THE CHRISTIAN DIVINITY, Contained in the Divine Service of The Church of
ENGLAND: Summarily, and for the most part in^^^^^^, according as point on point
depends, con^^^ded; and with the holy Scriptures plainly and plentifully
confirmed: Written for the furtherance of the Peoples understanding in the true
Religion established by public Authority, And for the increase of Unity in
that godly truth eternal.

BY EDMUND REEVE Bachelour in Divinity, and Vicar of the Parish of Hayes in
Middlesex.

IER. 6.16. Thus says the Lord, Stand ye in the ways, and see, and ask for
the old paths, where is the good way, and walk therein, and ye shall find
rest for your souls.

AVGVSTINVS. Vtile est de iisdem quaestionibus plures a pluribus fieri libros,
diverso style; non diversa fide.

LONDON, Printed for Nicolas Fussell and Humphrey Mosley, at the sign of the
Ball in Paul's Churchyard. 1631.

TO THE MOST HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCE, CHARLES, By the Grace of God King of
Great Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
MOST dread Sovereign, The holy Fathers of the Church, out of their due
consideration of the defects of these times, having in the liturgy for the
late Fast taught to pray, O Eternal God, and most gracious Father, we
confess that by our manifold transgressions, we have deserved whatsoever thy
Law has threatened against sinners, Our contempt of thy Divine Service is
great, and we hear thy word, but obey it not. Our charity to our neighbor is
cold, and our devotion to thee is frozen. Religion is with us, as in too many
places besides, made but a pretense for other ends then thy Service; and there
has been little or no care among us to keep truth and peace together, for
the preserving of our Church and State. Forgive us, O Lord, forgive as these,
and all other our grievous sins, etc. Have thereby signified to all Pastors
and Ministers of the Church, that they should do their part, toward the
repairing of those decays in many peoples minds and conversations. The which
most necessary signification being proceeded from them, who in the Clergy are
endued with the amplest understanding in all matters of Religion, has incited
me (though the most unworthy among the laborers in the Lords harvest) unto
greater accuration in my function, and thereto through help of the Divine grace
for to compile this work. The which now with all humility I present unto your
most sacred Majesty. And although it is for the most part but as it were a
collection of sentences out of the Divine Service Books of the Church, for to
put the common people in more remembrance and consideration of what therein is
delivered concerning the principal points of Christian Divinity, and a
quotation of Scriptures witnessing the same; yet unto all, which unfainedly
endeavor to know the will of God for to live obediently unto it, and will
unpartially read through and seriously consider every delivery therein, it will
appear to be a work profitable for to make more known unto the laity the
established Doctrine of the Church, and to further them in learning their duty
toward God, and your Highness, and their neighbors. Yea it will awake many
out of their sleep of ignorance, and cause all such as are upright of heart,
to say, Surely the Lord is in this place, and we knew it not: The everlasting
truth of the Eternal God is abundantly delivered in the public prayers,
exhortations, and Homilies of the Church of England, and we took none or but
little notice of it. Notwithstanding there will not be wanting spirits of
disobedience, which will calumniate the work, and me by reason of the same.
Wherefore I humbly crave of your most sacred Majesty, that since things of this
quality are subject to the censures of persons ill-meaning and wise in their
own eyes, it may receive patronage from your most gracious Highness. Your
Majesty's father a Prince of most worthy and ever blessed memory, all the time
of his happy Reign over us, showed most pious zeal toward maintaining the
Divine Service of the Church; and for confirmation thereof caused the
Proclamation made for the authorizing and uniformitie of the Book of Common
Prayer to be used throughout the Realm, to be printed with the said book;
and also the book of Homilies to be reprinted. The like most godly care to
conserve and maintain the Church in the unity of true religion, your Highness
in that most divine and ever most memorable declaration before the Articles of
the Church of England, has, unto the great comfort of all your Majesty's
loyal and religious people, manifested and testified. The Lord of heaven and
earth bless your Highness with many and happy years, That as his heavenly hand
has enriched your Majesty with many singular and extraordinary graces, So your
Highness may be the mirror of the world in this latter age (as most truly it
already is) for the prudent and zealous defending of the true Catholic and
Apostolic faith, unto the honor of that great God, and the good of his
Church, through Jesus Christ our Lord and only Savior,

Your Majesty's most humble and devoted subject EDMUND REEVE.

To the Reader.
HAving composed a sum of Divinity out of the books of the Divine Service
of the Church of England, Whereas ^n tius work thore is often mention ma^e of
the Church, thereby (wheresoever it is used for to signfi^ those unto whom all
people owe most faithful obedienc^) is to be understood: the Church
representative, where of the 139. Canon faith: ^hosoever shall hereafter ^^f^i^
me, that the sacred Synod of this Nation in the name of Ch^^^^, and by the
Kings Authority assemb^ed, is not the true Church of England by representation,
let him be excommunicated, and not restored until her repent and publicly
revoke his wicked error. And Canon 140. says: Whosoever shall affirm, that
no manner of person either of the Clergy or Laity not being themselves
particularly assembled in the said sacred synod, are to be subject to the
de^rces thereof in causes Ecclesiastical (made and ratified by the Kings
Majesty's Supreme Authority) as not having given their voices unto them: let
him be excommunicated, and not restored until he repent and publicly revoke
that his wicked error.
it is necess for me in some wise to declare their Authority, that they with
whom the said books are not in due account, may have no just cause, either of
undervaluing the deliveries taken forth of them, or of light esteeming this
work a collection of the same. If all the authorized writings of a godly and
learned Divine are much to be regarded, then how much more are those writings
to be esteemed, which are set forth by public Authority, as of the Royal
Majesty, of the Archbishops, Bishops, and the rest of the representative Church
of England, are assented unto by all the rest of the Clergy, and are confirmed
by Act of Parliament. That the book of Common prayer is thus established, the
Act for the uniformity of Common prayer, set in the beginning thereof,
testifies. Also every one, which enters into the Ministry of the Church of
England, first subscribeth, That the book of Common prayer contains in it
nothing contrary to the Word of God, and that it may lawfully so be used, and
that he himself will use the form in the said book prescribed in Public
prayer, and administration of the Sacraments, and none other. As it is in Canon
36. That the book of ordering of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons is likewise
ratified, the six and thirtieth Article of the Religion established, declares,
saying: The Book of Consecration of Archbishops, and Bishops, and ordering of
Priests and Deacons, lately set forth in the time of Edward the sixth, and
confirmed at the same time by Authority of Parliament, does contain all things
necessary to such Consecration and ordering: neither has it any thing that of
it self is superstitious and ungodly. And therefore, whosoever are consecrated
or ordered according to the Rites of that book, since the second year of the
aforenamed King Edward, unto this time, or hereafter, shall be consecrated or
ordered according to the same Rites, we decree all such to be rightly, orderly,
and lawfully consecrated and ordered. That both the books of Homilies now
printed in one Volume and distinguished into two Tomes, are approved by the
whole Clergy, it is manifest by every ones subscription unto the third Article
to be subscribed unto, before receiving any order or degree in the ministry,
whereof the words are, That he allows the book of Articles of Religion agreed
upon by the Archbishops, In Canon 36.
and Bishops of both Provinces, and the whole Clergy in the Convocation holden
at London in the year of our Lord God, one thousand five hundred sixty and
two: and that he acknowledges all and every the Articles therein contained,
being in number nine and thirty, besides the Ratification, to be agreeable to
the Word of God. And in the five and thirtieth Article thereof it is said, The
second book of Homilies, the several titles whereof we have joined under this
Article, does contain a godly and wholesome Doctrine, and necessary for these
times, as does the former book of Homilies, which were set forth in the time
of Edward the sixth: and therefore we judge them to be read in Churches by the
Ministers diligently and distinctly, that they may be understanded of the
people. The Eleventh Article concerning the justification of man, refers
unto the Homily of Justification, wherein the most wholesome Doctrine thereof,
and very full of comfort, is more largly expressed. In the book of Common
Prayer, in the Rubric after the Nicene Creed the Homilies are mentioned. It is
required that the book of Homilies be in every Church. Canon 80. And Canon 49
requires Ministers not allowed Preachers to read the said Homilies, For the
confirmation of be true says and for th^^^^d ^^str^^l^^ and (...) disication
of the people.
The great authority of the Homilies may also appear out of the Titles of both
Tomes of them. The Title of the first Tome is, Certain Sermons or Homilies
appointed to be read in Churches, in the time of the late Queen Elizabeth of
famous memory And now thought fit to be reprinted by Authority from the Kings
most Excellent Majesty. The Title of the second is, The second Tome of
Homilies, of such matters as were promised, and entitled in the former part of
Homilies: set out by the Authority of the late Queens Majesty: and to be read
in every Parish Church agreeably. There are no writings of any Author
whatsoever, whereunto the Church ascribes so much authority, as to the Books
of Divine Service, having ordained them only together with the holy Scriptures
to be publicly read in every congregation of the Land. Now some will say, It
appears by these relatings, that great is the respect which we owe unto the
said books of the Church; but yet we are to receive no delivery in them, but
what we know agrees with the Word of God. In which saying of many of these
times there is contained a greater defect, than all do observe therein. For
first by so saying, they attribute not such authority, as is due unto the
Church their Mother; they duly acknowledge not her loyalty unto Christ her
Head. S. Paul propounds the Church her fidelity or faithful obeience to be a
pattern for imitation, where he says: As the Church is subject unto Christ,
Ephesians. 5.24.
so let the wives be to their own husbands in every thing. Put case, that in
that her fundamental Doctrine there were some deliveries not in all respects
so perfect as are the Scriptures of God our Father, yet it is against her
loving nature and prudence to propound unto us any matter for our hurt. Yea,
what we suppose to be imperfect, we may make that use thereof, for which it
was by her intended, and be much benefited thereby. Secondly, by that their
limitation they imply, that they have an ability to judge the understanding and
wisdom of their mother. And if they be demanded, whence they have received so
great an extraordinary ability, as to judge of their mother the Church her
knowledge and Doctrine? The common answer is, by their reading the holy
Scriptures: They not seriously considering what is written in them also, Acts
8.30, 31.
That how can one reading the holy Scriptures understand them, except some man
guide him? Malachi 2.7.
And that the Priests lips is to keep knowledge, and the people is to seek
the Law at his mouth. The Clergy of the Church is to teach the common people
of the same. The lay people in their understanding, and applying the Scriptures
are to be guided by the Priesthood or Clergy. And before it has been
declared, that the universal Clergy with one mouth and consent have borne
witness, That there is not any thing in the Book of Common Prayer, which is
contrary to the Word of God: And that the book of Homilies does contain a
godly and wholesome Doctrine, and necessary for these times to be understanded
of the people. Seeing then all the guides in the Church, all the ordained
keepers of knowledge, all such from whom the people are appointed to seek the
Law, or spiritual instruction and teaching, do testify together the truth
and profitablenesse of the books of the Divine Service, can any one justly
accept against any deliverie in them, unless he do assume unto, himself for
to outsee the whole Clergy of the Church of England? The Lord Jesus Christ has
so greatly confirmed the authority of his Church, that he has said: Mat. 18.17.
Whosoever neglects to hear the Church, let him (or her) be unto his people as
an Heathen, and a Publicane. Wherefore it is our bounden duty most diligently
to hear, read, and meditate on every particular delivery in those fundamental
books composed by the perfectest wisdom of the Church our mother, and to
frame our minds and lives according to every prescription in the same, which
does in any wise concern us. And we thus honoring the Church our spiritual
Mother, God our heavenly Father will give us his blessing, He will send us
light in our understanding, readiness and obedience in our will, discretion in
our words and actions, true, serious, and loyal endeavors, As we are taught
to pray for; in the latter part of the Prayet next after the Letany in the late
Fast Book.
for the peace and prosperity of Jerusalem, the unity and glory of this Church
and State; That so we may love it, and prosper in it, full of grace in this
life, and be filled with glory in the life to come, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

An Advertisement.
SInce the 2 Timothy 3.1.2.3.4.
time that Isa. 5.21.
Wisdom in ones own eyes, and prudence in ones own sight, has so much
abounded, it is familiar with very many, when they see or hear any thing
delivered concerning religion, if it be a matter which they affect not,
presently to pass an hard censure thereon, though the deliverie be the very
established doctrine or discipline of the Apostolical Church of England by Law
established under the Kings Majesty. The Romans 3.13.14 Ps. 140.3.
poison of aspes is under the lips of many, Who say, with our Ps. 14.4.3.
tongue will we prevail, our lips are our own, who is Lord over us? The holy
Prophet says, The Lord shall cut off the tongue that speaks proud things.
The holy Apostle says, 1 Timothy 3.16.
Without controversy great is the mystery of godliness: And though the men
of God have signified that the Holy Scriptures divinity is partly Heb. 5.12.
milk for babes or little children in 1 Cor. 1.3.
Christ, partly Heb. 5.14.
strong meat for the 1 Ioh. 2.13.14.
young men, and partly hidden Rev. 2.17.
Manna for the fathers in God; also that natural ones 1 Cor. 2.14.
cannot know the things of the Spirit of God, because they are spiritually
discerned; yet notwithstanding so outrageous is the pride and arrogancy of
many, (who since they came to the years of discretion, have made no progress
in regeneration or the new birth, unto the Romans 2.2.
renewing of their mind, and the amendment of their Philip. 1.27. 1 Pet. 2.12.
1 Pet. 1.15. Ephesians. 4.22.
conversation, according to Gods Holy word) that rashly they 2 Pet. 2.12.
will speak evil of the things, which they understand not: and (as the
Apostle says) 1 Timothy 1.7.
desire to be teachers, understanding neither what they say, nor whereof they
affirm. Moreover how contrary minded soever each is to other, yea, how greatly
different they are from the mind and life prescribed in the Divine Service of
the Church, (whom some of them sometimes will acknowledge to be their Mother;)
Yet each one takes for granted that the grounds in his Prove. 21.2. Prove. 12.15.
own mind are the right, and that the grounds in all Philip. 2.3.
others minds, in any manner differing from his, are the wrong: and withal
every one for the most part of the aforesaid unhumbled heart, by his own
imagined-right grounds, without any fear of the Eternal Almighty God, and
without any reverence unto the Supreme divine Wisdom of Christ's holy Church,
contained in the books of her public worship, will 2 Pet 2.10.
presume to be able to judge of, yea, will assume confidence and boldness (or
rather most damnable audaciousnesse) to condemn deliveries in the aforesaid
books, which the Sovereign Majesty has ratified, and the most reverend
Fathers the Archbishops, and all the right reverend fathers the Bishops, and
the rest of the whole Clergy (not any one excepted, Quod medicor^m est,
promittunt ^edi^^: tractant Fa^^ilia fabri, Sola Scripturarum ars est, quam
si^i pass^^ omnes vendicant. Hanc garrula anus, hanc delirus sene^, have
Sophisia ver^^sus, ha^ universi praesumant, lacera^^, docent antequam discant.
Hier^nymus in epissola a^^ Pau^aum presbyterum de om^bus divine h^storia.
libris.
which has entered into holy orders according to such manner and sort, as by
the Ecclesiastical Law it is appointed) have allowed, and by subscription have
witnessed the same. But let the unpartiall reader of this treatise following,
where doubt about any matter may arise, thoroughly consider the Holy Scriptures,
which either are expressed, or in the margent but quoted, for the confirmation
of the point mentioned. And let none except here against, because the
deliveries are in no Philosophical method, but in the most vulgar plainnes:
for all hereof is written for the furtherance of the laity; and as well in
terms, as in form and manner accommodated unto the meanest capacity. All
teachers which study to edify their auditory, do well know, that it is far
easier to express their minds in divine matters, so as the learned may
comprehend, than as the unlearned may but a little apprehend. It is written
concerning Christ for our example, that Mark. 4.33.
he spoke the word unto the people, as they were able to hear it. There are
now extant in English sundry books very profitable, which few of the common
people do make use of, for that their style and words for the most or a great
part are for Scholars reading only. Great was the divine Wisdom of the
Church in setting forth her Homilies in so familiar a manner. And by those most
sacred Sermons all Pastors and teachers should take 2 Timothy 1.13.
example how to frame their meditations unto their auditories easiest and
speediest edification. Furthermore, let none expect to find any common place
of divinity here fully handled; but let this work be accounted only an
introduction into the books of the divine Service, where, as in an Ocean of
divine truth, there may be had a great abundance of information both touching
he matters ensuing, and also concerning many more. This book may be used as a
finger of one, that points us unto such places, as we have not thoroughly
taken notice of before. Also the godly reader shall perceive that every one
which Mat. 5.6.
hungreth and thristeth after righteousness, to have within him more and more
the Phil. 2.5. 1 Cor. 2.16.
mind of Christ, and to have the life of Jesus more and more made 2 Cor. 4.10,
11.
manifest in his body, may forth of every Chapter following receive some light
unto the apprehending of everlasting truth in the matter there treated on.
Lastly, Seeing that in the books of divine Service there are such heavenly
sentences and speeches; even as the learned are delighted in reciting the
sayings of the Fathers of the Greek and Latin Churches; so should we unto
Exodus 20.12. 1 Cor. 4.15. Ecclus. or Ecclesiasticus. 8.8.9.
due honoring of the Fathers of our own English Church, enable our selves to
say on every point of divinity, that which they have with one consent, out of
their far most profound judgments delivered unto us in an incomparable
divine manner.

A Table of the CHAPTERS in general.
CHAP. 1 THat there is a God. PAGE 1 CHAP. 2 That there is a Trinity in the
Godhead. PAGE 3 CHAP. 3 Of God the Father. PAGE 4 CHAP. 4 Of God the Son.
PAGE 5 CHAP. 5 Of God the Holy Ghost. PAGE 7 CHAP. 6 Of certain Attributes
unto God. PAGE 9 CHAP. 7 Of the Creation of the World, and of the Angels in
special. PAGE 13 CHAP. 8 Of the Creation of Man, and of his estate in
Innocence. PAGE 15 CHAP. 9 Of Man's falling from God, and of the Misery of
mankind thereby. PAGE 16 CHAP. 10 Of Gods Calling Mankind. PAGE 18 CHAP. 11 Of
Justification. PAGE 19 CHAP. 12 Of the true and lively Faith. PAGE 22 CHAP. 13
Of the Faith in the People of God which lived before the Incarnation of our Lord
Jesus Christ ever since the fall. PAGE 25 CHAP. 14 Of the Arc which Noah built
and of other things in the Story of the Old Testament. PAGE 27 CHAP. 15 Of
Circumcision, PAGE 29 CHAP. 16 Of the Calling of Moses. PAGE 31 CHAP. 17 Of the
Passover. PAGE 33 CHAP. 18 Of the Law given by Moses. PAGE 35 CHAP. 19 Of the
Tabernacle and Temple of the Jews. PAGE 38 CHAP. 20 Of St. John Baptists
Preaching. PAGE 40 CHAP. 21 Of the Holy Incarnation and Nativitie of our Lord
Jesus Christ, PAGE 42 CHAP. 22 Of Christ's death. PAGE 45 CHAP. 23 Of the
Resurrection and Ascension of Jesus Christ. PAGE 47 CHAP. 24 Of the Coming
down of the Holy Ghost. PAGE 49 CHAP. 25 Of the Merit of Redemption wrought
by Christ PAGE 54 CHAP. 26 Of the end for which Jesus Christ Redeemed Mankind,
and who of years of discretion, of perfect age partake of the merit of the
same Redemption. PAGE 56 CHAP. 27 Of Christ's Priesthood. PAGE 63 CHAP. 28 Of
Christ's Prophetship. PAGE 64 CHAP. 29 Of Christ's Kingdom. PAGE 66 CHAP. 30 Of
Christ's Mediation for his People, and of the Reconciliation PAGE 68 CHAP. 31 Of
Christ's Judging Mankind. PAGE 70 CHAP. 32 Of the Church of Christ. PAGE 74
CHAP. 33 Of the Ministry which Christ appointed in his Church in general.
PAGE 77 CHAP. 34 Of Deacons. PAGE 78 CHAP. 35 Of Priests. PAGE 80 CHAP. 36 Of
the Bishopric, that it is a degree, above the Priesthood, and so ordained to
be by Jesus Christ. PAGE 82 CHAP. 37 Of the Distinction or disparitie among
Bishops or of Arch-Bishopricke. PAGE 85 CHAP. 38 Of the Prophetship that every
kind thereof is not ceased. PAGE 90 CHAP. 39 Of Lord-ship which Archbishops
and Bishops have. PAGE 93 CHAP. 40 Of the Lyturgie or Divine Service of the
Church in general. PAGE 94 CHAP. 41 Of the Ceremonies of the Church of England
in general. PAGE 97 CHAP. 42 Of Wearing a Surplesse. PAGE 101 CHAP. 43 Of the
due Celebration of Sundays, and other times required by the Church to be kept
holy. PAGE 104 CHAP. 44 Of Prayer, Thanksgiving, and Confession unto God, in
public, and in private. PAGE 111 CHAP. 45 Of Singing Psalms, and Spiritual
Songs, in public, and in private, and also of singing with Music. PAGE 116
CHAP. 46 Of the public reading of the Holy Scriptures, as also of the
Homilies, and of making an Exhortation in public. PAGE 119 CHAP. 47 Of
Expounding the Scriptures, and of Preaching, also of Peoples hearing Sermons.
PAGE 124 CHAP. 48 Of Peoples reading the Holy Scriptures in private, and of
means helping to the Understanding of the^. PAGE 132 CHAP. 49 Of Reading the
Books in the Bible which are called writings Apocrypha. PAGE 142 CHAP. 50 Of
the Peoples learning the most Sacred Catechism of the Church which is in the
Book of Common Prayer. PAGE 144 CHAP. 51 Of Baptism. PAGE 147 CHAP. 52 Of
Godfathers and Godmothers. PAGE 150 CHAP. 53 Of the sign of the Cross made on
the forehead of the Child having received Baptism. PAGE 152 CHAP. 54 Of
Confirmation commonly called Bishopping. PAGE 154 CHAP. 55 Of the Holy
Communion, or the Sacrament of the and Blood of Jesus Christ. PAGE 158 CHAP. 56
Of preparing ones self for to receive worthily the Holy Sacrament. PAGE 166
CHAP. 57 Of Kneeling in the Act of Receiving the Sacrament. PAGE 168 CHAP. 58
Of Matrimony. PAGE 170 CHAP. 59 Of the Ring used in the Solemnization of
Matrimony. PAGE l72 CHAP. 60 Of thankesgiving of women after Childbirth,
commonly called the Churching of Women. PAGE 173 CHAP. 61 Of Combination or
Denouncing Gods Curse due unto sinners which will not Repent, or do neglect
the same. PAGE 175 CHAP. 62 Of Excommunication. PAGE 177 CHAP. 63 Of Confession
and Absolution in particular manner. PAGE 180 CHAP. 64 Of Penance. PAGE 184
CHAP. 65 Of Visiting the Sick. PAGE 187 CHAP. 66 Of the Communion of the
Sick. PAGE 189 CHAP. 67 Of the Burial of the Dead. PAGE 191 CHAP. 68 Of the
Reverence to be done to Almighty God in his Worship. PAGE 193 CHAP. 69 Of Good
Works in general. PAGE 202 CHAP. 70 Of the Kings Soveraigntie, and of bearing
faith and true Allegiance to his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors. PAGE 207
CHAP. 71 Of Submission to all Powers inferior to the Kings Majesty. PAGE 214
CHAP. 72 Of Magestrates duties in general. PAGE 217 CHAP. 73 Of Swearing. PAGE
220 CHAP. 74 Of Honoring the Ministry. PAGE 224 CHAP. 75 Of Using the
Perambulation of the Circuit of the Parish, called Going a Procession. PAGE 226
CHAP. 76 Of Almes-deedes. PAGE 230 CHAP. 77 Of Fasting. PAGE 233 CHAP. 78 Of
Conversion, Repentance, and Regeneration. PAGE 239 CHAP. 79 Of our Duty toward
God as it is delivered in the most sacred Catechism. PAGE 249 CHAP. 80 Of our
Duty toward our Neighbor, as it is expressed in most divine manner in the
Catechism also. PAGE 260 CHAP. 81 Of the Duty of the Husband unto his wife,
and of the Duty of the wife unto her husband. PAGE 266 CHAP. 82 Of the Duty of
Parents toward their children, and of children toward their Parents: likewise
of Masters and Dames to their servants, and of servants to their Masters and
Dames. PAGE 272 CHAP. 83 of the four Princiall virtues. PAGE 279 CHAP. 84 Of
the seeven gifts of Grace. PAGE 282 CHAP. 85 Of Sundry fruits of the Holy
Spirit. PAGE 287 CHAP. 86 Of Sundry other Virtues prescribed in the Divine
Service. PAGE 294 CHAP. 87 Of Satisfaction for wrong done in word or deed.
PAGE 306 CHAP. 88 Of Forgiving others the wrongs which they have done to us in
word or deed. PAGE 309 CHAP. 89 Of Examining and judging our own selves. PAGE
313 CHAP. 90 Of Seeking Gods Kingdom, and the righteousness thereof. PAGE 320
CHAP. 91 Of the Christian Unite. PAGE 326 CHAP. 92 Of Growing in the Christian
faith, and the Christian life. PAGE 333 CHAP. 93 Of the Devil. PAGE 343 CHAP.
94 Of the seven deadly Sins. PAGE 350 CHAP. 95 Of Sundry other Sins. PAGE
360 CHAP. 96 Of the Sin against the Holy Ghost. PAGE 373 CHAP. 97 Of Sundry
other Gods Curses upon disobedient people PAGE 377 CHAP. 98 Of deferring
Repentance until likelihood of bodily death. PAGE 382 CHAP. 99 Of sundry of
Gods blessings upon obedient people, in this present life. PAGE 386 CHAP. 100
Against separating from the Church of England, by law established under the
Kings Majesty, in any manner. PAGE 390
THE CHRISTIAN DIVINITY: OVT OF the Divine Service.
CHAP. I. That there is a GOD.
IN the third part of the In the second Tome in folio. page 228.
Homily for Rogation Week, it is said, That faith is the first entry into the
Christian life: according as the Scripture delivers, He Heb. 11.6.
that comes to God, must believe that he is, and that he is a Rewarder of
them that diligently seek him. The Heb. 4.2. Mal. ^.^4^
want of which belief is the cause, that m^^ in these days are so negligent
in seeking the lord: some being cold in Religion: others (...) warm: Some
there are that say in th^^ Psalm. 14.^.
hearts there is no God: through Psalm. 10.^.
their pri^^ they will not seek after him: God is not in all their thoughts.
Sundry others there are, which though they do Titus 1.16.
with their mouths profess to know God, in their Works they deny him, being
abominable and disobedient, and unto every good Work Or void of Judgment,
(as the Margent has it.)
Reprobate.

That there is a God, it needs no demonstration: for every Psalm 19.3.
Nation on the face of the whole Earth does acknowledge it. There was never any
one borne into the world, Romans 10.18. Nulla est gens tam barbara, quae non
fateatur esse aliquem Deum: adeo quidem vt homines falsum Deum haebere inalint,
quam nullu^ omnino: tam alte nimiru^ sensus divinitatis indit incordibus
nostris. Cice^o.
which at one time or another, (if he or she lived unto ripe years) testified
Romans 2.15. Act. 14.7.
not unto it. It is a principle or John 1.9.
light, which God has set in every Humane soul: That (says the Apostle)
which Romans 1.19.20
is naturally known of God, is manifest in mankind; for God has showed it
unto them. For the invisible things of him, from the Creation of the World, are
clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his eternal
power and Godhead, so that they are without excuse. The Psalm. 9 16. (...).
Th^^y^^^des.
judgments, which even in all ages come upon wilful breakers of Gods Laws; as
on Traitors, on such as break their lawful oaths, or take false oaths: Also
the judgments on wilful murderers (who being apprehended and examined,
commonly cannot but confess their deed:) also on Blasphemers and the (...) 5 9.
like, declare plainly, that there is a Righteous, most mighty power; though
in his Essence or being he is (...) ^1.27.
unseen to al eyes of flesh on Earth. Also the Heb. (...).
horrors and terrors, which come into the hearts of such as live wilfully
disobedient to Gods Laws; and especially when as (...) have Mat 27.37. (...)
10.
committed some great Wickedness. The Acts 2.37.
hea^^ and ^^ings, and the Wisd. 17.11.
Conscience remorses, the inward Genesis 3.10. Romans 6.21.
^^^me, which follows after transgressing of Gods everlasting Law, and the
like Effects, show the Colos. 1.29. Job 33.14.15.16.17.18.29.30.
working of the infinite Godhead in the minds of Mankind. Unto this God blessed
for ever, the Church says, In Saint Ambrose his song.
All the earth does worship thee the Father everlasting. To thee all Angels cry
aloud, the Heavens and all the powers therein. To the^ Cherubin and Seraphin
continually do cry: Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Or hosts. See Romans 9 29. with
Isa. 1.9.
Sabbath. Heaven and earth is full of the Majesty of thy glory.

CHAP. 2. That there is a Trinity in the Godhead.
In Hebraico Bibliorum exemplari non raro Trinitatis mysterium significatur,
vti in (...) Job. 35.10. (...) Psalm. 149.2. vide Isa. 54.5. and (...) in
Eccles. 12.1.
IN the Athanasian Creed it is said, The Catholic Faith is this, That we
worship one God in Trinity, and Trinity in Unity: Neither confounding the
persons, nor dividing the substance. For there is one person of the Father,
another of the Son, and another of the Holy Ghost. But the Godhead of the
Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost is all one Ioh. 10.30. Ioh. 17.22.
, the glory equal, the Majesty co-eternall.

Saint John says, 1. Ioh. 5.7.
There are three which bear record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the
Holy Ghost: and these three are one.

Saint Matthew says, Mat. 3.16.17. Tetragranimaton (ut Author est Galatinus) in
Targum anti^^itus scriptum erat (...) ad Trinitatis divinae mysterium inunondum.
When Jesus was baptized of John, he went up straight way out of the water, And
lo the Heavens were opened unto him, and he saw the Spirit of God descending
like a Dove, and lighting vhon him: And lo a voice from Heaven, saying, This
is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.

There was Jesus the Son, in his humane nature baptized with water: There was
the Holy Ghost descending like a Dove, and lighting upon him: There was the
Father speaking from heaven and saying, This is my beloved Son. And in the
name of each person of the Trinity Christ commanded his Ministers to baptize,
saying: Mat. 28.19.
Go ye and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. The Church in the Preface to be read upon
the feast of the Trinity only, Singula sunt in singulis, and omnia in
^^ngulis, and singula in omnibus and omnia in omnibus, and unum omnia. Qui
videt hoc vel ex part, vel per speculum in aenigmate, gaudeat cognoscens Deum:
and sic ut Deum honoret and gratias agat. Qui autem non videt, tendat per
pietatem ad videndum non per caecitatem ad calumniandum: quoniam unus est Deus,
sed tamen Trinitas: nec confuse accipiendum est, ex quo omnia, per quem omnia
and in quo omnia: nec dijs multis, sed ipsi gloria in secula seculorum. August.
l^bro sexto de Trinitate capite ultimo.
teaches us to say; It is very meet, right, and our bounden duty, that we
should at all times, and in all places, give thanks to thee, O Lord, Almighty
and everlasting God, which art one God, one Lord, not one only Person, but
three Persons in one substance. For that, which we believe of the glory of the
Father, the same we believe of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, without any
difference or inequality.

CHAP. 3. Of God the Father.
IN the third part of the 2 To. p. 40.
Homily against peril of Idolatry, it is said, Deus est spiritus ^atura
simplex, lux in accessibilis etc: Augustinus initio lib. quaest. vet. and Noui
Test. ad Quaest. quid sit Deus.
How can God, a most pure Spirit, whom never man saw, be expressed by a gross
bodily, and visible similitude? How can the infinite Majesty and greatness of
God, incomprehensible to man's mind, much more not able to be compassed with
the sense, be expressed in a small and little image? That God in his Essence is
Spirit, Christ has witnessed, saying: John 4.24.
God is a Spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in spirit and in
truth.

In the Nicene Creed it being said concerning God the Son, That he is Light
of Light, we are taught, that God the Father is the Light Eternal. Saint John
says, 1 John 1.5.
God is Light, and in him is no darkness at all. In the first 2 Tom. p. 179
Homily concerning the passion of Christ it is said: Christ delights to enter
and dwell in that soul, where love and charity rules, and where peace and
concord is seen. For thus wrighteth Saint John, 1 John 4.8.16
God is Charity, he that abides in charity, abides in God, and God in him.

Which to be spoken of God the Father also, it appears out of the Words before
that Text, where Saint John says, We have seen and do testify, that the 1
John. 4.14.15.
Father sent the Son to be the Savior of the World. And we have known and
believed the love that God has unto us, etc. Also of Romans 11.36. Not si quis
roget, quodna^ sit quod colamus atque adoremus, promptam est respondere, quod
sit Charitas. Etenim, vt a Spiritu Sancto pronunciatum est, Deus noster
Charitas est, coque nomine, magis quam quovis alio delectatur. Nazianzen. Orat.
14.
him, and through him, and to him are all things. To whom be glory for ever.
Amen.

CHAP. 4. Of God the Son.
IN the Nicene Creed, it is said, I believe in one Lord JESUS CHRIST, the only
begotten Son of God, begotten of his Father before all worlds, God of God,
Tertul, libro contra Praxean capite octauo: pretulit Deus Sermonent sicut radix
fruticem, et sol radium. Et mox: Quia omnis origo parent est: et omne quod ex
origin profertur, progenies est: Multo magis sermo Dei, qui etiam proprie
nomen silij accipit. Nec frutex tame^ a radice: Nec fluvius a font: nec radius
a sole discernitur: Sieut nec a Deo Sermo.
Light of Light, very God of very God, begotten, not made, being of one
substance with the Father, by whom all things were made. The which Saint John
testifies, saying: John 1.1.9.3
In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was
God. He was the true Light, which lights every man that comes into the
world. All things were made by him, and without him was not any thing made,
that was made. In the third part of the T. 2. pa. 228.229.
Homily for Rogation week, it is said concerning God the Son, Heb. 1.3.
That he is the brightness of his Fathers glory, and a very clear Image and
pattern of his substance. It is there also said, That Christ is the
everlasting Wisdom, as in the book of the Proverbs, it so of it self
speaks, saying: I P^o. 8.12.22.23.30.
Wisdom dwell with Prudence: The Lord possessed me in the beginning of his
way, before his works of old. I was set up from everlasting, from the
beginning, or ever the earth was. Then was I by him, as one brought up with
him: and I was daily his delight, rejoicing always before him. The eternal
Son of God is signified in Genesis, where it is said: Gen 19.24.
The Lord rained upon Sodom and upon Gomorrah Brimstone and fire from the Lord
out of Heaven. And likewise in the Psalm where David says: The Psalm 110.1.
Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou at my right hand, until I make thine enemies
thy foote-stoole.

A saying of Jesus the son of Syrach is memorable hereto, who in his prayer
uttered these words: Eccles. 51.10
I called upon the Lord, the Father of my Lord, that he would not leave me in
the days of my trouble, and in the time of the proud, when there was no help.
Unto God the Son it is said in the Scripture: Heb. 1.8.9.
Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever: a Scepter of righteousness is the
Scepter of thy Kingdom. Thou have loved righteousness and hated iniquity. We
are taught in the sacred Lyturgie most piously to say unto God the Father: In
Saint Ambrose his song.
The holy Church throughout all the World does acknowledge thine honorable,
true, and only Son, And unto God the Son for to say: Thou art the King of
Glory, O Christ. Thou art the everlasting Son of the Father.

CHAP. 5. Of God the Holy Ghost.
IN the first part of the 2. To p. 207.
Homily concerning the coming down of the Holy Ghost, it is said: The Holy
Ghost is a spiritual and divine substance, Opus est spiritu sancto ut pie and
dextere loquamur de Trinitate per quem folum, Deus and intelligitur, and
exponitur and auditur. Divus Nazianzenus oratione prima de fugae sua in Pontum.
the third person in the Deity, distinct from the Father and the Son, and yet
proceeding from them both. As for his proper nature and substance, it is
altogether one with God the Father, and God the Son, that is to say,
Spiritual, Eternal, Uncreated, Incomprehensible, Almighty; he is God, and
Lord everlasting. Concerning the Holy Ghost, Christ has said to his Disciples:
Ioh. 15.26.
When the comforter is come, whom I will send unto you from the Father, even
the Spirit of truth, which proceeds from the Father, he shall testify of me.
That the Holy Ghost is God, it is manifest out of St. Peter's words unto
Ananias, saying: Acts 5.3.4.
Why has Satan filled thine heart to lie unto the Holy Ghost? Thou have not
lied unto men, but unto God. So where Saint Paul says: 1. Cor. 12.4.5.6.
Now there are diversities of gifts, but the same spirit. And there are
differences of administrations, Spiritus Sanctus a patre procedit. Qui quatenus
ab illo procedit, Creatura non est: quatenus rursu^ genitus non est, filius non
est: quatenus autem inter ingenitum et genitum medius est, Deus est. D.
Nazianzenus oratione 37.
but the same Lord. And there are diversities of operations, but it is the same
God which works all in all.

In all the Sacred Song of the Church, which is to be said or Sung in the
Ordering of Priests, (which also is commonly set before the Psalms in Meeter,)
what the Holy Ghost is, and what his gifts and workings are, it is very
Divinely delivered; and remarkablely it is said in the second Staue thereof:

Thou art the very John 14.16
Comforter,
in all woe and distress:
The Heavenly Luke 11.13.
gift of God most high,
which no tongue can 2 Cor. 12.4 as in margent.
express.
The fountain and the lively spring,
of 1 These. 1.6.
joy Celestial,
The n="s" Acts 2.3.4.
fire so bright, Omnes quod sumus ac vigemus inde est: Regnat spiritus ille
sempiturnus a Chriso simul et parente missus, intrat pectora candidus pudica,
qua Templi vice consecrata vide^t, Post quam combiberint deu^ medullis: Sed
siquid vitij dolive nasci inter visceraiam dicata sensit ceu spurcum refugit
^eler satellum. Et nonnullis interjectis: Hic pastui anima est, saporque verus.
Po^^^ pr^denti^^.
the Romans 5.5.
love so clear,
and 1 Ioh. 2.20.27
unction Spiritual.
And now concluded be these Collections concerning the Holy, Blessed, and
Glorious Trinity, with that of the Prayer to the Holy Ghost, to be sung before
the Sermon.

All glory to the Trinity,
that is of mighties most:
The living father, and the Son,
and eke the holy Ghost.
As it has been in all the time,
that has been heretofore:
As it is now. and so shall be,
henceforth for evermore.
CHAP. 6. Of certain Attributes unto God.
IN the beginning of sundry Prayers, and in other places of the Divine Service,
Of Gods Eternity.
for the more expressing of the glory of God, there are added unto his name
sundry Attributes: As it is said oftentimes, O everlasting God, O everliving
God: And in the Athanatian Creed he is said to be, the One Eternal. Moses
in his Prayer, which is in the Book of the Psalms, does in like manner
confess the Eternity of God, saying: Before Psalm 9^.2.
the Mountains were brought forth, or ever thou had formed the earth and
the World; even from everlasting to everlasting thou art God.

The Everlasting is in the Book of Baruch mentioned as one of Gods names,
where it is said: Let them Baruch 4 14.
that dwell about Syon come and remember ye the Captivity of my Sons and
Daughters, which the Everlasting has brought upon them. God is also said to be
Infinite or Incomprehensible, Of Gods infiniteness, or immensity.
as in the first part of the 2 T. p. 221.
Homily for Rogation Week, where it is said: He is Job 9.11.
invisible every where; and Acts 17.27.28
in enery Creature, and Ieremia 2 3.24
fulfilleth both Heaven and earth with his presence: In considering whereof
David said: Whether shall I go from thy Spirit? Or whether shall I flee from
thy Presence? if I go up into Heaven, thou art there: if I make my bed in
Hell; behold thou art there. If I take the Wings of the morning, and dwell in
the uttermost parts of the Sea; even there shall thy hand lead me, and thy
right hand shall hold me. Psalm. 139.7.8.9.10.13.


Thou have possessed my Reins; thou have covered me in my mothers Womb. In
the Book of Wisdom it is said: The Wisd. 1.7.
Spirit of the Lord fills the World, and that which contains all things
has knowledge of the Voice. And Wisd. 12.1.
thine incorruptible spirit is in all things. Of Gods Almightinesse.
Moreover God is often called Almighty, as in the prayer to be said in the time
of War. O Almighty God, King of all Kings, and Governor of all things, whose
power no Creature is able to resist. The Almighty power of God is lively
expressed in the end of the Visitation of the sick, where it is said: The
Almighty Lord, which is a Pro. 18.10.
strong Tower to all them that put their trust in him, to whom all things in
Heaven, in Earth, and Phil. 2 9.10.
under the Earth do bow and obey, be now and evermore thy defense, and make
thee know and feel, that there is none other name under Heaven given unto men,
in whom, and through whom thou may receive health and salvation, but only
the name Act. 4.12.
of our Lord Jesus Christ.

The Prophet David says: The Psalm. 103.19
Lord has prepared his Throne in the Heavens, and his Kingdom rules over
all. Esaias says, Behold Esaias 40.15.17
the Nations are as the drop of a Bucket, and are counted as the small dust of
the Balance: Behold he takes up the Isles as a very little thing. All Nations
before him are as nothing; and they are counted to him less than nothing, and
vanity.

Incomparable Wisdom is also ascribed unto God: as in the first part of the 2.
T. p. 219.
Sermon for Rogation Week, Of Gods Wisdom.
where it is said: I do not take upon me to declare unto you the excellent
power, or the incomparable Wisdom of Almighty God, as though I would have you
believe, that it might be expressed unto you by Words.

And in the second part of that Homily it is said: Page 224.
His sight looks through Heaven and Earth, and sees all things presently
with his eyes. Nothing is too dark or hidden from his Knowledge, not the privy
thoughts of men's minds. David says, Great Psalm. 147.5.
is our Lord, and of great power, his understanding is infinite. The Apostle to
the Hebrews says: there is not any Heb. 4.13.
Creature, which is not manifest in his sight: but all things are naked and
opened unto the eyes of him, with whom we have to do.

Again, concerning Gods Wisdom David says, O Psalm. 104 24.
Lord how manifold are thy Works! in Wisdom have thou made them all.

Of Gods goodness.
Goodness also is attributed unto God even through out all parts of the Divine
Service. In the first part of the 2. Tom p. 217.
Homily for Rogation Week there is amply declared the goodness of God toward
mankind in sundry particulars. Wherein Holy Church does as the Scripture says;
abundantly Psalm. 145 7.9.
utter the memory of Gods great goodness. The Lord is good to all.

Of Gods Ivstnesse.
Justness also is ascribed unto God, as in the Prayer to be said in time of
War, where it is written. To God it belongs justly to punish sinners, and
to be merciful to them that truly Repent. David says: The O Lord is
righteous in all his ways: And Psalm. 62.12.
thou rendrest unto every one according to his works. Nehemiah said unto God:
Thou Nehem. 9.33.
art just in all that is brought upon us: for thou have done right, but we have
done wickedly. Zephaniah says: The Zeph. 3.5.
just Lord is in the midst of Jerusalem: He will do none iniquity. Every
morning does he bring his judgment to light, he fayeth not; but the unjust
know no shame. The Lord (says Hosea) has a controversy with Judah, Hosea 12.^
and will punish Psalm. 145.17.
Jacob according to his ways; according to his doings will he recompense him.
God also is often in the Divine Service mentioned to be Merciful, Of Gods
Mercifullnesse.
as in the third Collect to be read on good Friday it is said: Merciful God,
who have made all men, and hate Some object against this Divine Doctrine of
the Church, the saying in the Scripture, I have hated Esau. The Scripture says
not, that God hated Esau unto everlasting damnation before he was borne: but
signifies that he loved him less than he loved Jacob, in that for a time he
was to serve Jacob. That the word h^te does in Scripture signify to Love
less. See Iunius on Genes. 29.31. Deuteronomy 21.15. See Math. 6.24. Luke 14.26. And
that Esau was to be under Jacob foratime, See Genes. 27.40. Saint Paul's
Doctrine hereabout is one of his sayings hard to be understood 2. Peter 3.16.
There is in it an Allegory as in Gal. 4.24. See 2. Esaras 6.8.9. Also in Genes.
25.23. mentioned By Saint Paul in Romans 9. Jacob and Esau are called two
Nations, and two manner of people. And that Esau was said to be hated, was not
expressed in those words, until many ages after: Namely, in the days of the
Prophet Malachy 1.3. See Ezech. 33.11. and 2. Peter 3.9. Math. 23.37. Acts
7.51. See Pro. 1. from verse 20. unto the Chapters end. All Ezechiel 18.
Eccles. 15.11. to the end.
nothing that thou have made, nor would the death of a Sinner, but rather
that he should be converted and live, have mercy upon all Jews, Turks,
Infidels, and Heretics, etc. So in the last Prayer saving one of the
Commination, it is said: Oh most mighty God and Merciful Father, which have
compassion of all men, and hate nothing that thou have made, which would
not the death of a sinner, but that he should rather turn from sin and be
saved, etc. David says, The Psalm. 145.9
Lord is good to all; and his tender Mercies are over all his works.

Likewise Saint Paul witnesses: God has concluded all men in unbelief, that
he might have Mercy upon Romans 11.32.
all. In the Book of Wisdom it is said, Thou Wisdom 11.23 24.
haste Mercy upon all, for thou can do all things, and winkest at the sins
of men; because they should amend. For thou love all the things that are,
and abhorrest nothing which thou have made: for never would thou have made
any thing, if thou had hated it. Unto the which Eternal, Incomprehensible,
Almighty, Wise, Good, Just, and Merciful God be glore, through Jesus Christ
for ever. Amen.

CHAP. 7. Of the Creation of the World, and of the Angels in special.
IN the first part of the T. 1. p. 67.
Homily, an Exhortation concerning good order, and obedience to Rulers and
Magistrates, it is said: Almighty God has created and appointed all things in
Heaven, Earth, and Waters, in a most excellent and perfect order. In Heaven he
has appointed distinct and several orders and states of Archangels and
Angels. In the beginning (says the Scripture) God Genesis 1.1. and 2 1.
Created heaven and earth and all the Host of them. Also that by the Col. 1.16.
Son of God were all things Created that are in Heaven, and that are in
Earth, Visible, and Invisible, whether they be Thrones or Dominions, or
Principalities, or Powers; all things were Created by him, and for him. That
there are Archangels as well as Angels, it appears out of Daniel, where it is
Written, that Michael one of Dan. 10.13.
the chief Princes came to help him. Michael is called an Archangell in the
Jude 9.
Epistle of Jude. There is mention of another Archangell in 2. Esdras 4.36.
Esdras, namely Vriel. In Saint Ambrose his Song it is said unto God, To thee
all Angels cry aloud, the Heavens and all the powers therein: To thee Cherubin
and Seraphin continually do cry: Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Or Hosts.
Sabbath. That there are Powers in heavenly places, and also Principalities
among them; not only the text above cited out of the Epistle to the Colossians
proves, but also Saint Paul's words to the Ephesians, saying: To Ephesians. 3.10.
the intent that now unto the Principalities and Powers in heavenly places,
might be known by the Church the manifold Wisdom of God. Of Cherubins,
Novem Angelorum est cord^nes, testante sacro eloquio, scimus, scilicet Angelos,
Archangel^s, virtutes, potestates, principatut, dominati^nes, th^onos,
Cherubin, aeque Seraphim Greg. in H^mil.
there is often mention in the tenth Chapter of Ezechiel: And of Seraphins it
is mentioned in the sixth Chapter of Isaiah. In the Collect to be read on the
day of the Feast of Saint Michael the Archangel, the Church says:
Euerlasting-God, which have o dayned and constituted the Services of all Angels
and Men in wonderful order: Mercifully grant that they which always do thee
service in Heaven, may by thine appointment succor and defend us in Earth,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Heb. 1.14.
Are a they not all ministering Spirits (as the Apostle says) sent forth to
minister for them, who shall be Heirs of Salvation? David says, Because Psalm.
91.9.10.11.12.
thou have made the Lord, which is my refuge, even the most High, thine
Habitation, there shall no evil befall thee, neither shall any Plague come nigh
thy dwelling: For he shall give his Angels charge over thee, to keep thee in
all thy ways. They shall bear thee up in their hands, least thou dash thy foot
against a stone.

Some of the Angels sinned, in not 2 Pet. 2 4. Jude 6.
keeping their first estate; but left their own habitation, and are cast down
to Hell, reserved in everlasting Chains under darkness, unto the judgment of
the great day. It is our duty (as the Church In the Communion Service.
exhorts) with the holy Angels and Archangels, and with all the Company of
Heaven, to laud and magnify the Deuteronomy. 28.58.
glorious name, evermore praising him, and saying, Reave. 4.8. Esaias 6.3.
Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Hosts, Heaven and Earth are full of thy glory.
Glory be to thee, O Lord most high.

CHAP. 8. Of the Creation of Man, and of his estate in his innocence.
IN the To 2. p. 167.
Homily concerning the Nativity of our Savior Jesus Christ, it is said: That
among all the Creatures which God made in the beginning of the World most
excellent and wonderful in their kind, there was none (as the Scripture
bears Witness) to be compared almost in any point unto man, who as well in
Body and Soul Ezech. 18.15
exceeded all other, no less than the Sun in brightness and light exceeds
every small and little Star in the firmament. He was made Genesis 1.27.
according to the image and similitude of God, he was endued with all kind of
Heavenly gifts, he had no spotte of uncleanness in him, he was sound and
perfect in all parts, both outwardly and inwardly: his reason was vncorrupt,
his understanding was Pure and Good, his Will was obedient and godly, he was
made altogether like unto God in Ephe. 4.241
righteousness and holiness, etc. And it is said in the first part of the T.
2. p. 261.
Homily of Repentance. Therefore did God create and make men, that he might
have whom he should do good unto, and Psalm. 8.6. -- Col. 1
make partakers of his heavenly Riches.

In the like manner David says: thou Psalm. 8.5.
have made man a little lower than the Angels, and have Crowned him with glory
and Honor, etc. God (says Moses) created man in his own image; which Paul
expresses to be in righteousness and true holiness. Concerning man's
partaking of Gods heavenly riches, Paul signified to the Ephesians: that Ephesians.
3.8.
unto him grace was given, for to Preach among the Gentiles the unsearchable
riches of Christ. And he says unto them: I cease not to Ephesians 1.16 17.18.
give thanks for you, making mention of you in my Prayers, that the God of our
Lord Jesus Christ the Father of glory, may give unto you the spirit of Wisdom
and Revelation in the knowledge of him: the eyes of your understanding being
enlightened, that ye may know what is the hope of his Calling, and what the
riches of the glory of his inheritance in the Saints is.

In the book of Wisdom it is said: God Wisd. 2.23.
created man to be immortal, and made him to be an image of his own Eternity.
He Wisd. 1.14.
created all things that they might have their being: and the generations of
the World were healthful: and there is no poison of destruction in them: nor
the Kingdom of Death upon the earth.

CHAP. 9. Of Man's falling from God, and of the Misery of Mankind thereby.
IN the second part of the T. 1. p. 33.
Homily of good Works, it is said: That Adam notwithstanding Gods
Commandment, gave credit unto the Woman, seduced by the subtle persuasion of
the Serpent, and so followed his own will, and left Gods Commandment.
Whereby it came to pass, (as it is delivered in the T. 2. p. 168.
Homily of the Nativity of Christ) that as before he was blessed, so now he was
accursed; as before he was loved, so now he was abhorred: as before he was
most beautiful and precious, so now he was most vile and Wretched in the
sight of his Lord and Maker, etc. Which misery fell not only on him, but also
on his posterity and Children for ever: So that the whole Brood of Adams flesh
should sustain the self same fall and punishment, which their fore-father by
his offense most justly had deserved. Saint Paul says, Romans 5.12.14.18.
By one man sin entered into the World, and death by sin, and so death passed
upon all men, for that all have sinned. And death reigned from Adam to Moses,
even over them that had not sinned after the similitude of Adams transgression,
who is the figure of him, that was to come: And as by the offense of one,
judgment came upon all men to condemnation: Even so by the righteousness of
one, the free gift came upon all men unto justification of life.

Accordingly Esdras has testified, saying: 2 Esdras 3.21
The first Adam bearing a wicked heart, transgressed and was overcome, and so
be all they that are borne of him. And again says he, 2 Esd. 7.48.
O thou Adam, what have thou done? for though it was thou that sinned, thou art
not fallen alone, but we all that come of thee. Esaias declaring the state of man
fallen, says: Esaias 59.2.3.4
Your iniquities have separated between you and your God: and your sins have
hid his face from you, that he will not hear. For your hands are defiled with
Blood, and your fingers with iniquity: Your Lips have spoken lies, your
Tongue has muttered perverseness. None calls for Justice, nor any pleads
for the truth, etc. Unto the end of the 15. Verse.

And Esaias says also: Esaias 64.6
We are all as an unclean thing, and all our righteousnesses are as filthy
rags. Saint Paul to the Ephesians likewise tells them, what was their estate
before they were converted unto the obedience of the Gospel: Namely, that they
were Ephesians. 5.8.
darkness, Ephesians. 2.12.2.3
without Christ, being Aliens from the common wealth of Israel, and strangers
from the Covenant of Promise, having no hope, and without God in the World.
Also that they were dead in trespasses and sins, wherein they Walked
according to the course of this World, according to the Prince of the power of
the Air, the spirit that now works in the Children of disobedience. Among
whom also we all had our conversation in times past, in the lusts of our flesh,
fulfilling the desires of the flesh, and of the mind, and were by nature
Children of Wrath, even as others. Read the whole Homily of the misery of Man.

CHAP. 10. Of Gods calling of Mankind.
IN the first part of the T. 2. p. 219.220
Homily for Rogation Week, it is said: That it is the goodness of God, which
moves him to say in Scripture: It is my delight to be with the children of
men. It is his goodness that moves him to call us unto him, to offer us his
friendship and presence. It is his goodness, that patiently suffers our
straying from him, and suffers us long, to win us unto repentance. And what
other thing does his loving and gentle voice spoken in his Word, where he
calls us to his presence and friendship, but delare his goodness only
without regard of our Worthiness. It is said in the In the Service appointed
to be read on Ash-wensday.
Comminations Exhortation: The wrath of God shall appear in the day of
vengeance, which obstinate sinners through the stubbornness of their heart
have heaped unto themselves, which despised the goodness, patience, and long
sufferance of God, when he Romans 2.4.
called them continually to Repentance. From which places it is taught: That
Gods call of fallen man is unto repentance, and his friendship and presence;
according as it is written in S. Peter: The 2 Peter 3.9.
Lord is long suffering to usward, not willing that any should perish, but
that all should come to repentance. Mat. 9.13.
I came (says Christ) for to call sinners to repentance. And Saint Paul says
to the Corinthians: God 1 Cor. 1.9.
is faithful, by whom ye were called unto the fellowship of his son Jesus
Christ our Lord. And to the Thessalonians he says: 1 These. 2.12.
That ye would walk worthy of God, who has called you unto his Kingdom and
glory. And Saint Peter says: 1 Peter 2.9
That ye should show forth the praises of him, who has called you out of
darkness into his maruailous light. And again, 1 Pet. 5.10.11
The God of all grace, who has called us into his eternal glory by Jesus
Christ, after that ye have suffered a while, make you perfect, stablish,
strengthen, settle you. To him be glory and dominion for ever and ever. Amen.

CHAP. 11. Of Justification.
IN the first part of the T. 1. p. 13.
Homily of Salvation it is said: Because all men be sinners and offenders
against God, and breakers of his Law and Commandments, therefore can no man by
his own acts, works and deeds (seem they never so good) be justified, and
made righteous before God: But every man of necessity is constrained to seek
for another righteousness or justification to be received at Gods own hands,
that is to say, the forgiveness of his sins and trespasses in such things as
he has offended. And this justification or righteousness, which we so
receive of Gods mercy and Christ's merits, embraced by faith, is taken,
accepted, and allowed of God, for our perfect and full justification. Three
things therefore must go together in our justification. The three things which
must go together in our justification. To 1. p. 14.15.
Upon Gods part, his great mercy and grace: Upon Christ's part, Justice, that
is, the satisfaction of Gods justice, or the price of our redemption, by the
offering of his body, and shedding of his blood, with fulfilling of the Law
perfectly and thoroughly: And upon our part, true and lively Faith in the
Merits of Jesus Christ; which nevertheless is the gift of God, and not man's
only work, without God. Which said Faith does not shut out Repentance, Hope,
Love, Dread, and the fear of God, to be joined with Faith in every man that is
justified, but it shuts them out from the office of justifying. Nor the
faith also does not sout out the justice of our good works necessarily to be
done afterward of duty toward God. For we are most bounden to serve God, in
doing good Deeds, commanded by him in his Holy Scripture, all the days of
our life.

Page 17.
No man may justly think, that we may by this Doctrine take any occasion of
carnal liberty, to follow the desires of the flesh, or that thereby any kind
of sin may be committed, or any ungodly living the more used. Justification
is the office of God only, and is not a thing which we render unto him, but
which we receive of him: Not which we give unto him, but which we take of
him, by his free Mercy, and by the only Merits of his most dearly beloved
Son our only Redeemer, Savior, and iustifier JESUS CHRIST.

Saint Paul says: Romans 3.23.24.25.26.
All have sinned, and come short of the glory of God, being justified freely by
his grace through the redemption that is in Jesus Ghrist: whom God has set
forth to be a propitiation through Faith in his blood, to declare his
righteousness, for the remission of sins that are past, through the
forbearance of God. To declare, I say, at this time his righteousness that he
may be just, and the iustifier of him, which believes in Jesus.

The same Apostle likewise says: Romans 8.3.
What the Law could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh, God sending
his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and Or by a sacrifice for
sin: as in the margent: Peccatum graece (...), Hebra^ce (...) Et (...) saepe
exponitur expiat^o, et piaculum seu sacrificium expiationis. Leu. 4.34. Eze.
45.23. etc. In textu etiam chaldaico vsurpatur, vt in Esdr. 6.17.
for sin condemned sin in the flesh; that the righteousness of the Law migh
be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit.

Now the Page 19.
office and duty of a Christian man unto God, what we ought on our part to
render unto God again, for his great mercy and goodness, is, not to pass the
time of this present life unfruitfully and idly, after that we are Baptized
or justified, not caring how few good works we do to the glory of God, and
profit of our neighbors: Much less is it our Office after that we be once
made Christ's members, to live contrary to the same, making our selves members
of the Devil, walking after his inticements, and after the suggestions of the
World and the flesh, whereby we know that we do serve the World, and the
Devil, and not God.

The Lord says by his Prophet Micah: Mic 6.10.11.12.
Shall I count them pure with the wicked Balances, and with the Bag of
deceitful weights? For the rich men thereof are full of Violence, and the
inhabitants thereof have spoken lies, and their tongue is deceitful in their
mouth. In the beginning of the Common Prayer it is said concerning
justification: At what time so ever a sinner does repent him of his sin from
the bottom of his heart, I will put all his wickedness out of my remembrance,
says the Lord.

These Words of the Lord spoken at large by his Prophet, are; If the Ezech.
18.21 22.
Wicked will turn from all his sins that he has committed, and keep all my
Statutes, and do that which is lawful and right, he shall surely live, he
shall not dye. All his transgressions that he has committed, they shall not be
mentioned unto him, in his righteousness that he has done, he shall live.
And (says the Apostle) being justified Romans 5.1.2.
by faith, we have peace with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ. By whom also
we have access by faith into this grace wherein we stand, and rejoice in hope
of the glory of God.

CHAP. 12. Of the true and lively Faith.
IN the third part of the T. 1. p. 19.20.
Homily of Salvation it is said: The right and true Christian faith is, not
only to believe that holy Scripture, and all the aforesaid Articles of our
Faith are true (which things the Devils themselves do believe) but also to have
a sure trust and confidence in Gods merciful promises, to be saved from
everlasting damnation by Christ: Whereof does follow a loving heart to obey his
Commandments. The T. 1. P. 18.
true and lively faith in Christ, brings forth good works, and a life
according to Gods Commandments.

And P. 20.
this true Christian faith, neither any Devil has, nor yet any man, which in
the outward profession of his mouth, and in his outward receiving of the
Sacraments, in coming to Church, and in all other outward appearances, seems
to be a Christian man, and yet in his living and deeds shows the cortrary.
For how can a man have this true faith, this sure trust and confidence in God,
that by the merits of Christ his sins be forgiven, and he reconciled to the
favor of God, and to be partaker of the Kingdom of Heaven by Christ, when he
lives ungodly, and Tit. 1.16. Mat. 10 33.
denies Christ in his deeds?

Surely no such ungodly man can have this faith and trust in God. For as they
know Christ to be the only Savior of the World: so they know also that
Wicked men shall 1 Cor. 6.9.10.
not enjoy the Kingdom of God.

They know that God Psalm. 5.4.5.6
hates unrighteousness, that he will destroy all those that speak untruly,
that those which have done John 5.29.
good works (which cannot be done without John 15.5.
a lively faith in Christ) shall come forth into the Resurrection of life: and
those that have done evil, shall come unto the Resurrection of judgment. Very
well they know also, that to them that be Contentious, and full of strife, and
to them that will not be obedient unto the truth, but will obey
unrighteousness, shall come Romans 2.8.9.
indignation, wrath, and affliction, etc.

The great and merciful benefits of God (if they be well considered) do
neither minister unto us occasion to be idle, and to live without doing any
good works, neither yet stir us up by any means to do evil things. But
contrariwise if we be not desperate persons and our Hearts harder than stones,
they move us to render our selves unto God wholly, with all our Wills, Hearts,
Might, and Power, to serve him in all good deeds, obeying his Commandments
during our lives, to seek in all things his glory and honor, not our sensual
pleasures and vain glory, evermore dreading willingly to offend such a
merciful God, and loving Redeemer, in Word, Thought, or Deed. And the said
benefits of God deeply considered, move us for his sake to be ever ready to
give our selves to our neighbors, and as much as lies in us, to study with
all our endeavor to do good unto every man: these be the fruits of true
faith.

In the Collect for Innocents day, we are Divinely taught to pray, That in our
Conversation our life may express the Faith in God, which with our tongues we
do confess. Whence we may also learn that the true Christian faith is not a
matter merely holden in the mind; but which has its operation outwardly. And
so Saint Paul says: Gala. 5.6.
In Jesus Christ, neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision;
but Faith which works by love.

Saint James says James 2.14.26
What does it profit my brethren, though a man say he has faith, and has not
works? can faith save him? As the body without the spirit is dead, so faith
without works is dead also. And Jesus the son of Sirach says: Eccles. 32.24
He that believes in the Lord takes heed unto the Commandment. Read all
three parts of the Homily of faith; for in them the true Christian faith is
described in a wonderful Divine manner.

CHAP. 13. Of the Faith in the people of God, which lived before the Incarnation
of our Lord Jesus Christ, ever since the fall.
IT is said in the second part of the T. 1. p. 25.
Homily of Faith: All the Fathers, Martyrs, and other Holy men ( whom Saint
Saul spoke of) had their Faith surely fixed in God, when all the World was
against them. They did not only know God to be the Lord, Maker, and Governor
of all men in the World: but also they had a special confidence and trust,
Idem enim omnino erat etiam tli Deus, idem Spiritus, idem Christus, eadem
fides, eadem doctrina, eadem Spes, eadem haereditas, idem soedus, eadem vis
verbi dei. Et Eusebius ait: Omnes fideles vsque ab. Adamo, re quidem ipsa
Christianos fuisse (qua^vis non ita dicerentur, etc.) Apologia Ecclesiae
Anglicanae excusa Londini Anno 1626. p. 97.98.
that he was and would be their God, their Comforter, Ayder, Helper,
Maintainer and Defender. This is the Christian faith, which these Holy men had,
and we also ought to have. And although they were not named Christian men, yet
was it a Christian faith that they had, for they looked for all the benefits of
God the Father, through the merits of his Son Jesus Christ, as we now do.
This difference is between them and us, that they looked when Christ should
come, and we be in the time when he is come.

Therefore says Saint Augustine, the time is altered and changed, but not the
Faith. For we have both one faith in one CHRIST. The same Holy Ghost also that
we have, had they, says Saint Paul. For as the Holy Ghost does teach us to
trust in God, and to call upon him as our Father: So did he likewise instruct
and teach them to say, as it is Written, Esaias 63.16.
Thou Lord art our Father and redeemer, and thy name is without beginning, and
everlasting. God gave them grace to be his Children, as he does us now. But
now by the coming of our Savior Christ, we have received more abundantly the
Spirit of God in our hearts, whereby we may conceive a greater faith and surer
trust, than many of them had. But in effect they and we be all one: We have
the same faith that they had in God, and they the same that we have. And Saint
Paul so much extolleth their faith, because we should no less, but rather
more, give our selves wholly unto Christ, both in profession and living, now
when Christ is come, than the old Fathers did before his coming.

And by all the declaration of Saint Paul, it is evident, that the true,
lively, and Christian faith, is no dead, vain, or unfruitful thing, but a
thing of perfect virtue, of wonderful Operation or working, and strength,
bringing forth all good motions, and good Works.

Saint Stephen in his last Sermon to the Jews, making mention of the Faith,
that was concerning Christ, many Ages before his Incarnation, relates what
Moses said unto the Children of Israel: A Prophet Acts 7.37.
shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of your brethren, like unto me, him
shall ye hear. And afterward he said: Which Acts 7.52.
of the Prophets have not your Fathers persecuted? And they have slain them,
which showed before of the coming of the Just one, of whom ye have been now
the betrayers and murderers.

Christ told the Jews: Your John 8.56
Father Abraham rejoiced to see my day, and he saw it, and was glad. He also
said: before John 8.55
Abraham was, I am. Before the days of Moses and the Prophets, God had his
Priesthood on earth after the order of Genesis 14.18
Melchizedec. The which Priesthood did Psalm. 110.4.
figure forth Christ's euer-lasting Priesthood, like as the Leviticall had
Heb. 8.5. and 10.1.
shadows of the same. Melchizedec Priest of the most high God bringing forth
bread and Wine unto Abraham, ministered unto him therein Pro. 9.5
bread and Wine, even the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ: The mystery whereof
Melchizedec knew, and all Priests that were of his Order, (if there were any
thereof before or after him.)

Saint Paul said to the Corinthians: That 1 Cor. 10.2* 3.4.
the Fathers were all Baptized unto Moses in the Cloud, and in the Sea. And did
all eat the same Spiritual meat, and did all drink the same Spiritual
drink. For they drank of that Spiritual Rock which follows them; and that
Rock was Christ.

Also all the people of God, that lived after the fall, until the Incarnation
of our Lord Jesus Christ, had their Faith in that Seed, which was promised;
that it should bruise the Serpents head, and Romans 16.20
bruise Satan under their Feet. Heb. 13.8.
Jesus Christ (according to his eternal Divine nature) the same yesterday, and
to day, and for ever.

CHAP. 14. Of the Arc which Noah built; and of other things in the Story of
the old Testament.
IN the first Prayer for public Baptism, the Church says: Almighty and
Everlasting God, which of thy great mercy did save Noah and his Family in
the Genesis 7.23
Arc from perishing by Water, and also did safely lead the children of
Israel thy people through the red sea, figuring thereby thy holy baptism; and
by the baptism of thy well beloved Son Jesus Christ, did sanctify the
flood Mar. 1.9.
Jordan, and all other waters to the mystical washing away of sin, etc. And
in the first part of the Tom. 1. p. 69.
Homily concerning good order and obedience to Rulers and Magistrates, it is
said: Where there is no right order, there reigns all abuse, carnal liberty,
enormity, sin, and Babylonicall confusion. By which deliueries and sundry
other of like nature in the Divine Service, Holy Church does teach us, not
only to believe the truth of the histories in holy Writ; but also to learn
that spiritual matters were figured forth by them.

Saint Paul having mentioned to the Corinthians the Israelites Fathers passing
through the sea out of Egypt into the Wilderness toward the land of Chanaan,
and what befell sundry in the wilderness, adds, 1. Cor. 10.11.
Now all these things happened unto them for Or Types; as in the margent. In 1.
Cor. 10.6. it is said, Now these things were our examples, or figures: as in
the margent.
ensamples; and they are written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the
world are come.

Likewise he writing to the Galatians concerning Abraham, Sarah, Isaac, Hagar
and Ismael, says: Gal. 4.24.
Which things are an Allegory (or whereby other things are also meant) for
these are the two Or the two Testamen^s: as it is read in the margent.
Covenants, etc. Saint Peter says: 1. Pet. 3.20.21.
The long suffering of God waited in the days of Noah, while the Arc was a
preparing: wherein a few, that is, eight souls were saved by water. The like
figure whereunto, even Baptism, does also now save us, (not the putting away
of the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good conscience toward God) by
the resurrection of Jesus Christ. Saint John said also of Gods two witnesses
slain, That their Revel 11.8.
dead bodies should lie in the streets of the great City, which spiritually
is called Sodom, and Egypt, where also our Lord was crucified. Yea and sundry
of Moses Laws besides the Leuiticall ceremonies, had a further meaning than
the grammatical or literal sense only: as Paul said, It is written in the
law of Moses, Thou shall not 1. Cor. 9.9.10.11.
muzzle the mouth of the Ox, that treads out the corn: Does God take care
for Oxen? Or says he it altogether for our sakes? For our sakes no doubt this
is written: That he which ploweth, should plow in hope: and that he which
thresheth in hope, should be partaker of the hope. If we have sown unto you
spiritual things, is it a great thing, if we shall reap your carnal things?
In the aforesaid Prayer and Homily, The words, Arc, Babylonicall, Red sea,
sloud Jordan, and Land, are intimated to have a spiritual signification. David
in the Psalms, and even all the Prophets do in their writings often use Moses
his words in a mystical sense: as, Psalm. 143.10.
Lead me into the land of uprightness. And, Psalm. 116.9.
I will walk before the Lord in the land of the living. And, Psalm. 89.15. With
Number. 10.6. Whitherto the marginall quotation refers. See Number. 23.21.
Blessed is the people that knows the joyful sound: They shall walk, O
Lord, in the light of thy countenance.

CHAP. 15. Of Circumcision.
IN the T. 2. p. 134.
Homily concerning Common Prayer and Sacraments, it is said: Circumcision was a
Sacrament, which preached unto the outward senses the inward cutting away of
the fore-skinne of the heart, and sealed and made sure in the hearts of the
circumcised the promise of God touching the promised seed that they looked for.
It was first prescribed unto Abraham, as it is written: Genesis 17.11.13
Ye shall circumcise the flesh of your fore-skinne; and it shall be a token of
the covenant betwixt you and me. And my covenant shall be in your flesh for an
everlasting covenant. The which Sacraments signification Moses taught the
Jews, exhorting them, saying: Deuteronomy. 10.16.
Circumcise the fore-skinne of your heart, and be no more stiff necked.

Saint Paul says to the Romans: Romans 4.11:
Abraham received the sign of circumcision, a seal of the righteousness of the
faith, which he had yet being uncircumcised. Also he says, Romans 15.8.
That Jesus Christ was a Minister of the circumcision for the truth of God, to
confirm the promise made unto the Fathers. And to the Colossians the Apostle
further says: Col. 2.11.
In Christ ye are circumcised with the circumcision made without hands, in
putting off the body of the sins of the flesh by the circumcision of Christ.
To the Romans he declares: Romans 2.28 29
That he is not a Jew, which is one outwardly; neither is that circumcision,
which is outwardly in the flesh: but he is a Jew, which is one inwardly; and
circumcision is that of the heart, in the spirit and not in the letter, whose
praise is not of men, but of God. There is a memorable sentence concerning
circumcision, in an ancient book of the Jews, called Zohar, wherein it is
said: (...)
We have learned that at what time soever, when any one shall be marked with
this holy sealing (or signing) of this sign of circumcision, from that time he
has a sight of God, and the holy soul is united with him. This came to pass
in some measure, when as the Sacrament of circumcision, according to Gods
ordinance was received. But now the grace is received in Baptism, and in the
circumcision of the heart.

CHAP. 16. Of the calling of Moses.
IN the second part of the T. 1. p. 33.
Homily of good works it is said: Ever since the fall of Adam, all that came
of him have been so blinded through Original sin, that they have been ever
ready to fall from God, and his Law, and to invent a new way unto salvation by
Works of their own devising. Insomuch that almost all the World, forsaking
the true honor of the only eternal living God, wandered about their own
fantasies, Worshipping, some the Sun, the Moon, etc. Such was the rudeness
of the people, after they fell to their own fantasies, and left the eternal
living God and his Commandments, that they devised innumerable images and
Gods. In which error and blindness they did remain, until such time as
Almighty God, pitying the blindness of man, sent his true Prophet Moses into
the World, for to reprove and to rebuke this extreme madness, and to teach
the people to know the only living God, and his true honor and worship.

1 John 3.11.12.
Caine is mentioned the first man after Adam, that brought forth the fruits
of the fall, in that he fell from the love, which by the Law of nature he owed
unto his Brother, and hated him, and slew him. Caines posterity showed a
degenerated nature; namely, Genesis 4.23.
Lamech in taking two Wives: Whereas, as Christ says, From Math. 19.8.
the beginning it was not so. For in the beginning it was said: Genesis 2.24.
A man shall leave Father and Mother, and shall cleave to his Wife; and they
twain shall be one flesh. Lamech also further manifested his corrupted nature,
saying: I have Genesis 4.24.
slain a man in my Wounding, and a young man to my hurt. Great was the
departure from Gods everlasting Law, until the days of Enos: And Genesis 4.26.
then (says the Text) began men to call upon the name of the Lord.

Afterward Enoch, the Jude 14.15.
seventh from Adam, prophesied, saying: Behold the Lord comes with ten
thousands of his Saints, to execute judgment upon all, and to convince all
that are ungodly among them of all their ungodly deeds, which they have
ungodly committed, and of all their hard speeches which ungodly sinners have
spoken against him.

But in the days of Noah iniquity again more exceedingly abounded, though he
was a 2 Pet. 2.5.
Preacher of righteousness among the people. And God brought in the Flood upon
the World of the Ungodly. After the Flood (the consideration whereof, one might
think, would have terrified mankind from committing wickedness,) people
being multiplied, especially the Gene. 10.10.
posterity of Ham, fell to evil working again, to the building of a City and
Tower, whose Gene. 11.4.
top might reach unto Heaven, and to make themselves a name, etc. Yea, not only
the posterity of Ham, but many also of the posterity of Shem degenerated so
far, as that they served Ios. 24.2.
other Gods.

And as Achtor in the Book of Judith said, Abraham with his, would not follow
the Judith 5.7.
Gods of their Fathers, which were in the Land of Chaldea: but left the way of
their Ancestors, and worshipped the God of Heaven, the God whom they knew. In
the days of Abraham there was in the World Gods Priesthood after the order of
Genesis 14 18
Melchizedec, whereof among the most there was little or no use made; but
blindness of understanding, and iniquity of life most prevailed, until that
God raised up Moses (as the Homily says,) who was Heb. 3.5.
faithful in all Gods house, who also witnessed against the abominations of
the world, and taught Gods Ecclus. 1.5
everlasting Law, with Gods Statutes Deuteronomy 4.1
and judgments.

CHAP. 17. Of the Passover.
IN the first part of the T. 2 p. 197.
Homily concerning receiving the Sacrament, it is said: Of old time God decreed
his wondrous benefits of the deliverance of his people, to be kept in memory
by the eating of the Passover, with his rites and Ceremonies.

In the second part of the Page 202.
Homily concerning the Sacrament, it is said: That newness of life, as fruits
of Faith is required in the partakers of the Lords table, we may learn by
eating of the Typical Lamb, whereunto no man was admitted, but he that was a
Jew, that was circumcised, that was before sanctified.

And in the To. 2. p. 196. Transitus noster, id est, Phase ita e^lebratur,
siterrena et Aegiptu^ dimittente^, ad Coelestia festmemus. Hieronimus in cap.
26. Math.
Homily of the Resurrection it is said: Christ our Easter Lamb is offered up
for us, to slay the power of sin, to deliver us from the danger thereof, and
to give us example^ to dye unto sin in our lives. And let us pass over the
affections of our old conversation, that we may be delivered from the bondage
thereof, and rise up with Christ. Moses from the Lord said unto the people of
Israel: And Exo. 12.26.27
it shall come to pass, when your Children shall say unto you, what mean you
by this service? That ye shall say, it is the sacrifice of the Lords
Passover, who passed over the houses of the Children of Israel in Egypt, when
he smote the Egyptions, and delivered our houses.

Also says Moses, Exodus 12.48
when a stranger shall soiourne with thee, and will keep the Passover unto
the Lord, let all his Males be Circumcised, and then let him come near; and
keep it. And he shall be as one that is borne in the Land: for no
uncircumcised person shall eat thereof.

And concerning the Spiritual signification of the Passover, it is manifest
out of Saint Paul's Words, where he says: 1 Cor. 5.7.8
Purge out the old Leaven, that ye may be a new Lump, as ye are unleavened;
for even Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us. Therefore let us keep the
Feast, not with old Leaven, neither with the Leaven of malice and wickedness,
but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth.

The Passover was the second Sacrament celebrated in the Church of the Jews,
the Deuteronomy. 14.2
peculiar people of God in those times.

CHAP. 18. Of the Law given by Moses.
IN the first part of the T. 2. p. 275.
Homily against Disobedience and wilful Rebellion, it is said: As God the
Creator and Lord of all things appointed his Angels and Heavenly Creatures in
all obedience to serve and to honor his Majesty: So was it his will that man,
his chief Creature upon the earth, should live under the obedience of his
Creator and Lord. And for that cause, God, as soon as he had Created man,
gave unto him a certain Precept and Law, which he (being yet in the state of
innocence, and remaining in Paradize) should observe as a pledge and token of
his due and bounden obedience, etc.

In the third part of the T. 1. p. 85.
Homily against Adultery, it is signified, That before the Law was given by
Moses, the Law of nature only reigned in the hearts of men.

In the first part of the T. 2. p. 18.19.
Homily against peril of Idolatry, it is said: If we be the people of God,
how can the Word and Law of God not appertain unto us? Saint Paul alleging
one Text out of the Old Testament, concludes generally for other Scriptures
of the old Testament, as well as that, saying: Whatsoever is Written before
(meaning in the old Testament) is Written for our instruction. Which sentence
is most specially true of such Writings of the old Testament, as contain the
immutable Law and Ordinances of God, in no Age or time to be altered, nor of
any persons of any Nations, or Age whatsoever to be disobeyed, etc.

And in the first part of the T. 2. p. 125.
Homily concerning the place and time of Prayer, it is said: Whatsoever is
found in the Commandment, appertayning to the Law of nature, as a thing most
godly, most just, and needful for the setting forth of Gods glory, it ought to
be retained and kept of all good Christian people.

Moses divided the Law, which he from God gave to the people of Israel, into
Deuteronomy. 6.1 Deuteronomy. 6.20
three kinds, saying: Now these are the Commandments, the Statutes, and the
judgments, which the Lord your God commanded to teach you, that ye might do
them in the Land, etc. By the Commandments are meant the Deuteronomy. 4.13.14
ten Commandments, called commonly the Moral Law: By Deuteronomy. 16.12 See in Psalm.
119.8. according to the Divine Service Translation, and compare therewith the
last translation.
Statutes are meant the ceremonies, or the ceremonial Law: And by Judgments
are meant the Exodus 21.1
judicial Law.

Concerning the Moral Law, whereof the ten Commandments are a sum, or ten
general deliueries there, Christ in his Gospel has confirmed the everlasting
continuance of the same, the far greatest part of his new Testaments Precepts
being Moral, commanding and saying: Matthew 3.12
Whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, do ye even so unto them for
this is the Law and the Prophets. And Paul signifies the euerlastingnesse of
that Law, saying: Ephe. 6.2
Honor thy father and thy mother, (which is the first Commandment with
promise,) that it may be well with thee, and thou may live long on the earth.

The Ceremonial Laws, as of Circumcision in the Gal. 5.2.
flesh, of Heb. 1^.5.8
offering for Sacrifices the bodies of Beasts, and the like, endured but until
the time of Heb. 9.10.
Reformation, and the time of the Acts 21.25.
Establishing of the Ordinances of Messiah the Lord Jesus Christ.

Paul says: If ye be Gala. 5.2.
Circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing. And the Apostle speaking of
Christ's coming into the world, delivers: Wherefore when he comes into the
World, he says: Sacrifice Heb. 10.5.6.7 8.9.
and offering thou would not, but a body have thou prepared me. In burnt
offerings and sacrifices for sin thou have had no pleasure: Then said he,
Lo, I come to do thy will (O God:) He takes away the first, that he may
establish the second. Yet of no Ceremonial Law is the righteousness or moral
signification ceased, which is to be observed of us; but it endures for ever,
as it may very plainly appear out of Saint Paul's Words to the Romans,
where he says: Romans 8.4.
That the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, who Walk not
after the flesh, but after the Spirit.

The judgments or the Judicial Laws (though the righteousness intended by
them all, is everlasting) are not in every See the seventh Article of the
Religion established.
particular of them now in force in any Christian Common Wealth: as the Law of
punishing Adultery with Death: Which may appear by Christ's dismissing the
John 8.11.
Woman taken in Adultery: and by his permitting a man to Mat. 5.32.
put away his Wife for Fornication: Which putting away need not be, if the
Leu. 20.10.
Law of Moses concerning punishing Adultery with Death stood still in
Universal force or virtue. For so soon as the married party had committed
Adultery, he or she should be taken away by suffering Death, according to
Moses Law.

No law or ordinance of what kind so ever, which has proceeded forth of the
Wisdom of the Eternal God, for the use of Mankind, is to be neglected as
concerning the equity or morality thereof; though the ceremony of it, or such
like circumstance be ceased: as it is written, 2. Tim. 3.16.17.
All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is prositable for Doctrine,
for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness; That the man
of God may be perfect, thoroughly Furnished unto all good works.

And again the Apostle says to the Romans: Romans 15.4.
Whatsoever things were written before time, were written for our learning, etc.

CHAP. 19. Of the Tabernacle and Temple of the Jews.
IN the first part of the Tom. 2. p. 126.127.
Homily concerning the place and time of Prayer, it is said: So soon as God
had delivered his people from their enemies, and set them in some liberty in
the Wilderness, he set them up a costly and a curious Tabernacle, which was as
it were the Parish Church, a place to resort unto of the whole multitude, a
place to have Sacrifices made in, and other obseruances and rites to be used
in. Furthermore, after that God according to the truth of his promise, had
placed and quietly settled his people in the land of Canaan, now called Iewrie,
he commanded a great and magnificent Temple to be builded by King Solomon, as
seldom the like has been seen: a Temple so decked and adorned, so
gorgeously garnished, as was meet and expedient for people of that time, which
would be allured and stirred with nothing so much, as with such outward goodly
gay things. This was now the Temple of God, endued also with many gifts and
sundry promises. This was the public Church, and the mother Church of all
Iewrie. Here was God honored and served. Hither was the whole Realm of all the
Israelites bound to come at three solemn feasts in the year, to serve their
Lord God here.

The Tabernacle consisted of three parts: Exodus 27.9.
the Court, the Exodus 26.33.
Holy, and the most Holy. The Number. 1.50.51.53.
Levites did service in and about the Court: The Heb. 9.6.
Priests did service in the Holy: And the Heb. 9 7.
high Priest alone once every year did service in the most Holy.

The house of the Lord which Solomon built, consisted likewise of three parts:
The 1. Kings 6.3.
Porch, answering to the Court of the Tabernacle: The 1. Kings 6.5:
Temple, answering to the holy Place: and the Oracle, answering unto the most
holy Place.

Concerning the signification of the Temple, it is delivered in the first part
of the Homily of the right use of the Church, and also in the first part of the
T. 2. p. 127* T. 2. p. 2. P. 209.
Homily concerning the place and time of Prayer. Indeed the chief and special
Temples of God, wherein he has greatest pleasure, and most delights to
continue and dwell in, are the bodies and minds of true Christians, and the
chosen people of God, according to the doctrine of the holy Scripture, declared
in the first Epistle to the Corinthians: 1. Cor. 3.16: 17.
Know ye not, ( says Saint Paul) that ye be the Temple of God, and that
the Spirit of God dwells in you?

If any man defile the Temple of God, him will God destroy: for the Temple of
God is Holy, which ye are. And again in the same Epistle: 1 Cor. 6.19.20
Know ye not that your body is the Temple of the Holy Ghost dwelling in you,
whom ye have given you of God?

In the third part of the T. 2. p. 68.
Homily against the peril of Idolatry, there is cited a memorable Sentence of
Saint Jerome: That it is the Temple of the Lord, wherein dwells true Faith,
godly conversation, and the company of all virtues. Read there also his
interpretation of the goodly ornaments of the Temple built by Solomon, which
Exposition is very remarkable.

To Conclude this point: Although God would have our inward man to be a
Tabernacle or Temple for the Pro. 23.26. Ephe. 3.17. 1 Peter 3.4. 2 Cor. 6.16.
dwelling of his holy Spirit: Yet all this notwithstanding (as it is said in
the first part of the Tom. 2. p. 2.
Homily concerning the right use of the Church.) The material Church or Temple
is a place 1 Chronicles. 28.11.12. Psalm. 74 8. Luke 4.16.
appointed as well by the usage and continual examples expressed in the old
Testament, as in the New; for the people of God to resort together unto, etc.

CHAP. 20. Of Saint John Baptists Preaching.
IN the Collect for Saint John Baptists day, it is said: That by Gods
providence he was wonderfully borne, and sent to prepare the way of Jesus
Christ our Savior by Preaching of Penance. That the Birth of John the Baptist
was wonderful, it may appear by the Words of Zacharias to the Angel
foretelling of John's birth, saying: Luke 1.18.
Whereby shall I know this? for I am an old man, and my Wife well stricken in
years. That he was sent to prepare the way of the Lord, may appear also from
the Angels Words, saying: Luke 1.15.16.17.
He shall be filled with the Holy Ghost, even from his mothers Womb. And many
of the children of Israel shall he turn to the Lord their God. And he shall
go before him in the spirit and power of Elias to turn the hearts of the
Fathers to the Children, and the Disobedient to the wisdom of the just, for to
make ready a people prepared for the Lord. And that this preparing was by
Preaching of Penance or Repentance, it is testified by St. Luke, who says:
Luke 3.3.4.5.6.
John came into all the Country about Jordan, Preaching the Baptism of
Repentance, for the remission of sins: As it is written in the Book of
Esaias the Prophet, saying: Esaias 40.3.4.5. According it is read in the Epistle
for St. John Baptists day. Hoc ita distinguendum esse ostendit Hebraea
distincti?, and comparatio sequentis membri: Iun^us in annot. ad Esaias 40 30.
Mysteriu^ in hac Historia a Propheta Esaia olim praedicta, et tanto studio a
sanctis Euangelistis ad notata, latere aliqui^ majus suspicor, quam aut capere
ipse satis, a^t satis quea^ admirari. Causa bonus in Annal Bar.
A voice cried in the Wilderness, Prepare the way of the Lord in the
Wilderness, make straight the pathe of our God in the Desert. Let all Valleys
be exalted, and every Mountain and Hill be laid low. What so ever is
crooked, let it be made straight, and let the rough be made plain fields. For
the glory of the Lord shall plainly appear, and all flesh shall at once see
and behold it.

The which Doctrine is called by Saint Mark, the Mark 1.1
beginning of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. And the Prophet Malachy thus
Preached it: Mal 3.1.
Behold I will send my Messenger, and he shall prepare the way before me; and
the Lord whom ye seek, shall suddenly come to his Temple: even the Messenger
of the Covenant, whom ye delight in; behold he shall come, says the Lord of
Hosts.

Great was the Ministry of John the Baptist, as it may appear out of the
words of Zacharias his Father, who Prophesied of him, saying: Luke
1.76.77.78.79.
And thou child shall be called the Prophet of the Highest; for thou shall go
before the face of the Lord to prepare his ways; to give knowledge of
Salvation unto his people, by the remission of their sins: To give Light to
them that sit in darkness, and in the shadow of Death, and to guide our feet
into the way of peace. Christ himself testified of him, that Mat. 11.11.
among them, which are borne of Women, there has not risen a greater than
John the Baptist. And that all the Prophets and the Law were Luke 16.16. Mat.
11.13.
until John. So great a one he was, that he had Luke 11.1.
Disciples after a special manner differing from the Clergy of Iewry, in his
time. He was not only the Mat 3.1.
first Minister of the Sacrament of Baptism, but also he that Math. 3.13.14
15.16*
Baptized the Lord JESUS CHRIST. And therefore he is in an especial manner,
more than any other Minister, as it were surnamed the Baptist or the Baptizer.

CHAP. 21. Of the Holy Incarnation and Nativity of our Lord Jesus Christ.
IN the Preface to be Read upon Christmas day, it is said: That God did give
Jesus Christ his only Son to be borne as this day Esaias 9.6.
for us; who by the operation of the Math. 1.20
Holy Ghost, was made very man of the substance of the Virgin Mary his mother,
and that without spotte of sin, io make us Ephe. 5.25.26.27:
clean from all sin.

And in the T. 2. p. 173.
Homily of the Nativity it is delivered: That he made all them which would
John 1.12.
receive him truly, and believe his Word, good Esaias 61.3.
trees, and Esaias 32.15 16 and 51.3.
good ground, fruitful and pleasant John 15.2.
Branches, Children of 1 These. 5.5.
Light, Ephesians. 2.19. Hebr. 12.22.23.24. Phil: 3.20.
Citizens of Heaven, sheep of his John 10.16.
Fold, members of his Ephe. 5.30.
body, Romans 8.17. James 2.5.
Heirs of his Kingdom, his true John 15.14.15
friends and Heb. 2.11.12
Brethren, sweet and lively 1 Cor. 10.17
bread, the 1 Peter 21 10. Hosea 2.23.
Elect and chosen people of God. But for the better understanding and
consideration of this thing, let us behold the end of his coming, so shall we
perceive what great commodity and profit his Nativity has brought unto us
miserable and sinful Creatures.

The end of his coming was to Math. 1.21.
save and Luke 1.74.
deliver his people, Math. 5.17. John 15.10.
to fulfill the Law for us, to John 18.37.
bear Witness unto the Truth, As in the second past of the Homily against
Adultery, it is said. See Math. 5.21 22.27.28. etc. T. 1. P. 84.
to restore the Law of his Heavenly Father unto the right sense, understanding
and meaning; to teach and Luke 4 18.
Preach the words of his Father, to give John 12.46
Light unto the World, to Luke 6.32.
call sinners unto repentance, Math. 11.28 Acts 3.19. Esaias 40.29.
to refresh them that labor and be heavy laden, to John 12.31.
east out the Prince of this World, to Col 1.21.22.
reconcile us in the body of his flesh, to 1 John 3.8.
dissolve the works of the Devil; last of all, to become a 1 John 2.2.
propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but also for the sins
of the whole World.

These were the chief ends wherefore Christ became man, not for any profit
that should come to himself thereby, but only for our sakes, that we might
John 15.15.
understand the will of God, be John 17.22.
partakers of his Heavenly light, be delivered out of the Math. 4.24. 2 Timothy
2.26.
Devils claws, released from the Hebrews 12.1. Romans 6.18.22.
burden of sin, Romans 3.24.25.
justified through faith in his blood, and finally, Psalm 73.24. Colos. 3 4. 1
Pet. 5.10.
received up into everlasting glory, there to Romans 8.17. 2 Timothy 2.11.12
reign with him for ever. Therefore says the Church in the conclusion of the
said P. 174.
Homily: Dearly beloved, let us not forget this love of our Lord and Savior,
let us not show our selves unmindful or unthankful toward him: but let us
love him, fear him, obey him, and serve him. Let us confess him with our
mouths, praise him with our tongues, believe on him with our hearts, and John
15.8.
glorify him with our good works. John 1.9.
Christ is the Light, let us receive the Light: Christ is the Reave. 3.14
Truth, let us believe the Truth: Christ is the John 14.6
way, let us follow the way. Happy are they, (says the Scripture,) Mat. 24.13.
which continue unto the end. Be Reave. 2.10
faithful (says God) until Death, and I will give thee a Crown of Life.
Again he says in another place: He that puts his hand unto the Luke 9.62
Plough, and looks back, is not meet for the Kingdom of God. Therefore let
us be strong, steadfast, and immovable, 1 Cor. 15.58
abounding always in the works of the Lord.

Jesus Christ says: John 3.16.17
God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten son: that whosoever
believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life. For God sent not
his Son into the world to condemn the world; but that the world through him
might be saved. It is written in the Book of Baruch: This Baruch 3.35 36.37.
is our God, and there shall none other be accounted of in comparison of him.
He has found out all the way of knowledge, and has given it unto Jacob his
servant, and to Israel his beloved. Afterward did he show himself upon earth,
and conuersed with men.

CHAP. 22. Of Christ's death.
IN the beginning of the second Tom. 2. p. 181
Homily concerning the death and passion of our Savior Christ, it is said:
That we may the better conceive the great mercy and goodness of our Savior
Christ, in suffering death Heb. 2.9. 2. Cor. 5.14.15. See chapter 25 of the
merit of Christ's death.
universally for all men, it behooves us to descend into the bottom of our
conscience, and deeply to consider the first and principal causes, wherefore
he was compelled so to do. When our great Grandfather Adam had broken Gods
commandment, in eating the apple forbidden him in Paradise, at the Genesis 3.6.
motion and suggestion of his wife, he purchased thereby not only to himself,
but also to his 1. Cor 15.22.
posterity for ever, the just wrath and indignation of God, etc. He became Romans
5.12.14
mortal, he lost the favor of God, He was Genesis 3.23.24.
cast out of Paradise, he was no longer a Citizen of Heaven: but a firebrand
of Hell, and a bond-slaue to the Devil. To this does our Savior bear
witness in the Gospel, calling us Mat. 18.11.
lost sheep, which have gone 1. Pet. 2.25.
astray, and wandered from the true Shepherd of our souls. To this also does
Saint Paul bear witness, saying: Romans 5.18.
That by the offense of only Adam, death came upon all men unto condemnation.
And it is said in the T. 2. p. 169.
Homily of the Nativity of Christ: When the Gal. 4.4.
fullness of time was come, that is, the perfection and course of years,
appointed from the beginning, then God according to his former covenant and
promise, sent a Messiah, otherwise called a Mediator, into the world; not such
a one as Moses was, not such a one as Joshua, Saul or David was: but such a one
as should deliver mankind from the bitter curse of the Law, and make perfect
satisfaction by his death, for the sins of all people; namely he sent his
dear and only Son Jesus Christ, borne (as the Apostle says) of a woman,
and made under the law, that he might Gal. 4.5.
redeem them that were in bondage of the law, and make them the children of
God by adoption.

Concerning the necessity of Christ's death, the Apostle declares to the
Hebrews saying: Heb. 9.15.16.17.18 23.
And for this cause he is the Mediator of the new Testament, that by means of
death, for the redemption of the transgressions that were under the first
Testament, they which are called, might receive the promise of eternal
inheritance. For where a Testament is, there must also of necessity be the
death of the Testatour. For a Testament is of force after men be dead:
otherwise it is of no strength at all whilst the Testatour lives. Whereupon
neither the first testament was dedicated without blood. It was therefore
necessary that the patterns of things in the heavens should be purified with
these, but the heavenly things themselves with better sacrifices than these.

And in another place the same Apostle says: Heb. 2.9.10.
We see Jesus, who was made a little lower than the Angels, for the suffering
of death, crowned with glory and honor, that he by the grace of God should
taste death for every man. For it became him, for whom are all things, and by
whom are all things, in bringing many sons unto glory, to make the Captain
of their salvation perfect through sufferings. For as much then as the children
are partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself likewise took part of the
same, that through death he might destroy him, that had the power of death,
that is, the devil. And Christ signified the same unto the two men going to
Emmaus, saying: Luke 24 26.
Ought not Christ to have suffered these things, and to enter into his glory?
The Prophets Psalm. 2^.
David, Isa. 53.
Isaiah and Dan. 9.24.25.26.
Daniel foretold expressly of his death, And 2. Esdras 7.29
Esdras has mentioned the same.

CHAP. 23. Of the resurrection and ascension of Jesus Christ.
IN the T. 2. p. 189.
Homily of the Resurrection of our Savior Jesus Christ, it is said: So great
surely is the matter of this Article, and of so great weight and importance,
that it was thought worthy to keep our Savior still on earth forty days after
he was risen from death to life, to the confirmation and establishment thereof
in the hearts of his Disciples. Saint Paul says to the Corinthians: 1. Cor
15.14.1^.
If Christ be not risen, then is our preaching vain, and your faith is also
vain: yea and we are found false witnesses of God, because we have testified
of God, that he has raised up Christ. And if Christ be not raised, your faith
is vain, ye are yet in your sins. The Church delivers also in the
aforesaid P. 191. 192.
Homily: It had not been enough to be delivered by his death from sin,
except by his Resurrection we had been Romans 4.25.
endowed with righteousness. And it should not avail us to be delivered from
death, except he had risen again, to open for us the gates of Heaven, to enter
into life everlasting. He died to destroy the rule of the Devil in us, and he
rose again, to send down his holy Spirit to rule in our hearts, to endow us
with perfect righteousness. The second Antheme to be said on Easter day, is:
1. Cor. 15.20.21.
Christ is risen again, the first fruits of them that sleep. For seeing that
by man came death, by man also comes the resurrection of the dead. For as by
Adam all men do dye: so by Christ all men shall be restored to life.
Therefore says the Church in the Preface to be read on Easter day: Chiefly are
we bound to praise thee, for the glorious Resurrection of thy Son Jesus
Christ our Lord: for he is the very 1. Cor. 5.7.
Paschall Lamb which was offered for us, and has Ioh. 1.29.
taken away the sin of the world, who by his 1. Cor. 15.54.55.
death has destroyed death, and by his rising to life again has restored to
us life 1. These 4.14. John 5 24.28.29. Romans 8.11. Ioh. 6.33. 1. Cor. 15.23.
everlasting. Also by his rising again he was manifested to be God, as it is
written: And declared to be the Son of God, with power, according to the
Spirit of Holiness, Romans 1.4.
by the Resurrection from the dead. Read diligently the Homily of the
Resurrection, wherein the Doctrine thereof, and the use which we are to make of
it, is in most Divine manner delivered.

Now concerning Christ's Ascension, it is signified in the T. 2. p. 189.
Homily of the Resurrection; That he ascended up to his Father into the
heavens, there to receive the Ioh. 20.17. John 17.5. 1. I^e^. 3.22.
glory of his most triumphant conquest and victory. And in the Preface to be
read upon the Ascension day, it is said: that Jesus Christ our Lord, after his
most glorious Resurrection manifestly appeared to all his Apostles, and in
their Acts 1.9.10.11.
sight ascended up into Heaven, to prepare a place for us, that where he is,
thither might we also ascend, and reign with him in glory.

That Christ was glorified being ascended into Heaven, David declares, saying:
Psalm. 68.18.
Thou have ascended on high, thou have led captivity captive, thou have
received gifts for men: yea for the rebellious also, that the Lord might dwell
among them. Saint Paul says: Heb. 12.2.
That Christ for the joy which was set before him, endured the Cross,
despising the shame, and is set down at the right hand of the Throne of God.
That he also ascended to John 14.2.3*
prepare in Heaven a place for his true Disciples, he testifies by his
Words, saying: In my Fathers House are many Mansions: if it were not so, I
would have told you: I go to prepare a place for you. And if I go, and
prepare a place for you, I will come again, and receive you unto my self,
that where I John 17.24. John 12.26.
am, there ye may be also.

The Apostle to the Hebrews writting concerning the Ascension, says also:
Hebr. 9.24.
Christ is not entered into the Holy places made with hands, which are figures
of the true; but into Heaven it self, now to appear in the presence of God
for us. And to the Ephesians he says: Ephe. 4.10.
He that descended, is the same also that ascended up far above all Heavens,
that he might fill all things.

CHAP. 24. Of the coming down of the Holy Ghost.
HOly Church in most Divine manner in the Sacred Letany, mentions together
all the great things done and suffered by Christ for Mankind; teaching us to
pray, that by all and every of them we in particular may be delivered, saying:
By the Mystery of thy Holy Incarnation, by the Holy Nativity and Circumcision,
by the Baptism, Fasting, and Temptation: Good Lord deliver us. By thine Agony
and Bloody Sweat, by thy Cross and passion, by thy precious death and
burial, by thy glorious Resurrection and Ascension, and by the coming of the
Holy Ghost, Good Lord deliver us. Wherein we are taught to consider, that the
coming of the Holy Ghost is a matter pertaining to our deliverance or
salvation, and now here to be meditated on.

In the Preface to be read on Whitsunday, it is said: That according to the
most true promise of Jesus Christ our Lord, the Holy Ghost came down this day
from Heaven with a sudden great sound, as it had been a mighty wind, in the
likeness of fiery Acts 2.2.3.4.
tongues, lighting upon the Apostles, to teach them, and to lead them to all
Ioh. 16.13.
Truth, giving them both the gift of diverse Languages, and also boldness with
fervent Zeal, constantly to preach the Gospel unto all Mar. 16.15.
Nations, whereby we are brought out of darkness and error, into the clear
1. Pet. 2 9. Math. 4.16.
light and true knowledge of God the Father, and his Son Jesus Christ.

It is said in the first part of the Tom. 2. p. 208.209.
Homily for Whitsunday: As there are three several and sundry persons in the
Deity: so have they three several and sundry offices proper unto each of them.
The Father to create, the Son to redeem, the Holy Ghost to sanctify and
regenerate. Whereof the last, the more it is Ioh. 3 4.
hid from our understanding, the more it ought to move all men to wonder at
the secret and mighty working of Gods Holy Spirit, which is within us. For it
is the Holy Ghost, and no other thing, that does Ioh. 6.63.
quicken the minds of men, stirring up good and godly motions in their
hearts, which are agreeable to the will and Commandment of God, such as
otherwise of their own crooked and perverse nature they should never have.

The power of the Holy Ghost is to regenerate men, and as it were, to bring
them forth anewe, so that they shall be 2. Cor. 5.17.
nothing like the men, that they were before.

Neither does he think it sufficient inwardly to work the spiritual and new
birth of man, unless he do also dwell and abide in him. 1. Cor. 3.16. and
6.19.
Know ye not ( says Saint Paul) that ye are the Temple of God, and that his
Spirit dwells in you? Know ye not that your bodies are the Temples of the
Holy Ghost, which is within you?

Again he says: Romans 8.9.
You are not in the flesh, but in the spirit, For why? The Spirit of God
dwells in you.

To this agrees the Doctrine of Saint John, writing in this wise: The 1. Ioh.
2.27.
Annoynting which ye have received (he means the Holy Ghost) dwells in
you. And the Doctrine of Saint Peter says the same, who has these words: The
Spirit 1. Pet. 4.14.
of glory, and of God rests upon you. O what comfort is this to the heart of
a true Christian, to think that the Holy Ghost Romans 8.9.10 11.
dwells within him.

In the second part of the aforesaid P. 212.
Homily, it is also said: That our Savior Jesus Christ departing out of the
world unto his Father, promised his Disciples to send down Ioh. 14.16.
another Comforter, which should continue with them for ever, and direct them
into all truth.

Neither must we think, that this Comforter was either promised, or else given
only to the Apostles, but also to the 1. Cor. 12.3.13.
Universal Church of Christ, dispersed through the world: for unless the Holy
Ghost had bin always present governing and preserving the Church from the
beginning, it could never have sustained so many and so great brunts of
affliction and persecution with so little damage and harm, as it has.

Saint Paul says: Romans 8.9.
If any man has not the Spirit of Christ, the same is none of his. Hereby then
it is evident and plain to all men, that the Holy Ghost was given, not only
to the Apostles, but also to the whole body of Christ's Congregation, although
not in like form and Majesty, as he came down at the Feast of Pentecost.

The Lord has said by his Prophet Isaiah: Isa. 59.20.21.
The Redeemer shall come to Sion, and unto them that turn from transgression
in Jacob. As for me, this is my covenant with them, says the Lord, My Spirit
that is upon thee, and my words, which I have put in thy mouth, shall not
depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the
mouth of thy seeds seed, says the Lord, from henceforth and for ever. The
need we have of Gods holy Spirit, is signified in the Collect to be read on the
fifth Sunday after Easter, where it is said: Lord from whom all good things do
come, grant us thy humble servants, that by thy holy inspiration, we may ^hil.
2.13.
think those things which be good, and by thy merciful Psalm. 143.10. Psalm.
25.5.9.
guiding may perform the same, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Likewise in the Collect to be read before the ten Commandments. Almighty God,
unto whom all hearts be Acts 1.24.
open, all desires known, and from whom no secrets are hid: cleanse the
thoughts of our hearts by the inspiration of thy holy Spirit, that we may
perfectly love thee, and worthily magnify thy holy Name, through Christ our
Lord.

The holy Ghost comes down into the spirit of Gods people, in sundry
measures and degrees. It is in some measure received in Baptism; and therefore
in the Service for Baptism it is prayed, that the party to be baptized may be
baptized with water and the Mat. 3 11.
Holy Ghost, etc. It is also received in Acts 8.15.16.17.
Bishopping or Confirmation. And therefore in the service thereof it is prayed:
Strengthen them, we beseech thee, O Lord, with the Holy Ghost, the comforter.
And in the act of Confirmation, when the Bishop lays his hand on the party to
be Confirmed, it is said: Defend, O Lord, this child with thy heavenly grace,
that he may continue thine for ever, and daily increase in thy Holy Spirit
more and more, until he come to thine everlasting Kingdom.

It is also received in the Communion, as says the Tom. 2. p. 192
Homily of the Resurrection: Thou have received Christ's body to have within
thee the Father, Son, and Holy 1. Cor. 12.13.
Ghost, for to dwell with thee, and to endow thee with grace, to strengthen
thee against thine enemies, and to comfort thee with their presence. And in the
same Page 193.
Homily it is said: How can we find in our hearts to show such extreme
unkindness to Christ, who has now so gently called us to mercy, and offered
himself unto us, and he now Ioh. 6.56.
entered within us? Yea how dare we be so bold to renounce the presence of the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost? For where one is, there is God all whole
in Majesty, together with all his power, wisdom, and goodness.

By other ordinances of God, the holy Ghost is more and more received, as by
Prayer, etc. according as Christ says: Luke 11.13.
Your heavenly Father will give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him. And
likewise S. Peter with the other Holy Apostles has declared, to what
conditioned people God does send down his Holy Spirit more and more, where he
says: Acts 5.32.
We are VVitnesses of these things, and so is also the Holy Ghost, whom God
has given to them that obey him. Read the third part of the T. 2. p. 229. 230
Homily for Rogation Week, and there are expressed many operations of the
Holy Ghost, for and in the people of Almighty God.

CHAP. 25. Of the Merit of the Redemption wrought by Jesus Christ.
THE Church in her most Sacred Catechism, teaches every one of her Children
to say: I believe in God the Son, who has redeemed me and all Mankind. And
in the Prayer before the Ministration of the Communion, it is said: Jesus Christ
suffering Death upon the Cross for our Redemption, made there (by his own
Oblation of himself once offered) a full, perfect, and sufficient Sacrifice,
Oblation, and satisfaction for the sins of the whole World.

In the second T. 2. p. 181.
Homily of CHRIST'S passion it is said: He suffered Death universally for all
men.

And in the same P. 185.
Homily it is said: God gave Christ to the whole World, that is to say, to
Adam, and to all that should come after him.

And in the first part of the T. 2. p. 200.
Homily concerning the Sacrament, it is said: The Death of Christ is available
for the Redemption of all the World. The holy Scriptures testify the same
greatness of the merit of the Redemption wrought by Jesus Christ. Saint John
says: He is the propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but also
for the sins of 1 John 2.2
the whole World.

Saint Paul says: Christ gave himself a ransom for 1 Timothy 2.6.
all. And to the Hebrews he says: Heb. 2.9.
Jesus Christ tasted Death for every man. To the Corinthians he says: If one
dyed for all, then were all dead; and he dyed for 2 Cor. 5.14.15
all, etc. And to the Romans he says: Romans 5.18. 1 Cor. 15.21.22 John 12.32.
As by the offense of one, judgment came upon al men to condemnation: Eve so
by the righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all men unto
justification of life.

In the second part of the T. 1. p. 50.
Homily concerning Swearing, it is signified, That not only Christ's death, but
his life also, etc. are meritorious, where it is said: Whosoever wilfully
Zechar. 5.4.5 See Chap. 73.
forswear themselves upon Christ's Holy Euangely, they utterly forsake Gods
mercy, goodness and truth, the merits of our Savior Christ's Nativity, Life,
Passion, Death, Resurrection, and Ascension; they refuse the forgiveness of
sins promised to all penitent sinners, the joys of Heaven, the company with
Angels and Saints for ever. Also the aforesaid actions of Christ are
meritorious, because they were done for the sake of mankind.

CHAP. 26. Of the end for the which Jesus Christ redeemed mankind, and who of
years of discretion, or of perfect age, partake of the merit of the same
redemption.
IT is said in the second part of the T. 1. p. 82.
Homily against adultery: Christ that innocent Lamb of God, has bought us
from the servitude of the Devil, not with corruptible gold and silver, but
with his most precious and dear heart blood. To what intent? That we should
fall again into our old uncleanness and abominable living? Nay verily: but
that we should serve him all the days of our life, in holiness and
righteousness, that we should glorify him in our bodies, by purity and
cleanness of life.

And in the T. 2. p. 179.
Homily for good Friday it is said: Christ has not so redeemed us from sin,
that we may safely return thereto again: but he has redeemed us, that we
should forsake the motions thereof, and live unto righteousness. Yea we be
therefore washed in our Baptism from the filthiness of sin, that we should
live afterward in the pureness of life. In Baptism we promised to renounce
the Devil and his suggestions, we promised to be (as obedient children)
always following Gods will and pleasure.

So in the T. 2. p. 195.
Homily of the Resurrection it is said: Ye must consider that ye be therefore
cleansed and renewed, that ye should from henceforth serve God in holiness
and righteousness all the days of your lives, that ye may reign with him in
everlasting life.

If ye refuse so great grace, whereto ye be called, what other thing do
ye, than heap to your selves damnation more and more, and so provoke God to
cast his displeasure unto you, and to revenge this mockage of his Holy
Sacramerits in so great abusing of them.

In the second T. 2. p. 186.
Homily of the Passion it is said: Now it remains that I show unto you, how
to apply Christ's death and passion to our comfort, as a medicine to our wounds,
so that it may work the same effect in us wherefore it was given, namely, the
health and salvation of our souls. For as it profits a man nothing to have
salve, unless it be well applied to the part infected: so the death of Christ
shall sland us in no force, unless we apply it to our selves in such sort as
God has appointed.

Almighty God commonly works by means, and in this thing he has also
ordained a certain mean, whereby we may take fruit and profit to our souls
health, and that is Faith. Not an unconstant or wavering faith: but a sure,
steadfast, grounded, and unfeigned faith. Page 188.
For as all they which beheld steadfastly the brazen Serpent, were healed and
delivered at the very sight thereof, from their corporal diseases and bodily
stings: even so all they which behold Christ crucified, with a true and lively
faith, shall undoubtedly be delivered from the grievous wounds of the soul,
be they never so deadly or many in number.

In the Tom. 2. p. 173
Homily of the Nativity it is said: After that Christ was come down from
heaven, and had taken our frail nature upon him, he made all them that would
receive him truly, and believe his holy Word, good trees, etc. And to show
more plainly who partake of Christ's merits, the Tom. 2. p. 179
Homily for good Friday declares, saying: That we do call for mercy in vain,
if we will not show mercy to our neighbors. For if we will not put wrath and
displeasure forth of our hearts to our Christian brother, no more will God
forgive the displeasure and wrath, that our sins have deserved before him. For
under this condition does God forgive us, if we forgive other. God is to be
obeyed, which commands us to forgive, if we will have any part of the
pardon, which our Savior Christ purchased once of God the Father, by shedding
of his precious blood. And in the second part of the Tom. 1. p. 94.
Homily against contention the Church says: What crakest thou of thy head, if
thou labor not to be in the body? Thou can be no member of Christ, if thou
follow not the steps of Christ. In the first Tom. 2. p. 180
Homily of the Passion most divinely it is declared: That it shall little
avail us to have in meditation the fruits and price of Christ's passion, to
magnify them, and to delight or trust in them, except we have in mind his
examples in passion, to follow them. If we thus therefore consider Christ's
death, and will stick thereto with fast faith, for the merit and deserving
thereof, and will also frame our selves in such wise to bestow our selves, and
all that we have by charity, to the behoof of our neighbor, as Christ spent
himself wholly for our profit, then do we truly remember Christ's death; and
being thus followers of Christ's steps, we shall be sure to follow him thither,
where he now sits with the Father and the holy Ghost. Likewise in the Tom.
2. p. 196
Homily of the Resurrection it is said: Let us keep our feast the whole term
of our life, with eating the bread of pureness of godly life; and truth of
Christ's Doctrine. Thus shall we declare that Christ's gifts and graces have
their effect in us, and that we have the right belief and knowledge of his holy
resurrection: where truly if we apply our Faith to the virtue thereof in our
life, and conform us to the example and signification meant thereby, we shall
be sure to rise hereafter to everlasting glory, by the goodness and mercy of
our Lord Jesus Christ.

And in the same Page 191.
Homily it is said: Christ passed through death and hell, to the intent to put
us in good hope, that by his strength we shall do the same. In the Collect for
Palm Sunday it is signified, That Almighty God of his tender love toward man
sent our Savior Jesus Christ to take upon him our flesh, and to suffer death
upon the Cross, that all mankind should follow the example of his great
humility. In the Collect for the second Sunday after Easter it is said: That
Almighty God gave his only Son to be unto us both a sacrifice for sin; and
an example of godly life. In that most divine exhortation in the commination
Service it is said: Let us return unto our Lord God, who is the merciful
receiver of all true penitent sinners, assuring our selves, that he is ready to
receive us, and most willing to pardon us, if we come unto him with faithful
repentance, If we will submit our selves unto him, and from henceforth walk in
his ways. If we will take his easy yoke and light burden upon us, to follow
him in lowliness, patience and charity, and be ordered by the governance of
his holy Spirit, seeking always his glory, and serving him duly in our
vocation, with thanksgiving. This if we do, Christ will deliver us from the
curse of the Law, and from the extreme malediction, which shall light on them,
that shall be set on his left hand, etc. The holy Apostle Paul in his Epistle
to Titus says: Tit. 2.14.
Jesus Christ gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity,
and purisie unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works. Zacharias
in his song said: q That we being delivered out of the hands of our enemies,
might serve him without fear, in holiness and righteousness before him all
the days of our life. Saint Paul to the Romans says: Romans 8.3.4.
What the Law could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh, God
sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and Or by a sacrifice
for sin: as it is read in the margent.
for sin condemned sin in the flesh: That the righteousness of the Law
might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit.
To the Corinthians he says: 2. Cor. 5.15.
Christ died for all, that they which live, should not henceforth live unto
themselves, but unto him which died for them, and rose again.

To the Thessalonians he says: 1. These. 5.9.10
God has not appointed us to wrath, but to obtain salvation by our Lord Jesus
Christ; who died for us, that whether we wake or sleep, we should live
together with him. And Saint Peter says: 1. Pet. 1.24.
Christ his own self bare our sins in his own body on the tree, that we
being dead unto sin, should live unto righteousness. Again he says: 1.
Pet. 2.21.
Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an example, that we should follow his
steps. Further he says: 1. Pet. 4.1.2.
Forasmuch as Christ has suffered for us in the flesh, arm your selves
likewise with the same mind: for he that has suffered in the flesh, has
ceased from sin; That he no longer should live the rest of his time in the
flesh, to the lusts of men, but to the will of God. p Luke 1.74.75


Who of ripe age partake of Christ's merits.
Now who of ripe age partake of Christ's merits, these Scriptures following, and
sundry others do declare. John 14.15.21.23.
If ye love me (says Christ) keep my Commandments. He that has my
Commandments and keeps them, he it is that loves me; and he that loves
me, shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him: and will manifest my
self unto him.

Again, Ioh 15.10 14.
If ye keep my Commandments, ye shall abide in my love, even as I have
kept my Fathers commandments, and abide in his love. And, ye are my friends,
if ye do whatsoever I command you. Again, Ioh. 8.31.32.
If ye continue in my word, then are ye my Disciples indeed: and ye shall know
the truth, and the truth shall make you free. And to the Hebrews the Apostle
says: Heb. 3.14.
We are made partakers of Christ, If we hold the beginning of our confidence
steadfast unto the end.

To the Romans he says: Rom 6.5.8.
If we have been planted together in the likeness of his death: we shall be
also in the likeness of his resurrection. If we be dead with Christ, we
believe that we shall also live with him. Again, Rom 8.11.13.14.17.
If the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead, dwell in you, he that
raised up Christ from the dead, shall also quicken your mortal bodies, Or,
because of his spirit that dwells in you: as in the margent.
by the Spirit that dwells in you. If ye live after the flesh, ye shall dye:
but if ye through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live.
For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of God. And if
children, then heirs, heirs of God, and joint heirs with Christ: If so be
that we suffer with him, that we may be also glorified together. In like manner
says the Apostle to Timothy: 2. Tim. 2.11.12.13.
It is a faithful saying: for if we be dead with him, we shall also live with
him. If we suffer, we shall also reign with him: If we deny him, he also will
deny us. Saint John says: 1. John 1.7.
If we walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have fellowship one with
another, and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all sin.

To the Hebrews the Apostle says: Heb. 5.9.
Christ is the Author of eternal salvation unto all them that obey him. And
hereto may be added that saying of David unto Solomon: 1. Chro. 28.9.
And thou Solomon my son, know thou the God of thy father, and serve him with
a perfect heart, and with a willing mind: For the Lord searches all hearts,
and understands all the imaginations of the thoughts: if thou seek him, he
will be found of thee: but if thou forsake him, he will cast thee off for ever.

Of childrens partaking of Christ's merits.
As concerning infants, that they partake of the efficacy of Christ's passion
and oblation: The Church in the first part of the Tom. 1. p. 1^.
Homily of salvation thus delivers: Infants being baptized and dying in their
infancy, are by the sacrifice of Christ washed from their sins, See chap.
51. following.
brought to Gods favor, and made his children, and inheritors of his Kingdom
of Heaven. And now this point be concluded with the words of the Church in the
second T. 2 p. 168.
Homily of the passion: The Lord for his mercy sake grant that we never forget
the great benefit of our salvation in Jesus Christ, but that we always show
our selves thankful for it, abhorring all kind of wickedness and sin, and
applying our minds wholly to the service of God, and the diligent keeping of
his commandments.

CHAP. 27. Of Christ's Priesthood.
IN the second part of the T. 2. p. 116.
Homily concerning Prayer it is said: Christ sitting in heaven, has an
everlasting Priesthood, and always prays unto his Father for them that be
penitent, obtaining by virtue of his wounds, which are evermore in the sight of
God; not only perfect remission of our sins, but also all other necessaries
which we lack in this world. In the second part of the To. 2. p. 162.
Homily of Alms deeds, it is said: The godly do learn, that when the
Scriptures say, that by good and merciful works we are reconciled to Gods
favor; we are taught then to know what Christ by his intercession and
mediation obtains for us of his Father, when we be obedient to his will: Yea
they learn in such manner of speaking a comfortable argument of Gods singular
favor and love, who attributes that unto us and to our doings, which he by
his Spirit works in us, and through his grace procures for us. In the first
T. 2. p. 180.
Homily of the Passion it is likewise said: Christ sits on the right hand of
God his Father, as our Proctour and Attorney, pleading and suing for us in all
our needs and necessities. Wherefore if we want any gift of godly wisdom, we
may ask it of God, for Christ's his sake, and we shall have it. The Prophet
David speaking of Christ's everlasting Priesthood says, Psalm. 110.4.
The Lord has sworn and will not repent, thou art a Priest Riblia vulgata
habent in aeternum. aeternitas omnium temporum complexu describitur: vt, quod
suit, est and crit. (...) pluraliter in Eccles. 1.10. tempus prateritum denotat.
for ever, after the order of Melchisedee. The Apostle says to the Hebrews:
Heb. 2.17.18.
In all things it behooued him to be made like unto his brethren, that he might
be a merciful and faithful high Priest, in things pertaining unto God, to
make reconciliation for the sins of the people. For in that he himself has
suffered being tempted, he is able to succor them that are tempred. Heb. 7.23.
And they truly were many Priests, because they were not suffered to continue
by reason of death: But this man, because he continues for ever, has an
unchangeable Priesthood. Wherefore he is able to save them to the uttermost,
that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them.
Heb. 10.11.12.13.14.
And every Priest stands daily ministering, and offering oftentimes the same
sacrifices, which can never take away sins. But this man after he had offered
one sacrifice for sins, for ever sat down on the right hand of God, from
henceforth expecting till his enemies be made his foote-stoole. For by one
offering he has perfected for ever them that are sanctified. Romans 8.26.27.
His Spirit (says the Apostle to the Romans) helps our infirmities: for we
know not what we should pray for as we ought; but the Spirit it self makes
intercession for us with groanings, which cannot be uttered. And he that
searches the hearts, knows what is the mind of the Spirit, because he
makes intercession for the Saints, according to the will of God. Concerning
the Priesthood of the Lord Jesus Christ, read Isaiah 53.

CHAP. 28. Of Christ's Prophetship.
IN the third part of the T. 2. p. 228.229.
Homily for Rogation week it is said: By Jesus Christ our heavenly Mediator
do we know the favor and mercy of God the Father, by him know we his John
15.15.
will and pleasure toward us. For he is the Heb. 1.3.
brightness of his Fathers glory, and a very clear image and pattern of his
substance. It is he whom the Father in heaven delights to have for his well
beloved Son, whom he authorized to be our teacher, whom he charged us to
hear, saying, Man. 17 5.
Hear him. Moses said unto the Fathers (as Peter relates) ^eu^. 1^.15. Acts
3.12.23.
A Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of your brethren, like
unto me, him shall ye hear in all things whatsoever he shall say unto you: And
it shall come to pass, that every soul which will not hear that Prophet
shall be destroyed from among that people. The first text whereon Christ
preached, declared his Prophetical office, wherein it is said of him: Luke
4.18.
The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to preach the
Gospel unto the poor, he has sent me to heal the broken hearted, to preach
deliverance to the captives, and recovering of sight to the blind, to set at
liberty them that are bruised, to preach the acceptable year of the Lord. S.
John said of him, John 1.^.
That he was the true light which lights every man that comes into the
world. He shows to all men, that be in error, the light of the truth, to the
intent they may return into the way of righteousness: as it is delivered in
the Collect for the third Sunday after Easter. He teaches through his
Ministers; as Paul said: 2. Cor. 13.3.
Since ye seek a proof of Christ speaking in me. He also inwardly instructs
his people, as it is testified of Lydia; That the Lord Acts 16.14.
opened her heart, that she attended unto the things which were spoken by Paul.
Also he is the foreceller of things to come, as it is written: Revel. 1.1.
The Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave unto him* to show unto his
servants things, which must shortly come to pass. Heb. 1.1.
God (says the Apostle to the Hebrews) who at sundry times, and in diverse
manners spoke in times past to the Fathers by the Prophets; has in these last
days spoken unto us by his Son; who has said, Heb 2.12.
I will declare thy name unto my brethren.

CHAP. 29. Of Christ's Kingdom.
IN the third part of the Tom. 2 p. 227.
Homily for Rogation week, it is said: To Jesus Christ our Savior and
Mediator, has God the Father given the power of heaven and earth, and the
whole jurisdiction and authority, to distribute his goods and gifts committed
unto him. For so writes the Apostle, Ephesians. 4.7.
To every one of us is grace given, according to the measure of Christ's giving.
And thereupon to execute his authority committed, after that he had brought
sin and the devil to captivity; to be no more hurtful to his members, he
ascended up to his Father again, and from thence sent liberal gifts to his
well beloved servants; and has still the power to the worlds end, for to
distribute his Fathers gifts continually in his Church, to the establishment
and comfort thereof. In the first part of the Tom. 1^.54.
Homily concerning falling from God, it is said: Whereas God has showed to all
them that truly believe his Gospel, his face of mercy in Jesus Christ, which
does so lighten their hearts, that they (if they behold it as they ought to
do) be transformed to his image, be made partakers of the heavenly light, and
of his Holy Spirit, and be fashioned to him in all goodness requisite to the
children of God: So if they after do neglect the same, if they be unthankful
unto him, if they order not their lives according to his example and doctrine,
and to the setting forth of his glory, he will take away from them his
Kingdom, his Holy Word, whereby he should reign in them, because they bring
not forth the fruit thereof, that he looks for. Saint Paul says to the
Romans: Rom 5.20.21
The law entered that the offense might abound: but where sin abounded, grace
did much more abound: That as sin has reigned unto death; even so might
grace reign through righteousness unto eternal life, by Jesus Christ our
Lord. Math. 28.18.
All power (says Christ) is given to me both in heaven and in earth.
Concerning his Kingdom Isaiah thus writes: Isa. 9.6.7.
Unto us a child is borne, unto us a Son is given, and the government shall
be upon his shoulder, and his name shall be called Wonderful, Counselor, the
mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of peace: of the increase of his
government and peace there shall be no end, upon the Throne of David, and
upon his Kingdom to order it, and to establish it with judgment and with
justice from henceforth even for ever. Romans 14.17.
The Kingdom of God (says Paul) is righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy
Ghost. Luke 17.20.21
The Kingdom of God (says Jesus Christ) comes not with observation: neither
shall they say, Lo here, or Lo there: for behold the Kingdom of God is
within you. Psalm. 145.13.
Thy Kingdom (says David) is an Or, a kingdom of all ages: as in the Margent.
everlasting Kingdom, and thy dominion endures throughout all generations.
Christ must 1. Cor. 15.24.25.
reign (says Paul) till he has put all his enemies under his feet. Then
comes the end, when he shall have delivered up the Kingdom to God even the
Father, when he shall have put down all rule, and all authority and power.

CHAP. 30. Of Christ's mediation for his people, and of the reconciliation.
IN the third part of the Tom. 2. p. 228
Homily for Rogation week* it is said: God the Father of all mercy wrought the
high benefit unto us of reconciliation, not by his own person; but by a mean,
by no less mean than his only beloved Son, whom he spared not from any
pain and travail, that might do us good. And in the said part of the Page
228.
Homily, it is further delivered: That as by him (being the everlasting
Wisdom) he wrought all the world, and that is contained therein, so by him
only and wholly would he have all things restored again in heaven and in earth.

In the third part of the T. 2. p. 118.
Homily concerning Prayer, it is said: Whereas we must needs use the help of
some mediator and intercessour, let us content our selves with him, that is
the true and only Heb. 9.15.
Mediator of the new Testament, namely the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. For
as Saint John says, 1. Ioh 2.1.2.
If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
righteous, who is the propitiation for our sins. And Saint Paul in his first
Epistle to Timothy says: 1 Timothy 2.5.6.
There is one God, and one Mediator between God and man, even the man Jesus
Christ, who gave himself a ransom for all men, to be a testimony in due time.
The Prophet Isaiah declaring the state of man fallen, says: Isa. 59.2.
Your iniquities have separated between you and your God, and your sins have
hid his face from you that he will not hear.

Saint Paul shows the Saints of Ephesus what Christ's mediation had wrought
for them, saying: Ephesians. 2.13.14.15.16.
But now in Christ Jesus, Ye who sometimes were far off, are made nigh by
the blood of Christ. For he is our peace, who has made both one, and has
broken down the middle wall of partition between us: having abolished in his
flesh, the enmity, even the law of commandments contained in ordinances, for
to make in himself of twain one new man, so making peace. Likewise he says
to the Saints of Colosse: Colos. 1.18: 19.20 21.22.23
It pleased the Father, that in him should all fullness dwell. And (having made
peace through the blood of his cross) by him to reconcile all things unto
himself, by him I say, whether they be things in earth, or things in heaven.
And you that were sometime alienated, and enemies in your mind by wicked
works, yet now has he reconciled, in the body of his flesh through death, to
present you holy and unblameable, and unreprovable in his sight, If ye
continue in the faith grounded and settled, and be not moved away from the hope
of the Gospel, etc.

And for as much as Christ is for his people an high Priest unto God his
Father, to make intercession for them; also a Prophet to his people, or a
declarer unto them of his Fathers will, and is the Revel. 15.3.
King of Saints, or administreth the kingome of Romans 5.21.
grace unto and within his people: Whereas also he is the appointed Heb. 1.2.
heir of all things, and all things were created Col. 1.16.17.18.
by him, and for him: Also he is before all things, and by him all things
consist, And he is the head of the body the Church: who is the beginning, the
first borne from the dead, that in all things he may have the pre-eminence; and
no good thing comes from God the Father unto the Church on earth, but through
the Acts 4.12. John 20 31. John 15.16.
Name, and for the Dan. 9.17.
sake of Jesus Christ, Therefore the Church concludes even every of her
prayers with these or the like words, Through Jesus Christ, for the honor of
our Advocate and Mediator Jesus Christ, Through the merits of thy only Son,
etc.

For conclusion therefore of the mediatorie works of Jesus Christ, let S.
Paul's words to the Saints that were at Rome be here for our meditation: Rom
5.8.9.10.11.
God commends his love toward us, in that, whiles we were yet sinners,
Christ died for us. Much more then being now justified by his blood, we shall
be saved from wrath, through him. For if when we were enemies, we were
reconciled to God, by the death of his Son: much more being reconciled, we
shall be saved by his life. And not only so, but we also joy in God through
our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have now received the atonement. Let us
therefore (says the Church in the second part of the Tom. 1. p. 82.
Homily against Adultery) consider, first the glory of Christ, then our estate,
our dignity, and freedom wherein God has set us, by giving us his Holy
Spirit, and let us valiantly defend the same against Satan, and all his crafty
assaults, that Christ may be honored, and that we loose not our liberty or
freedom, but still remain in 1 Cor. 6.17. Ephesians. 4.3.4.
one Spirit with him.

CHAP. 31. Of Christ's judging Mankind.
IT is said in the Athanasian Creed: Jesus Christ shall come from the right
hand of the Father God Almighty, for to judge the quick and the dead. At whose
coming all men shall rise again with their bodies, and shall give account for
their own works. And they that have done good, shall go into life
everlasting: and they that have done evil, into everlasting fire. So the
Church says in Saint Ambrose Song: We believe that thou shall come to be our
Judge. In the Service for the burial of the dead, it is said: Thou most worthy
Judge Eternal. In the exhortation for the visitation of the sick, it is said:
Forasmuch as after this life, there is an account to be given unto the
righteous Judge, of whom all must be judged without respect of persons: I
require you to examine your self and your state, both toward God and man, so
that accusing and condemning your self for your own faults, you may find,
mercy at our heavenly Fathers hand for Christ's sake, and not be accused and
condemned in that fearful Judgment.

In the It is set in the beginning of the Psalms in Meeter, in the book of
Common Prayer in Folio.
Athanasian Treatise concerning the use and virtue of the Psalms, it is said:
The Psalms inform and teach every man with diverse instructions, whereby he
may not only epsy the affections and state of his soul, and win a good
pattern and discipline, how he may please God; but also with what form of
words he may amend himself, and how to give God due thanks: least if he
should speak otherwise than were convenient, he should fall into impiety, by
his vnreuerent estimation of God. For we must all make an account to the Judge,
as well of our Math. 12.36.
idle words, as of our evil deeds.

In the third part of the T. 2. p. 273.
Homily of Repentance, it is said: Verily when the highest, Sumner of all,
which is death, shall come, he will not be said nay: but we must forthwith be
packing, to be present before the Judgment Seat of God, as he does find us,
according as it is written: Eccles. 11.3.
Where as the tree falls, whether it be toward the South, or toward the
North, there it shall lie. Whereunto agrees the saying of the holy Martyr of
God Saint Cyprian, saying: As God does find thee when he does call, so does he
judge thee. In the second part of the T. 1. p. 63.
Homily against the fear of death, it is said, That Jesus Christ shall be
openly showed to be judge of all the world. In the T. 2. p. 109.
Homily against excess of apparel, it is said: Unto God we shall render
accounts for all his benefits, at the glorious appearing of our Savior Christ.
In the third part of the To. 2. p. 123.
Homily concerning prayer, it is said: We must take heed that we call upon
this advocate Christ, whiles we have space given us in this life, least when we
are once dead, there be no hope of salvation left unto us. For as every man
sleeps with his own cause, so every man shall Romans 14.12.
rise again with his own cause. And look in what state he dies, in the same
state he shall also be judged, whether it be to salvation or damnation. In the
third part of the Tom. 2. p. 229.
Homily for Rogation week, it is said: By Christ has almighty God decreed to
dissolve the world, to call all before him, to judge both the quick and the
dead, and finally by Mat. 25.34.41
him shall he condemn the wicked to eternal fire in hell, and give the good
eternal life, and set them assuredly in presence with him in heaven for
evermore. And in the first part of the Tom. 1. p. 3.
Homily, which is an Exhortation to the reading and knowledge of holy
Scripture, it is said: By this word of God we shall be judged: For the word,
that I speak (says Christ) is it, that shall Ioh. 12.48.
judge in the last day. Jesus Christ himself has also said: The Ioh. 5.22,
23, 27.
Father judges no man, but has committed all judgment unto the Son, that
all men should honor the Son, even as they honor the Father. And he has
given him authority to execute judgment, because he is the Son of man. Saint
Peter says: Acts 10.4^.
God has commanded us to preach unto the people, and to testify, that it is
he which was ordained of God, to be the judge of quick and dead. Saint Paul
says to the Romans, We shall all stand before the Romans 14.10, 11, 12.
judgment seat of Christ. For it is written, As I live (says the Lord) every
knee shall bow to me, and every tongue shall confess unto God. So then every
one of us shall give account of himself to God. And to the Saints of Corinth
he said: 2 Cor. 5.10, 11.
We must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, that every one may
receive the things done in his body, according to that he has done, whether it
be good or bad. Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord, we persuade men.
And unto Timothy Saint Paul said: 2. Tim. 4.1.
I charge thee before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the
quick and the dead at his appearing and his kingdom, etc. Himself has also
said: The Son of man shall come in the glory of his Father, with his Angels,
and then shall he Mat. 16.27.
reward every man according to his works. Again, Mat. 25.31, 32.33.40.
When the Son of man shall come in his glory, and all the holy Angels with
him, then shall he sit upon the throne of his glory. And before him shall be
gathered all Nations, and he shall separate them one from another, as a
Shepherd divides the Sheep from the Goats, and he shall set the Sheep on
his right hand, but the Goats on the left, etc. And these shall go away into
everlasting punishment, but the righteous into life eternal. Saint Paul says
to the Thessalonians, 2 The. 1.7.8.9
The Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven, with his mighty Angels, in
flaming fire taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the
Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall be punished with everlasting
destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power.
Wherefore says Saint Peter: 1 Pet. 1.17.
If ye call on the Father, who without respect of persons judges according to
every man's work, pass the time of your soiourning here with fear.

And says the Apostle to the Hebrews: Heb. 1228.29.
wherefore we receiving a kingdom, which cannot be moved, let us have grace,
whereby we may serve God acceptably with reverence and godly fear. For our God
is a consuming fire. The which Apostle also said: Heb. 10.30.31
The Lord shall judge his people. And it is a fearful thing to fall into the
hands of the living God.

CHAP. 32. Of the Church of Christ.
IN the Nicene Creed we are taught to believe and confess one Catholic and
Apostolic Church. In the second part of the Tom. 2. p. 213
Homily for Whitsunday, the Church of Christ is thus described: The true Church
is an universal congregation or fellowship of Gods faithful and elect people,
Ephesians. 2.20.
built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself
being the head corner stone. And it has always three notes or marks whereby
it is known. Pure and sound doctrine, The Sacraments ministered according to
Christ's holy institution, and the right use of Ecclesiastical discipline. This
description of the Church is agreeable both to the Scriptures of God, and also
to the doctrine of the ancient Fathers, so that none may justly find fault
therewith.

Saint Paul says to the Romans concerning the mystical union of the Church:
Romans 12.4:5.
As we have many members in one body, and all members have not the same office:
so we being many are one body in Christ, and every one members one of another.
And to the Corinthians he says: 1. Cor. 12.12.
As the body is one, and has many members, and all the members of that one
body being many, are one body, so also is Christ. That they are faithful
people or true believers in Jesus Christ, it appears in that they are called
the Gal 6.10.
household of faith. Also they are faithful unto God, as it may appear out of
Saint Paul's words to the Ephesians, saying: Paul an Apostle of Jesus Christ, by
the will of God, to the Saints which are at Ephesus, and to the Ephesians. 1.1.
faithful in Jesus Christ.

Likewise to the Collossians he says: To the Saints and Col. 1.2.
faithful brethren in Christ, which are at Colosse. They are also faithful
each to other, and faithful toward all people: as it is said unto servants
concerning masters, Let them not despise them, because they are brethren; but
rather do them service, because they are 1. Tim 6.2.
faithful, etc. Siluanus a member of the Church of Christ is said to be a 1.
Pet. 5.12.
faithful brother unto those to whom Saint Peter wrote. So Saint John
testified of Gaius, saying: Beloved, thou do 3. John 5.
faithfully whatsoever thou do to the brethren, and unto strangers. So
Saint Peter showing the dealing of the true members of Christ, and how they, to
whom he wrote, were to behave themselves among the unbelievers, says: 1. Pet.
2.12.
Having your conversation honest among the Gentiles, that whereas they speak
against you as evil doers, they may by your good works which they shall
behold, glorify God in the day of visitation. So Saint Paul to the
Thessalonians prescribes: 1 These. 5.15.
Ever follow that which is good, both among your selves, and to all men. They
are also elected of God, as Saint Peter says: ^ Pet. 1.2.
Elect according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, through
sanctification of the Spirit unto obedience, and sprinkling of the blood of
Jesus Christ. Likewise Saint Paul to the Thessalonians signifies, saying: 2
These. 2.13.
God has from the beginning chosen you to salvation through sanctification of
the Spirit, and belief of the truth.

And to the Ephesians he says: Ephesians. 1.4.
He has chosen us in him from before the foundation of the world, that we
should be holy, and without blame before him in love. The Church also
professes pure and sound doctrine: as Christ signifies, saying: Ioh. 10.27.
My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me.

Again, Ioh. 8.47.
He that is of God, hears Gods word. Saint John says: 1 Ioh. 4.6.
He that knows God, hears us. Saint Luke records of the Christians: Acts
2.42.
That they continued steadfast in the Apostles doctrine, and fellowship, and in
breaking of bread, and in prayers. St. Paul says to Timothy: 1 Timothy 3 15.
That the house of God, which is the Church of the living God, is the pillar
and ground of the truth. Moreover, the Church of Christ has the Sacraments
ministered according to his holy institution: as the Church of Corinth received
1 Cor. 1.14.16
Baptism, and celebrated the 1 Cor. 11.2.20
Lords Supper. In the Acts of the Apostles it is sundry times mentioned, that
when any believed, they were Acts 8.12.
Baptized. Also it is recorded that the Disciples or Baptized ones j came
together to break bread, that is, to ear the Acts 20.7.
Lords Supper. The Church of Christ also rightly uses Ecclesiastical
discipline: as the Church of Corinth 1. Cor. 5.4 5, 11.
excommunicated the incestuous one, according to the Law; If any man that is
called a brother be a fornicator, etc. with such a one, no, not to eat: and
afterward when he was 2. Cor. 2.6.7.8
penitent, the Church received him again into her holy communion.

CHAP 33. Of the Ministry which Christ appointed in his Church in general.
IN the Book of ordering Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, in the Prayer before
the consecration of a Bishop, it is said, That Christ being ascended into
heaven, powered down his gifts abundantly upon men, Ephesians. 4.11.12
making some Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors and
Doctors, to the edifying and making perfect his congregation. And in the prayer
before ordering Priests, it is added; By whose labor and Ministry, he
gathered together a great flock in all parts of the world, to set forth the
eternal praise of his holy Name. It is there also added, So that as ^ell by
these thy Ministers, as by them to whom they shall be appointed Ministers, thy
holy Name may be always glorified, and thy blessed kingdom enlarged. The
Apostle says to the Hebrews, Hebr. 5.1.^.4.5.
Every high Priest taken from among men, is ordained for men in things
pertaining to God, that he may offer both gifts and sacrifices for sins; who
can have compassion on the ignorant, and on them that are out of the way, for
that he himself also is compassed with infirmity: And by reason hereof he
ought as for the people, so also for himself, to offer for sins. And no man
takes this honor unto himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron.

The ground of Christ's Ministry is signified in Saint Peter's delivery out of
Amos, by whom the Lord said, Acts 15.16.17
After this I will return, and will build again the tabernacle of David,
which is fallen down; and I will build again the ruins thereof, and I will
set it up, that the residue of men might seek after the Lord, and all the
Gentiles, upon whom my name is called, says the Lord, who does all these
things. Paul and Barnabas said unto the Jews, Act. 13.46.47
It was necessary that the word of God should first have been spoken unto you;
but seeing ye put it from you, and judge your selves unworthy of everlasting
life, lo, we turn to the Gentiles: For so has the Lord commanded us,
saying; I have set thee to be a light of the Gentiles, that thou should be
for salvation unto the ends of the earth. Also it is signified thereof to the
Hebrews, where it is said, If perfection were by the Leuiticall Priesthood
(for under it the people received the Law) what further need was there, that
another Priest should rise after the order of Melchisedec, and not be called
after the order of Aaron: For the Priesthood being changed, there is made of
necessity a Cur ergo baptizas. si tu ^on es Christus ille, neque Elias, neque
Propheta ill^? Ioh. 1.25. Hinc doceri potest Iudaeos ipsos non ignorasse
mutationem aliquam fore in religione sub Mes^ia: inquit quidam in annot. ad
Ioh. 1.25. in bibl. Iun.
change also of the Law.

CHAP. 34. Of Deacons.
IN the sacred Service for the ordering of Deacons, it is said; It appertains
to the office (...) l a Deacon in Heb. 7.11.12.
the Church, where he shall be appointed, to assist the Priest in Divine
Service, and specially when he ministers the holy Communion, and to help him
in distribution thereof, and to read holy Scriptures, and Homilies in the
Congregation, and to instruct the youth in the Catechism, to Baptize, and to
Preach, if he be admitted thereto by the Bishop. And furthermore it is his
office, where provision is so made, to search for the sick, poor, and
impotent people of the Parish, and to intimate their estates, names, and places
where they dwell, to the Curate, that by his exhortation they may be relieved
by the Parish, or other convenient alms.

The Deacons (says Saint Paul unto Timothy) must be such as hold the 1. Tim.
3.8.9.10.
Mystery of the faith in a pure conscience. Their ordination is mentioned in
the Acts of the Apostles, where it is delivered, Act. 6.2.3.4 5.6
that the Apostles said to the multitude of Disciples; It is not reason, that
we should leave the word of God, to serve tables. Wherefore (said they) look
out among you seven men of honest report, full of the Holy Ghost and wisdom,
whom we may appoint over this business: and they choose Stephen, Philip, etc.
whom they set before the Apostles, and when they had prayed, they laid their
hands on them. Act. 6.9.10.
Steven forthwith mightily defended the Christian faith by disputing against
the adversaries thereof; and afterward made a divine declaration recorded in
the seventh of the Acts. Act. 8.5.12.
Philip after Steuens death went down unto the City of Samaria, and preached
Christ unto them, and baptized both men and women.

CHAP. 35. Of Priests.
IN the Divine Service of the ordering of Priests, in the exhortation to be
read unto them before hands be laid on them, it is said; And now we exhort you,
in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, to have in remembrance, into how high a d
gnity, and to how chargeable an office ye be called, that is to say, the Mal. 3
1.
Messengers, the Isa. 56 10.
Watchmen, the Ier. 3.15.
Pastors, and the 1 Cor 4.1.2.
Stewards of the Lord, to teach, to Eze. 33.7.8.9.
premonish, to Ioh. 21.15.16.17.
feed, and provide for the Lords family, to Ezech. ^4 6.
seek for Christ's sheep that be dispersed abroad, and for his children which
be in the Phil. 2.15.
midst of this naughty world, to be saved through Christ for ever. Wherefore,
consider with your selves the end of your Ministry, toward the childen of
God, toward the spouse and body of Christ, and see that you never cease your
labor, your care, and dil^gence until you have done all that lies in you,
according to your bounden duty, to bring all such as are, or shall be
committed to your charge, unto that Ephesians. 4.13.
agreement in faith, and knowledge of God, and to that ripeness and
perfectness of age in Christ, that there be no place left among you, either of
error in religion, or for viciousness of Col. 1.28.
life. It is said unto every one receiving the order of the Priesthood, he
humbly kneeling upon his knees, by the Bishop, when he with the Priests present
lay hands on him, Ioh. 20.22.23
Receive the Holy Ghost, whose sins thou do forgive, they are forgiven:
and whose sins thou do retain, they are retained. And be thou a faithful
2 Timothy 2.15. 1 Cor 9.17.
dispenser of the word of God, and of his holy Sacraments, in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Amen. The Lord by Ezechiel
finding fault with the shepherds of Israel, intimates therein what their
duty is, saying: Ezech. 34.2.4. Zechar. 11.16.
Woe be to the shepherds of Israel that do feed themselves: should not the
shepherds feed the flocks? The diseased have ye not strengthened, neither
have ye healed that which was sick, neither have ye bound up that which was
broken, neither have ye brought again that which was driven away, neither
have ye sought that which was lost.

Saint Paul testified of his diligence in the Ministry, saying: Col. 1.28.29.
Christ we preach, warning every man, and teaching every man in all wisdom,
that we may present every man perfect in Christ Jesus. Whereunto I also labor,
striving according to his working, which works in me mightily. Such as were
consecrated to the Ministry received the gift of the Holy Ghost, by the 2.
Tim. 1.6. ^ Tim. 4.14. Acts 13.23. Acts 26.17.18.
laying on of the hands of the Presbytery. And by the receiving of the said
gift of God in some measure, one becomes to be a Minister of Jesus Christ, to
have some ability in dividing the word of truth aright, as also some power in
the use of the Mat. 16 19.
Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven.

Whereas also the Apostle says: Romans 12.6.7.8
Having then gifis, differing according to the grace that is given to us,
whether prophecy, let us prophecy according to the proportion of Faith: or
Ministry, let us wait in our Ministering; or he that teaches, on teaching: or
he that exhorts, on exhortation: Ministers not having the faculty of
preaching out of the Pulpit, but preaching or publishing the truth which is
after godliness, in other manner according as the Church has orceined, are to
be accounted true Ministers of Christ, though they can minister but the milk
of the word of God.
It appears that such of the Priesthood, which have not the gift of prophecy
or preaching without book, from the memory only, or from the most part, forth
of the Pulpit: but do read the holy Scriptures, the common Prayer, and
Inferior Ministers may teach with the Doctrine delivered by the superior
Ministers. 2. Tim 2.2
the Homilies unto the people, instructing them also in the Catechism of the
Church, and observing all other prescriptions enjoined to unpreaching
Ministers, faithfully endeavoring also to inform the people committed to
their charge, as occasion is offered and requires, with the Divine Service
deliueries, the sincere milk of the Word, are to be accounted true Ministers
of God, and such as have the gift of teaching or exhorting, though not the
greater gift of prophesying or preaching.

Also that such their ministration may much edify the people, both in right
understanding the truth which is after godliness; and also unto the obeying of
the same, by holiness and righteousness in all manner of conversation.

CHAP. 36. Of the Bishopric, that it is a degree above the Priesthood, and so
ordained to be by Jesus Christ.
THe Preface before the Divine Service for ordering of the Ministry, says: It
is evident unto all men diligently reading Holy Scripture and ancient Authors,
that from the Apostles time there have ever been these orders of Ministers in
Christ's Church, Aug. in Psalm. 44.17. vt in Biblus vulg^tit. Quid est, pro pat
tbus tu^s n^tisunt tibi, silij? Patres m^si s^nt Apostoli; cro Apostolis silij
nati sunt tibi, constituti sunt Episcopi, Hadie enim Episc^pt, qui sunt per
totum mundum, vnde natisunt? Ipsa Ecclesia patres illos appellat, ipsa illos
genu^t, and ipsa ill^s constitu it insedibus patrum. Anacletus Pontifex and
Martyr, ep. 2. ad vniu^rso* Episcopos Italiae, Cap. 2. Ipsis (nempe Apost elis)
decedentibus, in locum eorum successerunt Episcopi. Et paucis interiectis:
Videntes autem Apostoli messem esse multam, and operarios paucos, rogauerunt
Dominum messis, vt mitteret operarios in messem suam. Inde clecti sunt ab tjs
septuarinta duo Discipuli, quorum typum gerunt Presbyteri, atque in little locum
sunt consatuti in Eccl^sia.
Bishops, Priests and Deacons. The Apostle Paul ordained Timothy Bishop of the
Church of the Ephesians: as it is expressly delivered in the end of the second
Epistle unto him, where it is said: The second Epistle unto Timotheus, ordained
the first Bishop of the Church of the Ephesians, was written from Rome, etc. So
Titus was Bishop of the Church in Creet, as it is also delivered in the end of
the Epistle unto him, where it is said: It was written to Titus ordeiued the
first Bishop of the Church of the Cretians, from Nicopolis of Macedonia.

These Bishops Timothy and Titus had authority of ordaining Priests, and of
ruling over them; as it is most manifest out of Saint Paul's sayings unto them.
Unto Timothy he said: 1. Tim. 1.3.4
As I besought thee to abide still at Ephesus, when I went into Macedonia, that
thou might charge some that they teach no other Doctrine, neither give heed
to fables, and endless Genealogies, which minister questions, rather than
edifying which is in faith: So do. What Timothy was to do concerning such as
were to be ordered Deacons, Paul says: 1. Tim. 3.10.
And let these also first be proved, then let them use the office of a Deacon,
being found blameless.

Again concerning Priests or Elders he says: 1. Tim. 5.17.19.20.22.
Let the Elders that rule well, be counted worthy of double honor, especially
they who labor in the Word and Doctrine. Against an Elder receive not an
accusation, but before two or three witnesses. Them that sin rebuke before
all, that others also may fear. Lay hands suddenly on no man. Also he said: 2 Timothy 2.2.14.
The things that thou have heard of me among many witnesses, the same commit
thou to faithful men, who shall be able to teach others also. Of these things
put them in remembrance, charging them before the Lord, that they strive not
about words to no profit, but to the subuerting of the hearers. Saint Paul unto
Titus says. Tit. 1.5.6.
For this cause left I thee in Creet, that thou should set in order the
things that are wanting, and ordain Elders in every City, as I had appointed
thee. If any be blameless, etc. And it is written: That Heb 7.7.
without all contradiction the less is blessed of the better. As Melch sedec
Heb. 7.6. Genesis 14.19.
blessing Abraham was the superior in God: So is every Bishop his superior in
God, whom he blesses and orders to be a Priest. They are therefore in the
service of ordering, justly styled, Reverend Fathers in God.

Moreover a Bishop in his consecration receives a greater measure of the Holy
Ghost, than a Priest does in his ordering. Which may appear out of the Divine
Service for consecrating a Bishop, where it is said: The Archbishop and Bishops
present shall lay their hands upon the head of the elected Bishop, the
Archbishop saying: 2. Tim. 1.6.7.
Take the Holy Ghost, and remember that thou stir up the grace of God, which
is in thee, by imposition of hands. For God has not given us the spirit of
fear, but of power, and love, and soberness.

For even so Saint Paul after a peculiar manner expressed unto Timothy Bishop
of Ephesus, as it is delivered in his second Epistle unto him.

CHAP. 37. Of the distinction or disparity among Bishops, or of Archbishopricke.
IN the Preface before the Common Prayer, it is said: For as much as nothing can
almost be so plainly set forth but doubts may rise in the use and practicing
of the same: To appease all such diversity (if any arise) and for the
resolution of all doubts concerning the manner how to understand, do and
execute the things contained in this book: The parties that so doubt or
diversely take any thing, shall always resort to the Bishop of the Diocese,
who by his discretion shall take order for the quieting and appeasing of the
same, so that the same order be not contrary to any thing contained in this
book. And if the Bishop of the Diocese be in doubt, then he may send for the
resolution thereof unto the 1. Pet. 5.5.
Archbishop.

An Archbishop therefore in the service of consecrating is called, Most
Reverend Father in God: unto whom, every Bishop consecrated to Diocese within
his Province, professes and promises by oath all due reverence and obedience;
like as every Priest does unto the Bishop, within whose Diocese he is Pastor.

Now that such an order among the Bishops is of Divine ordinance, it is evident
from that, the first persons named Bishops in the Primitive Christian Church,
2. Tim. 1.6.
Timothy and Tit. 1.4.5.
Titus, were ordered or ordained by their superior in God the Apostle; which
degree was the highest in the Christian Clergy: according as Paul says: 1.
Cor. 12.28.
God has set in the Church, first Apostles, etc. And the Apostleship is called
Bishopric, where it is said: And his Acts 1.20.
Bishopric, let another take. It being therefore a Bishopric above that
which Timothy and Titus had, properly it is named in respect thereof, an
Archbishopricke.

But some there are which say that such distinction was not by Christ or dained
to continue in his Church: but only was appointed in the primitive state
thereof, whiles Churches were in planting, and is now long ago quite ceased.
The which affirmation is no where delivered in Holy Scripture, nor intimated;
neither from any sentence therein can be truly concluded.

But the direct contrary Doctrine is delivered by Saint Paul to the Ephesians,
and that in most express manner. Let Saint Paul's whole delivery, or the most
part thereof hereto be impartially considered. His words are: Ephesians.
4.7.8.11.12.13 14.15
Unto every one of us is given grace, according to the measure of the gift of
Christ. Wherefore he says: When he ascended up on high, he led captivity
captive, and gave gifts unto men: And he gave some Apostles, and some
Prophets: and some Evangelists: and some Pastors and Teachers; For the
perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of
the body of Christ; till we all come in the unity of the Faith, and of the
knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the
stature of the fullness of Christ: That we henceforth be no more children,
tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of Doctrine by the slight
of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive; but
speaking the truth in love, may grow up into him in all things which is the
head, even Christ, etc.

The which delivery of the Apostle declares most plainly, that Christ gave
such different and distinct measures of grace unto his Church, not for a work
then only necessary, but now also needful, viz. For the perfecting of the
Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ.

Also he gave the said measures of grace to continue, not only during the
first age of the Primitive Church; but till we all come in the unity of the
Faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the
measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ.

And the cause or end of Christ's such giving does continually concern his
Church: Namely, That we henceforth be no more children, tossed to and fro, and
carried about with every wind of doctrine by the ^light of men, and cunning
craftiness, whereby they ^ye in wait to deceive; but speaking the truth in
love, may grow up into him in all things, which is the head, even Christ.

Moreover, Christ does not give less measure of grace to his Church in these
times, than in former times. Isaiah says: Isa. 59.1.
The Lords hand is not shortened. And the Lord himself said: Lo, Math. 28.^0.
I am with you always, even unto the end of the world.

Furthermore let be considered what the Apostolical work was, and the
Archiepiscopall now will appear to be the same in substance.

Timothy had for his Diocese but the Church of the Ephesians, and Titus the
Church of the Cretians: but Paul had for his Province or charge the care of all
the Churches of the G^l. 2 7.8.
Gentiles; Paul preached the Gospel, he Baptized, he 2. Tim. 1.6.7. 1. Tim.
1.3. Tit. 1.5.
consecrated Bishops, Acts 14.23. with Tit. 1.5. 1. Pet. 5.1.2.3 4. Acts
20.17.28.
he ordered Priests, and instituted them to 2. Cor 11.28.
be Pastors, he Bishopped or Act. 19.6. with Acts 8 17.
confirmed believers, he 1. Tim. 1.20.
excommunicated, he sat in Acts 15.12.
council about Church matters, etc. And even as the Tabernacle of God was all
one, (as concerning the substance and spiritual use thereof) when it was 1.
Kin. 8.6.13
seated in Solomon's Temple, as it was when it removed from place to place: so
the supreme Ephesians 4.7 8.11 with 1. Cor. 12 28.
grace and gift of Christ to his Church, the Apostolical gift or grace, was
all one for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for
the edifying of the body of Christ, when it is settled in a country; as it was
when the 2. Cor. 4.7.
vessel which beared it, removed from country to country, as he had commission
thereto from the Spirit of the Lord.

Also there is not express mention, that every Apostle travailed from country
to country, whom Christ ordained, or gave to his Church.

Did not Saint James Acts 15.13. In the second part of the Homily of
Repentance, it is s^gnified, that James was only Bishop of the Church
^^erusalem. See Act. 12.17. Acts 21.18. Gal. 2.9. Tom. 2. p. 266.
abide in the land of Iewry, ouer-seeing and looking to the Church there, which
Jesus Christ the first Heb. 3 1.
Apostle from God his Father had planted? If he or some other Apostle or
Apostles did, then the Apostolical gift or grace was also to be employed in a
Church already planted, and not to cease when Churches were planted.

It is also here to be noted that the name Apostle used in the new Testament,
does imply two degrees. Whence it is thought meet to translate it sometimes by
the word Phil. 2.25. 2. Cor 8.23.1. 2. Cor. 11.5. Gal. 2.9.
messenger.

And whereas there is in Scripture mention of the chiefest Apostles, it
implies that there was some disparity among the Apostles.

And what degree or order is that inferior, if it be not that 2. Tim. 4.5.
Euangelistship, which is above the Pastorship, which Timothy had, who was also
called Bishop, yea Phil. 1.1.
Bishop not only over lay people, but over 1. Tim. 1.3.
Ministers, Priests, Elders or Pastors also.

Truly therefore and properly in the Divine Service are Bishops signified to
be the Apostles of Christ's Church, as where it is said in the Service of
Confirmation: We make our humble supplications unto thee for these children,
upon whom (after the example of the holy Apostles) we have laid our hands, to
certify them (by this sign) of thy favor and gracious goodness toward them.

So in the Divine Service for the consecration of Bishops, where it is said by
the Archbishop: Brethren, it is written in the Gospel of Saint Luke, that our
Savior Christ continued the Luke 6.12.13
whole night in prayer, or ever that he did choose and send forth his twelve
Apostles.

It is written also in the Acts of the Apostles, that the Disciples which were
at Antioch did Acts 13.2.3.4.
fast and pray, or ever they laid hands upon, or sent forth Paul and Barnabas.

Let us therefore, 1. Cor. 11.1.
following the example of our Savior Christ and his Apostles, first fall to
prayer, or that we admit and send forth this person presented unto us, to the
work whereunto we trust the Holy Ghost has called him.

CHAP. 38. Of Prophetship, that every kind thereof is not for ever ceased.
WHereas the Church, both in the prayer before the ordering of Priests, and also
in the prayer before the consecrating of Bishops, mentions, That Christ has
given Prophets to his Church, together with the diverse orders of the constant
Ministry; it is necessary to consider what kind of prophetship that is. Saint
Paul says to the Corinthians: 1. Cor. 14.3.
He that prophesies, speaks unto men to edification, and exhortation, and
comfort.

Instead of which prophesying then ordinarily used in the Church of Corinth,
there is now used the exercise called Preaching. And therefore, because
preaching now is to the same effect, as the ordinary prophesying then in the
congregation was, therefore the word for prophesying is sometimes rendered As in
the margent of the Geneua Translation of 1. Cor. 11.3.
preaching. But the Prophetship mentioned in the aforesaid prayers appears to
be a greater gift, in that it stands in the second place. Yea Paul himself
in an other place says: 1. Cor. 12.28.
God has set in the Church, first Apostles, secondly Prophets, thirdly
Teachers, etc. As Ephesians 4.11.
Christ gave some to be Apostles, some to be Prophets^, some to be Evangelists,
some to be Pastors, and some to be Teachers: So in the Church of the Jews
before Christ's Incarnation, there was an high Priest, Math. 2.4.
chief Priests, Priests of the 1 Ch^or. 24.
second Order, and Levites, and also Prophets.

And of such as were called Prophets, some were of greater gifts, than other.
In the new Testament after Christ's Ascension some are named Prophets, as Act.
11.27 28
Agabus, Acts 21.10.11.
Judas, Silas, etc. Agabus foretold there should be a great dearth throughout
all the would: which came to pass in the days of Claudius Caesar. He foretold
also to Saint Paul, that the Jews should deliver him into the hands of the
Gentiles. Judas and Act. 15.32.
Silas are said to have, exhorted the brethren in Antioch with many words, and
to have confimed them. Act. 17.10.
Silas afterward accompanied Paul, and labored with him in publishing the
Gospel.

In the writings of the Evangelists and Apostles, there is nomention that
Prophets were made by ordination, but all whom it is said the Church did
ordain, were either to serve as Apostles, or Evangelists, or Elders, or as
Deacons.

It is written that there has been times when no Prophet was in the Church;
As in the Book of the Psalms it is said: Psalm. 74.9.
We see not our signs, there is no more any Prophet, neither is there among us
any, that knows how long. It appears to be so in the days of the
Maccabees, when as it was said; 1. Mac. 4.46. 1. Mac. 14 41.
The stones of the Altar were laid up in the mountain of the Temple in a
convenient place, until there should come a Prophet, to show what should be
done with them.

The principal Prophets, or such as were endued with the measure of grace,
which for the dignity thereof, obtained the greatest account next unto those of
the highest degree in the Ministry of the Church, seem to be men of a
singular divine understanding, Ier. 1.9 10.
raised up of God for Hag. 1.1.2.
spiritual occasions in special times.

And this may be observed, not only out of the beginning even of every Prophets
Book in the Bible, but also out of many places in Scripture, where mention is
of Prophets and their Prophesying.

For this present, there shall be no mention of what Prophets Christ has given
to his Church since the first Apostles days, but only of the The Church in
her 30. Cano^ terms them Great Divines.
Fathers in the Apostolical Church of England, who lived when the Reformation
was well forwarded.

Were not those holy men endued with a certain measure of prophetical grace,
or of the Holy Ghost, or of heavenly light in the knowledge of the true
Christianity, more than were the Fathers of the Church generally, which lived
for many ages before them, in that they observed a spiritual darkness to have
covered most people, whereof former times took none or very little notice; and
in that also they composed three books for Divine Service, wherein there is so
glorious and so plenteous a delivery of the true Apostolical Divinity, and of
the true Christian Religion; as the like no Fathers in any Church of
Christendom ever before set forth.

And if the said books were now to be composed, none were able to make the
like; unless by some measure of special illumination from Gods Holy Spirit;
(as many understanding ones do now think, yea and affirm.) And if the Heaven
mentioned in the Book of the Revelation, which is commanded or exhorted to
Acts 18.20.
rejoice over Babylon fallen, be the reformed Church of Christ, (as some do
expound it:) Is it not probable that the Apostles, (which are there willed to
rejoice with that Heaven) are the Archbishops and Bishops therein, and By
putting part or the chief for the whole, or all.
figuratively the rest of the Clergy thereof? And that the Prophets there
willed also to rejoice, are all such as then received a special enlightening
from Almighty God unto the setting forward of the reformation, and among them
more especially such as were composers of the aforenamed books of the sacred
Liturgy of the Church of England.

CHAP. 39. Of Lordship, which Archbishops and Bishops have.
IT is written that Heb. 7.1.2.
Melchisedec Priest of the high God was withal King of Salem or Jerusalem.
Abraham was a Genesis 20.7.
Prophet, and withal a man of great Genesis 14.14 15
temporal power, Moses was a Deuteronomy. 34.10.
prophet, and withal the supreme Acts 7 35. Number. 26.16.17
Governor of the people of Israel, under Almighty God. He is called a King,
Deuteronomy. 33.5. Iethro was Exodus 3.1.
Priest of Midian, and according to some interpretation he was Exodus 2.16. in
the Margent Sicautem Caldaeus Paraphrastes vertit, viz. (...).
Prince of Midian. Eli was Priest, and also 1. Sam. 4.18.
Judge over Israel.

Samuel was a Acts 13.20.
Prophet, and also 1 Samuel 7.6.
Judge over Israel. David was a Mat 27 35.
Prophet and King also. Solomon was a Eccles. 1.1.
Preacher and a King also. Simon was Ecclus. 50.1.
high Priest and 1. Mac. 13.42. 1. Mac. 14.47.
Captain, and Governor of the Priests and Jews, and defender of them all.

If then some of the Ministry have bin the supreme Governors in Nations, may
they not now be Governors, if the Royal Majesty so ordain them? Saint Jude
calls those persons Jude 18.
filthy dreamers, which do despise dominion and speak evil of dignities.

CHAP. 24. Of the Liturgy or Divine Service of the Church, in general.
IN the second part of the Tom. 2. p. 6.
Homily concerning the right use of the Church, the public Service of the Lord
is said to be, The teaching and hearing of his Holy Word, the calling upon his
holy Name, the giving thanks unto him, for his great and innumerable benefits,
and the due ministering of the Sacraments.

In the T. 2. p. 138.
Homily of Common Prayer and Sacraments, it is said: That Basilius Magnus, and
Johannes Chrysostomus did in their time prescribe public orders of public
administration, which they call Liturgies; and in them they appointed the
people to answer unto the prayer of the Minister, sometime, Amen; sometime,
Lord have mercy upon us, sometime, And with thy Spirit, and We have our hearts
lifted up unto the Lord, etc. In the same To. 2. p. 134.
Homily, it is also said: By the histories of the Bible it appears, that
public and common Prayer is most available before God, and therefore is much
to be lamented, that it is no better Even shortly after that the Divine Service
was set forth, the Devil wrought in many people a more and more neglecting of
it.
esteemed among us, which profess to be but one body in Christ.

It is said in the Preface before the Common Prayer, That the first original
and ground of the divine Service, of a man would search out by the ancient
Fathers, he shall find that the same was not ordained, but of a good purpose,
and for a great advancement of godliness, etc. Saint Paul said unto Timothy.
1. Tim. 2.1.2.3
I exhort that first of all, supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving
of thanks be made for all men: for Kings, and for all that are in authority,
that we may lead a quiet and a peaceable life in all godliness and honesty.
For this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior. Moses from the
Lord prescribed unto Aaron and unto his sons a form of blessing the people,
saying: Number. 6.23.24.25.26.
On this wise ye shall bless the children of Israel, saying unto them: The
Lord bless thee, and keep the: The Lord make his face shine upon thee, and be
gracious unto thee: The Lord lift up his countenance upon thee, and give thee
peace.

It is very considerable hereto, that which is written of King Hezekiah in the
book of Chronicles, That he and the Princes commanded the Levites to sing
praise unto the Lord, 2. Chro. 29.30
with the words of David, and of With the words also which Asaph delivered,
which were as a Form of praise, or of praising God.
Asaph the Seer. My son (says Pro. 1.8.9.
Solomon) hear the instruction of thy Father, and forsake not the law of thy
Mother. For they shall be an ornament of grace unto thine head, and chains
about thy neck. Solomon repeateth this precept of God, to the end we may
take it all unto heart, as a matter most greatly concerning us. Pro 6.21 22.23.
My son, keep thy Fathers commandment, and forsake not the law of thy
Mother. Bind them continually upon thine heart, and tie them about thy neck.
For the commandment is a Lamp, and the law is light. Haeresi septua gesima
q^inta contra A^^^um, de qu^bus^am traditionibus loquens: Ecclesia, inquit,
necessario hoc pers^e^^, traditione a patribus accepta. Quis autem poterit
statutum n^at^^s dissolu^re, aut legem patris? velut Solomon dicit: Audi fili
sermonem patris tui, and ne repud es statuta matris tuae, ostendens per hoc,
quod and in scriptis, and sine scripto dacuit pater, hoc est Deus, and
vnigen^tus, and spiritus sancius. Matter autem nosira Ecclesia babet statuta in
se posita, indissol^^bil a, quae d^solui non possunt.
Epiphanius an ancient holy Father understands by the word mother in this
Scripture, to be meant the Church, who has (besides the holy Scriptures the
Commandment of God our Father) a distinct law, teaching or instruction, the
which all her members are bound to observe most diligently, by virtue of this
charge thereto given by God through the ministry of Solomon.

The Christian Church is our mother, if God be our Father, as it is written,
Jerusalem which is above is free, which is the Gal. 4.26.
mother of us all. God ordinarily begets none without his Church: but in the
Psalm. 110.3.
womb of his Church they are conceived, thence they come to the Isa. 66.8.9.
birth, they Isa. 66.11.12
suck at the breasts, they are borne on her sides, and dandled upon her knees.
She feeds them with 1. Cor 3.2.
milk first, afterward with stronger meat; she nourishes, cherishes and
brings them up, until they become to be Col. 1.28.
perfect in Jesus Christ. The Church of England our mother has in her Book of
Common Prayer (as John the Baptist Luke 11.1.
taught his Disciples to pray) set forth unto us forms of prayer, and thanks
giving, for us to use; and for our better information how to speak unto the
great God of heaven and earth.

And in her book of Homilies she has delivered a 2. Tim. 1.13. 2. Tim. 2.2.
form of wholesome Doctrine in faith and love, to be publicly read unto her
members.

And says Paul to Timothy: Hold fast the form of sound words which thou have
heard of me, in faith and love, which which is in Christ Jesus. Most memorable
is that saying of his unto the Philippians: Finally, brethren, Phil. 4.8.
whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things
are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever
things are of good report: if there be any virtue, and if there be any praise,
think on these things. And what he says to the Romans is considerable: Ye
have obeyed from the heart that Rom 6.17.
form of doctrine which was delivered you.

CHAP. 41. Of the Ceremonies of the Church of England, in general.
IN the Treatise of Ceremonies, why some be abolished and some retained, set
before the Common Prayer, it is said: Of such Ceremonies as be used in the
Church, and have had their beginning by the institution of man; some at the
first were of Godly intent and purpose devised, etc. Other there be, which
although they have been devised by man, yet it is thought good to reserve them
still, as well for a decent order in the Church, (for the which they were first
devised) as because they appertain unto 1 Cor. 10.31. and 14.12, Romans 14.19.
edification, whereunto all things done in the Church (as the Apostle teaches)
ought to be referred. And although the keeping, or omitting of a Ceremony in
it self considered, is but a small thing: Yet the wilful and contemptuous
transgression and breaking of a common order and discipline, is no small
offense before God. 1 Cor. 14.40.
Let all things be done among you ( says Saint Paul) in a seemly and due
order. The appointment of the which order pertains not to Hag. 1.14. 2 King.
18.4. 2 Chronicles. 34.3, 4, 5, 6, 7. and 17.6.
private men: therefore no man ought to take in hand, nor to presume to appoint
or alter any public or common order in Christ's Church, except he be lawfully
called and authorized thereunto.

In the said Preface it is afterward said: Christ's Religion is content only
with those Ceremonies, which do serve to a decent order, and Godly discipline;
and such as be apt to stir up the dull mind of man to the Number. 15.38.39.40.
remembrance of his duty to God, by some notable and special signification,
whereby he might be edified, etc. But now as concerning those persons, which
peradventure* will be offended; for that some of the old Ceremonies are
retained still: If they consider, that without some Ceremonies it is not
possible to keep any order, or quiet discipline in the Church, they shall
easily perceive just cause to reform their judgments. And if they think much
that any of the old remain, and would rather have all devised anew: then such
men granting some Ceremonies convenient to be had, surely where the old may
be well used, there they cannot reasonably reproove the old, only for their
age, without bewraying their own folly. For in such a case, they ought rather
to have reverence unto them for their antiquity, if they will declare
themselves to be more studious of Ephesians 4.3.
unity and concord, than of innovations and new fanglenesse, which (as much as
may be, with the true setting forth of Christ's Religion) is always to be
eschewed. And (says the Church afterward) in these our doings we Romans
14.4.13. Luke. 6.17.
condemn no other Nations, nor prescribe any thing, but to our own People
only. For we think it convenient, that every Country should use such
Ceremonies, as they shall think best to the setting forth of Gods honor and
glory, and to the reducing of the People to a most The end why the Apostolical
Church of England uses Ceremoni^^.
perfect and Godly living, without error or superstition. Also in the Act for
the uniformity of Common Prayer, set before the beginning thereof, it is said:
If there shall happen any contempt or irreverence to be used in the Ceremonies
or Rites of the Church, by the misusing of the orders appointed in this Book;
the Q. Majesty may by the like advise of the said Commissioners or
Metropolitan, ordain and publish such further ceremonies or rites as may be
most for the advancement of Gods glory, the edifying of his Church, and the due
reverence of Christ's holy Mysteries and Sacraments.

That the Church has power to ordain Ceremonies signifying good things, not
only that saying of Solomon, Prove. 6.20.23.
Forsake not the Law of thy mother, for her Law is a light, prooveth it; but
the example of the Reubenites, Gadites, and the half Tribe of Manasseh, in
their building an Altar, whereunto they had no precept in the Law of Moses: who
when they were accused by others of the children of Israel, to have committed a
trespass against the God of Israel, to have turned away from following the
Lord, in building an Altar, which he had not commanded in Moses law; answered,
Ios. 12.^2. etc.
We have not built it in rebellion, nor in transgression against the Lord, to
turn from following the lord, or to offer thereon burnt offering, or meat
offering, or peace offerings: but rather have done it for fear of this thing,
saying, In time to come your children might speak unto our children, saying,
what have you to do with the Lord God of Israel? For the Lord has made Jordan
a border between us and you, etc. We have built it that it may be a witness
between us and you, and our generations after us; that we might do the
service of the Lord, etc. Which answer when Phinehas the Priest heard, he
said: Ios. 22.30, 31, 32, 33, 34.
This day we perceive, that the Lord is among us, because ye have not
committed this trespass against the Lord. And the children of Reuben and Gad
called the Altar Ed: For it shall be a witness between us, that the Lord is
God. Had not Ionadab the son of Rechab power to command his sons to Ier.
35.6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
drink no wine, to build no house, nor sow seed, nor plant Vineyard, nor have
any; but all their days to dwell in tents? And was not their obedience to
their father commended by the Lord, and their fathers making such laws
approved by God, in that he said? Ier. 35.18, 19.
Because ye have obeyed the commandment of Ionadab your father, and have kept
all his precepts, and done according to all that he has commanded, Therefore
thus says the Lord of Hosts the God of Israel, Ionadab the son of Rechab
shall not want a man to stand before me for ever.

And if all the commandments and precepts of a private father are to be kept,
which God has not forbidden: Then how much more all the commandments,
precepts and ordinances of the fathers of the Church, which God has not
forbidden, ought to be most conscionably observed? S. Peter commanded the
people of God to submit unto 2 Pet 2.13.
every ordinance of man for the Lords sake; even of such governors as were not
Christians: How much more then to every ordinance of Christian powers ought we
to be obedient? The Ceremonies now used by the Church of England are (as (...).
Dionysius said of the like in his time) resemblances framed according to
things spiritually understood; whereunto they serve as a hand to lead, and a
way to direct. God has commanded his people to use Ceremonies for to put them
in mind of their duties, as it is written in the book of Numbers: Number. ^^.38,
39, 40.
Speak unto the children of Israel, and bid them that they make them fringes
in the borders of their garments, throughout their generations, and that they
put upon the fringe of the border a ribband of blue. And it shall be unto you
for a fringe, that ye may look upon it, and remember all the Commandments of
the Lord, and do them: Such as oppose to the established Ceremonies of the
Church of England, say, They would have nothing used in the worship of God, but
what the Scripture expresses: and with the word Scripture, Scripture; they
triumph among the simple. But when as the truly learned in the holy Scriptures
do examine their deliveries, they discern that much, which those spirits of
disobedience do call Scripture, is Scripture of their own framing. For it is
most usu^l with them, when a Scripture is alleged testifying expressly against
them, to put it off by saying, we must not cleave to the letter, but to the
meaning: namely, a meaning which they will devise contrary to the letter, which
is the Scripture. Also the lea^^eder among them pretending the original Text
to make for them against the sacred deliveries of holy Church, do either add
thereto, or take there from, or wrest the same.
and that ye seek not after your own heart, and your own eyes, after which
ye use to go a whoring: That ye may remember and do all my commandments,
and be holy unto your God.

CHAP. 42. Of wearing a Surplisse.
IN the order, where morning and evening prayer shall be used and said, set
before the beginning of the common prayer, it is delivered, That the Minister
at the time of the Communion, and at other times in his ministration, shall use
such Ornaments in the Church, as were in use by Authority of Parliament, in
the second year of the Reign of Edward the sixth, according to the Act of
Parliament set in the beginning of this Namely, of the bocke of Common Prayer.
book. Among which Ornaments the Surplisse is one. In Canon 74. it is said,
The true, ancient, and flourishing Churches of Christ being ever desirous, that
their Prelacie and Clergy might be had as well in outward reverence, as
otherwise regarded for the worthiness of their Ministry, did think it fit by
a prescript form of decent and comely apparel, to have them known to the
people, and thereby to receive the honor and estimation due to the special
Messengers and Ministers of Almighty God. And toward the end thereof it is
said; In all which particulars concerning the apparel here prescribed, our
meaning is not to attribute any holiness or special worthiness to the said
garments, but for decency, gravity, and order. When Almighty God ordained his
Leviticall Priesthood, he commanded Moses saying, Exodus 28.2.
Thou shall make holy garments for Aaron thy brother, for glory and for beauty.
Whereof Jesus the son of Sirach says: Ecclus. 45.7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
God beautified Aaron with comely Ornaments, and clothed him with a robe of
glory. The Lord by Ezekiel in the restoration of his worship in the Temple,
gives special charge how the Priests shall be clad in their ministration,
saying: Ezekiel. 44.17, 18.
And it shall come to pass, that when they enter in at the gates of the inner
Court they shall be clothed with linen garments, and no Wool shall come
upon them, whiles they minister in the gates of the inner Court and within.
They shall have linen Bonnets upon their heads, and shall have linen Breeches
upon their loins; they shall not gird themselves with any thing that causes
sweat. In Exodus it is said: Exodus 39.27.
There were made Coats of fine linen, of woven work, for Aaron, and for his
sons. Is it any where forbidden in the new Testament, to the Ministers of the
Christian Religion, for to wear garments in any manner like to the garments,
which God ordained his Ministers to wear before the Incarnation of Jesus
Christ? Does not rather the equity and Romans 8.4.
righteousness of Moses law concerning ministerial garments, now bind Gods
Ministers, whiles they are executing their Office in the Church, to be attired
differently from lay men? Wherefore have Angels since Christ's death appeared in
their service, clothed in long Mar. 16.5.
white raiment, but to signify that such manner garment best beseems Gods
Ministers his Mal. 3.1. Rev. 1.20.
Augels, whiles they are in performing the Divine service?

Why is it written in the Revelation, that the seven Angels came out of the
Temple, clothed in pure, and Rev. 15.6.
white linen, but to signify that pure and white linen is the fittest
raiment for Angels or Ministers whiles they serve in any Temple? And if it be
granted to the wife of the Lamb, that she should be arrayed in fine linen,
clean and Rev. 19.8. Hieronymus contra Pelagian. libro primo scribit. Quae
sunt rog^ inimicitiae contra Deum, si Episcopus, Presbyter, Diaconus, and
reliquus ordo Ecclesiasticus in administratione s^c rificiorum c^ndida vest
processerint?
white; for the fine linen is the. righteousness of the Saints: Why may it
not be granted to her more excellent Members to be so arrayed in presence of
that Lamb, and in his public service, with material fine linen, clean and
white, in fignification of the righteousness of Saints, wherewithal they ought
most conspicuously or eminently to be Ps. 132.9.
arrayed? The general rule without all exception, given by the Holy Ghost
concerning matters in public worship, cannot but pertain unto every
circumstance in Gods worship: Let all things be done 1 Cor. 14.40
decently and in order.

CHAP. 43. Of the due Celebration of Sundays, and other times required by the
Church to be kept holy.
IN the first part of the T. 2. p. 124, 125, 126.
Homily concerning the place, and time of prayer; the Church says: It
appears to be Gods good will and pleasure, that we should as special times,
and in special places, gather our selves together, to the intent his name
might be renowned, and his glory set forth in the congregation and assembly of
his Saints. As concerning the time which Almighty God has appointed his people
to assemble together solemnly, it does appear by the fourth Commandment of
God: Remember (says God) that thou keep holy the Sabbath day. Upon the which
day, as is plain in the Act. 13.14.44. Act. 15.21.
Acts of the Apostles, the people accustomably resorted together, and heard
diligently the Law and the Prophets read among them. And albeit this
Commandment of God does not bind Christian people so straightly to observe and
keep the utter Ceremonies of the Sabbath day, as it was given unto the Jews,
as touching the forbearing of work and labor in time of great necessity, and
as touching the precise keeping of the seventh day, after the manner of of the
Jews. For we keep now the Act. 20. l. 1 Cor. 16.2. Non inep. e colligitur jam
tum consuevisse Christianos hoc die solennes agere conventus. Annol. ad. Act.
20.7. in Jun. Bibl. vide 1 Cor. 11.20. in Syriaco Teslamento, n^c non in
Arabi^o: in utroque mentio fit de die Domini nostri. Syrus legit, (...) Arabs
(...) qui^n nev. 1.10. pro eo quod in Graecis exemplaribus legitur (...) habet
(...) in ^^e ^llo primo.
first day, which is our Sunday, and make that our Sabbath, that is our day of
rest, in the honor of our Savior Christ, who as upon that day Mar. 16.6.1.2.
rose from death, conquering the same most triumphantly: yet notwithstanding,
whatsoever is found in the commandment appertaining to the law of nature, as a
thing most godly, most just, and needful for the setting forth of Gods glory,
it ought to be retained and kept of all good Christian people. But alas, it
is lamentable table to see the wicked boldness of those that will be counted
Gods people, who Ezekiel 20.12, 13.
pass nothing at all of keeping and hallowing the Sunday. And these people are
of two sorts. The one sort if they have any business to do, though there be
no extreme need, they must not spare for the Sunday, they must ride and
journey on the Sunday, they must drive and Neh. 13.15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. Ier.
17.21.22.
carry on the Sunday, they must row and ferry on the Sunday, they must buy and
sell on the Sunday, they must keep markets and faires on the Sunday. Finally,
they use all days alike, worke-dayes and holi-dayes all are one. The other
sort is worse. For although they will not travel nor labor on the Sunday as
they do on the week day, yet they will not Isa. 58.13, 14.
rest in holiness, as God commands; but they rest in ungodliness and
filthiness, prancing in their pride, pranking and pricking, poynting and
painting themselves, to be gorgeous and gay: they rest in excess and
superfluity, in gluttony and drunkenness, like Rats and swine: they rest in
brawling and railing, in quarrelling and fighting: they rest in wantonness, in
toyish talking, in filthy fleshlinesse, so that it does too evidently appear,
that God is more dishonored, and the Devil better served on the Sunday, than
upon all the days in the week besides.

As soon as God had finished heaven and earth and all the same, and had made
man, he rested the seventh day, and blessed it, and Genesis 2.2, 3.
sanctified it for man therein to rest also, as Christ says; Mar. 2.27.
The Sabbath was made for man. The Lord says by Isaiah, Isa. 58.13, 14.
If thou turn away thy foot from the Sabbath, from doing thy pleasure on my
holy day, and call the Sabbath a delight, the holy of the Lord, honorable, and
shall honor him, not doing thine own ways, nor finding thine own pleasure,
nor speaking thine own words: Then shall thou delight thy self in the Lord,
and I will cause thee to ride upon the high places of the earth, and feed thee
with the heritage of Jacob thy father; for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it.

The sacred Canon 13.
constitution of the Church concerning the due celebration of Sundays and
Holidays is ever memorable, viz. All manner of persons within the Church of
England shall from henceforth celebrate and keep the Lords day, commonly
called Sunday, and other holy days according to Gods holy will and pleasure,
and the Orders of the Church of England prescibed in that behalf: that is, in
hearing the Word of God read and taught; in private and public prayers; in
acknowledging their offenses to God, and amendment of the same; in reconciling
themselves charitably to their neighbors where displeasure has been; in
oftentimes receiving the Communion of the body and blood of Christ; in visiting
of the poor and sick, using all godly and sober conversation.

Concerning other times enjoined by the Church to be observed for holidays, Of
the celebration of holidays.
as Christmas day, etc. it is to be remembered, that because it is the Law of
the Church our mother, we ought so to observe them as she requires. And that
the Church has power to appoint holidays, it may appear out of the T. 2. p.
82, 83.
Homily of fasting, where it is said: We do not read that Moses ordained by
order of Law any days of public fast throughout the whole year, more than
that one day. The Jews notwithstanding had more times of common fasting, which
the Prophet Zechar. 7.5.
Zachary recites to be the fast of the fourth, the fast of the fifth, the
fast of the seventh, and the fast of the tenth month. But for that it
appears not in the Law, when they were instituted, it is to be judged, that
those other times of fasting, more than the fast of the seventh month, were
ordained among the Jews by the appointment of their governors, rather of
devotion, than by any express Commandment given from God. Upon the ordinance
of this general fast, good men took occasion to appoint to themselves private
fasts at such times as they did either earnestly lament and bewail their
sinful lives, or addict themselves to more fervent prayer, etc. And the
Prophet does not disallow their sequestring of days for fasting; but for that
they neglected Zech. 7.9.10.11.12.
judgment, mercy, and humility of heart; and (as it seemed) accounted true
religion for to consist only or most chiefly, in observing Ceremonies.

It is written in the book of Ester, that the Church of God then Esther 9.21.
celebrated two days in memory of the Lords most wonderful protection of
them; and deliverance of them from the plot of Haman. It is not written that
they had any law of God requiring it, neither that they received any special
revelation for to signify unto them, that they ought so to do: but that they
did it from the Common Prove. 8.14, 15, 16.
wisdom, with which God endueth his Church at all times.

There is also mention of a seast, in the Gospel according to S. John, called
The feast of the 1 Mac. 4.59.
dedication, which the Church of God then, the people of the Jews, had along
time observed ( in Ioh. 10.22.23
celebration whereof it seems that Christ was present) which was not ordained
by divine Law nor by Revelation: but by the common devotion of the Church, as
it is recorded in the Book of Maccabees. Moreover the people of God on such
holy days were not only to abstain from their ordinary Lev. 23.7.
vocation or work; but also they were to assemble unto the place of Gods
public worship, and there to perfome such religious duties as God and his
Church had appointed.

The which may appear out of the book of Chronicles, where it is delivered,
that David ordained of the ministry to stand every morning to to thank and
praise the Lord, and likewise at even; and to offer all burnt sacrifices unto
the Lord in the Sabbaths, in the new moons, and on the 1 Chronicles. 23.30, 31.
set feasts by number, according to the order commanded unto them continually
before the Lord.

Of the place wherein holy duties are to be performed by people or a
congregation.
Now concerning the place where holy duties upon Sundaies, and other Holy days
are to be performed, the first part of the T. 2. p. 126, 127, 128.
homily concerning the place and time of prayer, declares to be the material
temple or the Parish Church, unto which the people are by the Law required for
to repair and duly frequent, where Christ has promised to be Mat. 18.20.
present, and where he will hear the prayers of the^ that call upon him. Our
godly predecessors, and the ancient fathers of the primitive Church (says
that Homily) spared not their goods to build Churches, no they spared not their
lives in time of persecution, and to hazard their blood, that they might
assemble themselves together in Churches. And shall we spare a little labor to
come to Churches? Shall neither their example, nor our duty, nor the
Commodities (that thereby should come unto us) move us? If we will declare our
selves to have the fear of God, if we will show our selves true Christians,
if we will be the followers of Christ our master, and of those godly fathers,
which have lived before us, and have now received the reward of true and
faithful Christians, we must both willingly, earnestly, and reverently come
unto the material Churches and Temples to pray, as unto fit places appointed
for that use, and that upon the Sabbath day, as at most convenient time for
Gods people, to cease from bodily and worldly business, to give themselves to
holy rest, and godly contemplation pertaining to the service of Almighty God:
Whereby we may reconcile our selves to God, be partakers of his holy
Sacraments, and be devout hearers of his holy word, so to be established in
faith to Godward, in hope against all adversity, and in charity toward our
neighbors; T. 2. p. 131.
Also to have our poor and needy neighbors in remembrance, and from the
Church to depart better and more godly, than we came thither. The Lord has
said, Exodus 16.29.
Abide ye every man in his place: Let no man go out of his place on the
seventh (or Sabbath) day. Yet there was prescribed a Sabbath days Act. 1.12.
journey, and that appears to be but as unto ones own parish Church
ordinarily. The aforesaid T. 2. p. 127.
Homily says, That the Tabernacle was as it were the parish Church of the
Jews, being in the Wilderness, Vide Tremel. annot. ad Iam. 2.
A Chaldee Paraphrase upon Ruth, says (and the Chaldean Paraphrases are the
most ancient interpretations of Moses and the Prophets, (...)
which are now common to the Church of God) That we are commanded to observe
the Sabbath, and good days, and not to walk, unless 2000 cubits: which
distance appears to be the space between the place of the Camp, and the
place where the Arc was: as Joshua said, Ios. 3.3, 4.
There shall be a space between you and it, above 2000 cubits by measure. And
such a distance the suburbs belonging to Cities, were to be from them round
about; as it is written in the book of Number. 35.5.
Numbers. Lastly, concerning the due celebration of the Sabbath day, it is also
said in the first part of the T. 2. p. 2.
Homily concerning the right use of the Church: That unto the house or Temple
of God, at all times, by common order appointed, are all people that be godly
indeed, bound with all diligence to resort, unless by sickness, or other most
urgent causes they be let therefro. And all the same so resorting thither,
ought with all quietness and reverence there to behave themselves, in doing
their bounden duty and service to Almighty God, in the Congregation of the
Saints. In the said part of that P. 4.
Homily it is further delivered, That Jesus came Ioh. 8.2.
early in the morning into the Temple, and all people came unto him, and he
sat down and taught them. And in S. Luke it is said: Luke 21.38.
Jesus taught in the Temple, and all the people came early in the morning unto
him; that they might hear him in the Temple. Here ye see as well the
diligence of our Savior in teaching the word of God in the Temple daily, and
specially on the Sabbath days, as also the readiness of the people resorting
all together, and that early in the morning, into the Temple to hear him. The
Lord commanded the people of Israel to Number. 28.9.10
offer more on the Sabbath day, then on any other day. And was it not for our 2 Timothy 3.16.
instruction in righteousness, that we ought on that day to spend more time
in every religious exercise, than on any other day commonly? The In Canon 90.
and Article 30. of our Church Discipline also.
Law of the Church is, that We be present in the Temple, at the beginning of
the divine Service, and that (unless through some urgent occasion) we depart
not until every part of the divine Service be ended. Also, all persons of
every Family, that are able in any wise to understand any part of the public
worship (unles such as absolute necessity requires to stay at home) ought
duly to resort unto the church.

When Peter was to preach unto Acts 10.33. Deuteronomy. 32.12, 13 Neh. 8.2.
Cornelius, it appears that Cornelius brought his whole household with him, as
he said: Now are we all here present before God, to hear all things that are
commanded thee of God. And in the Psalm or Song for the Sabbath day, it is
expressed at what time in the morning of the Sabbath we should begin our
devotion, and until what time it should continue, Hebraea vox (...) a
Lexicographis reddita est Lucis mat^tinae primordium etc. Hinc verb^^ Arabicum
(...) Mane, seu ante lucem surrexit. (...) autem ab Arabe interpretatum est
(...) Et (...) in Mat. 20.1. exprimit Graecam phrasin (...), summo mane.
where it is said: Psalm. 92.1, 2.
It is a good thing to give thanks unto the Lord, and to sing praises unto thy
name, Omost Highest. To tell of thy loving kindness According to the
Translation of the Psalter in the divine Service.
early in the morning: and of thy truth in the night season.

CHAP. 44. Of Prayer, Thanksgiving, and Confession unto God, in public, and in
private.
IN the Exhortation before the general Confession, it is said: Although we
ought at all times humbly to acknowledge our sins before God, yet ought we
most chiefly so to do, when we assemble and meet together; to render thanks
for the great benefits that we have received at his hands, to set forth his
most worthy praise, to hear his most holy word, and to ask those things which
be requisite and necessary as well for the body as the soul. How greatly God
requires public prayer, it may appear from that he would have his house
called an house of Isa. 56. ^.
prayer for all people. Thither it is said Acts 3.1.
Peter and John went up together at the hour of prayer, being the ninth hour.
And S. Paul Acts 22.17.
praying in the Temple at Jerusalem was rapt in the spirit, and did see Jesus
speaking unto him. And public prayer made for Acts 12.5.7.
Peter being in prison, so far prevailed with God, that he was miraculously
thence delivered.

Christ Jesus said unto his Disciples; Mat. 18.19.20
It two of you shall agree on earth as touching any thing that they shall ask,
it shall be done for them of my Father, which is in heaven. For where two or
three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them.

Concerning prayer it is said in the first part of the T. 2. p. 110.
Homily of prayer: The necessity thereof is so great, that without it nothing
may be well-obtained at Gods hand. He is said to be rich and liberal toward
all them, that Romans 10.12.
call upon him, not because he either will not, or cannot give without asking;
but because he has appointed prayer as an ordinary means between him and
us. In the T. 2. p. 134.
Homily of Common prayer and Sacraments it is said: In the Scriptures we read
of three sorts of prayers, whereof two are private, and the third is common.
The first is that which S. Paul speaks of in his Epistle to Timothy, saying:
1 Timothy 2.8.
I will that men pray in every place, lifting up pure hands, without wrath or
striving. And it is the devout lifting up of the mind to God without the
uttering of the hearts grief or desire by open voice. So 1 Samuel 1.13.
Anna prayed. After this sort must all Christians pray, not once in a week, or
once in a day only: but as S. Paul writes to the Thessalonians, These. 5.17.
without ceasing. And S. James writes, Iam. 5.16.17
The continual prayer of a just man is of much force. The second sort of
prayer is spoken in the Gospel of Matthew, where it is said: Mat. 6.6.
When thou prayest, enter into thy secret closet, and when thou have shut the
door to thee, pray to thy father in secret, and thy father which sees in
secret shall reward thee. So Acts 10.2.
Cornelius prayed. These be the two private sorts of prayer, the one mental,
that is to say, the devout lifting up of the mind to God: and the other
vocal, that is to say, the secret uttering of the griefs and desires of the
heart with words, but yet in a secret closet, or some solitary place. The third
sort of prayer is public or common. And of it mention was first of all.

The Prophet David said: Ps. 55.17.
Evening and morning and at noone will I pray and cry aloud: and he shall
hear my voice. It is written that Daniel also kneeled upon his knees Dan. 6.10.
three times a day, and prayed, and gave thanks before God. David also says,
Ps. 119.6^.
At midnight will I arise to give thanks unto thee, because of thy righteous
judgments. The Church says in the aforenamed p. 141.
Homily: If we will that our prayers be not abominable before God, let us so
prepare our hearts before we pray, and so understand the things that we ask
when we pray, that both our hearts and voices may together sound in the cares
of Gods Majesty: and then we shall not fail to receive at his hand the things
that we ask, as good men which have been before us did, and so have from time
to time received that which for their souls health they did at any time
desire. Saint Augustine said: It is not the voice, but the affection of the
mind, that comes to the ears of God.

Concerning thankesgiving in public. The first part of the Homily concerning
the right use of the Church, Of thanksgiving.
says: That the Temple is likewise the place of thankesgiving unto the Lord
for his innumerable and unspeakeable benefits bestowed upon us, appears
notably in the latter end of Saint Lukes Gospel, and the beginning of the
story of the Acts, where it is written, that the Apostles and Disciples after
the ascension of our Lord, Act. 2.46, 47.
continued with one accord daily in the Temple, always praising and blessing
God. The Prophet David said; My praise shall be of thee in the great Ps. 22.25.
congregation. And, Enter into his gates with Ps. 100.4.
thankesgiving, and into his Courts with praise; be thankful unto him, and
bless his name.

In the first part of the T. 2. p. 218.
Homily for Rogation week, it is said: There can be none other end of such as
draw nigh to God by knowledge, and yet depart from him in unthankfulness, but
utter destruction. St. Paul says: In every thing 1 These. 5.18.
give thanks; for this is the will of God in Christ Jesus concerning you. And
Isaiah signifies, that thankesgiving acceptable to God consists not in words
only, where he says: Isa. 5.16.
God that is holy, shall be sanctified in righteousness. In another place he
says: Isa. 66.5.
Hear ye the word of the Lord, ye that tremble at his word; your brethren
that hated you, that cast you out for my names sake, said: Let the Lord be
glorified: but he shall appear to your joy, and they shall be ashamed.
Memorably says the Church in the Communion service: It is very meet, right,
and our bounden duty, that we should at all times, and in all places, give
thanks unto thee, O Lord Holy Father, Almighty Everlasting God.

Of confession to God.
Concerning public confession of our sins unto God, the Divine Service
begins with one that is general: and likewise there is a general
confession to be made before receiving of the holy Communion. The Prophet Daniel
made a solemn Dan. 9.4.
confession unto God in the behalf of the Jews in general, that were with
him in captivity in Babylon. And Baruch wrote a long Bar. 1.14.15, etc.
confession for the Jews at Jerusalem to make, reading it in the House of the
Lord, upon the feasts and solemn days. There is also private confession of
our sins, to be made unto God, whereof it is said in the second part of the T.
2.
Homily of repentance, that it is the second part of repentance. And the Homily
says: If we will with a sorrowful and contrite heart make an unfeined
confession of our sins unto God, he will freely and frankly forgive them,
and so put all our wickedness out of remembrance before the sight of his
Majesty, that they shall no more be Heb. 8.12.
thought upon. Hereunto does pertain the golden saying of David, where he
says on this manner Ps. 32.5.
Then I acknowledged my sin unto thee, neither did I hide mine iniquity: I
said, I will confess against my self my wickedness unto the Lord, and thou
forgavest the ungodliness of my sin. These are also the words of John the
Evangelist: 1 John 1.9, 10.
If we confess our sins, God is faithful and righteous, to forgive us our
sins, and to make us clean from all our wickedness. Which ought to be
understood of the confession made unto God. This is then the chiefest, and most
principal confession that in the Scriptures and Word of God we are bidden to
make, and without the which we shall never obtain pardon and forgiveness of
our sins. The Prodigal son made such a confession, saying: Luke 15.21.
Father, I have sinned against heaven and in thy sight, and am no more worthy
to be called thy son. Solomon says, Prove. 28.13.
He that hides his sins, shall not prosper: but he that confesses and
forsakes them, shall find mercy.

CHAP. 45. Of singing Psalms and spiritual songs, in public and in private:
and also of singing with music.
IN the title of the Psalms in meeter in the Book of Common prayer it is thus
said: The whole book of Psalms collected into English meeter by, etc.
Conferred with the Hebrew, with apt notes to sing them withal: Set forth and
allowed to be sung in all Churches, of all people together, before and after
morning and evening prayer, as also before and after sermons: and moreover, in
private houses, for their godly solace and comfort, laying apart all ungodly
songs and Ballads, which tend only to the nourishing of vice, and corrupting
of youth. James 5.13. If any be afflicted, let him pray: and if any be merry,
let him sing Psalms. And then in the Common prayer book, of that form which
is appointed for Churches, there is added a Treatise made by Athanasius the
great, concerning the use and virtue of the Psalms; whose beginning is thus,
and a delivery most memorable. All holy Scripture is certainly the teacher of
all virtue and of true faith: but the book of Psalms does express, after a
certain manner, the very state and condition of the soul. For as he which
intends to present himself to a King, first will compound with himself to
set in good order both his gesture and his speech, lest else he might be
reputed rude and ignorant: even so does this godly book inform all such as be
desirous to lead their life in virtue, and to know the life of our Savior,
which he ledd in his conversation; putting them in mind in the reading
thereof, of all their affections and passions whereto their soul is inclined,
etc. And then do follow 99. signifyings of what Psalms may be sung even upon
most occasions that come to pass in this present life. And both before and
also after the Psalms in meeter, there are sundry spiritual songs, which may
be sung upon sundry occasions, unto the great comfort of the mind.

Of singing with music.
Concerning singing in public, it is said in the book of Ezra, Ezra 3.10, 11.
When the builders laid the foundation of the Temple of the Lord, they set the
Priests in their apparel with Trumpets, and the Levites the sons of Asaph,
with Cymbals to praise the Lord after the Ordinance of David King of Israel.
And they sang together by course, in praising and giving thanks unto the Lord,
because he is good, for his mercy indureth for ever toward Israel. And in the
book of Chronicles it is said: 1 Chronicles. 16.7.
David delivered a Psalm to thank the Lord, into the hand of Asaph and his
brethren. The which holy Prophet has said: Ps. 148.11, 12, 13, 14.
Kings of the earth, and all people: Princes and all Judges of the earth: both
young men and maidens: old men and Children: let them praise the name of the
Lord. Ps. 149.1, 3.
Sing unto the Lord a new song: and his praise in the congregation of Saints:
let them sing praises unto him with Timbrell and Harp. Ps 150.1.
Praise ye God in his Sanctuary. Ps. 95.1, 2.
O come, let us sing unto the Lord: let us make a joyful noise to the rock of
our salvation. Let us come before his presence with thankesgiving: and make a
joyful noise unto him with Psalms. Ps. 100.1.
Serve the Lord with gladness: come before his presence with singing. Saint
Paul said to the Church of Ephesus: Be Ephesians. 5.18, 19
filled with the spirit, speaking to your selves in Psalms, and hymns, and
spiritual songs, singing and making melody in your heart to the Lord. Ps.
150.3, 4, 5.
Praise the Lord (says David) with the sound of the Trumpet: praise him with
the Psaltery and Harp. Praise him with the Timbrell and dance: praise him
with stringed instruments and Organs. Praise him upon the loud Cymbals: praise
him upon the high sounding Cymbals. It is written that Moses and the Children
of Israel Exodus 15.1.
sang a song unto the Lord. And that and 15.20, 21.
Miriam the Prophetess the sister of Aaron, took a Timbrell in her hand, and
all the women went out after her with Timbrels, and with daunces. And Miriam
answered them, Sing ye to the Lord, etc. Singing the same song, as did Moses
and the Children of Israel. And Saint John in the Revelation, foretelling the
actions of Christ's Church to come to pass, says: Rev. 15.2, 3.
I saw as it were a Sea of glass, mingled with fire, and them that had gotten
the victory over the Beast, and over his Image, and over his mark, and over
the number of his name, stand on the sea of glass, having the Harpes of God:
And they sung the song of Moses, etc. see Revel. 14, 2, 3, 4, 5. and 5.8. and 1
Cor. 14.7.26. and from thence, and other Scriptures it is manifest, that
Christian people have used music in praising the name of the Lord: and there
is not in the whole Bible any manner of mention concerning abolishing of the
same.

CHAP. 46. Of the public reading of the holy Scriptures, as also the Homilies,
and of making an Exhortation in public.
IN the Preface before the Common prayer it is said: The ancient fathers for a
great advancement of godliness so ordered the matter, that all the whole Bible
(or the greatest part thereof) should be read over once every year, intending
thereby that the Clergy, and especially such as were Ministers of the
Congregation, should (by often reading and meditation of Gods Word) be stirred
up to godliness themselves, and be more able to exhort others by wholesome
doctrine, and to confute them that were adversaries to the truth. And further
that the people (by daily hearing of holy Scripture read in the Church) should
continually profit more and more in the knowledge of God, and be the more
inflamed with the love of his true religion. What care hereto our fathers have
had, may appear out of the sacred Calendar, and out of the order how the
Psalter is appointed to be read, and out of the order how the rest of the holy
Scripture (beside the Psalter) is appointed to be read; all which are set
before the Common prayer.

It is recorded in the Acts of the Apostles, that at Antioch in Pisidia, in the
Synagogue on the Sabbath day, there was the Act. 13.15.
reading of the Law and the Prophets. In another place it is said: Moses of old
time has in every City them that preach him, being Act. 15.^1.
read in the Synagogues every Sabbath day. Saint Paul says to the Colossians:
When this Epistle is read amongst you, cause that it be Col. 4.16.
read also in the Church of the Laodiceans: and that ye likewise read the
Epistle from Laodicea.

Of reading the Homilies.
Concerning reading the Homilies the Sermons set forth by the public authority
of the Church, in the Preface published before them it is said: Considering how
necessary it is that the Word of God, which is the only food of the soul, and
that most excellent light that we must walk by, in this our most dangerous
pilgrimage, at all convenient times be preached unto the people, that thereby
they may both learn their duty toward God, their Prince, and their
neighbors, according to the mind of the Holy Ghost, expressed in the
Scriptures: and also to avoid the manifold enormities which heretofore by
false doctrine have crept into the Church of God: and how that all they which
are appointed Ministers, have not the gift of preaching sufficiently to
instruct the people, which is committed unto them, whereof great inconveniences
might rise, and ignorance still be maintained, if some honest remedy be not
speedily found and provided. The Queens most excellent Majesty, tendering the
sole health of her loving subjects, and the quieting of their consciences, in
the chief and principal points of Christian religion, and willing also by the
true setting forth, and pure declaring of Gods Word, which is the principal
guide and leader runto all godliness and virtue, to expel and drive away as
well all corrupt, vicious, and ungodly living, as also erroneous and poisoned
doctrines, tending to superstition and Idolatry: has by the advice of her most
honorable Counselors, for her discharge in this behalf, caused a book of
Homilies, which heretofore was set forth by her most loving brother, a Prince
of most worthy memory, Edward the sixth, to be printed anew, wherein are
contained certain wholesome and godly exhortations, to move the people to
honor and worship Almighty God, and diligently to serve him, every one
according to their degree, state, and vocation. And in the latter part of the
Preface it is said: That all her people, of what degree or condition soever
they be, may learn how to invocate, and call upon the name of God, and know
what duty they owe both to God and man: so that they may pray, believe, and
work according to knowledge, while they shall live here, and after this life
be with him that with his blood has bought us all. And at the end of the
first Tome of the Homilies it is said concerning the Homilies of the second
Tome, Hereafter shall follow sermons of fasting, praying, almesdeeds, etc. with
many other matters, as well fruitful as necessary to the edifying of
Christian people, and the increase of godly living. From al which aforesaid
delivery it is most manifest, that the one only end, why the reverend Fathers,
and the most learned Doctors of the Church composed the sermons commonly called
Homilies, was for the edification of the congregations in holiness and
righteousness; and for a help unto Ministers, that with the said sacred
sermons the people committed to their charge might be the more instructed in
the faith and life of the true Christian religion. As therefore we have
received from our fathers the Common prayer, as a form of prayer,
thanksgiving, and confession: so ought we not to receive from our fathers
hands their book of Sermons the Homilies, as a form of wholesome words, in
faith and love which is in Christ Jesus? Saint Paul charged Timothy to hold
fast the 2 Timothy 1.13. Romans 6.17.
form of sound words, which he had heard of him, in faith and love, which is
in Christ Jesus. Let any one unpartially weigh every particular sentence in the
book of Homilies, and there will appear nothing but Christian faith and godly
love intended and held forth therein.

Moreover, ought we reverently to hear the Sermons of such as be but young
Students in Divinity? and ought we not with great reverence to attend unto the
Homilies the Sermons set forth by the chiefest Divines in the whole Church of
our Land? We ought not to be partial toward the established Doctrine of our
Church.
We commonly ascribe great authority unto the spirit of the Church, accounting
her Common prayer profitable for us to pray with unto Almighty God: We ascribe
great authority unto the spirit of the Church, accounting her translation of
the Scriptures into our mother tongue to be faithful, and meet for us both to
hear and read, yea and to settle our belief therein; and ought we not also to
ascribe great authority unto the spirit of the Church, in her 1 These. 5.20.
prophesying or sermon making, her composing of the Homilies for our
instruction in the Doctrine of the holy Scriptures? We pray unto God as her
wisdom has prescribed; we hear and read for holy Scripture, as her wisdom
has translated; and ought we not with like conscionable respect to hear and
read the exhortations, interpretations, applications, etc. in her Homilies set
forth for Doctrine, refutation, correction, and instruction in righteousness,
as her wisdom has delivered unto us? The great authority of the deliveries in
the Homilies may appear unto us out of this consideration; When we hear a
Pastor, Curate, or Lecturer preach, we hear deliveries which are but the
wisdom of a private Minister: But when we hear a Homily read, we hear
deliveries, which are the wisdom of the Church, or for approbation whereof the
whole Churches Clergy have written their See the Epistle to the Reader, and
the Advertisement afterward. Of the Curates making a short exhortation to the
people, when just occasion is thereunto.
assent.

Concerning exhortation in public, it is said in the Rubricke after the Nicene
Creed: After such sermon, homily, or exhortation, the Curate shall declare unto
the people, whether there be any holy days, or fasting days the week
following, and earnestly exhort them to remember the poor, saying one or more
of these sentences following, as he thinks most convenient by his discretion.

In the T. 2. p. 138.
Homily of Common prayer and Sacraments a saying of Justinius Martyr is related,
viz. Upon the Sunday assemblies are made, both of them that dwell in Cities,
and of them that dwell in the Country also. Amongst whom, as much as may be,
the writings of the Apostles and Prophets are read. Afterward when the reader
does cease, the chief Minister makes an exhortation, exhorting them to follow
honest things.

In the first part of the T. 2. p. 3.
Homily concerning the right use of the Church, there is mentioned what the
Ruler of the Temple in Antiochia signified unto Paul and Barnabas, after the
lesson or reading of the Law and Prophets: viz. If any of you have any
exhortation to make unto the people, Acts 13.15.
say it. That exercise, which now is commonly called preaching, answers much to
the aforesaid exhortation: yea, exhortation is part of a preaching, as Paul
says: 1 Cor. 14.3.
He that prophesies, speaks unto men to edification, and exhortation, and
comfort. But the exhortation here now meant, is a short speech made unto the
people, which is allowed by authority, yea, required in sundry cases: As when a
brief is read, then to exhort the people unto Romans 12.13. 2 Cor. 9 5.
contribution, by alleging some Scriptures and reasons whereby the more to
move them to the same. When poor parties are to be married, and do desire an
Offering, then an Heb. 10.24. Gal. 2.10. 1 Timothy 6.17, 18.
exhortation may be made unto the Congregation, for to stir them unto
liberality. Sundry occasions do sometimes come to pass, needing some short
exhortation for matters better administration.

CHAP. 47. Of expounding the Scriptures, and of preaching, also of peoples
hearing sermons.
IN the first part of the T. 2. p. 4.
Homily concerning the right use of the Church, it is said, That it is
convenient that the Scriptures of God, and specially the Gospel of our Savior
Christ should be read and expounded to us that be Christians in our Churches,
etc. It is written in Nehemiah, that the Priests read in the Law of God
distinctly, and gave the Neh. 8.7, 8.
sense, and caused the people to understand the reading.

Of Preaching.
Concerning preaching, the aforesaid part of that Homily also delivers: In
Luke ye read how Jesus according to his accustomed use came into the Temple,
and how the book of Isaias the Prophet was delivered him, how he read a Text
therein, and made a Luke 4.16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21.
sermon upon the same.

In the first part of the T. 1. p. 54.
Homily concerning falling from God, it is said: God does send his Messengers,
the true preachers of his Word, to Isa. 58.1.
admonish and warn us of our duty. The 45. constitution of the Church is:
Every beneficed man allowed to be a preacher, and residing on his benefice,
having no lawful impediment, shall in his own Cure, or in some other Church
or Chapel where he may conveniently, near adjoining, (where no preacher is)
preach one sermon every sunday of the year, wherein he shall soberly and
sincerely 2 Timothy 2.15.
divide the word of truth, to the glory God, and to the 1 Cor. 14.12. Of the
dignity of preaching according to holy Church her prescription.
best edification of the people. Such a preaching of Gods Word is an exercise
worthily had in high account: It has the operation of Gods Spirit commonly
accompanying it into the hearts of the hearers. The Heb. 4.12.
Word of God divided aright is quick and powerful, and sharper then any two
edged sword, piercing, even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and of
the joints and marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the
heart. Saint Paul says: An 1 Cor. 14.24, 25.
unbeleever coming in where prophecy (or faithful preaching is) becomes to
be convinced in conscience: The secrets of his heart are made manifest, and so
falling down on his face, he will worship God, and report that of a truth God
is in the Preacher. How Act. 2.41.
powerful was the sermon of Peter, which he made to the Jews, by the
inspiration of Gods Spirit, and the same Spirits operation in the hearts of his
hearers! The Lord said by Jeremiah concerning some Prophets: If they had Ier.
23.27, 28, 29.
stood in my Counsel, and had caused my people to hear my words, then they
should have turned them from their evil ways, and from the evil of their
doings. He that has my word, let him speak my word faithfully. Is not my word
like as a fire, says the Lord? and like a hammer that breaks the rock in
pieces? The Apostle says: If our Gospel be 2 Cor. 4.3, 4
hid, it is hid to them that are lost: in whom the god of this world has
blinded the minds of them that believe not, lest the light of the glorious
gospel of Christ, who is the Image of God, should shine unto them.

Of Peoples hearing of Sermons.
Now concerning peoples hearing of sermons, it is said in the exhortation at the
end of Baptisme-service: That Children may know the better what their
godfathers and godmothers promised and vowed in their names, they shall be
called upon to hear sermons. And if they duly hearken unto the Homilies read
in their Parish Church, they in part do their duty concerning hearing sermons:
For the Homilies are nothing else but And so are often named in the book of
Homilies.
sermons. And yet they are such sermons, as are not made by any private spirit,
but by the public spirit of the Church, and are allowed by the whole Clergy of
the same.

In the second part of the T. 2. p. 265.
Homily of repentance, it is said: We must be diligent to read and hear the
Scriptures, and the Word of God, which most lively do paint out before our
eyes our natural uncleanness, and the enormity of our sinful life. For
unless we have a through feeling of our sins, how can it be that we should
earnestly be sorry for them? Before 2 Samuel 12.7, etc.
David did hear the word of the Lord by the mouth of the Prophet Nathan, what
heaviness I pray you was in him for the adultery and the murder that he had
committed! So that it might be said right well, that he slept in his own sin.
We read in the Acts of the Apostles, that when the people had heard the sermon
of Peter, they were compunct, and Act. 2.37.
pricked in their hearts. Which thing would never have been, if they had not
heard that wholesome sermon of Peter. They therefore that have no Ier. 5.9. and
2.13.
mind at all, neither to read, nor yet to hear Gods Word, there is but small
hope of them, that they will as much as once set their feet, or take hold upon
the first staff or step of this Ladder of repentance: but rather will sink
deeper and deeper into the bottomless pit of perdition. Besides the Sermons
the Homilies, the Church wills us to hear other also, such as are made by
Preachers, lawfully licensed, and are preached according to the Law of the
Church also.

The constitutions and * Canons Ecclesiastical require Every beneficed man,
Canon. 46.
that is not allowed to be a Preacher, to procure sermons to be preached in
his Cure once in every month at the least, by Preachers lawfully licensed, if
his living in the judgment of the Ordinary, will be able to bear it. And upon
every Sunday, when there shall not be a sermon preached in his Cure, he or his
Curate shall read some one of the Homilies prescribed. As the Ordinary
disposes unto every Parish concerning preaching, so is every Parishioner to
rest contented therewith. The true Christian religion does not totally consist
in the Iam. 1.22, 23, 24, 25. Mat. 7.24, 25, 26, 27.
hearing of sermons preached every Sunday. Christ's Kingdom of grace (as the
Apostle Paul has delivered) is not in 1 Cor. 4.20.
word, but in power. It is Romans 14.17, 18, 19.
righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost. For he that in these
things serves Christ, is acceptable to God, and approved of men. Let us
therefore follow after; the things which make for peace, and things, wherewith
one may edify another. That Counsel given by Jesus the son of Syrach is in
no wise to be neglected, Ecclus. 8.9. When a sermon is made, every person of
that Parish ought to be present at it, if he may.
Miss not the discourse of the Elders: for they also learned of their fathers,
and of them thou shall learn understanding, and to give answer as need
requires, but as the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 14.40
Let all things be done decently, and according to order. A devout person may
hear as many sermons preached, as he can: but so as he transgresses no law
of the Church thereby. For if he does transgress the Ecclesiastical law by his
going abroad to hear sermons preached, if he offends the Pastor or Curate
over him, if he by absenting himself from his Parish Church be a scandal to
those of his Parish; then is his hearing of sermons preached in other Parish
Churches but as Saul's sacrifice: unto whom Samuels saying is worthy of
perpetual memory: 1 Samuel 15.22, 23.
Has the Lord as great delight in burnt Offerings and Sacrifices, as in
obeying the voice of the Lord? behold, to obey is better than Sacrifice: and to
hearken, then the fat of Rams. For rebellion is as the sin of Witchcraft,
and (...) Symmacbus vertit,(...). Stubborn ones are Idolaters, in that they
worship or follow their own mind and will, and refuse to follow the mind and
will of Christ and his Church. See Ezekiel. 14.4, 5, 6.
stubbornness is as iniquity and Idolatry. The Gospel of Jesus Christ
commands thus: 1 Pet. 2.13.
Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake. Romans 13.1, 2.
Let every soul be subject unto the higher powers: for there is no power but
of God. The powers that be, are ordained of God, Whosoever therefore resists
the power, resists the Ordinance of God: and they that resist shall receive
to themselves damnation. Wherefore Paul said unto Titus Bishop of the Church of
the Cretians: Tit. 3.1.
Put them in mind to be subject to principalities and powers; to obey
Magistrates, to be ready to every good work. Saint Paul also said to the
Christians: Phil. 3.17.
Brethren, be followers together of me, and mark them which walk so, as ye
have us for an ensample. Who said most remarkeably, 1 Cor. 9.19.20, 21, 22, 23.
Though I be free from all men, yet have I made my self servant unto all, that
I might gain the more. And unto the Jews I became as a Jew, that I might
gain the Jews: To them that are under the law, as under the law, that I might
gain them that are under the law. To them that are without law, as without law
(being not without law to God, but under the law to Christ) that I might gain
them that are without law. To the weak became I as weak, that I might gain
the weak: I am made all things to all men, that I might by all means save
some. And this I do for the Gospels sake: or as Saint Peter says, for the 1
Pet. 2.1^1
Lords sake, who has commanded all that would be his people, for to obey every
Ordinance of man, that is not contrary to the everlasting Ordinances of his
holy Gospel. Such as break the order of the Church where they live, in
contemning or neglecting the Divine service there, under pretense of conscience
unto hearing of the Word preached, would they conscionably but consider of
matters, they might by the grace of God see their aberration. It is preaching
that they cry out for. Let them mark what is said in the Acts: Moses of old
time has in every City them that preach him, being Act. 15.1.
read in the Synagogues every Sabbath day. Does not the Apostle signify in
those his words, that in reading of Moses, Moses is preached? What is it to
preach? (though the term be now by an excellency commonly used for to make a
sermon of about an hour long in the Pulpit) is it not openly to make known
the Doctrine of Christian faith and life? And is not then the heavenly truth
In Luke 8.39 the word (...), which is many times translated preaching, is
rendered published.
published or preached in the reading of the lessons, the Epistle and the
Gospel? Is not Gods truth as concerning godliness So in Luke 12.3 (...),
(which sometimes is rendered shall be treached, as in Mat. 24 14.) is there
rendered shall be proclaimed.
published in the reading of the common prayer, in the reading of the Homilies,
in the explaining of the Catechism in the Divine service, and by instructing
the ignorant in the same? Let such as so slight, contemn or neglect the
Divine service-deliveries examine themselves, if they be not of like mind to
those, of whom it is written in Ezechiel, Ezekiel. 33.30, 31, 32.
that will speak one to another, every one to his brother, saying, Come, I
pray you, and hear what is the word that comes forth from the Lord! And they
come unto thee, as the people comes, and they sit before thee as my people,
and they hear thy words, but they will not do them: for with their mouth they
show much love, but their heart goes after their covetousness. And lo thou
art unto them as a very lovely song of one that has a pleasant voice, and can
play well on an Instrument; for they hear thy words, but they do them not. Or
rather if they be not such as Saint Paul foretold would be in the last days, 2 Timothy 4.3.4.
who will not endure sound Doctrine, but after their own lusts will heap to
themselves teachers, having itching ears: and they will turn away their ears
from the truth, and will be turned unto fables: Being also lovers 2 Timothy 3.2,
4, 5.
of their own selves, boasters, proud, disobedient to parents, unthankful,
unholy, without natural affection, false accusers, fierce, despisers of those
that are good, heady, high minded, etc. having a form of godliness, but
denying the power thereof. Were it the righteousness of faith and life which
they Mat. 5.6.
hungered and thirsted after, and (as the sacred Letany says) to have the grace
of Gods holy Spirit, for to amend their lives according to his holy Word; also
for to have an heart to love and dread God, and diligently to live after his
Commandments; They by the grace of Christ should perceive in the books of
Divine service, and from the public hearing of the same, a plentiful help to
be toward attaining that Phil. 3.14.
make; as also by the reading of the holy Scriptures, which the Church has
translated for them into the English tongue. Who now a days attaineth unto
that soundness of faith, and unto that measure of holiness and righteousness
of life, as is prescribed and taught plainly in the books of the Divine
service? Is it any godliness or true devotion, or any property of the
Christian profession, for people having most wholesome food, by the greatest
wisdom and care of the Church prepared, and so disposed as it may be
profitably received, and inwardly digested unto the great increase of holy
understanding and upright living in their own Parish, for to go out thence
ordinarily for food abroad, with violating the established order of the Church,
giving offense to the Minister, and a great 1 Cor. 10.32.24.33. Romans 14.13.19 1
Cor. 8.13.
scandal to the people of the congregation.

CHAP. 48. Of peoples reading the holy Scriptures in private, and of means
helping unto the understanding of them.
THE very first of all the sacred sermons or T. 1. p. 1.
Homilies of the Church is titled a fruit full exhortation to the reading and
knowledge of holy Scripture, and it says: Unto a Christian man there can be
nothing either more necessary or profitable, than the knowledge of holy
Scripture, forasmuch as in it is contained Gods true Word, setting forth his
glory, and also man's 2 Timothy 3.16, 17.
duty. And there is no truth nor doctrine Isa. 8.20.
necessary for our justification, and everlasting salvation, but that is (or
may be) drawn out of that Fountain and Well of truth. Therefore as many as
be, desirous to enter into the right and perfect way unto God, must apply
their minds to know holy Scripture, without the which, they can neither Mat.
22.29. Ier. 8.9.
sufficiently know God and his will, neither their office and duty. And as
drink is pleasant to them that be dry, and meat to them that be hungry: So is
the reading, hearing, searching and studying of holy Scripture, to them that be
desirous to know God or themselves, and to Ps. 19.10. and 119.103. John 7.17.
Ps. 103.18. Mat. 7.21.
do his will. And their stomachs only do Mat. 7.6. 2 Pet. 2.22. Phil. 3.19.
loath and abhor the heavenly knowledge and food of Gods Word, that be so
drowned in worldly Ephesians. 4.17. Ier. 2.5.
vanities, that they neither Romans 8.5.
savor God, nor any godliness: For that is the cause why they desire such
vanities, rather than the true knowledge of God. And so along forward the said
Homily delivers sentences, worthy to be printed in letters of gold, yea, to
be laid up in the secret of our hearts.

In the first part of the T. 2. p. 143.
Homily, an information for them, which take offense at certain places of the
holy Scripture, it is said: The great utility and profit that Christian men and
women may take (if they will) by hearing and reading the holy Scriptures
(dearly beloved) no heart can sufficiently conceive, much less is my tongue
able with words to express. Wherefore Satan our enemy, seeing the Scriptures
to be the very mean and right way to bring people to the true knowledge of
God; and that Christian religion is greatly furthered by diligent hearing and
reading of them, he also perceiving what an hinderance and let they be to
him and his kingdom, does what he can to drive the reading of them out of Gods
Church. And so forward it treats in a wonderful Divine manner.

In the third part of the T. 2. p. 230.
Homily for Rogation week, it is said: No where can we more certainly search
for the knowledge of the will of God (by the which we must direct all our
works and deeds) but in the holy Scriptures, for they be they that John 5.39.
testify of him, says our Savior Christ. We see with what vanity the school
doctrine is mixed, for that in this Word they sought not the Ephesians. 5.17. Romans
12.2.
will of God, but rather the will of reason, the trade of custom, the path of
the fathers, the practice of the Church. Let us therefore read and revolve the
holy Scripture both day and night, for blessed is he that has his whole Ps.
1.2. Ios. 1.8. ecclus. 50.18.
meditation therein, etc.

In the last of all the T. 2.318.
Homilies, in the sixth part thereof, and in the last part of the same, the
necessity of knowing the Scriptures, is most lively declared, where it is
said: The holy Scriptures do teach, that the people which Acts 28.27.
will not see with their eyes, nor hear with their ears, to learn, and to
understand with their hearts, cannot be converted and saved. And the wicked
themselves being damned in Hell, shall confess ignorance in Gods Word to have
brought them thereunto, saying, Wisd. 5.6, 7.
We have erred from the way of the truth, and the light of righteousness has
not shined unto us, and the sun of understa^ding has not risen unto us, we
have wearied our selves in the way of wickedness and perdition, and have
walked cumberous and crooked ways: but the way of the Lord we have not known.
And as well our Savior himself, as his Apostle S. Paul, does teach, that the
ignorance of Gods Word Luke 8.12. 2 Cor. 4.4.
comes of the Devil, and is the cause of all Ps. 95.10. as in the Divine
service translation.
error and misiudging, (as falls out with ignorant subjects, who can rather
epsy a little Mote in the eye of the Prince or a Counselor, than a great
Beam in their own) and universally it is the cause of all evil, and finally
of eternal Ioh. 3.19, 20, 21.
damnation, Gods judgment being severe toward those, who when the light of
Christ's Gospel is come into the world, do delight more in darkness of
ignorance, than in the light of knowledge in Gods Word. For all are commanded
to Rev. 1.3.
read or hear, to search and study the holy Scriptures, and are promised Pro.
2.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
understanding to be given them from God, if they so do: all are charged not
to believe either any Isa. 8.19, 20.
dead man, nor if an Gal. 1.8, 9.
Angel should speak from heaven, much less if the Pope do speak from Rome
against or contrary to the Word of God, from the which we may not Deuteronomy. 5.32.
decline, neither to the right hand nor to the left. In Gods Word Princes must
Deuteronomy. 17.18, 19, 20.
learn how to obey God, and to govern men: In Gods Word subjects must learn
obedience, both to God and their Princes. Old men and young, rich and poor,
all men and women; all estates, sexes and ages, are taught their several
duties in the Word of God. For the Word of God is bright, Ps. 19.7, 8.
giving light unto all men's eyes, the shining Ps. 119.105. Prove. 6.23.
Lamp directing all men's paths and steps.

In the first part of the T. 1. p. 91.
Homily against contention, it is said: Let us read Scripture, that by reading
thereof, we may be made the better Iam. 1.22, 23, 24, 25.
livers, rather than the more 1 Timothy 1.5, 6, 7. and 6.3, 4, 5, 20, 21.
contentious disputers. And says the first part of the first T. 1. p. 3.
Homily of all, In reading of Gods Word, he most profits not always, that is
most ready in turning of the book, or in saying of it without the book, but
he that is most turned into it, that is most inspired with the holy Ghost, most
in his heart and life altered and Ier. 48.11. Romans 12.2. 2 Cor. 3.18.
changed into that thing which he reads: He that is daily less and less
proud, less wrathful, less covetous, and less desirous of worldly and vain
pleasures: He that daily (for saking his old vicious life) * increases in
virtue more and more. See Chap. 92.


The Bereans (as it seems by the last translation) were accounted more noble
then those in Thessalonica, Acts 17.11.(...). Syrus vertit (...) utireddidit
Arabs.
for that they received the Word with all readiness of mind, and searched the
Scriptures daily, whether those things were so. David says, Ps. 1.2.
The delight of the blessed (man and woman) is in the Law of the Lord, and
therein will meditate day and night. Job said, He Job 23.12.
esteemed the words of Gods mouth, more then his necessary food.

Now concerning Of the means whereby people may be helped in understanding of
the holy Scriptures
means which may help peoples understanding of the Scripture, it is most
Divinely delivered in the second part of the first of all the T. 1. p. 5, 6.
Homilies, where it is said: Read it humbly with a meek and lowly heart, to the
intent you may 1 Cor. 10.31.
glorify God, and your selves, with the knowledge of it: and read it not
without daily praying unto God, that he would direct your reading unto good
effect, and take upon you to expound it no further than you can plainly
understand it. For (as Saint Augustine says) the knowledge of holy Scripture,
is a great, large, and a high place; but the door is very low, so that the
high and Mat. 11.25, 26. Dan. 12.10. Ps. 25.9. Mat. 13.10, 11.
arrogant man cannot run in: but he must stoop low and 1 Pet. 5.5, 6. Ecclus
3.19.
humble himself, that shall enter into it. Presumption and arrogance is the
mother of all error: and humility needs to fear no error. For humility
will only search to know the truth, it will search, and bring together one
place with another; and where it cannot find out the meaning, it will pray, it
will Acts 8.34.
ask of other that know, and will not presumptuously and rashly define any
thing, which it knows not. If one be ignorant, he ought the more to read
and to search holy Scripture, for to Pro. 1.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
bring him out of ignorance. I say not nay, but a man may prosper with only
hearing; but he may much more prosper with both hearing and 2 Cor. 1.13. Rev.
1.3.
reading. And concerning the hardness of the Scripture, he that is so weak
that he is not able to brook strong Heb. 5.12, 13, 14. 1 Cor. 3.1, 2, 3.
meat, yet he may suck the sweet and tender milk, and defer the rest
until he wax stronger, and come to more knowledge. For God receives the
learned and the unlearned, and casts away none, but is Iam. 1.5. Wisd. 6.7.
Romans 2.11.
indifferent unto all. And the Scripture is full as well of low valleys,
plain ways, and easy for every man to use, and to walk in: as also of high
hits and mountains, which few men can climb unto. And whosoever gives his
mind to holy Scriptures, with diligent study, and burning desire, it cannot
be (says Saint Chrysostom) that he should be Ps. 25.12, 13 Isa. 50.10.
left without help. For either God Almighty will Acts 8.29.
send him some godly Doctor, to teach him, as he did to instruct the Eunuch:
or else, if we lack a learned man to instruct and teach us, yet God himself
from above, will give 2 Samuel 22.29 See the Collect for the third Sunday after
Easter.
light unto our minds, and teach us those things which are necessary for us,
and wherein we be ignorant. And in another place Chrysostom says, That man's
humane and 1 Cor. 1.19, 20, 21. Romans 1.22. Col. 2.8. 1 Cor. 2.14. and 3.19, 20.
worldly wisdom or science, needs not to the understanding of Scripture, but
the Mat. 11.27. Ioh. 14 26. and 16.13.
revelation of the holy Ghost, who inspireth the true meaning unto them, that
with humility and diligence do search therefore, etc.

In the second part of the T. 2 p. 149, 150.
Homily, an information concerning certain places of Scripture; It is said: If
ye will be profitable hearers and readers of the holy Scriptures, ye must
first Mat. 16.24. 1 Cor. 4.18.
deny your selves, and keep under your 1 Cor. 2.14. Isay 55.7.8. Romans 8.5, 6,
7.
carnal senses taken by the outward words, and search the inward meaning: Romans
4.18, 19, 20, 21, 22.
reason must give place to Gods holy Spirit; you must submit your worldly
wisdom and judgment, unto his divine wisdom and judgment. Consider that
the Scripture, in what strange form soever it be pronounced, is the word of
the living God. It cannot therefore be but Tit. 1.2. Pro. 8.6, 7, 8, 9.
truth, which proceeds from the God of all truth: it cannot be but wisely and
prudently commanded, what Almighty God has devised, how vainly soever, through
want of grace, we miserable wretches do imagine and judge of his most holy
Word.

In the third part of the T. 2. p. 231.
Homily for Rogation week, it is said; Wisd. 7.14.
Wisdom is an infinite treasure unto men, which who so use, become partakers
of the love of God. I might with many words move some of this audience to
search for this wisdom, to sequester their reason, to follow Gods
Commandment, to cast from them the wits of their brains, to savor this
wisdom, to renounce the wisdom and policy of this fond world, to taste and
savor that whereunto the favor and will of God has called them, and wills
us finally to enjoy by his favor, if we Prove. 1.33. and 2.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. and
8.34, 35.
would give ear. The elect, as they can search Job 28.12.20.23.28.
where to find this wisdom, and know of whom to Iam. 1.5. Ephesians. 17.
ask it; So know they again, that in time it is found, and can therefore
attemper themselves to the occasion of the time, to suffer no time to Ephesians.
5.15, 16, 17. Prove. 14.23.
pass away, wherein they may labor for this Ecclus. 51.30. See all, etc.
Ecclus. 24.
wisdom. And to increase therein they know how God of his infinite mercy and
lenity, gives all men here time and place of Romans 2.4. Rev. 2.21.
repentance.

The natural man ( says Saint Paul) receives not the things of the Spirit of
God, for they are foolishness unto him, neither 1 Cor. 2.14.
can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned. Wherefore the Lord
Christ said; verily, verily, except a man be borne again, he John 3.3.
cannot see the kingdom of God. The Prophet David says. Psalm. 25.12 13, 14.9.
What man is he that fears the Lord? him will he teach the way that he
shall choose. His soul shall dwell at ease, and his seed shall inherit the
earth. The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him: and he will show
them his covenant. The meek will he guide in judgment: and the meek will
he teach his way. Saint Paul also says: Let no man deceive himself; If any
man among you seems to be wise in this world, let him become a 1 Cor. 3.18,
19, 20.
fool, that he may be wise. For the wisdom of this world is foolishnes
with God. We are to believe that every word, syllable, and Mat. 5.18, Gal.
3.16. 1 Cor. 15.27. Heb. 2.8.
letter of the holy Scriptures is truth, though the matter be far Rom
4.18.20, 21, 22. See in Homily in T. 2. p. 149.
above our comprehension or Some words are to be understood not naturally, but
spiritually: as in Rev. 11.8. and some figuratively: as John 15.8. Luke 22.20.
Psalm 6.6. Matthew. 3.5. namely, when as the natural or proper sense of them
cannot stand consonant either with the context, or with other Scriptures. The
letter is to be retained always in every understanding: for let any jot or
title pass, and where is the Scripture then?
understanding. The Lord says, Till heaven and earth pass, one Mat. 5.18.
jot, or one title shall in no wise pass from the Law, till all be fulfilled.
The Scripture cannot be John 10.35.
broken. Ye shall not Deuteronomy. 4.2.
add unto the word which I command you, neither shall ye diminish ought from
it, that ye may keep the commandments of the Lord your God, which I command
you. Pro. 30.6.
Add not thou unto his words, lest he reprove thee; and thou be found a lier.
Saint Peter says, that in Saint Paul's Epistles are some things 2 Pet. 3.16.
hard to be understood; which they that are unlearned and unstable do wrest,
as they do also the other Scriptures unto their own destruction. Again, the
Lord Christ says; If ye John 8.31.32.
continue in my word, then are ye my disciples indeed. And ye shall c know the
truth, and the truth shall make you free. Again, he said unto the Jews: If
any man will do the John 7.17.
will of God my Father, he shall know of the doctrine whether it be of God or
whether I speak of my self. Saint James says: If any want wisdom, let him
James 1.5.
ask of God, that gives to all men liberally, and upbraideth not: and it
shall be given him. Christ says, your heavenly Father will Luke 11.13.
give the holy Spirit to them that ask him, and which also Acts 5.32.
obey him: which holy Spirit teaches 2. Pet. 1.3.
all things that pertain unto life and godliness, and John 16.13. Psalm. 25.5.
leads the obedient into all truth, unto Ephesians. 4.3. Ioh. 17.21, 221
unity, Iam. 3.17.18. Gal. 5.22, 23.
peace, and Act. 1.14. Act. 2.46. and 4.32. Col. 2.2.5. 1 Cor. 1.10. Phil. 2.2.
concord. Solomon most memorably says; Prove. 2.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
My son, if thou will receive my words, and hide my Commandments with thee,
so that thou incline thine ear unto wisdom, and apply thine heart unto
understanding. Yea if thou cryest after knowledge, and liftest up thy voice for
understanding: If thou seek her as silver, and searchest for her as for hid
treasures: Then shall thou understand the fear of the Lord, and find the
knowledge of God. Also that saying of the Lord by the Prophet Malachy is ever
to be remembered; Mal. 2.5.6.7.
My covenant was with Levi of life and peace, and I gave them to him, for the
fear, wherewith he feared me, and was afraid before my name. The law of truth
was in his mouth, and iniquity was not found in his lips: he walked with me in
peace and equity, and did turn many away from iniquity. For the Priests lips
should keep knowledge, and they should seek the law at his mouth: for he is
the messenger of the Lord of hosts. People are to read the holy Scriptures,
which the 1. Tim. 3.15.
Church according to her wisdom and the Romans 3.2.
Hebrew Rev. 9.11.
Greek, and faithfulness has 1 Cor. 12.10.28.30.
interpreted into English out of Dan. 2.4.
Chaldean texts, wherein they were See all along the margent of Genesis 1. etc.
and of Mat. 5.11. etc. and of Ezra 4.9. etc. Soc also the title page of the old
Testament, and also of the new. Read all the Translators Preface set before the
Bibles in quarto and in solio.
first written by the Prophets and Apostles. And as people are to be thankful
unto God, and unto the Royal Majesty, and unto the Fathers and Doctors of the
Church for that delivery of the holy Scriptures; so are they to remember, it is
the Acts 8.30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35.
office of the Philips of the Church, for to interpret places of the Scripture
hard to be understood. And the Philips are the Mal. 2.7. Deuteronomy. 17.8, 9. etc.
Acts 15.6. Ephesians. 4.11, 12.
Clergy; and therein the 1 Cor. 12.28. See before in Chap. 35, 36, and 37. of
degrees in the ministry.
principal are the most reverend Fathers in God, the Archbishops, and the
right reverend Fathers in God, the Bishops; the next are the Doctors, and all
Pastors, and all authorized Preachers, whose conscionable and religious care is
both by their life and doctrine, to set forth Gods true and lively Word, and to
keep the unity of the spirit, the most holy faith, and the true godly life,
prescribed in the books of the Divine Service, and in the other books of the
established doctrine of the Church of England.

And hereunto may be considered that memorable and very remarkable delivery of
the most Reverend Father in God, Thomas Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury, out
of Saint Gregory Nazianzene, in the latter end of his Prologue before the
Church-bible of the former translation. I marvel much (says he) to recount
whereof comes all this desire of vainglory, whereof comes all this
tongue-itch, that we have so much delight to talk and clatter. And wherein is
our communication? not in the commendation of virtuous and good deeds, of
hospitality, of love between Christian brother and brother, of love between
man and wife, of virginity and chastity, and of Alms toward the poor. Not in
Psalms and godly songs, not in lamenting for our sins, not in repressing the
affections of the body, not in prayers to God. We talk of Scripture, but in
the mean time we subdue not our flesh by fasting, waking, and weeping: we
make not this life a meditation of death, we do not strive to be lords over
our appetites and affections. We go not about to pull down our proud and high
minds, to abate our fumish and rancorous stomachs, to restrain our lusts and
bodily delectations, our undiscreet sorrows, our lascivious mirth, our
inordinate looking, our unsatiable hearing of vanities, our speaking without
measure, our inconvenient thoughts; and briefly, to reform our life and
manners: but all our holiness consists in talking. And we pardon each other
from all good living, so that we may stick fast together in argumentation, as
though there were no more ways to heaven but this alone, the way of
speculation and knowledge, (as they take it.) But in very deed it is rather the
way of superfluous contention and sophistication. The same Author says also in
another place; That the learning of a Christian man ought to begin of the fear
of God, and to end in matters of high speculation: and not contrarily to begin
with speculation and to end in fear. For speculation (says he) either high
cunning or knowledge, if it be not stayed with the bridle of fear to offend
God, is dangerous, and enough to tumble a man headlong down the hill.
Therefore says he: The fear of God must be the first beginning, and as it
were an A. B. C. or an introduction to all them that shall enter into the very
true and most fruitful knowledge of holy Scriptures. Where as is the fear of
God, there is (says he) the keeping of the Commandments: and where as is the
keeping of the Commandments, there is the cleansing of the flesh: which flesh
is a cloud before the souls eye, and suffers it not purely to see the beam
of the heavenly light. Where as is the cleansing of the flesh, there is the
illumination of the holy Ghost, the end of all our desires, and the very light
whereby the verity of Scriptures is seen and perceived.

CHAP. 49. Of reading the books in the Bible, which are called writings
Apocrypha.
IN the Table of proper Lessons to be read both at morning and evening prayer,
on the sundays throughout the year, and on the holy days, there are
appointed sundry Lessons to be read of the books in the Bible, which are
called Apocrypha, as on Whitsunday there is ordained to be read the first
Chapter of the Wisdom of Solomon for the first Lesson at evening prayer. And
upon the feast day of Saint Peter, and of Saint James, and of Saint
Bartholomew, and of Saint Matthew, and of Saint Luke, and of Saint Michael the
Archangell, the first Lesson is prescribed out of the book called
Ecclesiasticus, or the Wisdom of Jesus the son of Syrach. And for the first
Lesson to be read on many week days in the year, it is appointed out of
more of those books, as out of the book of Judith, of Baruch, of Tobias, and
out of both books of Esdras, as it may be seen in the Calendar set in the
beginning of the book of Common Prayer. The Church has not appointed Lessons
to be read publicly in Churches, forth of any other books, of how great
authority soever, (excepting the Canonical Scriptures.) Among the holy
Scriptures, which are in the common prayer appointed to be read for to stir up
people to remember the poor, there are inserted three verses out of the book
of Tobias. In both Tomes of Homilies, the Church with great respect has
alleged very many sayings out of the books called Apocrypha, ascribing
greater authority to them than unto mere humane writings. In the margent of
the last translation of the Bible, there is often reference made unto Chapter
and verse of those books: as in the margent of Heb. 1.3. John 10.22. Matthew.
6.7. Matthew. 23.37. Heb. 11.35. and in more places. There is no such reference
made unto Chapter and verse of any other books, excepting the canonical
Scriptures. In the Concordance (which is sometimes bound with bibles of the
middle bigness, namely in quarto) places out of all those books are often
quoted and added unto the places cited out of the Canonical Scriptures. It is
not so done out of any other books. Even all the Fathers, which have lived in
the Church of Jesus Christ since first the Apostles days, have with great
reverence and respect alleged sayings out of those books. The true
Apostolical Church of England has ordained those books only, and none other
of what authority soever, to be translated with the Canonical Scriptures, and
to be set between the books of the old and new Testament. Seeing then that
the Church our mother so honors the said books called Apocrypha, ought not
we her members to have them bound in our Bibles, to reverence and respect
them, and diligently to read them for The Church in the sixth Article of
religion so delivers.
example of life and instruction of manners, and to account them for to be in
all respects of so much Phil. 4.8. 1 These. 5.21. 1 Pet. 5.5. Mat. 18.17. 1 Cor
16.16.
authority, as the Church of England now ascribes unto them?

CHAP. 50. Of peoples learning the most sacred Catechism of the Church which
is in the book of Common Prayer.
Every member of the true Apostolical Church of England has occasion greatly
to praise the name of the Lord, for stirring up our most gracious Sovereign,
and the holy Fathers of the Church, to take great care for this ordinance of
the Gospel of Jesus Christ, namely Catechizing, that it may be duly used,
according as it was prescribed by holy Church heretofore, and the same ratified
by our late Sovereign Lord King James, a Prince of ever blessed memory.
IN the end of the rubricke after the Service of Confirmation, it is said; None
shall be admitted to the holy Communion, until such time as he can say the
Catechism, namely, that in the book of Common Prayer, the which being printed
alone by it self, is now commonly called the A. B. C. The said most sacred
Catechism consists of but about twenty questions, whose answers require any
labor of learning by heart. And yet therein is contained the sum of the
whole Christian faith and life, in a most Divine delivery. This holy Ps.
119.130.
Catechism should all people members of the Church of England, have either in
memory; or else at least be able so to 1 Pet. 3.13.
answer unto each question therein, as that they may declare themselves to
have in effect such an Phil. 3.16. 1 Cor. 1.10.
understanding of the matters therein contained, as the Church has in full
words expressed in it.

Catechism is an instructing of people in the Heb. 5.12.
principles of the Oracles of God: It is a Heb. 6.1, 2.
laying of the foundation of repentance from dead works, and of faith toward
God, of the Doctrine of Baptismes, and of laying on of hands, and of the
resurrection of the dead, and of the eternal judgment: It is a ministering of
the 1 Pet. 2.2.
sincere milk of the Word unto the Heb. 5.13.
unskilful in the word of righteousness. Even as a house cannot be well
built up, and stand fast, unless the foundations thereof be firmly laid: so
people who should be built up a spiritual 1 Pet. 2.4.
house for an Ephesians. 2.21, 22.
habitation of God through the spirit, cannot be fitly framed together, and
grow unto an holy Temple in the Lord, unless they be Luke 11.52 Mat. 14.11.
rightly instructed in the principles of the Doctrine of Christ, and withal
grow up in all due Romans 1.5. and 16.26.
obedience unto the same. Not only the Catechism in the Divine Service does
deliver the Milk of the Gospel; but also the whole Divine Service does
minister the same abundantly.

If one would know what is repentance and faith, let him read the Homilies
thereof: If he would know what is the mystery of baptism, and of laying on
of hands, let him read the Services thereof: If one would know the mystery of
the Communion, let him read the Service and the Homily thereof. It is a main
part of the use of the Divine Service, to lay firmly in peoples minds, the 1
Cor. 3.10.
grounds of Christianity. All people therefore that would be rightly grounded
in the true Christian religion, and grow more and more toward Heb. 6.1. Col.
1.28, 29.
perfection in Jesus Christ, ought to be much conversant in every part of the
said Service, and to enable themselves so to render a reason of every point of
Christianity, according as they find it delivered in the said Prove. 6.20, 21,
22, 23. Luke 10.16.
books; and withal to 2 These. 1.3. Prove 4.18.
increase in that godly conversation which is throughout the service
prescribed. And thereunto this present work will much help every one, that
will make due use of all the same. The Church has ordained, that not only the
youth, but other ignorant persons also to be Song. 6.6. Ps. 1.48 12. Deuteronomy.
31.12. Nehem. 8.2.
instructed in the Catechism. For thus is her sacred Canon 59 This holy and
necessary Ordinance of Christ and his Church, is now by the great goodness of
Almighty God observed, and al true Christians hearts do pray that so it may
be continued, and more and more conscionably used, unto Gods glory and the
edification of all people.
constitution: Every Parson, Vicar, or Curate, upon every Sunday and holy day
before evening prayer, shall for half an hour or more, examine and instruct
the youth and ignorant persons of his parish, in the ten Commandments, the
Articles of the belief, and in the Lords prayer: and shall diligently hear,
instruct, and teach them the Catechism set forth in the book of Common
prayer, etc. Peoples Prove. 19.2.
neglect of learning that Catechism, and of obedience thereto; and also their
not regarding to have their Children and servants taught the same, and
instructed unto the observing of the duties therein prescribed, is a maine
cause, that now so many are ignorant in mind, and Prove. 29.15.
disorderly in conversation. The Oracle of God says: Prove. 22.6.
Train up a Child in the way he should go, and when he is old he will not
depart from it.

CHAP. 51. Of Baptism.
THE Catechism in the Divine service delivers; That the outward visible
sign or form in baptism is water, wherein the person baptized is dipped, or
Is. 52.15.
sprinkled with it, in the Mat. 28.19.
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost. And that the
inward and spiritual grace thereof, is a death unto sin, and a new birth
unto righteousness: for being by nature Ps. 51.5. Job 14.4.
borne in sin, and the Children of Ephesians. 2.3.
wrath, we are hereby made the Gal. 3.26, 27.
Children of grace. The necessity of this Sacrament is showed in the beginning
of the service thereof, where it is said: For as much as all men be conceived
and borne in sin, and that our Savior Christ says: None can enter into the
Kingdom of God, except he be regenerate and borne anew of John 3.5.
water and of the holy Ghost. I beseech you to call upon God the Father,
through our Lord Jesus Christ, that of his bounteous mercy he will grant to
these children that thing which by nature they cannot have, that they may be
baptized with water and the holy Mat. 3.11. Mar. 10.14, 15, 16.
Ghost, and received into Christ's holy Church, and be made lively members of
the same. The benefits of baptism are in the Service thereof by many speeches
signified. It is said to be a Christning, as in the Rubricke of private
baptism, where it is said, The Minister shall not Christen the child again,
but, etc.

In Baptism a child receives Christendom, and being baptized is pronounced
to be a Christian, as we are taught to say in our Catechism, In my baptism,
wherein I was made a member of Christ, the Child of God, and an Gal. 3.29.
inheritour of the kingdom of heaven. In the Service of private baptism, the
Minister is to pronounce concerning a child lawfully and sufficiently baptized,
That he being borne in Original sin, and in the wrath of God, is now by the
Tit. 3.9. Ephesians. 5.26.
Laver of regeneration in baptism, received into the number of the children of
GOD, and heirs of everlasting life. And then afterward he is to say: Doubt ye
not therefore, but earnestly believe, that he that favorably received this
present infant, that he has embraced him with the arms of his mercy, that he
has given him the Mar. 10.16, 14.
blessing of eternal life, and made him partaker of his Heb. 12.28.
everlasting kingdom. The Service says of a Child baptized, That he is
regenerate by Gods holy Spirit, and graffed into the 1 Cor. 12.13.
body of Christ's congregation, and received for Gods own Child by adoption.

In the first prayer of confirmation it is signified, that in baptism is
received the Col. 2.12, 13, 14.
forgiveness of all sins. And in the Rubricke next before the Catechism, it
is said: That it is certain by Gods Word, that children being baptized, have
all things necessary for their salvation, and be undoubtedly Romans 8.1. Gal.
3.27.
saved.

(The first part of the Homily of salvation adds, ^. 1. p. 13.
And dying in their Mar. 10.14. Act. 2.39. Genesis 17.7.
infancy.) The Divine Service also delivers, That baptism does represent
unto us our profession, (namely when we come to discretion) which is to follow
the Pet. 2.21. Ep^. ^.1, 2. John 3.15. 1 ^o^. 11.1.
example of our Savior Christ, and to be made (...) ^.^.29.
like unto him, that as he dyed, and rose again for Ro^. 25.
us, so should we which are baptized, Romans 6.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 11, 13.
die from sin, and rise again unto righteousness, continually Col. 3.5.
mortifying all our evil and corrupt affections, and daily 2 Cor. 4.16. 2
These. 1.3. 1 Pet. 1.15.
proceeding in all virtue and godliness of living. Saint Paul says to the
Romans: Rom 6.3, etc.
Know ye not that so many of us, as were baptized into Jesus Christ, were
baptized into his death? Therefore we are buried with him by baptism into
death, that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by glory of the Father:
even so we also should walk in newness of life. For if we have been
planted together in the likeness of his death: we shall be also in the
likeness of his resurrection. And to the Galatians he says: Gal. 3.27.
As many of you, as have been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ.
Wherefore to the Romans he says: Rom 8.1.
There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, which walk not
after the flesh, but after the Spirit. And to the baptized Corinthians he
says: 1 Cor. 6.11.
ye are washed, ye are sanctified, ye are justified in the Name of the Lord
Jesus Christ, and by the Spirit of our God. Also to Titus he says: Tit. 3.5.
Not by works of righteousness, which we have done, but according to his
mercy he has saved us, by the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the
Holy Ghost. And again to the Corinthians he says: 1 Cor. 12.13.
By one spirit are we all baptized into one body. To the Colossians he says:
Col. 2.12, 13, 14.
Ye are buried with Christ in Baptism, wherein also ye are risen with him
through the faith of the operation of God, who has raised him from the dead.
And you being dead in your sins, and the uncircumcision of your flesh, has he
quickened together with him, having forgiven you all trespasses.

CHAP. 52. Of Godfathers and Godmothers.
IN the most sacred Catechism, a question is, Why are infants baptized, when
by reason of their tender age, they cannot perform repentance and faith? The
answer is, Yes: they do perform them by their sureties, who promise and vow
them both in their names: which when they come to age, themselves are bound to
perform.

In the Service of public Baptism, the Priest having signified to the
Godfathers and Godmothers, what promise Christ for his part will most surely
keep and perform, says withal: Wherefore after this promise made by Christ,
these infants must also faithfully for their part promise by you that be their
sureties, that they will forsake the Devil and all his works, and constantly
believe Gods holy Word, and obediently keep his Commandments.

In the Service of private Baptism, The Priest is to say unto the Sureties:
Genesis 17.11. Genesis 18.19.
Do thou in the name of this Child for sake the Devil and all his works,
the vain pomp and glory of the world, with all the covetous desires of the
same, the carnal desires of the flesh, and not to follow and be led by them?
And do thou in the name of this child profess this faith, to believe in God
the Father Almighty, etc. And in the Exhortation to the sureties, we may see
most clearly to what a godly purpose holy Church has ordained them, where it
is said: You must remember that it is your part and duty, to see that this
infant be taught, so soon as he shall be able to learn, what a solemn vow,
promise, and profession he has made by you. And that he may know these things
the better, ye shall call upon him to Neh. 8.2. Deuteronomy 31.12.
hear sermons, and chiefly you shall provide, that he may learn the 2 Timothy
1.13
Creed, the Luke 11.1.
Lords prayer, and the Deuteronomy. 11.19, 20, 21, 22. Exodus 34.28.
ten Commandments in the English tongue, and Prove. 22.6.
all other things which a Christian man ought to know, and believe to his
souls health; and that this Child may be Ephesians. 5.4.
virtuously brought up, to lead a godly and a Genesis 18,
Christian life, etc. The Prophet Isaiah has written, Isa. 8.1, 2, 3.
The Lord said unto me, Take thee a great Roll, and write in it with a man's
Pen, concerning Maher-shalal-hash-baz. And I took unto me faithful witnesses,
to record, Vriah the Priest, and Zechariah the son of Ieberechiah. And I went
unto the Prophetess, and she conceived and bare a son: then said the Lord
to me, call his name Mahor-shalal-hash-baz. Hence it is Atque ex hoc ritu
profectum esse illum nostru^ conslat, quo certi homines speciatim, maxim vero
calamitosis temporibus (ut ista futura erant) adbibentur iestes accessus ad
Christum, et ad ecclesiam per baptismum, and nominis baptismo inditi: ex quo
ritu Propheta occasionem sumpsit, ut testes filijsui ad alter^^ hoc singular
testimonium adhiberet. Hos vulgus compatres and commatres, Graeci olim (...)
appellarunt. Iunius in Annot. ad Is. 8.2
observed, that Isaiah took unto him Vriah and Zechariah for witnesses of the
Childs naming; the Prophet would not name the Child, but before some of the
Church. Also childrens names were given at their circumcision, as it is
testified of John the Baptists Luke 1.59, 60 63.
naming; Yea also when our Lord Christ had the Luke 2.21.
name Jesus by Joseph pronounced on him. Moreover, from the holy Prophets
example of taking of witnesses unto the Childs naming, and from that the
Children were named in their circumcision, the ancient holy fathers ordained
that there should be witnesses of childrens names given at their baptism, as
also of their baptizing; and withal they should Phil. 2.4. 1 Cor. 12.25.
Ecclus. 4.10. Iam. 1.27.
undertake to do unto them that good Christian Office, as before was related
out of the Exhortation in the Baptism Service said unto the God fathers and
God mothers.

CHAP. 53. Of the sign of the Cross made on the forehead of the child having
received Baptism.
IT is said in the rubricke set after the words of the act of baptizing,
concerning the child baptized, that then the priest shall make a cross upon
the childs forehead, saying: We receive this child into the congregation of
Christ's flock, and do sign him with the sign of the cross, in token that
hereafter he shall not be ashamed to confess the faith of Christ crucified,
and manfully to fight under his banner, against sin, the World, and the
Devil, and to continue Christ's faithful soldier and servant unto his lives
end. Even as those of the children of Israel, which built an Altar, for which
they had no commandment in the Law of Moses, transgressed not, for that they
did it for a Ios. 22.22. etc.
good signification: So the Church our mother (who has power to make Pro.
6.20. See Chap. 41. before. See the twentieth Article of the religion
established.
law, teaching, or instruction, besides what is expressed in the holy
Scriptures; so that nothing be done contrary to the everlasting precepts of the
Gospel of Jesus Christ) she in using this ancient godly Ceremony, (though to
use the which there is no express commandment in the Bible,) in no wise
transgresses, for that she does it for a good signification, and to inform
her members of a maine duty, which all of years of discretion are bound to
endeavor faithfully to perform, under Romans 8.13. Rev. 21.7.8. Ps. 78.8.9.10.
pain of perishing everlastingly. Our mother does by that sign made on our
foreheads, put us in remembrance of the Christian warfare, that every one
baptized is to enter into, and to Mat. 10 22. Rev. 2.10.11. 1 Timothy 5.12.
continue in unto the end, that will be saved. We are not signed with the
sign of the Cross in token of any superstitious matter, but of a matter most
necessary, required by the Gospel, that all must confess, namely the faith of
Christ Gal. 6.14. Gal. 3.13.14. Call. 2 14.15.
crucified; and also of manfull fighting under Christ's banner, against sin,
the world, and the Devil; and also of continuing Christ's faithful soldiers
and servants unto our lives end. These maine Christian duties, who so
unfainedly endeavors to perform, is in no wise offended at the sign used
for to put people in mind of them; but thanketh God, that he is borne in a
Church, where not only the true Christian life is taught by tongue and pen,
but also is signified by some Ceremony, for ones Number. 16 38, 39, 40.
more remembrance of the same. S. Paul said: s God forbid that I should glory,
save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the world is crucified
unto me, and I unto the world. He says unto Timothy, 1 Timothy 6.12.
fight the good fight of faith. 2 Timothy 2, 3, 4, 5.
Thou therefore endure hardness, as a good soldier of Jesus Christ. 2 Timothy
4.7.
I have fought the good fight. To the Corinthians he says The 2 Cor. 10.3, 4,
5, 6.
weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God to the pulling
down of strong holds. To the Ephesians he lively declares the spiritual
enemies, and with what weapons Ephesians. 6.10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17.
we are to fight against them, saying: Finally my brethren, be strong in the
Lord, and in the power of his might. Put on the whole armor of God, that ye
may be able to stand against the wiles of the Devil. For we wrestle not
against flesh and blood, but against Principalities, against powers, against
the Gal 6.14.
rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high
places wherefore take unto you the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to
withstand in the evil day, and having done all, to stand, etc.

In the book of the Revelation, the spiritual blessings or promises, which
are made to the seven Churches in Asia, are propounded unto each Church to that
person which Rev 2.7.11.17.26. Rev. 3.5.12.21
overcommeth; also it is added, Rev. 2.26.
which keeps my works unto the end, and be thou faithful unto the Rev.
2.10.
death. It is said in another place, He that Rev. 21.7.8.
overcommeth, shall inherit all things, I will be his God, and he shall be my
son. But the fearful and unbeleeving, etc. shall have their part in the
lake, which burns with fire and brimstone; which is the second death. Who so
would read the lawful use of the sign of the cross made after baptism,
explaned, may see in the thirtieth Canon of the Church the same with much godly
wisdom delivered. And there it is said, Among some other very ancient
Ceremonies, the sign of the Cross in baptism has been retained in this
Church by the judgment and practice of those reverend fathers and great
Divines in the days of King Edward the sixth, etc.

CHAP. 54. Of Comfirmation, commonly called Bishopping.
THe order of confirmation, set before the Catechism in the divine service,
gives us to understand the reason of the same, in the three considerations
delivered, for the which unto none confirmation is to be ministered, save only
unto such, as can say that Catechism, viz. First, because that when children
come to the years of discretion, and have learned what their Godfathers and
Godmothers promised for them in Baptism, they may then themselves with their
own mouth, and with their own consent, openly before the Church, ratisie and
confirm the same: And also promise by the grace of God, they will evermore
endeavor themselves faithfully to observe and keep such things, as they by
their own mouth and confession have assented unto. Secondly, forasmuch as
Confirmation is ministered to them that be baptized, that by imposition of hands
and prayer, they may receive strength and defense against all temptations to
sin, and the assaults of the world and the Devil, it is most meet to be
ministered when children come to that age, that partly by the frailty of their
own flesh, partly by the assaults of the world and the Devil, they begin to
be in danger to fall into sundry kinds of sin. Thirdly, for that it is
agreeable with the usage of the Church in times past: Whereby it was ordained
that confirmation should be ministered to them that were of perfect age, that
they being instructed in Christ's religion, should openly profess their own
faith, and promise to be obedient to the will of God. In the prayer to be said
before the act of confirmation, there are mentioned together the sundry See
Chap. 24.
graces, wherein we are to desire for to be confirmed, where it is said:
strengthen them, we beseech thee, O Lord, with the holy Ghost the comforter,
and daily increase in them thy manifold gifts of grace, the spirit of wisdom
and understanding, the spirit of Counsel and ghostly strength, the spirit of
knowledge and true godliness, and fulsill them (O Lord) with the spirit of thy
holy fear. And the words of the confirmation firmation or Bishopping it self
are pronuonced by the Bishop laying his hand upon every child severally,
saying: Defend, O Lord, this child with thy heavenly grace, that he may
continue thine for ever, and daily increase in thy holy spirit more and more,
until he come unto thine everlasting kingdom. And the reason of the laying
the hands is delivered in the prayer to be said when Confirmation is done,
where it is said: We make our humble supplications unto thee for these
children, upon whom (after the example of the holy Apostles) we have laid our
hands, to certify them (by this sign) of thy favor and gracious goodness
toward them: Let thy fatherly hand, we beseech thee, ever be over them: Let
thy holy spirit ever be with them, and so lead them in the knowledge and
obedience of thy word, that in the end they may obtain the everlasting life
throughour Lord Jesus Christ. Also in the rubricke at the end of the
Catechism, it is said, every Child shall be brought to the Bishop, by one
that shall be his Godfather or Godmother, that every child may have a witness
of his Confirmation. Holy Church in her Laws called Constitutions and Canons
Ecclesiastical has two Canons concerning Confirmation: the Canon 60.
one, that it is to be performed once in three years: the Canon 61.
other, that ministers are to prepare Children for Confirmation. In the
sixtieth Canon it is said: Forasmuch as it has been a solemn, ancient, and
laudable custom in the Church of God, continued from the Apostles times, that
all Bishops should lay their hands, upon children baptized and instructed in
the Catechism of Christian Religion, praying over them, and blessing them,
which we commonly call Confirmation, and that this holy action has been
accustomed in the Church in the former ages, to be performed in the Bishops
visitation every third year, etc. Confirmation or laying on of hands is an
ordinance of the Gospel of so great importance, as that by the Apostle to the
Hebrews it is set as the fourth principle of the doctrine of Christ, where he
reckons up together the six principles of the Oracles of God, saying; Heb.
6, 1, 2.
Therefore leaving the principles of the doctrine of Christ, let us go on unto
perfection, not laying again the foundation, of repentance from dead works,
and of faith toward God, of the doctrine of baptismes, and of laying on of
hands, and of the resurrection of the dead, and of the eternal judgment. It
is written in the Acts, that sundry whom the Deacon Philip had baptized and
instructed in the Christian faith, had Confirmation or Act. 8.17.
laying on of hands from the Apostles Peter and John, and so received the holy
Ghost. It is also recorded that Paul Act. 19.6.
laid his hands upon some persons before baptized, and they received the holy
Ghost. The Apostles are said to have Act. 14.22.
confirmed the souls of the Disciples, and to have Act. 18.23.
strengthened them, after they had been converted. Laying on of hands for to
bless, etc. is often mentioned in the book of God, and to have been used
from the days of Genesis 48.14.
Jacob.

CHAP. 55. Of the holy Communion, or the Sacrament of the body and blood of
Jesus Christ.
IN the holy Catechism it is delivered concerning the Sacrament of Lords
Supper, That it was ordained for the continual remembrance of the sacrifice of
the death of Christ, and the benefits which we receive thereby. The outward part
or sign of the Lords supper is bread and wine, which the Lord has commanded
to be received. The inward part or thing signified, is the body and blood of
Christ, which are verily and indeed taken and received of the faithful in the
Lords Supper. The benefits whereof we are partakers thereby, is the
strengthening and refreshing of our souls by the body and blood of Christ, as
our bodies are by the bread and wine. The mystery of this Sacrament is most
divinely declared in the service for the Communion. In the second Exhortation
there it is said; Our heavenly Father has given his Son our Savior Jesus
Christ, not only to dye for us, but also to be our spiritual food Ioh. 6.32,
33, 35, 48, 50, 51.
and sustenance: In the third Exhortation it is said, The benefit is great, if
with a true penitent heart, and lively faith we receive that holy Sacrament:
for then we John 6.63, 56.
spiritually eat the flesh of Christ, and drink his blood, then we dwell in
Christ and Christ John 14.23. 2 Cor. 6.16.
in us, we be 1 Cor. 6.17. 1 Cor. 10.16, 17 1 Cor. 12, 13.
one with Christ, and Christ with us. And afterward it is said; Above all
things, ye must give most humble and hearty thanks to God the Father, the
Son, and the holy Ghost, for the redemption of the world, by the death and
passion of our Savior Christ, both God and man, who did humble himself even
to the death upon the Cross, for us miserable sinners, which lay in darkness
and shadow of death, that he might make us the children of God, and exalt us
to everlasting life. And to the end that we should always remember the exceeding
great love of our Master and only Savior Jesus Christ, thus dying for us, and
the innumerable benefits, which by his precious bloodshedding he has
obtained to us: he has instituted and ordained holy mysteries, as pledges of
his love, and continual 1 Cor. 11.24. 25, 26.
remembrance of his death, to our great and endless comfort. And in the Prayer
to be read before the receiving, it is said; Almighty God, our heavenly Father,
which of thy tender mercy did give thy only Son Jesus Christ to suffer death
upon the Cross for our redemption, who made there (by his one oblation of
himself once offered) a full, perfect, and sufficient sacrifice, oblation, and
satisfaction for the sins of the whole world, and did institute, and in his
holy Gospel command us to continue a perpetual memory of that his precious
death, until his coming again, etc. And in the second Prayer after the
receiving, it is said: Thou do assure us thereby of thy favor and goodness
toward us, and that we be very members incorporate in thy mystical Ephesians. 1.
22, 23. 1 Cor. 12.12.27.
body, which is the blessed company of all faithful people, and be also heirs
through hope, of thy everlasting Kingdom, by the merits of the most precious
death and passion of thy dear Son. In the T. 2. p. 192.
Homily of the resurrection, it is said; Thou have received him, if in true
faith, and repentance of heart thou have received him: If in purpose of
amendment, thou have received him for an everlasting gage or pledge of thy
salvation. Thou have received his body which was once broken, and his blood
which was shed for the remission of thy sin. Thou have received his body, to
have within thee the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, for to dwell with
thee, to endow thee with grace, to strengthen thee against thine enemies, and
to comfort thee with their presence. Thou have received his body to endow thee
with everlasting righteousness, to assure thee with everlasting bliss, and life
of thy soul: For with Christ by true faith art thou quickened again (says
Saint Paul) from death of sin to life of grace, and in hope translated from
corporal and everlasting death, to the everlasting life of glory in heaven,
Phil. 3.20.
where now thy conversation should be, and thy heart and desire set.

In the T. 2. p. 197.
Homily concerning the Sacrament it is most divinely delivered; That our Lord
and Savior thought it not sufficient to purchase for us his Fathers favor
again (which is that deep fountain of all goodness and eternal life) but
also invented the ways most wisely, whereby they might redound to our
commodity and profit. Amongst the which means, is the public celebration of
the memory of his precious death at the Lords Table. Which although it seem of
small virtue to some, yet being rightly done by the faithful, it does not
only help their weakness (who be by their poisoned nature readier to
remember injuries than benefits) but strengthens and comfort their inward
man with peace and gladness, and makes them thankful to their Redeemer, with
diligent care and godly conversation. And as of old time God decreed his
wondrous benefits of the deliverance of his people, to be kept in memory by the
eating of the Passover, See chap. 17.
with his rites and ceremonies: so our loving Savior has ordained and
established the remembrance of his great mercy expressed in his Passion, in the
institution of his heavenly supper. In the same p. 199.
Homily it is also said; We must be sure to hold, that in the supper of the
Lord, there is no vain ceremony, no bare sign, no untrue figure of a thing
absent: but (as the Scripture says) the 1 Cor. 10.21.
table of the Lord, the bread and cup of the Lord, the memory of Christ, the 1
Cor. 11.25, 26.
annuntiation of his death, yea the communion of the body and blood of the
Lord, in a marveilous incorporation, which by the operation of the Holy Ghost
(the very 1 John 3.24.
bond of our conjunctio^ with Christ) is through faith wrought in the souls of
the faithful, whereby not only their souls live to eternal life, but they
surely trust to win their bodies a resurrection to immortality. The true
understanding of this fruition and union, which is betwixt the body and the head,
betwixt the true believers and Christ, the ancient Catholic Fathers both
perceiving themselves, and commending to their people, were not afraid to call
this supper, some of them, the salve of immortality and sovereign preservative
against death. Other, a deificall communion: other, the Rev. 3.20.
sweet dainties of our Savior, the pledge of eternal health, the defense of
faith, the hope of the resurrection: Other, the food of immortality, the
healthful grace, and the conservatorie to everlasting life. And in the same
first part of the p. 200.
Homily, it is also said: Thus much more the faithful see, hear, and know the
favorable mercies of God sealed, the satisfaction by Christ toward us
confirmed, and the remission of sin established. Here they may feel wrought
the tranquillity of conscience, the increase of faith, the strengthening of
hope, the large spreading abroad of brotherly kindness, with many other sundry
graces of God. The taste whereof they cannot attain unto, who be drowned in the
deep durty lake of blindness and ignorance. From the which (O beloved) Ier.
4.14. Isay 1.16. Psalm 119.9. Psalm. 26.6.
wash your selves with the living waters of Gods Word, whence you may perceive
and know, both the spiritual food of this costly supper, and the happy
trustings and effects that the same does bring with it. And then after it is
said; It is well known that the meat we seek for in this supper, is
spiritual food, the nourishment of our soul, a heavenly reflection, and not
earthly, an invisible meat, and not bodily, a ghostly substance, and not
carnal, etc. By the advice of the p. 201.
Council of Nicene, we ought to lift up our minds by faith, and leaving these
inferior and earthly things, there seek it, where the Sun of righteousness
ever shines. Take then this lesson, (O thou that art desirous of this table)
of Emissenus a godly father, that when thou go up to the reverend Communion,
to be satisfied with spiritual meats, thou look up with faith upon the holy
body and blood of thy God, thou marvel with reverence, thou touch it with the
mind, thou receive it with the hand of thy heart, and thou take it fully with
thy inward man.

What the use is which we are to make of the Sacrament.
Concerning the use which we are to make of receiving the Sacrament, it is
signified in the prayer to be read after the Prefaces in the
Communion-service, where it is said: Grant us therefore gracious Lord, so to
eat the flesh of thy dear Son Jesus Christ, and to drink his blood, that
our sinful bodies may be made clean by his body, and our souls washed
through his most precious blood, and that we may evermore John 6.56. John 14.23.
dwell in him, and he in us. And it is also signified in the second prayer
after the receiving, where it is said: We now most humbly beseech thee O
heavenly Father, so to assist us with thy grace, that we may continue in that
holy Act. 2.42.46. Heb. 10.25. Col. 2.19. Ephesians. 2.19.
fellowship, and do all such good works, as thou have Ephesians. 2.10. That the
Sacrament is to be received oftentimes.
prepared for us to walk in, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Concerning the oftennesse of the receiving of the Sacrament, it is said in the
rubricke before the Service for the Communion of the sick, That Curats are to
exhort their parishioners to the often receiving (in the Church) of the holy
Communion of the body and blood of our Savior Christ: which if they do, they
shall have no cause in their sudden visitation to be unquiet for lack of the
same. It is said in the rubricke at the end of the Matrimony-service: The new
married persons, the same day of their marriage, must receive the holy Communion.
And in the end of the Churching-service, it is said in the rubricke: The woman
that comes to give her thanks, must offer accustomed offerings: and if there
be a Communion, it is convenient that she receive the holy Communion. It is
said in the rubricke at the end of the Communion-Service: That in Cathedral
and Collegiat Churches, where be many Priests and Deacons, they shall all
receive the Communion with the Minister every Acts 10.7.
Sunday at the least, except they have a reasonable cause to the contrary. And
in the end of that rubricke it is said: Every Parishioner shall communicate at
the least three times in the year, of which Easter to be one, etc. Also when
any receive any order of the Ministry, they are then to communicate: as it is
prescribed in the book of ordering Bishops, Priests and Deacons. It is written
in Genesis Genesis 14.18, 19.
, That Melchisedec King of Salem brought forth bread and wine: and he was the
Priest of the most high God. And he blessed Abraham, etc. Saint Paul says to
the Corinthians 1 Cor. 10.1, 2, 3, 4.
: Our Fathers were all baptized unto Moses in the cloud and in the sea: And did
all eat the same spiritual meat: and did all drink the same spiritual
drink: (For they drank of that spiritual rock that followed them, and that
rock was Christ.) Wisdom says in the Proverbes: Pro. 9.5.
Come eat of my bread, and drink of the wine which I have mingled. Saint
Matthew records, that as Jesus and his Disciples were eating the Passover,
Jesus took Matthew. 26.26, 27, 28.
bread and blessed it, and brake it, and gave it to the disciples, and said,
Take, eat; this is my body. And he took the cup, and gave thanks, and gave
it to them saying, Drink ye all of it: for this is my blood of the new
testament, which is shed for many for the remission of sins. Saint John writes
that Jesus before had said unto the Jews Ioh. 6.53, 54, 55, 56.63.
Verily, verily, I say unto you, Except ye eat the flesh of the son of man,
and drink his blood, ye have no life in you. Who so eats my flesh, and
drinks my blood, has eternal life, and I will raise him up at the last day.
For my flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed. He that eats my
flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I in him. It is the spirit
that quickneth, the flesh profits nothing: the words that I speak unto you,
they are spirit, and they are life. It is written in the Acts Acts 2.42.
, That the disciples continued steadfast in the Apostles doctrine and
fellowship, and in breaking of bread, and in prayers. Saint Paul says to the
Corinthians: 1 Cor. 10.16, 17.
The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the Communion of the blood of
Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the Communion of the body of
Christ? For we being many are one bread and one body: for we are all partakers
of one bread. Also he says: 1 Cor. 12.13.
We have all been made to drink into one spirit. And further he delivers: 1
Cor. 11.26.
As often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye do show the Lords
death till he come.

CHAP. 56. Of preparing ones self for to receive worthily the holy Sacrament.
IT is said in the third Exhortation to be read before the Communion; The danger
is great, if we receive the holy Sacrament unworthily, for then we be guilty
of the body and blood of Christ our Savior: we eat and drink our own
damnation, not considering the Lords body: we kindle Gods wrath against us: we
provoke him to 1 Cor. 11.30.
plague us with diverse diseases, and sundry kinds of death. Therefore if any
of you be a blasphemer of God, an hinderer or 1 Cor. 5.11.
slanderer of his Word, an adulterer, or be in 1 John 3.15 Mat. 5.23, 24, 25.
malice, or envy, or in any other griveous crime, bewail your sins, etc.
Judge therefore your selves (brethren) that ye be not judged of the Lord.
Repent you truly for your sins past: have a lively and steadfast faith in
Christ our Savior. Amend your lives, and be in perfect charity with all men,
so shall ye be meet partakers of those holy mysteries. Therefore it is to be
said unto them that come to receive the holy Communion, in the last words of
exhortation, before the general Confession be made: You that do truly and
earnestly repent you or your sins, and be in love and charity with your
neighbors, and intend to lead a new life, following the Commandments of God,
and walking from henceforth in his holy ways: draw near, and take this holy
Sacrament to your comfort.

In the Catechism it is said: There is required of them which come to the
Lords Supper, to examine themselves whether they repent the^ truly of their
former sins, steadfastly purposing to lead a new life, have a lively faith in
Gods mercy through Christ, with a thankful remembrance of his death, and be
in charity with all men.

In the first part of the T. 2 p. 198.
Homily concerning the Sacrament, it is said: We must address our selves to
frequent this Table in reverent and comely manner, lest as physic provided
for the body, being misused, more hurts then profits: so this comfortable
medicine of the soul undecently received, tends to our greater harm and
sorrow. We must certainly know, that three things be requisite in him, which
would seemly, as becomes such high mysteries, resort to the Lords table.
That is: first a right and worthy estimation and understanding of this
mystery. Secondly, to come in a sure faith. And thirdly, to have newness or
pureness of life to succeed the receiving of the same.

In the second part of the P. 202.
Homily concerning the Sacrament, it is said: We may learn by eating of the
typical Lamb, whereunto no man was admitted, but he that was a Jew, that was
Ex. 12.48.
circumcised, that was before sanctified. Yea, Saint Paul testifies, that
although the people were partakers of the Sacraments under Moses, yet for that
some of them were still worshippers of Images, Whoremongers, Tempters of
Christ, murmurers, and coveting after evil things: God 1 Cor. 10.5, 6, 11.
overthrew those in the wilderness, and that for our example, that is, that we
Christians should take heed we resort unto our Sacraments with holiness of
life, not trusting in the Mat: 15.8.9. Ier. 7.3, 4, 5, 9, 10, etc. Mat. 3.8, 9,
10.
outward receiving of them, and infected with corrupt and uncharitable manners.
For this sentence of God must always be justified: Mat. 12.7. Hos. 6.7. 1 Samuel 15.22, 23.
I will have mercy and not sacrifice. Wherefore (says Basil) it behooveth him
that comes to the body and blood of Christ, in commemoration of him that dyed
and rose again, not only to be pure from all 2 Cor. 7.1.
filthiness of the flesh and spirit, lest he eat and drink his own
condemnation: but also to 1 Cor. 11.26.24.
show out evidently, a memory of him that died and rose again for us, in this
point, that ye be Romans 6.11.8.
mortified to sin and the world, to live now unto God, in Christ Jesus our
Lord.

It is P. 203.
afterward delivered most divinely also: Furthermore, for newness of life, it
is to be noted that S. Paul writes, that we being many, are one 1 Cor. 10.17.
bread, and one body: for all be partakers of one bread. Declaring thereby not
only our communion with Christ, but that Ephesians. 4.16.
unity also, wherein they that eat at this Table, should be knit together. For
by dissension, vain glory, ambition, strife, envying, contempt, hatred, or
malice, they should not be 1 Cor. 11.18
dissevered: but so Ephesians. 2.21, 22. 1 Pet 2.5. Col. 2.2.5.19.
joined by the bond of love, in one mystical body, as the Corns of that bread
in one Loaf. In respect of which strait knot of Charity, the true Christians
in the Primitive Church called this Supper, Love. As if they should say, none
ought to sit down there, that were out of love and charity, who bare grudge
and vengeance in his heart, who also did not profess his kind affection by
some charitable Acts 20.7. with 1 Cor 16, 2.
relief, for some part of the congregation. And this was their practice. O
heavenly banquet then so used! O godly ghests, who so esteemed this feast! And
so along unto the end of the Homily, the preparation required unto the
receiving of the Communion, is declared in most Heavenly manner. Read the whole
second Exhortation, which is appointed to be read before the Communion, and
therein the preparation is most plainly expressed also. Read also the
Thanksgiving, which is appointed to be sung after receiving the Lords Supper,
set after the Psalms in meeter, and therein the preparing is withal
signified. Saint Paul says: Whosoever shall eat this bread, and drink this
cup of the Lord 1 Cor. 11.27, 28, 29, 30, 31.
unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord. But let a man
examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread, and drink of that Cup.
For he that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks damnation to
himself, not discerning the Lords body. For this cause many are weak and
sickly among you, and many sleep. For if we would judge our selves, we should
not be judged.

CHAP. 57. Of kneeling in the act of receiving the Sacrament.
IN the Rubricke before the words used in ministering the Communion, it is
signified, That both Ministers and people are to take the Sacrament, kneeling.
The reason is, because it is now received in prayer. The minister delivering
the Sacrament says: The body of our Lord Jesus Christ, which was given for
thee, preserve thy body and soul into everlasting life: The blood of our Lord
Jesus Christ which was shed for thee, preserve thy body and soul into
everlasting life. Are not these sayings words of prayer? And ought not the 1
Cor. 11, 4, 5 1 Kings. 8.62. 1 Cor. 14.16.
heart of the receiver to pray with the Minister praying? And is not Ps. 95.6.
See Chap. 68.
kneeling the fittest gesture for prayer? It is said in the last Exhortation to
be read before the Communion, Make your humble confession to Almighty God,
meekely kneeling upon your knees. And in no Rubric of the Communion-Service
are people required to change that gesture, but rather to continue it, until
they be let depart with the blessing. Charity (says S. Paul) does not behave
it self 1 Cor. 13.5.
unseemely. Again he says, 1 Cor. 14.40.
Let all things be done decently and in order. Is it seemly, decent, or
orderly, that people both before, and after the receiving of the Sacrament
should continue kneeling, and in the very act of receiving should stand or sit,
especially whereas it is now taken with and in Prayer? Christ first gave the
Sacrament after Supper, and so Christians in the Primitive Church celebrated it
in the evening and 1 Cor. 11.20, 21, 22, 33, 34.
after Supper: but now the Church for many ages has changed the time, and has
ordained it to be taken in the morning. If the Church our Mother has so great
power and authority, as to change the time of taking, and to ordain it to be
taken, not after meat, but before dinner, and in praying; has she not power to
change the gesture of taking, and to require such a gesture as is beseeming
Prayer? Such as grant that the Church has power as to change the time, (though
it be by the Holy Ghost called the Lords Supper) and to change other
circumstances about the receiving of it, cannot without committing the great
sin of Iam. 3.17.
partiality deny that the Church has the authority and power of changing that
one circumstance the gesture used in receiving?

CHAP. 58. Of Matrimony.
IN the Service for solemnization of Matrimony, it is said, That Matrimony is
an honorable estate, Genesis 2.22, 24
instituted of God in Paradise, in the time of man's innocence, signifying unto
us the Ephesians. 5.31, 32.30.
mystical union that is betwixt Christ and his Church: which holy estate
Christ adorned and beautified with his John 2.1.
presence, and first miracle that he wrought in Cana of Galilee, and is
commended of Saint Paul to be honorable among all men, and therefore is not
to be enterprized, nor taken in hand unadvisedly, lightly, or wantonly, to
saticfie men's carnal lusts and appetites, like brute beasts that have no
understanding, but reverently, discreetly, advisedly, soberly, and in the 1
Cor. 7.39.
fear of God, duly considering the causes for which Matrimony was ordained;
one was the Genesis 1.28.
procreation of Children to be brought up in the fear and nurture of the Lord,
and praise of God. Secondly, it was ordained for a remedy against sin, and
to avoid fornication, that such persons as have not the gift of continency,
might marry, and keep themselves undefiled Members of Christ's body. Thirdly,
for the mutual Ephesians. 5.28, 29. Genesis 2.8. Prove. 5.18, 19.
sooietie, help, and comfort that the one ought to have of the other, both in
prosperity and adversity.

In the T. 2. p. 239.
Homily concerning the state of Matrimony, it is said, Furthermore it is also
ordained, that the Church of God and his Kingdom might by this kind of life
be conserved and enlarged, not only in that God gives Children by his
blessing, but also, in that they be brought up by the Parents godly, in the
knowledge of Gods Word, that thus the knowledge of God, and true Religion might
be delivered by Ps. 78.4.5.6.
succession from one to another, that finally many might enjoy that everlasting
immortality. Heb. 13.4.
Marriage (says the Apostle) is honorable in all, and the bed undefiled: but
Whoremongers and adulterers God will judge. 1 Cor. 7.2.6.
To avoid fornication, let every man have his own wife, and let every woman
have her own husband. Tobias said: Tob. 4.12. 1 These. 4.3.4.5. Mal. 2.11.12.
Beware of all whoredom, my son, and chiefly take a wife of the seed of thy
fathers, and take not a strange woman to wife, which is not of thy fathers
Tribe: for we are the children of the Prophets, Noe, Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob: remember my son, that our fathers from the beginning even that they
all married wives of their own kindred, and were blessed in their children,
and their seed shall inherit the Land. s Know ye not (says the Apostle) that
he which is joined to an harlot, is one body? For two (says he) shall be
one flesh. Flee fornication: every sin that a man does, is without the body:
but he that commits fornication, sins against his own body. What, know
ye not that your body is the Temple of the holy Ghost which is in you, which
ye have of God, and ye are not your own? For ye are bought with a price:
therefore glorify God in your body, and in your spirit, which are Gods. Be not
deceived: neither 1 Cor. 6.9.10.
fornicators, nor Idolaters, adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abusers of
themselves with mankind, nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor
revilers, nor extortioners, shall inherit the kingdom of God. Wherefore he
also says: But Ephesians. 5.3.5.6. See 1 These. 4.3.4.5.
fornication and all uncleannes, or covetousnes, let it not be once named
amongst you, as becomes Saints. 1 Cor. 6.15.16.17.18.19.20.


CHAP. 59. Of the ring used in the Solemnization of Matrimony.
IN the rubric of Matrimony-service, it is said: The man shall give unto the
woman a Ring, and put it upon the fourth finger of the woman's left hand. And
the man taught by the priest shall say, With this Ring I thee wed, with my body
I thee There is some kind of worship, which may be done unto man as 1 Chronicles.
29.20.
worship, and with all my worldly goods I thee endow: In the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost. Amen. In the prayer
immediately after, it is prayed, That as Isaac and Rebecca lived faithfully
together, so these persons may surely perform and keep the vow and Mal.
2.15.16.14. Prove. 2.17.18.
covenant betwixt them made, (whereof the Ring given and received is a token
and pledge) and may ever remain in Ephesians. 5.25.28.29.
perfect love, and 1 Cor. 7.5. 1 Pet. 3.7.
peace together, and live according to thy Laws. And then it is said:
Forasmuch as they have consented together in holy wedlock, and have witnessed
the same before God and this company, and thereto have given and pledged their
troth either to other, and have declared the same by giving and receiving of a
Ring, and by joining of hands: I, etc. From which words of Holy Church it is
manifest, that the Ring is used not for any vanity, but for a godly Exodus 13.9.
Aurum nulla norat praeter unico digito, quem sponsus oppignorasset pronubo
annulo. Tertull. Apologet. C. 6.
signification, for a token and pledge of sure performing and keeping the vow
and covenant betwixt them made, and of pledging their troth either to other.
The which Ring being after seen, may put both parties in remembrance of what
signification it was given and received: And they may make good use of it, as
the children of Israel were to make of the Number. 15.38.39.40.
fringe in the borders of their garments, having thereon a Ribband of blue, to
look upon it, and remember all the duties, whereof to put them in mind it was
ordained. That Matrimony should be solemnized with the Ceremony of the Ring,
it is the Law of the Church our mother, it is as the Ios. 22.27.
Altar built by the Reubenites, Gadites, and half Tribe of Manasseh, it is as
one of the Ier. 35.6.7.8.18.19.
Commandments of Ionadab the son of Rechab, a Pro. 6.23.24.
light signifying good things, to keep the man from the evil woman, from the
flattery of the tongue of a strange woman. Also it may serve unto the woman for
a remembrance, that she Prove. 2.17. See Chap. 41. before.
forsake not the guide of her youth, neither forget the covenant of her God.
Well consider the Church-her deliverie concerning Ceremonies, why some be
retained, in the chapter thereof set in the beginning of the Book of Common
Prayer.

CHAP. 60. Of the thankesgiving of women after Childbirth, commonly called, the
Churching of Women.
IN the beginning of the Service for the Churching of women, it is said:
Forasmuch as it has pleased Almighty God of his goodness to give you safe
deliliverance, and has preserved you in the great danger of Childbirth: Ye
shall therefore give hearty thanks unto God, and pray. The Law of God was,
that a woman, when the days of her purifying were fulfilled, for a son or
for a daughter, should bring an Lev. 12.6.7.1.
offering into the door of the Tabernacle of the Congregation unto the priest:
who was to offer it before the Lord, and to make an atonement for her, etc. And
it is recorded by Saint Luke, that the blessed Virgn Mary observed this Luke.
2.24.
Law of the Lord, after she had brought forth her son, the Savior of the
world. Although that Law, as concerning the ceremony, be ceased; yet the Romans
8.4.
righteousness thereof is to be fulfilled in those, which walk not after the
flesh, but after the Spirit. For which cause our Mother the Church (whose godly
wisdom we ought to obey in Ephesians. 5.24.
every particular matter) knowing that the new Law commands Christians, in
every thing to 1 These. 5.18.
give thanks, has accounted it righteous before God, that women for so great
a deliverance, as from the danger of childbirth, should so soon as is
convenient, come to the Temple of the Lord, and there with him who is to be
her mouth unto the Lord, Heb. 13.15.
offer the sacrifice of praise unto God, the fruit of her lips, giving thanks
unto his name. Saint Paul said, I will that women adorn themselves in 1 Timothy
2.9.10.
modest apparel, with shamefastness and sobriety, as becomes women
professing godliness. And says he in another place: Whatsoever things are
honest, just, pure, lovely, or of Phil. 4.8.
good report: if there be any virtue or praise therein, think on those
things. Let all things be done 1 Cor. 14.40.
decently and in order. Is it not therefore more seemly, and more signifying
modesty of mind, that women, when they go to be Churched, or are Churched at
home, be so covered on their heads according as in former times; rather than
be so attired, like as those be, which go to a market or a fair, or to a
wedding, or the like?

CHAP. 61. Of Commination, or denouncing Gods curses due unto sinners, which
will not repent, or do neglect the same.
IN the beginning of the service of Commination, the Church says: It is though
good, that at this time (meaning in the beginning of Lent on Ashwensday) in
your presence should be read the general sentences of Gods cursing against
impenitent sinners, gathered out of Deuteronomy. 27. and other places of scripture:
And that ye should answer to every sentence, Amen: to the intent, that you,
being admonished of the great indignation of God against sinners, may the Prove.
1.7. and 16.6.
rather be called to earnest and true repentance, and may walk more warily in
these 2 Timothy 3.1. Mat. 24.21.22.
dangerous days, fleeing from such vices, for the which ye affirm with your
own mouths the curse of God to be due. The Lord says by Moses: Deuteronomy.
29.19.20.21.
If when one hears the words of this curse, he bless himself in his heart,
saying, I shall have peace, though I walk in the imagination of mine heart to
add drunkenness to thirst: the Lord will not spare him, but then the anger of
the Lord, and his Jealousy shall smoke against that man, and all the curses
that are written in this book, shall lie upon him, and the Lord shall blot out
his name from under heaven. Saint Paul says, Romans 2.3.4.5.6.7.8.9.10.
Think thou this, O man, that judge them which do such things (as are
abominable) and do the same, that thou shall escape the judgment of God? or
despisest thou the riches of his goodness, and forbearance, and long
suffering, not knowing that the goodness of God leads thee to repentance?
But after thy hardness, and impenitent heart, treasurest up unto thy self
wrath against the day of wrath, and Revelation of the righteous judgment of
God: who will render to every man according to his deeds: To them who by
patient continuance in well doing, seek for glory, and honor, and
immortality, eternal life: But unto them that are contentious, and do not
obey the truth, but obey unrighteousness, indignation and wrath: Tribulation
and anguish upon every soul of man that does evil, of the Jew first, and also
of the Gentile. But glory, honor and peace to every man that works good, to
the Jew first, and also to the Gentile. The Church our mother declares her
faithfulness unto her Isa. 54 5.
husband, the Lord of Hosts her maker, and unto her redeemer, the Holy one of
Israel, the God of the whole earth, in this very thing most apparently, namely
that she does not like as the false Prophets and false Prophetesses do, who
do say, Ier. 8.9.10 11. Ezech. 13.9.10.
Peace, and there was no peace: and one built up a wall; and lo, others dawbed
it with untempered mortar. She does not with Ezech. 13.22
lies make sad the heart of the righteous, whom God has not made sad; neither
does she strengthen the hands of the wicked, that he should not return from
his wicked way, by promising him life: But she 2 Cor. 4.2.
renouncing the hidden things of dishonestie, not walking in craftiness, nor
handling the word of God deceitfully, but by manifestation of the truth,
commends her self to every man's conscience in the sight of God. In her
Exhortation, which follows immediately after the curses, does she not in a
most wonderful divine manner declare as it were the sum of the everlasting
doctrine of Jesus Christ?

Is not that her exhortation (the beginning thereof is, Now seeing that all they
be accursed, as the Prophet Psalm. 119.21.
David bears witness, which do err and go astray from the commandments
of God, let us, etc.) so divine a delivery, as the like in brief can scarce be
showed in the writings of any Church, or of any Writer. Is it not worthy to be
most often read of every man, woman and child? And is there not a power in it
through the blessing of God, to work the fear of the Lord in the heart of the
diligent Reader thereof? And is not the said exhortation very greatly
profitable to be often read of such as have in their minds Gods fear, for to
help keep them in the same; and to preserve them from pride of spirit, Pro.
8.13.
arrogance, Isay 46.12.
stoutnesse and Zachar. 7.11.
hardness of heart? As it is good for all ancient people, to read, or hear
it in private read, many times in a year: so is it exceeding furthersome for
all younger people to have it all in perfect memory, and at least once a week
to examine themselves by the same.

CHAP. 62. Of Excommunication.
IT is said in the second part of the T. 2. p. 213.
Homily concerning the Holy Ghost, or in the Homily for Whitsunday: Christ
ordained the authority of the keys to excommunicate notorious sinners, and to
absolve the^ which are truly penitent. In the second part of the * Homily
concerning the right use of the Church, T. 2. p. 9.10.
it is said: In the primitive Church, which was most holy and godly, and in the
which due discipline with severitie was used against the wicked due discipline
with severitie suffered once to enter into the house of the Lord, nor admitted
to Common Prayer, and the use of the holy Sacraments with other true
Christians, until they had done ope^penance before the whole Church. And they
that were so justly exempted and banished (as it were) from the house of the
Lord, were taken (as they be indeed) for men divided and separated from Christ's
Church, and in most dangerous estate, yea as Saint Paul says, even given unto
Satan the Devil for a time, and their company was shunned and avoided of all
godly men and women, until such time as they by repentance and public penance
were reconciled. Jesus Christ said unto Peter, To thee I will give the Mat.
16.19.
keys of the Kingdom of Heaven: and whatsoever thou shall bind on earth,
shall be bound in Heaven: and whatsoever thou shall loose on earth, shall be
loosed in heaven. The same Mat 18.18, 19, 20.
authority he afterward pronounced unto the rest of his Apostles. Also when
after his resurrection he breathed on them, and said; Receive ye the Holy
Ghost, he gave the keys of the Kingdom of heaven unto them all, saying, Ioh.
20.22, 23.
Whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto the^, and whose soever
sins ye retain, they are retained. Saint Paul says to the Corinthians
concerning excommunicating the incestuous person: In the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, when ye are gathered together, and my Spirit, with the power of our
Lord Jesus Christ, To 1 Cor. 5.4, 5.
deliver such a one unto Satan for the destruction of the flesh, that the
spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus. He said of Hymenaeus and
Alexander, that he had 1 Timothy 1.20.
delivered them unto Satan, that they might learn not to blaspheeme.

Concerning what persons are to be excommunicated, if otherwise they will not
be reformed, it is observed that the Apostle signifies, where he says: If any
man that is called a brother, be a fornicatour, or covetous, or an Idolater, or
a railer, or a drunkard, or an extortioner: with 1 Cor. 5.11.
such a one no, not to eat. Unto the Thessalonians he says: And if any man
obey not our word, by this Epistle, note that man, and have 2 These. 3.14.
no company with him, that he may be ashamed. The Apostle speaks of
disorderly living, and living out of a vocation by the sweat of other men's
brows, or eating other men's bread for naught. The Apostle also faith: If any
man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be 1 Cor. 16.22.
anathema Maran atha. The speech here Sunt enim hae^ dicendi genera Haebraeis
non (...): inquit Buxtorfiu^ in Gram. Heb. page 548. excusa anno 1620.
love not is observed to signify hates. Anathema is interpreted a curse, a
cursed thing, or one accursed. Maran signifies our Lord; and atha signifies
comes. The excommunication which was called anathema maranatha, is accounted
to be the greatest kind thereof, and so the very last, namely, when as one for
his persevering wilful hatred against Jesus Christ is quite forsaken by the
Church, and left unto the just judgment of Christ, of whom Enoch said: Jude
14.15. Arabs juxta sensum reddidit (...) Apud Rabbinos est (...) and contracte
(...). Videt ur dicia syriac^ verbo (...) nominare quod h^c sit nominatissima
excommunicatio. Vulgo ta^en volunt esse nomen compositum ex (...) id est, Deus
venit. Alij ex (...), i. e. ibi mors.
Behold the Lord comes with ten thousands of his Saints, to execute judgment
upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly among them of all their ungodly
deeds, which they have ungodly committed, and of all their hard speeches, which
ungodly sinners have spoken against him. The holy scriptures deliver other
causes also, for which there may be excommunication, the which the Church of
England has partly mentioned in the Constitutions and Canons Ecclesiastical:
as also when any being summoned to appear before ecclesiastical authority,
will contemptuously refuse, etc. The Lord Christ Jesus has in his Gospel
given an everlasting general rule: If any one neglect to hear the Church, let
him be unto thee as an Mat. 18.17.
Heathen man, and a Publicane.

CHAP. 63. Of Confession and Absolution in particular manner.
BEsides the general Confession and Absolution to be said and pronounced in
the beginning of the Divine Service, and before receiving the holy Communion,
holy Church has ordained that a private may be made. In the second Exhortation
to be read before the Communion, it is said; Because it is requisite that no man
should come to the holy Communion, but with a full trust in Gods mercy, and with
a quiet conscience: therefore if there be any of you, which by the means
aforesaid, cannot quiet his own conscience, but requires further comfort or
counsel, then let him come to me, or some other discreet and learned Minister
of Gods Word, and open his grief, that he may receive such ghostly counsel,
advice, and comfort: as his conscience may be relieved, and that by the
ministry of Gods Word he may receive comfort, and the benefit of absolution,
to the quieting of his conscience, and avoiding of all scruple and
doubtfulnesse. In the Rubricke of the Service for the Visitation of the Sick,
it is said; The sick person shall make a special confession, if he feel his
conscience troubled with any weighty matter. After which confession, the Priest
shall absolve him after this sort. The form of absolution used to one in
particular.
Our Lord Jesus Christ, who has left power to his Church, to absolve all
sinners which truly repent and believe in him, of his great mercy forgive thee
thine offenses: and by his authority committed to me, I absolve thee from all
thy finnes. In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost,
Amen.

Concerning Confession the Church in the 113. Canon delivers, That if any man
confess his secret and hidden sins to the Minister for the unburthening of
his conscience, and to receive spiritual consolation and ease of mind from
him, We do straightly charge and admonish him, A Priest may not reveal any
sin confessed in private before him, unless it be such a one, as for
concealing whereof his own life may be called in question, by the Laws of
this Realm.
that he do not at any time reveal and make known to any person whatsoever
any crime or offense so committed to his trust and secrecy (except they be
such crimes as by the Laws of this Realm, his own life may be called into
question for concealing the same) under pain of irregularity. In the T. 2. p.
135.
Homily concerning Common Prayer and Sacraments, it is said; Although
absolution has the promise of forgiveness of sin, yet by the express word
of the new Testament it has not this promise annexed and tied to the visible
sign, which is imposition of hands. For this visible sign (I mean laying on
of hands) is not expressly commanded in the new Testament to be used in
absolution, as the visible signs in baptism and the Lords Supper are: and
therefore absolution is no such Sacrament as Baptism and the Communion are. The
Church has ordained special confession to be made for the committing of
sundry crimes, as for committing adultery, for giving a blow in Church or
Churchyard, etc. The Lord in his Law has said: And it shall be, when he shall
be guilty in one of these things, that he shall Lev. 5.5.6.
confess that he has sinned in that thing, etc. And the Priest shall make an
atonement for him, concerning his sin. Again it is written: Speak unto the
children of Israel, when a man or a woman shall commit any sin, that men
commit to do a trespass against the Lord, and that party be guilty: then
they shall Numb. 5.6, 7, 8.
confess their sin which they have done: and he shall recompense his
trespass, with the principal thereof, and add unto it the fifth part thereof,
and give it unto him against whom he has trespassed. But if the man have no
kinsman to recompense the trespass unto, let the trespass be recompensed
unto the Lord, even the Priest: beside the ram of atonement, whereby an
atonement shall be made for him. Forasmuch as the Lord knew how his laws
given from his eternal wisdom and delivered by Moses, would be by many
slighted, yea nothing at all regarded, therefore said the Lord Jesus, Think
not that I am come to Matthew. 5.17, 18, 19.
destroy the Law or the Prophets: I am not come to destroy but to fulfill. But
verily I say unto you, till heaven and earth pass, one jote, or one title shall
in no wise pass from the Law, till all be fulfilled. Whosoever therefore shall
break one of these least Commandments, and shall teach men so, he shall be
called the least in the kingdom of heaven: but whosoever shall do, and teach
them, the same shall be called great in the Kingdom of Heaven. It is to be
ever remembered, that of every Law written by Moses, whereof the ceremony is
ceased, the Romans 8.4.
righteousness and equity intended thereby remains continually. The Lord
Jesus abolished not confession of sin to be made unto his ministry, but in
saying to his ministers, Whose soever sins ye John 20.23.
remit, they are remitted unto them, and whose soever sins ye retain, they are
retained, necessarily implies that people are to make confession unto them,
according as the wisdom of his Luke 10.16.
Church now prescribes and requires. John the Baptist, who came in the way of
righteousness, and not with ceremonies during but a time, had the people come
to confession: as it is written; And they were baptized of him in Jordan Mat.
3.6. Mark. 1.5.
confessing their sins. Saint James says, Is any sick among you, let him
call for the Elders of the Church, and let them pray over him, etc. and the
prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise him up; and if he
have committed sins, they shall be forgiven him. James. 5.14, 15, 16, 17, 18.
Confess your faults one to another, and pray one for another, that ye may be
healed. And then he shows how effectual the Prophet Elias his prayer was.

CHAP. 64. Of Penance.
IN the beginning of the Service of Commination, it is said: Brethren, in the
Primitive Church there was a godly discipline, that at the beginning of Lent,
such persons as were notorious offenders, were put to open penance, and
punished in this world, that their souls might be saved in the day of the
Lord: and that others admonished by their example, might be the more afraid to
offend. In the stead whereof, until the said discipline may be restored again
(which thing is much to be wished) etc.

In the Service for Consecration of Bishops, it is said by the Archbishop unto
the Elected Bishop: Will you maintain and set forward (as much as shall lie in
you) quietness, peace, and love among all men? and such as be unquiet,
disobedient, and criminous within you Diocese correct and punish according to
such authority as ye have by Gods Word, and as to you shall be committed by the
Ordinance of this Realm? Out of which delivery it appears that the Superior
Ministry has power for to cause transgressors for to do penance, or to
undergo penalties. And did not the Royal Majesty, and the Law of this Realm
most graciously grant such authority unto the Clergy, the licentiousness of
these times considered, (as the 113. Canon expressly speaks) and had not the
Superior in the Clergy a Lordly power to restrain the violent course of
evil, wherein many would run; and to constrain the obstinate unto a
Christian conformay, or else to inflict penalty on them, the stream of
impiety would grow exceeding great: yea, in these dangerous days (as the
beginning of the commination service mentions) it would so much overflow, as
that the public profession of Christian religion, according as it is
prescribed in the Divine Service books of the Church, could not consist: So
Rev. 20.7, 8 9, 10.
great has been and still is the malice of Satan against the Apostolical
Doctrine, and Discipline maintained in this Kingdom by the public authority.
Saint Paul says, God has set in his Church, 1 Cor. 12.28, (...) Ar^bs exp.
suit(...)
helps in Governments. And can any government be administered without
punishing the disobedient? He says also to the Corinthians: Therefore I write
these things being absent, lest being present I should use 2. Cor. 13.10
sharpnes, according to the power which the Lord has given me to edification,
and not to destruction. In another place he says: What will ye? shall I come
unto you with a 1 Cor. 4.21.
rod, or in love, and in the spirit of meekness?

In the second part of the T. 1. p. 48.
Homily concerning Charity, it is said: Charity has two Offices, the one
contrary to the other, and yet both necessary to be used upon men of contrary
sort and disposition. The one Office of Charity is, to cherish good and
harmless men, etc. The other Office of Charity is, to rebuke, correct and
punish vice, without regard of persons, and is to be used against them only
that be evil men, and malefactors or evil doers. And that it is as well the
Office of Charity to rebuke, punish, and correct them that be evil, as it is
to cherish and reward them that be good and harmless, Saint Paul declares (
writing to the Romans) saying; That the high powers are ordained of God, not
to be dreadful to them that do well, but unto Malefactors, to draw the sword
to take Romans 13.4.
vengeance of him that commits the sin. The Lord says by Ezekiel, that his
Priests in controversy shall stand in judgment, and they shall Ezech 44.24.
judge it according to my judgments. The power of Gods Ministry in a Nation,
where the King is a Isa. 49.23.
nourishing father of the Church, and the people all professing to be
Christians, is of a different manner from where it is without such love of the
supreme power toward it, and where but a few are Professors of Christianity.
This may be observed in the state of the Church of God the Nation of the
Jews, from the time of Moses his rule over them, until they were carried away
captive to Babylon; That Gods Ministry had then another manner of outward
power, than it had under the Roman Empire, until the days of Constantine the
great. Moreover, the Ministry of God after the Ascension of Christ, not having
the Magistrates help in their administration, had from God Mar. 16.20. Heb.
2.4.
extraordinary power to cause fear in peoples hearts; as Peter had concerning
Ananias and Saphira his wife, that they were both smote with sudden death;
which caused Acts 3.11.
great fear to come upon all the Churches. Paul had power to cause Elimas the
Sorcerer to be Act 13.11.
smitten with blindness. Herod the Persecutor of the Christians was smitten
with a Act. 12.23, 24
dreadful death, where after the Word of God grew and multiplied. The Lord
then wrought with his Ministers extraordinarily, and confirmed the Word with
signs following: as the Apostle to the Hebrews says, Heb. 2.4.
God also bearing them witness, both with signs and wonders, and with diverse
miracles, and gifts of the holy Ghost, according to his own will.

CHAP. 65. Of visiting the sick.
IN the Order for the Visitation of the sick, at the beginning of the Service
thereto, it is said: The Priest entering into the sick persons house shall say:
Mat. 10.12, 13. Luke 10.5, 6, 9.
Peace be to this house, and to all that dwell in it. And that when he comes
into the sick man's presence, he shall say kneeling down, Remember not Lord
our iniquities, etc. Then there is prescribed a very Divine Exhortation divided
into two parts, wherewith the Minister is to exhort the sick person; the which
is most profitable for all people to meditate on, when they feel themselves
ill at ease, or in any adversity. And the Exhortation being read, the Minister
is to examine whether he continues in belief of all the Articles of the
Christian faith, and whether he be in charity with all the world, etc. And to
exhort him for to set his state in order: (whereto men, when they be in health,
should be often admonished) and earnestly to move him to liberality toward the
poor, because it is the last Alms that ever he shall give.

The Church has ordained an Homily, an Exhortation against the fear of death
to be read unto the people. And if the sick person can well endure to hear
the reading of it, he may be much comforted by the same. The visitation of the
sick is one of the Mat. 25.35.26.
six duties of Charity, whereof Jesus Christ will speak when he sits to
judge all Nations. That it is also a work Iam. 5.14. with Heb. 5.1.2, 3, 4, 5.
Ministerial, S. James in his Epistle plainly expresses. It is the last
kindness, that one can show unto another, whiles being is in earthly
Tabernacle. Man being in that misery desires to be visited. And one reason is,
that thereby he hops either bodily or ghostly to receive the more comfort.
Pure religion, and undefiled before God and the Father, is this, to Iam. 1.27.
visit the fatherless and widows in their affliction, and to keep himself
unspotted from the world. It is written for our learning, That when Jobs three
friends heard of his calamity, they made an appointment together to come for
to Job 2.11. Romans 12.15.
mourn with him, and to comfort him. Saint Paul says, blessed be God, even
the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of mercies, and God of all
comfort, who comfort us in all our tribulation, that we may be able to 2
Cor. 1.3.4.
comfort them which are in any trouble, by the comfort wherewith we our selves
are comforted of God. Jesus the son of Sirach says: Be not slow to Ecclus.
7.34, 35.
visit the sick: for that shall make thee to be beloved. It is the duty of
the sick to send for their Minister: as Saint James says, Let him Iam. 5.14.
send for the Elders of the Church. And therefore it is said in Articles of our
Church discipline: Whether does your Minister visit the sick, when he is
thereunto desired, to comfort and instruct them?

CHAP. 66. Of the Communion of the sick.
Whereas in the T. 2. p. 199.
Homily concerning the Sacrament, the Communion is said, To be a salve of
immortality, and sovereign preservative against death; and in the Catechism
it is called a refreshing, therefore not without cause does the conscience of
the sick sometimes desire it. Wherefore holy Church in the Rubricke before that
Service, says: If the sick person be not able to come unto the Church, and
yet is desirous to receive the Communion in his house, then he must give
knowledge overnight, or else early in the morning, to the Curate, signifying
also how many be appointed to Communicate with him, etc.

In the Rubricke of the same Service the Church delivers also most
comfortable counsel, saying: But if any man either by reason of extremity of
sickness, or for want of warning in due time to the Curate, or for lack of
company to receive with him, or by any other just impediment, do not receive
the Sacrament of Christ's body and blood: then the Curate shall instruct him,
that if he do truly repent him of his sin, and steadfastly believe that Jesus
Christ has suffered death upon the Cross for him, and shed his blood for his
Redemption, earnestly remembering the benefits he has thereby, and giving him
hearty thanks therefore, he does eat and drink the body and blood of our
Savior Christ profitably to his souls health, although he do not receive the
Sacrament with his mouth.

Our Mother the Church, who, according to her godly wisdom, was the first
causer of Temples to be built in this Land, and the first appointer of the
Parishes unto them, has ordained the Temples to be the ordinary places for
receiving the holy Sacrament. But in cases of necessity, when people cannot
with any convenience come or be brought into the Temple, her Divine Wisdom
has appointed such to receive in their private house. The Passover which was
even of like signification as the Communion is, was kept in Exodus 12.3, 4. Mat.
26.18.
private houses. So in the Primitive Church, it is said, The Disciples came
together into a Act. 20.7, 8, 9. Jta Syrus interpretatus est (...) At Arabs
optime ad frangen. dum vel distribuendum corpus Messiae.
house for to break bread, that is, to * celebrate the Communion. Christ
says: Mat. 18.20.
Where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst
of them. Saint Paul said to the Romans, Greet the Church, which is in the Romans
16.5.
house of Aquila and Priscilla. These Scriptures are here alleged for to
illustrate the lawfulness of receiving the Communion in private house,
according as the law of the Church allows, but not in any otherwise. And that
Christ's body and blood is profitably unto the souls health received sometimes
without the Sacrament, when as the Sacrament cannot conveniently be received,
that delivery of Christ declares, where he says: Except ye Ioh. 6.53, 54, 55,
56, 57, 47.
eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in
you. Who so eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, has eternal life, etc. He
that believes on me has everlasting life. Behold, (says Christ) I stand at
the door and knock: If any man hear my voice, and open the door, I will
come into him, and will sup with him, and Rev. 3.20.
he with me. But the holy Sacrament is in no wise to be neglected, but with all
due reverence to be received, when as it may conveniently and lawfully be
ministered, because it is Gods ordinary means, whereby his people spiritually
eat the flesh of Christ, and drink his blood.

CHAP. 67. Of Burial of the dead.
IN the Rubricke before the Service thereof, it is said: The Priest meeting the
corpse at the Church style, shall say, or else the Priest and Clerks shall
sing, and so go either into the Church, or toward the grave, I am the John
11.25, 26.
resurrection and the life (says the Lord) He that, etc. Upon Christ's words
concerning Mary the sister of Lazarus, that she was come before hand to annoint
his body to the burying. Tremellius a Jew by Nation, but a Christian by
profession in religion, and famous in the Church of God for his translation of
the Scriptures forth of Hebrew, Chaldean and Syriacke, relates out of Vide
Tremellianam Annotationem ad Mar. 14.6.
Judicial Antiquity, That it was the manner of the Jews among sundry
Ceremonies and Services used about the dead, as annoynting, washing, wrapping
in linen, laying it on a Beer, etc. before they committed the body to the
ground, first to utter certain sentences written by their Ancestors or Elders,
to be said at this occasion, in which funeral Service Gods Justice is
commended, and man's sins aggravated, by which they deserved death, and God is
beseeched so to exercise his Justice, that he would not forget that he is Mercy
also. And the Corpse being interred, some things also are said, as unto the
Mourners, for their consolation. This says he, was a custom in Israel,
(which in time past was the peculiar people of God:) and a godly custom not
much unlike is now in England used at a burial, unto the magnifying of Gods
Justice, the condemning of man's sin, the meek beseeching of Gods mercy
through Jesus Christ, and the comforting of the sorrowful upon the occasion.
And to perform such funeral Service, is it not only proper to the Ministry,
which is the ordinary Ios. 9.14.
mouth of God unto the people, and of the people unto God? Christ says, It
becomes us to fulfill all Mat. 3.1 5.
righteousness. The Apostle says, Phil. 4.8.
Whatsoever things are of good report, if they be of any virtue or praise, they
are to be thought upon, and observed. 1 Cor. 14.40
All things are to be done decently and in order. Ancient orders and customs,
ordained by the weighty deliberation of forefathers, which may be used without
any superstition, and do tend only unto piety and humanity, are (according as
the Church concerning them prescribes) with all conscionable care to be
retained and performed. Yea, the Church now greatly esteems deliveries of
Antiquity, as it may appear, where it is said in the Service for Consecration
of Bishops, That the Archbishop sitting in a Chair, shall say this to him that
is to be Consecrated, Brother, forasmuch as holy Scripture, A Prayer of
Chrysostom is a part of the Letany. In the Homilies there are sayings of all
the Fathers alleged with much respect.
and the old Canons commands, etc. S. Ambrose his song is a part of the
Morning Divine Service, the Confession of faith, composed by Athanasius, and
the Nicene Creed are therein likewise. Read the 34. Article of Religion.

CHAP. 68. Of the reverence to be done unto Almighty God, in his Worship.
HOly Church in her Prayer for the whole state of Christ's Church militant here
in earth, prescribes unto us for to say, And to all thy people give thine
heavenly grace, and specially to this congregation here present, that with
meek heart, and due reverence they may hear and receive thy holy word. In the
first part of the T. 2. p. 1.
Homily concerning the right use of the Church or Temple of God, and of the
reverence due unto the same, it is said; Where there appears at these days
great slacknesse and negligence of a great sort of people, in resorting to the
Church, there to serve God their heavenly Father, according to their most
bounden duty, as also much uncomely and unreverent behavior of many persons in
the same, when they be there assembled, and thereby may just fear arise of
the wrath of God, and his dreadful plagues hanging over our heads for our
grievous offenses in this behalf, among other many and great sins, which we
daily and hourly commit before the Lord.

In the second part of the said P. 8.
Homily, the Church says: And indeed concerning the people and multitude, the
Temple is prepared for them to be hearers, rather than speakers, considering
that as well the word of God is there read or taught, whereunto they are bound
to give diligent ear, with all reverence and silence, etc. And in the last P.
10.
part thereof it is says: Thus ye have heard (dearly beloved) out of Gods
word, what reverence is due to the Holy house of the Lord, how all godly
persons ought with diligence at times appointed thither to repair, how they
ought to behave themselves there, with reverence and dread before the Lord,
what plagues and punishments, as well temporal, as eternal, the Lord in his
holy word threatens, as well to such as neglect to come to his holy house, is
also to such, who coming thither, do unreverently by gesture or talk there
behave themselves. Holy Church has also made a Constitution or Canon 18.
Canon concerning reverence and attention to be used within the Church in time
of divine Service, saying: In the time of Divine Service, and of every part
thereof, all due reverence is to be used: For it is according to the Apostles
rule: 1 Cor. 14.40.
Let all things be done decently and according to order. Answerable to which
decency and order, we judge these our directions following: No man shall 1
Cor. 11.4.7. Omnis vir prophetans, nempe (ut inquit Iun. in annot. ad 1 Cor.
11.4.) memoriter, aut de scripto enuncians verbum ipsum Dei, sermon aut cantu
(nam etiam Prophetae Cymbolis, et Levitae olim in templo instrumentis musicis
personantes in testamento vetere dicti sunt prophetare) aut mente enunciantem
sequens, ut priva^^ in ecclesia faciunt.
cover his head in the Church or Chapel in the time of Divine Service, except
he have some infirmity. In which case let him wear a Mal. 1.6.
nightcap or Coife. All manner of persons then present shall reverently kneel
upon their knees, when the general Confession, Letanie, and other Prayers are
read, and shall stand up at the saying of the Belief, according to the rules
in that behalf prescribed in the Book of Common prayer. And likewise when in
time of Divine Service the Lord Jesus shall be mentioned, due and lowly
reverence shall be done by all persons present, as it has been accustomed:
Consider now unpartially that each of the reverences is prescribed for a godly
signification.
Testifying by these outward Ceremonies and gestures, their inward humility,
Christian resolution, and due acknowledgement that the Lord Jesus Christ, the
true and eternal Son of God, is the only Savior of the world, in whom
alone all the mercies, grace, and promises of God to mankind for this life and
the life to come, are fully and wholly comprised. As the Church has thus
zealously and holily prescribed, that Almighty God may have due reverence of
people assembled before him for to worship, so there was not long ago set
forth an Advertisement hereto by the late most Reverend Father in God, George
Archbishop of York, being then Lord Bishop of London. The which being a
delivery ever memorable, it has seemed good for to add here: and it is as
follows.

To all and every the Ministers, Churchwardens, and Sidemen, within the City,
Suburbs, and Diocese of London.

Whereas I am daily advertised by the relations of many honest and Religious
persons, of a general misbehaviour in most Churches, in, and about the City
of London, in time of Divine Service; Men and Boys sitting then covered with
their Hats on their heads, without all show of reverence or respect, either of
that holy place or action, the one being the house of Almighty God, the other a
continued vicissitude (as it were) of speech between God and his people. The
due consideration whereof might easily induce any well disposed Christian, to
use such outward Posture and gesture of his body as becomes that sacred
place, and the great Majesty of that God, to whom they come at that time
professedly to perform a divine worship. I have therefore thought it my duty,
instantly to recommend to you the Ministers, Churchwardens, and Sidemen, the
reformation of this profane abuse, scandalous to our Religion, against an
express Law in that case provided, and condemned by the contrary practice of
all Christians in all ages, in their like solemnities and assemblies; praying
and requiring you to join together your utmost and best endeavors to effect
the same, for which purpose it shall be necessary for you the Churchwardens
and Sidemen, during the time of Divine Service, diligently to look about the
Church, and where you see any covered, if Boys, or of the younger sort, these
to shame openly by pulling off their Hats, and chastise with such discipline,
as you have been laudably accustomed to inflict upon such rude and unmannerly
fellows. If of the elder or better sort (though I well hope that none of that
condition out of their own judgment will hereafter offend in this kind)
those to admonish gravely of their duty, representing unto them the
inconveniences of this their ill example, and how directly repugnant it is to
the Apostles rule of decency in the Church, thus to celebrate Divine Service,
and to perform a professed and Religious worship of Almighty God. After which
your admonition, if any shall obstinately refuse to uncover his or their heads
in Service time, you shall then present them to me or my Chancellor, to the
end, that they by the severity of censures may be amended, by whom brotherly
and gentle persuasions have been contemned. Moreover also, I am certainly
informed, that the public Service of Almighty God in the Churches is much
omitted, and thereby come to neglect, and almost scorned, forasmuch as the
Ministers read not Divine Service, the first and second service, before their
Sermons, according to the order of our Church Liturgy, and the Canon in that
case provided: I do therefore hereby require all the Parsons, Vicars, and
Curates in my Diocese, to take care that they offend not in this kind,
strictly likewise requiring you the Churchwardens and Sidemen, that according
to your oaths, you present to me or my Chancelour, those Ministers, that shall
be faulty in this kind, etc.

The Law of the Lord is: Ye shall keep my Sabbaths, and Lev. 19.30,
reverence my Sanctuary. The Prophet David says: God is greatly to be feared
in the assembly of the Saints, and to be had in Ps. 89.7.
reverence of all them that are about him. The Lord by his Prophet Malachi
complains that reverence is not done unto him, saying: A son honors his
Father, and a servant his Master. If then I be a Father, where is mine Mal. 1.6.
honor? And if I be a Master, where is my fear, says the Lord? David
therefore says: Serve the Lord in fear, and rejoice unto him with Ps. 2.11.
as in the divine Service translation. Of putting and keeping off, or not
wearing the common uppermost covering of the head in time of divine Service.
reverence. S. Paul says to the Corinthians: I would have you know, that the
head of every man is Christ: and the head of woman is the man: and the head of
Christ is God. Every man praying or prophesying, having his head 1 Cor.
11.2.3.4.7. Turpia vitiosaque legi debent: bonesta contraet vitio carentia
detegiac ostendi. Quod si vir operto capite preces agit, ostendit suum caput
esse vitiosum, et preinde tegendum. Atqui viri caput Christus est, qui vitij
est expers. Itaque debet viri caput detegi, quo Christum (qui viri caput est)
vitij expertem esse indicetur. Mul^eris vero caput vir est, qui cu^ sit nocens
et vitiosus, debet mulier suu^ caput tegere. Haec quidam anonymus. Of the
gesture to be used in prayer.
covered, dishonors his head. But every woman that prays or prophecieth
with her head uncovered, dishonors her head. For man indeed ought not to
cover his head, forasmuch as he is the Image and glory of God: But the woman
is the glory of the man. It is written that the Lord Jesus Luke. 22.41.
kneeled down and prayed. So Acts. 7.60.
did Saint Stephen; when he prayed, though stones then were thrown against
him, where through he presently died. etc. Peter Acts. 9.40.
kneeled down and prayed, etc. Paul Acts. 20.36. and 21.5.
kneeled down and prayed, etc. And David's saying is, which is appointed to be
read on every Sunday morning: O come let us worship and fall down and Psalm.
95.6. Of the gesture to be used when the confession of Faith, and the Gospel
for the day, is read.
kneel before the Lord our maker.

Moreover, concerning the reverence done by standing up, when we make
confession of our Faith, it is to be considered, that then to sit, is
altogether unseemely; because it is as it were a speaking unto God. And sitting
is no gesture of reverence. When any civil person goes unto his superior,
and declares any matter unto him, he will do it standing. And thus to
demean our selves in speaking to our superiors, we are taught even by the
very light of 1 Cor. 11.14 Thereout Balaam willed Balak to rise up. Thereupon
Eglon arose up out of his seat.
nature. Ought we not then when we make confession of our faith unto our God,
to stand up reverently? We read not in Scripture of any, that spoke unto God,
sitting, but either kneeling or standing, or fallen down on the face, as Genesis
17.17, 18.
Abraham did: Kneeling commonly when they prayed; and standing, in making
confession or profession. It is recorded of King Solomon, that he and all the
Congregation 1 King. 8.14.22.55.
stood, whiles he confessed or made acknowledgement of the goodness of God
toward them, and blessed the name of the Lord. And afterward when he fell to
prayer, it appears he 1 King. 8.54.
kneeled on his knees. It is also written that Abraham Genesis 18.22. Genesis 19.27.
stood before the Lord, whiles he spoke unto him. Very many are the Scriptures,
which mention the gesture of standing before the Lord, in speaking unto his
Omnipotent Majesty. Whereas also the Church prescribes, That when the Lord
Jesus shall be mentioned, due and lowly reverence shall be done by all
persons present, as it has been accustomed; testifying by these outward,
Ceremonies and gestures their inward humility, etc. It is to be understood,
that not only all are to bow the knee, when the Lord Jesus is mentioned in
saying the Belief, but also in the reading of the holy Gospel, when as the
the Lord Jesus is mentioned therein. For which cause, that people may then
perform that reverence unto the Lord Jesus, is it not requisite that all stand
up, whiles the Gospel, (which is in the divine Service) is in reading? And
that people are to stand up in hearing the special messages from Almighty God,
not a few Scriptures do teach.

Of standing up when the Gospel for the day is read.
When Ehud came to king Eglon, as he was sitting in a Summer Parlour, Ehud said,
I have a message from God unto thee: And the King Judge. 3.20.
arose out of his seat. Why is it written that he rose up? but for our
learning, that when we hear the Gospel, which the Church has upon specical
consideration for the day appointed to be read, we should stand up, and then
may make due and lowly reverence, Of bowing the knee, when the Lord Jesus is
mentioned.
when the Phil. 2.9, 10, 11. Rom 14.11. Isa. 45.23. Ephesians. 3.14. Ioh. 5.22.23.
Psalm. 72.9. and 95.6.
Lord Jesus shall be mentioned, as it has been accustomed. The word Gospel
in the original signifies a good or joyful message. It is written in the
book of Samuel, That as Samuel and Saul were going down to the end of the
City, Samuel said unto Saul, Bid the servant pass on before us, (and he passed
on) but 1 Samuel 9.27.
stand thou still a while, that I may show thee the Word of God. He does not
bid him sit still a while, whiles he delivered to him the special message. The
Prophet Isaiah says unto women, when they were to hear his special delivery
unto them from the Lord: Isa. 32.9.
Rise up ye women that are at ease: hear my voice, ye careless daughters,
give ear unto my speech. Rising up in the hearing of a matter published is a
token of the more careful attention thereunto. It is recorded that when Ezra
opened the book for to read, all the people Neh. 8.5.
stood up. Even very nature taught the heathen, when any message was said to
be published unto them as from God, that they were to stand up in hearing of
it: Whereupon Balaam said unto King Balak, Number. 23.18.
Rise up Balak, and hear; hearken unto me thou son of Zippor.

Against sleeping in the Church in time of Gods public worship.
Furthermore, people ought not to sleep, whiles the public worship of God is
in performing, no not in hearing an Homily or Sermon. It is recorded by Saint
Luke for our learning, that when Christ preached, the eyes of all that were in
the Synagogue were Luke 4.20.
fastened on him. And the judgment that befell Act. 20.7, 8, 9, 10.
Entychus sleeping whiles Paul preached, is written also for our admonition.

It is also remarkable what is said in the first part of the T. 1. p. 53.
Homily, How dangerous a thing it is to fall from God. Whosoever is occupied
with fables and tales, when the Word of God rehearsed, Of attentive harkening
to the public worship.
he is turned from God. Whosoever in time of reading Gods Word, is careful in
his mind of worldly business, of money, or of lucre, he is turned from God:
whosoever is entangled with the cares of possessions, filled with the
covetousness of riches, whosoever studieth for the glory and honor of this
world, he is turned from God. So that after Saint Origens mind, Whosoever has
not a Luke 8.18.
special mind to that thing that is commanded or taught of God, he that does
not listen unto it, embrace, and print it in his heart, to the intent that he
may duly Mat. 7.24. Iam. 1.22, 23, 24, 25.
fashion his life thereafter, he is plainly turned from God, although he do
other things of his own devotion and mind, which to him seem better, and
more to Gods honor. It is to be considered that teaching by Sermon or Homily
is a part of Gods public worship, and therefore all are to demean themselves
with due reverence in hearing the same. That public teaching is a worship of
God, it may appear out of Christ's words, saying, They Mat. 15.9.
worship me in vain, teaching for doctrines the commandments of men. In which
words Christ signifies that such do worship him unto good purpose, which
teach for doctrines Gods Commandments. Also, that Yea also it is plainly
signified in the first part of the sacred Homily concerning the right use of
the Church. T. 2. p. 6. where it is said; The Temple or Church is the house of
the Lord, for that the Service of the Lord (as teaching and hearing of his holy
Word, calling upon his holy name, giving thanks to him for his great and
innumerable benefits, and due ministering of his sacraments) is there used.
preaching is a part of Gods public worship, and so to be accounted by all
true Christians, and to be heard with all due reverence, it is manifest out of
the Act of Parliament set in the beginning of the book of Common Prayer, where
it is said; All and every person and persons, inhabiting within this Realm, or
any other the Kings Majesty's dominions, shall diligently and faithfully,
having no lawful or reasonable excuse to be absent, endeavor themselves to
resort to their Parish Church or Chapel accustomed, or upon reasonable let
thereof, to some usual place where common Prayer and such Service of God shall
be used in such time of let, upon every Sunday, and other days ordained and
used to be kept as holy days: and then and there to abide orderly and
soberly, during the time of Common Prayer, Preachings or other Service of God,
there to be used and ministered, upon pain of punishment by the censures of the
Church.

CHAP. 69. Of good works, in general.
IN the Collect appointed to be read on the 17. Sunday after Trinity, it is
said; Lord, we pray thee, That thy grace may always prevent and follow us, and
make us continually to be given to all good works, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. In the second part of the T. 1. p. 55.
Homily concerning falling from God, it is said; By these threatenings ( meaning
such as Isaiah mentions in his fifth Chapter) we are monished and warned,
that if we which are the chosen vineyard of God, bring not forth good grapes,
that is to say, good works that may be delectable and pleasant in his sight,
when he looks for them, when he sends his messengers to call upon us for
them, but rather bring forth Isa. 5.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
wild grapes, that is to say, sour works, unsavory, and unfruitful: then he
will pluck away all defense, etc. In the first part of the T. 2. p. 82.
Homily concerning fasting, it is said; Saint Paul therefore teaches, that we
must do good works for diverse respects. First, to show our selves obedient
children unto our heave^ly Father, who has Ephesians. 2.10.
ordained them, that we should walk in them. Secondly, for that they are good
Iam. 2.18, 20, 26.
declarations and testimonies of our justification. Thirdly, that others seeing
our good works, may the rather by them be stirred up and excited to Mat. 5.16.
glorify our Father which is in heaven. Let us not therefore be slack to do
good works, seeing it is the will of God, that we should walk in them,
assuring our selves, that at the last day, every man shall receive of God for
his labor done in true faith, a Psalm. 19.11.
greater reward than his works have deserved. It is also in the said p. 85.
part delivered: Good works are not all of one sort. For some are of
themselves and of their own proper nature always good: as to love God above
all things, to love thy neighbor as thy self, to honor thy father and
mother, to honor the higher powers, to give to every man that which is his
due, and such like. Other works there be, which considered in themselves,
without further respect, are of their own nature merely indifferent, that is,
neither good nor evil, but take their denomination of the use and end whereto
they serve; which works having a good end, are called good works, and are so
indeed: but yet that comes not of themselves, but of the good end whereunto
they are referred. Of this sort of works is Zechar. 7.5, 6.
fasting, etc. In the first part of the T. 1. p. 30.
Homily of good works, it is said, Even as the picture graven or painted, is
but a dead representation of the thing it self, and is without life, or any
manner of moving: so be the works of all Isa. 64.6.
unfaithful persons before God. They do appear to be lively works, and
indeed they be but dead, not availing to the everlasting life. They be but
shadows and shows of lively and good things, and not good and lively things
indeed. p. 31.
Again it is said, There is one work, in the which be all good works, that
is, faith, which Gal. 5.6.
works by charity: If thou have it, thou have the ground of all good works.
When the Jews asked of Christ, what they should do not work good works: he
answered, This is the Ioh. 6.29.
work of God, to believe in im whom he sent: so that he called faith the work
of God. And as soon as a man has faith, anon he shall flourish in good works:
for faith of it self is full of good works, and Heb. 11.6.
nothing is good without faith. p. 20.
True faith does give life to works, and out of such faith Psalm. 116.10. 2
Cor. 4.13.
come good works, that be very good works indeed; and without faith, no good
work is good before God, as says S. Augustine. In the second part of the p.
32.
Homily concerning good works, it is said; Now to go forward to the third
part, that is, what manner of works they be which spring out of true faith,
and lead faithful men unto everlasting life. This cannot be known so well, as
by our Savior Christ himself, who was asked of a certain great man the same
question, What Mat. 19.16, 17.
works shall I do (said a Prince) to come to everlasting life? To whom Jesus
answered, If thou will come to everlasting life, keep the Commandments. So
that this is to be taken for a most true lesson taught by Christ's own mouth,
that the works of the moral Commandments of God be the very true works of
faith, which lead unto the blessed life to come. And of the third part of the
aforesaid p. 39. Observe well this exhortation.
homily the conclusion is, an Exhortation to the keeping of Gods
Commandments, containing a brief rehearsal of them, very divine and
profitable to be read most oftentimes, yea to be gotten into memory, by all
that are able. And it is as follows: Wherefore as you have any zeal to the
right and pure honoring of God, as you have any regard to your own souls,
and to the life that is to come, which is both without pain, and without end,
apply your selves chiefly above all things, to Ios. 1.8. Rev. 1.3.
read and Ioh. 8.47.
hear Gods Word, mark diligently therein what his Ephesians. 5.17. Romans 12.2. 1
These. 4.3. 4, 6.
will is you shall do, and with Mat. 6.10. Psalm. 40.8. Col 4, 12. John 7.17.
Ephesians. 6.6. Mark. 3.35.
all your endeavor apply your selves to follow the the same. First, you must
have an assured Heb. 11.6. and 10.22, 23.
faith in God, and Prove. 23.26. Romans 12.1, 2.
give your selves wholly unto him, love him in prosperity and Job 13.15.
adversity, and Isa 66.2.5. Heb. 12.28, 29.
dread to offend him evermore. Then for his Ephesians. 4.32. Mat. 18.32.33.
sake love all men, friends and Mat. 5.44.
foes, because they be his Mal. 2.10.
creation and Iam. 3.9.
image, and 1 Timothy 1.6.
redeemed by Christ, as ye are. Cast in your minds, how you may Gal 6.10.
do good unto all men, unto your 2 Cor. 8.12.
powers, and Romans 13.10.
hurt no man. 1 Pet. 2.13. Rom 13.1.
Obey all your Superiors, and Heb. 13.17.
Governors, serve your Masters Tit. 2.9.10.
faithfully and diligently, as well in their absence, as in their presence, not
for dread of punishment only, but for conscience sake, knowing that you are
bound so to do by Gods Col. 3.22, 23 24.
Commandments. Col 3.20.
Disobey not your fathers and mothers, but honor them, 1 Timothy 5.4.
help them, and please them to your power. Isa. 33.15.
Oppress not, kill not, Tit. 3.2.
beat not, neither slander, nor hate any man: but 1 These. 5.15. Mat. 22.39.
love all men, 1 Pet 2.17.
speak well of all men, help and 1 John 3.17
succor every man, as you may, yea, even your Romans 12.20.
enemies that hate you, that speak evil of you, and that do hurt you. Ephesians
4.28.
Take no man's goods, nor Exodus 20.17.
covet your neighbors goods wrongfully, but Heb. 5.13.
content your selves with that which ye get truly, and also bestow your own
goods 1 Timothy 6.18. 2 Cor. 8.12. and 9.7.
charitably, as need and case requires. Flee 1 John 5.21. Ezekiel. 14.4. 1 Cor.
10.14.
all Idolatry, Deuteronomy. 18.10, 11, 12.
witchcraft, and Zech. 5.4.
perjury, commit no manner of Adultery, Ephesians. 5.3, 4, 5, 6.
Fornication, or other unchastnesse, in Mat. 5.28. 1 Cor. 6.15, 16, 18.
will, nor in deed, with any other man's wife, widow, or maid, or otherwise.
And traveling continually, (during this life) thus in keeping the
Commandments of God, (wherein John 15.8. Luke 6.46.
stands the pure, principal and right honor of God, and which wrought in
faith, God has ordained to be the Mat. 1^ 17. Mat. 7.1^. Ps. 119.32.
right trade and path way unto heaven) you shall not fail as Christ has
promised, to come to that blessed and everlasting life, where you shall live in
glory, and Mat. 25.21. Isa. 51.11.
joy with God for ever.

Saint Paul says to the Ephesians, We are Gods workmanship, created in Christ
Jesus unto good Ephesians. 2.10.
works, which God has before ordained, that we should walk in them. And to
Titus he s;aith: Christ gave himself for us that he might redeem us from all
iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar people, Tit. 2.14.
zealous of good works. To the Hebrews he says: Let us consider one another
to provoke unto love, and unto Heb. 10.24.
good works. John the Baptist preached, saying: And now also the Axe is laid
to the root of the trees, therefore every tree which brings not forth Mat.
3.10.
good fruit, is hewn down, and cast into the fire. Jesus Christ says: I am
the Vine, ye are the Branches: he that abides in me, and I in him, the same
brings John 15.5, 8, 14, 16.
forth much fruit: for without me you can do nothing. Herein is my Father
glorified, that ye bear much fruit, so shall ye be my Disciples Ye are my
friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you. I have chosen you and ordained
you, that you should bring forth fruit, and that your fruit should remain.
Saint John says: I heard a voice from heaven, saying unto me, write, Blessed
are the dead which die in the Lord, from henceforth, yea, says the Spirit,
that they may rest from their labors, and their Rev. 14.13.
works do follow them. But without Heb. 11.6.
faith (says the Apostle) it is unpossible to please God: for he that comes
to God, must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that seek
him diligently. Saint James says: as the body without the spirit is dead, so
faith without Iam. 2.26.
works is dead also. Saint Paul says to Titus: This is a faithful saying,
and these things I will that thou affirm constantly, that they which have
believed in God, might be careful to maintain Tit. 3.8.
good works: these things are good and profitable unto men. Glorious (says
Solomon) is the fruit of Wisd. 3.15.
good labors. The Lord Christ Jesus has said: The hour is coming, in the
which all that are in the Graves shall hear his voice. And shall come forth,
they that have done John 5.29:
good, unto the resurrection of life, and they that have done evil unto the
resurrection of damnation.

CHAP. 70. Of the Kings Sovereignty, and of bearing faith and true Allegiance
to his Majesty, his Heirs, and Successors.
IN the book containing the form and manner of making and Consecrating
Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, in the Service for the ordering of Deacons, and
in the Rubricke set after the Epistle then to be read, it is delivered, That
before the Gospel, the Bishop sitting in a Chair, shall cause the Oath of the
Kings Supremacy, and against the power and authority of all foreign
Potentates, to be ministered unto every of them that are to be ordered.

The Oath of the Kings Sovereignty.
I A. B. do utterly testify and declare in my conscience, that the Kings
Highness is the only Supreme Governor of this Realm, and of all other his
Highness Dominions, and Countries, as well in all spiritual or
Ecclesiastical things or causes, as temporal, and that no foreign Prince,
person, Prelate, State or Potentate, has, or ought to have any Jurisdiction,
Power, Superiority, Pre-eminence, or Authority Ecclesiastical, or spiritual
within this Realm, and therefore I do utterly renounce and forsake all
foreign Jurisdictions, Powers, Superiorities, and Authorities, and do
promise that from henceforth, I shall bear faith and true allegiance to the
Kings Highness, his Heirs and lawful Successors, and to my power shall
assist and defend all Jurisdictions, Privileges, Preheminencies and
Authorities, granted or belonging to the Kings Highness, his Heirs and
Successors, or united and annexed to the Imperial Crown of his Realm, so
help me God, and the Contents of this book.

The Oath of Allegiance, as it is expressed in the Book entitled God and the
King.
I A. B. do truly and sincerely acknowledge, profess, testify and declare,
in my conscience before God and the world; that our Sovereign Lord King
Charles, is lawful and rightful King of this Realm, and of all other his
Majesty's Dominions and Countries; and that the Pope neither of himself, nor
by any Authority by the Church, and Sea of Rome, or by any other means with
any other, has any power or Authority, to depose the King, or to dispose any
of his Majesty's Kingdoms or Dominions; and to authorize any foreign Prince
to invade or annoy him or his Countries, or to discharge any of his Subjects,
of their Allegiance and obedience to his Majesty, or to give License or leave
to any of them to bear arms, raise tumults, or to offer any violence or hurt
to his Majesty's Royal person, State or Government, or to any of his Majesty's
Subjects within his Majesty's Dominions. Also I do swear from my heart, that
notwithstanding any Declaration, or sentence or Excommunication, or
deprivation, made or granted, or to be made, or granted by the Pope or his
Successors, or by any Authority derived, or pretended to be derived from him,
or his Sea, against the said King, his Heirs or Successors, or any absolution
of the said subjects from their obedience: I will bear faith and true
Allegiance to his Majesty; his Heirs and Successors, and him and them will
defend to the uttermost of my power, against all conspiracies and attempts
whatsoever, which shall be made against his or their persons, their Crown and
dignity, by reason or color of any such sentence, or declaration, or
otherwise; and will do my best endeavor to disclose and make known unto his
Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, all treasons or traitorous conspiracies,
which I shall know or hear of, to be against him or any of them. And I do
further swear, that I do from my heart abhor, detest, abjure as impious and
haereticall, this damnable Doctrine and position, that Princes which be
excommunicated or deprived by the Pope, may be deposed or murdered by their
subjects, or any other whatsoever. And I do believe, and in my conscience am
resolved, that neither the Pope, nor any person whatsoever, has power to
absolve me of this oath, or any part thereof, which I acknowledge by good and
full authority to be lawfully ministered unto me, and do renounce all
pardons, and dispensations to the contrary. And all these things I do plainly
and sincerely acknowledge and swear, according to these express words by me
spoken, and according to the plain and common sense, and understanding of the
same words, without any equivocation, or mental evasion, or secret reservation
whatsoever, and I do make this recognition, and acknowledgement heartily,
willingly, and truly upon the true faith of a Christian: So help me God.

In the Collect to be read after the ten Commandments, we are taught to pray,
That we the subjects unto Gods chosen servant Charles our King and Governor,
(duly considering whose Authority he has) may faithfully serve, honor, and
humbly obey him, in thee, and for thee, according to thy blessed word and
ordinance.

In the second part of the T. 1. p. 49.
Homily concerning Swearing, it is said: Whereas Zedekias King of Jerusalem,
had promised fidelity to the King of Chaldea, afterward, when Zedekias contrary
to his 2 Chronicles. 36.13.
Oath and Allegiance, did rebel against King Nebuchodonosor: This Heathen King
by Gods permission and sufferance, invading the Land of Jury, and besieging
the City of Jerusalem, compelled the said Zedekias to flee, and in fleeing
took him prisoner, slew his sons before his face, and put out both his eyes:
and binding him with Chains, led him 2 King. 25.7.
prisoner miserably into Babylon. Thus does God show plainly how much he
abhors breakers of honest promises, bound by an Oath made in his name.

Concerning the Kings Sovereignty or Supremacy, namely, That our most dread
Sovereign Lord King Charles is the only Supreme Governor of this Realm,
and of all other his Highness Dominions and Countries, as well in all
spiritual or Ecclesiastical things or causes, as temporal, and that no
foreign Prince, Person, Prelate, State or Potentate, has, or ought to have
any jurisdiction, power, superiority, pre-eminence, or authority
Ecclesiastical, or Spiritual within this Realm, It is evident by considering
the Prerogative of the Kings of Israel, who were not subject to any foreign
jurisdiction, but had the chief power in their Land, and the chief government
of all estates in it, whether they were Ecclesiastical or Civil, and likewise
in all things or causes, as well Ecclesiastical as Temporal.

That there was no person above or over them, but God only, it is manifest by
that which Solomon uttered, saying: Eccles. 8.4.
Where the word of a King is, there is power: and who may say unto him, what
do thou? That they had power over the high priesthood, yea the rule thereof,
Salomons 1 King. 2.26.27.55.
deposing of Abiathar and the putting of Zadok in his room, is proof
sufficient. For to show the Soveraigntie of Kings over the highest degree in
the ministry or Clergy, the holy Scriptures naming of a King or Prince
always before the high priest is a plain argument. Moses is Exodus 4.29. etc.
named before Aaron, 1 Samuel 11.6.7
Saul before Samuel, (when Saul was King,) Hag. 1.14.
Zerubbabel before Iosedec, etc. Neh. 8.9.
Nehemiah which is the Or Governor, as it is rendered in the margent. Radix est
(...) et (...) Chaldaice ac Rabbinice. Inde in Hiphil (...) et (...)
potestatemfecit, concessit, permisit. Shindelerus refert ad (...) caput, litera
(...) omissa.
Tirshatha is named before Ezra the priest. And that Tirshatha was he, that
ruled matters Ecclesiastical, and said unto certain (whom likely he had put
from the priesthood,) That they shoud not eat of the most holy things, till
there stood up a priest with Ezra. 2.63.
Vrim and In the service of Consecration of Bishops in the Prayer after the
Letanie then road, the true signification of the words Vrim and Thummim is
delivered, namely, truth of Doctrine and innocence of life See 1 Esdras. 5.40.
Thummim. Saint Peter says, 1 Pet. 2.13.14
Submit your selves unto every ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it
be to the King, as Supreme, or unto governors, as unto them that are sent by
him, etc. Samuel told Saul; that God had made him the 1 Samuel 15.17. See the 37.
Article of Religion.
Head of the Tribes of Israel. Therefore our King is Head of the Tribe of Levi,
the supreme governor over all degrees and orders of the Clergy in his
Majesty's Realms and Dominions, as well as over all other persons. Concerning
bearing faith and true allegiance to the Kings Highness, his heirs and
successors, according as it is prescribed in the oath of allegiance, it may
first be considered, that in the whole Bible there is no mention of any of
Gods people at any time to have done contrary unto such allegiance; but ever to
have borne faith and true allegiance unto to their Sovereign, the supreme
Magistrate over them. The Lord Jesus Christ both by Mat. 12.20.21.
precept and also by example taught loyalty to be performed unto Caesar by all
professed Christians, and all others. The Apostle Paul enjoined Titus to put
all professors of Christianity in mind to be Tit. 3.1.2.
subject to Principalities, and powers, to obey magistrates, to be ready unto
every good work, to speak evil of no man, to be no brawlers, but gentle,
showing all meekness unto all men. Almost the whole 13. chapter of the
Epistle to the Romans is a declaration how subject and faithful, every soul
(not excepting any Ecclesiastical person) ought to be unto his Prince, which
bears the sword, which receives tribute and custom. The higher powers unto
whom Saint Paul commanded Christians to be subject for Conscience sake, and to
render all their dues, to owe nothing but love and honor, (and he for to
exclude universal ill attempts against ones Sovereign, says, Loveworketh no
ill to ones neighbor) were not defenders of the Christian faith; neither were
they favorers of the Gospel, the highest powers over 1. Pet. 1.1.
Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia, unto whom Saint Peter
required those to whom he wrote for to be loyally subject. If people were not
in Conscience bound to be universally faithful unto their Sovereign, the
society of mankind could not consist together, but the whole world would in
short time be turned into a wilderness. To release any from their duty to
their superiors was the ^ Mark. 7.7.8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.
Doctrine of the Scribes and Pharisees the mortal enemies to Christianity, who
taught that one having offered a certain gift, though he honored not his
father or his mother, should be free, making thereby the fifth Commandment of
God of non effect by that their damnable tradition. And are not Kings Isa.
49.23.
fathers, and Queens mothers according to the language of the Holy Scriptures?
Saint Peter says, Fear God, and 1 Pet. 2.17.
honor the King. Solomon also says, Eccles. 10.20.
Curse not the King, no not in thy thought. How zealous was David that he
would neither do nor 1 Samuel 24.6.7 and 26.9.
suffer to be done any manner of annoyance toward the Lords anointed, though
he were disobedient unto the Law of the Lord! Let any search the whole
Scripture, and more especially all the new Testament, and let him observe what
manner of innocent life the life of the Christian Religion is prescribed for to
be, or is described there, and he shall plainly see, that it is contrary to
the universal Christian Mat. 20.16. Romans 16.19. Romans 13.10. 1 These. 5.15. 1
Cor. 13.4.5.6.7.
nature for any people not to bear such faith and such true allegiance unto
their Sovereign, as is expressed in the oath of allegiance, and expounded or
delivered in the Book entitled God and the King. What it is to be defective
in duty toward ones Sovereign, the Church has also most divinely declared in
the Homily an Exhortation concerning good order, and obedience to Rulers and
Magistrates, and amply in the Homily against disobedience and wilful
Rebellion: the which deliverie of holy Church all persons should often read or
hear read unto them.

CHAP. 71. Of submission to all Powers inferior to the Kings Majesty.
IN the first part of the T. 1. p. 69.70.
Homily of obedience, it is said: Take away Kings, Princes, Rulers,
Magistrates, Judges, and such estates of Gods order, no man shall ride or go
by the high way unrobbed, no man shall sleep in his own house or bed
unkilled, no man shall keep his wife, children, and possession in quietness,
all things shall be common, and there must needs follow all mischief, and
utter destruction both of souls, bodies, goods, and Common wealths. But
blessed be God, that we in this Realm of England, feel not the horrible
calamities, miseries, and wretchedness, which all they undoubtedly feel and
suffer, that lack this godly order: and praised be God, that we know the great
excellent benefit of God showed toward us in this behalf. God has sent us
his high gift, our most dear Sovereign Lord king Charles, with a godly, wise,
and honorable Counsel, with other superiors and inferiors in a beautiful
order, and godly. Wherefore let us subjects do our bounden duties, giving
hearty thanks to God, and praying for the preservation of this godly order.
Let us all obey even from the bottom of our hearts, all their godly
proceedings, Laws, Statutes, Proclamations, and Injunctions, with all other
godly orders. Let us consider the Scriptures of the Holy Ghost, which persuade
and command us all obediently to be subject, first and chiefly to the King
Majesty, Supreme Governor over all, and the next to his Honorable Counsel,
and to all other Noblemen, Magistrates, and Officers, which by Gods goodness,
be placed and ordered. In the second part of the T. 2. p.
Homily of fasting, but it is said; Positive laws made by Princes, for
conservation of their Policy, not repugnant unto Gods Law, ought of all
Christian subjects with reverence of the Magistrate to be obeyed, not only
for fear of punishment, but also (as the Apostle says) for Romans 13.5.
Conscience sake. Conscience I say, not of the thing which of it own nature is
indifferent: but of our obedience, which by the Law of God we owe unto the
Magistrate, as unto Gods minister. That saying of the holy Ghost by Saint Peter
confirms all: Submit your selves to ever ordinance of man for the Lords sake,
whether it be to the King, as supreme, or unto 1 Pet. 2.13.14.15.
Governors, as unto them that are sent by him, for the punishment of evil
doers, and for the praise of them that do well. For so is the will of God, that
with well doing, ye may put to silence the ignorance of foolish men. Saint
Paul exhorts Timothy, that first all, Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions,
and giving of thanks be made for all men: For Kings, and for 1. Tim. 2.1.2.3.
all that are in authority, that we may lead a quiet and a peaceable life in
all godliness and honesty. The Apostle says to the Hebrews: Heb. 13.17.
Obey them that have the rule over you. The Lord has commanded his people by
Moses, saying: If there arise a matter too hard for thee in judgment, between
blood and blood, between plea and plea, and between stroke and stroke,
between matters of controversy within thy gates: Then shall thou arise, and
get thee up into the place, which the Lord thy God shall choose: And thou shall
come unto the Priests the Levites, and unto the Deuteronomy. 17.8. etc.
Judge that shall be in those days, and enquire, and they shall show thee the
sentence of judgment. And thou shall do according to the sentence which they
of that place (which the Lord shall choose) shall show thee, and thou shall
observe to do according to all that they inform thee, etc. In the Book of
Joshua there is recorded an example of profession of obedience, where the
people answered Joshua, saying: Ios. 1.17.18.
All that thou command us, we will do, and whithersoever thou sendest us,
we will go. According as we hearkened unto Moses in all things, so will we
hearken unto thee: only the Lord thy God be with thee as he was with Moses.
Whosoever he be that does rebel against thy commandment, and will not hearken
unto thy words, in all that thou command him, he shall be put to death;
only be strong and of a good courage. That which is afterward mentioned
concerning the obedience of the Reubenites, Gadites, and the half Tribe of
Manasseh is written for all professed Christians to mark for an example, the
which Joshua spoke and said unto them: Ye have keept all that Moses the
servant of the Lord commanded you, and have obeyed my voice in Ios. 22.1.2.
all that I commanded you. Salomons saying is hereto considerable: I counsel
thee, to keep the Eccles. 8.1.
Kings commandment, and that in regard of the oath of God. Yea for to
maintain peace, and to avoid giving of any the least offense to such as are
in office, it is the duty of Christians to condescend unto the performance of
any indifferent matter, though there be no express Law or statute requiring
the same. And this may appear to be a subjects duty, from the precept of
Christ, who knowing that tribute was there properly to be paid by strangers,
and that the Children were free: notwithstanding (says he) lest we should
Mat. 17.24, 25, 26, 27.
offend them, pay thou for me and for thine own self.

CHAP. 72. Of Magistrates duties in general.
IN the Prayer for the whole estate of Christ's Church militant here in earth,
the duty of Magistrates is signified, where it is said: And grant unto his
whole Counsel, and to all that be put in Authority under him, that they may
truly and indifferently minister Justice, to the punishment of wickedness and
vice, and to the maintenance of Gods true religion and virtue. Likewise in the
Letany, where it is said: That it may please thee to bless and keep the
Magistrates, giving them grace to execute justice, and to maintain truth.

In the second part of the T. 1. p. 44, 45.
Homily of Charity, it is said: As every loving father corrects his natural
son, when he does amiss, or else he loves him not: So all governors of
Realms, Countries, Towns, and Houses, should lovingly correct them which be
offenders, under their governance, and cherish them which live innoce^tly, if
they have any respect either unto God or their office, or love unto them of
whom they have governance. And such rebukes and punishments of them that
offend, must be done in due time, lest by delay, the offenders fall headlong
into all manner of mischief, and not only be evil themselves, but also do
hurt unto many men, drawing other by their evil example, to sin and outrage
after them. As one Thief may both rob many men, and also make many Thieves
and one seditious person may allure many, and annoy a whole Town or Country.
And such evil persons that be so great offenders to God, and the Commonweal,
charity requires to be cut from the body of the Commonweal, lest they
corrupt other good and honest persons: like as a good Surgion cutteth away a
rotten and festered member, for love he has to the whole body, lest it infect
other members adjoining to it.

In the T. 2. p. 254, 255.
Homily against idleness, it is said: God of his mercy put it into the hearts
and minds of all them that have the sword of punishment in their hands, or
have families under their governance to labor for to redress this great
enormitie, of all such as love idly and unprofitably in the Commonweal, to
the great dishonor of God, and the grievous plague of his silly people. To
leave si^^e unpunished, and to neglect the good bringing up of youth, is
nothing else but to kindle the Lords wrath against us, and to heap plagues
upon our own heads. Let all Officers therefore look straightly to their Charge.
Let none maintain vagabonds and idle persons, but deliver the Realm and their
households from such noisome loyterers, that idleness the mother of all
mischief, being clean taken away, Almighty God may turn his dreadful anger
away from us, and confirm the covenant of peace upon us for ever.

Exodus 18.21.
Iethro signified to Moses of what affection Governors should be, saying, Thou
shall provide out of all the people able men, such as fear God, men of truth,
bating covetousness, etc. So King Iehoshaphat in saying to the Judges: 2 Chronicles. 19.6, 7, 11.
Take heed what you do: for ye judge not for man, but for the Lord who is
with you in the judgment, wherefore now, let the fear of the Lord be upon
you, take heed and do it: for there is no iniquity with the Lord our God, nor
respect of persons, nor taking of gifts. Deal courageously, and the Lord shall
be with the good. The Prophet David says: Ps. 82.1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7.
God stands in the congregation of the mighty: he judges among the gods.
How long will ye judge unjustly: and accept the persons of the wicked? Defend
the poor and fatherless: do justice to the afflicted and needy: deliver the
poor and needy: rid them out of the hand of the wicked. I have said, Ye are
gods: and all of you are the Children of the most High: but ye shall dye like
men, and fall like one of the Princes. In the book of Wisdom it is said unto
Rulers: Wisd. 6.4, 5, 6
Because being Ministers of his Kingdom, you have not judged aright, nor kept
the Law, nor walked after the Counsel of God, horribly and speedily shall he
come upon you: For a sharp judgment shall be to them that be in high
places. For mercy will soon pardon the meanest: mighty men shall be mightily
tormented. It is recorded of Mordicai the Jew being advanced next unto King
Ahasuerus, that he sought the Est. 10.3.
wealth of his people, and spoke peace unto all his Seed. Blessed are they that
keep judgment: and he that does Ps. 106.3.
righteousness at all times: says David. But says Isaiah: Woe unto them that
Isa. 10.1, 2.
decree unrighteous Decrees, and that write grievousnesse which they have
prescribed: to turn aside the needy from judgment, and to take away the right
from the poor of the people, that widows may be their prey, and that they may
rob the fatherless. The Lord says by Moses: Exodus 23.2, 3, 8. Deuteronomy. 16.18,
19.20.
Thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil: neither shall thou speak in a
cause, to decline after many, to wrest judgment. Neither shall thou
countenance a poor man in his cause. The Judges and Officers shall judge the
people with just judgment. Thou shall not wrest judgment, thou shall not
respect persons, neither take a gift: for a gift does blind the eyes of the
wise, and pervert the words of the righteous. That which is altogether just
shall thou follow. Paul says to the Thessalonians: We command you brethren in
the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. That ye withdraw your selves from every
brother that walks disorderly, and not after the tradition which he received
of us. For even when we were with you, this we commanded you, That if any man
would not work, 2 These. 3.10.
neither should he eat. It is a saying, and observed out of Moses Law: There
should be no Deuteronomy. 15.4.
beggar in Israel.

CHAP. 73. Of Swearing.
IN the T. 1. p. 45.
Homily against Swearing and perjury, it is said: When Judges require oaths of
the people for declaration or opening of the truth, or for execution of
Justice, Swearing is lawful. Also when men make faithful promises with
calling to witness of the name of God, to keep covenants, honest promises,
statutes, laws, and good customs, as Christian Princes do in their
conclusions of peace, for conservation of Commonwealths, and private persons
promise their fidelity in Matrimony, or one to another in honesty and true
friendship: and all men when they do swear to keep common laws, and local
statutes, and good customs, for due order to be had and continued among men,
when subjects do swear to be true and faithful to their King and Sovereign
Lord, and when Judges, Magistrates and Officers swear truly to execute their
Offices, and when a man would affirm the truth, to the setting forth of Gods
glory, (for the salvation of the people) in open preaching of the Gospel, or
in giving of good Counsel privately for their souls health: All these manners
of swearing, for causes necessary and honest, be lawful. But when men do
swear of custom, in reasoning, buying and selling, or other daily
communications, (as many be common and great swearers) such kind of swearing
is ungodly, unlawful, and forbidden by the Commandment of God. For such
swearing is nothing else but taking of Gods name in vain. P. 46, 47.
Afterward it is said: Whosoever swears when he is required of a Judge, let
him be sure in his conscience that his oath have three conditions, and he
shall never need to be afraid of perjury. First, he that swears, must swear
truly, that is, he must (setting apart all favor and affection to the parties)
have the truth only before his eyes, and for love thereof, say and speak that
which he knows to be truth, and no further. The second is, he that takes an
oath, must do it with judgment, not rashly and unadvisedly, but soberly,
considering what an oath is. The third is, he that swears must swear in
righteousness: that is, for the very zeal and love which he bears to the
defense of innocence, to the maintenance of the truth, and of the
righteousness of the matter or cause: all profit, disposits all love and
favor unto the person for friendship, or kindred laid apart. That in
communication we ought not to swear, Christ's words do declare, where he
says; Mat. 5.34, 35, 36, 37.
Swear not at all, neither by heaven, etc. (by no creature) But let your
communication be yea, yea: nay nay: for whatsoever is more then these, comes
of evil. The which Scripture, as it forbids all manner of swearing in
communication; so it forbids to swear at any time by any thing, excepting
the name of God only. The Lord says to the Israelites by Jeremiah: How shall
I pardon thee for this? thy Children have forsaken me, and Ier. 5.7.
sworn by them that are no gods.

In the second part of the P. 50.
Homily of swearing, it is most memorably said: To the intent you should know
how great and grievous an offense against God wilful perjury is, I will show
you what it is to take an oath before a Judge upon a book. First, when they
laying their hands upon the Gospel book, do swear truly to enquire, and to
make a true presentment of things wherewith they be charged, and not to let
from saying the truth and doing truly, for favor, love, dread or malice of any
person, as God may help them, and the holy Contents of that book: They must
consider, that in that book is contained Gods everlasting truth, his most holy
and eternal Word, whereby we have forgiveness of our sins, and be made
inheritours of heaven, to live for ever with Gods Angels and Saints, in joy and
gladness. In the Gospel book is contained also Gods terrible threats to
obstinate sinners, that will not amend their lives, nor believe the truth of
Gods holy Word, and the everlasting pain prepared in hell for Idolaters,
Hypocrites, for false and vain swearers, for perjured men, for false witness
barers, for false condemners of innocent and guiltless men, and for them which
for favor, hide the crimes of evil doers, that they should not be punished.
So that whosoever wilfully for swear themselves upon Christ's holy Evangely,
(or Gospel) they utterly forsake Gods mercy, goodness, and truth, the merits
of our Savior Christ's Nativity, Life, Passion, Death, Resurrection and
Ascension, they refuse the forgiveness of sins, promised to all penitent
sinners, the joys of heaven, the company with Angels and Saints for ever. All
which benefits and comforts are promised unto true Christian persons in the
Gospel. And they so being forsworn upon the Gospel, do betake themselves to
the devils service, the master of all lies, falsehood, deceit, and perjurie,
provoking the great indignation and curse of God against them in this life, and
the terrible wrath and judgment of our Savior Christ, at the great day of the
last judgment, when he shall justly judge both the quick and the dead,
according to their works. For whosoever forsakes the truth, for love or
displeasure of any man, or for lucre and profit to himself, does forsake
Christ, and with Judas betray him. And although such perjured men's falsehood be
now kept secret, yet it shall be opened at the last day, when the secrets of
all men's hearts shall be manifest to all the world. And then the truth shall
appear, and accuse them: and their own conscience, with all the blessed
company of heaven shall bear witness truly against them. And Christ the
righteous Judge shall then justly condemn them to everlasting shame and death.
As in a great part of the book entitled God and the King, we may find much
divine instruction concerning taking a lawful oath, so where there is delivered
the nature of an oath in general, it is much remarkable. It is * there said,
An oath is a most sacred bond, and with a secret terror imprinted by the
immediate singer of God in the taking thereof, does so straightly oblige the
inmost soul and conscience, that although many men be obdurate unto other
grievous sins: yet they will be tender and sensible of the violation of an
oath. Very often (says Saint Augustine) men provoke their wives whom they
suspect to be adulterous, to clear themselves by an oath, which they would
not do, unless they did beleve that those which fear not adultery, may fear
perjurie: For indeed (says he) some unchaste women which have not feared to
deceive their husbands by wantonness, have been afraid to use God unto them
as a witness of their chastity. When one lays his hands upon the Gospel
book, and signifies that according as he testifies the truth, so he
expects and desires help from God and the contents of that book, he
swears by, or takes for witness the everlasting word of the Lord Jesus
Christ, in praying for benefit by that word, according as then he bears
witness unto the truth. To swear therefore by the everlasting word of God is
an high oath. For David says, Thou have magnified thy word Psalm. 138.2.
above all thy name.

CHAP. 74. Of Honoring the Ministry.
IN the Preface before the book of ordering Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, it
is said; That from the Apostles time, there has been these orders of
Ministers in Christ's Church, which officers were evermore in p. 18.
had in such reverent estimation, that no man by his own private authority,
might presume to execute any of them, except he were first called, etc. In the
rubricke before the Service for the ordering of Deacons, it is said; First, when
the day appointed by the Bishop is come, there shall be an exhortation,
declaring the duty and office of such as come to be admitted Ministers, how
necessary such orders are in the Church of Christ, and also how the people
ought to esteem them in their vocation. Saint Paul said to the Thessalonians,
We beseech you, brethren, to know them which labor among you, and are over
you in the Lord, and admonish you: and to esteem them very 1 These. 5.12, 13.
highly in love for their works sake. And unto Timothy he says; Let the
Elders that rulewell, be counted worthy of 1 Timothy 5.17.
double honor, especially they who labor in the word and doctrine. And unto
the Corinthians he says: Let a man so 1 Cor. 4.1.2.
account of us, as of the Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the mysteries of
God. Moreover, it is required in stewards, that a man be found faithful. Jesus
the son of Syrach says, Fear the Lord with all thy soul, and Eccsus. 7.29,
30, 31.
reverence his Priests. Love him that made thee, with all thy strength, and
forsake not his Ministers. Fear the Lord, and honor the Priest: and give him
his portion, as it is commanded thee, etc. The Lord says in his Law: Take heed
to thy self, that thou Deuteronomy. 12.9.
forsake not the Levite, as long as thou live upon the earth. Saint Paul
says to the Galathians: Let him that is taught in the Word, Gal. 6.6.
communicate unto him that teaches, in all good things. And unto Timothy he
says: The labourer is 1 Timothy 5.17, 18.
worthy of his reward. To the Corinthians he says: The Lord has ordained,
that they which preach the Gospel, should 1 Cor. 9.14.
live of the Gospel. It is written that Melchisedek having ministered to
Abraham bread and wine, and having blessed him, Abraham gave him Genesis 14.20.
Tithes of all. It is recorded of certain women, whom Jesus had healed of
evil spirits, and infirmities, Mary Magdalen, and Ioanna the wife of Chuza,
Herod's Steward, and Susanna, and many others to have ministered unto Christ of
their Luke 8.2, 3.
substance. It is also written, that when people went to a man of God for to
receive information, they carried some 1 Samuel 9.7, 8. 1 Kings 14.3. 2 Kings 8.8.
present with them, as a token of due thankfulness. The Ministers of Almighty
God are to be Heb. 13.17. Deuteronomy. 17.12.
obeyed, to be Hag. 2.11. Mal. 2.7.
consulted with, diligently to be Neh. 8.3. Acts 10.33. Ecclus. 8.8, 9. Psalm.
84.10. and 121.1.
heard when they teach, to be credited. People may not Hos. 4.4.
strive with them, but ought so much as they may, to 1 Cor. 16.11.
preserve them from being despised, and from being put in fear. Also the
blessing with which the Priests of God do Number. 6.23.24, 25, 26, 27. Ezech.
44.30.
bless people, is much to be regarded.

CHAP. 75. Of using the Perambulation of the Circuit of the Parish, called
going a Procession.
IN the T. 2. p. 234.
Homily an exhortation to be spoken to such Parishes, where they use their
Perambulation in Rogation week, for the oversight of the bounds and limits of
their Town, it is said; Although we be now assembled together (good Christian
people) most principally to laud and thank Almighty God for his great
benefits, by beholding the fields replenished with all manner of fruit, to the
maintenance of our corporal necessities, for our food and sustenance, and
partly also to make our humble suits in prayers to his fatherly providence, to
conserve the same fruits in sending us seasonable weather, whereby we may
gather in the said fruits, to that end for which his fatherly goodness has
provided them: yet have we occasion secondarily given us in our walks on those
days, to consider the old ancient bounds and limits belonging to our Township,
and to other our neighbors bordering about us, to the intent that we should
be content with our own, and not contentiously strive for others, to the
breach of charity, by any incroching one upon another, for claiming one of the
other, further than that in ancient right and custom our forefathers have
peaceably laid out unto us for our commodity and comfort. p 235.
Thou shall not (commands Almighty God in his Law) remove thy neighbors
Deuteronomy. 19.14.
mark, which they of old time have set in their inheritance. Thou shall not
(says Pro. 22.28. Prove. 23.10.11.
Solomon) remove the ancient bounds which thy fathers have laid. And lest we
should esteem it to be but a light offense so to do, we shall understand,
that it is reckoned among the curses of God pronounced upon sinners. Accursed
be he (says Almighty God by Moses) who Deuteronomy. 27 17.
removes his neighbors doles and marks, and all the people shall say,
answering Amen thereto, as ratifying that curse upon whom it does light. They
do much provoke the wrath of God upon themselves, which use to grind upon the
doles and marks, which of ancient time were laid for the division of meeres
and balkes in the fields, to bring the owners to their right. They do wickedly
which do turn up the ancient terries of the fields, that old men before times
with great pains did tread out, whereby the Lords records (which be the
tenants Evidences) be perverted and translated sometime to the disheriting of
the right owner, to the oppression of the poor fat herlesse, or the poor
widow. The p 237.
Homily also delivers, that men should not plough and grate upon their
neighbors land that lies next them, that they should not plough up so nigh
the common balkes and walks which good men before time made the greater and
broader, partly for the commodious walk of his neighbor, partly for the
better shacke in harvest time, to the more comfort of his poor neighbors
cattle. And that beer balkes wherein the corpse should be carried to the
Christian sepulture, should not be pinched at, but inviolably kept unto that
purpose. Also that all such encroachments should be looked on, and considered
in the days of Perambulation. The high ways then are also to be considered in
your walks, to understand where to bestow your days works, according to the
good statutes provided for the same. Whereas it is a custom at certain places
in the Procession to read a Gospel, that peoples minds may receive
instruction and their souls have food in their going, is it not done for the 1
Cor. 10.31.
glory of God and the edification of the company? It is written in the book of
Nehemiah, that the congregation of Israel made Neh. 8.14, 15, 16, 17, 18.
boothes abroad in the air, and sat under the boothes. And day by day from
the first day unto the last day (of the boothes feast) he read in the book of
the Law of God. It is not a sin to read some portion of scripture unto people
in the fields, neither is it a transgression for Christian people to say some
prayer there, always provided, that nothing be done contrary to the law
Ecclesiastical or temporal of the Realm wherein we live, and that what we
do, be by common authority an allowed custom. It is written in the Acts, that
by a Acts. 16.13.
rivers side prayer was sometimes made, and that people there received some
instruction. In the book of Canticles the Church of Christ says thus
concerning Jesus Christ: I am my beloveds, and his desire is toward me. Come,
my beloved, let us go forth into the Song. 7.10, 11, 12.
field: let us lodge in the villages. Let us get up early to the vineyards,
let us see if the vine flourish, whether the tender grape appear, and the
pomegranats bud forth: there will I give thee my loves: That is, there will I
say, O Lord our Lord, how excellent is thy name in Psalm. 8.3.6, 7.8, 9.
all the earth: there will I give thanks unto thee, and Psalm. 92.1.4.
sing praises unto thy name, O most High: I will there triumph in the works of
thy hands. Concerning peoples making the sign of the Cross at such places,
where it is to be known that their parish bounds do end; what mark or sign
is so fit to be made? It is the Christian sign: It is the mark wherewith we
were signed when we were baptized: The Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ is that
wherein we should all Gal. 6.14.
glory: And why may we not use the sign thereof in such occasions as Public
Authority allows? In the thirtieth Canon of the Church, it is said; That the
honor and dignity of the name of the Cross, begat a reverend estimation even
in the Apostles time (for ought that is known to the contrary) of the sign of
the Cross: which the Christians shortly after used in all their actions,
thereby making an outward show and profession even to the astonishment of the
Jews, that they were not ashamed to acknowledge him for their Lord and
Savior, who died for them upon the Cross. Read hereto the Chapter concerning
Ceremonies, why some be abolished, and some retained, that is set in the
beginning of the Common Prayer book.

CHAP. 76. Of Alms deeds.
IN first part of the T. 2. p. 154.
Homily of Almsdeeds, it is said; Amongst the manifold duties that Almighty
God requires of his faithful servants the true Christians, by the which he
would that both his name should be Ioh. 15.8.
glorified, and the 2 Pet. 1.10.5, 6, 7.
certainty of their vocation declared, there is none that is either more
acceptable unto him, or more profitable for them, then are the Mic. 6.8.
works of mercy and pity showed upon the poor, which be afflicted with any
kind of misery. In the third part of the T. 2. p. 74.
Homily against peril of Idolatry, there is alleged a saying out of Clemens
an ancient godly Writer, viz. If you will truly honor the Image of God, you
should by doing well to man, honor the true Image of God in him. For the Image
of God is in every man: but the likeness of God is not in every one, but in
those only which have a godly heart and pure mind. If you will therefore
truly honor the Image of God, we do declare to you the truth, that ye do
well to man, who is made after the Image of God, that you give 1 Pet. 2.17.
honor and reverence unto him, and refresh the hungry with meat, the thirsty
with drink, the naked with clothes, the sick with attendance, the stranger
harbourlesse with lodging, the Mat. 25.42, 43, 44, 45.
prisoners with necessaries: and this shall be accounted as truly bestowed
upon God. And these things are so directly appertaining to Gods honor, that
whosoever does not this, shall seem to have Prove. 14 31.
reproached and done villainy to the Image of God.

In the third part of the T. 1. p. 67.
Homily against the fear of death, it is said: While we have time (as Saint
Paul exhorts) let us do good unto Gal. 6.10.
all men, and not Mat 6.19.
lay up our treasures in earth, where rust and mothes corrupt it, which rust
(as Saint James says) shall bear Iam. 5.3.
witness against us at the great day, condemn us, and shall (like most
burning fire) torment our flesh. Let us beware therefore (as we tender our own
wealth) that we be not in the number of those miserable, covetous, and wretched
men, which Saint James bids Iam. 5.1.
mourn and lament for their greedy gathering, and ungodly keeping of goods.
Let us be wise in time, and learn to follow the wise Luke. 16.8.
example of the wicked Steward. Let us study daily and diligently to show our
selves to be the true honourers and lovers of God, by Ioh. 14.15.21.23.24.
keeping of his Commandments, by doing of 1 These. 5.15.
good deeds unto our needy neighbors, Romans 12.13.
Relieving by all means that we can, their poverty with our abundance and
plenty, their 1 Pet. 4.10. Iam. 5.19.20. Isa. 30.4.
Ignorance with our wisdom and learning, and 1 These. 5.14. Isa. 1.17.
comfort their weakness with our strength and authority, calling all men
back from evil doing by Lev. 19.17.
godly counsel and good Phil. 2.15.16. Mat. 5.16. 1 Timothy 4.12.
example, Gal. 6.9. Rev. 2.10.
persevering still in well doing, so long as we live. In the fourth part of the
T. 2. p. 237.
Homily for Rogation week, it is said: Love equity, and Prove. 15.9. Ier.
8.24. Wis. 1.1. Micah. 6.8. Mat. 23.23.
righteousness, ensue mercy and charity, which God most Lev. 19.9.10. Lev.
23.22. Dout. 24.19.20.21.22.
requires at our hands. Which Almighty God respecting chiefly, in making his
Civil Laws for his people the Israelites, in charging the owners not to
gather up their Corn too nigh at harvest season, nor the Grapes and Olives in
gathering time, but to leave behind some ears of Corn for the Lev. 19.9.10.
Lev. 23.22. Dout. 24.19.20.21.22.
poor Gleaners. By this he meant to induce them to pity the Poor, to
relieve the needy, to show mercy and kindness. It cannot be Prove. 19.17.
lost, which for his sake is distributed to the Poor. For he which 2 Cor.
9.10.
ministers seed to the sower, and bread to the hungry, which sends down the
early and latter Iam. 5.7.
rain upon your fields, so to Prove. 3.10.
fill up the Barnes with Corn, and the Wine-presses with Wine and Oil, he, I
say, who Luke 14.13.14
recompenceth all kind of benefits in the resurrection of the just, he will
assuredly recompense Mat. 10.42.
all merciful deeds showed to the needy, howsoever unable the poor is, upon
whom it is bestowed. Jesus Christ said to the Pharisees: But rather give Luke.
11.41.
Alms of such things as you have: And behold, all things are clean unto you.
The Prophet Daniel said unto Nebuchadnezzar; Break off thy sins by
righteousness, and thine iniquities by Dan. 4.27.
showing mercy to the poor; if it may be a lengthning of thy tranquillity. The
Church has gathered most memorable sentences out of the Scripture concerning
Almes-giving, and inserted them between the Nicene Creed and the prayer for
the whole estate of Christ's Church Militant here on earth, and in the rubricke
immediately following it adds; The^ shall the Churchwardens or some other by
them appointed, gather the devotion of the people, and put the same into the
Poor man's Box, etc. Where Almes-giving is said to be devotion, because it is
a maine duty in the Christian Religion, as S. James says: Pure religion and
undefiled before God and the Father, is this, To Iam. 1.27.
visit the Fatherless and Widows in their affliction, and to keep ones self
unspotted from the world. The praise of Cornelius is, That he was a devout man,
and one that feared God with all his house, which gave much Acts. 10.24.
Alms to the people, and prayed to God always. The praise of Dorcas is, that
she was full of good works and Acts 9.36.
Alms deeds which she did. Cast thy Eccles. 11.12.
bread (says Solomon) upon the waters: For after many days thou shall find
it. A good man ( says David) has dispersed, he has given to the poor: his
righteousness endures for ever. Saint John says: 1 Ioh. 3 17.
Whosoever has this worlds good, and sees his brother has need, and shuts up
his bowls of compassion from him; how dwells the love of God in him? Tobias
says, Give Tob. 4.7.8. etc.
Alms of thy substance, and when thou give Alms, let not thine eyes be
envious, neither turn thy face from any poor, and the face of God shall not
be turned away from thee. If thou have abundance, give Alms accordingly; if
thou have but a little, be not afraid to give according to that little, etc.
For the farthing which the poor widow gave, was greatly Mark. 12.42.43.44.
accepted: as testifies Jesus Christ the truth eternal. Let every true
Christian diligently often read through the whole Homily of Almsdeeds.

CHAP. 77. Of Fasting.
IN the first part of the T. 2 p 81.
Homily of Fasting, it is said: The life which we live in this world is of the
free benefit of God Rev. 2.2^. 2 Cor. 5.15.
lent us, yet not to use it at our pleasure, after our own fleshly will: but
to trade over the same in those works which are beseeming them, that are
become 2 Cor. 5.17.
new creatures in Christ. And P. 82. There are two sorts so Fasting.
afterward it is said: Fasting, which is found in the Scriptures, is of two
sorts. The one outward, pertaining to the body; the other inward, in the heart
and mind. This outward Fast, is an abstinence from meat, drink, and all
natural Ps. 112.6. 2 Cor. 9.9.
food, yea, from all delitious Isa. 58.3.
pleasures and Leu. 23.29.
delectations worldly. When this outward Fast pertains to one particular man,
or to a few, and not the whole number of the people, for causes which hereafter
shall be declared, then it is called a private Fast: But when the whole
multitude of men, women, and children, in a towne-ship City, yea; though a
whole country do fast, it is called a public Fast Such was that Fast which the
whole Multitude of the children of Israel were commanded to keep the Leu.
23.27.28.29.30.31.32.
tenth day of the seventh month, because Almighty God appointed that day to be
a cleansing day, a day of atonement, a time of reconciliation, a day wherein
people were cleansed from their sins. The order and manner how it was done,
is written in 16. and 23 Chapters of Leviticus. That day the people did lament,
mourn, weep, and bewail their former sins. And whosoever upon that day did
not humble his soul, bewailing his sins, as is said, abstaining from all
bodily food, until the evening, that soul (says Almighty God) should be
destroyed from among his People. And then P. 83.
afterward the ground of Fasting is delivered, where it is said: upon the
ordinance of this general Fast, good men took occasion to appoint to
themselves private Fasts, at such times as they did either earnestly lament and
bewail their sinful lives, or did addict themselves to more fervent Prayer,
that it might please God to turn his wrath from them, when either they were
admonished and brought to the consideration thereof by the Preaching of the
Prophets, or otherwise when they saw John 3.5.6.7 8.9.
present danger to hang over their heads. This sorrowfulness of heart, joined
to Fasting, they uttered sometime by their outward behavior and gesture of
body, putting on Neh. 9.1.
sackcloth, sprinkling themselves with Est. 4.3.
ashes and Ios. 7.6.
dust, and sitting or lying upon the z 2 Samuel 12.16.
earth. For when good men feel in themselves the heavy burden of sin, see
damnation to be the reward of it, and behold with the eye of their mind the
horror of hell, they Ps. 119.120. Ps. 143.^.^.7.
tremble, they quake, and are inwardly touched with sorrowfulness of heart for
their offenses, and cannot but accuse themselves and open this their grief
unto Almighty God, and call unto him for Ps. 51.1. etc.
mercy. This being done seriously, their mind is so occupied, partly with
sorrow and heaviness, partly with an earnest desire to be delivered from this
danger of hell and damnation, that all desire of meat and drink is laid
apart, and lothsomnesse of all worldly things and pleasures comes in place,
so that nothing then likes them more, than to weep, to lament, to mourn, and
both with words and behavior of body, to show themselves weary of this life.
And P. 86.87. There are three ends' whereto Fasting should be directed.
afterward it is delivered, That there be three ends, whereunto if our Fast be
directed, it is then a work profitable to us, and accepted of God. The first
is to chastise the flesh, that it be not too wanton, but tamed and brought into
subjection, to the spirit. This respect had Paul in his Fast, when he said, I 1
Cor. 9.27.
chastise my body, and bring it into subjection lest by any means it comes
to pass, that when I have preached to other, I my self be found a castaway.
The second, that the spirit may be more earnest and fervent to prayer, To this
end fasted the Acts. 13.3.
Prophets and Teachers that were at Antioch, before they sent forth Paul and
Barnabas to preach the Gospel. The same Apostles fasted for the like purpose,
when they Acts. 14.23.
commended to God, by their earnest prayers, the congregation, which were at
Antioch, Pysidia, Iconium, and Lystra, as we read it in the Acts of the
Apostles. The third, that our Fast be a testimony and witness with us before
God, of our humble submission to his High Majesty, when we confess and
acknowledge our sins unto him, and are inwardly touched with sorrowfulnes of
heart, bewailing the same in the affliction of our bodies. The Church of
England has appointed sundry times for Fasting more or less. We are willed to
fast at least from one meal every Eeve of such Saints days, as the Calendar
set before the Common Prayer shows. We are to Fast the whole day, Of times
when we ought to fast.
when a general public Fast is enjoined, to continue all the day without meat
and drink, till after Evening Prayer, even until night. In the common
Almanacke it is delivered, that upon the Wednesday, Friday, and Saturday of
every Ember week, a Fast is to be observed: And some say, that upon the Monday
in every such week also. And the 31 Cano^ renders a reason why fasting is to
be in the four Ember weeks; namely, because then prayer is to be made unto
God after an especial manner, for to send down his Holy Spirit into those,
which receive holy orders on the Sunday next following. For the four solemn
times appointed for the making of Ministers are the four Sundaies immediately
following the Ember weeks. It is also a custom to Fast on Ash wensday, and
likewise on good Friday. And the Epistle and Gospel appointed for the first
day of Lent, do make mention of Fasting, and from thence we may learn to
begin Lent with Fasting, at least from one meal on that day. The Collect for
the Sunday of Lent does very divinely inform us concerning Fasting, saying; O
Lord, which for our sake did fast Mat 4.2.
forty days and forty nights: give us grace to use such 1 Pet. 2.11. 1 Pet.
4.1.2.3,
abstinence, that our flesh being subdued to the Spirit, we may ever obey thy
godly motions in righteousness and true holiness. The fasting prescribed to
be observed all the Lent, is an abstinence from flesh, an usual abstaining
from that which does cherish blood with blood: according as Daniel signifies
to have abstained, saying: I Dan. 10.2, 3.
Daniel was mourning three full weeks. I ate no pleasant bread, neither came
flesh nor wine in my mouth. It is observed also that in ancient times, in
keeping a public or private fast, people took an austere repast, some coorse
fare in the Evening after abstinence the whole day. As some do in these times.
For, to forfeit a Noones meal, and then to recompense themselves at night,
was not their use.

Now concerning other fastings and at other times, read the whole Homily of the
same. The Lord says by his Prophet Joel, Joel 2.12, 13, 15.
Turn ye even to me with all your heart, and with fasting, etc. Gather the
people: sanctify the congregation: assemble the Elders: gather the Children,
and those that suck the breasts: let the Bridgroome go forth of his Chamber,
and the Bride out of her Closet. The Jonah 3.7, 8.
fast of the Ninevites is thus proclaimed to be: Let neither man nor beast,
herd nor flock taste any thing, let them not feed nor drink water: But let
man and Beast be covered with Sackcloth, and cry mightily unto God: yea, let
them turn every one from his evil way, and from the violence that is in their
hands. The Lord by Isaiah signifies the true use of fasting by Isa. 58.3, 4,
5, 6, 7.
reproving the Jews for their neglect of the same, saying: Behold, in the day
of your fast you find pleasure, and exact all your labors. Behold, ye fast
for strife and debate, and to smite with the fist of wickedness: ye shall not
fast as ye do this day, to make your voice to be heard on high. Is it such a
fast that I have chosen? a day for a man to afflict his soul? is it to bow
down his head as a Bulrush? and to spread sackcloth and ashes under him? will thou call this a fast, and an acceptable day to the Lord? Is not this the fast
that I have chosen? to loose the bands of wickedness, to undo the heavy
burdens, and to let the oppressed go free? and that ye beak every yoke? is
it not to deal thy bread to the hungry, and that thou bring the poor that are
cast out, to thy house? when thou see the naked, that thou cover him; and
that thou hide not thy self from thine own flesh?

Moreover, that there ought to be made fervent prayer in the fasting days of
the four Emberweekes, it is signified in an Exhortation at the consecrating of
an Elected Bishop, where the Archbishop says: Brethren, it is written in the
Gospel of Saint Luke, that our Savior Christ, continued the Luke 6.12, 13.
whole night in the prayer, or ever that he did choose and send forth his
twelve Apostles. It is written also in the Acts of the Apostles, that the
Disciples which were at Antioch did Act. 13.1, 2, 3. In every solemn fast we
ought to give some alms.
fast and pray, or ever that laid hands upon, or sent forth Paul and Barnabas.
Whereas Isaiah signifies, that the use which is to be made of fasting is
charitablenesse, some observe, that when one fasteth, he is to give somewhat
to the poor, what he has spared from his own self, to let some poor
member or members of Christ, to be comforted therewith.

CHAP. 78. Of Conversion, Repentance, and Regeneration.
IN the T. 1. p. 53.
Homily concerning Falling from God, it is said out of Saint Origin, He that
with mind, with study, with deeds, with thought, and care applies, and gives
himself to Gods Word, and thinks upon his Laws day and night, gives
himself wholly to God, and in his Precepts and Commandments is exercised:
this is he that is turned to God, (or one converted.) Conversion is the charge
of the stream of mind and life, of meditation and conversation, from
following ones Isa. 55.7, 8, 9.
own will, or the lusts of 1 Pet. 4.2.
others, unto an unfeined endeavor for to know all the Commandments of Mat.
28.20. John 15.14.
Christ, and his 1 Cor. 11.2. Icr. 35.18, 19.
Church, and to live obediently unto every particular of the same. Then ( says
David) shall I not be ashamed, when I have a Ps. 119.6.
respect unto all thy Commandments. If I Ps. 66.18.
regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear me. Ezekiel says, If the
wicked Ezekiel. 18.21, 22.
will turn from all his sins that he has committed, and keep all my
Statutes, and do that w^^ch is lawful and right, he shall surely live, he
shall not dye. Christ charged his Ministers to teach all Nations to observe
Mat. 28.20.
all things whatsoever he has commanded them. He also says, Ye are my John
15.14.
friends if ye do whatsoever I command you. And concerning the duty that all
owe unto his Luke 10 16.
Church, he says, Who so hears you, hears me, and he that desoiseth you,
despises me: and he that despises me, despises him that sent me. If any
neglect to hear the Mat. 18.17.
Church, let him be unto thee as an Heathen man, and a Publicane. When one is
in converting or turning unto God, he is said in holy Scripture Luke 15.17.
to come to himself, to Psalm. 22.27.
remember himself, to take his own estate into Ezech. 18.28. Of repentance
consideration. Concerning repentance it is said in the first part of the T. 2.
p. 256.
Homily thereof. There is nothing that the Holy Ghost does so much labor in
all the Scriptures to beat into men's heads as Acts 17.30.
repentance, amendment of life, and speedy returning unto the Lord God of
hosts. p. 258.
Afterward there is signified, That repentance is a returning again of the
whole man unto God, from whom we be Romans 3.23.
fallen away by sin. But that the whole discourse thereof may be the better
born away, we shall first consider in order four principal points, that is,
from what we must return, to whom we must return, by whom we may be able to
convert, and the manner how to turn unto God. First, from whence or from what
things we must return. Truly we must return from those things, whereby we
have been withdrawn, plucked, and led away from God; and these generally are
our sins, which as the holy Prophet Isaiah does testify, do Isa. 59.2.
separate God and us, and hide his face, that he will not hear us.

But un^^^ the name of sin, not only those gross words and deeds, which by
the common judgment of men, are counted to be filthy and unlawful, and so
consequently abominable sins: but also the filthy lusts and inward
concupiscences of the flesh, which (as Saint Paul testifies) do Gal 5.16, 17.
1 Pet. 2.11. Romans 7.23.
resist the will and Spirit of God; and therefore ought earnestly to be bridled
and Gal. 5.24.
kept under. We must repent of the Isa. 44.20. Isa. 59.13.
false and erroneous opinions that we have had of God, and the wicked
superstition that does breed of the same, the Rev. 9.20.
unlawful worshipping and service of God, and other like. All these things
must they forsake, that will truly turn unto the Lord, and repent aright. For
since that for such things the Ephesians. 4.6.
wrath of God comes upon the children disobedience, no end of punishment
ought to be looked for, as long as we continue in such things. Secondly, we
must see unto whom we ought to return. The Lord says: Return as far as
unto me. We must labor that we do return as far as unto him, and that we
do never cease nor rest, till we have Phil. 3.12.13 14. Act. 17.27.
apprehended and taken hold upon him. But this must be done by Ephesians. 3.17.
faith. For since that God is a Spirit, he can by no other means be apprehended
and taken hold upon. Therefore thirdly we are to consider, by whom we must
return unto God, because we have of our own selves nothing to present us to
God, and do no less flee from him, after our fall, then our first Parent Adam
did, who when he had sinned, did seek to Genesis 3.8.
hide himself from the sight of God: We have therefore need of a Mediator
to bring and reconcile us unto him, who from our sins is angry with us. The
same is Col. 1.22.
Jesus Christ. And he himself in his Gospel does cry out and say, I am the
John 14.6.
way, the truth and the life, no man comes to the Father but by me. P. 259.
Fourthly, as concerning the manner of our returning: first, he will have us to
return unto him with our Joel 1.12.
whole heart, whereby he does remove and put away all hypocrisy, lest the same
might justly be said unto us: This people draws near unto me with their
mouth, and worship me with their lips, but their Mat. 15.8.
heart is far off from me. Secondly, he requires a sincere and pure love of
godliness, and of the true worshipping and service of God, that is to say,
that forsaking all manner of things that are repugnant and contrary unto Gods
will, we do give our Prove. 22.26.
hearts unto him, and the Luke 10.27.
whole strength of our bodies and souls. Here therefore is nothing left unto
us, that we may give unto the world, and unto the lusts of the flesh. For since
that the heart is the Prove. 4.23.
fountain of all our works, as many as do with whole heart turn unto the
Lord, do Romans 14.7, 3
live unto him only.

In the second part of the P. 264, 265.
Homily of Repentance, it is said: Now it shall be declared unto you what be
the true parts of repentance, and what things ought to move us to repent, and
to return unto the Lord our GOD with all Psa. 119.60.
speed. Repentance (as it is said before) it is a true returning unto God,
whereby men Prove. 28.13. Isa. 55.7. Ezekiel. 14.4, 5, 6 Ezekiel. 18.21, 30, 31.
forsaking utterly their idolatry and wickedness, do with a lively faith
embrace, 1 John 4.7, 8, 16.
love, and worship the Rev. 14.7.
true living God only, and give themselves to all manner of 1 Timothy 5.10. Tit.
2.14. Ephesians. 2.10. 2 Timothy 3.17. Of the four parts of Repentance.
good works, which by Gods Word they know to be acceptable unto him. Now
there be four parts of repentance, which being set together, may be likened
to an easy and short Ladder, whereby we may climb from the bottomless pit of
perdition, that we cast our selves into by our daily offenses and grievous
sins, up into the Castle and Tower of eternal and endless salvation. The
first is the Joel. 2.13. Acts 2.37.
condition of the heart. For we must be earnestly sorry for our sins, and
unfainedly lament and Zechar. 12.10. Ezekiel. 36.31.
bewail that we have by them so grievously offended our most bounteous and
merciful God, who so tenderly loved us, that he gave his only begotten Son
to dye a most bitter death, and to shed his dear heart-blood, for our
redemption and deliverance. And verily this inward sorrow and grief being Iam.
4.9, 10.
conceived in the heart for the heynoursnesse of sin, if it be earnest and
unfeined, is a sacrifice to God, as the holy Prophet does testify, saying, Ps.
51.17. Isa. 57.15. and 66.2, 5. A means to unharden our hearts.
A sacrifice to God is a troubled spirit, a contrite and broken heart, O Lord,
thou will not despise. But that this may take place in us, we must be diligent
to read and hear the Scriptures, and Word of God, which most lively do paint
out before our eyes our natural Isa. 64.6. Ephesians. 2.2, 3, 12.
uncleanness, and the Rem. 7.7. Ps. 1.7, 8. 2 Timothy 3.16, 17 Ps. 119.104, 105,
130. Ephesians. 5.13.
enormity of our sinful life. The second, is an unfeigned confession and
acknowledging of our sins unto God, whom by them we have so grievously
offended, that if he should deal with us according to his Ps. 143.2.
justice, we do deserve a thousand Hels, if there could be so many. Yet if we
will with a sorrowful and contrite heart make an unfeigned 1 John 1.7, 9. Ps.
32.5. Ezekiel 18.22.
confession of them unto God, he will freely and frankly forgive them, and so
put all our wickedness Micah. 7.18, 19.
out of remembrance before the sight of his Majesty, that they shall no more be
thought upon. The third part of Repentance is faith, whereby we do apprehend
and take hold upon the promises of GOD, touching free pardon and Col. 2.13.
Romans 3.25, 24. Ephesians. 4.32. Heb. 9.15.
forgiveness of our sins. Which promises are sealed up unto us, with the Heb.
2.9, 14, 15. Heb. 9.16.17, 22, 23. Mat. 26.28.
death and bloodshedding of his Son Jesus Christ. The fourth in an amendment
of life, or a new life, in bringing forth the Mat 3.8, 10. 2 Cor. 5.17. Gal.
5.24.
fruits worthy of repentance. For they that do truly repent, must be clean
altered, and Romans 12.1, 2. 2 Cor. 3.18. Ier. 48.11.
changed, they must become new creatures, they must be no more the Ier. 50.4,
5. Ezekiel. 18.31. Mar. 16.17. 1 Cor. 6.11.
same that they were before. They that do from the bottom of their hearts
acknowledge their sins, and are unfainedly sorry for their offenses, will cast
off all hypocrisy, and put on true humility, and Mat. 11.29. 1 Pet. 5.5. Ephesians.
4.2.
lowliness of heart. They will not only receive the Physician of the soul,
but also with a most fervent desire Ps. 101.1. and 84.2 and 42.1, 2, 3. Song.
3.1, 2, 3. and 5.8.
long for him. They will not only 1 Pet. 2.11.12. 1 Pet. 4.1, 2, 3, 4.
abstain from the sins of their former life, and from all other filthy
vices, but also flee, eschew, and 1 These. 5.22.
abhor all the occasions of them, and as before they did give themselves to
uncleanness of life, so will they form henceforwards with all diligence give
themselves to innocence, Romans 6.13.29.
pureness of life, and true godliness.

Luke 19.8.
Zacheus after his repentance, was no more the man that he was before, but was
clean changed and altered. It is therefore our parts, if at least we be
desirous of the health and salvation of our own selves, most earnestly, to pray
unto our heave^ly father, to Ephesians. 3.16. Luke. 11.13.
assist us, with his holy Spirit, that we may be able to John 10.27.
hearken unto the voice of the true Shepherd, and with due Acts 3.22, 1 Pet.
4.17.
obedience to follow the same. Let us hearken to the voice of Almighty God,
when he Pro. 1.23, 24.
calls us to repentance, let us not Heb. 3.7, 8, 15.
harden our hearts, as such infidels do, who abuse the time Rev. 2.21.
given them of God to repent, and turn it to continue their pride and contempt
against God and man, which know not how much they Romans 2.4, 5.
heap Gods wrath upon themselves, for the hardness of their hearts, which
cannot Luke 13.25. Mat. 25.8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
repent at the day of vengeance.

In the third part of the P. 271.
Homily of Repentance there are declared some causes, which should the rather
move us unto repentance. As first the Commandment of God, who in so many
places of the holy and sacred Scriptures, does bid us return unto him.
Therefore we must take good heed unto our selves, lest whereas we have already
by our manifold sins and transgressions, provoked and kindled the wrath of
God against us, we do by breaking Mat. 3.2. Mat. 4.17. Mar. 6.12. Luke 13.3.
this his Commandment, double our offenses, and so heap still damnation upon
our own heads by our daily offenses and trespasses, whereby we provoke the
eyes of his Majesty, we do well deserve (if he should deal with us according
to his justice) to be put away for ever from the 2 These. 1.8.9
fruition of his glory. Heb. 2.3.
How much more then are we worthy of the endless torments of Hell, if when we
be so gently called again after our rebellion, and commanded to return, we
will in no wise hearken unto the voice of our heavenly Father, but walk still
after the Deuteronomy. 29.19, 20.
stubbornness of our own hearts. The second cause that should move us to
repent, is, the most comfortable and sweet promise, that the Lord our God did
of his mcere mercy and goodness join unto his Commandment. For he does not
only say, Return unto me, O Israel: but also Ier. 4.1.
if thou will return, and put away all thine abominations out of my sight,
thou shall never be moved. The third cause which should move us to repent, is
the filthiness of sin which in such, that as long as we do abide in it,
God cannot but Ps. 5.4, 5, 6. Ps. 66.18.
detest and abhor us; neither can there be any hope that we shall enter into
the heavenly Jerusalem, except we be first made Rev. 21.27.
clean and purged from it. But this will never be, unless Pro. 9.6. Ephesians.
4.22, 23, 24.
forsaking our former life, we do with our whole heart return unto the Lord
our God, and with a full purpose of amendment of life, flee unto his mercy,
taking sure hold thereupon through Romans 3.25. Gal. 5.6.
faith in the blood of his Son Jesus Christ. The fourth cause which should
move us to repentance, is the uncertainty and brittlenesse of our own lives,
which is such, that we cannot assure our selves, that we shall live one
hour, or one half quarter of it. Which by experience we do find daily to be
true, in them that being now merry and lusty, and sometimes feasting and
banqueting with their friends, do fall suddenly dead in the streets, and
otherwhiles under the Board when they are at meat. These daily examples, as
they are most dreadful and terrible, so ought they to move us to seek for to
be at 2 Cor. 5.20. 1 Cor. 6.17.
one with our heavenly Judge, that we may with a good 2 Cor. 5 9, 10, 11. 1
John 2.28.
conscience appear before him, whenever it shall please him for to call us,
whether it be Mat. 24.42, 43, 44, 46.
suddenly or otherwise, for we have no more Charter of our life, then they
have. But as we are most certain that we shall dye, so are we most uncertain
when we shall dye. For our life does lie in the hand of God, who will take it
away when it Ps. 31.15.
pleases him. And verily when the highest Summer of all, which is Death, shall
come, he will not be said nay: but we must be packing, to be present before
the Heb. 9.27. 1 Pet. 1.17. Ier. 17.10.
judgment Seat of God, as he does find us: according as it is written, Where
as the Eccles. 11.3. Luke 16.22, ^3
tree falls, whether it be toward the South, or toward the North, there it
shall lie. Whereunto agrees the saying of the holy Martyr of God Saint
Cyprian, saying: As God does find thee when he does call, so does he judge
thee. Let us therefore follow the counsel of the Wise man, where he says:
Ecclus. 5.7. Ps. 119.60.
Make no tarrying to turn unto the Lord, and put on off from day to day. For
suddenly shall the wrath of the Lord break forth, and in thy security shall
thou be destroyed, and shall perish in the time of vengeance. And afterward it
is said, Specially when thou art either by the preaching of Gods Word, or by
some inward motion of his holy Ephesians. 4.30.
Spirit, or else by some other means called unto repentance, neglect not the
good occasion that is ministered unto thee, lest when thou would repent, thou
Mat. 17.4, 5.
have not the grace for to do it. For to repent, is a good Acts 11.18. 2 Timothy
2.25.
gift of God, which he will never grant unto them, who living in carnal
security, do make a 2 Pet. 3.3. Gal. 6.7.
mock of his threatenings, or seek to Act. 7.51.
rule his Spirit as they list, as though his working and gifts were tied unto
their will. The fifth cause that should move us to repent, is, the avoiding of
the plagues of God, and the utter destruction that by his righteous judgment
does hang over the heads of them all, that will in no wise return unto the
Lord: whereof read the 28. Chapter of Deuteronomie, and the Exhortation in the
service of Commination.

Of Regeneration.
Concerning Regeneration or birth spiritual it is signified in the end of the
first part of the T. 2. p. 211.
Homily for Whiltsunday, to be a 1 Pet. 1.22.23. John 1.13.
new birth in all goodness, righteousness, sobriety and truth. It is also
said in that part of that p. 109.
Homily, It is the Holy Ghost, and no other thing, that does Psalm. 80.18.
Ephesians. 2.1.5.
quicken the minds of men, stirring up good and godly motions in their hearts,
which are agreeable to the will and Commandment of God, such as otherwise of
their own crooked and perverse nature they should 2 Cor. 3.5. Genesis 6.5.
never have. That which is borne of the John 3.6.
spirit, is spirit. As who should say: Man of his own nature is fleshly and
carnal, corrupt and naught, sinful and disobedient to God, Whereas it is said
in 1 John 4.7, 8. Every one that loves is borne of God, and knows God; and
he that loves not, knows not God: we may prove our s^lves, whether we grow
in regeneration, after we be come to the years of discretion, if we unfainedly
strive to increase in the 16. virtues of charity or godly love, reckoned up
together by the holy Apostle Saint Paul, in 1 Cor. 13.4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Many now a
days do frame to themselves a new birth or regeneration, not duly attending
what the holy Scripture and the divine Service of the Church declares new
birth or regeneration to be: and so they come short of the comforts of the same.
without any spark of goodness in him, without any virtuous or godly motion,
only given to evil thoughts and wicked deeds. As for the works of the
spirit, namely the fruits of faith, charitable and godly motions, if we have
any at all in him, they proceed only of the Holy Ghost, who is the x only
worker of our sanctification, and makes us new men in Christ Jesus: as David,
of a poor shepherd, to become a Princely Prophet: Matthew of a proud
Publicane, to become an humble and lowly Evangelist: Peter, of a simple fisher,
to become a chief and mighty Apostle: Paul, of a cruel and bloody persecutor,
to become a faithful disciple of Christ, and a teacher of the Gentiles. Such
is the power of the Holy Ghost, to 1 Cor. 6.11.
regenerate men, and as it were to bring them forth anew, so that they shall
be 2 Cor. 5.17.
nothing like the men that they were before. Regeneration is begun in Baptism,
(as the Service thereof expressly delivers) and it is increased afterward in
all such as are Romans 8.14. Gal. 5.18. Ephesians. 4.15, 16.
led by the spirit of Jesus Christ. Concerning conversion, repentance, and
regeneration, the holy Scriptures do thus deliver; Jesus Christ says: Verily
I say unto you, Mat. 18.3.
Except ye be converted, and become as little children, ye shall not enter into
the Kingdom of heaven. Except ye Luke 13.3.
repent, ye shall all likewise perish. Verily, verily, I say unto thee, John
3.5.3
Except a man be borne again, he cannot see the kingdom of God. Verily,
verily, I say unto thee, except a man be borne of water and of the spirit, he
cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. Moses says, Deuteronomy. 10.16.
Circumcise the foreskin of your heart, and be no more stiff-necked. The Lord
says by Jeremiah, Ier. 4 3, 4,
Break up your fallow ground, and sow not among thorns. Circumcise your selves
to the Lord, and take away the fore-skins of your heart: lest my fury come
forth like fire, and burn that none can quench it, because of the evil of
your doings. Hosea says, Hos. 10.22.
Sow to your selves in righteousness; reap in mercy: break up your fallow
ground: for it is time to seek the Lord, till he come and rain righteousness
upon you. Christ said to the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, Remember from
whence thou art fallen, and Rev. 2.5.
repent, and do the first works, or else I will come unto thee quickly, and
will remove thy Candlestick out of his place, except thou repent. Saint Paul
mentions to the Corinthians seven fruits of such repentance, saying: Godly
sorrow works 2 Cor. 7.10.11.
repentance to salvation not to be repented of, but the sorrow of the world
works death. For behold, this self same thing that ye sorrowed after a godly
sort, what carfulness it wrought in you, yea, what clearing of your selves,
yea, what indignation, yea, what fear, yea, what vehement desire, yea, what
zeal, yea, what revenge, etc.

CHAP. 79. Of our duty toward God, as it is delivered in the most sacred
Catechism.
MY duty toward God is, to believe in him, to fear him, and to love him with
all my heart, with all my mind, with all my soul, and with all my strength.
To worship him, to give him thanks, to put my whole trust in him, to call upon
him, to honor his holy name and his word: and to serve him truly all the
days of my life. Here are mentioned ten sundry matters of our duty toward
God, and each has a large extent. Now only there shall be delivered some
brief exposition of them. The first of the duties reckoned up, The first duty.
is to believe in God. The Iam. 2.19.
Devils (says Saint James) do believe that there is one God, and they tremble
also. But true Christians do more, they John 14.1.
believe in that one eternal God. In the first part of the T. 1. p. 22.
Homily of Faith, it is said; And this is not only the common belief of the
Articles of our Faith, but it is also a true trust and confidence of the mercy
of God Act 15.11. Romans 5.1.11.
through our Lord Jesus Christ, and a steadfast Ephesians. 1.18.
hope of all good things to be received at Gods hand; and that although we,
through infirmity or temptation of our ghostly enemy; do Rev. 2.5.
fall from him by sin, yet if we Deuteronomy. 30.2. and 4.29.30.
return again unto him by true repentance, that he will forgive and forget
our offenses for his Sons Dan. 9.17.
sake our Savior Jesus Christ, and will make us inheritors with him of his
everlasting Kingdom, and that in the mean time until that Kingdom come, he
will be our Psalm. 91.1, 2, 4.9.10.11.12.
protector and defender in all perils and dangers, whatsoever do chance: and
that though sometime he does send us sharp Psalm. 44.19.
adversity, yet that evermore he will be a loving father unto us, correcting
us for our sin, but not Psa. 89.28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33. and 99.8.
withdrawing his mercy finally from us, if we trust in him, and 1 Pet. 4.19.
Psalm. 37.3.4.5.
commit our selves wholly unto him, 1 Pet. 5.7.
hang only upon him, and call upon him, ready to Heb. 5.9.
obey and serve him. Read the whole Homily of Faith, for therein in wonderful
divine manner is declared, what it is to believe in God. Abraham's belief in
God is set forth unto us for an example: who (as Saint Paul says) Romans 4.18.
against hope believed in hope, that he might become the father of many
Nations: according to that which was spoken, so shall thy seed be. It is the
property of Christian faith to be Romans 4.19, 20, 21.
fully persuaded, that what God has promised, he is able also to perform,
though the matter far exceed our natural comprehension, how it can be. The
Apostle says, Heb. 11.1.
faith is the substance of things hoped for, and the evidence of things not
seen.

The second duty.
The second duty is to fear God. The fear of the Lord (says Solomon) is to
Prove. 8.13.
hate evil. And he there reckons up the four chief evils, which are to be
hated, namely, pride, and arrogancy, and the evil way, and a froward mouth.
David says: Let all the earth Ps. 33.8.
fear the Lord: let all the Inhabitants of the world stand in awe of him.
Peter intimates unto professors of Christianity, why they should fear God,
saying: Forasmuch as ye call on the Father, who without respect of persons
judges according to every man's work, pass the time of your sojourning here in
1 Pet. 1.17.
fear. David declares who truly fears God, saying: Blessed is the man that
Ps. 112.1. as it is in the Divine Service translation.
fears the Lord, he delights greatly in his Commandments. The mercy of
the Lord is from everlasting to everlasting upon them that Ps. 103.17.18.
fear him, and his righteousness unto childrens children: To such as keep
his Covenant, and to those that remember his Commandments to do them. Jesus
the son of Syrach, says, They that Ecclus. 2.15.16, 17.
fear the Lord will not disobey his Word, and they that love him, will keep
his ways. They that fear the Lord, will seek that which is well pleasing
unto him, and they that love him, shall be filled with the Law. They that
fear the Lord, will prepare their hearts, and humble their souls in his
sight. They Isa. 66.5.
tremble at Gods Word, they dread to transgress Iam. 2.10.
any part of it. David says, Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with Ps
2.11.
trembling. Paul says to the Romans, Be not high minded, but Romans 11.20, 21.
fear. For if God spared not the natural branches, take heed lest he also
spare not thee. To the Philippians he says: Work out your own salvation with
Phil. 2.12. The third Duty, To love God.
fear and trembling. The third is, To love God with all our heart, with all
our mind, with all our soul, and with all our strength. To love God is to
love that which God is, as namely heavenly 1 John 1.5.
light, 1 John 4.7.8.16.
charity, Pro. 8.12, 14. Wisd. 7.25, 26. with Heb. 1.3.
wisdom, for God is in Scripture said to be Light, Charity, Wisdom. Hence
Christ says, Ye are my Ioh. 15.14.
friends (or lovers) if ye do whatsoever I command you. This is the 2 Ioh.
5.3.
love of God, (says John) that we keep his Commandments, and his
Commandments are not grievous. Again he says, This is 2 Ich. 6.
love, that we walk after his Commandments.

Wherefore Christ says, If ye Ioh. 14.15.21 23.24.
love me, keep my commandments. He that has my commandments, and keeps
them, he it is that loves me. If a man love me, he will keep my words. He
that is of God, Ioh. 8.47.
hears Gods words. The entrance of Gods words gives Ps. 119.130.
light. God is a Ioh. 4.24.
spirit of light, a spirit of love, and a spirit of eternal wisdom. They
therefore that love this Holy Spirit, blessed for ever, cannot but love his
nature and property. They delight to have heavenly Ps. 43.3.
light come more and more into their understanding, they delight to Ephesians. 5.2. 1
Cor. 16.14.
walk in love, They unfainedly desire to do all things in 1 Samuel 18.5. Prove.
13.16. Wis. 7.8. Col. 1.9.
godly wisdom. God requires that we Prove. 23.26. Luke. 10.27.
give him our whole heart, mind, soul, strength, and that the Iam. 4.7. 1
Ioh. 5.18.
ill spirit have no part nor portion of us. David a man after Gods own heart
said to God, With my Ps. 119.10.
whole heart have I sought thee. The Lord says by Jeremiah, Ye shall seek me,
and find me, when ye shall search for me with your Ier. 29.13.
whole heart. The Lord Jesus says: If any man come to me, and Luke 14.26.
hate not his father, and mother, and wife, and children, and brethren, and
sisters, yea, and his own life also, he cannot be my Disciple. To hate, in
this place signifies to love less, as it is observed to signify so in sundry
Genesis 29.31. Deuteronomy. 21.15. Mat. 6.24.
other places. The holy Prophets and Apostles, which for the Lords sake left
not only their earthly substance, but their friends, wives and children, yea
and their own bodily lives, they in some measure loved God, as the
commandment requires. So such as unfainedly strive to be more and more dead
unto Romans 6.11.
sin, to be more and more buried with Christ in his Romans 6.4. Col. 2.12. 1
Cor. 15.31.
death, to Romans 6.6.
crucify the old man, and utterly to abolish the whole body of sin, (as it
is prescribed in the Baptisme-service) to the end that the 2 Cor. 4.10.11.
life of Jesus may be manifest in their mortal flesh, and that his kingdom of
grace may Zach. 14.9. Obad. 21. Luke 17.21.
only and wholly be administered in their souls, they in some measure love God,
as his Law requires. The fourth duty is to worship God. Christ says, God is a
spirit to be worshipped in Ioh. 4.23.24.
spirit and in truth. The fourth duty. To worship God.
Paul says, Glorify God in your 1 Cor. 6.20.
body, and in your spirit, which are Gods. As I live says the Lord, every knee
shall Romans 14.11.
bow to me, and every tongue shall confess to God. Of the outward worships
due to God read the 68. Chapter before.

There are also other bodily worshippings of God mentioned in the Holy
Scriptures, besides those, as to Genesis 17.3:
fall down on ones face to the earth unto the Lord, etc. The receiving of the
Sacraments is said to be a part of Gods worship, yea and the due observation
of all his other outward ordinances, as Mat. 15.9. See concerning Gods inward
worship, or worship in spirit, in the end of T. 2. p. 75
teaching, etc. is worship to God also. The inward worshipping of God is the
doing of all such duties within the spirit, as thence are to be performed unto
God immediately, as to Micah. 6.8.
humble ones self so as to walk with God, to do our parts toward the Iam.
4.8.
purifying of our hearts, to Joel. 2.13. Ezech. 36.31.
bear sorrow for our sins committed, to rent our hearts, to do our parts
toward the Ezech. 18.31.
making of a new heart and a new spirit, etc. The fifth duty is to give thanks
unto God. The fifth duty, to thank God.
And this duty is to be done within the spirit, in bearing a grateful mind
Ephesians. 5.20.
continually unto God for all his mercies. So did the Virgin Mary, when she
said, My soul does Luke 1.46.47.
magnify the Lord, and my spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior. So did
David, when he said, Bless the Lord, O my soul, and all that is within me
bless his Holy name. Ps. 104.1.2.
Bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all his benefits. Concerning
thanking God outwardly, see Chapter 44. The sixth duty, To trust wholly in God.
The sixth duty is, to put our whole trust in him. We are said to trust wholly in
God, when we Ps. 37.7.
rest on him, and Ps. 37.5.
depend totally upon him with hope of receiving his promises, we faithfully
doing our parts in keeping the 2 Kings. 18.4.5.6.
conditions, wherewith his promises are made. Trust or confidence in God
proceeds partly out of knowledge of Gods Attributes or properties: as it is
written, They that know thy Ps. 9.10.
Name will put their trust in thee, wherefore David having experience of Gods
goodness in his deliverance from the hand of Saul, said: I will love thee, O
Lord my strength. The Lord is my rock, and my fortress, and my deliverer: my
God, my strength, in whom I will Ps. 18.1.2.3.
trust, my Buckler, and the horn of my salvation, and my high tower. I will
call upon the Lord, who is worthy to be praised: so shall I be saved from
mine enemies. It proceeds also from belief in God and in his word, (which
belief God graciously gives unto those, that fear him and diligently pray
for the same) as Saint Paul signifies to the Ephesians, saying: In whom we
have boldness and access, with Ephesians. 3.12.
confidence by the faith of him. Jeremiah says, Cursed be the man that Ier.
17.5.6.7.8.
trusts in man, and makes flesh his arm, and whose heart departs from the
Lord. But blessed is the man, that trusts in the Lord, and whose hope the
Lord is. The seventh duty is, to call upon God. The seventh duty, to call upon
God.
And that is, to pray unto him. David says, offer unto God thankesgiving, and
pay thy vows unto the most High: and Ps. 50.14.15:
call upon me in the day of trouble; I will deliver thee, and thou shall
glorify me. It proceeds also out of belief, as it is written: How shall
they Romans 10.14.
call on him, in whom they have not believed? People obedient to Christ and his
Mat. 18.17.
Church, which humble themselves, and faithfully endeavor to observe all the
ordinances of Christ's Church, have the promise to be heard when they call on
the Lord, and do in the name and mediation of Jesus Christ ask such things as
be agreeable to his will: as Saint John says, Whatsoever we 1 Ioh. 3.22.
ask, we receive of him, because we keep his Commandment, and do those
things that are pleasing in his sight. The eight duty is to honor Gods Holy
name. The eight duty, To honor Gods holy name.
And for the performance thereof we pray, when we say, Hallowed be thy name.
They that make conscience of breaking the third Commandment, of Exodus 20.7.
taking his name in vain, are such as have a regard to honor his Mal.
3.16.17.18.
name. By the Name of the Lord is not only meant a word or words, proper to
the Creator, whereby he is distinguished from all creatures in speaking of him
or unto him; but also sundry other things whereby the Lord becomes known
unto us. The name of the Lord is observed sometimes to signify God himself,
his holy being, which is infinite, almighty etc, as where it is said, The Prove.
18.10.
Name of the Lord is a strong Tower, the righteous runs into it, and is
safe. Where name may signify also power and protection. So in Moses where it
is said: If thou will not observe to do all the words of this Law that are
written in this Book, that thou may fear his glorious and fearful Deuteronomy.
28.58.
Name, The Lord thy God; then the Lord will make thy plagues wonderful, etc.
It signifies also the will and Commandment of God: as where it is said;
whosoever will not hearken unto my words, which my Prophet shall speak in my
Deuteronomy. 18.19.
Name, I will require it of him. Officers under the Royal Majesty use the
word name in the like sense, when they say: I charge thee in the Kings name,
etc. It also signifies the religion or worship of God, as where it is said in
Micah: All people will walk every one in the name of his god, and we will
walk in the Micah. 4.5.
name of the Lord our God for ever and ever. Other significations it is
observed to have. It is our duty to honor, to reverence both with soul and
body, with heart and mouth, and with due respect for to esteem whatsoever Name
God is called by or known. The Lord said by Samuel unto Eli: Them that 1 Samuel
2.30.
honor me, I will honor. And his Omnipotency looks for honor to be
performed by us unto him, signifying it by his Prophet Malachie, saying: A
son honors his Father, and a servant his Master. If then I be a Father,
where mine Mal. 1.6.
honor? And if I be a Master, where is my fear, The ninth duty, To honor
Gods holy word.
says the Lord of Hosts, unto you O priests, that despise my name? and yet ye
say wherein have we despised thy name? The ninth duty is to honor Gods holy
word, David, says, I will worship toward thy holy Temple, and praise thy Name
for thy loving kindness, and for thy truth: for thou have magnified thy Ps
138.2.
word above all thy name. Christ says to his Father, Sanctify them through
the truth: thy Ioh. 17.17.
word is truth. And David says unto the Lord, Thy Ps. 119.142.
Law is the truth. Now for to make mention of any sentence in any deliverie by
the Kings Majesty, or by the Parliament, or by the Convocation, without due
reverence thereto, is justly a lightness, or rather a lewdness. Likewise for
to mention any sentence of holy Scripture, Gods holy word, without due
reverence thereto, both with heart and voice, honoring it as a word that 1
Pet. 1.23.24 25.
endures for ever, and as that whereby we shall every one without respect of
persons be Job. 12 48.
judged in the last day; lightly to allege any divine deliverie, is by all
that truly fear God, judged to proceed from a heart full of impiety and
iniquity. Isaiah signifies that we are to Isa. 66.5.
tremble at Gods word, and in no wise to make jests with any of it, or rashly
to utter any part of it: but when we speak any portion of holy Scripture, to
have a most serious care that it may tend directly to the glory of God, and as
much as may be to the Ephesians 4.2^.
edification of the hearers. Also we are not only at all times with fear and
honorable respect to recite holy Scripture, when we have occasion thereto;
but also to be obedient or obediently inclined unto every document thereof,
which we mention. Else our honoring of Gods word is but a Mat. 15.8.7.
lip honor, whereof Christ says, This people draw nigh to me with their
mouth, and honors me with their lips: but their heart is far from me.
Which doing, Christ in the verse before, signifies to be but a kind of
hypocrisy. Herein (says Christ) is my Father glorified, (or his word
honored) that ye bear Ioh. 13.8.16.
much fruit; so shall ye be my Disciples. He is not accounted a true honourer
of the Laws of a Realm, which merely with due regard does rehearse them; but
he that also conscionably endeavors to live according to every of them. The
tenth duty, to serve God truly all the days of our life.
The tenth and last duty unto God, according as the sacred Catechism has
expressed it, is that we serve him truly all the days of our life. God
requires us to serve him, not as we 1 S^m 15.22.23.
conceive best; but according to his will written in his word. For so the
Church teaches us most divinely in the last part of her Article concerning
Predestination and Election, saying: Furthermore we must receive Gods promises,
in such wise, as they be generally set forth to us in holy Scriptures: and in
our doings, that will of God is to be followed, which we have expressly declared
unto us in the word of God. To that end has Christ redeemed us, (says
Zacharias) that we being delivered out of the hands of our enemies, might serve
him without fear, in Luke 1.74.75.
holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our life. The Lord is
nigh (says David) unto all them that call upon him: to all that call upon him
in Ps. 145.18.
truth. And what is truly or truth has been declared out of Scripture a
little before. The people of God in Joshua his days signified what it is to
serve God truly, saying: The Lord our God will we serve, and his Ios. 24.24.
voice will we obey. Through whom did people then hear the voice of God
ordinarily in those days? Through whom do people hear the voice of God
ordinarily in these days? Is not the Ministry of God his mouth, from whence
his voice is ordinarily heard? Does not the Prophet Malachi press this point,
saying, The priests Mal. 2.6.7.
lips should keep knowledge, and they should seek the Law at his mouth: for
he is the Messenger of the Lord of Hosts to declare the Lords will unto
people? In the Book of Joshua some are found fault withal, that they asked
not counsel at the Ios. 9.14.
mouth of the Lord. Where was the mouth of the Lord, at which they asked
counsel? In Exodus it is expressed. The Lord said, I will Exodus 25.22.
commune with thee, from above the Mercy-seate, from between the two Cherubims
which are upon the Arc of the Testimony, of all things which I will give thee
in commandment unto the children of Israel. And the Apostle to the Hebrews
shows that this was done in the Tabernacle which is called the Heb. 9.3, 4,
5, 6, 7, 8.
holiest of all, the second, into which the high Priest went only. The which
is written to teach us for to attend with all Christian Conscience and due
reverence unto that doctrine which Christ's high Priesthood now holds forth
unto us, and that to the people is the doctrine of the Books of Divine
Service, wherein we are plainly and plentifully taught, how to serve God
truly all the days of our life. Also not to 1 These. 5.20.21.
neglect what the inferior priesthood does preach and teach, but to have all
due regard unto whatsoever they deliver consonant with the Divine Service, and
the rest of established Doctrine of the Church. The Catechism most divinely
adds also the time, when and how long we are to serve God truly, namely, all
the days of our life. In the service of Baptism it is said unto the sureties,
that the Infants are to be taught, so soon as they shall be able to learn,
what a solemn vow, promise, and profession they have made by you, etc.
Signifying that God requires a true service from us unto him from our very
Ephesians. 6.4. Dut. 31.12. Luke 1.75. 2 Timothy 3.15. read Chap. 98. following.
Childhood, so long as we live in this present world. They therefore which
consider not seriously upon serving God truly, till either old age, or
sickness, or some other great calamity befall them, do clean contrary to the
counsel of holy Church in her Catechism, as also in all the rest of her
Divine Service-Doctrine.

CHAP. 80. Of our Duty toward our Neighbor, as it is expressed in most
Divine manner in the Catechism also.
MY duty toward my Neighbor, is to love him as my self, and to do to all
men, as I would they should do unto me. To love, honor, and succor my father
and mother. To honor and obey the King and his Ministers. To submit my self
to all my governors, teachers, spiritual pastors and masters. To order my
self lowly and reverently to all my betters. To hurt no body by word or deed.
To be true and just in all my dealing. To bear no malice nor hatred in my
heart. To keep my hands from picking and stealing, and my tongue from evil
speaking, lying, and slandering. To keep my body in temperance, soberness, and
chastity. Not to covet nor desire other men's goods, but to learn and labor
truly to get mine own living, and to do my duty in that state of life, unto
the which it shall please God to call me. Hence may be observed fifteen duties
in particular, that we owe unto Man or our neighbor for the Lords sake, or by
reason of Gods Commandment.

The first duty, to love our neighbors as our self.
The first is, that we ought to love our neighbors as our Mat. 22 29.
selves. Herein is prescribed what manner of heart, mind or affection we are
to bear toward others: we are to wish all the same good unto all others, as
we do wish unto our own selves, or as we ought to desire for our selves.
This is to be understood concerning good, common to the bodies and souls of
all Christians. This love we are not only taught throughout all the most
Sacred Letanie; but also in most express manner in the third Collect or Prayer
appointed to be read on Good Friday. The which Holy prayer declaring the love
of God toward all mankind, and the love in heart which we should bear
toward all our brethren and sisters, the whole posterity of Adam, it is
profitable here to be rehearsed, that it may be duly considered, and the better
remembered. Merciful God, who have Act. 17.26.27
made all men, and hate Ps. 145.9. Wis. 11.23.24.26. Ezech. 33.11.
nothing that thou have made, nor would the Ezech. 18.23 32.
death of a sinner, but rather that he should be Prove. 1.22.23.
converted and Mat. 23.37.
live, have mercy upon all Romans 9.3.4.5 Romans 11.12.15.25.26. Ps. 14.7. and
122.6.
Jews, Ps. 67.2, 3, 5.
Turks, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
Infidels, and Heretics, and take from them all ignorance, hardness of heart,
and contempt of thy word: and so fetch them home, Blessed Lord, to thy flock,
that they may be saved among the remnant of the true Israelites, and be made
Ezech. 37.24.25.
one fold under one Shepherd, Jesus Christ our Lord. By this prayer we are
informed to wish that spiritual happiness to all others, as we wish to our
selves. The word neighbor and brother have in Moses oftentimes the same
signification. And the word brother in Malachi seems to signify every one of
Adams posterity, where it is said: Have we not Mal. 2.10.
all one Father? has not one God created us? we are commanded to Mat. 5.44.
love our enemies, and to pray for them, which despitefully use us, and
persecute us.

The second duty, to do unto all others, as we would they should do unto us.
The second duty mentioned is, that we do to all men, as we would they should
do unto us. And so taught Jesus Christ in his Mat. 7.12.
Gospel, and likewise the Law and the Prophets. They that always keep this
Duty in remembrance, and make it a rule for their thoughts, words, and deeds,
are thereby with the Phil. 4.13.
help of Christ's Spirit moved to Isa 1.16.17. Ps. 34 14.
cease from much evil, and to endeavor much good. The delivery is also in a
manner an explanation of the sentence immediately before, namely, of loving ones
neighbor as ones self. For who so Romans 13.10.
loves his neighbor as himself, does nothing unto him in word or deed, but
what he would his neighbor should do unto him.

The third duty, to love, honor, and succor our Parents.
The third Duty is, that we love honor and succor our Parents. That every one
should love the Father which begat him, and the Mother which bare him in her
womb, nature or common reason teaches. That they are to be Mat. 15.4, 5, 6
Ecclus. 3.8.12.14.16. Lev. 19 3.
honored, the fifth Commandment requires. That they are to be succored,
Saint Paul instructs, saying: Let them learn first to show piety at home,
and to 1. Tim. 5.4.
requite their parents: For that is good and acceptable before God.

The fourth duty, to honor and obey the King, and his Ministers. The fifth
duty, to submit to all our superiors.
The fourth Duty is, that we honor and obey the King and his Ministers, or
officers. And that is amply declared before in the Chapters 70. and 71.

The fifth Duty is, to submit ones self to all his governors, teachers,
spiritual Pastors and masters. And so the Holy Ghost commands, saying: Heb.
13.17. 1 Pet, 5.5.
Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves. And ye younger,
submit your selves unto the Elders. And ye 1 Pet. 2.18. The sixth Duty, To order
ones self lowly and reverently to all ones betters.
servants, be ye subject to your Masters with all fear, not only to the good
and gentle, but also to the froward.

The sixth Duty is, That we order our selves lowly and reverently to all our
betters: as it is written; Romans 13.7.
Render to al their dues, honor to whom honor is due. Be kindly affectioned
one to another with brotherly love, in honor Romans 12.10.
preferring one another. Thou shall Lev. 19.32.
rise before the hoary head, and honor the face of the old man, and fear thy
God. Ephesians. 5.21. The seventh Duty. To hurt no body by word nor deed.
Submit your selves one to another in the fear of God.

The seventh Duty is, To hurt no body by word or deed: So Saint Paul
signifies, that we speak Tit. 3 2.
evil of no man, and that we work Romans 13.10. 1 These. 5.15. The eight Duty,
To be true and just in all our dealing.
ill to none.

The eighth Duty is, That we be true and just in all our dealing. So says
the Apostle, That no man 1 These. 4.6. Zechar. 7.9, 10. The ninth Duty, To bear
no malice nor hatred in our heart.
go beyond and defraud his brother in any matter, because that the Lord is the
avenger of all such.

The ninth Duty is, That we bear no malice nor hatred in our heart. The
Apostle Peter signifies, That we should lay aside all 1 Pet. 2.1. Ephesians. 4.31. 1
John. 3.15. 1 Cor. 14, 20. The tenth Duty, To keep our hands from picking and
stealing.
malice. And Saint John says, Who so hates his brother is a murderer.

The tenth Duty is, That we keep our hands from picking and stealing: as Saint
Paul says, Let him that has stolen, Ephesians. 4.28.
steal no more. And Titus he wills to teach, that there should be no Tit.
2.10. The Eleventh Duty, To keep ones tongue from evil speaking, lying, and
slandering.
purloyning, but a showing of all good fidelity or faithfulness.

The eleventh Duty is, That every one keep his tongue from evil speaking,
lying and slandering. S. James says, Iam. 1.26.
if any one brideleth not his tongue, his religion is in vain. S. Paul says,
Let all Ephesians. 4.31, 32
bitterness and wrath, and anger, and clamor, and evil speaking be put away
from you, with all malice. To the Colossians he says: Col. 3.9.
Lie not one to another. And David says: Lord, who shall abide in thy
Tabernacle? who shall dwell in thy holy hill? He that Ps. 15.1, 2, 3.
backbiteth not with his tongue, nor does evil to his Neighbor: nor takes up
(or receives) a reproach against his Neighbor.

The twelfth Duty, To keep ones body in temperance, soberness, and chastity.
The twelfth Duty is, That every one keep his body in temperance, soberness
and chastity. S. Paul said, that he did 1 Cor. 9.27, 25.
keep under his body, and bring it into subjection. And that every one which
striveth for a mastery, is temperate in all things: now they do it, to obtain
a corruptible Crown, but we an incorruptible. Saint Peter says, Add to your
knowledge 2 Pet. 1.6.
temperance. Saint Paul says to the Thessalonians: Let us who are of the day
be 1 These. 5.8.
sober. Soberness or sobriety is often times commanded in the Gospel, and he
wills Titus to teach Tit. 2.5.
Chastity. To the Corinthians he says, Having therefore these promises
(dearly beloved) let us cleanse our selves from all 2 Cor. 7.1.
filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God.
To the Colossians he says, Mortify your Members which are upon the earth:
Col. 3.5. The thirteenth Duty, Not to covet nor desire other men's goods.
fornication, uncleanness, inordinate affection, evil concupiscence, etc.

The thirteenth Duty is, That we should not covet nor desire other men's goods.
And so the Exodus 20.17.
last of the ten Commandments requires. The Apostle says, Let your
conversation be without Heb. 13.15.
covetousness, and be content with such things as ye have: For God has said,
I will never leave thee nor forsake thee.

The fourteenth Duty, To learn to labor truly for to get our own living.
The fourteenth Duty is, That we learn and labor truly to get our own
living. The Apostle says, We did not eat any man's bread for naught: but 2
These. 3.8.
wrought with labor and travel night and day, that we might not be chargeable
to any. To the Ephesians he signifies, that people should Ephesians. 4.28.
work with their hands the thing which is good. And to Titus he says: Let
ours also learn to Tit. 3.14.
profess honest See the Margent there.
trades, for necessary uses, that they be not unfruitful.

The fifteenth, To do our Duty in that state of life unto the which it shall
please God to call us.
And the fifteenth is, That we do our Duty in that state of life, unto the
which it shall please God to call us.

In the first part of the T. 1. p. 52.
Homily concerning falling from God, it is said: Sometime men go from God by
the neglecting of his Commandments concerning their Neighbors, which
commands them to express hearty love toward every man, as Zechary said to
the people in Gods behalf. Zech. 7.9, 10.
Give true judgment, show mercy and compassion every one to his brother,
imagine no deceit toward widows, or children fatherless or motherlesse,
toward strangers, or the poor: Let no man forge evil in his heart against his
Brother. The Romans 12.4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
Apostle says, Having gifts differing, according to the grace that is given
us, whether prophecy, let us prophecy according to the proportion of faith:
or Ministry, let us wait on our ministering: or he that teaches, on teaching:
or he that exhorts, on exhortation: he that gives, let him do it with
simplicity: he that rules, with diligence: he that shows mercy, with
cheerfulness.

CHAP. 81. Of the Duty of the Husband unto his Wife, and of the Duty of the
Wife unto her Husband.
IN the Service of Matrimony the Duties of married persons are very Divinely
delivered. The Husbands duty briefly is comprehended in these words: Will thou
have this woman to thy wedded Wife, to live together after Gods Ordinance, in
the holy estate of Matrimony? Will thou love her, comfort her, honor, and
keep her in sickness and in health? and forsaking all other keep thee only
unto her, so long as you both shall live. And in the last prayer of Matrimony,
where it is said: That this man may Ephesians. 5.25, 26 27, 28.
love his Wife, according to thy Word, as Christ did love his Spouse the
Church, who gave himself for it, loving and cherishing it, even as his own
flesh.

In the T. 2. p. 240, 241.
Homily concerning the state of Matrimony, it is said unto the Husband, Learn
thou therefore if thou desire to be void of all these miseries, if thou
desire to live peaceably and comfortably in wedlock, how to make thy earnest
prayer to God, that he would govern both your hearts by the Holy Spirit, to
restrain the Devils power, whereby your concord may remain perpetually. But
to this prayer must be joined a singular diligence, whereof Saint Peter gives
this precept, saying, You 1 Pet. 3.7.
Husbands, deal with your Wives according to knowledge, giving honor to the
Wife, as to the weaker Vessel, and as unto them that are heirs also of the
grace of life, that your prayers be not hindered. This precept does
particularly pertain to the Husband: for he ought to be the leader and author
of love, in cherishing and increasing concord, which then shall take place, if
he will use moderation, and not tyranny, and if he 1 Cor. 7.3. Ephesians. 5.21. 1
Pet. 3.7. Romans 12.6.
yield something to the woman. For the woman is a weak creature, not endued
with like strength and constancy of mind, therefore they be the sooner
disquieted, and they be the more prone to all weak affections and dispositions
of mind, more than men be, and lighter they be, and more vain in their
fantasies and opinions. These things must be considered of the man, that he be
not too Col. 3.19.
stiff, so that he ought to Prove. 19.11.
wink at some things, and most gently expound 1 Cor. 13.7.
all things, and to Ephesians. 4.2, 3.
forbear.

In the said P. 245.
Homily it is also delivered: God forbid that a man should Ephesians. 5.28.29. Mal.
2.14. Col 3.19. Prove. 5.18, 19. 1 Pet. 3.7. 1 Cor. 13.4.5.
beat his wife, for that is the greatest shame that can be, not so much to her
that is beaten, as to him that does the deed. Let there be none so grievous
fault to compel you to beat your Wives. But what say I, your Wives? No, it is
not to be borne with, that an honest man should lay hands on his Genesis 16.6.
maidservant to beat her. Wherefore, if it be a great shame for a man to beat
his bondservant, much more Phil. 4.8.
rebuke it is, to lay violent hands upon his free woman. And this thing may be
well understood by the laws which the Panims have made, which does discharge
her any longer to dwell with such an Husband, as unworthy to have any further
company with her, that does smite her. For it is an extreme point, thus so
vilely to entreat her like a slave, that is fellow to thee of thy life, and so
joined unto thee before time, in the necessary matters of thy living. And
therefore a man may well liken such a man (if he may be called a man, rather
then a wild beast) to a killer of his father or his Mother, etc. Read the
remaining delivery, wherein is declared how monstrous and horrible a wickedness
it is, for a man to use any manner of violence or roughness to the person of
his Wife; and also sundry more duties are Divinely prescribed for the Husbands
observation.

Of the Duty of the Wife unto her Husband.
Now concerning the Duty of the wife unto her husband, who oftentimes by her
neglect of the duties which she is bound to perform unto her Husband, pulls
upon and against her self many unkindnesses, which would in no wise come to
pass, if she had conscience and care to do her duties. And the wives duty
is briefly comprised, where it is said, I take thee to my wedded husband, to
have and to hold, from this day forward, for better, for worse, for richer, for
poorer, in sickness and in health, to love, cherish, and to obey, till death
us depart, according to Gods holy ordinance. And in the last prayer of
Matrimony her duty is divinely signified, where it is prayed for, saying: And
also that this woman may be Genesis 29.11, 12, 17. and 30.1 and 26.8.
loving and amiable to her husband as Rachel, wise as Genesis 27.9, etc
Rebecca, faithful and 1 Pet. 3.5, 6.
obedient as Sarah, and in all and 3 4.
quietness, 1 Timothy 2.15.11.12.
sobriety and 1 Cor. 14.33 34, 35.
peace, be a follower of all holy and godly Matrons.

In the P. 242.
Homily concerning the state of Matrimony, it is said: Shall the wife abuse the
gentleness and humanity of her husband? and, at her pleasure, turn all things
Prove. 14.1. Ecclus. 42.6.
upside down? No surely. For that is far repugnant against Gods
Commandment. For thus does Saint Peter preach to them, Ye wives, be ye 1 Pet.
3.1, 2. Genesis 3.16. Tit. 2.4.5. Ephesians. 5.24.
in subjection to your own husbands. To obey, is another thing than to
control and command; which yet they may do to their Children and family: but
as for their husbands, them must they obey, and cease from commanding, and
perform subjection. For this surely does nourish concord very much, when the
wife is ready at hand at her husbands commandment, when she will apply her
self to his will, when she endeavors her self to seek his 1 Cor. 7.3.34.
contentation, and to do him pleasure, when she will eschew all things what
might offend him. For thus will most truly be verified the saying of the Poet,
A good wife by obeying her husband, shall bear the rule, so that he shall have
a delight and a gladness, the sooner at all times to return home unto her.
But on the contrary part, when the wives be stubborn, froward, and malapert,
their husbands are compelled thereby to abhor and flee from their own
houses, even as they should have battle with their enemies. And P. 242.
afterward it is signified, That when wives through frailty and infirmity have
done amiss, they beware that they stand not in their faults and wilfulness:
but rather let them acknowledge their follies, and say, My husband, so it is,
that by my anger I was compelled to do this or that, forgive it me, and
hereafter I will take better heed. Thus ought the woman more readily to do,
the more they be ready to offend. And they shall not only do this to avoid
strife and debate: but rather in the respect of the Commandment of God, as
Saint Paul expresses it in this form of words, Let women be subject to their
own Ephesians. 5.22, 23, 24. 1 Cor. 11.3.
husbands as to the Lord: for the husband is the head of the woman, as Christ
is the head of the Church. Here you understand, that God has commanded, that
ye should acknowledge the authority of the husband, and refer to him the
honor of obedience. And S. Peter says in that place before rehearsed, that
holy 1 Pet. 3.5.6.
Matrons did in former time deck themselves, not with Gold and Silver, but in
putting their whole hope in God, and in obeying their husbands, as Sarah obeyed
Abraham, calling him Lord, whose daughters ye be (says he) if ye follow her
example. This sentence is very meet for women to print in their remembrance.
And p. 243.
afterward it is also delivered: Obey thy husband, take regard of his requests,
and give heed unto him, to perceive what he requires of thee, and so shall
thou honor God, and live peaceably in thy house. And beyond all this, God
shall follow thee with his benediction, that all things shall well prosper,
both to thee and to thy Husband, as the Psalm. 128.
Psalm says. This let the wife have ever in mind, the rather admonished
thereto by the apparel of her 1 Cor. 11.5, 7, 8.
head, whereby is signified, that she is under covert or obedience of her
husband. And as that apparel is of nature so appointed, to declare her
subjection: So bids Saint Paul that all other of her raiment should express
both 1 Timothy 2.9.
shamefastness and sobriety. For if it be not lawful for the woman to have
her head 1 Cor. 11.6, 14, 15.
bare, but to bear thereon the sign of her power, (or the power over her)
wheresoever she goes: more is it required that she declare the thing that is
meant thereby. In the prayer to be read after the wed with the Ring, The duty
both of man and wife is delivered, That as Isaac and Rebecca lived faithfully
together, so these persons may surely perform and keep the vow and covenant
betwixt them made (whereof this Ring given and received is a token and pledge)
and may ever remain in perfect love and peace together, and live according to
thy Laws.

In the third part of the T. 1. p. 88.
Homily against Whoredom, it is said; The married are bound by the Law of God
so purely to love one another, that neither of them seek any Pro. 5.20, 21.
strange love. The man must only Genesis 2.24.
cleave to his wife, and the wife again only to her husband: they must so
Prove. 5.19.
delight one in another company, that none of them covet any other. Saint Paul
says, Let the husband render unto the wife due 1 Cor. 7.3, 4, 5.
benevolence; and likewise also the wife unto the husband. The wife has not
power over her own body, but the husband: and likewise also the husband has
not power of his own body, but the wife. Defraud not one the other, except it
be with consent for a time, that ye may give your selves to fasting and prayer,
and come together again that Satan tempt you not for your incontinencie.
Solomon says, Pro 5.18, 19.
Rejoice with the wife of thy youth: let her be as the loving Hind, and
pleasant Roe, let her breasts satisfy thee at all times, and be thou ravished
always with her love. Saint Paul wills, that young women be taught to be
sober, to love their Tit. 2: 4, 5, 6.
husbands, to love their children, to be discreet, chaste, keepers at home,
good, obedient to their own husbands, that the word of God be not blasphemed.
Young me^ likewise exhort to be sober minded. Here such persons as profess the
fear of God, a conscionable Psalm. 112.1. and 119.6.
respect unto the observation of all Gods Commandments, which are not married,
and do intend to enter into that estate, may be admonished, that seldom does
God leave unseverely punished those that profess his fear, which will Mal.
2.11.12. 1 Cor. 7.39. 2 Cor. 6.14, 15, 16. Genesis 27.46.
mary with those that profess not his fear in their conversation. As no woman
knows the miserable life with an Ecclus. 7.25. Ecclus. 4.30.
ill husband, but she that feels it: so no man can thoroughly comprehend, what
are the sorrows which a wicked Prove. 19.13. and 27.15.
wife causes to her husband, but he that has had the woeful experience of the
same. Solomon in his book of Proverbs, and Jesus the son of Syrach in his book
of Wisdom, in the Chapters 25, and 26. do make mention of some of them.

CHAP. 82. Of the duty of Parents toward their Children, and of Children
toward their Parents: likewise of Masters and Dames to their Servants, and of
Servants to their Masters and Dames.
IN the end of the Service of Baptism it is signified, That children should
be virtuously brought up to lead a godly and a Christian Psalm. 148.12, 13.
Genesis 18.19.
life. That they are to be called upon for to hear Deuteronomy. 31.12, 13. Neh. 8.2.
sermons, and that they learn the Heb. 5.12, 13.
Creed, the Lords prayer, and the ten Commandments in the English tongue, and
all other things which Christians ought to know and believe to their souls
health. In the Service of Matrimony it is signified, That they are to be
brought up in the fear and nurture of the Lord. And the T. 2. p. 239.
Homily of the state of Matrimony adds also, That they be brought up by the
parents godly, in the knowledge of Gods Word, that thus the knowledge of God
and true religion might be delivered by Psalm. 78.4, 5, 6, 7.
succession from one to another, that finally many might enjoy that everlasting
immortality. T. 1. p. 88.
In the third part of the Homily against Adultery, it is said; As man and wife
are bound to 1 Cor. 7.5.
live together in all godliness and honesty; so likewise is it their duty,
virtuously to bring up their children, and provide, that they fall not into
Ecclus. 7.23, 24, 25.
Satan's snare, nor into any uncleanness, but that they come pure and honest
unto holy wedlock, when time requires. In the T. 2. p. 253.
Homily against Idleness, it is said; Let all parents and others, which have
the care and governance of youth, so bring them up either in good learning,
labor, or some honest Tit. 3.14.25 in the margent.
occupation or trade, whereby they may be able in time to come, not only to
sustain themselves competently, but also to releeve and Ephe. 4.28.
supply the necessity and want of others. In the T. 2. p. 103.
Homily against Excess of Apparel, it is said; God utterly condemns and
disalloweth, whatsoever draws us from our duty toward God, or diminishes
our charity toward our neighbors and children, whom we ought to love as our
selves. Saint Paul says; Ye fathers Ephesians. 6.4.
provoke not your children to wrath: but bring them up in the nurture and
admonition of the Lord. And to the Colossians he says: Fathers provoke not
your children to anger, lest they be Col. 3.21.
discouraged. Parents are not to expect from 1 These. 2.7. 1 Cor. 3.1. and 13.11.
children and youths, the gravity of men, nor manly understanding. That is to
be desired, which every age is capable of; Whatsoever is upright natural in
children, is not to be checked. Children oftentimes being unnaturally used,
have been so discouraged, as that with grief their spirits have bin so
daunted, as that either they have become ever after stupide, and without the
common understanding; or else have had their hearts broken and have perished:
yea sometimes have been so provoked, as to depart from their parents, or to
destroy their own selves. Honest Zechar. 8.5.
recreations are not to be denied unto youth, but often to be granted at
convenient times. The Church requires that every son and daughter (so soon
as they be able to learn) be taught to say by heart readily all the
Catechism, called the A. B. C. The Scripture says, Prove. 22.6.
Train up a child in the way he should go: and when he is old, he will not
depart from it. All parents (if possibly they can) ought to have their children
taught to read, to write, and to cast account; and (if it may be) to
understand the Latin Grammar: because of such a measure of skill, or of almost
so much, every householder may have sometimes occasion. Saint Paul also says;
Parents ought to 2 Cor. 12.14.
lay up for their children. And Solomon says, A good man leaves his Pro.
13.22.
inheritance to his childrens children. If any 1 Timothy 5.8.
provide not for his own, and especially for those of his own house, he has
denied the faith, and is worse than an Infidel.

Of Childrens duty to their Parents.
Concerning the duty of children to their parents, it is signified in the second
part of the T. 1. p. 35.
Homily of good Works, where it is spoken against the Pharisees, For that they
taught the people such a devotion, that they offered their goods into the
treasure house of the Temple, under the pretense of Gods honor, leaving their
fathers and mothers (to whom they were chiefly bound) Mat. 5.12, 13. Ecclus.
3.12, 14 15, 16. 1 Timothy 5.4.
unholpen, and so they brake the Commandments of God, to keep their own
traditions. In the first part of the T. 2. p. 125.
Homily concerning the place and time of prayer, it is said; Good natural
children will not only become obedient to the commandment of their parents,
but also have a diligent eye to their doings, and gladly follow the same. The
Apostle says to the Colossians: Col. 3.20.
Children obey your parents in all things: for this is well pleasing unto the
Lord. To the Ephesians he says: Children obey your parents in the Ephesians. 6.1, 2,
3.
Lord, for this is right. So long as parents require nothing contrary to Gods
Word, they are in every thing to be obeyed. That counsel in Ecclesiasticus is
ever memorable: The Lord has given the Ecclus. 3.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10*
father honor over the children, and has confirmed the authority of the
mother over the sons. Who so honoreth his father, makes at onement for his
sins. And he that honoreth his mother, is as one that lays up treasure.
Whosoever honors his father, shall have joy of his own children, and when he
makes his prayer, he shall be heard. He that honoreth his father shall have a
long life: and he that is obedient unto the Lord, shall be a comfort to his
mother. He that fears the Lord will honor his father, and will do service
unto his parents, as to his masters. Honor thy father and mother, both in word
and deed, that a blessing may come upon thee from them. For the blessing of the
father establishes the houses of children, but the curse of the mother rooteth
out foundations. More counsels hereto follow on in the same chapter, very
profitable to be observed.

Of Masters and Dames duties to their Servants.
Concerning the duty of Masters and Dames to their servants, it is said in the
rubricke at the end of the Confirmation-Service, That they shall cause their
servants and prentices (which have not learned their Catechism) to come to the
Church at the time appointed, and obediently to hear, and be ordered by the
Curate, until such time that they have learned all that is here appointed for
them to learn. In the third part of the T. 1. p. 88.
Homily against Adultery, it is delivered; That all Masters and Rulers ought to
provide that no whoredom, nor any point of uncleanness be used among their
servants. In the T. 2. p. 254.
Homily against Idleness, it is said; God of his mercy put it into the hearts
and minds of all them that have the sword of punishment in their hands, or have
families under their governance, to labor for to redress this great enormity,
of all such as live 2. Th. 3.10.11 Ecclus. 33.24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29.
idly and unprofitably in the Common weal, to the great dishonor of God,
and the grievous plague of his seely people. To leave sin unpunished, and to
neglect the good bringing up of youth, is nothing else but to kindle the Lords
wrath against us, and to heap plagues upon our own heads. As long as the
adulterous people were suffered to live licenciously without reformation: so
long did the plague continue and increase in Israel, as ye may see in the book
of Numbers; But when due correction was done upon them, the Lords anger was
straightway pacified, and the plague Number. 25.3, etc. Psalm. 106.30.
ceased. All Masters are to remember the example of Abraham written for their
learning, of whom the Lord testified, saying; I know him, that he will command
his children, and his Genesis 18.19.
household after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord, to do justice
and judgment, that the Lord may bring upon Abraham that which he has spoken
of him. Saint Paul says to the Colossians: Masters, Col. 4.1.
give unto your servants that which is just and equal, knowing that ye also
have a Master in Heaven. And to the Ephesians he says: Ephesians. 6.9.
Forbear ye threatening. Jesus the son of Syrach says: Whereas thy servant
works truly, Ecclus. 33.30, 31.
entreat him not evil: nor the hireling that bestows himself wholly for
thee. Let thy soul love a good servant, and defraud him not of liberty. Many
are the good counsels for masters toward their servants in the book of
Ecclesiasticus, and throughout the whole Bible, which they may observe as they
read through all the same.

Of Servants duties toward their Masters and Dames.
Concerning servants duties toward their masters and dames, and other their
duty besides, it is said in the T. 2. p. 253, 254.
Homily against Idleness, Here ought artificers and laboring men, who be at
wages for their work and labor, to consider their conscience to God, and
their duty to their neighbors, lest they abuse their time in idleness, so
defrauding them which be at charge both with great wages, and dear commons.
They be worse then idle men indeed, for that they seek to have wages for
their loytering. It is less danger to God to be idle for no gain, than by
idleness to win out of their neighbors purses wages for that which is not
deserved. It is true, that Almighty God is angry with such as do defraud the
hired man of his Iam. 5.4. Ier. 22.13.
wages: the cry of that injury ascends up to Gods ear for vengeance. And as
true it is, that the hired man, who uses Tit. 2.9.10.
deceit in his labor, is a thief before God. Let no man ( says Saint Paul to
the Thessalonians) subtly 1 These. 4.6.
beguile his brother, let him not defraud him in his business: for the Lord is
a revenger of such deceits. And afterward the sacred p. 254.
Homily says: Here might be charged the Serving-men of this Realm, who Ephesians.
5, 15, 16, 17.
spend their time in much idleness of life, nothing regarding the opportunity
of their time, forgetting how service is no heritage, how age will creep upon
them: Where wisdom were they should expend their idle time in some good Pro.
14.23.
business, whereby they might increase in knowledge, and so the more worthy to
be ready for every man's service. It is a great rebuke to them, that they
study not either to write fair, to keep a book of account, to study the 1
Cor. 14.1, 5.
tongues, and so to get wisdom and knowledge in such books and works, as be
now plentifully set out in print of all manner of Languages. Sundry times does
the Holy Ghost by the Apostles deliver commandments unto servants concerning
their duties. Saint Paul says to the Ephesians, Ephesians. 6.5.6, 7, 8.
Servants, be obedient unto them that are your masters according the flesh,
with fear and trembling, in singleness of your heart, as unto Christ; Not
with eye-service, as men-pleasers, but as the servants of Christ, doing the
will of God from the heart. With good will doing service, as to the Lord, and
not to men: knowing that whatsoever good thing any man does, the same shall he
receive of the Lord, Col. 3.22.
whether he be bond or free. To the Colossians he says, l Servants obey in all
things your Masters according to the flesh. Unto Timothy he says: Let as many
1 Timothy 6.1, 2.
servants as are under the yoke, count their own masters worthy of all honor,
that the name of God, and his doctrine, be not blasphemed. Unto Titus he says:
Exhort Tit. 2.9, 10.
servants to be obedient unto their own Masters, and to please them well in
all things, not answering again: not purloyning, but showing all good
fidelity, that they may adorn the doctrine of God our Savior in all things.
And Saint Peter says: 1 Pet. 2.18, 19.20.
Servants, be subject to your masters with all fear, not only to the good and
gentle, but also to the froward. For this is thanke-worthy, if a man for
conscience toward God endure grief, suffering wrongfully. For what glory is
it, if when ye be buffetted for your faults, ye shall take it patiently? but
if when ye do well, and suffer for it, ye take it patiently: this is
acceptable with God.

CHAP. 83. Of the four principal Virtues.
IN the first part of the T. 1. p. 31.
Homily concerning good Works, it is said: There is one work, in the which be
all good works, that is, Faith, which Gal. 5.6.
works by charity: If thou have it, thou have the ground of all good works.
For the virtues of strength, wisdom, temperance, and justice, be all referred
unto this same faith. It is written in the book of the Wisdom of Solomon.
Wised. 8.7.
If a man love righteousness, Wisdoms labors are virtues: for she teaches
temperance and prudence, justice and fortitude: which are such things as men
can have nothing more profitable in their life: And these four Virtues are by
some called the principal Virtues, because they are fountains of others; and
four maine matters, wherein the due administration of man's affairs does
consist. Of Prudence.
And to begin with Prove. 1.2, 3. and 8.11.15, 16 2 Chro. 2.12.
Prudence first; It is observed to be a virtue, which according to the rule of
honesty prescribes unto man, what is to be sought after; and what is to be
shunned. Hereunto Christ exhorted his disciples, saying: Behold I send you
forth as sheep in the midst of Wolves: be ye therefore Mat. 10.16.
wise as Serpents, and harmles as Doves. Saint Paul says to the Ephesians; See
then that ye walk circumspectly, not as fools, but as Ephesians. 5.5.16.17.
wise, redeeming the time, because the days are evil: Wherefore be ye not
unwise, but understanding what the will of the Lord is. To the Romans he says:
Rom 12.2.
Be ye transformed by the renewing of your mind, that ye may prove what is that
good, that acceptable and perfect will of God. Jesus the son of Sirach says:
Do nothing without Ecclus 32.19
advice, and when thou have once done, repent not. Solomon says, He that
walks with wise men, shall be Prove. 13.20.
wise: but a companion of fools shall be destroyed. The heart of the prudent
gets knowledge; and the ear of the Prove. 18.15. Of Justice.
wise seeks knowledge.

Concerning Justice, that is said to be a virtue, whereby to every one his own
is rendered or given. Hereunto the Apostle exhorts, saying: Romans 13.7.
Render to all their dues, tribute to whom tribute is due, custom to whom
custom, fear to whom fear, honor to whom honor. Isa. 56.1.
Isaiah says: Thus says the Lord, keep ye judgment, and do justice. Christ
says, Mat. 22.21.
Render unto Caesar, the things which are Caesar's: and unto God, the things
which are Gods. Isaiah complained, saying: Isa. 59.4.14.15.
None calls for justice, nor any pleads for the truth. Judgment is turned
away backward and justice stands afar off: for truth is fallen in the
street, and equity cannot enter.

Of Tempeta^ce
Concerning Temperance, it is defined to be the virtue which moderateth the
pleasures of the flesh, which are taken by tasting and touching. Saint Paul
says, Romans 13.14.
Make not provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof. The Lord
Christ says: Take heed to your selves, lest at any time your hearts be Luke.
21.34.
overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness, and cares of this life, and so
that day come upon you unawares. Every one (says Saint Paul) that striveth for
the masterie, is 1 Cor. 9.25.
temperate in all things: now they do it to obtain a corruptible crown, but
we an incorruptible. Jesus the Son of Sirach says: Ecclus. 31.12 15, 16, 17,
19, 20 27, 28, 29.
If thou sit at a bountiful Table, be not greedy upon it, and say not, there
is much meat on it. Judge of thy neighbor by thy self; and be discreet in
every point. Eat as it becomes a man, those things which are set before
thee: and devour not, lest thou be hated. Leave off first for manners sake,
and be not unsatiable, lest thou offend. A very little is sufficient for a man
well nurtured. Sound sleep comes of moderate eating. Wine is as good as life
to a man, if it be drunk moderately. Wine measurably drunk, and in season,
brings gladness of the heart, and cheerfulness of the mind. But wine
drunken with excess, makes bitterness of the mind, with brawling and
quarrelling. There are more profitable instructions concerning temperance in
the said Book called Ecclesiasticus, and many in the Books of Solomon and the
rest of the Holy Scripture.

Of Forritude.
Concerning Fortitude or strength the other virtue, it is delivered to be that,
whereby painful labors, yea and the perils of death are both undergone, and
also unto the very end endured. Solomon says, The wicked flee when no man
pursues: but the righteous are Prove. 28.1.
bold as a Lion. Saint Peter says, If you suffer for righteousness sake,
happy are ye, and be not 1 Pet. 3.14.15
afraid of their terror, neither be troubled. Saint Paul says, My brethren
be Ephesians. 6.10.11.
strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might, put on the whole armor of
God, that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the Devil. And to the
Corinthians he says, Watch ye, stand fast in the faith, quit you like men:
be 1 Cor. 16.13.
strong. David complains, that some set not their heart aright, and whose
spirit was not Ps. 78.8, 9, 10
steadfast with God. The children of Ephraim being armed, and carrying bows,
turned back in the day of battle. They kept not the Covenant of God: and
refused to walk in his Law. The Rev. 21.8.
fearful, and unbeleeving etc. (says Saint John) shall have their part in
the lake, which burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death.

The duty of Soldiers.
Such as are sent forth unto war ought to pray for to be endued with the
spirit of fortitude and Ps. 144.1. and 18.39.
valor: They are also to remember the Gospels Commandment, Luke. 3.14.
Do violence to no man, neither accuse any falsely, and be content with your
wages. It is the duty of all Christians to live prudently, justly, temperately,
and courageously. So shall they keep the golden mean, to do nothing too
much, nor nothing too little. So shall they observe the Scriptures rule; Prove.
4.27
Turn not to the right hand, nor to the left: remove thy foot from evil.

CHAP. 84. Of the seven gifts of Grace.
IN the first part of the Service of Confirmation or Bishopping it is prayed
for such as receive that Blessing of the Church, saying: Strengthen them, we
beseech thee, O Lord, with the Holy Ghost the Comforter, and daily increase in
them thy manifold gifts of Grace, the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the
spirit of counsel and ghostly strength, the spirit of knowledge and true
godliness, and fulfill them (O Lord) with the spirit of thy holy fear. Six
of these gifts of Grace are by the Prophet Isaiah reckoned up together, and
foretold should be in Jesus Christ, where he says: There shall come forth a
rod out of the stem of Iesse, and a branch shall grow out of his roots. And
the spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him, the Isa. 11.2.
spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel and might, the
spirit of knowledge, and the fear of the Lord. In Jesus Christ dwells all
the Col, 2.9.
fullness of the Godhead bodily. God gave not the spirit by Ioh. 3.34.
measure unto him. And of his Ioh. 1.16.
fullness we all receive. Hereby (says Saint John) we know that we dwell in
him, and he in us, because he has given us of his 1 Ioh. 4.13.
spirit. And S. Paul says, If any one have not the Romans 8.9.
Spirit of Christ, the same is none of his. He means, If one have it not in
some measure. In Baptism some measure of Christ's 1 Cor. 12.13. Gal. 3.27.
Spirit is received, and in Acts. 8.14.15.16.17.
Bishopping an ampler measure thereof is obtained, if one duly prepared
according to the prescription of Holy Church, does submit to that Divine
ordinance, and receive the same. Concerning Wisdom there is a memorable
delivery of many sundry properties to be therein, in the Book of the Wisdom
of Solomon, where it is said: That in her is an Wis. 7.22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27,
28, 29.
understanding Spirit, Holy, one only, manifold, subtle, lively, clear,
undefiled, plain, not subject to hurt, loving the thing that is good, quick,
which cannot be let, ready to do good: kind to man, steadfast, sure, free
from care, having all power, overseeing all things, and going through all
understanding, pure, and most subtle spirits. For Wisdom is more moving than
any motion; she passes and goes through all things by reason of her
pureness. For she is the breath of the power of God, and a pure influence
flowing from the glory of the Almighty. Therefore can no defiled thing fall
into her. For the is the brightness of the everlasting light: the unspotted
mirror of the power of God; and the Image of his goodness. And being but one,
she can do all things: and remaining in her self, she makes all things new:
and in all ages entering into holy souls, she makes them friends of God, and
Prophets. For God loves none but him, that dwells with Wisdom. For she is
more beautiful than the Sun, and above all the order of the Stars, being
compared with the light, she is found before it. There are two Holy Scriptures
which tell us, what is wisdom and understanding. In the Book of Job it is
said: Behold the fear of the Lord, that is Job. 28.28.
wisdom; and to depart from evil, is understanding. Moses shows the same
also, saying: Behold I have taught you statutes and judgments, etc. Keep
therefore and do them, for this is your Deuteronomy. 4.6.
wisdom and your understanding in the sight of the nations, which shall hear
all these statutes, and say, Surely this great nation is a wise and
understanding people. In the third part of the T. 2. p. 230.
Homily for Rogation week, the Church very divinely hereto says: Let us with
so good an heart pray, as Solomon did, and we shall not fail but to have the
spirit of Wisdoms assistance. For he is soon Wis. 1.2. Wis. 6.12.13.14.
seen of them that love him, he will be found of them that seek him: for
very liberal and gentle is the spirit of Wisdom. In his power shall we have
sufficient ability to Ioh. 16.13.
know our duty to God, in him shall we be Acts. 9.31. Ioh. 14.16.
comforted and couraged to walk in our duty, in him shall we be meet
vessels to receive the grace of Almighty God: for it is he that purges and 1
Pet. 1.22.
purifieth the mind by his secret working. And he only is present every where
by his invisible power, and contains all things in his dominion. He
lightneth the heart to conceive worthy thoughts to Almighty God, she sits
in the tongue of man to stir him to speak his honor, no language is hid
from him, for he has the knowledge of all speech, he only ministers
spiritual Ephesians. 3.16.
strength to the powers of our soul and body.

Of the spirit of Counsel.
Concerning the spirit of Counsel, it is such an ability in some measure as
Paul had, whereof he speaks to the Corinthians, saying: That we may be able
to 2 Cor. 1.4.
comfort them which are in any trouble, by the comfort, wherewith we our selves
are comforted of God. Solomon says, A wise man will hear, and will increase
learning: and a man of understanding shall attain unto wise Prove. 1.5.
counsels. Iethro was not only wise for himself, but had ability to give some
good Exodus 18.19.
counsel unto Moses also.

Of ghostly strength.
Concerning ghostly strength or strength in the spirit, Paul prays for it to
be given to the Ephesians, saying: That God would grant you according to the
riches of his glory, to be Ephesians. 3.16, 17, 18, 19.
strengthened with might by his spirit in the inner man: that Christ may dwell
in your hearts by faith, that ye being rooted and grounded in love, may be
able to comprehend with all Saints, what is the breadth, and length, and depth,
and height: and to know the love of Christ, which passes knowledge, that ye
may be filled with all the fullness of God. Some are but Romans 14.^.
weak in the faith, but Abraham was Romans 4.19.20
strong in faith Paul for the Colossians having prayed that they might be
filled with the knowledge of Gods will, in all wisdom and spiritual
understanding, desires also that they may be Col. 1.9, 10, 11.
strengthened with all might according to his glorious power, unto all patience
and long suffering with joyfulnesse.

Of the spirit of Knowledge.
Concerning the spirit of knowledge, it is to be considered, that more is meant
than a mere Historical knowledge of truth, namely an experimental knowledge,
whereof Saint John says: Hereby do we 1 Ioh. 2.3.
know that we know him, if we keep his commandments. God says by Jeremiah,
Did not thy father eat and drink, and do judgment and justice, and then it
was well with him? He judged the cause of the poor and needy, then it was
well with him; Was not this to Ier. 22.15.16.
know me, says the Lord? Hereto pertains that knowledge, which is promised
to be given to the comprehended in the new covenant, whereof the Lord by the
same Prophet says: I will put my Law in their inward parts, and write it in
their hearts: and they shall all Ier. 31.33.34.
know me from the least of them unto the greatest of them, says the Lord.

Of the spirit of true godliness.
Concerning the spirit of true godliness, thereby is meant the inward
worshipping of God within the spirit principally, wherewith God is Ioh. 4.23.
most delighted. Saint Paul says, Bodily exercise profits little, but 1 Timothy
4.8.
godliness is profitable unto all things, having promise of the life that now
is, and of that which is to come. The outward worshipping of God in every
particular manner is with all care to be performed and preserved: But withal
the walking with God, and the inward Micah. 6.8. as in the margent.
humbling of ones self thereto, is to be zealously endeavored, by the which we
draw Heb. 7.19. Ps. 148.14. Iam. 4.8.9.10. Of the spirit of the Holy fear of
the Lord.
nigh unto God.

Lastly, Concerning the spirit of the Holy fear of the Lord, that is hereto
considerable which is written, That Christ in the days of his flesh, when he
had offered up prayers and supplications, with strong crying and tears, unto
him that was able to save him from death, and was heard in that he Heb. 5.7.
feared. Great was the Ioh. 8.49.
reverence which Jesus Christ did continually bear toward God his Father. We
are required to Ephesians. 5.1.2. 1 Pet. 2.21. Ioh. 13.15.
imitate him in all things written of him for our example, and unfainedly to
Romans 8.29. Phil 3.13.14.15
strive to come nearer and nearer unto that mark. We that are but Wis. 2.2.
sparks of spirit in small lumpes of clay (if the Angels and Archangels of
heaven do stand in Jude. 9.
awe of God,) ought to serve him acceptably, with reverence and godly Heb.
12.28.29.
fear. For our God is a consuming fire.

CHAP. 85. Of sundry fruits of the Holy Spirit.
IN the third part of the T. 2. p. 119.
Homily concerning Prayer, it is said: Because the soul is much more precious
and excellent than the body, therefore we ought first of all, to crave such
things as properly belong to the salvation thereof: as the gift of Repentante,
the gift of Faith, the gift of Charity and good Works, remission and
forgiveness of sins, patience in adversity, lowliness in prosperity, and
such other like fruits of the Spirit, as Hope, Love, Joy, Peace,
Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Meekness, and Temperance, which
things God requires of all them that profess themselves to be his children.
Saint Paul in his Epistle to the Galatians says: The Gal. 5.22, 23.
fruit of the spirit is Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness,
Goodness, Faith (or Faithfulness,) Meekness, Temperance. And on some of
these nine there shall be now some brief observation, because they are matters
necessary for our consideration, in that if they be in any measure in us, they
are testimonies that we have the Spirit of God, and are Romans 8.9.
his.

In the first part of the T. 2. p. 209, 210.
Homily for Whitsunday, it is said: O but how shall I know that the holy Ghost
is within me, some man perchance will say? Forsooth, as the Mat. 7.16, 17, 18,
19, 20.
tree is known by his fruit, so is also the Holy Ghost. The fruits of the Holy
Ghost ( according to the mind of Saint Paul) are these: Love; joy, peace,
long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faithfulness, meekness, temperance,
etc. If thou see that thy works be virtuous, and good, consonant to the
prescript rule of Gods Word, savouring and tasting not of the flesh, but of the
spirit, then 1 John 3.18, 19, 20, 21, 24.
assure thy self that thou art endued with the Holy Ghost: otherwise in
thinking well of thy self, thou do nothing else but Iam. 1.26. Gal. 6.7, 8,
9.
deceive thy self.

Of Love.
The first mentioned fruit of the Spirit is Love. Saint John says, Every one
that 1 John 4.7, 8.
loves, is borne of God, and knows God. He that loves not, knows not God,
for God is Love. By this shall all men know (says Christ) that ye are my
Disciples, if ye have John 13.35.
Love one to another.

In the fourth part of the T. 2. p. 235.
Homily for Rogation week, it is said, Love and charity is the only 1 John
3.10.
Livery of a Christian man. Saint Paul unto the Corinthians reckons up
sixteen properties of Love, saying: 1 Cor. 13.4, 5 6, 7, 8.
Charity suffers long, and is kind: Charity envieth not; Charity vaunteth
not it self, is not puffed up; does not behave it self unseemely, seeks not
her own, is not easily provoked, thinks no evil, rejoices not in iniquity,
but rejoices in the truth: bears all things, believes all things, hops
all things, endures all things. Charity never fails. The necessity of
Charity is declared in many places of the Divine Service: but in a most Divine
manner in the whole Homily thereof. The prayer therefore for it, the Collect to
be read on Shrovesunday called Quinquagesima, is profitable to be said often
by us. O Lord which do teach us that all our doings without Charity are 1
Cor. 15.1, 2, 3.
nothing worth: send thy Holy Ghost, and power into our hearts that most 1 Cor.
12.31.
excellent gift of Charity, the very Col. 3.14.
bond of peace and all virtues, without the which whosoever lives, is counted
Iam. 2.20 26 1 Timothy 5.6. Luke 15.32. Of Joy.
dead before thee.

The next fruit of the Spirit is Joy.

In the T. 2. p. 210.
Homily for Whitsunday and the first part thereof, it is said: Who will not
marvel at that, which is written in the Acts of the Apostles, to hear their
bold confession before the Countill at Jerusalem? and to consider that they
went away with Joy and gladness, Acts 5.41.
rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer rebukes and checkes for the
name and faith of Christ Jesus? This was the mighty work of the Holy Ghost,
who because he gives patience, and joyfulnesse of heart in temptation and
affliction, has therefore worthily obtained this name in holy Scriptures, to
be called a John 14.16.
Comforter. The Lord (says Isaiah) will comfort Zion: he will comfort all her
wast places, and he will make her wilderness like Eden, and her Desert, like
the Garden of the Lord: Isa. 51.3.
Joy and gladness shall be found therein, thanksgiving and the voice of
melody. The redeemed of the Lord shall return, and come with singing unto
Zion, and everlasting Isa. 35.10. and. 51.11.
joy shall be upon their head: they shall obtain gladness and joy, and
forrow and mourning shall flee away.

The third fruit of the Spirit is Peace. Of Peace.
Peace in conscience is so precious a matter in this present world, as that
congregations are not to depart from Church, until the Phil. 4.7.
Peace of God which passes all understanding, or the like blessing be said,
which the Church has appointed. For with the like manner of blessing did God
in former times ordain his Priests to Numb. 6.23, 24, 25, 26, 27.
bless his people the Jews, saying: The Lord bless thee and keep thee: the
Lord make his face shine upon thee, and be gracious unto thee: the Lord lift
up his countenance upon thee, and give thee Peace. Sundry times does the Divine
Service most divinely inform us hereof, saying: O God which art Author of 1
Cor. 141:33.
Peace, and lover of Ps. 133.1, 2, 3 Ephesians. 4.16.
concord, etc. And give unto thy servants that Peace which the world John 14.27.
cannot give, that both our hearts may be Ps. 108.1.
set to Mat. 228.20.
obey thy commandments, and also that by thee we being defended from the
fear of our enemies, may pass our time in Ier. 6.16. Ps. 116.7, 8, 9.
rest and Isa. 30.15. 1 Pet. 3.4. Ps. 31.2.
quietness. Most memorable is that Collect appointed to be read on the 21.
Sunday after Trinity, viz. Grant we beseech thee merciful Lord, to thy
faithful people pardon and Peace, that they may be 1 John. 1.7, 9. Ps. 31.2.
Ps. 73.1.13. Iam. 4.8.
cleansed from all their sins, and serve thee with a 1 Pet. 3.4.
quiet mind.

In the third part of the T. 1. p. 77.
Homily of Obedience, it is said: So shall we please God, and have the
exceeding benefit, Peace of conscience, rest and quietness in this world etc.

In the second part of the T. 1. p. 6.
Homily an Exhortation to holy Scripture, it is said: Let us pray to God (the
only Author of these heavenly studies) that we may speak, think, believe,
live, and depart hence, according to the wholesome Doctrine, and verities of
the holy Scriptures. And by that means in this world we shall have Gods
defense, favor and grace, with the unspeakeable solace of Peace, and
quietness of conscience, and after this miserable life, we shall enjoy the
endless Luke 16.25. and 23.43.
bliss and glory of heaven. Saint Paul says to the Romans, Therefore being
justified by faith we have Romans 5.1, 2.
Peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ. Great Ps. 119.165.
Peace (says David) have they that love thy Law: and nothing shall offend
them. Isaiah says: Thou will keep him in perfect Isa. 26.3.
Peace, whose mind is stayed on thee, because he trusts in thee. In another
place he says: And the work of righteousness shall be Peace, and the effect
of righteousness, Isa. 32.17, 18.
quietness and assurance for ever. And my people shall dwell in a peaceable
habitation, and in sure dwellings, and in quiet resting places. David says,
The meek shall inherit the earth: and shall Ps. 37.11. Of Long suffering.
delight themselves in the abundance of Peace.

The fourth fruit of the Spirit is Long suffering; which is signified to the
Ephesians, where it is said: With all lowliness, and meekness, with Ephesians. 4.2.
Long suffering, forbearing one another in love. So in the Epistle to the
Colossians, where it is said: Put on therefore (as the Elect of God holy and
beloved) bowels of mercy, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, Col.
3.12, 13.
Long suffering, forbearing one another, and forgiving one another, if any man
have a quarrel against any: even as Christ forgave you, so also do ye. The
servant of the Lord must not strive, but be gentle unto all men, apt to teach,
2 Timothy 2.24, 25, 26.
patient: in meekness instructing those that oppose themselves, if God
peradventure will give them repentance to the acknowledging of the truth. And
that they may recover themselves out of the snare of the Devil, who are taken
captive by him at his will. Paul unto Titus signifies: that we should speak
evil of no man, be no brawlers: but gentle, showing all Tit. 3.2, 3.
meekness unto all men. For we our selves were sometimes foolish,
disobedient, deceived, serving diverse lusts and pleasures, etc.

Of Gentleness.
The fifth fruit of the Spirit is Gentleness. The which property may be known
out of the Apostles words, where it is said to the Thessalonians, Not of of men
sought we glory, neither of you, nor yet of others, when we might have been
burdensome, as the Apostles of Christ. But we were 1 These. 2.6, 7.
gentle among you, even as a Nurse cherishes her Children, etc.

In the third part of the T. 1. p. 98.
Homily against Contention it is said: If you be provoked with evil speaking,
1 Per. 4.1.
arm your self with patience, lenity and silence, either speaking nothing, or
else being very Prove. 15.1.
soft, meek, and gentle in answering. Romans 12.19, 20, 21.
Overcome thine adversary with benefits and Gentleness.

Of Goodness.
The sixth fruit of the Spirit is Goodness, which (as one says) burceth none,
but wills well to all. The fruit of the spirit (says Saint Paul to the
Ephesians) is in all Ephesians. 5.9.10.
Goodness, and righteousness, and trum. Joseph of Arimathea is said to be a
Luke. 3.50, 51, 52.53.
Good man: He consented not to the counsel and deed of the Jews against
Christ: He waited for the Kingdom of God: He performed all the honor he
could unto the body of Jesus.

The seventh fruit of the Spirit is Faithfulness, Of Faithfullnes
faith or trust, as in promises, and in bargains or contracts: yea in all
businesses and matters both Ecclesiastical and temporal. Moses was Heb. 3.5.
faithful in all Gods house. Solomon says, Most men will proclaim every one
his own goodness: but a Prove. 20.6.
Faithful man who can find? Yet such as are endued with the spirit of Jesus
Christ, are Faithful in a good measure. Concerning Faithfulness Christ says:
He that is Luke 16.10, 11, 12.
Faithful in that which is least, is Faithful also in much: and he that is
unjust in the least, is unjust also in much. If therefore ye have not been
Faithful in the unrighteous Mammon, who will commit to your trust the true
riches? And if ye have not been faithful in that which is another man's, who
shall give you that which is your own.

Of Meekness.
The eighth fruit of the Spirit is Meekness.

In the T. 2. p. 247, 248.
Homily concerning the state of Matrimony, it is said to married persons, the
Husband and Wife, Do the best ye can of your parts, to custom your selves to
softness and Meekness, and bear well in worth such over sights as chance:
and thus shall your conversation be most pleasant and comfortable. S. Peter
says, A Pet. 3.4.
Meek and a quiet spirit is in the sight of God of great price.

The ninth fruit of the Spirit is Temperance: Of Temperance.
And of it there is some delivery in the 80. Chapter before.

CHAP. 86. Of sundry other Virtues prescribed in the Divine Service.
Of Honesty.
IN the T. 2. p. 108.
Homily against excess of apparel, it is said: It is not the goodlinesse of
apparel, nor the excellency of beauty, nor the abundance of Gold, that makes
a woman to be esteemed, but modesty and diligence to live 1 Timothy 2.2.
Honestly in all things.

In the third part of the T. 2. p. 119.
Homily concerning Prayer, it is signified, That it behooveth one that comes
to a King, to speak and ask only those things which are rightful and
honest. Saint Paul commands all Professors of Christianity, to walk 1 These.
4.12.
Honestly toward them that are without, and to have lack of nothing. To the
Romans he says, Provide things Romans 12.17.
Honest in the sight of all men. To the Hebrews he says, Pray for us: for we
trust we have a good Conscience in all things, willing to live Heb. 13 18.
Honestly. To the Philippians he says, Whatsoever things are Phil. 4.8.
Honest, think on the same. To the Thessalonians he says: See that none
render evil for evil unto any man: but ever follow that which is 1 These. 5.15.
good, both among your selves, and to all men. Saint Peter says, Dearly
beloved, I beseech you as Strangers and Pilgrims, abstain from fleshly lusts,
which war against the soul, having your conversation 1 Pet. 2.11, 12.
honest among the Gentiles, that whereas they speak against you as evil
doers, they may by your good works which they shall behold, glorify God in
the day of Visitation. Whence it may appear, that that is Honesty which is not
only expressly approved by the holy Scriptures, but also whatsoever is
accounted honorable or worthy of praise according to the light of true reason.
S. Paul says: For when the Gentiles which have not the law, do by nature the
things contained in the law, these having not the law, are a law to themselves;
which show the Romans 2.24, 15
work of the law written in their hearts, their conscience also bearing
witness, and their thoughts the mean while accusing, or else excusing one
another, etc. Also nothing ought to be supplicated unto a King, but what is
rightful and Honest. For ( Solomon says) Righteous lips are the delight of
Kings: and they love him that speaks Prove. 16.13.
right.

Of Courtesy.
IN the first part of the T. 2. p. 157.
Homily concerning Almsdeeds, it is said: Be courteous unto the poor. Saint
Peter says: Finally, be ye all of one mind, having compassion one of another,
love as brethren, be pitiful, be 1 Pet. 3.8, 9.
Courteous: not rendering evil for evil, or railing for railing: but
contrariwise, blessing. King Rehoboam for giving 1 King. 12, 13, 14, 16.
uncourteous answers to his subjects when they came unto him, lost the most
part of his Kingdom thereby. Solomon signifies, that a Superior should not
without just cause answer his inferior discourteously, saying: He that Prove.
14.21.
despises his neighbor, sins: but he that has mercy on the poor, happy
is he. He that Prove. 14.31.
oppresses the poor, reproacheth his Maker. In Ecclesiasticus wholesome
counsel is given hereto: Turn not away thine eye from the needy, and give
him none occasion to curse thee; for if he curse thee in the bitterness of his
soul, his prayer shall be heard of him that made him. Let it not grieve thee
to bow down thine ear to the poor, and give him a Ecclus. 4.5, 6, 8.
friendly answer with meekness. We ought not to despise any for any bodily
deformity or infirmity. The Apostle says, 1 Pet. 2.17.
Honor all men. Be gentle, showing all Tit. 3.2.
meekness unto all men.

Of retaining the memory of Saints.
IN the Calendar set before the Common Prayer, the names of sundry men and
women, which in their life time, here on earth were famous for piety and
virtue, are inserted for perpetual memory: as Cyprian, Benedict, Anne,
Katherine, etc. Wherein holy Church does according to the Scripture, which
says: The Prove. 10.7.
memory of the just is blessed: but the name of the wicked shall rot. The
righteous shall be had in everlasting Psalm. 112.6.
remembrance.

In the third part of the T. 1. p. 65.
Homily concerning the fear of death, there is a Saints saying mentioned,
namely, Saint Martin, who said, Good Lord, if I be necessary for thy people to
do good unto them, I will refuse no Phil. 1.24.
labor: but else for mine own self, I beseech thee to take my soul. In the
eleventh Chapter to the Hebrews the memorial of many Saints is blessed: so in
Ecclesiasticus, Chap. 44.45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50.

Of Veracity or True Speaking.
IN the first part of the T. 1. p. 47, 48.
Homily concerning Swearing, it is said; Every Christian man's word ( says
Saint Hierome) should be so true, that it should be regarded as an oath. And
Chrysostom witnessing the same, says, It is not convenient to swear: for
what needs us to swear, when it is not lawful for one of us to make a Col.
3 9. Isa. 63.8.
lie unto another. He that uses truth and plainness in his bargaining and
communication, he shall have no need by such vain swearing, to bring himself
in credence with his neighbors, nor his neighbors will not mistrust his
sayings. The Prophet Jeremiah says: Take ye heed every one of his neighbor,
and trust ye not in any brother: for every brother will utterly supplant, and
every neighbor will walk with slanders; and they will deceive every one his
neighbor, and will not speak the truth: they have taught their tongue to
speak Ier. 9.4, 5.
lies, and weary themselves to commit iniquity. David says: Lord who shall
abide in thy Tabernacle? who shall dwell in thy holy hill? He that walks
uprightly, and works righteousness, and Psalm 15.1, 2, 3.
speaks the truth in his heart.

Of Diligence.
IN the admonition to all Ministers Ecclesiastical, set before the second Tome
of Homilies, it is said; It shall be necessary that ye 1 Timothy 4.12 1 Pet. 5.3.
above all other do behave your selves most faithfully and diligently in your
so high a function. After it is said; It shall be well done to spend your time
to consider well of such Chapters before hand, whereby your Eccles. 12 9, 10,
11.
prudence and diligence in your office may appear, etc. In the first part of
the T. 2 p. 115.
Homily concerning the place and time of prayer, it is signified; That by the
fourth Commandment it appears, no man in the six days ought to be
sloathfull or idle, but Exodus 20.9. Romans 12.11.
diligently to labor in that state wherein God has set him. Most divinely
does the Church counsel us unto diligence, in the third part of the T. 2. p.
232.
Homily for Rogation week, saying: Brethren, howsoever the 1 Cor. 11.32.
world in generality is Hos. 4.6.
forgetful of God, let us particularly attend to our time, and Ephesians. 5.15.16.
Col, 4.5.
win the time with diligence, and apply our selves to that light and 2 Cor.
6.1, 2.
grace that is Tit. 2.11.12.
offered us: let us, if Gods favor and judgments which he works in our
time, cannot stir us to call home to our self to Phil. 2.12.
do that belonging to our salvation: At the least way, let the malice of the
devil, the naughtiness of the world, which we see exercised in these 1 Timothy
4.1. 2 Timothy 3.1. etc.
perilous and last times, wherein we see our days so dangerously set; provoke
us to Mar. 13.33, 34 35, 36, 37. Ephesians. 4.1.
watch diligently to our 1 Cor. 1.9.
vocation, to walk and go Phil. 3.13, 14. 2 Pet. 1.3.10. Prove. 4.18.
forward therein. In the T. 2. p. 241.
Homily concerning the state of Matrimony, it is said; But to this prayer must
be joined a 2 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7, 8.
singular diligence, etc. In the third part of the T. 2. p. 272.
Homily of Repentance, it is said; If we should suspect any uncleannes to be in
us, wherefore the earthly Prince should loath and abhor the sight of us, what
pains would we take to remove and put it away? How much more ought we with all
diligence and speed that may be, to put away that unclean 2 Cor. 7.1.
filthiness that does Isa. 59.1.
separate and maken division betwixt us and our God, and that hides his face
from us, that he will not hear us? The Apostle to the Hebrews says: We
desire that every one of you do show the same Heb. 6.11, 12.
diligence, to the full assurance of hope unto the end: that ye be not
sloathfull, but followers of them, who through faith and patience inherit the
promises. To the Clergy, Saint Paul says, Preach the Word, be 2 Timothy 4.2.
instant in season, out of season, reprove, rebuke, exhort with all long
suffering and doctrine. Solomon says, Be thou Prove. 27.23.
diligent to know the estate of thy flocks, and look well to thy herds. In
another place he says, See thou a man Prove. 22.29.
diligent in his business? he shall stand before Kings, he shall not stand
before mean men.

Of Watchfulness.
IN the T. 2. p. 252.
Homily against Idleness, it is said; Let us Iam. 4.7. 1 Pet. 5.8, 9.
resist the Devil with our diligent watching, in labor, and in 1 Pet. 4.19.
well doing. For he that diligently exercises himself in honest See Mat.
12.44. where the original of the word empty (...) also signifies being idle.
business, is not easily catched in the Devils snare. Saint Paul says unto
Timothy, 2 Timothy 4 5.
Watch thou in all things. Christ says, Mat. 26 41.
Watch ye and pray, lest ye enter in temptation. What I say unto you, I say
unto all, Mar. 13.37.
Watch.

Of Contentedness.
IN the T. 2: p. 106.
Homily against the excess of Apparel, it is said; Let us content our selves
quietly with that which God sends, be it never so little. And if it please
him to send us plenty, let us not wax Prove. 30.9. 1 Timothy 6.17, 18.
proud thereof, but let us use it moderately, as well to our own comfort, as to
the relief of such as stand in necessity. Afterward it is said; Every
Christian ought to content himself in our Savior Christ, thinking himself
sufficiently A most considerable sentence.
garnished with his heavenly virtues. Saint Paul says, Godliness with 1 Timothy
6.6, 7, 8.
contentment is great gain. For we brought nothing into this world, and it is
certain we can carry nothing out; and having food and raiment, let us be
therewith content. Let your Heb. 13.5.
conversation be without covetousness, and be content with such things, as ye
have: for he has said, I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee. Saint Paul
said concerning himself: I have learned in whatsoever state I am, therewith to
be Phil. 4.11.
content.

Of Simplicity.
IN the T. 2. p. 106.
Homily against the excess of Apparel, it is said; Let us take unto us
simplicity, chastity, and comeliness, submitting our necks to the sweet Mat.
11.30.
yoke of Christ. The Lord Jesus said to his Apostles: Behold, I send you forth
as sheep in the midst of Wolves: be ye therefore wise as serpents, and
harmless (or Mat, 10.16.
simple) as doves. Saint Paul said to the Corinthians, I fear lest by any
means, as the serpent beguiled Eve through his subtilty, so your minds should
be corrupted from the 2 Cor. 11.3.
simplicity that is in Christ. In another Epistle he says: He that gives, let
him do Romans 12 8.
it with simplicity. And I would have you wise unto that which is good, and
Romans 19.19.
simple concerning evil. Concerning himself he said: Our rejoicing is this,
the testimony of our conscience, that in 2 Cor. 1.12.
simplicty and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of
God, we have had our conversation in the world, and more abundantly to you
wards. Singleness of mind is one of the heavenly virtues. Let us hear what
David says of the contrary nature. They speak vanity every one with his
neighbor: with flattering lips, and with a Psalm. 12.2, 3.
double heart do they speak. The Lord shall cut off all flattering lips, and
the tongue that speaks proud things.

Of Zealousnesse.
IN the second part of the T. 2. p. 131, 132.
Homily concerning the place and time of prayer, it is said; But now forasmuch
as ye perceive, it is Gods determinate pleasure ye should resort unto your
Churches upon the day of holy rest; seeing ye hear what displeasure God
conceives, what plagues he powers upon his disobedient people; seeing ye
understand what blessings of God are given, what heavenly commodities come to
such people as desirously and zealously use to resort unto their Churches:
seeing also ye are now friendly bidden and jointly called, beware that ye
slack not your duty, take heed that you suffer nothing to let you hereafter to
come to the Church at such times as you are ordinarily appointed and commanded.
Ever memorable is that which the Lord said to the Angel of the Church of the
Laodiceans; I know thy works, that thou art neither cold nor hot, I would thou
were cold or hot. So then because thou art lukewarm, and neither cold nor hot,
I will spue thee out of my mouth. As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten, be
Rev. 3.15, 16, 17, 18.19. Ier. 48.10. as in the margent.
zealous therefore and repent. Paul signified of some, that had a Romans 10.2.
zeal of God, but not according to knowledge. He tells Titus therefore
whereof all should be Tit. 2.14.
zealous, namely of good works. Great also ought to be the zeal of every
Christian concerning Gods house, his Temple, and every part of his public
worship, and concerning every circumstance thereto ordained by the Church, that
nothing thereof be profaned, but every particular with all due reverence used
or performed, according to the example of Jesus Christ, of whom it is said,
that the John 2.17.
zeal of his fathers house had eaten them up.

Of Modesty.
IN the T. 2. p. 94.
Homily against Gluttony and Drunkenness, it is said; Almighty God (to the end
that we might keep our selves undefiled, and serve him in holiness and
righteousness, according to his word) has charged in his Scriptures so many
as look for the glorious appearing of our Savior Christ, to lead their lives
in all Tit. 3.12, 13.
sobriety, modesty, and temperance; whereby we may learn how necessary it is
for every Christian that will not be found unready at the coming of our
Savior Christ, to live sober minded in this present world, forasmuch as
otherwise being unready; he Mat. 25.10, 11, 12.
cannot enter with Christ into glory: And being unarmed in this behalf, he
must needs be in continual danger of that cruel adversary the roaring Lion,
against whom the Apostle Peter warns us to prepare our selves in continual 1
Pet. 5.8, 9.
sobriety, that we may resist, being steadfast in faith. To the intent therefore
that this soberness may be used in all our behavior, it shall be expedient
for us to declare unto you how much all kind of Ephesians. 5.18.
excess offends the Majesty of Almighty God, and how grievously he
punishes the immoderate abuse of those his creatures, which he ordains to
the maintenance of this our needy life, as meats, drinks, and apparel. In the
T. 2. p. 108.
Homily against the excess of apparel, it is said; It is not the goodlinesse
of apparel, nor the excellency of beauty, nor the abundance of gold, that
makes a woman to be esteemed, but Prove. 31.30. 1 Timothy 2.9.10.
modesty, and diligence to live honestly in all things. In the third part of
T. 2. p. 271.
Homily of Repentance, it is said: The true parts and tokens of repentance are,
an hearty Ps. 51.17.
contrition and sorrowfulness of our hearts, unfeigned Ps. 32.5.
confession in word of mouth for our unworthy living before God, a steadfast
Romans 3.24.25.26.
faith to the merits of our Savior Christ for pardon, and a purpose of our
selves by Gods grace to Isa. 55.7.
renounce our former wicked life, and a full Ezech. 18.21.
conversion to God in a Ioh. 15.8.
new life to glorify his name; and to live Col. 2.5.
orderly and charitably, to the comfort of our neighbor, in all Ephesians. 5.9.10.
righteousness, and to live soberly and modestly to our selves, by using
abstinence, and 1 Cor. 9, 25.
temperance in word and deed, in Col. 3.5.
mortifying our earthly members here upon earth. Saint Paul unto Timothy
signifying with what conditions a Minister of the Church is to be endued,
mentions modesty among the rest, saying: He must be blameless, the husband
of one wife, vigilant, sober, of good behavior ( or 1 Timothy 3.2. as in the
margent.
modest) given to hospitality, apt to teach, etc. The Apostle commands women
to adorn themselves in 1 Timothy 2.9.
modest apparel. Also he teaches that aged men be Tit. 2.2.3.
sober, grave, temperate, sound in faith, in charity, in patience. The aged
women likewise, that they be in behavior as becomes holiness, not false
accusers, not given to much wine, teachers of good things. That they may teach
the young women to be Tit. 2 3.4.
sober, to love their husbands, to love their children, to be discreet, chaste,
keepers at home, good, obedient to their own husbands, that the word of God
be not blasphemed. Young men exhort likewise to be sober minded. The
instruction in Ecclesiasticus is memorable: Eccius. 32.7.8.6.
Speak young man, if there be need of thee: and yet scarcely when thou art
twice asked. Let thy speech be short, comprehending much in few words; be as
one that knows, and yet holds his tongue. If thou be among great men, make
not thy self equal with them, and when Ecclus. 7.14.
ancient men are in place, use not many words.

Of Patience.
IN the Collect for Saint John Baptists day it is said, Make us so to follow
his Doctrine and holy life, that we may truly Luke 3.3, 4, 5, 6.
repent according to his Preaching, and after his example constantly Mat.
10.32. Phil. 2.16.
speak the truth, boldly Lev. 19.17.
rebuke vice, and patiently Mat. 5.10.11.12. Iam. 1.2.3.4. 1 Pet. 3.14.
suffer for the truths sake. In the first T. 2. p 178.
Homily of the Passion it is said, Let us therefore now open our hearts again
to Jesus Christ, and study in our lives to be thankful to such a Lord, and
evermore to be mindful of so great a benefit, yea, let us take up our Mat
10.38.
cross with Christ, and follow him. His Passion is not only the 1 Timothy 2.6.
ransom and whole amends for our sin, but it is also a most perfect Heb
12.1, 2, 3, 4.
example of all patience and sufferance. For it behooved Christ thus to Luke
24.46,
suffer, and to enter into the glory of his Father: Why should it not become us
to bear patiently our small crosses of adversity, and the troubles of this
world? For surely (as says Saint Peter) Christ therefore suffered, to leave us
an 1 Pet. 2.21.
example to follow his steps. And if we 2. Tim. 2.11.12.
suffer with him, we shall be sure also to reign with him in heaven. Not that
the Romans 8.18.
sufferance of this transitory life should be worthy of that glory to come, but
gladly should we be contented to suffer, to be Romans 8.29. 1 Ioh. 2.6.
like Christ in our life, that so by our Mat. 5.16.
works we may glorify our Father which is in heaven. And as it is painful
and grievous to bear the Cross of Christ in the griefs and displeasures of
this life: so it Heb. 12.11.
brings forth the joyful fruit of Romans 5.3.4.5.
hope, in all them that be exercised therewith. Let us not so much behold the
pain, as the Heb. 11.26.27.
reward that shall follow that labor. Nay, let us rather endeavor our selves
in our sufferance, to endure innocently and guiltless, as our Savior Chirst
did. Perfect patience cares not what, nor how much it suffers, nor of whom
it suffers, whether of friend or foe: but studieth to suffer 1. Pet. 2.19.
and 3.14.
innocently, and without deserving. Yea, he in whom Mat 5.48.
perfect Charity is, cares so little to revenge, that he rather studieth to
do good for evil, to bless and say well of them that curse him, to pray for
them that pursue him, according to the example of our Savior Christ, who is
the most perfect example and pattern of all meekness and sufferance. Saint
James says, My brethren, count it all joy when ye fall into diverse
temptations, knowing this, that the trying of your faith works Iam. 1.2.3.
patience: but let patience have her perfect work, that ye may be perfect and
entire, wanting nothing. Saint Paul to the Thessalonians says, Be 1 These. 5.14.
patient toward all men. And again Saint James says, Be Iam. 5.7.8.9.10.11.
patient therefore brethren, unto the coming of the Lord: Behold the
husbandman waits for the precious fruit of the earth, and has long patience
for it, until he receive the early and latter rain. Be ye also patient;
stablish your hearts: for the coming of the Lord draws nigh. Take, my
brethren, the Prophets, who have spoken in the name of the Lord, for an
ensample of suffering affliction, and of patience. Behold, we count them happy
which endure. Ye have heard of the patience of Job, and have seen the end of
the Lord: that the Lord is very pitiful, and of tender mercy.

Of Peacemaking.
IN the third part of the T. 1. p. 98.
Homily against Contention it is said: Above all things, keep peace and Ephesians.
4.3.
unity: be no Peace breakers, but Mat 5.9.
Peacemakers. And then there is no doubt, but that God the Author of comfort
and peace, will grant us 2 These. 3.16.
peace of Conscience, and such concord and agreement, that with Romans 15.5.6.
one mouth and mind, we may glorify God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.
As all true Christian people do receive by the spirit of Christ the peace of
God into their consciences Isa. 48.18. and 66.12.
more and more, so are they more and more peaceable toward others. Saint James
says, The Wisdom that is from above, is first pure, then Iam. 3.17.18.
peaceable, gentle, and easy to be entreated, full of mercy, and good fruits,
without partiality, and without hypocrisy. 2 Esdros. 13.12.39.
And the fruit of righteousness is sown in Peace, of them that make peace.
Blessed (says Christ Jesus) are the Mat. 5.2. 1 Pet. 3.11.
Peacemakers, for they shall be called the Children of God.

CHAP. 87. Of Satisfaction for wrong done in word or deed.
IN the second Exhortation to be said sometime at the discretion of the Curate,
before receiving the Communion, it is said: If ye shall perceive your offenses
to be such as be not only against God, but also against your neighbors: then
ye shall reconcile your selves unto them, ready to make restitution and
Satisfaction, according to the uttermost of your powers, for all injuries and
wrongs done by you to any other, and likewise being ready to forgive others
that have offended you, as you would have forgiveness of your offenses at Gods
hand: for otherwise the receiving of the Holy Communion does nothing else but
increase your damnation. In the Rubricke of the Visitation of the sick before
the particular Absolution, it is said: The Minister shall examine the sick
party whether he be in charity with all the world, exhorting him to forgive
from the bottom of his heart all persons that have offended him, and if he have
offended other, to ask them forgiveness: and where he has done injury or
wrong to any man, that he make amends to the uttermost of his power. In the T.
2. p. 195.
Homily of the Resurrection it is said: As ye have hurt the name of your
neighbor, or otherwise hindered him; so now intend to restore it unto him
again. For without restitution, God accepts not your confession, nor yet
your repentance. It is not enough to forsake evil, except you set your courage
to do good. By what occasion soever you have offended, turn now the occasion
to the honoring of God, and profit of your neighbor. In the second part of
the T. 2. p. 203. 204.
Homily concerning the Sacrament it is said: O wretched creatures that we be
at these days, who be without reconciliation of our brethren whom we have
offended, without satisfying them whom we have caused to fall, without any
kind of thought or compassion toward them whom we might easily relieve,
without any conscience of slander, misreport, division, rancor, or inward
bitterness, etc. Wherefore (O man) tender thine own salvation, examine and
try thy good will and love toward the children of God, the members of Chirst,
the heirs of the heavenly heritage? yea, towords the Image of God, the
excellent creature thine own soul. If thou have been offended, now be
reconciled. If thou have caused any to stumble in the way of God, now set them
up again. If thou have disquieted thy brother, now pacify him. If thou have
wronged him, no relieve him. If thou have defrauded him, now restore unto him.
If thou have nourished spite, now embrace friendship. If thou have fostered
hatred and malice, now openly show thy love and charity, yea be pressed and
ready to procure thy neighbors health of soul, wealth, commodity, and
pleasures, as thine own. Deserve not the heavy and dreadful burden of Gods
displeasure for thine evil will toward thy neighbor, so unreverently to
approach unto this table of the Lord. In the second part of the T. 2. p. 269.
Homily of repentance, it is said: We do learn, what is the satisfaction
that God does require of us, which is, that we Isa. 1.16.17.
cease from evil, and do good; and if we have done any man wrong, to endeavor
our selves to make him true amends to the uttermost of our power, following in
this the example of Luke 19.8.
Zacheus, and of this sinful Luk 7.38.39.
woman, and also that godly lesson which John Baptist Zacharies son did give
unto them that came to ask Luke 3.11.12.13, 14.
counsel of them. The Lord Jesus says, If thou bring thy gift to the Altar,
and there remembrest that thy brother has ought against thee, leave there thy
gift before the Altar, and go thy way, first be Mat. 5.23.24.25.26.
reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift. Agree with thine
adversary quickly, whiles thou art in the way with him: lest at any time the
adversary deliver thee to the Judge, and the Judge deliver thee to the officer,
and thou be cast into prison. Verily, I say unto thee, thou shall be no means
come out thence till thou have paid the uttermost farthing. The Law of the
Lord says, The guilty shall restore that which he took violently away, or
the thing which he has deceitfully gotten, or that which was delivered him to
keep, or the lost thing which he found. Read the sixth Chapter of Leviticus and
the 7. first verses. In the last whereof it is signified, that forgiveness for
such transgressions cannot be hope for from God, until restitution be made,
or at least unfainedly intended, desired, resolved on, and set forward
according to the very uttermost of one ability. Read the Laws concerning
restitution in Exodus 22, etc. If we find any of our neighbors substance be
it of what kind soever, we are bound to restore it unto him again Deuteronomy.
22.1.2.3. See Job. 20.18.

CHAP. 88. Of forgiving others the wrongs, which they have dene to us, in word
or deed.
IN the Service before the Communion, and in the Rubricke before the special
Absolution it is declared, that we are bound to be in Charity with every body
of mankind, as we would that God should be merciful unto us. For so we may
observe forth of the collections in the Chap. 87.
Chapter before. In the first T. 2. p. 179.
Homily of the Passion, it is said: It is not meet that we should crave
forgiveness of our great offenses at Gods hands, and yet will not forgive the
small trespasses of our neighbor against us. We do call for mercy in vain,
if we will not show mercy to our neighbors. For if we will not put wrath and
displeasure forth of our hearts to our Christian brother, no more will God
forgive the displeasure and wrath that our sins have deserved before him. For
under this condition does God forgive us, if we forgive other. It becomes not
Christian men to be hard one to another, nor yet to think their neighbor
unworthy to be forgiven. For howsoever unworthy he is, yet is Christ worthy to
have thee to do thus much for his sake, he has deserved it of thee, that thou
should forgive thy neighbor. And God is also to be obeyed, which
commands us to forgive, if we will have any part of the pardon which our
Savior Christ purchased once of God the Father, by shedding of his precious
blood. And P. 180.
afterward it is said: He which hates his brother, abides in death, even in
the danger of everlasting death, and is moreover the child of damnation and of
the devil, cursed of God, and hated (so long as he so remains) of God and
all his heavenly company. For as peace and charity does make us the blessed
children of Almighty God; so does hatred and envy make us the cursed children
of the Devil. In he second part of the P. 216.
Homile for Whitsunday it is said: Ye shall briefly take this short lesson.
Wheresoever ye find the spirit of arrogancy, and pride, the spirit of envy,
hatred, contention, cruelly, murder, extortion, witchcraft, necormaniec, etc.
assure your selves, that there is the spirit of the Devil, and not of God,
albeit they pretend outwardly to the world never so much holiness. For as the
Gospel teaches us, the spirit of the Jesus is a good spirit, and Holy spirit,
a sweet spirit, a lowly spirit, a merciful spirit, full of charity and love,
full of forgiveness and pity; not rendering evil for evil, extremity for
extremity, but overcomming evil with good, and remitting all offense even from
the heart. According to which rule, if a man live uprightly, of him it may be
safely pronounced, that he that the Holy Ghost with hin him: If not, then it
is a plain taken, that he does usurp the name of the Holy Ghost in vain.
Christ teaches us thus to pray: Mat. 6.12.
Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. And
he adds, For if ye Mat 6.14, 15:
forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you. But
if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your
trespasses. In the Parable it is said, O thou wicked servant, I forgave thee
all that debt, because thou desiredst me: should not thou also have had
compassion on thy fellow servant, even as I had pity on thee? and his Lord was
wroth, and delivered him to the Tormentors, till he should pay all that was due
unto him. So likewise shall my heavenly Father do also unto you, if ye from
your hearts Mat. 18.32, 33, 34, 35.
forgive not every one his brother their trespasses. Saint James says, Iam.
2.13.
He shall have judgment without mercy, that has showed no mercy. The Lord
also says; Take heed to your selves: If thy brother trespass against thee,
rebuke him; and if he repent, forgiven him. And if he trepasse against thee
seven times, in a day, and seven times in a day turn again to thee, saying, I
repent, thou shall Luke. 17.3, 4
forgive him. Memorable is the instruction in Ecclesiasticus: he that
revengeth, shall find vengeance from the Lord, and he will surely keep his
sin in remembrance. Ecclus. 28.^^ 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
Forgive thy neighbor the hurt that he has done unto thee, so shall thy sins
also be forgiven when thou prayest. One man bears hatred against another, and
does he seek pardon from the Lord? He shows no mercy to a man which is like
himself; and does he ask forgiveness of his own sins? Remember thy end,
and let enmity cease, remember corruption and death, and abide in the
Commandments. Remember the Commandments, and bear no malice to thy
neighbor: remember the Covenant of the Highest, and wink at ignorance. Some
will say, they can forgive, but not forget. But in so doing they do not well.
Saint Paul says, be ye kind one to another, tender hearted; Ephesians. 4.32.
forgiving one another, even as God for Christs-sake has forgiven you. Be ye
therefore Ephesians. 5.1.
sollowers of God as dear Children, and walk in love. Micah speaking of Gods
mercy to his penitent and obedient people, says, Thou will Micah. 7, 18, 19.
cast all their sins into the depths of the Sea. And that we like unto God,
ought to forget, as well as to forgive our neighbors trespasses against us, it
may appear out of that doctrine in the Meeter of the Psalms; where it is said
in Psalm. 103.8, 9.

The Lord is kind and merciful,
when sinners do him grieve:
The slowest to conceive a wrath,
and readiest to forgive.
He chides not us continually,
though we be full of strife:
Nor keeps our faults in memory,
for all our sinful life.
CHAP. 89. Of examining and judging our own selves.
IN the Divine Service for the Communion, it is to be said by the Curate unto
the people, namely in the second Exhortation: My duty is to exhort you to
consider the dignity of the holy mystery, and the great peril of the unworthy
receiving thereof, and to search and examine your own consciences, as you
should come holy and clean to a most godly and heavenly feast, etc. The way
and means thereto is: first to examine your lives and co^versation by the rule
of Gods Commandments, and wherein soever ye shall perceive your selves to have
offended, either by will, word or deed, there to bewail your own sinful
lives, and confess your selves to Almighty God, with full purpose of amendment
of life.

In the Exhortation of the Visitation-Service, it is said also unto us most
Divinely to this matter: Forasmuch as after this life, there is account to be
given unto the righteous Judge, of whom all must be judged without respect of
persons: I require you to examine your self, and your state both toward God
and man, so that accusing and condemning your self for your own faults, you
may find mercy at our heavenly Fathers hand for Christ's sake, and not be
accused and condemned in that fearful judgment.

In the second part of the T. 2. p. 204, 205.
Homily concerning the Sacrament, it is said: Let us all universal and
singular, behold our own manners and lives, to amend them. Yea now at the
least, let us call our selves to an account, that it may grieve us of our
former evil conversation, that we may hate sin, that we may sorrow and
mourn for our offenses, that we may with Zechar. 12.10, 11. Joel 2.12. Ps.
126 5, 6.
tears power them out before God, that we may with sure trust desire and crave
the salve of his mercy, bought and purchased with the blood of his dearly
beloved Son Jesus Christ, to heal our deadly wounds withal. For surely, if
we do not with earnest repentance 2 Cor. 7 1. 1 John. 3 3. Iam. 4.8.9.
cleanse the filthy stomach of our soul, it must needs come to pass, that
as wholesome meat received into a raw stomach corrupts and marreth all, and
is the cause of further sickness: so shall we eat this wholesome Bread, and
drink this Cup to our eternal destruction. Thus we and not other must
thoroughly Ier. 7.5. Ps. 119.59.60.
examine, and not lightly look over our selves, not other men; our own
conscience, not Mat. 7.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Ecclus. 19.8.
other men's lives; which we ought to do uprightly, truly, and with just
correction. Let as take heed we come not with our sins unexamined, into this
presence of our Lord and judge. If they be worthy blame, which kiss the
Princes hand with a filthy and unclean mouth: shall thou be blameless, which
with a Mat. 23, 25, 26, 27.28.
stinking soul, full of covetousness, fornication, drunkenness, pride full of
wretched cogitations and Mat. 15.18, 19, 20.
thoughts, do breathe out iniquity and uncleanness on the Bread and Cup of
the Lord? The Church therefore in the Communion-Service says: Judge therefore
your selves (brethren) that you be not judged of the Lord. Greatly and ever
observable is the Counsel of Jeremiah in his Book of Lamentations: Let us
Ier. 3.40.
search and try our ways, and turn again unto the Lord. The Apostle says to
the Corinthians: 2 Cor. 13.5.
Examine your selves whether you be in the faith: prove your own selves. To
the Galatians he says: If a man think himself to be something, when he is
nothing, he deceives himself. But let every man Gal. 6.3, 4, 5.
prove his own work, and then shall he have rejoicing in himself alone, and
not in another. David says: Stand in awe and sin not: Ps. 4.4.
Commune with your own heart upon your bed, and be still. Ezekiel says, Then
shall ye Ezekiel. 36.31.
remember your own evil ways, and your doings that were not good, and shall
loathe your selves in your own sight for your iniquities, and for your
abominations.

The cause of the licentiousness of these times.
The neglect of this duty of examining and judging our own meditations,
speakings and doings, is the cause of the licentiousness of these times,
whereof it is complained by the Church in her 113. Canon. Some about Easter
time when they receive, think a little upon themselves, whether they be in
open variance with their next Neighbor, and it may be before they go to the
Communion will signify some condiscending unto a reconciliation. But it is the
custom with many, within few days after Easter all the year long until
Easter come again, for to make no conscience of living in discord and envying.
True Christians do not only at Easter, but all the year long oftentimes take an
examination of their whole conversation, how it agrees to the Commandments of
the Gopel of the Lord Jesus Christ, bearing always in remembrance Christ's
words, viz. John 12.48.
The word that I have spoken, the same shall judge you in the last day. And
that of every Mat. 12.36, 37
idle word, that men shall speak, they shall give account in the day of
judgment. For by thy words thou shall be justified, and by thy words thou
shall be condemned. Also true Christians do believe and often think or Saint
Paul's words to the Corinthians, viz. We must all 2 Cor. 5.10, 11.
appear before the judgment seat of Christ, that every one may receive the
things done in his body, according to that he has done, whether it be good or
bad. Also Saint Peter's words: And if ye call on a Father, who without respect
of persons 1 Pet. 1.17.
judges according to every man's work, pass the time of your sojourning here
in fear. David's practice is written for our imitation, who in Ps. 119. says,
Ps. 119.59, 60.120.15.63.66.148.97.
I thought on my ways: and turned my feet unto thy testimonies. I made have,
and delayed not to keep thy Commandments. My flesh trembles for fear of
thee, and I am afraid of thy judgments. I will meditate in thy Precepts: and
have a respect unto thy ways. I am a companion of all them that fear thee:
and of them that keep thy Precepts. I have remembered thy name, O Lord in the
night, and have kept thy law. Mine eyes prevent the night watches, that I might
meditate in thy Word. O how I love thy Law! it is my meditation all the day.
The neglect of examining and judging our own minds and lives by the rule of
all the Commandments of Christ's holy Gospel, for to amend them according to
his holy express word, as we are advertised in the last part of the most
sacred Letany, it is the cause of so much difference about religion now in the
Christian world. As many as have their eyes in their own Eccles. 2 14.
heads, and not in the corners of the earth, only upon others; As many as obey
Christ's Commandment, Mat. 7.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
Judge not, that ye be not judged. For with what judgment ye judge, ye shall
be judged, and with what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again.
And why beholdest thou the Mote that is in thy brothers eye, but considerest
not the Beam that is in thine own eye? Or how will thou say to thy brother,
let me pull out the Mote out of thine eye, and behold a Beam is in thine own
eye? Thou Hypocrite, first cast out the Beam out of thine own eye: and then
shall thou see clearly to cast out the mote out of thy Brothers eye: As many as
do not merely talk of the strait gate and narrow way, but also their own
selves with their whole heart Luke. 13.24. Mat. 7.13.14.
strive to enter in at the same, becoming 1 Cor. 3.18.
fools, that they may be wise, Isa. 55.7.
forsaking all their imaginations, and Rev. 3.17.
false riches, and Mat. 19.22. Ier. 4.14.
possessions in spirit, which they have received from the 1 Cor. 2.12.
spirit of the world, and not from the Spirit of God, which are contrary to the
testimony and approbation of Gods express Word, and of the Divine Service of
the Church of England; As many as forsake their Prove. 9.6.
own chosen way, and only walk in the Ier. 6.16. Ps. 139.24.
old way, according to the direction of the universal holy Scriptures, and the
prescription and instruction of our Mother the Church of England, in her books
of Divine Service; who unfainedly strive to do like David, to Ps. 119.32.
run the way of Gods Commandments; to be Ps. 119.29, 30
removed from the way of lying, and to have God grant them his law graciously;
who choose the way of truth, and lay Gods judgments before them; who pray to
be Ps. 119.33.
taught the way of Gods Statutes, for to keep that way unto the end thereof;
who Ps. 119.14.
rejoice in the way of Gods Testimonies as much as in all riches; who pray to
be made Ps. 119.27,
understand the way of Gods Precepts; who pray to be quickened (or made lively)
in the way of the Lord; who pray to God for to Ps. 138.^3, 24
search them, and know their hearts, to try them, and to know their thoughts,
and to see if there be any Or way of pain or grief, as it is rendered in the
Margent.
wicked way in them; and to lead them in the way everlasting; Such as are like
David thus affectioned, do honor the godly wisdom of the Church of England
their Mother, Phil. 2.16.
held forth in the books of her Divine Service, and do at length by the grace
of our Lord Jesus, and the love of God, and the fellowship of the Holy Ghost,
come into the Act. 4.32. Ier. 32.39.
unity of the most holy faith and upright life, prescribed in the said sacred
Books, and in the other books of her Doctrine and discipline, established by
public and common Authority. But it is now with some as it is mentioned in
holy Writ: There is a generation that are pure their own eyes: and yet is not
Pro. 30.12, 13, 14.
washed from their own filthiness. There is a generation, O how lofty are
their eyes! and their eye lids are lifted up. There is a generation whose teeth
are as swords, and their jaw-teeth as knives, etc. Of such also the same Divine
Writer says, All the ways of a man are Prove. 16.2.
clean in his own eyes: but the Lord weighs the spirits. Every way of a man
is Prove. 21.2.
right in his own eyes, but the Lord pondereth the hearts. To neglect
examining, judging and amending ones own self, and to be a censurer of others
is the damnable Pharisaicall nature. Saint Luke records that the covetous
Pharisees heard Christ's sayings, and derided him. And he said unto them, Ye
are they which Luke 16.15, 14.
justify your selves before men, but God knows your hearts: for that which
is highly esteemed amongst men, is an abomination in the sight of God. And he
spoke this Parable unto certain which Luke 18.9, 10, 11, 12.
trusted in the uselves that they were righteous, and despised other. Two men
went up into the Temple to pray, the one a Pharisee, the other a Publicane. The
Pharisee stood and prayed thus with himself, God I thank thee, that I am not
as other men are, Extortioners, unjust, Adulterers, or even as this Publicane.
I fast twice in the week, I give tithes of all that I possess, etc. Christ
tells the Laodicean Angel what he thought of himself, saying: Thou say, I am
Rev. 3.17.
rich, and increased with goods, and have need of nothing: and know not that
thou art wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked, etc. Saint
Paul foretold, that wisdom in ones own eyes, or self wisdom, good opinion
of ones own ways, and the like spiritual pride, would be the disease of the
last days. And he reckons it up in the first place of the seventeene
reigning sins of these times, saying unto Timothy: This know also, that in
the last days, perilous times shall come, for men shall be 2 Timothy 3.1, 2, 3,
4, 5.
lovers of their own selves, etc. not 2 Cor. 13.5.
examiners, 1 Cor. 11.28.31.
judgers, and Ezech. 36.31.
condemners of themselves, according to the requiry of the holy Gospel. Much
considerable hereto is that ever memorable sentence of the Holy Ghost delivered
by Saint John: Every one that has this hope in him (namely to be like God in
holiness and righteousness, and to see him as he is when he shall appear) 1
John 3.3.
purifieth himself, even as he is pure. The meeter of the fifth verse in the
4. Psalm is memorable.

Sin not, but stand in awe therefore:
examine well your heart:
And in your chambers quietly,
see you your selves convert.
CHAP. 90. Of seeking Gods Kingdom, and the righteousness thereof.
IN the prayer for rain, it is said; O God heavenly Father, which by thy Son
Jesus Christ, have promised to all that seek thy Kingdom, and the
righteousness thereof, all things necessary for their bodily sustenance, etc.
In the book of the Wisdom of Solomon, it is said; Wisd. 1.12, 13, 14, 15, 16.
Seek not death in the error of your life: and pull not upon your selves
destruction, with the work of your hands. For God made not death: neither has
he pleasure in the destruction of the living. For he created all things that
they might have their being: and the generations of the world were healthful:
and there is no poison of destruction in them: nor the Kingdom of death (
(...) inferoru^, juxta vulgatam versionem, atque Innianam.
or hell) upon the earth. For righteousness is immortal. But ungodly men with
their words and works called it to them: for when they thought to have it
their friend, they consumed to naught, and made a covenant with it, because
they are worthy to take part with it. In the first part of the T. 2. p. 275.
Homily against Disobedience and wilful Rebellion, it is signified, That as
long as in the first Kingdom the subjects continued in due obedience to God
their King, so long did God embrace all his subjects with his love, favor and
grace; which to enjoy, is perfect felicity: whereby it is evident, that 1 Samuel
15.22, 23. Ier. 7.22.23.
obedience is the principal virtue of all virtues, and indeed the very root of
all virtues, and the cause of all felicity. But as all felicity and
blessedness should have continued with the continuance of obedience, so with
the breach of obedience, and the breaking in of rebellion, all vices and
miseries did withal break in, and overwhelme the world. We were Psalm. 51.5.
shapen in iniquity, and in sin did our mothers conceive us: Job 14.4.
unclean have we been borne into this world. And growing up in the world,
commonly when we come to the years of discretion, more or less there seizes
on us the Psalm. 143.3, 4.
power of darkness. Other Lords Isa. 26.13.
besides the Lord God have had dominion over us. Satan has had his 2 Timothy
2.26. Ephesians. 2.1, 2, 3.
kingdom more or less upon us. But God would that we should be as his
people the Colossians were whiles they were here in this world, delivered from
the Col. 1.13. 1 Pet. 2.9.
power of darkness, and translated into the Kingdom of his dear Son. For
which cause he sends to us his Ministers, for to open our eyes, and to turn
us from darkness to light, and from the Acts 26.18.
power of Satan unto God, that we may receive forgiveness of sins, and
inheritance among them which are sanctified by faith that is in Jesus Christ.
But to attain hereunto we are required to do our parts also, namely to Mat.
6.33.
seek for Gods Kingdom, and the righteousness thereof. The Kingdom of God
which now we are to seek, is his Kingdom of Romans 5.21.
grace: and Christ says, Behold the Kingdom of God is Luke 17.21.
within you. Holy Church has authorized for our help in devotion, a book
called The imitation of Christ; wherein are very many most heavenly meditations
and exhortations. In the first Chapter of the second book thereof there are
very useful observations hereto, whereof we may make good use in our seeking
of Christ's Kingdom. And they are as follows. The Kingdom of God is within,
says Christ. Joel 2.12.
Turn thee unto the Lord with all thine heart, having 1 John 2.15, 16, 17. and
5.4.
forsaken this wretched world, and thou shall Mat. 11.29.
find rest for thy soul. Learn to contemn 2 Cor. 4.18.
outward things, and to addict thy self to Col. 31.2.
spiritual; so shall thou perceive the Kingdom of God to come unto thee. For
the Romans 14.17.
Kingdom of God is righteousness and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost, which
the wicked Isa. 57.20, 21.
enjoy not. Christ will John 14.18. 2 Cor. 6.16.
come unto thee and comfort thee, if thou make a Luke 1.17. Isa. 40.3, 4, 5. as
in the Epistle for Saint John Baptists day.
sit resting place for him within thee. For all his Psalm. 45.13.
glory and beauty is within, there does he gladly abide. With the Ephesians. 2.16, 17.
inner man does he oftentimes walk, and reason sweetly, and Prove. 8.31.
delight himself pleasantly, and agree notably, and familiarly continue. Go
too now, O faithful soul, prepare thine heart for this Bridegroom, that he
may Ps. 101.^, etc. Song. 3.4.
come unto thee, and dwell within thee. For thus he says: If any man love me,
he will keep my word, and my Father will love him, and we will John 14.23.
come unto him, and will dwell with him. The Preface before the said book,
which Preface is entitled, A godly Preface, made by him, whosoever he was,
that translated this book out of the Latin tongue into French, is a most
singular delivery of many foundations unto true devotion, and very worthy every
Christians often reading through. Moreover, as the Kingdom, Rule, Reign,
Dominion, sway and pre-eminence, which God has in his people, is to be sought
after within our inward man, and to be expected there to 2 Pet. 1.19.
arise, begin, and to be administered more and more by the Romans 8.14.
Spirit of Jesus Christ; so also the Prove. 15.9.
righteousness of that Kingdom is to be seeked, which the Spirit of Christ
Heb. 1.8, 9.
administreth, not only Hos. 10.12.
inwardly within man's spirit, but also so as it Ps. 15.2. Psalm. 119.1, 2, 3, 4,
5, 6.
works outwardly, wherethrough every man and woman which are subjects of
Christ's Kingdom of Grace, are inflamed with fervent zeal, and an unfeigned
desire and striving to work righteousness in every Psalm. 106.3. Mat 7 23.
Isa. 33.15. Genesis 18.19. Mat. 7.12.
particular matter of this present world. And that thereunto Luke 1.74, 75 1
John 2 29. and 3.10.
tended Christ's Kingdom of Grace, it may appear unto us out of the most holy
delivery of the Church in the third collect for Grace, where it is said; Grant
that this day we Jude 2.4.
fall into no sin, neither run into any kind of danger: but that all our
doings may be ordered by thy governance (or Kingdom) to do always that,
which is righteous in thy sight, through Jesus Christ our Isa. 32.1. and 61.1,
2, 3. Romans 6, 13, 18, 19. Phil. 4.13. 1 Cor. 15.57, 58.
Lord. Amply and wonderful gloriously have the Prophets and Apostles written
of Christ's Kingdom of Grace, and the Lord Jesus Christ himself has much
expressed the mystery thereof by parables. To be a subject of Christ's Kingdom
is the Rev. 2.17.
new name, which none knows saving he that receives it. Many are the 1 Cor.
3.9, 10
privileges which the subjects thereof do enjoy, which are not thought of by
such as sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death, and have no desire to
depart thereout, and to seek for to have the divine governance to be Ephesians.
4.15, 16. 2 Pet. 3 18.
more and more within them. To conclude, when by the enlightening of Christ's
holy Spirit we do in see, that the coming of his Kingdom of grace is to be
attended for to be received inwardly in our spirits, we must also remember what
holy Church as it were inculcateth to us in the Gospel to be read at
Baptism, that we for our parts are to receive it with such an humility of
mind as is in a little child. The Lord there says, Suffer little children to
come unto me and forbid them not, for to such belongs the Kingdom of God.
Verily I say unto you, whosoever does not receive the Kingdom of God as a Mat.
10.15.
little child, he shall not enter therein. One must forsake Mat. 16.2^. Luke
14.26.33.
himself, and all that he has, 2 Timothy 3.2.
self-love, Prove. 3.7.
selfe-wisedome, Ier. 4.14.
vain thoughts, 2 These. 2.12, 1 ^. Isa. 28.15.
untrue beliefes, whatsoever spiritual possession in his mind, which he
enjoys, which the Spirit of God has not given to him and enstated him in:
Ones soul must be as a Psalm. 131.2.
weaned child, as David says his was. Also Christ's Kingdom is to be seeked
with obedience unto the universal ordinances of Christ's Church; of us, with
all conscionable and zealous obedience unto every particular ordinance of the
Apostolical Church of England. For every particular ordinance thereof, as well
the ceremonial as the other, serve to prepare us, and to introduct us, and to
plant us, and to establish us in the said divine Kingdom. It may be Such as
submit themselves to yield obedience to the universal ordinances of the Church
observe aspiritual fire in the disobedient.
observed in all places concerning all persons, which refuse to yield obedience
unto the ordinances of the Church of England, that they have not peace in their
Ephesians. 5.6. Romans 2.8.9.
consciences, because of their Mat. 18.17. Luke 10.16.
disobeying the wife or Spouse of Jesus Christ. If that Almighty God so
commended the house of the Rechabites, for keeping all the precepts, and for
doing according to Ier. 35.18, 15.
all that they were commanded by Ionadab their father: much more does he expect
that people should do according to every particular, which 1 Timothy 3.15. Isa.
2.2, 3. Micah 4.1, 2. Zech. 8.23. Act. 15.2, 4, 6, 22.
holy Church prescribes unto them. We are also hereto for to remember the
counsel given by Isaiah: Isa. 55.6, 7.
Seek ye the Lord, while he may be found, call upon him while he is near. We
are to seek before the door be Mat. 25.10, 11, 12.
shut against us, and before the master of the house be Luke 13.25, 26, 27.
risen up, as Christ admonishes. The Lord by Hosea says, That it comes to
pass, that there is a time, when such as have dealt treacherously against the
Lord, which will not frame their doings, to turn unto their God; but retain
the spirit of Whoredom in the midst of them, and not know the Lord, but walk
on in spiritual pride, They shall go with their flocks, and with their
herds to seek the Lord: but they shall not Hos. 5.6.
find him, he has withdrawn himself from them. Jeremiah signifies of the
manner of Ier. 50.4, 5.
seeking the Lord, where he says: In those days, and in that time, says the
Lord, the children of Israel shall come, they and the children of Judah
together, going and weeping: they shall go, and seek the Lord their God. They
shall ask the way to Zion with their faces thitherward, saying, Come, and let
us join our selves to the Lord, in a perpetual covenant that shall not be
forgotten. We are not to travel toward Canaan for to enjoy there the milk and
honey, retaining within our selves a lusting after the Exodus 16.3. 1 Cor. 10.6.
fleshpots of Egypt. Also unless we seek the Lords kingdom with our Ier.
29.13.
whole heart, we shall never find it. It is most memorable, what is written in
the book of Chronicles, That all Judah had sworn, with 2 Chronicles. 15.12, 15.
all their heart to seek the Lord, and sought him with their whole desire, and
he was found of them: and the Lord gave them rest round about. There are some
that seek (as they say) after Christ's kingdom, but it is according to the
imagination of their own heart, and not according to the prescriptions
expressed in Gods word, and declared in the Divine Service of the Church. And
it comes to pass with them, as Isaiah says: Isa. 29.8, 9, 10.
It shall even be as when an hungry man dreameth, and behold he eats; but he
awaketh, and his soul is empty: or as when a thirsty man dreameth, and behold
he drinks; but he awaketh, and behold he is faint, and his soul has
appetite; So shall the multitude of all Nations be, that fight against mount
Zion: Stay your selves and wonder, cry ye out, and cry: they are drunken but
not with wine, they stagger but not with strong drink. For the Lord has
powered out upon you the spirit of deep sleep, and has closed your eyes, etc.

CHAP. 91. Of the Christian unity.
IT is the last of the complaints, which the holy Fathers of the Church have
made in the sacred prayer after the Letany in the last Fast book, There has
been little or no care among us to keep truth and peace together, for the
preserving of our Church and State. In the Collect for Simon and Iudes day, we
are taught to pray, Grant us so to be joined together in unity of spirit by
the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles, that we may be made an holy Ephesians.
2.19, 20, 21, 22. Heb. 3.6. 1 Pet. 2.5. See also the margent.
temple acceptable to thee, through Jesus Christour Lord. In the Collect for
All Saints, it is said: Almighty God, which have knit together thy Elect in one
communion and fellowship, in the mystical Ephesians. 2.22, 23. and 4.15, 16.
body of thy Son Christ our Lord; grant us grace so to Phil. 3.17. Heb. 13.7.
follow thy holy Saints in all virtuous and godly living, that we may come to
those unspeakable joys which thou have Isa. 64. 4, 5. Psalm. 31.19. Mat. 25.21.
prepared for them that unfainedly love thee, through Jesus Christ our Lord. In
the prayer for the whole state of Christ's Church militant here in earth, it is
said; We beseech thee to inspire continually the universal Church with the
spirit of truth, unity, and concord: and grant that all they that do confess
thy holy name, may 1 Cor. 1.10.
agree in the truth of thy holy word, and live in 1 Cor. 12.13.25. Ioh.
17.21.22.23.
unity and Ephesians. 4.16. Col. 2.19. Ephesians. 5.2. Ioh. 13.35.
godly love, In the Collect to be read after private absolution, it is said;
Preserve and continue this sick member in the Ps. 122.3, Act. 1.4. Ephesians. 5.3.
Ps. 133.1.2.3.
unity of the Church. In the second Collect for Peace, it is said; O God,
which art Author of peace, and lover of concord, etc. In the Collect to be
read on the fourth Sunday after Easter, it is said: Almighty God which do
make the minds of all faithful men to be of one Phil. 2.1 3.2.5 and 3.16.
will, etc. In the sacred Letanie it is said: That it may please thee to give
to Ps. 67. Zechar. 14.9. Ephesians. 1.10. Is. 11.9.
all Nations, unity, peace, and concord. In the first part of the T. 1. p.
89.90. Ps. 22.27.28.29 Ezech. 37.22.
Homily against contention, it is said: Among all kinds of contention, none is
more hurtful, than is contention in matters of Religion. Eschew (says Saint
Paul) foolish and unlearned 2 Timothy 2.23.24.
questions, knowing that they breed strife. It becomes not the servant of God
to fight, or strive, but to be meek toward all men. This contention and strife
was in Saint Paul's time among the Corinthians, and is at this time among us
Englishmen. For too many there be which upon the Alebenches or other places,
delight to set forth certain questions, not so much pertaining to edification,
as to vain glory, and showing forth of their 1 Timothy 6.20.
cunning, and so unsoberly to reason and dispute, that when neither part will
give place to other, they fall to chiding and 1 Timothy 6.3.4.5.
contention, and sometime from hot words to further inconvenience. Saint Paul
could not abide to hear among the Corinthians, these words of discord or
dissension, I hold of 1 Cor. 3.3.4.5.
Paul, I of Cephas, and I of Apollo: What would he then say, If he heard these
words of contention (which be now almost in every man's mouth:) Iam. 4.11. Romans
14.12.13
He is a Pharisee, he is a Gospeller, he is of the new sort, he is of the old
faith, he is a new broched brother, he is a good Catholic father, he is a
Papist, he is an Heretic. O how the Church is divided? O how the Cities be
cut and mangled? O how the Coat of Christ, that was without seame, is all to
rent and torn? O body mystical of Christ, where is that holy and happy Unity,
John. 15.5.6. Ephesians. 2.12.
out of the which whosoever is, he is not in Christ? Mark well this sacred
delivery concerning the Absolute necessity of being in Christian Unity, or of
unfeined striving thereunto.
If one member be pulled from another, where is the body? If the body be drawn
from the head, where is the life of the body? We cannot be joined to Christ
our head, except we be glued with concord and charity one toward another. For
he that is not of this Unity, is not of the Church of Christ, which is a
Congregation or Unity together, and not a division. Saint Paul says, That as
long as emulation or envying, contention, and Factions or Sects be among us, we
be 1 Cor. 3.3.
carnal, and walk according to the fleshly man. And Saint James says, Iam.
3.14.15.16.
If ye have bitter emulation or envying, and contention in your hearts, glory
not of it: for where as contention is, there is unstedfastnesse, and all evil
deeds. And why do we not hear Saint Paul, which prays us, whereas he might
command us, saying, I beseech you in the name of our Lord Christ Jesus, that
you will speak all 1 Cor. 1.10.
one thing, and that there be no dissension among you, but that you will be
one whole body, of one mind, and of one opinion in the truth. The same Apostle
also says, Ephesians. 4.1.2.3.4.5.6.
I exhort you that you walk as it becomes the vocation in which you be
called, with all submission and meekness, with lenity and softness of mind,
bearing one another by charity, studying to keep the Unity of the spirit by
the bond of peace: For there is one body, one spirit, one faith, one baptism.
There is (says he) but one body, of the which he can be no lively member,
that is at variance with the other members. There is one spirit, Ephesians. 2.22. 1
Cor. 12.13.
which joyneth and knitteth all things in one. And how can this one spirit 1
Kings. 19.11.12.13.
reign in us, when we among our selves be divided? There is but one faith,
and how can we then say, he is of the old faith, and he is of the new faith?
There is but one baptism, and then shall not all they, which be baptized be
one? Prove. 13.10:
Contention causes division, wherefore it 1 Cor. 11.16.18. Romans 16.17. Gal
5.19.20.21
ought not to be among Christians, whom one faith and baptism joins in an
Unity. Again Saint Paul says, Phil. 2.1.2.3.
If there be any consolation in Christ, if there be any comfort of love, If
you have any fellowship of the spirit, if you have any bowels of pity and
compassion, fulfill my joy, being all like affected, having one charity, being
of one mind, of one opinion, that nothing be done by contention or vain
glory. In the T. 2. p. 179.
Homily for Good Friday, it is said: Christ delights to enter and dwell in
that soul where Ioh. 14.23. Act. 2.1.2.3.4.
love and charity rules, and where peace and concord is seen. In the second
part of the T. 2. p. 203.
Homily concerning the Sacrament, it is said: Saint Paul writes, that we being
many, are 1 Cor. 10.17.
one bread and one body; for all be partakers of one bread. Declaring thereby,
not only our communion with Christ, but that Unity also, wherein they that
eat at this table, should be Col. 2.2.19.
knit together. For by dissension, vain glory, ambition, strife, envying,
contempt, hatred, or malice, they should not be dissevered but so joined by the
bond of love, in one mystical body, as the corns of that bread in one loaf.
In the fourth part of the T. 2. p. 235.
Homily for Rogation week, it is signified, that by love and charity, which is
the only livery of a Christian man, and by godly peace and quiet, we be knit
together in one general fellowship of Christ's Ephesians. 3.15.
family, in one common Ephesians. 2.19. 1 Gal. 6.10.
household of God. And because that all true members of Christ's Church do live
in unity of the most holy faith, and in uniformity of godly life, or unfeinedly
endeavor thereunto, they are therefore in the first Collect for Good Friday,
called Gods Family; and in the Collect for the fifth Sunday after the Epiphany,
are called God Household.

David says, Ps. 122.3. as in the Divine Service translation.
Jerusalem is builded as a City: that is at unity in it self. Saint Paul very
lively shows the unity of Christ's Church, saying: From the head Christ, the
whole body fitly Ephesians. 4.16.
joined together, and compacted by that which every joint supplieth, according
to the effectual working in the measure of every part, makes increase of the
body unto the edifying of it self in love. To the Colossians he says, From
the head (Jesus Christ) all the body by joints and bands having nourishment
ministered, and Col. 2.19.
knit together, increases with the increase of God. S. Paul to the Corinthians
speaking of himself and other servants of Christ, says, An holy Scripture
much considerable hereto.
Walked we not in the 2 Cor. 12.18.
same spirit? walked we not in the same steps? Were we not of one mind, and
of one life? The Lord by Jeremiah promises to all people obedient to his will,
that he will give them Ier. 32.39.
one heart, and one way, that they may fear him for ever, for the good of
them, and of their Children after them. Zechariah says, And the Lord shall be
King over all the earth: in that day there shall be one Lord, and his Zech.
14.9.
name one. Saint Paul says to the Corinthians: As the body is one, and has
many members, and all the members of that one body being many, are 1 Cor.
12.12, 13, 14.
one body, so also is Christ. For by one spirit are we all baptized into one
body, whether we be Jews or Gentiles, whether we be bond or free: and have
been all made to drink into one spirit. For the body is not one member, but
many. Saint Paul says to the Ephesians, Christ is the Savior of his Ephesians. 5.23.
body, of members endeavoring to keep the unity of his spirit. He will save
his ( Heb. 5.9.
obedient) Mat. 1.21.
people from their sins: but will condemn to everlasting destruction 2 These.
1.8, 9.
such as willingly disobey the commandments of his Gospel. If a man (says
Christ) John 15.6.
abide not in me, he is cast forth as a branch, and is withered, and men
gather them, and cast them into the fire, and they are burned. Caiaphas
prophesied, that Christ should dye for that Nation: and not for that nation
only, but that also he should gather together in John 11.52.
one, the Children of God that were scattered abroad. The Lord by Jeremiah
complains, saying; My people has been lost sheep, their shepherds have
caused them to go astray, they have turned them away on the Mountains: they
have gone from Mountain to hill, they have forgotten their Ier. 50.6.
resting In Ps. 26.13. the words, His soul shall long at ease, are in the
Hebrew, His soul shall lodge in goodness. (...) as it is rendered in the
Margent.
place: (which is in the holy faith and godly life prescribed plentifully in
the Divine Service of the Church of England.) Solomon says, Pro. 13.10. Luke
1.51. 1 Pet. 5.5.
Only by pride comes contention. God A cause of the differences between
many people.
scatters the proud in the imagination of their hearts. They never come into
unity the life of Christianity, which will not bow their understandings under
the Doctrine of the Church, and their lives under her laws and prescriptions.
As all that despise to be in mind and life conformed to the deliveries in the
books of Divine Service, do live (for the most part) as a wild people in
many respects; so such persevering in such wilful disobedience unto holy
Church, do commonly perish in the Jude 11. Number. 16.
gainsaying of Core. Ever most memorable hereto is Christ's prayer unto his
Father, that all his Disciples might here on earth live in unity, and draw all
Iam. 4.8.
nearer and nearer together into some likeness of the unity of the holy,
blessed, and glorious God the Father, and God the Son, saying: Neither pray I
for these alone; but for them also, which shall believe on me through their
word. That they may all be Ioh. 17.20, 21 21, 23.
one, as thou Father art in me, and I in thee; that they also may be one in
us: The most Sacred Majesty, and the holy Fathers of the Church, for the
increase of Christian unity, peace, and concord in our Nation, declare most
godly care, and that the Gospels Ordinance of Catechizing, the laying of the
foundation of the true Christian faith and life (the unity of the holy Spirit,)
is enjoined to be more and more used, according to the Sacred Constitution
concerning the same.
that the world may believe that thou have sent me. And the glory which thou
gave me, I have given them: that they may be one, even as we are one: I in
them, and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one, etc. Memorable
also are the sacred words in His Majesty's Declaration before the Articles of
Religion, viz. We hold it is most agreeable to this Our Kingly Office, and Our
own religious Zeal, to conserve and maintain the Church committed to Our
charge in the unity of true Religion, and in the bond of peace. And therefore
His Highness in that Divine declaration, requires all his loving subjects to
continue in the uniforme profession of the said Articles; and prohibiteth the
least difference from them. It is also the requiry of His Most Sacred Majesty,
that all his loving Subjects, for a ground of uniforme profession of Christian
faith, and of Christian life, should conform to the universal prescription in
the Books of the Divine Service, according as they concern every one in his
place either in Clergy, or in Laity.

CHAP. 92. Of Growing in the Christian faith, and in the Christian life.
IN the general Confession we are taught to pray: Grant O most merciful
father, for Jesus Christ his sake, that we may hereafter live a godly,
righteous, and sober life, to the glory of thy Holy name: In the Absolution
following, it is said: And that the rest of our life hereafter may be pure and
holy, so that at the last we may come to his eternal joy, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. In the Sacred Letanie, it is said: That it may please thee to
give to all thy people increase of grace, to hear meekely thy word, and to
receive it with pure affection, and to Mat. 3.10. Gal. 5.22.23.
bring forth the fruits of the spirit. We are taught in the end of the Service
of Baptism, to be 1 Cor. 15.58. Romans 8.13.
continually mortifying 2 Cor. 5.17. Gal. 5.24.
all our evil and corrupt affections, and 2 Cor. 4.16.
daily proceeding in Ephesians. 5.9,10.
all virtue and godliness of living. In the Collect for the foureteenth Sunday
after Trinity, it is said: Almighty and everlasting God, give unto us the
increase of faith, hope, and charity: and that we may obtain that which thou
do promise, make us to love that which thou do command, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. In the prayer to be said immediately before the ordering of
Priests, it is said: Grant unto us all, that we may daily increase and go
forwards, in the knowledge and faith of thee and thy Son, by thy Holy Spirit.
In the third part of the T. 1. p. 29.
Homily of faith, it is said: As you profess the Name of Christ (good
Christian people) let no fantasy and imagination of faith at any time beguile
you: but be sure of your faith, 2. Cor. 13.5.
try it by your living, look upon the fruits that comes of it, mark the
increase of Gal. 5.6. Iam. 2.17.18.26.
love and charity by it toward God and your neighbor, and so shall you
perceive it to be a true lively faith. If you feel and perceive such a faith
in you, rejoice in it: and be diligent to maintain it, and keep it still in
you, let it be daily increasing, and more and more by well working, and so
shall you be sure that you shall please God by this faith, etc. In the first
part of the T. 1. p. 3.
Homily an exhortation to the reading of of Holy Scripture, it is said: A
delivery to be continually remembered in reading the holy Scripturer, declareing
unto what end they should be read.
In reading of Gods Holy word, he most profits not always, that is most
ready in turning of the Book, or in saying of it without the Book; but he
that is most turned into it, that is most inspired with the Holy Ghost, most in
his heart and life altered and changed into that thing which he reads: He
that is daily less and less proud, less wrathful, less covetous, and less
desirous of worldly and vain pleasures: he that daily (forsaking his old
vicious life) increases in virtue more and more. In the first part of the T.
2. p. 144.
Homily an Information of certain places of Scripture, it is said: If some man
will say, I would have a true pattern and a perfect description of an upright
life, approved in the sight of God: can we find (think ye) any better or
any such again, as Christ Jesus is, and his Doctrine? Whose virtuous
conversation and godly life, the Scripture so lively painteth and sets forth
before our eyes, that we beholding that pattern, might shape and frame our
lives, as nigh as may be, 2 Cor. 3.18. Romans 8.29. 1 Ioh. 2.6.
agreeable to the perfection of the same. In the first part of the T. 2 p. 258.
Homily of repentance, it is said: we must labor that we do return Heb.
7.19. Micah. 6.8. Genesis 5.22.
as far as unto God, and that we do never cease nor rest till we have
apprehended and taken Acts. 17.27.28 Song. 3.4.
hold upon him. At the end of the first tome of Ephesians. 5.9, 10.
the Homilies it is said concerning the Homilies of the second tome, that they
are as well fruitful as necessary to the edifying of Christian people, and the
increase of godly living.

David speaking of the people of God, says: They Ps. 84.7.
go from strength to strength: every one of them in Zion appears before God.
Solomon says, The path of the just is as the shining light, that shines Prove.
4.18.
more and more unto the perfect day. Saint Paul said to the Thessolonians, We
are bound to thank God awaies for you, brethren, as it is meet, because that
your faith 2 These. 1.3.
grows exceedingly, and the charity of every one of you all toward each
other abounds. To the Corinthians he says, We all with openface beholding
as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same Image 2. Cor.
3.18.
from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord. Saint Peter says, 2
Pet. 3.18.
Grow in grace and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
Again he says: Giving all diligence, 2 Pet. 1.5.6.7
add to your faith, virtue; and to virtue, knowledge; and to knowledge,
temperance; and to temperance, patience; and to patience, godliness; and to
godliness, brotherly kindness; and to brotherly kindness, charity. The which
eight matters His exposition of the seven stops.
one calls the Ladder of Salvation: and says he, it is necessary that each
step of it be understood, lest when one is only upon the first stop, The true
faith i^ in most divine manner described in the three parts of the Homlly
thereof.
he may deceive himself, thinking that he is near enough to Salvation, when
as he is far from the state thereof. Unto faith there is to be added virtue,
strength or godly valor. Mark. 9.23.
All things (says Christ) are possible to him that believes. Mark. 11.24.
Whatsoever things ye desire when ye pray, believe that ye receive them and
ye shall have them. Christ also said unto one, As thou have Mat. 8.13.
believed, so be it done to thee. Of the strength in right faith Saint John
has a remarkable sentence: Whatsoever is borne of God, overcommeth the world:
and this is the victory, that overcommeth the world, even our 1 Ioh. 5.4.
faith. And Saint Paul shows, who it is that makes man so strong, saying: I
can do all things through Christ Phil. 4.13.
which strengthens me. Flesh and blood thinks it unpossible to love ones
enemies; but that one must needs Mat. 5.43.
hate them, and Romans 11.17.
recompense to them evil for evil, and 1 Pet. 3.9. and 2.23.
reproachful words for reproachful words or writings. Yet to Mat. 5.44.
love ones enemies is Christ Commandment, a part of the yoke which he lays
upon us; who has said, Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me, for I am meek
and lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls. For my Mat.
11.29.30
yoke is easy, and my burden is light. And Saint John says, 1 Ioh. 5.3.
His commandments are not grievous. And because Christ Jesus in his Gospel
has commanded us nothing, but what in some good measure to perform, he will
give us more and more strength, if we in faith Ioh. 14.13. Iam. 1.5.6.
ask the same, and withal use all other means for to attain the same,
according as he in his holy word has prescribed, holy Church in the Collect
for Saint Stephens day has taught us to pray, saying: Grant us, O Lord to
learn to love your enemies, by the example of thy Martyr Saint Stephen, who
prayed for his persecuters.

Of the knowledge.
S. Peter says next, Add to your virtue, knowledge. True knowledge does
consist in experience. Joshua, and Galeb, and the rest of the Israelites, which
subdued the Canaanites, knew experimentally that they were conquerable. And
before they manfully fought against the^, hoping to overcome them, for that they
had faith in Gods word, who Exodus 3.17. Deu^. 1.29.30.31.32.41.
expressly pro mised unto the^ victory over them, they so fighting against them,
as Gods Spirit should direct them. But such as believed nor the promise of God
and through Number. 13.31.33.
unbelief were faint hearted, or cold, or lukewarm in courage unto the
battles of the Lord, their carcases Number. 14.^9.
fell in the wilderness, they could not enter into the rest of the Lord, because
of Heb. 3.19.
unbelief. Likewise such as now believe not the Gospels sentence, The God of
Peace shall Romans 16.20.
bruise (or tread) Satan under obedient believers feet shortly, they attain not
to have an experimental knowledge, what is the exceeding Ephesians. 1.19. Col. 1.29.
2. Cor. 13.3. Of Tempera^ce
greatness of Gods power unto and in his holy ones.

S. Peter also says, add to knowledge, temperance. A faithful Soldier and
servant of Christ (as we are all instructed to be by the divine Service read,
when the sign of the Cross is in making on the fore head of one baptized)
having fought manfully under Christ's bannour against sin, the world, and the
devll, and by 1 Cor. 15.57. Phil. 4.13.
Christ's help having overcome some spiritual enemies, Phil. 3.14.
Presses hard toward the mark, for the price of the high calling of God in
Jesus Christ hoping to have like good success against the rest of the
spiritual enemies, to have the victory over the^ more and more through the
Almighty Lord Jesus Christ, does therefore as Saint Paul did (or at least
faithfully and unfainedly endeavors thereunto) who says: Know ye not that
they which run in a race, run all, but one receives the prise? so run that
ye may obtain. And every one that striveth for the mastery, is 1 Cor. 9.24,
25, 26, 27.
temperate in all things: Now they do it to obtain a corruptible crown, but
we an incorruptible. I therefore so run, not as uncertainely: so fight I not
as one that beats the air: but I keep under my body, and bring it into
subjectio^: lest that by any means when I have preached unto others, I my
self should be a cast away. Hereto Saint Peter's counsel is to be remembered:
Dearly beloved, I beseech you as Strangers and Pilgrims 1 Pet. 2.11.
abstain from fleshly lusts, which war against the soul.

Of Patience.
Furthermore, Saint Peter says, Add to Temperance, Patience. Saint Paul says
unto Timothy, Thou therefore 2 Timothy 2.3, 4, 5, 12.
endure hardness, as a good soldier of Jesus Christ. No man that warreth
intangleth himself with the affairs of this life, that he may please him, who
has chosen him to be a soldier. And if a man also strive for masteries, yet
is he not crowned except he strive lawfully. If we suffer with Christ, we
shall also reign with him. Much considerable hereto is the holy delivery of
the Church in the sacred T. 2. p. 195, 196.
Homily of the resurrection: Truth it is, that sin is strong, and affections
are unruly. Hard it is to subdue and resist our nature, so corrupt and leavened
with the sower bitterness of the poison, which we received by the inheritance
of our old father Adam. But yet take good courage, says our Savior Christ,
for I have John 16.33.
overcome the world, and all other Col. 2.14, 15.
enemies for you. Romans 6.14.
Sin shall not have power over you, for ye be now under grace, says Saint
Paul. Though your power be weak, yet Christ is risen again to Phil. 3.10.
strengthen you in your battle, his holy Spirit shall Romans 8.26, 27
help your infirmities. In trust of his mercy, take you in hand to 1 Cor. 5.7,
8, 6.
purge this old leaven of sin, that crrupteth and sowreth the sweetness of
our life before God, that ye may be as new and fresh Dow, void of all sower
leaven of wickedness, so shall ye show your selves to be sweet bread unto God,
that he may have his delight in you. And in the same T. 2. p, 193.
Homily it is said: By the assistance of Christ's holy Spirit, we be replenished
with all righteousness, by whose power we shall be able to Romans 6.12. Romans
8.1^. 2 Cor. 10.4, 5, 6
subdue all our evil affections, rising against the pleasure of God. When the
Jews returned from their captivity in Babylon unto Jerusalem, and went about
reparing the Temple of the Lord, which was ruinated and laid wast, they were
sorely vexed and hindered by the Ezra. 4.1, 4, 5, etc.
Chaldeans, under which Nation they had been in captivity before: yet they Neh.
4.15, 16 17.
patiently endured, and took their times and best occasions to set the work
forward, and were not discouraged, as utterly to leave off the enterprised
business, but constantly persevered until it was 1 Esd. 7.5.
finished. We may make use of the Sacred Story, applying it unto the 1 Pet. 2
5. Ephesians. 2.21, 22.
spiritual work, which Christ requires at our hands.

Of Godliness.
Saint Peter further says, Add to Patience, Godliness. Whereas the inward
war of the flesh Gal. 5.17.
against the spirit is very great; and our war is not only against flesh and
blood, and visible enemies in this outward world; but also against enemies
working within our soul and spirit, namely against Ephesians. 6.12.
principalities, against powers, against the Rulers of the darkness of this
world, against spiritual wickedness (or * wicked spirits) in high (or *
heavenly) places; and so our sufferings, sorrows, agonies and the like
spiritual miseries are greater As in the margent of the last translation.
than our Ps. 143.3, 4, 7.
natural strength is able to abide, therefore we are to betake our selves (as
Saint Paul says) to Ephesians. 6.18.
pray always with all prayer and supplication in the spirit, and watching
thereunto with all perseverance, that God would Ps. 144.1, 2.
teach our hands to war, and our fingers to fight, that he would be our
fortress and high tower and our deliverer, our shield, wherein to trust, also
to Ps. 18.31, 34, 39.
gird us with strength unto the battle; and to subdue under us those that rise
up against us. And thus to be devoted unto prayer is Godliness: whereunto we
are exhorted in the most Sacred Catechism, where it is said: My good Child
know this, that thou art not able to do these things of thy self, nor to
walk in the Commandments of God, and to serve him, without his special 1
Cor. 12.9. Romans 5.20, 21.
grace, which thou must learn at all times to call for by diligent prayer. And
then in the answer concerning what we desire in the Lords Prayer, we are
taught to pray unto God, That it will please him to save and defend us in all
dangers ghostly and bodily, and that he will 2 Timothy 4.18.
keep us from all sin and wickedness, and from our ghostly Ioh. 1.10.
enemy, and from everlasting death.

Of Brotherly kindness.
Saint Peter also says: Add to Godliness, Brotherly kindness. And because
when we through the grace of God in Jesus Christ by prayer have obtained our
requests, and for every benefit received of God are bound to render most hearty
Ps. 116.1, 2, 12, 17.
thanks unto him, and to express our love unto him not in word only, but in
1 John 3.18.
deed also: For that the Lord has no need of our goods, seeing the whole world
is his and Ps. 24 1.
all therein, therefore says David: O my soul, thou have said unto the Lord,
thou art my Lord, my goodness Ps. 16.2, 3, 4.
extends not to thee: but to the Saints, that are in the earth, and to the
excellent, in whom is all my delight. Their sorrows shall be mutiplied that
hasten after another god (or As it is also rendered in the margent there.
give gifts to another.) It is our duty to love Iam. 2.14, 15, 16. 1 John 3.17.
1 John 5.1.
really those whom God loves, namely, our brethren, whom the Spirit with the
Iam. 1.18.
word of truth has begat as well as us, into some measure of Gods Image, which
is Ephesians. 4.24. Col. 3 10.
righteousness, and true holiness. Unto them we are to Rom 12.13.
impart of our goods, and for them to do all good Offices we can, and to
perform unto them all other duties according as it is prescribed unto us in
the Gospel of Jesus Christ: Yea, and as we have Gal. 6.10.
opportunity, we are also for the Lords sake to do good unto all other
people; though especially to them that are of the household of faith.

Of Charity.
Lastly, Saint Peter says, Add to Brotherly kindness, Charity. Forasmuch as
our aforesaid love toward God, and toward others for Gods sake, is 1 John
4.18.
imperfect, whiles it has joined with it the love of our selves, that is,
whereas we love God, and others for Gods sake, because God is good unto us;
therefore we are to grow in Charity until we truly love God, because he is
good in himself, and to do it beyond respect of benefit or punishment from
God, until also we love Romans 5.8, 10 Mat. 5.44, 45, 46, 47, 48.
whatsoever God himself loves, according as it is prescribed in the holy
Scriptures: Yea, we are to 2 These. 1.3.
grow in Charity, until we pass into that everlasting kingdom of heaven,
where all live in perfect Charity into all eternity. And if any devout soul in
the fear of God has in some measure received the faith in Jesus Christ, and
according to the holy Gospels requiry by the delivery of Saint Peter, is
zealous in adding thereto the seven other things, as being matters all 2 Pet.
1.8, 9, 10, 11.
necessary together with faith to be had and exercised in the way unto
everlasting salvation; if he be taken forth of this life before all these
things do abound in him, (as S. Peter says they ought,) he is to be
accounted to dye a true soldier of Jesus Christ, one that has made a
faithful entrance into his holy warfare. And even as by the law of God a
Virgin espoused to a man is his true Mat. 1.18, 19 20, 25.
wife, although they be not married, nor have come together, as Heb. 13.4.
after marriage they lawfully may: So a devout soul leaving this present world
before that high growth in the mystery of godliness be attained by it, which
the Scriptures record that sundry of Gods people have heretofore attained unto,
that holy soul having not Rev. 3.16.
lukewarmly, but Romans 10.2. Prove. 19.2.
truly, zealously pressed hard thereafter, by faithful using all Mat. 25.23.
Luke. 12.48. 2 Cor. 8.12.
helps vouchsafed unto it by God for the attaining nearer and nearer
thereunto, is through the mercy of God in Jesus Christ received, as a true Luke
23.43. 2 Cor. 11.2.
member of his mystical body, into Paradise, into Abraham's bosom, to be with
the Lord Jesus for evermore. Saint Peter says, As newborn Babes desire the
sincere milk of the Word, that ye may 1 Pet. 2.2.
grow thereby. Saint John declares the different ages in Christ, or in the
great mystery of godliness, from one whereof into the other the obedient
people of GOD do Ephesians. 4.15. Col. 1.28. 1 Cor. 13.11.
grow, where he says: I write unto you 1 John 2.12, 13, 14.
little Children, because your sins are forgiven you for his names sake. I
write unto you fathers, because ye have known him that is from the beginning.
I write unto you, young men, because ye have overcome the wicked one. I write
unto you little Children, because ye have known the Father. I have written
unto fathers, because ye have known him that is from the beginning. I have
written unto you, young men, because ye are strong, and the word of God abides
in you, and ye have overcome the wicked one. Out of which delivery it may
appear, that in the Christian Religion there is a childhood, a young manhood,
and a fatherhood, or old age: also thereout may be observed the different
spiritual strength and understanding in each age.

CHAP. 93. Of the Devil.
THe first of the three things promised and vowed in our name at our Baptism,
is, That we should forsake the Devil and all his works. So by the sign of
the Cross which we had made on us, we are to learn for to fight manfully
under Christ's banner against sin, the world, and the Ephesians. 6.11, 12.
Devil. Even in every part of the divine service we are taught to pray for to
be defended from the Devil. In the Catechism, we are taught to pray for to be
delivered from our ghostly enemy. In the Baptisme-Service, it is said: Grant
that they may have power and strength to have victory, and to triumph against
the 1 Ioh 5.18.
Devil, the world, and the flesh. In the Communion-Service, it is signified,
that we should not come unto the Sacrament, but with due preparation, lest
after the taking thereof, the Devil enter into us, as he entered into John
13.27.
Judas, and sill us full of all iniquities, and bring us to destruction both of
body and soul. In the Service of Matrimony, it is said: Be unto them a Prove.
18.10.
tower of strength from the face of their eenemy. In the Service for the
Visitation of the sick, it is said: Let the 1 Pet. 5.8.
enemy have none advantage of him, nor the wicked approach to hurt him. And
defend him from the danger of the enemy. And renew in him whatsoever has been
decayed by the fraud and malice of the Devil.

In the Collect for the eighteenth Sunday after Trinity, it is said: Grant thy
people grace to avoid the infections of the 2 Cor. 2.11.
Devil, and with pure heart and mind to follow thee the only God. In the
holy Letany it is said, Finally to beat down Satan under our feet. And
Graciously hear us, that those evils, which the craft and 2 Cor. 11.3. Rev.
20.2.11.
subtilty of the Devil or man works against us, he brought to naught, and by
the providence of thy goodness they may be dispersed. In the second part of
the T. 1. p. 57.
Homily of falling from God, it is said; They shall be given into the power of
the Devil, which bears the rule in all them that be cast away from God, as
he did in 1 Samuel 28.15, 16.
Saul and Mat. 27.5.
Judas, and generally in all such, as work after their own wills, the
children of Ephesians. 2.2.
mistrust and unbeleefe.

In the third part of the T. 1. p. 68.
Homily against the fear of death, it is said; Considering also the
innumerable assaults of our ghostly enemy the Devil, with all his Ephesians. 6.16.
fiery darts of ambition, pride, lechery, vain glory, envy, malice,
detraction, or backbiting, with other his innumerable deceits, engines, and
snares, whereby he goes busily about to catch all men under his dominion, ever
like a roaring Lion, by all means searching whom he may devour. In the third
part of the T. 1. p. 88.
Homily against Adultery, it is said; Now to avoid fornication, adultery, and
all uncleanness, let us provide that above all things, we may Prove. 4.23.
keep our hearts pure and Iam. 4.8.7. Mat. 15.15, 20.
clean, from all evil thoughts and carnal lusts: for if that be once
infected and corrupt, we fall headlong into all kind of ungodliness. This
shall we easily do, if when we feel inwardly, that Satan our old enemy
tempts us unto whoredom, we by no means consent to his crafty suggestions,
but valiantly resist and withstand him by strong 1 Pet. 5.9.
faith in the Word of God, alleging against him always in our heart, this
commandment of God: It is written, thou shall not commit Whoredom. It shall
be good also for us Prove. 28.14. and 23.17.
ever to live in the fear of God, and to set before our eyes the grievous Mat.
25.46.41. Rev. 21.8. Deuteronomy. 28.15, etc.
threatenings of God against all ungodly sinners, and to consider in our mind,
how filthy, beastly, and short that pleasure is, whereunto Satan continually
stirs and mooveth us. And again, how the pain appointed for that sin is
1 Cor. 6.9, 10 Luke 16.23, 24.
intolerable and everlasting. And afterward it is said; It is the duty of the
married, virtuously to bring up their children, and to provide, that they fall
not into Satan's 2 Timothy 2.26.
snare, nor into any uncleanness, etc. In the third part of the T. 2. p. 50.
Homily against peril of Idolatry, it is said; Satan, Gods enemy, desiring to
rob God of his honor, desires exceedingly that such Mat. 4.6.
honor might be given unto him. Wherefore those which give the honor due to
the Creator, to any Romans 1.23, 25.
creature, do service acceptable to no Saints, who be the friends of God, but
unto Satan, God and man's mortal and sworn enemy. And afterward it is said,
Clemens has a notable sentence concerning this matter, saying thus, That
serpent the Devil does by the mouth of certain men utter these words: We for
the honor of the invisible God, do worship visible images, which doubtless
is most false. And by and by after he says, Understand ye therefore that this
is the suggestion of the serpent Satan, lurking Ephesians. 6.12.1^ and 2.2.
within you, which persuades you that you are godly, when you honor
insensible and dead images, and that you be not ungodly, when you hurt or leave
unsuccoured the lively and reasonable creatures. In the first part of the T. 2.
p. 143.
Homily an information concerning certain places of Scripture, it is said:
Satan our enemy seeing the Scriptures to be the very mean and right way to
bring the people to the true knowledge of God, and that Christian religion is
greatly Psalm. 119.130.9.
furthered by diligent hearing and reading of the^, he also perceiving what an
hinderance and let they be to him and his Kingdom, does what he can to drive
the reading of them out of Gods Church. In the second part of the T. 2 p. 225.
Homily for Rogation week, it is said: If we stand in necessity of corporal
health, whither go the common people, but to Deuteronomy. 18.10, 11, 12.
charms, witchcrafts, and other delusions of the Devil? If we knew that God
were the author of this gift, we would only use his means appointed, and bide
his leisure, till he thought it good for us to have it given. If the Merchant
and worldly occupier knew that God is the giver of riches, he would content
himself with so much as by just means approved of God, he could get to his
living, and would be no richer tha^ truth would suffer him, he would never
procure his gain, and ask his goods at the Devils hand. God forbid ye will
say, that any man should take his riches of the Devil. Verily so many as
increase themselves by usurie, by extortion, by perjurie, by stealth, by
deceits and craft, they have their goods of the Devils gift. And all they that
give themselves to such means, and have renounced the true means that God
has appointed, have forsaken him, and are become 1 Cor. 10.20.
worshippers of the Devil, to have their lucres and advantages. They be such
as kneel down to the Devil at his bidding, and worship him: for he promises
them for so doing, that he will give them the world, and the goods therein.
They cannnot otherwise better serve the Devil, than to do his pleasure and
commandment: and his motion and will it is, to have us forsake the truth, and
betake us to falsehood, to lies and perjuries. In the T. 2. p. 239.
Homily of Matrimony, it is said; The common example of the world declares how
the Devil has their hearts bound and entangled in diverse snares, so that they
in their wivelesse state run into open abominations, without any 1 Timothy 4.1,
2, Ephesians. 4.17, 18, 19.
grudge of their conscience. And T. 2. p. 240.
afterward it is said unto the married; The 1 Cor. 7.15.
Devil will assay to attempt all things for to interrupt and hinder your
hearts and godly purpose, if ye will give him any entry.

In the T. 2. p. 251.
Homily against Idleness, it is said; The enemy came while men were Mat.
13.25.39.
asleep and sowed naughty tares among the good wheat. In very deed the best
time that the devil can have to work his feat, is when men be asleep, that
is to say, Mat. 21.44, 45.
idle: Then is he most busy in his work, then does he soonest catch men in
the snare of perdition, then does he fill them with all iniquity, to bring the^
(without Gods special favor) unto utter destruction.

In the third part of the T. 2. p. 296, 297.
Homily against wilful rebellion, it is said; As heaven is the place of good
obedient subjects, and hell the 1 Pet. 3.19, 20.
prison and dungeon of rebels against God and their Prince: So is that Realm
happy where most obedience of subjects does appear, being the very figure of
heaven: and contrariwise where most rebellions and rebels be, there is the
express similitude of hell, and the rebels themselves are the very figures of
fiends and Devils, and their captain the ungracious pattern of Isa. 14.12.
Lucifer and Satan, the Prince of darkness, of whose rebellion as they be
followers, so shall they of his damnation in hell undoubtedly be partakers. The
Lord Christ Jesus said unto the wilful disobedient Jews: Ye are of your
father the John 8.44.
Devil, and the lusts of your father ye will do: He was a murderer from the
beginning, and abode not in the truth, because there is no truth in him. When
he speaks a lie, he speaks of his own: for he is a liar, and the father of
it. Christ knowing the Devils great power in the world, called him the John
12.31.
Prince of the world. Saint Paul called him the 2 Cor. 4.4.
God of this world. And unto the Ephesians he says of him, that he is the
Ephesians. 2.2.
Prince of the power of the air, the spirit that now works in the children
of disobedience. And speaking of the Hell-spirits he calls them
principalities, powers, rulers of the darkness of this world, the Ephesians. 6.12.
as in the margent.
wicked spirits in heavenly places ( namely in the spirits and souls of men
and women, where the Romans 8.9, 10 11, 13, 14, 15, 16.
Spirit of God the Father, and of the Lord Jesus Christ, should only live,
walk, dwell, rule and reign.) Saint Paul unto Timothy signifies, that
people, till they be penitent for their sinful life, and do bring forth
fruits meet for repentance, are in the snare of the 2 Timothy 2.26.
Devil, taken captive of him at his will. Saint John foretold how that Rev.
20.2, 7, 8, 9.
Satan should be bound a thousand years: and after that he must be loosed a
little season, when the thousand years were expired, Satan should be loosed
out of prison; and should go out to deceive the Nations, which are in the
four quarters of the earth, Gog and Magog, to gather them together to battle,
the number of whom is as the sand of the sea: And that they would go up on the
breadth of the earth, and compass the camp of the Saints about, and the
beloved City; but fire should come down from God out of heaven, and devour
them. Saint Paul likewise foreknowing how that in the time when Satan was let
loose out of the prison, wherein he had been bound a thousand years, Mat.
24.12.
iniquity would abound, and the love of many would wax cold, foretells what
sins would reign then, yea in the professors of the name of Christianity,
saying: This know also, that in the 2 Timothy 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
last days, perilous times shall come. For men will be lovers of their own
selves, covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents,
unthankful, unholy, without natural affection, truce breakers, false
accusers, incontinent, fierce despisers of those that are good, traitors,
heady, high-minded, lovers of pleasures more than lovers of God, having a form
of godliness, but denying the power thereof. How mighty soever the Devil is,
and that he is like a roaring Lion; yet if the obedient people of God do
resist him, Saint James says, that he will Iam. 4.7.
flee from them. Saint John says, He that is begotten of God, keeps
himself, and that 1 Ioh. 5.18.
wicked one touches him not. Such as do Iam. 4.8, 9, 10.
draw nigh unto God, cleansing their hands, and purifying their hearts,
submitting themselves unto God, humbling themselves in the sight of the Lord,
unto such ( as James says) God draws nigh, he gives grace, he lifts them
up into Ephesians. 1.3. and 2.6.
heavenly places in Christ Jesus. Job the obedient child of God, witnessed by
God himself, to be a perfect and upright man, a fearer of God, and an eschewer
of evil, was by Gods Almighty power and wisdom Job 1.1, 10.
hedged in round about, so that the Devils hand could not reach him, until for
a time and with Job 1.12.
limitation there was permission: Wonderful is the providence of God for such
as Psalm. 34.7, 9, 18.
fear him, and have a religious and conscionable Psalm. 119.6.
respect unto all his Commandments. It is ever remarkably signified in the
prayer toward the end of the most sacred Letany, That such, in whom is the
sighing of a contrite heart and of a spirit sorrowful for committing sins,
are graciously heard; so that those evils, which the craft and subtlety of
the Devillor man works against them, be brought to naught, and by the
providence of Gods goodness be dispersed; that the obedient servants of Christ
being hurt by no persecution (according as the Eternal Wisdom sees it most
requisite to dispose) may evermore give thanks unto God in his holy Church,
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

CHAP. 94. Of the Seven deadly Sins.
SAint Paul 2 Timothy 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
reckons up seventeene deadly sins, that among many professors of the name
of Christianity would reign in these latter times. And holy Church according
to the delivery of godly antiquity, in the third part of the T. 2. p. 293, 294.
Homily against disobedience and wilful rebellion says; Thus you see that all
good Laws are by rebels violated and broken, and that all sins possible to
be committed against God or man, be contained in rebellion: which sins if a
man list to name by the accustomed names of the seven capital or deadly
sins, as Pride, Envy, Wrath, Covetousness, Sloth, Gluttony, and Lechery,
he shall find them all in rebellion, and among rebels, etc. We are taught to
pray in the sacred Letany: From fornication, and all other deadly sin, and
from all the deceits of the world, the flesh, and the Devil, Good Lord deliver
us.

Of Pride.
IN the first part of the T. 1. p. 7.
Homily of the misery of man, it is said; The holy Ghost, in writing the holy
Scriptures, is in nothing more diligent, than to pull down man's vain glory and
pride, which of all vices is most universally grafted in all mankind, even
from the first infection of our first father Adam. And therefore we read in
many places of Scripture, many notable Lessons against this old rooted vice, to
teach us the most commendable virtue of 1 Pet. 5.5.
humility how to know our selves, and to remember what we be of our selves. In
the first part of the T. 1. p. 52.
Homily of falling from God, it is said: Of our going from God, the wise man
says, That Ecclus. 10.12 13.
Pride was the first beginning: for by it man's heart was turned from God his
maker. For Pride (says he) is the fountain of all sin: He that has it, shall
be full of cursings, and at the end it shall overthrow him. And as by pride and
sin we go from God, so shall God and all goodness with him go from us. In
the T. 2. p. 109.
Homily against excess of apparel, it is said: That people in hell, too late
repenting themselves, shall openly complain with these words: Wis. 5.8.9.13.
What has our pride profited us? or what profit has the Pomp of riches
brought us? all these things are passed away like a shadow. As for virtue, we
did never show any sign thereof: and thus we are consumed in our wickedness.
In the second part of the T. 2. p. 214.
Homily for Whitsunday, it is said: Saint Gregory says, Pride is the root of
all mischief. And Saint Austines judgment is this, that it makes men devils.
And T. 2. p. 216.
afterward it is said: Wheresoever ye find the spirit of arrogancy and pride,
etc. Assure your selves that there is the spirit of the devil and not of God,
albeit they pretend outwardly to the world never so much holiness. For the
spirit of Jesus is a Mat. 11.29.
a lowly spirit, etc. Habbakkuk says, Behold, his soul which is Hab. 2.4.
lifted up, is not upright in him, but the just shall live by his faith.
Whereby the Prophet gives us to understand, that faith whereby Gods people do
live, is a property quite contrary to loftiness of mind. Also God Iam. 4.6.
resists the proud, but gives grace to the lowly: as the Scripture sundry
times delivers, to the end we should take serious notice of it.

Of Envy.
WE are taught in the Letany to pray, From Envy, hatred, and malice, and all
uncharitableness, good Lord deliver us. In the first T. 2. p. 180.
Homily of the Passion it is said: As peace and charity make us the blessed
children of Almighty God; so does hatred and Envy make us the cursed children
of the Devil. Concerning the great peril of living in Envy, read the whole
Homily against Contention. Saint John says: He that 1 Ioh. 3.15.
hates his brotheer, is a murderer: and ye know, that no murderer has
eternal life abiding in him. The Revelation says, Rev. 21.8.
Murderers shall have their part in the lake, which burns with fire and
brimstone: which is the second death.

Of Wrath.
IN the second part of the T. 1. p. 95.
Homily against contention, it is said: That Pericles being provoked to anger
with many villainous words by one, answered not a word. But we, stirred but
with one little word, what foul work do we make? How do we fume, rage,
stamp, and stare like madmen? many men of every trifle will make a great
watter, and of the spark of a little word will kindle a Iam. 3.5.
great fire, taking all things in the worst part. But how much better is it,
and more like to the example and Doctrine of Christ, to make rather of a great
fault in our neighbor, a small fault, reasoning with our selves after this 1
Cor. 13.7. Prove. 10.12.
sort: He spoke these words, but it was in a sudden heat, or the drink spoke
them, and not he, or he spoke them at the motion of some other, or be spoke
them being ignorant of the truth, he spoke them not against me, but against
him whom he thought me to be. And so along in most divine manner we are there
counseled: And afterward it is there signified, That anger is a kind of
madness, and that he which is angry, is (as it were for a time) in a
Frenzy. Wherefore let him beware, lest in his fury he speak any thing,
whereof afterward he may have just cause to be sorry. And he that will defend
that anger is not fury, but that he has reason, even when he is most angry:
then let him reason thus with himself when he is angry; Now I am so moved and
chafed, that within a little while after I shall be otherwise minded: Wherefore
the^ should I now speak any thing in mine anger, which hereafter, when I would
fainest, cannot be changed? Wherefore shall I do any thing, now being (as it
were) out of my wit, for the which, when I shall come to my again, I shall be
very sad? Why does not reason, why does not godliness, yea why does not Christ
obtain that thing of me now, which hereafter time shall obtain of me?
Almighty God by Solomon says: Be not hasty in thy spirit to be angry: for
Eccles. 7.9.
anger rests in the bosom of fools. That saying of the Lord Jesus might
move us to take heed how we be angry: Whosoever is Mat. 5.22.
angry with his brother without a cause, shall be in danger of the judgment:
and whosoever shall say unto his brother, Racha, shall be in danger of the
counsel: but whosoever shall say, thou fool, shall be in danger of hell sire.
Likewise that saying of Saint Paul: The works of the flesh are these,
Adultery, etc. Gal. 5.19.20.21.
Wrath, strife, etc. They which do such things shall not inherit the Kingdom
of God. Saint Paul therefore says: Be Ephesians. 4.26.
angry and sin not: Let not the Sun go down upon your wrath: neither give
place to the Devil. Great is the power which the Devil has in every man and
woman, which easily will be moved unto wrath.

Of Covetousness.
IN the third part of the T. 2. p. 163.
Homily of Almsdeeds, it is signified, That some seek excuses to withhold
themselves, from the favor of God, and choose with pinching covetousness,
rather to lean unto the Devil, than by charitable mercifulness, either to
come unto Christ, or to suffer Christ to come unto them. In the second part of
the T. 2. p. 205.
Homily concerning the Sacrament it is said: O ( says Chrysostom) let no Judas
resort to this table, let no covetous person approach. Saint Paul says to the
Ephesians, No Whore monger, nor unclean person, nor Ephesians. 5.5.6.
covetous man who is an Idolater, has any inheritance in the Kingdom of
Christ, and of God. Let no man deceive you with vain words: for because of
these things comes the wrath of God upon the Children of disobedience. The
Lord Christ said, Take heed and beware of Luke 12.15.
covetousness: for a man's life consists not in the abundance of the things
which he possesses. And again: No man can serve two Masters: Ye cannot
serve God and Mat. 6.24.
Mammon. Saint Paul says to the Colossians: Mortify therefore your members
which are upon the earth: fornication, uncleanness, inordinate affection,
evil concupiscence, and Col^ 3.5.
covetousness, which is Idolatry. And unto Timothy he says, They that will be
rich, fall into temptation and a snare, and into may foolish and hurtful
lusts, with drown men in destruction and perdition. For the 1 Timothy 6.9.10
love of money is the root of all evil, etc. In Eccesiasticus it is said,
There is not a more wicked thing than a Ecclus. 10.9.
covetous man: for such a one sets his own soul to sale, because while he
lives he casts away his bowels. Read diligently the whole Homily of Alms.

Of Sloth.
IN the second Collect for Good Friday, it is said: Receive our prayers and
supplications, which we offer before thee for all estates of men in thy holy
Congregation, that every member of the same in his vocation and Romans
12.4.5.6.7.8.
ministry, may truly and godly serve thee. In the T. 2. p. 254.
Homily against idleness it is said, Let young men consider the precious value
of their time, and Ephesians 5.16. P. ov. 14.23.
waste it not in idleness, in jollity, in gaming, in banqueting, in Romans
13.13. 1 Pet. 4.3.4.
ruffians company. Youth is but vanity, and must be accounted for before God.
How merry and glad soever thou be in thy youth, O young man (says the
Preacher) how glad soever thy heart be in thy young days, how fast and freely
soever thou follow the ways of thine own heart, and the lust of thine own
eyes, yet be thou sure that God shall bring thee unto judgment Ecclus. 11.9.20.
for all these things. In the third part of the T. 2. p. 166.
Homily of Alms deeds, it is signified, that God is careful to feed them, who
in any state or vocation do unfeinedly serve him. In the T. 2. p. 249.
Homily against idleness it is said: By the ordinance of God, which he has
set in the nature of man, Song. 6.6. Tit. 3.14. as in the Margent.
every one ought, in his lawful vocation and calling, to give himself unto
labor. It is the appointment and will of God, that every man, during the time
of this mortal and transitory life, should give himself to such honest and
godly exercise and labor, and every one follow his own business, and to
walk uprightly in his own 1 Cor. 7.17.20.
calling. Man ( says Job) is borne to Ioh. 5.7. as in the Margent.
labor. And we are commanded by Jesus Sirach, not to hate Ecclus. 7.15.
painful works, neither husbandry, or other such mysteries of travel, which
the Highest has created. Christ's sayings might move every one to shun
Slothfulness in all matters and business both bodily and ghostly; where he
pronounces, Cast the Mat. 25.26.30.
unprofitable (and slothful) servant into utter darkness, there shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth. And by his Apostle to the Hebrews, saying: We
desire that every one of you do show the same diligence, to the full assurance
of hope unto the end: That ye be not Heb. 6.11.12
slothful, but followers of them, who through faith and Man.
6.25.26.27.28.29.30. Ps. 34.10.
patience inherit the promises. And by Saint John, saying: Because thou art
Reu. 3.16.
lukewarm, and neither cold nor hot, I will spue thee out of my mouth. Solomon
says: The desire of the Prove. 21.25.
sloathfull kills him: for his hands refuse to labor, The Apostle to the
Romans says, Be not Romans 12.11.
sloathfull in business, but fervent in In the Epistle for the second Sunday
after the Epiphany, it is rendered, Apply your selves to the time, (...), ut in
quibusdam codieibus.
spirit, serving the Lord. (Or the * time) having a due respect unto the times
and occasions, according to prescription in the Word of God. Continually is
that saying of Christ to be rememembred, wherein spiritual sloth is
signified to be most damnable: Luke 13.24.
Strive to enter in at the strait gate: for many, I say unto you will seek to
enter in, and shall not be able. Read the sacred Homily against idleness.

Of Gluttony.
IN the T. 2 p. 95.
Homily against Gluttony and Drunkenness it is said: That ye may perceive how
detestable and hateful all excess in eating and drinking is before the face
of Almighty God, ye shall call to mind what is written by Saint Paul to the
Galatians, where he numbreth Gal. 5.19, 20, 21. 1 Cor. 6.10.
Gluttony and drunkenness among those horrible crimes, with the which (as he
says) no man shall inherit the Kingdom of heaven. He reckons them among the
deeds of the flesh, and coupleth them with Idolatry whoredom, and murder,
which are the greatest offenses, that can be named among men. Saint Paul
signifies to the Philippians: That many walk enemies to the Cross of Christ:
whose end is destruction, whose god is their Phil. 3.18, 19
Belly, and whose glory is in their shame, who mind earthly things. Take heed
(says Christ) to your selves lest at any time your hearts be overcharged with
Luke 21.34.
surfeiting and drunkenness, and cares of this life. Saint Paul says: Be not
drunken with wine, wherein is Ephesians. 5.18.
excess: but be filled with the Spirit. The Lord says by Isaiah: Woe unto
them that are Isa. 5.21. Quis in illis regionibus orientis calidoribus Vinum
non bibatur nisi probe dilutum, inde usur patur (...) pro bibere. Sch^ndelerus
in Lexico Pentaglotto.
mighty to drink wine, and men of strength to mingle (or * drink) strong
drink. There is a spiritual gluttony and drunkenness, besides a bodily, as
Isaiah signifies saying: They are Isa. 29.9, 10.
drunken, but not with wine; they stagger, but not with strong drink. Jesus
the son of Syrach says: Be not unsatiable in any dainty thing: nor too
greedy upon meats. For Ecclus. 37.29, 30, 31.
excess of meats brings sickness, and surfeiting will turn into Choler.
By surfeiting have many perished; but he that takes heed, prolongeth his life.
Read diligently the Homily against Gluttony and drunkenness.

Of Lechery.
THe Divine Service of Matrimony reckons up the second cause of Matrimony to
be for avoiding the said horrible and most damnable sin, saying: Matrimony was
ordained for a remedy against sin, and to 1 Cor. 7.2, 9.
avoid fornication, that such persons that have not the gift of continency,
might marry, and keep themselves 1 Cor. 6.15.20.
undefiled members of Christ's body.

IN the first part of the T. 1. P. 78.
Homily against whoredom and uncleanness, it is said: Although we want not
(good Christian people) great swarms of vices worthy to be rebuked, ( unto
such 1 Timothy 4.1. 2. Tim. 3.1.
decay is true godliness and virtuous living now come:) yet above other vices,
the outrageous seas of adultery, (or breaking of Wedlock) whoredom,
fornication and uncleanness, have not only burst in, but also overflowed
almost the whole world, unto the great dishonor of God, the exceeding Romans
2.24.
infamy of the name of Christ, the notable decay of true religion, and the
utter destruction of the public wealth, and that so abundantly that through
the accustomable use thereof, this vice is grown into such a height, that in a
manner among many it is counted no sin at all, but rather a Prou. 10.23 and
14.9.
pastime, a dalliance, and but a touch of youth: not rebuked, but winked at:
not punished, but laughed at. The Apostle says: Marriage is honorable in all,
and the bed undefiled: but Heb. 13.4.
Whoremongers, and Adulterers God will judge. Again he says, Be not deceived:
neither 1 Cor. 6.9, 10
Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, not Effeminate, nor abusers of
themselves with mankind, etc. shall inherit the kingdom of God. Saint Paul to
the Thessalonians says: This is the will of God, even your sanctification,
that ye should abstain from 1 These. 4.3, 4, 5.
fornication: that every one of you should know how to possess his Vessel in
sanctification and honor: not in the lust of concupiscence, even as the
Gentiles which know not God. Whosoever is inclined unto any manner of
incontinency, let him in Gods fear often read through the whole Homily
against adultery and uncleanness, and by Christ's help he may get the
victory over that deadly sin, using fasting, prayer, abstaining from the
company of all lascivious persons, and using other means which are prescribed
in Gods holy Word. Considerable hereto is also that of Solomon, where he says:
Pro. 9.17, 18.
Stolen waters are sweet, and bread eaten in secret is pleasant. But he
knows not that the dead are there, and that her ghests are in the depth of
Hell.

CHAP. 95. Of sundry other sins.
Of Slandering.
IN the second part of the 7.1. p. 95.
Homily against Conte^tion, it is said: He that is ready to speak evil against
other men, first let him examine himself, whether he be faultlesse and clear
of the Romans 2.1, 3.21, 22, 23.
fault which he finds in another. For it is a shame when he that blames
another for any fault, is guilty himself, either in the same fault, or in a
greater. It is a shame for him that is blind, to call another man blind; and
it is more shame for him that is whole blind, to call him blinkard, that is
but purblinde. For this is to see a Mat. 7.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
straw in another man's eye, when a man has a block in his own eye.

In the second part of the T. 2. p. 203.
Homily concerning the Sacrament, it is most truly and most necessarily
complained: O wretched creatures that we be at these days, who be 1 John 2.11.
without reconciliation of our brethren whom we have offended, etc. Iam. 4.11.
Without any conscience of slander, disdain, misreport, division, rancor, or
inward bitterness. It is even a wonder to consider unto what a licentiousness
of slanderous speech very many, of men, women, and children, are come unto in
these times: they respect neither civil Superiority, nor the Clergy, nor the
Nobility: Yea, there are some, which regard not how 1 Pet. 2.17. Eccles. 10.23.
unbeseemingly they speak of the Royal Majesty. It may now be most truly
said, The very Devil of Hell is Rev. 20.3, 7.
let loose in many peoples mouths. Such might consider the saying of the Holy
Ghost by Saint James, If any one seem religious and Iam. 1.26.
bridleth not his tongue, his religion is vain: (God accepts not his
religion.) Saint Paul says, Be not deceived, the 1 Cor. 6.10.
revilers shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. The Lord Jesus says: O
generation of vipers, how can ye being evil Mat. 12.34, 35, 36, 37
speak good things? for out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks.
A good man out of the good treasure of his heart brings forth good things:
and an evil man out of the evil treasure, brings forth evil things. But I
say unto you, that every idle word (much more every detracting and slanderous
word) that men shall speak, they shall give account thereof in the day of
judgment. For by thy words thou shall be justified, and by thy words thou
shall be condemned. David in the 15. Psalm asking who should be saved,
answers from Gods Spirit, He that Ps. 15.3.
backbiteth not with his tongue, nor does evil to his neighbor, nor takes up
(or As in the M^rgent.
receives, or endures) a reproach against his neighbor. Such as are prone
unto evil speaking, should often read through the Epistle of Saint James:
also the whole Homily against strife and contention. Moreover, they should be
much conversant in Solomon's Proverbs, in Ecclesiastes, in the Book entitled
The Wisdom of Solomon, and in the Book Ecclesiasticus.

Of Vnjustnesse.
IN the fourth part of the T. 2. p. 236.
Homily for Rogation week, it is said: Love equity and righteousness, ensue
mercy and charity, which God most Micah. 6.8. Mat. 23.23. Ier. 9.24.
requires at our hands. And a little before it is amply discoursed against
unjustnesse, saying: God is the God of all equity and righteousness, and
therefore forbids all deceit and subtilty in his Law, by these words, ye
shall not deal Leu. 19.35, 36
unjustly in judgment, in line, in weight, or measure. Ye shall have just
balances, true weights, and true measures. Prove. 11.1.
False balances ( says Solomon) are an abomination to the Lord. Remember what
Saint Paul says, God is the 1 These. 4.6.
revenger of all wrong and injustice, as we see by daily experience: how ever
it thriveth ungratiously, which is gotten by falsehood and craft. Saint Paul
says, Know ye not that the 1 Cor. 6.9, 10
unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? The Lord says to all that
are in Authority. Ye shall do no unrighteousness; thou shall not respect the
person of the poor, nor honor the person of the mighty: but in Leu. 19.15.
righteousness shall thou judge thy neighbor. One envouring faithfully to
make the rule, which Christ gave, the rule of all actions, shall walk in much
justness: viz. Luke 6.31.
As ye would that men should do to you, do ye also to them likewise.

Of Uncharitableness.
IN the Sacred Letany we are taught to pray; From all uncharitableness good
Lord deliver us.

In the second part of the T. 2. p. 132.
Homily of the place and time of Prayer, it is said; Consider that all thy
doings 1 Cor. 13.2, 3. Isa. 1.13, 15, 16, 17, 18. and Isa. 65.2 3 4, 5, 6, and
66.3, 4. Prove. 15.8. and 21.27.
stink before the face of God, if thou be not in charity with thy neighbor.
Saint Paul says, Let all your things be done with 1 Cor. 16.14.
charity. Isaiah says, The meek shall increase their joy in the Lord, and the
poor among men shall rejoice in the holy one of Israel. For the terrible one
is brought to naught, and the scorner is consumed, and all that watch for
iniquity, are cut off: That make a man an Isa. 29.19, 20, 21.
offender for a word, and lay a snare for him that reproves in the gate, and
turn aside the just for a thing of naught.

Of Uncomeliness.
IN the T. 2. p. 106.
Homily against excess of Apparel, it is said: Let us take unto us
simplicity, chastity, and comeliness, submitting our necks to the sweet yoke
of Christ. Saint Paul says to the Ephesians: But fornication and all
uncleannes, or covetousness, let it not be once named among you, as becomes
Saints: neither Ephesians. 5.3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
filthiness, nor foolish talking, nor jesting, which are not convenient: but
rather giving of thanks. Let no Ephesians. 4.29.
corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth, but that which is good to the
use of edifying, that it may minister grace to the hearers. Let all things be
done 1 Cor. 14.40.
decently and in order. As uncomely words and actions are sin, so for a man
or woman to go uncomely in their apparel, or to be of any uncomely behavior
is a sin also: for the Gospel commands, That whatsoever things are Phil.
4.8.
lovely, or of good report, if there be any virtue, and if there be any
praise, think on these things, and do them.

Of contempt of Gods Word.
IN the Letany we pray, From contempt of thy Word and Commandment, good Lord
deliver us. In the first part of the T. 1. p. 53.
Homily of falling from God, it is said; All they that may not abide the word
of God, but following the persuasions and stubbornness of their own hearts,
go backward and not forward ( as it is said in Ier. 7. 24.
Jeremy). they go and turn away from God. Many now a days by their neglect
to have the holy Bible in their houses, by their neglect to search it, by their
neglect to live according to it, by their neglect to amend according to it,
what by the ministry they are informed of to be amiss; by their neglect to
hear it duly according to the Law of the Church, by their neglect even all the
year to confer on it, and by their neglect to meditate thereon, they show
plainly that they have it in contempt: and were it not for fear of being
punished by the Magistrate, they would express what is in their hearts against
it: And so some Machavillians will adventure sometimes to utter, without any
fear of God or man.

Moreover, the contemners of the Divine Service-doctrine of the Church, and of
the Ministers which conscionably endeavor to live and teach according to all
the same, are to be reckoned among the 1 These. 4.8.
contemners of Gods Word; as it may appear out of Christ's words, where he
says unto his Ministers: He that hears you, hears me; and he that Luke
10.16.
despises you, despises me. If they have kept my saying, they will keep
yours also. Jeremiah says: The wise men are ashamed, they are dismayed and
taken: lo, they have Ier. 5.9.
rejected the Word of the Lord, and what wisdom is in them?

Of halting on both sides.
IN the first part of the T. 2. p. 259.
Homily of Repentance, it is said; God requires a sincere and pure love of
godliness, and of the true worshipping and service of God, that is to say,
that for saking all manner of things that are repugnant pugnant and contrary
unto Gods will, we do give our hearts unto him, and the whole strength of our
bodies and souls, according to that which is written in the Law: Thou shall
love the Lord thy God, with Deuteronomy. 6.5.
all thy heart, with all thy soul, and with all thy strength. Here therefore
nothing is left unto us, that we may give unto the world, and unto the Romans
13.14.
lusts of the flesh. For since that the heart is the fountain of all our
works, as many as do with whole heart turn unto the Lord; do Romans 14.7, 8,
9. 1 These. 5.10.
live unto him only. Neither do they yet repent truly, that halting on both
sides, do otherwhiles obey God, but by and by do think, that laying him
aside, it is lawful for them to serve the world and the Romans 8.8.4, 5.12. Gal.
5.16, 17.24.
flesh. Elijah said: How long halt ye between two opinions (or thoughts?) If
the Lord be God, 1 Kings 18.21
follow him; but if Baal, then follow him. The Lord Jesus has said, Mat. 6.24.
No man can serve two Masters: for either he will hate the one and love the
other; or else he will hold to the one, and despise the other. Ye cannot
serve God and Mammon.

Of Vain glory.
IT is signified in the second part of the T. 2. p. 203.
Homily concerning the Sacrament, That by vainglory, ambition, etc. people
are Prove. 13.10.
dissevered, which should be joined together in unity and godly love. And
therefore in the sacred Letany, we are taught to pray, for to be delivered
from it. Saint Paul says, Let us not be desirous of vainglory, Gal. 5.26.
provoking one another, envying one another. Christ said to the disobedient
Jews, Romans 5.44.
How can ye believe, which receive honor one of another, and seek not the
honor which comes from God only? Again, the Lord says: John 7.18.
He that speaks of himself, seeks his own glory: but he that seeks his
glory that sent him, the same is true, and no unrighteousness is in him. Saint
Paul says: O Timothy keep that which is committed to thy trust, avoiding
profane and vain bablings, and 1 Timothy 6.20, 21.
oppositions of science, falsely so called: which some professing, have erred
concerning the faith. Saint John says, Among the chief Rulers many believed
on Christ, and because of the Pharisees they did not confess him, lest they
should be put out of the Synagogue. For they Ioh. 12.42, 43.
loved the praise of men, more than the praise of God.

Of Hypocrisy.
IN the first part of the T. 1. p. 10.
Homily of the misery of man, it is said, Few of the proud, just, learned,
wise, perfect, and holy Pharisees, were saved by Christ, because they justified
themselves by their counterfeit holiness before men. Wherefore (good people)
let us beware of such hypocrisy, vain glory, and justifying of our selves.
The Lord said unto his disciples, Beware ye of the leaven of the Pharisees,
which is Luk 12.1.
hypocrisy. The Lord signifies that the Hypocrites do their Alms for to
Mat. 6.2.5.
have glory of men; They love to pray standing, etc. that they may be seen of
men: They make long Mat. 23.14.
prayer, thinking to be heard for their Mat. 6.7.
much speaking. They outwardly Mat. 23.28.
appear righteous unto men, but within are full of hypocrisy and iniquity.
All their works they do, for to be Mat. 23.5.
seen of men. They justify Mat. 16 15.
themselves before men. Saint Paul says, not he that 2 Cor. 10.18.
commends himself is approved, but whom the Lord commends. Christ has
very plainly displayed the nature of hypocrisy, in the 23. Chapter of Saint
Matthew.

Of Heresy.
IN the Letany we are taught to pray, To be delivered from all false doctrine
and heresy. Saint Paul says unto Titus, A man that is an Tit. 3.10.11.
Heretic, after the first and (...), ab (...) inverto, id quod interius
eratextra verto, seu resu^ino. An Heretic is as a dog returned to his own
vomit again. 2 Pet. 2.22.21.
second admonition, reject: knowing that he that is such, is subverted, and
sins, being condemned of himself. Whence it may appear, that 3. things are
to be considered concerning heresy. First, that it is a departing out of the
narrow way that leads unto life eternal, both with mind and life: or a
turning clean contrary to the right form. Secondly, it is returning unto an
habit of sinning. And thirdly, it is a condition or estate without peace of
conscience, but having an inward condemnation. They of the Church of Rome,
which call heretics the members of the Apostolical Church of England, namely
that Church in England, which is by Law established under the Kings Majesty,
do greatly and damnably slander them. For the true members of the said
Apostolical Church of England, are not in mind and life departed forth of the
narrow way which leads unto life eternal, neither do they give themselves
unto sinning, neither are they without Gods peace in their consciences. Every
true member of the said Church of England endeavors to believe and live
according to the divine Servince-doctrine, and the rest of the doctrine and
discipline, which is established by public or common Authority. All which said
doctrine and discipline (as this present work abundantly declares) serves to
further people in the Ier. 6.16.
old paths, where is the good way (as the Prophet Jeremiah speaks) and every
one that faithfully walks therein according to the established doctrine and
discipline, finds more and more rest for his mind or soul.

Of hardness of heart.
IN the second part of the T. 2. p. 269, 270.
Homily of Repentance it is said; Let us hearken unto the voice of Almighty
God, Prove. 1.23, 24, 28.
when he calls us to repentance, let us not Job 9.4. Prove. 21.29. and 29.1.
harden our hearts, as such Exodus 8.15.
Infidels do, who abuse the time Rev. 2.2.
given them of God to repent; and turn it to continue their pride and contempt
against God and man, which know not how much they Romans 2.5. Iam. 5.3.
heap Gods wrath upon themselves, for the hardness of their hearts, which
cannot repent at the Luke 13.25, 26, 27.
day of vengeance. With great godly wisdom has holy Church ordained to be
read at morning Prayer the Psalm, wherein God says unto us by his servant
David: To day if ye will hear my voice, Ps. 95.8.
harden not your hearts. Wherefore Saint Paul says, Take heed brethren, lest
there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief, in departing from the
living God. But exhort one another daily while it is called, to day, lest any
of you be Heb. 3.12.13.14.15.
hardened through the deceitfulness of sin. For we are made partakers of
Christ, if we hold the beginning of our confidence steadfast unto the end. A
means to unharden ones own heart is to believe as well Christ's Mat. 5.20.
Matt. 18.3. Luke 13.3. Romans 8.13. Luke 14.26.33. Ioh. 15.6.
threatenings, as his promises. And all that do believe what is said in the
Gospel concerning his unpartiall judging of mankind, have not hearts so hard
as they have, which believe not those divine Oracles concerning Christ's
righteous judging. See Zechariah 7.9.10.11.12.13. and Acts. 28.23.24.25.26.27.

Of Desperation.
IN the second part of the T. 2. p. 57.58.
Homily of falling from God, it is said: Let us beware (good Christian people)
lest that we rejecting or casting away Gods word (by the which we obtain and
retain true faith in God) be not at length cast off so far, that we become
as the children of unbeleefe, which be of two sorts far diverse, yea, almost
clean contrary, and yet both be very far from returning to God; the one
sort, only weighing their sinful and detestable living, with the right
judgment and straitness of Gods righteousness, be so without counsel, and
be so comfortless (as they all must needs be, from whom the Spirit of
counsel and comfort is gone) that they will not be persuaded in their hearts,
but that either God cannot, or else that he will not take them again to his
favor and mercy. The other hearing the loving and large promises of Gods
mercy, and so not conceiving a right faith thereof, make those promises larger
than ever God did, trusting, that although they continue in their sinful and
detestable living never so long; yet that God at the end of their life, will
show his mercy upon them, and that then they will return. And both these two
sorts of men be in a damnable state, and yet nevertheless, God (who wills
not the death of the wicked) has showed means, whereby both the same (if they
take heed in Heb. 3.7.13. 2 Cor. 6.1.2. Ioh. 9.5.4. Ioh. 12.36. Luke
13.25.26.27. Mat. 25.10.11.12.13.
season) may escape. The first, as they do dread Gods rightful justice in
punishing sinners (whereby they should be dismayed, and should despair
indeed, as touching any hope that may be in themselves) so if they would
constantly or steadfastly believe, that Gods mercy is the remedy appointed
against such despair and distrust, not only for them, but generally for all
that be sorry and truly repentant, and will therewithal stick to Gods mercy,
they may be sure they shall obtain mercy, and enter into the Port or haven of
safeguard, into the which whosoever does come, be they before time never so
wicked, they shall be out of danger of everlasting damnation, as God by
Ezechiel says, Ezech. 18.21.22.23.27.28.
What time soever a sinner does return, and take earnest and true repentance,
I will forget all his wickedness. The other, as they be ready to believe Gods
promises, so they should be as ready to believe the Rev. 21.8. 1 Cor. 6.9.10.
Gal. 6.
threatenings of God: as well they should believe the Law, as the Gospel: as well
that there is an hell and everlasting fire, as that there is an heaven, and
everlasting joy: as well they should believe damnation to be threatened to the
wicked and evil doers, as salvation to be promised to the faithful in word
and works, as well they should believe God to be true in the one as in the
other. And so along the Church delivers Gods truth in a wonderful divine
manner. Christ says, Mat. 11.28.29.30.
Come unto me all ye that labor, and are heavy laden (with the burden of your
sins and with grief for them) and I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon
you, and learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart, and ye shall find
rest unto your souls. But ( as Saint Paul says) The Lord Jesus shall be
revealed from heaven, with his mighty Angels, in flaming fire, taking vengeance
on them that know not God, and that 2 These. 1.7.8.9.
obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ: who shall be the Gospel of our
Lord Jesus Christ: who shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the
presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power, etc.

Of Sedition and privy conspiracy.
THough we hear it (or at least should often hear it) read in the sacred
Letaine. From all Sedition and privy conspiracy, good Lord deliver us; yet
how prone are many in the world thereunto! Such consider not what the Gospel
says: There is no Romans 13.1.2.
power but of God. The powers that be, are ordained of God. Whosoever
therefore resists the power, resists the ordinance of God: and they that
resist, shall receive to themselves damnation. Such consider not that other
most memorable oracle of God delivered by S. Peter: Submit your selves to 1
Pet. 2.13.14
every ordinance of man for the Lords sakes, whether it be to the King, as
Supreme, or unto governors, as unto them that are sent by him for the
punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well. If such as
are seditiously inclined would sometimes read through the whole Homily of
obedience, and the whole Homily against disobedience and wilful rebellion, and
also would call to mind the end of all seditious ones, and of all privy
conspiratours in former times, even in all privy conspiratours in former
times, even in all ages and almost in all places, they by the grace of Christ
might be of a clean contrary disposition. Saint Paul from God Almighty
denounces, that hatred, variance, emulations, wrath, strife, Gal. 5.20.21.
seditions, heresies (or sects, or factions) envyings, etc. Are works of the
flesh: and that they which do such things shall not inherit the Kingdom of
God. And now for conclusion about mentioning particular sins, referring every
devout soul unto a diligent reading or hearing of the whole Bible, and to
observe thereout what the spirit of God has delivered and prescribed for every
one in his several vocation and state, either to do, or to leave undone and
to shun: and also to a most serious search of the whole divine Service of the
Church of England, for to perform every particular duty mentioned therein,
which concerns him; and to shun whatsoever it is there dehorted from, let
us hear what holy Church delivers unto us in the first Homily T. 2. p. 176.
of the Passion concerning the detestation which we ought to have within us
continual against all sin. No man can love sin, which God Ps. 5.4.5.6.
hates so much, and be in his favor. No man can say, that he Ioh. 14.23.24.
loves Christ truly, and have his great enemy (sin I mean, aut hour of his
death) familiar and in friendship with him. So much do we love God and Christ,
as we hate sin. We ought therefore to take great heed, that we be not
favorers thereof, lest we be found enemies to God, and traitors to Christ.
We can no otherwise live to God, but by 1 Cor. 15.31. Romans 6.8.11.
dying to sin. If Christ be Romans 8.10.11
in us, then is sin dead in us: and if the spirit of God be in us, which
raised Christ from death to life, so shall the same spirit raise us to the
Resurrection of everlasting life. Romans 6.16.
But if sin rule and reign in us, then is God, which is the fountain of all
grace and virtue, Ier. 6.8.
departed from us: then has the Devil, and his ungracious spirit 2 Pet 2.19.
rule and dominion in us. And surely if in such miserable Eccles. 11.^^. Heb.
9.27.
state we dye, we shall not rise to life, but fall down to death and
damnation, and that without end. David therefore says, Ye that love the Lord,
Ps. 97.10. Ps. 119.104.
hate evil.

CHAP. 96. Of the sin against the Holy Ghost.
IN the first part of the T. 2. p. 261.
Homily of repentance, it is said: But of the final falling away from Christ
and his Gospel, which is a sin against the Holy Ghost, that shall never be
forgiven, because that they do Heb. 10.26.
utterly forsake the known truth, do Cor. 16.22.
hate Christ and his Ioh. 8.47.
word, they do Heb. 6.6.
crucify and Heb. 10.29.
mock him (but to their utter destruction) and therefore fall into
desperation, and cannot repent. In the second part of the T. 2. p. 150.
Homily of certain places of Scripture, it is said concerning three sorts of
people, whose company the Prophet David would to be shunned by every one that
would be blessed. The third sort the Prophet calls Ps. 1.1:
scorners, that is, a sort of men whose hearts are so stuffed with malice, that
they are not contented to dwell in sin, and to lead their lives in all kind
of wickedness: but also they do 2 Timothy 3.3. Prove. 29.27.
contemn and scorn in other all godliness, true religion, all honesty and
virtue. Of this sort, I think I may without danger of Gods judgeme^t
pronounce, that never any yet converted unto God by repentance, but continued
still in their abominable wickedness, Romans 2.5. 2 Timothy 3.8.13.
heaping up to themselves damnation, against the day of Gods inevitable
judgments. What sin against the Holy Ghost is, it may the better appear by
considering first, what is sin against God the Father; and what is sin
against God the Son. Sin against God the Father is all transgression
committed; whiles one is in the first Luke 15.18.24 Ephesians. 2.1.
death of trespasses and sins, and in mind is Ephesians. 5.14.
asleep, not attending unto the gracious call of God the Father, nor following
his proffered Ioh. 6.44. Hos. 11.4. Ier. 31.3.
drawing or leading unto repentance. Sin also is said to be against God the
Father which is committed through humane 1. Ioh. 2.12.
weakness and frailty. And sin against God the Son, is the speaking of a
word against the Mat. 12.31.32
son of man Jesus Christ; which sin Saul (afterward called Paul) committed
1 Timothy 1.13.16
ignorantly, in unbeleife. Yea and Peter's Luke 22.56. etc.
denial of Christ for a time appears to be a sin of that nature. Also
when one is a disciple of Christ's Gospel, and through mere ignorance, or the
like infirmity offends against Christ, as Peter did when he said unto
Christ, Be it Mat, 16.22.
far from thee Lord: This shall not be unto thee: (meaning the suffering
which Christ signified that he should endure.) All sin committed against God
the Father, is Romans 3.25.
forgiven through his great mercy in Jesus Christ, Ezech. 18.21 22.
when one repents for the sin. All sin committed against God the Son is
forgiven for his 1 Ioh. 2.12. Ephesians 4 32.
names sake, unto such as 1 Timothy 6.12. Rev. 2.10.11.
fight the good fight of faith, and truly endeavor to lay hold on eternal
life. Now concerning sin against the Holy Ghost, it is either committed by
such as have been made partakers of the Holy Ghost; of whom S. Paul says to
the Hebrews, That it is impossible for those who where once enlightened, and
have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made Heb. 6.4.5.6.7.8.
partakers of the Holy Ghost; and have tasted the good word of God, and the
powers of the world to come; being (...) Hieronymus vertit, Prolapsi sunt.
Syrus (...) qui rursum peccaverunt, id est, a justitia deficientes certamalitia
in omne peccatum projecti sunt, etc Iunius.
fallen away, to renew them again to repentance: seeing they crucify to
themselves the Son of God afresh, and put him to an open shame. For the earth
which drinks in the rain that comes often upon it, and brings forth
herbs meet for them by whom it is dressed, receives blessings from God. But
that which bears thorns and briers, is rejected, and is nigh unto cursing,
whose end is to be burned. And again where he says, If we sin Heb. 10.26,
27, 28, 29.
wilfully after that we have received the knowledge of truth, there remains
no more sacrifice for sins; but a certain fearful looking for of judgment,
and fiery indignation, which shall devour the adversaries. He that despised
Moses Law, dyed without mercy under two or three witnesses. Of how much sorer
punishment suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy, who has trodden under foot
the Son of God, and has counted the blood of the covenant wherewith he was
sanctified, an unholy thing, and has done despite unto the spirit of Grace? Or
else sin against the Holy Ghost is committed by such who will not at all be
made partakers of that holy Spirit; but do as did many Jews, to whom Saint
Stephen said: Ye stiff-necked and uncircumcised in heart and ears, Ye do
Acts. 7.51.
always resist the Holy Ghost, as your fathers did, so do ye. They also of whom
Solomon mentions, are not much differing, where it is said: I Wisdom will
power out my Prove. 1.23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32.
spirit unto you, I will make known my words unto you. Because I have called,
and ye refused, I have stretched out mine hand, and no man regarded: but ye
have set at naught all my Counsel, and would none of my reproof: I also will
laugh at your calamity, I will mock when your fear comes. When your fear
comes as desolation, and your destruction comes as a Whirlewinde; when
distress and anguish comes upon you: Then shall they call upon me, but I
will not answer: they shall seek me early, but they shall not find me: for
that they hated knowledge, and did not choose the fear of the Lord. They would
none of my Counsel, they despised all my reproof, Many of the Pharisees among
the Jews were of such a condition, who of set malice against Christ Ioh. 7 7.
witnessing unto them that their works we evil, against the common light of
reason with which Gods holy Spirit endueth Ioh. 1.9. Romans 2.14.15.
mankind even universally, said that Jesus Christ did cast out Devils by Mat.
12.24.
Beelzebub the prince of the Devils; when as they and their Mat 12.27.
children had received it as an infallible principle, that Satan did not cast
out Satan, but that only in Mat. 7.22. Mat. 9.38.39.40
Gods name and by Gods power the evil spirit was cast out. And therefore unto
them thus wilfully and spitefully speaking contrary to their very consciences,
the Lord said, Mat. 12.31.32
All manner of sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men: but the
blasphemy against the Holy Ghost shall not be forgiven unto men. And whosoever
speaks a word against the Son of man it shall be forgiven him: but
whosoever speaks against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him,
neither in this world, neither in the world to come. It most greatly therefore
concerns all, which would in life, death, and for ever have Gods mercy in
Jesus Christ, to take heed that they at no time speak or do against the true
light of conscience; remembering that it is a fearful thing to fall into the
Heb. 10.31.30.
avenging hands of the living Gods.

CHAP. 97. Of sundry of Gods Curses upon disobedient people.
IN the first part of the T. 1. p. 54.
Homily of falling from God, it is said: The displeasure of God toward us is
commonly expressed in the Scripture by these two things: by showing his Ps
34.16. Ps. 6.1.
fearful countenance upon us, and by turning away his face, or by Lam. 3.44.
Isa. 59.2.
hiding it from us. By showing his dreadful countenance, is signified his
great wrath: but by turning his face or hiding thereof is many times more
signified, that is to say, that he clearly Deuteronomy. 31.17, 18. Ier. 33.5.
forsakes us, and gives us over. When God does show his dreadful countenance
toward us, that is to say, does send dreadful plagues of sword, famine, or
pestilence upon us, it appears that he is greatly wroth with us. But when he
withdraws from us his Word, the A delivery what the true Word preached is.
right Doctrine of Christ, his gracious assistance and aid (which is ever Ier.
23.22.
joined to his Word) and 1 Samuel 28.15
leaves us to our own wit, our own will and strength: he declares then,
that he begins to forsake us.

In the second part of the said T. 2. p. 57.
Homily it is said: What deadly grief may a man suppose it is to be under the
wrath of God, to be forsaken of him, to have his holy Spirit the Author of
goodness to be taken from him, to be brought to so vile a condition, that he
shall be left meet for no better purpose, than to be for ever condemned in
hell? That place of Isa. 5.5, etc.
Isaiah shows, that God at length does so forsake his unfruitful Vineyard,
that he will not only suffer it to bring forth weeds, briars, and thorns,
but also further to punish the unfruitfulnesse of it. He says he will not cut
it, he will not delve it, and he will command the Clouds that they shall not
rain upon it: whereby is signified the teaching of his holy Word, which Saint
Paul after a like manner expressed by 1 Cor. 3.6.
planting and watering; meaning that he will take that away from them, so that
they shall be no longer of his Kingdom, they shall be no longer governed by
his holy Spirit, they shall be put from the grace and benefits that they had,
and ever Luke 19.42, 44: Mat. 23.37, 38. Ps. 81.12, 13, 14 15, 16. Isa. 48.18,
19.
might have enjoyed through Christ, they shall be deprived of the heavenly
light, and life which they had in Christ, John 15.4.6.5.7. Romans 11.17, 20 22,
23.
whiles they abode in him: they shall be (as they were once) as men without God
in this world, or rather in worse taking. And to be short, they shall be
given into the power of the Devil, which bears the rule in all them, that be
cast away from God, as he did in Saul and Judas, and generally in all such as
work after their own wills, the Children of mistrust and Ephesians. 2.2.
unbelief.

In the first part of the T. 2. p. 5.
Homily concerning the right use of the Church, it is said: We shall not in
this life escape his heavy hand and vengeance for this contempt of the house of
the Lord, and his due service in the same, according as the Lord himself
threatens in the first Chapter of the Prophet Aggeus, after this sort: Hag.
1.9, 10, 11.
Because ye have left my house desert, and without company (says the Lord) and
ye have made have every man to his own house, for this cause are the heavens
stayed over you, that they should give no deaw, and the earth is forbidden that
it shall bring forth her fruit, and I have called drought upon the earth, and
upon the Mountains, and upon corn, and upon wine, and upon Oil, and upon all
things that the earth brings forth, and upon men, and upon beasts, and upon
all things that men's hands labor for.

In the second part of the T. 2. p. 91, 92.
Homily of fasting, it is said: God sometime strikes private men privately
with sundry adversities, as Deuteronomy. 28.65, 66, 67.
trouble of mind, loss of friends, Zeph. 1.13.
loss of goods, long and Deuteronomy. 28.22, 27, etc.
dangerous sicknesses, etc.

In the fourth part of the T. 2. p. 236.
Homily for Rogation week, it is said: That God in his ire does 1 King. 14.15.
Zeph. 2.3, 4.
root up whole kingdoms for wrongs and oppressions, and does translate
kingdoms from one nation to another, for unrighteous dealing, for wrongs and
riches gotten by deceit. This is the practice of the Holy One (says Dan. 4.30,
31 32.
Daniel) to the intent that living men may know, that the most High has power
over the Kingdoms of men, and gives them to whomsoever he will. Furthermore,
what is the cause of penury and scarceness, of dearth and famine? Is it any
other thing but a token of Gods ire, Ezech. 5.6, 7, 8, 15, 16.
revenging our wrongs and injuries, done one to another? Ye have sown much
(upbraideth God by his Prophet Aggai) and yet bring in little, ye eat, but ye
be not satisfied, ye drink, but ye be not filled, ye cloth your selves, but
ye be not warm, and he that earneth his wages puts it in a Hag. 1.5, 6.
bottomless purse: ye looked for much increase, but lo, it came to little,
and when ye brought it home (into you Barnes) I did blow it away, says the
Lord. The Lord says by Moses, It shall come to pass, if thou will not hearken
unto the voice of the Lord thy God, to observe to do all his Commandments and
his Statutes, which I command thee this day, that all these curses shall come
upon thee and overtake thee. Cursed shall thou be in the City, and cursed shall
thou be in the field, etc. Read from verse 16. unto the Chapters end: it is of
all Chapters in the Bible amplest in reckoning up Gods sundry curses in this
life upon disobedient people. Read also the 26. Chapter of Leviticus. The Lord
in these days much inwardly punishes people of unbelief and disobedience:
The Lord does unto many now, as he did to the Israelites: He gives them their
request, (as concerning many outward blessings) but sends Ps. 106.15.
leanness into their soul. Isaiah says, The wicked are like the Isa. 57.20,
21.
troubled Sea, when it cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt. There
is no peace to the wicked. In the Revelation it is said: They have no Rev.
14.11.
rest day nor night, who worship the Beast and his Image, and whosoever
receives the mark of his name. Isaiah concludes his prophecy with declaring
what is the inward estate and condition of all such as continue in sin
willingly, yea, whiles they live here on earth, saying also concerning obedient
people, That they shall go forth, and Isa. 66.24. (...)
look upon the Carkeises of the * transgressing ones against God: for their
worm shall not dye, neither shall their fire be quenched, and they shall be
an abhorring unto all flesh. In all people, which will not humble themselves to
live according to all the commandments of Christ, and according to all the
Ordinances of his Church, but resolve to persist in their owne-chosen ways,
and to follow the imagination of their own minds, there at length breeds in
such people a worm within their conscience, which more and more Abben Esrain
Ps. 1.1. s^ribit, Improbos esse dictos (...) quasi inquietos, qui nunquam in
eadem constitutione permanent.
gnaweth them; so that if the said worm (like as the Woolfe which breeds in
some peoples bodies) be not fed with what likes him, he gnaweth the conscience
exceedingly. Such a worm was bred in the Conscience of many of the Jews
through their wilful disobedience, when as Christ and his Ministers preached
amongst them. Nothing could those disobedient people John 8.43, 45.51.
learn from Christ, and his Ministry, which could comfort them, or appease
their troubled minds, whiles they endeavored not to obey his Gospel. Also
within disobedient peoples breasts there becomes a Heb. 10.27. Ps. 11.6.
fire kindled, wherethrough they are in a spiritual fire: and any spiritual
person which had the spirit of discerning, might insee into them, and perceive
them inflamed with a great Romans 10.2, 3.
zeal, but not toward obedience of all the Commandments of Christ's Gospel,
nor toward obedience of all the Ordinances of Christ's Apostolical Church of
England. There is a proverb, The which are in hell, know of none other heaven.
Wilful disobedient people being themselves without Isa. 48.22. Romans 3.17.
peace of conscience, conclude contrary to the Doctrine of the universal holy
Scriptures, and of the whole Divine Service of the Church, that no body else
has that Phil. 4.7.
peace of God which passes all understanding, and keeps our hearts and minds
in the knowledge and love of God, and of his Son Jesus r 1 Cor. 2.13.
Christ our Lord: with the which blessed peace holy Church from Sabbath to
Sabbath Numb. 6.23. etc.
blesses her obedient Members; and every one of them 2 These. 3.16. Isa. 66.12.
Isa. 14.27. Phil. 1.9. (...) in all sense: (or feeling) as it is rendered in the
Margent.
feels it within themselves more and more.

CHAP. 98. Of deferring repentance until likelihood of bodily death.
IN the Collect for the first Sunday in Advent, we are taught to pray, Almighty
God, give us grace that we may cast away the works of darkness, and put upon
us the armor of light, Romans 13.11, 12, 13, 14.
now in the time of this mortal life, (in the which thy Son Jesus Christ
came to visit us in great humility) etc. In the Rubricke before the Communion of
the sick it is said: Forasmuch as all mortal men be subject to many sudden
perils, diseases and sicknesses, Ps. 31.15.
and ever uncertain what time they shall depart out of this life, therefore to
the intent they may be always in a Job. 14.14. 1 Cor. 5.9. Mat. 25.10. Rev. 19.7.
readiness to dye whenever it shall please God to call them, the Curate
shall diligently from time to time, etc. In the Service for Burial, it is
said: Job 14.1, 2.
Man that is borne of a woman, has but a short time to live, and is full of
misery. He comes up, and is cut down like a flower, he flees as it were a
shadow, and never continues in one stay: In the midst of life we be in death.

In the second part of the T. 1. p. 58.
Homily of falling from God, it is said: Sinners that continue in their wicked
living, ought to think, that the promises of Gods mercy, and the Isa. 61.1, 2,
3.
Gospel, pertain not unto them, being in that state, but only the Gal.
3.23.24.
law, and those Scriptures which contain the wrath and indignation of God, and
his threatenings; which should certify them, that as they do over boldly
presume of Gods mercy, and live dissolutely: So does God still more and more
withdraw his mercy from them, and he is so provoked thereby to Romans 2.4, 5, 6, 8.
wrath at length, that he destroys such presumers many times suddenly. For of
such S. Paul 1 These. 5, 2, 3.
said thus, When they shall say it is peace, there is no danger, then shall
sudden destruction come up* on them. Let us Heb. 12.15. and 3.12.
beware therefore of such naughty boldness to sin. For God, which has
promised his mercy to them that be truly repentant (although it be at the
latter end) has not promised to the presumptuous sinner, either that he shall
have long life, or that he shall have true repentance at the last end. But for
that purpose has he made every man's death uncertain, that he should not put
his hope in the end, and in the mean season (to Gods high displeasure) live
ungodly. Wherefore let us follow the counsel of the Wise man, Ecclus. 5.7.
Let us make no tarrying to turn unto the Lord: Let us not put off from day to
day, for suddenly shall his wrath come, and in time of vengeance he will
destroy the wicked.

In the third part of the T. 2. p. 273.
Homily of repentance, it is said: Which words I desire you to mark
diligently, because they do most lively put before our eyes, the fondness of
many men, who Romans 2.4, 5, 6. Ps. 10.3, 4, 5, 6.
abusing the long suffering and goodness of God, do never think on
repentance or amendment of life. Ecclus. 5.2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
Follow not (says he) thine own mind, and thy strength to walk in the ways
of thy heart, neither say thou, who will bring me under for my works: For God
the revenger, will revenge the wrong done by thee. And say not, I have sinned,
and what evil has come unto me? For the Almighty is a patient rewarder, but
he will not leave thee unpunished. Because thy sins are forgiven thee, be not
without fear to heap sin upon sin. Say not neither, The Mercy of God is
great, he will forgive my manifold sins. For mercy and wrath come from him,
and his indignation comes upon unrepentant sinners. As if he should say: Art
thou strong and mighty? Art thou lusty and young? Have thou the wealth and
riches of the world? Or when thou have sinned, have thou received no punishment
for it? Let none of all these things make thee to be the slower to repent, and
to return with speed unto the Lord. For in the day of punishment, and of his
sudden vengeance, they shall not be able to help thee. And specially when thou
art either by the preaching of Gods Word, or by some inward motion of his Holy
Spirit, or else by some other means called unto repentance, neglect not the
good occasion that is ministered unto thee, lest when thou would repent, thou
have not the grace for to do it. For to repent is a good 2 Timothy 2.25. Act.
11.18.
gift of God, which he will never grant unto them, who living in carnal
security, do make a mock of his threatenings, or seek to rule his Spirit as
they list, as though his working and gifts were Ps. 135. 5, 6. Isa. 40.12, 13,
14, 15, 17.
tied unto their will. It is greatly considerable, that almost every such
person; as is before mentioned, which deferreth repentance till toward his end,
being asked a little before his death, whether he thinks that he has lived as
he ought, and as he might have lived, in obedience unto Christ's Laws, and the
Ordinances of Christ's holy Church, if he would have used the prescribed means
thereunto, he will then from an opened conscience not justify himself, but
confess much truth as experience even in all places from time to time
confirms. Many there are which never all their life long have any regard to
confer with any godly Minister, concerning what be the Mat. 7.13, 14 Psalm.
25.4, 5, 9, 10. and 143.8.
strait ways of the Lord, wherein all of years of discretion are bound to
walk conscionably and more and more obediently, that would come unto Mat.
19.16, 17.
life eternal: but when they are in fear of dying (their conscience then
being awaked and accusing them, and telling them they must 2 Cor. 5.10. Heb.
9.27.
appear before Christ's judgment seat to receive everlasting judgment
according as they have believed and lived) they will acknowledge some use of
the ministry, and of the Church-Prayers to be used in the Visitation of the
sick. It it is become and old Proverb with very many, A saying too common.
namely, that if they can before they dye, have but time to ask God mercy, they
shall do as well as the best of the^ (who have Luke 1.74, 75.
served God in holiness and righteousness before him even all the days of their
life.) But how greatly such desperate and dissolute persons do Mal. 3.13, 14
15, 16, 17, 18.
mistake the proceeding of Almighty God, they may see if they will believe what
is written in the first chapter of the Proverbs from the 20. verse unto that
chapters end. Also they may perceive that they are in a damnable error, if
they will observe what is delivered in that most Divine Whose beginning is, Now
seeing all they be accursed, etc.
Exhortation in the Service of Commination. Saint Paul says, Be not deceived,
God is not mocked: for Gal. 6.7, 8.
whatsoever a man sows, that shall he reap. For he that sows to his flesh,
shall of the flesh reap corruption: but he that sows to the spirit, shall of
the spirit reap life everlasting. And again he says, We then as workers
together with God, beseech you also, that ye receive not the grace of God in
vain. For he says, I have heard thee in a time accepted, and in the day of
salvation have I succored thee: behold, 2 Cor. 6.1, 2.
now is the accepted time; behold, now is the day of salvation. Whiles it is
said Heb. 3.15.
to day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts, as in the
provocation.

CHAP. 99. Of sundry of Gods blessings upon obedient people, in this present
life.
IN the first part of the T. 2. p. 5.
Homily concerning the right use of the Church, it is said; If we would with
diligence resort to the house of the Lord together, to serve the Lord with one
accord and Zeph. 3.9.
consent, in all holiness and righteousness before him, we have promises of
benefits both heavenly and worldly. Wheresoever two or three be gathered in my
name (says our Savior Christ) there am I in the Mat. 18.20.
midst of them. And what can be more blessed* than to have our Savior
Christ Psalm. 16.11.6.5. Ezech. 48.35.
among us. In the second part of the T. 2. p. 93.94.
Homily of Fasting, it is said; Godwhich heard 1 King 21.29
Ahab and the Jonah 3.10.
Ninevites, and spared them, will also hear our prayers, and spare us, so that
we after their example, will unfainedly turn unto him: yea, he will bless us
with his heavenly benedictions the time that we have to tarry in this world, and
after the race of this mortal life, he will bring us to his Mat. 7.21.
heavenly Kingdom. In the second part of the T. 2. p. 212.
Homily for Whitsunday, it is said; Our Savior Christ departing out of the
world unto his Father, promised his disciples to send down another Comforter,
that should John 14.16.
continue with them for ever, and direct them into John 16.13.
all truth. The blessing pronounced at the end of Evening-Service, namely, 2
Cor. 13.14.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the fellowship of
the Holy Ghost, be with us all evermore: Is it not a great comfort to a soul
for to enjoy all the same? Saint John accounted the fellowship with Gods Spirit
the Su^mum bonum the supreme happiness in this world, where he says Pet.
1.11.
to the little children in Christ; That which we have seen and heard, declare
we unto you, that ye also may have fellowship with us; and truly our 1 Ioh.
1.1, 2, 3
fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ. And these
things write we unto you, that your joy may be full. In the T. 2. p. 193.
Homily of the Resurrection, it is signified; That until the general
resurrection in the last day, whiles we now are in this world, Gods holy
spirit may be had within our hearts, as a 2 Cor. 1.22.
seal and Ephesians. 1.13.14. Rom 8.15, 16.23.
pledge of our everlasting inheritance. Yea, says that sacred T. 2. p. 192,
Homily, unto every true member of Christ, Thou have received Christ's body, to
have within thee, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, for to Ioh. 14.23.
2 Cor. 6.16.
dwell with thee, for to endow thee with grace, to strength thee against thine
enemies, and to comfort thee with their presence. And again, Christ now entered
within us, how dare we be so bold to renounce the presence of the Father, the
Son, and the Holy Ghost? (for where one is, there is God Col. 3.11. Ephesians.
4.6. 1 Cor. 3.16, 17. and 6.19.
all whole in Majesty, together with all his power, wisdom, and goodness) and
fear not I say the danger and peril of so traitorous a defiance and
departure? In the first T. 2. p. 180.
Homily of the Passion, it is said, God give us all grace to follow Christ's 1
Pet. 2.21. 1 John 2.6.
examples in peace and in charity, in patience and sufferance, that we now may
have him our ghest to enter and dwell within us, so as we may be in full
surety, having such a pledge of our salvation. If we have him and his favor,
we may be sure that we have the favor of God Mat. 3.17.
by his means. In the third Exhortation before the Communion, it is said: If
with a true penitent heart, and lively faith we receive that holy Sacrament,
then we John 6.63.36.
spiritually eat the flesh of Christ, and drink his blood, then we dwell in
Christ and Christ in us; we be 1 Cor. 6.17.
one with Christ, and Christ with us. In the T. 2. p. 195.
Homily of the Resurrection, it is said: Apply your selves (good friends) to
live in Christ, that Christ may still live Gal. 2. 2 Cor. 4.10.11
in you, whose favor and assistance if ye have, then John 3.36. and 6.47. 1
John 5.20.
have you everlasting life already within you, then can nothing Romans 8.31.
hurt you. Whatsoever is hitherto done and committed, Christ ye see has
offered you pardon, and clearly received you to his favor again, in full
surety whereof, ye have him now inhabiting and Romans 8.9, 10, 11. Gal 4.6. 1
John 3.24.
dwelling within you. In the first part of Whitsunday T. 2 p. 209.
Homily, it is said: The Holy Ghost does not think it sufficient inwardly to
work the spiritual and new birth of man, unless he do also 1 Cor. 3.16.
dwell and abide in him. In the first part of the T. 1. p. 60.
Homily against the fear of Death, it is signified, That a true Christian is
the very Ephesians. 5.30.
member of Christ, the 1 Cor. 3.17.
Temple of the Holy Ghost, the Romans 8.14, 15, 16.
Son of God, and the very Romans 8.17. Iam. 2.5.
inheritour of the everlasting Kingdom of Heaven.

Most memorable is that sentence of the Holy Ghost delivered by Saint Paul unto
Timothy: Godliness is profitable unto all things, having promise of the life
that 1 Timothy 4.8.
now is, and of that which is to come. David says, The Lord will give strength
unto his people: The Lord will bless his people with Psalm. 29.11.
peace. Wisdom says in the book of the Proverbs, Whosoever hearkeneth unto me,
shall dwell Prove. 1.33.
safely, and shall be quiet from fear of evil. And Solomon also says: Prove.
3.16, 17, 18.
Length of days is in her right hand, and in her left hand riches and honor.
She is a tree of life to them that lay hold upon her. Isaiah says: Since the
beginning of the world; men have not heard, nor perceived by the ear, neither
has the eye seen, O God, besides thee, what he has prepared for him that
waits for him. Thou Isa. 64.4, 5.
meetest him that rejoices and works righteousness, those that remember
thee in thy ways. Peter says, The eyes of the Lord are over the righteous,
and his ears are 1 Pet. 3.12.
open unto their prayers. Hanani the Seer said: The eyes of the Lord run too
and fro throughout the whole earth, to show himself strong in the 2 Chro. 16.9.
behalf of him whose heart is perfect toward him. David says, The Lord is a
Sun and shield: the Lord will give grace and glory: Psalm. 84.11.
no good thing will he withold from them that walk uprightly. Saint John
says, Whatsoever we ask 1 Ioh. 3.22.
we receive of him, because we keep his Commandment, and do those things
which are pleasing in his sight. And Isaiah says unto Christ's Church, Behold
the darkness shall cover the earth, and gross darkness the people, but the
Lord shall arise upon thee, and his glory shall be seen upon Isa. 60.2.
thee. Saint Paul says to the Ephesians, In Christ also after that ye
believed, ye were Ephesians. 1.13.14.
sealed with that holy Spirit of promise: which is the earnest of our
inheritance, until the redemption of the purchased possession, unto the praise
of his glory. Yea, Saint Peter signifies, that if faith, virtue, knowledge,
temperance, patience, godliness, brotherly kindness, and charity be in us and
abound, we shall never 2 Pet. 1.10, 11.
fall: but so an entrance shall be ministered unto us abundantly into the
everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Many more are the
blessings which accompany Gods true Religion, now in this life present, which a
devout soul may observe signified throughout all the Scriptures, and the books
of Divine Service. Read Deuteronomy 28. Isaiah 60. and observe the 7. sundry
blessings promised by Christ in Mat. 5. and to what conditioned people they are
made: likewise the 7. promises or blessings signified to the seven Churches of
Asia, in Rev. 2and3.

CHAP. 100. Against separating from the Church of England, by law established
under the Kings Majesty, in any manner.
IN the third part of the T. 1. p. 36.
Homily concerning good works, it is signified, That the world from the
beginning until Christ's time, was ever ready to Exodus 32.1, 7, 8.
fall from the Commandments of God, and to seek other means to honor and
serve him, 1 Samuel 15.21, 22, 23.
after a devotion found out of their own heads: and how they did set up their
own Mat. 15.3, 6, 9.
traditions, as high or above Gods Commandments; which has happened also in
our times (the more it is to be lamented) no less than it did among the Jews,
and that by the corruption, or at least by the Mat. 13.25, 26.
negligence of them that chiefly ought to have preserved the pure and heavenly
doctrine left by Christ. What man having any judgment or learning, joined with
a true zeal unto God, does not see, and lament, to have entered into Christ's
Religion, such 1 Timothy 4.1, 2, 3.
false doctrine, superstition, idolatry, hypocrisy, and other 2 Timothy 3.1, 2,
3, 4, 5.
enormities and abuses, so as by little and little, through the sour leaven
thereof, the sweet Rev 11, 3, 7, 8.
bread of Gods holy Word has been much hindered and laid apart? For the
reforming of the which and the like things amiss, the holy Fathers of the
Church of England, by the assent and consent of the Royal Majesty, set forth
the book of common Prayer, the book of Homilies, and the book of ordering of
Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, for to declare the true worship of Almighty God,
and to be used in the public performance of the same. They also for the
avoiding of diversities of opinions, and for the stablishing of consent
touching true Religion, composed 39. Articles concerning fundamental matter in
religion. And for to keep decency, order, and uniformity of Christian life
throughout the whole Church, there are made Constitutions and Canons
Ecclesiastical 141. Moreover for the instruction of scholars in schools, and
likewise for the use of all other people, there is set forth by public
authority a Catechism of a larger, and of a shorter form, which is commonly
called Nowels Catechism: And it expounds the 10. Commandments, the 12.
Articles of the Creed, the 6. Petitions of the Lords Prayer, and the
Sacraments, Baptism, and the Supper of the Lord: There is also the book
called, God and the King, which every subject ought to have, for to be minded
and most consta^tly resolved according to the information of the same book.
These aforesaid books are the books of the established doctrine and discipline
of the Church of England. Now besides those books the law, instruction, or
teaching of the Church our Prove. 6.20, 21, 22, 23.
mother; There is also the whole holy Bible by the appointment of the royal
Majesty, and the ministry of learned Doctors in the Church, 1 Cor. 14.12.19.
Hab. 22. Psalm. 67.2.
set forth into our mother tongue, and so published as that every man, woman,
and child, may enjoy it for to Ps. 119.9.
conform their minds and lives according to all the everlasting commandments
of the same. Seeing then that the Church of England does thus Phil. 2.16.
hold forth the word of life eternal, and cherishes and nourishes up her
members therein, even from their very infancy, (for so it is her ordinance that
every particular person should be educated) how greatly do they sin, which
do in any manner Jude 19.
separate from her? But some will say, That she her self is separated from
other Christian Churches, with which she was at unity in times past. Let us
hear the words of the Church her self concerning this matter, written in her
30 Canon, where it is said: So far was it from the purpose of the Church of
England to forsake and reject the Churches of Italy, France, Spain, Germany,
or any such like Churches in all things which they held and practiced, that, as
the Apology of the Church of England confesses, it does with reverence
retain those Ceremonies, which do neither endamage the Church of God, nor
offend the minds of sober men: and only departed from them in those
particular points, wherein they were fallen both from themselves in their
ancient integrity, and from the Apostolical Churches which were their first
Founders. There are others of sundry kinds, which say, we separate not from the
Church, but from her errors, and from her superstitions, or from her
imperfections. If any one will unpartially by all Gods express word examine
what those wise ones in their own eyes do find fault withal in any of the
aforementioned books of the Church, and what they do Isa. 50.11. Ier. 16.20.
setup to themselves for to follow, he cannot but by the grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ (which at length Psalm. 25.12, 13, 14. John 7.17. Mat. 7.7, 8.
brings every one into the way of truth which unfeinedly seeks it for to
walk faithfully therein unto his lives end) plainly perceive that such have no
more cause to separate in regard of any particular, than others have in regard
of the general deliveries by the aforesaid Church of England in the books
above named. To God only wise, be glory through Jesus Christ for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

