The Red-Crosse: OR, Englands Lord have mercy upon us.
(...) able Relation of many Visitations by the Plague in times past, as well
in other Countries as in the City of London, and the certain causes thereof:
With a true number of all those that dyed in the last great Visitation, at the
coming in of King James: And also the number of all those that have dyed this
present Visitation; with two special Medicines against the Plague.
IT is no doubt, that the corruption of the Air, together with uncleanly and
unwholesome keeping of dwell^ng, where many are pestred together, as also the
not-obseruing to have fires private and publicly made as well within ^ouses,
as without in the streets, at times when the Air is infected, are great
occasions to increase, corrupt, and produce pestilent Diseases. Neither can it
be denied, that the ouer-boldnesse of many preasing into infected places, and
the lewdness of others with Sores upon them, presuming into the open Air,
some of wilfulness, but truly many of necessity, contaminateth and corrupts
diverse: as the Leprosy, the Pocks, and sundry such unclean diseases do: as
by drinking, lying in company, and other such means, where pure complexions
and clean bloods are defiled with such as are putrified; and therefore
carefully to be avoided. But all these are accidental, and rather effects then
the cause. For it plainly appears in the Book of Exodus, that when it
pleased the Almighty God to smite the Egyptians, the Children of Jsrael were
appointed to dip Isop in the Blood of the Paschall Lamb, and smite of that
blood on the outward Posts of their doors, that when the slayer came to destroy
in one night all the first borne in Egypt, he might pass over the houses of
Gods children. So that it is plain, it was an Angel then sent to smite those
cruel people with the Pestilence.

Then first* this City of London, cannot be denied, to have had as great
blessings as ever had Jerusalem: for here God has long time been present by
his Word and Sacraments, yet they have abounded in all iniquity, when Jerusalem
long since had not a stone left upon a stone.

Secondly, London is situated as pleasantly as Sodom, and her sister Cities
before they sunk, even for the same sins that we have committed: for the
sin of Sodom (says the Prophet Ezechiel) was pride, fullness of bread, and
contempt of the poor. That these sins reign in London, who can deny? To
them, add fullness of drink; for therein we exceed the Nation, that within
these fifty years we hated for drunkenness: and I doubt, That vnname*able
sin of Sodomy is used in too many places of the City. Yet London stands, and
so God grant with his mercy it long may.

Lastly, where in the change of Princes, (especially after long peace, as
London most happily enjoyed all the time of our late Sovereign Queen
Eli^^beth, of worthy memory) many Cities have come to miserable spoil, if not
to ruin: yet London, by our most potent Lord and King, has increased in
tranquillity, blessing pouring upon blessing: save only now for our negligence*
God has with his own hand smitten us, and sent many to mourn in death after
our late Sovereign deceased, whom we had almost ungratefully forgotten in a
day.

In the City, called the great Caire, there is a Plague once every seu^^
years, which comes with such a fierceness, that the most part of the people
there do dye thereof: and diverse of them that remain alive, lose their
eyesight with the vapors and great heat which comes from the ground.

In the year of Christ, 81. and in the year 188. there continued a great time
a Plague in Rome, of which there daily dyed two thousand people.

In the year 254. fifteen Provinces of the Roman Empire, were in a manner
consumed with the Pestilence.

In the year 530* there dyed in Constantinople five thousand a day, and diverse
times ten thousand: and at that time, in some other parts of Greece, there were
not sufficient living men left to bury their dead.

And in the year 1569. there fell such a Plague in Constantinople, that there
died in six months space, seven hundred thousand persons, and the year
following fell such a famine, that a penny loaf of Bread of English money, was
worth a crown of gold: by reason whereof, the people died as fast then of the
Famine, as they did before of the Plague.

In the year 540. there began an universal Plague all over the world, that
continued 50. years with great violence.

In the year 1348. in Paris in France, there dyed a hundred thousand people of
the Plague.

In the year 1359. so great a Pestilence there was in Italy, that there were
scarce ten left of a thousand.

In the year 1521. there died in Rome a hundred thousand of the Pestilence.

In the years 1576. and 77. in Millan, Padua and Venice, there fell a hundred
thousand in every City: and in Bohemia (being but a small Kingdom) here dyed
three hundred thousand the same time.

Soon after the conquest of King William, Duke of Normandy, when the people
were subdued to him, and the Knights fees rated which he had made, an^ himself
placed with Crown and Scepter, he took number of the Acres of land in all the
Realm, and of all the people, and of all the cattle: after which fell so sore
a Plague, that the people died in such number, that Tillag^ decayed, Famine
ensued, with Rot of cattle, that men were fa^ne to eat ^lesh of Dogs, Cats and
Mice. A fearful example for Princes.

In the Ra^gne of King Edward the third, there fell a very great Pestilence in
the East Indies, among the Tartarians, Saracens and Turks, which laste^ the
space of seven years: through the fear whereof, many of the Heath^ns
willingly offered themselves to become Christians. And shortly after, ^y reason
of Passengers from one Province to another, the same Pestilenc^ was dispersed
in many Christian Kingdoms, and amongst other places, b^^ught into England;
where it was so forcible all over the Land, that not ^nely men, but also
Beasts, Birds and Fishes were smitten therewith, and ^ound dead with Botches
upon them. Also among men, the numbers tha^ were left alive, were scarcely
sufficient to bury their dead. At which t^me, with the rest that then dyed of
the Plague, Henry, Duke of Lancaster Blanch, Duchess of Lancaster, and the
Earl of Warwick ended their ^iues. So that in one year, in a little plot of
ground of thirteen Acres compass, then called Spittle-croft, and now the
Charterhouse, was buried fif^y thousand persons, besides all them that were
buried in the Church-ya^ds, and diverse places in the fields.

Also in Barbary, Alexandria, Tripolie, and in Constantinople, in the year
1602. fell so grievous a Plague, that there dyed three thousand a day for a
long time together.

Our visitations, though our sins exceed, have been more gentle: For in the
first great Plague in our memory, after the lo^^e of New-hauen, from the first
of January 1562. to December 1563. there dyed of the Plague, twenty thousand,
one hundred, thirty six.

In the second great Visitation, from the 20. of December 1592. to the 23. of
the same month, in the year 1593. dyed in all 25886. of the Plague in and
about London, 15003. And in the year before, 2000.

In the last Visitation which it pleased God to strike us with, at the coming
in of King James of happy memory, there dyed from the 17. of December 1602. to
the 14 of July 1603. the whole number in London and the Liberties, 4314.
Whereof of the Plague, 3310.

From the 25. of August, to the 1. of September, there dyed in London and the
Liberties, 3385. whereof of the Plague 3035. being the greatest number that
dyed in one week.

From the 23. of December, 1602. unto the 22. of December, 1603. there died of
all Diseases, within London and the Liberties, thirty eight thousand, two
hundred, four and forty; whereof, of the Plague, thirty thousand, five
hundred, seventy eight: and the next year following, London was clear of that
infection, and then were all the Shires in England grievously visited. Note the
work of God.

Now those that dyed this present Visitation, 1625. are here set down weekly,
for better satisfaction to the Reader.

From the 23. of June* to the 30. of the same, total, 942. Whereof of the
Plague, 390. From the 30. of June* to the 7. of July, total, 1222. Whereof of
the Plague, 593. From the 7. of July, to the 14. of the same, total, 1741.
Whereof the Plague, 1004. From the 14. of July, to the 21. of the same, total,
2850. Whereof of the Plague, 1819. From the 21. of July, to the 28. of the
same, total, 3583. Whereof of the Plague, 2471. From the 28. of July, to the
4. of August, total, 4517. Whereof of the Plague, 3659. There have dyed from
the 2. of June, to the 4. of August, 17359. Whereof of the Plague 6771.
Buried in Stepney, from the 18. of July, to the 24. total, 184. Whereof of
the Plague, 144. From the 24. of July, to the 31. of the same, total, 259.
Whereof of the Plague, 241.
A preservation by way of defense, to be used in common Assemblies, and in open
Air.
When you go abroad into the open Air, and amongst company hold a piece of
strong Tobacco in your hand to smell too; or the Root called Angelica, to bite
on now and then, as occasion requires* as for Tobacco, it has approbation
from the most learned Doctors of the Kingdom, to be a most rare Antidote and
Preservative, either being smelled unto, or taken fasting in the morning:
provided, that presently after the taking thereof* you drink a deep draught
of six shill^ngs Beer, and walk after it.

A necessary Prayer for the present time.
O God of glory, Lord of power, distributer of vengeance, and yet the
favorable Physicion of sick souls and bodies, look down upon thy sinful,
yet prostrate servants, the people of the City of London, who are every where
heart-strucke with the Arrows of thy angry Visitation: We have sinned, we
have sinned, we have grievously offended, and without thy grace there is no
help, being now shunned and despised, even of all the Country people round
about us; for whom, notwithstanding, we earnestly pray, as for our selves:
beseeching thee, of thy unmeasurable goodn^sse, not to look upon them
according to their deserts, but to have mercy on them and us; and stay thy
heavy hand from them as well as from us. O Lord God of mercy, be good to us,
and look not upon our sins: for if thou wayest the offenses of man, no slesh
shall stand before thee. We have sinned, we confess, O Lord, we have sinned
there is no righteousness in us, nor any help but thine. O then, let thy
Angel stay his hand, as he did at thy merc^full appointment, when D^uid
offending thee, saw the sword over Jerusalem Let the doors of our hearts be
sprinkled with the Blood of that Immaculate Lamb, Christ Jesus, that the
slayer may pass by us, as he did when the first borne in Egypt were smitten
with the Pestilence O God, thou can slay and restore again, strike into
sickness, and give health; for thou art only a Savior. O God, the Maker of
us all, look mercifully on thy workmanship. O God, the Savior of us all, be
an Intercessor to thy Father for us. O God the holy Ghost, the Comforter of us
all, inspire us with true repentance, that we may humbly seek, and suddenly
find mercy from the holy Trinity; one God in unity, ever to be honored, while
man has breath, or creatures any being. Have mercy, O God, have mercy, O God:
for to thee mercy belongs, which all true Repentants purchase in our Redeemer
Jesus: in whose name we beseech thee to free us and our brethren, from this
fearful Visitation: concluding these our requests with that absolute form of
Prayer, which he himself has taught us, saying, Our Father which art in
Heaven, etc.

FINIS.
God save the King.
London printed for John Trundle, and are to be sold at his shop in
Smith-field, near the Hospitall-gate. 1625.


