A compendious treatise called the complaint of Grace compiled by the notable
clerk master Ihon Redman Doctor in diuinitee deceassed, late master or
President of Trinity college in Cambridge, containyng in it much godly
learning and veritee of matter, greatly profitable and necessary for all men to
look in, Now newly and first set forth by Thomas Smyth servant to the Queen's
most excellent majesty.

Excusum Londini in adibus Roberti Caly.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

To the most excellent and most virtuous lady and our most gracious
sovereign, Marie by the grace of God Queen of England, France, Naples,
Jerusalem and Irelande, Defendour of the faith, princess of Spaigne and
Sicilie, Archeduchesse of Austria, Duchess of Milaine, Burgundy and Braband,
Countess of Haspurge, Flaunders and Tyrole. Your Majesty's most faithful,
loving and obedidient servant Thomas Smyth wissheth long and prosperous life,
with consonaunt accomplishment of all your most godly disires.
Christ in his Gospel (most godly and virtuous Lady) admonished his
disciples and all others in them, saying. Luc. xi.
Nemo lucernam accendit and in abscondito pomt, neque sub modio, sed supra
candelabrum, vt qui ingrediuntur, lumen videant. That is, Noman lights a
candell, and puts it in covert neither under a busshell, but upon a
candelsticke, that they which come in, may see light. Declaringe thereby, how
earnestly he wills the virtue of his verity, and light of his word, not to
be obscured nor hidden (specially in all such as profess the same) as more
plainly may also appear by that which follows the like sentence written by
theuangeliste S. Mathewe saiynge. Sic luceat lu^^ vestra coram homini^ bus,
Math. v.
vt videant opera vestra bona. That is. Let your light so shine before men,
that they may see your good works. Which lesson every, christian ought
christianly to considre, as matter commanded by the highest master, Christ
himself. Wherefore having in my hands this worthy and notable work, called
the complainte of Grace, compiled by that worthy and notable clerk master
John Redman doctor in divinity, deceassed, late master or president of
Trinity college in Ca^bridge, not very long before he left this tra^sitory
life, which was. 1551. a time (as in like wise to long before, and also to
long since) nothing mere openly to manifest so godly and so true a matter.
For truth was than so tender, that without great danger she might not well be
touched (witness my-selfe, who also among others for truths sake have
sundrely suffered). And darkness was than so dim, and menues eyes were so
daseled, or rather wilfully blinded (by error) that either they could not or
would not look toward the true light, Joan. i.
tenebrae non compraehenderunt lucem. Nevertheless now (being loathe in this
comfortable change, or rather restauracion of Christ's true religion, by the
goodness of God and the virtuous regiment of your most gracious reign: Whereof
to speak more I will now omit, lest flattery should seem a furtherer to win favor for me, albeit the whole world must needs witness it with me.
Being loathe I say to see lost so clear a light of so learned a clerk,
expressed as well by his conversation of life as also by others his liuelye
works, whereof this is one, a piece clean repugnant to the sclaunderous
report of sum peruers persons which since his deceasse, have not ceased
both to speak and to write of him most vniustelye, (but such is the
property of obstinate heresy, with falsitie to enforce her froward
iniquity). I therefore have thought good, most gracious lady, not only to
set it abroad, as a mirror for all men to behold themself truly, but also
for the worthynes of the work, to dedicate it unto your Majesty, as to the
clearest lantern, giuinge fairest light to all virtuous life and godly
magnanimite. But here, ones again I will s^aie, lest I should seem as I
said, efisons to set furthe fained flattery, although in very deed,
conscience commands me to confess it (as it is) a veritable verity. And
now, because tediousnes shall not abuse time, I will conclude briefly. Most
humbly besechinge thine ffable Trinitee, that as (by his divine providence)
your Majesty in marriage has matched your self with such a noble King and
worthy Prince as no earthly province has presently the like. Hit may also
further please his inestimable deity, to grant unto both your graces
(indiuidedly) long to live and reign over us in all health honor and
felicity. And that of your two most noble personages, may be procreat unto
us such a posterity, as may be to the pleasour of God, to the profit of
both your dominions, and to the full encreasse of true Christianity. Amen.

Your Majesty's most humble servant and perpetual Orator. Thomas Smythe.

The complaint of grace.
Grace speaks.
MERVEL not that although I (being most full of patience and longa -- nimitie)
do yet at length break forth in this manner of complaint and lamentacion, for
the easing of my great doloure and heuinesse. Whereof many times the outward
expressing and opening is no small aswaging and comfort, and it may so chance
that the autour of all goodness (inspiringe into some hearts pity and
compassion upon me, or rather upon themselves, through this my complainte) may
thereby send me some relief or mitigacion of my great pain and anguishe. The
greater and more noble personage that one is, and being fallen into adversity,
the moore grievous is the lamentacion, and the cause of grievous complainte is
thought moore just and reasonable. As for me, I neade not to boste of my
self, what I am, and whereof I came, for the world, though it be never so
blinded through wickedness and wylfulnes, yet it can not but grant me to be
the inestimable treasour of all goodness, and confess all things to come of me
the grace of God. The blind fools know the beginning and root of all
goodness, and the spring from whence it comes, and where they may have it
most plentifully, and yet they either irke or disdain there to take it (when
it is offered), yea when it is put into their mouths, as meat is ministered to
infantes or sickefolkes), yet abhor they to receive it, and so put it furthe
again. Mine au^cientie is from the beginning, when the foundacions of the
world were laid, and al things were created and brought forth by that
almyghtie word, which was with God, and was God himself. By whom with his
Father and the holy spirit, I was appointed specially to wait upon that
creature for which the rest of ye work was made, that unkind creature, I
say mankind with whom I was put in paradise, that I might conducte and guide
them, that through mine assistaunce they should have been translated to a
perfect and most sure state of felicite immortalite and bliss. Gene. iii.
But that false serpent deceived the woman, and by her suggestion the man being
overthrown, both were expelled forth of the garden of pleasaunce into the vale
of wretchedness, to toil upon the earth, whereof they were made, and so
became subject unto death, sin, infirmity, and all kind of misery. This
grieved me not a little that this my sheep (to which I was committed) through
his own fault and folly was cast into such calamite. But yet of pity I
left him not, but followed and pursued after, that I might recover him again,
and ever sins there about I have travailed continually, sparinge for no
pain, though God him self should suffer, as finally in deed I brought it to
pass, and yet al will not serve. So far I entreated for ye pore outlaw
(ma^kinde) when he was banished forth of Paradise, that promise of comfort was
proffered unto him, which was, that his sede should break the Serpents head,
Gene. iii.
and that of him at the time appointed, should come one that should destroy ye
power of Satan, who was ye worker of all this woe, wherein mankind was wrapped,
I thought long for the coming of this time, for I knew that than I should
bear great rule, and mine honor should be dilated all abroad the world.
But in the mean season o Lord, how was I troubled and vexed? little, and of
the most part nothing set bye nor esteemed, but rejected and repelled over all
the world, most vnkindlye and cruellye. Malediction and sin reigned every
where. Even shortly after, in Adams life time, Cayn (his ungracious son)
stirred with envy and malice), slew his brother Abell, and would not be
advertised by me, Gene. iiii.
to humble him self and acknowledge his fault, with trust in gods mercy,
but fell into desperacion, and became a runnagate upon the earth. And the
most part of that generation and posterite desptsed me, and set me at
naught, and followed the steps of their father Cayn, and were all given to
worldly and carnal inuencions. Seth (the third son of Adam) was more
blessed, Gene. iiii.
and I was something more familiar with his posterite, but at length I was
clean rejected of all sides, and contemned of all sorts of people, and the
more that the world multiplied in generation, the less their regarded me, but
gave them self all to sin and iniquite, sekinge only to satisfy their
carnal lusts and worldly desires, in so much that God (seeing them so wholly
disposed and bent to al ungraciousness) waxed heuie and repented him of the
creacion of man, Gene. vi
and for vengeance and punishment of sin, he determined to destroy the whole
world (both man and beast), and wylled me to withdraw my self from the
world that they might perish in their unhappiness. But as God would there was
one good and virtuous man, whose name was Noe, who even as I was secretlye
departinge from the earth, found me, and obtained of God, that I might tarry
with him, and God of his goodness was content that so I should. Than was I
glad to wait upon Noe and to be closed up in the Arc, which God had caused
him to make for sauinge of him self, with his small retinue, from the raging
floode, which in the space of forty days and forty nyghtes swalowed up
all the lyuinge creatures upon the earth. Me thought it a strange thing to
have so straight an habitacion, but for the time I comforted my self, in that
I thought the world after this wasshing, would amend and become much
fairer. And truly here God showed him self very good unto mankind, provoking
them to make much of me, and as if he had even than created the world a new,
he blessed Noe and his children, and badde them increase and multiply, and
replenishe the earth, Gene. ix.
and gave unto them maistrie and dominion over all beasts of the earth,
fowls of the air and fisshes of the sea, and bad the^ eat thereof as they
thought good, which liberty was not expressed before that time, but shortly
after. When we were gotter: for the of the Arc, and began to dwell again
upon the earth, trustinge to have found some quietness and rule than at my
pleasure, I found it much otherwise, for ungracious Cham one of Noe sons
began to renew ungracious touches, Gene. ix.
and became a mocker of his father, and than came malediction in again upon
Chanaan, which so daily increased and spread abroad, not only in that time
and generation of Cham, but also in the posterite of Iapheth and Sem, that I
could scante find any quiet place where too abide. Than came Nembroth, Gene.
x.
that mighty hunter not so much for his huntinge of wild beasts, as for
huntinge of possessions and lordshippes, he and his sort (oppressors,
extortioners, enrychers of them selves (whereof many were than, although no
thing like as now) hunted so, that they almoost hallawed me out of the
world. And suddenly as I was wandering and sekinge some dwelling place, I
saw the people all set on madness going about to build a city and a tower,
whose top should have retched to heaven. Gene. xi.
And when I could not diswade them from this arrogant enterprise, I committed
the matter to God, who confounded their languages and tongues that on of the^
could not understand an other, and so they ceased with shame and no small
punishment, and than were they divided and dispersed over all the earth. I
followed and attended here and there, waiting where I might find rest, but all
went to wrack, for sin ouerflowed every where, and than of sin came
blindness, ignorance, and forgetting of God, in so much that the wysest
nations (as the Chaldees) fell from the worshippinge of the only true lyuinge
God, to most foul Idolatry. And wha^ I saw this abomination, I acacquainted
my self with one Abram, Gene. xii.
the son of Chare, and persuaded him to obey the calling of God, and to
depart forth of that wicked country, and by my means I gate him such
frendshippe and familiarity with god, that he gave him his blessing, and made
him promise that universal blessing should come to the hole world in his
seed. I found this Abraham very gentle and tractable, and he attended
diligently to my monitions and was careful to keep me, and refused no travail
nor tribulacion, but always humblye he followed me and waited upon me. And I
leafte him not, but was ever ready to preserve him in all dangers, and from
al enmies. God lyked him well and made him eftsoon free promise of the
singular benedictio^ that should come by his seed, and that he should have an
heir: (although he were old, and Sara his wife barrain) and that his
posterite should exceade in noumbre the multitude of the stars. Gene. xv.
And I taught Abraham to believe and give credit to the promise of God, who is
al truth, and god accepted that well, and imputed his faith unto him for
ryghtewisenes. Of this promise made by God unto Abraham I received great
comfort, and was wonderfully revived, trustinge by this benediction to be
exalted, and to bear rule in ye world. And I continued still with Abraham, and
brought him diverse times to familiar speech with almighty God. I fouude also
some comfort and delight in his cousin Loath, and taught him the virtue of
hospitalite, Ge. xix.
whereby he received the Angels into his house. And I obtained his
deliverance from that terrible destruction of Sodom and Gomorre. These were
Cities given to extreme abomination, and would in no wise suffer my tarienge
among them, nor I could not get so much as ten persons within the hole
city of Sodom to take my part, whereby the city might have been saved. And so
the just punishment did light upon them for an example of the just judgment
of God. After that Abraham was departed forth of this world, I remained with
his son Isaac. For in other places abroad in the world, I could get but
small herborow. I would gladly have been also with I smaell, (an other son of
Abraham) but I found him over sturdie. Isaac was meke and gentle, and so was
Rebecca his wife. He had two sons (Esau the elder and Jacob the younger) I had
a more delight unto the younger. Ge. xxv.
For the elder was proud, impatiente, a glotton, and given to pastime and
pleasour, but Jacob was simple, sober, and no medler abroad, but loved to keep
home. And I taught him (through his mothers counsel) to preuente his brother
Esau, in gettinge his fathers blessinge. Ge. xxvii.
And after that, I waited upon him into Mesopotamia, all the while he served
his uncle Laban, and by the way I obtained him such familiarity with God,
Genesis xxviii
that it pleased God to speak to him from the top of the ladder, upon which
Aungelles came up and down, and there God vouchesafed to renew the promise
made before unto Abraham of the universal blessinge that should come to the
world. Whereat I greatly reioysed, knowing that my full power should not
come before that time. Than I prospered Jacob in all his ways, and all his
business, and gate him a good marriage of his uncles daughter. Gene. xxix.
And when Jacob was well increased in richesse and substance, I conducted him
into his country again, and saved him from the danger of his brothers
displeasure, and endued him with such strength that he wrastled with the
Angel, whereby his name was changed from Jacob to Israel. I bare a great
stroke in Jacobs house a certain space, but suddenly the clearnes of my joy
began to be ouercast. For Jacob had one son named Joseph, Gene. ^^.
and the rest of his brethren began to conceive indignacion and malice against
him, because their father Jacob bare special love and favor unto him. There
can be no greater grife or vexacion unto me, than to abide in the house where
malice and hatred is entered. This malice of the other brethren against Joseph,
was also increased by certain dreams of Joseph, whereof of he made
interpretacions, which greatly misliked his brethern. Finally, they sold him
to merchants Ismaelites, who passed through the country, and made his
father believe that a wild beast had devoured him. Thus Joseph was carried
away and brought into Egypt, and tha^ Phutiphar the Chamberlain of king
Pharao bought him of the merchants. Gene. 39.
But I was with him and he prospered in all things, and I gate him the favor
of his Lord and master, who made hun ruler of his house, and put him in
singular trust. Joseph was an innocent man, of great integrite and perfection,
and there with all bewtifull and well favored. His lady and maistres tempted
vehemently his chastity, but through my help and council he refused to
consent to that wicked woman. Wherefore in despite she wrought him woe; forginge
lies and slanders against him, and making false co^playntes of him, whereby
his master (gyuinge ouerlyght and hasty credence to his wives tale) did cast
good Joseph into prison, where he was shut up, and closed a good season. But
I left him not, but conforted his heart with patience, and brought him into
favor with the keeper and master of the prison, so that he bare chief rule
among the prisoners, and was in great trust and credit, behauinge himself
in all things most vpryghtlye through my help. At length he was delivered
forth of the prison at such time as the unkind Butler remembered the true
interpretacion of his Dream, which Joseph had made, and than king Pharao
caused him to be brought forth of prison: Gr. xli.
and when he saw that Joseph also had declared the meaning of his dreams so
wonderfullye, he had him in great veneracion, (saying him to be replenished
with the spirit of God) and exalted him, and made him his lieutenaunte and
next in dignite and honor to him self, in all the land of Egypt. And by his
prudente policy and provision both the people were quietly pacified in time
of the darthe, and the king enriched. At that time hunger and general
scarsite of corn compelled Jacob to send his sons our of the land of
Chanaan into Egypt, Genesis xlii.
to bye some grain, where they found their brother in principal authorite,
but they knew him not, he dalyed with them for a season after a strange
facion, and at the last he showed him self with all gentleness what he was, so
that they knew him, and than after comfortable words, he commanded them to
go and bring their old father Jacob into Egypt, Genesis xlv.
and to return themselfes with all their household stuff and substance, and
so they did. And king Pharao (for Joseph's sake,) received the^ with great
benignite, Ge. xlvii.
granting to them commodious habitacio^ in ye country of Gersyn. All this I
brought to pass, and continued still with Joseph and his father Jacob during
their life. And although I was not so well entreated as was meet, yet I
remained among the rest of Jacobs sons, and continued for the most part
with that generation and people, which daily increased and multiplied in
Egypt. In other places I could bear but small rule, for Idolatry had
infected the world. Yet I found one good servant abroad among the other
nations, whose name was Job, whom I instructed with singular patience, and
preserved him in perfitte innocentye, so that neither his wife, nor his
fre^des, nor Satan had any power to peruerte his godly heart: he was like a
strong tower which bye no enemies could be overthrown. Now, when Jacob and
his sons were dead, I was conuersante most among that people which were
called Israelytes. But certain years after, there fell unto them great
affliction and trouble, by reason that the king of Egypt began to have them in
despite, Exo. i.
and the people of the country enuyed them very sore, and so they were put to
great vexation, and oppressed with labor in dawbing and tyling, that they were
werie of their lives, and wist not whether to turn them. Than it pleased GOD
to send one whose name was Moses, Exo. iii.
upon whom by Gods will and apointment I waited diligently from time of his
birth till the hour of his death. He was taken forth of the river, and brought
up by king Pharaos daughter in the court. Exodus ii.
He was taught and instructed with all kind of science and conning of the
Egyptians, but through my motion and advertisement he (refusinge and
renouncing all worldly honor and preeminence) fled away and conuated him
self into the land of Madian, and there he was content to keep sheep in the
wyldernes, where God appeared to him, and commanded him to go and deliver the
people of Israel further of the sclauerye that they were in, Exo. iii.
in Egypt. This Moses was marvelous in the famour of God, and had revelation
of the essential name of God, and a Rod delivered to him wherewith to work
wonders and miracles. Exo. iiii.
And than by gods commandment, he with his brother Aaron entered unto king
Pharao charginge him in Gods name that the people should be delivered. But
Pharao, obstinatlie refused the monition and will of God, and hardened his own
heart and still oppressed the people. But God declared his almyghtye power by
the hand of Moses, Exo. v.
and did send diverse plages upon Pharao and all the land of Egypt, so that
finallye he was glad to let the Israelites depart. Exo. xiiii.
But suddenly his heart changed against them, and being all blinded with
cruel malice, furiously he and his people persecuted them, purposing utterly
their distructio^. But I wrought so mightelie with Moses, that he and the
children of Israel escaped through the red Sea, in which Pharao with all his
host was overwhelmed and drowned. Than I taught Moses and the people of God
with him, to give laud and praise to God with joyful song, saying: Cantemue
domino, Exo. xv.
gloriose enim magnificatus est. After this wha^ Moses had brought the people
into the wyldernes of Surria, I taught him by his prayer, to change the
bitter and sower waters in to swetenes, whereby the murmuringe of the people was
pacified. And after that also in the wyldernes of Syn, God granted unto them
Quails and Manna. Exo. xvi.
And in Raphydim I stirred Moses unto prayer, Exo. xvii.
wherbye he obtained water out of the rock, to quench the thirst of ye
murmuring people. And I taught him also by lyftyng up his hands in prater, to
vanquishe Amaler, which came and made assault upon the Israelites. After all
this I came with Moses, Aaron and the children of Israel into the deserte of
Sinay, and there I brought Moses to more familiar co^municatio^ with God, Exo.
xix.
who vouchesafed to appear unto him upon the mountain in fire, (the Mountain
also smoking in most terrible manuor, with thonders and lightninges, and an
huge cloud coueringe the Mountain, and the trumpette fearfullie sounding,
that the people were al affraide and astonished). There Moses received the ten
commandments and the law, and made dedication of the old testament,
sprinkling blood toward the people. But behold my contrarious chau^ces. When
Moses was ascended again up to the Hill, to receive the law in tables of
stone (written by Gods hand) while he was learning the mysteries of God,
remaininge through my help upon the Mou^tain by the space of.xl. days
and.xl. nyghtes, the ungracious people assembled them selfs, Ex. xxxii.
and compelled Aaron to make them a Calfe, which they worshipped, and fell to
eating and drynking and sporting them selfs in their Idolatry. This
excedinglye grieved me, and made also God angry, who bade Moses go down from
the Hill, and thretened to destroy that hard and stiffenecked people. But I
stired Moses to feruente prayer, whereby the anger of God was aswaged that he
with drue his vengeance. But Moses coming down and hearing the reuellinge
and singinge which the people made, and saying their calfe (for vehement
anger) cast the tables forth of his hands, and brake them at the foot of the
Hill, and took the Calfe and burnte it, and beat it to powder, and gave it to
drink in water to the children of Israel, and than for great zeal and
indignario^, wherewith Moses was e^^la^^ed, he caused one of them to kill an
other, to the slaughter of.xxiii. thowsande. Yet I so moved the heart of Moses,
that he most instantly prayed unto God for the offense of the people,
wishinge (rather than that God should not forgive them), to be blotted forth
of the book of life. Thus I continued with Moses and his brother Aarou* and a
few other which were contented to be ordered by me. Exo. xxxiiii.
And I helped Moses to recover again the tables of the law, and to erecte
the tabernacle, and than God taught him the manner and form of all sacrifices
and oblations, with all the rites, ceremonies, and manner of judgments, which
God thought mete and conueniente for that time of the old testament. As for
the nombre of the Israelites they were ever stubborn, styffe necked, hard
hearted, doubting and mistrusting gods promises, ever crying and murmuringe
against Moses and Aaron, yea of Aaro^s kinsfolks there were some as Nadab,
and Abin, which despisinge my precepts, for their presu^ption were consumed
with fire: yea I had much a do to keep Aaron him self and Mary the sister of
Moses. Leu^. xi
They were almoost vanquished away from me, for their murmuringe against
Moses, and Mary, was stryken with Leprosye. And by and by the hole people made
insurrection, Nom. xi.
and would have stoned Caleb and Iosue, because they exhorted the people to be
constante in their journey, Nom. 13.14.
and did animate them to the conquest of the land of Chanaan. God was for this
Rebellion (as he is for all other) very angrye and thretened destruction, but
Moses by fervent prayer over came him for that present vengeance. Than
sodainlye arose an other Rebellion against Moses and Aaron, by Core, Nom. xvi.
Datha^, and Abyron, with diverse other, which were of the principal sort of
ye Synagoge. But their end was horrible and wonderful distructio^. And yet
could not the ungracious and wicked people be stayed, but fell in murmuring,
and began new tumult and busynes, but the wrath and plague of God fell upon
them, and they were consumed with fire, to the number of xiiii. thousand. And
all this would not help, still they continued murmuring when so ever their
wa^ted the satisfiyng of their carnal desires, insomuche that Moses was feign
to get the^ water out of the hard stone. Number. xx.
But here alas, I was almost utterly rejected altogether, not only of the
people, but also of Aaron and Moses himself, For at this point Moses and
Aaron were (as men over weried in continual conflict) some thing faynted in
their hertes, and for because their faith was not so upright as should have
been, God took such displeasure with them, that they entered not into the land
of Behest. No meruell if the rest of the people which issued forth of Egypt
with Moses, were excluded, which by so many ways offended God, that they were
destroyed, and their bodies prostrate in the wyldernes, in which God fed
them and conducted them by the space of xl. years: but they could never attain
the land of Chanaan, because they resisted my admonitions. Of six hundredth
thousand, Number. ^ ^^
only two persons entered into the land, and al for their incredulity and
misbeleif. But Iosue and the children of them which came forth of Egypt
through my aid (according to Gods promise) entered ye country of Canaan, at
whose entryng God wroughte great wonders. And when Iosue had conquered the
la^d, and divided it among the xii. trybes, he through my suggestion (like a
most godly and gracious governor) most instantly exhorted the people,
diligently to learn, Iosue. 23.
and steadfastly to observe the law and commandments of God.

After that Iosue and that generation was dead, Iudic. ii.
the Israelites began to fall into another kind of sin, and would not regard
God nor his works, but did noughtely in ye sight of the lord, and served
Baalim. Thus was I evil entreated among them, and in manner deprived of all
honor and estimation: yet I recovered my self through great strength and
virtue. And in this extremity I would not cast of this unkind people, as they
had rejected me, but I obtained of God for them, just, wise, and valiant judges
at sundry times, By whom they were always delivered forth of the captivity and
daungier of their enemies. And this continued by the space of four hundredth
and fifty years. Yet ever when their judge was dead, than would they return
to their old wicked ways and inventions, not fearing to provoke the anger of
god. And they did not only fall into idolatrye of the Gentiles, Iudic. iii.
but also into their vices and fylthie abominations, as appeared in the
abusing of the Levites wife, Iudic. xix
by the men of Gabaa, which detestable crime was cause of great murder, and
in manner occasion of the destruction of the whole trybe of Beniamyn. Iudic. xx.
In that time there was no king in Israel, but every one did what himself
thought best. The preistes, Iudic. xxi.
judges, and auncie^tes bare chief rule, and governed the people as well as it
would be, but all was far amysse, and daily it waxed worse and worse, and my
power and honor continually decreased. Yet at length I brought forth Samuel, i.
Reg. i.
and of a good child made him a good old man. In his days the people began to
cry for a king, i. Reg. 8.
and I procured at Gods hand, that a certain goodly young man named Saul, i.
Reg. x.
was appointed to be their king. A small time was he in his kingdom, i. Reg. xv.
but he shaked me of, and was disobedient to the will of God declared to him by
Samuel, and followed his own, and saved Agag. Wherefore I left king Saul, and
permitted him to an evil spirit, and I acquainted me with David the son of
Iesse, a man of the special election of God, i. Reg. xvi
whom I caused Samuel to anoint king in place of Saul. I comforted David in
great tribulations, which Saul raised against him, and finallye I brought him
to quiet possession of the kingdom of Israel, I gate him great victories
against thinfideles, i. Reg. vi.
I made him bring home to his City with great reverence the Ark of God, Yea
I obtained that most gracious promise of Messiah, which was made long before to
Abraham, 2. Reg. ^*
to be renewed with this king David, that of him and his seed the son of God
should be incarnate. I stirred his heart to devotion and fervent desire to have
God honored: I taught hun to make Psalms and songs in the praise of the
most highest and merciful God. But see what misfortunes happen unto me.

This same king Dauyd upon who^ I had so long and diligently attended, and so
carefully norished and brought up, suddenly with a blast of temptacion was
carried away, and had almost lost me. He forgot me and himself, and committed
no small faults, First adultry, 2. Reg. 11.
and than murder. And another time also he offended me in numbering the people,
^. Reg. 24.
he had for these been lost and forlorn, if I had not with all vehemency
styrred his heart to penance and contrition. But he ceased not to wayle and
weep, to mourn and lament, to call and cry, both day and night, till I had
brought him into his former state, and reconciled him with God, who was hyghly
displeased. He cried after me as a la^be or a bird, which had lost his
damme, and God of his goodness received him, and restored to him the comfortable
and joyful spiri^^ and before he dyed; he left his son Solomon sittyng in
his throne, 3. Reg. i.
to whom he gave most godly precepts and exhortacions (as becomes the
father to give 3. Reg ii.
to the child) and so he departed forth of this world. Than waited I upon
young Solomon which was a gracious child, and well-beloved of God. ^. Reg. 3.
I taught him (by his prayer) to obtain that synguler gift of wisdom,
inspiring the desire thereof (as a thing most necessary for a king) into his
heart. God lyked him well, and exalted him to edify the glorious and famous
temple wherein God should be worshipped, and therein the Ark of God was placed,
and Solomon with great solemnity and multitude of sacrifices, 3. Reg. 8.
made dedication thereof: (But O how wonderful and fearful are the secret
judgments of God.) This same Solomon (for all that I could do) after all
these benefits of God, declyned from me, and fell to love of strange ladies:
and had so many wives, ^. Reg. 11.
queanes, and concubines, that it was no merueil, if for all his wisdom they
made him a fool. In his old age when he should have been wysest, his heart
was perverted and depraved, in such wise that he fell to idolatry and
worshipping of strange and false gods. God was therewith so moved, that he
decreed to divide the kingdom of Israel, and to take away x. trybes from the
house of Solomon. This had been done incontinently, but I entreated so, that
for his father Dauyds sake, it came not to pass while Solomon lived: but in
his sons days it came to pass, according as God had threatened. 3. Reg. 12.
But after the death of Solomon when his son Roboam (contrary to my mind)
dispisyng the counsel of ancient men, was led by his yonkers and wanton
flatterers: the threatenyng of God came to effect, and the people divided them
selves, and x. trybes made them a new king named Jeroboam, and only the trybe
of Judah and part of Beniamyn tarried we king Roboam. And thus of one kingdom
were made two. Division and separation of kingdoms and turning diverse into
one, is no small plage of God. But now, Hieroboam when he was thus exalted
into the kingdom by the will and sufferaunce of God (whereby he should have had
cause to retain me, and with all study and diligence to observe me:) yet he
co^trarywise utterly neclecting me and forsakyng me, gave him self all to
Idolatrye, ^. Reg. 12.
and did also draw all the people with him into the same abomination, and
would give no ear to the Prophets of God, but forged a new religion after
his own mind, and contrary to Gods ordinance made preistes at his
pleasure, (and all for money). And after him his successors kings of Israel
followed his ungracious steps, and continually kept the people in error and
blyndnesse: so that finallye through their abomination, they provoked ye
wrath of God, ^. Reg. 18.
who gave them up into the hands and captivity of Salmanazar king of the
Assyrians. But as for Roboam and his posterity kings of Judah they were not so
evil as the kings of Israel, (but al together noughtie, and adversaries unto
me) except three or four of the^, with whom I did insinuate my self into some
familiarity, that the vengeance of God was prolonged and did not fall upon
the country so soon as the people deserved: but at length for all that I could
do, I was repudiate and cast of. But there was no remedy, but to let them go
to destruction and captivity, as the Israelites were served before them, For
the king of Babylon came upon them with main power, and burned the city and
temple of Jerusalem, and took the king and put out his eyes, and bound him in
chains, ^. Reg. 30.
and caused his sons to be slain before him, also all the chief principal
sort which were taken prisoners, he caused to be slain without pity. This
was the just punishmente and vengeance of God for dishonoring me. Thus was I
in great heaviness and distress, which being before rejected and despised of
all the nations of the world: and having no comfort but among the Jews,
which were elected to be the holy people of God, was also in this manner
abandoned of them. Now had I no place to resort unto, saving that I had
always some old servants in corners, as Elye, Helize, Esaie, Hieremye, and
certain other Prophets and their children, which received and retained me
gladly. Some seed was ever left, else had they been worse then Sodom and
Gomorrhe. All together did not bow their knees unto Baal. Now after this
captivity and transmigration of the Jews, I ceased not yet to allure unto
such as I lyked among them, and I followed and serched out among the
Chaldees and Babylonians, where they were despised. There I found Ezechiel,
and reveled to him strange visions, Ezech^. ^.
and taught him both sharp and comfortable monitions, which he preached unto
the people.

Also I obtained for the child Daniel the spirit of wisdom and prophecy in
great excellency, And I delivered him forth of the den of Lions, Dani, i.
And his three companions forth of the flaming furnace: Dani. 14.
And not only I was co^uersant with men, Dani, 3,
but also about this time I found certain women which with all gentilnesse
and humility observed me, as Susanna, Judith, Ester, Sara the daughter of
Raguel, with whose husband and father in law, (the two Tobies) I delighted much
to abide. But all this time the scarsitee and small nombre of my servants,
greatly abated my joy, For I bare but small rule over all the yerth, Yet I
departed not utterly from the Jews being in misery. But when the years of
their captiuitee (appointed by God, and declared by ye mouth of Jeremy the
Prophet) were past: than I styrred the heart of that noble king Cyrus to be
gracious unto them, i. Esdr. i.
and to license them with favor to return to Jerusalem, and to build again
the City and the temple, which before was destroyed by Nabuchodonosor. I had
good faithful servants among the Jews, which did help manfully, and
couraged the people to this work, as Iosue, Zorobabell, Aggeus, Zacharias. And
I wrought so that after this, i. Esdr. v.
Darius also the king of Perses was favorable to the Jews, i. Es. vi.
and confirmed the liberty of buildinge again the temple, as Cyrus had done
before. And so in like manner did Artaxerxes. In whose days I moved the spirit
of Esdras i. Es. vii.
to search the law of the lord, and to exercise and teach the
commandments thereof. And this Esdras obtained of king Artaxarxes (through
my mediation) great privileges for the Jews, that they might frelye and
quietly repair again to Jerusalem, and there renew the service of God
accordingly as the law appointed. And shortelie after this, ii. Esd. ii.
Nehemias in like manner obtained (through my help) of king Artaxerxes to
reedifie the City of Jerusalem. And now I began something to be conforted
again, after long distress and desolation. And I restored the people of
Israel ito a meetlie good and tolerable state. But alas, my gladness continued
not long. The people by little and little fell to their own disposition, and
daily set less by me. In so much ye God did many ways afflicte and punish
them and suffered them for their iniquite to be overcome, and vanquished of
diverse Heathens and Barbarous princes, and finally, to be conquered of the
Romans. Thus was I utterly exiled from the Iewishe people, which ever I had
most tenderly atte^ded unto. And alas, all the wide world beside, had me in
most extreme disdain. Sin most horrible, reigned over all the earth,
Idolatry, Murder, Pride, Avarice, Fornication. These vices with all other of
all kinds and sorts had replenished the hole world. Scantly could I find
at this time any hole, or corner wherein I might hyde my head. But now behold
the goodness of God exceeding and passing all speech, thought, and
understanding. At this time, wha^ all the world was thus drowned in the bottom
of sin, and of recouerye mine au^cientie seemed to be desperate, yet ye eternal
almyghtie father of his incomprehensible charity and mercy, when I was
brought most low, sodainlye exalted me, and set me up again in much greater
excellency tha^ ever I had before. Yea the mighty and good God orderer and
disposour of all times was content now to send the time of my illustration.
Which time was promised and prophesied of so long before. It pleased the
heavenly father according to his word by manifold ways spoken before, to
accomplish and perform his promise made from the beginning of the world,
that redemption should come, that reconciliation should be made, that health
should be restored, that benediction should be enlarged, that I should
florishe and be exalted and dilated over all the earth. The son of God
(saying man destitute of my help, descended from heaven, and was incarnate of
Marye that ever immaculate and blessed virgin, Joan. i. Math. i.
a vessel singulerlie among all creatures, elected and prepared by me, to be
the mother of Jesus, Luc. i.
the son of the most highest. The Angel was sent in message to open to her
the will of the Trinite, saluting her saying Hail full of grace, the lord is
with the. And he told her that she should conceive and bring furthe a son,
whose name should be Jesus. Math. i.
For he should deliver the people from their sins. At which word I
received comfort inexplicable. For as much as I perceived the time of my full
joy to brawe nere. I had secret acquaintance at the same time in the house of
Zachary, whose wife Elizabeth through me, Luc. i.
conceived a blessed child. Who tha^ being in his mothers womb was by me
stirred in such wise at the voice of Marye the handmaide of God, that he for
joy did leap. The birthe of the blessed babe drew nere. And it came to pass
that when Joseph and Marye were come to Bethlem to be taxed according to the
general commandment given by Augustus the Emperor, Luc. ii.
Marye brought forth that glorious child which should be author of salvation,
and wrapped him in swathelinge clothes, and laid him in the mau^gere, because
there was no room for them in the Inn. O vanite of mankind, see how the lord
of glory confounds thy pride in his natiuite. It pleased him that made the
and all the world, thus to be incarnate, thus to be borne, thus to show him
self destitute of all glory, in poverty, in humilite, that thy pride might
be pardoned, thy insolency might be abated, thy vanite might be confounded,
that by this humility thou might be exalted, by this poverty, thou
might be enriched. He came down to earth that thou might ascend to
heaven. Here I began to appear as the son shining in a clear morninge
continuinge still duringe the infancy of this child, in spredinge abroad my
beams a thousand times more clear than any son. I rested with this child
and in him remained as the water in the fountain or continual spring. Shortly
after, I flowed into his Apostles whom he elected, that by them I should be
preached and declared. The heavenly father inspired me into their hearts, that
I should move the^ to attend upon Jesus his son. And take heed to his
words, and mark his miracles. Little had I to do at this time with the rest
of the people. The towns and cities cared not for me, Capharnaum. Bethsayda,
Math. xi.
Corazaim, Samaria and Jerusalem it self (which was by name the city of
God) did little regard or esteem me. The prince, the priests, the Scrybes, the
Pharisees, for most part disdained me, and most malinglie envied and hated
me. But I sustained their malice and peruersite, Knowinge that through Jesus I
should be set at large and have such power after his exaltacion, that I
should be chief lady and mystres and draw the world up to him, though
Satan and his me^bres striued never so much to the contrary. The time came
according to Gods will, and the prophecies, that Jesus was exalted upon the
cross, and was wounded for the offenses of his people. Mat. xxii. Mar. xv.
Luc. xxiii. Joan. xix.
He abhorred not the cruelty and death, that thereby salvation, peace, life,
and glory might come to mankind. Jesus loved mankind greatly. Love
constrained him to take upon him that heuie and bitter passion. He yielded his
sprite into his fathers hands, his side was perced with a spear. Than I
gusshed out as the sea when it over runs the banks, and ouerfloweth the
land. Than I took up with me all that lay in my way, and many went home,
Luc. xxiii.
knockinge them self on the breasts. To Joseph of Aramathia I gave the spirit
of boldenes to require the body of Jesus to be laid in his Sepulcher, Mat.
xxvii Mar. xxv. Luc. xxiii. Joan. xix.
the Apostles, Disciples, and the good women mourned, I was then but as the
son hyd under a dark cloud. The third day I pearsed the cloud, and drove
away all the power of darkness. Jesus arose again and appeared to Maudlen
and to Peter, Ma. xxviii. Mar. xvi. Luc. xxiiii. Joan. xx.
and to the rest of the Apostles, and bade them put away all fear and
heuinesse. All power says he is given to me, Ma. xxviii.
both in heaven and earth: Go preach the Gospel to every creature: Luc.
xxiiii.
teach them amendment of life, and remission of sins. Wherein I give you
power through the holy ghost to use mine authoritee in losing and binding.
Ioh. xx.
Take Grace with you, till she bring you to my kingdom. Be constante and
follow me, and ye shall come after me unto my father, and be there as I am.
Than Jesus ascended and entered into his rest, and into his glory. And after
all his labors sat him down on the fathers right hand. O how glad I was
wha^ all this was come to pass. Mar. xvi.
And seeing that my maker and restorer Jesus gave me in commandment to remain
with his Apostles, I so did, and cleaued fast unto them, exciting the^ with all
vehemency to accomplish Mar. xvi.
all things as they were taught by their master and lord Jesus. Who for my
sure stablishement and confirmation, promised to send the holy spirit unto
them, Luc. xxiiii.
and badde the^ tarry certain days in Jerusalem til that promise were
fulfilled, which was done at Penthecoste after. Than was I in my full strength
and courage. And I enflamed the hearts of the Apostles and Disciples of Jesus
with most fervent charity, and put them in perfect remembrance of all the
words of Christ. And inspired unto them the understanding of all mysteries,
and moved them to set in hand boldly with preaching of the glad tydinges of
the kingdom of heaven. I exhorted their hearts most comfortably. Bidding them
not to be afraid of any power carnal, t. iiii.
or spiritual, visible, or invisible. But with all confidence and courage,
defye the world and the prince thereof, and fight valiauntlye in the battle
of God against the old serpent, that they might recover the prisoners
innumerable which lay in the chains of sin, in the dongeon of infidelite,
and build the new temple and church of God upon the sure foundation (Jesus
Christ). Whereby, to him and to his father they should do most acceptable
service. They being thus stirred by this my exhortacio^, were comforted and
began to speak with diverse to^ges as the holy ghost inspired them. Act. ii.
And Peter (as a valiant captain) gave the onset upon the world, drawinge
forth the sword of the spirit, which is the word of God. Preachinge to a
great multitude the passion and resurrection of Jesus. Act. ii.
Peter behaved him so well and vigorouslye, and his strokes were so mighty,
that he gate a great pray at that time, and wan about the nombre of three
thowsande souls. His strokes were not such as brought death, but life, not
hurting, but healing, not making sorrow, without bringing joy after. In deed
he pricked them to the heart with the sharp point of the sword, that they
wyste not whither to turn them. But said. Alas, Act. ii.
what shall we do. And he bye and bye told them (saying). Do ye penance, and
see that every one of you be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ to obtain
remission of your sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the holy ghost.
With in a little while after Peter made an other sermon, Act. iii.
and laid upon them with the sword in such wise, that he vanquished a great
company. So that the nombre of the faithful men encreaced till about fine
thowsande: The heads of the Jews, Princes, Priests, Magistrates, Pharisees,
Scrybes, and Saducees, saying how prosperouslye it succeeded to the Apostles in
their affairs, were not a little displeased. Act. iiii.
And assembled them selfs, intending with all power to resist their
enterprices. But wha^ they heard Peter and John speak so wonderfully, they
were a stomed and were contented to dimise them, only inhibiting them any more
to preach or teach in the name of Jesus. But the Apostles excused them selfs
from keeping that imunction (saying). Act. v.
Oportet obedire deo magis que hominibus. The nombre of the church of Christ
and faithful beleuers, increased daily through the power of God declared by
the Apostles, both in word and wonderful workinge of miracles. The Synagoge
of the Jews had enupe, and freated for malice, Act. vi.
and set out certain to challenge Steuin in disputacion, when they were not
able to resist the wisdom of God and the spirit which spoke, they did
subornate certain false witnesses which should accuse him and lay to his
charge words of blasphemy. But Steuin being thus assailed, drew against the^
the bright sword of Gods word, reproving them Charpelie for their
incredulite and obstinate striuinge against the son of God. Act. vii.
And they (all to gether enraged), stoned him to death, whereby he attained ye
crown of Martyrdom, and declared hi self a true and perfitte witness of Jesus,
and by force of strong faith and mine assistau^ce, triumphed upon Satan and
death. Many took great courage at this example, and feared not to fight in
the battle of God unto death. The church malignante sought all ways of
resistaunce against the Apostles and disciples of the lord Jesus, and of
defaiting their enterprices, and stoppinge the light of the eternal truth of
the Gospel. And they sent furthe a young hearty and courageous Captain of
theirs (named Saulus), all inflamed with desire of destruction and murder.
Act. ix.
But I ^^e^^ge that the fellow went ^edling in ignorauncie not kn^winge what
he did) had pity on his blind zeal and caused him to be cast down. And at
the hearing of the mighty voice of Jesus, (whom he persecuted), I blinded his
carnal eyes and took from him his stomach by the space of three days, that he
neither did eat nor drink. And than I caused a disciple (whose name was
Ananias, to go to him and baptize him. Than his sight was restored to him
again, and he was replenished with the holy ghost, and began to magnify by
prechinge, the name of Jesus, declaringe him to be the son of God. Thus I
brought Saulus from being a persecutour of Christ, to the dignity of a
principal Apostle, and of a wolf I made him a lamb. An instrument specially
elected to serve God in settinge abroad the light of the Gospel. And than I
would no longer have him called Saulus, but Paulus. That, as he was converted
both body and soul to God and to the truth from the way of error, so I
willed his name should be changed also. It were to long to rehearse how
meruelouslie I wrought with this same Paulus. He was the most faithful,
earnest, painful, and diligente seruante that ever I had. Nor by none was I
ever more magnified, and mine honor more dilated, than by him. He ever
extolled me and took my part against all my adversaries (the Jews,
pseudapostles, and heretics). He was my singular protector or rather my chief
champion. He glorified not but in me, nor could not abide or suffer that any
should glory but in me, Ad gal. vi. mad Co. i.
and in the cross of Christ and in testimony of a good conscience, which
can not be, but by me and of me. Peter in like manner, John and James, with all
the rest of the twelve, as most victorious co^ductours of Gods Army under
the standerde of the cross, ceased not daily to bring the world in
subjection to Christ, and obedience of the Gospel. They spared for no pain
or affliction. Death was, no thing in their sight, so that they might bring
other to life, and be partakers them selfs of the passion and resurrection of
Jesus. They shed their blood and despised this tra^sitorie life, not fearinge
any that has power only to kill the body. I remained ever with them and
prospered them in all their travails, till their sound was passed through
all the world, and their words were heard in the extreme parts of the
earth. And when they were dissolved out of this bodylie tabernacle, and that
Christ had received their spirits into his glory, that they might
everlastingly dwell with him as his true and faithful ministers. Than I in
like manner excited and moved their scholars and disciples (whereof there was no
small number) to follow their examples in heavenly doctrine and godly
conversation, and to order the church of God according unto such
instructions and precepts as they had received of the Apostles. They were
obedient with all diligence and study folowinge my suggestions. The peoples of
all nations embraced the word of life, and were converted unto the very true
and living God, which delivers from the wrath to come. Act. iiii.
The tyrauntes of the earth (being not contented that Christ's kingdom was
thus enlarged), assembled the^ selfs together and conspired against God and
his son Christ. They were incensed by the spirits of darkness to persecute,
tourme^t, and kill all them that professed the name of Christ. They executed
their furious intentes, and spared no state, degree, kind, or, age, but with all
kinds of tourmente and pain that wicked Imaginacion could devise or inuente,
they afflicted the innocente and most holy servants and members of Christ.
Fire sword, wild beasts, rakes, Heb. xi.
forkes, gredirons, cauldrons, wheles, plummettes, stones, all was to little.
But through me, the patience of ye Saints over came all these horrible
pains. I bad the^ hold fast my daughter faith, by which they overcame
kingdoms, they wrought right wysenes, and obtained the promises. The more of
them that were killed or shed their blood for Christ, the more clearlie and
brightlie did I shine over all the world. And I procured many tunes that by
their torments they wan their tormentours, and by their passions they subdued
the persecutours. Their prisonment enlarged my liberty, their death was my
life, and their triumph was my victory. After that the storms of this
tormenting world was paste, I ruled the church in more tranquillite and
quietness, and kept both the ministers of the church, and also the common
people in the fear of God, in great devotion in fervent charity in unity and
concord, in continual prayer, abstinence and penance, in all godly order,
correction, and discipline. Tha^ Emperors, Kings and Princes, began to
inclyne their ears unto me, and chief rulers and magistrates of countries and
cities acknowledged them selfs to be my servants. Their great pleasure and
delyght was in heringe and obeiynge Gods word, and settinge forth his honor
and service. They thought their own honor cheifelie should stand, by
maintayninge Gods honor and religion. There arose in the ages by the
procuring of Satan diverse heresies (as euin from the time of Christ's Ascension
there were some false prophets) which maintained errors, but at this time
they began more to prevail. Arrians, Manichees, Nestorians and my special
adversaries Nouatians, and Pelagians with great violence and subtlety
infested the church, and seduced many of all sorts. But I prepared and
stirred up always doctors and teachers of excellent learning, understanding,
virtue and holiness, which confuted such false doctrine, and disparsed those
mistes and dark clouds. Thus through my help, neither the violente
persecutions and assaults of Tyrants, nor the crafty vndermyninges of
heretics could ever prevail against her. And this promise undoubtedly
shall ever be found true. She is builded upon the sure rock. For he was the
wise man him self who builded her, that she should build his house, and that
he might dwell in her. The floodes of persecueion did come upon her, the winds
of heresy did blow upon her, but she could not be subverted, her foundation
is so sure, But the soft rain of carnal and worldly pleasure by little and
little began to sowple into her. Which most of all has wekened her. When
both the sword of persecution was put up into the shethe, and the fyrebrandes
of heretics wherewith they kindled dissension in the church than, were
extincte and put out. Than when she seemed most to be in peace, than was she in
Amaritudine amarissima. The world and the flesh (by the crafty conueians of
ye devil) began first to faune upon her, and than so infected, poysonned,
inuolued, entangled oppressed and overwhelmed her that her florisshing virtue
began to quail, her spiritual strength, courage and liberty began to fail,
her quickenes, lightness, and sharpenes began to wax dull, heavy and blunte, her
beauty began to decreasse, her color became pale, her stomach began to
fainte. Finally, she began wonderfully to waste and consume, and her light was
almost turned into darkness, she waxed drousie, al given to slo^bring,
sleapinge, dreaminge, eatinge, drinkinge, and deuisinge of pastime, for her
recreacion to drive away the time. Than her ministers (forgettinge the bataill
of God, whereunto they were taken and appointed to fight against the world)
began to take trewce with the world, and so to lose the service of God and the
wages promised for the same. Than pride, ambicion, couetise, contention (which
be the vices of the world) began to creape in every where: Than settinge aside
thaffaires of God, every state, degree, and order, as well ecclesiastical as
laicall, began to contend either among themselfes, or oue against another.
Thus my joy which I had in the primative church, and a certain space after,
began to dyminishe more and more, and mine honor continually decayed, and the
world on all sides waxed daily worse and worse, and more repugnant and
obstinate against me, even from the time of the Apostles and Martyrs, till this
present age, in which al sin and iniquite is increased in such abundaunce,
that al my griefs and dolours past I count but light and easy, in comparison
of the sorrows which I suffer in these days. I might much more at large
describe the evil entreating which I have had in times paste, and specially
in these later ages, with in these four or five hundredth years. But the
contemplation and felinge of this mine infelicitee in this present generation
now walking upon the earth, makes me to forget all that is paste, and to
cry out, for vehemency of pain which is present. Peradventure ye look I
should speak what misfortunes I have had in your fathers days through their
faults. Ye think I have no cause to complain upon you, But ye be utterly
deceived. What should I spare you and not rebuke you plainly as becomes me,
and is profitable for you, that by the truth ye may be converted and healed. Ye
be the cursed generation of Cham which mocked his father, Gene. ix.
and had his delight in laughing at his fathers nakedness: So is your pleasure
and pastyme in the report of such faults as you lay to your fathers, and
your own you will not see, which be a hundredth times worse. Ye can rail on
their abuses, their supersticions and idolatry, and ye your self be worse
than Pagans or Infideles, and clean fallen from God and from my governance. I
report me in this thing to as many of you as be not utterly blinded in your
souls, and have any spark of the fear and love of God remainyng in you.
Whether this my complainte be not just and true. Much dishonor have I suffered
in times past in diverse ages, But thou O age present do pass and excede al
other, in mischief, and all kind of sin. As the age of the Apostles and
Martyrs surmounted all other in virtue and godlynes: So, neither the age of
the universal flod, nor of the tower of Babell, nor of Amalec and all the
Gyauntes, nor of al wicked kings of Irael, nor of all the blood thrystie and
idolatours tyrants, is worthy to be compared to thee, in greatness of sin
and iniquity. I can bear no rule with thee. I can not persuade nor allure
thee. My counsel thou despisest, Prouer. i.
my monitions thou disdaynest, thou shakest of mine inspirations, thou closist
thine ears against me, and thou hardnest the heart as the flynt or Adamante
stone, that by no means I can enter into thee. I cannot amend thee, for thou
wylt not receive me. Considre all thy states how they be corrupted and
perverted. Every head is sicks, Esaie. i.
and every heart heuye, from the sole of the foot to the top of the head,
there is no whole place in the body. Look upon thy princes, governors,
nobles, magistrates: compare them with such as have but homelye names in the
scripture of God, and judge whether they deserve any better The Prophets makes
exclamations against the Princes which were in ye old testament, Ezechi. 2^
Sopho. ^.
calling them Lions, Bears, and Wolfes. O that thy princes and rulers now,
were innocent as Lambs, prudent as serpe^tes, simple as Doves. For such
virtues would not only become Apostles, but also christian rulers. But alas,
are they not as much given to vanity, lust, pride, contempt of God,
prodigality, auerice, exaction, shedding of blood, maintainyng of wars for
their own respects as ever any among ye heathen were, or now be among the
Turks? And as the princes and rulers be, so be the people. O would God I were
as great in their hearts, as I am much used in their styles and tytles. Be
not their courts schools for the most part of vanity and dissolute life? Is
not there learned to swear, to brag, to disdain, to look a loft, to
defraude, to deprave, to detract, to flatter to dissemble, and as they say
bear two faces in one hodde? I grant I have some servants and favorers, for
whose sake god mercifully spares the rest, else could he not contain his
wrath. As for the bishops and the pastors among the clergy, wherein I should
have chief comfort and delight, and hope of recovering mine ancient honors and
dignity, My heart will not serve to speak of the^. It greueth me to speak of
the^, they be so alienate from me.

Are they not such pastors as feed them selves, and neelecte the poor
flock? which seek their temporal gain, and care not for their spiritual
loss? Which of them is a good pastor that puts his life in adventure for
his sheep? Joan. x.
who is not a mercenarie runnyng away when the woulfe comes? Deuteronomy. 32.
O that diverse of them were not woulfes them selves. O that they had knowledge
and understanding. And as for the inferior sort of the Clergy, many of them
be more insolente than ever they were. And as they be in deed in wardly, so
they show themselfes outwardly, in all manor of behauour and conversation, in
all lightness, wantonness, vanity, and all worldly and carnal vices.

In speech, communication, gesture, apparel, manners, works, conversation, they
contend with the worst, They should excel in virtue and holiness, and by their
sad examples reform the world. But their virtue is al together to conform
them selves now to the world, or rather run before the world, in all madness.
Though all christian people be light in Christ, yet should the Clergy shine as
chief lamps to lyghten the whole Church, and should excel and go before the
rest of the people. So was the order of going among the children of Israel.
Iosue. iii.
The Levites went before (bearyng the Ark of God) and the army followed after.
Now they go before, but without the Ark of god, without trompets or sound of
true preaching, all out of array and order, following their own pleasures, lusts
and fantasyes, and drawing the people the hie way to hell. They were wont in
ancient times past, in token of more perfection in their co^uersacion, to have
in their apparel and habit certain distinetion: but now they would be loathe
to be esteemed Pharisets. Wherefore they apply the^ selfs to the common vain
facions, such as fantastike devises daily bring forth. And because they know
the names of hypocrites to be odious, therefore they hyde none of their
noughtines, but as they be noughtie, so they glory in showing themselves what
they be (as bad as the worst). Yet some of them fall to a new Pharisaisme, and
delight to appear in strange facion with long berdes, and broad hattes with some
ancient cloak cast upon them, or a long gown after a new devise. And thus
they come and go so symplie that the people may behold the^ with reverence and
admiration. But some will merueil that I speak so lightly of them, considering
they be so busy and painful in preaching and declaring the word of God to the
people.

O would to God they declared Gods word, and not their presumption and
fantasy. The gospel says: Matthew. vi. Luc. vit.
Grapes be not gathered of Thorns, nor Fygges of Breers. But I will say no
more, but God send the world good fruit of their preachinges. Surely more
solemue ignorance joined with presu^ptuous boldness in uttering it self, has
in no age been known. Preaching is prating, railyng, telling tales jesting and
scoffing, making the people to laugh, where they should rather weep. Take these
things out of a great sort of their sermons, and the rest is small and and
very bare. What should I speak how with their preaching, indiscreet talking,
and profane reasoning, the people is so troubled and distracted that many be
uncertain what to say, think or believe. Yea, the chief among them, yea the
bishops them selves and they which be esteemed of some most singular clerks,
be so diverse in their opinions and judgments, that there be almost as many
kinds of faithes, as sects were among the Philosophers. Their division is
noted by these names (which be in every man's mouth). The new and the
old. One sort runs headlong, an other draws back, and not with out a
cause. For if all should ru^ne a like, all were like to fall on a hepe and mar
themselves. The new sort spur and prycke with all their might, The old
sort hold in brydel with no less strength. No merueil if the horse being
thus cumbred, rear up his whole body, that he scant will suffer any to sytte
in the saddle. I would wysshe that these new Spurrers should be put to hold
in the bridle, and keep in the horse head, and leave their wanton spurryng
for fear of castyng over both horse and man. And I would wysh that these old
bridle holders would begin to spur more quickly, not with such new sharp
spurs and pricks as move debate, or nourish controversy and contencion in
opinions, but such gentle spurs after the old ancient making, as would
stir the horse. I mean the people to ample a good gentle pace in the
commandments of God. Such pryckes as would stir to penance and true
amendment of life, The prick of spiritual exhortacions to charity, humility,
patience, hope, godly virtue and wisdom, Of which Salomo^ speaks, saying:
The words of wise men are like pricks and nails that go through: Eccle. xii.
wherewith men are kept together, For they are given of one sheparde only,
which is Christ: O how much need has the world of such strong nails in
this time? wherewith men should be fastened together in unity, peace;
concord and charity: For all is divided and parted in sundre, not one joint
holds fast by another. In the body scante one poast or sparre joined to
another. In the house the pinnes be broke, the timbre is rotten, the tiles and
covering is every day blown at with the wind, and the walls be shronken,
so that al is in danger and ruin. But God is able to repair al, and to make
it strong again. Ask Paul how God buyldeth, and he will say it is Charity:
i. Cor. viii
Charitas edificat, sciencia inflat. This world is full of this windy
knowledge which makes swellyng, and puffs up the stomach and the brain
with such presumption, that men esteem all knowledge in their own heads, and
what so agreith not with their fantasye, they set it at naught. But Charitas
non inflatur. If men had a little of this Charity, Cor. xiii.
they would not so hastily and presu^ptuously disse^t in their opinions from
their fellows now living (which see and understand as much as themselfes)
conte^ning the testimonies of such as have gone before, nor also condemn their
own fathers, unto who^ they were not worthy to loose the lachettes of their
shows. But what be the fruits of this presumptuous knowledge, or rather
ignorant presumption, the world daily does, and daily shall perceive and
feel. Truly it is much contrary unto me and chaseth me clean away. Every
man thinks himself a doctor: eueryman disdaineth to learn, except it be of
himself. Every man takes in hand to expound that he understands not, to
declare that which he perceives not, to dispute and determine as his brayn
serves him, and to talk he woteth not what. Thus goth the scripture out of
reverence, and is turned into matter of talking, plaiyng jesting, and singing.
And as the prophet Ezechiel says: Vertunt sermones meos in canticum. God will
not long suffer such dishonor of his word. Why, the word (say thou) is
exalted and much glorified, For it is written upon the white walls in the
Churches, and in other houses, that men may read it in every place. So did the
Jews and the Phariseis write it in their clothes and hemmes of their
garments, but it was far out of their hearts. O how long shall God suffer
thine hypocrisy, which pretendest the honor of Gods word, and do esteem
it no thing at all. Great was the hypocrisy of some Monks and Freers in these
latter days, But thy present hypocrisy does justify them, and make them
saints in comparison of thee. It was one of ye most sharp reproaches of the
prophet Esaie, Esaie. xxix. Math. xvii.
and also of Christ against the Jews, that they were a people which in their
mouth honored God, but their heart was far from him. When was Gods word
and his name so much in the mouth and so little in the heart? Yet in this point
how far do the Jews excelle the and are more to be praised? For they (as
the scripture does testify) honored God in the mouth, but thye speech, for
the most part is such as no honor, but rather blasphemy appears therein.
Thy preachers glory in their tongues, and in that they please their audience
(such as them selfs) tickling their ears with that which deliteth their
affections with out refourminge of their conditions. They make soft pillowes
and bolsters for consciences, they kill them that dye not, and promise life to
the^ that live not. Eze. xiii. xiii.
They speak and prophecy out of their own hearts, they cry, thus says the
lord, and this is Gods word, when God sent the^ not. They cry peace
peace, where as there is no peace, and they name me when I am away. They daube
their walls with loose claye and untempered mortar, and therefore they can not
stand. I trust one day to stir such as shall show them selfs more endued
with my gifts. Who shall with all charity and mekenes of spirit, tell the
people their faults and the ways of amendment. In the mean time I counsel
every man to take head to him self, and remember what he is, and whereunto he
is called, and the end of all things. And consider how great need he has
of mine aid and assistaunce. I am ready to enter where I am not with obstinat
malice kept out. I enbrace most gladly such as will receive me. Yea my
goodness is so swyfte, that by many ways I preuente their wills. I stir
them wha^ they be dull, I warm them when they be could, and mollify the^
when they be hard, I revive the^ when they lie dead. Apo. iii.
I stand at the door of man's heart and there I cease not to knock, Apo xix.
if any man will open unto me, I enter into him, and refreshe my self with him
and him with me. I cry and call behind and before, and of al sides, above
and be love, with in and without. in aduersitee and prosperity, in riches and
poverty, in sykenesse and in health, in plenty and in penury, in war and
in peace, in liberty and captivity. I am ever stirring and inuiting mankind
to his salvation. For my lord author and founder Jesus Christ came into the
world to save sinners, Luc. xix.
and to recover that which was lost. If any man would have me and keep me
(for if I be not kept it were better never to have had me) then let him often
fall down before God in prayer, and of him he plentifully shall receive me. I
am the good gift descending from the father of light. Jacob. i.
I am no fruit of the earth, thou must receive me from above. Prayer I tell the
is a special mean to keep me and to encreace me. But alas, how can I be glad
when I see prayer so despised? O how prayer was used and frequented in
ancient time, when I was in my florishinge age in Christ's church, at
midnyght, before son rise, at the first hour, at third hour, at the sixth
hour, at the.ix hour, in the evening, and at compline. These were beside ye
most solemn prayers, which were at the holy Communions. And now o lord
what is all come to? The prayer is made short, lest the sclender and weak
devotion should be ouerlaied with it. But the devotion is so dull, that with
the short prayer it is nothing stirred. and the prayer is so short, that
devotion onles it were more quick, can not arise at the calling thereof. This
was the exercise and the discipline of the old church, in which the ministers
and they that were of the clergy spente all time in prayer, redinge, study,
writing, visiting the syke, comfortinge, exhortinge, preaching, and such
spiritual occupations. Now we have learned that God rarethe not for long
prayers, but for a good heart and true faith. But, while we be fallen from our
prayers, our faith is almoost deed and gone. If prayer be the elevation of
the mind toward God, secluding al other worldly and carnal business, than the
longer it is, the better it must be. If it consiste but in multitude of words
without attention of mind toward God, than it is reproved. We have now
learned to contemn the churches prayer, and say we may pray in all places.
But while we grant unto prayer in all places, we can scarcely suffer her to
rest in any place at all, the space of one Pater noster. Prayer should be
joined with Fasting and Alms, Tob. xii.
but where are they? Their names remain in the scriptures, but the use of them
semethe to be abolished. Men be so affraide of popish superstition, that they
let them clean alone. They fear lest they should fall into the abuse of
them, but they provide well for the avoiding the abuse, wha^ they use them
nothing at all. The church had certain times prescribed for fasting, Fie (say
they) this is popisshe. But if they had the spirit which they boaste of, and
the scripture in their hearts as in their mouths, and considered the orderinge
of Christ's church from the beginning, and the sentences and minds of
Saints touching the same, they would either amend their sayings and doings
orels they should needs declare them selfs to be of an obstinat peruersite. So
far are men destitute of me now a days (through their own wilfulnes) that
when time of common prayer is, than will they be most prophanelie occupied,
wha^ time of abstinence is, than will they do most solemn feast and sacrifice
to the world and to the bellye. Our fasting, say they, should not be at this
time, or at that time appointed, but when we be disposed. But why are they not
disposed, when the church labors to dispose the^? But that they rejoice to
declare themselves of an other disposition for that they can not find in their
hearts to be ordered by that spirit which has ordered the church from the
beginning. I can with great difficulty find one now in a hole city which
fasteth one day, except it be for the body or the purse, and not for the
soul. As for private fasting or private and solitary prayer, I speak
nothing. Where they be used, I am greatly delighted. But their rareness is
such, that I have small matter to rejoice. It should greatly comfort me if the
common were better used. By which I have in times past stirred up, and brought
many to the use of the private, more steadfastly. Well, though men pray or
fast little, yet they make amends with Alms. For they know what is written in
the Gospel. Give Alms and all is clean to you. But for very shame let the^
hold their peace, Luc. xi.
and remember which way the Alms of all the world paste is gone. Every
man's Alms is to him self, and bestowed upon him self and not for Gods
sake. O cruel charity, o miserable poverty, o mercy with out grace. Every
man is so charitable yt he has no neighbor but himself. Every man is so
poor in his own sight, that he needs all thiges which he may come bye.
Every man is so merciful that he would have all, and depart with no thing,
except it be in the respect of the flesh and the world, This insaciable
Avarice is the root of all euylles, i. Tim. vi.
the mother of mischief, and corruptrice of al conscience and common wealth.
She peruerteth all faith, she blyndeth the heart and chaungethe man (who is
borne to help man) into a tyrau^te, which is worse than a beast or a devil. O
auaryce thou art my most extreme and cruel aduersarye. I can not
sufficiently accuse the. Thou haste through thy crafty and false persuasions
utterly expelled and banished me furthe of the country, which by right I
ought to inhabit, which is man's soul. Other vices assail me from some
special states of men, and in certain places more one than another. But thou
in every place, from every estate, and on every side, most fierssie ceasist
notto beat upon me, so that the sentence of Hieremie was never so true as it is
now, saying. From the greatest unto the least, Hiert. vi.
all follow Avarice and work all craftelie. O fylthie Avarice, how haste thou
infected and poisoned all vocations, offices, all states and degrees? Thou
haste extinguished the lamps of clergy, thou have distained the honor of
nobilitee, thou haste corrupted all the mean and inferior sort of the
comminalte, Law, justice, conscience, honesty, fidelite, mercy are all
through thy vyolence trodden under foot. O blind Avarice how have thou put
out the eyes of the world, that men can neither see what is honesty, nor
discern what is truly and certainlye profitable? O false and subtle Avarice,
how have thou obtained the name of wisdom and providence, saying that of all
vices thou art most foolish, destroyenge thy self through thine own
gredines? O detestable Avarice of most false judgment and estimacion, which
haste made all vile things so dear, and most precious things so vile. How
have thou enhau^sed the rent of the vile earth: How have thou increased the
price and valewe of all transitory things, which men either for necessite,
or for commodite and pleasour does occupy? And contrary wise thou haste
diminished, impaired and brought down the price and estimacion of all heavenly
things, which ought to be most set bye, as learning, virtue, Gods word,
teachinge, preachinge, and all kind of spiritual ministracion. These things
haste thou brought to no estimacion, and made them in manner right naught. And
their ministers thou have defrauded, and made them so bare, that they be not
able to sustain the heardnesse of this wretched life. All this have thou done
in despite of me, because thou knoweste that where as I am, thou bear no
rule. But I doubt not but to see thye destruction which shall come of thye
self, except thou shortly avoid hense, and let me have more liberty. If
thou were not the impedimente, I doubt nothing but with the instrument of the
word of God, and good handlyng of the same (by such ministers as I could
prepare, enable and set furthe) I should deal metelie well with all other
vices, that the state of the world should be much more tolerable, and the
general plague of iiquite should not be so fervent. But while thou do
continue in thy rage, and that thy floodes arise in such force that no banks
can stop them, nor no dytches drink them up, while thou ouerrunnest all at
large, with thy bryberie, extortion, exaction, oppression and thy manyfolde
muencions and devises of destruction. I determine it to be best for me, to seek
here and there mine habitation where I may, and to desire all men in the mean
time to take patience, although I bring not general reformacion and redress
of things according to their wish, and so long frustrate their expectacion.
Therefore as one dispairynge to recover and obtain my hole dew right, which I
ought to possess, (so wrongefullie withholden from me by this deuelishe dame
Avarice) I shall yet be content privately to search and spy what good I may
do. And I trust that (God willing) I shall in diverse places get some pray
among the people and make some one that fears God worth a thousand of the
rest of the wicked. And for as much as my loud general cries can not be hard,
I shall labor secretly with such as I shall find mete for me, and persuade
them (a part severally) one by one, as it shall be Gods pleasure that I shall
mete with them.

Let every one therefore attend and take head (upon the pain intolerable
which shall ensue) that when so ever I find him or he me, that then he do
enbrace me with all diligence, and with all carfulness retain and keep me.
But what should I thus speak of thee O man what so ever thou art, as though I
were far from thee? Where so ever thou art I am ready at hand to enter into
thee, If thou do not through the malice of thine own will resyst me. I am
all spread about thee, as the air or the light. If thou stop not thine own
breathe (through wylfulnes) and close not thine eyes of malicious set
purpose, thou must needs receive and admit me. The whole yerth is replenished
with me, Psalm. 11^.
syns the time that Christ was incarnate. He purchased me for the world in such
plenty that I can not be consumed: Joan. 1.
Gratia et veritas per Iesum facta est. He appointed me to shine in his church
as the son in the firmament. From the heat of my beams no creature can hyde
him self. Psalm. 18.
Now is the day of salvation, in the which I cease not continually to shine
Now is the acceptable time, in the which I cease not to call upon the ears
of your hearts unto me. 2. Cor. 6.
All ye children of men behold and consider what inestimable treasure ye have
and may have by me, and how wretched and miserable ye are without me. I shall
lead you the right ways and show you the kingdom of God. I shall give you
knowledge and understanding, and prosper you in all your affairs and labors,
Joan. 15.
(which without me shall be but vain and without effect). I shall make a
through and a perfect peace of good conscience and quietness of mind, with joy
in the holy ghost, which passes al worldly delites and pleasures. If ye refuse
me, your peace shall be but war, and your joy bytternesse, and your pleasure
shall be turned into pain. Let all your care be to keep me, For I am (doubt you
not) already offered and given to you abundantly. Receive me not in vain, 2.
Cor. 6.
but suffer me to work and exercise my properties and virtues in you, that
your sanctification may be perfect, and ye may inwardely rejoice in the sight
of God. I exhort you to return with all your heart unto ye lord your God, and
wa^der no longer after your own sensual desires which fight against the
soul, which labor to bring you to eternal destruction. Remember your selves
and the everlasting world to come, Matthew. 25.
wherein ye shall evermore live in joy, or eternally continue in pain, which
can not be expressed. Let not the flesh deceive you, nor the world blind you,
nor the devil so ouerlay you, that ye loose the heritage, whereunto my desire
is to bring you. O wretched and unhappy, if ye be disapointed of that glory
whereunto ye are redeemed. But follow my counsel and ye shall be sure to
obtain the promises. Yea I do not only give counsel, but I also help your
infirmity, and bear up your wekenes, and draw you forward through my sweet
inspirations and suggestions. I open your eyes, and would gladly open them
better if you would suffer me, that you might see your own offenses and
wyckednes, and that ye might behold the vanite and falsenes of the world, and
perceive and avoid the crafty snares of all wicked spirits, your ghostly
enemies. I would illuminate you with the knowledge, understanding, and feling
of heavenly things, and take from you the vain respects of things of this
transitory world. I am like unto the gall of the fyshe, wherewith the eyes of
Tobye were anointed. Tobi. xi.
For I give and restore clear sight, and cause ye scales of false imaginations
and vain fantasies to fall from the eyes, that man may behold steadfastly the
light of truth, and see things in their native colors. I restored sight unto
Paul, or rather brought into him a new sight. Act. ix.
But first I made him blind, and so I must do also with you. First I say I
must take from you that false sight and regard which you have of temporal
things, after the working and desire of your own lusts and affections, and
than bring unto you a true sight of things spiritual and heavenly. And
furthermore, as I did cast down Paul and made him weak, and made him strong
after. In like manner also must I entreat you. I must cast you down into
repentance, penance, humility of heart, lowlynes and confession, before that
I can strengthen you or make you valiant or able soldiers under the baner of
Christ. ^^g. ii.
My property is first to mortify, and than to quicken: first to cast down
and than to raise up again, First to quench and than to kyndle: First to
wound and make sore, and than to heal: First to humiliate, and than to
exalte. They which will not abide and sustain my first operation, cannot be
partakers of the second. Therefore if thou will have me work my principal
effects, (the which be to make thee a true servant of God in this life, and
a possessour of the glory eternal) than suffer me first to lay my sharp salues
and bitter medicines unto the. And yet not so sharp or bitter but that they be
easy and pleasant enough mixed and tempered with joy and comfort more than
man can deserve, For my medicine is both the wine and the oil, which the
Samaritane did pour upon the wounded man that descended from Jerusalem to
Hiericho. Luc. r.
I am the very water of life, he that will, let him come and receive me for
gramercie. Come unto me ye that be thristie, and ye that have no money, Esaie.
iv.
come and bye that ye may have to eat. Come bye wine and milk without any
money or money worth. Though ye have nothing wherewith to bye me, yet if you
will, ye shall have plenty and abundance of me through ye goodness of Christ, who
is mine author, maker, and founder. I am not less to be esteemed though thou
pay nothing for me, but have me freely given unto thee. I am paid for by him,
which only was able by due and just exchau^ge to purchase me: (which was the
son of God thy savior) I require nothing on thy part but a fre heart, the
which also thou shall have of me, if thy peruersitie do not with stand me. I
abhore to come where any challenge of desert is, But where I come I make desert,
and bring in worthiness, where as no worthiness is or can be but through me
only. I am the lively seed which being cast into the cold and barren
earth, nevertheless does spryng up and florishe and bring forth fruit, which is
pleasant to ye taste and smelling of God and all his saints and Angels. I am the
rain and swear dew, which moisteth and mollifieth the cold and dry ground
of man's heart, that it may be a fruitful field unto God. I am the very
hand of God, which rayseth and heals whom so ever I touch, if they shrink
not from me. I am the pleasant and amiable eye of ye very king Jesus, in whose
gracious look is life, and in whose displeasaunt countenance is death. I am
the chief ha^dmayde of God. I am the mother and maistres of all virtue and
holiness. I am the root of the good tree, which brings furthgood fruit. I am
the nourse of good works, their guide and their keaper, their virtue and their
perfection, and but for me and by me, they be but vain and counterfeit. I am
the straight line and pathe way unto glory. Therefore I counsel thee receive
me, and disdain not (what soever thou art) to serve me.

So shall thou be free from al servitude, and attain most glorious liberty.
If thou be a Lord, earl, duke, Prince, or never so great a potestate in this
world, yet without me thou art but a slave and a wretch, being but a vile
drudge of sin, and servant of all thine own noughtie affections: Johan. viii
Omnis enim qui facit peccatum seruus est peccati. Which from this transitory
rule, dominion and lordship will bring thee into everlasting bondage and
captivity: Roma. vi.
Stipendia enim peccati mors. what reason is it that thou which art a ruler
shall be worse than they which be under thee, If thou be more vicious, more
folishe, more vain, more blind in the soul, art thou not worse? How shall
thou rule or govern other, which rulest so badly thy self, or rather art
ruled so ungraciously out of al rule of virtue and goodness? Without me thine
honor shall be turned into shame, thy grace into ungraciousness, thy majesty
into misery and thy dignity and preeminence into extreme confusion. And the
higher thou art, the lower thou shalt be brought. But if thou attend unto me,
I shall conduct thee to true and stable honor, and perfect renown of glory. I
shall make thee get favor, and to win the hearts of thy subjects, tenantes,
servants or such as be under thee, and teach the to order them in justice
with equity, and to govern them by the spirit of wisdom, that they shall
both love and fear thee (as their father) and be always sure and faithful
unto thee. For be thou assured, where dread is without love, there is grudge
and hatred, which in time will bring displeasure. The proper nature of a
prince or a true Lord, ruler, or master is, to provide and procure the
commodity of such as be under his subjection. He that seeks only his own
profit and pleasure, is rather worthy the name of a detestable tyra^t. The
heart of a king says Salomo^ is in the hand of God. Prouer. 21.
Keep thy heart there. Let God rule and moderate thy heart, take not thy heart
forth of his hand. In deed it shall be in ye power of God, whether thou wylt or
not, and he shall incline and turn it as it pleases him, either to thine
honor and wealth of thy subjects (if thou be acceptable in his sight) or else
to thine own destruction and their punishment, if thou displease him. But
commit (I say) thy heart, thy purpose, and entente into the gracious hand of
God, and there let it rest in his gracious will, and doubt not but his hand
will, ever be redye to aid and defend the. Put all the courage of thy heart
and al thy strong trust in the hand of God, and neither in gold Iuelles,
nor riches, nor no worldly Armures or munitions. Declare thy self like unto
God, as thou art a principal ministre and spectacle of God in the earth,
show furthe thy power in doing good and no harm. And remember what power
strength and might is granted and committed unto the. But forgette not him
which is more mighty, and almyghtie, and able in a momente to subuerte all
thye puissaunce, and annichilate thy majesty. Wise men in times paste have
said. That to rule well, is the chief of al sciences. Who so ever bears
rule, and has charge of people committed unto him, he has conning enoughe, if
he can well govern and order them, to whom he is appointed to be a pastoure,
Not only spiritual ministers ought to be pastors, but also princes and
lords. 2. Reg. 5.
God said unto David. Thou shall feed, 2, Reg. ^.
thou shall be pastor over my people of Israel. This conninge of playinge the
good pastor, is not obtaimed but by me, it requires the gift of a singular
wisdom which I get unto them that ask it of God, as Solomon did. 3. Reg.
iii.
This gift is not gotten by any other learning, tha^ through my inspiracion.
Although outward learning, and redinge of good books, be a necessary
instrument, whereby I may commodiouslie work with princes and great men of
the world. For good books be no flaterers but show many good instructions
and examples for the^. Which neither their friends, servants nor subjects
for fear dare speak. Therefore did a certain wise Ppilosopher council ones a
king often to pass the time in redinge or hearing the writings of good and
wise men, and to read histories and to consydre the procedinges and chau^ces
of the times past, whereby they may learn much prudence. But the special
thing that keeps me back from princes, lords, and great men, is the evil
ministers, servants and such as be about them. For it is impossible (says
one wise man) that a prince should fall into great vices, unless he have
ministers which entyce and move him to the same. How happy then are those
princes and great men, which have virtuous and honest men about the^, who will
make no suggestions, but such as shall be co^me^dable and profitable to the
world, honorable to their master, and acceptable to God? Where such ministers
and servants be, blessed is the common welthe. Yea where they be not, there
is no common wealth at all. A prince or great ruler which gives ear unto
flatterers, detractours, liars, and false tale tellours, can not have about
him good servants. For Solomon says. Prouer. ^^
Rex qui libenter audituerba mendacij, omnes ministros habet impios* A king or
any ruler which gladly hears words of lesing, has all his ministers
wicked. O that I could printe but this one short sentence of Solomon in the
heart of all princes. Prouer. xx.
Misericordia et ueritas custodiunt regem. Mercys and truth defend the king.
There is no guard of men nor strong walls of stoone, that can better defend
him than these. Mercy becomes all men, but specially princes. Not only in
pardoninge and remittyng the offenses of trausgressours (which many times
mercy requires more to have punished than pardoned) but in having compassion
of the misery of the poor, and such as be oppressed. In prouidynge for their
succor and deliverance. Deliver says god, by the mouth of David, Psa. xviii.
the poor and nedie from the hand of the sinner. The mercy and pity of a
prince will suffer nothing to be amiss. Than consequently, truth and justice
do stablishe his chayer. He will see all wrongs revenged, much less he will do
wrong him self. I need make no longer exhortacion unto him, let him read in
the law of God (as he is commanded) and there shall he see his duty
described unto him. i. Parall. xxii.
And that for all his hyghnes, yet is he but a servant, ad Romans xiii.
and ministers unto other. And according to his ministration shall he receive
his reward. One thing I must needs put him in remembrance of, that he seek
my daughter peace, and with all his study continually keep her, for a
christen king should be an image of Christ. Who is rex pacificus and hates
all war debate and contention. One of the ancient great clerks says: that
a tyrant is a prince of war, but a king is a prince of peace. If kings and
princes would be ruled by me, I should teach them to find peace, and to keep
her. For grace and peace can not but be joined together: as commonly they be in
the Apostles Epistles in their first reco^mendacions. As for all states of the
nobilite, would God they did deeply consydre, that without me there is no
nobilite, but most vile ignobilite, though it be folden in chains of gold,
and wrapped in purple, velvet or sylke. The Jews thought the^ selfs gentlemen
and said: Patrem habemus Abraham. Joan. viii.
But Christ bad them prove it, and do the works of Abraham. It becomes
noble bloudes to follow their noble progenitors in virtue, and not vainlye to
boste of their pedigree. Noble blood may well be called noble, if it have in
it a noble spirit, regenerate and renewed by me, for such be noble in deed.
That is to say, sons of God and heirs apparaunte of his kingdom. Else they
be but of a vile stock and a corrupt root, which is the nature of Adam. I
would they should have in remembrance their beginning, and whereof they
come. Than shall no pride raygne in their hearts. Which sin is most
contrary to a gentle spirit (whereof they bear their name). They came al of
one slyme, but I will not go so far. They come all from the spade and the
mattocke. And that of so late time, that few of their houses can reckon their
noble discente from many hundredth years past. God (as his pleasure is) raises
ye poor man from the dongehyll, and makes him sit with the princes of his
people. Let the^ therefore not disdain that other arise into noble place and
dignitee, specially if they attain thereunto by their virtue and actiuite,
which is the true enter to all nobilitee. It is greater commendation to be the
first of a noble house or stock, than to be the last. I would they would
all be advertised by me, than should they have first the love of God, and than
the love of others, (whom God loves) and be clear and far from all
dangers. Of the clergy ye know what I have said. I lamente many to be so
ignoraunte, many to be learned with out the right use of conninge, many to
be so sclaunderous in their conversation to the hole church, and few to have
both learning and godly, zeal and holy life whereby to edifye the people.
I lamente their dissentions and diversities of opinions whereby the unite of
Christ's religion is cut in pieces, and the people so amassed that they wot not
what to think. If they would be ordered by me, they should fall to more
earnest study with prayer and abstinence and leave their vanitees, and give
better example of life, and so stop the mouths of false teachers, and
stablishe the people in true faith and doctrine. Leui. xxi.
God commanded in the law of Moses that none which had notable deformities in
their body should be admitted to offer the bread of God. By which deformities
were signified spiritual fautes and vices, from which men of the clergy
should be clean and pure. But God knows, because they cast me of, and set me
at light, many of them be ilfauored and mysshapen creatures. But I know what
God has purposed and firmly decreed with him self, that unless they amend
and enbrace me earnestlye and take better head to the word of God, he will
send his curse upon them, depryue them of all reputation, and make the^ be
despised of the people, beside their later conde^pnation, which they shall not
escape. But if they would suffer me to abide with them, I should make them
like unto those aunciente fathers of whom they claune the succession: I mean
the Apostles, Martyrs, and Confessors. I should make them very pyllers of
the church, and not garguilles in the walls. I should make them acceptable to
God, honorable to the people, well-beloved to good princes, and fearful to the
evil. I should make them mylde without pusillanimite, and bold with sobrenes
and discretion, learned without presumption, and fervent in zeal according to
charitee joined with true learning. I made Nathan bold to speak unto David,
2 Reg. 12. 3. Reg. 17. Math. 14. Marc 6.
and likewise Elye to speak unto Achab, and John Baptist to reprove Herod,
and Ambrose to reprove Theodosius, and a thowsande such examples have I
wrought and am no less able to do so still if I might be suffered, and find
apt instruments. Therefore I say, Ye of the clergy receive me, hold me
while ye may, and make much of me, that I vanishe not from you before ye be
ware, and than your repentance be to late. Remember that which you read of me
in your books. Yea I exhort you as Paul does Timothee. Be atte^riue in
redyng, ^ T^m. iiii. (...). ii.
exhorting, and learning. Learn as ye should do. That is, first to amend
and refourme your selfs. Thou which teach an other, teacheste not thy
self. Thou reioysest in the law, Rom^. ii.
and through breakinge of the law do dishonor God. Awake I say, remember
thye self, thye vocation, and thy charge. Thou art appointed to confess the
name of Christ, to be a lantern shyninge in the eyes to teach the ignorante,
to lead the blind to direct the feeble and weak, to feed the sheep of
Christ, in wholesome pastures, to be a porter of the house of god, take heed
thou be not found a sleep at the sudden cominge of the great lord. Math. ^
^. Mar. 13.
Woo be to the if thou offend one of the lest. Math. 18.
Better were it for the to be cast with a mylstone about thy neck into the
bothome of the sea. Beware thou be not one of them, which shall be cut in
pieces, and thy part put with hypocrites. Math. ^ 4.
Yt shall be better for the to hear that joyful word. Math. 25. Luc. 19.
Euge serve bone and fidelis, and so furthe. Finally to make an end,
concerning the hole common people, and all degrees and ordres thereof it were
to long to express and speak out all matter of exhortacion, which I would
gladly printe in their hearts. It is over grievous and lamentable for me to
tarry and declare al, and it should also be but vain, saying it is to well
known, how I am decayed among the^ touching the service of God, and all
godly devotion, touching al obe^die^ce, good order and discipline. But what
remedy? If I could ones get the over hand among the higher sort, I should
more easelie obtain rule among the inferiors. Osee. iiii.
For as the great men of the world and the clerks be, so be the people,
which as a flock of sheep can not (of simplicite) but follow the pastor and
chief Ra^mes. Therefore almyghtie God grant of his mercy, that I may bear
full rule among them which be in dignite, authorite and preeminence, that the
poor sheep may be led, and guided also through me, in all truth, justice,
obedience and quietness. And that they may be all one in true faith, hope, and
charity, all inward grudge, rancour, contention, and division being
expelled. Which myschiefes (if they be not quenched speedily) must needs
bring any realm, being never so florishinge, into calamite. But I shall with
slande as far as I may be suffted, so that al me shall impute their
mischiefs to none but to them selfs, and be driven, maugre all the stubbernes
of their hearts: finally, to accuse them selfs either with wholesome, or vain
repentance, and to knowledge ged to be only all goodness, and his
judgments to be right and just. To whom be eternally honor glory and
praise.

Amen.

