THE COMMUNION BOOK CATECHISM EXPOVNDED, According to Gods holy Word, and the
established Doctrine of the Church.

Written for the furtherance of youth and ignorant persons, in the
understanding of the grounds and principles of the true Christian Religion, set
forth by public authority.

Wherein also are explaned sundry of the highest points in Divinity, and
matters greatly considerable in these present times.

In special there is demonstrated, that His most excellent Majesty's
Declaration to his Subjects, concerning lawful sports to be used, does tend
unto a very great increase of true godliness throughout the whole Kingdom.

Jesus Christ said: Simon Peter, feed my Lambs, Joh. 21.15. If any neglect to
hear the Church, let him be unto thee, as an heathen,

Math. 18.17. Non pertinet ad Christi praemia, qui relinquit Ecclesiam Christi.
Alienus est, hostis est. Habere jam non potest Deum patrem, qui Ecclesiam non
habet matrem.

Cyprianus et Augustinus. LONDON: Printed by MILES FLESHER. 1635.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER in God, ROBERT Lord Bishop of Lichfield and
Coventrie.
HOly Father in God, Even as the Shepherds of Israel (according to Gods
commandment) humbled themselves under the High Priesthood, and afterward the
Elders or Priests of the inferior order did unto the Apostleship; So is it the
duty of Patours unto the Bishopric the succession of the Apostleship. Which
highest order in the Christian Clergy, though in these latter days some have
endeavored to have abolished; yet Christ (who is true in all his promises)
having said, That the gates of hell shall not prevail against his Church, has
moved the hearts of Kings to be nursing Fathers thereof, and Queens to be
nursing Mothers. So that by the providence of Almighty God, and the true godly
zeal of our most gracious Sovereign Lord King CHARLES, the said sacred
fundamental order in the holy Ministry, flourishes in the Apostolical
Church of England. I (though the most unworthy among the laborers in the Lords
Harvest) did upon your Fatherhoods encouragement, compose a certain body of
Divinity out of the books of the established Liturgy: and (thanks be to God)
sundry of the elder and more understanding sort of people have made good use of
the same: but experience has taught, that the youth and the ignorant persons
have need to have matters more plainly divided unto them, so as they may be
able to receive the same. Now some will object against me and say, Whence have
you such an ability? It is therefore my duty for to acknowledge in all humility
by whom I have profited. The first instrument which God used for to instruct me
in the The Athanasian Creed in the Divine Service, says; Whosoever will be
saved, before all things it is necessary that be hold the Catholic faith.
Which says, except every one do keep whole and undefiled, without doubt he
shall perish everlastingly. And the Catholic faith is, etc. In such manner
also speaks the Church in her sacred Homilies. In the Articles to be enquired
of, within the Arch. deaconry of Middlesex, given Anno Domini 1632. and the 32.
concerning the Parishioners it is expressly prescribed, That nothing must be
tending to Popery, Puritanisme, or any other Sect, error, or heresy, against
true Religion, and Catholic doctrine, now publiquel professed in this Church,
or the government or Discipline of the Church of England, now within the Realm
received and established by common authority. But though it is thus plainly
and Divinely signified, what every one should only profess; yet many are
taken with such lightness of mind, as that they rather affect vain novelty,
than the said eternal verity delivered in the fundamental books of our
Church.
Catholic faith, was that most greatly learned Divine Master Doctor Overall,
the late Lord Bishop of Norwich. Afterward I received further light in the
great Mystery of godliness, from that renowned and profoundly understanding
Prelate in the Church, Master Doctor Buckeridge, the late Lord Bishop of Elie.
And last of all, by the ghostly instructions received from your holy
Fatherhood, I have not been a little benefitted. Whereas for the use of the
whole Parish of Hayes (whereof you were sometimes the worthy Rectour) this
work (how mean soever) is made, it has seemed good to dedicate it unto your
Lordship, who are an unfeined zealous honourer of the Divine Service-doctrine
of the Church; humbly craving protection for it under the reverend wings of
your judgment; which vouchsafed, I shall be the more obliged (as already
greatly I am for all respect undeservedly granted) in my powers and prayers
ever to acknowledge my self yours devoted. The Lord God Almighty, which was,
and is, and is to come, infinite, and incomprehensible, universally prosper
your good Fatherhood unto all fullness of years and days.

Your Lordships in all reverence and observance, EDMUND REEVE.

UNTO ALL HIS BELOVED PARISHIONERS, AS WELL WHICH pertain unto the Chapel of
Norwood, as unto the Mother Church of Hayes in Middlesex, EDMUND REEVE your
loving Pastor wishes all growth in grace, and in the knowledge and obedience
of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
BEloved, whereas the care of your Heb. 13.17. Ezech. 33.7.8.9.11 12.
souls is committed unto me (how unworthy soever,) it is my duty, so long as I
am 1 These. 5.12.
over you in the Lord, to do mine uttermost endeavor (according as it is
prescribed in the Divine Service for the Ordering of Priests) 2 Pet.
1.12.13.15. Col. 1.25.26.27.28.29.
to Every Pastor and Curate should have this most divine delivery of the
Church, in perpetual remembrance.
bring you unto that agreement in faith, and knowledge of God, and to that
ripeness and perfectness of age in Christ, that there be no place left among
you, either of error in Religion, or for viciousness in life. This is the
Phil. 3.13.14.
mark, whereat to aim, and whereunto to approach nearer and nearer
continually, and the which at length in Gods good time to hope for to attain
in some measure in this present world, by the help of the special grace of
his holy Spirit, the Divine wisdom of the Church propounds unto every one
of us. Now that in this holy Heb. 12.1.
race set before us, we may not run as uncertainly. nor in the spiritual
warfare fight, as those that 1 Cor. 9.26.
beat the air; nor in this building work, as those which lay not the due
Math. 7.24. Psalm. 11.3.
foundation; nor in this 1 Cor. 3.9.
husbandry labor, as those which expect no Hos. 10.12.
harvest in this present life; It is our parts seriously to consider by what
means we may come unto the aforementioned agreement in faith, and knowledge
of God, and unto that ripeness and perfectness of age in Christ, wherein we
may agree together in the truth of Gods holy word, and live in unity and godly
love; as holy Church has in a certain In the prayer for Christ's Church
militant here on earth.
prayer prescribed unto us. Saint Peter says: Ye as lively stones, So is it
in the margent of 1 Pet. 2.5.
be ye built up a spiritual house, an holy Priesthood, to offer up spiritual
sacrifice, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. Saint Paul signifies, that we
should not be Ephesians. 2.12.
without Christ, being aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, and strangers
from the covenants of Promise, having no hope, and without God in the world;
but that we should be Verses 19.20, 21.22.
fellow-Citizens with the Saints, and of the household of God, built upon the
foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the corner
stone. In whom all the building fitly framed together, grows unto an holy
temple in the Lord. In whom we also should be builded together for an
habitation of God through the Spirit. But (says Psalm. 11.3.
David) if the foundations be destroyed, what can the righteous do? If of any
house to be built, one of the Sea of Vox Clamantis pages 14.15.
maine foundations may not be laid, when will there be any firm setting up
thereof? That the life of Christianity, the practice of Christ's Gospel in all
conversation, is so imperfect in some places, is there not some cause thereof?
Is there not some cause of every thing which comes to pass in this world?
Christ and his word is the Ephesians. 2.20. All people should thoroughly learn, what
are the foundations of the visible Church or congregation of Jesus Christ.
chief corner stone in the Christian house, the principal foundation of than
spiritual building. But there are more * foundations than one in a house.
Cyrus the King making a decree concerning the house of God at Jerusalem, said:
Let the Esra 6.3.
foundations thereof be strongly laid, etc. Therefore David says, If the
foundations be destroyed, etc. Wise Solomon therefore, or rather the infinitely
wise God by Pro. 1.8.
Solomon says: My son hear the instruction of thy Father, and forsake not
the law of thy Mother, her * teaching, ** So in the Geneva translation. See
there in Pro. 6.20. See hereto the Preface to the Reader, and the advertisement
set before the Christian Divinity.
her * instruction, as translations render. The Namely on Pro. 1.8. And yet
monstrous is the neglect of very many toward the Church doctrine, who would
sceme to have a zeal unto Religion.
Geneva note upon the word Mothers teaching, is, That is, of the Church,
wherein the faithful are begotten by the incorruptible seed of Gods word. And
so godly See Chap. 24. of the Christian Divinity.
Antiquity has expounded the place. Solomon also afterward shows a reason,
why we should not forsake the law, doctrine, teaching or instruction of the
Church, because it is a Pro. 6.23.
light unto us. He says, The Fathers commandment is a Compare ver. 20. with
23.
lamp unto us, and the Yet many are so wedded to their imagination, as that
they will not hear any sentence thereof.
Mothers doctrine and discipline is a light unto us. And therefore God says
unto us, That we should bind them continually upon our Verses 21.22.
hearts, and tie them about our necks: because when we go, they will lead us;
when we sleep, they will keep us; and when we awake, they will talk with
us. Are we not then (good people) all bound in conscience for to learn,
believe and obey, whatsoever is contained in the Communion book The book of
Homilies is the Theology or Divinity, set sorth by the supreme divine
wisdom of the Apostolical Church of England; and therefore it is a
fundamental work of our Church, which all people are to hearken unto
perpetually.
, Homilies Book, and Constitutions or Canons book, Though it be nor required,
that unto every congregation all the Homilies be read once a year, yet it is
the will of the Church, that they should be for the most part as occasion
requires, read; and that all people should be acquainted with their doctrine.
It is a shame even to mention in what contempt many have the Homilies, the most
sacred Sermons of the Church.
all which are appointed to be read unto every congregation of the Kingdom
every year? Should we not take notice of what the Church our Mother
delivers unto us out of the said fundamental books of hers? They are
counted graceless children, which will not hear their natural Mother speak,
which will scorn or set light of their grave natural mothers teaching and
prescribing unto them: and may those people be justly reputed gracious
Christians, which despise, or nothing, or very little regard the Divine Service
doctrine of their Spiritual mother? Saint 2 Pet. 3.3.
Peter and Saint Jude 18.
Jude have foretold, that in the last days there would be scoffers, walking
after their own ungodly lusts. When we therefore hear the proud There are but
in general three kinds of people in Christendom, true Christians, Pharisees,
and Libertines. The true Christian has a respect unto all Christ's
commandments. Psalm. 119.6. Math. 28.20. Ioh. 15.14. The Pharisee has not a
respect unto the weightier matters of the law. Math. 23.23. Luke 11.42. The
Libertine minds no more of the commandments of God and of the Church, but
which by the law of the Land he is constrained to consider, and often times he
neglects them also.
Pharisees, and the licentious Libertines of these times, scoff at sentences
in the aforementioned fundamental books of the Apostolical Church of
England, or at all the said books, or at any of them; and when we hear the
malignant Pharisees scoff at the fundamental most sacred Order in the
Christian Clergy, let us not mervaile: for they dared to scoff at Jesus
Christ the eternal God, as Saint Luke 16.14.
Luke records. Let us nothing admire, though the said spirits of arrogancy
and disobedience do charge with error the Communion book, Homilies book,
etc. and though they do so unreverently speak of the Fathers, and other
Ministers of the Church, as is not here meet to be mentioned; Saint Luke
writes, that the like spirits did accuse Saint Paul of walking in a way of
Acts 28.14.
heresy. Moreover, beloved Parishioners, as you are to suffer exhortation out
of all the Church her books set forth by public authority, and to become
edified in faith and life by all the holy doctrine signified in them, and to
account them a For so Solomon in Pro. 1.8. and 6.20.21.22.23. signifies, as
also Christ himself in Mat. 18.17. etc.
foundation whereon to be built up together, according whereunto your minds
and conversations are to be framed and conformed; so also are you to
understand, that the living Ministry is a foundation, whereon ye are so to
ground your selves as Gods word has signified. Saint Paul says, The Church of
the living God is the pillar and ground (or 1. Tim. 3.15.
stay) of the truth. Ezza (or Esdras) that great Priest of God, is said to be
the Esra 7.9. in the margent.
foundation of the going up from Babylon unto Jerusalem, according to the good
hand of his God upon him. For (says the Scripture there) Ezra had prepared his
heart to Verse 10.
seek the Law of the Lord, and to do it, and to teach in Israel, statutes and
judgments. It is said in the Epistle unto the Hebrews, That Abraham looked
for a City which has Heb. 11.10.
foundations, whose builder and maker is God. And says Saint John, That the
holy City new Jerusalem, which comes Rev. 3.12. and 21.2.3.10.14. See Isa.
33.20.21.24. and 65.18, etc.
down from God out of heaven, and is a tabernacle of God with men, in the wall
thereof has twelve foundations, and in them the names of the twelve Apostles
of the Lamb. Whether this holy City be not the beloved City spoken of in the
Chapter next before, where it is said, That Satan being loosed out of prison,
would gather Gog and Magog Rev. 20.9.
against it, etc. Let those judge, whom God has enabled and appointed to See
the last page of Vox Clamantis.
determine on such sacred matters. But the said spiritual City of God, with
description whereof the holy Apostle ended his writing, has in the spiritual
wall thereof twelve foundations, and in them the names of the twelve Apostles
of the Lamb. Whereby we are given to understand, that the Apostolical order in
the Christian Ministry, is also a certain foundation in diverse respects, the
which it concerns you to know, and whereof to make use in the due Heb. 13.17.
Romans 13.1.
obedience of the same. It is come to that pass among many, as to have no
consideration at all on that most holy Order of the Clergy 1 Cor. 12.28 Ephesians.
4.11.12.
constituted by Jesus Christ: and hence it is that so much atheism,
heathenishnesse, and barbarousnesse is in some people. It is written in the
book of Chronicles: 2 Chr. 20.20. Isa. 7.9.
Believe in the Lord your God. so shall ye be established; believe in his
Prophets, so shall ye prosper. And it is recorded concerning the people of
Israel, That they believed in the Lord, and in his servant Exodus 14.31.
Moses. For though the word in be not expressed in our English translation, yet
it is in the Hebrew text, and so See Buxtorfius Heb. Gram. lib. 2 cap. 11. and
page 452. See of Vox Clamantis p. 15.
observed in some translations. So that from the said texts, and from what else
is delivered in sundry places of this work, it will appear unto you, that ye
are to have a belief in the chief This Amandus Polanus has even also taught,
saying, in lib. 9. cap 6. of his Syntagma: Meton, mice obiectum fidei, quatenus
illa est assensus, dicuntur ministri verbi Dei, qui annunciant verhum fidei:
ut, firm credit prophetis eius. 2 Chro. 20.20. Joh. 5.46. Exo. 14.31.
Ministers of the Church, whereof you profess your selves to be members, and
unto such a faith ye are to train up your children and your servants, if ye
have a desire to be such Christians as you ought to be. And concerning every
Pastor and Curate it is to be known, that it is their parts and duties not
only to put people in remembrance, what are the express words of holy
Scripture; but also to make known unto them more and more (as Solomon says)
the Mothers doctine and law, the interpretations and applications of the sacred
texts by the Church in her It is to be remembered that Saint Paul signifies
unto Titus then Bishop of the Cretians, that an Elder or a Priest must hold
fast the faithful word, as he has been taught. Tit. 1.9. So 2. Tim. 1.13.
and 2.2.
fundamental books, and all other her holy deliveries: and in no wise to
expound any place of Scripture, so as it may make against the harmony of the
Church doctrine, but according to the analogy or proportion of the same. And
whereas there are that say of the Divine Service Divinity, that it is old
doctrine delivered when the light of See Chap. 24. and 35.
the Gospel was not so great as now it is, and that in latter times by sundry
zealous Ministers matters have been handled and expressed more refinedly (their
meaning is, more truly:) know ye, good people, that if ye like the Bereans
will without The wisdom which is from above, is without partiality. James 3.17.
partiality Acts 17.11. Ioh. 5.39.
search the universal Scriptures, and seriously examine whether doctrine
agrees with the Bibles teaching, the old doctrine delivered throughout the
Divine Service books, or the new contrary doctrine which is to be seen in
some late Ministers books, and withal look to the Luke 11.35.36 Math. 6.23.
light set by God in your consciences, and in the conscience of universal
mankind (for Christ has charged, that we all should take heed that that
light which is in us, be not darkness: for if that be darkness, how great is
the darkness in our understandings?) Ye shall by Gods grace plainly see, that
all new doctrine contrary to the old doctrine of the divine Service of the
Church, is utter untruth, vanity, unprofitable, unwholesome, hurtful to mind
and life; yea, and that which has been cause of a very great part of the
lukewarmnesse in Religion, which is in some; and of the licentiousness of
life, which is in many others. But this no Such account the calling on people
to believe and live according to the Divine Service doctrine, for to be as it
were a tending unto another Religion; And they have new names for the Ministers
which faithfully teach that orthodoxe Divinity.
light-minded ones can comprehend, but those which seriously meditate upon
finding out the causes of evil effects, to the intent for to hate all the
causes of evil, as well as the effects and acts which are evil. Be it also
known, that here is not condemned every writer, in whose works are seen some
doctrines contrary to the doctrine of the divine Service: for some which in the
general unfeinedly desired, that such a mind and such a life, as was in
Christ Jesus, might have the pre-eminence in all mankind, departed this life
before they had thoroughly examined every point now controverted in the world. As
for example, it was given unto the zealous, learned and godly Pastor, Master
Samuel See the Relation of the Confession he made o^ his deathbed, set in the
first tome of his works before the Alphabeticall table thereunto. Yet in some
volumes it is left out.
Hieron, for to see on his death bed some mistakes in the course of his
writings, which in his health he duly considered not. Wherefore, beloved in the
Lord, if ye hear or read any thing contrary to that which ye have heard from
some particular Ministers, or read in some particular books, ye shall do
well not rashly to condemn it; but your duty is to do as God commands,
namely, 1 These. 5.21.
To try all things, and to keep that which is good. Whatsoever doctrine
tends to move us for to be Math. 18.3 4. Psalm. 13.1.2.
humble as little children, and like them to be without 1 Pet. 2. 1 2. James
1.21.
maliciousness; but in understanding to be perfect, or of ripe age in Jesus
Christ, it cannot be but that it is from the holy Spirit of Almighty God; for
so the holy Ghost by Saint Paul has 1 Cor. 14.20. as it is in the margent.
commanded us all to strive for to be. Ye are to remember continually what
Saint John says: 1 Ioh. 4.1.
Beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the spirits whether they are of
God: because many false Prophets are gone out into the world. Therefore the
Lord says by Isaiah, Isa. 8.20.
To the law, and to the testimony: if they speak not according to this word,
it is because there is no light in them. So likewise it may be with a safe
conscience before God affirmed, if any one There are that could willingly
condescend unto it, but having a long time professed with some difference from
it, they are more tender over their own honor among men, then of Gods glory.
See of such in John 12 42 43. and 5.44.
speak not according to the Communion book doctrine of the Church of England,
but preach or teach contrary unto the same, it is because there is no Math.
18.17.
light of Gods holy spirit within him. And whereas so long as I am your
watchman, it is my bounden duty to speak unto you Gods words, and the words of
his holy Church, Ezech. 2.3.4.5.6.7.8.
whether ye will hear, or whether ye will forbear, as the Lord commanded
his Minister Ezechiel; and to warn such as hold any error in Religion for to
depart from the same, and such as have any viciousness in their life, for to
forsake it all; because I so doing have delivered mine own soul, and the
Ezech. 33.7.8.9.
blood of every unrepentant one will be upon his own head, I have for the
further discharge of mine own conscience, and for the more edification of
every one of you in the Catholic and Apostolic faith, and in the true
Christian life, manners, and conversation, See Acts 8 30. Neh. 8.8. 1 Cor. 14
20.15.
explaned the most sacred Catechism of the Church, namely that which is in the
book of Common prayer, wherein all the chief principles of the true Christian
Religion are comprised, and in most divine manner for every capacity expressed.
When the faithful Ministers of Jesus Christ taught Christianity unto people,
they first taught them the word of the Heb. 5.12.13. 1 Cor. 3.2.
beginning of Christ, as Saint Paul signifies; They first Heb. 6.1.
laid the foundation of repentance from dead works, and of faith toward God,
and of the doctrine of Baptismes, and of laying on of hands, and of
resurrection of the dead, and of eternal judgment. And when people were six
fundamental matters in the great mystery of godliness, then were they led on
unto perfection, as the Holy Ghost expressly delivers. Then were they taught
the high points about the Priesthood of Melchisedech. But as the Apostle says
speaking thereof, Of whom we have many things to say, and hard to be uttered,
seeing Heb. 5.11.
ye are dull of hearing, the like may be said of too too many among us, yea
and also the words immediately following, viz. Heb. 5.1^.
When for the time ye ought to be teachers, ye have need that one teach you
again, which be the first principles of the Oracles of God, and are become
such as have need of milk, and not of strong meat. Such mean proficients
there were among the professed members of the Church of the Corinthians, unto
whom Saint Paul said: 1 Cor. 3.2.3.
I have fed you with milk, and not with meat: for hitherto ye were not able
to bear it, neither yet now are ye able. For ye are yet earnall: for whereas
there is among you envying, and strife, and divisions, are ye not carnal, and
walk as men? Now the benefits which every one shall reap, that will
diligently and unpartially read all in this work contained, Psalm. 103.18.
for to conform his heart, spirit and conversation, according to all the
doctrine of God, and of his holy Church herein mentioned (for it is impossible
for any one of a contrary affection, Math. 13.11. Dan 12.10. Psalm.
25.9.12.13.14. See Vox Clamantis.
to understand aright any of the Christian mysteries, how learned soever he be
in languages, arts, or any other humane literature, as it is most plainly
declared in the end of this work) the benefits which every truly religious one
may make, are; first, to understand more and more the Divine Service
Catechism, the true grounds of Christ's Religion. Secondly, it will be an Luke
11.52.
introduction, how the better to understand and to profit by reading the rest
of the Common prayer, the Homilies, and other fundamental books of the
Church. Thirdly, he will in reading the holy Scriptures perceive more and more
the meaning of such sayings as do contain in them the So the Apostle calls
the principles or grounds of Gods word. Heb. 6.1. as it is in the margent.
word of the beginning of Christ. Fourthly, whereas also there are in this
work some of the highest points in Divinity expounded, every one that desires
to be led on unto Evangelicall perfection of mind and conversation, shall by
Gods help find here in such a light and direction thereunto, as whereby he in
reading the harder places of the book of God, shall be able to perceive out of
many of them more and more unto his edification and great consolation. Fifthly,
youth and other ignorant persons (if they will take so much pains as to read
or hear read all this work) they will hereby understand the meaning more and
more of the Catechism, which they learn by heart, and also of the Divine
Service which they hear in the Church; and become the more able to Math.
15.10. N^h. 8.2.3.
understand Sermons, which many now adays hear, and yet scarce apprehend any
thing delivered in them. Sixthly, the most sacred doctrine of the Divine Service
of the Church will become more honored, more attended unto, more meditated on,
more believed and obeyed. Seventhly and lastly, the doctrine of our spiritual
mother being thus duly respected, the word of our heavenly Father will be the
more For unless we do give our selves to learn, believe, obey all the
Church doctrine, we do not as the Scripture prescribes* Pro. 6.20.21.22.23.
Math. 18.17. Luke 10.16. etc.
observed, his most holy name the more hallowed, Our Kings most excellent
Majesty's laws ecclesiastical and temporal better kept, and unity, peace,
and concord among all more increased, and the Number. 6.26.27
peace of God which passes all understanding, will come more and more into our
consciences, and all other blessings both bodily and ghostly will be multiplied
upon us, through Jesus Christ: unto whom with the Father, and the Holy Ghost,
be all honor and glory now and evermore. AMEN.

Some of the matters declared in this work, beside the continued explanation
of the points expressed in the Catechism.
IN the Authors Epistle unto his Parishioners, there is mentioned the mark,
whereunto all Pastors and people are for to aim, approach, and use the due
means for to attain thereunto.

Also that none should be dismayed, though they hear some set light of the
doctrine and discipline of the Church, seeing that the Scripture has foretold,
how in the latter days there would be scoffers, walking after their own lusts.

That there are two other foundations whereon people are to ground themselves
in due manner, besides upon the principal foundation and chief corner stone
JESUS CHRIST and his most holy word.

That peoples admitting into their minds a belief contrary to that, which is
prescribed throughout the Divine Service of the Church, is the cause of so much
lukewarmenesse in Religion, and of licentionsnesse of life, as now is in very
many.

That it is a matter greatly necessary for all, which will endeavor to be
such Christians as they ought to be, for to understand aright the doctrine of
the Communion-booke-Catechisme, according as the Church throughout her Divine
Service and the rest of her fundamental Books has signified the meaning of
the same.

Sundry of the benefits which every one shall more and more reap, that duly
reads this Exposition of the Church-Catechisme.

How greatly profitable and necessary it is for all people to know the doctrine
of the Homilies.

In the Exposition of the Catechism:
There is delivered in general what that is, which we for our parts are b^
and to strive unfainedly for to perform more and more obediently. pages 3, 4,
5, 6, 7. Of the necessity of Gods helping us by the assistance of his holy
Spirit, for performing all our duty required by Christ, and how it concerns
us to pray diligently for the said help. p. 8, 9, 156. Every child which dies
in its infancy, and is baptized, is certainly saved. p. 10, 2, 62, 63. God
calls us al and every one in particular, for to walk in his ways, to the
intent that not any one of us should perish everlastingly, p. 10, 11, 19, 20,
21: The great danger wherein all are, which refuse or neglect to come unto
Christ calling them. p. 11, 9. What the state of salvation is, which is begun
in this life. p. 10. How needful it is to pray for Gods grace, whereby to
continue in the said estate. p. 12, 6, 154, 155, 156. That it is possible to
fall from grace, if due heed be not taken, p. 13. 63, 64. What the heed to be
taken is, that we may not fall from grace p. 14, 64, 65. What the eternal and
Almighty Lord God is. p. 15. What Gods will is, which is resisted by some; and
what his will is, which none can resist, p. 15, 16. Why God does not hinder
mankind from committing sundry evils, which are daily done. p. 16. God is not
the cause of any sin. p. 17. 18. Gods continual care for the world. p. 19.
What it is to believe in God the Father. p. 19. And in God the Some. p. 30. And
in God the holy Ghost. p. 51. God is merciful unto universal mankind, and
wills not absolutely the perishing of any one of us all p. 19, 20, 21, 17,
18, 11, 65, 66, 60, 61, 130. We ought not to account for untrue such sayings
in the Divine Service, whose truth we cannot comprehend or apprehend; but in
the fear of the Lord to consider, that the holy Fathers in God do know many
things in the great mystery of godliness, which most people* yea and many
Ministers of the inferior Order in the Priesthood, do not understand. p. 20.
108. The holy Fathers in God the Bishops, are to be guides in Divinity unto the
whole Clergy which is of inferior order, and therefore all Priests are to
submit unto their godly judgments in all matters pertaining unto Religion. p.
20. Every one of all mankind has received some measure of Gods light into his
heart or conscience, to the intent for to walk in the way of righteousness p.
19, 20, 21. Who do become drawn to Christ by God the Father. p. 21, 22. Of
the Godhead or divine nature of Jesus Christ. p. 22, 23. Why Christ is in the
Creed and in the Scriptures, so often after a special manner called, the LORD,
and our LORD. p. 26. 27. Of the reverence which is to be showed unto the
graciows presence of Jesus Christ in the holy Congregation, in every part of
the public worship, during all the same. p. 27, 28, 29, 139, 140. When one may
be said to be endued with the right, true, and lively faith in Jesus Christ.
p. 30. God caused not the Jews to use his Son Jesus so evilly as they did,
neither did God move Judas Iscariot to betray him. p. 34. The two Scriptures
Acts 2.23 and 4.28. do contain no such doctrine about Deftinie, as some do
endeavor to prove from them p. 35. Of the greatness of Christ's sufferings. p.
37, 38, 34. CHRIST JESUS in his humane soul after his bodily death descended
into bell. p. 38, 39. How the Gospel prescribes unto us for to imitate Christ
in his sufferings, etc. p. 40, 41, 42. There is some measure of conquest to be
attained in this life over all our spiritual enemies, by the help of the
Almighty power of the spirit of JESUS. CHRIST. p 43. Of Christ's just and
unpartiall judging of all mankind. p. 47. God has absolutely reprobated none
of universal mankind. p. 48. How unpr^fitable and hurtful the doctrine of
absolute reprobation has been in the world. p. 48. In this life Christ judges
mankind after some manner p. 49. Of the holy Ghosts wonderful working always
in mankind p. 50. To persevere in schism is very perilous. p. 54* What the
repentance is which the Gospel teaches and requires. p. 55, 56. CHRIST died
for universal mankind. p. 60, 61. What the holy Ghosts sanctifying of people
is. p. 61, 62. What are the Elect in general. p. 62. Who among infants are the
elected ones. p. 62. Who among those of perfect age are the elect. p. 63. How
to prevent falling from the election received in Baptism. p. 64 The Article of
the Church concerning Predestination and Election is wrested by some: It
contains not in it any sentence contrary to any doctrine delivered in the book
of Common prayer. p. 65, 66 The Communion Divine Service testifies unto every
particular member of the Church of England, that Jesus Christ died for him. p.
66, 67. Justifying faith is not alone in man, without true repentance, hope,
charity, dread, and the fear of God, at any time and season. p. 67. The sacred
stories of Scripture contain in them everlasting doctrine concerning faith and
manners. p. 70. Avery memorable allegorizing of a certain Scripture, made by
the Church in her larger Catechism. p. 71. Graven images may be made and
civilly used, but may not be worshipped. p. 74. It is most highly derogatory
from the infiniteness of God, to make any image for to be said a resemblance
of God. p. 74. How it is said, that some make an idol of preaching. p. 74, 75.
There are very great matters required by Christ's Gospel for people to observe
besides hearing of Sermons, whereof some are reckoned up. p. 75, 76. For to be
a complete minister of Jesus Christ, there is more required than an ability to
preach twice on every Sunday. p. 76, 77. It is not necessary (or in any place
of Gods word required) that the holy Fathers in God, the Lord Bishops, should
preach on every Sunday. p. 77. Sundry of their high employments are rockoned
up. p. 78. The name of God, which should not be taken in vain, signifies
sundry things. p. 82, 83. What the Church teaches concerning an oath taken
upon the book of Christ's Gospel. p. 83, 84. The most great danger of perjury.
p. 84, 85. The peril of such as use to swear vainly p. 85, 86. Holy
Scriptures signifying that the seventh natural day of every week is not now
to be kept holy. p. 87, 88. Not the seventh day, but the 1. day of the week is
our Sunday p. 89 Sundry of the religious duties, which are by the Church
prescribed to be done on the Sunday. p. 89. What liberty is used in some other
countries on the Sunday, as in Geneva, etc. p. 90. A demonstration, that they
Kings most excellent Majesty's Declaration to his subjects concerning lawful
sports to be used, Let people thoroughly consider with what humble^esse of
mind, and vertuousnesse of life and conversation such ministers for the most
part are endued, which are unwilling to have his most sacred Majesty's
Declaration published and honored, and they shall perceive by what spirit such
are led concerning this matter. See Gal. 5.22.23. Ephesians. 5.9.10. Iam. 3.13, 142
15, 16.17, 18.
tends to a very great increase of true godliness throughout the whole
kingdom, by a considering of the sundry grounds of His Highness most sacred
prescriptions therein p. 90, 91, 92, 93, 94, 95, 96, 97, 98, 99, 100, 101, 102,
106, 108. The great necessity of restoring the Whitsun-feast and the Wakes
again in this kingdom. p. 102, 103. Dancing is an exercise allowed by the
holy Scriptures p. 104, 105 There is now by the special providence of Almighty
God a repairing of ruins, which have chanced in the holy Tabernacle of this
Land. p. 106, 107. The holy Fathers of the Church in their high and holy
understanding d^^ clearly see the causes of evil, the which but of few others
are perceived. p. 108. Feasting in the fear of God is one of the ordinances,
with which the Lord would be served. p. 108, 109. Every member of the Church of
England ought to honor it. p. 110, 111. The gracelessenesse of many professing
to be members thereof. 111, 112. Gods ten Commandments are broken inwardly
as well as outwardly, and ought to be kept both inwardly and outwardly. p. 113,
114, 115, 116. There are everlasting Laws delivered in most chapters of the
books of Moses, and therefore the said books are to be diligently read and
heard of all people. p. 117. Obeisance may lawfully be made unto Gods gracious
presence in Sanctuary, when one is entered therein for to worship, and when hoe
goes out from the public worship ended or not ended. p. 127, 128. The
sincere professors of the Catholic doctrine contained in the holy Scriptures,
and established by the public Authority of this Realms, are now by some
reproached with new names of faction. p. 123. See the Authors preface unto his
Parishioners. Thanksgiving unto God consists not in the mere uttering of
good words unto God; but is to have good works accompanying it, as opportunity
serves thereunto. p. 128, 129. 195. The great unreverence of many people in
making no manner of obeisance unto Christ in the holy congregation, when as his
name Jesus is mentioned in the creed, the Gospel for the day, etc. the contempt
of that holy ordinance is signified, p. 130, 131, 132, 140, 141. It is no
honoring of God for to ascribe utter untruth unto him: the which is noted
against such which say, that God is robbed of his glory, when that is affirmed
concerning him, which is the express doctrine of the third collect for Good
Friday. p. 130. The Church her just complaint of the neglect of many among the
richer sort, in yielding due obedience. p. 131, 132. Prostration ought to be
made toward the Table of the Lord, unto God there, when as we are entered into
an holy Temple unto the public worship, or to pray privately. p. 132, 133,
134. Gods board is ever to be duly reverenced, and toward it unto God (who is
there perpetually) obeisance is to be made, when we enter into the Lords
Sanctuary, though it be not at the time of any public worship. p. 134, 135.
Christians Temples may have in them such instruments of Music and other
matters, which God ordained to be in his holy Temple among the Church of the
Jews, which the Scriptures express not to be quite abolished, and whereof the
godly wisdom of the Church judges it meet to retain some use. p 135, 136. It
is utterly undecent that in a Chauncell any seat, bench, or form should stand
above Gods board or Mercy seat. p. 136, 137. It is comely that the sacred
communion Table standing in the uppermost part of the Chauncell, do stand with
the ends thereof toward North and South. p. 137. In Churchyards and all other
consecrated ground we should abstain from whatsoever is unbeseeming in holy
place. p. 137, 138 The Church-house of every Parish should be only employed to
godly, and its right use. p. 137, 110. Whatsoever thing is consecrate to holy
use, should in no wise be used profanely, or to a common use. p. 137, 138.
There ought not to be a carrying of burdens through Churches. See the margent
of p. 138. Mr. Hierons most memorable delivery concerning the reverence to be
used in hearing Gods word preached. p. 138, 139. Mr. Doctor Laurence his
delivery concerning standing in hearing Gods Word. p. 139, 140. We ought to
stand up whenever in the Divine Service there is said: Glory be to the
Father, and to the Son, and to the holy Ghost, etc. And likewise always when
the Gospel for the day is read. p. 140. See Chapter 68. in the Christian
Divinity composed out of the books of the Divine Service. In the whole public
worship we ought not to talk, nor to use any gesture unbeseeming in the
gracious presence of God, but to be duly attentive unto every Divine Service
performed. p. 141. There ought to be much instructing of all people unto the
due reverencing of God. p. 138. The blessing of God on such, as with meek
hearts and due reverence do hear and receive his holy Word, and in his
public worship do observe what the Church prescribes to be observed. p. 141.
What befalls every one, which refuses or neglects to be ordered by the
Church, in the reverencing of God at all his public worship. p. 141. How in
ancient time religiousnesse among people was furthered. p. 142. The great
unrespectfulnesse of many toward faithful Pastors and Curates is noted p.
146, 147, 148. Parents are to inform their children so soon as they are able
to learn the Catechism, concerning Bishopping, what it is, and how necessary
it is, as it is signified in the Communion book. p. 181.200.146. Of the power
of Gods special grace. p. 155, 156. The Church in a certain Homily calls
Matrimony a Sacrament, and signifies that more ordinances of God may be so
called in a general acception. p. 180, 181. The late most excellent Majesty's
sacred meditation expressed concerning charity, and Gods special enlightening
of His Highness soul, etc. p. 196, 197, 198, 199. Of the necessity of the
holy Ordinance of Confirmation. p. 200, 201. Why it cannot be performed but by
a Bishop only. p. 204.205. What an Archbishop is. p. 205, 206. Of the
submission that is due unto their most high and holy understanding in Religion
from all other in the Clergy, according as it is signified in the book of
Ordering the Ministry, and elsewhere in writings of public authority. p. 206,
207. A most momorable Declaration how the holy Scriptures may be understood
more and more, written by the greatly learned and holy man SEBASTIAN CASTELLIO,
and set before his re^owed translation of the Bible, wherein it is demonstrated
that no ungodly person can know the mysteries of the Scriptures. p. 207, etc. A
signification that the comparing together of places of holy Scripture is in no
wise a sufficient means, whereby to understand the great mystery of
godliness, without a due consideration of the Church her interpretation, and
the leading of a rightly devout life, and their receiving illumination from the
holy Ghost. p. 216.
And be it signified, that not only by most diligent search of the universal
holy Scriptures, and the use of the principal helps extant and to be enjoyed
for the understanding of them; but also by very much experience in the work of
the sacred Ministry it is observed, that for to further people unto that true
Christian mind and life, which is held forth in the established doctrine of
the Church, it is necessary that they be informed with the matters before
specified, and al other contained in this work, which are declared to be
delivered in any of the fundamental books or deliveries of the Apostolical
Church of England. For let many people in most places be examined concerning
even but the principles, or the first matters to be known unto apprehending
and practicing the true Christian Religion, and they will be found to be so
uncertain, as touching the grounds whereon holy Church declares that people
should become built up Since the time that so many have fallen from due respect
unto the fundamental divinity of the Church, namely that which is delivered in
the books of the Divine service, etc. they have bin many of them like sheep
scattered, as concerning the estate of their minds. Now it is the duty of
Pastors to endeavor the gathering together of their people unto that holy
faith and upright life which the Church of Christ in he fundamental writings
holds f^rth: and thereunto their duty is to stitre up all what may be unto
the learning of all the divine Service books deliveries, which is the
experimented means for the furthering of all to come into the Christian unity.
Ezech. 34.
together in holy understanding and upright conversation, as that their
ignorance in mind, and their imperfection in manners is very greatly to be
considered and to be lamented.

And whereas all Pastou^s and other inferior ministers of the Church should in
no wise seek their own glory, but the glory of Christ, and the honor which
is due unto his Church, therefore in this work following it has bin
endeavored, that the word of Christ and the express doctrine of the Church
might determine every matter whereon question is made, so far as there could
be called to remembrance any sentence in the fundamental books of the Church
for to resolve the same. And that the Divine Service doctrine ought to be of
such authority, not only among the Laity, but also among the Clergy, it is
demonstrated in the Theology or Divinity thereout composed, and in special
manner in the preface unto the reader, and in the advertisement set in the
beginning thereof. Perpetual experience declares that all those, which have
not a due respect unto the doctrine of the Church delivered in her fundamental
books, but understand the holy Scripture according as their own mind and
affection leads them, do not come into the unity of the holy Spirit; but
fall into more and more diversity and contrariety, and run even into infinite
error in their imagination, and exceeding great enormity in their conversation.

An addition concerning the great profit of Homilies set forth by the Church.
In the table of the degrees wherein by Law men are prohibited to marry,
appointed to be set up in Churches, there is signified, That the Homilies
already set forth are to be read for the instruction of the people, and such
other form of doctrine as shall be hereafter by authority published.
Whereas is the end first tome of the Homilies the Church signified, that more
Homilies should be set forth, as against covetousness, envy, wrath, and
malice, with many other matters, as well fruitful as necessary to the edifying
of Christian people, and the increase of godly living; and as yet peculiar
Homilies against the said grievous fins have not bin composed: And whereas in
the rubricke immediately following the Nicene creed it is said, After the
Creed, if there be no Sermon, shall follow are of the Homilies already set
forth, or hereafter to be set forth by common authority, we are given to
understand, that they are fruitful and necessary to the In the 35. of the
Articles of the Church of England, whereunto every one admitted into the
Ministry, does subscribe, it is th^^ most memorably said concerning the
Hom^lies, viz. The second book of Homilies, the saverall titles whereof we
have joined under this article does contain a godly and wholesome doctrine, and
necessary for these times, as does the former book of Homilies, which were set
forth in the time of Edward the sixth: and therefore we judge them to be read in
Churches by the Ministers diligently and distinctly that they may ^e
understanded of the people.
edifying of Christian people, and the increase of godly living; and that from
time to time (according as the divine wisdom of the Church sees it requisite)
more and more may be set forth by the public authority. Also seeing that they
are concerning the fundamental matters of the Christian Religion, they are not
to be accounted only useful for times past, but to be profitable perpetually;
because in them in all plain manner is delivered, how the All people therefore
should en deavour to know the whole doctrine of the Homilies, that thereby they
may judge of doctrines delivered by private Ministers, whether they agree with
the fundamental doctrine of the Church, yea or no. Also in no wise to account,
that the homilies serve only for the use of Minist^rs which cannot preach,
seeing that they are set forth for all peoples learning and practicing in mind
and conversation.
Church does teach such and such points of faith and life. They are in no wise
now needless (as many suppose) for that there is such a plenty of those which
can by memory speak forth of the pulpit; but they are greatly necessary, both
for peoples information in the truth, and also for their enablement whereby the
better to understand and judge of Sermons made unto them. Yea they are very
greatly profitable for Pastors and Curates to instruct congregations withal,
and to be as a rule of doctrine, from which themselves may not swarve in the
Sermons which they make. People also for the most part have not the spirit of
discerning between doctrine perfect and unperfect, but do account whatsoever
foundeth eloquently unto their ears, to be wholesome and very good: and few
take into serious consideration and examination, what are the effects in mind
and conversation, which such doctrine causes, that is contrary unto the
doctrine of the homilies. And whereas the book of homilies is the Theology or
divinity set forth by the supreme divine wisdom of the Apostolical Church of
England, ought not all Priests and people to be conversant therein, that in
faith and life they may become conformed thereunto? Also, even as we in our
hearts assenting unto the prayers read out of the Communion book, do thereby
with our minds speak unto God: so with all due reverence attending unto the
Sacred Homilies publicly read, we do hear Christ Jesus speaking unto us, who
has said and ever does say unto his Ministers concerning their publishing of
his truth: He that hears you, hears me, and he that despises you,
despises me, and him that sent me. Luke 10.16. 1 These. 4.8. 1 Samuel 2.30.

THE MOST SACRED CATECHISM OF the Church expounded.
Question.

WHY in the most sacred Catechism of the Church is it first asked, What is
your name?

Answ. Because by the Christen name one is distinguished from another; it is
first given to one before he is baptized; and from the consideration thereof The
Catechismes beginning is from some observation about Baptism.
occasion is taken of asking concerning the first matter, which is received in
the Christian Religion.

Q. What is meant by Godfathers and Godmothers?

A. They are those which at Baptism do not only give one his name, but also
do See chap. 52. of the Christian Divinity. Isa. 8.2. So is it delivered in
the end of Baptism service.
undertake to perform the parts and duties of parents, in doing their true
endeavors to see that he be taught, so soon as he shall be able to learn,
what a solemn vow, promise and profession, he has made by them. And therefore
they are so called, because they should be as fathers and mothers in God, for
ones furtherance in the knowledge and obedience of God.

Q. How were you made a member of Christ in your Baptism?

A. In that thereby I was So says the Baptism service. Romans 6.5. and
11.17.24. 1 Cor. 12.13.
graffed into the mystical body of Christ, whereof he is the Ephesians. 1.22.23
head.

Q. What is the mystical body of Christ?

A. The blessed company of all So in the communion service.
faithful people.

] Q. How were you made a child of God in your Baptism?

A. Whereas I was borne in So in private Baptism service. Ps. 51.5. Ephesians. 2.3.
Tit 3.5.6. Gal. 3.27. and 4.5.6.
original sin, and in the wrath of God, I by the laver of regeneration in my
Baptism, was received into the number of the children of God.

] Q. How in your Baptism were you made an inheritour of the Kingdom of
heaven?

A. In that therein I was So in the Baptism service. Mar. 10.14.15.16. Col.
2.12.13 and 1.12.13. See c. 51. of the Christian Divinity. And be it observed
that by chap. hereafter mentioned, is meant of that book.
embraced with the arms of Gods mercy, I received the blessing of eternal
life, and was made partaker of his everlasting Kingdom.

Q. How can one in this life be said to be made partaker of Gods everlasting
Kingdom?

A. In that in ones Baptism he is made partaker of righteousness, peace, and
joy in the holy Ghost, which is Christ's Romans 14.17.
Kingdom of grace, and is now Luke 17.21.
within his peoples hearts, and is unto them as it were an 2 Pet. 1.11. See the
answer unto the seventh question in the largest Catechism of the Church called
Nowell in quarto.
entrance into his everlasting Kingdom of heaven.

Q. Why is the question, What did your Godfathers and Godmothers for you in
your Baptism?

A. Because it is my duty now being come to the years of some Exodus 12.26. Jos
4.6. Ps. 78.5.6. Ephesians. 6.4. Deuteronomy. 6.7. See Chap. 82.
discretion, for to understand more and more the benefit and the signification
of the holy Sacrament received in mine infancy; and withal to know the three
things which they promised and vowed in my name, And see the rubricke before the
Catechism, the order of Confirmation. Eccles. 12.1. Deuteronomy. 31.12. Ps. 148.12.
which now I my self am bound to perform.

Q. Which is the first of the three things, which now you are to do?

A. To forsake the devil and all his works, the pomps and vanities of the
wicked world, and all the sinful lusts of the flesh.

Q. What is the devil?

A. He is a So says the Homily against Rebellion in the first part thereof.
Isa. 14.12. 2 Pet. 2.4. Job. 1.7. 1. Pet. 5.8. See chap. 93.
created spirit, and in the beginning was a glorious Angel; but for his
wilful sinning was cast out of heaven; and has ever since compassed the earth
to and fro, going about like a roaring lion, seeking whom he may devour.

Q. What are the works of the devil?

A. All Ephesians. 6.16. Matt. 5.37. 1 Cor. 7.5. 1 Chronicles. 21.1.
suggestions within us for to think, speak or do contrary to Gods
commandments.

Q. Why is the devil and all his works to be forsaken.

A. Because no Ephesians. 5.27.
place is to be given unto him within us, but he is to be Jam. 4.7.
resisted. And unless 2 Cor. 6.15. Ps. 66.18. and 139.24. 2 Cor. 7.1. Heb.
12.14. 1 John 5.18. Isa. 40.4 Se^ Vox Clamantis^ and the Epistle for S. John
Baptists day.
all his works be forsaken, God will not work his works of grace in us. Hence
holy Church has taught us to pray: In the Collect for the 18. Sunday after
Trinity.
Grant thy people grace to avoid the infections of the devil, and with pure
heart and mind to follow thee the only God. And again we are taught to say:
In the Collect for the 1. Sunday in Lent.
Give us grace to use such abstinence, that our flesh being subdued to the
spirit, we may ever obey thy godly motions in righteousness and true
holiness.

Q. What are the pomps and vanities of the wicked world?

A. Excessive outward shows, vain gloryings, and Tit. 3.14. See the margens
there.
unprofitable exercises, and also the peculiar Ephesians. 2.2.
courses of all ungodly people.

Q. Rehearse some place of the Divine Service speaking against such pomps and
vanities.

A. It is said in the Page 103. of Tome 2. It is to be noted, that reference
is unto the edition of the Homilies in folio, anno 1623. Also anno 1623. Also
that the impression come forth since that year, does in some pages contain
more or less, then that former does. So that, though both editions in fosio
have not in contents any words difference, yet in the printing, that which is
in one page of the one is not always in the same page of the other.
Homily against excess of apparel: Saint Paul teaches us to use this world,
as though we used it not; whereby he cutteth away not only all ambition, pride,
and vain pomp in apparel; but also all inordinate care and affection, which
withdraws us from the contemplation of heavenly things, and consideration of
our duty toward God. They that are much occupied in caring for things
pertaining to the body, are most commonly negligent and careless in matters
concerning the soul. We ^^st yield accounts of those things, which we have
received of God, who abhors all excess, pride, Jer. 9.23. Gal. 5.26.
Ostentation and vanity; Who also utterly condemns and disalloweth
whatsoever draws us from our duty toward God, or diminishes our charity
toward our neighbors and children, whom we ought to love as our selves.

Q. Why are the pomps and vanities of the wicked world to be forsaken?

A. Because the Scripture says: 1. Joh. 2.15. and 5.4. Ioh. 15.19.
If any one love the world, the love of the Father is not in him. For all that
is in the world, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of
life, is not of the Father, but is of the world. And the world passes away,
and the lust thereof; but he that does the will of God, abides for ever.

Q. What are the sinful lusts of the flesh?

A. All deeds, desires, and Col. 3.5. 1. Cor. 10.6.
inclinations of soul and body, which are contrary to the will of God.

Q. Rehearse out of the holy Scripture some of them.

A. Saint Paul says to the Galatians: Gal. 5.17.19.20.
The flesh lusts against the spirit, and the works of the flesh are
manifest, which are these, adultery, fornication, uncleannes, lasciviousnes,
idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, variance, emulations, wrath, strife, The original
word is observed also to signify Sects and factions.
seditions, heresies, envyings, murders, drunkenness, revellings, and such
like.

Q. Why are all the sinful lusts of the flesh to be forsaken?

A. Because the holy Ghost says: Gal. 5.21. Col 3.5.6. Ephesians. 5.3.4.5.6.
They which do such things shall not inherit the Kingdom of God: and for such
things sake the wrath of God comes upon the children of disobedience. Hence
we are taught to pray: In the collect for the day of the Circumcision of Christ.
Grant us the true Circumcision of the spirit, that our hearts and all our
members being mortified from all carnal and worldly lusts, we may in all
things obey thy blessed will.

Q. What is the second thing which you now are bound to do?

A. To believe all the Articles of the Christian Faith.

Q. Where are those Articles of the Faith expressed, which one is bound to
believe?

A. In the Belief called the Apostles Creed, which begins with these words,
I believe in God the Father Almighty, etc.

Q. Are you not to believe also whatsoever God has spoken, and is set down in
his word?

A. Yea: for it is said in the service of Baptism, We are constantly to
believe Luke 24.25. Mar. 1.15. John. 5.46.47.
Gods holy word.

Q. Why is it said, Of the Christian Faith?

A. Because there are many and diverse beleefs in the minds of mankind; and
there is but one only faith which we are to hold, and that is the faith
Christian, which CHRIST has taught, the So in the third part of the Homily of
obedience, page 77. Tome 1.
Catholic Faith contained in the holy Scriptures.

Q. Why are we to believe all the Articles of Faith expressed in the Creed?

A. Because they are the maine points of belief delivered in the holy Gospel:
and CHRIST has said; Mar 16.15.^6. Isaiah 7.9. See chap. 12. and 1.
Preach the Gospel to every creature: he that believes not, shall be damned.

Q. Can we of our selves believe constantly the mysteries of Faith, unto our
souls true consolation?

A. No; and therefore we are taught to confess and say: In the general
confession to be said every morning set among the Godly prayers after the
reading Psalms in the Communion book. Wis. 3.14
O Lord God heavenly father, to comfort my self in affliction and temptation
with these articles of the Christian Faith, it is not in my power, for Faith is
thy gift: and forasmuch as thou will be prayed unto and called upon for it, I
come unto thee to pray and beseech thee, both for that and for all other my
necessities.

Q. Is the Christian Faith a grace wherein we may grow?

A. 2. These. 1.3.
Yea: and therefore we are taught to pray, In the collect for the 14. Sunday
after Trinity.
Almighty and everlasting God, give unto us the increase of Faith, hope and
charity.

Q. What is the third thing which we are bound to do?

A. To keep Gods holy will and In the Latin edition of the service it is said,
all the commandments.
commandments, and to walk in the same Luk 1.74.75.
all the days of my life.

Q. What is that holy will of God, which is to be kept?

A. The Church says unto us in a certain place: In the end of the article
concerning Predestination.
In our doings that will of God is to be followed, which we have expressly
declared unto us in the word of God.

Q. What are the Commandments which are to be kept?

A. They are Gods Sirach. 1.5. Romans 8.4, and 15.4. 2 Timothy 3.15.16.17.
everlasting precepts prescribed throughout all his holy word, either by rule
or by example, the sum whereof are the ten Commandments.

Q. Why is it said, And walk in the same all the days of my life?

A. The Church says in her The third part, page 39. Tome 1.
Homily of good works: And you travailing continually (during this life) thus
in keeping the Commandments of God (wherein stands the pure, principal, and
right honor of God, and which wrought in faith, God has ordained to be the
right trade and path way unto heaven) you shall not fail, as Mat. 19.17. and
7.14. See the beginning of the second part of that Homily.
CHRIST has promised, to come to that blessed and everlasting life, where ye
shall live in glory and joy with God for ever.

Q. Does God require of young folk an unfeined striving for to yield such
obedience unto him?

A. He says: Eccles. 11.^. and 12.1. S^^ chap. 98.
Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth. And again he says,
having as it were in an holy derision the vain mind and course of most youth:
Rejoice o young man in thy youth, and let thy heart cheer thee in the days of
thy youth, and walk in the ways of thine heart, and in the sight of thine
eyes: but know thou, that for all these things GOD will bring thee into
judgment. Wherefore the Lord says by Moses: Deuteronomy. 31.12.
Gather the people together, men, women, and children, and the stranger which
is within thy gates, that they may hear, and that they may learn, and fear
the Lord your God, and observe to do Deuteronomy. 29.29.
all the words of this law.

Q. Why is the question, Do thou not think that thou art bound to believe
and do, as they have promised for thee?

A. Because it is said in the Baptism service: Christ will do his part, if
we (being come to age) will strive to do our part. See the end of the
exhortation in the commination service.
CHRIST for his part will most surely keep and perform his promise. Wherefore
after this promise made by CHRIST, these infants must also faithfully for their
part promise by you that be their sureties, that they will forsake the devil
and all his works, and constantly believe GODS holy word, and obediently keep
his commandments. Also because it is said, In the Catechism of the service.
When children are come to age, themselves are bound to perform those things.
I my self therefore must strive to forsake all things to be forsaken, to
believe all things to be believed, and to keep all matters to be observed, and
so to walk as it is by God prescribed. The Scripture says: Ezech. 18.4, etc.
The soul that sins, it shall die. Romans 14.12.
Every one of us shall give account of himself to God.

Q. Why does the answer begin with the words, Yes verily?

A. It is said in the In the first part, page 46. Tome 1. See Heb. 6.13.14.
Romans 1 9.
Homily concerning swearing: That thus did our Savior CHRIST swear diverse
times, saying, verily, verily. When a man would affirm the truth to the
setting forth of GODS glory (for the salvation of the people) in open preaching
of the Gospel, or in giving of good counsel privately for their souls health
he may so swear.

Q. Why also are there added these words, And by GODS help so I will?

A. Because without Gods helping of us by this holy spirit, we are neither
able to believe, nor to do, as our Godfathers and Godmothers have promised for
us. Ioh. 15.5.
CHRIST says, without me ye can do nothing: but S. Paul says: Phil. 4.13.
I can do all things through Christ strengthening me. And CHRIST says: Mat.
9.23.
All things are possible unto him that believes, wherefore we are taught to
In the collect for the 1. Sundry after Trinity.
pray: O GOD the strength of all them that trust in thee, mercifully accept our
prayers: and because the weakness of our mortal nature can do no good thing
without thee, grant us the help of thy grace, that in keeping of thy
Commandments, we may please thee both in will and deed, through JESUS CHRIST
our Lord. For though to Romans 7.8.
will be present with us, yet by our own natural strength we are not able to
do our duty; and therefore we are to pray, that God would grant us according
to the riches of his glory, that we may be strengthened Ephesians. 3.16.
with might by his spirit in the inner man, for to perform his will more and
more obediently. That he would work in us both Phil. 2.12.13 So it is read in
the last translation, and so the Church reads in her service of Confirmation.
to will and to do in the great work wherein we are required to labor,
namely the working out of our own salvation with fear and trembling.

Q. Why is there said after the answer, And I heartily thank our heavenly
father, that he has called me to this state of salvation?

A. It is taught unto us in the In the 1. part, page 217. 218.
Homily for Rogation week, That GODS singular goodness well and diligently
remembered on our part, should moove us (as duty is) again with hearty
affection to love him, and with word and deed to praise him, and to serve him
all the days of our life. There can be no other end of such, as draw nigh to
GOD by knowledge, and yet depart from him in unthankfulness, but utter
destruction.

Q. When did God call you to this state of salvation?

A. In mine infancy, when I was brought unto his holy baptism. For says the
Divine service, In the service for certifying of Baptism. Mark 10.14.
Our Lord JESUS CHRIST does not deny his grace and mercy unto such infants, but
most lovingly does call them unto him.

Q. Is every baptized infant in the state of salvation?

A. Yea: for it is written in the book of common prayer; In the rubric of the
order of Confirmation, the last section, the next words before the Catechism
there.
And that no man shall think that any detriment shall come to children by
deferring of their confirmation, he shall know the truth, that it is certain
by GODS word, that children being baptized, have all things necessary for their
salvation, and be undoubtedly saved.

Q. Rehearse some place of the Service, where the state of salvation which is
in this life begun, is signified.

A. It may be observed where it is said: In the first prayer of Baptism
service.
Mercifully look upon these children, sanctify and Tit. 3.5. 1. Pet. 3.21.
wash them with the holy Ghost, that they being delivered from thy wrath, may
be received into the arc of CHRIST'S Church, and being steadfast in faith,
joyful through hope, and rooted in charity, may so One being in the state
before prayed for, he is in the state of salvation which now begins. See 2.
Cor. 6.1.2. Tit. 3.5.
pass the waves of this troublesome world, that finally they may come to the
land of everlasting life, there to reign with thee world without end.

Q. Why has God called you to this state of salvation?

A. The Rogation Page 219. 220.
Homily says: It is GODS goodness that moves him to say in scripture: It is
my Prove. 8.31.
delight to be with the children of men. It is his goodness that moves him to
call us unto him, to offer us his friendship and 1. Cor. 1.9. Ioh. 14.23.
presence. And what other thing does his loving and gentle voice spoken in his
word, where he calls us to his presence and friendship, but declare his
goodness, only without regard of our worthiness? And what other thing does
stir him to call us unto him, when we be strayed from him, to suffer us
patiently, to Romans 2.4. Ierem. 4.1. Joel 2.12.
win us to repentance, but only his singular goodness, no whit of our
deserving?

Q. Rehearse some scripture declaring the reason of Gods calling of us unto him.

A. Saint Peter says: 2. Pet. 3.9.
The Lord is long suffering to us ward, not willing that any should perish, but
that all should come to repentance. The Lord therefore willing more abundantly
to show unto us the unchangeablenesse of his counsel, Heb. 6.17. Ezech. 33.11.
and 18.31.32. Psalm. 145.9.
confirmed it by an oath, saying: As I live, says the Lord God, I have no
pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way,
and live: turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways; for why will ye die, O ye
house of Israel?

Q. In what manner does God call such, as are of the years of some discretion?

A. CHRIST signifies it, where he says: Matt. 23.37. 2. Esdras 1.28.29.30.
O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest them that
are sent unto thee: how often would I have gathered thy children together, even
as a hen gathers her chicken under her wings, and ye would not! The Lord
says by Jeremy: Ier. 31.3.
I have loved thee with an everlasting love: therefore with loving kindness
have I drawn thee. And by Hosea the Lord says: Hos. 11.4.
That he drew Israel with the coards of a man, with the bands of love. Saint
Paul says: Romans 2.4. See chap. 10.
Despisest thou the riches of Gods goodness, and forbearance, and long
suffering, not knowing that the goodness of God leads thee to repentance?

Q. And what will befall such as will not come unto CHRIST calling them?

A. He faith: Prove. 1.24.25.26.28.29.
Because I have called and ye refused; I have stretched out mine hand, and none
regarded. But ye have set at naught all my counsel, and would none of my
reproof: I will also laugh at your calamity, I will mock when your fear
comes. Then will they call upon me, but I will not answer: they will seek
me early, but they shall not find me: for that they hated knowledge, and did
not choose the fear of the Lord. Of such Saint Acts 7.51.
Steven complained, and said unto them: Ye do always resist the Holy Ghost: as
your Fathers did, so do ye.

Q. Why say you also, Through JESUS CHRIST our Savior.

A. It is said, In the Homily for Regation week, page 228. 229.
That it is he for whose sake we received this high gift of grace. Saint Peter
says: 1. Pet. 5.10.
The God of all grace has called us into his eternal glory by CHRIST JESUS.
All is of GOD by his Son CHRIST JESUS our Lord.

Q. Why is there added prayer for grace to continue in the state of salvation
unto your lives end?

A. In the Homily of Page 269.
Repentance it is said: It is our parts, if at least we be desirous of the
health and salvation of our own souls, most earnestly to pray unto our
heavenly Father, to assist us with his spirit, that we may be able to hearken
unto the voice of the true sheapherd, and with due obedience to follow the same.

Q. Rehearse some place of the Service, signifying what that grace prayed for,
is.

A. It may appear out of the prayer, where it is said: One of the Collects in
the end of the communion service.
Prevent us, O Lord, in all our doings, with thy most gracious favor, and
further us with thy continual help, that in all our works begun, continued,
and ended in thee, we may glorify thy holy name.

Q. Recite some counsel of the Church memorable unto this point, which we have
in hand.

A. It is said in the Homily of Salvation: Page 19. Tom. 1.
Now the office and duty of a Christian man unto GOD, what we ought on our part
to render unto GOD again, for his great mercy and goodness, is, not to pass
the time of this present life unfruitfully and idly, after that we are
baptized or Note that justification is received in Baptism.
justified, not caring how few good works we do to the glory of GOD, and
profit of our neighbors: much less is it our office after that we be once
made CHRIST'S members, to live contrary to the same, making our selves The
Church signifies, that it is possible for such as are made the members of
Christ, to become the members of the dev^ll, if they take not due care. So in
page 193 of the Homily of the Resurrect. And in page 57. of the Homily of
falling from God.
members of the devil, walking after his enticements, and after the
suggestions of the world and the flesh, whereby we know that we do serve the
world, and the devil, and not GOD.

Q. Whereas you pray for grace to continue, what need have you so to do? Do
not all continue in the way of salvation, being once entered thereinto?

A. The Homily of Repentance signifies, In the 1. part, page 258.
That some do begin to return unto the Lord, and do faint in the mid way,
before they come to the mark that is appointed to them. Wherefore the divine
wisdom of the Church has set forth the Homily, Of falling from GOD, for to
show how dangerous a thing the same is. Moreover many Scriptures make express
mention of sundry, which have entered into the way of salvation, and afterward
have turned out of the same. It is written, John 6.66.
That many of Christ's disciples went back, and walked no more with him. Christ
also mentions, Luke 8.13.
That some for a while believe, and in time of temptation fall away. Saint Paul
spoke of widows 1. Tim. 5.12.
that had damnation, because they had cast off their first faith. He said,
Verse 15.
That some turned aside after Satan: 2. Tim. 1.15.
That all they in Asia, forsook him. 2. Tim. 4.10.
Demas did forsake him, and loved the present world. He signified to the
Hebrews of some, which Heb. 6.4.5.6. See chap. 56. page 35.
fell from five measures of grace, and so became incurable. Saint 2. Pet.
2.20.1.22.
Peter spoke of some, that like the dog returned to their vomit, and like the
sow washed, returned unto wallowing in the mire. Wherefore says the Apostle
to the Hebrews: According to the Geneva translation.
Take heed that no man fall from the grace of God. And again he says: Heb.
3.14.
We are made partakers of Christ, if we hold the beginning of our confidence
steadfast unto the end. Ye (says Christ to his obedient people) shall be
hated of all men for my names sake: but he that endures to the Mat. 10.22.
end shall be saved. We have need to pray for grace, whereby to continue unto
our lives end: For says Saint Paul: Romans 11.22.23.
Behold therefore the goodness and severity of God: on them which fell,
severity: but toward thee goodness, if thou continue in his goodness:
otherwise thou shall be cut off. And they also, if they bide not still in
unbelee^e, shall be grassed in. It most necessarily therefore concerns all
that would be saved, for to do as Saint Peter counsels, 2. Pet.
1.10.5.6.7.8.11.
to give diligence for to make their calling and election sure. For if ye
giving all diligence do add to your faith, virtue; and to virtue, knowledge;
and to knowledge, temperance; and to temperance, patience; and to patience,
godliness; and to godliness, brotherly kindness; and to brotherly kindness,
Charity: If these things be in you and abound, and ye continue in them, Ye
shall never fall.

Q. Why is the Creed set before the ten Commandments and the Lords prayer?

A. Because In the Rogation Homily, the third part, page 228. see chap. 1.
Faith is the first entry into the Christian life. Romans 10.14.
It is written: How shall they call on him, in whom they have not believed?
Before any one Mat. 7.13.14. Luke 13.24.25.26.27.
striveth to enter in at the strait gate, he first believes that without doubt
he shall perish everlastingly, unless he enter in thereat, and go in the
narrow way, which leads unto the life everlasting.

Q. Which is the first Article of the Creed?

A. I believe in God the Father Almighty maker of heaven and earth.

Q. What does the Scripture say that God is?

A. Christ says, Ioh. 4.24.
God is a spirit. Saint John says: 1. Ioh. 1.5.
God is Light, and 1. Ioh. 4.7.8.16. see chap. 3. of Divinity.
Love.

Q. Why is it said, GOD the Father?

A. Because there is 1. Ioh. 5.7.
God the Father, and God the Son, and God the holy Ghost; three Persons, and
but one God.

Q. Why is God the Father first mentioned?

A. In such order he is mentioned in Scripture. So says the Athan. Creed.
Also he is made of none, neither created, nor begotten, nor proceeding; but
has from everlasting begotten his only Son.

Q. Why is God said to be Almighty?

A. It is signified where it is said: In the Visitation service.
The Almighty LORD is a most strong tower to all them that put their trust in
him; unto whom all things in heaven, in earth, and under the earth do Phil.
2.10. 2. Esdras 8.21.
bow and obey.

Q. If God be Almighty, how can his will be left undone here on earth, as the
Lords prayer signifies?

A. His will is to be considered two manner of ways. First concerning that,
which he would have us mankind to do: as Saint Paul says, 1. These. 4 3.4.5.6.
This is the will of God, even your sanctification; that ye should abstain
from fornication: that no man go beyond nor defraud his brother in any matter,
etc. Now that such will of God is left undone, continual experience
testifies; yea, that that will of God is Act. 7.51. Mat 23.37. Act. 28.27.
resisted. Secondly Gods will is to be considered about things, whereof he will
be the alone worker by his Almightinesse; and in such matters his will cannot
be resisted: as his will now is, Genesis 8.22.
that summer and winter, etc. shall continue. Such his Read concerning the will
of God both books set forth thereof by that most greatly Learned Doctor in the
Church of England Master Thomas Iackson entitled, A treatise of the divine
essence and attributes. The 1. part of the said work is chiefly for scholars
reading; but the second part is for all peoples reading; and therein the most
holy eternal truth of doctrine delivered in the 3. collect forgood Friday is
in most plain and perfect manner declared. See chap. 6. and page 12. of the
Christian Divinity.
will was, that the Israelites should not be still detained in Egypt, but that
they should pass into the Wilderness: and the like case is in innumerable
particulars, wherein God will be the effecter by his Almighty power.

Q. Cannot God by his Almightinesse hinder the committing of many evils daily
acted?

A. Even as our Sovereign the Kings most excellent Majesty could cause such
watch and ward to be kept continually in all high ways, as that none or fewer
should be robbed in them; and yet it is His Majesty's wisdom to leave his
people for to use their freedom in such cases, declaring by the Law of the
Kingdom, that if they will rob, they shall suffer death for it: So God by
his infinite power could stop many evil courses, and hinder many evil acts
done by mankind; but his eternal wisdom is to leave people in many cases to
their freedom, declaring by all his holy word and by his Catholic Church, In
the Athan. Creed. Mat. 25.46. Romans 2.6.7.8.8.10.
That he which does good, shall go into life everlasting, and he which
works evil, shall be cast into everlasting fire. Wherefore God says by
Moses: Deuteronomy. 30.15.19. and 11.26.27.28.
See, I have set before thee this day, life and good, death and evil:
therefore choose life, that both thou and thy seed may live. In the first lesson
appointed by the Church to be read on Saint Peter's day, it is said; Sir. 15.11.
^^c.
Say not thou, It is through the Lord, that I fell away, for thou ought not
to do the things that he hates. Say not thou, He has caused me to err, for
he has no need of the sinful man. The Lord hates all abomination, and they
that fear God love it not. He himself made man from the beginning, and left
him in the hand of his counsel. If thou will, to keep the commandments and
to perform acceptable faithfulness. He has set fire and water before thee:
See in the Homily of swearing, the first part, and page 48. with what respect
the Church quoteth a saying out of the said book of the holy Bible.
stretch forth thy hand unto whether thou will. Before man is life and death,
and whether him likes shall be given unto him. He has commanded no man to do
wickedly, neither has he given any man license to sin.

Q. It appears then, That God is no cause of any sin.

A. And therefore Saint James says: James 1.13.
Let no man say when he is tempted, I am tempted of God: for God cannot be
tempted with evil, neither tempts he any man. David says, Psalm. 5.4.
Thou art not a God which have pleasure in wickedness, neither shall evil
dwell with thee. Jer. 7.31.
The Lord says by Jeremy concerning the Jews burning of their children in the
fire, That he commanded them not that thing, neither came it into (or upon)
his heart. David also says, Psalm. 145.17.
The Lord is righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works. Zephaniah
says, Zeph. 3.5.
The Lord will do no iniquity. Wherefore as we are to believe, that God it
Almighty; so also are we to believe, that he is wise and righteous. The
universal holy Scripture declares, that God does exercise his power, will and
pleasure, no otherwise, than according to his wisdom and See Wisd. 12.15.
righteousness: according to which example of his, all Christian Kings do not
do whatsoever by their power they may effect, but in every thing they their
consider what is according to godly wisdom and Christian righteousness, and
thereunto they use their power. And whereas in such manner is his dealing and
proceeding toward us Mankind, in such sense are we to understand that saying
of his by Isaiah, Isa. 5.3.4.
What could have been done more to my Vineyard, that I have not done in it?
wherefore when I looked that it should bring forth grapes, brought it forth
wild grapes? And in such sense are we to understand the saying of the Church
in the homily of Charity, where it is said, In the first part, page 41. the
second section of that page, in the Tome 1.
And when Christ could not amend his adversaries, yet he prayed for them.
Abraham also grounding his reason upon Gods declared wisdom and The late most
excellent Majesty has signified it to be horrible and execrable, by any
consequent to make God author of finne: in his Highness Meditations on the Lords
prayer, page 117
righteousness, said unto God, Genesis 18.25.
Far be it from thee to slay the righteous with the wicked, and that the
righteous should be as the wicked: Shall not the Judge of all the world do
right? There is a memorable saying in the Communion book, Athanasius his 32.
direction about singing of the Psalms, where it is said, If thou see wicked
men contend among themselves to do mischief, think not that their nature does
impell them by necessity, to work sin against their will, as certain
Heretics suppose: but consider the 36. Psalm, and thou shall see, that they
be to themselves their own occasion of sinning.

Q. Why is there added, Maker of heaven and earth?

A. For to show his eternity, that he was before all worlds. Hence Saint Paul
says, Romans 1.20.
The invisible things of him from the creation of the world are clearly seen,
being understood by the things that are made, even his eternal power and
godhead.

Q. What are the things invisible mentioned in the Nicene Creed in the Divine
Service, where it is said, Maker of all things visible and invisible?

A. Saint Paul signifies of them to the Colossians, where he says, Col.
1.16. See hereof the works of Dion^sius Arcopagita.
For by him were all things created, that are in heaven, and that are in earth,
visible and invisible, whether they be thrones or dominions, or principalities,
or powers; namely the heavenly spirits (commonly called Angels) in their
several orders.

Q. Rehearse out of the Service some place giving further consideration
concerning Gods creating of the world.

A. In the Page 221.
Rogation homily it is said, It is not to be thought, that God has created all
this whole universal world as it is, and thus once made, has given it up to
be ruled and used after our own wits and device, and so takes no more charge
thereof: as we see the Shipwright, after he has brought his Ship to a perfect
end, then delivers it to the Mariners, and takes no more care thereof. Nay
God has not so created the world, that he is John 5.17. Psalm. 103.19.
careless of it; but he still preserves it by his goodness, he still stays
it in his creation. For else without his special goodness, it could not stand
long in his condition. And therefore Saint Paul says, That he preserves all
things, and bears them up Heb. 1.3.
still in his word, lest they should fall without him to their nothing again,
whereof they were made. If his special goodness were not every where present,
every creature should be out of order, and no creature should have his property
wherein he was first created.

Q. What is it to believe in God the Father?

A. It is to believe all concerning God the Father, which the holy Scripture
does deliver, and in special that which is signified to be the Fathers work.

Q. What is declared to be a special work of God the Father?

A. The drawing of Mankind unto his Son Jesus Christ: as it is said, John 6.44.
See Ioh. 12.32. with the second Antheme to be read on Easter day, in the divine
Service.
No man can come unto me, unles the Father which has sent me draw him.

Q. Whereby does God the Father draw all Mankind und CHRIST?

A. Holy Church does signify it unto us, where it says, In the Collect for
the third Sunday after Easter.
That Almighty God does show unto all that be in error, the light of his
truth, to the intent they may return into the way of righteousness. S. John
says, John 1.9. Luke 11.35.
CHRIST is the light, that lightneth every man which comes into the world.
Saint Paul says, Romans 10.18.
Have they not heard? Yes verily, their sound went into all the earth, and
their words unto the ends of the world. The which words taken forth of the
nineteenth Psalm are, There is no language nor speech, where their voice is
not heard. Their rule ( or So it is in the margent of the last translation of
Psalm. 19.4.
direction) is gone out through all the earth, and their words to the ends of
the world. The Apostle also says, Romans 10.8. Deuteronomy. 30.14. See Col. 1.23. as it
is in the Greek.
The word is nigh thee, even in thy mouth, and in thine heart, this is the word
of faith, which we preach. Many Scriptures more might be mentioned, which
declare, that God is merciful to Psalm: 145.9. Romans 11.32. Wisd.
11.23.24.25.26. Ezech. 33.11. Romans 5.18.
universal mankind, hating nothing that he has made, nor willing the death
of any sinner, but rather that he should turn from sin, and be saved, as the
In the third collect for good Friday, in the last prayer saving one of the
commination, in the collect for the first day of Lent. Therefore we pray in the
Letany, That it may please thee to have mercy upon all men.
Divine Service teaches and informs us, The which doctrine of hers, as
sundry more, though we in our youngnesse in Christian knowledge do not
understand, yet are we to believe, and also to know, that the Fathers, which
set forth the Divine Service, did perfectly understand; like as also we are to
believe, that the 2. Esd. 14.47.
Fathers of the Church now and always do in the great mystery of godliness
comprehend many things which the common people do not, yea also some things
which Ministers of the inferior order, as priests, pastors, and teachers do
not apprehend, who are therefore to be 1. Pet. 5.1.5. See Vox clamantis, and
pages therein, 18.19.
guided in Divinity by those most reverend and right reverend fathers in God;
and not to say that such and such sayings in the Communion book are untrue,
because they understand them not. And whereas (as S. Paul says) 1. These. 5.9.
The Lord has not appointed us unto wrath, but to obtain salvation by our
Lord JESUS CHRIST, he does by his spirit write in Romans 2.14.15 26.27. Heb. 8.10.
all our hearts the work or effect of his law, whereby the Psalm. 19.8. Ephesians.
1.18. Col. 1.23. Psalm. 98.3. Act. 26.18. Romans 10.18. Psalm. 19.3. Romans
1.18.19.20.21.28.32.
eyes of our understanding are enlightened to in see much of our duty, our own
neglect of the same, and GODS wrath and curse upon us because of our
disobedience, To the intent we should return into the way of righteousness, and
being weary and heavy laden with our sins, should Mat. 11.28.29.30.
seek unto CHRIST for to give rest unto our souls, we taking his yoke upon
us, and learning of him to be meek and lowly in heart. Many even out of all
places of the world being thus by Gods law become sensible of their spiritual
misery, have came to Jerusalem to Zech. 8.22.23.
seek the Lord of Hosts, and to pray before him, and to be instructed in the
knowledge of the Act. 8.27.28. Mat. 12.42.
Savior of the World JESUS CHRIST, Romans 3.25.
whom GOD has set forth to be a propitiation through faith in his blood, to
declare his righteousness for the forgiveness of sins that are past, through
the forbearance of GOD.

Q. Who then do become drawn by GOD the Father unto his Son CHRIST?

A. They that do not Heb. 3.8.12.13.15.
harden their hearts, nor wilfully Act. 28.27.
close the eyes of their souls; but do Luke 15.17.
come to themselves, Psalm. 22.27.
remember themselves, and Ezech. 18.28.
consider within themselves earnestly, how it is between GOD and their souls;
and perceiving that whiles they continue in Luke 13.3.5.
unrepentance, not changing their minds and lives according to the prescription
of GODS word, they are in danger of everlasting damnation; and having Act. 2 37.
sense and feeling of their inward miserable condition, become to be of a Joel.
2.13. Psalm. ^1.17. Zech. 12.10.
contrite spirit, a broken heart, and a mournful mind, hungring and
thirsting Joh. 2.2.
after the Act. 3.19. Luke 4.18.
refreshing, which comes from GOD by JESUS CHRIST.

Q. What must one do for his part, to become to be in such a penitent estate?

A. He must hear the preaching of Gods word, and attend unto the reading of
all the same, Lam. 3.40.
examining and judging his whole mind and life by it, and pray unto GOD to
assist him with his grace, that he may become endued with the 2 Cor. 7 9.10
11. Psalm. 25.4.5. and 143.8.10. Mat. 21.32.
godly sorrow, which works repentance unto salvation not to be repented of.

Q. What is the second article?

A. And in JESUS CHRIST his only Son our Lord.

Q. What says the Athanasian Creed concerning the faith in CHRIST?

A. That the right faith is, we should believe and confess, that our Lord
Jesus Christ the Son of God is God and man. God of the substance of the
Father, begotten before the worlds; and Man of the substance of his Mother,
borne in the world.

Q. Where has the Church declared concerning the divine nature of Jesus Christ?

A. In her prayer unto CHRIST, where she says, It is called a most necessary
prayer, and is among the godly prayers set after the reading Psalms.
O Lord Jesus Christ, which are the true Psalm. 84.11. M^l. 4. ^. Isa. 60.20.
Sun of the World, evermore arising, and never going down, which by thy most
wholesome appearing and sight, do bring forth, preserve, nourish, and
refresh all things, as well that are in heaven, as also that are on earth, we
beseech thee mercifully and favorably to shine into our hearts, that the night
and darkness of sins, and the mists of errors on every side driven away,
thou 2 Cor. 4.6. 2. Pet. 1.19. Rev. 22.16. Ephesians. 5.14.
brightly shining within our hearts, we may all our lives space go without any
stumbling or offense, and may decently and seemly walk (as in the day time)
being pure and clean from the works of darkness, and abounding in all good
works, which God has Ephesians. 2.10.
prepared for us to walk in.

Q. Rehearse some Scriptures declaring Christ's divine nature.

A. John 1.1.
In the beginning was the word, and the word was with God, and the word was
God. Heb. 1.3.
The Son of God is the brightness of the Fathers glory, and the express
image of his person. 1 Ioh. 5.20.
Jesus Christ is the true God, and the eternal life.

Q Why is the Son of God called JESUS?

A. Because he Mat. 1.21.
saves his people from the is sins.

Q. By whom was that name given unto him?

A. By God, and Luke 1.26.31.
pronounced by the ministry of his Angel Gabriel, when as he was sent from
GOD to signify unto the Virgin Mary of the holy Incarnation.

Q. Why is the Son of God called CHRIST?

A. Because he is the So is the signification of the name, as it may be seen
in the table of proper names, which is bound with some Bibles.
Anointed, whereby is meant that he is the Sovereign King, Prophet, and
Priest. David says unto him, Psalm. 45.6.7. Heb. 1.8.9.
Thy Throne (o GOD) is for ever and ever: the Scepter of thy Kingdom is a
right Scepter. Thou love righteousness and hate wickedness: therefore
GOD, thy GOD has anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows.

Q. By whom was he so named?

A. By GOD, and Luke 2.12.
pronounced on him by the ministry of an Angel, in the day of his nativity.

Q. Are not the names JESUS and CHRIST read, mentioned in books of the Bible
written before his holy Incarnation?

A. The name Jesus is signified in that which the people called him, or said
unto him, Mat. 21.9. Hosanna in the highest.
Hosanna, which is in the Hebrew text of Psalm. 118.25. The name Christ being in
the Hebrew Messiah, is in Dan. 9.25. Psalm. 2.2. with Act. 4.26. And in 2.
Esdras 7.28.29. both names are read.

Q. How is Christ the Sovereign King of his Church?

A. The Angel Gabriel said, Luke 1.32.33.
He shall be great, and shall be called the Son of the Highest, and the Lord
God shall give unto him the throne of his father David: And he shall reign over
the house of Jacob for ever, and of his kingdom there shall be no end. Within
few days after that he was borne, there came Wise men from the East to
Jerusalem, saying, Where is he that is borne Mat. 2.2.
King of the Jews? Christ afterward said, Mat. 28.18.
That all power was given unto him, both in heaven and in earth. Isaiah said,
Isa. 16.5.
In mercy shall the throne be established, and he shall sit upon it in truth,
in the Tabernacle of David, judging and seeking judgment, and hasting
righteousness. Romans 14.17.
His Kingdom of grace, is (as Saint Paul says) righteousness, peace, and joy
in the holy Ghost; of the which Kingdom Christ has said, Luke 17.21.
Behold it is within you.

Q. How is he the Sovereign Prophet of his Church?

A. Saint Peter relates that Moses said of Christ, Act. 3.22.23.24.25.26.
A Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you, of your brethren like unto
me, him shall ye hear in all things whatsoever he shall say unto you. And it
shall come to pass, that every soul which will not hear that Prophet, shall
be destroyed from among the people. Christ said of himself when he first began
to preach, Luke 4.18. Isa. 61.1.2.3.
The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to preach
the Gospel to the poor, etc. And to preach the acceptable year of the Lord.
Concerning Christ's Prophesying, doctrine, and discipline, the voice from heaven
said: Mat. 17.5.
Hear ye him. And Christ has said concerning his true Ministers in all ages
to the world end: Luke 10.16.
He that hears you, hears me: and he that despises you, despises me: and
he that despises me, despises him that sent me. And Saint Paul said, 2. Cor.
13.3. 1. Pet. 1.11.
That Christ spoke in him.

Q. How is CHRIST the Sovereign Priest of his Church?

A. Saint Paul says: Heb. 3.1.
Consider the Apostle, and high Priest of our profession, CHRIST JESUS, Heb.
6.20.
made an high Priest for ever, after the order of Melchisedech, Heb. 7.24.
having an unchangeable Priesthood; Heb. 10.12.13.
who after he had offered one sacrifice for sins for ever sate-downe on the
right hand of GOD, from henceforth expecting till his enemies be made his
footstool. Wherefore he is able also to save them to the uttermost, that
come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to make Heb. 7.25.
intercession for them. Heb. 2.18.
And in that he himself has suffered being tempted, he is able to succor
them that are tempted. Heb. 4.14.15.16.
Seeing then (says Saint Paul) that we have a great high Priest that is
passed into the heavens, JESUS the Son of GOD, let us hold fast our profession.
Let us come boldly to the throne of Grace, that we may obtain mercy, and
find grace to help in time of need. For he being made perfect, is become the
author of eternal salvation unto all that Heb. 5.9. see 2. These. 1.8. 1. Pet.
4.17. Ioh. 15.14. Mat. 7.21.
obey him.

Q. What do CHRIST'S members (his obedient people) receive from him their head,
being Sovereign King, Prophet and Priest?

A. The Scripture says: Joh. 1.16.
Of his fullness have we all received, and grace for grace. Unto Ephesians. 4.7.
every one of us is given grace, according to the measure of the gift of
CHRIST. 1. Pet. 2.9.
We are a chosen generation, a Royal Priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar
people, that we should show forth the praises of him, who has called us out
of darkness into his marveilous light. So the Page 173. Tome 2. Joh. 1.12.
Homily of the Nativity says: Christ made all them, that would receive him
truly, and believe his word, to be children of light, heirs of his Kingdom,
members of his body, etc.

Q. Why is JESUS CHRIST said to be God the Fathers only Son?

A. Because he only is begotten of God the Father from all eternity, he alone
is naturally the Son of God. Saint John says: Joh. 1.14.18.
The Word was made Flesh, and dwelt among us, and we beheld his glory, the
glory as of the only begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth.

Q. Why is JESUS CHRIST said to be our LORD?

A. The Rogation Homily says: Page 229. Ioh. 5.22.
To this our Savior and Mediator has God the Father given the power of
heaven and earth, and the whole jurisdiction and authority, etc. Again the
Church says: In her shorter Catechism, on this Article.
Hereby are the godly put in mind, that they are not at their own liberty,
but that both in their bodies and souls, and in their life and death, they are
wholly subject to their Lord, to whom they ought to be obedient and serviceable
in all things, as most faithful servants. Saint Paul says: 1. Cor. 6.20.
Glorify God in your bodies and in your spirit, which are Gods. In Malachi
Christ says: Mal. 1.6.
A son honors his father, and a servant his master. If then I be a
father, where is mine our honor? and if I be a master, where is my fear (or
the reverence of me?) Christ says: The Father has committed all judgment to
the Son, that all men should honor the Son, Ioh. 5.23.
even as they honor the Father. And he says: Luke 6.46.
Why call ye me, Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say? Mat. 7.21.
Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of
heaven, but he that does the will of my father which is in heaven. It is
observable, that in most places of the New Testament, where Christ is
mentioned, there is added the word Lord, and our Lord. The people of GOD are
called So in the words before the prayer for the Church Militant, and elsewhere.
Christ Church, the Congregation of Christ, because he only is called in the
holy Scriptures the Head of the Church. Saint Paul therefore for to have all
things done 1 Cor. 14.40
decently and in order, did from the holy Ghost prescribe that (whereas Christ
is in the Mat. 18.20.
midst of two or three gathered together in his name) the gracious presence of
Christ should be Exodus 3.5. Jos. 5.15. Lev. 19.30. Psalm. 89.7.
testified by some sign of outward reverence thereunto. Says he; I would have
you to 1. Cor. 11.3.4.5.7. See Castellioes Annotation on the said place. See
chap. 68. all of it.
know (or by an outward sign to express forth) that the head of every man is
Christ, and the head of the woman is the man. Every man therefore praying or
prophesying, having his head covered, dishonoreth his head. But every woman
prayingor prophesying with her head uncovered, dishonors her head. For a man
indeed ought not to cover his head, forasmuch as he is the image and glory of
God: but the woman is the glory of the man. It may be demanded, How does every
woman pray and prophecy in the assembly? They are required to keep 1. Cor.
14.34.
silence in the Churches. The holy Ghost then in the said Chapter to the
Corinthians speaks of such a prophesying and praying of every woman, as of
See what Mr Samuel Hieron has delivered concerning the reverence to be used in
the hearing of Gods word preached, as it is rehearsed in this work where the
duty unto God, the honoring of his word is expounded.
every man in the same assembly: for it is there delivered within one period
concerning the headhabit of both sexes in each of the worships of GOD, when we
speak unto God, or when God speaks unto us. And the praying and prophesying
which is to be performed by the whole congregation of men and women is only by
consent unto the Priests performing of both Services. And because consent to
the doing of any matter is accounted as the acting of it, therefore in like
manner of speaking it is said in the book of Kings, 1. Kings 8.62.
That King Solomon and all Israel with him offered sacrifice before the Lord,
when as the act of offering was performed by the Luke 1.10. Lev. 16.17. Heb.
5.1.3. Iunius on the Syriacke of 1. Cor. 11.4. says, That the private ones in
the Church are said there to prophecy, in that they with mind do follow him
that speaks. So that most great German Clerk Matthias Marti^us in his
dictionary unto the word Propheto adds, that to Prophecy signifies
sometimes only to hear a Prophet; as in 1. Cor. 11.1.
Priests. Wherefore also if the Priests now in their performing prayer and
prophesying (or preaching) may not have on their heads their common upper
covering, because it is requisite they should show reverence unto the presence
of JESUS CHRIST their Lord, ought not also the whole congregation of men, the
learners, be habited so on their heads, as that there may be from them some
sign of reverence unto Jesus Christ's presence, as well as the women are to
have on their heads in the Church some sign of their subjection unto the man?
And therefore the holy Apostolical Church of England knowing that Christ is in
every assembly of the Saints, and that he looks for bodily worship from all
people of both sexes, she tendering the glory of her head Christ, that during
all the time whiles his gracious presence is among his people, it may be by
some outward Worship the Lord in the beauty of holiness. Ps. 29.2. Holiness
becomes thine house. Ps. 93.2.
sign from the head of every man acknowledged, she has prescribed, (to the
end that no man under any pretense may neglect his due Ps. 89.7. See the
seventh articl. concerning the Clergy delivered in the late Metropolitall
visitation. Psalm. 2.11. according to the divine Service translation. Mal. 1.6.
Psalm. 89.7. Heb. 12.28. Psalm. 111.9. Lev. 26.2.
reverence owed unto his head Christ Jesus, but in every part of his public
worship may express before Christ a testification of his special presence,
and that he is his head,) Holy Church zealous of Christ's honor and glory, has
in her found Constitution ordained, That in the time of every part of Divine
service all due reverence is to be used. And she thus most divinely
delivers for the sake of Christ her Lord: No man shall In the eighteenth
Canon.
cover his head in the Church or Chapel in the time of Divine service, except
he have some infirmity. In which case let him wear a nightcap or coife. The
Church there also requires Psalm. 95.6.
kneeling before the Lord Jesus by whom Col. 1.16.
all were made, when as prayers are read. Also to 1. King. 8.14.22.55. Genesis
18.22. and 19.27. So to stand up at the hearing of the Gospel for the day
read. See Judges 3.20. 1. Sam. 9.27. Isa. 32.9. Neh. 8.5. Numb. 23.18.
stand up at the saying of our belief in Christ, unto the honoring of his
presence. And says the Church likewise: When in time of Divine Service the
Lord Jesus shall be mentioned, due and lowly Phil. 2.10. Romans 14.11. Rev. 5.12.
See c. 68. and page 199
reverence shall be done by all persons present, as it has bin But now many
men and women have that most holy custom even in open defiance, so as it is
not meet for to mention.
accustomed: testifying by these outward ceremonies and gestures, their inward
humility, Christian resolution, and due acknowledgement, that the Lord Jesus
Christ the true and eternal Son of God, is the only Savior of the world,
in whom alone all the mercies, graces and promises of GOD to mankind for this
life and the life to come are fully and wholly comprised. By which said care
that all due reverence may be performed unto the Lord Jesus in every part of
the Divine Service or public worship, the holy Church shows her loyalty
unto her husband her Lord and maker. And in the Homily concerning the right use
of the Church the due reverence unto Christ in every part of his public
worship is most fervently, many a time urged. For the Church his Spouse
observed how many peoples love unto the honoring of the Bridegrom was waxen
cold, as Christ himself foretold, that in the latter times it would come to
pass, and that iniquity toward him, as well as toward man would among sundry
abound, unto the Mal. 3.9.
robbing of him, in withholding from him the Mat. 23.21.
due reverence, which his Gospel and his It is much memorable, what our late
most gracious Sovereign, out of his highness great zeal for Christ's due
eeverence in the public worship wrote in his sacred meditation on the Lords
pray, That we are to prepare our reverence in the highest degree for to speak
unto God; and not like some, to task homely with God, as our fellow; which
some therefore love to sit Iackefellowlike with Christ at the Lords table, as
his brethren and camerades. In page 22.
holy Church has prescribed.

Q. Rehearse somewhat more out of the Divine Service for our better
understanding of Christ's Godhead, or his nature from all eternity.

A. In the Athanasian Creed it is said. The Godhead of the Father and of the
Son is all one, the glory equal the Majesty coeternall. Such as the Father
is, such is the Son: He is uncreate, incomprehensible, eternal, Almighty,
God and Lord.

Q. What is it to believe in Jesus Christ? or when may one of the years of
discretion be said to have the true faith in the Son of God?

A. Whereas the Church in all her most sacred Homily of Faith does declare,
that in whomsoever of perfect natural age the true, lively, and Christian
Faith is, there is in his soul not death but life stirring inwardly in the
heart, and showing it self forth more and more by all good works, having
withal increase of Romans 5.1.
peace with GOD, and of Acts 9.31.
comfort in the holy Ghost; therefore when one from Christ's spirit and word
begins to receive gladness (or good Luke 4.18.
tidings,) to have the breaches in his heart more and more healed, the bruises
in his spirit or conscience bound up, and feels more and more liberty from
his inward captivity under sin and Satan, and has the eves of his
understanding in somewise opened for to Luke 3.6. and 2.30.
see the salvation of the Lord, he has then the 1. Joh. 5.10.
witness within himself, that he is endued with the Faith in JESUS CHRIST.

Q. What is the third Article?

A. Which was conceived by the holy Ghost, borne of the Virgin Mary.

Q. Rehearse out of the Athanasian Creed that which may give light for our
better understanding of the Incarnation of our Lord Jesus Christ.

A. Our Lord JESUS CHRIST is God of the substance of the Father, begotten
before the worlds: and Man of the substance of his mother borne in the world.
Perfect God and perfect Man; of a reasonable soul, and humane flesh
subsisting. Ioh. 10.30.
Equal to the Father as touching his Godhead, and Ioh. 14.28.
inferior to the Father touching his Manhood. Who although he be God and man;
yet is he not two, but one Christ. One, not by conversion of the Godhead into
flesh; but by taking of the Manhood into GOD. One altogether, not by confusion
of substance; but by unity of person. For as the reasonable soul and flesh is
one man: So God and man is one Christ.

Q. Recite the Scripture expressing the holy Incarnation.

A. The Angel said unto the Virgin Mary: Luke 1.31.33.
Behold thou shall conceive in thy womb, and bring forth a Son, and shall call
his name JESUS. The holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the
Highest shall overshadow thee: Therefore also that holy thing which shall be
borne of thee, shall be called the Son of GOD. Isaiah said: Isa. 7.14.
The Lord himself shall give you a sign; behold a Virgin shall conceive and
bear a son, and shall call his name IMMANUEL, which is by interpretation,
GOD with us.

Q. Mention some saying of the Divine Service hereunto.

A. In the Homily of repentance it is said: Page 259.
JESUS CHRIST, who being true and natural God, equal and of one substance
with the Father, did at the time appointed, take upon him our frail nature, in
the blessed Virgins womb, and that of her undefiled substance, that so he
might be a Mediator between God and us, and pacify his wrath.

Q. Why is the Virgin Mary by name expressed?

A. In the shorter Catechism.
That Christ may be known to be that true Heb. 2.16.
seed of Abraham and Mitt. 1.1.
David, of whom it was from GOD foretold and foreshewed by the Prophesies of
the Prophets: Of the which Abraham and David the Virgin Luke 1.27. and
2.4.32.69.
Mary lineally descended.

Q. In what honor does the Scripture deliver, that we are to account the
Virgin Mary?

A. We are to say of her, that she was Luke 1.28. The Church reads it in the
Gospel for the day of her Annunciation, Hail full of grace.
highly favored, that the Lord was with her, that she was the most blessed of
women, and that blessed is the fruit of her womb, and that all generations are
to call her blessed.

Q. What further honor of her memorial does the Church now retain?

A. It See chap. 43.
requires that the day of her Annunciation, and the day of her Purification
be kept holy.

Q. What signifies the name Mary?

A. Saint See Martinius his Latin dictionary on the name Maria.
Jerome says, that it signifies in the Syrian tongue, A Lady or Mistress. It
is observed to signify according to its letters importance in the Hebrew, one
teaching, etc.

Q. What does the Church teach us to mind concerning our selves in her prayer
for Christmas day?

A. For to pray, That we being Ioh. 1.13. with 1. Ioh. 4.7.8.
born again, and made GODS children by adoption and grace, may daily be
renewed by his holy spirit, through JESUS CHRIST our Lord. Saint Paul therefore
says, Gal. 4.19.
My little children, of whom I travail in birth again, until Christ be
formed in you. Whereby it is signified, that we are to labor for to have more
and more such a mind and conversation as was in CHRIST. Whose virtuous
conversation and godly life (says an The information of certain places of
Scripture page 144. tome 2.
homily) the Scripture so lively painteth and sets forth before our eyes,
that we beholding that pattern, might shape and frame our lives, as nigh as
may be, agreeable to the perfection of the same.

Q. What is the fourth article?

A. Suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead, and buried, he
descended into hell.

Q. What was Pontius Pilate?

A. He was at that time Luke 3.1.
chief Judge in Jerusalem under the Emperor of Rome.

Q. Why is the Roman governor, under whom Christ suffered, expressly named?

A. In the larger Catechism.
First, the certain expressing of the persons and times brings credit to the
matter. Secondly, the very thing it self declares that Christ took our
nature upon him at his due time, the very time limited and appointed by God,
that is, when the Genesis 49.10.
scepter was transferred from the issue of Juda, to the Romans, and to
foreign Kings, that held the kingdom of sufferance under the Roman Empire.
Moreover, it had been long before foreshewed by God, that Christ should be
delivered to the Gentiles, Dan. 9.46. Luke 2.1. and 18.31.32.33.
to execution, and should suffer death by the Judges sentence.

Q. What did Christ suffer under Pontius Pilate?

A. He being falsely and maliciously In the shorter Catechism. See Mat. 26.
and 27. Mar. 14. and 15. John 18. and 19. Chapters.
accused by the Jews, suffered under him a condemnation unto death. He was
buffeted, scourged, crowned with thorns, and clothed in purple; and otherwise
abused, both most cruelly and spightfully: and finally, with his cross laid on
his neck, he was haled out of the City, into the place named Calvarie, where
between two thieves, they villanously nailed him upon the cross: upon the
which being extremely tormented, he suffered most painful and shameful
death, sustaining withal torments of mind more cruel than any bodily death.

Q. Recite out of the Service some expressing of Christ's suffering.

A. In the homily of the Passion it is said, The second part, page 184.
Call to mind, O sinful creature, and set before thine eyes Christ crucified.
Think thou see his body stretched out in length upon the cross, his head
crowned with sharp thorns, and his hands and his feet pierced with nails, his
heart opened with a long spear, his flesh rent and torn with whippes, his
brows sweating water and blood. Think thou hear him now crying in an
intolerable agony to his Father, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?

Q. Was not GOD a mover of the Jews for to use his Son thus, seeing he by
his Prophets foretold, that Christ should suffer such things?

A. Though God foretold by David, that one of Christ's own company would betray
him; yet he moved not Judas Iscariot thereunto; it was the Devil being Ioh.
13.27.
entered into him, which evil spirit Ephesians. 2.2.
ruling in the other children of disobedience moved them unto such wickedness
as they committed.

Q. How is that saying to be understood, Act. 2.23.
Him being delivered by the determinate counsel and This Scripture is wrested
by some for to teach adoctrine contrary to the express delivery of all holy
Scripture, and of the divine Service.
foreknowledge of God, ye have taken, and by wicked hands have crucified and
slain?

A. The words only declare, that Gods determinate counsel and foreknowledge
was, that CHRIST should in his manhood be left in the hands of the disobedient
Jews; for he was to be a sacrifice for the sins of the 1. Joh. 2.2.
whole world. But yet those persons which did crucify him, did it with wicked
hands and hearts, as Peter in the same Act. 2.23.
verse signifies. God also left the bodies of many of his Prophets and
Apostles in the hands of wicked ones: Yea, and says Saint Paul, Unto you it is
given in the behalf of Christ, not only to believe in him, but also to Phil.
1.29.
suffer for his sake: and yet those which tortured them, are said to have done
Mat. 23.33.34.35.
wickedly therein, and the casting of them into prison is said to be the work
of the Rev. 2.10.
Devil. Wherefore though Christ was not delivered into his enemies hands
without his Fathers determinate counsel, foreknowledge, and sufferance; yet
the delivering of him by Judas Iscariot into the Jews hands, was very great
sin. And this does Christ himself testify, when as Pilate said unto him,
Know thou not, that I have power to crucify thee, and I have power to
release thee? Jesus answered and said, Thou could have no power at all
against me, except it were given thee from above: therefore he that Ioh.
19.11.
delivered me unto thee, has the greater sin.

Q. How is that other like place to be understood, Act. 4.27.28.
Of a truth against the holy child JESUS, whom thou have anointed, both Herod
and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles, and the people of Israel were gathered
together, for to do what soever thy hand and thy counsel determined before to
be done?

A. God had foretold by his Prophets, that such and such things would befall
his Son JESUS, and that he should Luke 24.26.
undergo them all. Also when the time of his suffering came, God so ruled the
rage of his enemies, that they acted on Christ not whatsoever their malicious
minds could have desired, but what he had determined before, to suffer that he
should endure. The Jews before sought to Luke 4.29.30.
mischief him, but it was not suffered them. Also when Christ hung on the
cross, the soldiers brake the thieves legs, but not a bone of Jesus: and
Saint John says, it was so, that the Scripture should be fulfilled, saying,
Ioh. 19.33.36
A bone of him shall not be broken. And CHRIST'S body (being by his enemies
accounted to have been Mat. 27.64.65.66.
kept fast) was not so long in the power of the watch, as they intended to have
kept it. Of all the evils therefore, which were then wrought upon and against
JESUS, there proceeded not any one of them from GOD (though he The Greek word
(...) in Acts 4.28. translated determined has in it naturally the importance
of limiting. See Scapula, etc.
limited them as they were in the committing) but they proceeded only from the
devil, as CHRIST himself expressly witnessed, saying, Luke 22.53.
When I was daily with you in the Temple, ye stretched forth no hands against
me: but this is your hour and the power of darkness.

Q. Explane the word Crucified.

A. Christ was fastened to a cross, they nailed him through hands and feet
unto it, and hanged him upon the same between two thieves, until hewas dead.

Q. Where was CHRIST buried?

A. Saint Luke says, Luke 23.50.^1.52.53.
There was a man named Joseph, a Counselor, and he was a good man, and a
just. The same had not consented to the counsel and deed of them; he was of
Arimathen a City of the Jews, who also himself waited for the kingdom of
GOD. This man went unto Pilate and begged the body of Jesus. And he took it
down, and wrapped in linen, and laid it in a sepulcher, that was hewn in
stone, wherein never man before was laid.

Q. Why is it added, That he was buried?

A. In the shorter Catechism.
His dead body was laid in grave, that his Mat. 12.40. and 27.60. 1 Cor. 15.4.
death should be more evident, and that all men might certainly know it. For
if he by and by had revived, many would have brought his death in debate and
question, and made it doubtful.

Q. Before we pass to the last part of this article, rehearse some Scripture
testifying of Christ's sufferings in his soul.

A. Isalah says, Isa. 53.12.
He poured out his soul unto death, his Verse 10.
soul was made an offering for sin, the LORD has Verse 6.
laid on him the iniquity of us all. The Evangelists write that he said, Mat.
26.38.
My soul is exceeding sorrowful even unto death: that being in an Luke 22 44.
agony, he prayed most earnestly, and his sweat was as it were great drops of
blood, falling down to the ground. And being on the cross, not long before he
gave up the ghost, he Mat. 27.46.
cried with a loud voice, saying, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?

Q. Recite now some delivery concerning Christ's sufferings, as it is in the
Church writings.

A. In her larger Catechism it is said, CHRIST suffered not only a common
death in sight of men, but also was touched with the For the more perfect
understanding of the word Hell, it may be noted, that sometimes it signifies a
certain dark and woeful spiritual estate of the soul, in the body in this
present life, out of which by Christ, Gods people do become delivered, like as
by Christ they are preserved from the hell of the damned: and the said hell in
this world is as it were a certain likeness in some manner and measure of the
unexprestable doleful hell in the world to come. The Church says in the
homily of the Nativity and of the passion, that Adam in stead of the citizen of
heaven was become the bondslave of hell and a firebrand of hell. In the Homily
for the resurrection and page 192. it is said, Christ passed through death and
hell, to the intent to put us in good hope, that by his strength we shall do
the same. In the larger Catechism on the tenth article it is said, Faith
lifts up the mind from hell it self unto life. Whereas in Rev. 1.18. it is
said, that Christ has the keys of hell and death, Is it not meant of his
letting of peoples minds forth of the first death of sinfulnes, and so out of
the spiritual or first hell of ignorance, horror, and unrest fulness in the
conscience? Consider also the signification of the word hell in Prove. 9.18.
horror of eternal death: he fought and wrastled as it were hand to hand with
the whole army of hell: before the Judgment seat of GOD he put himself under
the heavy judgment and grievous severity of Gods punishment: he was driven
into most hard distress: he for us suffered and went through horrible fears,
and most bitter griefs of mind, to satisfy GODS just judgment in all things,
and to appease his wrath. For to sinners, whose person CHRIST did here bear,
not only the sorrows and pains of present death are due, but also of death
to come and everlasting. So when he did take upon him and bear both the
guiltiness and just Judgment of Mankind, which was undone and already
condemned, he was tormented with so great trouble and sorrow of mind, that he
cried out, My God, My God, why have thou forsaken me? He suffered all these
things without any sin, much less did any desperation possess his soul.
For he never ceased in the mean time to trust in his Father, and to have good
hope of his safety. And being beset round about with fear, he was never
dismayed or overwhelmed with sorrow. And wrestling with the whole power of
hell, he subdued and Rev. 3.21.
overcame all the force that stood against him, and all the furious and violent
assaults.

Q. Now rehearse how the Church has delivered her understanding of CHRIST'S
descent into hell.

A. It is said in her larger Catechism: That as Christ in his body descended
into the bowels of the earth, so in his soul severed from his body he
descended into The Church signifies, that the hell wherein the departed damned
souls are, is under the earth, in her largest catechism on the article of
Christ's ascensio^, saying. That at the name of Jesus every knce should bow
both of things in heaven, earth, and hell. See Phil. 2.10.
hell: and that therewith also the virtue and efficacy of his death, so
pierced through to the 1 Pet. 3.19.
dead, and to very hell it self, that both the souls of the unbeleeving felt
their most painful and just damnation for Ioh. 8.24.
infidelity, and Satan himself the 1. Cor. 15.55. Heb. 2.14.15.
prince of hell, felt that all the power of his tyranny and darkness was
weakened, vanquished, and fallen to ruin. On the other side, the Romans 14.9.
Col. 1.20.
dead which while they lived, believed in CHRIST, understood that the work of
their Redemption was now finished, and understood and perceived the effect and
strength thereof with most sweet and assured comfort. It is said in the Creed
in meeter set after the singing Psalms: His soul did after this descend, into
the lower parts; a dread unto the wicked spirits; but joy to faithful hearts.

Q. Show some Scriptures declaring that Christ's soul was in hell.

A. David speaking of Christ's soul, says: Psalm. 16.10.
Thou will not leave my soul in hell. And Saint Act. 2.27.31.
Peter twice mentions it in his Sermon. Yea the word death in that 24.
verse, where our translation is Having loosed the pains of death, is in some
Greek copies (...) of hell. In the vulgar Latin Bible it is also Inferni of
hell: so in the Syriacke edition it is (...) of hell, which is said to be
written by S. So Alstedius relates in his Encyclopaedia, printed anno 1630.
and page 167.
Mark. In the ancient Arabic translation it is (...) of hell. Again the
Prophet David says: Psalm. 86.13.
Thou have delivered my soul from the lowest (or neithermost) hell. And the
most ancient Father In his 5. book against heresies and the thirty first chap.
Irenaus understands, that David there also meant CHRIST'S soul. It is the
express affirmation of other ancient Fathers, that CHRIST in his soul
descended into hell, as of Tertullian, Hierome, etc. And Saint In his ninety
ninth epistle unto Evodius.
Augustine says: Who unless an infidel (or an unbeleever) will deny that
CHRIST was in Hell?

Q. Having now heard, what Christ for his part has suffered for the salvation
of 1. Ioh. 2.2.
universat mankind, that (as the Divine Service says) he by his own oblation
of himself once offered, has made a full, perfect and sufficient sacrifice,
oblation, and satisfaction for the sins of the whole world; let us now consider
what we for our parts are by Christ in his holy Gospel required to do, under
pain of The Athanas. Creed in the Divine Service so speaks, signifying that
salvation is upon condition, and not to any one of ripe age absolutely
orunconditionably.
perishing everlastingly.

A. Whereas we are taught to pray: In the collect for Innoc. day.
Mortify and kill all vices in us, that in our conversation, our life may
express thy faith, which with our tongues we do confess; It is given unto
us for to understand; that the Christian faith does not consist in a bare
believing of the story of Christ's actions and sufferings, but it has
accompanying it an unfeined striving to imitate Christ in such manner as his
Gospel has prescribed. Most divinely therefore the holy Apostolical Church
of England in a certain Homily signifies, That for every one of us in
particular to receive part of the general pardon, which is to be preached
openly in Christ's name to all the nations of the world, there is required
condition to be observed by us. The Church says: Under this condition does God
forgive us, if we forgive other. In the Homily for good Friday, the first part,
page 179. See chap. 26.
And God is also to be obeyed, which commands us to forgive, if we will have
any part of the pardon, which our Savior Christ purchased once of God the
Father, by shedding of his precious Blood. Furthermore Saint Paul says to the
Romans, That Romans 1.5. and 16.26.
obedience is to be unto the faith. And Saint Luke declares many Priests of
the Jews to become converted, when they became Acts 6.7.
obedient to the Faith.

Q. Seeing then that Christ is the propitiation for the sins of the whole
world, what is our duty to This doctrine of holy Church that by Christ's death
is purchased a general pardon, is of great consolation and for daily
meditation.
believe herewithall?

A. The Church says, both in her larger and shorter Catechism: Christ's
suffering and death is not only a medicine of our miseries, but also an This
point of Divinity the spirits of disobedience will not take notice of, though
the Apostolical Church of England does declare it to be necessarily learned,
as now along following it is manifested.
example for us to follow: We ought after this example to be obedient unto the
will of God our heavenly Father, and patiently to take all injuries at man's
hands, and to crucify the wicked lusts of the flesh, and to be as dead and
buried unto sin. And if we be once dead and buried to sin, how shall we
hereafter live in the same? In the book of common prayer, and of Homilies the
doctrine of our imitating Christ's sufferings is often mentioned, and urged as a
matter necessary for our learning and observation. Saint Paul says: Romans 8.17.
If we be children then are we heirs, heirs of God, and joint heirs with
Christ; if so be that we suffer with him, that we may be also glorified
together. He says unto Timothy; 2. Tim. 2.11.12.
It is a faithful saying: For if we be dead with him, we shall also live
with him. If we suffer we shall also reign with him. And therefore he said
concerning himself: Phil. 3.10.
That he labored to know Christ, and the power of his Resurrection, and the
fellowship of his sufferings, being made conformable unto his death. Saint
Peter says: 1. Pet. 2.21.
Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an example to follow his steps. And
again he says: 1. Pet. 4.1.
Forasmuch as Christ has suffered for us in the flesh, arm your selves
likewise with the same mind: for he that has suffered in the flesh, has
ceased from sin: that he no longer should live the rest of his time in the
flesh to the lusts of men, but to the will of God.

Q. Express the required imitation in some more particular manner, How are we
to imitate Christ's crucifying?

A. Saint Paul says: Gal. 5.24.
They that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh with the affections and
lusts. He said of himself: and 2.20.
I am crucified with Christ. Nevertheless, I live; yet not I, but Christ
lives in me; and the life which I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith
of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me. We are taught to
pray, In the Baptism Service.
That we may crucify the old man.

Q. How are we to imitate Christ's death?

A. The Church declares where she says: In the end of the said service.
We are always to remember that Baptism does represent unto us our
profession, which is, to follow the example of our Savior Christ, and to be
made like unto him, that as he died, and rose again for us, so should we that
are baptized, die from sin, and rise again unto righteousness, continually
mortifying all our evil and corrupt affections, and daily proceeding in all
virtue and godliness of living.

Q. How are we to imitate Christ's burial?

A. It is signified, where we are taught to pray: In the Baptism Service.
That the baptized party being dead unto sin, and living unto righteousness,
and being buried with Christ in his death, may crucisie the old man, and utter
abolish the whole body of sin. The Homily of Resurrection says: Page 194.
Polanus in his Syntagma lib. 6. cap. 37. says Spirituali mortificatiori
conjuncta est spiritualis sepultura, quae est continuus mortificationis
progressus.
Saint Paul exhorts us saying: As we be buried with Christ by our Baptism
into death, so let us daily die to sin, mortifying and killing the evil
desires and motions thereof.

Q. Is Christ's descent into hell to be imitated of us in any manner?

A. Saint Paul signifies, Ephesians. 6.12. See hereunto what before is observed and
set in the marge^t unto the answer next before the exposition on Christ's
descent into hell.
That we are not one^ly to wrestle against flesh and blood, but against
principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this
world, against spiritual wickedness in high (or So terdeth the margent,
heavenly) places: and therefore to take unto us the whole armor of God, that
we may be able to withstand in the evil day: and having done (or So in the
margent.
overcome) all, to stand, yea to stand so armed, as he to the Ephesians has
prescribed. And whereas the Church does teach us to pray for every party to be
baptized, In the Baptism Service.
Grant that he may have power and strength to have victory, and to triumph
against the devil, the world, and the flesh, we are thereby informed, that by
the help of Christ there may be attained at length in this life some measure
of ability so to triumph. Saint Paul told to the Romans, Romans 16.20. So in the
most sacred Letany it is said, And finally to beat down Satan under our feet.
See 1. Ioh. 5.18.
That the God of peace would shortly bruise Satan under their feet. And that in
our descending (or entering) into such a warfare against all invisible
spiritual enemies, by the help of Gods holy spirit we may at length have
some conquest, the Church in a certain Homily declares, saying: In the end of
the first part of the Homily against the fear of death, page 62. the 1. tome.
If we have Christ, then have we with him, and by him, all good things
whatsoever we can in our hearts wish or desire, as A very memorable sentence
is, 1. Cor. 15.57.58.
victory over death, sin, and hell: We have the favor of God, peace with
him, holiness, wisdom, justice, power, life and redemption; we have by him
perpetual health, wealth, joy, and bliss everlasting. See Master Hierons,
second Tome, and page 31. and in his Help unto devotion, the prayer to be
said at the point of death.

Q. What is the fifth Article?

A. The third day he rose again from the dead.

Q. How on the third day?

A. As on good Friday he suffered death, So on Easterday he rose again.

Q. By what power came this his Resurrection to pass?

A. By the power of the Eternal Spirit, as it is written: Romans 8.11. and 1.4.
1. Pet. 3.18.
If the spirit of him that raised up JESUS from the dead, dwell in you; he that
raised up Christ from the dead, shall also quicken your mortal bodies, by his
spirit that dwells in you.

Q. Why did CHRIST then rise again?

A. It is written, Romans 4.25.
That he was delivered for our offenses, and raised for our justification.
Saint Peter says: 1. Pet. 1.3.
God has begotten us to a lively hope, by the Resurrection of CHRIST once from
the dead, to enjoy an inheritance immortal, etc. Also he rose again, that the
1. Cor. 15.4. Ps. 16.10.
prophesies might be fulfilled, which told before, that neither his body should
be touched with corruption, nor his soul be left in hell.

Q. Rehearse some saying of the Church concerning the use; which we are to
make concerning Christ's Resurrection.

A. It is said in a certain Homily: In the end of the Homily of the Resurrect.
If we apply our faith to the virtue thereof in our life, and conform us to
the example and signification meant thereby, we shall be sure to rise
hereafter unto everlasting glory. S. Paul says: Romans 6.4.5.
We are buried with him by baptism into death, that like as CHRIST was raised
up from the dead by the glory of the Father; even so we also should walk in
newness of life. For if we have bin planted together in the likeness of his
death: we shall be also in the likeness of his Resurrection. And to the
Colossians he says: Col. 3.1.2.
If ye be risen with Christ, seek those things which are above, where Christ
sits on the right hand of God: set your affections on things above, not on
things upon the earth. Wherefore the Church says in her larger Catechism: If
we be risen again with Christ, if by assured faith and steadfast hope we be
conversant with him in heaven, then ought we from henceforth to bend all our
cares and thoughts upon heavenly, divine, and eternal things, not earthly,
worldly, and transitory. And as we have heretofore borne the image of the
earthly man, we ought from henceforth to put on the 1. Cor. 15.49.
image of the This and all other the Church-her high divine deliveries we
should learn and always remember.
heavenly man, quietly and patiently bearing, after his example, all sorrows
and wrongs, and following and expressing his other divine virtues so far as
mortal men be able.

Q. How long did Christ remain upon the earth after that he rose again?

A. It is said, In the Homily of the Resur, page 190.
That it pleased our Savior not straightway to withdraw himself from the
bodily presence and sight of his disciples, but he chose out forty days,
wherein he would declare unto them, by manifold and most strong arguments and
tokens, that he had conquered death, and that he was also truly risen again
to life.

Q. What is the sixth Article?

A. He ascended into heaven, and sits at the right hand of God the Father
Almighty.

Q. On what day did Christ ascend into heaven?

A. On the Acts 1.3.
fortith day after his Resurrection, the which is called Ascension day, or
commonly Holy Thursday.

Q. In what manner did he ascend?

A. Act. 1.9.10.11.
He was taken up, and a cloud received him out of his Apostles sight, Angels
being present with their service unto him.

Q. Why did he ascend into heaven?

A. It is said: In the Homily of the Resur,
That he ascended up to his father into the heavens, there to receive the Ioh.
17.5. 1. Pet. 3.22.
glory of his most triumphant conquest and victory: also to So in the preface
to be read on Ascension day. Ioh. 14.3.
prepare a place for us, that where he is, thither might we also ascend, and
reign with him in glory: Ephesians. 4.10.
also that he might fill (or fulfill) all things.

Q. What use are we to make of his ascending?

A. The use is signified unto us in the collect for Ascension day, and also in
the Collect for the Sunday after, where we are taught to pray: Grant that we
may in heart and mind ascend into heaven, and with him continually dwell:
therefore also to pray; O God, leave uc net comfortless, but send to us thy
holy Ghost to comfort us, and to exalt us unto the same place. Saint Paul being
on earth said, Phil. 3.20.
that his conversation was in heaven: So we are to lift up our hearts unto the
Lord, that we may receive of his spiritual gifts, which he being ascended now
on high, does Ephesians. 4.8.
give unto men.

Q What is meant by the words, He sits at the right hand of God the Father
Almighty? May we suppose and imagine that God has the shape or form of a man?

A. In the larger Catechism.
No. But because we speak of God among men, we do in some sort after the
manner of men, express thereby how CHRIST has received the Kingdom given him
of his Father. For 1. King. 2.19. Ps. 110.1. Matt. 20.21.
Kings use to set them on their right hands to whom they vouchsafe to do
highest honor, and make Lieutenants of their dominion. Therefore in the words
is meant, that God the Father made Ephesians. 1.20.21.22 23. and 5.23.
CHRIST his Son the head of the Church, and that by him his pleasure is to
preserve them that be his, and to govern all things Col. 1.17.
universally. He has exalted him to the highest height, and given him a
name, that is above all names, that at the Name of JESUS every Phil. 2.9.10.
knee should bow, both of things in heaven, earth and So speaks the Church in
the end of the answer next before. Sundry of the ancient fathers have
delivered, that hell is under the earth.
hell. p So in the margent.


Q. What is the seventh article?

A. From thence shall he come to judge the quick and the dead.

Q. From whence is it meant that CHRIST shall so come?

A. From out of heaven, from the right hand of God the Father Almighty. The
Scripture says, 1. These. 4.16.17.
The Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the
Archangel, and with the trump of GOD; and the dead in Christ shall rise first.
Then we which are alive and remain, shall be caught up together with them in
the clouds, to meet the LORD in the air, and so shall we ever be with the
LORD. The Church says, In the Rogation Homily, page 229. 2. Cor. 5.10.11. Act.
10.42. See Chap. 31.
By CHRIST has Almighty GOD decreed to dissolve the world, to call all before
him, to judge both the living and the dead; and finally by him shall he
condemn the wicked to eternal fire in hell, and give the good eternal life,
and set them assuredly in presence with him in heaven for evermore.

Q. Is there any other judging of mankind by CHRIST JESUS?

A. Yea, he judges every soul so soon as it is gone out of the body, as he
himself concerning Luke 16.22.23.25.
Dives and Lazarus declares. The divine Service says, In the Visitation
Service.
That after this life, there is an account to be given unto the righteous
Judge, of whom all must be judged without respect of persons. Saint Paul says,
Heb. 9.27.
After death is a judgment. And whereas the holy Scripture and the divine
Service do many times declare, that CHRIST will pronounce judgment upon every
one of mankind, without See the Scriptures quoted in the margent of Wisd. 6 7.
respect of persons according to their See the Scriptures quoted unto Ps. 62.12.
works done here in their bodies, does not the doctrine of Absolute
Reprobation, viz. That GOD has from all eternity, irrevocably, irresistibly,
and unchangeably decreed and ordained some to be damned everlastingly, to whom
(as they say) he offers not his grace as he does unto others, but does
withhold from such his Spirits calling on them; does not the said doctrine
directly cross Christ's righteous and See the end of the Athanasian Creed, and
Chap. 31.
unpartiall judgeing of all mankind? How can he equally and in an even manner
judge every soul according to his Romans 2.6.7.8 9.10.11.
deeds; if he has not Ps. 33.13.14.15. Wisd. 6 7.
fashioned every heart alike, and created all with a Rev. 3.20. Heb. 3.6.7.8.15
Prove. 1.23 24. etc.
power to hear the voice of his preventing grace when it calls, and to Ps.
24.6.7. Rev. 3.20. Sir. 15.14.15.16.17. Jer. 21.8. 2. Cor. 6.1. Jude 4. See the
translation thereof in the Epistle for Simon and Iudes day.
open the door of their hearts, when he by his spirit knocks thereon? The
whole Ezech. 18.23.25.29.30.26.27.
eighteenth Chapter of Ezechiel is by the wisdom of GOD of purpose made for
to root out such an opinion out of the mind of Mankind, which was in hatching
in those times. And so the whole Homily of falling from God is by the divine
wisdom of the Church made for to keep forth of our minds such an opinion of
Jesus Christ the righteous Judge eternal. What can be possibly said more
plainly, than does the Lord there by Ezechiel? O house of Israel, are not my
ways equal? I judge you every one according to his ways. See Ezech. 18. the
whole. It is not possible to utter unto the full, into what a slumber, sleep,
yea death in sinfulness the said doctrine of So the most greatly learned
Doctor in our Church, Master Thomas Jackson in his 18. Chap. of the first part
of Gods essence and attributes delivers. Read most dil^gently from Cap. 14.
to that Books end. The ^a^ty may there understand much.
Absolute Reprobation has brought the world, wheresoever it has been
received for a truth. But wheresoever the Catholic doctrine in that point is
believed, as it is delivered in the book of common prayer, there people
fearing Christ's dreadful and unpartiall judgment do betake themselves not to
receive GODS grace in vain, but as the Gospel commands, for to work out
their own salvation with fear and trembling by a true and lively faith in
Christ Jesus.

Q. Does Christ in no manner judge people in this life?

A. Many Scriptures do express that he judges in some manner both bodies
and souls now in this world. David says, Ps. 62.12.
Thou rendrest to every man according to his works. Saint Peter says, 1. Pet.
1.17.
If ye call on a Father, who without respect of persons judges every one
according to his works, pass the time of your sojourning here in fear. David
says, Psalm. 82.1.
GOD stands in the congregation of the mighty, he judges among the Gods. He
says concerning the disobedient Jews, God gave them their request, but Psalm.
106.15.
sent leanness into their soul. Does not Saint John foretell CHRIST'S Rev.
19.2.
judging the great whore, in this life? Are not Judgments See all Deuteronomy. 28.
Lev. 26. Joh. 5.22.23. Mat. 28.18.
temporal on body and soul in this life denounced to come down upon people
of disobedience, in all places of the holy Bible? Had not 1 Samuel 28.6.15.16.
Saul, Mat. 27.4.5.
Judas, and the like, whiles they here lived, some Isa. 66.24. The Hebrew word
there rendered have transgressed, is transgressing, and it imports wilfully,
see Heb. 10.26. See Cap. 97. and page 380. See in Riders Dictionary on
Conscientia.
taste of their eternal judgment? Does not Gods spirit bear Romans 8.16.15
witness with obedient spirits, whereby they can call, Abba, Father? And does
not the holy Spirit still show it self grieved, when as contrary to the light
of it in the conscience, some will sin by false swearing and the like horrible
abominations, in that it smites the spirit of man and woman, Prove. 18.14.
wounds the conscience, sends Act 2.37. See Chap. 1. of Divinity. and To.
2.15.16.
pricks into the heart, and remorses into the mind? David says, Psalm. 7.11.
God judges the righteous, and God is angry with the wicked every day. Psalm.
19.6.
The Lord is known by the judgment which he executes: the wicked is snared
in the work of his own hands. A meditation always (as some do interpret.)
Higgaion. A meditation always (as some do interpret.)
Selah.

Q. What is the eighth article?

A. I believe in the holy Ghost.

Q. What is the holy Ghost?

A. The Church thus declares, In the homily for whitsunday page 207. 208.
The holy Ghost is a spiritual and divine substance, the third person in the
Deity, distinct from the Father and the Son, and yet proceeding from them both.
As for his proper nature and substance, it is altogether one with God the
Father, and God the Son, that is to say, spiritual, eternal, uncreated,
incomprehensible, almighty; to be short, he is even God and Lord everlasting.
In the sacred Called Veni Creator. See chap. 5.
song to be sung at Ordering of Priests, it is said,

Thou art the very comforter
in all woe and distress,
The heavenly gift of God most high,
which no tongue can express.
The fountain and the lively spring,
of joy celestial,
The fire so bright, the love so clear,
and unction spiritual.
In the Nicene Creed he is also called the LORD and giver of life, who with the
Father and the Son together is worshipped and glorified, who spoke by the
Prophets. Most memorably hereunto is it said in the Rogation Homily, Page 230.
Let us with so good heart pray, as the wise man did, and we shall not fail
but to have the assistance of the holy Ghost. For Sap. 6.12. etc.
he is soon seen of them that love him, he will be found of them that seek
him: for very liberal and gentle is the spirit of wisdom. In his power we
shall have All these operations of the holy Ghost, which are here by the divine
wisdom of the Church reckoned up, are greatly memorable.
sufficient ability to know our duty to GOD, in him we shall be comforted and
couraged to walk in our duty, in him we shall be meet vessels to receive the
grace of Almighty GOD: for it is he that purges and purifieth the mind by
his secret working. And he only is present every where by his invisible power,
and contains all things in his dominion. He lightneth the heart to conceive
worthy thoughts of Almighty GOD, he sits in the tongue of man for to stir
him to speak unto his honor; no language is hid from him, for he has the
knowledge of all speech, he only ministers spiritual strength to the powers
of our soul and body. A great part of the Homily for Whitsunday opens the
mystery of the holy Ghost. And because it is the eighth article of the
Christian faith to believe in the holy Ghost, so great a matter in the
Christian Religion, therefore in the godly prayer for This divine prayer is set
among the godly prayers after the reading Psalms of the common prayer bound
unto the smaller Bibles.
Sunday we are taught to say, O Almighty and merciful Lord, which give unto
thy elect people the holy Ghost as a sure 2 Cor. 1.22. Ephesians. 1.13.14.
pledge of thy heavenly Kingdom: grant unto us, Lord, thy holy Spirit, that he
may bear witness with our spirit, that we be thy children, and heirs of thy
Kingdom; and that by the operation of this spirit, we may kill all carnal
lusts, unlawful pleasures, concupiscences, and evil affections contrary unto
thy will, by our Savior and Lord Jesus Christ.

Q. What is it to believe in the holy Ghost?

A. Not only to believe that there is an holy Ghost ( Act. 19.2.
which thing also Many in these days will take no notice of what the church
says, when a Bishop is consecrated, and a Priest is Ordered, the which is
expressed in the divine Service then to be read.
some consider not on) but also to expect the coming of it into our hearts,
from the Fathers sending in CHRIST'S name. And therefore it is to be The Church
therefore has 2 divine songs unto the singing Psalms, wherein prayer is for
the receiving the holy Ghost. Ioh. 14.26. and 15.26. and 16.13.
prayed for, yea and to be prayed unto, and to be worshipped as God eternal,
coequall with the Father and the Son, and faith, and hope, and So says the
Church in both her Catechismes on this article, and delivers sundry more
considerations about the working of the holy Ghost in us.
confidence is also to be had in him the Lord Almighty.

Q. What is the ninth article?

A. The holy Catholic Church, the communion of Saints.

Q. How is the visible Church of CHRIST described?

A. So says the Churches article thereof.
It is said to be a congregation of faithful men, in the which the pure word of
God is preached, and the Sacraments be duly ministered, according to Christ's
ordinance, in all those things that of necessity are requisite to the same.

Q. Why is the Church called holy?

A. It is said, In each catechism. 1. Pet. 1.15.16.
That by this mark it may be discerned from the wicked company of the ungodly.

Q. What is the meaning of Church Catholic?

A. It is said in the larger Catechism thus, It is as much as if I called it
universal: for this company or assembly of the godly is not pent up in any
certain place or time, but it contains and compriseth the universal number
of the faithful, that have lived and shall live in all places and ages since
the beginning of the world, that there may be Ephesians. 4.4.5.6.
one body of the Church, as there is one CHRIST, the only head of the body. For
whereas the Jews claimed and challenged to themselves the Church of God as
peculiar and by lineall right due to their nation, and said that it was theirs,
and held it to be only theirs: the Christian faith professes that a great
number and infinite multitude of godly persons, gathered together out of all
countries of the world, out of all parts of all nations every where, and all
ages of all times, by the strength and power of his holy word and voice, and by
the divine motion of his heavenly Spirit, is by God incorporated into this
Church as into his own city, which all agreeing together in one true faith,
one mind and voice, may be in all things obedient to Christ their only King, as
members to their Ephesians. 4.15.16.
head.

Q. What means the Communion of Saints?

A. It is said also in the larger Catechism, Whereas God has as well in all
coasts and countries, as in all times and ages, them that worship him purely
and sincerely, all they, though they be severed and sundred by diverse and far
distant times and places, in what nation soever, or in what land soever they
be, are yet members most nearly Psalm. 122.3. Col. 2.19.
conjoined and knit together of one and of the self same body whereof CHRIST
is the head. Such is the 2. Cor. 13.14. and 1. Joh. 1.3.
communion that the godly have with God and among themselves. For they are most
nearly knit together in community of spirit, of faith, of sacraments, of
prayers, of forgiveness of sins, of eternal foelicity, and finally, of all
the benefits that God gives to his Church through CHRIST. Yea they are so
joined together with most strait bonds of concord and love, they have so all
one mind, that the 1. Cor. 12.26.
profit of any one and of them all is all one, and to this endeavor they do
most Phil. 2.4.20.21. Romans 12.5.
bond themselves, how they may with interchange of beneficial doings with
counsel and help, further each other, in all things, and specially to
attaining of that blessed and eternal life. But because this communion of
Saints cannot be perceived by our senses, nor by any natural kind of knowledge
or force of understanding, as other civil communities and fellowships of men
may be, therefore it is here rightly placed among these things that lie in
belief.

Q. Has not the Church here on earth any manner of Communion with the Saints
in heaven?

A. Yea, they have such as is testified in the holy Scriptures. The Divine
Service in the Collect for the day of Saint Michael and all Angels, signifies,
Ps. 34.7. and 91.11.12. Dan. 12.1. Ephesians. 3.10.
That they which always do God service in heaven, do by his appointment
succor and defend us here on earth. Also the Church in her proper preface to
be read on all the high Feast days of the year, having mentioned the great
mercies of God toward all mankind through JESUS CHRIST, concludes, saying:
Heb. 12.22.23.24.
Therefore with Angels and Archangells, and with all the company of heaven, we
laud and magnify thy glorious name, etc.

Q. What is the tenth Article?

A. The Forgiveness of sins.

Q. Why is there by and by after the Church made mention of the forgiveness of
sin?

A. In the larger Catechism it is said: First, because the Mat. 16.19. and
18.18.19. Luke 24.47. Ioh. 20.23.
keys, wherewith heaven is to be shut and opened, that is, that power of
binding and loosing, of reserving and forgiving sins, which stands in the
ministry of the word of God, is by Christ given and committed to the The
Atheists and libertines of these days have this sacred doctrine in great
derision. See chap. 63. of the Christian Divinity.
Church, and properly belongs unto the Church. Secondly, because no man
obteineth forgiveness of sins, that is not a true Ioh. 15.4.6. Ephesians. 5.23.
Matt. 24.13.
member of the body of CHRIST, that is, such a one as does not earnestly,
godlily, holily, yea and continuingly, and to the end, embrace and maintain
the common fellowship of the Church.

Q. Is there then no hope of salvation out of the Church?

A. The said Catechism says: Out of it can be nothing but damnation, death
and destruction. For what hope of life can remain to the members, when they
are pulled asunder and cut off from the head and body? They therefore that
seditiously stir up discord in the Church of GOD, and make division and Romans
2.^. and 16.17. Gal. 5.20.21. Tit. 3.10.11. See the 1. part of the Homily
against contention. See chap. 91.
strife in it, and trouble it with sects, have all hope of safety by
forgiveness of sins cut off from them, till they be reconciled and return
to agreement and favor with the Church.

Q. What is meant by the word forgiveness?

A. It also says: That the faithful do obtain at Gods hand discharge of
their fault, and pardon of their offense: For GOD for Ps. 32.1.2. Act.
13.38.39. Ephesians. 1.7. Col. 4.32. 1. Ioh. 2.12.
CHRIST'S sake freely forgiveth them their sins, and rescueth and delivers
them from judgment and damnation, and from punishments just and due for their
ill doing.

Q. Is there nothing at all to be done on our behalf, that we may obtain
forgiveness of sins?

A. The Church says: Although among men, the fault once granted, it is hard
to obtain forgiveness of him that ought to be the punisher of offenses, yet
even they that are strangers to our religion, have not bin ignorant, that
confession is a certain remedy to him that has done amiss. The Lord
promises that he will pardon sinners if they Ier. 18.8. Acts 3.19.20. Isa.
55.7.
repent, if they amend and turn their hearts from their naughty lives unto him.

Q. Though to treat of repentance be proper, where it is mentioned in the most
sacred Catechism, yet because here it has bin spoken of, and it is the
condition which we are required to keep and perform, if we should have of God
through CHRIST pardon for our sins, it is profitable now to have it explaned.
Recite therefore, what says the Church of it unto this Article?

A. It says, That it has two chief parts, The mortifying of the old man or
the flesh: and the quickening of the new man or the spirit. The mortifying of
the old man is unfeined and sincere acknowledging and Ps. 51.3.4.17. Prove.
28.13. 2 Cor. 7.10.11. 1. Ioh. 1.9.
confession of sin, and therewith a shame and sorrow of mind, with the feeling
whereof the person is sore grieved, for that he has swarved from righteousness,
and not bin obedient to the will of GOD. For every man ought, in Ezec. 36.31.
Luke 15.18. and 23.41.
remembering the sins of his life passed, wholly to mislike himself, to be angry
with himself, and to be a severe judge of his own faults, and to give sentence
and pronounce 1. Cor. 11.31.
judgment of himself, to the intent he abide not the grievous judgment of
God in his wrath. This sorrow some have called contrition, whereunto are joined
in neerenesse and nature an earnest hatred of sin, and a love and desire of
righteousness lost.

Q. But the conscience of heinous offenses, and the force of repentance may be
so great, that the mind of man of each side compassed with fear may be
possessed with despair of salvation.

A. The answer of the Church is: That is Genesis 4.13. Matt. 27.3.4.
true, unless God do bring 2. Cor. 2.7.
comfort to the greatness of sorrow. But to the godly there remains yet one
other part of repentance, which is called Ephesians. 4.23.24.
renewing of the spirit, or quickening of the new man, That is, Gal. 3.23.25.
When faith comes and Luke 4.18. Act. 2.41.46. and 16.34.
refreshes and lifts up the mind, so troubled, asswageth sorrow, and
comfort the person, and does revoke and raise him up again from
desperation, to hope of obteining pardon of God through CHRIST, and from the
Ps. 116.3.4.6.7.8.10.
gate of death, yea from hell it self unto life. And this it that we profess,
that we believe the forgiveness of sins?

Q. What is the eleventh Article?

A. The Resurrection of the body.

Q. When shall that be?

A. In the Athanasian Creed it is said: That at Matt. 25.31.32.33.46. Romans
14.10.12.11. Ioh. 5.28.29.
CHRITS coming all men shall rise again with their bodies, and shall give
account for their own works. And they that have done good, shall go into
life everlasting: and they that have done evil into everlasting fire.

Q. In what sort shall the body of every Saint be raised up?

A. It is signified in the Scripture set in the Burial Service, saying: Phil.
3.21.
Our LORD JESUS CHRIST shall change our vile body, that it may be like unto his
glorious body, according to the mighty working, whereby he is able to subdue
all things unto himself.

Q. What use may we make from believing the general Resurrection in the last
day?

A. That we may be partakers of the So speaks the Church in her prayer
appointed to be said before an Homily or sermon, in Canon 55.
glorious Resurrection in the life everlasting, it is necessary that we now
have part in the first Resurrection, because it is written: Rev. 20.6. Ephesians.
5.14.
Blessed and holy is he, that has part in the first resurrection, on such the
second death has no power.

Q. What is the first Resurrection?

A. The Church does signify unto us, what it is in the Service of burial,
where it teaches us to pray: We meekely beseech thee, O Father, to raise us
from the death of Romans 6.5.17.18.
sin unto the life of righteousness.

Q. What is the twelft article?

A. That life everlasting.

Q. Rehearse some of the Divine Service saying, Where it is signified, what
that life is?

A. In the Service for the Burial of the dead, it is declared to be, An ever
living 1. These. 4.17.
with the Lord, and in whom to be in Wisd. 3.1.3.
rest, joy, and felicity; to have perfect consummation and bliss, both in
Phil. 3.21.
body and soul, in Gods eternal and everlasting Ps. 73.24.
glory.

Q. Recite how the Church has showed, that the condition of all souls
departed in the true faith of Christ now is.

A. In the Homily against the fear of death it says, In the end of the third
part, and page 68.
That blessed and comfortable is the state of the heavenly life to come, and
sweet is the condition of them that depart in the LORD, how they are delivered
from the continual encumbrances of their mortal and sinful body, from all
the malice, Crafts, and deceits of this world, from all the assaults of their
ghostly enemy the devil, to live in peace, rest, and endless quietness; to
live in the fellowship of innumerable Angels, and with the congregation of
perfect just m^n, as Patriarchs, Prophets, Martyrs and Confessors, and finally
unto the presence of Almighty God, and our Savior JESUS CHRIST.

Q. What use are we in make from belief of this Article concerning the life of
the world to come?

A. In the prayer for It is among the godly prai^s at the end of the divine
service.
Saturday we are taught to desire of God to grant unto us sure hone of the
life everlasting, that we being in this miserable world, may have some taste
and feeling of it in our hearts. In a prayer of the matrimony service, we are
instructed to beseech GOD for to sow the seed of eternal life now in our
minds. The Church in an The Homily of the Resurrection, p. 195.
Homily says: Apply your selves to live in CHRIST, that CHRIST may still live
in you, whose favor and assistance if ye have, then have you everlasting life
already within you. And Saint Paul to the Hebrews plainly shows, that now a
Heb. 6.5.
taste of the powers of the world to come may be enjoyed. Wherefore it we would
have the fullness of life everlasting in the world to come, we are to begin now
with that which the Scripture calls that life. Ioh. 12.50.
CHRIST faith, That his Fathers commandment is life everlasting: and therefore
his requiry is; if thou will enter into Mat. 19.17.
life, keep the Commandments. And the Church delivers hereon, That the
works of the In the beginning of the second part of the Homily of good works,
pages 32.33. So in the end of the third part of that Homily and page 39.
moral commandments of God be the very true works of faith, which lead unto
the blessed life to come.

Q. Why does the Creed make mention only of life everlasting, and of hell no
mention at all?

A. In the larger Catechism it is said: This is a confession of the Christian
faith, which pertains to none but to the godly, and therefore rehearses
only those things that are fit for comfort, namely the most large gifts which
God will give to them that be his. And therefore here is not recited what
punishments are provided for them that be out of the Kingdom of God.

Q. Why is the word Amen added to the Creed?

A. It is observed to be added as a seal of the belief: For although the Creed
be not a prayer; yet this particle is justly added thereto, as a seal of the
faith, whereof a sum is in the Creed.

Q. Why does the Church immediately after the Creed make this question, What
do thou chiefly learn in these articles of thy belief?

A. Because it is her holy mind, that every one should have some Act. 8.30.
Neh. 8.8. 1. Cor. 14.20.
understanding of what they have learned by heart. And therefore immediately
after the ten Commandments, and the Lords prayer, the like question is made.

Q. What is the sum of the Catechismes answer thereunto?

A. That we are to have a right belief in each person of the Trinity. And the
Church says in the The 1. part, pages 208.209.
homily for Whitsunday, As there are three several and sundry persons in the
Deity, so have they three several and sundry offices proper unto each of them:
the Father to create, the Son to redeem, the holy Ghost to sanctify and
regenerate.

Q. Seeing on the first article of the Creed it has been spoken concerning GOD
the Fathers creation of all things, there needs here no question thereon.
Show now how Christ has redeemed all Mankind.

A. Saint Paul says, 1. Tim. 26. 2. Cor. 5.15. Heb. 2.9. See Chap. 25.
That he gave himself a ransom for all; he died for universal Mankind.
Even so expressly speaks the Church in the homily for the passion: CHRIST
suffered death Page 181.
universally for all men. Again, In the first part of the homily of the
Sacrament. p. 200.
The death of CHRIST is availeable for the redemption of all the world. To the
Romans it is said, Romans 5.18.
As by the offense of one, judgment came upon all men to condemnation: Even so
by the righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all men unto
justification of life. In the second Antheme to be read on Easter day, it is
said, As by Adam all men do die: So by CHRIST 1. Cor. 15.22.
all men shall be restored unto life. Further says the Church, In the second
part of the passion Homily. page 185.
GOD gave CHRIST to the whole world, that is to say, unto Adam, and to all that
should come after him. The Scripture says, (...) Cor. 5.19.
God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their
trespasses unto them. Now he commands Act. 17.30.
all men every where to repent. Verse. 31.
He has offered faith unto all men. The grace of GOD that brings salvation
has appeared unto all men. And CHRIST gave himself for us, that he might
Tit. 2.14.
redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar people,
zealous of good works: That we being by him Luke 1.74.75.
delivered out of the hands of our enemies might serve God without fear, all
the days of our life in holiness and righteousness before him. And whereas
here against it is said by some, That Christ dyed not for universal Mankind
efficiently or effectually, namely for such as perish; they consider not, what
the Scripture signifies CHRIST to have done, that he did it not in fantasy;
but in reality, in very deed. Saint Peter in 2. Ep. 2.1. foretells, That
there would be those which will bring in damnable heresies, even denying the
Lord that If Christ bought them, his death was efficient or effectual for the^,
until they abused his grace. See Jude 4. according to the translation in the
epistle for Simon and Judes day.
bought them, and bring upon themselves swift damnation. And Saint Paul
signifies more, where he says, Of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye,
shall he be thought worthy, who has trodden under foot the Son of God, and
has counted the blood of the covenant, wherewith he was If he was sanctified
with the blood of the covenant, the^ was Christ's death efficient unto him,
until he had thus sinned against it. Heb. 10.26.
sanctified, and unholy thing, and has done despire unto the Spirit of Grace?
Heb. 10.20. Also in 1 Ioh. 2.2. it is not said, that CHRIST is the propitiation
for the sins of the world, but for the sins of the whole world; for to
include uniuersall mankind therein, and not to exclude so much as any one of
the whole posterity of Adam, that ever was, or that now is, or that shall be at
any time hereafter.

Q. What is the holy Ghosts sanctifying of people?

A. It is showed in the In the first part, page 209.
Homily for Whitsunday, where it is said, It is the holy Ghost, and no other
thing, that does quicken the minds of men, stirring up good and godly motions
in their hearts, which are agreeable to the will and commandment of GOD, such
as otherwise of their own crooked and perverse nature they should Ephesians. 2.^.5.
never have. As for the works of the spirit, the fruits of faith, charitable
and godly motions, if he have any at all in him, they proceed only of the holy
Ghost, who is the only worker of our sanctification, and makes us 2. Cor.
5.17.
new men in Jesus Christ. Such is the power of the holy Ghost to regenerate men
and as it were to bring them forth anew, so that they shall be Jer. 50.5. Ioh.
3.3.6.
nothing like the men that they were before. Neither does he think it
sufficient inwardly to work the spiritual and new birth of man, unless he do
also dwell and abide 1. Cor. 3.16.17. and 6.19.
in him.

Q. What is meant by people elect?

A. All such whom GOD does choose out of mankind for himself, to be 2. Cor.
6.16.17.
temples for his holy dwelling and walking in them, and to be partakers of all
his promises, and to set forth his 1. Pet. 2.9.10.
praise, honor, and glory.

Q. Who among Infants are the elect?

A. Every one that is baptized dying in his infancy, or whiles he or she is in
infancy. So the Church signifies, where it teaches us to pray, saying, In the
divine service of haptisme.
Grant that they may ever remain in the number of thy faithful and elect
children. For whereas we are to beseech for their ever remaining among the
number of the faithful and elect children, it necessarily implies, that they
being baptized are of the number of GODS elect. For every Infant baptized is So
it is signified in the Homily of salvation, the third part, page 19.
justified, is made a member of Christ, a child of God, and an inheritour of
the kingdom of heaven, and is endued with the sundry blessings mentioned in
the divine service of baptism. The In page 13.
Homily of salvation says, Infants baptized and dying in their infancy, are
by the blood of Christ washed from their sins, and brought to Gods favor. In
the Communion book it is said, In the end of the order of confirmation, the
very words next before the Catechism^
That children being baptized have all things necessary for their salvation,
and are undoubtedly saved. The Lord JESUS says, Mar. 10.14.15.16.
Unto such belongs the Kingdom of God: and therefore he wills that little
children be brought unto him for to receive his blessing.

Q. Who among those of perfect age are GODS elect?

A. The Church declares in the Page 173.
homily of the Nativity, saying, After Christ was once come down from heaven,
and had taken our frail nature upon him, he made all them that would Joh. 1.12.
receive him truly, and believe his word, good trees, etc. also the elect and
chosen people of God. Christ says, Rev. 3.20.
Behold, I stand at the door and knock: if any man hear my voice, and open
the door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he with me.
Again he says, Joh. 14.21.23.
He that has my commandments, and keeps them, he it is that loves me: and
he that loves me, shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and will
manifest my self unto him: I and my Father will come unto him, and make our
abode with him. Saint Paul hereunto says, 1. Cor. 8.3.
If any man love God, the same is By this place we may understand, who are the
fore known of God. See. Romans 8.28.29.
known of God. Is not such a coming of Christ's spirit into one an electing of
him to be his temple, from among the many people of the world, which Zech.
7.11.12.13. c Act. 28.27.
stop the ears of their fowls, shut the doors of their consciences, and
harden their hearts, for to keep out Christ's word and spirit from ruling
within them? in the two last staves sawing (...) one of the song A thanksgiving
after the communion, the Church declares in most plain manner who are Gods
chosen or elect people; yea t a lively declaration thereof for ever very
memorable. It is in the margent unto the lost words of the Catechismes answer.


Q. Whereas the Church in that prayer of Baptism beseeches, That every
baptized party may temaine in the number of Gods elect: Are we not given to
understand, that it is possible for such to become to be out of that number, if
they, when they come to perfect natural age, do not duly take heed lest they
fall?

A. The In page 218.
Homily for Rogation says, It profited not the Jews, which were God, See
concerning election, from what kind thereof some have fallen, and from what
kind thereof none are read to have fallen, in the treatise there of by that
godly and greatly learned man Castellio, in his works called Opuscula, printed
anno 1613.
elect people, to hear much of God, seeing that he was not received in their
hearts by faith, nor thanked for his benefits bestowed upon them: their
unthankfulness was the cause of their destruction. In the Homily of See page
55. in the second part thereof.
falling from God, it is likewise taught, saying, By these threatenings we are
monished and warned, that if we which are the chosen Isa. 5.5.6.7.
vineyard of God, bring not forth good grapes, that is to say, good works that
may be delectable and pleasant in his sight, when he looks for them; but
rather bring forth wild grapes, that is to say, sour works, unsavowry and
unfruitful; then he will pluck away all defense, etc. and suffer us to perish.

Q. Seeing then that some have perished, which have been pronounced to have
been in the number of Gods elect, what counsel does the holy Ghost give unto
us for to prevent such falling?

A. Saint Peter says, 2. Pet. 1.10.
If ye do these things, ye shall never fall. Namely, if the In verses
5.6.7.8.11.
eight matters of Christianity reckoned up by him be in us, and do abound
within us continually. In like manner holy Church having in the latter part of
her Commination-exhortation reckoned up the weighty duties enjoined unto us by
Christ's Gospel, says in most divine and ever memorable manner, This if we
do, Christ will deliver us from the curse of the law, and from the extreme
malediction, which shall light upon them, that shall beset on the left hand,
and he will set us on his right hand, and give us the blessed benediction of
his Father. It is greatly observable hereunto, what Peter says unto those, to
whom he wrote his first Epistle, 1. Pet. 2.9.10. So Romans 9.25.26.
That they submitting to obey Christ's Gospel, from being not a people of God,
became came to be his people: and having not obtained mercy before in the time
of their disobedience, when as they turned unto obeying of Christ's
commandments, they obtained mercy. Much considerable hereunto is also that
saying of David unto Solomon, 1. Chro. 28.9.
And thou Solomon my son, know thou the God of thy Fathers, and serve him with
a perfect heart, and with a willing mind; For the Lord searches all hearts,
and understands all the imaginations of the thoughts: if thou seek him, be
will be found of thee: but if thou forsake him, he will The which text may
serve for an example that God is no respecter of persons, as often the Bible
teaches. 2. Tim. 2.12.
cast thee off for ever. Christ said unto his disciples, Joh. 8.31.32.
If ye continue in my word, then are ye my disciples indeed. And ye shall
know the truth, and the truth shall make you free. Again he says, Joh.
15.9.10.6
As the Father has loved me, so have I loved you: continue ye in my love. If
ye keep my commandments, ye shall abide in my love, even as I have kept my
Fathers commandments, and abide in his love. If a man abide not in me, he is
cast forth as a branch, and is withered. He that Mat. 10.22.
endures unto the end, shall be saved.

Q. Does not the Church in her article of Predestination teach a doctrine
contrary hereunto?

A. The holy Apostolical Church of England professes no In the second Homily
for good Friday, or of the passion it is signified, That in Adam all became
reprobates, the Church does not use the word Reprobates, so as do some now
adays, namely for persons absolutely created and from eternity ordained to be
damned. The Church acknowledges not such a creation of any of mankind.
doctrine contrary to Gods word; neither is there any thing in all her 39.
Articles, which is contrary to the doctrine of the book of Common prayer. The
Kings most excellent Majesty in His Highness Declaration has with divine
prudence admonished and required, That none do draw the Article aside any way,
but submit to it in the plain and full meaning thereof: and For such as have
false grounds in their minds, namely opinions and imaginatio^s of truth which
are contrary to the doctrine of the Communion book, do wrest sayings in the
Article, endeavoring to have them for to agree with their corrupt understanding.
put not his own sense or comment to be the meaning of the Article, but take
it in the literal and Grammatical sense: Which whosoever truly does, shall
plainly perceive, that it delivers not a doctrine contrary to the general
doctrine of the book of common prayer, and of the book of Homilies, in that
point. Saint Peter advertiseth, 2. Pet. 3.16.
that Saint Paul has in his Epistles some things hard to be understood, which
they that are unlearned and unstable, As Scripture is wrested by the unlearned
in true godliness, so by such is the Church holy doctrine wrested also.
wrest, as they do also the The word ordained in Act. 13.14. signifies not
destinated, but ordered, as that word in the original is rendered in the
margent of Rom, 13.1. in the last translation.
other Scriptures unto their own destruction. There are hundreds of places in
Gods holy word, most expressly delivering, like as does the Church throughout
all her Divine Service concerning the said point: but there is not so much as
any one sentence in the universal Bible teaching diversely. There are some few
sayings, which seem unto some to teach differently: but every particular of
them, being alleged to confirm that which is contrary to the general
delivery of the Divine Service, is manifestly wrested; and that it is so
concerning them all, it may be abundantly demonstrated. How could the Church
ordain and require for to be said unto every particular member of hers, in the
Communion, The Body of our Lord JESUS CHRIST which was given for thee, preserve
thy body and soul into everlasting life: and take and eat this in remembrance
that CHRIST died for thee, and feed on him in thine heart by faith with
thankesgiving: And likewise, The blood of our Lord JESUS CHRIST which was shed
for thee, preserve thy body and soul into everlasting life: and drink this in
remembrance that CHRIST'S blood was shed for thee, and be thankful? How could
truly the said words be pronounced to every In the Latin Dictionary called
Riders Dictionary, printed anno 1633. the interpretation of the word
Praedestinations, is, A kind of Heretics that held fatal predestination of
every particular matter, person or action, and that all things came to pass,
and fell out necessarily; especially touching the salvation and damnation of
particular men; that Omnia fient fato. Such a predestination the church of
England in no wise professes.
particular professed member of the Church of England in every Parish of the
whole land, if so be that any one of them were absolutely reprobated, that is,
from all eternity unconditionally decreed to be damned in hell fire
everlastingly?

Q. What measure of Sanctification (or holiness) does the holy Ghost work in
the elect people of GOD?

A. The Church says, In the homily of falling from God, the first part, and
page 55.
GOD has showed to all them that truly believe his Gospel, his 2. Cor. 4.6.
face of mercy in JESUS CHRIST, which does so lighten their hearts, that they
(if they behold it as they ought to do) be 2. Cor. 3.18.
transformed to his image, be made partakers of the Heb. 6.4.
heavenly light, and of his holy Spirit, and be fashioned to him in Ephesians. 5.9.
all goodness requifite to the children of God.

Q. Why from the Creed is the next question concerning the Commandments?

A. Whereas the Church in the homily of salvation having alleged sundry
ancient Authors affirming that we are justified by faith only, says, That it
is not so meant of them, that the said justifying faith is Credere in Deum est
amando tendere inipsum: inquit Augustine.
alone in man, In the second part of the Sermon of salvation, page 16. James
2.26.
without true repentance, hope, charity, dread, and fear of God, at any time
and season, therefore that our faith may be true, lively, and Christian, So
speaks the Church in her godly Prayers, the one called A general confession
to be said every morning, and the other called, Aprayer to be said in the
morning.
right and perfect, (as the Church expresses) it is necessary that we with
matters of belief do consider on matters of practice and obedience, because
Saint Paul signifies, that the Gal. 5.6.
availing faith is that which works by love. And Saint James says, Faith
without works is dead.

Q. Why is it said The ten Commandments? does God require at our hands, but
the observing of ten only?

A. It is said in Deuteronomy, Deuteronomy. 4.13.
The Lord declared unto you his covenant, which he commanded you to perform,
even ten Commandments, and he wrote them upon It is observed, that the four
first Commandments were written in the one table, and the six last in the
other.
two tables of stone. The said ten are ten general precepts containing in
them all the moral and everlasting duties expressed throughout the whole
Bible, which we are to perform to God and man, whiles we live in this present
world.

Q. Why is it said, The same which God spoke in the twentieth Chapter of Exodus?

A. For to put difference from the Commandments mentioned in certain other
chapters of Exodus, whose outward or ceremonial observation concerned the
Church of the Jews, and does not so now concern the Catholic Church of
Christians.

Q. Why is it said, GOD spoke those ten Commandments? Did he not in like
manner speak all else which he has given unto us mankind?

A. The words of those ten Commandments See in Buxtorfius his Hebrew Grammar
de anomalia accentuum in Deo^logo. Cap. 5. lib. 1.
God himself uttered unto the people of Israel from out of heaven; but not in
like manner did he deliver his other laws concerning ceremonies and
judgments. From whence we are taught, to have most diligent respect unto every
one of those principal and everlasting precepts.

Q. Why does God begin, saying thus, I am the Lord thy God, which have brought
thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage?

A. The Church says, In her larger Catechism.
God does first speak somewhat of himself, and of his benefit toward the
people of Israel, because he had principally care, that the estimation of the
laws ordained by him, should not be shortly abated by Deuteronomy. 6.6.
contempt. And therefore that they might have the greater authority, he uses
this as it were an entry, I am the Lord thy God. In which words he teaches,
that he is our Deuteronomy. 10.12. Mal. 2.10.
maker, Lord, and Savior, and the author of all good. And so with good right
by his dignity of a lawmakers, he chalengeth to himself the authority of
commanding: and by his goodness he procures favor to his law: and by them both
together he imposes on us a necessity to obey it, unless we will be both Mal.
1.5.6.
rebels against him that is most mighty, and unthankefull toward him that is
most bountiful.

Q. What means the word LORD here used?

A. It is in the Hebrew text Jehovah the only name of God, which signifies
Rev. 1.4.8. See Buxtorfius his Hebrew Lexicon on that most holy name set after
the root (...).
Him that is, and that was, and which is to come; as Saint John speaks. And
Saint Paul says: Romans 11.56.
Of him, and through him, and to him are all things: To whom be glory for ever.
Amen.

Q. Why is it said thy God?

A. The word GOD is observed to import the supreme essence and nature that is.
It in the Hebrew is Elohim, which has in it the signification of Mightiness.
So that Jehovah Elohim interpreted the Lord God, is as much as to say, the
eternal Almighty. And so Saint John says, That they in Heaven utter of him,
saying: Rev. 4.8.
Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come. And
whereas it is said, thy God (or the GOD of thee,) we are hereby put in mind of
the goodness of the Lord toward such as are his obedient people. He is the God
of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and of their So it is said in the prayer of Manasses
set before the first book of the Maccabees. See hereto. Ps. 37.25.
righteous seed. Such are said to have Jehovah for their God, as have made a
covenant with him of believing in him, and of serving him; and with which
people he also is in covenant to be their Savior, so long as they Joh. 8.31.
Heb. 5.9.
continue in all conscionable obedience unto him.

Q. Unto what nation did God speak these ten commandments, in such a manner
as is before mentioned?

A. Unto the people of Israel commonly called the Jews.

Q. When did God bring them out of the Land of Egypt?

A. After that they had lived therein certain Act. 7.6.7.
hundreds of years, He by his mighty hand and out stretched arm brought them
out from thence, as it is also recorded in the book of Exodus.

Q. Where were the children of Israel, when God spoke all these words unto them?

A. They were then in the wilderness of Exodus 19.20
Sinai, wherein God led them along by the hand of Moses and Aaron.

Q. Why is it said, Out of the house of bondage?

A. Because Egypt was a place of bondage to the Israelites, they lived not
there like free people, but in the latter part of their time there they lived
in Exodus 5.7.8. etc.
great slaverie.

Q. Why does the Church make mention of these matters unto us, before the ten
commandments?

A. The Church in her divine wisdom full well knows, that the word of God is
an everlasting word, and not a See Erasmus his Enchiridion mi^^tis Christi^^^,
it is set forth in English, as well as in Latin.
mere story (or Chronicle of matters past;) but that withal it signifies the
everlasting ways of God toward us mankind, and the spiritual condition of
mankind in all generations.

Q. Rehearse some saying of the Church for to illustrate this matter.

A. It is said most memorably in the larger Catechism: GOD rescued the
Israelites by his servant Moses from bodily bondage, but he has delivered all
them that be his, by his Son JESUS CHRIST from the spiritual Romans 6.18.
thraldom of sin, and the Heb. 2.15. 2. Tim. 2.26. Ioh. 8.36. Col. 1.13.
Act. 10.38.
tyranny of the devil, wherein else they had lien pressed and oppressed. This
kind of deliverance pertains indifferently to Romans 3.22.
all men, which put their trust in God their deliverer, and do to their power
Ioh. 8.51.
obey his laws. Which if they do not, he does by this rehearsal of his most
great benefit pronounce, that they shall be guilty of most great Ier. 2.6.
unthankfulness. For let every man imagine the Luke 13.16.
devil that hellish Pharao ready to oppress him, and how sin is that foul
Ps. 40.2. Isa. 59.3. 2. Pet. 2.22.
mire, wherein he most filthily walloweth: let him set before the eyes of his
mind hell the most wretched Egyptian bondage, and then shall he easily
perceive, that this freedom whereof I speak, is the thing that he ought
principally to Mat. 16.26. Acts 26.18.
desire, as the thing of most great importance to him, whereof yet he shall be
most unworthy, unless he honor the Isa. 17.9.10. Ioh. 14.15. 1. Cor. 6.19.20
author of his deliverance with all service and obedience. In like manner says
the In the 2. part, page 82.
Church in her Homily against adultery: CHRIST that innocent Lamb of God, has
bought us from the servitude of the devil, not with corruptible gold and
silver, but with his most precious and dear heart blood. To what intent? That
we should fall again into our old uncleanness and abominable living? Nay
verily: but that we should serve him Luke 1.74.75.
all the days of our life, in holiness and righteousness, that we should 1.
Cor. 6.20.
glorify him in our bodies, by purity and cleanness of Ioh. 15.8.
life.

Q. What is the first commandment?

A. Thou shall have none others Gods but me.

Q. What is it to have the Lord for his God?

A. To have for his hearts chiefest delight that which God is. And whereas the
Scripture says that GOD is a Ioh. 4.24. 1. Ioh. 1.5. and 4.8.16. See chap. 3.
Spirit, Light, and Love, ones desire and labor ought to be for to be joined
and become 1. Cor. 6.37. Ioh. 17.22.23.
one with that most blessed spirit, to have his light come more and more into
ones mind and understanding, and his righteous love more and more into ones
will and affections: and also duly to use all means appointed by God to
receive and increase in these things.

Q. Whereas it is said, Thou shall have none other Gods, are there other Gods?

A. Saint Paul says: 1. Cor. 8.5.6.
There be gods many, so called: Yea he called the devil the 2. Cor. 4.4.
god of this world, because worldly people do more his The Church declares
how such do worship the devil. See Homily of Rogation, page 225.
will than the will of the God of heaven. He also says that some have their
Phil. 3.19.
belly for their God, which are lovers of 2. Tim. 3.4.
pleasures more than lovers of God. Such as Romans 6.16.
serve Mammon, that is, which set their affections more on earthly riches, than
on the heavenly treasures, have Mammon for their god, etc. It is here also to
be noted, that the words but me are in the Hebrew, before me or in my sight;
whereby we are to learn, that we cannot once so much as tend to revolting from
God, but that he is a witness of it: for there is nothing so close, nor so
secret, that can be Heb. 4.12.13.
hid from him. Moreover GOD hereby declares, that he requires not only the
honor of Matt. 10.32.33.
open confession, but also inward and sincere godliness of Pro. 23.26. Wisd.
1.6.11.5.
heart, for that he is the understander and judge of secret thoughts. All the
idols therefore, which are set up within the Ezech. 14.4.7
heart of man, (wherein God only and alone would be) against which the holy
Prophet Ezechiel speaks again and again, are by this commandment
forbidden, and Gods true worship in the Ioh. 4.23.24.
Spirit is hereby required.

Q. Why does the Church teach us to say after this commandment and other of
the ten, Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this Law?

A. All we are to pray for Gods mercy toward us, because we have broken every
of the commandments; either in thought, word, or deed. And we are to pray unto
GOD for to incline our hearts to keep every one of his laws in particular,
because Saint James says: Iam 2.10.
Whosoever shall keep the whole law, and yet offend in one point, he is
guilty of all. Also as we are to pray unto God for to work in our hearts,
that they may be ready and So in the 2. Collect at evening prayer.
set to obey all his commandments; so we for our parts are to remember and
observe, what we are to strive unto, Namely to do that, which God commands
by Ezechiel: Ezech. 18.31.32.
Cast away from you all your transgressions, whereby ye have transgressed, and
make you a new heart and a new spirit: for why will ye die, O house of Israel?
For I have no pleasure in the death of him that dies, says the Lord God:
wherefore turn your selves, and live ye.

Q. What is the second commandment?

A. Thou shall not make to thy self any graven image, etc.

Q. Does this commandment condemn the art of painting and graving, so that it
is not lawful to have any image at all?

A. Not so: In the lesser C^^echisme.
for God in this first Table speaks not of any artificial thing, Matt.
22.20.21.
civilly to be used; but only teaches of things which do appertain to the
worshipping of God. The Lord explaneth his own meaning, where he says in
Leviticus; Lev. 26.1.
ye shall make you no idols nor graven image, neither rear you up a standing
image, neither shall ye set up any image of stone in your land; to Ps. 97.7.
bow down unto it: for I am the Lord your God.

Q. May there be made any image for to be said to be a resemblance of God?

A. In the Homily against the In the third part, and p. 40.
peril of Idolatry it is said: How can God, a most pure spirit, whom never man
saw, be expressed by a gross, bodily, and visible similitude? How can the
infinite Majesty and greatness of God, incomprehensible to man's mind, much
more not able to be compassed with the sense, be Isa.
40.12.13.14.15.16.17.18.25, etc.
expressed in a small and little image? Wherefore the LORD said: Take ye
therefore good heed to your selves, (for ye saw Deuteronomy. 4.15.16.17. etc.
no manner of similitude on the day that the Lord spoke unto you in Horeb, out
of the midst of the fire) lest ye corrupt your selves, and make you a graven
image, the similitude of any figure, the likeness of male or female, etc.

Q. Whereas by this commandment there is forbidden all outward worshipping of
whatsoever is not God, and there is a saying, that some make an idol of
CHRIST'S ordinance of preaching, declare in what A Saul's sacrifice or an
im^gined good intent, having with it a great disobedience of Gods
commandments, is by Samuel signified to be idolatry. 1. Sam. 15.22.23. See
chapter 47. and therein also pages 127.128. etc.
sense that is said.

A. They are said to make an idol of preaching, which place even the whole
Christian Religion in hearing of Sermons, and in comparison of preaching forth
of a pulpit they nothing or very little account of the common prayer and the
reading of the Homilies; which also are so wholly taken up with the hearing of
sermons, as that they neglect even all other maine and weighty duties required
by the Gospel of JESUS CHRIST, as to perform more and more the requisite
Described in 2. Cor. 7.10.11.
repentance, and the manifold obedience, which they owe to God and unto his
Church.

Q. Rehearse some Scriptures witnessing plainly, Luke 3.3.4 5. as it is
expressed in the Epistle for S. John Baptists day, also Ezech. 18.21.
that there are great matters to be observed, besides hearing of Sermons.

A. CHRIST says: Ye have omitted the Matt. 23.23.
weightier matters of the Law, judgment, mercy and faith; these ought ye to
have done, and not to leave the other undone. Micah says: GOD has showed
thee, O man, what is good, and what the Lord thy GOD Mic. 6.8.
requires of thee; to do justly, to love mercy, and to So it is in the
margent of the last translation, and in the text of the Geneva.
humble thy self for to walk with thy GOD. Saint James says: I am. 126.27.
Pure religion, and undefiled before God and the Father, is this, to visit the
fatherless and the widows in their affliction, and to keep himself
unspotted from the world. Saint Paul says: 1. Cor. 13.
Though I have the gift of Prophecy, and understand all mysteries, and all
knowledge; and though I have all faith, so that I could remove mountains, and
have not charity, I am nothing. The Lord JESUS says: Ioh. 13.35.
By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye love one another.
Saint John says: 1. Ioh. 3.10.
In this the children of God are manifest, and the children of the devil:
whosoever does not righteousness, is not of GOD, neither he that loves not
his brother. Wherefore he says also: 1. Ioh. 2.29.
If ye know that he is righteous, know ye that every one that does
righteousness, is borne of him. Again he says: Every one that 1. Ioh. 4
7.8.16.
loves, is borne of God, and knows GOD. He that loves not, knows not God;
for God is love. Many (says Matt. 7.22.23.21.
CHRIST) will say unto me in that day, Lord, Lord, have not we prophesied in
thy name? and in thy name have cast out devils? and in thy name done many
wonderful works? And then will I profess unto them, I never knew you: depart
from me, ye that work iniquity. CHRIST also says, and it is greatly to be
marked: Luke 13.26.27.
Then shall ye begin to say: We have eaten and drunk in thy presence, and
thou have taught in our streets. But he shall say, I tell you, I know not
whence you are; depart from me all ye workers of iniquity. Hereunto also may
be considered for For negl^cting the six works of mercy there by Christ
reckoned up. Mat. 25.42.43.44.45.
what CHRIST will arraigne people in the day of judgment, written by Saint
Matthew in his five and twenty Chapter. Most divinely according to CHRIST'S
voice says holy Church in the Rogation Homily. The fourth part, and p. 237.
If now therefore ye will have yours prayers heard before Almighty God, for the
increase of your corn and cattle, and for the defense thereof from
unseasonable mistes and blastes, from hail and other such tempests; love ye
equity and righteousness, ensue mercy and charity, which GOD A divine
sentence, everlastingly memorable. Hereunto may be added the making in ones
self a new heart and a new spirit, and what else is prescribed in Ezech. 18.
most requires at our hands.

Q. Do not they likewise err, which place the perfection or compleatnesse of
a minister, in an ability to preach out of the pulpit twice every Sunday?

A. It has bin before declared, out of a saying of CHRIST that a man may
prophecy in CHRIST'S Name, and in his name cast out devils, and in his name do
many wonderful works; and yet be unapprooved unto CHRIST, if he be a 2. Cor.
11.15
worker of iniquity. The holy Ghost by Saint Paul declares, that there are to
be in a Minister a great many more properties, besides aptness to teach: as to
be 1. Tim. 3.2.3.4.5.6.7.8.9.10.11.12. Tit. 1.6.7.8 9.
vigilant, blameless, sober, of good behavior (or modest) given to
hospitality, patient, one that rules well his own house, just, holy,
temperate, a lover of good men, not self willed, not soon angry, not given to
wine, no striker, no brawler, not given to filthy lucre, (...) one which is not
a lover of money. See 1. Tim. 6.10. There are some people, that w^l say, We a^e
not covetous (no such idolate^s) for we covet no bodies goods or means; and yet
they set their most hearty affections on their Mammo^. Many people that are
full of covetousness, or of the love of this world, will so plead for
themselves.
not covetous, not accused of riot, or unruly, and sundry more properties are
mentioned by Saint Paul in his Epistles to Timothy and Titus, and in many other
Scriptures, which are necessary to be in him, that would be a complete Minister
of JESUS CHRIST.

Q. Do not also they greatly err, which except against the holy Fathers of
the Church, for that they preach not unto some congregation ordinarily on every
Sunday?

A. Such excepters do very greatly err. It may justly be said of them, as
Saint Paul said of many Jews, That they have a Romans 10.2.
zeal of God, but not according to knowledge. To preach unto a congregation on
every Sunday, is the So it is prescribed in the Canon 45.
proper work of Pastors. But the Bishops the Fathers in God having received
the greatest measure of the holy Ghost, are to be employed besides in the
greatest ministerial matters of the Church, as on the Sundays immediately
following the So in Canon 3^^.
Ember weeks, they are to make and ordain Priests and deacons, it takes up a
great part of their time to perform all over their Diocesses, Christ's holy
ordinance of Or Bishoping See Canon 60.
Confirmation. It is their work to 1. Cor. 3.10. Heb. 7.7.
consecrate churches, to 1. Tim. 5.22.
examine Ministers, and to institute them into Tit. 1.5.
Pastorships, to Act. 20.28. 2. Cor. 11.28.
oversee that part of the Church which is committed unto them, to require all
the Ecclesiastical laws of the Kingdom, necessary for the present Romans
12.11. according to the reading in the epistle for the second Sunday after the
Epiphany.
times, to be duly observed, to cause to be kept the 1. Cor. 14.40.
uniformity of Gods public worship, and that doctrine to be taught which is
established by public authority, to take care for the due observation of the
universal Psalm. 119.8. according to the divine service translation See chap 41.
ceremonies of the church, all and every of which do serve, and are very
greatly necessary and profitable for to nurture people in humility of heart, in
outward reverence and christian manners, and they are much useful to the So in
the Chapter, why some ceremonies are retained, set in beginning of the
Communion book.
stirring up of peoples dull minds, unto the remembrance of their duty toward
God, and for to introduct them unto the Continual woeful experience declares,
that the co^^emners of the Church ceremonies have atheism in their minds, and
much barbarousnesse in their manners.
worshipping of God in the spirit. It is a part of the high function of the
Fathers in God to 2. Tim. 1.13. and 2.2. and Tit. 1.9. See cap. 40. and 36.37
direct all pastors and ministers under them, in matter and form of praying
and preaching, and catechizing, etc. according as they in their godly wisdom
from time to time shall see it expedient, under the assent and allowance of the
Kings most excellent Majesty, and according to the laws and customs of the
Land. The Divine Service of consecration signifies, That such as be unquiet,
disobedient, and criminous within their Diocesses, thy are to correct and
punish, according to such authority as they have by Gods word, and as to them
shall be Their great authority they are to use as far as may be, for the
relieving of oppressed ministers etc. Ps. 72.3 4.
committed by the ordinance of this Realm. And as the Sea Vox clamantis, and
therein, pages 15.16.17.18.19.
high Priests ministered to the Kings of Israel, and had to do also in the
administration of the common wealth; so now the Bishops being of like order to
the high Priesthood, are according to their places and callings, in the work of
the Sacred Ministry, for to serve unto the royal Majesty, and to have to do
in the affairs of the Commonwealth, according to the Laws and customs of
the Kingdom. Many more are the employments pertaining to their high Order and
calling, by reason whereof they may but at some certain times preach unto
congregations, when as they shall see occasion thereunto.

Q. Why does GOD mention unto the second Commandment, That he the LORD GOD is
a jealous GOD?

A. The Church says, In her larger Catechism.
There is a most just reason. For since that to us which have Psalm 44.3.4. Isa.
48.9. Romans 5.8.
nothing deserved, only of his own infinite goodness, he has given
himself; by most good right it is, that he will have us to be Mat. 4.10. and
22.37.
wholly, altogether, and entirely his own. For this is that Jer. 2.2. 2. Cor.
11.2. Ephesians 5.24. Isa. 54 5. Hos. 2.16.19.20.
bond as it were of an holy marriage, wherein to God the faithful husband our
souls as chaste spouses are coupled. Whose chastity stands in this, to be
dedicate to God alone, and to cleave wholly unto him; like as on the other side
our souls are said to be defiled with Jer. 2.20. and 3.1. Ezech. 6.9. and
16.15.
adultery, when they swarve from God to idolatry or superstition. And how much
more heartily the husband loves his wife, and the chaster he is himself; so
much is he more grievously displeased with his wife when she breaks her
faith.

Q. Why is it said, And visit the sins of the Fathers upon the children; unto
the third and fourth generation of them that hate me?

A. The answer is, In the larger Catechism.
To the intent for to show more vehemently how he hates idolatry, and with
greater fear to restrain us from offending therein, he threateneth that he
will take vengeance, not only of them that shall so offend, but also of their
children and posterity.

Q. But how does this agree with the righteousness of GOD, that any one should
be punished for Exodus 34.7. Deuteronomy. 7.9.10. Isa. 14.20.21.
Some understand that it is chiefly meant against such as commit spiritual
whoredom,
another offense? The Lord by Ezekiel says, Ezech. 18.4.
The son shall not bear the iniquity of the Father.

A. We are to observe all the sayings of God, and then in the last part thereof
that appears which makes all plain: to wit, them that hate me. Such as
continue in hatred toward God, shall have their forefathers sins visited upon
them; but not such as Ezech. 18.14.15.16.17.21.22.
turn away from their own sins and from their fathers sins, and do that
which is lawful and right. The Lord visited upon the 1. Sam. 15.23
posterity of Amalek the sin which he did unto Israel. He visited upon 2.
King. 10.8.9.10.11.
Ahabs house the great sin of Ahab: and more like examples there are. It is
continually observed, that on a Hos. 2.4.
posterity walking in the ungodly ways of their ancestrie, God commonly
visits the sins of the fathers; so that very seldom do any such outwardly
prosper in this world, apast the third generation. And because so to visit
sins is the righteous judgment of God, therefore David prays, Psalm. 109.13.
Let his posterity be cut off, and in the generation following, let their name
be blotted out, etc. According to which righteousness the Law detaineth from
the children of Traitors the lands which their fathers through treason did
lose.

Q. Are any so wicked as to hate GOD?

A. The holy Scripture speaks of Ps. 81.15. and 139.21. Romans 1.30.
many such. Every one which hates that which God is, is a hater of God. They
therefore which hate heavenly light, do hate God, for God is light. And that
some do hate such light, CHRIST declares where he says, Every one that does
evil, Joh. 3.20.
hates the light. They are properly said to be haters of God, which are in the
highest degree of sinning, which The Church says of such in her homily called
An information, That they do contemn and scorn in all other all godliness,
true religion, all honesty and virtue.
sit in the seat of the scornful. Such were the Pharisees and Lawyers of
Jerusalem toward the Joh. 3.35. Luke 7.30.
light held forth by John the Baptist. Christ says, They rejected the counsel
of God within themselves.

Q. Why is it said, That mercy is showed unto thousands that are lovers of God?

A. To show, that he is much more inclined to mercifulness and to liberality,
than he is to severity; like as also in another place he professes, that he
is very Psalm. 103.8.
slow to wrath, and most ready to forgive. Micah says, Micah 7.18.19.20.
Who is a God like unto thee, that pardons iniquity, and passes by the
trangression of the remnant of his heritage? He retains not his anger for
ever, because he delights in mercy. Thou will perform the truth to Iacoh,
and the mercy to Abraham, which thou have sworn to our Fathers from the days
of old. David says, Ps. 106.44.45
He regarded their affliction, when he heard their cry. And he remembered them
for his covenant, and repented according to the multitude of his mercies.

Q. Why after the words, That love me, is there added, And that keep my
Commandments?

A. The Church says, In the homily of charity, page 42. of the first part.
Although almost every man persuades himself to be in charity, yet let him
examine no other man, but his own heart, his life and conversation, and he
shall not be deceived; but truly discern and judge, whether he be in perfect
charity or not. For he which follows not his own appetite and will, but
gives himself earnestly to God, to do Act. 13.22.
all his will and Commandments, he may be sure, that he loves God above all
things; and else surely he loves him not, whatsoever he pretend. For he that
John 14.21.
knows my Commandments and keeps them, he it is that loves me, says
Christ. And again he says, He that loves me, will keep my words: and he
that loves me Joh. 14.24.
not, will not keep my words. Saint John says, 1. Ioh. 5.3.
This is love, that we keep his Commandments, and his Commandments are not
grievous.

Q. What is the third Commandment?

A. Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain: for he will not
hold him guiltless that takes his name in vain.

Q. What is it to take the name of God in vain?

A. In the larger Catechism.
To abuse it, either with Lev. 19.12.
forswearing, or with swearing rashly, unadvisedly, and without Ecclus.
23.9.10.11.13. unto that chapter the Church refers in the margent of her
Catechism.
necessity, or with once naming it without a weighty cause. For since the
Majesty of GODS name is most holy, we ought by all means to beware, that we
seem not either to despise it our selves, or to give other any occasion to
despise it: yea and so to see that we never once utter the name of GOD without
most great 1 Chr. 29.13. Psa. 113.1.2.3.
reverence, that it may ever appear honorable and glorious both to our selves
and to all other. For it is not lawful once to The Church in the margent of
her Catechism refers unto Wisd. 1.5. and 14.30. Ecclus. 39 33.34.35.
think, much less to speak of GOD and of his works, otherwise then to his
honor. Briefly, whosoever uses the name of GOD otherwise then for weighty
causes and for most holy matters abuses it.

Q. That we may the better shun the breaking of this Commandment, rehearse
some of the sundry significations, wherein the word Name of GOD is taken.

A. By the name of God is meant such words, whereby God is noted forth and
distinguished from creatures: as is, The Lord, Jehovah, Psalm. 68 4.
Iah, Exodus 3.14.
I am, the Bar. 4.22.
Eternal, the Almighty, the High and holy one, the most Highest, the Creator,
Jesus, Christ, Emmanuel, the Father, the Son, the holy Ghost, the Rev. 3.14.
Amen. 1. Joh. 2.27.
truth, etc. It is also taken for the strength, power or favor of God, as
where it is said, Psalm. 118.10.
In the name of the Lord I will destroy them. It is taken for the will and
commandment of God, as where it is said, And it shall come to pass, that
whosoever will not hearken unto my words, which he shall speak in my Deuteronomy.
18.19.
name, I will require it of him. It is taken for the belief, worship,
invocation, celebration, and professing of GOD; as where it is said, Micah. 4.5.
All people will walk every one in the name of his God, and we will walk in
the name of the Lord our God for ever and ever. It also signifies his holy
word, the sacred Scripture; as where it is said, Psalm. 138.2.
Thou have magnifyed thy word above all thy name. Some observe that by the name
of GOD is meant every of his works, his good creatures, etc. by the
consideration of which, God is understood and his power and operation
perceived; and therefore that in this Commandment all unright using of them
contrary to their upright natural use, is forbidden: and such observation on
this precept is according unto truth.

Q. Whereas swearing is referred unto this Commandment, when may one use the
name of God in an oath?

A. The Church says, In the larger Catechism.
when an oath is taken for a just cause, either to affirm a truth, especially
if the Magistrate require or command it, or for any other matter of great
importance, wherein we are either to maintain unviolate the honor of God, or
to preserve mutual agreement and charity among men. But whenever we say
truth, we may not swear; for so the estimation and reverence of the name
should be abated, and should become of no price, and be contemned as common.
The Church therefore in her homily concerning swearing declares, In the first
part, page 46.48.
That when men do Psalm. 8.1.3. Romans 1.20. 1. Tim. 4 4.5.
Exodus 22.11. Ios. 2.12. 2. Cor. 11.31. 1 Kings 24.21.
swear of custom, inreasoning, buying and selling, or other daily
communications, such kind of swearing is ungodly, unlawful, and forbidden by
this Commandment of God. For such swearing (says the Church) is nothing else,
but taking of Gods holy name in vain.

Q. Rehearse what the Church has delivered concerning an oath to be taken
before a Judge, or upon Gods book.

A. Thus says the Church unto us, In the second part of the homily against
swearing, page 50.
When any laying their hands upon the Gospel book, do swear truly to so and
so, etc. as God may help them, and the holy contents of that book: they must
All young persons have need to be informed of the danger of being perjured.
There are some which make no conscience of swearing falsely, as not privately,
so neither publicly of committing perjurie before Authority. And of putting
their hands unto a false testimony they make no scruple at all.
consider, that in that book is contained Gods everlasting truth, his most
holy and eternal word, whereby we have forgiveness of our sins, and be
made inheritours of heaven, to live for ever with Gods Angels and Saints, in
joy and gladness. In the Gospel book is contained also Gods terrible threats
to obstinate sinners, that will not amend their lives, nor believe the truth of
Gods holy word, and the everlasting pains prepared in hell, for Idolaters,
hypocrites, for false and vain swearers, for perjured ones, for false witness
bearers, for false condemners of guiltles and innocent ones, and for them which
for favor do hide the crimes of evil doers, that they should not be
punished.

Q. Into what danger do they fall which wilfully be forsworn, or do swear
falsely, swearing to that which is not true?

A. The Church says, There is added in the margent of the aforesaid place in
the Homily, to the end that the reader should take notice of what is delivered:
Against Perjurie. An o^th before a Judge.
Whosoever do wilfully forswear themselves upon CHRIST'S holy Evangelie (or
Gospel) they utterly forsake Gods mercy, goodness and truth, the merits of
our Savior Christ's Nativity, Life, Passion, Death, Resurrection, and
Ascension; they refuse the forgiveness of sins, promised to all penitent
sinners; the joys of heaven, the company with Angels and Saints for ever. All
which benefits and comforts are promised unto true Christian persons in the
Gospel. And they, so being forsworn upon the Gospel, do betake themselves
to the devils service, the master of all lies, falsehood, deceit, and perjurie,
provoking the great indignation and curse of GOD against them in this life, and
the terrible wrath and judgment of our Savior Christ, at the great day of the
last judgment, when he shall judge both the quick and the dead, according to
their works.

Q. What is the meaning of the words, The Lord will not hold him guiltless?

A. It is as much as to say, He will surely punish, he will surely take
vengeance on every one, that abuses his name. A matter greatly considerable.
By swearing, and so calling the eternal infinite wise, and Almighty God for to
be witness unto an untruth or a lie, who perfectly knows universal things,
is a matter of no small danger.
Daily experience testifies in all places, how that wilful false-swearers do
for the most part die with unexpressible horror of conscience; yea all the
time of their life after they be so forsworn, they for the most part, have no
inward peace, but the Isa. 66.24.
hell-worme gnawing within them, and the unquenchable fire beginning to burn
in their souls more and more. And as false swearers do thus fall into the
avenging Heb. 10.31.
hands of the living God; so all other takers of his name in vain, do live
void of the peace of God, that most Ps. 29.11.
precious inheritance of the Saints in this life, a matter that Phil. 4.7.
passes all natural understanding. The Church therefore in her The larger.
Catechism asks, saying: Since God does in other places pronounce that he
will punish generally all breakers of his Law, why does he here particularly
threaten them that abuse his name? She answers and says: His meaning was to
show, how highly he esteems the glory of his name, to the end that we
seeing punishment ready for us, should so much the more heed-fully beware of
Ier. 20.8.9.10.
abusing the same. And whereas the Lord by Jeremiah declares it to be an
horrible thing for to Ier. 5.7.
swear by them that are no Gods, we ought therefore to remember CHRIST'S
commandment, namely not to swear at all in our Mat. 5.34.35.36.37. James 5.12.
communication; and therein to use but yea or nay, or words of like importance;
because CHRIST says: Whatsoever is more than these, comes of evil: And for
all evil words, CHRIST has Matt. 12.36.37. Wisd. 1.7.8.9.10.11.
denounced, that we shall give account in the day of judgment; who also
says, That by our words we shall be justified, and by our words we shall be
condemned.

Q. What is the fourth commandment?

A. Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day. Six days shall thou labout,
etc.

Q. Why does God set the word Remember before this fourth commandment and the
last in his first table of our direct duty unto him?

A. Because he knows, that we in our corrupt nature are most prone to
consider less of this commandment, than of any of all the rest, especially in
such an observing of it, as the mind of the LORD is we should do
everlastingly.

Q. Whereas this commandment was given unto the Jews, as they were in the
wilderness traveling toward Canaan, show in which natural day amongst the
number of seven (or of every week) were they to do no manner of work.

A. It is prescribed to be the last of seven (or of every week) in
remembrance of Gods making the world in six days, and his resting on the
seventh day.

Q. Does the holy Catholic and Apostolic Church of JESUS CHRIST now observe
that seventh natural day of every week, which the Church of the Jews was
required to keep holy, and which that nation celebrateth unto this present
time?

A. In no wise.

Q. Upon what ground does not the Church now observe that seventh natural day
of every week?

A. By reason that JESUS CHRIST and his Apostles (or the holy Ghost by them)
have signified, how it is not Gods will, that we Christian Gentiles should be
bound unto the keeping of it.

Q. Rehearse some Scripture signifying the same doctrine.

A. When the LORD JESUS upon the seventh day had healed an impotent man, he
bade him, Ioh. 5.8.
rise, take up his bed, and walk: which thing the Jews understood ought not
to be, because the Lord had said by Jeremiah, Ier. 17.22.24.
Bear no burden on the Sabbath day. But JESUS answered them, saying: My Father
Ioh. 5.17. Si quaeras, cur Christianus non observat otium Sabbathi, cum Dominus
non venerit solvere legem, sed adimplere? Respondeo, Istud non observat
Christianus, quia quod ea figura profitebatur, iamipse implevit. In isto
habemus Sabbathum qui dicit: Venite ad me omnes qui laboratis, and invenietis
requiem animebus vestris. Aug. contr. Faust. lib. 1.
works hitherto, and I work: declaring by that answer, that those Jews
which were offended at him for healing the man on the seventh day, and for his
bidding of him to take up his bed and walk, though they in some manner were
observers of the ceremony or shadow then meant in the fourth commandment, yet
of the substance and maine matter required by the said great commandment of
God, they were ignorant. CHRIST said at other times, Matt. 12.8.
The Son of man is Lord even of the Sabbath day, which words then the
unbeleeving Jews understood not. Yea afterward sundry of the Jews Acts 15.5.
and 21.20.21.25.
believing in CHRIST, did yet deem, that it was needful to use outward
circumcision, and to walk after the customs, which Moses had delivered. But
there was held a council about that question by the Apostles and Elders at
Jerusalem, who said: Acts 15.28.
It seemed good to the holy Ghost, and to us, to lay upon you no greater burden
than these necessary things, etc. among which, to observe the seventh day, was
none. It is afterward said: As touching the Acts 21.25.
Gentiles which believe, we have written and concluded, that they observe no
such thing, namely of such ceremonies which had bin peculiar unto the Jews for
their observation only. Saint Paul says unto the Romans: Romans 14.5.6.
One man Zeal for observing the Sabbath is laudable, so that the zeal be
according to knowledge, and not like the unbeleeving Jews zeal, whereof see
Romans 10.2.
esteems one day above another: another esteems every day alike. He that
regards (or observes) a day, regards it unto the Lord: and he that
regards not the day, to the Lord he does not regard it. The Church says in
the contents of that chapter: Men may not contemn nor condemn one another for
things indifferent. Saint Paul disliked the Galatians for observing Gal. 4.10.
days, and months, and times, and years, and for their proneness unto Gal.
5.2.
outward circumcision; whereas they had let go the right understanding of such
things, as he had taught them, and hearkened unto such as informed them amiss
about those things. Unto the Colossians he says: Col. 2.16.
Let no man therefore judge you in meat or in drink, or in respect of an holy
day, or of the new Moon, or of the Sabbath days; which are a shadow of things
to come, but the body is of CHRIST.

Q. Is there no day in the week, wherein now Gods people are to assemble
together to do the duties of public worship?

A. Yea on the 1. Cor. 16.2. Act. 20.7. Whosoever his owneselfe or her owneselfe
will on all Sunday meditate, speak and do only spiritual matters, is in no
wise to be condemned therefore. See Romans 14.4.5.6.13.17.18.
first day of every week: For so it is signified and expressed in the writings
of the Evangelists and of the Apostles.

Q. What are the requisite duties to be done on every first day of the week
which now is commonly called Sunday?

A. They are such as we have example of in the new Testament, to be performed;
and such as are by the Church enjoined unto us.

Q. How does the Church prescribe unto us, that we should be employed on every
Sunday?

A. It signifies unto us, In the Homilies, canons, and other writings set
forth by public authority. Mat. 18.20. Ps. 42.2. Mat. 28.20.
that on all that day no work is to be done, but what is merely necessary to
be then done, to the end that we may duly prepare our selves for coming
before the gracious * presence of JESUS CHRIST, which is in the midst of the
holy congregation assembled in his name, and thereunto we are to use private
prayers and meditations. We are to be present at all the public worship from
the beginning thereof unto the end of the same, every master and dame, son
and daughter, manservant and maidservant, and the stranger that is within our
gates, both forenoone and afternoon. The youth and ignorant persons for half
an hour or more before evening prayer, are to be examined and instructed in
the sacred Catechism of the common prayer book. Every one is to reconcile
himself charitably to his neighbor where displeasure has bin; also the poor
and sick are to be visited; and every other religious work necessary to be
done on that day, is to be performed.

Q. Is there in any countries of Christendom a tolerating of any recreations
to be used on the Sunday.

A. In the book entitled They that account the doctrine and discipline of
Geneva to be perfecter than the doctrine and discipline of the Apostolical
Church of England, and which insist more on an outward Sabbath, than on the
inward Sabbath, shall do well to take into serious consideration Genevaes
custom concerning the Sabbath.
Relations of the most famous Kingdoms, etc. printed at London, In page 308.
anno 1630. concerning Geneva it is thus written: All honest exercises, as
shooting in pieces, Crosse-bowes, long-bows, etc. are used on the Sabbath day,
and that in the morning, both before and after the Sermon: neither do the If
any think, that Geneva Ministers do err concerning the Sabbath in allowing so
much liberty. Why may they not suspect them to be in some other error also?
Ministers find any fault there with, so that they hinder not from hearing the
word at the time appointed. And in relation concerning the States of the
Low Countries, there is signified that where they are of the Geneva-confession,
In p^g. 206.207.
There the Faires are on Sundays in the afternoon as much frequented, as the
Churches were in the forenoone.

Q. Let there be no more mention of the custom in others countries, but let
us consider the ground of the toleration now in our Land.

A. The ground is manifold: viz. That the This is in his most sacred Majesty's
declaration, and signified in p g. 2.8.15. The 1. mentioned ground of the
tolerating of some recreation in the Sunday evening.
meaner sort who labor hard all the week should have some recreations to
refresh their spirits. Whereas in many places, especially in Cities and Towns,
servants are by their Masters and Dames caused to labor privately (if not in
some public manner) on the most holy days in the year, even as on the
working days; yea many are so hard toward their servants, as that on the very
Sunday they will employ them in painful businesses; whence it comes to
pass, that many for want of some bodily refreshing in convenient time, have
their spirits dull, and their understanding with melancholy and the like malady
oppressed; yea often such whose trade of life consists not in much firming of
the body, do contract within themselfes such diseases, as do shorten their
natural life. In towns and cities, and more especially in the head city of
the Kingdom, many servants labor hard all the six days in an ill air. When
Sunday comes, they before morning service, as also before evening service are all
that time required to be in attendance, if not in some hard business: and if
they may not The Gospel commands let all your, things be done with charity.
1. Cor. 16.14. Such charity as is described in 1. Cor. 13.4.5.6.7. And who so
reads being endued with such a spirit of charity, will not rashly censure
hardly what now along is delivered.
after evening service walk abroad and take the air, and refresh their
spirits, how is it possible that they can long continue in health? How much is
the life of such servants, different from the life of slaves among the Turks?
Their Mrs and Dames can in the week days take their liberty and use their
pleasures. Now God says, on the Exodus 23.12. Deuteronomy. 5.12.
Sabbath thy servants and thy servants children are to rest and to be
refreshed as well as thy self. If any say, that the Jews servants were only
to cease from their servile labor, and to have no other refreshing; and
therefore servants are likewise now to have no other refreshing, such may
consider that the case of many of our servants is not alike. Very many were the
The servants and the meaner people among the Jews had by Gods appointment many
days in the year, wherein they recreated themselves.
feasts which the Jews were required to keep, in which days their servants
were to rejoice and be recreated, as well as their governors. See Deuter. 16.
Levit. 23. Numb. 28. etc. And as the case of all such servants is considerable,
so also the condition of innumerable householders having children and charge,
that for to get bread for themselves and their family are constrained to work
early and late all the six days: and should such have no bodily recreation
all the year long? There is a proverb, The full-fed knows not the
sufferings of an hungry stomach. Those that can recreate themselves when they
will, are commonly unsensible what it is to be quite or much debarred from the
same. We are to thank Almighty God, that our dread Sovereign LORD the King
can be touched with the feeling of mean men's endurings, and so graciously
provide for their ease and comfort. When the Pharisees found fault with CHRIST'S
disciples, which being Matt. 12.1.2.7.8. Hos. 6.6.
hungry plucked a few ears of come on the Sabbath, he answered, Had ye
known what this means, I will have mercy and not sacrifice, Some devout
persons not knowing what the spiritual Sabbath is (the which holy Church has
declared unto us, and is expressed in the latter part of this discourse about
the Sabbath; and the zealous observing whereof is a duty continuing whiles the
world endures) may perhaps take offense at some delivery herein; but such as
are christianly wise will thoroughly examine the matter by the Scriptures and
the doctrine of the Church in her fundamental books. Prove. 14.15.16.17. See
Heb. 43.9.10.11. Esa. 32.17.18. Ps. 116.7.8. and 25.12.13. and 23.2. Romans
6.12.18. 1. Pet. 4.1.2.
ye would not have condemned the guiltless. The Sabbath was made for man, and
not man for the Sabbath. It is a sacrifice, if hard laboring people all the
week long, do Sunday evening sit still in their houses: but if in the fear
of God they spend then an hour or two where music or some such like lawful
recreation is, for the refreshing of their spirits, which all that day have bin
intent on heavenly matters as well privately as publikly (which have bin at the
whole public worship, forenoone an afternoon,) what commandment of CHRIST
JESUS is there transgressed? Micah says: Mic. 6.8.
God has showed thee, O man, what is good, and what the Lord requires of
thee, To do justly, to love mercy, and So is it in the margent, and so is the
Geneva translation.
to bumble they self for to walk with thy God. The Church says in an Homily.
In the fourth part of the Rogation Homily, page 237.
Love ye equity and righteousness, ensue mercy and charity, which GOD Ier.
9.24. Mat. 23.23.
most requires at our hands. There is a generation which will strain at Mat.
23.24.
gnats and swallow up camels: which will take offense at their honest poor
neighbors recreating himself in the Sunday evening, and they themselves keep
in their own houses, swelling * Such now as rejoice not for his Majesty's most
gracious toleration, are for the most part such, as feel not what it is to
labor hard all the six days.
with spiritual pride, vain glory and hypocrisy, envy, hatred, and malice,
and all uncharitablenes, Ps. 5.6. Prove. 17.5. Isa. 33.15.
blood thirstines and rejoicing at others calamities, and given unto
unexpressable lying and circu^venting, and uncivility. The saying of the Lord
by Isaiah unto hypocritical fasters ay be used unto such. Is it such a Isa.
58.3.4.5.6.7.8.9.
fast (or a Sabbath) that I have chosen? a day for a man to afflict his soul?
Is it to how down his head as a bulrush, etc. Is not this the fast (or
Sabbath) that I have chosen? to loose the bands of wickedness, to undo the
heavy burdens, to let the oppressed go free, and that ye break every yoke,
etc. and that ye exercise the Reckoned up by Christ in Matt. 25.41.42.43.
six works of the Christian mercy or charity, according to which ye shall
receive your everlasting judgment in the last day? Another The second ground of
the tolerating, expressed in pa. 8.
ground of the said toleration is, That men may not spend the Sunday evenings
in filthy tiplings and drunkenness, with idle and discontented speeches in
alehouses, (which is now the practice of many of the meaner sort in most
places,) where like In the Homily of the place and time of prayer, page 126
rats and swine, (as the homily speaks) they also rest in brawling, and
railing, in quarrelling and fighting. And whether is it better for such men
then to use manlike and lawful exercises, as may make their bodies more able
for war, or more expert for their private defense, or the more healthful, than
in that which tends only to hurt both of body and soul, estate, name, and of
whatsoever may be unto welfare? And whereas such persons are prone to misbehave
themselves as well in public, as in private; therefore it is provided, that no
ungodly or unsober conversation shall be used in the recreation: It is
prohibited that any Pages 13.16. of the declaration.
offensive weapons be carried or used in the said times: and it is required,
that all disorders there may be prevented or punished, to the end that all
neighborhood and freedom may be used. A A third ground of the toleration, in
page 7.
further ground is for the sake of such as live in Recusancie, that they may
not be deterred from coming to conformity with the reformed Apostolical
Church of England, by being persuaded that no honest mirth or recreation is
lawful or tolerable in our Religion: which persuasion cannot but breed a great
coffeehouse in their hearts, and hinder them from conforming.

Also In page 13.
there it is straightly commanded, A fourth matter most observable in the Royal
Declaration.
That every person shall resort to his own parish Church to hear Divine
Service, and each parish by it self to use the said recreation after Divine
Service. And whereas hereby every parishioner is required to be usually at his
own Church, as well afternoon, as forenoone; is there not here prescribed
uniformity, which is the great glory of a Christian Kingdom? It is written, 1.
Cor. 14.40.
Let all things be done decently and in order. And the Colossians are commended
for the Col. 2.5.
order which they observed. But some will say, When we have afternoones no
Sermon at our own Church, it is requisite that we go where a Sermon is, for
our edification. It is therefore necessary to be considered seriously, wherein
such for the most part do desire to be edified Saint Paul speaking of the true
people of CHRIST signifies, Ephesians. 4.16.
That they make increase unto their edifying in Love. And to the Hebrews he
says, Heb. 10.24.25
Let us consider one another to provoke unto love and good works: not
forsaking the assembling of our selves together, as the manner of some is. The
Lord CHRIST JESUS says, Mat. 5.6.
Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness. Saint Jude also
says, Jude 20.
Build up your selves on your most holy faith. Holy Church has ordained, That
in the Sunday afternoon there should be taught her fundamental Catechism,
Her laws the Canons and constitutions should be read, the Common prayer with
the Lessons be said, and that the Homilies should be read also. Is there not
See Chap. 47. of the christian Divinity.
edifying in the true Catholic and Apostolic faith, and in the Christian life
and conversation, to he received from the doctrine of the said books composed
and set forth by the supreme divine wisdom of our Church? Where are they
that have attained unto so perfect a beleese and course of life, as is in the
said writings held forth? If then such a measure of edifying be to be had from
what is appointed to be unto every congregation, do not such as usually depart
there from, and have the said sacred deliveries in light account or contempt,
declare themselves to be of the number of those foretold, 2. Tim. 4.3.4.
That will not endure sound doctrine, but after their own lusts will heap to
themselves teachers, having itching ears; and will turn away their ears form
the truth, and will be turned unto fables? Let the Mat. 7.18 19.20.
fruits in words and deeds, which many such daily bring forth, be considered;
and it will plainly appear, that the most of them do not seek to be
edified, how they may amend their lives according to Gods holy word, and to
have an heart to love and dread him, and diligently to live after his
Commandments: Unto which edification the most sacred Let any informs us all.
Also if it be requisite for some often to go from their own Parish Church, is
it not likewise for all the rest? And then in some Churches on the Sunday
afternoon there would be no Divine Service at all. Now it remains, that
answers be unto some questions made concerning See about recreation what Mr.
Doctor Prideaux has delivered in his treatise concerning the Sabbath, printed
in this year; and what is said thereof in another Doctors preface unto the
said treatise.
recreations on the Sunday evening. It is demanded, how can it agree with the
doctrine of an In the homily of the place and time of prayer, and in the first
part thereof.
Homily signifying that then we should rest in holiness? The answer is, It is
said, In page 13.
That they to whom it belongs in office, shall present and sharply punish all
such as in abuse of this our liberty, will use these exercises before the ends
of all divine Services for that day. Bowling and all unlawful games are In
page 12.
prohibited to be used on the Sunday. The Church allows of no profaneness
to be at any time of that day.

It is manifest not only from her The thirteenth.
canon concerning the celebrating of Sunday, but also from the Articles given
at the late Metropoliticall visitation, wherein Church Officers are required to
inquire, In the 17. arcide concerning the parishioners.
Whether any person in the parish do exercise any trade or labor, buy or
sell, or keep open shops or warehouses upon the Sunday, or holyday, by
themselves, their servants, or apprentices, or have otherwise profaned the
said days, contrary to the orders of the Church of England? And whether there
be any Innekeepers, Alehouse keepers, Victuallers or other persons, that permit
any persons in their houses, to eat drink or play, during the time of Divine
Service or Sermon, or reading the Homilies in the forenoone or afternoon, upon
those days? Moreover concerning holiness it is to be distinguished: There is
holiness 1. These. 4.3.4.5.6.7.
moral, namely an abstaining from such things as are always unlawful,
against which kind of matters the Church insisteth in that her sacred Homily.
And there is holiness Lev. 23.7.8.
ceremonial which is an abstaining upon Sunday or any other holy day from such
matters, as are lawful upon a working day, which holiness also the Church in
that her Homily has prescribed. Now concerning holiness ceremonial of what
kind soever, whereof the Church has been the prescriber, yea all ceremonial
holiness whatsoever CHRIST in his word has not commanded to be everlastingly
observed, the Church has power to See Chap. 41. in the christian Divinity.
dispense with the same, according as she in her godly wisdom sees it most
expedient for the time. For thus she delivers in her In the Article 34. of
the Traditions of the Church.
Articles of Religion, It is not necessary that traditions and ceremonies be in
all places one, or utterly like; for at all times they have been diverse, and
may be changed according to the diversity of countries, times, and men's
manners, so that nothing be ordained against GODS word. Every particular or
national Church has authority to ordain, change, and abolish ceremonies or
rites of the Church, ordained only by man's authority, so that all things be
done to edifying. Let such as doubt, search every sentence of the whole holy
Bible, and see if there be any saying, which does, not seemingly but
certainly, prove it to be a sin, for such as have been at all the whole
public divine Services of the Sunday, and have had their meditations all the
forenoone and afternoon It is the will of the Church, that every person should
on Sunday be thus devoted, until the full end of all public Divine worship
for that day.
zealously set on matters heavenly and spiritual, in the evening to refresh
themselves with such recreations, as are allowed then to be used. It is
memorably said in the contents set in the In the last Translation.
Bible before Romans 14. about observation of days, Men may not contemn nor
condemn one another for things indifferent. There is also objected that
delivery by the holy Prophet Isai. 58.13.
Isaiah, viz. That on the Sabbath one may not do his own ways, nor find his
own pleasure, nor speak his own words. The answer is, The exposition of that
sentence, which is set in the margent of the Geneva translation, is, If thou
refrain they self from thy wicked works. Whereby it is signified to be
understood, that that text speaks of moral holiness to be observed
perpetually, as Saint Peter says, 1. Pet. 1.15.
Be ye holy in all manner of conversation; not only on the first day of every
week, commonly called Sunday; but also on Ps. 106.3. Luke 1.74.75.
every other of the days of the week also. And the pleasure against which the
Prophet speaks, appears not to be pleasure of lawful recreation then
allowed to be used, but pleasure in very wickedness. And so the word pleasure
is observed to signify in the same Chapter, where it is said, Isa. 58.3.
Behold, in the day of your fast you find pleasure, and exact all your labors.
Behold, ye fast for strife and debate, and to smite with the fist of
wickedness. In the Geneva translation, verse 3. It is rendered, You will seek
your will, and require all your debts. The note on those words is, Thus he
convinces the hypocrites by the second table, and by their duty toward their
neighbor, that they have neither faith nor religion. And His words are
Jejuniorum dies consumunt in maleficiis, etc.
Iunius in his annotations on his translation of the said 3. ver. of Isa. 58.
expressly signifies the sense to be, that they spent fasting days in
mischievous deeds. Yea Isaiah himself in the Chapter a little before shows,
that he speaks against mere wickedness wrought on the Sabbath, from that as
he says, Isa. ^6.1.2.
Keep ye judgment ( or As the margent reads.
equity) and do justice. Blessed is the man that does this, and the son of
man that lays hold on it, that keeps the Sabbath from polluting it, and
keeps his hand from doing any evil. Also that Isaiah by forbidding ones own
ways, ones own pleasure, and ones own words, means matters of sin
absolutely (such things as are sin in their own nature on any day) it
appears from that he says also a little before, Isa 55.7.
Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts. Moreover
the holy Prophets by the Sabbath do in sundry places mean, as did the
Apostles where they mention it, or use words unto the same effect. Saint Paul
says, There remains a rest ( or a keeping of a In the margent of the last
translation of Heb. 4.9.10.
Sabbath) to the people of God. For he that is entered into his rest, he also
has ceased from his own works, as God did from his. The It is of those notes
which are translated out of Latin, and set unto the Geneva translation.
note in the margent is, As GOD rested the seventh day, so must we rest from
our works, that is, from such as proceed from our corrupt nature. Of such
Sabbathising or resting Saint Peter also speaks, where he says, 1. Pet.
4.1.2.
Forasmuch then as CHRIST has suffered for us in the flesh, arm your selves
likewise with the same mind: for he that has suffered in the flesh, has
ceased from sin: that he no longer should live the rest of his time in the
flesh, to the lasts of men, but to the will of GOD. It is also asked, how can
agreement be with the fourth Commandment? The answer is, It is declared in the
exposition thereof, that that natural seventh day therein mentioned is not
See what is before delivered next after the exposition of the third Commandment.
now to be kept holy. Sunday is the first day of the week (as speaks the
Acts 20.7. 1. Cor. 16.2. etc.
Gospel) and not the seventh day of the week. But let us hear how the
Church expressly delivers, that we are to understand the fourth Commandment,
And thus it says, These sayings are all expressly delivered in the larger
Catechism of the Church, commonly called Nowel in quarto, in the exposition of
the fourth commandment.
Sabbath, by interpretation signifies Rest. This Commandment has a double
consideration. For in so much as it contains a ceremony, and requires only
outward rest, it belonged peculiarly to the Jews, and has not the force of a
continuing and eternal law. But now by the coming of Christ, as the other
shadows of Jewish ceremonies are abrogate, so is this law also in this behalf
abridged. And the ceremony excepted, there is remaining that, whereunto we are
perpetually bound. For this Law was ordained for three causes: First, to
establish and maintain an Ecclesiastical discipline and a certain order of
the Christian Common weal: Secondly, to provide for the state of servants that
it be made tolerable: Thirdly, to express a certain form and figure of the
spiritual rest. The spiritual rest is, when resting from worldly business,
and from our own works and studies, and as it were having a certain holy
vacation, we yield our selves wholly to Gods governance, that he may do his
works in us: and when (as the Scripture terms it) we crucify our flesh, we
bridle the froward desires and motions of our heart, restraining our own
nature, that we may obey the will of God. For so shall we most aptly reduce
and bring the figure and image of the eternal rest to the very thing and truth
it self. Also, we may not cast away this care on the other Daemones debemus
interimere, non little substantiam perime^tes; sed quia opus little and studiu^
est, ut nos pec^^e faciant, sme dubis little interitus est si non peccamus. Si
omnes nos hosts destrurerimus, tunc diem festum Domino celebramus. Greg. Hom.
8. super Ps. 101.8.
days, for when we have once begun, we must go forward to the end,
throughout the whole race of our life. And (says the Church, out of her most
high divine knowledge in the mysteries of GODS word) the number of seven,
forasmuch as in the Scripture it signifies perfection, puts us in
remembrance that we ought with all our force and endeavor continually to
labor and travail toward Heb. 6.1. 2. Cor. 13.9.11 Genesis 17.1.
perfection. Also for the great comfort of souls, which Psalm. 42.1.2.
pant after God, which thirst for the living God, the Church there in
concluding her delivery about the Sabbath, does signify, That here in this life
a Heb. 6.5. and 4.3.
taste of that rest may be had, which we shall enjoy perfectly, fully, and most
blessedly in the Kingdom of GOD. Of the which Taste now to be enjoyed, as many
holy Scriptures do speak in most glorious manner; so also the Church
delivers wonderful divinely in sundry places of her sacred Service; as in
her first Homily of all it is said concerning the most holy writings, In the
end of the second part of the Homily called, An Exhortation to holy Scripture.
Let us pray to GOD (the only Author of these heavenly studies) that we may
speak, think, believe, live and depart hence, according to the wholesome
doctrine, and verities of them. And by that means, in this world we shall
have Gods defense, favor and grace, with the unspeakeable solace of peace, and
quietness of conscience, and after this miserable life, we shall enjoy the
endless bliss and glory of heaven. Now true Christians as they ought to be
mindful to observe the first day of every week (called Sunday) by virtue of
the Romans 8.4. See the Homily of the place and time of prayer, and chap 43.
equity signified in that fourth law or commandment of Almighty God, according
as CHRIST in his Gospel and the Church in her doctrine and discipline do
require; so are they also zealously to remember and consider, that God is not
Isa. 1.13. and 66.4. Matthew. 12.2.7. Ier. 9.24. Micah 6.8.
delighted in a Pharisaicall regarding of the day unto him. In the days of
Jeremiah there were which would say, The Temple of the Lord, The Temple of the
Lord; but as the Ier. 7.
Prophet declares, their conversation was quite contrary unto the doctrine of
the Lord. So are there very many in the Christian world, which cry out, The
Sabbath of the Lord, The Sabbath of the Lord; so drawing near unto him with
their mouth, and with their lips honoring him, but have ( as the Isa. 29.13.
Prophet says) removed their heart far from him, and their fear toward him
is taught by the precept of men. And therefore (says CHRIST) in Mat. 15.8.9.
vain they do worship me, teaching for doctrines the commandments of men.
Ezechiel speaking of such says: Ezech. 33.31.
With their mouth they show much love, but their heart goes after their
covetousness. It may now be added, And after pride and arrogancy of spirit,
and enviousnesse of affection. They bear a fervent zeal against any the least
recreation to be used on a Sunday evening, professing what a strictness then
ought to be: but as on very Sunday they take plenty of liberty inwardly to
follow their own corrupt affections, and outwardly to use their mouths
uncharitably; so in the other days of the week, in their dealings they take no
small Ier. 7.5.6.8.9.10.
liberty to speak and to do that, which is expressly contrary to the
everlasting laws of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; as woeful experience in
too too many places testifies. And these things in the expounding of the
Catechism are here added, not as in the behalf of any the least sin to be
committed; but to further such as are ignorant, and hate not to become in mind
and life Ps. 50.16.17.18.19.20.21.22.23.
reformed, that they may aright understa^d what is by supreme authority
published, how it is for a great abundance of true Christian good intended and
also so expressed. Moreover the Kings most excellent Majesty according to the
mind of the eternal Almighty God has ordained, that the ancient Christian
feasts be kept again, as they were heretofore: as the feast of Whitsuntide,
the feasts of the dedication of Churches, commonly called Wakes, and what other
feasts have bin observed also since Reformation has bin established. Have we
not great cause now of magnifying the goodness of God, for moving the heart of
our most gracious Sovereign thus to Isa. 58.12. and 61.4.
build the old wastes, to raise up the former desolations, the foundations of
many generations, To be a repairer of the breach, the restorer of paths to
dwell in? Who are there among the ancient people of our Kingdom, (that are of
any observation) which do not daily complain, that since Wakes have bin
neglected, One maine cause why iniquity has abounded, and the love of many
waxed cold, as is fore told in Mat. 24.
love between people of neighbor Parishes has very greatly decayed; and since
Whitsun feasts have ceased, love among the people of every Parish has
unexpressibly waxen cold?

The wisdom of the great GOD knowing what a nourishing and preserving of godly
love and charity among his people the solemnizing of feasts would be, ordained
in his Law many to be duly kept every year. Therefore the Catholic and
Apostolic Church of JESUS CHRIST has prescribed so As are mentioned together
after the Calendar in the Communion book. Seech. 43
many feast days to be yearly observed by all her members. Our godly
forefathers were zealous in the keeping of them, though we now for the most
part do little consider of them. Was not the LORD CHRIST in the days of his
flesh here on earth present at the feasts celebrated by the Jews? Does not
Saint Paul say, speaking concerning Easter, 1. Cor. 5.8.
Let us keep that feast, etc. Does not Saint Jude tell us, that the Christians
of the primitive Church, as well Gentiles as Jews, had their Jude 12.
feasts of charity, though 2. Pet. 2.13.
some at the said feasts did not rightly carry themselves? And did they keep
such feasts without commandment thereunto by the holy Ghost in the Apostles?

The said feasts are in the Greek Text (...), which is as much as to say Loves.
And Scapula on the word says: The common banquets of Christians were so
called, because they were instituted for the cause of retaining mutual love
and charity; In page 235.
The which (as says the Church in the Rogation Homily) is the only livery of
a Christian man, and whereby together with godly peace and quiet, we be knit
together in one general fellowship of CHRIST'S family, in one common household
of God. See with what fervency God has prescribed the Whitsun-feast to be kept
for the rejoicing together of the whole body of a people, which belong each to
other; in Deuter. 16.9.10.11.12. It is a matter greatly considerable to hear
discret old folk relate, what The happiness of the times, when the feasts now
commanded, were duly observed. Satan now has great wrath, and does express
it in his members by their hindering what they can, the yearly solemnizing of
the allowed feasts.
justness, charitablenesse, and friendlinesse among neighbors was, when the
said feast was godlily solemnized: how little viciousness, drunkenesse,
whoredom, maliciousness, theft, and other enormities were then. Moreover, in
keeping of the Wakes, our forefathers not only expressed every year a
grateful remembrance and thankesgiving unto God for their Churches builded,
but also would unto that their said feast invite their friends of the Parishes
round about or near them, and then when their neighbors Wakes were, they were
invited again. Thus the whole landfeasted each other unto an unutterable
co^servation of unity and godly love. And whereas Dancing is allowed by holy
Scripture.
dancing is nominated for one of the lawful recreations (and yet there are
which otherwise account it:) Is it not directly commanded by God himself,
where it is said? Let Israel rejoice in him that made him: Let the children of
Sion be joyful in their King. Let them praise his name in the Ps. 149.2.3.
dance: let them sing praises to him with the timbrell and harp, Ps. 150.4.
praise him with the timbrell and dance. Did not David dance before the Lord,
and (as he spoke expressly) 2. Sam. 6.21.16.
played before the LORD? And was not Michal smitten with barrenness for
despising him because of the same? Let the Michals of these days consider,
what was that which Michal so verse. 20.22.
excepted against in David's Schindeler the most learned interpreter of the
Hebrew tongue delivers, That a feast is called in Hebrew (...) because
therein people do dance. He says: Die festo edunt, bibunt and sallant
homines. And festis diebus laetitian sua^ choreis and saltationisbus
declarabant and adbue declarant Iudaei.
dancing, and it may teach them not to be censorious and so uncharitable, in
passing their sentence upon men and women's dancing together. Did not CHRIST
JESUS himself mominate Music and dancing to be that, whereby the Luke 15.25.
good and holy father of the prodigal son did express his joy for his
conversion? And whereas some there are that allow of the recreation, so that
men and women do not dance together, but each sex in a company apart; and
their reason is, because (as they say) no example can be showed in the Bible of
any such dancing, Such may consider what is said in Jeremiah: Ier. 31.13.
Then shall the virgin rejoice in the dance, both young men and old together.
In the Greek Bible it is: (...). That is, then shall the virgins rejoice in
the assembly of young men, and the old men shall be glad. Does not this ancient
translation considered with the Hebrew reading, at the least intimate that
young men and maidens may dance together? The Church has power to change the
circumstances of ordinances mentioned in the Scriptures, yea of The Church has
altered the time and g^sture used in receiving the Sacrament.
circumstances in the receiving of the Sacraments. And if the Church allow men
and women to dance together, who can then prove it to be a sin? But it is
objected, They may not be near together, because it may cause unchaste
thoughts. By the like reason they may conclude, that it is unlawful for men
and women to be nigh each other in any place or occasion. But Saint Paul says:
Tit. 1.15.16.
Unto the pure all things are pure: unto them that are defiled and unbeleeving,
is nothing pure: but even their mind and conscience is defiled. Such as fear
Satan's temptation, may provide for their own safety: but such as are fully
persuaded in their hearts, that by Gods grace he shall not in such recreation
annoy them, appear to be free to dance with whom they will, according to the
Phil. 4.8.
laudable custom. When as dancing was often used in all Parishes by all
people, how greatly was true Christian friendship increased thereby, and
con^erved. By this (says the Lord JESUS) shall all men know that ye are my
disciples, if ye have Joh. 13.35. Godly love is signified in the prayer for
Christ's Church Militant, to be the Sovereign good or chief happiness in the
life or conversation of mankind. See 1. Cor. 13.13. and 1. Joh. 4.7.8.16. Joh.
13.35.
love one to another. And even as Peter and John said in another case, so may
it be said: Whether is it better in the sight of GOD, for people Sundays
after all Divine Services for that day ended, for to assemble together unto
such public recreation as is allowed, than to keep at home or one to go to
another houses, and there to speak against the higher powers (especially such
as are in the Clergy, there to talk of other folks matters which nothing
concern them, there to consult mischief against such as they affect not, and
to spend the time in unprofitable talking, yea and in such matters as are not
meet here to be mentioned? Moreover, whereas throughout the whole Kingdom
there is a great neglect of very many in coming to evening prayer: For many of
the richer sort account it not beseeming their State, to come to evening
prayer, unless there be a Sermon; and many of the meaner sort take example by
them, concluding that if the richer may lawfully absent themselves from Church,
why may not they likewise? Now by this prescription of the Kings most excellent
Majesty being in every expressed point thereof duly observed, very many will
repair to the Divine Service more carefully, and so Devotion will be
increased by the due observing of the prescriptions in the Declaration.
devotion will be abundantly increased. And what is true godliness? Can there
be a more perfect godliness, than for people to agree together in the truth of
Gods holy word, and to live together in unity and godly love? Is not this the
drift, scope, and maine intent of his Highness Declaration? Whosoever will
impartially by Gods holy word consider of his most sacred Majesty's declared
care for the Church, cannot but see, that now it is from God, as in the days
of the Prophet Haggai, when as the Lord Hag. 1.14.
stirred up the spirit of Zerubbabel, Governor of Judah, and Joshua the high
Priest, and sundry other truly godly persons for the restoration of what was
then defective. The Lord says by the Prophet Amos: Amos 9.11.
In that day will I raise up the Tabernacle of David, which is fallen, and
close up the breaches thereof, and I will raise up his ruins, and I will build
it as in the days of old: that the residue of men might seek after the Lord,
and all the Gentiles, upon whom my name is called, says the Lord, who does all
these things. Though it may not be said, that the Tabernacle of David has
fallen down in our land, yet (like as all material houses and tabernacles are
subject to ruins) so has it had some certain The holy fathers have mentioned
some of the decays in their prayer made for to be used at the last fast. See
the beginning of the Epistle dedicatory of the Christian Divinity.
decays. Was there not a breach beginning in it, about Predestination and all
the doctrines depending thereon, until the Royal prudence by GODS especial
providence Amos 9.11. In his highness most prudent reign that prophecy of Amos
has a fulfilling now in our land.
closed up that breach in the Tabernacle, by that most divine Declaration set
before the 39. Articles of Religion, requiring that so that high doctrine and
all depending on it may be so understood, as not to be contrary to the
divinity expressly contained and delivered throughout the book of common
prayer? His Majesty's most sacred instructions concerning Catechizing, etc.
would they not cause a great increase of knowledge in the grounds of the true
Christian Religion, among youth and all persons, of the meaner sort, who in
very many places are lamentably ignorant of the same? Is it not his Sacred
Majesty's most godly endeavor, and likewise of the holy Fathers of the Church,
for to have the Tabernacle of David in our Land, to be as in the days of So
would God have his Tabernacle to be restored. See Amos 9.11. Jer. 6.16.17. Isa.
58.12. 2. Joh. verse. 5.6.
old, namely when as reformation was in its perfectest flourishing and
standing? Is not the sum of his Highness late declaration, that Christian
charity may amongst us all toward each other abound, the very life of true
Religion and virtue? And therefore people are not to show themselves to be of
the number of those, which the Apostles foretold would be in the last times,
which Jude 8. and 2. Per. 2.12.
speak evil of dignities, and of those things which they know not. There are
sundry well disposed people, which observe many evil effects come to pass,
and do greatly bewail them: but very few do take matters into so serious a
consideration, as to find out the causes of such evils. The high understa^ding
Fathers of the Church do clearly see, that the cause of all evil which has
so much increased, is, for that a 1. Tim. 4.1. and 2. Tim. 4.3.4.
Faith has entered into many peoples minds, contrary to that which is
prescribed throughout the three books of the Divine service. Also that a great
cause of the decay of much charity and good neighborhood, has bin the In his
most sacred Majesty's Declaration, and pages 15 16. it is signified.
forbidding of the ancient feasts of the Church, and of ordinary meetings, and
of the like nourishings of unity and godly love. For this present here shall be
an end of this discourse with the rehearsing of some of the Scriptures
testifying of the Whitsun feast, and of the feasts of the Dedication of
Churches, both which are to be kept yearly for evermore in every Parish of or.
Land, if his Sacred Majesty's holy will and pleasure be duly observed and
obeyed. Concerning the Whitsun feast, thus says the Lord. Deuteronomy. 16.10.11.
Thou shall keep the feast of weeks unto the Lord thy God, with a tribute of a
free will Then every one of ability is to contribute for some pious use.
Tribute in the margent there is sufficiency, for to signify, that every one
according to his ability is to be liberal in such a contribution.
offering of thine hand, which thou shall give unto the Lord thy GOD, according
as the Lord thy God has blessed thee. And thou shall rejoice before the Lord
thy God, thou, and thy son, and thy daughter, and thy manservant, and thy
maidservant, and the Levite that is within thy gates, and the stranger, and the
fatherless, and the widow, that are among you, in the place which the LORD thy
God has chosen to put his name there. Concerning the feasts of Dedication of
Churches, thus it is signified in the Scripture. King Solomon having built the
Lords Temple, did at the 1. Kings 8.65.66.
Dedication of it make a feast, and all Israel with him. It is written in the
book of Maccabees, that when GODS Sanctuary was cleansed and made up, etc.
Judas and his brethren with the whole congregation of Israel ordained that the
days of the 1. Mac. 4.56.57.58.59.
dedication of the Altar should be kept in their season from year to year,
with mirth and gladness. Saint John in his Joh. 10.22.23. In the margent of
the said chapter and verse of S. John, there is reference unto 1. Mat. 4.59.
Gospel records the said feast, and writes that then CHRIST was present,
and walked in the temple in Solomon's porch. Saint Paul says, Romans 15.4.
Whatsoever things are written before time, are written for our learning. And
says the In the homily against Idolatry, pages 18.19. See cap. 18.
Church, speaking of what is written in the old Testament, If we be the people
of God, how can the word and law of God not appertain unto us? Saint Paul
says, Every Scripture is given for our instruction in righteousness, that we
may be perfect unto 2. Tim. 3.16.17.
every good work. And again says the Church (which though it be mentioned
but about the fourth Commandment, yet it is to be made use of about In the
homily of the time and place of prayer, pages 124.125.
every Commandment mentioned in the old Testament) Whatsoever is found in the
Commandment, appertaining to the law of nature, as a thing most godly, most
just, and needful for the setting forth of Gods glory, it ought to be retained
and kept of all good Christian people. It is no indifferent matter to leave
unobserved such feasts, which are mentioned in the Scripture, and which the
Church signifies should yearly be kept. Most memorable hereunto is the saying
of the Lord in Deuteronomy, Deuteronomy. 28.45.46.47.
Curses shall come upon thee for a sign, and for a wonder, and upon thy seed
for ever: because thou servedst not the Lord thy God with joyfulnesse, and with
gladness of heart, for the abundance of all things. GOD ordained the feasts to
be kept, that in them all the people might express their thankfulness unto
him for his blessings given unto them. And therefore the people of GOD in all
ages have not only with great zeal and care kept the feasts prescribed unto
them by GOD and the Church, but also in thankfulness to God for sundry
blessings received, have kept feasts voluntarily, as Abraham made a feast when
Isaac his son was Genesis 21.8.
weaned, so now at childrens christening, women's churching, etc. In the
Articles delivered at the late Metropoliticall visitation it is required, That
Church-houses be kept in due reparation, and only for that right holy use, for
which they were ordained. In them the parishioners are to celebrate their
banquet at Whitso^tide etc. for the increase of godly love, and for the comfort
of the poor amongst them.


Q. Now proceed on in explaning the rest of the Commandments, What is the
fifth Commandment?

A. Honor thy Father and thy Mother, that thy days may be long in the land
which the Lord thy God gives thee.

Q. Because in the duty toward ones Proximus nester, est quilibet cui vel
officium, vel auxilium nostru^ exhibere debemus, aut cujus officio auxiliove
nos indigemus. Luc. 10.36.37. Polanus lib. 10. cap. 2.
neighbor, that which is included in this Commandment is signified, and in
sundry things expressed, therefore here shall not be question concerning what
is there delivered. But now here declare, whether by Father and Mother are
meant any else, saving our natural Parents?

A. The Lord says in Isaiah, Isa. 49 23.
Kings shall be thy nursing fathers, and their Queens thy nursing mothers;
whereby we are given to understand, that they which have the chief rule over
us, and also all that are in authority under them, and are set to govern us
are signified by the said names. By Mother is also meant the Church of Christ,
wherein the faithful are begotten by the incorruptible seed of Gods word, as
the Yea also the Fathers of the Church in the former ages.
Geneva note expounds that saying of Solomon, Prove. 1.8.
Forsake not thy mothers teaching. Wherefore by this Commandment we are
required to have in all due honor the most reverend Fathers in God the
Archbishops, and the right reverend Fathers in God the Bishops. And as we are
duly to honor all Churches of Christ in what nation soever; so in a more
special manner we are to honor the Apostolical Church of England, wherein
we have been spiritually Psalm. 110.3. Isa. 66 7.8.9.
conceived and brought forth, and 66.11.12.
borne on her sides, dandled upon her knees, suckled at her breasts, fed with
her 1. Cor. 3.2.
tender meat, and with Heb. 5.11.12.13.14.
stronger, according as we have been and are able for to Joh. 16.12.
bear or digest the same Are they not justly counted graceless children,
which have their natural mother in contempt, that regard not her Prove.
6.20.21.22.23. Pro. 31.1.2. etc. See Prove. 30.17 and 15.20. and 19.26. and
20.20.
advising of them? Can the gracelesnesse of such be unto the full expressed,
which contemn or neglect the divine Service books of our mother the Church,
and think their own imagined wisdom in religion matters many degrees more
excellent than hers?

Q. Why is it added, That thy days may be long in the land, which the Lord thy
God gives thee?

A. Jesus the son of Sirach says, The Lord has given the father honor over
the children, and has confirmed the authority (or judgment) of the Sir.
3.2.4.4.5.6.7.8.9.16.
mother over the sons. Whosoever honors his father, makes an atonement for
his sins: and he that honors his mother, is as one that lays up
treasure. He that honors his father shall have a long life, and he that is
obedient unto the Lord, shall be a comfort to his mother. Honor thy father and
mother both in word and deed, that a blessing may come upon thee from them. For
the blessing of the father establishes the houses of children, but the curse
of the mother rooteth out foundations. Seeing that the Lord JESUS said, Mat.
16.19.
Unto thee Peter, will I give the keys of the kingdom of heaven: and
whatsoever thou shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven: and whatsoever
thou shall loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven: and also said unto the
other Apostles, Ioh. 20.23.
Whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them, and whose soever
sins ye retain, they are retained: Ought not our mothers discipline and
doctrine to be much reverenced, and her excommunicating to be dreaded? Few do
consider how great and manifold is the authority of the Church, and fewer lay
to heart how many in these times have in contempt or neglect the said
authority. It is observed that the Hebrew text of this Commandment is, That
they may prolong thy days, that is, as See his annotation on Exo. 20. set unto
his translation.
Iunius says, by their blessing of thee. In which sense (says he) some are
said to 1. Tim. 4.16. Iam. 5.20.
save others: and he refers unto the chapter of Sirach before mentioned for
illustration of the matter. Did not 2. King. 2.24.
Elishaes curse shorten the days of those Children that dishonored him a
father in Israel? And were not the obedient children of the Patriarchs the
better in soul and body for their parents blessing? Atheism and unbeleefe
has so prevailed in many, that they believe not that the blessing of a
spiritual Father, namely confirmation performed by a Bishop, does any good.
And because it is not believed that GOD works so by the holy Fathers, and in
the Sacraments, and in other ordinances of his, and by other God says, that
upon his true people the Ministers shall put his name, and he will bless such
Israchtes. Number. 6.27. See chap. 74.
ministers, according as his word expresses, hence is it that due honoring of
them is so greatly neglected. And here it might be largely treated concerning
the promised land, into which the people of Israel were now travailing, when
GOD spoke these words unto them; he having brought them out of one land, was
leading them into another land. David signifies what that land was
spiritually, where he prays, saying, Lead me into the Psalm. 143.10.
land of uprightness. And that is the land which every obedient soul shall in
this world have some entrance into; and David expresses it where he says,
Psalm. 25.13.
The fearer of the LORD shall dwell at ease ( or See the margent in the last
translation.
lodge in goodness) and his seed shall inherit that earth (or land.) Again he
says, Psalm. 37.11.
The meek shall inherit the earth (or that land:) and shall delight themselves
in the abundance of peace. And these words of this fifth Commandment are also
to be understood concerning the outward land, which we inhabit: for by
dishonouring of the higher powers many pull miseries upon themselves, yea and
sometimes destruction. David says, Psalm. 55.23.
The deceitful as well as the bloodthirsty, shall not live out half their
days.

Q. What is the sixth Commandment?

A. Thou shall do no murder.

And here it is to be observed, as it was before signified, that GODS
Commandments require our observation of them, as well inwardly as outwardly.
Hence it is said, God requires, that we should honor the King with our very
heart, and likewise to bear a reverent remembrance of all powers under Him,
that are over us. Eccles. 10 20
Curse not the King, no not in thy thought (or conscience.) And Saint Paul
says, Col. 3.22.23.
Servants obey in all things your masters according to the flesh: not with
eye-service, as men pleasers, but in singleness of heart fearing GOD: and
whatsoever ye do, do it heartily, as to the Lord, and not unto men. So there
is a committing of murder with the heart before the eyes of the Lord, as Saint
John says, 1. Joh. 3.15.
Whosoeve hates his brother is a murderer. The Lord JESUS CHRIST (of whose
coming one cause was (as the In the Homily against adultery page 84. See chap.
21.
Homily says) to restore the law of his heavenly Father unto the right sense,
understanding and meaning) gives to us for to know, that whosoever is angry
with any one without cause, or shall say to one, Racha, that is, empty brain,
idle head, or shall say thou fool, pish, or the like, is a breaker of this
Mat. 5.21.22.
sixth Commandment. And whereas the Lord says, Mat. 22.40.
That on these Commandments hang all the Law and the Prophets, we are given to
understand, that there is no sin whatsoever, but it may be referred to be a
breach of one of these ten precepts. So that if one should take in hand for to
show all the duties required to be done by each Commandment, and all the
sins forbidden by each, would it not require a very great volume for to
contain such a narration? The Church relleth us, In her lesser Catechism.
That all things tending toward blood shedding, are also forbidden, as mocks,
reproaches, quarrellings, fightings, and such like. The sin of mocking and
scoffing now greatly reigns in very many, whereby they show their murtherous
minds toward such, at whom they scoff. Many much delight themselves in
jesting at others, though the Gospel does Ephesians, 5.4.
expressly forbid it, because it is a thing not only uncomely, but also not
proceeding from charity: for whom one loves, he will not break jests upon
him, but 1. Pet. 4.17.
honor him what he may. It is the music that many make to themselves to have
a jest upon or against such or such a person, such or such a matter. The
Gospel commands, that no corrupt Ephesians. 4.29.
communication proceed out of our mouths, that our speech be always Col. 4.6.
gracious; and the reason is, because we shall give account for every Mat.
12.36.37.
idle word: for (says CHRIST) by thy words thou shall be justified, and by thy
words thou shall be condemned. His religion is James 1.26. It is not the
Cari^tian Religion which he practices. Tit. 1.16.
vain, that bridleth not his tongue, says the holy Ghost by Saint James. It
is by Gods universal word signified to be the maine mark, whereby a true
Christian is discerned from a Pharisee, and also from a libertine, namely the
Mat. 12.34.35. Iam. 3.15.16.17 Psalm. 17.3.
continual endeavoring to bridle his tongue, as well privately as publicly,
and to have a respect unto all the Bibles Commandments, concerning how ones
mouth and tongue are to be ordered. The Prophet David prayed unto God for to
deliver him from Psalm. 51.14.
bloud-guiltinesse in the matter of Vriahs death. Even innumerable are the
kinds of murdering indirectly or by consent, and to reckon up many of them
would be horrible to be read or heard. Such as live in retired manner as it
were out of the world, or converse with none but such as either are civil, or
do carry themselves civilly before them, cannot imagine what evils are done by
many in Ephesians. 5.12.
secret, and where they dare show themselves in their proper colors. How many
are indirectly murdered in such and such a manner, as the law of the land can
take no hold on such Murderers? Universal cruelty is observed to be forbidden
by this Commandment: And Gods word forbids that any cruelty should be
showed to any body christian or unchristian, yea and to our Prove. 12.10.
cattle or to any other Romans 8.22.
creature Scarce any can comprehend how great avertue is charity, but such as
have experienced the mercies of uncharitable ones in these times. Many
Spiritual murtherings might be here mentioned, inward and outward: as, The 1.
These. 5.19.
quenching of Gods Spirit within one, The putting out and extinguishing of the
Luke 11.35.
light of conscience within one, The Heb. 6.6.
crucifying to ones self afresh the Son of God, and the putting of him to an
open shame, the treading of him under foot, and the doing of Heb. 10.29.
despite to the spirit of grace. How have Gods two witnesses, the books of the
old and new Testament, been many manner of ways Rev. 11.7.8.
murdered, as the Revelation foretold? How many manner of ways have the
Church her two witnesses, the Communion book and the Homilies book been
murdered, in that the authority, which their sayings should have among all the
members of the Church of England, is either quite destroyed by many and among
many, or so weakened as it cannot sway or move a It is not to be named, it is
unexpressable, in how light account very many which profess themselves to be
members of the Church, have those two fundamental books of the Church.
whit, either in matter of mind or of conversation.

Q. What is the seventh Commandment?

A. Thou shall not commit adultery.

And this Commandment is likewise broken, as well inwardly with the mind, as
outwardly with the body; for CHRIST says, Mat. 5.28.
Whosoever looks on a woman to lust after her, has committed adultery with
her in his heart. And therefore the Lord signifies in the words immediately
after the said sentence, that he requires we should mortify our members
which are upon earth: fornication, uncleanenesse, inordinate affection, evil
concupiscence, Ioh. 31.1.
and not suffer Mat. 5.29.30.
eye or hand to be instrument of any manner of unchastity, but to be only used,
as GODS Law may not be by them in any wise transgressed. How many a law has
GOD given by Moses for to show (as Saint Paul says) how every one should
possess his 1. These. 4.4.5.7.
vessel in sanctification and honor; not in the lust of concupiscence, even
as the gentiles which know not God? For God has not called us unto
uncleanenesse, but unto holiness. And how are the apparent everlasting laws
delivered by Moses hereunto by many utterly neglected? Saint Paul says, It is
a shame even to Ephesians. 5.12.
speak of those things which are done of them in secret. Why does the Lord by
Malachi say, Mal. 4.4.
Remember ye the law of Moses my servant, which I commanded him in Horeb, for
all Israel, with the statutes and judgments? The Libertines of these days
will not consider, that though Moses wrote some laws peculiar to the Jews, as
concerning their ceremonial, circumstantiall, and outward observation; yet
that in all his books and in most chapters of his books there is expressed or
signified that which is moral and See Polani Syntagma and therein lib. 10.
cap. 23. Many students in Divinity do neglect the study of that part of
Theology, his tenth books contents.
everlasting. Is it now lawful for a woman to be See Lev 12.
Churched, before such time as it is by law of our Church prescribed? Is it now
lawful for a man to marry his Lev. 20.17.
sister? And that is forbidden by Moses in Leviticus. That saying of the Church
is perfect truth about every particular law delivered by Moses: In the homily
of the place and time of prayer, page 125.
Whatsoever is found in the commandment appertaining to the law of nature, as
a thing most godly, most just, and needful for the setting forth of Gods
glory, it ought to be retained and kept of all good Christian people. The Lord
commands us to be 1. Pet. 1.15.16 2 Pet. 3.11.
holy in all manner of conversation. And therefore says the Church in her most
divine Homily against whoredom and uncleanness: In the first part and page 79.
CHRIST teaches us an exact and full perfection of purity and cleanness of
life, both to keep our bodies undefiled, and our hearts pure and free from all
evil thoughts, carnal desires, and fleshly consents. In the 3. part and page
86.
GOD at this present abhors all manner of uncleanness, no less than he did
in the old law, and will undoubtedly punish it, both in this world, and in the
world to come. Ezech. 18.6. and the Church in her Declaratio^s exposition of
the seventh commandment observes the same also.
Ezechiel in his 18. chapter signifies a great and weighty duty to be observed
by all such as are married: and they that desire to be complete Christians,
and to receive Gods manifold mercies and blessings in this world, and
everlasting salvation, are diligently to read all Moses law, whereof he was not
the author, but the eternal God. There is a considerable saying in the book
of Tobias, and it is expressed in the Church-her first translation, which the
Bishops the Fathers in God did set forth, and it is likewise in sundry Latin
translations, and it is alleged in those holy Fathers exposition of this
commandment: It is in that which is called Saint Jeromes translation the 17.
ver. of chapter 6. The said book of the Church is commonly called, King Henry on
the Sacraments; whereas it was set forth in the latter part of his reign. It
is entitled, A necessary doctrine and crudition for any Christian man, etc.
See in the homily of good works the third part and page 38. what is delivered
concerning that renowned King.
They that marry in such wise, that they exclude God out of their hearts, and
give themselves unto their own carnal lusts, as it were an horse or a mule,
which have no reason, upon such persons the devil has power. And the Church
now says in her larger Catechism: By this commandment is forbidden all kind
of filthy and wandering lust, and all uncleanness that rises of such lust, as
fondness in handling, unchastnesse of speech, and all wantonness of
countenance and gesture, all outward show of unchastitie whatsoever it be. And
not only filthiness of words and uncleanness of doings is forbidden by God,
but also forasmuch as both our bodies and our souls are the temples of the
holy Ghost, that honesty may be kept undefiled in them both, shamefastness
and chastity is commanded, that neither our bodies be defiled with
uncleanness of lust, nor our minds with unhonest thoughts or desires, but be
always preserved chaste and pure. Wherefore says the Church, In the homily
against adultery, page 88. See chapter 94. and page 359.
This shall we easily do, if when we feel inwardly, that Satan our old
enemy tempts us unto whoredom, we by no means consent to his crafty
suggestions, but valiantly resist and withstand him by strong faith in the word
of God, alleging against him always in our heart, this commandment of God:
It is written, thou shall not commit wheredome. It shall be good also for us,
ever to live in the fear of GOD, and to set before our eyes the grievous
threatenings of God against all ungodly sinners, and to consider in our mind,
how filthy, beastly, and short that pleasure is, whereunto Satan continually
stirs and mooveth us: and again, how the pain appointed for that sin is
intolerable and everlasting. There is also spiritual whoring, when one
follows not the will of God, but (as David says) goes a whoring with his
own Ps. 106.39.
inventions. Who therefore says: Ps. 73.27.
They that are far from thee shall perish, thou have destroyed all them that
go a whoring from thee. And are not they Hereof should they duly consider,
which profess themselves to be zealous for religion and yet are defective in
duty toward the Church.
guilty of spiritual whoredom, which neglect meditating on the fundamental
doctrine of their mother, the instruction in Religion, which is contained in
the books of the Divine Service, composed and authorized by the supreme divine
Wisdom of the Church, and are wholly affected unto books written by private
persons, which deliver doctrine contrary to the general doctrine of the Church
books aforesaid?

Q. What is the eight Commandment?

A. Thou shall not steal. This sin likewise may be committed in the heart,
namely, when as one takes from God that which is his. Hence the Prophet
Malachy says: Will a man Mal. 3.9.
rob GOD? yet ye have robbed the Lord. Our heart is the Lords due; he says:
Prove. 23.26.
My son give me thy heart. Now if we Very many rob god in these times, as
those which withhold from Ministers that, which is their due by the law or
custom of the land, etc.
set our hearts or earthly riches, or earthly pleasures, or any thing else
besides God, his word, his light, and the life which he requires; and do not
duly prepare our hearts to be fit temples for the dwelling of his spirit
within us in this present life, that our Creator may in this world have a
delight in us, we steal from God, and deceive our own selves. God is very
jealous concerning peoples hearts, when as he perceives them declining from
the due obedience unto his requiries. Therefore he often says: Ier. 17.9.10.11.
I the Lord search the heart, I try the reins, even to give every man
according to his ways, and according to the fruit of his doings. As the
partridge sits on eggs, and hatcheth them not: so he that gets riches
and not by But by doing wrong to God or man.
right, shall leave them in the midst of his days, and at his end shall be a
fool. verse 13.
O Lord the hope of Israel, all that for sake thee shall be ashamed, and they
that depart from me shall be written in the earth, because they have forsaken
the Lord the fountain of living waters. Universal unjust dealing between one
another is forbidden by this precept. Workers of any Ps. 66.18. and therefore
119.3.
iniquity cannot assure themselves, that they are in the way to Salvation. The
Lord says by Micah: Micah 6.10.11.12.
Shall I count them pure with the wicked balances, and with the bag of
deceitful weights? For the rich men thereof are full of violence: and the
inhabitants thereof have spoken lies, and their tongue is deceitful in their
mouth. Saint Paul says: 1. These. 4.3.6.
This is the will of the Lord, that no man go beyond and defraude his brother
in any matter, because the Lord is the avenger of all such. Blessed (says
David) are they that keep judgment: and he that does righteousness at Ps.
106.3.
all times. But whosoever is a worker of injustnesse shall perish everlastingly,
how zealous soever he has bin about other laudable matters, as CHRIST has
pronounced and Luke 13.26.27. Mat. 7.22.23.
denounced the same. CHRIST'S ministry is called the 2. Cor. 3.9.
ministration of righteousness, his word the Heb. 5.13.
word of righteousness, his people people of Isa. 61.3. and 60.21.
righteousness, his way the way of 2. Pet. 2.21.
righteousness, his Ministers 2. Cor. 11.15. and 2. Pet. 2.5.
Preachers of righteousness. 1. Ioh. 3.10.
Righteousness and love is the visible mark (says S. John) whereby his people
are manifest from the children of the devil. The Church says in her
Catechism: All withdrawing of others duties (or dues) as withholding of the
laborers hire, refusing by covetousnes to relieve the poor, to succor
widows, fatherless children, and strangers, to leave the ignorant untaught,
the simple uncounselled, the wandering and erring, undirected, the sorrowful
uncomforted, and such like, are by this law uncondemned. The LORD CHRIST JESUS
has given a rule serving to the observation of this commandment, and even of
all the rest toward man, the which if we remember and perform, we shall scarce
at any time, in word or deed commit wrong against any one. And the rule is:
Mat. 7.12.
Whatsoever ye would, that men should do unto you, the same do ye unto them:
and whatsoever ye would not that others should do unto you, do not ye the
same unto them. And this is to be understood concerning thought, word, and
deed.

Q. What is the ninth Commandment?

A. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor. The Church
says: In the lesser Catechism.
In this law we are forbidden not only open and manifest perjury, and breaking
of our oath: but also all It is unexpressable, how little conscience very many
do make of lying, though the Gospel denounces liers to be none of Gods
people, but such as are for that most horrible sin to be damned everlastingly.
See Isa. 63.8. Rev. 21.8.27. and 22.15.
lying, slanders, backbiting, and evil speakings, whereby our neighbor may
lose his good name, and all flattery and dissembling whereby he may take
harm. And that neither our selves at any time speak any false or untrue
thing, neither by words, writings, or silence, allow the same in other, but
that we ever love, follow, maintain and uphold the truth. GOD, who knows
the secrets of our hearts, when he forbids evil speaking, does therewith
also forbid wrongful misdeeming, and evil thinking of our neighbors. Yea,
and he charge us, as far as truth may suffer, to think well of them: And
to our uttermost power to preserve their good name. As we are required by the
Gospel under pain of perishing everlastingly, not to Romans 1.29.30.32.
slander any one openly or secretly, so likewise are we required not to take up
(or Ps. 15.3. As it is in the margent.
receive, or endure) a reproach against our neighbor, as the holy Prophet
declares: considering that we live in an age, wherein few are found which make
conscience of wronging others in their name. The Lord JESUS signified unto his
obedient people, that they should be hated of Matt. 10.22.
all others for his names sake, that they would say all manner of evil against
them Matt. 5.11.
falsely for his sake. If they have called the master of the house Mat. 10.25.
Beelzebub; how much more will they call them of his household? The children of
Satan will not be content themselves to hold errors and heresies, and live in
disobedience to God and Church; but also they will mortally malign all others,
which will not profess and practice, and walk 1. Pet. 4.4. 2. Tim. 3.12.
in that desperate way, as they do. Some reason is; They know that such as
refuse to accompany them, do Ioh. 7.7.
witness thereby against them, that their ways are evil. Now concerning
lying and speaking untruth, who trembles to transgress in that kind? Though
the holy Ghost says, Rev. 21.8.
All liers shall have their part in the lake, that burns with fire and
brimstone, the second death; yet who lays it to heart? To make conscience of
speaking any untruth, is by God in Isaiah delivered to be the peculiar property
of his children, where it is said: Surely they are my people, Isa. 63.9.
children that will not lie: so I was their Savior. And to make no conscience
of uttering untruths is by CHRIST delivered to be the peculiar property of the
devils children, where it is said: Ye are of your father the Ioh. 8.44.
devil, and the lust of your father ye will do: for he is a lier, and the
father thereof. Saint John says: Rev. 22.15.
Without Gods city is whosoever loves or makes a lie. Therefore says the
Lord by Zech. 8.16.17.
Zechariah: Speak ye every man the truth to his neighbor: execute the
judgment of truth and peace in your gates. And let none of you imagine evil
in your hearts against his neighbor, and love no false oath: for all these are
things that I hate, says the Lord. Unto that outragiousnesse of slandering are
many now come, that they blaspheme with Many reproach with new names of faction
and the like, such as profess sincerely the established doctrine of the
Church. Yea it is a maine policy of the devil so to hinder the passage of the
divine Service doctrine.
names of reproach such as profess the faith and life prescribed in the book
of common prayer. So odious is the Catholic, Apostolic, and eternal truth of
godliness unto such as live in any viciousnes outward or inward! Therefore the
complaint is now true, that the devil of hell is brake loose in very many
peoples minds and mouths. The Lord says: Mat. 12.34.
Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks. All people do
manifestly declare, which spirit has his Kingdom within them by the words
which proceed out of them. CHRIST says, O generation of vipers, how can ye
being evil, speak good things? David says: Help Lord, for the godly man
cease: for the faithful Ps. 12.1.2.3.4.
fail from among the children of men. They speak vanity every one with his
neighbor: with flattering lips, and with a double heart do they speak. The
Lord will cut off all flattering lips, and the tongue that speaks proud
things. Who have said, with our tongues we will prevail, our lips are our own,
who is Lord over us? There is also In the declarations exposition of this
commandment.
referred unto the breach of this commandment, the teaching of untrue
doctrine, and calling it Gods word. See of such doings mentioned in Jeremiah
23. and Ezechiel 13. Isaiah 30.9.10. and Jeremiah 5.30.31.

Q. What is the tenth commandment?

A. Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, thou shall not covet thy
neighbors wife, nor his servant, nor his maid, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor
any thing that is his. In the Declaration set forth by the Christ says in Joh.
8.12. He that follows me, shall have the light of life. Whosoever with a
single heart will read the said declaration, shall perceive that the Fathers of
the Church, then following gods light arising in the Christian world at that
time in a special manner, in expounding the ten commandments, abundantly set
forth the upright life of true Christianity.
Church in the latter part of the reign of King H. the Eight it is thus
delivered upon this commandment: All they be transgressors of this
commandment, which by deliberation and full consent, cast their minds and
lusts, to accomplish the concupiscence and desire, which they have to ob^eine
and get unlawfully an other man's wife, child, servant, house, land, cattle, or
any thing or goods that be his. And they also be transgressors of this
commandment, which by envy, be sorry of their neighbors wealth and
prosperity, or be glad of their sorrow, hinderance and adversity. And also all
they which do not set their minds and studies, to preserve, maintain, and
defend, unto their neighbors (as much as it is in them) their wives, children,
servants, houses, lands, goods, and all that is theirs. For this commandment
not only forbids us to desire unlawfully from our neighbor any thing that
is his: but by the same we be also commanded, gladly to wish and will unto him,
that he may quietly possess and enjoy all that which God has sent him, be it
never so great abundance. And this mind we ought to bear unto every man by
this commandment, not only if they be our friends and lovers, but also if
they be our enemies and adversaries. And it is there also said: Furthermore
like as in the fifth commandment, under the name of father and mother is
understood all superiors: and in the sixth commandment, under the name of
killing is understood all wrath and revenge: and in the seventh commandment,
under the name of adultery is understood all unchaste living: and in the eight
commandment, under the name of theft is understood all deceitful dealing with
our neighbors: and in the ninth commandment, under the name of false
witness, is understood all misreport, and untrue use of our tongue: So in this
last commandment, under the name of desiring of another man's wife and goods,
is understood all manner of evil and unlawful desire of any thing. Mortify
therefore (says the Apostle) evil Col. 3.5.6.
concupiscence and covetousness, which is idolatry. For which things sake the
wrath of God comes upon the children of disobedience. 1. Tim. 6.6.
Godliness is great gain if a man be content with that he has.

Q. Why are we taught to pray, Write all these thy laws in our hearts?

A. It is one of Gods promises unto his obedient people, as it is related in
the Epistle to the Hebrews, I (says the Lord) will put my laws into their
mind, and Heb. 8.10.11.12.
write them in their hearrs. We also for our parts unto the attaining of that
favor from God, are to do like David, who said, Psalm. 119.11.
Thy word have I hid in my heart, that I might not sin against thee. We are
(as Christ commands) to Mat. 6.20.
lay up treasure in heaven for our selves: and (as Paul says) let the word of
Christ dwell in us plenteously in all wisdom: and to have our Psalm. 1.2.
delight in the law of the Lord, and therein to meditate day and night. Which
if we do, then (as Isaiah signifies) we shall be Isa. 54.13.14.
taught of the Lord, great shall be our peace, and in righteousness we shall
be established.

Q. Of how many branches does ones duty toward God consist, according to the
delivery in the Catechism immediately after the ten Commandments?

A. It may be conceived to be there expressed in ten.

Q. What is the first branch thereof?

A. To believe in God. And in the exposition of the Creed the true belief (or
what we are to believe in and of God, the Father, Son, and holy Ghost) has
been largely declared. Saint Paul says, Heb. 11.6.
He that comes to God must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of
them that diligently seek him. And he signified to the Athenians, Acts
17.26.27.28.
how it is Gods will, that Col. 3.16.
every one of mankind should seek the Lord, if happily they might feel after
him, and find him, though he be not far from every one of us; for in him we
live, and move, and have our being.

Q. What is the second?

A. To fear him: And that with a sonnelike fear. It is said of Michael the
Archangel, when contending with the devil, he disputed about the body of
Moses, that he Jude 9.
durst not bring against the devil a railing accusation, but said, The Lord
rebuke thee. The Angels of heaven do fear to d^splease their Creator,
knowing what befell them which 2. Pet. 2.4. See 2 Esd. 8.21.
sinned, that they are cast down to hell, and delivered into chains of
d^rkenesse, to be reserved unto judgment. Wherefore CHRIST says unto us,
Luke. 12.45.
I will forewarne you whom ye shall fear: Fear him, which after he has
killed, has power to cast into hell, yea, I say unto you, Fear him. See Jesus
the son of Sirachs description of Gods fear in his second chapter.

Q. What is the third?

A. To love him with all my heart, with all my mind, with all my soul, and
with all my strength.

And how the CHURCH has expounded these things, hear what is delivered in the
Homily of charity, and the first part, viz. Charity is, to love God with all
our heart, all our soul, and all our powers and strength. With all our heart,
that is to say, that our heart, mind, and study be set to believe his word, to
trust in him, and to love him above all other things, that we love best in
heaven or in earth. With all our life, that is to say, that our chief joy and
delight be set upon him and his honor, and our whole life given unto the
service of him above all things, with him to live and die, and to forsake all
other things, rather than him. For he that loves his father or mother, son or
daughter, house or land, more than me ( says CHRIST) is not worthy to have me.
With all our power, that is to say, that with our hands and feet, with our eyes
and ears, our mouths and tongues, and with all our parts and powers, both of
body and soul, we should be given to the keeping and fulfilling of his
Commandments.

Q. What is the fourth?

A. To worship him. And he is to be worshipped with our whole man, both
outward and inward, as it is said by Saint Paul, 1. Cor. 6.20. See also the
vulgar Latin translation there
Glorify GOD in your body, and in your spirit, which are Gods. David says,
But as for me, I will come into thine house, in the multitude of thy mercy: and
in thy fear will I Psalm. 5.7. In Psalm. 96 9. It is said, Worship the Lord in
the beauty of holiness. 1. Cor. 14 40.
worship toward thy holy temple. The Hebrew word signifies to bow down, to
make low obeisance. Again says David, Hear the voice of my supplications
when I cry unto thee: when I Psalm. 28.2.
lift up my hands toward thy holy In the marge^t it is, Toward the oracle of
the sanctuary. Whereunto the Chauncell in every Church answers.
oracle. The Oracle was the innermost place in the house of the Lord, whereunto
our Chauncels in Churches do answer. And therein was GODS mercy seat, etc.
Whereas it is said, The people of the land shall worship at the door of this
gate Ezech 46.2.3.
before the Lord, and the gracious presence of the Lord was in the oracle, it
appears that wheresoever about the temple they were, they did their low
obeisance toward the place of the Lords special presence, which was as in the
Chauncell. Wherefore are these things written? Are they not for our Romans 15.4.
Some observe that people are to make some obeisance before departing out of
Church, as Former in his Theology. See Exo. 12.27.28.
learning, as says Saint Paul? Unto this very day even in all parishes there
are some devoutly affected women, whose consciences do tell them that they
should make some obeisance toward the gracious presence of CHRIST in the
Sanctuary, and before they kneel down to prayer, they do constantly observe
it. Likewise there are seen some ancient grave men in some places, which have
retained such reverence, and are never unmindfull of the same, when they come
When the divine service is either already begun or upon beginning.
before JESUS CHRIST. May it not be done, and that by virtue of that saying, As
it is in the last translation Psalm. 95.6.
O come let us Those two words importing outward orbeysance enjoined besides
kneeling, are not to be let pass unconsidered. Christ says, not one jote or
title of his word must be let pass unregarded.
worship and fall down: let us kneel before the Lord our Maker? It is so said
in that Psalm which is appointed to be read in the beginning of Divine
Service: In which Psalm whatsoever is propounded, is it not for an everlasting
observation? It is most manifest out of those words of the Psalm, that before
kneeling down to prayer, some obeisance may be made toward Almighty GOD.
David says, Ps. 119.126. See Chap. 68.
It is time for thee, Lord, to work; for men have made void thy law. Almost all
the laws of GOD and Church concerning the reverence due to be done unto GOD in
his holy temple, are by very many scarce any whit regarded. In the Epistle set
before the Church her lesser Catechism in Latin, these words are: Fieri inquam
non potest, quin and Dei metum atque reverentiam, quae jam ex hoc mundo pene
profligata esse videtur, etc. Out of the which words and the rest of the said
Epistle it is manifest, That holy Church has seriously considered on the great
decay of the due fearing and reverencing of GOD, that is come to pass in this
world; and therefore carefully endeavors the repairing of the same.

Q. What is the fifth?

A. To give him thanks. And this duty is to be done within the spirit, in
bearing a grateful mind continually unto GOD for all his mercies. So David
did. And Saint Paul says, 1. These. 5.18.
In every thing give thanks. It is also to be performed outwardly with the
lips. He says, By CHRIST therefore let us offer the sacrifice of praise to GOD
continually, that is the fruit of our lips, Heb. 13.15.16
giving thanks unto his name. But to do good, and to communicate, forget not:
for with such sacrifices GOD is well pleased. And whereas by communicating to
the poor the Lord is thanked, and one maine cause why the Lord has commanded
his people to keep feasts, is, that the bowels of the poor may be refreshed,
that they may see some joyful days wherein to Deuteronomy. 16.11.14.15.
rejoice with others before the Lord, Therefore blessed for ever be Our Kings
most excellent Majesty for thus restoring the feasts of the Lord, which have
been prescribed by his Apostolic Church. It is a memorable duty delivered in
the book of Nehemiah, to be observed by all of ability on every feast day,
Sunday, holy day, and others: Neh. 8.10.
Eat the fat, drink the sweet, and send portions unto them, for whom nothing
is prepared.

Q. What is the sixth?

A. To put my whole trust in him. We are to Psalm. 9.10. and 37.5.
depend on Gods providence for all things which he has promised, in all
matters, bodily and ghostly, according as he has prescribed, we doing our
duties, and obediently performing all conditions by GOD enjoined thereunto.
David in the book of the Psalms gives examples of his own, and uses
exhortations hereabout abundantly. There is a memorable counsel hereto by
Judith, who said, Judith 8.15.16.17. etc.
If the Lord will not help us within these five days, he has power to defend
us when he will, even every day, or to destroy us before our enemies. Do not
bind the counsels of the Lord our God, let us wait for salvation of him, etc.

Q. What is the seventh?

A. To call upon him. And that is to pray unto him: Concerning which duty it
shall be spoken afterward. Saint Paul says, Romans 10.12.
The same Lord over all people, is rich unto all that call upon him.

Q. What is the eighth?

A. To honor his holy name. It is to be remembered, that CHRIST declares, how
some do Mat. 15.9. Isa. 29.13.14.15.
vainly honor God, when their fear and honor toward him is taught by the
precept of men, and thereby the precept of God is transgressed. Job therefore
very memorably says, Job. 13.7.8.10
Will you speak wickedly for God, and talk deceitfully for him? Will ye
accept his person? Will ye contend for God? He will surely reprove you, if
ye do secretly accept persons. There are that say, Gods glory and honor is
diminished, if we confess him to be so, as the book of Common prayer says
of him, in sundry As in the last prayer saving one of the Co^mination service;
and in the collect for the first day of Lent, etc.
places thereof. But do not they rather in an unexpressable manner dishonor
him, which attribute that unto him, which the Bible declares to be contrary
unto his universal eternal nature? What many do say, which hold contrary to
the doctrine of the third collect for good Friday, it is most horrible to be
named. The late most excellent Majesty observed it in His Highness Meditation
upon the Lords prayer, saying, In page 117.
We are to eschew the extremity of some, who by consequent make God the Author
of sin. Concerning the honoring of Gods name, it was in parr signified on
the third Commandment, and shall be further explaned in expressing what it is
to hallow his name, in exposition of the Lords prayer. But here it may be
lamented how slack, yea impiously obstinate are some against the In canon 18.
See Phil. 2.9.10 Romans 14.11.
prescribed honoring of Christ's holy name. It is the holy ordinance of the
Church, that when the Lord Jesus is mentioned in the reading of the Gospel for
the day, etc. all people, men and women, young and old, should make due and
lowly reverence: but there are some which will then constantly sit, and CHRIST
shall have from them neither Most lamentable is the unreverence of many toward
Jesus Christ. See Psalm 89.7.
bend nor beck. When as the greatest part of the congregation do duly
reverence the Lord JESUS, they will express their contempt of the most sacred
Church-law before the very face of God and the face of his holy congregation,
unto the high dishonor of the Lord, and the scandal of all godly people
assembled in Gods holy fear. And if such be informed of their neglect or
contempt, and do hear the sacred canon or constitution of the Church
alleged unto them, they will spet, at the very hearing of it, in so It cannot
be in few words expressed how the established doctrine and discipline of the
Church is by some despised.
deep a detestation have they holy Church her teaching, which God requires
all that would be his true people to hear and obey, and in no wise for to
forsake. The holy Fatherhood in their articles which they set forth for
Church Officers use, to know whereunto to they are to have an eye, do divinely
admonish hereof; but where are the Church Officers which have care and zeal to
take notice, who do their duty, and who not? If Pastors and Curates do but
once in a year make any exhortation unto the remembering of the four
reverences prescribed in the eighteenth Constitution, they shall hear of it
all the year after, yea and procure to themselves such hatred and prejudice,
as is not meet to be related. Holy Church in her larger Catechism declares
that which is now come to a full measure, where she says, In the larger
Catechism upon the words of the Creed The Communion of Saints. Ier. 5.5.
In the visible Church of CHRIST, if it be well ordered, there shall be seen
to be observed a certain order and manner of governance, and such a form of
ecclesiastical discipline, that it shall not be free for any that abides in
that flock, publicly to speak or do any thing wickedly or in heinous sort,
without punishment, yea and so, that in that congregation of men, all offenses
(so far as is possible) be avoided. But this discipline since long time past
by little and little decaying, as the manners of men be corrupt and out of
right course, specially of the Daily woeful experience declares the truth
hereof.
rich and men of power, which will needs have impunity, and most free liberty
to sin and do wickedly, this grave manner of looking to them and chasticement
can hardly be maintained in Churches. But yet if all in authority under the
Lord Bishops would use their uttermost endeavors for the repressing of
unreverence in Gods public worship, such disorderlinesse would daily decrease,
and all at length would therein become easily reformed. In these times not very
many are They of the Clergy which bear rule in the Church, are sensible of
Gods matters being neglected; It is they, who under the Royal Majesty, do
conscionably consider of what is committed amiss in the Church, and are
zealous for the redress of all the same.
servent for GODS cause, neither zealous that the LORD JESUS CHRIST may have
his due honor and reverence done unto his gracious presence in the Sanctuary.
And because matters are so greatly neglected in some places, they of the
Recusancie do injustly charge the The Church in her books of Divine Service,
and in the rest set forth by public authority, does prescribe all due
revere^ce unto the eternal Almighty God, and allows not of any the least
unreverence.
Church with the same.

Moreover it is here to be observed, that unto the due honoring of Gods holy
Name, the place where Gods Name is put, is to be honored also, as it is
written: Lev. 19.30.
Ye shall reverence my Sanctuary. For in the uppermost part thereof was Gods
holy 1. King. 8.29. Deuteronomy. 12.5.
name or most gracious Psalm. 95.2.
presence, his Exodus 25.21.22.
mercy seat from off which he was heard Number. 7.89.
speaking. And as the people of God then being entered into GODS house did do
Ezech. 46.2.3.
worship toward that most holy place; so now also ought every one being come
into GODS house, to prostrate himself, that is, to make low obeisance toward
GODS mercie-seate being in the uppermost part of our Temples, unto Almighty GOD
there. David says; Psalm. 5.7. The which Text learned Castellio renders, Aedem
tuam ingressus, religiose adtuam sacram c^llam veneror. And Ps. 132.7. he
interprets, Intrem^ in eius domiciliu^, vencremus cius pedum scamnu^. See Ps.
138.2. The Divine Service translation is, Toward the mercy seat of thy holy
Temple.
But as for me, I will come into thine house, in the multitude of thy mercy:
and in thy fear will I worship toward the holy Temple. The Church has it in
her meeter: Therefore will I come to thine house, trusting upon thy grace; and
reverently will worship thee, toward thine holy place. And that David did turn
himself toward Gods mercie-seat, it is evident from his words, saying: Hear
the voice of my supplication, when I cry unto thee; when I lift up mine hands
Ps. 28.2.
toward thine holy Oracle. Wherefore a great Mr. Doctor Laurence in the
former of the two most weighty Sermons by him set forth, and in page 37. The
said Sermons contain in them very many matters most greatly considerable.
Divine in our Church thus writes: We are no more idolatrous by our
prostration toward the table of the Lord, than the Jews were by theirs toward
the Tabernacle of the Lord; Toward the cloud in the desert here, or the
mercie-seate in the Temple, because we do it (...); not (...); (as that
Constantinopolitane council speaks upon another occasion,) to God, which is
there; not to a similitude of God, which is not there: and our faith points at
heaven, while our eyes are fixed on the altar. But here-against some object,
that such bodily worshipping of God was to cease when CHRIST came: now we are
only required to worship God in spirit, and need not so to prostrate our selves
as is before signified. Whereunto answer is; That it is written that after
CHRIST'S Ascension his people did Yea so he was worshipped, when newly born,
Mat. 2.11. See Rev. 4.10. and 5.14.
fall down before him and worship him. Yea says the Revelation, that when the
seventh Angel sounded, blew the seventh Trumpet, the four and twenty Elders
Rev. 11.16.
fell upon their faces and worshipped God. And the practice of Gods holy ones
mentioned in the said place of Revelation does plainly show, that the
prostrating of our selves unto God is a bodily worship to endure whiles this
For the generality of interpreters understand that trumpet to be sounded in the
last time.
world lasts. Wherefore the Divine Wisdom of the Church appoints a Psalm
to be said throughout the year in morning prayer, wherein it is commanded by
the LORD; That when we come before his Ps. 95.2.6.
presence, we worship and fall down (or It is bow dowre, in the last
translation.
bow very low) and kneel before the LORD our maker. Those three words, each
importing great reverencing, cannot but signify that such prostrating of our
selves unto GOD, as is before mentioned, is a And if it were but a duty enjoined
by the Church, it is very greatly profitable to stir up in people devotion
unto God, they being entered into his house. See the necessary use of ceremonies
delivered in the chapter of ceremonies, and in the end of the Act of
Parliament, both set in the beginning of the Communion book.
duty, required by the said Scripture to be for ever in CHRIST'S church observe.
Some also object, Though there was Gods-mercie seat in the Chancell of
Solomon's Temple, yet GOD has none in our Chancels; and therefore we need not
prostrate our selves so directly toward that uppermost place of the Temple;
but so that we make some prostration before we kneel down to prayer, it is
sufficient. The answer is: The divine Wisdom of the Church calling the sacred
Communion table In the Sacred Communion Service in the rubricke before the
prayer which begins, We do not presume, etc.
Gods board, does give us to understand, that that is to be accounted the
peculiar seat of God within the Temple; and therefore toward it unto God
there, we are to make low obeisance, whenever we come into Gods house for to
pray. Also, as the chair of state is always to be honored, though the person
of the Royal Majesty be not seen therein; So is Gods board ever to have due
It is not to be named, how mean Gods board is in some places, and how meanly
it is respected and used.
reverence, and God, who is there 2. Chron. 7.16. Ps. 26.^. Lev. 26.2.
perpetually, is always to be For after a Church or Chapel is consecrated by
a Bishop, Gods gracious presence is ever at his mercy seat in it.
prostrated unto: yea when as the body and blood of CHRIST in the blessed
Sacrament is not upon the same, nor divine Service in saying thereon or in any
other place of the holy Temple. For which cause it is In Articles to be
enquired of by the Minister, Churchwardens, and Sidemen of every Parish, and
chappelry, etc.
prescribed, That ever the holy Communion table should be kept sacred, and not
at any time to be used, save only with the sacred matters of God appointed by
the Church to be performed upon it. And whereas some say, that now in our
temples no such ceremonies or rites are to be used, which were of use in
Solomon's Temple; but that all were forever abolished, when CHRIST'S Ministration
was established by the holy Ghost in the Apostles time, Such consider not, that
no where in the holy Scriptures there is declared, that there was an utter
abolishing of all See Mal. 4.4. and Ps. 119.8. according to the Divine service
translation.
ceremonies. Neither do they seriously mind, how that when Moses was to build
the Tabernacle, Solomon the Temple, and it to be reedified after it was by the
Babylonians destroyed, the Eternal God out of his infinite Wisdom in most
special manner Exodus 25.40. 1. Chro. 28.12. Ezech. 40.1.4. etc.
prescribed the manner of every particular matter about the same. Solomon in
his prayer unto God for wisdom, says; Wisd. 9.8.
Thou have commanded me to build a Temple upon thy holy Mount, and an Altar in
the City wherein thou dwell, a Heb. 8.5. and 9.23.
resemblance of thy holy Tabernacle which thou have prepared from the
beginning. Wherefore very great is the mystery of the Temple, and much is the
Ps. 27.4. Romans 15.4. 2. Tim. 3.16.17.
doctrine of decency and order and of other matters of Christianity to be
learned from the same. Because Solomon had in that Temple Music, and David
says: Praise GOD in his Sanctuary: and praise him with stringed instruments
and Ps. 150.2.4. 1. Ch^o. 16.5.6.42
organs, etc. and no where in holy Scripture the use of instruments of Music
in GODS public worship is forbidden, therefore the Church uses them. So may
the Church (according as it seems best unto her godly wisdom) have in her
Temples other The Wisdom of God, ordained, that la^ps should be in his holy
Tabernacle and Temple perpetually. Exodus 27.20. Lev. 24.2. 1. Chro. 28.15. See
2. Chro 29.7.8. Christ abolished not all use of them unto godly signification;
but commanded his people expressly to have an holy use of them. Luke 12.35. If
the^ the Church allows, that on Gods board there be a continual standing of
some lights, for to put people in remembrance of spiritual matter necessary to
be considered, ought not such a benefit to be embraced with thankesgiving unto
God? See Number. 15.39.40. Ps. 119.105. Joh. 5.35. Luke 2.32.
matters that were in that built by Solomon, and appointed by GOD to be
therein, which the holy Scripture forbids not to be in Christians Temples.
If the Temple had bin such a shadow universally vanished, and no more in any
matter thereof to be imitated by the Christian Church, the Lord would not so
often have pressed unto his Prophet Ezechiel these and the like words: Ezech.
44.5. and 40.4.
Son of man, mark well, and behold with thine eyes, and hear with thine
ears, all that I say unto thee concerning all the ordinances of the house of
the Lord, and all the laws thereof, and mark well the entering in of the
house, with every going forth of the Sanctuary. Ezech. 43.10.11.
And show the house of Israel the form of the house, and the fashion thereof,
and the goings our thereof, and the commings in thereof, and all the forms
thereof, and all theordinances thereof, and all the forms thereof, and all the
laws thereof: and write in their sight, that they may keep the whole form
thereof, and all the ordinances thereof, and do them. Here also there is to be
considered unto the honoring of GODS holy name, in what place of the Chancell
Gods board or Quid est enim altar, nisi seeds and corporis and sanguinis
Christi? Optatus libro sexto centra Denatistas. In the Sermon before mentioned
the Sacred Communion Table is called an Altar, as page 5. and 37. And in page
37. it it called also Gods mercy seat.
seat should stand. Does not nature it self teach us, that in every common
house, the seat of the chiefest should be above every seat of inferiors? And
should not Christianity teach us, that no seat of any person, much less of
any of the Laity, should be above gods mercy seat the sacred Communion table
standing in the Chancel? For into the Chancel of Solomon's Temple no lay person
was admitted for to come; it was for the Heb. 9.7.8. Exodus 30.10. Lev. 16.2.
high Priest only to enter thereinto. The godly and learned In page 12.
Divine before mentioned, signifies, as if anciently in the Chancels of
Christian Temples none of the Laity did sit; much less had men or youths any
seat, bench or form there above GODS seat or board. And when as the Lords
holy table is set in the uppermost place within the chancell, is it not decent
that the ends thereof be toward North and South? The holy Ghost commands,
that 1. Cor. 14.40.
all things be done decently and according unto order. And if it ought so to
be in all things, then much more ought it to be so in every thing about Gods
house, and specially in the standing of his sacred seat. Lastly, as unto the
honoring of Gods holy Name his Sanctuary is to be reverenced, so is also all
the consecrated ground about the same or thereunto to be in no wise profaned.
It is therefore necessarily In the Articles given at the Metropolitical
Visitation.
prescribed, that every part and portion of Churchyard be kept free from swine
and all other nastiness as becomes the place so dedicated. And whereas in the
holy Scriptures Exodus 3.5. Ios. 5.15. Act. 7.33.
sundry times mention is of the respect due to be had unto holy ground, are we
not admonished thereby, that when we are in consecrated ground, we should
abstain from whatsoever is Phil. 4.8.
unbeseeming in holy place? Likewise the prescription is perpetually memorable
viz. That the In the aforesaid Articles.
Church-house in every Parish should be employed to godly, and its right holy
use: That not any thing or place consecrated to holy use, should be used
profanely or wickedly. And for that all these, and the like Christian duties
have not in some places bin duly urged, hence is it that so many people have
no regard unto them; but among very many, (especially of the meaner sort) much
heathenishnesse and atheism in mind, and much irreligiousnesse, unseemlinesse
and uncivility in life, manners and conversation has prevailed and abounded.
Wherefore it is the duty of all that are in any authority, for to exhort such
as are under them unto the observing of all and every duty by holy Mat. 18.17.
Prove. 1.8. and 6.20.21.22.23. Deuteronomy. 17.9.10.11.12.
Church prescribed unto them: as Curates are to admonish their people,
Schoolmasters their Scholars, Parents their children, Masters and Dames
their servants; and to Deuteronomy. 31.12.
train them up unto such reverencing of God in his holy And concerning the due
reverencing of the Temple it self, The Church memorably says; Such reverence
would Christ should be therein, that he would not suffer any vessel to be
carried through the Temple. In the second part of the Homily of the right use
of the Church.
Temple, both as the Ecclesiastical law commands, and as they have for
example the Phil. 3.16.17. Heb. 13.7.17.
practice of such, as are most observant of all the Churche-her constitutions
and godly intentions.

Q. What is the ninth?

A. To honor his holy word. As all Gods r^^ord is at all times to be honored
in thought, word, and deed, so in special manner in the public worship. For
which cause the holy Apostolical Church of England does with a fervent divine
zeal many a time call upon us for to use all due reverence in the hearing of
GODS word; in her Homily, of the right use of the Church or Temple of God, and
of the reverence due unto the same. On Psalm. 51.4. in page 135. of his second
Tome. To tremble at Gods word is the property of his true children. Isa. 66.5.
And the Geneva note thereon in verse 2. is; To him that is humble and pure in
heart, which receives my doctrine with reverence and fear. Saint Paul says;
Let us have grace, whereby we may serve God acceptably, with reverence and
godly f^are. Heb. 12.28. In Gods public Service we are to be outwardly
reverent, and inwardly fearful godlily.
There may be here considered what M. Samuel Hieron has written hereunto, who
declared himself thereby an honourer of the LORD JESUS CHRIST, and thus his
words are: As CHRIST is termed the sun of righteousness, so his ministers
are called stars. And therefore as the light of the stars is, by way of
reflection the very light of the Sun, which they receive from thence, and
return upon the earth; so is the doctrine of Christ's Ministers, the very
doctrine of CHRIST, and it is by a secret enablement from him that they speak.
The words of an Ambassador, are reputed as his from whom he comes. It is the
quality of all true Ministers, that they are the Lords messengers; and so that
which they deliver, is not man's, but Gods. This is so plain that I need not to
enlarge it, and these proofs which I have produced for it, they are each of
them very direct. This is to teach us, with what manner of respect to embrace
that which is brought unto us by this ordinance of God, the preaching of his
word. We should make no other account, but that in hearing of man sent from
God, we do hear even God himself: so that lookewith what awe, with what
reverence, with what respect, with what submission we would demean our selves,
if we should be called to hear the LORD himself personally speak unto us
from the clouds; with the same ought we to frame our selves to the hearing of
them which are amongst us in his stead, and whom he has put into his service:
assure our selves, we shall never profit by hearing, until this persuasion is
ingrafted in us. This was it that brought Paul's ministry to be among the
Thessalonians, not in word only, but in power. This made it to work and
prevail so mightily as it did, etc.

And here also it is to be considered seriously, what the godly and Learned
Doctor has delivered concerning peoples reverent and profitable hearing of
Gods word. He says: M. Doctor Laurence in pages of his aforementioned Sermon
4.5.6.8.
Standing is a posture of respect, we kneel and stand to our superiors:
kneel, to show our subjection; and stand to show our obedience; that we are
ready to execute, what these are to command. Standing (says he) then is a
posture of respect, and respect is a preparation unto attention, for no man
listens to what he scorns. Standing is a posture of attention, the posture of
hearers. When Esra opened the law, all the people stood up. Neh. 8.5. There is
no duty oftener enjoined then this, etc. It is required, that the Minister do
preach In the Articles give^ at the late Metropoliticall visitation.
standing: and if it be meet that the person teaching do stand, is it not
likewise meet that the people hearing should stand, every one as long as the
ability of his body will serve thereunto? And as it is there most 1. Cor.
11.3.4.7.
justly required, That every Minister do preach with his hat off; is it not
likewise requisite, that For verse. 5. of 1. Cor. 11. declares that the Apostle
meant as well the heaters, as the teachers.
every man and youth of the people in the congregation should in all the time
of the preaching be with their hats off also? Moreover the endeavoring to
stand all the while Gods word is read or preached, as it is most profitable for
the receiving of edification, (because God has promised to give his Isa. 55.3.
Prove. 8.34. 1. Sam. 2.30. Isa. 66.5.7.
blessing unto such as reverently and attentively hearken unto his most holy
word) so is it also a means to cause that sleep and drowsinesse shall not
prevail on one, as soon it does on many such as are sitting, which have
ability to be standing, when as God by his Minister is 2. Cor. 13.3. Luke
10.16. Jos. 9.14.
speaking unto them. There are seen as this day some in most congregations,
which will So example is signified in Rev. 4.10.11. that they sat not, when
they said, Thou art worthy to receive glory, etc.
stand up, when as it is said, Lately by authority the said holy duty was very
graciously in open court enjoined at a Visitation; and also that every person
should stand up, when as the Gospel for the day is read.
Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the holy Ghost, etc. And
whereas it is a speaking to God, can such as then sit be truly accounted duly
reverent? Also it is a most holy law prescribed by the Church, that every
person should use all due and lowly reverence, when the blessed Name of the
LORD JESUS CHRIST is mentioned, unto the LORD JESUS CHRIST there. But how can
this duty be duly performed, when as we sit in the hearing of the word,
wherein that sacred Name is pronounced? Holy Church also In the Homilies, and
in Articles.
prescribes, that whiles God speaks unto us in his word read or preached,
(like as while we are speaking unto him in our praying, singing, and the like)
yea in every part of his public worship, we should neither walk nor talk,
nor use any kind of gesture or demeanor Ps. 2.11. As in the Divine service
Translation. Heb. 12.28.29.
unbeseeming to be used in the presence of of Almighty God, and the performance
of the most holy public worshipping of him. And wheresoever they are, which
conscionably give themselves to perform every reverence unto God, which is by
the Church held forth unto them, either by precept, or example; continual
experience teaches, that there through the power of GODS word and the Divine
Service doctrine, the Lord giving increase, such become Ephesians. 4.23.
renewed in the spirit of their mind, and do 2. Cor. 3.18. and 7.11.
amend their lives according to CHRIST'S most holy word more and more. But all
1. These. 4.8. 2. Pet. 2.10.12.
despisers or light accounters of what the Church so holds forth unto them,
they Act. 28.24.25.27.
harden their hearts; the word of GOD which they hear, is unto them as seed
sown and fallen by the ways side, or upon stony places, or among thorns. And
persevering in neglecting to hearken unto the Church-her fundamental doctrine
and discipline, and to imitate her devout and reverent practicing, they 2. Tim.
3.13.
wax worse and worse, their way is as Prove. 4.19.
darkness, and further and Isa. 60.2. Jude 13.
further they fall into the same. It may here also be added, that it would be a
great furtherance unto the stirring up of many to the honoring of GODS holy
Name and his word (in the which peoples hearts much atheism and
heathenishnesse reigns) if so far forth as the law of the Church requires
or permits, godly endeavor were used for to cause them to be ashamed of
their unreligious mind and conversation. In the In the second part of the same,
in pages 9. and 10. of the second Tome.
Homily concerning the right use of the Church it is said, In the primitive
Church, which was most holy and godly, and in the which due discipline with
severity was used against the wicked, open offenders were not suffered once to
enter into the house of the Lord, nor admitted unto Common prayer, and the use
of the holy Sacraments with other true Christians, until they had done open
penance before the whole Church. Such was the honor of the Lords house in men's
hearts, and outward reverence also at that time, etc.

Q. What is the tenth?

A. To serve him truly all the days of my life. And hereby we are given to
understand, that we are to have God in remembrance, not only Sundaies; but
also all other days and nights unto our lives end. He is continually to be
served, all our meditations, speakings, and doings are to be ordered according
to his holy word uncessantly. And this is signified to be the true perpetual
worshipping of God, where it is said in the sacred Letanie, That it may please
thee to keep and strengthen in the true worshipping of thee, We are taught
hence, that righteousness and holiness of life is the true worshipping of
God, which is to be continually. Also we are to know, that without the said
worship, truly endeavored ones public worship is not accepted. See Isa. 1.
Jer. 7. Prove. 28 9.
in righteousness and holiness of life, thy Servant Charles our most gracious
King and governor.

Q. Of how many branches does the duty toward ones neighbor consist,
according to the deliverie in the Catechism?

A. It may be conceived to be there expressed in twenty.

Q. Which is the first and second?

A. To love him as my self; And to do unto all men as I would they should do
unto me. And here is to be noted first, who is ones neighbor. The Church
says, In the larger Catechism.
The name of neighbor, conteyneth not only those that dwell near us, or be of
our kin and alliance, or friends, or such as be knit to us in a civil bond of
love; but also those whom we know not, yea, and our enemies. Moreover says
the Church, In the answer before the other
CHRIST'S will was that there should be most strict bonds of love amongst his
Christians. And as we be by nature most inclined to the love of our selves, so
can there be not devised a plainer, nor shorter, nor more pithy, nor more
indifferent rule of brotherly love; than that which the Lord has gathered out
of our own nature and set before us, that is, that every man should bear to
his neighbor the same good will that he bears to himself. Whereof it
follows, that we should not do any thing to our neighbor, nor say nor
think any thing of him, which we would not have other to do to our selves, or
to say or think of our selves. Within the compass of which only law, which is
indeed as it were the soul of all other laws, if we could be holden, surely
there were no need of so many bars of laws, as men do daily devise to hold
men in from doing wrong one to another, and to maintain civil society; and
all well-neare in vain, if among men this one law be not regarded.

Q. What is the third?

A. To love my Father and Mother. And great need has the Church to put us in
mind of what very nature teaches: for now are the perilous times, in which
many are without 2. Tim. 3.3.
natural affection, as Saint Paul foretold. Yea and disobedient to As in the
aforesaid verse.
Parents, as he likewise delivers. The Church signifies in the Commination
Service, that we should walk warily in these 2. Tim. 3.1.
dangerous days: giving us to understand there, as also in sundry places of
her Homilies, that the perilous times foretold of, are already begun. And so
the late Royal Majesty expressed, saying, In his Highness Meditation on the
Lords prayer, and page 33.
Of that fearful defection that is threatened to come in the latter days, we
in our days have the doleful experience, that Faith shall not be found on the
earth, and the love of many shall wax cold.

Q. What is the fourth?

A. To honor my Father and Mother. Honoring is added unto loving, because
whom one loves, him also will he honor. How dishonourably many children now
both speak and do unto their Parents, it is a shame to mention. The Gospel
says, Children obey your Parents in Col. 3.20.
all things. And says GOD, Deuteronomy. 27.16.
Cursed be he, that sets light by his father or mother. And again, Lev.
11.3.
Ye shall fear every man his mother and his father. Solomon says, Prove.
28.24.
Whosoever robs his father or mother, and says it is no transgression, the same
is a companion of a destroyer. The In the Declaration before mentioned.
Church in former time thus read that text, and according to the same sense
also: He that steals any thing from his father or mother, is to be taken as
a murderer.

Q. What is the fifth?

A. To succor my father and mother. The Gospel says, 1. Tim. 5.4.
Let them learn to requite their parents. Those that are of ability, having
poor parents in necessity, are bound in conscience to succor them what they
may, like as their parents did succor them, when they could not help
themselves. But where are the children, which think upon the cares, which
their loving parents have taken for them from their infancy, and so the rest
of their time? There are some fathers, and likewise some mothers which are
monsters in nature, not regarding the welfare, nor the life of the children,
which GOD gives them. But the love of a truly natural hearted father and
mother, what child is ever able to recompense so fully, as it has deserved?

Q. What is the sixth?

A. To honor the King and his Ministers. Next after the eternal Almighty God
the 1. Pet. 2.17.13 Eccles. 10.20.
Gospel names the King to be honored. Wherefore we should be studious for to
know all the honor in thought, word and deed, which is due unto so great and
high a Majesty. But we live in an age, wherein there are they, which as they
regard not to honor the Clergy, so do they not endeavor as they ought,
universally to honor the Kings most sacred Highness and the Queens Majesty.
Moreover, by Ministers in this speech there are such to be understood, as are
put in authority under His Highness, for the administering of any business in
Church or Commonwealth. And we may here understand also the Lords of the
Counsel, and all the Nobility, for whom we are to pray As in the sacred
Letany, and in the prayer for Christ's Church milita^t here on earth.
that they may be more and more endued with grace, wisdom, and understanding.

Q. What is the seventh?

A. To obey the King and his Ministers (or officers.) And so the Gospel
commands, saying, 1. Pet. 2.13.14
Submit your selves to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it be
to the King as Supreme, or unto Governors, as unto them that are sent by him
for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well.
Romans 13.1.2.
Let every soul be subject unto the higher powers, for there is no power but
of God. The powers that be, are ordained of God. Whosoever therefore resists
the power, resists the ordinance of God: and they that resist, shall receive
to themselves damnation.

Q What is the eighth?

A. To submit my self to all my governors, teachers, spiritual Pastors and
Masters. By governors are meant all they that have the legal rule over one,
either in Church or Commonwealth. By teachers may be understood such from whom
one receives any learning, as in school, or elsewhere. By Spiritual Pastors
we are to understand the Ministers, Priests and deacons: and also here may not
be excluded but included, and understood the chief Pastors in the Church the
Bishops, because children are to be informed for to prepare themselves to
receive their blessing in the holy ordinance of Confirmation, which thing in
the title of the Catechism is signified. For the duties toward God and our
neighbor do concern also such as be of ripe age.
It is to be observed, that the doctrine of this Catechism is as well for them
of ripe years to observe, as it is for children. Pastors themselves are to be
submitted (or to submit themselves) unto the Lord Bishops, as Phil. 2.22.
sons unto Fathers: but every parishioner is to Heb. 13.17. and 1. These.
5.12.13
submit himself unto his own Pastor, that is set over him, according to the
constitution of the Kingdom. Pastors are to submit themselves to be ordered
by none, save only by such as have, according to the law of the land,
jurisdiction over them. They are to be universally loyal and subject unto the
supreme governor of our Church the Kings most excellent Majesty, They are
According as it is prescribed and intended in the Divine Service for the
Ordering of Priests.
reverently to obey their Ordinary, and other chief Ministers, unto whom the
government and charge is committed over them, following with a glad mind and
will their godly admonitions, and submitting themselves unto their godly
judgments. But unto what arrogancy and outrageous insolency are many
parishioners in these days come, who would be their There are sundry in the
laity, which would have Pastors live in a slavery under them, and not to enjoy
their Liberty, which the Kings Majesty's law vouchsafes unto the^.
Pastors governors and teachers? And unless they will break their oath made
to the Church at their Institution, for their endeavoring to see all the Kings
Majesty's laws observed in their Parish, unless they will suffer a juggling to
be used among their parishioners, namely, that some shall have only such
doctrine and discipline as they peculiarly affect, and let the doctrine of the
Divine Service, and the reverence and obedience required by the Ecclesiastical
law, be stamped under foot, they will be wanting in no 1. Kings. 21.10.13.
endeavor to work them out of their vineyards, as Naboth was. Whereas here is
also mention of masters, all that live in any service are thereby admonished of
their duty. Tit. 2.9.10.
The Gospel of God requires servants to be obedient unto their own masters,
and to please them well in all things, not answering again: not purloining,
but showing all good faithfulness, that they may adorn the doctrine of GOD
our Savior in all things.

Q. What is the ninth?

A. To order my self lowly and See chap. 74. of the christian divinity.
reverently to all my betters. And upon a divine foresight Holy Church has
added this clause or sentence. Esdras foretold, in what great 2. Esd. 8.50.
Hos. 4.4.
pride the world would walk in the latter times. Saint Paul says, they would
be 2. Tim. 3.2.
lovers of their own selves, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to
parents, truce breakers, false-accusers, fierce, despisers of those that are
good, heady, high minded, etc. having a form of godliness, but denying the
power thereof: from such turn away. Here shall be no mention of any
unreverence, which is committed against the higher powers: but only it is to be
considered, that the Pastor of every parish is in God the 1. These. 5.12.
superior to every one of his Parishioners, save only to such as by the law of
the Kingdom are in place above him. Is it meet then that they be used as An
intimation of the audaciousnesse of some toward their Pastors and Curates. It
is not meet to be expressed, how uncivilly many in these times will speak unto
Ministers.
Serving-men, or rather like unto swineheards? If they would express some
conscience that the Kings Majesty's Church-lawes may be in some measure
observed, then are they accounted troublesome persons, and shall be called
busy fellows. If they would discharge their consciences toward looking to the
stare of their flock or flocks, according as it is prescribed in the book of
Ordering of Priests; and hold forth only wholesome doctrine, namely that which
is in the Communion book, and in the other fundamental books of the Church,
then shall they want no new names to be imposed upon them. And unless they
subject themselves to be The Kings most excellent Majesty in his Highness
Declaration set before the 39. Articles of Religion, and page 3. wills, That
the Churchmen do the work which is proper unto them.
advised by every one wise in his own eyes, and slack the faithfulness which
they owe to God and his Church, and admit that the chief Fathers of the Church
are in some error concerning Religion, then are Priests and Pastors accounted
for It is the property of Shepherds to guide and feed their sheep. Mal. 2.7.
Hos. 4.4. Heb. 13.17. Act. 20.28. But unto this pass also is it come in some
places of the world, that if a Pastor will leave all his ^^ock to themselves,
every one to live according to their own lust, and admonish them of none of
their transgressings of Gods laws or of the Church doctrine or discipline but
let the Devil sway all and take all: then by very many he is reputed and
reported a right honest, quiet, and peaceable man.
proud, and selfe-willed persons. It is written, that the very servants of Saul
would not put forth their hand to fall upon the Priests of the Lord. Is it not
likely that those servants considered, that Gods Priests do bear about within
their souls, that which every one has not? But at length one Doeg flew upon
them, and used them at his pleasure. There are not wanting in these times such
1. Sam. 22.17.18.
Doegs, which will not only in most barbarous manner flee in Priests faces,
but also declare that they have a will to fly higher, were their wings long
enough. This sacred most necessary sentence, That every one should order
himself lowly and reverently to all his betters, is for the continual
remembering of every subject whatsoever.

Q. What is the tenth?

A. To hurt no body by word or deed. And whereas Saint Paul says, That Romans
13.10.
love works no ill to ones neighbor, it is necessary that he, which would
live in unity and godly love, do keep in continual remembrance the sixteen
properties of Christian charity, 1. Cor. 13.4.5.6.7.
namely, To be long suffering, to be kind, not to envy, not to vaunt himself
(or be rash,) not to be puffed up, not to behave himself unseemely, not to
seek his own, not to be easily provoked, to think no evil, not to rejoice
in iniquity, but to rejoice in the truth, to bear all things, to believe all
things, to hope all things, to endure all things, and never to fail doing the
duties of all godly love. The late most excellent Majesty in his sacred
Meditation on the Lords prayer calls the said delivery of the Apostle the
pattern of charity, in page 98.


Q. What is the eleventh?

A. To be true and just in all my dealings. Faithfulness and justness to be
used in every particular dealing between man and man, is the maine doctrine of
GODS holy Bible, and of the Churches Divine Service. GOD says, Deuteronomy. 16.20.
That which is altogether just shall thou follow, that thou may live and
inherit the land which the Lord thy God gives thee.

Q. What is the twelfth?

A. To bear no malice nor hatred in my heart. Saint John says, 1 John
2.9.10.11. and 3.15.
He that says, he is in the light, and hates his brother, is in darkness
even until now, and walks in darkness, and knows not whither he goes,
because that darkness has blinded his eyes; yea and he is a murderer. The
Divine Service for the Communion teaches us to be in perfect charity with all
men, and in other places; as in the sacred Letany, etc. to pray for the welfare
of universal mankind.

Q. What is the thirteenth?

A. To keep my hands from picking and stealing. We ought not to steal from
any one not so much as a point or a pin, but to be true in every matter unto
a very farthing token. CHRIST JESUS the Judge of the whole world has said, 1.
Cor. 6.9.10
Thieves shall not inherit the Kingdom of GOD, so also no unrighteous dealing
one.

Q. What is the fourteenth?

A. To keep my tongue from evil speaking, and lying. Evil speaking is
manifold: as Ephesians. 5.3.4.5.6
unclean talk, scoffing, saucy jesting, spiteful words, unseemely speeches,
and whatsoever utterance tends not unto any good. The horriblenesse of lying
was In the exposition of the ninth Commandment.
before declared.

Q. What is the fifteenth?

A. To keep my tongue from slandering. When we hear a rumor raised up
against any, near or afar off, it is our duty not to affirm any thing unto
the derogating from the good name of any, until we know the matter to be true.
Also sins of others committed by ignorance or humane weakness are not to be
reported about. Solomon says, Prove. 10.12.
Love covers all sins. All the trespasses of all others are to be hid and
concealed as much as may be, saving such as the law of the land requires every
one to discover. But concerning slandering God says, Deuteronomy. 27.24.
Cursed be he that smites his neighbor secretly. And says CHRIST, 1. Cor.
6.10.
The revilers shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. The everlasting law of the
LORD is, Exo. 23.1.2.3
Thou shall not raise (or receive) a false report: put not thy hand with the
wicked to be an unrighteous witness. Thou shall not follow a multitude to do
evil: neither shall thou speak in a cause to decline after many, to wrest
judgment. Saint James says, Jam. 4.11.
Speak not evil one of another. He that speaks evil of his brother, and
judges his brother, speaks evil of the law, and judges the law. Jam. 5.9.
Grudge not one against another, lest ye be condemned: Behold; the Judge
stands before the door. The devil is called in the Syrian new Testament
Ochelkartso, which is by interpretation one eating accusation: the which phrase
(though in Aramicall text it signifies an accuser, etc. See Shindelers
lexicon, and Rev. 12.10.) yet it may note forth, that it is meat unto the devil
and his people to See Castellioes treatise de calumnia in his Opuscula printed
anno 1613.
slander others. It is the maine of their meditation and discourse to defame
people of obedience.

Q. What is the sixteenth?

A. To keep my body in temperance and soberness. That is, to shun all manner
of gluttony and all manner of drunkenness, and in every respect so to order
ones body with diet, sleep, exercise, etc. as it may be in no wise the
unfitter for GODS service; but that ones mind may be the freer for all godly
meditations; and as all virtue may be expressed in the conversation.

Q. What is the seaventeenth?

A. To keep my body in chastity. How often does the universal word of GOD,
and the Divine Service of the Church deliver exhortation unto this duty? Is it
not because the nature of mankind is prone to be unchaste, in one kind or
another? And is not the reason of universal chastity required, that our bodies
should be 1. Cor. 6.18.19.13.
temples of the holy Ghost, as the Church in her 1. These. 5.6.7.8.
homilies sundry times advertiseth? The Gospel says, Heb. 13.4.
Marriage is honorable in all, and the bed undefiled: but whoremongers,
adulterers, and committers of any uncleanness, God will judge.

Q. What is the eighteenth?

A. Not to covet nor desire other men's goods. Saint Paul says, Phil. 4.11.12.
He had learned, in what state soever he was, therewith to be content. He knew
how to be abased, how to be hungry, and how to suffer need. He says
therefore, Phil. 4.5.6.
Let your moderation be known unto all men. The Lord is at hand. Be careful
for nothing. He also said, Act. 20 33.
I have coveted no man's silver, gold, or apparel. It is unlawful to wish and
say (as many usually do) would I had such a house, or such a piece of ground,
or any thing else, which is ones neighbors. Whosoever would be a true Christian,
ought to strive for to have a mind universally upright perpetually. Mat. 7.12.
One would not that another should defire any thing that is his, and which he
would enjoy: and the like mind is every one to bear toward each other. We
are to endeavor unfeinedly for to be continually affectioned righteously and
charitably in our hearts before Gods 1. Chro. 28.9.
eyes sight.

Q. What is the nineteenth?

A. To learn and labor truly for to get mine own living. The Gospel says,
Tit. 3.14.
Let ours also learn to profess honest trades, for necessary uses, that they
be not unfruitful. Ephesians. 4.28.
Let him that stole, steal no more: but rather let him labor, working with
his hands the thing which is good, that he may have to give to him that
needs. 1. These. 4.10.11.12.
We beseech you (says Saint Paul) to do your own business, and to work with
your own hands, that ye may walk honestly toward them that are without, and
that ye may have lack of nothing (or of As it is in the margent.
no man.) The Church in her homily against idleness says, In page 249.
By the Ordinance of GOD, which he has set in the nature of man, every one
ought, in his lawful vocation and calling, to give himself unto labor. It is
the appointment and will of GOD; that every man, during the time of this
mortal and transitory life, should give himself to such honest and godly
exercise and labor, and every one follow his own business, and to walk
uprightly in his own calling. And (says the In the third part of the Homily
of Alms deeds.
Church) God is careful to feed them, who in any state or vocation do
unfeinedly serve him. Also it signifies, That we should In the Homily against
idleness, page 250.
live of our own labors, and not devour the labors of others. In page 253.
When one lives of his own labor (so it be honest and good) he lives of it
with a good conscience: and an upright conscience is an inestimable treasure.
Also the Church says, In pages 253.254. Many of the rich in this world
consider not of the duty prescribed unto them by the Church in the said Homily.
Here ought artificers and laboring men, who be at wages for their work and
labor, to consider their conscience to God, and their duty to their neighbor,
lest they abuse their time in idleness, so defrauding them which be at charge
both with great wages, and dear commons. It is less danger to GOD to be idle
for no gain, then by idleness to win out of their neighbors purses wages for
that which is not deserved. The hired man, who uses deceit in his labor, is a
thief before God. Further it is said, In page 251.
A great part of the beggary that is among the poor, can be imputed to no
thing so much, as to idleness, and to the negligence of parents, which do not
bring up their children, either in good learning, honest labor, or some
commendable-occupation or trade, whereby when they come to age, they might get
their living. The Homily also advertiseth In page 254. and in page 250. The
Church most divinely delivers, That every one capable should be employed one
way or other unto others good, like as is every member in a natural body.
serving men, to redeem the time wherein they are not employed, in getting some
learning or knowledge, which may benefit them when age comes upon them,
remembering that Service is no heritage. The holy Ghost pronounces a life of
idleness to be a life of idolatry, in 1. Cor. 10.7.


Q. What is the twentieth?

A. To do my duty in that state of life, unto the which it shall please GOD to
call me. Saint Paul says: 1 Cor. 7.24.
Let every man wherein he is called, therein abide with God: namely learning
what is his whole duty, and laboring to perform all the same. And when God
shall please to call one unto an higher estate of life, then likewise to
meditate how to manage it also. The Church hereby gives us to understand, that
preferment comes not by fortune, but by GODS calling of men into higher
conditions of life. And so says the holy Scripture: Ps. 75.6.7.
Promotion comes neither from the East, nor from the West, nor from the
South* But God is the Judge: he puts down one and sets up another.

Q. In what sense may a Pastor call every one of the youth my good child?

A. Every godly Curate is in some manner a ghostly Father of the people
committed to his charge or oversight. For as many as he spiritually begets
unto conscionable obeying of CHRIST'S Gospells commandments, and the None can
be said to be converted until he respect the Church doctrine and discipline.
Mat. 18.17. Deuteronomy. 17.12.
Churches holy doctrine and discipline, so many are his Philemon verse 10. and
1. Cor. 4.15. Gal. 4.19.
children in the Lord. And in such sense sundry in the Scripture are called
Ministers children.

Q. What is meant by the saying, Know this that thou art not able to do these
things of thy self?

A. The Church does give us to understand, that when we have learned, what are
our duties toward God and man, by our own strength we are not able to do them
duly. Saint Paul says: 2. Cor. 3.5.
Not that we are sufficient of our selves to think any thing as of our
selves: but our sufficiency is of God. CHRIST says: Without me (or Ioh. 15.5.
as in the margent.
severed from me) ye can do nothing (or ye can bring forth no good fruit.)
But says Saint Paul: Phil. 4.13. Ps. 18.29.32.34.36.39.
I can do all things through Christ strengthening me.

Q. What is Gods special grace, by the which received we are able more and
more obediently to perform all our duties aforesaid, and to walk in Gods
commandments, and to serve him?

A. It is that which in the beginning of this Divine Service Catechism is
called This matter many do not rightly consider; but greatly err from the
truth herein.
Gods help, where it is signified, that by Gods help I will believe and do
the three things promised and vowed in my name, when I received holy Baptism.
There cannot be found any one particular duty prescribed by JESUS CHRIST, but
by the holy Ghost strengthening our inward and outward man, we may be Mark
9.23.
able more and more obediently to observe the same. Moreover concerning grace,
we are to know, that it comes unto us by measure, as Saint Paul says: Unto
every one of us is given grace, according to the Ephesians. 4.7.
measure of the gift of CHRIST. There is a first measure of grace which is
given unto universal mankind alike: as it is written: The grace of God which
brings salvation has appeared to Tit. 2.11.
all men. CHRIST is that light, which enlighteneth Ioh. 1.9.
every one that comes into the world. And whosoever does make right use of
that one talent of grace, and does not 2. Cor. 6.1.
receive in vain, nor Jude 4.
turn it into wantonness, nor lets that Matt. 6.23.
light in him become to be darkness, unto him that Mat. 25.29.30
has and keeps that conscionably, CHRIST says more shall be given, and at
length he shall have abundance of grace, yea such an abundance (the special
grace is here signified) whereby he shall be able to walk more and more
obediently in all Gods Commandments; as it is Ier. 32.40.41. Ezech. 36.27.28.
promised in the holy Prophets. When Saint Paul had a strong temptation unto
pride, he besought the LORD thrice, that it might depart from him. Unto whom
the Lord said: 2. Cor. 12.8.9.
My grace is sufficient for thee: for my strength is made perfect in
weakness. Most gladly therefore (said Paul) will I rather glory in mine
infirmities, that the power of CHRIST may rest upon me. CHRIST'S Almighty
strength coming to assist Paul's weakness, enabled him to overcome that
temptation, which in no wise by his own strength he could have done.

Q. Why is it said, We must at all times call for Gods special grace by
diligent prayer?

A. Because it is from everlasting ordained, that man shall not receive that
special grace, without Ps. 14.4. James 4.2.
diligent prayer for it. God requires that we must not be careless and idle
about our souls welfare, but duly Romans 10.13.
call upon his name, and then we have his promise to hear us and save us.
CHRIST commands, saying: Mat. 7.7.8.9.
Ask, and ye shall receive: seek, and ye shall find: knock, and it shall
be opened unto you. For every one that asks, receives: and he that
seeks, finds: and to him that knocks, it shall be opened. Your heavenly
Father will give the holy Spirit to them that Luke 11.13.
ask him. And in the coming down of that holy Spirit, there is received such
an abundance of grace, that special grace by the Church signified. There are
in the divine Service sundry prayers for that special grace, as the third
collect for grace, the prayer before the ten Commandments, etc.

Q. Why is it said by diligent prayer?

A. Saint Paul says: Heb. 5.7.
Christ in the days of his flesh, when he had offered up prayers and
supplications, with strong crying and tearers, unto him that was able to save
him from death, and was heard, in that he feared (or for his As in the margent.
piety.) If then it was necessary for Christ in his humane nature thus to pray
unto his Father for what was requisite, how much necessary is it for us to pray
diligently? Wherefore the holy Ghost says: 1. These. 5.17.
Pray ye without ceasing. David would pray in the Morning, at Ps. 55.17.
Noone, in the Evening, and at Ps. 119.62.
Midnight. Whereby also it is signified unto us, that we at all these times
every day of our life are to direct some It is much memorable what is written
in the book of Wisdom; We must prevent the sun for to give God t anks, and
at the day spring to pray unto him. Wisd. 16.28.
prayer unto God; and if we cannot conveniently perform it on our knees, and
with our mouths, yet at least constantly at the said times with our hearts. For
it appears by David's practice that GOD the infinite Spirit expects that so
often at the least every day our hearts in special manner to be lifted up
unto him. And the diligence to be used in prayer is signified where Paul says:
Ephesians. 6.18.
Praying always, with all prayer and supplication in the spirit, and watching
thereunto with all perseverance, and supplication for all Saints.

Q. Why does the Church proceed from treating on the commandments, unto prayer?

A. The reason appears out of the Catechism question made before the Lords
prayer recited: Namely, because that after we have learned what to believe and
do, we are to Few do devote themselves unto due calling on the name of the
Lord, for that they consider not how much it prevails with God, being made
out of an obedient heart. 1. Ioh. 3.22.
pray for Gods help, his special grace, his strengthening of us for to
accomplish the same.

Q. Why does the Church ask her children, if they can say the Lords prayer?

A. When any one is baptized, it is nominated, that so soon as he is able to
learn, he is to be taught the creed, the ten commandments, and the Lords
prayer in the English tongue.

Q. Why the Lords prayer, rather than any other prayer written in the Bible?

A. Because the infinite Wisdom of Christ saw it meerest to have his Disciples
taught Mat. 6.9.
thus to pray, and so his Church requires every one of her members to Luke
11.2.
say it. It is also the perfectest of all prayers in the Bible, and the most
absolute form whereby to conceive other prayers acceptable unto God through
JESUS CHRIST. In it is contained the The sum of the promised blessings upon
godliness. 2. Tim. 4.8.
sum of all true Christian hope, like as in the Creed is the sum of Faith,
and in the Decalogue is the sum of Charity.

Q. Is it proper for every one of mankind to say the Lord prayer?

A. It is only proper for such to say it, as can truly call God their father.
Christ taught his obedient people thus to pray, who could call God, Romans 8.15.16
Abba, Father. As for all people whose father is the Ioh. 8.44.
devil, and whose works they do, which Rev. 22.15.
love or make lies, which live in 1. Ioh. 3.15.
envy, hatred, and malice; which abound with Mat. 18.3.4. Mat. 10.15.
pride and arrogance, which regard not the due 2. Thef. 1.8 9
obedience unto CHRIST'S Gospel, and do contemn or set light of the
fundamental doctrine of the Mat. 18.17.
Church delivered in her book of the Divine Service, until such turn unto
unfeined Ezech. 18.21.22.31.32.
repentance from all their sins, they can not truly and properly be sayers of
the Lords prayer. It is a prayer peculiar for Christ's body, the blessed company
of all faithful people; and therefore the first word of it is [our:] For they
therein pray, not only every one for himself, but also one for another, as
feeling members of the mystical body, whereof JESUS CHRIST is the head. Saint
Paul says: 1. Cor. 12.25.26.27.
There should be no Schism (or division) in the body: but the members should
have the same care one for another. And whether one member suffer, all the
members suffer with it: or one member be honored, all the members rejoice with
it. Now are ye the body of Christ, and members in particular.

Q. Why does Christ teach us to speak so directly unto God, saying our Father?

A. Because (says the Church) we speak not to one absent, but In the lesser
Catechism.
present. The not considering of Gods presence by his spirit every where, is a
cause of many defects in our minds and conversations. David says: Ps. 139.7.
Whither shall I go from thy spirit? or whither shall I fly from thy
presence? verses 3.5.13.12.
Thou compassest my path, and my lving down; Thou have beset me behind and
before. Thou have possessed my reins: thou have covered me in my mothers
womb. The darkness hides not from thee, but the night shines as the day:
the darkness and the light are both alike unto thee. Moreover it is the
custom of children, when they speak unto their parents, first to call them by
the name of father or mother, as having that privilege. So the prodigal son
repenting, begins saying: Luke 15.18.
Father, I have sinned against heaven and against thee. Saint Paul calls our
parents on earth the fathers of our flesh, but God he calls the Heb. 12.9.
father of our spirits. For howsoever nature has its constituted course in the
generation of mankind, yet scripture declares that the Spirit of GOD rules in
nature, suffering it to have its course, or Genesis 16.2. and 20.18. and 30.2.
hindering the same, causing also 1. Sam. 1.5.5.11.17.19.20.
fruitfulness and barrenness, according to his holy and righteous will. S.
Paul says: Ephesians. 4.6.
There is one God and Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and in
us all, unto whom we (behaving our selves as dutiful children, in having Ps.
119.6. 1. Joh. 4.22.
respect unto all his commandments) may Heb. 4.15.16.
boldly speak in the name and mediation of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord,
that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need. In the
Homily for good Friday it is said: In page 176.177.
In Baptism we promised to renounce the devil and his suggestions, we
promised to be (as obedient children) always following Gods will and pleasure.
Then if he be our Father indeed, let us give him his due honor. If we be his
children, let us show him our obedience. And (says the Church) if we want any
thing, for body or soul, we may lawfully and boldly approach to God, as to our
merciful father, to ask that we desire, and we shall obtain it. So well
pleased is the Father Almighty God with Christ his Son, that for this sake he
favors us, and will deny us nothing. So pleasant was this sacrifice and
oblation of h^s Sons death, which he so obediently and innocently suffered,
that we should take it for the only and full amends fo^^ll the sins of the
world. And such favor did he purchase by his death, of his heavenly father
for us, that for the merit thereof (if we be These words of the Church are
duly to be marked; we are not to take some, and to let other pass
unobserved; her doctrine being all taken and compared together, has no
contrariety, but an harmony, stirring us up toward the mind and life of Jesus
Christ. 1. Cor. 2.16. and 2. Cor. 4.10.11.
true Christians indeed, and not in word only) we be now fully in GODS grace
again, and clearly discharged from our sin. And afterward the Church
adds: In page 178.
That Christ's passion is not only the ransom and whole amends for our sin,
but it is also a most perfect example of all patience and sufferance. For
surely (as says Saint Peter) CHRIST therefore suffered, to leave us an example
to follow his steps: And if we suffer with him, we shall be sure also to reign
with him in heaven, etc.

Q. Why is it said, Which art in heaven?

A. The late Royal Majesty has most divinely written, In the homily of Common
prayer and Sacraments, page 134.
Though GOD be present every where, as well in his infinite essence, as power;
yet he is only resident in heaven, as the seat of his Majesty, according to
that of Esaias 66.1. Heaven is my throne, and earth is my footstool. And whereas
the earth is his footstool, and so he has a being nigh unto us: hence we are
taught by the Church to pray sometimes In the homily of Common prayer and
Sacraments, page 134.
mentally, that is, with the devout lifting up of the mind unto God with a
speaking of our spirit only. Also there the Church puts us in mind of
CHRIST'S saying, Pray in thy closet unto thy Father which is in Mat. 6.6.
secret, and thy Father which sees in secret, shall reward thee openly. Also
we are hereby admonished, that when we pray, we lift up our minds, and have our
hearts and thoughts only directed and intent on the infinite Spirit Almighty
GOD.

Q. What are the words Our Father which art in heaven, called?

A. The beginning and entry of the Lords prayer. And says the In her larger
Catechism.
Church, The said prayer contains in deed six petitions; but in the whole
sum there are but two parts: Whereof the first belongs only to the glory
of God, and contains the three former petitions: the second which contains
the three latter petitions, belongs properly to our commodity.

Q. What is the first petition in the Lords prayer?

A. Hallowed be thy name. Some render it, Holily worshipped be thy name. And
says the Church, In the Declarations exposition hereof.
By the name of God is understood God himself, the power of God, the might,
the Majesty, the glory, the wisdom, the providence, the mercy and goodness
of God, and all such other good things, as in Scripture be attributed unto God.
And this name is hallowed, when it is praised, glorified, set forth, honored,
and magnified of us both in word and deed. That saying of Isaiah is very
memorable hereunto, Isa. 5.16.
God that is holy, shall be sanctified in righteousness. There are that will
say, Let the Lord be Isa. 66.5.
glorified, and yet for all that they shall be ashamed or confounded (says the
Prophet,) because by unrighteousness they dishonor his name, and cause it
through their ill doings to be Romans 2.23.24
Hallowing, glorifying, praising and thanking of Gods name is not a matter
consisting merely in words.
blasphemed by others. Gods name is hallowed, when as it is not taken in vain,
when his gracious presence is duly reverenced with all reverence signified in
the Scripture to be due unto him, and ordained by the Church for to be
performed. The Gospel says, 1. Cor. 10.31.
Whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of GOD. We are to strive for to do
universal matters so, as Gods name may have all due honor thereby, and not in
any the least manner be dishonored or unhallowed. Many are the promised Deuteronomy.
28.1.2.3. etc. 58.
blessings unto such as obediently observe to do all the words of Gods
everlasting law, that they may fear the great and glorious and fearful name
The Lord thy God. The Isa. 8.13.
Propher says, Sanctify the Lord of host himself, and let him be your fear,
and let him be your dread.

Q. What is the second Petition?

A. Thy Kingdom come. And thus has the Apostolical Church of England written
on the same. In the Declarations exposition hereof. It is to be remembered that
by the said name is meant the book before mentioned, set forth by the Church in
the later part of the reign of King Henry the eight.
This second Petition is very necessary, for no doubt our ancient enemy the
devil goes about continually by all crafty means, to deceive us, and bring
us under his power and dominion. And surely so long as pride and disobedience
reigns in us, so long as ire, envy, wrath, or covetousness reigns in us,
so long as gluttony, lechery, or any kind of sin reigns in us, so long we
be under the dominion and kingdom of the devil. For the devil undoubtedly,
is the Job. 41.34.
king over all the children of pride, that is to say, over all them that be
sinners, rebels, and disobedient unto GOD. And forasmuch as it is not in our
own power to deliver our selves from under this tyranny of the devil, but
only by Gods help (for our Hos. 13.9.
perdition and undoing is of our selves, but our help and salvation is of GOD,
as says the Prophet O see) therefore it is very necessary for all true
Christian people, to make this petition uncessantly unto our heavenly father,
and to beseech him according to this doctrine of CHRIST, that by his grace and
help, we may escape the dominion and power of the devil, and that we may be
made subject unto his heavenly kingdom. Therefore in this petition we desire
GOD to give us before all things, true and constant faith in him, and in his
Son JESUS CHRIST, and in the holy Ghost, with pure love and charity toward
him and all men, to keep us from all infidelity, desperation and malice, which
might be the cause of our destruction, to deliver us from dissentions,
covetousness, lechery and evil desires, and lusts of sin, and so the virtue
of his Kingdom to come, and to Luke 17.21. Gods Kingdom of grace is a matter
within the soul of man, upon which manner of Christ's reigning few duly consider.
reign within us, that all our heart, mind, and wits, with all our strength
inward and outward, may be ordered and directed to serve God, to observe his
Commandments and his will, and not to serve our self, the flesh, the world,
or the devil. We desire also, that this kingdom once in us begun, may be
daily increased and go forward more and more, so that all subtle and secret
hate, or sloth, which we have to goodness, be not suffered to rule so in us,
that it shall cause us to look back again, and to fall into sin; but that we
may have a stable purpose and strength, not only to begin the life of
innocence, but also to proceed earnestly further in it, and to perform it,
according to the saying of Saint Paul, where he prays, that we may Col.
1.9.10.11.
walk worthily, pleasing God in all things, being fruitful in all good
works, and growing and increasing in the knowledge of God. Also in another
place he says, Ephesians. 4.15.
Work and do the truth in charity, and increase and go forward in CHRIST.
Therefore in this prayer, desiring the kingdom of God to come, we require
also, that we being already received and entered into the kingdom of Romans 5.21.
grace and mercy of God, may so continue and persevere therein; that after this
life, we may come to the kingdom of glory, which endures for ever. The Church
also says, In her larger Catechism.
We pray that Gods kingdom come, that is, that he suffer not the divine truth
of his word, which also CHRIST calls the Gospel of the Kingdom, to lie
hidden in darkness, but that he daily more and more bring it abroad, and with
his succor maintain and defend it against the devises, craft, and policy of
Satan, and of wicked men, and against their Or the laid ambushment, or framed
wiles.
fained treasons that labor to darken the truth, and to defame or spot it with
lies, and against the violence and cruelty of tyrants, that travail by all
means to extinguish and oppress the truth and utterly to root it up: so as it
may be made manifest and well known to all men, that there is nothing able to
resist the invincible strength of GODS truth. And may we not refer unto this
petition, that which the Church prays for in the third collect for good
friday, That universal mankind may become one Joh. 10.16. Ezec. 34.23.24.
fold under one Shepherd JESUS CHRIST our LORD? Says not GOD by Zechariah,
Zech. 14.9.
The Lord shall be King over all the earth: in that day there shall be one
Lord, and his name one? Why does the Church daily pray, That it may please thee
to give unto all nations, unity, peace, and concord: Let thy saving health be
known among In the psalm to be read after the second lesson every evening.
Psalm. 67.
all nations: let all the people praise thee?

Q. What is the third Petition?

A. Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven. And says the In the
Declarations exposition.
Church, For the better understanding of this third petition, we must know,
that by disobedience and sin of our first father Adam, we be as of our nature
only, without the grace of God, unable to fulfill the will and precepts of God,
and so inclined to love our selves, and our own In the thanksgiving to be sung
after receiving the Lords supper, the evil will of unregenerat man is
signified, where it is said, A law God gave us for to know, what was his holy
will: He would us good, but we would not, avoid the thing is ill. Not one of
us that seeks out, the Lord of life to please: Nor do the thing which might
us lead to Christ and quiet ease. Naught else but sin and wickedness, does
rest within our hearts: And stubbornely against the Lord, we daily play our
parts.
wills, that we cannot heartily love neither God nor man, as we ought to do.
And therefore we being once Christian men, it is requisite for us to pray,
that like as the holy Angels and Saints in heaven (in whom God reigns
perfectly and wholly) do never cease, ne shall cease to glorify him, to praise
him, and to fulfill his will and pleasure in all things, and that most readily
and gladly without any manner of grudging or resisting thereunto, knowing
certainly and clearly, that his will is always the best: even so that we the
children of God in earth, may daily and continually praise God, and by our holy
conversation in good works and good life, honor and glorify him. And that
we may from time to time so mortify our own natural corrupt and sinful
appetite and will, that we may be ever ready, like loving children, humbly,
lowly, and obediently, to approve and allow and accomplish the Ps. 40.8. and
143.10.
will of God our Father in all things, and to submit our selves with all our
heart unto the same, and to acknowledge, that whatsoever is the Matt. 26.39.42.
will of GOD, the same is most perfect, most just, most holy, and most
expedient for the wealth and health of our souls. Joh. 4.34.
Wherefore in this petition also, we desire of GOD true and stable patience,
when our will is let or broken: and that when any man speaks or does
contrary to our will; yet therefore we be not out of patience, neither curse
or murmr, or seek vengeance against our adversaries, or them which let our
will, but that we may say well of them, and do well unto them. We pray also,
that by Gods grace we may gladly suffer all diseases, poverty, despisings,
persecutions, and adversities, knowing that it is the will of God, that we
should crucify and mortify our wills. And when any such adversity chances
unto us, attribute all unto the will or sufferance of God, and give him thanks
therefore, who does order all such things for our weal and benefit, either for
the exercise and the trial of the good, to make them stronger in goodness and
virtue: or else for the chasticement and amendment of the evil, to suppress
their evil motions and desires. We desire furthermore, that all our members,
eyes, tongue, heart, hands, and feet be not suffered to follow the desires of
the flesh, but that all may be used to the will and pleasure of God, etc. The
Church also says: In the larger Catechism.
It is the duty of children to frame their life according to the will of their
fathers, and not contrariwise the parents to conform themselves to the will of
their children. And in a certain In the collect for the ninth Sunday after
Trinity.
collect therefore says: Grant to us LORD, we beseech thee, the spirit to
think and do always such things as be rightful, that we which cannot be
without thee, may by thee be able to live according to thy will, through JESUS
CHRIST our LORD. Then does one perform Christian repentance, when as he takes
his own will into examination, and whereinsoever he finds it different from
Christ's will or law, therein to forsake it. Luke 14.33.


Q. What is the fourth petition.

A. Give us this day our daily bread. The Church says: In the larger
Catechism.
By the name of bread is meant, not only those things that minister us food
and apparel, but also all other things universally, that are needful to the
maintaining and preserving of our life, and the leading of it in quietness
without fear. It is called our bread, because it becomes ours, when he
liberally Ps. 115.16.
gives it us for our daily uses, though by right it be not due to us. David
says: Ps. 24.1.
The earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof. By this word bread, we are
put in mind, that we ought to get our living with our labor, or by other
lawful means, and that being therewith contented, we do never, by
covetousness or fraud, seek any thing of other men's. In the lesser Catechism.
We ask bread of God, because that in vain shall we wast all the course of
our life in toil of body and travel of mind, unless it please GOD to Ps.
127.1.2. and 1. Cor. 3.7.
prosper our endeavors. The rich also are to crave bread of GOD, because
(says the Church) in vain shall we have plenty of all things, unless God by
his grace do make the use of them Mat. 4.3.
healthful unto us for the maintenance of our life. There are added these
words daily and this day, That we avoiding all careful covetousnes, and doing
diligently our duty, should daily crave of our most liberal father that, which
he is ready daily to give us. The words of Prove. 30.8.
Agur are: give me neither poverty nor riches, feed me with food convenient
for me. The In her declaration.
Church also has delivered, that by bread we are also to understand the holy
Sacrament of the body and blood of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, who
says: Ioh. 6.51.
I am the bread of life, which came down from heaven. And the bread which I
will give, is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the world. And in
this prayer, we desire, that the same may be purely ministered and
distributed, to the comfort and benefit of us all, the true children of God.
And that we may also receive the same with a right faith, and perfect
charity, at all times, when we do and ought to receive the same, so that we
may be spiritually fed therewith to our salvation, and thereby enjoy the life
everlasting. By bread also is meant the Prove. 9.5. Isa. 55.2.
true doctrine of the word of God, which is the spiritual bread which feeds
the soul. For as the body is nourished and brought up, grows and feeds
with bread and meat; so needs the soul even from our youth to be nourished
and brought up with the word of God, and to be fed with it. And like as the
body will faint and decay, if it be not from time to time releived and
refreshed with bodily sustenance: even so the soul waxes feeble and weak
toward God, unless the same be cherished and kept up with the word of God,
according to the saying of Christ: A man lives not with meat only, but with
every word that proceeds from the mouth of God. And surely the word of God is
the very comfort, remedy, and health of the soul. If we have any manner of
sickness or disease in our souls, what medicine or remedy can we have, but
that is declared in GODS word?

Q. What is the fifth petition?

A. And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against
us. The Church says in the former Homily for good Friday: In the former Homily
and page 179.
It is not meet that we should crave forgiveness of our great offenses at Gods
hands, and yet will not forgive the small trespasses of our neighbors against
us. We do call for mercy in vain, if we will not show mercy to our
neighbors. For if we will not put wrath and displeasure forth of our hearts to
our Christian brother, no more will God forgive the displeasure and wrath that
our sins have deserved before him. For under this Mat. 6.14.15. and 18.35.
condition does he forgive us, if we forgive other. It becomes not Christian
men to be hard one to another, nor yet to think their neighbor unworthy to
be forgiven. For howsoever unworthy he is, yet is Christ worthy to have thee
do thus much for his sake, he has deserved it of thee, that thou should
forgive thy neighbor. And God is also to be obeyed, which commands us to
forgive, if we will have any part of the Here is a fundamental sentence in
Christian faith or divinity. Christ by his death obtained pardon for the sins
of the whole world: but yet no person in particular can receive his part in the
said general (or rather universal pardon) but upon condition. See Acts 26.18.
pardon which our Savior Christ purchased once of God the Father, by shedding
of his precious blood. The Homily against contention says: In page 93.94.
Mine enemy (say some) is not worthy to have gentle words or deeds, being so
full of malice or frowardness. Thy neighbor has peradventure with a word
offended thee: call thou to thy remembrance with how many words and deeds, how
grievously thou have offended thy Lord God. What was man, when Christ died for
him? Was he not his enemy, and unworthy to have his favor and mercy. Even so,
with what gentleness and patience does he forbear, and tolerate, and suffer
thee although he is daily offended by thee? What crakest thou of thy head, if
thou labor not to be in the body? Thou can be no member of CHRIST, if thou
follow not the steps of CHRIST. The Church also has delivered: In her
declaration.
Ye shall understand, that foregivenesse before spoken of, is not so meant in
Scripture, that by it justice or laws of Princes should be broken, contemned,
or not executed. For although our Savior CHRIST in this petition does teach us
to remit and forgive all injuries and trespasses done against us; yet he which
has done the injury or trespass, is, nevertheless bound to Luke 17.3.4.
acknowledge his fault, and to ask forgiveness therefore, not only of God,
but of him also whom he has offended, and to intend to do no more so. And
furthermore to recompense and make amends unto the parties, against whom he
has trespassed, according to his ability and power, and as the greevousnesse
and greatness of the offense requires. And in case he which has committed
the offense or trespass, be 1. Tim. 1.9.10. Exodus 21.19.22. and
22.9.10.11.12. etc. Deuteronomy. 17.8. etc.
obstinate, and will not do these things before rehearsed, which he is bound
to do by the law of God, then may the party, which finds himself grieved,
notwithstanding any thing that is said before in this petition, lawfully and
without offense of Gods commandments ask and seek recompense of such
injuries, as be done to him, according to the order and provision of the laws
of the Realm, made in that behalf; so that he always have an eye and respect
unto charity, and do nothing for rancour, or malice, or for sinister
affection, neither bear any hatred in his heart toward him, whom he sueth, but
only upon a zeal and love of the maintenance of justice, correction of vice,
and reformation of the party that has offended; remembering always that he
exceed not, nor go beyond the limits and bounds of this general rule, taught
by our Savior Christ in his Gospel: As ye would that men should do unto
you, even so do you unto them: for this is the law and the Prophets.

Q. What is the sixth petition?

A. And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. And says the
Church: In her shorter Catechism.
As we before do ask forgiveness of sins past, so now we pray that we sin
no more. For we by nature are so unwarie to foresee, and so weak to resist
the manifold snares, temptations, and inticements of the devil, the world, and
the concupiscence of the flesh, that we cannot but be overcome, unless GOD
do assist us with his grace, and arm us with his strength: and therefore we
fly by prayer unto the protection of our Almighty and most loving Father, that
he will not suffer us to be overcome with any wicked temptation, but that he
will deliver and save us from evil. In the larger Catechism.
We pray that God lead us not into temptation, because God as he defends and
2. Cor. 12.9. 2. Tim. 4.17.18
preserves them that be his, that they be not snared with the guiles of
Satan, and so fall into vices and foul sins, so from the wicked he 1. Sam.
16.14.
holds back and withdraws his help and succor, whereof they being
destitute, blinded with lust, and running headlong, are catched in all sorts of
deceitful trappes, and carried unto all kind of wickedness, and at length
with custom of ill doings, as it were gathering a Isa. 6.10. 2. Cor. 4.3.4.
Jer. 6.8.
thick tough skin, their hearts wax hard, and so they becoming bondmen,
and yielding themselves to slavery unto the tyrant Satan, they run in ruin
to their own undoing and everlasting destruction. The In her declaration.
Church has also delivered, That there be two manner of temptations, whereof
one comes and is sent to us by God, who suffers those that be his, to be
tempted by one means or other, for their probation or trial, albeit he so
assisteth and ardeth them, in all such temptations, that he turns all at the
end unto their profit and benefit. For as the wise man says: Ecclus. 27.5. The
Church there reads according to the vulgar Latin.
Like as the oven tries the potters vessel, so does temptation of trouble
try the righteous man. And with this manner of temptation God sundry wise
tempted our holy father Abraham, he tempted also Job with extreme poverty,
horrible sickness, and sudden death of his children: and daily he tempts
and prooveth all such as he loves. It is said concerning Ezekiah in the book
of Chronicles: 2. Chron. 32.31.
How beit, in the business of the Ambassadors of the Princes of Babylon, who
sent unto him to enquire of the wonder that was done in the land, God left him
to try him, that he might know all that was in his heart. The other manner of
temptation comes chiefly of the 1. Cor. 7.5.
devil, which like a furious and a wood lion, rages and runs about
perpetually seeking how he may devour us. The Church also there signifies of
our temptation by our own concupiscence, whereof Saint James says: James 1.14.
Every man is tempted, when he is drawn away of his own lust, and is enticed:
and that by the devil and this our concupiscence and our consent, all vice and
sins be engendered, like as between man and woman children be engendered,
according to the saying of Saint James, where he says, James 1.15.
Concupiscence when she does conceive, she brings forth sin, and that of
all sorts, that is to say, first acts and deeds, contrary to the laws of God;
and after that, use and custom of the same deeds; and at length blindness and
contempt. Wherefore (says the Church) considering how dangerous it is to fall
into sin, and how hard it is to arise, the chief and best way is, to James
4.7. Ephesians. 6.11.12.13.14.15.16.17
resist with Gods help the first suggestion unto sin, and not to suffer it
to Ephesians. 4.27.
prevail with us; but as soon as may be, to put it out of our minds. For if we
suffer it to tarry any while in our hearts, it is great peril, lest that
consent and deed will follow shortly after. The Church there also has
delivered, That our Savior JESUS CHRIST teaches us not in this sixth petition
to pray unto God our Father, that we should be clearly without all temptation:
but that he will not suffer us to be led into temptation, that is to say, that
when we be tempted, he will give us grace to withstand it, and not to suffer
us to be overcome therewith, according whereunto Saint Paul says, 1. Cor.
10.13.
GOD is true and faithful, and will not suffer us to be tempted above that we
may bear, but he will so moderate the temptation, that we may sustain and
overcome it. And Saint James says, James 1.2.3.
Count it all joy when ye fall into diverse temptations, knowing this, that the
trying of your faith works patience: but let patience have her perfect work,
that ye may be perfect and entire, wanting nothing.

Q. Why is it said (as it is in the prayer in the Gospel according to Saint
Matthew) For thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, for ever,
Amen?

A. The Church would have this conclusion added, to make us understand that
GODS power and Romans 8.31.32
goodness is so infinitely great, that there is nothing which he either
cannot, or will not give us, praying for it, and asking it rightly: which also
this word Amen, which is to say, So be it, being added in the end of the
prayer, does confirm unto us. There is mention made of the glory of God, for
to teach us to conclude all our prayers with praises of God: for that is the
end whereunto all that we desire to obtain in our prayer, and all our
thoughts, words, and works, and all things universally ought to be referred and
applied. For to this end he has created us, and placed us in this world.
Moreover, to praise and magnify GODS goodness, justice, wisdom, and power,
and to give him thanks in our own name, and in the name of all mankind, is 1.
These. 1.2. Luke 17.17.18 Nehem. 11.17. Act. 2.46.47. Psalm. 100.4. All Ps. 103.
etc.
parcel of the worshipping of God, belonging as properly to his Majesty, as
prayer. It is the voice of the heavenly company likewise to say, Rev. 4.15. and
3.12.13.
Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory, and honor, and power: for thou
have created all things, and for thy pleasure they are and were created.

Q. Why does the Church propound to be asked, What is desired in the Lords
prayer?

A. Like as her holy wisdom would have her children understand in some wise,
what they learn from the Creed and the ten Commandments, so also she would
have them pray with some understanding. Which thing God requires of all that
speak unto him, that in some measure they know what they say. Hence it is
commanded, Sing ye Psalm. 47.7.
praises with understanding. And Saint Paul propounds his example for our
imitation, where he says, 1. Cor. 14.15.
I will pray with the spirit, and will pray with the understanding also: I will
sing with the spirit, and I will sing with the understanding also. And even as
in the Lords prayer it self Ephesians. 3.20.21. Psalm. 34.1.2.3.
there are The entri conclusion with the six petitions.
eight distinct matters considerable, so also in the rehearsal of the contents
thereof eight sundry points may be observed.

Q. What is the first?

A. Even as before the Lords prayer there is an entrance thereto, namely the
words Our Father which ar^ in heaven; so here before the first desire is
specified, there is mentioned, unto whom prayer is made, with his honorable
title and property.

Q. What is the honorable title of him whom we do desire or pray unto?

A. My Lord God our heavenly Father. And in such manner have the holy men of
God heretofore spoken of him saying in the singular manner, Joh. 20.28. Psalm.
110.1. and 25.2.
My Lord, and my God: And whereas I say, My Lord, I declare that I in Luke
6.46. Psalm. 143.10. and 40.8.
particular desire to be his obedient servant: And whereas I say, My God, I do
both signify what I do worship, and also that I have had some experience of
his good nature. And I call him Our heavenly Father, because (as the In her
larges Catechism on the wotds Which art in heaven.
Church says) he is most high, most mighty, most blessed, most good, most
great, incomprehensible: also because he begets us to be his children,
after an heavenly and spiritual manner. Saint James says, James 1.18.
Of his own will begat he us with the word of truth. And Saint Peter says,
1. Pet. 1.23.
Being borne again, not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible; by the word
of God, which lives and abides for ever. And says the Lord, John 3.6.
Whosoever is borne of the spirit, is spirit, he is in some measure in the
image and likeness of GOD, namely in righteousness and true holiness.

Q. What is the honorable property mentioned unto him?

A. That he is the giver of all goodness. For so says Saint James, James 1.17.
Every good gift, and every perfect gift is from above, and comes down from
the Father of lights, with whom is no variableness, neither shadow of turning.

Q. What is the next matter in the rehearsal?

A. It is the first of the desires, namely, That God would send his grace unto
me, and to all people, that we may be As the church teaches to pray in a
certain prayer, set in the end of the Communion Service.
prevented with his most gracious favor in all our doings, and furthered with
his continual help, and be endued with all requisite gifts and operations of
his holy spirit. And this is desired in the first place to be multiplied on
his Church all people obedient to the Commandments of the Gospel, and also
that grace may in convenient manner be extended more and more to all the rest
of mankind, as was observed on the Second Petition.

Q. Why is this first desire made?

A. To the end that we may worship God, serve him, and obey him, as we ought
to do: the which three things answer to the three former petitions of the
Lords prayer.

Q. What is the second desire?

A. I pray God that he will send us all things, that be needful both for our
souls and bodies: and this desire answers unto the fourth petition. The
Church says in a Homily, In the end of the Homily against excess of apparel,
page 109.
That daily bread signifies all things necessary for this our needy life.

Q. What is the third desire?

A. That he will be merciful unto us, and forgive us our sins. And this
answers to the fifth petition, wherein we beseech God to be merciful unto us,
and to forgive us our trespasses against him, according as we are merciful
unto others, and do forgive them their trespasses against us. CHRIST says,
Mat. 6.14.15.
If ye do not forgive men their trespasses, no more will your heavenly Father
forgive you yours. And as the party, that would have pardon of him whom he has
offended, is to Luke 17.34.
acknowledge his fault, and for to promise to offend so no more: so says
Solomon, it is with us before God. For he that hides his sins shall not
prosper; but he that Prove. 28.13. 1. Ioh. 1.9.
confesses and forsakes them, shall find mercy.

Q. What is the fourth desire?

A. That it will please him to save and defend us from all dangers ghostly and
bodily, that is, which may befall our ghosts, (spirits or souls,) and our
bodies.

Q. What is the fifth desire?

A. That he will keep us from all sin and wickedness, and from our ghostly
enemy. In which desire the Church does give us to understand, that it is GODS
will, that not any the least sin should reign in us; but that we should
thereto pray for his subduing of universal sin in us, by the might of the
spirit of JESUS CHRIST; and that we for our parts should unfeinedly strive,
utterly to abolish the whole body of sin forth of us. We are also to pray
for to be kept from our ghostly enemy, which in the end of the Lords prayer is
called (...) from the evil one. It is the same word as is used in Mat. 13.19.
and 5.37.
the evil one, and so in other Scriptures. He is the adversary to all the
true people of God; them he desires to have for to Luke 22.31.
sift as wheat: the Apostles journeys toward the Churches he sometimes 1 These.
2.18.
hindered, and caused of the disciples some to be Rev. 2.10.
cast into prison, yea and prevailed with sundry for to leave following God,
and to 1. Tim. 5.15.
follow after him. As God by the power of his spirit keeps his obedient
people from the power of the evil one, so does he use the ministry of his
mighty Dan. 10.13. and 12.1. Tobias. 8.3. Psalm. 34.7. and 91.11. Heb. 1.14.
Angels thereunto, as in the Bible example is showed thereof. Wherefore holy
Church prays on the Feast day of Saint Michael and all Angels, Everlasting
God, which have ordained and constituted the services of all Angels and men in
a wonderful order: Mercifully grant that they which always do thee service in
heaven, may by thine appointment succor and defend us in earth, through our
Lord Jesus Christ.

Q. What is the sixth desire?

A. That he would keep us from everlasting death. Whereto we are to remember
what we for our parts are to do, what is signified where it is said, Rev. 20.6.
Blessed and holy is he that has part in the first resurrection: on such the
second death has no power. Rev. 2.11.
He that overcommeth, shall not be hurt of the second death. Rev. 3.12.
Him that overcommeth, I will make a pillar in the temple of my God, and he
shall no more go out. But the three last mentioned desires are included in the
sixth petition of the Lords prayer.

Q. What is the eighth point?

A. It is the ground of the hoped matters mentioned in the Lords prayer,
namely, Faith and trust in the mercy and goodness of God through our Lord
Jesus Christ. Every of the said things petitioned for, GOD has promised to do
unto his believing and obedient people, out of his infinite goodness and mercy
in JESUS CHRIST. And therefore the Lord says, Ioh. 14.13.14.
Whatsoever of such things as are asked in his name, they shall be granted.
Saint John says, 1. Ioh. 5.14.15
This is the confidence that we have in him, that if we ask any thing according
to his will, he hears us. And if we know that he hear us whatsoever we
ask, we know that we have the petitions that we desired of him. 1. Ioh.
3.22.
Whatsoever we ask, we receive of him, because we keep his commandments, and
do those things which are pleasing in his sight. The Church in her Rogation
Homily has in ample and plain manner expressed the goodness of God unto
mankind, through his Son pages 228. 229.
Jesus Christ; and likewise in other Homilies. The Apostle speaking of the
christian hope, says, That we have it, as Heb. 6.19. It is memorable what is
observed; the creed is the sum of our faith, the Lords prayer is the sum of
our hope, and the ten Commanments are the sum of love. See 1 Cor. 13.13. Romans
13.8.9.10.
an anchor of the soul, both sure and steadfast. And therefore (says every true
member of the Church) I say Amen, So be it. Whereby the strong consolation and
great confidence, the firm belief and unfeined hearty desiring of the things
petitioned for, are signified and declared.

Q. Why is the next and last matter handled in the sacred Catechism,
concerning the Sacraments?

A. They are said to be most conveniently treated of after discourse of prayer
and thankesgiving, In the lesser Catechism.
for that they have always prayers and thankesgiving joined unto them. They
also being outward representations of inward things spoken of before, will best
be understood being explaned in the last place.

Q. Why at all would God have us to use such outward signs?

A. The Church faith, In her larger Catechism.
Surely we are not endued with mind and understanding so heavenly and divine,
that the graces of God do appear clearly of themselves to us as it were to
Angels, by this mean therefore God has provided for our weakness, that we
which are earthly and blind, should in outward elements and figures, as it were
in certain glasses, behold the heavenly graces, which otherwise we were not
able to see. And greatly for our behoof it is, that Gods promises should be
also presented to our senses, that they may be confirmed to our minds without
doubting. In an answer a little after.
Moreover to lighten and give bright cleerenesse to men's minds and souls, and
to make their consciences quiet and in security, as they be in deed, so ought
they to be accounted the proper works of the holy Ghost alone, and to be Luke
12.12. Joh. 1.33. and 6.63. and 14.17.26. and 1. Cor. 4.6. etc.
imputed to him, and this praise not to be transferred to any other. But this
is no impediment but that God may give to his mysteries the second place in
quieting and stablishing our minds and consciences, but yet so that nothing be
abated from the virtue of his spirit. Wherefore we must determine, that the
outward element has neither of it self, nor in it self enclosed the force
and efficacy of the Sacrament, but that the same wholly flows from the Ioh.
1.33. Acts. 1.5. and 10.45.
spirit of God, as of a springhead, and is by the divine mysteries, which are
ordained by the Lord for for this end, conveyed unto us.

Q. Why is it said, that CHRIST has ordained in his Church Two Sacraments
only, as generally necessary to salvation?

A. The Church says, In her larger Catechism.
Baptism and the Lords Supper are the two Sacraments commonly used among all
the faithful. By the one we are born again, and by the other we are nourished
to everlasting life. So that these two are necessary for the In the homily of
common prayer and Sacraments the Church says, That these two are to be
received of every christian in due time and order. In page 135.
generality of the Church: for every one is required to be baptized, that would
be a member of Christ's visible Church: and every one is required to partake of
the Lords Supper, so soon as he comes to age.

Q. Are there any other Sacraments, which Christ has ordained in his Church
besides these two?

A. In the Homily concerning swearing, the Church calls In the first part,
page 47. of Tome 1.
Matrimony a Sacrament. And in the Homily concerning prayer and Sacraments it
says: That in a general acception, the name of Sacrament may be attributed
to any thing whereby an holy thing is signified. And the Church there
signifies, that See the Homily of common prayer and sacraments, and pages 135.
136. Tome 2.
Absolution, Ordering of Ministers, Confirmation of children, and Extreme
Unction, have bin called Sacraments by ancient Writers: but yet no man ought to
take these for Sacraments, in such signification and meaning, as the Sacraments
of Baptism, and the Lord supper are. Moreover, that confirmation is not of
such necessity as Baptism is, The Church shows where it says: And that no
man shall think that any detriment shall come to children by deferring of
their confirmation, he shall know the truth; that it is certain by Gods word,
That children being baptized, have all things In the communion book rubric
immediately before the Catechism therein.
necessary for their salvation, and be undoubtedly saved. But yet Confirmation
is necessary to be had, as soon as it may with convenience, by reason of the
great blessing received therein from God by such as with due preparation have
it ministered unto them. And therefore says the Church: In the end of the
rubricke of Confirmation.
None should be admitted to the holy Communion, until such time as he can
say the Catechism and be confirmed.

Q. Rehearse how the Church describes that which is properly called a
Sacrament of the Gospel?

A. In her larger Catechism.
It is an outward testifying of Gods good will and bountifulness toward us
through CHRIST, by a visible sign representing an invisible and spiritual
grace, by which the promises of God touching Acts 2.38. Mat. 26.26.27.28.
forgiveness of sins and eternal 1. Pet. 3.21. Joh. 6.54.
salvation given through CHRIST are as it were sealed, and the truth of them is
more certainly confirmed in our hearts. The Church says in the Communion
Service: CHRIST has instituted and ordained holy mysteries, as pledges of his
love, and continual remembrance of his death, to our great and endless
comfort.

Q. Rehearse also the description of Baptism.

A. In her larger Catechism.
The Church says: Whereas by nature we are the Ephesians. 2.3.
children of wrath, that is, strangers from the Church, which is Gods household,
baptism is as it were a certain Mar. 16.16.
entry by which we are received into the Church, whereof we also receive a
most substantial testimony, that we are now in the number of the household, and
also the children of God, yea and that we are joined and graffed into the 1.
Cor. 12.13.
body of Christ, and become his members and do Ephesians. 4.5.16.
grow into one body with him.

Q. Recite how the Church declares, that the secret and spiritual grace has
its full and express resemblance by the outward sign?

A. First, as the uncleanness of the body are washed away with water, so the
spots of the soul are washed away Tit. 3.5.6. Col. 2.13. Acts 22.16. Ephesians. 5.26.
by forgiveness of sins. Secondly, the beginning of regeneration, that is,
the Romans 6.3.5.6.7.
mortifying of our nature is expressed by dipping in the water, or by spinkling
of it. Finally, when we by and by Col. 2.12.
rise up again out of the water, under which we be for a short time, the new
life which is the other part and the end of our regeneration is thereby
represented. Also as in Baptism GOD truly delivers us forgiveness of sins
and newness of life, so do we certainly These words the Church has in her
larger Catechism for to show, that the Sacrament is not a bare figure, but
has withal the truth of the things themselves joined and knit thereunto.
receive them. These are the words of the Church also.
The holy Ghost as it were sprinkling our Heb. 9.14. Heb. 10.22. Col. 1.14.
consciences with the holy blood of JESUS CHRIST, wiping away all the spots of
sin, makes us clean before God. Of this cleansing of our sins we have a
Romans 4.11.
seal and pledge in the Sacrament.

Q Whereas the ancient custom was in administering this Sacrament, for to dippe
the party three times in water, and in the third time as it were to bury it
in the water by dipping the whole body therein, is there any Scripture for the
usage now with sprinkling.

A. Isaiah says, speaking concerning Christ, that the Lord said: Isa.
52.13.14.15.
Behold, my servant shall deal prudently, he shall be exalted and extolled,
and be very high. As many were astonished at thee, (his visage was so marred
more than any man, and his form more than the sons of men,) So shall he
sprinkle many nations, etc. And whereas it is the 1. Ioh. 1.7.
blood of JESUS CHRIST, which cleanses us from all sin, as Saint John says;
and that blood is 1. Pet. 1.2.
sprinkled, as Saint Peter signifies; and the blood of bulls and goats, which
in old time sanctified unto the purifying of the flesh, was Heb. 9.13.
sprinkled on the unclean, therefore the divine Wisdom of the Church says
in the rubricke of Baptism: If the child be weak, it shall suffice to power
water upon it, etc.

Q. Why is the baptized party said to be baptized in the Name of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost?

A. CHRIST commanded it to be so expressed, because we are to worship the holy,
blessed, and glorious One God in Trinity, and Trinity in unity. Baptism also
is into unity with Christ's body, as the Apostle signifies in 1. Cor. 12.13.
And so says the divine Service.
Trinity, and to bear written in our foreheads spiritually each name, that is,
we are to submit our selves in true repentance, under the obedience of God
holy law, unto a reformation of our minds and co^versations according to all
the everlasting precepts of the same more and more: we are to submit our selves
under the obedience of the Faith of Jesus Christ, and to enter into such an
imitation of his sufferings, as is prescribed in the holy Gospel: we are also
to walk in newness of life, in the likeness of his Resurrection and
Ascension, through the enlightening, strengthening, guiding, and manifold
working of the holy Ghost, which is given unto all which have a right and a
lively faith in JESUS CHRIST. This threefold spiritual grace signified by
Baptism is prescribed unto us by holy Church in most divine manner, where it
says: In the latter part of the commination exhortation.
God is ready to receive us, and most willing to pardon us, if we come to him
with faithful repentance, if we will submit our selves unto him, and from
henceforth walk in his ways, if we will take his easy yoke and light burden
upon us, to follow him in lowliness, patience, and charity, and be ordered by
the governance of his holy Spirit, seeking always his glory, and serving him
duly in our vocation, with thankesgiving. This if we do, Christ will deliver
us from the curse of the law, etc.

Q. What is it to die unto sin?

A. Not to let Romans 6.12.6.
any sin reign in our mortal bodies, that we should obey it in the lusts
thereof; but to crucify the old man, and So speaks the Church in the end of
Baptism Service.
utterly to abolish the whole body of sin.

Q. What is it to be newborn unto righteousness?

A. To become changed from our corrupt natural unrighteous mind and life,
unto a mind Ps. 106.3. 1. Ioh. 2.29. and 3.7.
continually meditating for to give God and all mankind their universal due
from us, and unto a conversation expressing more and more all the same.

Q. How are we by nature borne in sin?

A. David says: Psalm. 51.5.
Behold I was shapen in iniquity: and in sin did my mother conceive me.

Q How are we said to be borne the children of wrath?

A. In that we bring with us into the world a corrupt nature, not such anature
as God created us withal: with the which corrupted nature God cannot but be
Ephesians. 2.3. Ezech. 16.3.4.5.6.
angry and displeased; and therefore requires that all infants of Christians
be baptized, that they may be sanctified and washed with the holy Ghost, that
being 1. These. 1.10.
delivered from GODS wrath, may be received into CHRIST'S holy Church, and be
made lively members of the same. Every child therefore that is baptized, is a
child of grace, that is, is in the favor of God; and if it die in its
infancy, it is undoubtedly saved, as says the Divine Service else where.

Q. Why is repentance required to be in a party, which is to be baptized?

A. Because in Baptism CHRIST is Gal. 3.27.
put on, who cannot be put on in any soul, but where the old man, which is
corrupt according to the deceitful lusts, is So the order mentioned in Ephesians.
4.22.23.24. does signify.
begun to be put off. CHRIST and Belial can have no 2. Cor. 6.16.
fellowship in one and the same soul. David says: Ps. 5.4.
Evil shall not dwell with thee, or in what soul thou dwell.

Q. Why is faith likewise require?

A. As we are to believe, what we for our parts are to do; so are we to Mar.
1.15. Heb. 11.6.
believe what God for his part has promised to do unto us doing our parts
obediently. And the sundry blessings promised to be conferred in Baptism, are
the promises which are steadfastly to be believed: as that therein is received
the forgiveness Col. 2.12.13.14. Romans 3.25.
of all sins past, a becoming to be a member of CHRIST, a child of God,
and an inheritour of the Kingdom of Heaven, a Christened one or a Christian,
that is, one in some measure 2. Cor. 1.21.22.
anointed with the holy Ghost, etc. These and the like promises are to be
believed for to be given by GOD in the holy Baptism Isa. 7.9. Belief is named
before baptism. Mar. 16.16.
otherwise they cannot be received. Saint James says: Iam. 1.6.
Let him ask in faith, nothing wavering; for he that wavereth, is like a wave
of the sea, driven with the wind, and tossed: for let not that man think,
that he shall receive any thing of the LORD.

Q. Relate what is said in the larger Catechism, why infants are to be
baptized.

A. Seeing God, which never swarveth from truth, nor in any thing strayeth from
the right way, did not exclude infants in the Jewish Church from Circumcision,
neither ought our Romans 3.29.
infants to be put back from baptism. As Moses and all the Prophets do
testify that Deuteronomy. 30.6. Jer. 4.4.
Circumcision was a sign of repentance, so does Saint Paul teach that it was a
Romans 4.11.
Sacrament of Faith. Yet the Jews children being not yet by age capable of
faith and repentance were nevertheless circumcised, by which visible sign God
showed himself in the old Testament to be the father of young children, and of
the seed of his people. Now since it is certain that the grace of GOD is more
plentifully powered, and more clearly declared in the Gospel by CHRIST, that at
that time it was in the old testament by Moses, it were a great indignity if
the same grace should now be thought, to be either obscurer or in any part
abated. Since it is certain that our infants have the force, and as it were the
Matt. 18 3.4.10. and 19.14. Luke 18.15.16.17. Romans 4.16. Act. 2.39.
substance of baptism common with as, they should have wrong done them, if the
sign, which is inferior to the truth it self, should be denied them; and
the same, which greatly avails to testifying of the mercy of God and
confirming of his promises, being taken away, Christians should be defrauded
of a singular comfort, which they that were in old time, enjoyed; and so should
our infants be more hardly dealt with in the new Testament under CHRIST, than
it was dealt with the Jews infants in the old Testament under Moses. Therefore
most great reason it is, that by Baptism as by the print of a seal, it be
assured to our infants that they be heirs of Gods grace, and of the salvation
promised to the seed of the faithful. Since also the Lord Christ calls
infants unto him, and commands that no man forbid them to come, embraces
them when they come to to him, and testifies that to them the Kingdom of
Heaven Mar. 10.13.14.15.
belongs: whom God vouchsafes to be in the heavenly palace, it seems a
great wrong that men should forbid them the first entry and door thereof, and
after a certain manner to shut them out of the Christian common wealth.

Q. Relate also what says the larger Catechism about infants uncapablenesse
for to perform repentance and faith.

A. That repentance and faith go before Baptism, is Joh. 3.16.18.
required only in persons so grown in years, that by age they are capable of
both. But to infants the promise made to the Church by Christ, in whose faith
Matt. 28.19.
they are baptized, shall for the present time be sufficient, and then
afterward when they are grown to years, they must needs themselves
acknowledge the truth of their Baptism, and have the force thereof to be
lively in their souls, and to be represented in their life and behaviors. Is
it (...) not likely that in old time when the Sacrament of Circumcision was
administered unto children of eight days old, there was an undertaking by some
that they should be brought up after the law of GOD? And did not infants then
perform that by others, which such as were of age were required to profess
when they were then circumcised? The infants and those of ripe age received
that Sacrament upon one and the same condition. And because the infant does as
it were speak by the witness, and the witness speak in the In the service
concerning private baptism, It is said, Do thou in the name of this child
forsake the devil, etc. And do thou in the name of this child profess this
faith, etc.
person of the infant, therefore the Church says unto the witness, Will thou
be baptized in this faith? He answers, That is my desire. The like is in
some civil matters and cases. A King is said to reign, though being but a
year old, when as then by others his Kingdom is administered. And if witnesses
at the font do faithfully see performed what they have undertaken, namely,
That the infants be taught, so soon as they shall be able to learn, what a
solemn vow, promise, and profession they have made by them, and what else is
enjoined in the end of the Baptism Service, according to Gods ordinary working
with such endeavors, the Scripture will be fulfilled which says: Prove. 22 6.
See chap. 51 52.
Teach a child in the trade of his way, when he is young, and when he is old,
he will not depart from it.

Q. Now declare the order of the Sacrament of the Lords supper.

A. The In her Catechismes, both larger and shorter.
Church says: It is even the same which the Lord Christ did institute; Who in
the same night that he was betrayed, 1. Cor. 11.23.24.25.26.
Took bread, and when he had given thanks, he brake it, and gave it to his
disciples, saying: Take, eat, this is my body, which is given for you. Do
this in remembrance of me. Likewise, after supper he took the cup, and when he
had given thanks, he gave it to them, saying, Drink ye all of this: For this
is my blood of the New Testament, which is shed for you, and for many, for
remission of sins. Do this as often as ye shall drink it in remembrance of me.
For so often as ye shall eat this bread, and drink of this cup, ye shall show
the Lords death till he come. This is the form and order of the Lords Supper,
which we ought to hold and holily to keep until he come, for to Luke 22.19.
celebrate and retain continually a thankful remembrance of the Lords death,
and of that most singular benefit which we have received thereby: and that as
in Baptism we were once born again, so with the Lords Supper we be always fed
and sustained to spiritual and everlasting life. It is enough to be once
baptized, as to be one borne; but the Lords Supper, like as food, must be often
used.

Q. Why is it said The sacrifice of the death of Christ?

A. The death which he suffered upon the cross was a sacrifice offered up to
GOD, a propitiation for the sins of the 1. Joh. 2.2.
whole world. Saint Paul says, Ephesians. 5.2.
Christ loved us, and has given himself for us, an offering and a sacrifice
to GOD for a sweet smelling savor. In the larger Catechism.
The holy Supper sends us to the death of CHRIST and to his sacrifice once
done upon the cross, by which alone GOD is Romans 5.10.11
appeased toward And toward universal mankind, so as in the Divine Service it
is signified. See what is in the next answer advertised.
us. For by bread and wine the signs, there is assured unto us, that as the
body of Christ was once offered a sacrifice for us to reconcile us to favor
with God, and his blood once shed to wash away the spots of our sins; so now
also in his holy Supper both are given to the faithful, that we surely know
that the reconciliation of favor pertains to us, and may take and receive
the fruit of the redemption purchased by his death.

Q. What are the benefits which we receive by the sacrifice of the death of
CHRIST?

A. The Church signifies in the Communion Service, That innumerable are the
benefits, which by his precious bloodshedding he has obtained to us. The
meaning is, that they are very many. In the Homily for good Friday it is said,
The first part and page 175.
Christ by his death has purchased for us the undoubted pardon and
forgiveness of our sins, whereby he made at Romans 5.8.10. ^. Cor. 5.19.
one the Father of heaven with us, in such wise, that he takes us now for his
loving children, and for the true inheritours with Christ his natural Son.
Saint Paul says, Heb. 2.14.15.
CHRIST took part of flesh and blood, that through death he might destroy him,
that had the power of death, that is, the devil: and deliver them who through
fear of death were all their life time subject unto bondage. Joh. 11.52.
He died that he might gather together into one the children of GOD, that were
scattered abroad. 2. Tim. 1.10.
That he might abolish death, and bring life and immortality to light, through
the Gospel. 1. These. 5.10.
That whether we wake or sleep, we should live together with him. Heb.
9.15.16.17.
That he might ratify and confirm his New Testament. Many more are the
benefits of his death, which are signified throughout the holy Scriptures. We
may not wrest any sentence of the Church doctrine unto our own purpose, but so
to understand her mind in every sentence, as that there may be no contrariety:
for her Divine service doctrine is a most holy harmony.
And here it is to be remembered, that all the sayings of holy Church are to be
considered together and compared each with other; so shall we perceive her to
have the mind of Christ, and to be in unity of faith with the Primitive Church.
It is said in the Homily concerning the Sacrament, In the second part, and page
202.
It behooveth him that comes to the body and blood of Christ, in
commemoration of him that died and rose again, not only to be pure from all
filthiness of the flesh and spirit, lest he eat and drink his own
damnation: but also to show out evidently, a memory of him that died and rose
again for us, in this point, that ye be mortifyed to sin and the world, to
live now to GOD in CHRIST JESUS our LORD. So then we must show outward
testimony, in following the signification of Christ's death. And therefore says
the Church also in the Passion Homily, In the first part, and page 180.
It shall little avail us to have in meditation the fruits and price of
Christ's passion, to magnify them, and to delight or trust in them, except we
have in mind his examples in passion to follow them. The consideration hereof
moved Saint Paul not to rest content with the historical knowledge of Christ's
sufferings; but withal to labor for to know the fellowship of his sufferings,
being made Phil 3.10.
conformable unto his death; and so to know CHRIST, and the power of his
resurrection.

Q. How are the body and blood of Christ verily and indeed taken and received
of the faithful in the Lords Supper?

A. In the Communion Service it is said, If with a true penitent heart and a
lively faith, we receive that holy Sacrament, then we spiritually eat the
flesh of Christ, and drink his blood, then we dwell in Christ, and Christ in
us, we be one with Christ, and Christ with us. In the Gospel after Saint John
it being written that Christ said, Joh. 6.56.
He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I in him;
there is added presently after, Verse 36.
The words which I speak unto you, they are spirit and life. Hence the Church
teaches also for the comfort of such as cannot receive the Sacrament,
whenever they desire it, In the Service for the communion of the sick.
That whosoever does truly repent him of his sins, and steadfastly believe that
Jesus Christ has suffered death upon the cross for him, and shed his blood
for his redemption, earnestly remembering the benefits he has thereby, and
giving him hearty thanks therefore, he does eat and drink the body and blood
of our Savior Christ profitably to his souls health, although he do not
receive the Sacrament with his mouth. The saying of the Church is much
memorable, In the homily of the Sacrament, the first part, and page 199.
Thus much we must be sure to hold, That in the Supper of the Lord, there is no
vain ceremony, no bare sign, no untrue figure of a thing absent: but (as the
Scripture says) the Table of the Lord, the bread and cup of the Lord, the
memory of Christ, the annunciation of his death, yea the Communion of the body
and blood of the Lord, in a marveilous incorporation, which by the operation of
the holy Ghost (the very bond of our conjunction with Christ) is through faith
wrought in the souls of the faithful) whereby not only their souls live to
eternal life, but they surely trust to win their bodies a resurrection to
immortality. There is a saying of the Church not unprofitable to be added here
concerning the infiniteness or immensity of Christ's godhead or divine nature,
where it is said, In the Rogation Homily, the first part, and page 221.
He is invisible every where, and in every creature, and fulfilleth both heaven
and earth with his presence. In the fire, to give heat; in the water, to give
moisture; in the earth, to give fruit: in the heart, to give his strength; yea
in our bread and drink is he, to give us nourishment, where without him the
bread and drink cannot give sustenance, nor the herb health, etc.

Q. Why is it said, Taken and received of the faithful?

A. The Church says, In the 29. Article of Religion.
The wicked, and such as be void of a lively faith, although they do carnally
and visibly press with their teeth the Sacrament of the body and blood of
Christ, yet in no wise are they partakers of Christ, but rather to their
condemnation do eat and drink the sign or Sacrament of so great a thing.

Q. Recite what the Church in her larger Catechism says also of the
Sacraments nourishing of us.

A. In the larger Catechism it is memorably delivered, That at length Christ
abiding in us, and we again abiding in Christ, we also by Christ abiding in us,
may obtain not only everlasting life, but also the glory which his Father
gave him. See Joh. 17.22. and 2. These. 2.14.
The Lord severally gave the signs both of his body and blood, that it might
be the more plain express image of his death, which he suffered, his body
being torn, his side pierced, and all his blood shed, and that the memory
thereof so printed in our hearts should stick the deeper. And moreover that the
Lord might so provide for and help our weakness, and thereby manifestly
declare, that as the bread for nourishment of our bodies, so his body has most
singular force and efficacy spiritually to feed our souls. And as with wine
men's hearts are cheared, and their strength confirmed, so with his blood our
souls are releeved and refreshed: that certainly assuring our selves that he
is not only our meat, but also our drink, we do not any where else but in
him alone, seek any part of our spiritual nourishment and eternal life.

Q. Let somewhat be said on these three great matters required to be in them,
which come to the Lords Supper, and so to conclude discourse on the Catechism.
Why is one to examine himself whether he repent him truly of his former
sins, steadfastly purposing to lead a new life, before he come to the Communion?

A. The Church shows the reason where it says, In the second exhortation
before the receiving of the Communion.
Ye are to be exhorted to consider the dignity of the holy Mystery, and the
great peril of the unworthy receiving of the same, and to search and examine
your own consciences, as you should come holy and clean to a most godly and
heavenly feast, so that in no wise ye come but in the marriage garment required
of God in holy Scripture, and so come and be received, as worthy partakers of
such an heavenly table. And then there the Church declares the requisite
examination, as also in her Homily, concerning the Sacrament.

Q. Why is there added, Steadfastly purposing to lead a new life?

A. It is likewise said in the Communion Service, You that intend to lead a new
life, following the commandments of GOD, and walking from henceforth in his
holy ways, draw near, and take this holy Sacrament for your comfort. The
Church full well knows, that very many which come to the Communion, do
intend nothing less than the leading of new lives; that many upon the
Communion day will a little bridle themselves, but on the day following and so
after, they will declare what spirit Ephesians. 2.2. 2. Tim. 2.26.
reigns in them, to whom they are subject, and in whose suggestions and
works they are most delighted. The Church in her Homily of the Sacrament
likewise prescribes three things to be most seriously considered of every one
that would be a Communicant, In the first part, and page 198. And in the Homily
the said three things are further expressed in very divine manner.
First, to have a right and worthy estimation and understanding of the mystery
of the Sacrament. Secondly, to come in a sure faith. And thirdly, to have
newness and pureness of life to succeed the receiving of the same.

Q. What is the second requisite matter?

A. To examine ones self whether he has a lively faith in Gods mercy through
Christ, with a thankful remembrance of his death. When ones conscience is sure
that he is a worker of no iniquity, but an enemy toward all unrighteousness
which may be committed against God or man, then may he be certain that he is
under Gods mercy through Christ. And the Church does divinely add a lively
faith, because it must be a faith striving for the due observing of all Christ's
commandments. It also adds, that there must be a thankful remembrance of
Christ's death: and here it is to be noted, that in the holy Sacrament there is
not only a remembrance of Christ's death, but also of his life after his death.
The Church says in her Homily for the Communion, In the second part, page
202.203. See Saint Basils saying in page 202.
we are to render thanks to Almighty God for all his benefits; briefly
comprised, in the Death, Passion, and Resurrection of his dearly beloved
Son. The which thing, because we ought chiefly at this table to solemnise,
the godly Fathers named it Eucharistia, that is, thankesgiving. Saint Paul
says, 2. Cor. 4.10.11.
Always bearing about in the body the dying of the Lord Jesus, that the life
also of Jesus might be made manifest in our body. Christ says: Ioh. 6.37.
As the living Father has sent me, and I live by the Father: So he that eats
me, even he shall live by me. And whereas Christian thankfulness unto God is
not in mind and word only toward God, but also to be expressed by kindness
toward Christ's poor members, therefore the Church says in her Homily, In
page 203. of the second part.
None should sit down at Gods table, who does not profess his kind affection
by some charitable relief, for some part of the congregation. Ps. 16.2.3.
Some Alms should be given.

Q. What is the third requisite matter?

A. To examine himself whether he be in charity with all men. Namely of the
communion, and in p. 203.
The Homily says: In respect of which strait knot of charity, the true
Christians in the primitive Church called this supper, Love: as if they should
say, none ought to sit down there, that were out of love and charity, who
bare grudge and vengeance in his heart. And it may be observed, that the three
points mentioned in this last answer of the Catechism are according to the
three matters vowed before baptism whereby the worship of GOD the Father,
Son, and holy Ghost is signified: For Charity is the third vow in effect.
See 1. John 5.3. and 2. Joh. 5. Jo^. 14.15.21.23.
Charity is often declared to be the true respect unto every of Christ's
commandments. And whereas the Church prescribes no further duty than charity,
and her last words are for Charity, her Divine Wisdom intimates thereby the
greatness thereof. Hereunto is greatly considerable what the late Royal
Majesty has left written concerning charity, in his Sacred In pages
91.92.93.94.95.96.97.98.
Meditations on the LORDS prayer. Charity is not only a divine virtue, but 1.
Ioh. 4.8.16.
God himself is Charity. Saint Paul reckoning the three great Theological
virtues, without which no man can be saved, not only puts in charity for one,
but even for the most 1. Cor. 12.31 and 13.13.
excellent of all, without the which the rest are nothing. And it is also the
only permanent virtue of them all; for Faith and Hope remain only with the
elect, while they are in this world, but Charity is ever with them, here and
hence for ever. Yea even will ye look to God himself, Ps. 145.9.
His mercy is over all his works, and mercy is a work of charity. Charity
dwells with God, and all the elect; Angels, and Saints, and men are Col. 3.14.
clad with it It is said in thankesgiving after the Communion; Even as the
comes by unity, into one loaf are knit; so is the Lord and his whole Church,
though he in heaven sit. As many grapes make but one wine, so should we be
but one: in faith and love in Christ above and unto Christ alone. Leading a
life without all strife, in quiet, rest, and peace: from envy and from malice
both our ^earts and tongues to cease. Which if we do, then shall we show,
that we his chosen be, by says in him to lead a life, as always willed ^e.
eternally. I know not by what fortune, the dicton of Pacificus was added to my
title, at my coming in England; that of the lion, expressing true fortitude,
having bin my dicton before. But I am not ashamed of this addition; For King
Solomon was a figure of CHRIST in that, that he was a King of peace. The
greatest gift that our Savior gave his Apostles, immediately before his
Ascension, was, that he left his Peace with them; he himself having prayed for
his persecutours, and forgiven his own death, as the preverb is. The foot
steps of his charity being so vively imprinted in the disciple whom his master
loved, and who leaned on our Savicurs bosom; as he said nothing, wrote
nothing, did nothing; yea in a manner breathed nothing all the days of his
life, but love and charity. To the blessed Virgin and him Christ upon the
Cross reco^mended their charitable Ioh. 19.26.27
cohabitation together, as mother and son: his style in all his writings, is
full of love and charity, his Gospel and Epistles sound nothing but charity.
Yea S. Jerome makes mention, that when he was so old, as he could preach and
scarce walk, he would many times make himself be led to the preaching place,
and there repeating of these words, 1. Ioh. 3.18.
Little children love one another, he would come back again; and being asked
why he so often repeated that sentence, his answer was, This is the 2. Ioh. 5.
new and last commandment that our master left us, and if it only be done,
it suffices. But above all, the third chapter of his Gospel deserves to be
graven in letters of marble, in the hearts of all Christians, especially the
sixteenth verse thereof, Ioh. 3.16.
GOD so loved the world, etc. We may see at last, even by his death, how God
loved him for his charity, besides the manifold other proses, that he gave him
thereof during his life; for he died peaceably in his bed, full of days, and
was the notablest Confessor that ever was, albeit no Martyr as all the rest of
the Apostles were. To conclude then my description of this divine virtue,
Charity, I remit you to that pattern, which that admirable, learned, and
eloquent penne-man of the holy Ghost, has set forth of her in his verses
4.5.6.7.8.
thirteenth of his first to the Corinthians, etc. The Church says in her
Homily of Christ's In the first^ part, and page 179.180.
Passion. CHRIST delights to enter and dwell in that soul where love and
Ioh. 14.23.^^.
Charity rules, and where Peace and Concord is seen. For thus writes S.
John, God is charity, he that abides in charity, abides in God and God in
him. And by this (says he) we shall know that we be of GOD, if we love our
brethren. Yea, and by this shall we know, that we be delivered from Ioh. 3.14.
death to life, if we The Church teaches us true love in the song a prayer to
the holy Ghost, for to be sung before the Sermon, where it is said; Convert all
those that be our foes, and bring them to thy ^ight, that they and we man
well agree, and praise thee day and night. O Lord increase our says in us, and
love so to abound: that man and wife be void of strife, and neighbors about us
round. In our time give thy peace, O Lord, to nations far and nigh, and teach
them all thy holy word, that we may sing to thee. All glory to the Trinity,
etc Thus the Church does teach us to desue godly unity among all mankind. So in
special manner in all Christen dome, in the song called, Veni Creater, saying;
Of all strife and dissensions, O Lord dissolve the bands; and make the knots of
peace and love, throughout all Christian lands. See 1. Cor. 12.13.
love one another. But he which hates his brother (says the same Apostle)
abides in death, even in the danger of everlasting death, and is moreover the
child of damnation and of the devil, cursed of God, and bated (so long as he
so remains) of GOD and all his heavenly company. For as peace and charity
make us the blessed children of Almighty GOD; so does hatred and envy make us
the cursed children of * the devil. Whereas the late most excellent Majesty
so insisted on Peace and Charity, is it not a most manifest demonstration,
that he had received the holy Spirit of God in an ample measure? At his
Highness first coming, did not GOD enlighten his Royal mind for to see the
vanity of those spirits of disobedience, which made up themselves together for
to seek for alteration in the public Divine Service book? etc. Who therefore
made a proclamation thereto, and caused it to be set in the beginning of every
communion book. How many a divine sentence ever most memorable is there to be
seen in his Majesty's books set forth from time to time? And whereas God unto
all (saving his only Son Jesus Christ) gives his spirit by Ioh. 3.34. Ephesians.
4.7.
measure, so that in the increase of the spirit is the increase of the heavenly
light in the understanding, and the knowledge of divine mysteries: Came there
not from the Light Eternal into his Highness heart an illuminatio^ even unto
perfection of divine co^prehension, when as his most excellent Majesty, (not
long before His Highness commended his spirit into the hands of the King of
Kings and Lord of Lords) in special manner required, that Predestination
should be so understood and preached, as it might have no appearance of
difference from the divinity thereto in the book of common prayer? Was not
that abundance of heavenly light sent as 2. Cor. 1.22. Ephesians. 1.13.14.
pledge unto His Royal Soul for to be received into the Light infinite and
eternal? His most sacred Majesty lived a Solomon, delighting in divine
Wisdom, Peace, and Charity: and as his Highness thus unto the end delighted
in God, so can it not be but that God was delighted in him, and that He is Ps.
73.24.25. and 20.6. all Ps. 21.
received up into glory everlasting.

And for our better understanding of what is the Church-her meaning concerning
this her last clause in her Catechism, of being in charity with all men, let
us seriously consider and ever remember the express delivery hereabout in the
end of the first part of the Homily of charity, where the words of the Church
are as here follows. Thus have I set forth unto you what charity is, as well
by the doctrine as by the example of CHRIST himself, whereby also every man
may without error know himself, what state and condition he stands in,
whether he be in charity, (and so the child of the Father in heaven) or not For
although almost every man persuades himself to be in charity, yet let him
examine none other man, but his own heart, his life and conversation, and he
shall not be deceived, but truly discern or judge whether he be in perfect
charity or not. For he that follows not his own appetite and will, but
gives himself earnestly unto God, to do all his will and Commandments, he
may be sure that he loves God above all things, and else surely he loves him
not, whatsoever he pretend: as CHRIST said, If ye love me, keep my
Commandments. For he that knows my commandments and keeps them, he it is
(says CHRIST) that loves me. And again he says, He that loves me, will
keep my word, and my Father will love him, and we will both come unto him, and
dwell with him: And he that loves me not, will not keep my words. And
likewise he that bears a good heart and mind, and uses well his tongue and
deeds unto every man, friend and foe, he may know thereby that he has charity.
And then he is sure that Almighty God takes him for his dear beloved son, as
Saint John says, Hereby manifestly are known the children of God, from the
children of the Devil: for whosoever does not love his brother, belongs not
unto God.

Q. And therefore children are to be instructed co^terning Bishops, for to
learn more and more, what is to be known concerning their ministration, and
duly to honor all the same.
Whereas in the rubricke immediately following the Cathechisme in the Communion
book, it is said: So soon as the children can say in their mother tongue the
Articles of the Faith, the Lords prayer, the ten Commandments, and also can
answer to such questions of this short Catechism, as the Bishop (or such as
he shall appoint) shall by his discretion appose them in: then they shall be
brought to the Bishop by one that shall be his Godfather, or Godmother, that
every child may have a witness of his confirmation: and the title of the
Catechism is, An instruction to be taught and learned of every child, before
he be brought to be confirmed by the Bishop: declare what confirmation is.

A. The Church says in her These words are set immedatly after the discomse of
Baptism, and before the discourse of the Lords supper.
Catechism: Parents and Schoolemasters did in old time diligently instruct
their children as soon as by age they were able to perceave and understand, in
the first principles of Christian Religion, that they might suck in godliness
almost together with the nourses milk, and straightwaies after their cradle,
might be nourished with the tender food of virtue toward that blessed life.
For the which purpose also little short books which we name Catechismes, were
written: wherein the same, or very like matters, as we now are in hand with,
were entreated upon. And after that the children seemed to be sufficiently
trained in the principles of our religion, they brought and offered them unto
the Bishop: that children might after Baptism do the same, which such as were
elder, who also were called Catechumeni, that is, Scholars of Religion, did in
old time before, or rather at Baptism it self. For the Bishop did require,
and the children did render reason and account of their Religion and Faith: and
such children as the Bishop judged to have sufficiently profited in the
understanding of Religion he allowed, and laying his hands upon them and
blessing them, let them depart. This allowance and blessing of the Bishop our
men do call Confirmation. And afterward it says: It is very much to be wished
surely, that the The Church honors the wisdom of Antiquity. So does it in
special manner in the beginning of the Service of Commination. And in the
sacred meditation upon the Lords prayer, page 23. The late most excellent
Majesty declares his unfeined dislike of those contemners of Antiquity, which
will have nothing, but all Babysomish till their time.
ancient manner and usage of examining children were restored again: for so
should parents be brought to the satisfying of their duty in the godly
bringing up of their children, which they now for the most part do leave
undone, and quite reject from them: which part of their duty if parents or
Schoolemasters, would at this time take in hand, do, and thoroughly perform,
there would be a marveilous consent and agreement in religion and faith, which
is now in miserable sort torn asunder. Surely all should not either lie so
shadowed, and overwhelmed with the darkness of ignorance, or with dissentious
of diverse and contrary opinions be so disturbed, dissolved, and dissipated, as
it is at this day: the more pity it is, and most to be sorrowed of all good
men for so miserable a case. In the prayer to be said before the act of
Confirmation, there are mentioned together the sundry graces, wherein we are to
desire for to be confirmed, where it is said: Strengthen them, we beseech
thee, O Lord, with the holy Ghost the comforter, and daily increase in them thy
manifold gifts of grace, the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of
counsel and ghostly strength, the spirit of knowledge and true godliness, and
fulfill them, O Lord, with the spirit of thy holy fear: The which are called
the Sea chap. 84.
seven gifts of grace. And the words of the Sea chap. 54.
Confirmation or Bishopping it self are pronounced by the Bishop laying his
hand upon every child, severally, saying: Defend, O Lord, this child with thy
heavenly grace, that he may continue thine for ever, and daily increase in thy
holy spirit more and more, until he come unto thine everlasting Kingdom. And
the reason of the laying on of the hands is delivered in the prayer to be said
when Confirmation is done, where it is said: We make our humble supplications
unto thee for these children, upon whom (after the example of the holy
Apostles) we have laid our hands, to certify them (by this sign) of thy
favor and gracious goodness toward them: let thy fatherly hand, we beseech
thee, ever be over them: let thy holy Spirit ever be with them, and so lead
them in the knowledge and obedience of thy word, that in the end they may
obtain the everlasting life through our Lord JESUS CHRIST. The Church also
has said: In the Declaration of Religion.
The holy Fathers of the primitive Church, taking occasion and founding
themselves upon the said Acts and deeds of the Apostles, and considering also,
that such as had once received the gifts and benefits of the holy Ghost, by the
Sacrament of Baptism, might and oftentimes did indeed, by temptation,
frailty, or otherwise by their own sin and malice, Children or youth have
need to enjoy benefit of the Episcopal ministration, besides of the Diaconall
and the Pastoral, hence the ground of the holy ordinance of Bishopping may be
known.
lose and fall from the same again: did use and observe (as it has bin
hitherto by succession of ages continued) that all Christen people should after
their baptism, be presented to their Bishops, to the intent that by their
prayers, and imposition of their hands upon them, they should be confirmed,
that is to say, they should receive such gifts of the holy Ghost, as whereby
they should be so corroborated, and established in the gifts and graces before
received in baptism, that they should not lightly fall again from the same:
but should constantly retain them, and persevere therein, and should also be
made stronger and hardier, as well to confess boldly and manfully their faith,
before all the persecutors of the same, and to resist and fight against their
ghostly enemies, the world, the devil and the flesh: as also to bear the
cross of CHRIST, that is, to suffer and sustein patiently all the afflictions
and adversities of this world, and finally, that they should attain increase
and abundance of Such as profess to be devout, should observe the true devout
deliveries of godly antiquity, and not set light of all the same, as too many
in these times do.
virtues and graces of the holy Ghost. The ancient Fathers have written much
for to set forth the dignity of this Ordinance of the holy Gospel. Heb. 6.2.
Laying on of hands is the fourth principle of the word of Christ: therefore a
point of necessary meditation. And although there is understood laying on of
hands in Ordering of the holy Ministry, yet this ordinance is there also
included, and in no wise to be excluded. In baptism we are borne again unto
life; but after baptism in this holy ordmance we are confirmed for to fight
the good fight of faith. In Baptism we are washed, but in this after baptism
we are strengthened, that unto the regenerate the holy Ghost may be present a
keeper, and a comforter, and a defender. The Church also has signified, that
if the holy ordinance of Confirmation be This is much to be noted, that (as the
Church signifies) in the worthy receiving of the Sacraments and holy
Ordinances, the benefit of them is enjoyed.
worthily taken, thereby is received more abundantly ghostly strength, aid and
comfort. And therefore is very wholesome and profitable, and to be desired, and
reverently received. Now the cause why some receive the said sacred Ordinance
and are not the better, is, because they receive it unworthily, like as many
unworthily receive the Lords Supper, and are nothing benefited thereby. Whosoever
would enjoy the said blessings, are to learn before they seek for it, the
meaning of the Catechism, the ground and necessity of Confirmation, as it is
showed in the Immediately before the Catechism therein. See chap. 54.
common prayer book; they are to consider what the Sea Chap. 84.
seven graces of the holy Ghost are, which are the more abundantly received by
due taking of this ordinance, and to be resolved for to enter and continue in
the Christian warfare fighting in it manfully and zealously under CHRIST'S
banner against sin, the world, and the devil: and so to hunger and thirst
after the benefits of Confirmation, which whosoever unfeinedly do before GODS
all-seeing eyes, he then in the act of the Bishopping, and afterward more and
more according to his wisdom and goodness, gives all that is prayed for in
the Service thereof.

Q. Cannot a Priest or Pastor reading the Service of Confirmation, and laying
his hand upon the head of every child, perform the Confirmation?

A. In no wise: for it is Priests cannot minister Confirmation.
only proper to the order of Bishops, and is therefore called a Bishopping. It
is recorded in the Acts of the Apostles, that though Philip did convert unto
the faith people of Samaria, and did baptize them, yet it was by the Apostles
Act. 8.14.17.
laying on of their hands, that they received the holy Ghost. The giving of the
holy Ghost is by GOD disposed unto the Apostolical or Episcopal order. The
keys of the Kingdom of heaven are committed by GOD into the hands of the
Clergy: and as to Absolve is the work of the Priesthood, so to confirm is
the work of the High Priesthood. A lay person has not spiritual power to
perform the Absolving of a penitent sinner, but he that is in the Mat. 16.19.
Joh. 20.22.23.
priesthood: so to Confirm, to cause such a measure of the holy Ghost to
descend upon a baptized party, a Priest has not enough spiritual power, but
a Acts 19.6.
Bishop As every one in temporal power can effect what the Kings Majesty with
the law of the kingdom enableth him unto, so every one in spiritual order can
effect that as God enableth him unto, and which ability his word has signified
to be annexed and appropriated unto such an order in the holy ministry.
only. A Priest cannot make a Priest or Deacon, but a Bishop can, according as
it is prescribed in the book of the Ordering of the Ministry. The reason is,
The Almighty GOD in all his works has set and keeps a constant course, as
well here on earth, as in heaven. The Moon has not that power, which the
Sun has; neither is there the like influence from all the stars; but from
some is more, from some is less. God works with what is done according to
his Ordinance, but not otherwise. It is so in civil administrations: for if
any put the Kings Majesty's Seal unto a writing, who have not from His
Highness authority thereunto, is it of any validity or force, when it comes
to be considered?

Q. It has been before treated sundry times concerning Bishops, now add in a
word, what is an Archbishop?

A. Even as among many natural Fathers considered together, one of them is the
eldest in nature: So among An Archbishop is a father in God highest grown up
into Christ in all things. See Ephesians. 4.15.
Fathers in God considered together one is the That is, has the amplest
measure in grace. See Ephesians. 4.7.
eldest in grace: for which cause the word grace is used unto an Archbishop.
The holy Scripture delivers, that among CHRIST'S Apostles some were chief or
Arch. Saint Paul says, He was not a whit behind the very Therefore there was
a disparity among the Apostles, some were chiefer than others, See cap. 37. and
2. Cor. 12.11.
chiefest Apostles. He signifies that James, Peter, and John were Gal. 2.9.
pillars. And when as Peter had the oversight of the Circumcision (the people
circumcised) and Paul of the Gentiles (the uncircumcised,) were not these two
Apostles in degree Gal. 2.7.
above other Apostles? Saint Paul says, When James, Cephar, and John, who
seemed to be pillars, perceived the grace that was given unto me, they gave to
me and Barnabas the right hands of fellowship. And Saint Paul thereby
signifies that he was endued with such a measure of grace, as are the fathers
of the Namely the Archiepiscopall.
oldest age in Christ. It is not expedient to express, in this Catecheticall
treatise the most high understanding in the great mystery of godliness, which
is in those of the said spiritual age or degree. We read, that in the first
Christian council mentioned in the Acts of the Apostles, they which among the
Apostles were the pillars, determined of matters, whereabout difference was:
and they could say, Acts 15.7.12.13.28
It seemed good to the holy Ghost, and to us, etc. And whereas among all in the
Clergy they are the nearest unto GOD, and do comprehend the universal
matters pertaining unto Christian religion, in so much as if a Bishop chance to
be in doubt about the meaning of the Church concerning the use of a matter in
the Liturgy, he is (as it is written in the Communion book) to send for
resolution thereof unto the Archbishop: it is therefore the duty of all in the
Clergy for to remember what the holy Ghost has commanded, 1. Pet. 5.5.
Ye younger, submit your selves unto the Elder. And where the inferior duly
submits unto the superior, there is 1. Cor. 14.40. Col. 2.5.
order observed, there is Psalm. 133.1.3.
unity, there the Lord commands the blessing, even life for evermore, that is
Psalm. 122.3.
Jerusalem, the name of that city is, Ezech. 48.35
The Lord is there. But where the younger account themselves to have more, or
as much understanding in matters of religion, as have the Elder, and so will
not submit unto their judgments, but follow the imagination of their own
minds; there is James 3.14.15.16.
confusion wrought, there is division, there is Gods cursing darkness in the
understanding, and disorderlinesse in the conversation, that is Babylon, and it
is the ill spirit which Ephesians 2.2.
works in all persons of disobedience.

Q. Whereas after that one has duly fed of the milk of the word, he is to
eat of meat stronger and stronger, and from exercising in the Catechism for
to proceed unto meditating in the rest of the Divine Service; and also to read
the word of GOD, the which in very many places is hard to be understood, recite
therefore out of some godly and learned Writer, what counsel is delivered for
to be observed unto the attaining more and more of the mind and meaning of GOD
in the holy Scriptures.

A. A certain most godly and most learned Namely Sebastian Castellio, of whose
worth see what is delivered in Riders Dictionary printed anno 1633. This his
declaration agrees with the doctrine of the homilies called an exhortation and
an information.
Writer has before his renowned translation of the holy Bible into Latin, in
the fourth edition thereof, thus declared, what is the one only way to
understand the holy Scriptures, saying, Even as a man consists of a body and
a soul, as that the body is the dwelling place of the soul: so the holy
Scriptures consist of the letter and the spirit, as that the letter is as it
were an abiding place of the spirit. And even as beasts can see the body of
man, and hear his voice, but cannot understand clearly his mind or speech,
because they are not endued with the same soul, with whose eyes they can be
able so to perceive: likewise of the holy Scriptures (which are come forth for
to instruct and 2. Tim. 3.15.16.17
edify true man) th^^^ godly can see the letter and hear the words, but what
is the spirit of the letter, and whitherto the mind of God tends, they only
do understand, which are endued with the same spirit. The ungodly indeed do
no more perceive that spirit, then Jer. 10 14.
beasts do the speech of men, of whom only a few voices they do understand,
and them also scarce, as namely, cryings out, rebukings, encouragings,
threatenings. So the ungodly do see in the holy Scriptures what is told, what
is commanded or forbidden: but they have not the spirit, and as it were the
marrow of the letter. For even as the affairs of man the spirit of man only
knows: so the 1. Cor. 2.11.
things of God none knows but the spirit of God) and Mat. 11.27.
he whom that spirit teaches. But that spirit teaches Mat. 11.25.
none but the apt to learn: that is, those which by Heb. 11.6. Ioh 8.12. and
12.36.
faith come unto CHRIST our righteousness, being humble, Man. 11.29.
lowly, and ready, leaving the Mat. 16.24. 1. Cor. 3.18. Isa. 55.7.
judgment of the flesh and their own will, to Ioh. 7.17.
obey the will of God. These things may be declared plainly by many oracles
and examples, out of which I will produce some, that I may show, that sin and
man's wisdom and the love of ones self, is the cause that men do not
understand Gods matters: and that by how much every one does the further depart
from these things, by so much is he the more Ioh. 7.17.
understanding in the things of God. Now the first and greatest oracle is, that
Adam before he sinned, had the knowledge of GOD, and of divine things, so that
he gave names unto beasts, unto every one according to his nature, and he
presently knew the beginning of his wife, made of his rib he asleep, and Genesis
2.23.24.
prophesied concerning her. The same after he sinned and followed the judgment
and mind of the flesh, fell into so great ignorance, that he would Genesis 3.8.
Ier. 23.24. Heb. 4.13. Psalm. 139.7.
hide himself among the trees from the sight of God: which indeed was a very
great blindness, that he would hide from the eyes of God seeing all things.
And what came to pass in Adam, the same also was done in his posterity
afterward, that if any were believing and obeying of God, those God chose and
manifested his will unto them, but not to others. For an example is Enoch, who,
whereas he Genesis 5.22.
lived according to the will of God, was taken up unto GOD; and Noah, being the
most Genesis 6.9.
righteous of his time, God showed unto him his purpose concerning the Genesis
6.13.17.18.
flood, a matter indeed of very great moment: which same thing also he did in
Abraham, that he would show unto him his will concerning Sodom and Gomorra, of
which matter God himself delivers this reason, Genesis 18.17.18.19.
saying, Shall I hide from Abraham the thing which I will do? seeing that
Abraham shall surely become a great and mighty nation, and all the nations of
the earth shall be blessed in him. For I know him, that he will command his
children and his household after him, that they keep the way of the Lord, to
do justice and judgment, that the Lord may bring upon Abraham, that which he
has spoken of him. The same did David write, Psalm. 25.9.12.13.14.
What man is he that seareth the Lord? him will he teach in the way that he
shall choose: his soul shall dwell at ease, and his seed shall inherit the
land. The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him: and he will show them
his covenant. Again says David, Psalm. 119.97.98.99.100.101
O how I love thy law; it is my meditation, all the day. Thou through thy
commandments have made me wiser than mine enemies; for they are ever with me.
I have more understanding than all my teachers, for thy testimonies are my
meditation, I understand more than the ancients, because I keep thy precepts.
I have refrained my feet from every evil way, that I might keep thy word.
Solomon says, Prove. 1.7.
The fear of the Lord is the beginning of knowledge: but fools despise
wisdom and instruction. Again says Solomon, Wisd. 1.4.5.
Into a malicious soul wisdom shall not enter, nor dwell in the body, that
is subject unto sin. For the holy spirit of discipline will fly deceit, and
remove from thoughts which are without understanding; and will not abide when
unrighteousness comes in. And Jesus the son of Sirach says, Ecclus.
1.16.17.18.20.
The fear of the Lord is the fullness of wisdom, and fills men with her
fruits. She fills all their house with things desirable, and the garners
with her increase. The fear of the Lord is a Crown of wisdom, making peace
and perfect health to flourish; both which are the gifts of GOD; and it
inlargeth their rejoicing that love him. The root of wisdom is to fear the
Lord, and the branches thereof are long life. Again he says, and 3.19.
Many are in high place and of renown: but mysteries are revealed unto the
meek. The Lord has made all things, and to the and 43.33.
godly he has given wisdom. GOD by Isaiah says, Bind up the testimony,
Isa. 8.16.
seal the law among my disciples. And after that the Prophet had inveighed
against the wickedness of the Israelites, which was the cause that they could
not understand divine doctrine, thus he says, Isa. 29.10.11.
For the Lord has poured upon you die spirit of deep sleep, and has closed
your eyes: the prophets and your rulers, the seers has he covered. And the
vision of all is become unto you as the words of a book that is sealed, which
men deliver to one that is learned, saying, Read this, I pray thee: and he
says, I cannot, for it is sealed. GOD also having described unto Ezechiel his
holy temple (wherein the mysteries of the Christian Religion are shadowed out)
says thus unto the Prophet, Ezech. 40.4. and 43.10.11.
Thou son of man show the house to the house of Israel, etc. In Daniel it is
said, Dan.12.10.
Many shall be purified and made white, and tried: but the wicked will do
wickedly: and none of the wicked shall understand: but the wise shall
understand. In Hosea it is said, Hos. 14.9.
Who is wise, and he shall understand these things? Prudent, and he shall know
them? Likewise in the new Testament the same things are delivered. CHRIST spoke
to them that were Mar. 4.11.
without only in parables, that is, figuratively, and in covered words: but to
his own disciples, that is, to believers, to the endued with Gal. 5.6.
charity, to the obedient, and to such as followed him he Mar. 4.34.
expounded all things afterward apart. Paul himself finisheth the whole matter
in few words, saying, 1. Cor. 2.10.14.15.
GOD has revealed the secrets (or mysteries) unto us by his spirit: for the
spirit searches all things, yea the deep things of God. But the natural man
receives not the things of the spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto
him: neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned. But he
that is spiritual, judges (or discerns) all things. Out of these and many
other places it appears; that the mind of God, and the secret counsels
lying hid in the holy Scriptures are known to the faithful only, to the
godly and religious, and to the endued with the spirit of God. For God is a
King which manifests his counsels to none but to his faithful friends, as
we see the Kings of this world themselves to do. Therefore one may observe
from the beginning of the world, that none except the godly have bin admitted
into the counsel of God. Before there was mentioned Enoch, Noah, Abraham: the
same may one say concerning Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, Moses, Joshua, Samuel, David,
and the other Prophets and Apostles servants of Christ, to whom whether they
were learned or Acts 4.13. 1. Cor. 1.26.27.28.
unlearned, God made manifest his will, and Luke 24.45.
opened their mind for to understand the Scriptures. But the ungodly, and such
as Prove. 2.5.7.
rely on their own judgment, although they understood all Ioh. 7.48.49. Acts
17.18. 1. Cor. 2.6.7.8.
learning, never understood the spirit of the Scriptures, but rather persecuted
it, as Steven did upbraid unto them, saying: Ye stiffenecked and uncircumcised
in heart and ears, ye do always Acts. 7.51.
resist the holy Ghost; as your Fathers did, so do ye. And if so be that the
ungodly have at any time prophesied, or have spoken concerning divine and
spiritual things, as did, Balaam, Saul, Caiphas, the Scribes and Pharisees,
yet they truly understood not the mind and spirit of God, but so spoke of
things unknown unto themselves, as if a French man hearing a Dutch man
enditing words unto him, should speak in Dutch those matters which himself
understands not. CHRIST seems to declare this, where he says: Mat. 23.2.3.
The Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses seat: what things they say, do ye:
for they say, and do not. And concerning the same he says elsewhere: Mat.
15.14.
Let them alone they are blind and leaders of the blind; and he bids his
people beware of their Mat. 16.6.
leaven. As if he had said this: In that they teach Moses-his Laws, ye are to
obey them: but in that they see not, but reject the mind and spirit of those
commandments, which is uttered by me, they are blind. For examples sake: Moses
wrote: Honor thy Father and thy Mother: this while they teach, they are to be
obeyed. But when as they with their sophistries do deprave the same precept,
and by their false and covetous interpretation, draw away Mat. 15.5.6.
children from the true honoring of their parents, they are blind and do
Zeph. 3 4. 2. Cor. 2.17.
corrupt the commandment of God. The same while they teach, that ceremonies
and sacrifices are to be observed according to Moses Law, are to be followed:
but while they reject me, who show the mind and spirit of those ceremonies and
sacrifices, and being puffed up with a vain (or unprofitable) knowledge of the
letter do too stiffely (or subbornely) hold to it, they refuse the truth and
sense of the letter, and the will of God, and do not 1. Tim. 1.7.
truly understand the Law. For if they did understand, certainly they would
not reject CHRIST, which is the Romans 10.2.3 4.
end of the Law. Neither truly only do not the ungodly understand the spirit
of God, but also if there be any one to whom there is given some knowledge of
him, he unless he endeavor diligently that he may grow therein, loses
that very knowledge, which he had: which very matter the Lord declares, whiles
he bids that the talent be taken away from him, which put it not to
increase, and be given to him which has ten. For to him which has, it shall
be given, and from him which has not, even that very same which he has shall
be Mat. 25.25.27 28.29.30.
taken away. The which we see came to pass unto Saul, who having the spirit of
God, was 1. Sam. 10 6.7.10.
for his disobedience deprived of it, and became thereby seven times And
16.14. and 15.26. and 28.15.16.17.18.
worse, than ever he had bin before. Which things seeing they are so, all which
would apply their minds to the study of the holy Scriptures, and to the knowing
of Gods will, are to be exhorted, that they do it in what way and in what
manner it ought to be done. First that they Luke 24.25. Ioh. 5 46.47.
believe those things to be true, which are written there: For unless they
will believe, they shall not understand, but will account the holy Scriptures
to be profane. Then afterward (which also is the fruit of belief) that they
subject their will to Ioh. 7.17.
Gods will, ready to do whatsoever God has commanded, whether it be sweet or
bitter, whether light or heavy, whether easy or hard. For that is the nature
of faith (by which we must be saved, and without which we cannot please God)
that not only it does justify a man, and procure to him pardon of sins
through CHRIST; but also by causing to him a new 2. Cor. 5.17.
spirit, does Col. 1.13.
deliver him from the power of the devil, and set him at Romans 6.18 22.
liberty for the service of God. Faith Acts 15.9.
purifieth the heart, and makes a man of unjust to be just, of disobedient
obedient, of carnal spiritual, of earthly heavenly, of ungodly 1. Cor. 6.11.
godly: to be short, of an old man and son of darkness, it makes a new
creature and a son of Ephesians. 5.8.
light, who casting away the works of darkness puts on the armor of light,
and brings forth fruit unto righteousness, as before he brought forth fruit
unto unrighteousness. If then any one endued with this faith, mind and will,
will come to the study of the holy Scriptures, whether he be learned or
unlearned, whether poor or rich, whether male or female, (for God has no Romans
10.12. and 2.11.
respect of persons) he shall truly understand them, and read them with fruit,
and from thence shall become daily 2 These. 1.3. Romans 1.17. Prove. 4.18.
better, and shall 1. Pet. 2.9.
wonder that there lie hid those treasures of heavenly wisdom, which before he
never thought of. But if any one will obey his own will, and retain humane,
that is, foolish wisdom, and not forsake his vices and sins, but only either
believe or perform, as much as shall like his lust and flesh, he being blinded
through his own corrupt will, shall not see the Ioh. 3.3. 1 Cor. 2.14.
spirit of the holy Scriptures; and not following them, but drawing and 2. Pet.
3.16.
wresting them according to this own pleasure, and from thence every where
seeking about for defenses, and Genesis 3.7. Isa. 30.1.
coverings, and protections for his sins, shall attain no other thing, than a
Matt. 13.14.
vain knowledge of the letter, wherewith he being puffed up, will become daily
by how much the more skillful, by so much the more 2 Timothy 3.13.
desperately naught, as is the Dutch proverb. This we see came to pass unto
the Scribes and Pharisees, who although they professed the holy Scriptures, and
were daily conversant in the study and reading of them, yet because they would
not 1. Cor. 3.18. Isa. 55.7.
forsake their own understanding, vices and will, they erred so far from the
mind and spirit of them, that they crucified CHRIST the true and divine
expounder of them: and this very same thing will come to pass unto all so
affected and so disposed as they were. Wherefore go to now, O ye all which
take those holy books into your hands, Ezech. 18.31.
cast away profane minds: believe God: forsake your own will, and give over
your selves, with a lowly, pliant, obedient, and altogether Mat. 18.3. Ps.
131.2.
childlike, that is, a teachable mind, so to be informed of God, as 1. Pet. 2.2.
a child does to his teacher: and with the same mind Ps. 25.4.5.
pray unto God continually: and 1. These. 5.16. Isa. 62.7.
leave not off, before ye have obtained your desires: For whosoever seeks,
Matt. 7.7.8.
finds; and he which asks, obtains; and to him that knocks, it is
opened. By this one only way ye shall understand the will of GOD, and living
according to it, and forsaking your own will, and Luke 14.26. Col. 3.5. Prove.
16.32.
fighting against your own selves, through faith in JESUS CHRIST the Savior
of the world, at length ye shall attain unto everlasting life.

Q. May not any one attain the understanding of the holy Scriptures, by
considering the context, and by comparing place with place, etc. without
entering into such a devoutnesse of mind and life, as Castellio has prescribed?

A. The comparing of one scripture with another, etc. is profitable unto the
more full perceiving of the deliverie of many points or matters; but there was
never as yet any one, that could apprehend the great mystery of godliness,
nor ever can any one possibly perceive the same by any endeavor whatsoever,
unless he duly attend unto the interpretation delivered by the holy Fathers
of the Church, and strive to do the whole will of God, and so become See all
chapter 48. of the Christian Divinity.
enlightened by his holy spirit. The unexpressable diversity and contrariety
of understanding of Gods matters, whereinto all they in these latter times have
fallen, and continually do fall, which submit not unto the guidance of the
holy Fathers of the Church, but follow the imagination of their own minds, is a
most manifest proof of the utter impossibility of knowing aright so much as the
principles of Gods word, without having help of such as are the guides in the
Apostolical Church, and without entering into such an uprightness of heart and
conversation, as is before declared requisite to be sought after.

FINIS. Glory be to God in the highest, and all due honor be ascribed unto his
Church on earth. Amen.

