The pathway to KNOWLEDGE, CONTAINING THE FIRST PRINciples of Geometry, as they
may most aptly be applied unto practice, both for use of instruments
Geometrical, and astronomicall and also for proiection of plattes in every
kind, and therefore much necessary for all sorts of men.

Geometries verdicte
All fresshe fine wits by me are filed,
All gross dull wits wish me exiled:
Though no man's wit reject will I,
Yet as they be, I will them try.
The arguments of the four books
The first book declares the definitions of the terms and names used in
Geometry, with certain of the chief grounds whereon the art is founded. And
then teaches those conclusions, which may serve diuersely in all works
Geometrical.

The second book does set forth the Theoremes, (which may be called
approved truths) seruinge for the due knowledge and sure proof of all
conclusions and works in Geometrye.

The third book entreats of diverse forms, and sundry protractions thereto
belonging, with the use of certain conclusions.

The fourth book teaches the right order of measuringe all platte forms, and
bodies also, by reason Geometrical.

TO THE GENTLE READER.
EXCVSE ME, GENTLE REder if ought be amiss, straung paths are not trode^ al
truly at the first: the way must needs be comberous, where none has gone
before. where no man has given light, light is it to offend, but when the
light is showed ones, light is it to amend. If my light may so light some
other, to epsy and mark my faults, I wish it may so lighten the^, that they
may void offense. Of staggeringe and stomblinge, and inconstant turmoilinge:
often offending, and seldom amending, such vices to eschew, and their fine
wits to show that they may win the praise, and I to hold the candle,
whilst they their glorious works with eloquence set forth, so cunningly
invented, so finely indicted, that my books may seem worthy to occupy no
room. For neither is mi wit so finely filed, another mi learning so largly
lettred, another yet mi laiser so quiet and vnco^bered, that I may perform
justly so learned a labor or accordingly to accomplish so haulte an
enforcement, yet may I think thus: This candle did I light: this light have
I kindeled: that learned men may se, to practice their pens, their eloquence
to advance, to register their names in the book of memory I drew the platte
rudely, whereon they may build, whom god has endued with learning and
liuelihod. For living by labor does learning so hinder, that learning serves
living, which is a peruers trade. Yet as careful family shall cease her
cruel calling, and suffer any laiser to learning to repair, I will not
cease from travail the pathe so to trade, that finer wits may fashion them
selves with such glimsinge dull light, a more complete work at laiser to
finisshe, with inuencion agreeable, and aptnes of eloquence.

And this gentle reader I hartelie protest where error has happened I
wisshe it redrest.

TO THE MOST NOble and puissaunt prince Edward the sixte by the grace of God,
of England France and Ireland king, defendour of the faith, and of the
Church of England and Irelande in earth the supreme head.
IT IS NOT Unknown to your majesty, most sovereign lord, what great
disceptacion has been amongst the wyttie men of all nations, for the exact
knoweledge of true felicity, both what it is, and wherein it consists:
touching which thing, their opinions almost were as many in number, as were
the persons of them, that either disputed or wrote thereof. But and if the
diversity of opinions in the vulgar sort for placyng of their felicity shall
be considered also, the variety shall be found so great, and the opinions so
dissonant, yea plainly monsterouse, that no honest wit would vouchesafe to
lose time in hearing the^, or rather (as I may say) no wit is of so exact
remembrance, that can consider together the monsterouse multitude of them all.
And yet not withsta^dyng this repugnant diversity, in two things do they all
agree. First all do agree, that felicity is and ought to be the stop and end of
all their doings, so that he that has a full desire to any thing, how so ever
it be esteemed of other me^, yet he estemeth him self happy, if he may obtain
it: and contrary ways unhappy if he can not attain it. And therefore do all
men put their whole study to get that thing, wherein they have persuaded
them self that felicity, does consist. Wherefore some which put their
felicity in fedyng their bellies, think no pain to be hard, nor no deed to be
dishonest, that may be a means to fill that foul pauche. Other which put their
felicity in play and idle pastimes, judge no time evil spent, that is
employed therabout: nor no fraud unlawful that may further their winning. If
I should particularly ouerru^ne but the common sorts of men, which put their
felicity in their desires, it would make a great book of it self. Therefore will
I let them al go, and conclude as I began, That all men employ their whole
endeavor to that thing, wherein they think felicity to stand. which thing who
so lists to mark exactly, shall be able to epsy and judge the natures of al
men, whose conuersacio^ he does know, though they use great dissimulacion to
color their desires, especially when they perceive other men to mislyke that
which they so much desire: For no man would gladly have his appetite improued.
And hereof comes that seco^nde. thing wherein al agree, that every man would
most gladly win all other men to his sect, and to make the^ of his opinion, and
as far as he dare, will dispraise all other men's judgments, and praise his
own ways only, onles it be when he dissimuleth, and that for the furthera^ce
of his own purpose. And this property also does give great light to the full
knowledge of men's natures, which as all men ought to observe, so princes above
other have most cause to mark for sundry occasions which may lie them on,
whereof I shall not need to speak any farther, considering not only the greatness
of wit, and exactnes of judgment which god has lent unto your highness
person, but also ye most grave wisdom and profou^d knowledge of your majesty's
most honorable counsel, by who^ your highness may so sufficiently understand all
things convenient, that less shall it need to understand by private readyng,
but yet not utterly to refuse to read as often as occasion may serve, for books
dare speak, when men fear to displease. But to return again to my first
matter, if none other good thing may be learned at their manners, which so
wrongfully place their felicity, in so miserable a co^ditio^ (that while they
think them selfs happy, their felicity must needs seem unlucky, to be by
them so evil placed) yet this may men learn at them, by those.ij. spectacles
to espy the secret natures and dispositions of others, which thing unto a
wise man is much auailable. And thus will I omit this great tablement of
unhappy hap, and will come to.iij. other sorts of a better degree, whereof the
one puts felicity to consist in power and royalty. The second sort unto
power annexeth worldly wisdom, thinkyng him full happy, that could attayn
those two, whereby he might not only have knowledge in all things, but also
power to bring his desires to end. The third sort estemeth true felicity to
consist in wysdom annexed with virtuous manners, thinkyng that they can take
harm of nothing, if they can with their rwysedome overcome all vices. Of the
first of those th^ee sorts there has been a great number in all ages, yea
many mighty kings and great gouernoures, which cared not greatly how they
might atchieue their purpose, so that they did prevail: nor did not take any
greatter care for governance, then to keep the people in only fear of them,
Whose common sentence was always this: Oderint dum metuant. And what good
success such men had, all histories do report. Yet have they not wanted
excuses: yea Julius Caesar (which in deed was of the second sort) makes a
kind of excuse by his common sentence, for them of that first sort, for he
was ever woonte to say: (...). Which sentence I wysshe had never been learned
out of Grecia. But now to speak of the second sort, of which there has been
very many also, yet for this present time amongst them all, I will take the
exaumples of king Phylippe of Macedonie, and of Alexander his son, that
valiant conqueror. First of king Phylip it appears by his letter sent
unto Aristotle that famous philosopher, that he more delited in the birthe of
his son, for the hope of learning and good education, that might happen to
him by the said Aristotle, then he did rejoice in the continuance of his
succession, for these were his words and his whole epistle, worthy to be
remembered and registered every where.

(...).

(...).

That is thus in sense,

Philip unto Aristotle sends gretyng.

You shall understand, that I have a son borne, for which cause I yield
unto God most hearty thanks, not so much for the birth of the child, as
that it was his chance to be borne in your time. For my trust is, that he
shall be so brought up and instructed by you, that he shall become worthy not
only to be named our son, but also to be the successor of our affairs.

And his good desire was not all vain, for it appeared that Alexander was
never so busied with wars (yet was he never out of most terrible battle)
but that in the mids thereof he had in remembrance his studies, and caused in
all countreies as he went, all strange beasts, fowls and fisshes, to be taken
and kept for the aid of that knowledge, which he learned of Aristotle: And also
be had with him always a great number of learned men. And in the most busye
time of all his wars aagainst Darius king of Persia, when he hard that
Aristotle had put forth certain kookes of such knowledge wherein he had
before studied, he was offended with Aristotle, and wrote to him this letter.
(...).

(...).

that is Alexander unto Aristotle sends greeting.

You have not done well, to put forth those books of secret philosophy
entitled, (...) For wherein shall we excel other, if that knowledge that we
have studied, shall be made commen to all other men, namely sith our desire is
to excelle other men in experience and knowledge, rather then in power and
strength. Farewell.

By which lettre it appears that he esteemed learning and knowledge above
power of men. And the like judgment did he utter, when he beheld the state of
Diogenes Cinicus, adiudginge it the best state next to his own, so that he
said: If I were not Alexander, I would wisshe to be Diogenes. Whereby apeareth,
how he esteemed learning, and what felicity he put therein, reputing all the
world save him self to be inferior to Diogenes. And by al coniecturs,
Alexander did esteem Diogenes one of them which contemned the vain estimation
of the disceitfull world, and put his whole felicity in knowledge of virtue, and
practice of the same, though some report that he knew more virtue then he
followed: But whatsoever he was, it appears that Socrates and Plato and many
other did forsake their livings and sell away their patrimony, to the intent to
seek and travail for learning, which examples I shall not need to repete to
your Majesty, partly for that your highness does often read them and other
like, and partly since your majesty has at hand such learned schoolemaysters,
which can much better the^ I, declare them unto your highness, and that more
largely also then the shortenes of this epistle will permit. But this may I yet
add, that King Solomon whose renoume spread so far abroad, was very greatly
esteemed for his wonderful power and exceading treasure, but yet much more was
he esteemed for his wisdom And him self does bear witness, that wisdom is
better then precious stones. yea all things that can be desired are not to be
compared to it. But what needs to allege one sentence of him, whose books
altogether do none other thing, then set forth the praise of wisdom and
knowledge? And his father king David joins uertuous conversation and knowledge
together, as the sum of perfection and chief felicity. Wherefore I may
iustelye conclude, that true felicity does consist in wisdom and virtue. Then
if wisdom be as Cicero defines it, Diuinarum atque humanarum rerum scientia,
then ought all men to trauail for knowledge in matters both of religion and
human doctrine, if he shall be counted wise, and able to attain true
felicity: But as the study of religious matters is most principal, so I leave
it for this time to them that better can write of it then I can. And for
human knowledge this will I boldly say, that who soever will attain true
judgment therein, must not only trauail in ye knowledge of the tungs, but must
also before al other arts, taste of the mathematical sciences, specially
Arithmetike and Geometry, without which it is not possible to attayn full
knowledge in any art. Which may sufficiently by gathered by Aristotle noto^ly in
his books of demonstration (which can not be understand without Geometry) but
also in all his other works. And before him Plato his master wrote this
sentence on his schole house door. (...). Let no man enter here (says he)
without knowledge in Geometry. Wherefore most mighty prince, as your most
excellent Majesty appears to be borne unto most perfect felicity, not only by
reason that God moved with the long prayers of this realm, did send your
highness as a most comfortable inheritour to the same, but also in that your
Majesty was borne in the time of such skilful schoolmaisters and learned
techers, as your highness does not a little rejoice in, and profit by them in
all kind of virtue and knowledge. Amongst which is that heavenly knowledge most
worthily to be praised, wherbi the blindness of error and superstition is
exiled, and good hope conceived that all the seeds and fruts thereof, with all
kinds of vice and iniquite, whereby virtue is hindered, and justice defaced,
shall be clean extrirped and rooted out of this realm, which hope shall increase
more and more, if it may appear that learning be esteemed and flourish within
this realm. And al be it the chief learnig be the divine scriptures, which in
struct the mind principally, and next thereto the laws politic, which most
specially defend the right of goods, yet is it not possible that those two can
long be well used, if that aid want that governs health and expels
sickness, which thing is done by Physik, and these require the help of the vij.
liberal sciences, but of none more then of Arithmetik and Geometry, by which
not only great things ar wrought touchi^g acco^ptes in all kinds, and in
suruaiyng and measuring of lands, but also al arts depend partly of the^, and
building which is most necessary can not be without them, which thing
considering, moved me to help to serve your majesty in this point as well as
other wais, and to do what may be in me, yt not only they which studi
pri^cipalli for lernig, may have furdera^ce by mi poor help, but also those
which have no time to travail for exacter knowledge, may have some help to
understand in those Mathematical arts, in which as I have all ready set
forth sumwhat of Arithmetike, so god willing I in tend shortly to set forth a
more exacter work thereof. And in the mean ceason for a taste of Geometry, I
have set forth this small introduction, desiring your grace not so much to
behold the simplenes of the work, in comparison to your Majesty's
excellencye,, as to favor the edition thereof, for the aid of your humble
subjects, which shall think them selves more and more daily bounden to your
highness, if when they shall perceive your graces desire to have them profited
in all knowledge and virtue. And I for my poor ability considering your
Majesty's study for the increase of learning generally through all your
highenes dominions, and namely in the universities of Orforde and Camebridge,
as I have an earnest good will as far as my simple service and small knowledge
will suffice, to help toward the satisfiyng of your graces desire, so if I
shall perceive that my service may be to your majesty's conte^tacion, I will not
only put forth the other two books, which should have been set forth with
these two, if misfortune had not hindered it, but also I will set forth other
books of more exacter art, both in the Latin tongue and also in the
English, whereof part be all ready written, and new instruments to them
devised, and the residue shall be ended with all possible speed. I was
boldened to dedicate this book of Geometrye unto your Majesty, not so much
because it is the first that ever was set forth in English, and therefore
for the noueltye a strange present, but for that I was persuaded, that such
a wise prince doothe desire to have a wise sort of subjects. For it is a
kings chief reioysinge and glory; if his subjects be rich in substance,
and wytty in knowledge: and contrary ways nothing can be more greuouse to a
noble king, then that his realm should be other beggarly or full of
ignorance: But as god has given your grace a realm both rich in
commodities and also full of wyttie men, so I trust by the readyng of wyttie
arts (which be as the whette stones of wit) they must needs increase more
and more in wisdom, and peradventure find some thing toward the aid of
their substance, whereby your grace shall have new occasion to rejoice, seeing
your subjects to increase in substance or wisdom, or in both. And they again
shall have new and new causes to pray for your majesty, perceiuyng so graciouse
a mind toward their benefit. And I trust (as I desire) that a great number
of gentlemen, especially about the court, which understand not the latin
tongue, or else for the hardness of the matter could not away with other men's
writing, will fall in trade with this easy form of teaching in their vulgar
tongue, and so employe some of their time in honest study, which were wont to
bestow most part of their time in triflyng pastime: For undoubtedly if the
mean other your majesty's service, other their own wisdom, they will be
content to employ some time about this honest and witty exercise. For whose
encourageme^t to the intent they may perceive what shall be the use of this
science, I have not only written somewhat of the use of Geometry, but also I
have annexed to this book the names and brefe arguments of those other books
which I will set forth hereafter, and that as shortly as it shall appear unto
your majesty by conjecture of their diligent vsyng of this first book, that
they will use well the other books also. In the mean ceason, and at all times
I will be a continual petitioner, that god may work in all english hearts an
ernest mind to all honest exercises, whereby they may serve the better your
majesty and the realm. And for your highness I beseech the most merciful god,
as he has most favorably sent you unto us, as our chief comforter in earth,
so that he will increase your majesty daiely in all virtue and honor with
most prosperous^ success, and augment in us your most humble subjects, true
love to godward, and just obedience to ward your highness with all reverence and
subjection.

At London the.xxviij. day of January. M. D. L I. Your majesty's most humble
servant and obedient subject, Robert Record.

THE PREFACE, declaring briefly the commodities of Geometrye, and the
necessitye thereof.
GEometrye may think it self to sustain great injury, if it shall be
enforced other to show her manifold commodities, or else not to prease into the
sight of men, and therefore might this ways answer briefly: Other I am able
to do you much good, or else but little. If I be able to do you much good,
then be you not your own friends, but greatly your own enemies to make so
little of me, which may profit you so much. For if I were as discourteous as
you unkind, I should utterly refuse to do them any good, which will so curiously
put me to the trial and proof of my commodities, or else to suffer exile, and
namely sith I shall only yield benefits to other, and receive none again. But
and if you could say truly, that my benefits be another many nor yet great,
yet if they be any, I do yield more to you, then I do receive again of
you, and therefore I ought not to be repelled of them that love them self,
although they love me not at all for my self. But as I am in nature a
liberal science, so can I not against nature contend with your
inhumanitye, but must show my self liberal even to mine enemies. Yet this
is my comfort again, that I have none enemies but them that know me not, and
therefore may hurt themselves, but can not noye me. If they dispraise the
thing that they know not, all wise men will blame them and not credit them.
and if they think they know me, let them show one untruth and error in
me, and I will give the victory.

Yet can no humayne science say thus, but I only, that there is no spark of
untruth in me: but all my doctrine and works are without any blemishe of
error that man's reason can discern. And next unto me in certainty are my
three systers, Arithmetike, Music, and Astronomy, which are also so nere
knitte in amitee, that he that loves the one, can not despise the other, and
in especial Geometry, of which not only these three, but all other arts do
borow great aid, as partly hereafter shall be showed. But first will I begin
with the unlearned sort, that you may perceive how that no art can stand
without me. For if I should declare how many ways my help is used, in
measuryng of ground, for meadow, corn, and wodde: in hedgyng, in dichyng, and
in stackes making, I think the poor Husband man would be more thankful unto
me, then he is now, whyses he thinks that he has small benefit by me. Yet
this may he conjecture certainly, that if he keep not the rules of Geometry,
he can not measure any ground truly. And in dichyng, if he keep not a
proportion of breadth in the mouth, to the bredthe of the bottom, and just
slopenesse in the sides agreeable to them both, the diche shall be faulty many
ways. When he does make stackes for corn, or for heye, he practices good
Geometry, else would they not long stand: So that in some stackes, which stand
on four pillars, and yet made round, do increase greatter and greatter a good
height, and then again turn smaller and smaller unto the top: you may see
so good Geometry, that it were very difficult to counterfaite the like in any
kind of buildyng. As for other infinite ways that he uses my benefit, I
ouerpasse for shortness.

Carpenters, Karuers, Joyners, and Masons, do willingly acknowledge that they
can work nothing without reason of Geometry, in so much that they challenge
me as a peculiare science for them. But in that they should do wrong to all
other men, seeing every kind of men have some benefit by me, not only in
buildyng, which is but other men's costs, and the art of Carpenters,
Masons, and the other aforesaid, but in their own private profession, whereof
to avoid tediousnes I make this rehersall.

Since Merchauntes by ships great riches do win,
I may with good right at their feate begin.
The Ships on the sea with Sail and with Ore,
were first found, and still made, by Geometries lore,
Their Compass, their Card, their Pulle is, their Ankers,
were found by the skill of witty Geometers.
To set forth the Capstocke, and each other part,
would make a great show of Geometries art.
Carpenters, Caruers, Ioiners and Masons,
Painters and Limners with such occupations,
Broderers, Goldesmithes, if they be cunning,
Must yield to Geometrye thanks for their learning.
The Carte and the Plowe, who does them well mark,
Are made by good Geometrye. And so in the warke
Of Tailers and Shoomakers, in all shapes and fashion,
The work is not praised, if it want proportion.
So we auers by Geometrye hade their foundation,
Their Loome is a frame of strange imaginacion.
The wheel that does spinne, the stone that does grind,
The Myll that is driven by water or wind,
Are works of Geometrye strange in their trade,
Few could them devise, if they were unmade.
And all that is wrought by weight or by measure,
without proof of Geometry can never be sure.
Clockes that be made the times to divide,
The wittiest inuencion that ever was spied,
Now that they are common they are not regarded,
The arts man contemned, the work unrewarded.
But if they were scarce, and one for a show,
Made by Geometrye, then should men know,
That never was art so wonderful witty,
So needful to man, as is good Geometry.
The first findinge out of every good art,
Seemed then unto men so godly a part,
That no recompense might satisfye the finder,
But to make him a god, and honor him for ever.
So Ceres and Passas, and Mercury also,
Eosus and Neptune, and many other mo,
were honored as gods, because they did teach,
First tillage and weuinge and eloquent speech,
Or winds to observe, the seas to sail over,
They were called gods for their good endeavor.
Then were men more thankful in that golden age:
This iron world no we ungrateful in rage,
will yield the thy reward for travail and pain,
with sclaunderous reproach, and spiteful disdain.
Yet though other men unthankful will be,
Suruayers have cause to make much of me.
And so have all Lords, that lands do possess:
But Tennauntes I fear will like me the less.
Yet do I not wrong but measure all truly,
And yield the full right to every man justly.
Proportion Geometrical has no man oppressed,
If any be wronged, I wish it redrest.
But now to proceed with learned professions, in Logike and Rhetorike and all
parts of philosophy, there neadeth none other proof then Aristotle his
testimony, which without Geometry proves almost nothing. In Logike all his
good syllogismes and demonstrations, he declares by the principles of
Geometrye. In philosophye, nether motion, nor time, nor ayrye impressions
could he aptely declare, but by the help of Geometrye as his works do
witness. Yea the faculties of the mind do the he express by similitude to
sigures of Geometrye. And in moral philosophy he thought that justice could
not well be taught, nor yet well executed without proportion geometrical. And
this estimacion of Geometry he may seem to have learned of his master Plato,
which without Geometrye would teach nothing, another would admit any to
hear him, except he were expert in Geometry. And what merualle if he so much
esteemed geometrye, saying his opinion was, that Godde was alwaaies workinge
king by Geometry? Which sentence Plutarche declares at large. And although
Plat o do use the help of Geometrye in all the most waighte matter of a common
wealth, yet it is so general in use, that no small things almost can be well
done without it. And therefore says he: that Geometrye is to be learned, if it
were for none other cause, but that all other arts are both sooner and more
surely understand by help of it.

What great help it does in physike, Galene does so often and so copiousely
declare, that no man which has read any book almost of his, can be
ignorant thereof. in so much that he could never cure well a round vlcere,
till reason geometrical did teach it him. Hippocrates is earnest in
admonyshynge that study of geometry must prepare the way to physike, as well
as to all other arts.

I should seem somewhat to tedious, if I should reckon up, how the divines
also in all their mysteries of scripture do use healpe of geometry: and also
that lawyers can never understand the hole law, no nor yet the first title
there of exactly without Geometry. For if laws can not well be established,
nor justice duly executed without geometrical proportion, as both Plato in
his Politic books, and Aristotle in his Moralles do largely declare. Yea
sith Lycurgus that chief lawmaker amongst the Lacedaemonians, is most
praised for that he did change the state of their common wealth from the
proportion Arithmeticall to a proportion geometrical, which without knowledge
of both he could not do, than is it easy to perceive how necessary
Geometry is for the law and students thereof. And if I shall say preciselie
and freely as I think, he is utterly destitute of all abilitee to judge in
any art, that is not sommewhat expert in the Theoremes of Geometry.

And that caused Galene to say of him self, that he could never perceive what
a demonstration was, no not so much, as whether there were any or none, till
he had by geometry gotten abilitee to understand it, although he heard the
best teachers that were in his time. It should be to long and nedelesse also
to declare what help all other arts Mathematical have by geometry, since it
is the ground of all their certeintie, and no man studious in them is so
doubtful thereof, that he shall need any persuasion to procure credit thereto.
For he can not read.ij. lines almost in any mathematical science, but he
shall epsy the nedefulnes of geometry. But to avoid tediousness I will make
an end hereof with that famous sentence of ancient Pythagoras, That who so
will travail by learning to attain wyfedome, shall, never approach to any
excellency without the arts mathematical, and especially Arithmetike and
Geometry.

And if I shall somewhat speak of noble men, and governors of realms, how
needful Geometrye may be unto them, then must I repete all that I have
said before, sith in them ought all knowledge to abound, namely that may
appertain either to good governance in time of peace, either wittye policies
in time of war. For ministration of good laws in time of peace Lycurgus
example with the testimonies of Plato and Aristotle may suffice. And as for
wars, I might think it sufficient that Vegetius has written, and after him
Valturius in commendation of Geometry, for use of wars, but all their words
seem to say nothing, in comparison to the example of Archimedes worthy
works made by geometry, for the defense of his country, to read the
wonderful praise of his witty devises, set forth by the most famous
hystories of Liuius, Plutarche, and Pliny, and all other hystoriographiers,
which write of the strong siege of Syracusae made by that valiant captain,
and noble warrior Marcellus, whose power was so great, that all men meruayled
how that one city could withstand his wonderful force so long. But much
more would they marvel, if they understood that one man only did withstand
all Marcellus strength, and with counter engines destroyed his engines to the
utter astonyshment of Marcellus, and all that were with him. He had invented
such balastelas that did shoot out a hundred darts at one shot, to the
great destruction of Marcellus soldiers, whereby a fond tale was spredde
abroad, how that in Syracusae there was a wonderful giant, which had a
hundred hands, and could shoot a hundred darts at ones. And as this fable
was spredde of Archimedes, so many other have been feigned to be gyantes and
monsters, because they did such things, which far passed the wit of the
common people. So did they feyne Argus to have a hundred eyes, because they
herd of his wonderful circumspection, and thought that as it was above their
capacitee, so it could not be, unless he had a hundred eyes. So imagined they
Janus to have two faces, one lokyng forward, and an other backwarde, because
he could so wittily compare things paste with things that were to come, and
so duly pondre them, as if they were all present. Of like reason did they feyn
Lynceus to have such sharp sight, that he could see through walls and hills,
because peradventure he did by natural judgment declare what co^moditees
might be dug out of the ground. And an infinite noumbre like fables are
there, which sprange all of like reason.

For what other thing means the fable of the great giant Atlas, which was
ymagined to bear up heaven on his shulders? but that he was a man of so high a
wit, that it reached unto the sky, and was so skylfull in Astronomy, and
could tell before hand of Eclipses, and other like things as truly as
though he did rule the sterres, and govern the planettes.

So was Eolus accounted god of the wyndes, and to have them all in a cave at
his pleasure, by reason that he was a wit tie man in natural knowledge, and
observed well the change of wethers, and was the first that taught the
observation of the wyndes. And like reason is to be given of all the old fables.

But to return again to Archimedes, he did also by art perspectiue (which
is a part of geometry) devise such glasses within the town of Syracusae,
that did bourne their ennemies ships a great way from the to wne, which was
a meruaylous politic thing. And if I should repete the varietees of such
strange inventions, as Archimedes and others have wrought by geometry, I
should not only excede the order of a preface, but I should also speak of
such things as can not well be understand in talk, without sum knowledge
in the principles of geometry.

But this will I promise, that if I may perceive my pains to be thankfully
taken, I will not only write of such pleasant inventions, declaryng what they
were, but also will teach how a great number of them were wroughte, that they
may be practiced in this time also. Whereby shall be plainly perceived, that
many things seem impossible to be done, which by art may very well be
wrought. And when they be wrought, and the reason thereof not understand, than
say the vulgar people, that those things are done by negromancy. And hereof
came it that friar Bakon was accounted so great a negromancier, which never
used that art (by any conjecture that I can find) but was in geometry and
other mathematical sciences so expert, that he could do by them such
things as were wonderful in the sight of most people.

Great talk there is of a glass that he made in Oxforde, in which men might
see things that were done in other places, and that was judged to be done by
power of evil spirits. But I know the reason of it to be good and natural,
and to be wrought by geometry (sithe perspectiue is a part of it) and to
stand as well with reason as to see your face in common glass. But this
conclusion and other diverse of like sort, are more mete for princes, for
sundry causes, than for other men, and ought not to be taught commonly. Yet to
repete it, I thought good for this cause, that the worthynes of geometry might
the better be known, and partly understanding given, what wonderful things
may be wrought by it, and so consequently how pleasant it is, and how necessary
also.

And thus for this time I make an end. The reason of some things done in this
book, or omitted in the same, you shall find in the preface before the
Theoremes.

The definitions of the principles of GEOMETRY.
GEOMETRY Teaches the drawyng, Measuring and proporcion of figures. but in as
much as no figure can be drawn, but it must have certain bounds and
enclosures of lines: and every line also is begone and ended at some certain
prycke, first it shall be meet to know these smaller parts of every figure,
that thereby the whole figures may the better be judged, and distinct in
sonder.

A Point or a Prycke, is named of Geometricians that small and insensible
shape, which has in it no parts, Apoincte.
that is to say: another length, breadth nor depth. But as this exactnes of
definition is more meeter for only Theorike speculacion, then for practice and
outward work (consideringe that mine intent is to apply all these whole
principles to work) I think meeter for this purpose, to call a point or
prycke, that small printe of pen, pencyle, or other instrumente, which is
not moved, nor drawn from his first touch, and therefore has no notable
length nor bredthe: as this example does declare.

Where I have set.iij. pricks, each of them having both length and breadth,
though it be but small, and therefore not notable

Now of a great number of these pricks, is made a Line, as you may perceive
by this form ensuyng........................ where as I have set a number of
pricks, so if you with your pen will set in more other pricks between every
two of these, then will it be alyne, as here you may see -- and this line, is
called of Geometricians, Alyne.
Length without breadth.

But as they in their theorikes (which are only mind works) do precisely
understand these definitions, so it shall be sufficient for those men, which
seek the use of the same things, as sense may duly judge them, and apply to
handy works if they understand them so to be true, that outward sense can
find none error therein.

Of lines there be two principal kinds. The one is called a right or
straight line, and the other a crooked line.

A Straight line, A streghte line.
is the shortest that may be drawenne between two pricks.

And all other lines, A crokyd line.
that go not right forth from prick to prick, but boweth any way such are
called Crooked lines as in these examples following ye may se, where I have set
but one form of a stratght line, for more forms there be not, but of crooked
lines there be innumerable diversities, whereof for examples sum I have set
here.

-- A right line.

diagram Crooked
diagram lines.
diagram Crooked lines.


So now you must understand, that every line is drawn between two pricks,
whereof the one is at the beginning, and the other at the end. diagram Therefore
when soever you do see any forms of lines to touch at one notable prick, as
in this example, then shall you not call it one cr^oked line, but rather two
lines: in as much as there is a notable and sensible angle by. A. which e
evermore is made by the meetyng of two several lines. an Angle.
And likewayes shall you judge of this figure, diagram which is made of two
lines, and not of one only.

So that when so ever any such meetyng of lines does happen, the place of
their metyng is called an Angle or corner.

Of angles there be three general kinds: a sharp angle, a square angle, and
a blunte angle. The square angle, which is commonly named a right corner, A
right angle.
is made of two lines meetyng together in form of a squire, which two
lines, if they be drawn forth in length, will cross one an other: as in the
examples following you may see.

A sharp corner.
A sharp angle is so called, because it is lesser than is a square angle, and
the lines that make it, do not open so wide in their departing as in a square
corner, and if they be drawn cross, all four corners will not be equal.

Ab lante angle.
A blunt or broad corner, is greater then is a square angle, and his lines do
part more in sonder then in a right angle, of which all take these examples.

And these angles (as diagram Right angles.
you see) are made partly of streght lines, partly of crooked lines, and partly
of both together. Howbeit in right angles diagram Sharp angles.
I have put none example of crooked lines, because it would much trouble a
lerner diagram Blunte or broad angles.
to judge them: for their true judgment does appertain to art perspectiue,
and as I may say, rather to reason then to sense.

But now as of many pricks there is made one line, so of diverse lines are
there made sundry forms, figures, and shapes, which all yet be called by one
propre name, Platte forms, A platte form.
and they have both length and breadth, but yet no depenesse.

And the bounds of every platte form are lines: as by the examples you may
perceive.

Of platte forms some be plain, and some be crooked, and some partly plain,
and partly crooked.

A plain platte.
A plain platte is that, which is made al equal in height, so that the
middle parts another bulk up, another shrink down more then the both ends.

A crooked platte.
For when the one part is higher then the other, then is it named a Crooked
platte.

And if it be partly plain, and partly crooked, then is it called a Myxte
platte, of all which, these are exaumples.

diagram A plain platte.
diagram A crooked platte.


And as of many pricks is made a line, and of diverse lines one platte form,
so of many plattes is made a body, A body.
diagram A myxte platte.
which conteigneth Length, breadth, Depenesse.
and depenesse. By Depenesse I understand, not as the common sort does, the
holownesse of any thing, as of a well, a diche, a pot, and such like, but I
mean the massy thickness of any body, as in exaumple of a pot: the
depenesse is after the common name, the space from his brimme to his bottom.
But as I take it here, the depenesse of his body is his thickness in the
sides, which is an other thing clean different from the depenesse of his
holownes, that the common people means.

Now all bodies have platte forms for their bounds, so in a dye (which is
called a cubike body) by geomdtricians, Lubike. Asheler.
and an ashler of masons, there are.vi. sides, which are.vi. platte forms,
and are the bounds of the dye.

But in a Globe, (which is a body round as a bowl) there is but one platte
form, and one bound, A globe.
and these are the exaumples of them both.

diagram A dye or ashler.
diagram A globe.


But because you shall not muse what I do call a bound, A bound,
I mean thereby a general name, betokening the beginning, end and side, of any
form.

Form, Figure.
A form, figure, or sharp, is that thing that is enclosed within one bond or
many bonds, so that you understand that shape, that the eye does discern,
and not the substance of the body.

Of figures there be many sorts, for either they be made of pricks, lines,
or platte forms. Notwithstanding to speak properly, a figure is ever made by
platte forms, and not of bare lines unclosed, neither yet of pricks.

Yet for the lighter form of teaching, it shall not be unseemly to call all
such shapes, forms and figures, which ye eye may discern distinctly.

And first to begin with pricks, there may be made diverse forms of them, as
partly here does follow.

diagram Alynearie number.
diagram Trianguler numbres
diagram Long square nu^bre.
diagram Just square numbres
diagram a threcornered spire.
diagram A square spire.


And so may there be infinite forms more, which I omit for this time,
considering that their knowledge appertains more to Arithmetike figurall, than
to Geometry.

But yet one name of a prick, which he takes rather of his place then of his
form, may I not ouerpasse. And that is, when a prick stands in the
middell of a circle (as no circle can be made by compass without it) then is
it called a center. And thereof do masons, and other work men call that
patron, A center
a center, whereby they draw the lines, for just hewyng of stones for arches,
vaultes, and chimneies, because the chief use of that patron is wrought by
findyng that prick or center, from which all the lines are drawn, as in the
third book it does appear.

Lyres make diverse figures also, though properly they may not be called
figures, as I said before (unless the lines do close) but only for easy manner
of teaching, all shall be called figures, diagram that the eye can discern, of
which this is one, when one line lies flat (which is named the ground
line) and an other comes down on it, A ground line.
and is called a perpendiculer or plu^me line, A perpendicular. A plume line.
as in this example you may see. where. A. B. is the ground line, and C. D.
the plumbe line. And like ways in this figure there diagram are three lines,
the ground line which is A. B. the plumme line that is A. C. and the bias
line, which goes from the one of the^ to the other, and lies against the
right corner in such a figure which is here.C. B. But considering that I shall
have occasion to declare sundry figures anon, I will first show some certain
vary tees of lines that close no figures, but are bare lines, and of the other
lines will I make mention in the description of the figures.

Paralleles, or gomowe lines be such lines as be drawn forth still in one
distaunce, Parallelys Gemowe lines.
and are no nerer in one place then in an other, for and if they be nerer at
one end then at the other, then are they no paralleles, but may be called
bought lines, and lo here exaumples of them both.

diagram tortuouse paralleles.


I have added also paralleles tortuouse, diagram parallelis.

parallelis: circular.

Concentrikes.

diagram bought lines

which bow contrary ways with their two ends: and paralleles circular,
which be like imperfect compasses: for if they be whole circles, then are
they called co^centrikes, Concentrikes.
that is to say, circles drawn on one center. Here might I note the error of
good Albert Durer, which affirms that no perpendicular lines can be
paralleles. which error does spring partly of oversight of the difference of
a straight line, and partly of mistakyng certain principles geometrical, which
al I willet pass until an other time, and will not blame him, which has
deserved worthyly infinite praise.

A twine line.
And to return to my matter. an other fashioned line is there, which is named a
twine or twist line, and it goes as a wreyth about some other body. A spirall
line. A worm line.
And an other sort of lines is there, that is called a spirall line, or a worm
line, which represents anapparant form of many circles, where there is not
one in deed: of these.ii. kinds of lines, these be examples.

diagram A twiste line.
diagram A spirall line


A touch line, A tuch line.
is a line that runs a long by the edge of a circle, only touching it, but
does diagram A touch line.
not cross the circumference of it, as in this exaumple you may see.

And when that a line does cross the edg of the circle, A cord.
the^ is it called a cord, as you shall see anon in the speaking of circles.

In the mean season must I not omit to declare what angles be called match
corners, Match corners.
that is to say, such as stand directly one against the other, when two
lines be drawn a cross, as here diagram Match corner.

March corner.

appears.

Where A. and B. are match corners, so are C. and D. but not A. and C. another
D. and A.

Now will I begin to speak of figures, that be properly so called, of which
all be made of diverse lines, except only a circle, an egg form, and a tun
form, which.iij. have no angle, and have but one line for their bound, and an
eye form which is made of one line, and has an angle only.

A circle is a figure made and enclosed with one line, A circle.
and has in the middell of it a prick or center, from which all the lines
that be drawn to the circumfernece are equal all in length, as here you see.

And the line that encloseth the diagram whole compass, Circumference.
is called the circumference.

A diameter
And all the lines that be drawn cross the circle, and go by the center, are
named diameters, whose half, I mean from the center to the circumference any
way, Semidiameter.
is called the semidiameter, or half diameter.

But and if the line go cross the circle, and pass beside the center, then
is diagram it called a cord, or a stryng line, as I said before, A cord or a
string line.
and as this exaumple shows: where A. is the cord. And the compassed line
that answers to it, is called an arche line, or a bow line, An archline A
bowline.
which here is marked with B. and the diameter with C.

But and if that diagram part be separate from the rest of the circle (as in
this example you see) then ar both parts called ca^telles, A cantle.
the one the greatter cantle, as E. and the other the lesser cantle, as D. And
if it be parted just by the center (as you see in F.) then is it called a
semicircle, A semyecircle.
or half compass.

Sometimes it happens that a cantle is cut out with two lines drawn from
the center to the circumference (as G. is) diagram and then may it be called a
nooke cantle, A nooke cantle.
and if it be not parted from the rest of the circle (as you see in H.) then
is it called a nooke plainly without any addicion. A nooke.
And the compassed line in it is called an arche line, as the exaumple here
does show.

diagram An arche.
Now have you heard as touching circles meetely sufficient instruction, so
that it should seem nedeles to speak any more of figures in that kind, save
that there does yet remain ij. forms of an imperfecte circle, for it is like
a circle that were bruised, and thereby did run out endelong one way, which
form Geometricians do call an egg form, An egg form.
because it does represent the figure and shape of an egg duly proportioned
(as this figure shows) having the one end greater then the other.

diagram An egg form.


diagram A tun form.


A tun or bar form
For if it be like the figure of a circle pressed in length, and both ends
like bygge, then is it called a tun form, or barrel form, the right making
of which figures, I will declare hereafter in the third book.

An other form there is, which you may call a nutte form, and is made of
one line much like an egg form, save that it has a sharp angle.

And it chances sometime that there is a right line drawn cross these
figures, and that is called an axelyne, An axtre or axe line.
or axtre. Howebeit properly that line that is called an axtre, which goes
thoroughe the myddell of a Globe, for as a diameter is in a circle, so is an
axe line or axtre in a Globe, that line that goes from side to side, and
passes by the middell of it. And the two points that such a line makes in
the utter bound or platte of the globe, are named polis, which you may call
aptly in englysh, turn points: of which I do more largely entreat, in the
book that I have written of the use of the globe.

But to return to the diuersityes of figures that remain vndeclared, the most
simple of them ar such ones as be made but of two lines, as are the cantle of a
circle, and the half circle, of which I have spoken already. Likewise the
half of an egg form, the cantle of an egg form, the half of a tun
form, and the cantle of a tun form, and beside these a figure much like
to a tun form, save that it is sharp covered at both the ends, diagram and
therefore does consist of two lines, where a tun form is made of one line,
and that figure is named an yey form. An yey form.


A triangle.
The next kind of figures are those that be made of.iij. lines other be
allright lines, all crooked lines, other some right and some crooked. But what
form so ever they be of, they are named generally triangles. for a triangle
is nothing else to say, but a figure of three corners. And this is a general
rule, look how diagram many lines any sigure has, so mannye corners it has
also, if it be a platte form, and not a body. For a body has diverse lines
metyng sometime in one corner.

Now to give you example of triangles, diagram there is one which is all of
crooked lines, and may be taken fur a portion of a globe as the figur marked with A

An other has two compassed lines and one right line, and is as the portion of
half a globe, example of B.

An other hatht but one compassed line, and is the quarter of a circle, named a
quadrate, and the right lines make a right corner, diagram as you se in C.
Otherlesse then it as you se D, whose right lines make a sharp corner, or
greater then a quadrate, as is F, and then the right lines of it do make a
blunt corner.

Also some triangles have all right lines diagram and they be distincted in
sonder by their angles, or corners. for other their corners be all sharp, as
you see in the figure, E. other ij. sharp and one right square, as is the
figure G other ij. sharp and one blunt as in the figure H

There is also an other distinction of the names of triangles, according to
their sides, which other be all equal as in the figure E, and that the Greeks
do call Isopleuron, and Latin men aequilaterum: (...)
and diagram in english it may be called a threlike triangle, other else two
sides be equal and the third unequal, which the Greeks call I so sceles,
the Latin men aequicurio, (...).
and in english tweyleke may they be called, as in G, diagram H, and K. For,
they may be of iij. kinds that is to say, with one square angle, as is G, or
with a blunte corner as H, or with all in sharp korners, as you see in K.

Further more it may be yt they have never a one side equal to an other,
diagram and they be in iij kinds also distinct like the twisekes, as you may
perceive by these examples. M.N, (...).
and O where M. has a right angle, N, A, blunte angle, and O, all sharp
angles these the Greeks and latin men do diagram diagram call scalena and in
english theye may be called nouelekes, for they have no side equal, or like
so^g, to any other in the same figur. diagram Here it is to be noted, that in a
tria^gle all the angles be called innera^gles diagram except any side be
drawenne forth in length, for then is that fourth corner caled an diagram
utter corner, as in this example because A, B, is drawn in length, therefore
the a^gle C, is called an utter a^gle And thus have I done with tria^guled
figures, Quadra^gle
and now follows quadrangles, which are figures of iiij. corners and of iiij.
lines also, A square qua^iate.
of which there diagram be diverse kinds, but chiefly v. that is to say, a
square quadrate, whose sides be all equal, A long square.
and all the angles square, as you se here in this figure Q. The second kind is
called a long square, whose four corners diagram be all squ^re, but the sides
are not equal each to other, yet is every side equal to that other that is
against it, as you may perceive in this figure. R.

A losenge A diamo^d.
The third kind is called losenges diagram or diamondes, whose sides be all
equal, but it has never a square corner, for two of them be sharp, and the
other two be blunt, as appears in, S.

The iiij. sort are like unto losenges, diagram save that they are longer one
way, and their sides be not equal, yet there corners are like the corners of a
losing, and therefore ar they named losengelike or diamo^dlike, A losenge like.
whose figur is noted with T Hereshal you mark that al those squares which
have their sides al equal, may be called also for easy understanding,
likesides, as Q. and S. and those that diagram have only the contrary sides
equal, as R. and T. have, those will I call likeiammys, for a difference.

diagram The fifth sort does contain all other fashions of four cornered
figurs, and ar called of the Greeks trapezia, diagram of Latin me^ mensulae and
of Arabitians, helm* ariphe, they may be called in english board forms, they
have no side equal to an other as these examples show, neither keep they any
rate in their corners, Board forms.
and therefore are they counted unruled forms, and the other four kinds only
are counted ruled forms, in the kind of quadrangles. Of these unruled forms
there is no number, they are so mannye and so diverse, yet by art they may be
changed into other kinds of figures, and thereby be brought to measure and
proportion, as in the thirtene conclusion is partly taught, but more plainly in
my took of measuring you may see it.

And now to make an cande of the diagram diverse kinds of figures, there does
follow now sigures of.v. sides, other v. corners, which we may call cinkangles,
whose sides partlye are all equal as in A, and those are counted diagram ruled
cinkeangles. and partlye unequal as in, B and they are called unruled.

Like wise shall you judge of siseangles, which have six corners, septangles,
which have seven angles, and so forth, for as mannye numbres as there may be
of sides and angles, so many diverse kinds be there of figures, unto which you
shall give names according to the number of their sides and angles, of which
for this time I will make an diagram end, Asqnyre.
and wyllsette forth on example of a syseangle, which I had almost forgotten,
and that is it, whose use comes often in Geometry, and is called a squire, is
made of two long squares joy ned together, as this example shows.

And thus I make an eand to speak of platte forms, and will briefelye say
somewhat touching the figures of bode is which partly have one platte form
fortheir bound, and yt just round as a globe has, or ended long as in an egg,
and a tun diagram The globe as is before
form, whose pictures are these.

How be it you must mark that I mean not the very figure of a tun, when I
say tun form, but a figure like a tun, for a tune form, has but one
plat form, and therefore must needs be round at the ends, where as a tun
has three platte forms, and is flat at each end, as partly these pictures do
show.

Bodies of two plattes, are other cantles or halues of those other bodies, that
have but one platte form, or else they are like in foorme to two such cantles
joined together as this A does partly eppresse: or else diagram it is called a
round spire, or stiple form, as in this figure is some what expressed

Arounde spier.
Now of three plattes there are made certain figures of bodies, as the diagram
diagram cantels an halues of all bodies that have but j. plattys and also the
halues of half globys and canteles of a globe. Likewise a round pillar, and a
spyre made of a round spyre, slytte in ij. parts long ways.

But as these forms be hard to be judged by their pycturs, so I do entende
to pass them over with a great number of other forms of bodies, which
afterward shall be set forth in the book of Perspectiue, because that without
perspectiue knowledge, it is not easy to judge truly the forms of them in
flat protacture.

And thus I make an end for this time, of the definitions Geometrical,
appertayning to this part of practice, and the rest will I prosecute as cause
shall serve.

THE PRACTIKE WORKINGE OF sundry conclusions Geometrical.
THE FIRST CONCLUSION.
To make a threlike triangle or any line measurable.
TAKE THE IVSTE length of the line with your compass, and stay the one foot of
the compass in one of the ends of that line, turning the other up or down at
your will, drawyng the arche of a circle against the middle of the line, and do
likewise with the same diagram compass unaltered, at the other end of the line
and where these ij. crooked lines does cross, from thence draw a line to each
end of your first line, and there shall appear a threlike triangle drawn on
that line.

Example.
A.B. is the first line, on which I would make the threlike triangle, therefore I
open the compass as wide as that line diagram is long, and draw two arch lines
that mete in C, then from C. I draw ij other lines one to A, another to B, and
than I have my purpose.

THE.II. CONCLUSION. If you will make a twileke or a nouelike triangle on any
certain line.
Consider first the length that you will have the other sides to contain, and
to that length open your compass, and then work as you did in the threleke
triangle, remembryng this, that in a nouelike triangle you must take ij.
lengthes beside the first line, and draw an arche line with one of the^ at the
one end, and with the other at the other end, the example is as in the other
before. diagram

THE III. CONCL. To divide an angle of right lines into ij. equal parts.
First open your compasseas largely as you can, so that it do not excede the
length of the shortest line yt incloseth the angle. Then set one foot of the
compass in the very point of the angle and with the other foot draw a
compassed arch from the one line of the angle to the other, diagram that arch
shall you divide in half, and the^ draw a line from the a^gle to ye middle of
yt arch, and so ye angle is divided into ij. equal parts. Example. Let the
tria^gle be A.B.C, the^ set I one foot of ye compass in B, and with the other
I draw ye arch D.E, which I part into ij. equal parts in F, and the^ draw a
line from B, to F, and so I have mine intent

THE IIII. CONCL. To divide any measurable line into ij. equal parts.
diagram

Open your compass to the just length of ye line. And the^ set one foot
steddely at the one end of the line, and with the other foot draw an arch of a
circle against ye middle of the line, both over it, and also under it, then do
like waise at the other end of the line. And mark where those arche lines do
meet crossewaies, and between those ij. pricks draw a line, and it shall cut
the first line in two equal portions.

Example.
The line is A. B. according to which I open the compass and make.iiij. arche
lines, which meet in C. and D, then draw I a line from C, so have I my
purpose.

This conclusion serves for making of quadrates and squires, beside many other
commodities, howebeit it may be don more readylye by this conclusion that
follows next.

THE FIFTH CONCLUSION. To make a plumme line or any prick that you will in any
right line appointed.
Open your compass so that it be not wyder then from the prick appointed in
the line to the shortest end of the line, but rather shorter. Then set the
one foot of the compass in the first prick appointed, and with the other
foot mark ij. other pricks, one of each side of that first, afterward open
your compass to the wydenes of those ij. new pricks, and draw from them ij.
arch diagram lines, as you did in the first conclusion, for making of a
threlyke tria^gle. then if you do mark their crossing, and from it draw a line
to your first prick, it shall be a just plum line on that place.

Example

The line is A.B. the prick on which I should make the plumme line, is C.
then open I the compass as wide as A, C, and set one foot in C. and with
the other do I mark out C.A. and C.B, then open I the compass as wide as
A.B, and make ij. arch lines which do cross in D, and so have I done.

How be it, it happens so sommetymes, that the prick on which you would
make the perpendicular or plum line, is so nere the eand of your line, that you
can not extend any notable length from it to the one end of the line, and if so
be it then that you may not draw your line longer from that end, then does
this conclusion require a new aid, for the last devise will not serve. In
such case therefore shall you do thus: If your line be of any notable length,
divide it into five parts. And if it be not so long that it may yield five
notable parts, then make an other line at will, and part it into five equal
portio^s: so that three of those parts may be found in your line. Then open
your compass as wide as three of these five measures be, and set the one foot
of the compass in the prick, where you would have the plumme line to light
(which I call the first prick,) and with the other foot draw an arche line
right over the prick, as you can aim it: then open your compass as wide as
all five measures be, and set the one foot in the fourth prick, and with the
other foot draw an other arch line cross the first, and where they two do
cross, thense draw a line to the poinct where you would have the
perpendicular line to light, and you have done.

Example.
diagram The line is A. B. and A. is the prick, on which the perpendicular
line must light. Therefore I divide A. B. into five parts equal, then do I
open the compass to the wideness of three parts (that is A. D.) and let one
foot stay in A. and with the other I make an arche line in C. Afterward I
open the compass as wide as A.B. (that is as wide as all five parts) and set
one foot in the.iiij. prick, which is E, drawyng an arch line with the other
foot in C. also. Then do I draw thence a line unto A, and so have I done. But
and if the line be to short to be parted into five parts, I shall divide it
into iij. parts only, as you see the line F. G, and then make D. an other line
(as is K. L.) which I divide into.v. such divisions, as F. G. contains.iij,
then open I the compaas as wide as.iiij. parts (which is K. M.) and so set I
one foot of the compass in F, and with the other I draw an arch line toward H,
then open I the co^pas as wide as K. L. (that is all.v. parts) and set one
foot in G, (that is the iij. prick) and with the other I draw an arch line
toward H. also: and where those.ij. arch lines do cross (which is by H.)
thence draw I a line unto F, and that makes a very plumbe line to F. G, as my
desire was. The manner of workyng of this conclusion, is like to the second
conclusion, but the reason of it does depend of the.xlvi. proposicio^ of ye
first book of Euclide. An other way yet. set one foot of the compass in the
prick, on which you would have the plumbe line to light, and stretche forth
the other foot toward the longest end of the line, as wide as you can for the
length of the line, and so draw a quarter of a compass or more, then without
stirryng of the compass, set one foot of it in the same line, where as the
circularline did begin, and extend the other in the circular line, setting a
mark where it does light, then take half that quantity more thereunto, and by
that prick that ends the last part, draw a line to the prick assigned, and
it shall be a perpendicular.

Example.
A. B. is the line appointed, to which diagram I must make a perpendicular
line to light in the prick assigned, which is A. Therefore do I set one foot
of the compass in A, and extend the other unto D. making a part of a circle more
then a quarter, that is D. E. Then do I set one foot of the compass unaltered
in D, and stretch the other in the circular line, and it does light in F, this
space between D. and F. I divide into half in the prick G, which half I
take with the compass, and set it beyond F. unto H, and therefore is H. the
point, by which the perpendicular line must be drawn, so say I that the line
H. A, is a plumbe line to A. B, as the conclusion would.

THE.VI. CONCLUSION. To draw a straight line from any prick that is not in a
line, and to make it perpendicular to an other line.
Open your compass so wide that it may extend somewhat farther, the^ from the
prick to the line, then set the one foot of diagram the compass in the
prick, and with the other shall you draw a compassed line, that shall cross
that other first line in.ij. places Now if you divide that arch line into.ij.
equal parts, and from the middell prick thereof unto the prick without the
line you draw a straight line, it shall be a plumbe line to that first line,
according to the conclusion.

Example.
C. is the appointed prick, from which unto the line A. B. I must draw a
perpe^dicular. Therefore I open the co^pas so wide, that it may have one foot
in C, and the other to reach over the line, and with yt foot I draw an arch line
as you see, between A. and B, which arch line I divide in the middell in the
point D. Then draw I a line from C. to D, and it is perpendicular to the line
A. B, according as my desire was.

THE.VII. CONCLUSION. To make a plumbe line or any portion of a circle, and
that on the utter or inner bughte.
Mark first the prick where ye plu^be line shall light: and prick out on each
side of it.ij. other poinctes equally distant from that first prick. Then set
the one foot of the co^pas in one of those side pricks, and the other foot
in the other side prick, and first move one of the feet and draw an arche
line over the middell prick, then set the compass steddie with the one foot in
the other side prick, and with the other foot draw an other arche line, that
shall cut that first arche, and from the very poincte of their meetyng, draw a
right line unto the first prick, where you do mind that the plumbe line
shall light. And so have you performed the intent of this conclusion.

Example.
The arche of the circle on which I would erect a plumbe line, is A. B. C. and
B. is the prick where I would have the diagram plumbe line to light. Therefore
I meat out two equal distaunces on each side of that prick B. and they are
A. C. Then open I the compass as wide as A. C. and setting one of the feet in
A. with the other I draw an arch line which goes by G. Likewaies I set one
foot of the compass steddily in C. and with the other I draw an arche line,
going by G. also* Now considering that G. is the prick of their meetyng, it
shall be also the poinct from which I must draw the plu^be line. Then draw I
aright line from G. to B. and so have mine intent. Now as A. B. C. has a
plumbe line erected on his utter bought, so may I erect a plumbe line on the
inner bught of D. E. F, doing with it as I did with the other, that is to
say, first setting for the the prick where the plumbe line shall light,
which is E, and then markyng one other on each side, as are D. and F. And then
proceeding as I did in the example before.

THE VIII. CONCLVSYON. How to divide the arche of a circle into two equal
parts, without measuring the arche.
Divide the cord of that line into ij. equal portions, and then from the
middle prycke erecte a plumbe line, and it shall part that arche in the middle.

Example.
The arch to be divided is diagram A.D.C, the cord is A, B. C, this cord is
divided in the middle with B, from which prick if I erecte a plum line as B.D,
the^ will it divide the arch in the middle, that is to say, in D.

THE IX. CONCLUSION.
To do the same thing other wise. And for shortenes of work, if you will make
a plumbe line without much labor, you may do it with your squyre, so that it
be justly made, for if you apply the edge of the squyre to the line in which
the prick is, and foresee the very corner of the squyre do touch the prick.
And than from that corner if you draw a line by the other edge of the squyre,
yt will be a perpendicular to the former line.

Example.
A.B. is the line, on which I diagram would make the plumme line, or
perpendicular. And therefore I mark the prick, from which the plumbe line
must rise, which here is C. Then do I set one edg of my squyre (that is
B.C.) to the line A.B, so that the corner of the squyre do touch C. justly.
And from C. I draw a line by the other edge of the squire, (which is C. D.)
And so have I made the plumme line D.C, which I sought for.

THE X. CONCLUSION. How to do the same thing an other way yet
If so be it that you have an arche of such greatness, that your squyre will
not suffice thereto, as the arche of a bridge or of a house or window, then may
you do this. Mete underneath the arch where ye middle of his cord will be, and
there set a mark Then take a long line with a plummet, and hold the line in
such a place of the arch, that the plummet do hang justly over the middle of
the cord, diagram that you did divide before, and then the line does show
you the middle of the arche.

Example.
The arch is A.D.B, of which I try the middle thus. I draw a cord from one
side to the other (as here is A.B,) which I divide in the middle in C. The^
take I a line with a plummet (that is D.E,) and so hold I the line that the
plummet E, does hang over C, And then I say that D. is the middle of the
arche. And to thenien^ that my plummet shall point the more justly, I do make
it sharp at the nether end, and so may I trust this work for certain.

THE XI. CONCLUSION. when any line is appointed and without it a prick,
whereby a parallel must be drawn how you shall do it,
Take the just measure beetwene the line and the prick, according to which
you shall open your compass. The^ pitch one foot of your compass at the one
end of the line, and with the other foot draw a bow line right over the
pytche of the compass, likewise do at the other end of the line, then draw a
line that shall touch the vttermoste edge of both those bow lines, and it
will be a true parallele to the first line appointed.

Example.
A.B, is the line unto which diagram I must draw an other gemow line, which
must pass by the prick C, first I meat with my compass the smallest
distance that is from C. to the line, and that is C. F, wherefore staying the
compass at that distaunce, I set the one foot in A, and with the other foot
I make a bow line, which is D, the^ like wise set I the one foot of the
compass in B, and with the other I make the second bow line, which is E. And
then draw I a line, so that it touches the uttermost edge of both these bow
lines, and that line passes by the prick C, end is a gemowe line to A. B, as
my sekyng was.

THE.XII. CONCLUSION. To make a triangle of any.iij. lines, so that the lines
be such, that any.ij. of them be longer then the third. For this rule is
general, that any two sides of every triangle taken together, are longer then
the other side that remains.
If you do remember the first and second conclusions, then is there no
difficulty in this, for it is in manner the same work. First co^siuer
the.iij. lines that you must take, and set one of the^ for the ground line,
then work with the other.ij. lines as you did in the first and second
conclusions.

Example.
diagram I have.iij. lines. A. B. and C. D. and E. F. of which I put.C.D. for
my ground line, then with my compass I take the length of. A. B. and set the one
foot of my compass in C, and draw an arch line with the other foot. Likewaies
I take the length of E. F, and set one foot in D, and with the other foot I
make an arch line cross the other arche, and the prick of their metyng
(which is G.) shall be the third corner of the triangle, for in all such
kinds of woorkynge to make a tryangle, if you have one line drawn, there
remains nothing else but to find where the pitche of the third corner shall
be, for two of them must needs be at the two candes of the line that is
drawn.

THE XIII. CONCLUSION. If you have a line appointed, and a point in it
limited, how you may make on it a right lined angle, equal to an other
right lined angle, all ready assigned.
First draw a line against the corner assigned, and so is it a triangle, then
take heed to the line and the point in it assigned, and consider if that line
from the prick to this end be as long as any of the sides that make the
triangle assigned, and if it be long inoughe, then prick out there the length
of one of the lines, and then work with the other two lines, according to
the last conclusion, making a triangle of three like lines to that assigned
triangle. If it be not long inoughe, then lengthen it first, and
afterward do as I have said before.

Example.
Let the angle appointed diagram be A. B. C, and the corner assigned, B.
Farthermore let the lymited line be D. G, and the prick assigned D.

First therefore by drawinge the line A.C, I make the triangle A.B.C.

Then consideringe that D. G, is longer thanne A.B, you shall cut out a line
from D. toward diagram G, equ^l to A. B, as for example D, F. The^ measure out
the other ij. lines and work with the^ according as the conclusion with the
first also and the second teaches you, and then have you done.

THE XIIII. CONCLUSION. To make a square quadrate of any right line appoincted.
First make a plumbe line unto your line appointed, which shall light at one
of the ends of it, according to the fifth conclusion, and let it be of like
length as your first line is, then open your compass to the just length of
one of them, and set one foot of the compass in the end of the one line,
and with the other foot draw an arche line, there as you think that the
fowerth corner shall be, after that set the one foot of the same compass
vnsturred, in the cande of the other line, and draw an other arche line cross
the first arche line, and the poincte that they do cross in, is the prick of
the fourth corner of the square quadrate which you seek for, therefore draw a
line from that prick to the eande of each line, and you shall thereby have made
a square quadrate.

Example.
A. B. is the line diagram proposed, of which I shall make a square quadrate,
therefore first I make a plu^be line unto it, which shall light in A, and
that plu^b line is A. B, then open I my compass as wide as the length of A. B,
or B. C, (for they must be both equal) and I set the one foot of thend in C,
and with the other I make an arche line nigh unto D, afterward I set the compass
again with one foot in B, A and with the other foot I make an arche line
cross the first arche line in D, and from the prick of their crossyng I
draw.ij. lines, one to B, A and an other to C, and so have I made the square
quadrate that I intended.

THE.XV. CONCLUSION. To make a likeia^me equal to a triangle appointed, and
that in a right lined a^gle limited.
First from one of the angles of the triangle, you shall draw a gemowe line,
which shall be a parallele to that side of the triangle, on which you will
make that likeiamme. Then on one end of the side of the triangle, which lies
against the gemowe line, you shall draw forth a line unto the gemow line, so
that one angle that comes of those.ij. lines be like to the angle which is
limited unto you. Then shall you divide into ij. equal parts that side of the
triangle which bears that line, and from the prick of that division, you
shall raise an other line parallele to that former line, and continewe it unto
the first gemowe line, and the^ of those.ij. last gemowe lines, and the first
gemowe line, with the half side of the triangle, is made a lykeiamme equal to
the triangle appointed, and has an angle like to an angle limited, according
to the conclusion.

Example. diagram B. C. G, is the triangle appoincted unto, which I must make
an equal likeiamme. And D, is the angle that the likeiamme must have. Therefore
first entendyng to erecte the likeia^me on the one side, that the ground line
of the triangle (which is B. G.) I do draw a gemow line by C, and make it
parallele to the ground line B. G, and that new gemow line is A. H. Then do I
raise a line from B. unto the gemowe line, (which line is A. B) and make an
angle equal to D, that is the appointed angle (according as the.viij.
conclusion teaches, and that angle is B. A. E. Then to proceed, I do part in
ye middle the said ground line B. G, in the prick F, from which prick I draw to
the first gemowe line (A. H.) an other line that is parallale to A. B, and that
line is E. F. Now say I that the likeia^me B. A. E. F, is equal to the
triangle B. C. G. And also that it has one angle (that is B. A. E. like to D.
the angle that was limited. And so have I mine intent. The prose of the
equalnes of those two figures does depend of the.xli. proposition of Euclides
first book, and is the.xxxi. proposition of this second book of Theoremis,
which says, that when a tryangle and a likeiamme be made between.ij. self
same gemow lines, and have their ground line of one length, then is the
likeiamme double to the triangle, whereof it follows, that if.ij. such figures
so drawn differ in their ground line only, so that the ground line of the
likeiamme be but half the ground line of the triangle, then be those.ij.
figures equal, as you shall more at large perceive by the book of Theoremis,
in ye.xxxi. theoreme.

THE.XVI. CONCLUSION. To make a likeiamme equal to a triangle appoincted,
according to an angle limited, and on a line also assigned.
In the last conclusion the sides of your likeiamme were left to your liberty,
though you had an angle appoincted. Now in this conclusion you are somewhat
more restrained of liberty since the line is limited, which must be the side
of the likeia^me. Therefore thus shall you proceed. First according to the
last conclusion, make a likeiamme in the angle appoincted, equal to the
triangle that is assigned. Then with your compass take the length of your line
appointed, and set out two lines of the same length in the second gemowe lines,
beginning at the one side of the likeiamme, and by those two pricks shall you
draw an other gemowe line, which shall be parallele to two sides of the
likeiamme. Afterward shall you draw.ij. lines more for the accomplishement of
your work, which better shall be perceived by a short exaumple, then by a
great number of words, only without example, therefore I will by example set
forth the whole work.

Example.
First, according to the last diagram conclusion, I make the likeiamme E. F. C.
G, equal to the triangle D, in the appointed angle which is E. Then take I the
length of the assigned line (which is A. B,) and with my compass I set forth
the same length in the ij. gemow lines N. F. and H. G, setting one foot in E,
and the other in N, and again setting one foot in C, and the other in H.
Afterward I draw a line from N. to H, which is a gemow line, to ij. sides of
the likeiamme. then draw I a line also from N. unto C, and extend it until
it cross the lines, E. L. and F. G, which both must be drawn forth longer
then the sides of the likeiamme. and where that line does cross F. G, there I
set M. Now to make an end, I make an other gemowe line, which is parallel
to N. F. and H. G, and that gemowe line does pass by the prick M, and then
have I done. Now say I that H. C. K. L, is a likeiamme equal to the triangle
appointed, which was D, and is made of a line assigned that is A. B, for H. C,
is equal unto A. B, and so is K. L, The prose of ye equalnes of this likeiam
unto the tria^gle, depends of the thirty and two Theoreme: as in the hoke of
Theoremes does appear, where it is declared, that in all likeiammes, when there
are more then one made about one bias line, the filsquares of every of them
must needs be equal.

THE XVII. CONCLUSION. To make a likeiamme equal to any right lined figure, and
that on an angle appointed.
The readiest way to work this conclusion, is to tourn that right lined
figure into triangles, and then for every triangle to gether an equal
likeiamme, according unto the eleven conclusion, and then to join al those
likeiammes into one, if their sides happen to be equal, which thing is ever
certain, when all the triangles happen justly between one pair of gemow lines.
but and if they will not frame so, then after that you have for the first
triangle made his likeiamme, you shall take the length of one of his sides, and
set that as a line assigned, on which you shall make all the other likeiams,
according to the twelft conclusion, diagram and so shall you have al your
likeiammes with ij. sides equal, and ij. like angles, so yt you maieasily join
the^ into one figure.

Example.
diagram If the right lined figure be like unto A, the^ may it be turned into
triangles that will stand between ij. parallels any ways, as you maise by C and
D, for ij. sides of both diagram the tria^gls ar parallels. Also if the right
lined figure be like unto E, the^ will it be turned into tria^gles, liyng
between two parallels also, as ye other did before. as in the example of F. G.
But and if ye right lined figure be like unto H, and so turned into tria^gles
as you se in K. L. M, where it is parted into iij tria^gles, the^ will not all
those triangles lie between one pair of parallels or gemow lines, but must have
many, for every triangle must have one pair of parallels several, yet it may
happen that when there be three or sower triangles, ij. of them may happen
to agree to one pair of parallels, which thing I remit to every honest wit
to search, for the manner of their draught will declare, how many paires of
parallels they shall need, of which varietee because the examples ar infinite,
I have set forth these few, that by them you may conjecture duly of all other
like.

diagram

Further explicacion you shall not greatly need, if you remember what has been
taught before, and then diligently behold how these sundry figures be turned
into tria^gles. In the first you se I have made v. triangles, and four
paralleles. in the second vij. triangles and four paralleles. in the third
three tria^gles, and five parallels, in the iiij. you se five tria^gles and four
parallels. in the fifth, iiij. tria^gles and.iiij. parallels, and in ye sixth
there ar five tria^gles and iiij. paralels. Howbeit a man may at liberty alter
them into diverse forms of tria^gles and therefore I leave it to the discretion
of the woorkmaister, to do in all such cases as he shall think best, for by
these examples (if they be well marked) may all other like conclusions be
wrought.

THE XVIII. CONCLUSION. To part a line assigned after such a sort, that the
square that is made of the whole line and one of his parts, shall be equal to
the squar that comes of the other part alone.
First divide your line into ij. equal parts, and of the length of one part
make a perpendicular to light at one end of your line assigned. then add a
bias line, and make thereof a triangle, this done if you take from this bias
line the half length ol your line appointed, which is the just length of
your perpendicular, that part of the bias line which does remain, is the
greater portion of the division that you seek for, therefore if you cut your
line according to the length of it, then will the square of that greater
portior be equal to the square that is made of the whole line and his lesser
portion. And contrary wise, the square of the whole line and his lesser part,
will be equal to the square of the greater part.

Example.
A.B, is the line assigned. E. is the diagram middle prick of A. B, B. C. is
the plumb line or perpendicular, made of the half of A. B, equal to A.E,
other B.E, the byas line is C. A, from which I cut a piece, that is C. D,
equal to C. B, and according to the length loathe piece that remains (which
is D. A,) I do divide the line A.B, at which division I set F. Now say I,
that this line A, B, (which was assigned unto me) is so divided in this point F,
yt yt square of ye hole line A.B, and of the one portion (yt is F.B, the lesser
part) is equal to the square of the other part, which is F.A, and is the
greater part of the first line. The proof of this equality shall you learn by
the.xl. Theoreme.

THE.XIX. CONCLUSION. To make a square quadrate equal to any right lined
figure appoincted.
First make a likeiamme equal to that right lined figure, with a right angle,
according to the.xv. conclusion, then consider the likeiamme, whether it have
all his sides equal, or not: for if they be all equal, then have you done
your conclusion. but and if the sides be not all equal, then shall you make
one right line just as long as two of those unequal sides, that line shall
you divide in the middle, and on that prick draw half a circle, then cut
from that diameter of the half circle a certain portion equal to the one
side of the likeiamme, and from that point of division shall you erecte a
perpendicular, which shall touch the edge of the circle. And that
perpendicular shall be the just side of the square quadrate, equal both to
the lykeiamme, and also to the right lined figure appointed, as the conclusion
willed.

Example.
diagram

diagram

K, is the right lined figure appointed, and B. C. D. E, is the likeia^me, with
right angles equal unto K, but because that this likeiamme is not a square
quadrate, I must turn it into such one after this sort, I shall make one right
line, as long as.ij. unequal sides of the likeia^me, that line here is F.G,
which is equal to B. C, and C. E. Then part I that line in the middle in the
prick M, and on that prick I make half a circle, according to the length of
the diameter F. G. Afterward I cut away a piece from F. G, equal to C. E,
markyng that point with H. And on that prick I erecte a perpendicular H. K,
which is the just side to the square quadrate that I seek for, therefore
according to the doctrine of the.x. conclusion, of that line I do make a
square quadrate, and so have I attained the practice of this conclusion.

THE.XX. CONCLUSION. when any.ij. square quadrates are set forth, how you may
make one equal to them both.
First draw a right line equal to the side of one of the quadrates: and on
the end of it make a perpendicular, equal in length to the side of the other
quadrate, then draw a byas line between those.ij. other lines, making thereof
a right angeled triangle. And that byas line will make a square quadrate,
equal to the other.ij. quadrates appointed.

Example.
A.B. and C.D, are the two diagram square quadrates appointed, unto which I
must make one equal square quadrate. First therefore I do make a right line
E.F, equal to one of the sides of the square quadrate A.B. And on the one end
of it I make a plumbe line E. G, equal to the side of the other quadrate D. C.
Then draw I a byas line G.F, which being made the side of a quadrate
(according to the tenth conclusion) will accomplish the work of this
practice: for the quadrate H. is as much just as the other two. I mean A. B.
and D. C.

THE XXI. CONCLUSION. when any two quadrates be set forth, how to make a
squire about the one quadrate, which shall be equal to the other quadrate.
Determine with your self about which quadrate you will make the squire, and
draw one side of that quadrate forth in lengte, according to the measure of
the side of the other quadrate, which line you may call the ground line, and
then have you a right angle made on this line by an other side of the same
quadrate: Therefore turn that into a right cornered triangle, according to the
work in the last conclusion, by making of a byas line, and that byas line
will perform the work of your desire. For if you take the length of that byas
line with your compass, and then set one foot of the compass in the farthest
angle of the first quadrate (which is the one end of the groundline) and
extend the other foot on the same line, according to the measure of the byas
line, and of that line make a quadrate, enclosyng ye first quadrate, then will
there appear the form of a squire about the first quadrate, which squire is
equal to the second quadrate.

diagram

Example.
The first square quadrate is A. B. C. D, and the second is E. Now would I
maked squire about the quadrate A. B. C. D, which shall be equal unto the
quadrate E.

diagram

Therefore first I draw the line A.D, more in length, according to the measure
of the side of E, as you see, from D. unto F, and so the hole line of both
these several sides is A. F, the^ make I a byas line from C, to F, which byas
line is the measure of this work. wherefore I open my compass according to the
length of that byas line C. F, and set the one compass foot in A, and extend
the other foot of the compass toward F, making this prick G, from which I erect
a plumbe line G. H, and so make out the square quadrate A. G. H. K, whose sides
are equal each of them to A. G. And this square does contain the first
quadrate A. B. C. D, and also a squire G.H.K, which is equal to the second
quadrate E, for as the last conclusion declares, the quadrate A. G.H. K, is
equal to both the other quadrates proposed, that is A. B.C.D, and E. Then
must the squire G.H.K, needs be equal to E, considering that all the rest of
that great quadrate is nothing else but the quadrate self, A. B. C. D, and so
have I the intent of this conclusion.

THE.XXI. CONCLUSION. To find out the ce^tre of any circle assigned.
Draw a cord or stryng line cross the circle, then divide into.ij. equal
parts, both that cord, and also the bow line, or arche line, that serves to
that cord, and from the pricks of those divisions, if you draw an other line
cross the circle, it must needs pass by the center. Therefore divide that line
in the middle, and that middle prick is the center of the circle proposed.

Example.
Let the circle be A.B.C.D, whose center I shall seek. First therefore I draw a
cord cross the circle, that is A. C. Then do I divide that cord in the
middle, in E, and likewaies also do I divide his arche line A.B.C, in the
middle, in the point B. Afterward I draw a line from B. to E, and so cross
the circle, which line is B. D, in diagram which line is the center that I
seek for. Therefore if I part that line B.D, in the middle in to two equal
portions, that middle prick (which here is F) is the very center of the
said circle that I seek. This conclusion may other ways be wrought, as the
most part of conclusions have sundry forms of practice, and that is, by
making three pricks in the circu^ference of the circle, at liberty where you
will, and then findinge the center to those three pricks, Which work because
it serves for sundry uses, I think meet to make it a several conclusion by
it self.

THE XXIII. CONCLUSION. To find the commen center belongyng to any three
pricks appointed, if they be not in an exact right line.
It is to be noted, that though every small arche of a great circle do seem
to be a right line, yet in very deed it is not so, for every part of the
circumference of al circles is compassed, though in little arches of great
circles the eye cannot discern the crokednes, yet reason does always declare
it, therefore iij. pricks in an exact right line can not be brought into the
circumference of a circle. But and if they be not in a right line how so ever
they stand, thus shall you find their common center. Open your compass so wide,
that it be some what more then the half distance of two of those pricks. Then
set the one foot of the compass in the one prick, and with the other foot
draw an arche syne toward the other prick, Then again put the foot of your
compass in the second prick, and with the other foot make an arche line, that
may cross the first arch line in ij. places. Now as you have done with those
two pricks, so do with the middle prick, and the third that remains. Then
draw ij. lines by the points where those arche lines do cross, and where
those two lines do meet, there is the center that you seek for.

Example

The ij. pricks I have set diagram to be A. B, and C, which I would bring into
the edg of one common circle, by finding a center common to them all, first
therefore I open my co^pas, so that they occupye more then ye half distance
between ij. pricks (as are A. B.) and so settinge one foot in A. and
extendinge the other toward B, I make the arche line D.E. Likewise settig one
foot in B, and turninge the other toward A, I draw an other arche line that
crosses the first in D. and E. Then from D. to E, I draw a right line D.H.
After this I open my compass to a new distance, and make ij. arche lines
between B. and C, which cross one the other in F. and G, by which two
points I draw an other line, that is F. H. And because that the line D. H. and
the line F. H. do meet in H, I say that H. is the center that serves to
those iij. pricks. Now therefore if you set one foot of your compass in H, and
extend the other to any of the iij. pricks, you may draw a circle which shall
enclose those iij. pricks in the edg of his circu^fere^ce, and thus have you
attained ye use of this co^clusio^

THE XXIIII. CONCLUSION. To draw a touch line unto a circle, from any poincte
assigned.
Here must you understand that the prick must be without the circle, else the
conclusion is not possible. But the prick or poinct being without the circle,
thus shall you proceed: Open your compass, so that the one foot of it may be
set in the center of the circle, and the other foot on the prick appoincted,
and so draw an other circle of that largeness about the same center: and it
shall govern you certainly in making the said touch line. For if you draw a
line from the prick appointed unto the center of the circle, and mark the
place where it does cross the lesser circle, and from that poincte erect a
plumbe line that shall touch the edge of the utter circle, and mark also the
place where that plumbe line crosses that utter circle, and from that place
draw an other line to the center, taking heed where it crosses the lesser
circle, if you draw a plumbe line from that prick unto the edge of the
greatter circle, that line I say is a touthe line, drawn from the point
assigned, according to the meaning of this conclusion.

Example.
Let the circle be called B.C. D, and his ce^tre E, and ye prick diagram
assigned A, open your co^pas now of such widenes, yt the one foot may be set
in E, which is ye ce^tre of ye circle, and ye other in A, which is ye point
assigned, and so make an other greter circle (as here is A. F G) the^ draw a
line from A. unto E, and where that line does cross ye inner circle (which here
is in the prick B.) there erect a plu^b line unto the line. A.E. and let that
plumb line touch the utter circle, as it does here in the point F, so shall
B.F. be that plumbe line. Then from F. unto E. draw an other line which shall
be F.E, and it will cut the inner circle, as it does here in the point C,
from which point C. if you erect a plumb line unto A, then is that line A.C,
the touch line, which you should find. Notwithstanding that this is a
certain way to find any touch line, and a demonstrable form, yet more
easyly by many fold may you find and make any such line with a true ruler,
layinge the edge of the ruler to the edge of the circle and to the prick, and
so drawing a right line, as this example shows, where the circle is E, the
prick assigned diagram is A. and the ruler C. D. by which the touch line is
drawn, and that is A, B, and as this way is light to do, so is it certain
inoughe for any kind B of workinge.

THE XXV. CONCLUSION. when you have any piece of the circumference of a circle
assigned, how you may make out the whole circle agreynge thereunto.
First seek out the center of that arche, according to the do trine of the
seuententh conclusion, and then setting one foot of your compass in the center,
and extending the other foot un to the edge of the arche or piece of the
circumference, it is easy to draw the whole circle.

Example.
A piece of an old pillar was found, like inform to this figure A.D.B. Now to
know how much the compass of the hole pillar was, seeing by this part it
appears that it was round, thus shall you do. Make in A table the like draught
of yt circu^ference by the self patro^, using it as it were a crooked ruler
diagram Then make.iij. pricks in that arche line, as I have made, C. D. and E.
And then find out the common center to them all, as the.xvij. conclusion
teaches. And that ce^tre is here F, now setting one foot of your compass in
F, and the other in C. D, other in E, and so making a compass, you have your
whole intent.

THE XXVI. CONCLUSION. To find the center to any arche of a circle.
If so be it that you desire to find the center by any other way then by
those.iij. pricks, considering that sometimes you can not have so much space
in the thing where the arche is drawn, as should serve to make those.iiij.
bow lines, then shall you do thus: Part that arche line into two parts,
equal other unequal, it makes no force, and unto each portion draw a cord,
other a string line. And then according as you did in one arche in the.xvi.
conclusion, so do in both those arches here, that is to say, divide the
arche in the middle, and also the cord, and draw then a line by those two
deuisions, so then are you sure that that line goes by the center. Afterward
do lykewaies with the other arche and his cord, and where those.ij. lines do
cross, there is the center, that you seek for.

Example.
The arche of the circle is A. B. C, unto which I must seek a center, therefore
first I do diagram divide it into.ij. parts, the one of them is A. B, and the
other is B. C. Then do I cut every arche in the middle, so is E. the middle of
A.B, and G. is the middle of B.C. Likewaies, I take the middle of their cords,
which I mark with F. and H, setting F. by E, and H. by G. Then draw I a line
from E. to F, and from G. to H, and they do cross in D, wherefore say I, that
D. is the center, that I seek for.

THE XXVII. CONCLUSION. To draw a circle within a triangle appoincted.
For this conclusion and all other like, you must understand, that when one
figure is named to be within an other, that is not other ways to be
understand, but that either every side of the inner figure does touch
every corner of the other, other else every corner of the one does touch
every side of the other. So I call that triangle drawn in a circle, whose
corners do touch the circumference of the circle. And that circle is contained
in a triangle, whose circumference does touch justly every side of the
triangle, and yet does not cross over any side of it. And so that quadrate
is called properly to be drawn in a circle, when all his four angles does
touch the edge of the circle, And that circle is drawn in a quadrate, whose
circumference does touch every side of the quadrate, and lykewaies of other
figures.

Examples are these. A. B. C. D. E. F.

diagram A. is a circle in a triangle.

diagram B. a triangle in a circle.

diagram C. a quadrate in a circle.

diagram D. a circle in a quadrate.

diagram diagram

In these.ij. last figures E. and F, the circle is not named to be drawn in a
triangle, because it does not touch the sides of the triangle, neither is the
triangle counted to be drawn in the circle, because one of his corners does
not touch the circumference of the circle, yet (as you see) the circle is
within the triangle, and the triangle within the circle, but another of them is
properly named to be in the other. Now to come to the conclusion. If the
triangle have all.iij. sides like, then shall you take the middle of every
side, and from the contrary corner draw a right line unto that point, and
where those lines do cross one an other, there is the center. Then set one
foot of the compass in the center, and stretche out the other to the middle
prick of any of the sides, and so draw a compass, which shall touch every
side of the triangle, but shall not pass with out any of them.

Example.
The triangle is A. B. C, whose sides I do part into.ij. equal parts, each by
it self in these points D. E. F, puttyng F. between A. B, and D. between B.
C, and E. between A. C. Then draw I a line from C. to F, and an other from A.
to D, and the third from B. to E.

And where all those lines do mete (that is to say (...) G,) I set the one
foot of my compass, diagram because it is the common center, and so draw a
circle according to the distaunce of any of the sides of the triangle. And then
find I that circle to agree justly to all the sides of the triangle, so that
the circle is justly made in the triangle, as the conclusion did purporte. And
this is ever true, when the triangle has all three sides equal, other at the
least.ij. sides like long. But in the other kinds of triangles you must divide
every angle in the middle, as the third conclusion teaches you. And so draw
lines from each angle to their middle prick. And where those lines do cross,
there is the common center, from which you shall draw a perpendicular to one of
the sides. Then set one foot of the compass in that center, and stretche the
other foot according to the length diagram of the perpendicular, and so draw
your circle.

Example.
The triangle is A. B. C, whose corners I have divided in the middle with D.
E.F, and have drawn the lines of division A. D. B. E. and C. F, which cross
in G, therefore shall G. be the common center. Then make I one perpe^dicular
from G. unto the side A. C, and that is G.H. Now set I one foot of the compass
in G, and extend the other foot unto H. and so draw a compass, which will
justly answer to that tria^gle according to the meaning of the conclusion.

THE XXVIII. CONCLUSION. To draw a circle about any tria^gle assigned.
First divide two sides of the triangle equally in half, and from those ij.
pricks erect two perpendiculars, which must needs meet in cross, and that
point of their meting is the center of the circle that must be drawn,
therefore set one foot of the compass in that point, and extend the other
foot to one corner of the triangle, and so make a circle, and it shall touch
all iij. corners of the triangle.

Example.
A.B.C. is the triangle, whose two sides A.C. and B, C. are divided into two
equal parts in D. and E, setting D. between diagram B. and C, and E. between
A. and C. And from each of those two points is there erected a perpendicular
(as you se D.F, and E.F.) which mete, and cross in F, and stretche forth the
other foot of any corner of the triangle, and so make a circle, that circle
shall touch every corner of the triangle, and shall enclose the whole triangle,
according, as the conclusion wills.

An other way to do the same.

And yet an other way may you do it, according as you learned in the
seuententh conclusion, for if you call the three corners of the triangle iij.
pricks, and then (as you learned there) if you seek out the center to those
three pricks, and so make it a circle to enclose those three pricks in his
circumference, you shall perceive that the same circle shall iustelye include
the triangle proposed.

Example.
A. B. C. is the triangle, whose iij. corners I count to be iij. points. Then
(as the seuentene conclusion does teach) I diagram seek a common center, on
which I may make a circle, that shall enclose those iij pricks that center. as
you se is D, for in D. does the right lines, that pass by the angles of the
arche lines, meet and cross. And on that center as you se, have I made a
circle, which does enclose the iij. angles of the tria^gle, and consequent lie
the triangle it self, as the conclusion did intend.

THE XXIX. CONCLUSION. To make a triangle in a circle appointed whose corners
shall be equal to the corners of any triangle assigned.
when I will draw a triangle in a circle appointed, so that the corners of that
triangle shall be equal to the corners of any triangle assigned, then wust I
first draw a tuche line unto that circle, as the twenty conclusion does teach,
and in the very point of the touch must I make an angle, equal to one angle
of the triangle, and that inward toward the circle: likewise in the same
prick must I make an other angle with the other half of the touch line,
equal to an other corner of the triangle appointed, and then between those two
corners will there resulte a third angle, equal to the third corner of that
triangle. Now where those two lines that enter into the circle, do touch the
circumference (beside the touch line) there set I two pricks, and between
them I draw a third line. And so have I made a triangle in a circle
appointed, whose corners be equal to the corners of the triangle assigned.

Example.
A. B. C, is the triangle diagram appointed, and F.G.H. is the circle, in which
I must make an other triangle, with like diagram angles to the angles of
A.B.C. the triangle appointed. Therefore first I make the touch line D.F.E. And
then make I an angle in F, equal to A, which is one of the angles of the
triangle. And the line that makes that angle with the touch line, is F. H,
which I draw in length until it touch the edge of the circle. Then again
in the same point F, I make an other corner equal to the angle C. and the line
that makes that corner with the touch line, is F.G. which also I draw
forth until it touch the edge of the circle. And then have I made three
angles upon that one touch line, and in yt one point F, and those iij. angles
be equal to the iij. angles of the triangle assigned, which thing does
plainly appear, in so much as they be equal to ij. right angles, as you
may guess by the sixth theoreme. And the three angles of every triangle are
equal also to ij. right angles, as the two and twenty theoreme does show, so
that because they be equal to one third thing, they must needs be equal
together, as the common sentence says. The^ do I draw a line from G. to H,
and that line makes a triangle F.G.H. whose angles be equal to the angles of
the triangle appointed. And this triangle is drawn in a circle, as the
conclusion did will. The proof of this conclusion does appear in the
seventy and iiij. Theoreme.

THE XXX. CONCLUSION. To make a triangle about a circle assigned which shall
have corners, equal to the corners of any triangle appointed.
First draw forth in length the one side of the triangle assigned so that
thereby you may have ij. utter angles, unto which two utter angles you shall
make ij. other equal on the center of the circle proposed, drawing three half
diameters from the circumference, which shall enclose those ij. angles, the^
draw iij. touch lines which shall make ij. right angles, each of them with one
of those semidiameters. Those iij. lines will make a triangle equally cornered
to the triangle assigned, and that triangle is drawn about a circle appointed,
as the co^clusio^ did will.

Example.
A.B.C, is the triangle assigned, and G.H.K, is the circle appointed, about
which I must make a triangle having equal angles to the angles of that
triangle A.B.C. First therefore I draw A.C. (which is one of the sides of the
triangle) in length that there may appear two utter angles in that triangle,
as you se B. A. D, and B. C, E.

Then draw I in the diagram circle appointed a semidiameter, which is here
H.F, for F. is the ce^tre of the circle G. H.K. Then make I on that center an
angle equal diagram to the utter angle B. A. D, and that angle is H.F. K.
Likewaies on the same ce^tre by drawyng an other semidiameter, I make an other
angle H. F. G, equal to the second utter angle of the triangle, which is B.
C. E. And thus have I made.iij. semidiameters in the circle appointed. Then at
the end of each semidiameter, I draw a touch line, which shall make right
angles with the semidiameter. And those.iij. touch lines mete; as you see, and
make the triangle L. M. N, which is the triangle that I should make, for it is
drawn about a circle assigned, and has corners equal to the corners of the
triangle appointed, for the corner M. is equal to C. Likewaies L. to A, and N.
to B, which thing you shall better perceive by the vi. Theoreme, as I will
declare in the book of proofs.

THE XXXI. CONCLUSION. To make a portion of a circle on any right line
assigned, which shall contain an angle equal to a right lined angle
appointed.
The angle appointed, may be a sharp angle, a right angle, other a blunte
angle, so that the work must be diuersely handeled according to the
diversities of the angles, but consideringe the hardenes of those several
works, I will omit them for a more meter time, and at this time will she,
we you one light way which serves for all kinds of angles, and that is this.
When the line is proposed, and the angle assigned, you shall join that line
proposed so to the other two lines contayninge the angle assigned, that you
shall make a triangle of them, for the easy dooinge whereof, you may enlarge
or shorten as you see cause, nigh of the two lines contayninge the angle
appointed. And when you have made a triangle of those iij. lines, then
according to the doctrine of the seven and twety coclusio^, make acircle about
that triangle. And so have you wroughte the request of this conclusion. which
yet you may work by the twenty and eight conclusion also, so that of your
line appointed, you make one side of the tria^gle be equal to diagram ye
a^gleassigned as your self may easily guess

Example.
First for example of a sharp a^gle let A. stand and B.C. shall be yt line
assigned. The^ do I make a triangle, by adding B. C, as a third side to those
other ij. which do include the a^gle assigned, and that tria^gle is D E.F, so
yt E. F. is the line appointed, and D. is the angle assigned. Then do I draw
a portion of a circle about that triangle, from the one end of that line
assigned unto the other, that is to say, from E. a long by D. unto F, which
portion is evermore greatter then the half of the circle, by reason that the
angle is a sharp angle. But if the angle be right (as in the second exaumple
you see it) then shall the portion of the circle that contains that angle,
ever more be the just half of a circle. And when the angle is a blunte angle,
as the third exaumpse does propounde, then shall the portion of the circle
evermore be less then the half circle. So in the second example, G. is the
right angle assigned, and H. K. is the line appointed, and L.M.N. the portion
of the circle aunsweryng thereto. In the third exaumple, O. is the blunte
corner assigned, P. Q. is the line, and R. S. T. is the portion of the circle,
that contains that blu^t corner, and is drawn on R. T. the line appointed.

THE XXXII. CONCLUSION. To cut of from any circle appoineed, a portion
containyng an angle equal to a right lyned angle assigned.
When the angle and the circle are assigned, first draw a touch line unto that
circle, and then draw an other line from the prick of the touching to one
side of the circle, so that thereby those two lines do make an angle equal to
the angle assigned. Then say I that the portion of the circle of the contrary
side to the angle drawn, is the part that you scke for.

Example.
A. is the angle appointed, and D. E. F. is the circle assigned, from which I
must cut away a portion that does contain an angle equal to this angle A.
diagram Therefore first I do draw a touch line to the circle assigned, and that
touch line is B. C, the very prick of the touch is D, from which D. J. draw
a line D. E, so that the angle made of those two lines be equal to the angle
appointed. Then say I, that the arch of the circle D. F. E, is the arche that I
seek after. For if I do divide that arche in the middle (as here it is done in
F.) and so draw thence two lines, one to A, and the other to E, then will the
angle F, be equal to the angle assigned.

THE XXXIII. CONCLUSION. To make a square quadrate in a circle assigned
Draw.ij. diameters in the circle, so that they run a cross, and that they
make.iiij. right angles. Then draw.iiij. lines, that may join the.iiij. ends
of those diameters, one to an other, and then have you made a square quadrate
in the circle appointed.

Example.
A. B. C. D. is the circle assigned, and A. C. and B. D. are the diagram two
diameters which cross in the center E, and make.iiij. right corners. Then do
I make four other lines, that is A. B, B. C, C. D, and D. A, which do join
together the four ends of the ij. diameters. And so is the square quadrate
made in the circle assigned, as the conclusion wills.

THE XXXIIII. CONCLUSION. To make a square quadrate about annye circle
assigned.
Draw two diameters in cross ways, so that they make four right angles in
the center. Then with your compass take the length of the half diameter, and
set one foot of the compass in each end of those diameters, drawing two arche
lines at every pitchinge of the compass, so shall you have viij. arche lines.
Then if you mark the pricks wherein those arch lines do cross, and draw
between those iiij. pricks iiij right lines, then have you made the square
quadrate according to the request of the conclusion.

Example.
A.B.C. is the circle assigned diagram in which first I draw two diameters, in
cross ways, making iiij. right angles, and those ij. diameters are A.C. and
B.D. Then set I my compass (which is opened according to the semidiameter
of the said circle) fixing one foot in the end of every semidiameter, and
draw with the other foot two arche lines, one on every side. As first, when
I set the one foot in A, then with the other foot I do make two arche
lines, one in E, and an other in F. Then set I the one foot of the compass
in B, and draw two arche lines F. and G. Like wise settinge the compass
foot in C, I draw two other arche lines, G. and H, and on D. I make two
other, H. and E. Then from the crossinges of those eighte arche lines I draw
iiij. straighte lines, that is to say, E.F, and F. G. also G.H, and H.E,
which iiij. straight lines do make the square quadrate that I should draw
about the circle assigned.

THE XXXV. CONCLUSION. To draw a circle in any square quadrate appointed.
First divide every side of the quadrate into two equal parts, and so draw
two lines between each two contrary poinctes, and where those two lines do
cross, there is the center of the circle. Then set the one foot of the
compass in that point, and stretch forth the other foot, according to the
length to half one of those lines, and so make a compass in the square quadrate
assigned.

Example.
A, B.C.D. is the quadrate appointed, in which I must make a circle. diagram
Therefore first I do divide every side in ij. equal parts, and draw ij. lines
acrosse, between each ij. contrary pricks, as you se E. G, and F. H, which
mete in K, and therefore shall K, be the center of the circle. Then do I set one
foot of the compass in K. and open the other as wide as K.E, and so draw a
circle, which is made ancordinge to the conclusion.

THE XXXVI. CONCLUSION. To draw a circle about a square quadrate.
Draw ij. lines between the iiij. corners of the quadrate, and where they mete
in cross, there is the center of the circle that you seek for. The^ set one
foot of the compass in that center, and extend the other foot unto one corner
of the quadrate, and so may you draw a circle which shall justly enclose the
quadrate proposed.

Example.
A. B. C. D. is the square quadrate proposed, about which I must make a circle.
Therefore do I draw ij. lines cross the square quadrate from angle to angle,
diagram as you se A. C. and B. D. And where they ij. do cross (that is to say
in E.) there set I the one foot of the compass as in the center, and the other
foot I do extend unto one angle of the quadrate, as for exa^pse to A, and so
make a compass, which does justly enclose the quadrate, according to the mind
of the conclusion.

THE XXXVII. CONCLUSION. To make a twileke triangle, which shall have every of
the ij. angles that lie about the ground line, double to the other corner.
First make a circle, and divide the circumference of it into five equal
parts. And then draw from one prick (which you will) two lines to ij.
other pricks, that is to say to the iij. and iiij. prick, counting that for
the first, wherhence you drew both those lines, Then draw the third line to
make a triangle with those other two, and you have done according to the
conclusion, and have made a twelike tria^gle, whose ij. corners about the
ground line, are each of them double to the other corner.

Example.
A, B. C. is the circle, which I diagram have divided into five equal
portions. And from one of the pricks (which is A,) I have drawn ij. lines, A.
B. and A. C, which are drawn to the third and iiij. pricks. Then draw I the
third line C. B. which is the ground line, and makes the triangle, that I
would have, for the a^gle C. is double to the angle A, and so is the angle B.
also.

THE XXXVII. CONCLUSION. To make a cinkangle of equal sides, and equal
corners in any circle appointed.
Divide the circle appointed into five equal parts, as you did in the last
conclusion, and draw ij. lines from every prick to the other ij. that are
next unto it. And so shall you make a cinkangle after the meaning of the
conclusion.

Example.
You se here this circle A. B. C. D. E. divided into five equal portions. And
from each prick ij. lines drawn to the other ij. next pricks, so from A.
are drawn ij. lines, one to B, and the other to E, and so from C. one to B.
and an other to D, and likewise of diagram the rest. So that you have not only
learned hereby how to make a sinkangle in any circle, but also how you shall
make a like figure spedely, when and where you will, only drawinge the
circle for the intent, readylye to make the other figure (I mean the
cinkangle) thereby.

THE XXXIX. CONCLUSION. How to make a cinkangle of equal sides and equal
angles about any circle appointed.
Divide first the circle as you did in the last conclusion into five equal
portions, and draw five semidiameters in the circle. Then make five touch
lines, in such sort that every touch line make two right angles with one of
the semidiameters. And those five touch lines will make a cinkangle of equal
sides and equal angles.

Example.
diagram

A. B. C. D. E. is the circle appointed, which is divided into five equal
parts. And unto every prycke is drawn a semidiameter, as you see. Then do I
make a touch line in the prick B, which is F. G, making ij. right angles
with the semidiameter B, and like ways on C. is made G. H, on D. stands H.
K, and on E, is set K. L, so that of those.v. touch lines are made the.v.
sides of a cinkeangle, according to the conclusion.

An other way.

An other way also may you draw a cinkeangle about a circle, drawyng first
a cinkeangle in the circle (which is an easy thing to do, by the doctrine of
the.xxxvij. conclusion) and then drawyng.v. touch lines which shall be just
paralleles to the.v. sides of the cinkeangle in the circle, forseeyng that one
of them do not cross ouerthwarte an other and then have you done. The exaumple
of this (because it is easy) I leave to your own exercise.

THE XL. CONCLUSION. To make a circle in any appointed cinkeangle of equal
sides and equal corners.
Draw a plumbe line from any one corner of the cinkeangle, unto the middle of
the side that lies just against that angle. And do likewaies in drawyng an
other line from some other corner, to the middle of the side that lies against
that corner also. And those two lines will meet in cross in the prick of
their crossyng, shall you judge the center of the circle to be. Therefore set
one foot of the compass in that prick, and extend the other to the end of the
line that touches the middle of one side, which you list, and so draw a
circle. And it shall be justly made in the cinkeangle, according to the
conclusion.

Example.
The cinkeangle assigned is A. B. C. D. E, in which I must make a circle,
wherefore I draw a right line from the one angle (as from B,) to the middle of
the contrary side (which is E. D,) and that middle prick is F. Then lykewaies
from an other corner (as from E) I draw a right line to the middle of the side
that lies against it (which is B. C.) and that prick is diagram G. Now
because that these two lines do cross in H, I say that H. is the center of
the circle, which I would make. Therefore I set one foot of the compass in H,
and extend the other foot unto G, or F. (which are the ends of the lines
that light in the middle of the side of that cinkeangle) and so make I a
circle in the cinkangle, right as the conclusion means.

THE XLI. CONCLUSION. To make a circle about any assigned cinkeangle of equal
sides, and equal corners.
Draw.ij. lines within the cinkeangle, from.ij. corners to the middle on
the.ij. contrary sides (as the last conclusion teaches) and the point of
their crossyng shall be the center of the circle that I seek for. Then set I
one foot of the compass in that center, and the other foot I extend to one of
the angles of the cinkangle, and so draw I a circle about the cinkangle
assigned.

Example.
A. B. C. D. E, is the cinkangle assigned, about which I would make a circle,
Therefore I draw first of all two lines (as you see) one from E. to G. and the
other from C. to G. and because they do meet in H, I say that H. is the
center of the circle that I diagram would have, wherefore I set one foot of
the compass in H. and extend the other to one corner (which happens
first, for all are like distaunte from H.) and so make I a circle about the
cinkeangle assigned.

An other way also.

An other way may I do it, thus presupposing any three corners of the
cinkangle to be three pricks appointed, unto which I should find the
center, and then drawinge a circle touching them all three, according to the
doctrine of the seuentene, one and twenty, and two and twenty conclusions. And
when I have found the center, then do I draw the circle as the samc
conclusions do teach, and this forty conclusion also.

THE XLII. CONCLUSION. To make a siseangle of equal sides, and equal angles,
in any circle assigned.
If the center of the circle be not known, then seek out the center
according to the doctrine of the sixetenth conclusion. And with your compass
take the quantitee of the semidiameter justly. And then set one foot in one
prick of the circu^ference of the circle, and with the other make a mark in
the circumference also toward both sides. Then set one foot of the compass
stedily in each of those new pricks, and point out two other pricks. And if
you have done well, you shall peceaue that there will be but even six such
divisions in the circumference. Whereby it does well appear, that the side of
any siseangle made in a circle, is equalle to the semidiameter of the same
circle.

Example.
diagram

The circle is B. C. D. E. F. G, whose center I find to be A. Therefore I
set one foot of the compass in A, and do exte^d the other foot to B, thereby
taking the semidiameter. Then set I one foot of the compass unremoved in B,
and mark with the other foot on each side C. and G. Then from C. I mark D,
and from D, E: from E. mark I F. And then have I but one space just unto G.
and so have I made a just siseangle of equal sides and equal angles, in a
circle appointed.

THE XLIII. CONCLUSION.
To make a siseangle of equal sides, and equal angles about any circle
assigned.

THE XLIIII. CONCLUSION.
To make a circle in any siseangle appointed, of equal sides and equal angles.

THE XLV. CONCLUSION.
To make a circle about any siseangle limited of equal sides and equal angles,
Because you may easily conjecture the making of these figures by that that
is said before of cinkangles, only consideringe that there is a difference in
the number of the sides. I thought best to leave these unto your own device,
that you should study in some things to exercise your wit withal and that
you might have the better occasion to perceive what difference there is
between each two of those conclusions. For though it seem one thing to make
a siseangle in a circ e, and to make a circle about a siseangle, yet shall you
perceive, that it is not one thing, another are those two conclusions wrought
one way. Like waise shall you think of those other two conclusions. To make a
siseangle about a circle, and to make a circle in a siseangle, though the
figures be one in fashion, when they are made, yet are they not one in working,
as you may well perceive by the xxx vij. xxx viij xxxix. and xl. conclusions,
in which the same works are taught, touching a circle and a cinkangle, yet
this much will I say, for your help in workyng, that when you shall seek
the center in a sise angle (whether it be to make a cir^le in it other about
it) you shall draw the two cross lines, from one angle to the other angle
that lies against it, and not to the middle of any side, as you did in the
cinkangle.

THE XLVI. CONCLUSION.
To make a figure of fifteen equal sides and angles in any circle appointed.
This rule is general, that how many sides the figure shall have, that shall
be drawn in any circle, into so many parts justly must the circles be
divided. And therefore it is the more easier work commonly, to draw a figure
in a circle, then to make a circle in an other figure. Now therefore to end this
conclusion, divide the circle first into five parts, and then each of them
into three parts again: Or else first divide it into three parts, and then each
of the^ into five other parts, as you list, and can most readilye. Then draw
lines between every two pricks that be nighest together, and there will appear
rightly drawn the figure, of fiftene sides, and angles equal. And so do with
any other figure of what number of sides so ever it be.

FINIS.
THE SECOND BOOK OF THE PRINCIPLES of Geometry, containing certain Theoremes,
which may be called Approved truths. And be as it were the most certain
grounds, whereon the practike co^clusions of Geometry ar founded.

Whereunto are annexed certain declarations by examples, for the right
understanding of the same, to the end that the simple reader might not justly
co^plain of hardness or obscuritee, and for the same cause ar the demonstrations
and just profes omitted, until a more conuient time.

1551.

If truth may try it self,
By Reasons prudent skyll,
If reason may prevail by right,
And rule the rage of will,
I dare the trial bide,
For truth that I pretend.
And though some list at me repine,
Just truth shall me defend.
THE PREFACE UNTO the Theoremes.
I Doubt not gentle reader, but as my argument is strange and unacquainted
with the vulgar tougue, so shall I of many men be straungly talked of, and as
straunglye judged. Some men will say peradventure, I might have better
employed my time in some pleasant historye, comprisinge matter of chiuasrye.
Some other would more have preised my travail, if I had spente the like time
in some moral matter, other in decising some controversy of religion. And yet
some men (as I judge) will not mislike this kind of matter, but then will they
wish that I had used a more certain order in placinge both the Propositions
and Theoremes, and also a more exacter proof of each of them both, by
demonstrations mathematical. Some also will mislike my shortenes and simple
plainness, as other of other affections diuersely shall espy somewhat that they
shall think blame worthy, and shall miss somewhat, that they would wish to have
been here used, so that every manne shall give his verdicte of me according to
his fantasy, unto whom ioinctly, I make this my first answer: that as they are many and in opinions very diverse, so were it scarce possible to please them
all with any one argument, of what kind so ever it were. And for my second
answer, I say thus. That if annye one argument might please them all, then
should they be thankful unto me for this kind of matter. For another is there
any matter more strange in the english tungue, then this whereof never book
was written before now, in that tungue, and therefore ought to delight all
them, that desire to understand strange matters, as most men commonly do.
And again the practice is so pleasant in vsinge, and so profitable in
appliynge, that who so ever do the delight in any of both, ought not of right
to mislike this art. And if any manne shall like the art well for it self,
but shall mislyke the form that I have used in teaching of it, to him I shall
say, First, that I do wish with him that some other man, which could
better have done it, had showed his good will, and used his diligence in
such sort, that I might have been thereby occasioned justly to have left of
my labor, or after my travail to have suppressed my books. But sith no man has yet attempted the like, as far as I can learn, I trust all such
as be not exercised in the study of Geometrye, shall find great ease and
furtheraunce by this simple, plain, and easy form of writing. And shall
perceive the exact works of Theon, and others that write on Euclide, a
great deal the somner, by this blunte delineacion before hand to them
taught, For I dare presuppose of them, that thing which I have set in my
self, and have marked in others, that is to say, that it is not easy for a
man that shall travail in a strange art, to understand at the beginning
both the thing that is taught and also the just reason why it is so. And by
experience of teachinge I have tried it to be true, for whenne I have taught
the proposition, as it imported in meaning, and annexed the demonstration with
all, I did perceive that it was a great trouble and a painful vexacion of
mind to the learner, to comprehend both those things at ones. And therefore
did I prove first to make them to understand the sense of the propositions,
and then afterward did they conceive the demonstrations much sooner, when they
had the sentence of the propositions first ingrafted in their minds. This
thing caused me in both these books to omit the demonstrations, and to use
only a plain form of declaration, which might best serve for the first
introduction. Which example hat been used by other learned men before now,
for not only Georgius Ioachimus Rheticus, but also Boethius that wittye clarke
did set forth some whole books of Euclide, without any demonstration or any
other declaration at al. But and if I shall hereafter perceive that it may be a
thankful travail to set forth the propositions of geometry with
demonstrations, I will not refuse to do it, and that with sundry varietees of
demonstrations, both pleasant and profitable also. And then will I in like
manner prepare to set forth the other books, which now are left unprinted,
by occasion not so much of the charges in cuttyng of the figures, as for other
just hynderances, which I trust hereafter shall be remedied. In the mean
season if any man muse why I have set the Conclusions before the Teoremes,
seeing many of the Theoremes seem to include the cause of some of the
conclusions, and therefore ought to have gone before them, as the cause goes
before the effect. Hereunto I say, that although the cause do go before the
effect in order of nature, yet in order of teaching the effect must be first
declared, and than the cause thereof showed, for so shall men best understand
things First to learn that such things ar to be wrought, and secondarily what
they ar, and what they do import, and tha^ thirdly what is the cause thereof.
An other cause why yt the theoremes be put after the co^clusions is this, wha^
I wrote these first cu^clusions (which was.iiiij. years passed) I thought not
then to have added any theoremes, but next unto ye co^clusio^s to have taught
the order how to have applied the^ to work, for drawing of plottes, and such
like uses. But afterward considering the great commodity yt they serve for,
and the light that they do give to all sorts of practice geometrical, beside
other more notable benefits, which shall be declared more specially in a
place convenient, I thought best to give you some taste of them, and the
pleasant contemplation of such geometrical propositions, which might serve
diuerselye in other books for the demonstrations and proofs of all
Geometrical works. And in them, as well as in the propositions, I have
drawn in the Linearie examples many times more lines, than be spoken of in the
explication of them, which is done to this intent, that if any manne list to
learn the demonstrations by heart, as sum learned men have judged best to
do) those same men should find the Linearye exaumples to serve for this
purpose, and to want no thing needful to the just proof, whereby this
book may be well approved to be more complete then many men would suppose it.

And thus for this time I will make an end without any larger declaration of
the commoditees of this art, or any farther answeryng to that may be objected
against my handelyng of it, wyllyng them that myslike it, not to meddle with it:
and unto those that will not disdain the study of it, I promise all such
aid as I shall be able to show for their farther procedyng both in the same,
and in all other commoditees that thereof may ensue. And for their
encouragement I have here annexed the names and brefe arguments of such
books, as I intend (God willing) shortly to set forth, if I shall perceive
that my pains may profit other, as my desire is.

The brefe arguments of such books as ar appointed shortly to be set forth by
the author hereof.
THE second part of Arithmetike, teaching the workyng by fractions, with
extraction of roots both square and cubike: And declaryng the rule of
allegation, with sundry pleasant exaumples in metalles and other things.
Also the rule of false position, with diverse examples not only vulgar, but
some appertaynyng to the rule of Algeber, applied unto quantitees partly
rational, and partly surde.

THE art of Measuryng by the quadrate geometrical, and the disorders
committed in vsyng the same, not only reveled but reformed also (as much as to
the instrument pertayneth) by the devise of a new quadrate newely invented by
the author hereof.

THE art of measuryng by the astronomers staff, and by the astronomers ryng,
and the form of making them both.

THE art of making of Dials, both for the day and the night, with certain
new forms of fixed dialles for the moon and other for the sterres, which may
be set in glass windows, to serve by day and by night. And how you may
by those dialles know in what degree of the Zodiake not only the son, but
also the moon is. And how many howrs old she is. And also by the same dial to
know whether any eclipse shall be that month, of the son or of the moon.

The making and use of an instrument, whereby you may not only measure the
distance at ones of all places that you can see together, how much each one
is from you, and every one from other, but also thereby to draw the plotte of
any countreie that you shall come in, as justly as may be, by man's
diligence and labor.

THE use both of the Globe and the Sphere, and therein also of the art of
Navigations, and what instruments serve best thereunto, and of the true
latitude and longitude of regions and towns.

Euclides works in four parts, with diverse demonstrations Arithmeticall and
Geometrical or Linearie. The first part of platte forms. The second of
numbres and quantitees surde or irrational. The third of bodies and solid
forms. The fourth of perspectiue, and other things thereto annexed.

BESIDE these I have other sundry works partly ended, And partly to be
ended, Of the peregrination of man, and the original of al nations, The state
of times, and mutations of reasmes, The image of a perfect commonwealth, with
diverse other works in natural sciences, Of the wonderful works and
effects in beasts, plants, and minerals, of which at this time, I will
omit the arguments, because they do appertain littell to this art, and
handle other matters in an other sort.

To have, or leave,
Now may you choose,
No pain to please,
Will I refuse.
The Theoremes of Geometry, before WHICH ARE SET FORTH certain grauntable
requests which serve for demonstrations Mathematical.
That from any prick to one other, there may be drawn a right line.
AS for example diagram A being the one prick, and B. the other,


Example of A. B, which as it is diagram a line of measurable length, so may
it be drawn forth farther, as for exaumple unto C, and that in true
streightenes without crokinge.

diagram may be made a circle of any qua^titee that a man will.
Let the center be set to be A, what shall hinder a man to draw a circle about
it, of what quantitee that he lusts, as you se the form here: other bygger
or less, as it shall like him to do?

That all right angles be equal each to other.
Set for an example A. and B, of which two diagram though A. seem the greatter
angle to some men of small experience, it happens only because that the,
lines about A, are longer the^ the lines about B, as you may prove by drawing
them longer, for so shall B. seem the greater angle* if you make his lines
longer then the lines that make the angle A. And to prove it by demonstration,
I say thus. If any ij. right corners be not equal, then one right corner is
greater then an other, but that corner which is greatter then a right angle, is
a blunt corner (by his definition) so must one corner be both a right corner
and a blunt corner also, which is not possible: And again: the lesser right
corner must be a sharp corner, by his definition, because it is less then a
right angle. which thing is impossible. Therefore I conclude that all right
angles be equal.

If one right line do cross two other right lines, and make ij. inner corners
of one side lesser the^ ij. right corners, it is certain, that if those two
lines be drawn forth right on that side that the sharp inner corners be, they
will at length mete together, and cross on an other.
The ij. lines being as diagram A. B. and C. D, and the third line crossing
them as does here E.F, making ij inner corns (as ar G.H.) lesser then two
right corners, fithech of them is less then a right corner, as your eyes may
judge, then say I, if those ij. lines A.B. and C.D. be drawn in length on
that side that G. and H. are, the will at length meet and cross one an other.

Two right lines make no platte form.
A platte form, as you hard before, has both length and hredthe, and is
enclosed with lines as with his bounds, but ij. right lines cannot enclose all the bonds diagram of any platte form. Take for an example first these two
right lines A B. and A. C, which meet together in A, but yet cannot be called
a platte form, because there is no bond from B. to C, but if you will draw a
line between them two, that, is from B. to C, then will it be a platte form,
that is to say, a triangle, but then are there iij. lines, and not only ij.
Likewise may you say of D.E. and F. G, which do make a platte form, another
yet can they make any without help of two lines more, whereof the one must be
drawn from D. to F, and the other from E. to G, and then will it be a long
square. So then of two right lines can be made no platte form. But of ij.
crooked lines be made a platte form, as you se in the eye form. And also of one
right line, and one crooked line, may a platte form be made, as the
semicircle F. doothesette forth.

Certain common sentences manifest to sense, and acknowledged of all men.
The first common sentence. What so ever things be equal to one other thing,
those same be equal between them selves.
Examples thereof you may take both in greatness and also in number. First
(though it pertain not proprely to geometry, but to help the understanding
of the rules, which may be wrought by both arts) thus may you perceive. If
the sum of monnye in my purse, and the money in your purse be equal each of
them to the money that any other man has, then must needs your money diagram
and mine be equal together. Likewise, if any ij. quantities, as A and B, be
equal to an other, as unto C, then must needs A. and B. be equal each to
other, as A. equal to B, and B. equal to A, which thing the better to
peceaue, turn these quantities into number, so shall A. and B. make fixteene,
and C. as many. As you may perceive by multipliyng the number of their sides
together.

The second common sentence. And if you add equal portions to things that
be equal, what so amounts of them shallbe equal.
Example, If you and I have like sums of money, and then receive each of us
like sums more, then our sums will be like still. Also if A. and B. (as in
the former example) be equal, then by adding an equal portion to them both,
as to each of them, the quarter of A. (that is four) they will be equal still.

The third common sentence. And if you abate even portions from things that
are equal, those parts that remain shall be equal also.
This you may perceive by the last example. For that that was added there, is
subtracted here. and so the one doothe approve the other.

The fourth common sentence. If you abate equalle parts from unequal things,
the remainers shall be unequal.
As because that a hundredth and eight and forty be unequal if I take ten from
them both, there will remain nynetye and eight and thirty, which are also
unequal. and likewise in quantities it is to be judged.

The fifte common sentence. when even portions are added to vnequalle things,
those that amounte shall be unequal.
So if you add twenty to fifty, and like ways to nynty, you shall make
seventy. and a hundred and ten which are no less unequal, than were fifty
and nynty.

The syxt common sentence. If two things be double to any other, those same
two things are equal together.
diagram

Because A. and B. are each of them double to C, therefore must A. and B. needs
be equal together. For as v. times viij. makes xl. which is double to iiij.
times v, that is xx, so iiij. times x, likewise is double to xx. (for it makes
forty) and therefore must neades be equal to forty.

The seventh common sentence. If any two things be the halfes of one other
thing, than are they.ij. equal together.
So are D. and C. in the last example equal together, because they are each of
them the half of A. other of B, as their number declares.

The eight common sentence. If any one quantitee be laid on an other, and they
agree, so that the one excedeth not the other, then are they equal together.
As if this figure A. B. C, be laid on diagram that other D. E. F, so that A.
be laid to D, B. to E, and C. to F, you shall see them agree in sides exactlye
and the one not to excede the other, for the line A.B. is equal to D. E, and
the third line C. A, is equal to F. D so that every side in the one is equal
to some one side of the other. wherefore it is plain, that the two triangles
are equal together.

The nynth common sentence. Every whole thing is greater than any of his parts.
This sentence needs none example. For the thing is more playner then any
declaration, yet considering that other commen sentence that follows next
that.

The tenthe common sentence. Every whole thing is equal to all his parts
taken together.
It shall be mete to express both with one example, for of this last sentence
many me^ at the first hearing do make a doubt. Therefore as in this example of
the circle divided into sundry parts diagram it does appear that no part can
be so great as the whole circle, (according to the meaning of the eight
sentence) so yet it is certain, that all those eight parts together be equal
unto the whole circle. And this is the meaning of that common sentence (which
many use, and few do rightly understand) that is, that All the parts of any
thing are nothing else, but the whole. And contrary ways: The whole is nothing
else, but all his parts taken together. which sayings some have understand to
mean thus: that all the parts are of the same kind that the whole thing is:
but that that meaning is false, it does plainly appear by this figure diagram
A. B, whose parts A. and B, are triangles, and the whole figure is a square,
and so are they not of one kind. But and if they apply it to the matter or
substance of things (as some do) then is it most false, for every compound
thing is made of parts of diverse matter and substance. Take for example a
man, a house, a book, and all other compound things. Some understand it thus,
that the parts all together can make none other form, but that that the whole
does show, which is also false, for I may make five hundred diverse figures
of the parts of some one figure, as you shall better perceive in the third
book. And in the mean season take for an example this square figure following
A. B. C. D, which is divided but into two parts, and yet (as youse) I have made
five figures more beside the first, with only diverse ioynyng of those two
parts. But of this shall I speak more largely in an other place, in the mean
season content your self with these principles, which are certain of the
chief grounds whereon all demonstrations mathematical are fourmed, of which
though the most part seem so plain, that no child does doubt of them,
think not therefore that the art unto which they serve, is simple, other
childishe, but rather consider, how certain the profes of that art is, yt
diagram has for his grou^des soche plain truths, and as I may say, such
vndowbtfull and sensible principles, And this is the cause why all learned
men does approve the certenty of geometry, and consequently of the other
arts mathematical, which have the grounds (as Arithmetike, music and
astronomy) above all other arts and sciences, that be used amongst men. Thus
much have I said of the first principles, and now will I go on with the
theoremes, which I do only by examples declae, minding to reserve the proofs
to a peculiar book which I will then set forth, when I perceive this to be
thankfully taken of the readers of it.

The theoremes of Geometry brieflye declared by short examples.
The first Theoreme. When.ij. triangles be so drawn, that the one of the^
has ij. sides equal to ij. sides of the other triangle, and that the angles
enclosed with those sides, be equal also in both triangles, then is the
third side likewise equal in them. And the whole triangles be of one
greatness, and every angle in the one equal to his match angle in the other, I
mean those angles that be enclosed with like sides.
Example.
This triangle A.B.C. has ij. sides (that is to say) C.A. and diagram C.B,
equal to ij. sides of the other triangle F.G.H, for A. C. is equal to F.G, and
B.C. is equal to G.H. And also the angle C. contained beetweene F.G, and G.H,
for both of them answer to the diagram eight part of a circle. Therefore does
it remain that A. B. which is the third line in the first triangle, does
agree in length with F.H, which is the third line in yt second tria^gle and ye
hole tria^gle. A.B.C. must needs be equal to ye hole triangle F.G.H. And every
corner equal to his match, that is to say, A. equal to F, B. to H, and C. to
G, for those be called match corners, which are enclosed with like sides,
other else do lie against like sides.

The second Theoreme. In twileke triangles the ij. corners that be about the
ground line, are equal together. And if the sides that be equal, be drawn out
in length the^ will the corners that are under the ground line, be equal also
together.
Example
A.B.C. is a twileke triangle, for diagram the one side A.C, is equal to the
other side B.C. And therefore I say that the inner corners A. and B, which are
about the ground lines, (that is A.B.) be equal to gither. And farther if C.
A. and C. B. be drawn forth unto D and E. as you se that I have drawn them,
then say I that the two utter angles under A. and B, are equal also together:
as the theorem said. The proof whereof, as of all the rest, shall apeare in
Euclide, whom I intend to set forth in english with sundry new additions, if
I may perceive that it will be thankfully taken.

The third Theoreme. If in annye triangle there be two angles equal
together, then shall the sides, that lie against those angles, be equal also.
Example
This triangle A.B.C. has two corners equal diagram each to other, that is A.
and B, as I do by supposition limite, wherefore it follows that the side A.C,
is equal to that other side B. C, for the side A. C, lies against the angle
B, and the side B.C, lies against the angle A.

The fourth Theoreme. when two lines are drawn from the ends of any one
line, and meet in any point, it is not possible to draw two other lines of
like length each to his match that shall begi^ at the same points, and end in
any other point then the two first did.
Example.
The first line is A.B, on which I have diagram erected two other lines A.C,
and B. C, that meet in the prick C, wherefore I say, it is not possible to
draw ij. other lines from A. and B. which shall mete in one point (as you se A.
D. and B.D. mete in D.) but that the match lines shall be vnequa^, I mean by
match lines, the two lines on one side that is the ij. on the right hand, or
the ij. on the left hand, for as youse in this example A. D. is longer the^ A.
C, and B.C. is longer then B.D. And it is not possible, that A. C. and A. D.
shall be of one length, if B. D. and B.C. be like long. For if one couple
of match lines be equal (as the same example A.E. is equal to A.C. in
length) then must B.E needs be unequal to B.C. as you see, it is here shorter.

The fifte Theoreme. If two tria^gles have there ij. sides equal one to
another, and their ground lines equal also, then shall their corners, which
are contained between like sides, be equal one to the other.
Example.
Because these two triangles A.B. C, and D.E.F. have two sides equal one to an
other. diagram For A. C. is equal to D. F, and B.C. is equal to E. F, and
again their ground lines A.B. and D.E. are like in length, therefore is each
angle of the one triangle equal to each angle of the other, comparyng together
those angles that are contained within like sides, so is A. equal to D, B. to
E, and C. to F, for they are contained within like sides, as before is said.

The sixth Theoreme. when any right line stands on an other, the ij. angles
that they make, other are both right angles, or else equal to.ij. right angles.
Example.
diagram A.B. is a right line, and on it there does light another right line,
drawn from C. perpendicularly on it, therefore say J, that the.ij. angles
that they do make, are.ij. right angles as may be judged by the definition of
a right angle. But in the second part of the example, where A.B. being still
the right line, on which D. stands inslope ways, the two angles that be
made of them are not right angles, but yet they are equal to two right
angles, for so much as the one is to great, more then a right angle, so
much just is the other to little, so that both together are equal to two
right angles, as you may perceive.

The seventh Theoreme. If.ij. lines be drawn to any one prick in an other
line, and those.ij. lines do make with the first line, two right angles, other
such as be equal to two right angles, and that toward one hand, than those
two lines do make one straight line.
Example.
A.B. is a straight line, diagram on which there does light two other lines one
from D, and the other from C, but considering that they meet in one prick
E, and that the angles on one hand be equal to two right corners (as the last
theoreme does declare) therefore may D.E. and E.C. be counted for one right
line.

The eight Theoreme. when two lines do cut one an other cross ways they do
make their match angles equal.
Example.
What match angles are, I diagram have told you in the definitions of the
terms. And here A, and B. are match corners in this example, as are also C.
and D, so that the corner A, is equal to B, and the angle C, is equal to D.

The nynth Theoreme. when so ever in any triangle the line of one side is
drawn forth in length, that utter angle is greater than any of the two inner
corners, that join not with it.
Example.
The triangle A. D. C diagram has his ground line A. C. drawn forth in
length unto B, so that the utter corner that it makes at C, is greater then
any of the two inner corners that lie against it, and join not with it,
which are A. and D, for they both are lesser then a right angle, and be sharp
angles, but C. is a blonte angle, and therefore greater then a right angle.

The tenth Theoreme. In every triangle any.ij. corners, how so ever you take
the^, ar less the^ ij. right corners.
Example.
In the first triangle E, which is a diagram threlyke, and therefore has all
his angles sharp, take any two corners that you will, and you shall perceive
that they be lesser then.ij. right corners, for in every triangle that has all
sharp corners (as you see it to be diagram in this example) every corner is
less then a right corner. And therefore also every two corners must needs be
less then two right corners. Furthermore in that other triangle marked with M,
which has.ij. sharp corners and one right, any.ij. of them also are less
then two right angles. For though you take the right corner for one, yet the
other which is a sharp corner, is less then a right corner. And so it is
true in all kinds of triangles, as you may perceive more plainly by the.xxij.
Theoreme.

The.xi. Theoreme. In every triangle, the greattest side lies against the
greattest angle.
Example.
As in this triangle A. B. C, diagram the greattest angle is C. And A. B.
(which is the side that lies against it) is the greatest and longest side.
And contrary ways, as A. C. is the shortest side, so B. (which is the angle
liyng against it) is the smallest and sharpest angle, for this does follow also,
that as the longest side lies against the greatest angle, so it that follows

The twelft Theoreme. In every triangle the greattest angle lies against the
longest side.
For these ij. theoremes are one in truth.

The thirtenth theoreme. In every triangle any ij. sides together how so ever
you take them, are longer the^ the third.
For example you shall take this triangle A.B.C. which has a veery diagram
blunt corner, and therefore one of his sides greater a good deal then any of
the other, and yet thr ij. lesser sides together ar great then it. And if it
be so in a blunte angeled triangle, it must needs be true in all other, for
there is no other kind of triangles that has the one side so great above
the other sids, as they yt have blunt corners.

The fourtenth theoreme. If there be drawn from the ends of any side of a
triangle.ij. lines metinge within the triangle, those two lines shall be less
then the other two sides of the triangle, but yet the corner that they make,
shall be greater then that corner of the triangle, which stands over it.
Example.
diagram A.B.C. is a triangle. on whose ground line A.B. there is drawn ij.
lines, from the ij. ends of it, I say from A. and B, and they meet within the
triangle in the point D, wherefore I say, that as those two lines A.D. and B.D,
are lesser then A.C. and B.C, so the angle D. is greatter then the angle C,
which is the angle against it.

The fiftenth Theoreme. If a triangle have two sides equal to the two sides of
an other triangle, but yet the a^gle that is contained between those sides,
greater then the like angle in the other triangle, then is his ground line
greater then the ground line of the other triangle.
Example. diagram

A.B.C. is a triangle, whose sides A.C. and B.C, are equal to E.D. and D. F,
the two sides of the triangle D. E. F, but because the angle in D, is greatter
then the angle C. which are the ij. angles contained between the equal lines)
therefore must the diagram ground line E. F. needs be greatter then the
ground line A. B, as you se plainly.

The xvi. Theoreme. If a triangle have two sides equalle to the two sides of
an other triangle, but yet has a longer ground line the^ that other triangle,
then is his angle that lies between the equal sides, greater the^ the like
corner in the other triangle.
Example.
This Theoreme is nothing else, but the sentence of the last Theoreme turned
backward, and therefore needs none other proof another declaration, then the
other example.

The seuententh Theoreme. If two triangles be of such sort, that two angles of
the one be equal to ij. angles of the other, and that one side of the one be
equal to on side of the other, whether that side do adioyne to one of the
equal corners, or else lie against one of them, then shall the other two
sides of those triangles be equalle together, and the third corner also shall
be equal in those two triangles.
Example.
diagram Because that A. B. C, the one triangle has two corners A. and B,
equal to D. E, that are two corners of the other triangle. D. E. F. and that
they have one side in them both equal, that is A. B, which is equa^l to D.
E, therefore shall both the other ij. sides be equal one to an other, as A C.
and B. C. equal to D. F and E. F, and also the third angle in them both
shall be equal, that is, the angle C. shall be equal to t the angle F.

The eightenth Theoreme. when on.ij. right lines there is drawn a third right
line cross ways, and makes.ij. match corners of the one line equal to the
like two match corners of the other line, then ar those two lines gemmow
lines, or paralleles.
Example.
The.ij. first lines are A. B. and C. D, the third line that crosses them is
E. F. diagram And because that E. F. makes ij. match angles with A. B, equal
to.ij. other like match angles on C. D, (that is to say E. G, equal to K. F,
and M. N. equal also to H, L.) therefore are those ij. lines A. B. and C. D.
gemow lines, understand here by like match corners, those that go one way as
does E. G, and K. F, lykeways N. M, and H. L, for as E. G. and H. L, other N.
M. and K. F. go not one way, so be not they like match corners.

The nyntenth Theoreme. when on two right lines there is drawn a third right
line cross ways, and makes the ij. over corners toward one hand equal
together, then ar those.ij. lines paralleles. And in like manner if two inner
corners toward one hand, be equal to.ii. right angles.
Example.
As the Theoreme does speak of.ij. over angles, so must you understand also
of.ij. nether angles, for the judgment is like in both. Take for an example
the figure of the last theoreme, where A. B, and C. D, be called paralleles
also, because E. and K, (which are.ij. over corners) are equal, and like
ways L. and M. And so are in like manner the nether corners N. and H, and G.
and F. Now to the second part of the theoreme, those.ij. lines A. B. and C.
D, shall be called paralleles, because the ij. inner corners. As for example
those two that be toward the right hand (that is G. and L.) are equal (by
the first part of this nyntenth theoreme) therefore must G. and L. be equal
to two right angles.

The xx. Theoreme. when a right line is drawn cross over.ij. right gemow
lines, it makes.ij. match corners of the one line, equal to two match
corners of the other line, and also both over corners of one hand equal
together, and both nether corners likewaies, and more over two inner corners,
and two utter corners also toward one hand, equal to two right angles.
Example.
Because A. B. and C. D, (in the last figure) are paralleles, therefore the
two match corners of the one line, as E. G. be equal unto the.ij. match
corners of the other line, that is K. F, and lykewaies M. N, equal to H. L.
And also E. and K. both over corners of the left hand equal together, and
so are M. and L, the two over corners on the right hand, in like manner N. and
H, the two nether corners on the left hand, equal each to other, and G. and
F. the two nether angles on the right hand equal together.

Farthermore yet G. and L. the.ij. inner angles on the right hand be equal
to two right angles, and so are M. and F. the.ij. utter angles on the same
hand, in like manner shall you say of N. and K. the two inner corners on the
left hand. and of E. and H. the two utter corners on the same hand. And thus
you see the agreeable sentence of these.iij. theoremes to tend to this purpose,
to declare by the angles how to judge paralleles, and contrary ways how you
may by paralleles judge the proportion of the angles.

The xxi. Theoreme. what so ever lines be paralleles to any other line, those
same be paralleles together.
Example.
A. B. is a gemow line, or a parellele diagram unto C. D. and E. F, like ways
is a parallele unto C. D. Wherefore it follows, that A. B. must needs be a
parallele unto E. F.

The.xxij. theoreme. In every triangle, when any side is drawn forth in
length, the utter angle is equal to the ij. inner angles that lie against it.
And all iij. inner angles of any triangle are equal to ij. right angles.
Example.
The triangle being diagram A. D. E. and the side A. E. drawn forth unto B,
there is made an utter corner, which is C, and this utter corner C, is equal
to both the inner corners that lie against it, which are A. and D. And all
three inner corners, that is to say, A. D. and E, are equal to two right
corners, whereof it follows, that all the three corners of any one triangle
are equal to all the three corners of every other triangle. For what so ever
things are equalle to anny one third thing, those same are equalle
togitther, by the first common sentence, so that because all the.iij. angles
of every triangle are equal to two right angles, and all right angles be
equal together (by the fourth request) therefore must it needs follow, that all
the three corners of every triangle (accomptyng them together) are equal to
iij. corners of any other triangle, taken all together.

The.xxiii. theoreme. when any ij. right lines does touch and couple.ij. other
right lines, which are equal in length and paralleles, and if those.ij.
lines be drawn toward one hand, then are they also equal together, and
paralleles.
Example.
A. B. and C. D. are ij. right lines and paralleles, and equal diagram in
length, and they are touched and joined together by ij. other lines A. C. and B.
D, this being so and A. C. and B. D. being drawn toward one side (that is to
say, both toward the left hand) therefore are A, C. and B. D. both equal
and also paralleles.

The.xxiiij. theoreme. In any likeiamme the two contrary sides ar equal
together, and so are each.ij. contrary angles, and the bias line that is drawn
in it, does divide it into two equal portions.
Example.
diagram Here ar two likeiammes joined together, the one is a long square A.
B. E, and the other is a losengelike D. C. E. F. which ij. likeiammes ar proved
equal together, because they have one ground line, that is, F. E, And are made
between one pair of gemow lines, I mean A. D. and E. H. By this Theoreme may
you know the art of the right measuringe of likeiammes, as in my book of
measuring I will more plainly declare.

The xxvi. Theoreme. All likeiammes that have equal ground lines and are
drawn between one pair of paralleles, are equal together.
Example.
First you must mark the difference between this Theoreme and the last, for
the last Theoreme presupposed to the diverse likeiammes one ground line common
to them, but this theoreme does presuppose a diverse ground line for every like
iamme, only meaning them to be equal in length, though they be diverse in
numbbe. As for example. In the last figure there are two parallels, A. D. and E.
H, and between them are drawn three likeiammes, the first is, A. B. E. F, the
second is E. C. D. F, and the third is C. G. H. D. The first and the second
have one ground line, (that is E. F.) and therefore in so much as they are
between one pair of paralleles, they are equal according to the five and
twentye Theoreme, but the third likeiamme that is C. G. H. D. has his
ground line G. H, several from the other, but yet equal unto it. wherefore
the third likeiam is equal to the other two first likeiammes. And for a
proof that G.H. being the ground line of the third likeiamme, is equal to E.F,
which is the ground line to both the other likeiams, that may be thus
declared, G.H. is equal to C. D, seeing they are the contrary sides of one
likeiamme (by the four and twenty theoreme) and so are C.D. and E. F. by the
same theoreme. Therefore seeing both those ground lines. E.F. and G.H, are
equal to one third line (that is C.D.) they must needs be equal together by
the first common sentence.

The xxvii. Theoreme. All triangles having one ground line; an standing
between one pair of parallels, ar equal together.
Example.
diagram A.B. and C. F. are two gemowe lines, between which there be made two
triangles, A. D. E. and D. E. B, so that D. E, is the common ground line to
them both. wherefore it does follow, that those two triangles A.D.E. and D.E.B.
are equal each to other.

The xxviij. Theoreme. All triangles that have like long ground lines, and be
made between one pair of gemow lines, are equal together.
Example.
Example of this Theoreme you may see in the last figure, where as six
triangles made between those two gemowe lines A. B. and C. F, the first
triangle is A. C. D, the second is A.D.E, the third is A.D.B, the fourth is
A. B. E, the fifte is D.E.B, and the sixte is B.E.F, of which fix triangles,
A. D.E. and D. E. B. are equal, because they have one common ground line. And
so likewise A.B.E. and A.B. D, whose commen ground line is A.B, but A.C.D. is
equal to B.E.F, being both between one couple of parallels, not because they
have one ground line, but because they have their ground lines equal, for C.D.
is equal to E.F, as you may declare thus. C.D, is equal to A.B. (by the four
and twenty Theoreme) for theiare two contrary sides of one lykeiamme. A.C.D.B,
and E.F by the same theoreme, is equal to A. B, for they ar the two ye
contrary sides of the likeiamme, A.E.F.B, wherefore C.D. must needs be equal
to E.F. like wise the triangle A.C.D, is equal to A.B.E, because they are made
between one pair of parallels and have their groundlines like, I mean C. D.
and A. B. Again A.D.E, is equal to each of them both, for his ground line D.E,
is equal to A. B, in so much as they are the contrary sides of one likeiamme,
that is the long square A. B. D. E. And thus may you prove the equalnes of all
the rest.

The xxix. Theoreme. Alequal triangles that are made on one ground line, and
rise one way, must needs be between one pair of parallels.
Example.
Take for example A.D.E, and D.E.B, which as the xxvij. conclusion does prove)
are equal together, and as you see, they have on ground line D.E. And ag aine
they rise toward one side, that is to say, up ward toward the line A. B,
wherefore they must needs be enclosed, between one pair of parallels, which
are here in this example A.B. and D.E.

The thirty Theoreme. Equal triangles that have the irground lines equal, and
be drawn toward one side, ar made between one pair of paralleles.
Example.
The example that declared the last theoreme, may well serve to the
declaracion of this also. For those ij. theoremes do diffre but in this one
point, that the last theoreme means of triangles, that have one ground line
common to them both, and this theoreme does presuppose the ground lines to
be diverse, but yet of one length, as A. C. D, and B.E.F, as they are ij.
equal triangles approved, by the eighte and twentye Theorem, so in the same
Theorem it is declared, yt their ground lines are equal together, that is C.D,
and E. F, now this being true, and considering that they are made toward one
side, it follows, that they are made between one pair of parallels when I
say, drawn toward one side, I mean that the triangles must be drawn other
both upward from one parallel, other else both downward, for if the one be
drawn upward and the other downward, then are they drawn between two pair of
parallels, presupposinge one to be drawn by their ground line, and then do
they rise toward contrary sides.

The xxxi, theoreme. If a likeiamme have one ground line with a triangle, and
be drawn between one pair of paralleles, then shall the likeiamme be double
to the triangle.
Example.
A. H. and B.G. are.ij. gemow diagram lines, between which there is made a
triangle B. C G, and a lykeiamme, A.B.G. C, which have a ground line, that is
to say, B. G. Therefore does it follow that the lykeiamme A.B.G.C. is double to
the triangle B. C. G. For every half of that lykeiamme is equal to the
triangle, I mean A.B.F.E. other F.E. C.G. as you may conjecture by the.xi.
conclusion geometrical.

And as this Theoreme does speak of a triangle and likeiamme that have one
groundelyne, so is it true also, if their groundelynes be equal, though they
be diverse, so that theibe made between one pair of paralleles. And hereof may
you perceive the reason, why in measuryng the platte of a triangle, you must
multiply the perpendicular line by half the ground line, or else the hole
ground line by half the perpendicular, for by any of these both ways is
there made a lykeiamme equal to half such a one as should be made on the
same hole ground line with the triangle, and between one pair of paralleles.
Therefore as that lykeiamme is double to the triangle, so the half of it, must
needs be equal to the triangle. Compare the.xv. conclusion with this theoreme.

The.xxxij. Theoreme. In all likeiammes where there are more than one made
about one bias line, the fill squares of every of them must needs be equal.
Example.
First before I declare the examples, diagram it shall be mete to show the true
vndersta^dyngof this heorem. Therefore by the Bias line, Bias line.
I mean that line, which in any square figure does run from corner to
corner. And every square which is divided by that bias line into equal halues
from corner to corner (that is to say, into.ij. equal triangles) those be
counted to stand about one bias line, and the other squares, which touch
that bias line, with one of their corners only, those do I call Fill squares,
according to the greek name, Fill squares. (...)
which is anapleromata, and called in latin supplementa, because that they
make one general square, includyng and enclosyng the other diverse squares, as
in this example H. C. E. N. is one square likeiamme, and L. M. G. C. is an
other, which both are made about one bias line, that is N. M, than K. L. H.
C. and C. E. F. G. are.ij. syll squares, for they do syll up the sides of
the.ij. first square sykeiammes, in such sort, that of all them four is
made one great general square K. M.F.N.

Now to the sentence of the theoreme, I say, that the.ij. fill squres. H. K.
L. C. and C. E. F. G. are both equal together, (as it shall be declared in
the book of proofs) because they are the fill squres of two likeiammes made
about one bias line, as the exaumple shows. Confer the twelfthe conclusion
with this the oreme.

The xxxiij. Theoreme. In all right anguled triangles, the square of that side
which lies against the right angle, is equal to the.ij. squares of both the
other sides
Example.
A.B.C. is a triangle, having diagram a right angle in B. Wherefore it soloweth,
that the square of A. C, (which is the side that lies against the right
angle) shall be as much as the two squares of A. B. and B. C. which are the
other.ij. sides. By the square of any syne, you must understand a figure made
just square, having all his iiij. sides equal to that line, whereof it is the
square, so is A.C.F, the square of A.C. Lykewais A. B. D. is the square of A.
B. And B. C. E. is the square of B.C. Now by the number of the divisions in
each of these squares, may you perceive not only what the square of any line
is called, but also that the theoreme is true, and expressed plainly both by
lines and number. For as you see, the greatter square (that is A.C.F.) has
five divisions on each side, all equal together, and those in the whole square
are twenty and five. Now in the left square, which is A.B.D. there are
but.iij. of those divisions in one side, and that yeldeth nine in the whole. So
lykeways you see in the mean square A.C.E. in every side.iiij. parts, which
in the whole amount unto sixtene. Now add together all the parts of the two
lesser squares, that is to say, sixtene and nine, and you perceive that they
make twenty and five, which is an equal number to the sum of the greatter
square.

By this theoreme you may understand a ready way to know the side of any right
anguled triangle that is unknown, so that you know the length of any two
sides of it. For by tournynge the two sides certain into their squares, and so
adding them together, other subtractynge the one from the other (according as
in the use of these theorem es I have set forth) and then finding the
root of the square that remains, which root (I mean the side of the
square) is the just length of the unknown side, which is sought for. But
this appertains to the third book, and therefore I will speak no more of
it at this time.

The xxxiiij. Theoreme. If so be it, that in any triangle, the square of the
one side be equal to the.ij. squares of the other ij. sides, than must needs
that corner be a right corner, which is contained between those two lesser
sides.
Example.
As in the figure of the last Theoreme, because A. C, made in square, is
as much as the square of A.B, and also as the quare of B.C. joined both
together, therefore the angle that is enclosed between those.ij. lesser lines,
A.B. and B. C. (that is to say) the angle B. which lies against the line,
A.C, must needs be a right angle. This theoreme does so depend of the truth
of the last, that when you perceive the truth of the one, you can not justly
doubt of the others truth, for they contain one sentence, contrary ways
pronounced.

The.xxxv. theoreme. If there be set forth.ij. right lines, and one of them
parted into sundry parts, how many or few so ever they be, the square that is
made of those ij. right lines proposed, is equal to all the squares, that are
made of the undivided line, and every part of the divided line.
Example.
diagram The ij. lines proposed ar A. B. and C.D, and the line A.B. diagram is
divided into three parts by E. and F. Now says this theoreme, diagram that the
square that is made of those two whole lines A.B. and C.D, so that the line
A.B. stands for the length of the square, and the other line C.D. for the
breadth of the same. That square (I say) will be equal to all the squares that
be made, of the vndiueded line (which is C.D.) and every portion of the divided
line. And to declare that particularly, First I make an other line G.K, equal
to the line C.D, and the line G.H. to be equal to the line A.B, and to be
divided into iij. like parts, so that G. M. is equal to A.E, and M.N. equal
to E.F, and then must N. H. needs remain equal to F.B. Then of those ij.
lines G.K, undivided, and G.H. which is divided, I make a square, that is
G.H.K.L, In which square if I draw cross lines from one side to the other,
according to the divisions of the line G. H, then will it appear plain, that
the theoreme does affirm. For the first square G.M.O.K, must needs be equal
to the square of the line C.D, and the first portion of the divided line, which
is A.E, for because their sides are equal. And so the second square that is
M.N.P.O, shall be equal to the square of C.D, and the second part of A.B, that
is E.F. Also the third square which is N.H.L.P, must of necessitee be equal to
the square of C.D, and F.B, because those lines be so coupeled that every
couple are equal in the several figures. And so shall you not only in this
example, but in all other find it true, that if one line be divided into
sundry parts, and an other line whole and undivided, matched with him in a
square, that square which is made of these two whole lines, is as much just
and equally, as all the several squares, which be made of the whole line
undivided, and every part severally of the divided line.

The xxxvi. Theoreme. If a right line be parted into ij. parts, as chance may
hap, the square that is made of that whole line, is equal to both the
squares that are made of the same line, and the two parts of it severally.
Example.
The line propouned being A.B. and divided, as chance happens, in C. into
ij. unequal parts, diagram I say that the square made of the hole line A. B,
'is equal to the two squares made of the same line with the two parts of it
self, as with A. C, and with C. B, for the square D, E.F.G. is equal to the
two other partial squares of D.H. K G and H. E. F. K, but that the greater
square is equal to the square of the whole line A.B, and the partial squares
equal to the squares of the second parts of the same line joined with the
whole line, your eye may judge without much declaracion, so that I shall not
need to make more exposition thereof, but that you may examine it, as you did
in the last Theoreme.

The xxxvij Theoreme. If a right line be divided by chance, as it may happen,
the square: hat is made of the whole line, and one of the parts of it which so
ever it be, shall be equal to that square that is made of the ij. parts joined
together, and to another square made of that part, which was before joined with
the whole line.
Example.
The line A.B. is divided diagram in C. into two parts, though not equally,
of which two parts for an example I take the first, that is A.C, and of it I
make one side of a square, as for example D. G. accomptinge those two lines to
be equal, the other side of the square is D.E, which is equal to the whole
line A.B. Now may it appear, to your eye, that the great square made of the
whole line A.B, and of one of his parts that is A.C, (which is equal with D,
G.) is equal to two partial squares, whereof the one is made of the said
greatter portion A. C, in as much as not only D.G, being one of his sides,
but also D. H. being the other side, are each of them equal to A. C. The
second square is H.E.F.K, in which the one side H.E, is equal to C.B, being the
lesser part of the line, A.B, and E.F. is equal to A.C. which is the greater
part of the same line. So that those two squares D.H.K.G, and H, E, F, K, be
both of them no more then the great square D.E, F, G, according to the
words of the Theoreme before said.

The xxxviij. Theoreme. If a right line be divided by chance, into parts,
the square that is made of that whole line, is equal to both the squares that are made of each part of the line, and moreover to two squares made of the one
portion of the divided line joined with the other in square.
Example.
Let the divided line be A, B, diagram and parted in C, into two parts:
Now says the Theoreme, that the square of the whole line A, B, is as mouche
just as the square of A.C, and the square of C. B, each by it self, and more
over by as much twice, as A. C. and C. B. joined in one square will make. For
as youse, the great square D.E.F.G, conteyneth in him four lesser squares, of
which the first and the greatest is N. M. F. K, and is equal to the square of
the line A. C. The second square is the lest of them all, that is D. H. L. N,
and it is equal to the square of the line C A. Then are there two other long
squares both of one bygnes, that is H.E.N.M. and L.N.G.K, each of them both
having.ij. sides equal to A.C, the longer part of the divided line, and there
other two sides equal to C.B, being the shorter part of the said line A.B.

So is that greatest square, being made of the hole line A. B, equal to the
ij. squares of each of his parts severally, and more by as much just as.ij.
long squares, made of the longer portion of the divided line joined in square
with the shorter part of the same divided line, as the theoreme would. And as
here I have put an example of a line divided into.ij. parts, so the theoreme
is true of all divided lines of what number so ever the parts be, four, five,
or six. etc.

This theoreme has great use, not only ingeometrie, but also in arithmetike,
as herafter I will declare in convenient place

The.xxxix. theoreme. If a right line be divided into two equal parts, and
one of these.ij. parts divided again into two other parts, as happens the
long square that is made of the third or later part of that divided line, with
the residue of the same line, and the square of the mydlemoste part, are both
together equal to the square of half the first line.
Example.
The line A.B. is divided into diagram ij. equal parts in C, and that part
C.B. is divided again as happens in D. Wherefore says the Theorem that the
long square made of D. B. and A.D, with the square of C.D. (which is the L
mydle portion) shall both be equal to the square of half the line A.B, that
is to say, to the square of A. C, or else of C. D, which make all one. The long
square F.G.N. O. which is the long square that the theoreme speaks of, is
made of.ij. long squares, whereof the first is F. G.M.K, and the second is K.N.
O. M. The square of the myddle portion is L. M. O.P. And the square of the
halft of the first line is E. K. Q. L. Now by the theoreme, that long square
F. G. M. O, with the just square L.M. O.P, must be equal to the great
square E.K.Q. L, which thing because it seems somewhat difficult to
understand, although I intend not here to make demonstrations of the
Theoremes, because it is appointed to be done in the new edition of Euclide,
yet I will show you brefely how the equalitee of the parts does stand. And
first I say, that where the comparyson of equalitee is made between the great
square (which is made of half the line A. B.) and two other, where of the
first is the long square F.G. N. O, and the second is the full square L.
M.O.P, which is one portion of the great square all redye, and so is that long
square K.N.M.O, being a parcel also of the long square F.G.O.O, Wherefore as
those two parts are common to both parts compared in equalitee, and therfire
^eynge both abated from each part, if the rest of both the other parts be
equal, than were those whole parts equal before: Now the resle of the great
square, those two lesser squares being taken away) is that long square E. N.
P. Q, which is equal to the long square F.G. K. M, being the rest of the
other part. And that they two be equal, their sides do declare. For the
longest lines that is F.K, and E.Q. are equal, and so are the shorter lines,
F.G, and E.N, and so appears the truth of the Theoreme.

The.xl. theoreme. If a right line be divided into.ij. even parts, and an
other right line annexed to one end of that line, so that it make one right
line with the first. The long square that is made of this whole line so
augmented, and the portion that is added, with the square of half the right
line, shall be equal to the square of that line, which is compounded of half
the first line, and the part newly added.
Example.
The first line propouned is A.B, and it is divided into diagram ij. equal
parts in C, and an other right line, I mean B. D, annexed to one end of the
first line. Now say I, that the long square A. D. M.K, is made of the whole
line so augme^ted) that is A.D, and the portion annexed, yt is D.M, for D.M is
equal to B.D, wherefore yt long square A.D. M.K, with the square of half the
first line, that is E.G.H.L, is equal to the great square E.F.D. C. which
square is made of the line C. D. that is to say, of a line compounded of half
the first line, being C.B, and the portion annexed, that is B. D. And it is
easyly perceived, if you consider that the long square A. C. L. K. (which
only is left out of the great square) has a another long square equal to
him, and to supply his steed in the great square, and that is G, F.M. H. For
their sides be of like lines in length.

The xli. Theoreme. If a rightline be divided by chance, the square of the
same whole line, and the square of one of his parts are just equal to the
long square of the whole line, and the said part twice taken, and more over
to the square of the other part of the said line.
Example.
A. B. is the line divided in C. And D.E.F.G, is the square of the whole
diagram line, D.H. K. M. is the square of the lesser portion (which I take for
an example) and therefore must be twice reckened. Now I say that those ij.
squares are equal to two long squares of the whole line A. B, and his said
portion A.C, and also to the square of the other portion of the said first
line, which portion is C. B, and his square K. N. F. L. In this theoreme there
is no difficulty, if you consider that the little square D.H.K.M. is.iiij.
times reckened, that is to say, first of all as a part of the greatest square,
which is D.E.F.G. Secondly he is rekned by him self. Thirdely he is accounted
as parcel of the long square D.E.N.M, And fourthly he is taken as a part of
the other long square D.H.L.G, so that in as much as he is twice reckened in
one part of the comparion of equalitee, and twice also in the second part,
there can rise none occasion of error or doubtfulnes thereby.

The xlij. Theoreme. If a right line be divided as chance happens the iiij.
long squares, that may be made of that whole line and one of his parts with
the square of the other part, shall be equal to the square that is made of the
whole line and the said first portion joined to him in length as one whole
line.
Example.
The first line is A. B, and is divided by C. into two unequal diagram parts
as happens. the longsquare of yt and his lesser portion A. C, is four
diagram times drawn, the first is E. G.M. K, the second is K. M.Q.O, the
third is H. K. R. S, and the fourth is K.L.S. T. And where as it appears
that one of the little squares (I mean K.L.P O) is reckened twice, ones as par
cell of the second longsquare and again as part of the third longsquare, to
avoid ambiguite, you may place one insteede of it, an other square of
equalitee, with it. that is to say, D.E.K.H, which was at no time accompethy
as percell of any one of them, and then have you iiij. long squares distinctly
made of the whole line A.B, and his lesser portion A.C. And within them is
there a great full square P.Q. T. V. which is the just square of B.C, being
the greatter portion of the line A.B. And that those five squares do make
just as much as the whole square of that longer line D.G, (which is as long
as A.B, and A.C. joined together) it may be judged easyly by the eye, since that
one great square does comprehe^d in it all the other five squares, that is to
say, four longsquares (as is before mentioned) and one full square. which is
the intent of the Theoreme.

The xliij. Theoreme. If a right line be divided into ij. equal parts first,
and one of those parts again into other ij. parts, as chance hapeneth, the
square that is made of the last part of the line so divided, and the square of
the residue of that whole line, are double to the square of half that line,
and to the square of the middle portion of the same line.
Example.
The line to be divided is A.B, and is parted in C. into two equal parts, and
then C. B, is divided again into two parts in D, so that the meaning of the
Theoreme, is that the square of D. B. which is the latter part of the line,
and the diagram square of A.D, which is the residue of the whole line. Those
two squares, I say, ar double to the square of the one half of the line, and
to the square of C.D, which is the middle portion of those three divisions.
Which thing that you may more easilye perceive, I have drawn four squares,
whereof the greatest being marked with F. is the square of A.D. The next, which
is marked with G, is the square of half the line, that is, of A.C, And the
other two little squares marked with F. and H, be both of one bigness, by reason
that I did divide C.B. into two equal parts, so that you may take the square
F, for the square of D.B, and the square H, for the square of C.D. Now I think
you doubt not, but that the square E. and the square F, ar double so much as
the square G. and the square H, which thing the eayser is to be understand,
because that the great square has in his side iij. quarters of the first
line, which multiplied by it self makes nine quarters, and the square F.
contains but one quarter, so that both do make ten quarters. Then G.
contains iiij. quarters, seeing his side contains two, and H. contains
but one quarter, which both make but five quarters, and that is but half of
ten. Whereby you may easylye conjecture, that the meaning of the theoreme is
verified in the figures of this example.

The xliiij. Theoreme. If a right line be divided into ij. parts equally, and
an other portion of a right line annexed to that first line, the square of
this whole line so compounded, and the square of the portion that is annexed,
ar double as much as the square of the half of the first line, and the square
of the other half joined in one with the annexed portion, as one whole line.
Example.
diagram

The line is A.B, and is divided first tnto two equal parts in C, and the^
is there annexed to it an other portion which is B.D. Now says the Theoreme,
that the square of A. D, and the square of B.D, ar double to the square of A.C,
and to the square of C.D. The line A.B. co^taining four parts, then must
needs his half contain ij. parts of such parts I suppose B.D. (which is
the a^nexed line) to contain three, so shall the hole line comprehend vij.
parts, and his square xlix. parts, whereunto if you ad ye square of the annexed
line, which makes nine, than those both do yield, lviij. which must be
double to the square of the half line with the annexed portion. The half line
by it self conteyneth but.ij. parts, and therefore his square does make
four. The half line with the annexed portion conteyneth five, and the square
of it is. xxv, now put four to. xxv, and it makes just. xxix, the even half
of fifty and eight, whereby appears the truth of the theoreme.

The.xlv. theoreme. In all triangles that have a blunt angle, the square of the
side that lies against the blunt angle, is greater than the two squares of the
other two sides, by twice as much as is comprehended of the one of those.ij.
sides (inclosyng the blunt corner) and that portion of the same line, being
drawn forth in length, which lies between the said blunt corner and a
perpendicular line lightyng on it, and drawn from one of the sharp angles of
the foresaid triangle.
Example.
For the declaration of this theoreme and the next also, whose use are
wonderful in the practice of Geometry, and in measuryng especially, it shall
be needful to declare that every triangle that has no right angle, as those
be which are called (as in the book of practice is declared) sharp cornered
triangles, and blunt covered triangles, yet may they be brought to have a right
angle, either by partyng them into two lesser triangles, or else by addyng an
other triangle unto them, which may be a great help for the aid of
measuryng, as more largely shall be set forth in the book of measuryng. But
for this present place, this form will I use, (which Theon also uses) to
add one triangle unto an other, to bring the blunt cornered triangle into a
right angled triangle, whereby the proportion of the squares of the sides in
such a blunte cornered triangle may the better be known.

First therefore diagram I set forth the triangle A.B.C, whose corner by C.
is a blunt corner as you may well judge, than to make an other triangle of yt
with a right angle, I must draw forth the side B.C. unto D, and from the sharp
corner by A. I bring a plumbe line or perpe^dicular on D. And so is there now
a new triangle A.B.D. whose angle by D. is a right angle. Now according to
the meaning of the Theoreme, I say, that in the first triangle A. B.C, because
it has a blunt corner at C, the square of the line A. B. which lies against
the said blunte corner, is more then the square of the line A. C, and also of
the line B. C, (which enclose the blunte corner) by as much as will amount
twice of the line B.C, and that portion D.C. which lies between the blunt
angle by C, and the perpendicular line A. D.

The square of the line A. B, is the great square marked with E. The square of
A. C, is the mean square marked with F. The square of B. C, is the least
square marked with G. And the long square marked with K, is set in steed of
two squares made of B. C, and C. D. For as the shorter side is the just
length of C. D, so the other longer side is just twice so long as B. C,
Wherefore I say now according to the Theoreme, that the greatte square E, is
more then the other two squares F. and G, by the quantitee of the long square
K, whereof I reserve the proof to a more convenient place, where I will also
teach the reason how to find the length of all such perpendicular lines,
and also of the line that is drawn between the blunte angle and the
perpendicular line, with sundry other very pleasant conclusions.

The.xlvi. Theoreme. In sharp cornered triangles, the square of any side that
lies against a sharp corner, is lesser then the two squares of the other two
sides, by as much as is comprised twice in the long square of that side, on
which the perpendicular line falls, and the portion of that same line, liyng
between the perpendicular, and the foresaid sharp corner.
Example.
First I set diagram forth the triangle A. B.C, and in yt I draw a plu^be
line from the angle C. unto the line A. B, and it lights in D. Now by the
theoreme the square of B.C. is not so much as the square of the other two
sides, that of B. A. and of A.C. by as much as is twice contained in the long
square made of A. B, and A.D, A. B. being the line or side on which the
perpendicular line falls, and A.D. being that portion of the same line
which does lie between the perpendicular line, and the said sharp angle
limited, which angle is by A.

For declaration of the figures, the square marked with E. is the square of
B.C, which is the side that lies against the sharp angle, the square marked
with C. is the square of A. B, and the square marked with F. is the square of
A. C, and the two long squares marked with H. K, are made of the hole line
A.B, and one of his portions A. D. And truth it is that the square E. is
lesser than the other two squares C. and F. by the quantitee of those two long
squares H. and K. Whereby you may consider again, an other proportion of
equalitee, that is to say, that the square E. with the two long squares H.K,
are just equal to the other two squares C. and F. And so may you make, as
it were an other theoreme. That in all sharp cornered triangles, where a
perpendicular line is drawn from one angle to the side that lies against
it, the square of any one side, with the ij. longesquares made of that hole
line, whereon the perpendicular line does light, and of that portion of it,
which joins to that side, whose square is all ready taken, those three
figures, I say, are equal to the ij. squares, of the other ij. sides of the
triangle. In which you must understand, that the side on which the
perpendiculare falseth, is thrice used, yet is his square but ones mentioned,
for twice he is taken for one side of the two long squares. And as I have thus
made as it were an other theoreme out of this forty and six theoreme, so
might I out of it, and the other that goes next before, make as manny as
would suffice for a whole book, so that when they shall be applied to
practice, and consequently to express their benefit, no man that has not
well wayde their wonderful commoditee, would credit the posibilitie of their
wonderful use, and large aid in knowledge. But all this will I remitte to a
place convenient.

The xlvij Theoreme. If ij. points be marked in the circumfere^ce of a circle,
and a right line drawn from the one to the other, that line must needs fall
with in the circle.
Example.
The circle is A.B.C.D, the ij. poinctes are A. B, the right line that is
drawenne from the one to the other, is the line A. B, which as you see, must
needs light diagram within the circle. So if you put the points to be A.
D, or D. C, or A. C, other B. C, or B. D, inany of these cases you see, that
the line that is drawn from the one prick to the other does evermore run
within the edge of the circle, else can it be no right line. Howbeit, that a
crooked line, especially being more crooked then the portion of the
circumference, may be drawn from point to point without the circle. But
the theoreme speaks only of right lines, and not of crooked lines.

The xlviij. Theoreme. If a right line passinge by the center of a circle, do
cross an other right line within the same circle, passinge beside the center,
if be divide the said line into two equal parts, then do they make all
their angles right. And contrary ways, if they make all their angles right,
then does the longer line cut the shorter in two parts.
Example.
The circle is A. B. C. D, the line that passes by the center, is A. E. C, the
line that goes beside the center is D. B. Now diagram say I, that the line
A. E. C, does cut that other line D. B. into two just parts, and
therefore all their four angles ar right angles. And contrary ways, because
all their angles are right angles, therefore it must be true, that the greater
cutteth the lesser into two equal parts, acordinge as the Theoreme would.

The xlix. Theoreme. If two right lines drawn in a circle do cross one an
other, and do not pass by the center, every of them does not divide the
other into two equal partions.
Example.
diagram The circle is A. B. C. D, and the center is E, the one line A. C, and
the other is B. D, which two lines cross one an other, but yet they go not by
the center, wherefore according to the words of the theoreme, each of them
does cut the other into equal portions. For as you may easily judge, A C.
has one portion longer and an other shorter, and so like wise B. D. Howbeit,
it is not so to be understand, but one of them may be divided into ij. eue^
parts, but both to be cut equally in the middle, is not possible, onles
both pass through the ce^tre, therefore much rather when both go beside the
center, it can not be that each of them should be justly parted into ij.
even parts.

The L. Theoreme. If two circles cross and cut one an other, then have not
they both one center.
Example.
This theoreme seems of it self diagram so manifest, that it neadeth another
demonstration another declaracio^. Yet for the plain understanding of it, I
have set forth a figure here, where ij. circles be drawn, so that one of
them does cross the other (as you see) in the points B. and G, and their
centres appear at the first sight to be diverse. For the center of the one is
F, and the center of the other is E, which diffre as far a sondre, as the
edges of the circles, where they be most distaunte in sonder.

The Li. Theoreme. If two circles be so drawn, that one of them do touch the
other, then have they not one center.
Example.
There are two circles made, as you see, the one is A. B. C, and has his
center by G, the other is diagram B. D. E, and his center is by F, so that it
is easy enough to perceive that their centres do dyffer as much a sonder, as
the half diameter of the greater circle is longer then the half diameter of
the lesser circle. And so must it needs be thought and said of all other
circles in like kind.

The.lij. theoreme. If a certain point be assigned in the diameter of a
circle, distant from the center of the said circle, and from that point
diverse lines drawn to the edge and circumference of the same circle, the
longest line is that which passes by the center, and the shortest is the
residew of the same line. And of all the other lines that is ever the greatest,
that is nighest to the line, which passes by the center. And contrary ways,
that is shortest, that is farthest from it. And amongst the^ all there can be
but only.ij. equal together, and they must needs be so placed, that the
shortest line shall be in the just middle betwixt them.
Example.
diagram The circle is A. B. C. D. E. H, and his center is F, the diameter is
A. E, in which diameter I have taken a certain point distaunt from the center,
and that point is G, from which I have drawn.iiij. lines to the
circumference, beside the two parts of the diameter, which makes up vi.
lines in all. Now for the diuersitee in quantity of these lines, I say
according to the Theoreme, that the line which goes by the center is the
longest line, that is to say, A. G, and the reside we of the same diameter
being G. E, is the shortest line. And of all the other that line is longest,
that is nearest unto that part of the diameter which gooeth by the center,
and that is shortest, that is farthest distant from it, wherefore I say, that
G. B, is longer then G. C, and therefore much more longer then G. D, since G. C,
also is longer then G. D, and by this may you soon perceive, that it is not
possible to draw.ij. lines on any one side of the diameter, which might be
equal in length together, but on the one side of the diameter may you
easylie make one line equal to an other, on the other side of the same
diameter, as you see in this example G. H, to be equal to G.B, between
which the line G. E, (as the shortest in all the circle) doothe stand even
distaunte from each of them, and that is the precise knoweledge of their
equalitee, if they be equally distaunt from one half of the diameter. Where as
contrary ways if the one be nearer to any one half of the diameter then the
other is, it is not possible that they two may be equal in length, namely if
they do end both in the circumference of the circle, and be both drawn
from one point in the diameter, so that the said point be (as the Theoreme
does suppose) somewhat distaunt from the center of the said circle. For if
they be drawn from the center, then must they of necessitee be all equal,
how many so ever they be, is the definition of a circle does importe,
without any regard how near so ever they be to the diameter, or how distante
from it. And here is to be noted, that in this Theoreme, by neerenesse and
distaunce is understand the nerenesse and distaunce of the extreme parts of
those lines where they touch the circumference. For at the other end they do
all meet and touch.

The.liij. Theoreme. If a point be marked without a circle, and from it
diverse lines drawn cross the circle, to the circumference on the other side,
so that one of them pass by the center, then that line which passes by the
center shall be the longest of all them that cross the circle. And of the other
lines those are longest, that be next unto it that passes by the center. And
those ar shortest, that be farthest distant from it. But among those parts of
those lines, which end in the outewarde circumference, that is most shortest,
which is part of the line that passes by the center, and amongeste the
othere each, of the^, the nerer they are unto it, the shorter they are, and the
farther from it, the longer they be. And amongst them all there can not be
more then.ij. of any one length* and they two must be on the two contrary
sides of the shortest line.
Example.
diagram

Take the circle to be A. B. C, and the point assigned without it to be D. Now
say J, that if there be drawn sundry lines from D, and cross the circle,
endyng in the circumference on the contrary side, as here you see, D.A, D.E,
D.F, and D.B, then of all these lines the longest must needs be D.A, which
goes by the center of the circle, and the next unto it, that is D. E, is the
longest amongst the rest. And contrary ways, D. B, is the shorteste, because
it is farthest distaunt from D.A. And so may you judge of D. F, because it is
nerer unto D.A, then is D. B, therefore is it longer then D. B. And likewaies
because it is farther of from D.A, then is D.E, therefore is it shorter then
D.E. Now for those parts of the lines which be without the circle (as you
see) D. C, is the shortest, because it is the part of that line which passes
by the center, And D.K, is next to it in distance, and therefore also in
shortness, so D.G, is farthest from it in distance, and the^rfore is the longest
of them. Now D.H, being nerer then D. G, is also shorter then it, and being
farther of, then D.K, is longer then it* So that for this part of the theoreme
(as J think) you do plain ly perceive the truth thereof, so the residue has
no difficulte. For seeing that the nearer any line is to D.C, (which joins
with the diameter) the shorter it is and the farther of from it, the longer it
is. And seeing two lines can not be of like distaunce being both on one side,
therefore if they shall be of one length, and consequently of one distaunce,
they must needs be on contrary sides of the said line D. C. And so appears
the meaning of the whole Theoreme.

And of this Theoreme does there folo we an other like, which you may call
other a theoreme by it self, or else a Corollary unto this last theoreme, J
pass not so much for the name. But his sentence is this: when so ever any
lines be drawn from any point, without a circle, whether they cross the
circle, or cande in the utter edge of his circumference, those two lines that
be equally distaunt from the least line are equal together, and contrary
ways, if they be equal together, they are also equally distant from that least
line.

For the declaracion of this proposition, it shall not need to use any other
example, then that which is brought for the explication of this last theoreme,
by which you may without any teachinge casyly perceive both the meaning and
also the truch of this proposition.

The L iiij. Theoreme. If a point be set forth in a circle, and from that
point unto the circumference many lines drawn, of which more then two are
equal together, then is that point the center of that circle.
Example.
diagram

The circle is A.B.C, and with init J have set fourth for an example three
pricks, which are D.E. and F, and from every one of them J have drawn (at the
least) iiij. lines unto the circumference of the circle but from D, J have
drawn more, yet may it appear readily unto your eye, that of all the lines
which be drawn from E. and F, unto the circumference, there are but two
equal, and more can not be, for G.E. nor E.H. has none other equal to them,
nor can not have any being drawn from the fame point E. No more can L. F,
or F. K, have any line equal to either of them, being drawn from the same
point F. And yet from either of those two poinctes are there drawn two lines
equal together, as A.E, is equal to E. B, and B. F, is equal to F. C, but
there can no third line be drawn equal to either of these two couples, and
that is by reason that they be drawn from a point distaunte from the center
of the circle. But from D although there be seven lines drawn, to the
circumference, yet all be equal, because it is the center of the circle. And
therefore if you draw never so mannye more from it unto the circumference, all
shall be equal, so that this is the privilege (as it were of the center) and
therefore no other point can have above two equal lines drawn from it unto the
circumference. And from all poittes you may draw ij. equal lines to the
circumference of the cirle, whether that point be within the circle or without
it.

The l v. Theoreme. No circle can cut an other circle in more points then
two.
Example.
diagram

The first circle is A.B.F.E, the second circle is B. C. D, F, and they cross
one an other in B. and in E, and in no more points. Another is it possible that
they should, but other figures there be, which may cut a circle in four
parts, as you se in this example. where I have set forth one tun form, and
one eye form, and each of them cutteth every of their two circles into four
parts. But as they be irregulare forms, that is to say, such forms as have
no precise measure another proportion in their draughte, so can there scarsely
be made any certain theorem of them. But circles are regulare forms, that is
to say, such forms as have in their protracture a just and certain
proportion, so that certain and determinate truths may be affirmed of them,
since they are uniform and vnchaungable.

The lvi. Theoreme. If two circles be so drawn, that the one be within the
other, and that they touch one an other: If a line be drawn by both their
centres, and so forth in length, that line shall run to that point, where
the circles do touch.
Example.
diagram

The one circle, which is the greattest and uttermost is A. B. C, the other
circle that is ye lesser, and is drawn within the first, is A. D. E. The
ce^tre of the greater circle is F, and the center of the lesser circle is G,
the point where they touch is A. And now you may see the truth of the
theoreme so plainly, that it needs no farther declaracion. For you may see,
that drawinge a line from F. to G, and so forth in length, until it come to
the circumference, it will light in the very poincte A, where the circles
touch one an other.

The Lvij. Theoreme. If two circles be drawn so one without and other, that
their edges do touch and a right line be drawenne from the center of the
oneto the center of the other, that line shall pass by the place of their
touching.
Example.
The first circle is A.B.E, and his center is K, The second circle is D, B.C,
and his ce^tre is H, the point where they do touch is B. Now do you se that
the line K.H, which is drawn diagram from K, that is center of the first
circle, unto H, being center of the second circle, does pass (as it must needs
by the point B,) which is the very point where they do to tuche together.

The.lviij. theoreme. One circle can not touch an other in more points then
one, whether they touch within or without.
Example.
diagram

For the declaration of this Theoreme, J have drawn iiij. circles, the first
is A. B. C, and his center H. the second is A. D. G, and his center F. the
third is L. M, and his center K. the.iiij. is D.G.L.M, and his center E. Now
as you perceive the second circle A.D.G, touches the first in the inner side,
inso much as it is drawn within the other, and yet it touches him but in one
point, that is to say in A, so like ways the third him, as you may see, but
in one place. And now as for the.iiij. circle, it is drawn to declare, the
diversity between touching and cuttyng, or crossyng. For one circle may
cross and cut a great many other circles, yet can be not cut any one in
more places then two, as the five and fifty Theoreme affirms.

The.lix. Theoreme. In every circle those lines are to be counted equal,
which are in like distaunce from the center, And contrary ways they are in
like distance from the center, which be equal.
Example.
diagram In this figure you see first the circle drawn, which is A.B.C.D,
and his center is E. In this circle also there are drawn two lines equally
distaunt from the center, for the line A.B, and the line D. C, are just of one
distaunce from the center, which is E, and therefore are they of one length.
Again they are of one length (as shall be proved in the book of profes) and
therefore then distaunce from the center is all one.

The.lx. Theoreme. In every circle the longest line is the diameter, and of
all the other lines, they are still longest that be next unto the center, and
they be the shortest, that be farthest distaunt from it.
Example.
diagram In this circle A.B.C.D, I have drawn first the diameter, which is
A.D, which passes (as it must) by the center E, Then have I drawn ij. other
lines as M.N, which is nearer the center, and F. G, that is farther from the
center, The fourth line also on the other side of the diameter, that is B. C,
is nearer to the center then the line F. G, for it is of like distance as is
the line M.N. Now say I, that A. D, being the diameter, is the longest of all
those lines, and also of any other that may be drawn within that circle, And
the other line M. N, is longer then F.G, because it is nerer to the center of
the circle then F. G. Also the line F. G, is shorter then the line B. C. for
because it is farther from the center then is the line B. C. And thus may you
judge of al lines drawn in any circle, how to know the proportion of their
length, by the proportion of their distance, and contrary ways, how to
discern the proportion of their distance by their lengthes, if you know the
proportion of their length. And to speak of it by the way, it is a
maruaylouse thing to consider; that a man may know an exact proportion
between two things, and yet can not name nor attain the precise quantitee of
those two things, As for exaunple, If two squares be set forth, whereof
the one contains in it five square seete, and the other contains five and
forty foot, of like square feet, I am not able to tell, no nor yet any
manne living, what is the precyse measure of the sides of any of those.ij.
squares, and yet I can prove by infallible reason, that their sides be in a
triple proportion, that is to say, that the side of the greater square (which
contains.xlv. foot) is three times so long just as the side of the lesser
square, that includes but five foot. But this seems to be spoken out of
ceason in this place, therefore I will omit it now, reseruyng the exacter
declaration thereof to a more convenient place and time, and will proceed with
the residew of the Theoremes appointed for this book.

The.lxi. Theoreme. If a right line be drawn at any end of a diameter in
perpendicular form, and do make a right angle with the diameter, that right
line shall light without the circle, and yet so jointly knitte to it, that it
is not possible to draw any other right line between that said line and the
circumfere^ce of the circle And the angle that is made in the semicircle is
greater then any sharp angle that may be made of right lines, but the other
angle without, is lesser then any that can be made of right lines.
Example.
In this circle A.B.C, the diameter is A.C, the perpendicular line, which
makes a right angle with the diameter, is E.A, which line falls without the
circle, and yet joins so exactly unto it, that it is not possible to draw an
other right line between the circumference of the circle and it, which thing
diagram is so plainly seen of the eye, that it needs no farther declaracion.
For every man will easily consent, that between the crooked line A.F, (which is
a part of the circumfere^ce of the circle) and A.E (which is the said
perpe^dicular line) there can none other line be drawn in that place where
they make the angle. Now for the residue of the theoreme. The angle D. A. B,
which is made in the semicircle, is greater then any sharp angle that may
be made of right lines, and yet is it a sharp angle also, in as much as it
is lesser then a right angle, which is the angle E.A.D, and the residue of that
right angle, which lies without the circle, that is to say, E.A.B, is lesser
then any sharp angle that can be made of right lines also. For as it was
before rehearsed, there can no right line be drawn to the angle, between the
circumference and the right line E.A. Then must it needs follow, that there can
be made no lesser angle of right lines. And again, if there can be no lesser
then the one, then does it sone appear, that there can be no greatter then
the other, for they two do make the whole right angle, so that if any corner
could be made greater then the one part, then should the residue be lesser
then the other part, so that other both parts must be false, or else both
granted to be true.

The lxij. Theoreme. If a right line do touch a circle, and an other right
line drawn from the center of tge circle to the point where they touch, that
line which is drawenne from the center, shall be a perpendicular line to the
touch line.
Example.
diagram The circle is A. B. C, and his center is F. The touch line is D. E,
and the point where they touch is C. Now by reason that a right line is drawn
from the center F. unto C, which is the point of the touch, therefore says
the theoreme, that the said line F.C, must needs be a perpendicular line
unto the touch line D.E.

The lxiij. Theoreme. If a right line do touch a circle, and an other right
line be drawn from the point of their touching, so that it do make right
corners with the touch line, then shall the center of the circle be in that
same line, so drawn.
Example.
The circle is A. B. C, and the center of it is G. The touch line is D.C.E,
and the point where it touches, is C. Now diagram it appears manifest,
that if a right line be drawn from the point where the touch line does join
with the circle, and that the said line do make right corners with the touch
line, then must it needs go by the center of the circle, and then
consequently it must have the said ce^tre in him. For if the said line
should go beside the center, as F. C. does, then does it not make right
angles with the touch line, which in the ^heoreme is supposed.

The lxiiij. Theoreme. If an angle be made on the center of a circle, and an
other angle made on the circumference of the same circle, and their ground
line be one common portion of the circumference, then is the angle on the
center twice so great as the other angle on the circu^fere^ce
Example.
diagram The cirle is A. B. C. D, and his center is E: the angle on the center
is C.E.D, and the angle on the circumference is C. A. D t their commen ground
line, is C.F.D, Now say I that the angle C. E. D, which is one the center, is
twice so great as the angle C.A.D, which is on the circumference.

The lxv. Theoreme. Those angles which be made in one cantle of a circle, must
needs be equal together.
Example.
Before I declare this theoreme by an example, it shall be needful to
declare, what is to be understand by the words in this theoreme. For the
sentence can not be known, onles the uery meaning of the words be first
understand. Therefore when it speaks of ang^es made in one cantle of a
circle, it is this to be understand, that the angle must touch the
circumference: and the lines that do enclose that angle, must be drawn to
the extremities of that line, which makes the cantle of the circle. So that if
any angle do not touch the circumference, or if the lines that in close that
angle, do not end in the extremities of the cord line, but end other in
some other part of the faid cord, or in the circumference, or that any one of
them do so eande, then is not that angle accounted to be drawn in the faid
cantle of the circle. And this promised, now will I cumme to the meaning of
the theoreme. I set forth a circle which is A. B. C. D, and his diagram
center E, in this circle I draw a line D.C, whereby there are made two cantels,
a more and a lesser. The lesser is D. F. C, and the geater is D.A.C.C. In this
greater cantle I draw two angles, the first is D.A.C, and the second is D.B.C
which two angles by reason they are made both in one cantle of a circle (that
is the cantle D.A.B. C) therefore are they both equal (...) Now does there
appear an other triangle, whose angle lights on the center of the circle, and
that triangle is D. E. C, whose angle is double to the other angles, as is
declared in the lxiiij. Theoreme, which may stand well enough with this
Theoreme, for it is not made in this cantle of the circle, as the other are, by
reason that his angle does not light in the circumference of the circle, but on
the center of it.

The.lxvi. theoreme. Every figure of four sides, drawn in a circle, has his
two contrary angles equal unto two right angles.
Example.
diagram The circle is A. B. C. D, and the figure of four sides in it, is made
of the sides B.C, and C.D, and D.A, and A.B. Now if you take any two angles
that be contrary, as the angle by A, and the angle by C, I say that those.ij.
be equal to.ij. right angles. Also if you take the angle by B, and the angle
by D, which two are also contrary, those two angles are like ways equal to
two right angles. But if any man will take the angle by A, with the angle by B,
or D, they can not be accounted contrary, no more is not the angle by C.
esteemed contrary to the angle by B, or yet to the angle by D, for they only be
accounted contrary angles, which have no one line common to them both. Such
is the angle by A, in respect of the angle by C, for there both lines be
distinct, where as the angle by A, and the angle by D, have one common line A.
D, and therefore can not be accounted contrary angles, So the angle by D, and
the angle by C, have D.C, as a common line, and therefore be not contrary
angles. And this may you judge of the residewe, by like reason.

The lxvij. Theoreme. Upon one right line there can not be made two cantles of
circles, like and unequal, and drawent toward one part.
Example.
Cantles of circles be then called like, when the angles that are made in them
be equal. But now for the Theoreme, let the right line be A.E.C, on which
diagram I draw a cantle of a circle, which is A.B.C. Now says the Theoreme,
that it is not possible to draw an other cantle of a circle, which shall be
unequal unto this first cantle, that is to say, other greatter or lesser then
it, and yet be like it also, that is to say, that the angle in the one shall be
equal to the angle in the other. For as in this example you see a lesser
cantle drawn also, that is A.D.C, so if an angle were made in it, that angle
would be greatter then the angle made in the cantle A. B. C, and therefore ban
not they be called like cantess, but and if any other cantle were made greatter
then the first, then would the angle it it be lesser then that in the first,
and so another a lesser another a greater cantle can be made upon one line with
an other, but it will be unlike to it also.

The.lxviij. Theoreme. Like cantelles of circles made on equal right lines,
are equal together.
Example.
What is mentby like cantles you have heard before. and it is easy to
understand, that such figures are called equal, that be of one bygnesse, so
that the one is another greater another lesser then the other. And in this kind
of comparison, they must so agree, that if the one be laid on the other, they
shall exactly agree in all their bounds, so that another shall excede other.

diagram Now for the example of the Theoreme, I have set forth diverse
varieties of cantles of circles, amongst which the first and second are made
upon equal lines, and ar also both equal and like. The third couple ar joined
in one, and be another equal, another like, but expressyng an absurd
deformitee, which would follow if this Theoreme were not true. And so in the
fourth couple you may see, that because they are not equal cantles, therefore
can not they be like cantles, for necessarily it goes together, that all
cantles of circles made upon equal right lines, if they be like, they must be
equal also.

The lxix. Theoreme. In equal circles, such angles as be equal are made upon
equal arch lines of the circumference, whether the angle light on the
circumference, or on the center.
Example.
First I have set for an exaumple two equal circles, that diagram is A. B.
C. D, whose center is K, and the second circle E. F. G. H, and his center L,
and in each of the^ is there made two angles, one on the circumference, and the
other on the center of each circle, and they be all made on two equal arche
lines, that is B.C.D. the one, and F.G.H. the other. Now says the Theoreme,
that if the angle B. A. D, be equal to the angle F. E. H, then are they made
in equal circles, and on equal arch lines of their circumference. Also if the
angle B.K.D, be equal to the angle F.L.H, then be they made on the centres of
equal circles, and on equal arche lines, so that you must compare those
angles together, which are made both on the centres, or both on the
circumference, and may not confer those angles, whereof one is drawn on the
circumference, and the other on the center. For evermore the angle on the
center in such sort shall be double to the angle on the circumference, as is
declared in the three score and four Theoreme.

The.lxx. Theoreme. In equal circles, those angles which be made on equal
arche lines, are ever equal together, whether they be made on the center, or
on the circumference.
Example.
This Theoreme does but convert the sentence of the last Theoreme before, and
therefore is to be understand by the same examples, for as that says, that
equal angles occupy equal archesynes, so this says, that equal arche lines
causes equal angles, consideringe all other circumstances, as was taught in
the last theoreme before, so that this theoreme does affirming speak of the
equality of those angles, of which the last theoreme spoke conditionally. And
where the last theoreme spoke affirmatively of the arche lines, this theoreme
speaks conditionally of them, as thus: If the arche line B. C. D. be equal
to the other arche line F.G.H, then is that angle B.A.D. equal to the other
angle F.E.H. Or else thus may you declare it causally: Because the arche line
B.C. D, is equal to the other arche line F.G.H, therefore is the angle B. K. D.
equal to the angle F.L.H, consideringe that they are made on the centres of
equal circles. And so of the other angles, because those two arche lines
aforesaid ar equal, therefore the angle D.A.B, is equal to the angle F. E. H,
for as much as they are made on those equal arche lines, and also on the
circumference of equal circles And thus these theoremes do one declare an
other, and one verify the other.

The lxxi. Theoreme. In equal circles, equal right lines being drawn, do
cut away equalle arche lines from their circumference, so that the greater
arche line of the one is equal to the greater arche line of the other, and the
lesser to the lesser.
Example.
The circle A. diagram B. C. D, is made equal to the circle E.F.G.H, and the
right line B. D. is equal to the right line F.H, wherefore it follows, that
the ij. arche lines of the circle A. B. D, which are cut from his
circumference by the right line B. D, are equal to two other arche lines of
the circle E. F. H, being cut from his circumference, by the right line F.
H. that is to say, that the arche line B. A. D, being the greater arch line
of the first circle, is equal to the arche line F. E. H, being the greater
arche line of the other circle. And so in like manner the lesser arche line of
the first circle, being B.C.D, is equal to the lesser arche line of the
second circle, that is F.G.H.

The lxxij. Theoreme. In equal circles, under equal arche lines the right
lines that be drawn are equal together.
Example.
This Theoreme is none other, but the conversion of the last Theoreme before,
and therefore needs none other example. For as that did declare the equality
of the arche lines, by the equality of the right lines, so do the this
Theoreme declare the equalnes of the right lines to ensue of the equalnes of
the arche lines, and therefore declares that right line B.D, to be equal to
the other right line F.H, because they both are drawn under equal arche
lines, that is to say, the one under B.A.D, and the other under F.E.H, and those
two arch lines are esteemed equal by the theoreme last before, and shall be
proved in the book of proofs.

The lxxiij. Theoreme. In every circle, the angle that is made in the half
circle, is a just right angle, and the angle that is made in a cantle greater
then the half circle, is lesser thanne a right angle, but that angle that is
made in a cantle, lesser then the half circle, is greatter then a right angle.
And moreover the angle of the greater cantle is greater then a right angle and
the angle of the lesser cantle is lesser then a right angle.
Example.
Jn this proposition, it shall be meet to note, that there is a great
diversity between an angle of a cantle, and an angle made in a cantle, and also
between the angle of a semicircle, and ye angle made in a semicircle. Also it
is meet to note yt al angles that be made in ye part of a circle, ar made other
in a semicircle (which is the just half circle) or else in a cantle of the
circle, which cantle is other greater or lesser then the semicircle is, as in
this figure annexed you may perceive every one of the things seuerallye.

diagram First the circle is, as you see, A.B.C.D, and his center E, his
diameter is A.D, Then is there a line drawn from A. to B, and so forth unto F,
which is without the circle: and an other line also from B. to D, which
makes two cantles of the whole circle, The greater cantle is D.A B, and the
lesser cantle is B. C. D, Jn which lesser cantle also there are two lines that
make an angle, the one line is B. C, and the other line is C.D. Now to show
the difference of an angle in a cantle, and an angle of a cantle, first for an
example J take the greater ca^tle B.A.D, in which is but one angle made, and
that is the angle by A, which is made of the line A, B, and the line A.D, And
this angle is therefore called an angle in a cantle. But now the same cantle
has two other angles, which be called the angles of that cantle, so the two
angles made of the right line D.B, and the arche line D.^.B, are the two
angles of this cantle, whereof the one is by D, and the other is by B. Where you
must remember, that the a^gle by D. is made of the right line B.D, and the
arche line D.A. And this angle is divided by an other right line A.E.D, which
in this case must be omitted as no line. Also the a^gle by B. is made of the
right line D.B, and of the arch line. B.A, and although it be divided with ij.
other right lines, of which the one is the right line B. A, and the other the right
line B.E, yet in this case they are not to be considered. And by this may you
perceive also which be the angles of the lesser cantle, the first of the^ is
made of yt right line B. D, and of ye arch line B.C, the second is made of the
right line. D.B, and of the arch line D.C. Then ar there ij. other lines, which
divide those ij. corners, yt is the line B.C, and the line C.D, which ij. lines
do meet in the point C, and there make an angle, which is called an angle
made in that lesser cantle, but yet is not any angle of that cantle. And so
have you heard the difference between an angle in a cantle, and an angle of a
cantle. And ^n like sort shall you judge of the a^gle made in a semicircle,
which is distinct from the angles of the semicircle. For in this figure, the
angles of the semicircle are those angles which be by A. and D, and be made of
the right line A. D, being the diameter, and of the half circumference of the
circle, but the angle made in the semicircle is that angle by B, which is made
of the right line A. B, and that other right line B.D, which as they mete in
the circumference, and make an angle, so they end with their other extremities
at the ends of the diameter. These things premised, now say J touching the
Theoreme, that every angle that is made in a semicircle, is a right angle, and
if it be made in any ca^tle of a circle, the^ must it neds be other a blu^t
a^gle, or else a sharp angle, and in no wise a right angle. For if the cantle
wherein the angle is made, be greater then the half circle, then is that angle
a sharp angle. And generally the greater the ca^tle is, the lesser is the
angle comprised in that cantle: and contrary ways, the lesser any cantle is,
the greater is the angle that is made in it. Wherefore it must needs follow,
that the angle made in a cantle less then a semicircle, must needs be greater
then a right angle. So the angle by B, being made of the right line A. B, and
the right line B.D, is a just right angle, because it is made in a
semicircle. But the angle made by A, which is made of the right line A. B, and
of the right line A. D, is lesser then a right angle, and is named a sharp
angle, for as much as it is made in a cantle of a circle, greater then a
semicircle. And contrary ways, the angle by C, being made of the right line
B.C, and of the right line C.D, is greater then a right angle, and is named a
blunte angle, because it is made in a cantle of a circle, lesser then a
semicircle. But now touching the other angles of the cantles, J say according
to the Theoreme, that the.ij. angles of the greater cantle, which are by B. and
D, as is before declared, are greatter each of them then a right angle. And the
angles of the lesser cantle, which are by the same letters B, and D, but be on
the other side of the cord, are lesser each of them then a right angle, and be
therefore sharp corners.

The lxxiiij. Theoreme. If a right line do touch a circle, and from the point
where they touch, a right line be drawn cross the circle, and divide it,
the angles that the said line does make with the touch line, are equal to
the angles which are made in the cantles of the same circle, on the contrary
sides of the line aforesaid.
Example.
The circle is A.B.C.D, and diagram the touch line is E. F. The point of the
touching is D, from which point J suppose the line D. B, to be drawn cross
the circle, and to divide it into.ij. cantles, whereof the greater is B.A.D and
the lesser is B.C.D, and in each of them an angle drawn, for in the greater
cantle the angle is by A, and is made of the right lines B. A, and A.D, in the
lesser cantle the angle is by C, and is made of ye right lines B.C, and C.D.
Now says the Theoreme that the angle B. D. F, is equal to the angle made in
the cantle on the other side of the said line, that is to say, in the cantle
B.A.D, so that the angle B.D.F, is equal to the angle B.A.D, because the angle
B.D.F, is on the one side of the line B.D, (which is according to the
supposition of the Theoreme drawn cross the circle) and the angle B.A.D, is
in the ca^tle on the other side. Likewaies the angle B.D.E, being on the one
side of the line B. D, must be equal to the angle B.C.D, (that is the a^gle by
C,) which is made in the ca^tle on the other side of the right line B.D. The
proof of all these J do reserve, as J have often said, to a convenient book,
wherein they shall be all set at large.

The.lxxv. Theoreme. In any circle when.ij. right lines do cross one an other,
the likeiamme that is made of the portions of the one line, shall be equal to
the lykeiamme made of the parts of the other line.
diagram Because this Theoreme does serve to many uses, and would be well
understand, J have set forth.ij. examples of it. Jn the first, the lines by
their crossyng do make their portions somewhat toward an equality Jn the
second the portio^s of the lines be very far from an equality, and yet in
both these and in all other ye Theoreme is true. Jn the first example the
circle is A.B.C.D, in which the one line A.C, does cross the other line B. D, in
ye point E. Now if you do make one likeia^me or lo^gsquare of D.E, and E. B,
being ye.ij. portions of the line D.B, that longsquare shall be equal to the
other longsquare made of A.E, and E.C, being the portions of the other line
A.C. Lykewaies in the second example, the circle is F.G.H.K, in which the line
F.H, does cross the other line G.K, in the point L. Wherefore if you make a
lykeiamme or longsquare of the two parts of the line F. H, that is to say, of
F.L, and L. H, that longsquare will be equal to an other longsquare made of
the two parts of the line G. K. which parts are G.L, and L.K. Those
longsquares have J set forth under the circles containyng their sides, that
you may somewhat whet your own wit in practisyng this Theoreme, according to
the doctrine of the nineteenth conclusion.

The.lxxvi. Theoreme. If a point be marked without a circle, and from that
point two right lines drawn to the circle, so that the one of them do run
cross the circle, and the other do touch the circle only, the long square
that is made of that whole line which crosses the circle, and the portion of
it, that lies between the utter circumference of the circle and the point,
shall be equal to the full square of the other line, that only touches the
circle.
Example.
The circle is D.B.C, and the point without the circle is A, from which
point there is drawn one line cross the circle, and that is A.D.C, and an
other line is drawn from the said prick to the marge or edge of the
circumference of the circle, and does only touch it, that is the line A.B.
And of that first line A.D.C, you may perceive one part of it, which is A.D,
diagram to lie without the circle, between the utter circumference of it, and
the point assigned, which was A. No we concerning the meaning of the
Theoreme, if you make a longsquare of the whole line A. C, and of that part of
it that lies between the circumference and the point, (which is A. D,) that
long square shall be equal to the full square of the touch line A. B,
according not only as this figure she weth, but also the said nyneteenth
conclusion does prove, if you list to examyne the one by the other.

The.lxxvij. Theoreme. If a point be assigned without a circle, and from that
point.ij. right lines be drawn to the circle, so that the one do cross the
circle, and the other do end at the circumference, and that the longsquare
of the line which crosses the circle made with the portion of the same line
being without the circle between the utter circumference and the point
assigned, do equally agree with the just square of that line that ends at
the circumference, then is that line so endyng on the circumference a touch
line unto that circle.
Example.
Jn as much as this Theoreme is nothing else but the sentence of the last
Theoreme before converted, therefore it shall not be needful to use any other
example then the same, for as in that other Theoreme because the one line is a
touch line, therefore it makes a square just equal with the longsquare made of
that whole line, which crosses the circle, and his portion liyng without the
same circle. So says this Theoreme: that if the just square of the line that
ends on the circumference, be equal to that longsquare which is made as for
his longer sides of the whole line, which comes from the point assigned, and
crosses the circle, and for his other shorter sides is made of the portion of
the same line, liyng between the circumference of the circle and the point
assigned, then is that line which ends on the circumference a right touch
line, that is to say, if the full square of the right line A. B, be equal to
the longsquare made of the whole line A. C, as one of his lines, and of his
portion A. D, as his other line, then must it needs be, that the line A. B, is
a right touch line unto the circle D. B.C. And thus for this time J make an
end of the Theoremes.

FINIS.
IMPRINTED at London in Poules churcheyarde, at the sign of the Brazen
serpent, by Reynold wolf.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

ANNO DOMINI. M.D.LI.

