A little treatise after the manner of an Epistle Written by the famous clerk
Doctor vrbanus Regius, unto a special frynde of his, wherein he declares the
cause of the great co^trouersy that has been and is yet at this day in the
christen relygyon and also the dyuersyte between the right worshyppyng and
service of God and the ceremonis invented by mannis institucion, very fruteful
and profitable.

John.x. Ezech.xxxiiij. Mich.v. I am the good shepehearde. A good shepehearde
gives his life for the shype.

scene from John 10:13 HANS HOLBEIN


The hired servant flies, because he is an hered servant and cares not for
the sheep.

The Epistell of doctor Vrbanus Regius.
IT is no marvel that many good virtuous persons at this time are troubled
within them selves not knowinge how to order them selves for to come to
goodness, because that there are so few faithful shepeheardes and Preachers,
that can teach the right way to ryghteousnes and salvation, and in the mean
while men cry on both sides, that men do err grievously. By the reason whereof
the poor simple man knows not, which side he may take, and which he ought
to forsake wherefore I will here exhybyte my poor service unto your wisdom,
and by the grace of God give you a short instruction, how the matter of the
Christen relygyon at this time stands.

First is to be noted, that in the church from the Apostles time, unto this
day, it stood never so well in the church, that there was no parcyalyte and
controversy for the doctrynes sake. Therefore now to be brefe, all varyaunce
and controversy ryseth upon this question, how men shall be made righteous,
and which is the right way to God?

Secondely, here has been always controuersye and variaunce, yea even in the
Apostles days, Actu. 15.
as ye may read. The one will be made ryghteous and quite from sin, and
obtain a merciful God by this manner, the other by yt manner, wherefore it can
not be denied but that the one must needs err, here ryseth then variaunce and
controuersye, for the wicked enemy, is an enemy to ye true doctrine, and to
the catolyke faith, because yt men through ye true doctrine and faith are made
ryghteous, and by the same escape from the power of the wicked enemy, and are
saved. Therefore does he raise and stir up errors, for to stre^ghten his
kingedome.

Thyrdely, here have always ben two parts, the one part has sought to be
iustyfyed and saved by certain means, which could not help them to
ryghteousnes, as the Jews, which would be saved and delivered from their
sins by the corporal circuncision. The Saracenes (which now are the Turks)
trust to be saved and justified, by the kepinge of their Alkaron, and doing of
outward works: And always who soever orders him self in this matter after
the judgment of his wits, takes some works before him, by the which he
thinks to amend his sins, to make satisfaction unto God for his sins, to
obtain grace, and (to be short) to be iustyfyed and saved, as all they do now
also that will merit and deserve heaven at the hands of God, by man's
institucio^s, and their own works.

For they think, when the law is declared unto them, what they must do and
leave undone, that it is suffycient, and that as than their wits may
knowledge the same for a good and perfect doctrine (for they know that men
must be ryghteous) and that then ye will of men may yield him self there in,
and consent to fulfill the same with the deeds. And when a man now throug his
wits and understanding knows that which is good, and the will geuet him
self over therein to perform the same, that than he obtains grace and
favor before God, and is converted and made ryghteous.

But this opinion is wicked and false, and this is the princypall cause of the
strife and controuersye in these days, and they that have the holy ghost have
ever resysted the same, and confuted this error, for this is not the right
way to ryghteousnes and salvation.

The true ryghteousnes is far otherwise then that she so easily should be
executed only by a synful man's wit. For if she should after that sort be
obtained, then should man need no more justification, but a good ordinance,
for if he had the same, he might be able of his own strenght to be obedient
to the same: Truly then had it ben suffycyent, that God had sent Moses upon
earth, to teach us, what we should do or leave undone, and than we might have
done it, and so we should have been ^^^^stifyed and saved. But where should
Christ become then? Now might a Christen man think ones, wherefore did God
him self become man? Why was Christ sent down from heaven? wherefore dyed he?
Romans 6.
why are we baptized in his death, and named after him, that we are Christen
men after Christ our Lord? Sure it is, that such a great thing is not done
in vain, God truly had no need of us he could have forborne our manhood
well enough, our manhood verily made him not God, nor added any perfection unto
him which he had not before, why are we not called Mosini after Moses? Is it
not to be lamented yt we are so blind and negligent in his godly matters? that
we have not at ye least ones thought wherefore God caused his son to become
man to suffer to dye, to rise again from death? why he suffered such a
vylanous death upon the cross, and rose again, and ascended into heaven? Is
all this the^ in vain? But if it be some great matter let any man tell me
wherefore it was done and what Christ did mean and execute by the same? Many
simple persons think yt this present controversy co^cerninge our believe and
ye Christen relygion is only a wylfull presumption, and that men might
content the^ selves well enough and leave the church in relte, and that there
is no need of such controuersye, and that the church is in case good enough.
They suppose also, that this strife and varyaunce is only risen because of the
cerymonyes, and that there is no fault nor error in any other points,
wherefore me^ might content the^ selves well enough.

To this do I answer, that they are foull deceived, and err grievously. For
there is another manner of matter in the way, and there be far greater
occasions of this controuersye than only the ceremonies: We would not ones
take a pen in hand, or make one sermon, only forsome seremonies sake. Alas
o God, this strife is for Christ's sake, Him will not ye world yet know, She
will come unto God without him, not wythstandinge that there is none other way
to God, Ioh. 14.
but by Christ.

John. 1.
The world names Christ, but she knows him not, for she despyseth the
Gospel which teatcheth Christ, the true salvation. Men strife for it, which is
the ryghtwaye to God, and we teach that it is Christ. And that no man's
wisdom nor understanding, can of her self find out, know or show this
way to everlasting life, nor be made ryghteous through any manner of natural
strength, but that God him self must teach us the right way to God by the
holy ghost in his word, and that he him self must make us good or righteous,
which is done only by the faith in Christ. Should man's wit it self know,
what is sin, what true righteousness, and which is the true way to the
kingdom of God, or if man by his own wysedo^ should know the true gods
service, than might also Plato. Aristotel, Cicero, Pliny, and other heathen of
high and excellent wits have attained be ryghteousnes and salvation. Wherein
did they fail than, or what did they lack? Answer, they were but natural
men, and they had no gospel. But the nature of man, was in Adam so myserably
corrupted and blinded through sin, that even in natural things she has no
sure knowledge, how should she then attain to the knowledge of spiritual and
eternal things? As for an example, Aristotel knew none other, but that the
wit and discretion of man is such a perfect light, which in every point is
to be followed, as that which teaches the thing which is right and just,
and leads to the best. And that anger and ire is not so great a sin, but a
wet stone of quickenes and fearcenes, and that it is not to be blamed what
soever is in us of nature, as though our nature were incorrupt and unguilty.
Item that the wit and dyscretyon of man, may rule and maystre, wrath, envy,
immodestye, pusyllanymitie, ryghteteousnes, unrighteous, and other like
motions of the soul, and that by this rulynge and maysterynge he may prepare
him self to all virtues, so that a man thorough his own wit may become
meke or gentle toward men, in all things measurable, strong herted or
magnanyme in all aduersytye, and give to every man yt which is right and just.
Plyuye was of this opinion, that the soul dyed with the body for if the souls
should yet all live (says he) where should so many souls have rowme in the
world? Epicurians.
The Epicurians and their adherentes supposed that God medleth not with the
world, and yt hecareth not what is done here beneth whether it be good or
evil, but that he suffers all things to go after their inclinatio^s. Actu.
17.


The learned and ingenious heathen at Athenes in Greece took S. Paul's doctrine
of the resurrection, for a fantastycall dream. Plinius the elder, calls the
doctrine of the immortalytye of body and soul, bablinge of children. Plinius
the younger, and Suetonius call our holy catholyke faith, John. 3.
a new sorcerous supersticion. What knew Nicodeme (a high learneth Pharysee
among the Jews) of the regeneracion? To be brefe, the wit of man with his
light, and the doctrine of Christ, 1. Cor. 1.
are so far unlike, that Paul (i. Cor. i.) says. That the wisdom of man,
judges ye Gospel to be foolyshnesse. Now, the above named wise men have
studied and sought with all their powers, to know high things of God and of
man, but what heue they gotten? Is not their sainges great blindenes? It may be
felt right well, that nature does neither understood nor yet conclude in the
heart, any truth or fu+/enes in godly matters, She waxes idle and vain in her
ymaginacions, and her indiscreet heart is darkened. When she counts her self
wise, she becomes folisshe, as Paul says. Romans i. What need many words?
saying the scripture speakinge of Adams son, affyrmeth that he laith in
heart, Psa. 14. Ephe. 2. Romans 15 1. Tes. 4. Romans 1.
there is no God. And Paul says, the heathen (that is all they that have not
the word of God and the faith in christ) are without God in this world. And
says he they know not God. This is sure, that nature is so blind without
Gods word, that she suffers her self to be treatened, that God will
punisshe sin, but she does despise it and does not believe it. She can suffer
many good things to be promised unto her, but she carreth not for it and she
regards not God, 1. Cor. 2.
she takes it for fables, as Paul says, the natural man (that is, he that
does not yet truly believe in Christ) perceaueth not those things that
belong to the spirit of God for it is foolishness unto him, and he can not
understand it: for it must be examyned spyrytually.

Forasmuch now as the wisdom of man, before he is regenerate, and believing
in Christ, because of his natural blyndenes and untowardness, knows not God,
fears him not, regards him not looks for no goodness at his hand, nor yet
cares for him, Mark well.
how should the^ a man by his own wisdom will or possybilitie, or through
all the power and strenght that he has from his first birth be able to come
unto God, to knowledge his sins, to have repentance, to ser, ue God truly,
and to become righteous? Therefore may well the wisdom of man imagyne many
ways for to quench sin, and to obtain righteousness, But they are all
Erroneous by paths, which lead from God, to wards hell, and do only cover ye
sins before ye world, But it is less then nothing auayllable before God,
for it is merry blindness and hypocrysye, which is enemy to God, as both the old
and the new Testamente declare in every corner.

Thus is now this a true saying, whithout any contradiction, that man in
godly matters pertaining to salvation (as how a man may be delivered from
sin, and obtain mercy, serve God, be justified and saved) by his natural
light of understanding is able to do nothing that is good, but is starcke
blind, and he must have a greater light from above, namely the holy ghost, he
it is that must illumin the heart with the Christen faith, love, hope, and
such like gifts of God, which Christ the son of God has deserved for us.

Romans 10
The holy ghost comes by the preachinge of the Gospel, which Gospel teaches
how a man shall be made ryghteous, serve God truly, and obtain salvation.
Mark well.
Wherefore we must turn our eyes to the gospel, yt we may learn of God him
self, how we shall serve him in holiness. Thou art a man, and yet can not
suffer, that thy servant should serve ye after his own mind and brain how
shall than God suffer of us, yt every man will serve him after his own blind
good intencion? John. 3. Romans 5. 1. Ioh. 4. Math. 9 15. Luc. 19. Ioh. 12. 1.
tim. 1, 2
For he has sent Christ for this purpose, that he should preach the gospel,
and declare the will of his father, unto the world, to the intent that we might
learn, what GOD intends toward us, what sin is, what virtue and
ryghteousnes is, and how we shall be made good and ryghteous, for to serve God
truly, and to come unto him.

If our wisdom it self knew ye right way of truth, and were wise enough of
her self in godly matters, to what end then should God have sent Christ, and
the Apostles? What need should we have of the holy scriptures? Nay whosoever
will neither fail nor err, must needs look on Gods word, even there and no
where else shall he find the right truth and the right way.

We read that Christ is the light, John. ^.
to illumyne the world, whereof it must needs follow that she is dark and
ignorant in godly matters. And John.xiiij. Ioh. 14.
says Christ, I am the way the truth and the life, no man comes unto the
father but by me. But what manner of light and way he is, and how a man may
obtain him for his own must be learned only out of the gospel. And Paul
says.ij. 2. Tim. 3
Tim. iij. That the scripture is able to instruct us, unto salvation. Is not
this clear and plain enough yt whosoever will know ye truth how he shall be
saved must learn it out of the scripture? He says not that he shall follow
his own mind and good intencion.

Moreover Moises writes. Deu. xij. Deu. 12.
yt noma^ shall do what seems hi^ good which is as much to say, he yt will do
well, be good and righteous, and serve God, must learn it of God, in his
word, and not of his own wisdom, or of men. And Christ says, Mat. 15
yt God is worshypped in vain with men's precepts, this is spoken plain
enough. If ye will serve God truly, than do it not with men's tradicions, for
it is in vain, But do it according to the word of God, and than can ye not
err nor do amysse.

For as much now as no man by his own invented ways man's institutions, can
truly serve God, be delivered from his sins, and be made righteous, but
must before all things have Christ to the same: We will show and declare
how and after what sort the same is done, whereby every man shall easily
perceive, what an Erroneous doctrine has been preached a great while in the
Christianity.

Therefore note, that a man may be made good and ryghteous after two sorts.
Mark well.
First before ye world, eue^ as a scole-maister keeps a boy in awe, and
constrayneth him weth the rod and fear of correction, to walk regularely
and to hurt noman, or even as a magistrate corrects the evil doers so
strayghtly, that ye many me^ outwardely lead an honest life for fear of
punissheme^t, they steal not, they kill nome^, they pay their debtes, they
are not ouerous to their neighbors, neither concerning his body, wife nor
child, so that it may be said, they are good honest men, such behaueour and
honest conversation is good, and God does also require it. Therefore has he in
the world ordained the sword to the temporal powers, Sapi. 6. Romans 13. 1.
Petr. 2 Titu. 3. Pro. 20. and. 24.
and chastysement of children, to the intent that ye people may lead an honest,
good and still life, not after their own lusts, but that they may be
compelled so to walk, that the neighbor may perceive it, yt good peace and
outwardely and honest conversation may continue among men.

But yet this is nothing else but work holiness, cyuyle policye, and wordely
ryghteousnes, which also may be found well enough among the infydelles,
which through the law of nature, in their opinion judge it good and righteous,
that a man lead an honenest life and conversation, commit none adultery, do
no murder, steal not, lie not, and deceive no man. etc.

(...) to say) for there is no thief hanged for his thoughts because he
minds or intends to steal, as long as he does not accomplysshe the deed.
But all this is not suffycient before God: for he sees in the heart, and will
that men shall behave them selves godly in truth and from the botome of the
heart, so that the heart mouth and hand be good and ryghteous. When is that
done? When ye have a lust in your heart, to be honest, sober, chaste,
frendlye toward all men.

And when ye have a lothsomnes and prkesomnes to evil, as dronkenes,
uncleanliness, theft, maliciousnes, murder and such like. But this is nature
not able to do of her self, Job. 4.15.25. Psa. 14.53. and. 143 Romans 3. Psalm.
51.
because that the lust of evil cleaves so fast unto us from our original
natiuite, and powered into our nature through ye first sin, in so much yt the
scripture does openly call us evil and perverse even from our mothers womb.

Therefore must the heart first be cleansed from such uncleanliness, and get pure
thoughts, lusts and affections, and afterward may a man do right good
works and than is a man made right good and righteous both inwardely and
outwardely.

Now teaches the scripture that our heart is purifyed by none other thing,
but by the true faith in Christ Actu. xv. Faith comes by the workinge and
illuminatio^ of the holy ghost, Actu. 15.
by the hearing of the gospel. Romans x. Romans 10
Wherefore he that will truly be made righteous, must purely and syncerely hear
and receive the gospel of Christ, or else he continues a natural man
without grace.

What is the gospel? Mark well.
It is a predication of Christ, what he is, and what he does, Math. 9 and.15.
Luc. 19. Ioh. 3.12 Roma. 5 1. tim. 1.2 1. Ioh. 4 Gene. 2. Romans 6. and.5.
as that he was sent from the father of mere love and favor, to help the
sinner. But how does he help? The sinner stycketh fast in sin, which he
can not amend or put out him self, he stycketh in death, for death is the
reward of sin. Whosoever commits sin, has after the righteous
judgment of God deserved to dye both temporally, and perpetually, and to be
the devils own unto damnacio^, out of which captivity noman is able to escape
by his own power or stre^ght. Man is in such miserable and pyteous case,
because of his first birth of Adam, 1 Co. 15.
that he is a sinner borne, condemned to death and damnation, captive under the
power of the devil, in the kingdom of darkness with body and soul to
everlasting pain. Now if there should come a man, and pay for the sin
(which is deaths stinge) and make us clean and ryghteous, destroy ye
fearful death, and make that we might live for ever in body and soul, and
overcome the devil, and make us fre from his power, so that neither sin,
devil nor death might hurt us animore, were not this well helped? Now are
not we able to do the same, neither any angel, but only God can do it, and
will also do it, wherefore he has sent his only begotten son, to become man
even as we, a very man in all points only sin except, which dyed for our
sins, and has by the only sacryfyce of his body upon the cross, and the
shedinge of his blood, made amends for our sins, made a perfect
satisfaction, reconsiled us to his heavenly father, and deserved for us the
holy ghost with his gifts, he rose again from ye dead, Mat. 23 Mar. 16 Ioh.
20.
brought again life and declared ye same unto us, and also commanded the
Apostles to publishe it until the last day, to the intent that whosoever
believes in Christ, and trusts to him for such a help, may take such a
great work of Christ for his own, and be ryghteous and save. mat. 3.7 Luce.
3.
Therefore is the gospel such a predication, which exhorts every man to
amendment of life, and to cease from sins, which to pay have cost Christ
so much that he dies for their sakes: And admonishes al men to believe in
Christ, Mat. 11.
and to come unto him, as to the true savior of the world which only can and
will help, both te^porally and everlastingly. Ioh. 14. and.15.16.
Only in his name and for his sake will God be merciful unto us, forgive us
all our sins, and except us for his children, that we may be the children
of God through the faith in Christ, heirs of God, and fellow heirs with
Jesus Christ our savior for ever.

Whosoever therefore, believes the gospel of Christ, Mat. 16. Ioh. 6
and doubts not but yt Christ is the very son of God, both God and man,
that he him self has puryfyed us from all sins, Esa. 53.
and bought us from everlasting death, wyht his precious blood, yt we live
through Christ in everlasting salvation, is made righteous and good. For this
will ye scripture, that the faith in Christ is our righteousness before God,
Romans 4. Galat. 3
when we trust to obtain remyssyon of our sins and ye life everlasting not
by our deeds or deseruinges, but only throug the mere mercy and grace of God,
and the infynyte merytes and great mighty works of Chiste.

Where as such a faith is, there follows a right christen life, and right
good works, How be it this faith is ye work of the holy ghost, he must so
illumine our heart, that first it may knowledge his great and many fold
sins aright, for the which we have deserved everlasting damnation. Here
must we consider the intolerable earnest of the wrath of God over sin, which
he so hates that he will not suffer it, but punysshe it temporally and
eternally. And that the sin is so wicked and grievous, that no man can remedy
nor cleanse it, but only the son of God of heaven him self through his own
precious blood. Than is the heart abashed and afraid even from the botome,
for the straight judgment of God, and there is raised a right and true
repentance for the sins sake, after this does also the holy ghost illumme
the humble and broken heart with the knowledge of the infynyte mercy of God,
promised and given through Christ, that the heart begins again to receive
conforte, and believes stedfastely, that his sins are now all amended an
forgeuen him, through the wholesome death of Jesus Christ: And that God from
the^cefurth will be no more a terryble judge, but a merciful father, for
Chistes sake, which has taken us to him self, and has borne our iniquities,
and made satisfaction for our transgressyons. Mark well.


This is the right and true Christen faith. The devils and false Christians can
also read, hear and remember ye passion of Christ: But they have not this
lively faith, and this trust and confydence in God, their heart looks for no
such comfort and grace at Gods hands. But a Christen man is myghtely
comforted of the gospel, for he does affirm it in his heart to be true, and
gets such a strong and joyful confydence in God, yt he trusts to him, as
a child to his father, and looks for all comfort and help from God, in all
his aduersityes, Mat. 7.
he doubts not but that which the Gospel teaches, is the everlasting
undoubted truth, and takes God to be true in all his promyses, and so mighty,
wise, Esa. 49. and.66. Iere. 14.
and merciful toward us, that he has a respect unto us, and makes al
things good, how so ever it goes with us, that he also always and every
where has his eyes upon us, that he keeps, fedeth and defends us, even as a
father looks to his dear child, and for saketh it not in any necessytye.
Bryefly a Christen man does surely hold and conclude in his heart, that there
is unspeakably more conforte, help, assystence, faythfulnes, love, and more
goodness of all things by God, wherewith he will help us, than any man, ever is
able to express, think, believe or hope. There becomes than the heart merry
in God, that it loves God as a father, and lives freely with a lust to do
good, and prays wyllingely and earnestly, helps his neighbor, and
becomes an enemy to sin. There serves God, and mynystreth unto the
neighbor, not only the hand, the tunge and the fete outwardely, but also ye
heart within ye body means truly without dissymulation.

Such a faith and knowledge of God is a high thing, it suffers not ye man to
continue as he was before, but it makes him pure and vpryght, yt he gets
another mind, other thoughts and lusts than he had before, he has a respect
to the will of God in all things which he does, and endeavors him self to
live according to the same, with lust and gladness, even as a child does
gladly and with all his heart accomplish the will of his father. But a
servant serves for wages and rewards, for fear of correction, unwillingly
and lothsomely. for he would rather do otherwise. Therefore it proceeds all of
an vnwyllinge seruise heart, what soever man does unto god with out grace. But
whersoeuer is ye grace of faith, yt man serves wyllyngly and gladly in spyrite
and truth. Therefore does Christ magnifye and anaunce this faith in ye gospel
very highly, for it does great things, and brings all goodness. It tourneth
the heart toward GOD that it may fear God, trust in him, love him, and hope
in him only, this is the first commandment.

It styrreth up the heart, that it does confydently call to God, prays,
gives thanks, laudeth and prayseth the name of God, and that it uses God
only to the honor and glory of God, this is the second commandment.

It changes man, that he denies him self, and wholly gives him self over
into the hands of God, and suffers God to rule, and to order us as it
pleases him, suffers God to work in us, that we be made a new creature in
Christ, and stand in a steadfast and co^tynuall exercise of a godly life, and
serve God according to his word under the cross in patience. Heb. 12. Prou.
3. Apoc. 3.
As they that know ryghtwell, that God chasteneth his verily beloved children,
that he may make them good, and will help them wha^ they call unto him, Psa.
50.
according to his promise, Psalm.l. Call unto me in the day of trouble, and I
will deliver the, and thou shall praise me, this is the third commandment.

Where soever this faith is, there is the holy ghost, which powers love in ye
heart, love is the fullfyllynge of ye law Roma.xiij. 1. Cor. 13. Romans 13.
For love honors father and mother and she is obedient to the hyer powers.
This is the fourth commandment.

Love keeps her self from anger, she is meke and gentle toward all men,
kylleth not, neither can bear any malice in the heart. In the.v. commandment.

Love has not in her heart to put her neighbor to dishonestie or wrong
concerning wife and children, 1. Co. 13.
in the.vi. commandment.

Love steals not, but she gives and helps where soever she can and may, in
the.vii. commandment.

Love bears no false witness, but assysteth the truth, she helps to save her
neighbors honestye, to cover and defend his faults, in the.viij.
commandment.

Love coueteth not her neighbors goods wife nor child, but rather helps
him to keep ye same, in the.ix. and.x. commandment.

Thus do we see that faith which works by love, is the fountain of al good
works. If the work shall be good than must it flow out of such a faith endued
with love. Faith must be there before ye works, that it may make ye person
faith full and good. Now, when ye person has faith and love, then does he
first good works and no rather. Do what soever ye will, if ye have not this
faith, your heart is not clean, and your works are not good. But this faith
keeps the ten commandments, for it can setman to behave him self vpryghtly
toward God and his neighbor.

Now, when we praise and magnyfye this faith, as ye only true ryghteousnes
before God, that is ye world angry and supposes that we do it of contempt and
contumacye, and can not understand, that we there with first of all do teach
and set up the true good works. When we teach this faith, because there is no
work good without this faith, the^ do we first plant the tree, 1. Cor. 7.
after that do we plant the fruit, that is the true natural ordinance. For
so has Christ done likewise, and the Apostles.

Mark well.
Now are there many things in the Christianite for a long time and season
used and taken for good, and for gods service which are clean contrary to
this wholesome doctrine, and to this faith: wherefore the same are justly
rejected and condemned. And therefore rages the world and can not understand,
that it is done of a good zeal, and by ye commandment of God. For ye world
can not understand the righteousness of God (ye true faith in Christ) and the
fruits thereof. She understands only ye righteousness of works, and
worshippinges of god, or gods services inverted by man's own brain. Out of
this does cheifely rise al ye controversy in the world.

Forasmuch now, as out of ye gospel of S, John. 1. Romans 4. Gala. 3.
Ioh. S. Paul's epistles to ye Romans, and Galathia^s, out of ye true ground
of ye law and the Prophets, it is clear and evidently concluded, that there
is none other righteousness of valor before god than the faith of the Gospel
in Christ: And forasmuch as there is none other way, to obtain pardon and
remission of sins, to be made good and righteous and to be saved, than the
same faith in Christ which Christ was given us of the father, to thyntent,
that he only by his own works should make us good, and be him self our
everlasting ryghteousnes, life and salvation, if we believe in him. It
follows then without any contradiction, of the same, that in many points,
from certain hondreth years unto this day, we have grossly erred, and that
all other means and ways, which have been set up for to obtain by them
remyssyon of sins, and grace, or to be made good and ryghteous, and to
obtain salvation, are nothing else but Erroneous by paths, and not the true
Gods service.

Now will I in a sum recyte the pryncypall Artycles and points of the false
worshyppynge of God, and false Gods service: To thinte^t that ye mayse, that
the controuersye of these days is not without great and urgent causes.

Mark well. Romans 5. i. Pet. 3. He. 9.10. 1. Ioh. 2.
This faith in Christ does surely affirm and establyshe, that Christ alone
by his only oblacion upon the cross, ones made for all, has made perfect
satisfaction for all the sins of the universal world, so that now there is
no new sacryfyce or oblacion more for our sins, in the Christianite, nor can
be. But only an offeringe of geuinge over of our selves, a co^tryte and
penitent heart, and the praise of God, these are no sin offerynges, but
thank offeringes. This teaches Paul throught out the whole Epistle to the
hebreues.

But Christ has left and ordained unto his church, a daily memoryal or
remembrance of ye same only sacrifice, Mark well. The supper of ye Lord.
which is his supper, wherein he fedeth and nourissheth the Christians
spyrytually with his very body and blood unto everlasting life, and the
Chrystians receive ye Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, with thanks
and praise, for this benefyte, that Christ offered his body for us, and shed
his blood for the remission of our sins, and give them selves over wyllyngly
to dye concerning sin, to mortyfye the old man, and offer sacryfyces of
thankesgeuinge, and sacryfyces of praise, for all the mercys, which God so
wonderfully has showed us through his son, and one Christian loves another
in deed and truth, this is the true worshippinge and service of God.

Wherefore it follows of this, Of the Mass.
that it is an error, and a false gods service, that men yet will undertake
to make a daily new massyng sacryfyce or oblacion, for the sins of the
quick and dead. For this perfect satisfaction; and reconcylyacyon, comes by
the only sacrifyce and oblacion made upon the cross where as Christ gave
over his body, and bare our sins, and shed his own blood for the remyssyon
of our sins. Wherefore the mass can in no wise be such a sacryfyce. For it is
an horrible error, that men will obtain and purchase the satisfaction for
sins, and the reconciliation of God any other way than by ye death of Jesus
Christ. If sins be releassed by offering of masses, than died Christ in
vain.

There is more abhominacion hydden under this error than can be thought and
expressed. Forasmuch as the death and passion of Christ is our comfort, by
the which, and by nothing else, we be delivered from sin and death, let
every good christian judge in his heart, what a doctrine this is, which so
little regards ye death of Christ, that she makes our works equal with
the death of Christ, yea obscureth and denies in a manner all the fruits of
the bitter death and passion of Christ. The great and holy appearau^ce of the
mass, and the outward syghte and pomp blyndeth the world that she can not
se the great and abhomynable abuse. The word of God dyscloseth this
abhomynacyon, for it teachet one only sacrifyce or oblacion ones offered, and
never to be reiterated, which is of perfect strength and power for ever, so
that this sacryfyce for sin must now only be received in faith through
the word and the sacrament, and we must give thanks for the same with a
faithful heart, knoweledgynge with the mouth in laudinge and praysynge his
holy name, we must also give thanks with the deeds, that we life soberly,
ryghteously, and godly in this life, willyngly and gladly followynge Christ,
which bought us with such a great price, of his most holy sacrifyce upon ye
cross, and purifyed us for his own people to him self, that from hencefurth
we should live innocently, as ye children of God. For God says, Leui. 19.
I am holy, therefore be ye holy also. Leui. xix.

Now have they of ye Lords supper The supper of ye Lord.
not only made a new daily sin offri^g for to make daily satisfaction thereby
for sin, and to appease gods ire and indignation. But have also wholly
changed and alterated the testament of Christ or his supper, for they have
forbidden ye lay people to receive the one part, and they constrayne and
compel the world to receive the one part only which is manyfestly against
the word and ordinance of God: For he instytuted both kinds to be received
of his Christians, Saint Paul taught and ordained it so to the Corinthia^s.
1. Cor. 11.
The primative church did use it so, and the holy Bysshoppes, Cyprian,
Augustine. etc. kept it so. Therefore must the pope needs be in a wrong way
seeing he has no commissyon nor commanndement to alter nor to diminishe gods
word, as also Gerson writes.

Now do I ask you on your consciences, whether of these is most sure in his
conscience? There are two Christians, the one receives the sacrament,
according as Christ him self did institute and command it to be used
until the last day, and as the Apostles, the true prymatiue church,
Augustine, Cypriane and such like have used the same, and gives glory unto
Christ, that he certaynely has not erred from his institucion, for noma^
could better institute it tha^ Christ, now this man has on his side,
Christ, the word of God, the Apostles, and the whole christianity, which at
that time was coniected by the Apostles, and he has also on his side the most
holiest and best learned fathers.

The other Christians will receive the sacrament after the Popes will, he
cares not whether God do so require it or not, this man has on his side, Pope
innocente the third, which at Rome in the laterane church with his counsayll
did forbydde the holy communyon to be given to the children, and commanded ye
layte to receive but the one part thereof in the year of our Lord, a
thousand two hundredth.xv. Now tell me I pray you, which of these two
Christians shall at the last day stand in better case before God, concerning
the sacrament? The one may say, I have done as Gods word did teach me, then
must ye other needs say that he has done after the institution of a man. Now
God has not given his word in vain, but he will that we shall follow the
same. Is it not than great pitye, that the pope will compel the poor
christianity to receive the one part of the communion only, without Gods
word, yea contrary to the express commandment of god? And shall men yet
hold their peace and say nothing to it? No, Saint Paul does curse the
Angels if they should preach any other gospel, the^ that which he had
preached, Galat. 1. 1. Cor. 15.
Galat. 1. How come we tha^ to this that we shall suffer the pope to burden
our conscyences, which does peruerie gods word and ordinance, and besides
that curses and destroys all the^ that keep gods ordinance?

Mark well.
Item, if the faith in Christ does only iustyfye, and if the faith of the
gospel does look for salvation, of the mere grace and mercy of God, without
our deservings, but by the works and merytes of Christ, and if we do
justly confess, that we can not deserve the same, because we are borne
sinners, and although we kept all the commandments that yet we are
unprofitable servants. Luce. 17.
Luce.xvij. But if we believe that Christ dyed for us, and deserved for us
remyssyon of sins and everlasting life, as we have plainly and euydently
in. To. 4.5. Gala. 3. Ephe. 2. 1. Tim. 2 Hebr. 9. 1. Pet. 2.
Saint Paul's Epystles to the Romans, Galathians, and Ephesians, etc. that
good works are done of us of duty, for the profit of our neighbor, and to
the glory of God, So must it needs follow that all such doctrines are false, as
teach us to do our works to this intent, yt through the same we may
extynguysshe sin, and become good and ryghteous. For these two cannot stand
together, to be justified by grace through faith, and to be iustyfyed by the
merytes and deseruinges of our works. If it be grace, then is it not our
deserving, If it be deserving, then is it not grace. And as Paul says, Gal. 2.
Galat. ij. If the ryghteousnes come by the law, that is if mem be made good
and ryghteous by the law or by works, then dyed Christ in vain. But if he
dyed not in vain, Romans 4.
but for the remyssyn of our sins. Roma. iiij. Then must it follow
necessarely, 1. Cor. 15
when the death of Christ does only make satisfaction for sins, and the
faith in Christ does only save and purefye, that the world has been deceived
by ye doctrine of works, as foundinge and instituting of monasteries, orders,
pilgrimages, and al relygions and gods services invented by man. For by all
these things have men intended to satysfye for sin to deserve grace, and to
be made good and ryghteous notwithstanding that the honor of iustifycation
pertains to noma^ but only to the precious death of Christ and the shedinge
of his blood. I would feign se his face that durst be so bold as to deny
this truth. But if this truth stands and abides, then must needs fall down
to the ground, whatsoever hitherto has been kept and taught to the intent that
men thereby should be saved and come to God.

Hebr. 5.6.8.9.
Item the worthy priesthode of Christ wherein consysteth all our conforte, is by
the Popes doctrine defaced and disanulled. Genesis 22 Psa. 101. Hebr. 7.
For the scripture teaches us, that ye father by the conuenau^t of an oath,
has consecrated and made his son an everlasting pryeste, which not only
ones by the sacryfyce of his body has sanctified his elect, Ioh. 17. Roma. 3
1. Tim. 2 1. Ioh. 2.
but also apeareth yet in ye sight of God for us, as a perfect mediator and
advocate, a faithful and merciful bishop, in those things which we have to
do before God, in whose name we must call and pray to God, and than God has
promised to hear us. Hebr. 5.6.7.8.9.
All this teaches us the Epistle to the Hebrews and other scriptures, and
they do not show us any other mediator nor advocate before God. Of this it
follows yt it is an unsure, false and erroneous doctrine, which the pope and
his adherentes teach, namely that they make Christ fearful as though we must
have other mediators in heaven, to bring us first to Christ. Where is here
the trust and confydence in Christ?

Now judge your selves I pray you. Do ye think yet yt we strive for naught
with the Papacye? Is not the matter weighty enough? It touches our salvation,
which is god him self, what thing is there greater? If we suffer our selves
to be brought to this believe, that we must and may by our own works and
satisfaction put out sins, deserve the grace of God, be justified and saved,
then have we thereby denied the power of the death of Christ, and his precious
blood. Tell me then now, where to will ye use the death and blood of Christ
if it should not wasshe away sins puryfye and yustyfye us? Therefore let
every man pondre with him self in his conscience, and way the whole matter,
for it is not so light as men think. If we fall from our doctrine of faith
then fall we from Christ, then have we no redemer, then have we no sacryfyce
for our sins, than lies sin, death, and perpetual damnation still upon us
than is God yet angry and not appeased, and there is no grace but mere wrath
indignacion, Hebr. x.
and a fearful lokynge for the judgment. Hebr. x. For noman needs to look
for any grace at Gods hand without Christ, our only mercy seat. Thus is
Christ with his merits obscured and darkened, yea taken away from us by the
popystycall doctrine, and our trust and confydence turned to our own
works. How can we abide this?

Yea say they, but the hier powers will not suffer this doctrine. Answer. I
can not tell, Mark well.
I suppose that they would suffer it well enough, if it were exactely opened
and declared unto them. And although they would not abide it yet may here
every Christian man think that it is expedient for him, to take hold on God,
and the truth, without contempt of the hyer powers, and in this case not to
follow ye wordly commandment. Act. 4.5.
This does also ye spiritual or ecclesiastical law admytte, for it is
written.x. Distinc. x. non lycet, It becomes not ye Emperor to pretend any
thing contrary to the law of God, nor to do any thing that is contrary to
the rulers of the Euangelycall, Prophetical or Apostolical truth. Item
again.xi. q. iii. Si dominus. If it be evil which the Emperor commands,
than answer, Act. 4.5.
we must obey God rather then men, but in such things as are not contrary to
ye commandment of God, we must obey. More over.x. q. iij. Qui resistit. When
the Emperor commands oun thing and God another. What does ye christen man
judge? There is God, which is of greater power. O Emperor pardon us here, ye
treathen captivity, god treateneth hell. Ephe. 6. 2 Cor. 10 Sapi. 5.
Here must ye take your faith as a shield, by the which ye may quench all
the fyery darts of your enemies.

Mark well.
Yet say they further. The popisshe doctrine is old, if she were not true, tha^
must the church err. Answer. If ye be a christen man, then believe ye Christ
stedfastely in his words of the gospel, and ye do al so take ye same word
for the very true doctrine of God. Now if she be right and true, then must it
needs be false, and erroneous whatsoever is contrary to the same, what need men
to care much for the lenght of time? The le^ght of time, cannot make a false
thing true. If the scripture therefore be ye true way then must he needs err
that forsakes ye same way, and walks an other way, whether he be great or
small, many or few, holy or sinners.

Yet say they moreover. That these are the last days, in the which we ought
to beware of false Prophets. What and if the luterians (for so do they call
us) were the same false Prophets? Answer Search the scripture, John. 5.
and judge hardely, who^ ye hitte, let him be hitted. The scripture says, 1.
Tim. 4 2. Tim. 3 2. Pet. 3 Iudi. 1. 2. Tess. 2
that the false Prophets of the later days shall forbydde matrymonye, and
meats which God has created, they shall deny Christ that bought them, that
is they shall deny ye same being, they shall have a shine or a colloer of
godlynes, but they shall deny the power thereof. Mark well.
If ye find these tokens in the Lutherians (as ye call the^) then take them
for false Propetes. But if ye find them not by them, than look about you, and
ye shall soon perceive, who erreth. Wherefore do the Lutheria^s (as ye call
them) suffer so much sclaunderinge and persecution. Even for this cause, 1.
Cor. 7. Hebr. 13.
that they will have matrimony fre and at liberty, even as it is fre for every
man in the word of God. They will yt for meats sake no man's conscience shall
be burdened, so that they give ye honor only to Christ, that he through his
passion has bought us out of everlasting death, and that he puryfyeth us all
from sin by his blood. Therefore do they reiecte the massynge sacrifyce, and
whatsoever is done to that intent, that thereby me^ will be delivered from sin
and death. They are also reuyled, because they lead a commune simple life in
the state of wedloke, as an honest lay man, without any shine of a pryuate
holiness with out shaven crounes, graye amyses, surplices, stoles, and such like
abilleme^tes, for the which things sake, the estate of priesthode hither to
in the world has be^ counted as holy, and contrary wise ye common state of
layemen, as unholy and profane.

For the spiritual fathers, have drawn to them selves and appropriated to
them selves the Christian offices, whereby their estate has been counted the
State of perfection and holiness and the State of the laytie has been counted
heathen and profane, for they would offer alone to God, as the priests in
the old testament offered for ye people. They have esteemed their prayer of
greater valor a great deal, then the prayer of the leaye men: And yet it is
but bought, sold, and compelled gere, which for the most part is done
without faith and earnest zeal, without spirit and truth, for moneys and
legacyes sake. For if there were neither money nor substance, the monasteryes,
chauntryes and churches should sone be still without prayenge, singing and
massynge. They have kept the whole sacrament to them selves and given us the
one half. And of these their manyfolde errors and erroneous occupyenges, have
they made no just account as yet, but have only alleged the scripture in a
wrong sense, and the institucion of popes and counseyls, which nevertheless
they have not kept them selves as I can easily prove.

The fourth counsayll of Charthagen commands that a bishop shall have a
small poor house, decking, and lodginge, and a poor table and living, and
that he shall seek the respect of his dignity, by faith and deserving of his
life. Where do they here keep their counsayll? Think ye that now there could
not be found a bishop, which besides his Jewels and plate, were of as
great or greater ability, than a temporal Prince? Yes truly, I am sure of it.

The.xx Canon of the forsaide counsayll commanded, that a bisshoppe shall
avoid temporal ears, and do nothing else but read pray study and
preach. Where is there one that does this? Or if they count it so small a
matter not to keep the counsayles, why do they tha^ make the transgressyons of
the cou^sayles so grievous unto us?

The.xiiij. Canon Concily Neocesariensis will that there shall be no more but
seven Deacons in a great city. Where have they kept this? Where as now is a
small town there are.x. or.xx. priests, where as the Chapelaynes as Deacons
should be for the poor as in the Apostles time, Actu. 6. ^. Tim. 3
and the Curate should preach. Of the other surte do we not need half so many.

Even in this counsayll it is commanded, that when a priest takes a wife, he
shall be priest no longer. This have they weakened goodly, although they do
neither keep the same also, for they punysshe it by death. But this counsayll
does only depose them from their office.

The first canon of the fourth counsayll of carthagyne commanded, that noman
shall be ordained and made a bishop, except he be examyned before and found
to be well learned and exercysed in the holy scripture, sober, dyscrete, and
merciful. How many are there found now that can the Catecismus? Thus do
they institute and command many things, and yet they keep them not them
selves.

The.vi. Canon among them that are called Canones Apostoles, says, A bishop
or priest shall in nowyse put away from him his wedded wife for relygions
sake. But if he put her away from him, he shall be excommunicated, and if he
so continue, he shall be deposed. Now have they concluded of late, that
whosoever puts not away his wife from him shall not be suffered.

The.vii. Canon of the Apostles, Canons commands that a bishop, priest, or
Deacon, shall in no wise addicte him self in worldely matters or cares, or if
he do it, he shall be deposed. They that have been at Ausburgh at the
convocation there, have seen ryghtwell who would put him self even in the
mids of all the busynes. But here are they merciful unto them selves, and
they ca^ soon dispense therein. But if a young priest to avoid offense
marieth a wife there is the fire prepared, and less mercy than in hell.

The fourth Canon Concely Gangie^sis says, whosoever makes any dyfference of
a married priest, for wedlockes sake, as though for wedlockes sake he might not
offer or say mass, or whosoever therefore does with draw him self from his
mass, accursed be he. Now will they not hear speakinge of wedlock, but
stir up Princes and Lords against us, and can in the mean season goodly
defend there vnchastelyfe.

Item Did. lxxxi. c. Si qui presbiteri forbyddeth the spiritual law to all
priests and deacons, being whoremongers or fornicatours, to enter into the
church saying on this wise, what priests Deacons or Subdeaco^s soever they
be that live in vncle^lines or whoredom, to them we forbydde in the name of
our almyghtie God, and by the power and virtue of sayncte Peter, the intraunce
into the church until they amend their life. But if they will continue in
their sin, then shall none of you hear their office, for their blessing is
turned into a curse, and their prayer into sin. And whosoever will not obey
this wholesome commandment, shall fall into ye sin of Idolatrye. This canon
did Pope Gregory write unto all Italians and Doutchemen.

Who is there now among the spyritualtie that regards this commandment? I
have thought it good to show you a little for an introduction, how the
spirituality keep not their own laws even were as they are best And because
the Emperors, Kings and Princes cease not cryenge, Canons, fathers,
cou^sayls, only because ye unlearned should think their matter to be good
notwithstanding that it is evil and wicked, and that they might teach and
live not only contrary to gods word, but also contrary to their own laws.
And yet will they blind the world with open eyes, and make them to believe that
they have ruled well.

But how is it with man's institutions are they all to be despised, than will
there follow a mad and dissolute lyuinge? Answer. If the curates did so sore
plye gods commandment as they do men's institucions, there would follow
no mad and dissolute living. But to the intent that ye may know the ground
of the matter, thus it stands with men's institutions, they are of many
sorts.

Sap. 6. Pro. 20. and.24. Romans 13. Tim. 3. 1 Pet. 2.
First, we speak not here of ordinances and institucions of the hier powers,
for they go over body and goods, conconcerninge the temporal life, and they
ought to be kept peaceably, when they be not against God. Romans i. b. i. Pet. ij.

Secondarely the disputacion is of ye institucions that have been made in the
church for gods service, or such as are concerning spyrytuall persons (as
they are called) or gods service. Here do we teach by the foundations of
gods word, that the consciences must only be taught and led by gods
word and not with man's traditions, for this concerns salvation or
damnacion. Here ought he only to commau^de and to have a do, 2. pa. 20. Mat.
10 Luc. 12.
that has power to condemn or to save body and soul. Therefore all ma^s
institucions that are made contrary to the word of God, as the forbiddinge of
matrymony. etc. shall be in the conscience of less then of no repentation.
Also wha^ men's institutions are made or commanded to this intent, that
thereby grace may be obtained, God worshipped, and men saved like as men are
forced and compelled to certain fasting days crepyng to the cross
processyons, forbyddinge of meats, or how soever they be called, they shall
be regarded of a christen man less then nothing, and they can not bind the
consciences. For the christian lybertye is not only of power, that we are
delivered from sin and the power of the devil by Christ, but also that
Moses ceremonies and other ecclesiastical ordinances, of days, meats, and of
such like do not bind us, if they be kept, men are not saved by them, if they
be transgressed without arrogauncye and offense, me^ commit no deadly sin.
But when the bisshoppes make any institutions without burdeninge of men's
consciences, for a decent order, whether it be holy days or other things, to
the intent that al things in the christianite may he done after a comely sort
and a decent order, not that it be necessary to salvation, the same will we
keep gladly, and teach that they shall be kept. All this is grounded. Esaye.
xxix. Mat. xv. xxiij. Colo. ij. i. Timo. vi. Romans xvi. Galat. i. iiij. Tit. i.

This did also Augustine teach above a thousand years a go in the Epistle to
Ianuarius. It is no new thing, but ye right old catholyke doctrine. For the
Prophets Christ, and the Apostles are older then the pope and the
ecclesiasticals institucions and consayles. Wherefore I beseech and exhort you
by the glorious coming of Jesus Christ at ye last day, Mat. 25
that ye will show unto this great entreprise this favor, which was wont to
be showed to a small worldely entreprise, that is, that ye be not to swifte in
judgment. But that ye will first by your self earnestly with a prayer unto
God through Christ, for the spirit of truth, perpende and pondre the matter
and afterward judge. And I beseech you take in worth this small instruction
written in haste, for I seek nothing else but that our faithful God and
Lord Jesus Christ, may be exactely known of you and of many men to their
righteousness and salvation: which vouchesafe to send us his spirit, and to
make us true christians. Amen. Salute all them that are with you, and rejoice
with us of the aboundau^t grace of God through Christ, as of our only
conforte Amen.

Finis.
Seek peace, and ensue it. Psalm. xxxiij. i. Pet. iij. printer's device of
Walter Lynne

Psalm. cxj. b. Prou. ix. b. Job. xxviij. c. Eccle. i. c. The fear of the Lord
is the beginning of wisdom. Imprinted by me Gwalter Lynne, dwelling upon
Summers kaye, by Byllynges gate. In the year of our Lord God. M.D.Xlviij.

Cum gratia and priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


