A SERMON PREACHED APRIL, 8. 1635. AT A VISITATION AT BRENTVVOOD in Essex.

By ALEXANDER READ. Doctor of Divinity, late Fellow of Pembroke-Hall in
Cambridge, now Parson of Fifield in Essex.

The Author to his Book.
Untimely birthes inherit not long breath.
See and be seen, then dye a timely death.
After a Month or two say naught of me:
Mean while go witness my Conformity.
LONDON, Printed for JOHN CLARK, and are to be sold at his Shop under St.
Peter's Church in Cornehill. 1636.

A SERMON PREACHED AT A Visitation at Brentwood in ESSEX.
1. COR. 14.40. (...).

Let all things be done decently and in order.


Our English translations differ in turning the words (...). Some turn it by
Order, some according to Order, and this is verbum verb with the Greek.
Others, among which is our last translation, turn it In Order. Wherein they
leave the Greek and follow the Syriac. It is frequent with the Syriac
translator to borrow the Greek word, so has he done here. He borrowes the
Greek word (...), and joins it with the Hebrew preposion (...) in steed of
(...), -- (...) in order, in steed of (...) according to Order. But the sense
being the same I will inquire no further into the words, I come to the matter.

I must not while I plead for decency and order, pass the bounds of decency
and order.

If I should follow decency and order as far as they go, an age were fitter
for my discourse then an hour.

The words Creature and Creation, are not so large as the words Decency and
Order; for as much as God himself falls within the compass of order. Primum,
secundum, tertium, are but so many linkes of the same order, and GOD is Primum
Ens, primum Vivens, primum Momens and ultimum. Alpha and Omega. (Apoc. 1.8.)

The whole Creature also (or as St. PAVL calls it (...) the whole Creation) falls
within the extent of Decency and Order. Romans 8.22.
For that which we say in English, GOD made all things in decency and order,
is no other than that which MOSES in Hebrew says, ( Genesis 1.31.) -- (...), and
then that which the Penman of the book Wisdeme (whether PHILO IUD Aeus,
Sapient. 11.21 Engl. verse. 17
or JESUS the son of SYRAC, or who else) in Greek says (...), thou have
ordered all things in measure, number and weight, and This is Canonical though
the book be Apochrypha.

I will not therefore meddle with the (...) natura, the Order of natural
things and comeliness of them.

Nor will I meddle with the (...), the dependency and correspondency of Arts
and Sciences in themselves and their own principles, or their mutual helps
one to another and contatenations one with another: their mediocrities,
proportions and lovely rules and fruits.

Not will I intermeddle with bodies Civilpolitick or oeconomick. In all which
notwithstanding Order is their stability and strength, and Decency their
comeliness and beauty.

That which I will spend my time in, shall be the Decency and Order of the
Church.

Nor will I take the whole Decency and Order of the Church to view. I will not
look how glorious the Kings daughter is within, ( Psalm. 15.13.) How comely in
the eyes of God the Soul of man is, when the affections and passions are
ordered by reason and reason by God, Nagian. page 110. li. 1.
when the whole man is (...), as Nazianzen speaks. When men's lives are lived
out toward Heaven. When there is in the Soul of man an aspiring ambition of
coming near the Angels in perfection, and the Saints and Martyrs in devotion.

But the Decency and Order which I will now meddle with, is the Decency and
Order of our publiqve Assemblies, and of those, not in Councils and Synods, and
Convacation-houses or the like: but in that House which is gloriously styled by
GOD (...), ( Esa. 56.7.) The house of Prayer or material Temple.

In these assemblies I will not inquire into the inward reverence done, nor sit
judge upon the Souls of men, Stapl. tom. 2.707.
whether they do Hoc agere or no. I will only lay before your view, the
outward face and carriage of our Assemblies.

And (that yet I may bound my self narrower) I will only discourse of those
things which I am daily (...) and (...) of; showing only mine opinion, leaving
the decision of judgment to you that have the Seats of judgment; and because
the spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets, (1 Cor. 14.32.) To you
also my brethren of the Clergy.

I will begin with the Place of our Assemblies.

While I speak of the Place, understand me not of all the Churches in our
land, we have those that are according to St. PAUL'S rule, Orderly and Decent,
and which have according to our Canons framed themselves into a blameless
beautifulness, I speak of some Churches only, and of some only would I be
understood.

1 It seems to me an indecent thing, That places of Churches of late years
fairly ceeled should now have nothing left to defend, either the eye from
offense or the floor from floods; but that we may fear shortly least navis
Ecclesiae should floate away in rain and snow water. ASAPH complained of the
like above 2600 years ago, whose spirit I desire to be of in this age. Qui
hoc habuit peculiare, ut de rebus Ecclesiae tristibus meditaretur, Now they
break down all the carved work thereof with Axes and hammers. ( Psalm. 74.6.)
Calaturas ejus her ceelings.

2 It seems to me as indecent, That Church-wainscots, and perhaps the same,
wrought with gold and diverse colors by the pensill of the cunning limmer,
should now be a Sear for private men. Since it was a more noble employment for
them to be the common beauty of a Church, then to be the decking of a private
Seat, and since Publica privatis sunt anteponenda.

3 It seems to me an undecent thing, Since PAUL is never the more paid by this
robbing of PETER, that seats of the highest rank should by the Parishioners
be kept, now full 4 years together in such a condition, that the rain falls on
their Books, on their tender Infants, the Cushins and mats rot under them as
they sit, the boards are as white under their feet with mould, as a Swans-skin
with feathers, the whole seat saving your presence stinkes so, that it is fitter
to be ha^a suis, then sella venenantis, and so it is at this hour. Indecent I
say, since even the meanest in the Congregation ought to serve God windright
and watertight. For howsoever in the Temple of SOLOMON, Godw Antiq. Hebr page
40. lin. 1.
Laici the People, in fair weather did always pray sub dio and test Caelo,
in the open eye of Heaven: Yet had they their Porticus and shelters, to which
they betook themselves to worship dry in time of rain. And thus much of the
Place of our Assemblies. Now of some Vtensils in it and things of affinity in
nature.

And first of that which in all ages of the Church has been counted (Gods
book only excepted) the most reverend and honorable, the Communion Table.

1. It seems to me an undecent thing and against St. PAUL'S rule; That a Church
should have in it a Communion Table not worth above 12. or 14d. at the most.
Since of all the tables in the Parish that only has had the honor to be called
(...), as Greg. Nazian. (...), Morn. 1. de Miss. 375.
as the first Council of Nice; and (...), as St. Paul. (1 Cor. 10.21.)

2 It seems to me an undecent thing, That our Communion bread, which is by and
by to be the body of CHRIST, (...) should be brought into our Church, and
Sanctum Sanctorum in a stained course totterd linen poke, like adsit
reverentia verbo, a pudding bag, or that (I may not (...)) a foul muckinger,
and therely all prayers time till Sermon begin, in the view of the Congregation
to vilescere in oculis populi; since the very bringing of it into the Church to
that use, is a taking of it out of the World, a promotion of it to more
reverence, and a next step to consecration it self. Also, that a Church should
not have so much as a homely Napkin to cover it, or to take away in decent
manner the fragments. Since all the instruments of the Tabernacle were by Gods
own appointment so curiously covered, even the candlesticks, snuffers and
snuffedishes, from the eyes of the Sons of Kohath with a cloth of blew silk
when they were to remove the Tabernacle. Numb. 4.9.15.

3 It seems to me an undecent thing. That many times the coursenesse of the
bread and vappidnesse and foulness of the the wine is such, or of the
bottles, that the eye makes the mouth loath to touch the cup, and extra
sacramentum, would rather drink homely water. Since when GOD carved for
himself; he chose out not only the pure, but the purest; nor the fine, but
the finest; Exodus 25.24
aurum Purissimum, Exodus 27.20.
Oleum purissimum, Levit. 24.6.
Suffimentum purissimum, Number. ^9.9
locum purissimum. For so the vulgar translation translates the words, (...)
and (...) and I think he does not amiss in so translating it, for so I am
sure the sense is; and the Simila, out of which the Levit. 24, 5
Panes Propositionis, were made to stand before the Lord, was the finest of the
flower, for the Sons ^ornel. a lap.
of Kohath (not the lay people) made them and baked them. 1. Chron. 9.32. And
they boulted out of so many peckes of meal but so many pottles; as Maimon
reports in his Tamidin of daily sacrifices, Ainsworth on Levit. 24, 5
and this must be no other but the finest. And since God has made the fine and
pure, why should man serve him up to his own Table the faces, the foul and
course. Thus of the first Vtensil, the Communion Table, and some undecencies
about it.

The next in honor is the Font.

It seems to me an undecent thing, (...) that a Church should have a cover to
a Font not worth a groat, not three pence, scarce two pence, and that many
Fonts should have none at all, but a clamp of rotten boards, or a piece of some
forlorn table. That the Font should stand behind a Pillar, hiding the sacred
action from the Congregation. Since copula cum Christo is more honorable then
copula cum carne, and Baptism more honorable then Marriage, yet is the
solemnity of marriage performed in the holiest place, and fullest face of the
Congregation.

2 It seems to me a defective thing, if not undecent, that the whole care of
our Aqua baptismalis should be left to the Clerk, without any other inspect or
over him. Who (having perhaps but one paile in his house, and wanting (...) a
Vessel to honor, Romans 9, 21
as St. PAVL calls it) serves the sacred Font with the same payle with which he
serves his hog. O^ perhaps snatches up water in his house homely used and half
fouled before, and powers it into a Font more foul than it. Or perhaps commits
the whole care of it to his young boy or girl, or takes water standing in the
Font before; a month, or two months, older than the child. Carrion. an. 743
and an: 978
-- I dare undertake that those two unhappy Princes, Constable. Copr^nymus Emperor
of the East, and Etheldred King of the English, (though the Stories prove true
which are reported of them) left as fit behind them as that which we many
times use. -- I do not desire to bring into our Church again the Papist rite
of Exorcisme. Although I do not therefore reject it, because it is in their
Church* for it is nearer us, it is in the Lutheran Church, Eck. sasc. 613 Hem
Har. lib. 3 part, 2.196. Eck sasek. 615 Aret prob. 197 Kem har. lib. 3 part, 2
196. Kem. har. lib 3 part, 2 196. Esk fasch. 613 6.4.
and nearer us then so, it was in the Primitive Church, in Cyprian, Nazianzen,
Ambrose, Austins time, though in a better sense then theirs I doubt not. -- I
do not think there is immundus spiritus in the water, an unclean devil to be
cast out by exorcisme, but I think there is many times a divelish uncleanness,
which (superstitious Ceremonies laid aside) deserves to be more reverently
avoided. Since it must by and by represent the water that came out e capsula
cordis Christi, and was part of our Redemption, and since it must by and by be
the one part of an high Sacrament, even to us (...) the laver of a new birth,
is St. PAVL to Titus 3.5.

3 It seems to me (...), that the ancient and pious institution of Godfathers,
is so far declined from the gravity of their original, that young boys and
girls, that have neither the face nor age of a man, Nodin Exodus 518. lin. 1.
and that cannot respo^dere pro seipsis, should spo^dere pro aliis. -- Beza
(who worthily mislikes much in Dionysius the falsely called Areopagite) yet
highly comends this in him, Bez. vol. 1.325
above all that ever he read; that he would have Parents deliver their
children over, Praeclaro alicui divinarum rerum doctori or informatori, to
bring the^ to the Font, and there to undertake the care of their future
Christianity. -- His meaning is not that all Godfathers should be divines: but
his meaning is, that the chief aim of Parents in the choice of Godfathers
should be, to choose able men that could and would. Again, that those should be
no Godfathers, whose very face and presence, pulls down the solemnity of the
Sacrament.

4 It seems also to me an undecent thing, that Godfathers should decline so
far from the primordiall usefulness of their office, and profitablenes to
Christian proficiency. How much increase of Religion and good manners (kept
they a diligent watch over children in those three parts of their office, which
Dionysius, Augustine and Beza, Bez. vol. 2.325 Nodin. Exodus 517. Aq. 3. q. 71.
art. 4. ad 3.
agree with our Church in) might they bring to the Church. 1 To teach and
instruct in all fundamentals of Christianity, both for knowledge and life. 2 At
every occasion to persuade encourage and exhort them. 3 Where they fell short
to rebuke and reprove them, and in all these to have diligentem curam and
sollicitudinem continuam. So should every child be under some awful eye
where ever he went. Beza vol. 2.325. sin. 326. init.
Beza commends the Geneva Church that it twice presses the Godfather, both
before and after Baptism, and makes him twice seriously to promise that he
will use his best care and endeavor, that the child be brought up in the
whole doctrine and law of both Testaments: And

5 It seems to me an undecent thing, that Godfathers undertaking this so
solemnly, in the face of God and his Angels, and in the face of his
Congregation, should so flight a promise made under the eye of so great
witnesses. Scitote says Aug. vos fidejussores pro ipsis apud deum extitisse;
Nodin. Exodus 517.
and surely marriage it self which yet binds so strong, is not undertaken
with much more solemnity of promises then this office of Godfathers. And thus
much of the Font, and some undecencies about that.

And thus have I said all that I meant to trouble you with concerning the Place
of our assemblies and of the vtensils of it. I should now lay before your view
our Assemblies together, but I would feign have a fit man first to clean the
Church, and to speak for them, for when they come they will leave their
tongues at home.

It seems to me an undecent thing, that our Clerks should be scanted in their
wages as they are. The ancient orders wanted good husbandry to contract them.
Subdiaconus Acoluthus Exorcista Lector actiarius Psalmista.
It has been the good husbandry of rural Congregations to contract two
offices the Clerk and Sextons into one; that that one might have a sufficient
maintenance. After that, to contract that one man's wages so, that it shall not
be enough for one; and scanty though it be, yet more scantily shall it be paid.
For they being in their original an Ecclesiastical Order constituted by
Bishops as we are, their means also was a kind of Church maintenance. As they
deal with the Minister therefore in his portion, no marvel if they deal so
with the Clerk in his; and let him complain if he dare. Math. 10, 24
For the Disciple is seldom above his Master. -- Along with the contraction of
niggardize, has gone the contraction of times; For their means being neither
praediall nor personal Tithes, but a bare stipend of so many pence by the
year; the greater price things bear the fewer will their purse reach too; and
the more must they be content to want. For a penny will never be more then a
penny; but a pennyworth will in time grow to be worth a shilling. The Clerk
has still but his penny to buy that shillings worth, and so have the times
swept away eleven parts of 12. of his maintenance, and it shall go hard but
his Parish will sweep away a quarter of that too, his penny shall be but three
farthings, perhaps a half penny. Hence come they to be men of so mean parts
as they are, scarce Organa (...), so mean God wot in the rural parts of the
Church, that they are not able to do the Clerkly part of their office, to
answer the responsories without blasphemy. -- An undecent thing I say it is,
that these should be so scanted for wages, since the cleanliness of our
Churches, depends upon the reward of the work: and since the sufficiency of
the man is not bought but by the sufficiency of the wages, and since every
workman (even the most dunghill labourer) is worthy of his hyer. Luc. 10.7. And
now will I show you our Assemblies and the parts in them.

The parts and parties are Men, Women and Children, Joel. 2.16. For it seems
to me an undecent thing, that any that has a reasonable soul (actu primo and
secundo reasonable) should exempt himself when Gods reasonable service, as St.
Paul calls it, is a doing. Romans 12, 1
-- And it seems to me a more undecent thing, that any that has not a
reasonable soul, (neither actu primo nor secundo reasonable) should frequent
when Gods reasonable service is a doing. -- I must therefore crave pardon while
I reckon up (pax sit auribus and suggesto salus) dogs among the parts of our
Assemblies.

1 Shall I call it no more then a disorder, that the Consecrated bread even
then when the Priest is administering it and saying take eat, should be to be
taken up from under the feet, and that flung down by the disturbance of Dogs?
-- 2 That Dogs should be about the Font, under his feet between his legs as he
is administering the sacred Baptism? -- 3 Shall I call it but a disorder, that
dogs are seen in the face of the Congregation ((...)) Bitchering, others
smelling out a seat to bepisse, and in their courses do it? Non sunt haec
ficta sed facta, I feign them not. I have noted the days nigro th. Are these
the omnia been of our Churchwardens bills? -- I say nothing of their frequent
barkings, brawlings and fightings; the breaking off of divina officia till they
have done: because these are small things. When the Osliarii Tabernaculi did
their office according to Gods own Book of Canons, Deuteronomy. 23.18. a Dog might
not be suffered to come into the Tabernacle, no not the hire of a dog. No not
the hire of a dog in (...), Kem. Harm. l. 1.279.
the popular place of the Temple, much less in Sanctum Sanctorum. None ought
to have a place in the Church, who are not capable of a place in heaven,
because the Church is a school to heaven. But leave we dogs to their proper
place (...), as St. John says, Apoc. 22.15. Let all Dogs be without, and all
Christians within: And to their proper work, Excubare per re Domini, as Livie
speaks, Livius 10^ lin. 33. Stack: tom. 2.46. page 2.
Let them watch at home while their Masters worship at Church.

2 It seems to me (...). That the Minister should sit, after the bells have
don, and the books laid half an hour, 3. quarters of an hour, before he can
have a company, that shall bear the face of a Congregation; in the mean time
the Churchyard has his several confabulations, consultations and
deambulations, his laughings, leapings and shoutings. -- An undecent thing I
say, since it is the office of Bells to make them (...); That is to call them
out of Houses, Streets, Fields, Churchyards and all places into Churches.

3 It seems to me an undecent thing, That if the Minister begin at his
appointed time or soon after the last toll: half prayers, nay 3 quarters
should be don, sermon begun, before the Congregation meet. Since the first part
of our Liturgy is as acceptable to God as the middle and end. And since he
never in any undertaking makes a good end, that leaves out the beginning or
middle. --

4 It seems to me an undecent thing, that when half divine Service is lost for
want of company, the rest should be lost for want of auditors. My meaning is,
the clashing of Pattens in the porches; and the clamping of nailed shoes on
the pavements of the Church; the rusling up of those who are already kneeled to
make way for them that come late, to come to their seats, do so cry down for
half an hour together the rest of the Liturgy, that those that should be
auditors are but images, they have ears to hear but hear not. An undecent
thing I say, Since divine service ought to be free from disturbance as well of
walking as of talking. Canon, 18.

5 It seems to me an undecent thing, and not only deordinatu^ but deordinans,
a cause of much disorder; That in Parishes where there are that come not to
Church in 6 weeks, 8 weeks, 18 weeks together, being able persons. That in
Parishes where there are young ones of 12, or 14 years of age which never yet
came in Church but once, viz. on the day of their Baptism. Yet our
Churchwardens should give up bills with Omnia been. An undecent thing I say,
since the Courts of reformation are the immediate instruments of GOD by which
he keeps his Church in decency and order. And since Oaths there given are the
strongest instruments of Courts. Erasm. Ling. 95.
-- Since the greatest sin (next to blasphemy) which the tongue can commit is
Perjury; and the greatest perjury, is perjury before a rightful Judge sitting
in actu judicativo.

6 It seems to me an undecent thing, That young boys of 14, and 16 years of
age should sit covered while the Preacher is delivering to him Gods message.
Kem. Harm. l. 4. part 1.138.
Since potiores sunt parts docentis quam discentis and sedere and cooperire is
the proper situs and habitus docentis. And since the son owes this to his
Father; and the servant to his master; and the inferiors to the heads of the
Congregation, not to sit covered at so small a a distance.

7 It seems to me an undecent thing. That Parishioners should teach the
Minister another method of care of souls then the Canons do. That he should
leave out a lesson, with the Epistle and Gospel, the Letanie and Commandments
that they may have Sermon enough. -- Since the Lessons Epistles and Gospels,
are verbum Dei (...), but a Sermon is but verbum dei (...) at the most; and I
would to God that those Sermons which such men so much glote after, and
prefer so far before Lessons, Epistles and Gospels, were always so much.

8 It seems to me an undecent thing, That in a Parish of Three or 400 people,
there should not be found three beside the Clerk, that answer Amen to our
Prayers or make any responsorie to the Commandments or other parts of the
Liturgy. And that selfe-conceited man, Kem. Harm. l. 2.136.
his brains stood certainly the backside forward, that acquitted himself and
his Sect of their lip-labor thus. How should a man say Amen to that he
understands not; the plainness of our prayers convince him rather of Schism
and obstinacy than of ignorance. Canon. 8.
-- An undecent thing I say, Since the Amen of the mouth is as due as the Amen
of the heart; if both need both must ask, if both receive both must give
thanks. Since in the times of the Church nearer CHRIST, the whole people, not
only the Clerk answered Amen to the Church prayers. (...), (says Justin
Mart. Page 1 ^2. Ar^t Pr^bl. 227.
) (...). And that not with whispering or mumbling, but fausta acclamatione,
with a shouting voice, a voice of men showing how they favored them, consented
to them, and desired they should prosper. Nonnius Marcellus.
Faustus a favendo. -- Yea since even in the Churches trained up under the
Apostles themselves, All the people said Amen. Bell. tom 3.48^.
How shall he that occupies the room of the unlearned say Amen at the giving
of thanks. (1 Cor. 14.16.) -- Yea since the light of nature teaches as much,
for thence Epicletus had it. If I were a Nightingale (says he) I would do as
a Nightingale, but being a man I will do as a man. I will not be all voice,
for that's like a bird, too low, nor all spirit for that's like an Angel too
high for me; but spirit and voice that's like a Man, I will keep my rank. --
And Constantine the Great (whose memory ought ever to be honorable in the
Church) would not only say Amen to the prayers, but would read the verses of
the Psalms interchangeably with the Minister, S D. 185
says Eusebius in. vit. Constable.

9 It seems to me (...) a disorder, That Parishioners should throng by
Thirties and by forties to other Churches and leave their own empty. That a
sick party should send to the next Parish to be prayed for; That another on
his deathbed, should send for the same Minister home to him to visit him, to
pray with him, to Preach for him. In the mean time the proper Pastor, to whom
God and the Church has committed the care of his soul, though he offer his
service shall not be accepted; though he offer to Preach, there shall be no
Sermon rather. What is this, but for the people to usurp Episcopal authority?
To set over themselves what pastor they please? nay more then Episcopal
authority. Upon every vain fancy to chose, upon every vain flesh to leave
their choice. In those ancient Churches where (by connivence not of right) the
people had a hand in the choice of their Pastor, yet when they had chosen they
were no more at liberty to leave them. Even in St. John's time, though Parishes
were not yet divided. As the 7 Angels had their several Churches; so those 7.
Churches had their several Angels. Apoc. 1.20.

10 It seemed to me an undecent speech, his brains sure had no Pia matter, that
spoke it. I heard (says one) a Preacher, and he spoke for the bowing at the
name of JESUS, he was fitter to preach in a tub then in a pulpit. -- An
undecent speech I say; Since not only the Reverend Fathers of our Church,
(whose learned and pious Sermons deserve for them (I am sure) better then a Tub
to preach in) do speak for it in their Canons: but a Hoker, 347. Bell. to.
2.246
b Aret. Probl. 189 cap. 1.
c Hoker, 433. Canon 18.
also ancient Fathers the honor of Pulpits for their times, do yet speak for
it in their writings: writings not bung'd up in bartels, nor tumbled into cubs,
but writings which are counted the ornaments of the greatest Libraries in the
world. And he whose writings are in the most Preachers hand in this land (who
are worthily famous for preaching) and are many a time the credit of their best
sermons, Stell Luc. 10.1.67. coll. 1.
thinks this fit for a Pulpit not for a Tub. The name JESUS (says he) of all
his names cost him dearest, the name God he has from his nature; the name LORD
from his power; the name CHRIST from his unction, etc. they cost him no shame,
no tears, no trouble, no blood; the name JESUS or Savior cost him his blood.
Romans 5.9. (...) saved by his blood. On the Cross he saved us, on the cross
(by divine providence) was no other name. This is Jesus the King of the Jews.
Mat. 27 33 -- If Christ be God and man do we amiss to bow to him? If we do
not amiss in bowing to him, do we amiss in taking that time to bow to him
when his name is named? Few prayers in our Liturgy are made to Christ, Bell.
to. 3.847 84^.
but to the father in Christ's name, and are concluded for Christ's sake: to who^
the suite is made, to him is the bowing; not to him directly in whose name it is
made. If we add therefore this decent ceremony to his direct worship, will not
a little patience be enough to bear it? If he like not our ceremony, nor list
not to conform himself to it, yet let him yield us the protection of St.
James prohibition, Iam. 3.1. (...). -- Let him show me, that it is either contra
fidem, or contra bonos mores, 8. K 56. Epist. 11 s, ad Ianuarium.
and as St. Aug. says, and I will justle with our Church about it an no longer
obey; which till he can do, let the Philosophers ambition be his wisdom; who
when every man was eager to show his opinion, and to have it recorded as
conclusum est, desired that this only might be recorded of him. Advancem. l. 2
106 pa.
That there was one there, that knew how to hold his peace, -- which is time
for me to do.

I will add only this one thing, for the necessity of outward decency an
order. -- It is necessary it should be seen, there is a God in the world. --
This cannot be seen by his essence, though it fill the world. -- It cannot be
seen by the hearts of men, they are as hidden from our eye as God himself. --
In the book of nature he has too much hid himself from the people eye. --
Therefore there need other outward expressions of him, which the people are
capable of, viz our outward asse^blies, the places of them, and our carriages
in them; all which ought to be such, as may convey a revere^t opinion of him
into the peoples heart by the eye.

If it be necessary God should be seen in the world, it is necessary he should
be seen as he is. Not only that he is a God of holiness, but also that he is a
God of majesty. To this Christ directs us. Mat. 5.16. Let your light so shine
before men, that they seeing your good works, may glorify your father which is
in heaven; he would have not only our doctrine, but our outward works, to direct
men to this, that God is a glorious God, and therefore to be glorified.

If any outward works of man do report Gods majesty to the world, then surely
these; the building of houses for him, the frequenting of the^, the cariages of
men in them; for these are directly to that end to report God. The more
directly they are to that end, the more lively they ought to do it, and pro
posse, lest they report short, and make him undervalued. -- Outward carriage
therefore and speech, as well of the assembly as of the Priest ought to report
home.

And for our Temples and the utensils of them, God himself directs us.

When he platform'd out his own Tabernacle and inspired Solomon to his own
Temple, we see how glorious they were. Not only the buildings, but even the
lowest utensils, the snuffers and snuffedishes did pro posse praese
ferre-numen, all of pure gold. 1. King. 7.49.

Though we are not bound to take this as a law from God, to make all our
Temples by; yet we shall do well to make him our pattern. At least to learn
thence, what manner of Temples distaste him not. And if we acquit our selves
from the costlines and gloriousnes; yet may we not free our selves from the
decency and comelines. Though God shun not a cottage, yet men must think him
worthy of a palace.

Thus have I laid before this Synod* those things which I thought differed from
St. Paul's rule, (...) If I have spoken that which is pleasing in his eyes, the
Lord prosper it and carry it on; if otherwise, the Lord amend it, and there end
it.

Blessed are they which hear the word of God, etc.


