A Necessary instruction of Christian faith and hope, for christians to hold
fast, and to be bold up on the promise of God, and not to doubt of their
salvation in Christ.

Translated out of D. Vrbanus Regius, into English And newly recognized by John
F.

PSALM. 54 verse. 8. Taste ye and see how gracious the Lord is: blessed is the
man that trusts in him. Imprinted at London by Hugh Singleton, dwelling in
Creed Lane, at the sign of the gylden Tun, nere unto Ludgate, and are there
to be sold.

Cum priuilegio.

Anno. 1579.

To the Right honorable Sir Fraunces Knolles Knighte, Thresorer of the Queens
Majesty's household, and one of her highness most honorable privy Counsel,
wishes abundance of blessedness, both in this life and in the life to come.
HAVING (RIGHT honorable) above thirty years since, printed this short
treatise ensuing, being translated and delivered unto me by Master Fox,
whose judgment and faithfulness in the Lords causes are, so sufficientlye
grounded among the faithful both at home and abroad, as my pore testimony can
nothing add thereunto, nay so much as I not only protect, but also rejoice my
self in the first printing hereof under the same. And the event has yet more
made good his choice in this treatise whilst that the same was even desirously
embraced of the christian readers, and has been known to persuade in the
matter, it treats of, some that before were far wide from the truth therein.
For though the volume be very small yet does it discourse a great point of our
christian faith, religion, and comfort, not only very plainly and familiarly,
but also most pithely and substantially, which to do can not be but to the
reader singularly fruitful. Wherefore I have now my self requested of M.
Fox, of whom I first received it, that it would please him to reviewe the
same, with such profitable additions as to him should seem meet for the
benefit of the godly reader, that yet once more in my time I might publish the
same to Gods glory and the comfort of the godly. Wherein I esteem my self much
bound unto him for granting my request. And now (right honorable) I thought
my self to have a fit occasion as well to give unto your honor some duetiful
remembrance of my thankefulnes for so great kindness as I acknowledge to have
inioyed from you^ as also to publish a book so greatly adu^^cing the honor of
God and the faith of his people under your honors name, to whom I know both
those respects to be very precious: The Lord give his blessing thereunto, and
increase his heauly gifts upon you with daily increases, ever preserving your
honor and al yours in this life, and unto the life of immortality, blessedness,
and glory, in the kingdom of heaven.

Your honors ever to command, Hugh Singleton.
A preface to the book here following.
THere came to my hands of late a certain little book, bearing the title: An
instruction how to be bold upon gods promise, etc. Which book being
translated above xxx. years since, for a dear father of mine, one Richard
Melton (to recompense him with some fruit of my studyes, for the charge which
he more like a natural, then a stepfather bestovved upon me in setting me to
school) and being brought to me by the Printer, I was desired to take a
little pains in perusing the same. Whereunto, to satisfy the request both of
him, and certain others, which seemed desierous of the book, I was contented
to grant. And so much the more, both for the authors sake, being a learned
writer of Luthers years and standing, and especially for the argument of the
book, which in these our days I see greatly expedient and much needful,
for comfort of the simple ignorant. For what doctrine can be more excellent,
then of salvation? what more sure, then the promise of God? what more
certain then the verity thereof? what more comfortable, then to stand firm
and ascerteined of the same? or what more needful, then the same doctrine to
be taught a broad? And that so much more needful, by how much we see the
adversaries of this doctrine in these our days to grow, both strong and many,
but none more strong, then man's own natural sense and judgment, which
f^lowing nothing but his own original capacity. without the word of the
gospel, can comprehend little or nothing, of this mystery.

From the which our naturally ingrafted blindness little differs the
scholediuinitie of the papists, who albeit they do seem outwardly to hold
the nam of christ: yet the promises made to us in christ, they hold not: the
freedom of his grace they see not, but make doubts vvher none is, teaching
also that no man ought to be sure of his salvation, but to stand in fear and
doubt. And no great marvel if they so teach, Difference between the Papist and
the Protestant.
for if justification as they say do stand by works with faith, and not by
faith with out works: by merits: and not by promise freely, by our selves
partly, and not by Christ only, how can any certainty c be holden without
fear or doubting? And yet neither is fear altogether excluded from this
certainty, which we hold, nether works also from faith. The fear of God I
mean, How fear and confidence stand together in a true christian.
which is and ought to be in every good child of God. And yet not
vvithstanding his inheritance stands fast and sure. As a son and heir
fears and reuerenceth his father, and yet doubts not of his heritage: So
God is always to be feared, but his covenant never to be mistrusted. Neither
do they rightly consider the causes of our salvation, which teach this
docttrine of fear and doubting.

Touching the explication whereof, three causes are especially to be noted.
Three causes of salvation declared
Whereof the one rests in the promise of God, the other in the blood of
Christ. The third in the faith of man. All which three, be causes together
concurrent for our salvation. For both gods promise saves, and Christ's
passion saves: Also faith saves, but in sundry and diverse respects, by
promise and grace we ar saved, as being the cause purposing, or formal. By
Christ, as cause material and meritorious. By faith as cause instrumental or
conditional. Of these three, the promise, (the things promised I mean) is to
come. The death of Christ, whereupon the promise stands, is past. Faith which
looks to the person of him that dyed, Assurance of our salvation how it
rests.
endures. And hereupon rests the true assurance of salvation in the hearts
of all the faithful, for as it is true that the suffering of Christ is past: So
no less true it is, the things promised upon his suffering, are to come.

And for so much, How faith brings in hope.
as all these promises of God are in Christ, and made to them that believe in
him: therefore faith in Christ, to which faith alone the promise is made, may
boldlye call hope unto her, and so most certainly assure himself of undoubted
salvation. And here rises up the operacion of faith, and of hope, with
difference betvveene them both. Which two albeit most jointly knitte
together, yet they differ The difference between faith and hope discussed.
some what in the obiecte. For as hope The obiecte of faith and of hope
considered.
properly respects the promise of God, and respects things to come: even so
faith properly looks to the person of the son of God, and in him takes
present justification. Thus then the obiecte of hope is the word of promise.
The obiecte of faith is principally the person of the Savior. And though it may
be said truly, speaking in right terms, that we believe the promise of god
to be true: yet it is not so truly said, that we believe in the promise, but
hope in the promise of almighty god.

Faith then, The operation of faith and hope.
touching his object, runs to the person of the son, in whom the promise
is given. Hope holds fast in the promise given in Christ, whereby hope
assures, faith f^aueth. Faith saves hope comfort The cause of our
salvation, ever to faith only and not to hope.
And as true faith in Christ can not b^e without hope: So hope again without
faith in Christ is to no purpose. Neither is every man ^h^t hops, or be
cause he hops well, therefore saved, but because he believes well, (that is
in the son of God) therefore is he saved. Who so is freely saved by blood,
as boldlye may hope of salvation by promise and nothing doubt. Albeit
notvvithstanding this hope is not alvvayes alike strong in every particular
believing man, for although the promises be general, and indifferently extended
to all believers, and ought to be hold ^^st of all men: yet every particular
person, though he believe in Christ right well, can not so well at al times,
as we se, apply these promises to himself, as he should, but many times
creeps in some distrust or misdoubt of himself, partlye thorovve vvekenes of
spirit, partly through conscience of sin, or grievous impressions of the
enemy. As many times by experience we see happen to the good s^intes of God,
who holding the same profession of christian faith, Faith to justification may
be sometimes where hop faints but hope to comfort can never be without faith.
as other good christians do, yet in applying these general promises to
themselves, can not without some fear and diffidence, be so comforted, as
others be, and as they would themselves. Against whom, nothing in this book is
meant, or spoken, but only against such as vvilfully mayntain the contrary
doctrine: Not against such as of infirmity being dejected through fear would
feign hope better, and can not: but against those, which of purpose contrary to
the promise of grace, do hold that no man ought to be certain or assured in
this life of his salvation and favor of God, but ever to stand in doubt and
fear thereof. Of the which two sorts of men the one is to be comforted, and
well hoped of, for though hope and faith many times in good men do shrink and
qua^e through infirmity and tentation, yet by grace and goodness of the Lord
it rises again. The other utterly as heretical and contrary to grace, are to
be detested and by sound doctrine impugned, by such godly books as in this ye
may read. The lord Jesus of his grace and goodness, comfort the weak sp^ted,
raise up them that be fallen, reduce the ignorant, and set up his glorious
kingdom with speed, to who^ be glory for ever.

Amen.
John Fox.
AN error of all errors, most pestilent and deuilish it is, to teach us ever
to doubt, and never to be sure of Gods favor and our salvation: as we have
been led in the popes church, by unlearned priests, which for their purpose
have wickedly wrasted the words of Solomon in a wrong understanding. Eccl. 9
No man can till whether he be worthy of love or hatred. The Hebrew text
means another thing, and is wrong translated.
This error has Satan himself brought into the church to obscure Christ,
and clean to abolish our faith in him, and in the place of our faith to bring
in wavering and doubtful opiniones, and weak imaginations into our heads,
whereby in great extremity, and earnest temptations we could take no
assurance, A true christian man doubts not of Gods favor.
but were driven to fear and doubting, for he that doubts of the will and
favor of God, and is not assured that he will be merciful to him for Christ's
sake, and that all his sins be pardoned in him, and makes a staid doctrine
thereof, and wilfully rests therein, hec is no true christian, and in his
incredultie can not be but condemned, if he do not rise and repent. Most sure
it is, faith Faith.
in Christ is only that makes a true christian man, doubtting and incredulity
Incredulity.
makes a man no christian. To bel^ue and to doubt be not both one. To believe
is one thing, and to doubt is an other. Therefore he that continues in this
foresaid errore, believes not the twelve articles of our Creed, in which Gods
grace is clearly and undoubtedly given to us in Christ: Then how can they be
christian men, which lack the faith of Christ? Or how can such one say the
Lords oration well, which makes a doctrine of doubtfulnes. He may with his
mouth sound the words, O our be aue^ly father, but his heart has no trust in
God, neither has any ^irmitie yt he is a merciful father, but doubts of yt
grace of god, whither he be merciful or no, or whither he pardon him or not.
His tongue says, I believe in Jesus Christ, I believe the forgiveness of sins,
but his heart believes not that Christ dyed for our offenses, and yt by his
death he has obtained for us forgiveness of all our sins. He that wauereth
thus, can not but despair in y^ last extremity of this life. And if he
despair, without repentance is in danger: for he deperteth with an evil
conscience, and has no knowledge of Christ, nor believes the gospel. Then
what hope can he have of everlasting life except I say he repent his error? Yet
our blind guydes and seducers in the Popes clergy have taught us, that no
man can preciselye know, but ought to doubt whether he be in Gods
favor or no. They that be or have been in this error, what belief had
they? did they not waunder like the Wind hither and thither? Were they not
clean void of faith? Had they not a wretched, uncertain and a wavering life?
How could they know whither their works pleased GOD or no? What could
such a man think in him self but thus.

I am a Christened man, I have studied to live well, and to do good works:
but yet I am uncertain whither my works please GOD, or whether my sins be
forgeauen me or or not. Mine ill deeds be more then my good. I have don mo sins
then virtues. Alas what shall become of me. They that thus waver and doubt,
what hope ca^ they have in the agony of death, what faith have they, what thing
to trust upon? At what time Satan and his own conscience shall accuse him of
sin, saying, he that lives ill, shall be damned, thou never fulfilledst the
commandments of God, No sinner can be saved. Does not Christ say if thou will
enter into life keep the commandments: Math. 19.
but thou have never kept them. Here is no hope left but that a man oppressed
with such cogitations, must needs despair. The blind Papists have taught
us poor wretches, that the foundation of our hope lies in the grace of God,
The doctrine of the priests clergy.
and in the m^rites of our own works, so that our hope should be nothing else
but the expectation of life coming of gods grace and of our own deseruinges.
What hope is, by the sophisters.
Item, that our hope in no wise could stand without the help of our merits,
other of the sophisters do thus defyne it: Hope is a boldness of mind
conceived of Gods goodness to have everlasting life through our good works.

Here thou hear these two, grace and deserving, Grace and deserving are two
contrary things and to be separated
but these two do i^ join together, for where is grace there is no meriting,
again, where meriting is there is no grace. Therefore if a sick person
tempted about his sins think thus, that without his own merits he can
look for no salvation, then he trusts not to the grace of God, neither does
he apprehend it nor ground himself upon it, for so he has been taught and
led that it was presumpcion to say, a man might be assured of Gods favor,
without the adding of his works and merits. And thus have we ben led in this false persuasion so many years, but in earnest tenta^ions there is none that
can stand upon his merits or deeds, for here comes in the law of God
accusing him and all other men, that none of them al have fulfilled it. Then
where be those good deeds where upon the sick man may trust, and hope for
salvation thereby? In our great tentations we all do feel that we be
sinners, and that all our life is naught and so void of all goodness, that
it is not able to abide and stand in the severe judgment of GOD. These blind
seducers have made one foot of our hope lame and mayned, which is grace. The
other foot lame and halting, which is our own works. Now how can our hope
stand fast, that we fall not into desperation?

To prove than that by our deeds we can deserve no justification, neither
any part thereof, with all that ever we are able to do: And that it is not
in our power to accomplish the law of GOD, but that the law The law,
only serves to see our unableness, our vices and sins thereby, it needs
no great declaration. We see this daily in our selves, that our flesh never
cease fighting, against the spirit, and does inwardlye grudge at every
good deed we do, so that this naughtiness and corruption of ours marreth
all, whereby our good works can not be pure nor acceptable that we do To.
vii. Romans 7.
Gal. v. Gala. 5.
1. John. 1. 1. John. 1
Wherefore writteth John, if we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves,
and truth is not in us. Also all the faithful say daily in the Lords prayer.
Forgeiue us our trespasses, Ers. lxiiii. We be as unclean every one, and al
our righteousness like a cloth de^led with the flowers of a woman. Ephesians. 64.
Furthermore if we did fulfill all commandementes of God, yet did we nothing
but which is our bound duty to do, neither can we look for any reward
thereby, witness to Christ. Luke. xvii. Luke. 17.
When you have d^n all that you can, yet say you be unprofitable servants.
These words of Christ verelye may pluck down our glory, and make us all
ashamed to put any affiaunce in our selves, or in our own good works.

Howbeit I speak not this to extenuat the worthiness of good works, good works,
how they are necessary.
or to pluck men back from well doing. For y^ scripture teaches us, y^ the
study of good works is ever to be employed, and wills us to be folowers of
honesty and good working.

But no man must put affiaunce in his works, as though by y^ worthiness of the^
he could obtain grace, or put away sin, or get his salvation. For if our
righteousness and justification before god stand in our might or merits, then
dyed Christ in vain. Gala. ii. Gala. 2.
Good works in their degree and order have their value and be greatly
commended. A good man ought to insewe good virtues to thentent he may do the
will of his Lord God, which commands us to live virtuously, and that he may
also approve himself to his Lord God, that God our heavenly father may be
glorified thereby. Math. 5.
Also we ought to do good works, to show our selves thankful again to God,
for his infinite benefits and gifts. Phil. 2.
Also we must do good works to exercise our faith, that they may be
testimonies of our belief, and thus do they profit both me and my neighbor:
My neighbor in giving example to encorage him the better to a christian life,
also in that he is succored by them in his necessity. Secondarily, they profit
me in that they exercise my faith, 2. Pet. 1
and mortify my flesh and keep me truly in my vocacion. For why if I do any
benefit to my friends and to mine enemies, and perceive it to come of a frank
and free heart, then I well assure my self that my faith is lively and a true
faith which makes of damned sinners the true children of god. John. 1
Gala. 3.


Item, here is to be noted that good works be those, which a man believing in
Christ works in faith in his lawful vocation, after the ordinance and form
of the law of God: Contrary evil works Evil works.
and sins be those, which be don without faith and with a fained charity,
trusting upon them to purchase the favor of God, the forgiveness of sins,
and the kingdom everlasting, which is directly contrary from our christian
faith. For our christian faith does ground us upon a more substanciall stone,
which is Christ the true forgiuer of sins, The foundation of our faith.
and our only reconciler, which has obtained for us this grace, has washed
away our sins and has deserved for us everlasting salvation. This faith
makes our consciences not to waver nor doubt any thing of the grace of God.
For the property of this faith is to quiet our conscience. The true catholic
and lively faith is this, Romans 5.
when a man grounding upon Christ fully persuades himself, What true faith
is.
and believes stedfastlye and nothing doubts, that he has God pacified, and
a most gentill father to him for Christ's sake, to whom in all his necessity,
adversity, and in all his affairs as a child to his father, he wholly
commits and commends him self, puts al his trust in him calls on
him, seeks no succor, consolation, nor goodness but only of him.

This faith purifieth our hearts. Acts. 15.
This faith is always working through charity and has the holy ghost which
moves us and stirs us up to follow the example of Christ, which has left
behind steps of all good works, and patience in afflictions for us to
follow, saying to us: This is my commandment that ye love together as I have
loved you. John. 15.
You be my friends if you will do these things that I have given and taught you.
He that loves me will keep my lessons. John. 13.
I have given you example, Luke. 19.
as I have done to you, so do ye to your selves, by this you shall be known
to be my disciples, if ye have love one to another. Again, he that takes not
up his cross and follows me, he is not my disciple.

Where there is no repentance nor any amendment of life, No good faith, no good
works
and study of good works, verery there is no true faith.

True faith can not be without good works, True faith true works.
no more then a good tree with out fruit or the sun without his heat, this
is undoubted. Therefore let every man examine and search himself well least
he deceive himself. Many men there be which say they believe when they have
no belief, as it may appear by their vicious and wicked life. For this is
certain, where soever true faith is, there is also the fear of God, there is
repentance, there a true and a Christian man's life follows, there the old
sinful man is put off and a new put on. Ephe. 4.
For because this is the virtue and operation of our holy baptism, that faith
does clean renew and transform a christian into a new man, which walks not
afte flesh but after the spirit. Romans viii. Romans 8.


Then where the grace of god wor^keth in us good fruit, and we begin to follow
the commandementes of God, our old man is not all mortified straight way, but
wild and wanton flesh, with her lusts does strive against us all our life
long, and never cease provoking us to sin, and ever rebelleth against our
spirit, letting and hindering us in all honest virtues, whereby we be not
able to live so vprightlye after Gods commandments as we would Wherefore when
our sinful conscience or the fear of death does come upon us, we can not
trust to our works, nor find any comfort therein, but (if we will be saved)
we must needs cry with the holy king David. Enter not Lord into judgment with
thy servant, for in thy sight no living flesh shall be justified. Our good
works though they be never so holy and excellent, yet the value of them is
not such, neither ought we to do them for any such purpose, neither does God
require them to be done of us for that in tent, that we should be justified and
saved by them. For no man can trust any thing to his works, neither be they
able to deliver us from our death. That thing only the works of Jesus Christ
is able to do and nothing else.

This glory and honor is only dew to him and to no man else, Our
justification only belongs to Jesus Christ.
to be a Jesus, that is by interpretation, a Savior. For he only takes
away our sins justifies and saves us by his works, and passion. This is
his office, his work and duty only, for the which he was sent hither of his
Heavenly Father and ours to do. Therefore if the holy works and
commandments of God, can bring no peace of conscience, then what shall a
miserable sinner do in the distress of his tentation? Whether shall he go?
whether shall he turn himself? Where shall he find help, and succor and
comfort? so then if we look for any salvation, we must firmelye believe and
persuade our consciences, that our sins be pardoned us, and clean taken away.

But now how shall we be so certified in our minds. I answer, in such
tentations a man must needs set aparte the law, and all his good deeds
that ever he has done, all his strength, all his power, and merits, and let
them all stand a side in this case. For here nothing can succoure us, but
only the works and passion of Jesus Christ. And therefore we must appeal
from the law, Appeal from the law to Christ.
streighte to the rich and merciful promise of our Father in his son
Christ, as unto a sure succor and a sanctuary of eternal security and peace,
and hold it fast in a firm and a sure faith. And thus shall we find comfort
and quietness enough, and more then we can desire, then neither sin, nor
death, nor hell, shall be able to hurt us.

The promise of God is this.

Almightye GOD has promised us damnable sinners in his only begotten son
Jesus Christ, What the promise of God is.
without any manner of exception or condition of our own merits clearely^ of
his own free grace and goodness, Hie. 31.
full remiss^on of al our sins his holy spirit and ever lasting life, and that
he will evermore be our Father, Heb. 3.
and that he will vouchsafe to receive us to his children, and give us
perpetual salvation.

These things stand true, Heb. 9.
firm eternal, vnfalible, sure and steadfast for ever. God which is almighty,
and which can not lie has so promised to us, 2. Cor. 1
and has sworn depely by himself yt he will perform the^.

This is the new testament and the everlasting covenant of grace made to us in
Christ betwixt him and us, and confirmed with his blood, whereof his prophe^s so
greatly speak.

Christ the son of God has confirmed this testament by his death, and is a
sure gage or a pledge of this promise of God. The truth and grace of God is
laid and reposed for us in Christ, in him we be sure to find it, as God
speaks of his son Christ, our true David in the psalm. lxxxix. Psalm. 89.


My truth and my mercy shall eueruermore be with him, and in my name his power
shall be exalted, he shall call me: Thou art my father my god, and the rescue
of my health. And I shall set him to be mine heir and first begotten, auance
him abaue al ye kings of ye earth. I shall evermore reserve my mercy to him,
and my faithful testament upon him. And I shall set up his seed for evermore,
and his throne like the days of the firmament. And if his children transgress
my precepts, and will not walk in my judgments I shall visit and chastise
their iniquities with my rod, and their sins with stripes but I will never
take away my mercy clean from him, and my truth shall never fail him. I will
never break my testament that I make, neither will I ever go from my words yt
proceed out of my lyps. Once have I sworn in my holiness, see if ever I break
mine appointment with my leruant David, his sede shall remain for ever, and his
thron like y^ son in my sight. etc. This promise is also read in the ii. Reg.
vii. Here in this prophecy God speaks of yt eternal kingdom of Christ which
perpetual mercy, peace and quietness is, for in Christ he has reposed and
laid up his truth and mercy. Therefore in no other thing can this promise of
grace be found or obtained save only in Christ. In him God has promised to us
salvation freely through his mighty mercy: Therefore who soever believes in
Christ without any more a do (to be bold upon it) he has al things. And
though there be in Christ's kingdom weak and infirme-sinners, Weakness in
Christ's kingdom born vvithal
which slip and fall many times, yet this privilege and prerogative they
have, their sins shall not be imputed to damnation. All their offenses be
offenses of children not of servants. We have a salue-conducie and a passeporte
through all the perils of death and damnation. And though we fall never so
hainous^ye yet shall we not perish therefore, for our christian faith does so
fasten us unto our David Christ that we be made o^e spirit with him. In Christ
we have the verity of Gods promise, and his mercy evermore to continue, our
heavenly father will not punish his weak children in his wrath for ever, but
will chastise them with favor in this temporal life, call us again to
repentance. Thus the grace of God shall ever abide firm and stable, which we
be sure shall not fail us so that we believe this David Christ to be our
king, and cast all our trust on him.

And here is to be noted and considered where he says. My truth Truth.
and mercy always go with him, if it be his truth then it cannot lie, nor
deceive us: if it be his mercy and grace, Grace.
then it stands not by our works nor the law: wherefore al these things
shall happen to us in Christ and for Christ's sake, which by his works and
passion, has purchased and boughte all things for us. Esa. 55.


Bow down your ear and come to me, hear me and your soul shall live, and I
shall strike a bargain with you perpetual, the sure mercies which I promised
to David. This shall be the bargain, that I shall strike with the house of
Israel. Iere 31.
After those days I shall give my law within their bowels, and will write it
in their hearts: and I will be their god, Nota.
and they shall be my people, for I will pardon all their iniquities, and will
no more remember their offenses. etc. So does the Apostle in his epistle to the
Hebrews Heb. 8. 10.
allege the same place, where he approves that this bargain of grace or this
new Testament betwixt God and us is now confirmed and sealed up by the death
of Christ. And that god is now no more a straight judge, but a most tender
father to all the faithful of Christ, and that he will pardon all their
offenses. Likewise to the Gala. Gala. 3.
S. Paul calls this eternal bargayne of grace, a testament that shall stand
for ever, where as he writes: No man breketh or adds unto y^ will or
testamente of a man being once confirmed and ratified. Then if men's testaments
ones made and confirmed, abide firm and sure, how much more the testament of
God once confirmed and ratified shall abide firm? These testimonies do prove
evidently and stronglye that Gods grace promised in Christ is firm and sure,
We ought not to dout.
so that now no beleuer ought ne can doubt of the favor of God and remission
of his sins. But undoubtedly and constantly ought to stick to the promise
of God, which cannot, neither shall be found false.

What heart now is so hard or stonye that will not relent nor be stirred up
by this firm and sweet promise of god, to take a bold faith and a confident
trust upon ye grace and favor of almighty God being so promised to us? Will not
these words make us certified, yea and also secure as it were, a bond, Bond,
testament. promise. mercy. oath.
a bargain, a testament, promise, oath, and mercy. And al these does no man
which may deceiu us, but god eternal our father in heaven promise, which is
truth it self. Yt is an horrible blindness in us y^ when god himself does call
us to his grace, and does promise freely to us for his mercy sake, clear
remission of our sins, and for y^ same purpose has sent to us his only
begotten son into the world, to be a sure token or pledge of his heavenly
favor and grace, and yet we lean and hold more to our own stinking works then
to the true and everlasting truth of God. Ah for pity how many precious
souls most pituously have we brought to ruin and doubtful desolation through
these works doing. The law only has been uttered unto them, and nothing else
beaten into their heads but this, what God requires of us, how great
sinners we were, what vengeance of God did fall upon sin, what tormen^s,
what fire and brimstone we should suffer in hell. But none taught the people
faithfully the promises of God, the go^pell of Christ, in the which sorrowful
and vexed consciences of sinners might be refreshed, and learn the infinite and
vnlearchable grace which God of his unknown mercy has promised, that is to
say has given us freely in Christ, Gods promise is a gi^t.
with the which promises seelye consciences might be reliued and confirmed
strongly against all the gates of hell. We blind and wretched creatures would
reward God with ou^s, and deserve of him all things that we have, we would
not be in his debt or danger, we disdayned to have his liberty come freely unto
us, and nothing would take of him by grace. An^ that was the cause why Christ
was not rightly preached, What was the cause why Moses was preached and not
Christ.
but only Moses: So it always comes to pass, when the commandementes only
be set forth, after the manner of y^ Jews, and the promises of God nothing
spoken of, there can be none other but that men's consciences must needs be
vexed and disquieted with miserable sorrow and perplexity, so that they can
receive almost no consolation. But whosoever will bring men to God in deed,
and will quiet their consciences, must always teach these two together, the
law and the promise, as the prophets, Christ, and the Apostls ever did.

By the law they brought men to the knowledge of their sinfulnes, The use of
the law.
their unworthiness, their infirmity and inability to goodness, their duty what
they ought to do, and their damnation which thereof followed: And so brought
them to humiliate themselves before God, whereby they being justly stricken with
the feeling of Gods right judgment, might ernestly forethinke them of their
sins, and call for mercy. They taught not the law so as though it were
enough to know, what were to be done, or not to be done, or as though of our
strength we could do good and eschew ill, and so by the law and by our
own works be found just before God, and put away sin. They taught not
the law I say, for no such end and purpose, Why the law was given.
neither was the law given therefore that we should be justified thereby before
God, but it was given for this, to require of us all righteousness, and to
threaten us, that by the requiring of this righteousness, and we being nothing
able to perform it, we might the better learn thereby our vnright^ousnes,
and naughtines, and so finally to acknowledge and confess our own
wretchedness, to the intent y^ being thus contrite and humiliated in heart we
might seek to Christ for succoure the which by his works and passion does
only justify us.

We be nothing able to deserve any salvation by the law or our works. That is
an higher and a more excellent thing then that our rotten works be able to
procure. God has promised to give us that freelye by his mercy for Christ's
sake, and does give it of grace to them that believe in Christ, as S. Paul to
the Romans Romans 6
does call everlasting life the g^ft of God. And likewise to the Galathians
Gala. 3.
does put a clear difference betwixt them, and shows plainly his mind of
the law and of the promise how they concur to our justification. Let us weigh
well his words, for all y^ weight and foundation of our justification does lie
upon the^. His words be these. If our inheritance stand of the law, then it
stands not of promise. But God did geeue it to Abraham. Mark this well.
If the law had been given unto us, which might have justified us, then our
justification might be of the law. But the scripture has wrapped al things
under sin, that the promise might come by the faith of Jesus Christ to all
that believe.

And again in the second to the Gal. Gala. 2.
If our justification says he, could come by the law, then Christ dyed in
vain. Therefore I say where as men thus by the law were brought to the
knowledge of their sins, and so stricken with great sorrow and heaviness of
conscience, for their sinful and vicious nature, tha^ was the gospel put and
set before them, that is to say grace promised in Christ.

And than did they begin to believe ernestly and to rejoice in their hearts
truly for this grace promised in Christ, that God had geeuen them for Christ's
sake, forgiveness of their sins. Thus s. Paul in the place before recited,
does comfort with true consolation wretched and desperate sinners, for he
leads the^ only to the promise of GOD and beats that into them, for thereby
only our consciences be clean and quieted. And does teach the law and Gods
commandments also, exhorting us diligently to the study of good works, and
is not only content with that, but also does show where and how to come by the
courage and just to do these good works.

Thus first they taught the law for repentance, but streighte after they
joined with all the promise of God, to bring me^ to the knowledge of the most
rich grace of God given and promised us in Christ, teaching withal where we
should get the strength to fulfill the commandments where our sinful nature
was not able to fulfill it. In consideration whereof, the Apostles every where
declared and settefoorth the exceeding and passing riches and treasures of Gods
mighty grace which he has given and promised us in Christ, Romans 8.
if we believe upon him, and so ^orth did lead wretched sinners from y^ law
to Christ. This great grace of god, so offered they receive then and embraced
greatly: and thus believing were pacified in their consciences.

The law does threaten and affraye, but than she is not able to heal or
comfort them being grieved, or to deliver them from their agonye, wherefore
we must needs flee to the promise. And there shall we find righteousness,
peace, life, and health enough. Here upon S. Paul to the Galathians Gala. 3
says. The law was as it were our schoolemayster unto Christ, The end of the
law.
that we should be justified by Christ, for the law does force us, does
strain us, does call upon us, does manace us, and lies upon our necks,
requiring of us all manner of good works, perfect justice, perfect innocence
of heart, perfect fear and love of God, and also of our neighbor. But we of
our own strength be not able to accomplish that which it requires, and thus
it drives us to Christ, and is our schoolemaister unto Christ. He than
receives us coming to him, helping us, and giving us all such things that
the law requires of us, so that the law shall not be able to damme us.

For this cause S. Paul does call Christ the end of the law: Romans 10.
Or as Saint Augustine does expound it, the fulfilling of the law. He that
has Christ is just, he that believes in Christ, has al things which the law
requires. Christ has reconciled for us God his Father, he is our mediator
and everlasting priest, he has obtained for us grace, the holy ghost with
all his gifts, remission of sins, and all manner of goodness, with life
everlasting, he as Ieremye Iere. 11.
writes does give us a new heart, and a soft heart, and the holy ghost to
move us to do well. And where as yet we be partly fleshly, nor can not be al
mortified in this body, nor thoroughly fulfill the commandments of God, there
is he made our wisdom, our justice and redemption, so that his innocence
and all that ever he has, is made ours by faith, for after that we put on
Christ upon us, and after we believe in him, there is no ieoperdye can hurt
us, though we be never so weak and frail, so that we do not walk purposely
after our appetite of the flesh and run still headlong in sin, without
repentance, for oftymes it happens that good and most godly men do fall as
well as other, Good men do sin.
but yet they lie not still, but get up again, and be still delited with the
law of God inwardly in their hearts, ever calling for remission of sins by
Christ, and obtain also the same which we desire.

All these things we may see very well expressed in Abraham, for Abraham says
Paul is the father of all the faithful beleuers in Christ, therefore we have
in Abraham a clear figure, and an example how that a sinner may be justified,
and what is the nature of a christian faith, what is the power, the propertye
and working of the same, and also how that our consciences may be quieted,
whither by faith or by works. Therefore he that is the true child of Abraham,
that is a good man in deeede, or that would be a true member of Christ, let
him look upon Abraham his father, and there he shall se how God does with us,
how he tendereth us, and how we ought to do again for him, as Paul also
teaches us. First of all Abraham heard the great and ri^he promise of God,
saying unto him: Romans 4.
Do not fear Abraham, Gal. 3.
I am thy de^e^der, and great is thy reward with me. And afterward. In thy
seed all nationes shall be blessed, that is, shall be delivered from sin,
death, and malediction, and shall have everlasting life. This was glad
tydinges to Abraham. And still did Abraham bel^eue this promise, notwithstanding
yet much grieved with troubles and sorrows. And so therefore was justified by
this faith and trust, that he had to the promise of God. Now this was
iiii.^. and thirtye years, Not^.
before the law was given, and therefore was he saved, not by the works of
the law, but by his faith in God and in the blessed seed which was promised
him. And no otherwise also must we all be saved, for there is no other way
nor means to come to health, but only the promise of God must justify us if
we believe, and not the law, nether works.

Secondarilye the faith of Abraham y^ he had upon Christ, made him a new
man, and clean did alter his old affections, and put in him new cogitations,
otherwise then this nature of ours hat^, for he reioysed only in the Lord,
and in him takes a maruailous boldness, he knows well that God is his father,
which in all his affairs, afflictions and troubles, will help him, and thus
trusting unto Gods promise receives and reposeth him self in the hands of
God, with a bold heart and a strong confidence, doubtting nothing that God will
be merciful unto him, even as any father will be to his own natural child,
whom he loves most tenderlye, so then Abraham having this faith, went up to
the hill at the commandment of God, to show his obedience, and offered his
son. Jacob. 2
For true faith can never be with out good works, Gala. 2.
but ever will be occupied, in the obedience of God. In the mean season
Abraham's heart and conscience was nothing unquieted for all that, but still
quiet by reason of his faith ^he had in Christ, for he was ever sure of the
favor and love of God toward him. Roma. 4.
Wherefore s. Paul full well describes his whole thought and cogitation,
where as he says that Abraham did never shrink in his faith, nor doubted in
the promise of God, but ever strong in his faith, did give glory to God,
knowing well this that ^ee which promised him was able to perform it. And
therefore he says that it was imputed to him for righteousness, that is for his
justification, for this Abraham thought and persuaded himself, that God was
almighty and true of his promise, which would not defeat nor deceive his
people And if he had so thought in himself (as now our papists do teach) I
can not tell surely whither God love me or no, peradventure he is not
freendly unto me, nor cares for me, nor regards me. etc. If Abraham I say,
had thought on this manner, or had shrinked so in his faith, I think he would
never have intended to offer up his only son, nor would have been persuaded
to go from his Fathers house out into a strange land, but rather would have
thought thus: It is good to be sure of that a man has already, this I have and
am sure of, the other is unsure, what should I kill my only and well beloved
son? who will give me another? What shall I go out of mine own house into a
strange land, I can not tell how far? what folishnes were it? I will not so,
I will tarry still her^ where I am in my Fathers house, neither will I be so
cruel to my son for to slaye him.

Thus I say he had thought if he had not believed constantlye, but when he
went out so boldly and mearily out of his Fathers house, into a far and a
strange country, and with so lustye cheer went up to the hill with his
Son to offer him up to God, which no nature of man can do, for what natural
man can find in his heart to offer up his son. Than be like he did only
hang of the hands of God, only did trust upon God, upon his grace, upon his
help, nohing doubting in his conscience, but that God was able to perform all
that he had promised, for why no doubting heart can be so willing to do as
Abraham did, nor yet once think to do it. So quiet was Abraham's conscience by
faith in Gods promise, that Paul in his Epistle to the Romans, Romans 4.
does give him an excellent praise therefore, that we all should mark it, and
well bear it away. Abraham, says he, never did shrink in his faith, but
always strong in his believing trusted surely. Why did he trust surely?
because God promised, for this he did know and was fully persuaded that God
was true of his word and promise, what soever he promises he performs of
his grace, and is well able to perform it, for he is almightye, nor does not
promise for our deseruinges, but of his grace only, that now we may be bold
to trust unto it. For if he should promise after our deseruinges any thing,
he could never perform it, for our merits be none, and nothing worth. And
yet notwithstanding he does promise us infinite goodness in Christ without our
merits, only of his own pure grace and mercy.

And therefore writes Paul y^ God promised Abraham the blessing cccc.xxx.
years before the law of Moses was given, The promise was made before the law
ca^e.
because no man should think so, this blessing to stand by the works of the law
or that he could not enjoy this free promise and blessing of God, before he
did fulfill all the laws of Moses. Wherefore for the love of God let al good
men here mark, that Abraham never failed nor did shrink in faith, Nota.
nor ever doubted at the promise of God, nor of the love and grace of God
toward him. For so y^ holy ghost does say that he had a sure persuasion, mark
^his well: If it were a firm persuasion he had, then it was no opinion, or
doubting, but fully did he trust and believe, and he went not whether,
incredulitye and doubting did bydde him to go, (which doubting papists have
taught us) neither thought be thus, be it true or not true, I will do it: but
his conscience was fullye persuaded that it was true which God had promised,
and that God would be good and merciful unto him, had forgeuen his sins,
had justified him and would never forsake him nor abiecte him, and after this
life also would give him everlasting life, for the ^ede sake that was promised
him, which was Christ.

If God had said thus to Abraham. Hear Abraham: I will be merciful unto
thee, I will forgive thee thy sins, and always be present with thee and
help thee, so on this condition, that thou keep and fulfill all my
commandments, thus I say if God had given him his promise under this
condition of fulfillyng his commaun^ementes, then Abraham's conscience had
never been merye nor quiet, but always doubtting of y^ grace of God and
for^iuenes of his sins, nor should ever have been certain of his salvation.

For thus he might have thought: I have done all that I can with all
diligence to fulfill Gods precepts, yet I could never fulfill them so
perfectly as I ought, nothing like. Wherefore this promise of God is uncertain
to me, neither can I test whither I shall take it or no, because I have not
performed all was enjoined and commanded me, and God did give me his promise
no otherwise, but of this condition if I kept his commandments and I am not
able so to do. Wherefore I am not sure whether he will give me these things y^
he promised. I can do nothing on my part, and therefore how can he keep
his promise with me, wherefore what hope can I have now of health. It is but
lost labor all that I go about.

Thus I say if God had promised his blessing under this contition to Abraham,
then he might well have despeared but now he addid no such condition, The
promise came without any condition.
and all because we should not doubt, but that his promise remains always
sure and stable. And this it is that god requires only of us, that we should
never doubt nor question of his free grace, but to be bold and trust upon it,
that he is a loving father unto us, and that we be his children.

But we could never be so bold of this grace of God, if any such condition
Condition. excluded.
of full filling ye law were given with al, as if thou keep my commandments well,
then shall thou have thy sins forgiven. Therefore it is necessary that y^
promise of this blessing stand without al conditions, and without all respect of
works or merits, but only in the free grace of God, or else we could never be
sure of it, nor certain, but always in doubt and mistrust. For if remission of
our sins should stand in ye fulfilling of the law, then our flesh being so
weak and frail, and not able to fulfill the law, how should we be sure
that god is good to us, or that we were in the favor of God, but rather
should think, that he were angry with us, because we never fulfill his
commandementes, as we should do. And thus the free promise of God should stand
void and in no effect. For why, no man were able to obtain it.

But thanks and praise be to the faithful Lord the father of our Lord Jesus
Christ and ours, the father of mercy and the god of all comforth, who having
mercy upon us and tendering our weakness, has not bilded our health and
salvation upon any such brickle and weak foundation, The foundation of our hope.
as upon our works and our fulfilling of ye law, for so we cold never be saved.
But the foundation yt we be grounded upon and prevail against the gates of
hell, is the great grace and mercy of God in his son Christ. For in him God
has promised us all, remission of our sins, and everlasting life. This
promise is only and alone all our comfort, which boldlye we do and may
trust upon.

So thus you see how God promises us remission of our sins and life
everlasting, not under any condition of working, Grace free without condition.
and fulfilling the law, but he gives it freely, of his fre grace I say, only
and alon through Christ, and not for any works of ours. And therefore he
geeueth it freelye without any condition of our works, because the promise
might stand firm and stable, that is, that we may be sure of the favor of
God, and of remission of our sins, doubting nothing therein, notwithstanding
we ^ee never so much sinful in our nature, and unworthy wretches, that every
believing Christian man may say with Paul: Romans 8.
This I know and is undoubted, that neither death, nor life, neither angels,
neither princes, nor potestates, neither things present nor things to come,
neither height nor depenes, nor no other creature is able to separate us from
the love of God, which is in Jesus Christ our Lord. Here may we plainly see
that Paul had a bold and a confident trust of the forgiveness of sins, and of
his health to come, plentuouslye persuaded of the grace of God toward him, or
else how could he so fervently rejoice and tryumphe in spirit against all
creatures both in heaven and in the world, so mightelye, defying them all,
being right sure and certain, that nothing neither above nor beneath, could
anoy him. And why? because he believed in Christ, and was sure of the mercy of
God toward him through faith, and therefore was his conscience so quiet, and
triumphant.

And even so may every Christian man likewise take ye same courage and the same
mind in himself. Mark and learn.
Howbeit no man can do this unless he put away all respect of his own
merits and works and only trust unto the free mercy and grace of God, Tit. 3.
which grace is given us only through Christ and not through our selves.
Notwithstanding yet that good works of ours consequently do follow and spring
out of this faith, and promise of God. So that where as the same do not
follow, and may follow, there is no true nor lively faith, but a deed, and
barraine opinion of faith, but where this true and lively faith is, there is
works and miracles and things far passing the possibility of natural
working. For as saint Paul says, we receive the holy ghost, Gal. 3.
not by our working, but by hearing of the Gospel, this holy Ghost, will not
suffer us to doubt after the papists fashion, or as they would have us not to
fear as their seruyle spirit does: but with a bold trust cries in our
hearts to GOD Abb A Father, and witnesses with our spirit that we be the
children and the heirs of GOD, and fellow heirs with C^riste, that we may be
glorified together with him. And as Paul to the Ephesians says, Ephe. 1.
they that believe in Christ be sealed up with the holy spirit of promise,
the with spirit we have as a pledge The holy spirit is our pledge.
or an ernest penye of our inheritance and possession which we have got and be
redeemed unto

Therefore with all faith and trust we must ever look upon the promise of God,
and upon Jesus Christ only. And so in this promise of God our conscience may
find comfort and peace plentye, but in our works we shall find none. And
therefore mark well this text of Paul and keep it well in your remembrance,
Romans 4.
where he says: Abraham had this promise geauen to him and to his sede, that
he should be the heir of the world, not for his working after the law, but
for his believing in faith, for if they that belong to the law, be the
heirs, then is faith void and the promise of none effect, for why the law
works anger, by reason that if there were no law, there were no
traunsgression, therefore the inheritance is given by faith as by grace
freely, because the promise must stand firm and stable to all y^ seed of
Abraham.

Daily experience Experience.
and practice in troubles and distresses declares, that no man (be he never
so holy) can quiet his conscience by his works. Our sins and death be more
grievous ennemies unto us, then that we be able to over come, by our own
deeds and deseruings, we must have an other manner of means to that, which is
our faith, receiving and hol^eing the promise of GOD in Christ. And so that
shall be able to conquer the mighty feircenes of sin and death, This faith
retains and apprehends those infalible and eternal things, that is to say:
it receives not the feeble works of ours, but the great grace of GOD, Christ
himself, his works and his deseruings, and the promises in Christ, which
things be much greater, higher, more stable, and magnificall, then our
capacities be able to comprehend. Therefore when any tentacion assaulteth, we
must not look to the law and our works, Remedy. in tentation.
but setting all them aside, we must run and creep to the cross of
Christ, we must seek for help and grace by Christ, and humbly must
knowledge our faults.

And though our sins be never so great, or g^eeuous, though the fear and
tentation of death be never so horrible, yet ^^e must still stick to the
promise of God, and surely must trust and doubt nothing, that our sins be
forguie^ us for Christ's sake according to the promise of God, without any
dese^uings of ours: and that God is our father, and we shall hue with him for
ever and ever.

The works and passion of Christ which be of great and infinite and omnipotent
power, ought more to stir us up to trust well on God, that he will be
ever more to us a merciful Lord, then our sins ought to fray us. For the grace
of God in Christ is much stronger and more able to deliver and help, then our
sins be to condemn us. And this grace of GOD does not hang of our works,
Romans 5.
for than it should be uncertain, but it stands firm by grace and by faith
in Christ, with out any regard or respect of our working. And this is done by
the singular pro^idence of the great fatherly love of God toward us, because
our justification should stand firm and certain by faith, so that no man
need doubt of the favor and mercy of God toward him. If this grace and
promise stand in y^ hand of God, then is it sure, so that we cannot doubt of
the remission of our sins. But if ^hey should stand in our own hand and should
hang of our selves, then we should a^wayes be uncertain because we were never
able to descrue sufficiently, being not sifficient of strength to fulfill the
law. But after that we return^ and repose our selves in Christ alone, and in
the promise of God, through Christ, then be we safe and sure enough, because
God has so promised of his voluntary grace freely, and has founded his promise
upon the faith in Christ, to the intent it shall stand firm and certain. And
therefore I said, and say agai^e the kingdom of Christ to be a kingdom of
security and peace, as the Prophets do desc^ybe it.

In this kingdom we have peace and most sure succor, so that there is now
neither sin, death, nor hell can fear us. So does Es^ias also call Christ ye
prince of peace, Christ's kingdom is a kingdom of secu^^e: Esa. 32. Esa. 9.
Christ the prince of peace. Icre. 23.
whose princedome is large and great, and whose peace shall never have end. In
Jeremy also, God does promise unto Israel, that is, unto all believers in
Christ, a springing bud of justice, a king which shall rule wisely, and shall
execute indgement and justice in earth, and under whom Israel shall dwell
boldly with confidence, these things be in the spiritual kingdom of Christ,
in which there is true and spiritual security, where as every christian man's
heart has pea^e with god through faith in Christ, in the which kingdom neither
sin can damneos, neither death can kill us, nor hell can swalow us, for god is
with us and feeds us, and defe^deth us as his sheep. Therefore who shall
stand against us? And Esai When ye holy ghost, Esa. 42.
says he, shall be powered from above (yt was when Christ began his kingdom)
then the work and fruit of justice shall be peace and the keeping of Justice
shall be silence and security for ever and ever. And ye people of god shall
dwell in com^ines of peace and in houses of trust. All these things do nothing
else but signify y^ Christ's people in his kingdom shall be all good, quiet,
at rest and merry which shall have a quiet and a glad con^cience, being
evermore sure and certain that God is favorable unto them for Christ, which
does deliver us from all evils without any doubt.

I beseech you what can our adversaries bring against this? or how can they
maintain their errors in the face of the world? The conclusion.


Here I have proved and taught out of ye foundation of the word of God, y^ no
faithful beleuer in Christ can, or ought to doubt of the favor of God, and
of remission of his sins, and that his conscience may thoroughly be certified, y^
god is favorable unto him, which will pardon all his fautes, for Christ's sake
in whom we believe, and which will justify us, and give us everlasting life
without any doubt. Here our adversaries can have nothing to lay against this
doctrine or to subvert this foundation but one refuge they have, Objection. of
the papists.
that when we bring scriptures against them: what say they, the Lutherians,
bring Scriptures for them, but they must expound Scriptures as our fathers
did.

I answer again, An answer
We do not deny so to doc, for we may do it well enough. And I may say with
Saint Cirillus Cirillus.
we keep the faith of our fathers, and of the church so far as we ought, and
use their interpretations so much as they require. But the chiefest of the
ancient Ancient. doctors against the new Roman Papists.
fathers of the church do agree in the same matter no otherwise then we expound
it, therefore why do these holy workers bring for them the church?

S. Augustine Augustine de predest. 11.
one of the most catholic and godly doctor of the^ al, in his book which he
writes of Predestination, in the xi. chapter. says in this wise: Truly where
as ye apostle in his epistle to ye To. writes these words: Therefore is our
inhetaunce given us by faith through grace, because the promise might stand
firm and steadfast, I marvel (says he) that me^ had rather look on their o^ne
infirm^^y then unto the firmity and steadfastness of Gods promise. But here
thou will say, I can not tell nor do not know the will of God of me. Well
then do thou know thine own will of thy self? if thou do, beware, for
he y^ thinks he stands let him take heed y^ he fall not. Therefore in so much
as thou know nether his will nor thine own will, then why should not a man
rather put his trust and hope in y^, which is more certain, than in that which
is less certain?

But say they again, where it is spoken, if thou beleeuest thou shall be
saved, there one of these is required of us, the other is offered, and that
which is required of us is in our own power, the other in God. And why I pray
you, is not both in Gods power, both that which is required, and that which is
offered? for do not we as well desire God to forgive us that which he
requires, as well as that he offers? do not the believers also desire him to
increase their faith: Do they not desire also for the unbelievers, that they may
have faith, so that God only must be the beginner and increaser of faith. In
like manner is this to be taken. If thou beleue^st thou shall be saved, And
this: if you mortify y^ works of the flesh by the spirit, ye shall live: for
in like case here one is required, the other is offered. If thou mortify
(says he) y^ works of flesh by the spirit, ye shall live: Then to mortify the
works of the flesh by spirit, that is required, the other is offered us that
we should live. What then therefore shall we not say, that this is the gift of
god to mortifye the works of the fiesh, because it is required of us to be
done? God forbid, y^ any pertaining to the grace of god should so think. This
is a damnable error of the Pelagians. whom as the Apostle in his words
following doothe confute, saying: Who soever be led with the spirit of God,
they be the children of God. Less we should think this mortefiing of the
flesh came by our spirit, but by the spirit of God, of the which spirit of
God the same Apostle speaks more over. All these things says he, works one
alonly spirit, destributing to every man his gifts so as it pleases him,
amongste the which gifts also he rekeneth faith. So then, like as this
mortifieng of the flesh, notwithstanding it be required of us, is the gift of
God, even so is faith also the very gift of God, though never thelesse it be
required of us (if we will be saved) to believe, for these things both be
commanded us of god, and also be the gifts of God. To the intent we should
understand, that both we do them, and yet it is the gift of God that we do
them, so as the Scripture shows by Ezechiell Ezechiell.
the Prophet. And I (says almighty God) shall make you that you shall do them.
What can be more plain? Mark well this place of scripture (gentle brethren)
and ye shall see that God promises he will make them to do such things,
which he will have done. And there in ye same place, he brings forth no
merits of theirs, but much wickedness, showing and declaring thereby y^ he
gives good for evil, in y^ he makes the^ bring forth afterward good works,
Augustine upon the psalm. 88.
causing them to do his commandments.

Also in the lxxxviii. psalm he says in like manner. Lift up your hearts,
for he which promised will perform, so as he has performed many things
already, for the trust that we have in him, we have it not in our merits, but
only of his mercy. No man can be strong in this life but only in the hope of
Gods promise. We be weak in our selves, in Gods promise strong.
For as concerning our own merits, we be marvelous weak, but as concerning
the promise of God we be strong.

And in the lxxxxviii. psalm he says: where is security and peace? he
answers again, truly none in this life but only in the hope of the promise
of God.

S. Ambrose in the first book de vocat genti. Ambrose. De vocat genti lib. 1.
Cap. 3.
etc. writes if no man (says he) will break or despise a man's will or
testamente, as says the Apostle nor alter it, Then how can it be that Gods
will and testament should be broken in any thing. It tarieth always, and every
day is fulfilled, that the Lord promised to Abraham without any condition, and
gave with out any law.

By this saying of Ambrose it may well appear, that the promise of the new
testament, (which is, that God will be merciful unto us, will forgive us our
sins, will give us the holy ghost, and will make us safe) that this promise I
say does not depend of any condition of the law. For freely it comes only of
grace, because we should never doubt of his grace and favor toward us. And
what other thing means S. Ambrose Ambrose up on. Paul to the Romans 3. 4. 9.
10.
where he says so often, y^ we be saved before God by faith only and a
lonely. Look upon his comentaries of the Romans, look also in the Corin. and
Gal.

Theophilactus 1. Cor. 1. Gal. 1. 3. 5. Theophilact in Romans 4
also writes in like sort. In so much (says he) as it is evident, yt the law
brings nothing but anger, therefore had Abraham, his justice and inheritance
given him, because that all should go by grace. Wherefore then seeing that all
things now do stand, in the grace and in the mercy of God, so that he is
bound now not to work after his justice, then what should let us to think,
but that all things be certain and stable what soever he does, gives, or
promises.

Now if blind hypocrisy here obiecte again that Paul in this place speaks
only of Abraham and therefore y^ thing concerns none else but him, but we
must seek our health and justification otherwise. I answer again. Not so.
For therefore Paul calls Abraham there the father of all the beleuers, and
in him propounds, to us al y^ true means how al men both before the coming
of Christ, and after the coming of Christ, must be justified. And therefore
this text of Paul does as well pertain to us all, for it is written and set
forth unto all us. Even as S. Paul in the very same chap. Romans 4.
writes This is not written for him only (says he) that it was imputed to
him for justice but for us all, to whom it shall be imputed for justice,
believing on him, who raised up from death our Lord Jesus Christ, w was given
for our sins, and raised up again for our justification.

Amen.
Imprinted at London by Hugh Singleton, dwelling in Creed Lane, at the sign
of the gylden Tunn, near unto Ludgate, and are there to be sold.

Cum priuilegio.

Anno. 1579.


