THE Chirurgicall Lectures OF Tumors and Ulcers. DELIVERED on Tusedayes
appointed for these Exercises, and keeping of their Courts in the Chirurgeans
Hall these three years last past, viz. 1632, 1633, and 1634.

By ALEXANDER READ Doctor of Physic, and one of the Fellows of the Physicians
College of LONDON.

LONDON Printed by I. H. for Francis Constable and E. B. and are to be sold at
the sign of the Crane in Paul's Churchyard. 1635.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND his much esteemed Lord, THOMAS Lord WINDSOR, Baron
of Bradenham, and one of the Knights of the Noble order of the Bath, ALEXANDER
READ Doctor of Physic wishes health, and all happiness.
FOr many ages past, it has been a custom amongst those who have endeavored
to leave to posterity, any monument of their learning and skill, to dedicate it
to some eminent personage: partly to express their gratitude for benefits
received (whereof I may allege many examples: partly to procure with the
readers, a more easy acceptance of the work, and a more firm protection for
it from the reproachful tongues of malicious censures, which no age hitherto
ever wanted. I purposing to publish my Chirurgicall Lectures which I delivered
to the worshipful Company of the Surgeons of the famous City of London, on
Tusedaies appointed for the keeping of their courts, and the performing of
these exercises, these three years last past, and willing to keep on foot
this laudable custom, have made choice of your Honor as most fit unto whom
they should be consecrated. For who can be a more fit patron, yea, I add, a
more competent Judge to these my labors than he, who has pierced even into
the mysteries of the art. Let no man think it any disparagement to any noble
personage to have taken pains to attain to some reasonable measure of
knowledge in this art; But rather let him persuade himself that it belongs
properly, and of right to such as are renowned for their greatness and valor
to be well versed in this art. Achilles is no less famous for his curing of
Telephus by art, than wounding of him by his strength and magnanimity. Besides
this, seeing your Honor has graced this Company by desiring to be admitted
into it, rather than into any other, has been beneficial unto it, and has
embraced me with extraordinary favor and respect, I thought it meet that some
testimony of deserved respect toward your Honor should be left to posterity
of all the Company in general, and of me in particular. Receive then with a
cherefull countenance this first volume of Chirurgicall discourses into your
favor and protection. will serve you at the least for an index of such things
as you have read set down in other Authors dispersedly concerning these
subjects, and will further your directions, when occasion shall be ministered by
any imploring your advice. This benefit will redound unto me, that the work
will find the better entertainment at the Readers hands; because it shows in
the beginning your Honors name.

In London the fifth of August 1634.
To my courteous Reader.
HEre J present to thy view my Chirurgicall Lectures of the two first points of
the first part of Chirurgerie, which J call (...), to wit, of Tumors and
Ulcers, delivered these three years last past in the Surgeons Hall upon the
days appointed for this exercise. J have labored to instruct thy mind, and
to direct thy hand in the knowledge and curation of the diseases mentioned in
these two Treatises. If thou shall think that I have attained to my purpose,
and have not frustrated thy expectation, I have my desire. If thou think that
they are only clouds without rain, and that I have deluded my Readers, let me
entreat thee to lay them down out of thy hands, and to have recourse unto such
Authors as thou shall best like of, they serving thy taste. I dare be bold to
affirm that I have more methodically set down the nature of every disease,
and prescribed more effectual means for the c^ring of them than thou shall
find in most, who have written of these subjects. I have not concealed from
thee my own observations, which I would not have thee to slight: I have (I
thank God) so much literature, as is sufficient to guide me in these studies:
And J have practiced physic and Chirurgerie now 42 years. But with what
success I will refer it to the testimonies and relations of such as have been
my patients in sundry parts of this Realm. If thou doubt of the verity of
any thing delivered by me in these lectures, I will labor to clear it, if
thou acquaintest me with it. If thou prove evidently that I have declined from
the truth, I will acknowledge my error, and render unto thee thanks for thy
friendly admonition. Until thou effect this, let me entreat thee to accept of
my labors which I have undergone to further the public good. One thing I
would not have thee to be ignorant of, and that is this, that hereafter I mean
not to add, detract or change any thing in these Treatises, but to go through
the rest of the points of Chirurgerie, of God grant me life, which are to be
added to these now published to perfect the art of Chirurgerie. Wishing unto
thee increase of knowledge, and experience in this study, I will commit thee
to the protection of the Almighty God, and rest,

Thy well wishing friend Alexander Read.

The contents of the Treatise of Tumors.
OF the definition and parts of Surgery page 1 The general doctrine of
Tumors page 15 Of the general indications of curing of Tumors page 25 Of the
four times of a Tumor, and the indications taken from them page 33 Of curing
of a Tumor come to suppuration page 35 Of a Phlegmon page 45 Of an Erysipelas
page 56 Of an Oedema page 66 Of a Scirrhus page 75 Of an aqueous Tumor page 83
Of a flatuous Tumor page 90
The contents of the Treatise of Ulcers.
OF the Authors who have written of Ulcers, and of the definition of an Ulcer
page 95 Of the causes of Ulcers page 100 Of the general differences, and
signs of Ulcers page 107 Of the general prognostics of Ulcers page 110 Of
the general curation of Ulcers, and of their times page 114 Of the medicaments
befitting Ulcers in general page 118 Of the curing of a plain and hollow
Ulcer being simple page 130 Of the compound, but milder Ulcers in general page
136 Of a hollow Ulcer without callosity page 144 Of a sinewous Ulcer with
callosity in general page 150 Of the curation of Fistulaes in general page
159 Of Fistula lachrymalis page 166 Of Fistulaes of the breast page 174 Of
Fistulaes of the belly and joints page 184 Of Herpes exedens page 193 Of
Phagedaena and Nome page 201 Of a Cancer and a cancerous Ulcer page 211 Of the
Leprosy and a leprous Ulcer page 222 Of the abating of superfluous flesh page
231 Of the scaling of corrupt bones page 238 Of a discolored and varicous
Ulcer page 246 Of a verminous and lousy Ulcer page 255 Of the Ulcers of the
hayry scalp page 266 Of Ulcers of the ears, and Opthalmia page 277 Of Ulcers
of the eyes page 287 Of Ozaena page 299 Of Ulcers of the mouth page 308 Of
Ulcers of the lungs page 317 Of Ulcers of the back, abdomen, and joints page
325
Of the description and parts of Surgery, Tab. 1. Of Surgery, which is an
Art which teaches the curation of diseases of the body of man by manual
operation, there are four parts.
1.(...), or Compositrix, the part which teaches to unite parts disjoined.
2.(...), or Separatrix, the part which teaches to sever or separate parts
which are unnaturally joined together. 3.(...), or Ablatrix, the part which
teaches the removing of those things which are superfluous. 4.(...), or
Additrix, or Appositrix, the part which teaches the supplements of such things
as are deficient in the body.
Of the branches of the first part (...), or Compositrix, Tab. 2. (...), the
which teaches the unition of the solution of unity of the parts, shows the
unition of parts disjoined:
Which either may be gathered and inferred by rational discourse, rather than
be deprehended by the sense; and hence arises the first branch de tumoribus;
of Tumors. Or may be deprehended by the sense, and this is Either in the soft
parts, and from hence arise two branches; 1. De Vlceribus, of Ulcers. 2. De
Vulneribus, of Wounds.
Or in the hard parts, and from hence spring 2 other branches; 1. Of fractures
of the bones. 2. Of the luxations or dislocation of the same.


A TREATISE OF TVMORS. The first Treatise.
LECT. I. Of the definition and parts of Chirurgerie.
MAny learned discourses have been delivered out of this sear, of sundry
points of the renowned art of Chirurgerie by Master Doctor Gwyn of famous
memory, who by reason of his not vulgar learning, has left an eternal
memory in the minds of those who knew him inwardly, to himself. God having
called him out of this transitory life, and vale of misery, to rest from his
labors, it seemed good to the Governors of this worshipful Company to have
this exercise performed by the most able of the brethren as it should come to
every one according to his place and dignity. And undoubtedly this office has
been performed by most, laudably, and f^^itfully to the praise of the Hall,
and mutual communication of skill, for the better performing of duties which
so high a calling does require. And surely if this course had been continued,
it had mightily increased in readers the theoricall or contemplative part,
which does consist in the knowledge of the precepts, had made them able to give
greater contentment to their patients by their rational discourses, and more
emboldened them in particular operations, having sufficient warrant of Art for
their practice, and ability to convince empyrickes and malicious calumniators.
But seeing (as I understand) the highest power of this Realm, from whom there
is no appeal, has decreed that this exercise shall be performed by a Doctor
of Physic, and that the worshipful Company has for the present made choice
of me, who profess my self to be a member of the Company; I shall labor by
diligence to supply all defects in me, which sundry may find in me, if they
compare my weakness, with the ableness of my predecessor. Howsoever the
matter falls out. I will endeavor to deliver what is for the purpose of that
subject whereof I read, although not all peradventure which might be alleged
to the purpose. Nevertheless I mean not to be so sparing in my discourses, as
that you shall have occasion to think that any thing absolutely requisite has
been kept back. And if it fall out that at any time I check or control
those authors, who by some are highly esteemed; I desire that none ascribe this
to any ambition or vain glory in me before thy weigh my reasons in the
impartial balance of judgment. And as it is impossible for any man, who
curiously and scrupulously treads in another man's footsteps, to compass a
long journey in a day: So let none think that ever he shall be famous in his
art, if he give himself only to imitation of others. The ancients have left
not a little to be found out by the diligence of posterity. Whosoever is
industrious and judicious shall find my words to be an oracle. Many of them
have set down sundry things not tried by experience, but imagined by their
fancy, which the sickle of trial will prune. Nevertheless, in reprehension I
will use them respectively, by reason of reverence, which is due to antiquity.
Besides this nothing can be both invented and perfected. Now seeing in all the
discourses and lectures which have been delivered out of this place, only
particular points of the Art have been handled, and none has taken the pains
to touch any Praecognita, or general notions, which may be instead of an
Introduction to the particulars, seeing no subject has been delivered, or
commended to me, I will briefly though some Introductorie points, which will
give no small light to the lectures, which hereafter shall be read. The
Praecognita.
The first shall be of antiquity and dignity of Chirurgerie. The second
shall be of most famous authors, who have taken the pains to illustrate it, by
their writings: The third shall be of its place in the course of Philosophy.
The fourth of the definition of it: The fifth of the division or parts of it.
Which things when I have set down, I shall shut up this lecture; permitting
election to the Governors, whether they will have me proceed methodically,
through the whole course of Chirurgerie, or scatteredly to handle dispersed
parts of the same as hitherto has been done. My opinion is, The intention of
the author.
that it will be both more fruitful and pleasing to intelligent hearers (if
God will grant me life and health) to pass through all the points of
Chirurgerie methodically: for first the coherence of the parts will help the
memory: And who shall be assiduous hearers shall not by snatches take a
hungry morsel; but have a full banquet, fully to answer the appetite. When I
come to particulars, I will not only deliver the principles of Hippocrates, and
Galen, and their sectators the Arabians: but I will acquaint you with the
theorems of the Chimists, and compare the opinions of both, that it may be
known who have been most familiarly nursed in the bosom of nature. Of the
Chemists Paracelsus is the General. The chief Chemists.
He has sundry Colonels under him, as Petrus Severinus the Dane, Quercetan,
Petreius, and sundry others, who are oftentimes clouds without rain; more
fraughted with bountiful promises, than real performances. Now to come to
touch the first general point of Chirurgerie, The antiquity of Chirurgerie.
which is the antiquity of it, I dare be bold to affirm, that of all arts
liberal, it was the first which was invented after the fall: for as for
Agricultura and are pastoralis, husbandry and grazing, they would have been
required of man, if he had continued in the state of innocence, to have
furnished unto him nourishment, and other things requisite for the enjoying of
this life contentedly, until he should have been translated from earth to
heaven to enjoy the beatificall vision of his Creator. Now it is most probable,
I may say demonstrative, that what strange event did first minister occasion to
invent an art, that that art was first enquired for and found out. Such was the
wounding and killing of Abel, by his brother Cain, by reason of emulation. This
could not but move Adam, and Cain himself to study how they might not only
repel violence, but have in readiness means to cure hurts also, if they
should have been wounded, and their lives spared. All things which were done
before the flood are uncertain and unknown, if you except those things which
that eminent Prophet Moses, by the inspiration of the Holy Ghost, has
recorded. You may read of bragging Lamech, Genes 4 23 who boasted of
murdering. Besides this the wickedness of man increased, Genesis 6.5. sufficient
to set him on, and that there were before the flood, giants and mighty men,
verse. 4. and so able to perform by violence of villainy. Shall any man think
that men unable to resist, did not think upon remedies to cure their hurts,
being endued with reason; but as dogs licked their own wounds, and provided
no means for curing contusions, fractures, dislocations, and such accidents as
follow after violence offered. As for internal Physic, being so near to the
creation, Physic not so ancient as Chirurgerie.
living long even to 969 years, Genesis 6.27. as Methuselah did, it is like they
used none, seeing they had no other sickness but that of old age: which falls
out, the natural and accidental heat exhausting the radical moisture, and
was unavoydable after that the sentence of mortality was pronounced against
Adam and his posterity, Genesis 3.10. Thus we see that as the practice of
Chirurgerie was necessary before the flood, so we cannot gather by any
obscure conjectures, that that part of Physic, which cures by exhibiting
internal medicaments, was in use. Yea until the time of Hiprocrates. Physic
it self seems to have been only a knowledge of simples, fit for curing of
internal diseases, and outward griefs found out by experience: and that there
were but few precepts concerning the art, showing either the knowledge of
particular griefs, or the method of curing of them; They, who are accounted
the autors and inventors of Physic, prove this to be true: The inventors of
Physic.
Amongst the Grecians, Apollo the son of Jupiter and Latona, is accounted the
first, which gave his mind to the study of Physic and Surgery. Or him thus
writes Ovid. 1. Metamorph.

Inventum medicina meum est, opifexque per orbem
Dicor, and horharum subjecta potentia nobis.
Physic is my invention and throughout the world (to me.

Helpful I am said to be, and the faculty of h^rbs is subject Aesculapius his
son followed his father, who added much to that which his father invented:
wherefore he was accounted amongst the gods. His two sons Podalyrius, and
Machaon accompanied the Grecians to Troy, unto whom they did good service in
curing the wounded persons. Chiron Achill^s his master is said by Pliny to
have had great skill in the knowledge of simples, and that he was skillful in
dressing of wounds: both his name she weth, (for it is likely he was called
Chiron, because he was skillful in the manual part: (...) in Greek is a
hand) and Achilles his practice in curing wounded persons: for he cured
Telephus king of Mysia, whom he had overcome and hurt, and from him the herb
Millefole is called Sideritis Achilaea. Of this, which has been spoken, we
may gather that these eminent and worthy men did more practice Chirurgerie,
than Physic. Hippocrates is the first we have, who committed to writing
precepts concerning the practice of Physic: He did not only practice
Chirurgerie himself, but wrote sundry treatises concerning sundry operations
of it: as of fractures, lib. 1. of joints, lib. 1. of reducing bones by
instruments, lib. 1. of ulcers lib. 1. of fistulaes, lib. 1. of wounds of the
head, lib. 1. of drawing out of the womb a dead child, lib. 1. All these are in
the sixth section of his works. Galen succeeded him about six hundred years
after, a man worthy of eternal memory, who did illustrate Hippocrates with his
learned commentaries, and by adding of those things, which were wanting, did
perfect the art. In his works are sundry Treatises, concerning Chirurgicall
subject. The rest of the Greek writers follow him, as Paulus of Aegina,
Aetius, Alex. Trallianus, Oribasius, Actuarius and the rest. Amongst the
Latins Celsus excels, who has written acurately of all Chirurgicall
operations, whom all modern writers do exceedingly commend; as Fallopius de
tumoribus praeter naturam, cap. 1. And Fabricius ab aqua pendente in sundry
places, and the rest. Of some, who went before him, thus he writes: lib. 6. c.
1. And in Rome sundry reasonable good professors (he means of Chirurgerie,
which he calls vetustissimam most ancient) But chiefly of late Triphon the
father, and Euelpistus added somewhat to that discipline. The Arabians follow;
amongst whom Avicen is the chiefest, who lived 1100 years after Christ: of
Chirurgicall matters he discourses in the third book of his canon, and in
the fourth part of his Canticles. Rases 2. Continent. Albucasis. Amongst our
modern writers these excel, Guido de Cauliaco, whom Tagaultius has expressed
in good Latin: Fallopius, with whom none is to be compared: Ambrosius
Paraeus, Johannes de Vigo, Hieronynous Fabricius ab aqua pendente, Guilielmus
Fabricius in his centuries and Master Gale, Master Banister, and Master Clowes,
while they lived, brethren of this worshipful company, who by their writings
have commended themselves to all posterity. So much I thought good to deliver
of the antiquity, dignity, and of the chief professors of Chirurgerie; which
ought to stir up your diligence in laboring, to excel in the particular
operations of it, and to resolve to contemn the obloquies and calumnies of
rude and ill bred persons, who shall seem to slight this excellent art. If you
inquire for the beginning of it, it is vetustissima most ancient, according to
Celsus in the place above mentioned: If you require certainty, it is grounded
upon experience, and offers it self to the eye: If you ask who did of old
practice it, you shall find that either they were numbered amongst the gods, or
were renowned persons, called heroes, as Hercules, Chiron, Achilles, or men of
eminent learning and worth, as Hippocrates, Galen, Avicen, and sundry others.
The subject of Chirurgerie.
It has for its subject the body of man, and in this point no whit inferior
to Physic it self. And whereas many will stick to take a dangerous
medicament; yet they will not stick to admit Chirurgicall operations, although
they be full of peril, as incision for the stone, and dropsy, To what part
of Philos phie Chirurgerie is to be referred.
dismembring and such like, as we may see day by day. Now to know to what part
of Philosophy Chirurgerie is to be referred, we must consider that there be
two parts of Philosophy: whereof the one is speculative, whose end is
knowledge; Parts of Philosophy.
The other practick, whose end is practice. Now practice has two differences,
Action, and Effection. Action leaves no work behind it. Effection does.
Arist. 6 Ethic. c. ^ and li. 1 mag. moral. c. 35^
Of the active part of philosophy, there be three parts; Ethick, which
frames the manners of a private person: Oeconomick, which shows how a family
is to be governed, and Policy, which teaches how a Commonwealth is to be
ruled: These we will leave, because they belong not to our purpose: as neither
those arts, which are merely factive, commonly called mechanical, and so
unworthy of a Philosopher. The speculative part of philosophy comprehends
under it the Metaphysics, Arise. 6. Metaphys c. 1.
natural philosophy, and the Mathematics: Of the first and last we will
speak nothing, because they belong nothing to that subject which we have in
hand. The subject of natural philosophy is corpus natural, or a natural
body: Now of all natural bodies, the body of man is the chiefest and most
excellent, which moved the kingly Prophet to burst out into this resolution:
Laudabo te, quia mirabiliter formatus sum: I will praise thee, because I am
wonderfully framed: The admirable composition of the body of man drew from
Galen himself, not the best master of piety, a hymn to his Creator. Now
natural philosophy considers the body of man, The parts of Medicine.
as it is a species or kind of natural body: but medicine as it is curable by
art. Of Medicine there are two principle parts, (...), and (...). The first
teaches the preservation of health by convenient diet, exercises, and such
like: And seeing the operation of a Surgeon is more subject to the eye and
other senses, than the exhibition of medicaments is, it behooves every one to
be well verst in that which he takes in hand, seeing his practice is more
subject to censure: There be a number of empyricall knaves, filthy bands, and
bold queanes, who daily minister medicaments boldly, who ^^twithstanding dare
not meddle with any curious operation in Chirurgerie. Such impure hands dare
not touch such a chaste and undefiled Lady. Now it is time to come to the
fourth point, IV. Point.
which I intended in my proposition: which is to show what Chirurgerie is: Now
there is a double quid, or what, quid nominis, and quidrei: The first shows
the reason why this term was found out to express this art: The second
delivers the nature of the art it self. The Erymon.
Chirurgia is a Greek term composed of (...) which signifies a hand, and
(...) to work: Because it restores health to the bodies of men by manual
operation. The definition of Chirurgerie.
Chirurgerie then may be thus defined: It is a branch of the curative part of
medicine, which teaches how sundry diseases of the body of man are to be
cured by manual operation. It is not a science properly, because it rests
not in only knowledge; but an art as Physic it self is: for it leaves an
effect after the operation, to wit, health: So that for the genus, it has the
same with Physic it self: Both Physic and Chirurgerie propose to themselves
one end: yet the means are diverse. Physic restores health by ministration of
medicaments; but Chirurgerie by manual operation: Seeing then the definition
which I have assigned to Chirurgerie does consist of genus and differentia,
according to school terms, it must be an essential definition, fully
expressing the nature of it. The fifth point whereof I intended to speak of
this lecture, V. The parts of Chirurgerie.
was of the parts of Chirurgerie, which must be assigned according to the
maine differences of operations. Those are four in number, and consequently so
many parts: for either by Chirurgerie, solution of un^tie is removed, and union
restored; or things unnaturally united are separated and disjoined; or things
superfl ous taken away: or last of all defects supplied. The kinds of solution
of unity.
Now solution of unity is either gathered by reason, or deprehended by sense.
In tumors although the parts seem to the eye united; yet reason teaches us,
that there is a divulsion of them: The doctrine of tumors therefore ought to
be the first particular treatise. Solution of unity apparent to the senses,
to wit, sight and touch, are either in the soft parts, or in the more solid
and hard. In the soft or fleshie parts there be two differences of solution of
unity: vulnus and ulcus, awound, and an ulcer: In the hard parts there are
found a fracture, and a luxation; two distinct sorts of solution of unity to
fill up the fourth and fifth places. This part may be called (...), or pars
compositrix, 1. Part of Chirurgerie.
the part joining together. The second part of Chirurgerie opposite to the
first, teaches to separate parts unnaturally united: where either the comely
composition of the body of man is defaced or empaired, or the actions of the
same hindered. Sundry have been brought into the world with the anus and vulva
quite shut up. The consideration of that membrane, which is found in the neck
of the matrix of some women, is in this place to be noted and considered:
Seeing there have been and yet are so many concertations amongst both skillful
Physicians and Surgeons. Here also is the cure of the wrie neck to be set
down. In this grief the head on the one side by reason of one or more tendons
of the muscles of the neck shortened, the head is drawn toward the claves
more than on the other whereby it comes to pass that the face grows awry
and distorted: and so the beauty of the countenance is much impaired. To this
part belonged the curing of tongue-tyed children, in whom sucking and speech
are hindered. Not only fingers and toes cleave together in the same person: but
twins also, and double members of one person. The consideration of such does
belong to the history of Monsters; not to any art: seeing such things are to
be ranged amongst raro contingentia, and so belong not to art, which is of
things necessary. 2. Part of Chirurgerie.
This part may be termed (...), or separatrix pars, the separating part. 3.
Part.
Now follows the third part of Chirurgerie, which shows the means to
remove from the body things superfluous, which may fitly be called (...), or
ablatrix pars, the nipping or removing part. Things superfluous are such,
either by event, or by their own nature. Things superfluous by event are
sundry: And first a dead child in the womb, or staying too long to the
prejudice of it own and the mothers life. Here shall be set the manner how to
bring women to bed (as we term it) artificially and safely. Secondly, a
falling of the small guts into the cod by enlarging or renting of the
production of the Peritonaeum, which we call a rupture. When I come to this
point, I will set down the diversities of ruptures, and the means of curing
of each: which are either incision, or trusse, or application of medicaments,
sometimes used solitary, sometimes concurring most or all together. Thirdly,
the amputation of a limme by reason of a mortification, or some other accident.
Here shall be set down the most accurate method of dismembring. Fourthly, the
exstirpation of any part, as the breast, when a cancerous either tumor or ulcer
does possess it. Here you shall be acquainted with the safest way of
exstirpating a cancer and a lupus. Fifthly, blood offending either in quantity,
or quality is drawn by phlebotomie, leeches, ventoses, of all which I will
particularly discourse. Things by their own nature superfluous, are either
somewhat familiar to nature, or altogether adverse: Of the first sort, are Wens,
and Strumae: when I come to them I will set down the diversities of them, and
how they also are to be cured. Secondly, the couching of a cataract offers
it self. Here I mean to set down the variety of cataracts, the prognostics
of them, whereby it shall be known which are curable and which not, and the
most exquisite manner of couching of such as are curable. Things adverse to
nature, are stones in s^^dr^^ parts of the body; but chieflly in the bladder.
The incision for extracting of it, is called (...): of it I mean diligently to
discourse, because it is a dangerous operation, and many times scandalous. Last
of all, I come to the fourth and last principal part of Chirurgerie, IV. Part
of Chirurgerie
which is the supplying of the defects of the body, which may be called (...),
or additrix the supplying or adding part. Now things which are added, are
either of the body it self, as restoring of the Nose lost, or curing of the
hare lip. Of the first, I will set down the method of the Bononian Physicians,
and Surgeons: Of the second, my own and other famous men's experiments in
curing both the single and the double hare-lip. The matter of things, which is
used for repairing of the losses in other parts, as the eye, the eat, arm,
and leg, is no ways of the nature of the body. Nevertheless when I am come
so far, I will make an end of the course of Chirurgerie with touching these so
much as shall seem sufficient, to instruct such as have not been verst in
these practices. I have run through those five introductorie points of
Chirurgerie, to wit of the antiquity and dignity of it: of the professors of
it, of its place amongst the liberal arts, of the definition and parts of the
same. As concerning the two last points, I have varied from all who have
written of this subject: Nevertheless I have the light of nature on my side,
and the experience of all skillful practitioners. So that it is needless to
take further pains, either to confirm those things which I have alleged, or
to refute that which has been said by others; Seeing I intend rather to frame
an able operating Surgeon, than to set out a contentions disputing
theorician: Besides, reprehending of others does not so much instruct the
hearers in the knowledge of the truth, as shows that, which is not to be
learned, but shunned. Neither is a Surgeon contented to have performed so
many duties to the body of man while it is alive and the instrument of the
soul, for performing actions; but when it is dead the spirit returning to God,
who gave it, he cease not to be officious to it, in dissecting of it, for
the instruction of himself and others, and preserving it from putrefaction and
annoyance, until time and place fit for burying of it be offered: which he
compasses partly, by encearing of it, partly by embaulming: of the which two
last, I mean also to discourse: That the Surgeon, which I mean to frame,
may be complete. I have now presented to the view of the eyes of your
understanding, this Chirurgicall Canaan: Into the which I mean to bring you,
not to use the native inhabitants hardly, as Joshua did the Canaanites and
their things: but mutually to enjoy the use of those good things which you
shall find with them. If I proceed orderly, I must enter into the doctrine of
Tumors, which will be both pleasing and profitable in my first lecture. It is
a subject, which is most frequently offered, and from whence the meanest of all
the brethren, which practices, is not exempted. Wherefore it behooves every
one to be well grounded in this point: Howsoever I shall be willing that the
Governors of the worshipful Company set down the matter, whereof I shall
reader:

The Treatise of Tumors does deliver things either
General to all Tumors, and those are in number three. 1. The description of a
Tumor. 2. The causes of a Tumor according to the Dogmatists. Chemists.
3. The differences of Tumors.
Special, belonging to every Tumor particularly. How all Tumors are either
Simple, and those are 6. which proceed from either Humors, and those are four.
Phlegmone, caused of blood. Erysipelas, of choler. Oedema, of phlegm. Schirrus,
of Melancholy.
Or from Water, an aqueous Tumor. Flatuositie, a flatuous Tumor.

Compound Now the Combination of the Tumors proceeding from the mixture of the
material causes, causing the simple, I have set down in every particular
Tumor.

LECT. II. The general doctrine of Tumors.
SEeing according to Aristotle in cap. 1. lib. 1. physic. acroas. in every
methodicall tractation, that which is most general ought first to be set
down, then that which is more special; because the general points being set
down, they exceedingly further the knowledge of the particulars: I will begin
from those things which are common to all special Tumors, and those I make in
number three. First, I will declare what a Tumor is. Secondly, which are causes
of Tumors: Thirdly, which are the maine differences of Tumors.

The appellations of a Tumor.
Before I come to the essential definition of a Tumor, I Will set down the
denominations of it. A Tumor in Greek is called (...), that is, a prominence
or protuberance in the body. And from hence the Latin words uncus a crook or
hook, and aduncus bended or crooked, are derived: Because things bended cause
a sticking out. The Arabians and barbarous Physicians, who follow them, call
all Tumors unnatural Apostemata, in Latin abscessus: this word is derived
from the greek verb (...), abscedere: Because in apostemes there is a
collection of humors in any place, which have left their own proper seat etc.
For humors, which cause Apostemes, come from the veins, and so leaving there
own natural receptacle, seat themselves in other parts of the body, being
dependant and weak. And Chirurgeans commonly call Tumors wherein there is
collection of matter Apostemes. Tumor, which is a Latin word, and by frequent
use made familiar in English conferences and discourses, is derived from the
Latin word Tumeo, to be raised or puffed up: And from Tumor comes Tumulus a
grave: because it is raised up higher than the ground adjacent to it. Now
bunchings or stickings out of parts of the body, are threefold: Differences of
Tumors (...) the body.
for either they are natural, and then they serve for the comeliness of the
body are threefold: for either they are natural, and then they serve for the
comeliness of the body, Galen(...), id est, tumor praeter naturam, a Tumor
contrary to nature. Having set down the denominations of a Tumor, I must come
to the definition of it. Seeing so many as have written of tumors have set down
one definition, or another, if I should set down all the several definitions,
which are by diverse authors set down, and insist in the refutation of such
definitions as offend against the conditions of a good definition, I should
rather seem to the judicious, to make an ostentation of reading, and wit, than
a care of the profiting of the hearers. Of all the definitions, two are chiefly
to be noted: the one of Fallopius in his treatise of tumors: c. 3. The other
of Hieron. Fabricius ab aqua pendent. in Operibus Chirurgicis, part. 2. lib. 1.
de tumorib. cap. 1. That of Fallopius is gathered out of Galen, cap. 1. lib.
13. de method. medendi: and it is thus. It is a disease, whereby the parts lose
their natural bigness, exceeding it. So that extenuation is contrary to a
tumor. He will have it to be a disease of the instrumentorie parts: for
quantity is only an instrument, whereby the organicall parts perform their
actions, more strongly, or weakly, as we may see in dwarfs, and tall men.
Galen lib. 1. de tumorib praet. not. c. 1. affirms that in tumors contrary
to nature, all dimensions, that is, length, height and breadth are increased.
But the former definition cannot be ascribed to every particular tumor, and so
it is not large enough: for in an Erysipelas extreme heat rather offends,
than the bigness enlarged, which very often cannot be deprehended by the
senses. The definition of Fabricius.
The definition set down by Fabricius ab aqua pendente is this: A Tumor
against nature, is a disease for the most part compounded, which is to be
named of that thing, which hinders the actions. And seeing to a crow, her own
birds seem fairest, for if any one set under her, hens eggs to be hatched,
that they may have cocks of the game, they must watch for the time of
disclosing, lest she kill them: So he to make his definition plausible to his
readers, will have all to mark some remarkable points in his definition. And
first of all, in that he calls a Tumor against nature morbus, or a disease,
he will not have pushes in the face, and such small eminences of the skin to be
Tumors, because they hinder not the actions: he cannot deny that the equality
of the skin is altered, and besides this, the action of the skin, which is
perspiration, in that place is hindered. Let no man think it harsh, that I
ascribe action unto the skin, being a simple and similary part of the body: it
cannot be denied that all similary parts have an use, which use sometimes is
an action, as this of the skin; to send out by the pores of it fuliginous
vapors, and superfluous serositie of the blood by insensible perspiration and
sweat. And although such small eminences commonly are denied to be diseases,
because they hinder not the actions; yet they be passions, and affections,
which require the skill of the Physician and Chirurgean: yea those pushes of
the face are sometimes more hard to be cured than great Tumors, and Artists many
times gain more by those, than these: besides this, by reason of the matter
they are to be referred to one or other of the maine Tumors. Howsoever they are
not to be neglected. According to Aristotle 1. Rhetoric. c. 5. and Galen. ad
Thrasibulum, Three gifts of the body.
there be three gifts of the body, to wit, Health, Strength, and Beauty, all
which medicine is to direct: Health is preserved by holesom nourishment,
Strength by convenient exercises: of the which (...) entreats, whereof
Hieron. Mercurialis has written a volume; (...) has care of the beauty: now
seeing by reason of the face, a man is called beautiful or ugly, who can deny
that they deserve the care of the Physician, and Chirurgean. He adds that a
Tumor is a disease most commonly compounded; if he had said ever compounded,
he had spoken a truth: for in every one of these Tumors, there is a Tumor
conspicuous or latent; or a solution of unity, either sensible or imaginary.
In an Erysipelas it self, wherein there appears neither quantity of part
increased, nor solution of unity procured; yet in it there are undoubtedly
both: for the first, seeing there is so great a heat in the part possessed with
this grief, the Humors must be rarefied, and the part dilated, which will
require a more spacious place than it had before, which is an evident argument,
that the quantity is enlarged. As for the second, the parts before arctly
united must be somewhat separated by stretching: Reason must teach us that which
cannot be deprehended by the senses. The last clause of the definition, That
the Tumor is to be named from that which hinders the action, as Erysipelas a
disease of distemperature, because heat does most hinder the action of the
part: this is frivolous, because not heat only, but the bedewing of the skin
with choler, by the which it is stretched, hindered the contraction and
extension of the skin, and so by a necessary consequence, the hindering of the
motion of the part organicall, wherein it is seated. To conclude, this
definition may be applied to other griefs than a Tumor, as to the headache,
which is a disease most commonly compounded of distemperature of the humors,
and solution of unity, and may have its denomination from the diversity of the
humor causing it. Wherefore, seeing neither the definition of Fallopius out of
Galen, nor the definition of Fabricius ab aqua pendente, can abide the trial
of the laws of a good definition, we must assay to give another, which shall
be this: A Tumor against nature is most frequently a disease, sometimes a light
affection, for the most part incident to the organicall parts, increasing their
quantity above nature, by reason of receiving of superfluous humors sent from
other parts. Here I will labor to yield a reason for every point of this
definition. The genus is a grief, The definition of the author.
because it hinders the actions, sometimes it is a passion or light affection,
which hinders not the action of the part, as appears in small adomatous
Tumors, and scirrhosities: and therefore these modifications frequently, and
sometimes are added. The subject of a Tumor is a part organicall, sometimes by
its own nature organicall, as a finger or toe, sometimes organicall only by
office, as when the use of a similarie part is performed by an action: as it
appears in the skin, one of the uses whereof, is to send forth by its pores
insensible perspirations, fuliginous vapors, superfluous serosity of the blood
by sweat, and ichors of humors in the beginning of Tumors, and declination by
discussive and resolutive medicaments. The form of a Tumor is quantity
increased, whereby it differs from all other griefs. The cause of quantity
increased.
The cause of increase of quantity, is receiving of superfluous humors, which
is done two manner of ways, to wit, affluxion, and congestion. Affluxion is,
Affluxion.
when a humor offending either in quantity or quality, suddenly with violence
seizes upon any member, either by reason of the weakness of it, the rarity,
looseness, dependancy, heat, or pain, or because the whole body is full, or
cacochymicall, and the parts sending strong. Congestion is, Congestion
when a humor is collected in any part by little and little, by reason of the
weakness of the concocting and expelling faculty of the same: so that a Tumor
against nature is a disease always compounded, against Fallopius in his
Treatise of Tumors, c. 3. For there is always a solution of unity, either
manifest, or latent and occult, and this he grants; for he says, and de
hoc conveniemus: we shall agree concerning this. Besides this, the quantity is
increased, and that always to reason and imagination, although not to the
sense, as has been said of an Erysipelas. Moreover, you shall hardly find a
Tumor without some distemperature, either simple, or compounded. I have
insisted somewhat too long in clearing the Problem of the definition of a
Tumor against nature, because there is great contention concerning it amongst
Authors, both ancient and modern.

Causes of Tumors.
Now order of doctrine requires, that we speak somewhat of the causes of
Tumors: these are either external, or internal; External.
The causes external are in number eight. I. The air, if it be contagious, it
causes Tumors, as Carbuncles, and Botches in the plague time. II. The touching
of things exceeding temperature in the active qualities, as we see in the
application of Veficatories, and sitting long upon any cold seat. III. Too hard
binding of the part, which causes sometimes Gangrenes. IV. The application of
an attracting instrument to the body, as Cupping-glasses, and Horns. V.
Whatsoever may cause solution of unity, as wound, fracture, luxation, or
contusion. VI. Biting of beasts, whether they be venomous or no. VII. Taking
inwardly things offensive to nature, whether it be by the excessive quantity,
as when by too liberal drinking wine, an Erysipelas seazeth upon the head, or
by a malign quality, as we may see fall out after the taking of Arsenicke or
Mercury sublimate. VIII. Immoderate motion, whereby immoderate heat is
procured, whereby the Humors become more subtle, and the passages to the
weaker part more patent.

Causes of the weakness of a part.
Now the part is weak: First, by nature, and that either by reason of its
substance, it being spungeous, and loose as Glandules: so we see frequently
Parotides behind the ears, and Bubones in the groynes, or by reason of the
natural humidity of the part; so Tumors more often appear in the flesh than
in the spermaticke parts. A part also naturally is weak by reason of the
situation, for the dependant parts are more apt to receive influence of humors,
as the more high are to receive Halitus; so it is often seen, that it rising
from the stomach, or some inferior part, causes in some the falling sickness.
A part, secondly, is weak by accident, and that by reason of errors committed
in the things not natural, as air, meat and drink, exercise, and such like,
whereof much is spoken in that part of Physic which is called Physiologia.
Things required in a Tumor.
So that to the causing of a Tumor in a part, there be required, the weakness
of the part which receives, patent passages, preparation of the Humor, and the
strength of the part sending.

The internal, causes of Tumors are either Humors or Flatuosities: The Humors
are either natural or unnatural: Internal
The natural are either sincere, as choler, phlegm and melancholy; or mingled,
as some of these with blood, for blood is no where sincere, but according to
the humor mingled with it, which is predominant, it is called choleric,
phlegmatic, or melancholy blood. The Humor unnatural is water, as in the
dropsy, for it never can become nourishment. Of Tumors which are caused by
reason of strange things, as worms, lice, bones, nails, hair, grissy
substances, and such like, I will speak when I come to the third part of
Chirurgerie, called (...) or Ablatrix, which takes away superfluities. But
time admonishes to come to the setting down of the principal differences of
Tumors. In this matter I will leave all needless and fruitless distinctions
of Tumors, from time, as that some are new, some old, some short, some long
enduring: from the quantity, as that some are small, some great, some of a
mean bigness: from the condition of them, as that some are mild, some
malign, some curable, some uncurable, and such like; which either do not
greatly further the knowledge and curation of Tumors, or else are to be set
down to some purpose in the explication of every particular Tumor. Only now
in my general discourse of Tumors, which is to show light unto that which
shall hereafter be spoken in the special doctrine of each, I will meddle with
the differences taken from the material cause of Tumors, from whence spring
the maine principal Species of Tumors, unto which all other may be reduced.

The maine differences of Tumors.
All Tumors then are either simple or compounded. The simple are caused either
of Humors or Flatuosity: the humors are either natural, or unnatural: the
natural Humors are four, Blood, Choler, Phlegm and Melancholy: If blood,
which neither in the veins, nor without, is found sincere and unmixed (as has
been said) cause a Tumor, it is called Phlegmone, or Inflamatio, according to
Galen lib. 2. ad Glaucon. cap. 1. Of the diverse kinds of it, which have their
denominations from their places, and of the diversities which arise from the
complication of it with other Humors, I mean to discourse when I come to the
particular tractation of it: for I mean not to confound particulars with
generals, because this would breed confusion, and so deprive the memory of
fruit of that which is delivered. Of all other Tumors a Phlegmone deserves the
first place, because it is caused of blood, which is the son of nature, first
begotten, and the treasure of life. If choler cause the Tumor, it is called
Erysipelas; these two are hot Tumors. If phlegm cause a soft and white Tumor
like it self, it is called Oedema, unto which diverse pituitous Tumors are
reduced, of the which I will speak in their proper places. If a Tumor very
hard be produced of the melancholy juice, and without pain, it is called
Scirrhus; these two last are cold Tumors. If a Tumor be caused of water
contained in any part, it is called Tumor aquosus: If from flatuosity
Emphysoma; these two last Tumors are the offsprings of crudity, caused by the
weakness and defect of the natural heat. And seeing these have the material
cause different from that of others, I will speak of these in several
Lectures, as was done in every other particular Tumor. Besides this, they
require other medicaments than the rest of the maine Tumors do, as shall be
showed when we come to the curation of them. Differing then from the rest, I
see no reason why they may not be accounted several Tumors; one cannot truly
say that either Hernia aqu^sa, or flatuous Tumors of the joints, can be
reduced to the aforesaid four principal Tumors, or that they can be cured by
the same indications of curing, and medicaments which are applied to the other.
You see how I have set down six simple Tumors, for fewer I cannot, if you
consider either the diversity of the material causes, or the diversity of the
topicall applications, or the evidence of doctrine. The combination of these
beget the compound Tumors; in these compound Tumors, Compound Tumors.
what Humor is predominant, that carries away the denomination: As for
example, if blood abound more than choler, the Tumor is called (...). If choler
be predominant, it is called (...), and so in all other combinations of Humor
in Tumors, which shall be presented to your view. When you have noted the
Pathognomonical signs of each of the simple principal Tumors, it is an easy
matter at the first sight to discern the kind of Tumor, and what compound
medicaments are to be applied to it. Hitherto have I declared unto you the
opinion of Hippocrates, Galen, and of the rest of the Grecians, as also of the
Arabians concerning the material causes of Tumors. Now to fulfill my promise,
I will show you what Paracelsus and his followers think of this point: First
then they acknowledge but two elements, water and earth; for if they should not
grant so much, they could not be accounted in the number of the faithful; for
in the very first Verses of Genesis mention is made of both. Secondly, The
Humors are not parts of the body.
they account the Humors parts of the body, and so the causes of no griefs,
but erroneously, for if they were parts, they would be endued with life, which
they are not. Thirdly, they would have some action, whereof they also are
deprived: only they have an use, which is to nourish the parts. Besides this,
they maliciously dissemble the doctrine of the rational Physicians and
Surgeons, for they make each Humor, contained in the mass of blood, either
natural, or against nature: the natural they make, either alimentary, which
nourishes the parts, or superfluous, which nature reserveth for some other
uses: of this abounding, diseases proceeding of fullness are engendered, called
Plethora: of the Humor against nature, causing impurity, Cacochymia is caused;
so choler in the veins and arteries is natural, and alimentary. In the Cystis
fellis, and in the Porus biliarius, the superfluous is contained: if it leave
the appointed receptacles, and pass to the habit of the body, it causes the
yellow jaundize; if by adustion, it become Bilis atra, it procures Cancers and
Wolfes; What Humors cause diseases.
so that they hold not the natural, but those that are unnatural to be causes
of diseases.

The principles of all things according to Paracelsus and his followers.
The Paracelsians appoint three principles of all things, Sal, Sulphur, and
Mercury, and not only by resemblance, or allegorically, but really: By
Sulphur, they understand the fattie substance; by Mercury, the waterish
substance; by salt, the earthy substance: Distill Cloaves, there come two
humidities, the oil and spirit: in the bottom the earthy substance stays,
which has two parts, Terra repurgata, the crystalline salt, and Terra mortua,
the black earth. The life of the salt is a strong water, The life of salt.
which if it be by distillation drawn, it leaves but a Terra damnata, only
fit for the dunghill. The effect and benefit of salt.
This salt preserves the body from putrefaction, wherefore Christ called his
Disciples the salt of the earth, because by the preaching of the Gospel, and
administration of the healthful Sacraments, they procured to the unfaithful
the life of grace, who before were but Terra damnata; and by a wonderful
transmutation of terrestrial creatures, made them spiritual, representing the
Angels, yea God himself, by restoring his image. From defects in these three,
The causes of diseases according to the Chemists.
they will have all diseases to proceed: and concerning Tumors against nature,
the hot they will have to proceed from Sulphur and Mercury, and the hotter it
is, the more Sulphur to concur. The cold Tumors they will have to proceed
from Mercury and Salt, and according to the looseness, or firmness of the
Tumor, the more Salt or Mercury to be required, as in Oedema more Mercury, in
Scirrbus more Salt. This is their doctrine concerning the material causes of
Tumors, in my judgment it is the salfest course to insist in the footsteps of
the ancient, for their way is plain and easy; no man can deny that there are
four Humors in the mass of blood, as may appear when it is drawn out of the
veins: Choler swimmeth about the blood, which is known by its bright redness;
Melancholy is in the bottom, which is deprehended by its grossness and
blackness; now Phlegm uniteth these two last Humors, and makes them tough.
The Paracelsian doctrine is full of difficulties, which he makes more obscure
by coining strange words, as his Reader will perceive; so that his discourses
are but a kind of canting Philosophy. Nevertheless, I thought good in plain
terms to acquaint you with it, that when any Empericke shall make a show of
learning, by using these terms, you may find him out, and esteem of him as
he is: that is, like that head which the Wolf afar off espied, representing
the head of a living man, but coming near, and seeing it but curiously
carved, affirmed it to be Pulchrum caput, sed sine scientia, A comely head, but
without wit.

LECT. III. Of the general Indications of curing Tumors.
OF the general points whereof I intended to speak before the handling of
every particular Tumor, having set down the definition, causes, and
differences of Tumors, now I am called upon to set down the general
indications of curing Tumors.

Indication what it is,
Now an indication is that which shows what course is to be taken for the
recovery of health: The general indications are taken either from the matter,
or from the times of every Tumor; In the matter, we are to consider the motion
of it, and its nature: As concerning the motion of the matter, it is either in
flowing, or it is received already into the part. The causes of fluxion are
two, Plethora, or fullness, and Cacochymia, an ill complexion: Plethora or
fullness is twofold, Ad vasa, and Ad vires: Ad vasa is when the veins are
only full, and the body notwithstanding quick and nimble^^ this is twofold,
Pura, when there is a due proportion of the Humors of the body, and Impura,
when there is an excess of any of the three Humors besides blood, as Choler
Phlegm, or Melancholy. Ad vires is when there is such a fullness, as causes
sluggishnesse of the body: this requires evacuation of Phlebotomie, as
Cacochymia by purgation. As for Phlebotomie, three things are to be observed
concerning it. I. The manner: In fullness, Quoad vasa, at one time so much
blood is to be drawn as is requisite; but in fullness, Quoad vires, because
strength is somewhat abated, you are to draw blood by repetition, and not all
at one time. II. Is the quantity, how much then is to be drawn, the weakness
or strength of the party will inform you; for in a weak body you are to draw
less, in a strong body more, strength and weakness are to be discerned by
the functions: the weakness of the natural faculty is discerned by crudity of
Urine, and excrements of the body: the weakness of the vital, by a weak and
small pulse, as also breathing weak and thick: the weakness of the animal
function is found out by defect in moving and feeling; by the integrity and
perfection of these three faculties the strength of the party is perceived: But
we must diligently distinguish beweene languishing and weakness indeed,
Weakness and oppression differ.
and oppression of faculties by reason of fullness, making them dull and slow;
for as in weakness, great moderation is to be used, so in oppression we may
more bountifully and boldly suffer the vein to run. The third thing to be
observed in Phlebotomie is the end of it, whereof it is instituted; the scopes
of bloodletting are two, Derivation and Revulsion: Derivation is the drawing
of the Humor to the part adjacent, or of the same side, by opening of that
vein, or a branch of it, which is inserted into the part affected: as for
example, if in diseases of the head or neck, we open the Cephalica in the same
side: and even in this there is a kind of opposition, to wit, high and low; or
in Tumors of the groyne, we open Vena poplitis: this they do also who open
this vein in Podagra, if the gout invade the foot. This kind of interception
we use, not only because there is a plentiful fluxion to the part affected,
but because a speedy interception is required, lest the natural heat of the
part be oppressed, or the rupture of a vessel ensue: so in inflammation of the
lungs, and side, we open the liver vein of the same side, and draw blood
plentifully. Revulsion is a drawing of the Humor to a part opposite: of this
there be four differences: I. From the higher to the lower parts, as from the
head to the feet. II. From the right side to the left. III. From the fore part
to the back, which we shall do if we apply Leeches in diseases of the breast
or belly. IV. Is when we draw from the center unto the circumference, as in
applying Ventoses with Scarification to the neck in diseases of the brain, as
in the Apoplexy, and Lethargy Vesicatories perform the same.

But one may ask which we to be accounted high, Quest.
and which low.

I answer, That all those parts which are above the navell, Answ.
including also the liver and stomach, are accounted high; but the parts below
the liver, are accounted low, as the kidneys, and genitals in man and woman.

The ends of Revulsion.
This kind of interception we use in two cases: First, if the matter flow but
flowly, and so a sudden interception is not required. Secondly, if we are to
open a vein to prevent a disease, as Vena cubiti for to free one of a fit of
the gout. But this kind of drawing has no place in contagious Tumors, if they
appear either in the upper or lower parts; for whether they appear either
behind the ears, and arme-pits in the upper parts, or in the groynes in the
lower, revulsion must be by the Vena cava, which is inserted into the right
ventricle of the heart: now whether any contagious vapor or Humor can be sent
by this passage safely, let every judicious person consider.

Now there is a difference between Revulsion, Derivation, and Evacuation, for
in the former two, motion is required, as you have heard, but in vacuation the
Humors must be quiet. In the translation of Humors flowing from any part, we
must mark according to Hippocrates, that it be done (...), Secundum
rectitudinem, by observation of a straight course; and that is done two manner
of ways:

First, by the rectitude of the parts, as the left with the left, and right
with the right, and the hinder with the fore parts. Secondly, by the rectitude
of the vessels: as for example, The liver vein of the arm has a kind of
straitness with the veins ascending to the head: so if one bleed immoderately
at the right nostrill, by applying a Ventose to the region of the liver, the
flux cease: if it flow from the left nostrill, it must be applied to the
region of the spleen.

Having set down how Plethora is to be abated, if it cause fluxion, we are to
show how Cacochymia is to be removed, which is not so much by reason of the
quantity oppressing, as by reason of an evil quality offending a part. Now
this matter offending in quality, it either moves from place to place, or it
rests where it had its first invasion; if it move from place to place, it is
the safest course to abate the Humors wherein this quality is resident by
Phlebotomie, lest it seize upon some principal part: if it be quiet, resting
contented with the first place, then let us use by purging, expelling the
Humor, whether it be choler, phlegm, or melancholy, with appropriate
medicaments, which Physic prescribes in that branch of the curative part of
Physic which restores health by the administration of inward medicaments.
Having set down the indications which are taken from the motion of the Humor,
we must come to those which are taken from the nature of it.

Indications from the nature of the humor.
Now the humor it self is either not contagious, or contagious: If it be not
contagious, the fluxion of it does proceed from three causes: The first is the
strength of the part sending the humor, which it does, either because it is
burdened with the quantity, or pricked on by the quality; we have showed what
is to be done in these cases. The second is the thinness of the humor. The
third is the attraction of the affected part. If fluxion be caused by reason of
the thinness of the humor, if we cannot use phlebotomie or purging, as in
children, decrepit persons, and in women with child in the last month: then
we must use revulsion, and this is done six manner of ways. I. By Ventoses
region of the liver, when one bleedeth too much at the right nostrill. II.
Painful constriction, or binding of the parts, as arms, and legs: but we
must first rub hard the parts which are to be bound; and if we bind the arm,
we must use a Ligature in three parts: 1. Near the arme-pit. 2. A little above
the elbow. 3. About the wrist. In the legs we must use a Ligature near the
groyne, a little above the knee, and near the anckle. III. Painful frications
when we mean to revell from the center to the circumference. IV. Bathing of
the parts with very hot water: for first by reason of the pain it does revell.
Secondly, it does discuss because it opens the poores. And in fevers by
bathing of the limbs sleep is procured, the vapors ascending to the head. V.
Vesicatories which are used in the Apoplexy, Lethargy, and such like. VI.
Fontanels, and they are in great use to be applied to diverse parts, for the
preventing and curing sundry griefs. If the fluxion be procured by the
attraction of the part affected, there be two causes of the attraction: First,
the distemperature of the part. Secondly, pain. If distemperature of the part
be the cause, it must be removed by its contrary: but seeing it is most
commonly a hot distemperature, things cooling are to be applied, as by applying
clothes moistened with oil of Roses, or violets cold: but when the clouts
become hot, the^ are to be removed, and cold to be applied, or clothes
moystned in the juyces of cold herbs. If we apply unguents, as infrigidans
Galeni, Rosatum Mesuis, de cerussa Rasis, Populeon, we must not apply the
unguent immediately to the skin; but a thin linen cloth: for it keeps the
unguent from drying, and does not hinder the breathing out of the vapors, which
the immediate application of the unguent would do, and so by stopping of the
pores, would increase both the heat and pain.

And in application, of pulteses, they are to be spread between the fouldings
of a cloth, dipped in some convenient oil or liniment; for so it does not
hinder perspiration, and the applications are removed more easily from the
part. This in your pratice is to be noted, and the invetorate error to be
shunned, if the ways by the which the humor passes, be too ample and patent,
and a hot distemperature joined, then things astringent and cooling are to be
applied, roulers and other clothes being moystened in them. Wherefore in this
case myrtils berries, red rose leaves dried, pomgranate rindes and flowers,
sumach, sloes, oaken and owlar bark boiled in red astringent wine, or vinegar
and water, or new and fresh Tanners woose, and strained are effectual. The
parts therefore by the which the humor passes, are to be rouled somewhat
strait with the rouler, clothes, stupes, or pledgets and bowlsters being
moistened in this liquor, and wrung: you may also apply astringent and defensive
emplasters drawn upon leather; such an one is this, rad. torment. bistort.
symphyti. ros. rub. gallar. balaust. malicor. sang. drac. boli. Armen. santal.
rubr. cerass. an. j. cerae albae iij. ol. myrtill. j. mise. fiat ceratum. So
much then shall be sufficient to have been set down, concerning the
attraction of the affected part, by reason of the distemperature of it: now we
must come to the second cause of the attraction, which is pain or dolor. There
are two causes of pain, solution of unity, and a venomous quality: if the
solution of unity proceed from the affluxion of Humors hot or sharp distending
the parts, the pain is to be eased with medicaments convenient: these are of
two sorts, Anodine, and Narcoticall: Anodynes gently contemperate the part, by
reason of the conformity which they have with the nature of man. They are hot
in the first degree, and of subtle parts; such are milk, old sallet-oyle,
butter, the fat of swine, hens, ducks, geese, eeles, man, badger, bears: the
oil of camomil, lilies, earth-wormes, lineseed, dill, sweet almonds, eggs,
the pulp of Cassia tempered with the oil of roses, the pulp of swect apples
with the powder of saffron. Narcoticks, are which deprive the part of the
faculty of feeling, such are Opium, hemlocke, henbane, the deady nightshade,
mandragora, and the apple of Peru, or prickly apple: When narcoticall means
are to be used.
these we are to use when the former will not prevail, and when by reason of
watching, a fever or faintnes is to be feared. Sometimes in extremities they are
used solitary, sometimes with their correctives, to wit, things hot, if we fear
stupefaction of the part, unto the which they are to be applied: such things
are castoreum, saffron, cinnamon, cloves, pepper, and such like. If the biting
of a venomous beast, What is to be done in biting of venomous beasts.
as of a mad dog, or a viper, or adder: or the stinging and pricking of any
beast, as of a scorpion, or insect, as a hornet, be the cause of a Tumor, we
must address our selves to meet speedily with the poison. If therefore a
venomous beast bite or sting, first, the part is to be scarified, and ventoses
to be applied: then the part is to be fomented with Theriaca Andromachi,
dissolved in strong wine vinegar, and stupes moistened in the same, applied to
the same; or it is to be fomented with the oil of scorpions, and a pledget
wet in it to be applied: and above the pledget, this emplaster of Fallopius is
to be spread warm, De tumoribus c. 14.
pic. naval. j. sal. nitri. ss. semen. synapi ij. cepar. allior. sub. prun.
coctor. an. iij. assae foetid. sagapen. an. ij. stercor. columbini j ss.
aristol. rotund dictamni albi an. j. ol. lil. albor.. ss. fiat emplastrum:
pigeons also, and hens, and cocks divided in two parts, and applied hot are
avallable. Sometimes the actual cauterie is to be applied, to tame the
malignitie of the poison, if the poison has continued above three days:
Besides this, two things more are to be done, first, according to Galen, the
member is to be bound hard, 3. de loc. affect. 7.
three or four inches above the part bitten or stung: secondly, Antidots
inwardly are to be given; but chiefly Theriaca Andromachi, for many days
together in a liquor, fit for the constitution of the diseased person: now if
the matter of a Tumor be contagious, Indications in contagious Tumors.
we are by all means to draw it out of the body, lest if it go in, it
deprive the person of life, as in the plague, or infect the liver, as in the
pox, wherefore ventoses are to be applied, and medicaments attractive to be
applied: such is Fallopius his emplaster set down before, for the attraction
of poison. In the plague, we must not fail to minister Antidots, even to
three times in a day, and to procure sweat: such are Theriaca, Electuarium de
ovo, Electuarium Orvietani, or this of Fallopius: De Tumor. c. 9.
baccar. juniper. caryophyll. nuc. muscas. rad. enul. an. ij. rad. aristol.
utriusque, gentian. an. vj. semen. portul. acetos. doron. been rub. an. j.
spodii, oss. de cord cervi. ligni aloes. coralii albi and rubri, rasur. ebor.
baccar. lauri, mastich croci. an. ij. rut. morsus diabol. au. j. pulp. ficuum
and dactylor. an. j cinamoni liquirit. an. ss. tormentill. card. benedict.
dictamni albi an. iij. amygdal. dulc. and pinear. excort. an. j. agaric.
trochiscat. vj. rad. peuced. ij. terrae sigillat. and bol. erient. an j zedoar.
ij. caphur. iij. spec. 3. santal. spec. diarrhod. abbat. an. ij, cort. citri,
pulv. smaragdi an. j. moschi j. Theria^. Andromach. and Mithridat. an. j. fol.
mali Arm^niaci ss. cum syrup. de cort. citri, and de acetositatecitri an.
triplopondere ad pulveres fiat Electuarium. Coquendo em^ias^a.
Vt Electuarium fiat magis efficax addi possunt cornu rhinocerotis iij, and
cornu cervi praparat. ss. dos. a j ad ij, in convenience liquore.

The stinging of waspes or bees is cured with mallows stamped and mingled with
cold water, or chaulke applied with the same.

LECT. IIII. Of the four times of a Tumor, and the Indications taken from them.
HAving spoken of the Indications curative, taken from the matter of a Tumor,
now it follows that we speak of the Indications taken from the times of a
Tumor: the times of a Tumor are four, the beginning, the increase, The times
of a Tumor.
the state and declination. The beginning is thought to be, sanguis draconis,
terra sigillata, sour wine, Tanners woose, which you may apply either single,
or mingled according to your scope. When repelling medicaments are not to be
used.
But in six cases we are not to use repelling topics, first, if the matter
be venomous or malign: least it being repelled, should assault some
principal part. Secondly, if the matter be critically turned to a part, so
that it be not a principal part by the error of nature: for then it ought to
be repelled, as when in a burning fever, the matter being sent to the meninges
causes raving. Thirdly, when the body is either plethorick, or of an ill
habit. Fourthly, 6. a con p med. 2. m. loc a. 2.
when the humor flows to the emunstories. Fifthly, if the part have but little
natural heat, we are not to use repercussives, least the natural heat be
extinguished, and the part mortify. Sixthly, when the dolor Id. tod. lib. c. 7.
and 13 method.
is vehement, 13. method. c. 16.
and the part exceedingly pained, for then Anodyns are only to be used. We
are to think the Tumor to increase, when the part is stretched, and symptoms
are increased, and seeing in the increase the matter partly flows, and partly
possesses the part, you are partly to repel, and partly to discuss: but if
the matter flow with such force and plenty of humor, that it threatens
corruption of the part, (e) or if the humor which flows be thick, and so
hot, that the part feels a burning, as in a carbuncle, then are you to use
sensible evacuation by scarification; but where we cannot conveniently
scarifie, the leeches are to be applied as in the hemorrhodes, and other
griefs of the anus. Discussion.
Now discussion is an evacuation of a thin matter gathered in a part, by
insensible evaporation, procured by the natural heat increased by
proportionate medicaments. In this description, insensible is added to
distinguish it from evacuation by incision, scarification, or leeches, which
evacuate sensibly to the eye: the principal efficient cause is the natural
heat; the adjuvant discussive medicaments, the matter which is to be resolved
must be thin; for it is in vain to go about to discuss a thick substance:
because it is not apt to yield vapors. In the description, The effects of
discussive medicaments.
discussive medicaments are said to help natural heat by increasing of it,
which being done: First, the humor is made thin: Secondly, it is resolved into
a vapor: Thirdly, it is drawn from the center to the circumference, and lastly
expelled by the pores of the skin. The qualities of these medicaments.
Such medicaments then must be familiar to nature, and these perform their
office, by consuming superfluous humiditie: and so they must be hot and dry.
Degrees of them. Gal 6. de comp. medic. 2. in loca c. 1.
They must then be subtle, that they penetrate to perform these offices. There
be three degrees of discussive medicaments, they in the first degree are hot
and dry in the second, as dry figs, branne, camomil, Ammoniatum, galbanum,
leaven, lilie roots, melilot, the roots of the marshe mallow, goose grease, and
old hens grease: and because such assuage pain, we ought c Id 6. de compos
med. 2. in. loc. c. 2
d Id. 2. ad Glaucon c. 9 Id. 14. method. 20.
always to begin with them. In the second degree, are calamint, Peucedanum,
the roots of both the birth woorthes, lions fat, old bearer fat, old badgers,
cats, dogs, and man's fat: these are somewhat drier, and hotter than those of the
first. In the third degree, assa foetida, etc. These are to be applied
according to the constitution of the party, as the skillful Chirurgean shall
see cause. The state of a Tumor is, when it is come to such a degree, What is
to be done in the state of a Tumor. Its signs.
as that it can go no further in bigness, the signs of it are these: first
all symptoms, as tension, pain, redness, and fever symptomaticall are at
the height, and remain uniforme, neither increasing nor decreasing: secondly,
the veins of the parts adjacent continue in this same fullness and dilation.
In the state, we are to use Anodyns with discussives by reason of the pain.
Of the Declination.
We are to think that the declination of the Tumor begins, when the
aforesaid symptoms begin to abate, and then strong discussives only are to be
applied, whereof we have spoken before. In necessity we may use these which are
found in the shops, diachylon cum gummis, diachylon magnum Mesuis, diachylon
ireatum. The termination of Tumors.
Tumors end not only by resolution, but often by maturation; and sometimes by
induration and corruption: and as discussion is better than apostemation; so
induration is better than the corruption of the part: fifthly, Tumors do end
changing the place, The matter.
as when in a plurifie the matter falls upon the midrife, and causes Empyema.

LECT. V. Of curing of a Tumor come to suppuration.
HAving in my former Lecture set down, that all Tumors end in one of these five
ways, to wit, discussion, apostemation, induration, corruption of the part,
and passing from one part to another.

Having showed the method how they are to be discussed: Now order requires
that the means be set down, how a Tumor is to be handled, if it tend to
suppuration, or maturation: which by our usual term is called Apostemation.
Thus we are enforced so to go to work: When naturation of a ^umor is to be
procured.
First, if the humor be too plentiful; for then the natural heat cannot well
rule it, and so it must be seconded by foreign and external heat, which
working upon superfluous humidity, causes putrefaction according to the
Philosopher. Secondly, when it is crude; for then we must labor to concoct it
with the medicaments, which are peptica or coquentia. Thirdly, when the matter
is hard; and then we must use emollient medicaments. The medicaments which
procure quittour, they are temperately hot and most: and these help natural
heat, that it may the more easily elaborate the matter, and make it fit for
expulsion, and this we call concoction. Emollient topics are used to soften
any matter indurated, and such are dry in the first degree; and hot in the
first, and in the beginning of the second. But it is to be noted that there is
a difference between tension and hardness, and relaxation and softnes: a part
stretched will yield to the finger pressing it; if it be hard it will not: and
where there is any tension, relaxing medicaments are to be applied, which
attenuate and open the pores, and therefore they must more discuss than dry,
and so be drying in the first degree, and hot in the second. A part indurated
must have emollient means applied to it: whereof we will speak, when we come
to discourse of a schirru. Indications in curing of Apostemes.
In the curation of Apostemes, we are to do two things: first, we are to
prepare the matter, and make it fit for expulsion: secondly, we are to
evacuate it, when it is prepared. To accomplish the preparation of the matter,
first, Removing of accidents.
we are to remove accidents: secondly, to procure the maturation of the
matter. The accidents are these, pain, tension of the part, hardness, and
heat. Asswaging of pain.
As for the asswaging of pain, narcoticall or stupefactive medicaments have no
place here: for first, they extinguish the natural heat of the part, The
inconveniences of narcoticall medicaments.
which is the principal efficient cause of coction: secondly, by thickning of
the matter, they make it more rebellious; wherefore we are to use Anodine
medicaments, whereof we have spoken already: you shall do well to apply such
a cataplasme as this. Take of white bread crumbs jiii, of new milk three
quarters of a pint, of mallow and violet leaves pounded small of each an
handful: boil these to the consistence of a cataplasme; then add to it of
saffron a dram, of unguentum populeum iij: let the aposteme be dressed with
this, or such a medicament, morning and evening.

Against tension. Simples.
If the part be stretched, use relaxing topics, such are those which are
temperately hot, not drying much, and of subtle parts, as white hore-hound,
archangell red and white, mullen, dill, camomill, fenygreek, mercury, melilot,
turnips, the leaves of the marsh mallow, the flower of barlie, beans, and
vetches; of these you may frame to your purpose such a cataplasme: Take of
camomil-flowres beat to powder ij pugils, of barlie, bean, and flower of
vetches, of each ij ounces, of marsh mallow leaves and flowers pounded a
handful: boil these in beef, or mutton broth strained, and the fat taken
away, until they come to the consistence of a poultice: Then add to it of the
oil of dill, camomill and rape-seed, of each j. ounce: dress the aposteme
with this or the like, morning and evening.

Against hardness. Simples.
If hardness hinder, use those things which are emollient, as all manner of
fats, the dregs of oil, all sorts of mallows, coltsfoot, buglosse and
burrage, quince seed, milk, the white lilie, linseed, figs, raisins, the marrow
of beasts, the oil of sweet almonds, march violets, Ammoniacum, Bdellium: of
some of these you may frame a cataplasme after this manner: Take of linseed
meal or powder, Compounds.
iiij., of marsh mallow roots, and white lilie roots boiled in water, and well
bruised, of each ij., of the violet leaves, and flowers, and coltsfoot leaves,
of each an handful; boil these in new milk, until they come to the
consistence of a cataplasme: unto the which add of ammoniacum dissolved in
muscadine, of the pulp of figs and raisins, of each j. ounce;, and so make up
your cataplasme.

Against heat.
If immoderate heat trouble you, apply things cooling: but let them be cold
either in the second degree, or beginning of the third: for the reasons yielded
against narcoticks, when I spoke of pain, such are umbilicus veneris, or
navell woort, prickmadam, singreene, barlie meal, endive, the pulp of the
pumpeon, sea-tong lettice, ducks-meat, the water lilie, the water archer,
plantine, garden nightshade: of these herbs with barlie meal boiled in fair
spring water make a poultice; and to every lib. of the poultice, add ij. of
populeum unguentum, and one ounce and an half of unguentum rosatum Mesuis.

You may demand of me, Quest.
how long the application of these topics prescribed, for the removing of
accidents, are to be continued.

I answer, Answer.
until the accident be almost gone, with the which you encountered, and then
you may proceed to assist nature, by increasing natural heat by ripening
medicines, which was the second intention of curing apostemes set down by me.
Maturation of apostemes.
Now those medicaments which help nature, ought first to stop the pores
reasonable, only suffering the sharp vapors to breath out, and to detain those
which are mild, and somewhat thick, which are the secondary cause of coction. In
this respect, then they ought to be viscous and tough in substance, such are
temperate oils, and mucilages, Gal de simplic. ^acult.
which by Galen, are called Emplastica: secondly, they ought to be familiar to
nature, and so temperately hot and moist. One thing is to be noted, that hotter
simples are to be chosen, according to the temperature of the part, if the
Tumor seem somewhat cold: wherefore if the Tumor seem hot, only maturatives in
the first degree are to be used, and those of the second degree to be shunned:
But if the matter be somewhat cold, then you are to use maturatives of the
second, yet always mingling with them some of the first degree. And the reason
is this, because the medicaments of the second degree dry too much, wherefore
those of the first degree are to be added, in the which there is much moisture,
which is requisite to coction and producing of quittor. These medicaments are
called Concoquentia, and Pus moventia, and Suppurantia: such ought to be hot
and moist, as the body of a temperate man is, and so they ought neither to dry
or moisten, or to heat or cool immoderately, but only to preserve and
increase the natural heat; for a suppurative medicament ought to answer the
constitution of him unto whom it is applied.

Degrees of suppurative medicaments.
Of these suppurative medicaments there be two ranks: In the first, are
Mans-grease which asswageth pain also, Duckes-grease, Goose-grease,
Hens-grease, oil of sweet Almonds, sweet sallet Oil, Mallows, sweet Butter,
Figs, Simples of the first degree.
Fenugreeke, Lilly roots, Linseed, Wheat-flowre; a Cataplasme made of
Wheat-flowre, Water and Oil, an Emplaster made of yellow wax, and oil called
Cerelaeum, Violet leaves and flowers, saffron. For an example, Compound.
I will set down the description of a suppurative Cataplasme compounded of some
of these of the first rank: Take of Milk a pint, in the which boil of
Wheat-flowre a quartet of a pound, of Violet-leaves, and Mallow-leaves stamped,
of each a handful, of Lilly-roots, and Figs boiled in water, until they be
soft, of each two ounces; when they are come to the consistence of a Pultice,
add of Saffron beat to powder a dram, of the oil of Linseed, sweet Almonds,
Lillies, and Mans-grease, of each one ounce; and so make up your medicament. If
the Tumor be immoderatly hot, mingle always with your suppuratives those
things which are cold and moist in the first degree, as Violet-leaves, Lettice,
the pulp of Pompions, Grownfill, Succorie, Dandelion, and such like. If of a
sudden you be called, and be required to dress a Tumor tending to suppuration,
you may have recourse to the Apothecaries shop, and with these things dress
it. First, beat some oil of Violets and fair Spring water, together, taking
two spoonful of oil, and one of water, with the which embrocat the Tumor,
then apply a pledget moistened in this, upon the part which is like to break,
or be opened; and above the pledget, Diachylon simplex if the Tumor be hot, or
Diachylon cum gummis if it be but a little exceeding the ordinary temperament.

Suppuratives of the second degree. Simples.
Suppuratives of the second degree are these; Terebinthina, Ammoniacum, Galbanum
sagapenum, Gummi elemni, Pix navalis, Burgundy pitch, Saffron, Leaven,
Fenugreek, Onyons and Garlic roasted under the imbers, old Butter, oil of
Camomill, and Dill, old Hens-grease, Badgers-grease, and Bears and
Dogs-grease, Wheat-flowre, Flower of Linseed. In the shops there are Emplastrum
de mucilaginibus, Dialthaea cum gummis, Diachylon cum gummis, Diachilon magnum.
Compound.


As before I have done, so now I will set down a compound medicament, framed
of these Simples: Take of the roots of the white Lilies, of the roots of the
marsh Mallow, of Onyons boiled and bruized, with the liquor of each iiij.. of
Leaven ij.. of Linseedmaeale j.. and a half, of Saffron beat to powder a dram,
of Ammoniacum and Galbanum dissolved in Muscadine, and the pulp of Figs, of
each j.. of oil of Camomill and Lilies so much as will make a Cataplasme of a
good consistence.

In Strumes, and Bubos venereall, use this: take of Diachylon cum gummis, and
Emplastrum de muci laginibus, of each j.. of Garlic and Onyons roasted under
the imbers of each ij. drammes, of Dialthaea cum gummis, Mans-grease, and
Beares-grease of each j. dram, make a medicament. One thing I would have you
to note, that suppuratives of this degree are fittest for all contagious
Tumors, and that to all such, Onyons and Garlic roasted, and mingled with
other medicaments, are to be applied; for being thus prepared, they leese their
sharpness, attract, and become familiar to the natural heat.

How Apostemes are to be opened.

Hitherto you have heard how that Tumors that cannot be discussed are brought
to suppuration: Now I am to deliver unto you, how the matter, which is
suppurated, is to be discharged. This is done by opening the part: Now some
things are to be considered before the action, some in the action, and some
after the action: Before we go about to open an Aposteme, First, we must be
certain whether it be ripe enough; Secondly, we must resolve how to open it.

Signs of maturitie.
The signs of maturation are; I. The Tumor, by contracting it self, seems
less than it was in the state; for while the natural does concoct the matter,
vapors are raised by the heat, and so the part is distended; but when the
matter is concocted, the elevation of vapors cease, and the Tumor falls
somewhat. II. The Tumor draws it self to a point, or prominence; because
when nature overcommeth the matter, it draws it together, and draws it to
the skin. III. Hardness and tension are much abated; for maturation being
procured, many vapors are discussed, which before stretched; and made hard the
skin. IV. By pressing the matter with the finger, we find a fluctuation, or
coming and going of it: but we must be circumspect when a Tumor in a great
joint is offered unto us, as in the knee; for if we press laterall parts of
it, a certain undation will appear. V. The party feels much ease in the
part; partly, because some of the sharp vapors are resolved; partly, because
the matter concocted does make the parts more loose. VI. The vehement heat
cease; for the Humor being come to maturation, the unnatural heat abateth,
and the natural heat rests. VII. If the part inflamed has changed the
color, and of red is become white, and chiefly in the pointed place. VIII. The
scarffe skin becomes shriveled, and ruffled; and this is a good sign, for it
shows that unnatural heat has left it.

^^^truments fit (...) ^pening.
The second thing which we said was to be resolved upon, was the instruments
with the which the Apostemes are to be opened. They are three; I. The lancet or
incision-knife, of the which there be diverse forms set down by the ancients:
of the which we will speak, when we come to discourse of particular
operations for the which they are required. II. Is the causticke or pyroticall
medicament. III. The actual cauterie, which we will leave willingly to horse
Leeches, unless we be destitute of other means: and when we are to make a
fontanell, or to stay a great flux of blood, or to dry a carious bone, or to
correct a cancerous part after that it is extirpate.

Steel instruments.
As for steel instruments, we are to use them, First, Apostemes be in the
face, to avoid the filthiness of the scarre, after the curation. Secondly, in
small Tumors: for so they will be the sooner whole.

As for the Causticke medicaments, Caustickes.
we use two sorts of them: the first is made of the strongest soap lees,
boiled to the consistence of a soft stone. The second is made of the like lee,
and unslaked lime, boiled to the form of a firm unguent. The first is best in
Tumors which possess the unequal part. The second is most convenient, if they
be in parts concave or hollow.

These Pyroticall medicaments are most fit to be used in five cases: I. If we
intend to keep the Tumor long open, as is requisite in all contagious Tumors, in
the plague, and pox: for where the caustic is applied, there is always loss
of substance, and by it we may make the orifice round, which of all other
figures most slowly is cured. II. In large Apostemes causticks are fittest; for
by them, making as large an orifice as we will, we shall spare tenting and
enlarging of it; besides, the stretched parts will the sooner be contracted.
III. They are to be used in deep apostemations, such as happen in the belly
and back, for so the matter shall have a readier way for evacuation. IV. They
are best, when a flux of blood may be expected. V. We apply them, when we will
gratify timorous persons.

Things to be done in the opening.
When we are come to open the part, then these things are to be observed: I. The
nature of the part: this teaches us, to shun veins and arteries by reason of
hemorrage, and nerves, tendons, and membranes by reason of the pain which
ensues. II. If the skin only be to be divided, then the apertion is to be made
straight; but if a muscule also be to be incised, it must be done according to
the fibers of it. III. Apertion must be made in the depending part, because the
matter will be more readily so drawn out. IV. It must be done where the part
is thinnest, for so less pain is caused. V. The apertion must be
proportionate; for if it be too little, then the matter, especially if it be
thick or grumous, cannot be well drawn without expression, which makes way
for callosity, and fistulation. If it be too large, first, the scar will be the
more ugly. Secondly, the parts subjacent will be made more apt to be altered,
by receiving the impression of the cold air. VI. We are to know how much
matter is to be evacuate at one time: In great Tumors, and those which are in
the joints, great moderation is to be used; for with the matter many spirits
breathe out, and so are spent: from whence extenuation of the body, yea and
death sometimes ensues. The Surgeon who is to do this, ought to be
resolute, cheerful in countenance and speeches, and no ways scrupulous:
otherwise he shall make the Patient dismayed, and fearful, Gal. 2. de Sympto
cause. 2.
which does much weaken and abate the courage of the Patient.

Things to be done after apertion.
Things to be observed after the opening of an Aposteme, are these: First, the
removing of accidents which most commonly fall out. Secondly, the manner of
dressing. The accidents are most commonly three, fainting, chiefly if the
parties be children, women, but above these, effeminate men. Secondly, pain.
Thirdly, a flux of blood.

Against fainting.
As for fainting, we may labor to prevent it, by ministering unto the Patient a
Caudle, Aleberrie, or some stiptick wine with a toast, as Allegant, and tent;
or if it be like to ensue, we may minister unto them some cordial water with
sugar, as Cinamome water, Triacle water, or Aqua coelestis. If dolor and pain
ensue, Against pain.
let the part be embrocat with oil of Roses, and the third part of wine
beaten together: yet the oil is not to touch the brimmes, if apertion has
been made by incision, lest it cause spungeous flesh to grow. Against bleeding.
As for staying of blood, I will set down the sit, and most effectual
means to perform this, when I shall come to discourse of wounds, for in them
it does most commonly fall out.

Dressing after opening.
As concerning the manner of dressing after opening: If this has been done by
incision, either a tent, if it be small, or dosels with pledgets armed with
some restringent powder, as bole, frankincense, and flower tempered with the
whites of eggs, if it be large, are to be used: and so it is to remain for
the space of four and twenty hours. If the caustic be applied, then Dialthea
simplex, or sweet butter melted in a sawcer, are fit to be used until the
eschare fall; then the cavity is to be incarnate: If in the mean time
spungeous flesh appear, it is to be removed with cathereticall medicaments, as
precipitate alone in gentle bodies, or mingled with alome, taking the third
patt of this in harder bodies: yea, you shall be enforced sometimes to use
Pulvis sine pari. and other Fistula powders with some medicaments, which cool
and asswageth pain, as Vnguentum populeum, and Rosatum Mesuis: take my word,
Basilicum and Aureum are not so fit.

Last of all, it is to be sealed up with epuloticall medicaments, as Diapalma,
Emplastrum de minio, Vnguentum comitissae, and Desiccativum rubeum. If a Tumor
end into an Induration, it must be cured as a Scirrhus, whereof I will speak
in its proper place. If it end into the corruption of the part, the way of
dressing this shall be set down in my discourses of and Gangraena and
Spacelus. If a Tumor cease, because the matter removes from one place to
another, as when Pleuritis ends in Empyema, neither does this belong to this
place.

LECT. VI. Of a Phlegmon.
HItherto I have delivered a general rule or method, common to the curation of
all particular Tumors: Now it rests, that the use of the general documents
be showed in every special Tumor. Of all which, Phlegmon.
a Phlegmon does first offer it self: First, because it is caused by the most
excellent humor, to wit, blood; the matter of spirits, and the storehouse of
life. Secondly, because it is most frequent. Thirdly, because very often, as a
Symptom, It accompanies other griefs, as wounds, contusions, ulcers,
luxations, and fractures, as Galen notes. a 2. ad Glau^. c. 1. and 13. method
c. 1.


The word (...) is drived from (...) from whence flagro, to burn, by reason of
the heat of it.

A Phlegmon is a Tumor hot, proceeding from the affluxion of blood to any part.
In this description, A description of it.
where it is said to be hot, in this it is distinguished from Oedema and
Schirrus; and in this that it is pronounced to proceed from blood, it is
severed from Erysipelas of caused of choler: the differences are taken either
from the material cause of it, or else from some parts which it possesses.
The differences of it taken from the matter are these: Differences from the
matter.
It is either Legitima, or Notha, either truly bred, or else bastardly.

A proper Phlegmon, is caused of good blood, only offending in quantity: Good
blood is discerned by color, Good blood.
taste, and consistence: In color it is red, in taste sweet, in consistence
mean, between thick and thin: of all other humors it is most plentiful in
the body, because it affords nourishment to all the fleshy parts, as they
have their being by it. Next unto blood, More phlegm than choler or
melancholy.
there is more of sweet and alimentarie phlegm, than of choler and melancholy;
because it is blood half concocted, and in extreme hunger nature turns it
unto nourishment. But it is not so easy to determine of the other two humors,
choler and melancholy; Alex. Aphrodisaeus thinks that there is more choler
than melancholy, a. 2. problemat.
for by reason of choler being hot and thin, the blood being made thin, does
pass the more readily, even by the capillar veins, to nourish the most
outward parts: but in truth, More melancholy than choler.
and by all likelihood, there is more melancholy than choler, if you take
melancholy for the grosest part of the blood: for first, seeing the bones which
by ancient computation are 246. but more in number indeed are nourished by this
humor, it being cold and dry, answerable to their temperature, it must be more
plentiful than choler. Secondly, because the spleen appointed to be a
receptacle of melancholy, is larger than the gall. Thirdly, because choler is
not so familiar to nature as melancholy is: for as by a small quantity of
choler, a great deal of milk becomes bitter, even so it is in blood. Now
things bitter are unpleasant to nature; wherefore it is probable, that
provident nature has in the mass of blood appointed more melancholy than
choler. Lastly, if we diligently note blood drawn out of the veins by
phlebotomie, we shall evidently see more feculent blood in the bottom of the
the sawcers, than yellow choler fleeting in the top.

Signs of a true phlegmon.
The signs of a true Phlegmon are six. I. This Tumor begins suddenly, and
increases speedily, because the matter is plentiful, and the ways by the
which it is sent very patent and large. II. It is very hot in respect of Oedema
and Schirrhus, but yet not so burning as Erysipelas. III. The color of the
part is of a fresh ruddy color. IV. In this Tumor there is great pain with
pulsation. V. There is a great tension in the part, because the unnatural heat
raises plenty of vapors which distend the part. VI. The veins which before
lay hid become conspicuous, and appear either ruddy or blackish.

Now as I said, there be many differences of Phlegmons taken from the parts
which they invade: for if it sease upon the meninges or membranes of the
brain, Differences of a phlegmon taken from the parts.
it if called (...), if the conjunctiva of the eye, then it is called (...), if
the muscules of the throat, it is termed Angina, if the Pleura, it is named
(...), if the lungs, (...), if the kidneys, (...), if the emunctorie of the
heart and liver, Bubo, of the brain, Parotus, of the gums, Parulis, of the
almonds, Paristhmia, Tonsillae: Phlegmons in other parts have no proper names,
and even these I will refer to the particular practice of Physic, wherein
they are handled, and rest contented with the doctrine of external Tumors.

These inflammations, if they possess the external parts, and be but moderate
are healthful; Prognostics.
as those which either by reason of the plenty, or malignity of the humor,

In the beginning therefore, we must prescribe such a diet as is able to hinder
the increase of superfluous blood, and the fluxion of that which is already
bred: wherefore the diet must be spare and slender, only sufficient to
sustain nature, and withal cooling: the patient then shall rest contented
with chicken, and veale broth with bread, calves-feet and trotters stewed, and
seasoned with vinegar, thin oatmeale-gruell, panadoes, sallets made of sorrel,
spinach, purselaine boiled in thin chicken or veale broth, seasoned with some
vinegar, verjuice and sugar; let his drink be small beer or ale, altered in
the summer with barrage, buglosse and burner; barley-water, fair spring water,
wherein the crust of a loaf has been boiled, and made pleasant with oxie
saccharum, or oximel diureticum, mingling with a pint of the water, one ounce
and an half of the sirrups. If the party be weak, Almond-milke made of
barley-water, or the thin broth of a chicken may be permitted: If we intend to
make the blood unapt to motion, and to detain it in its own receptacles, then
we must institute a diet, having these three qualities: For first, it must
cool: Secondly, it must make a constriction, and pursing up of the vessels:
Thirdly, it must be diureticall, or move urin; for much serosity being carried
away by the passages of urine, the blood must be made thicker, and therefore not
so apt to flow. But we must take heed, that such a diet be only prescribed to
such as are in their constant age, and have large veins; otherwise, we shall
cause new obstructions, and multiply griefs: now to this purpose, you may
ordain broths, wherein lettice, sorrel, spinach, purselain, marigold-flowers,
and columbine-flowers and leaves have been boiled, calves, sheeps, and lambs
heads boiled, with greene-sawce made of sorrel, or alleluia, be ware of
alliaria, jacke of the hedge, or those simples which are hot, young chickens
with gooseberry-sawce, are good, and such like. We must forbid wine, flesh,
eggs, fat things, and such as breed too much blood; and spices, because they
heat the blood; and piercing drinks, as stale beer or ale, Wardens and pears
rested, stewed, or baked are good.
because they further the fluxion of blood. To procure urine, an almond-milke
may be made of a ptisan, having the emulsion of the seeds of the pompion,
gourd, musck-melon, cucumber, lettice, purselaine, and plantaine. Now the humor
flowing immoderately, Evacuation.
we must labor to stay by abetting of it, and that by two manner of ways; by
phlebotomie, and purgation.

As for phlebotomie, Phlebotomie.
if the inflammation be great, the party young and strong, and full of blood; in
the spring time we may take a lib. at a time, yea more, and iterate it if
occasion be offered: in others, moderation is to be used, according to the
strength of the patients. Which veins are to be opened.
If a phlegmon possess the parts which are above the liver, then the veins of
the arms and upper parts are to be opened: but if it invade the parts which
are under the liver, as the kidneys and genitals, then the branches of the vena
cava descending are to be opened in the hams or ancles. One thing is to be
noted in Phlebotomie; that we open not veins too far distant from the part
affected, as Vena frontis in diseases of the feet: for we should evacuate too
great a quantity of blood, before we should intercept any tending to the part
affected. If a Phlegmon has succeeded the staying of the evacuation of blood
from any part, as from the nose, the womb, the hemorrhodes, means must be
used to procure these accustomed evacuations: but seeing these may be found in
all who have set down the manner how to cure particular diseases, I will leave
them to diligence and industry of your selves, being unwilling to mispend time.

As for Purgation, Purgation.
one may doubt whether it can do any good; seeing no blood, the matter of a
Phlegmon, can be by this mean spent. I answer, that it helps by accident,
and two manner of ways: for first, purgation dries the body, and so depriving
the blood of moisture, makes it more unapt to flow. Secondly, by purging
sharp humors, the part which sends the humor is not pricked forward. But in
this case, lenitives are better than eradicatives, What purgatives most sit,
because they rather cool than heat, and cause no ebullition in the humors:
such are Diacatholicum, Electuarium lenitivum, Electuarium de sebesten, or a
bole, or cassia, tamarinds and sugar of violets.

Local medicaments.
As for the Topicall means, which respect the part, and the humor, they are of
three sorts: Revellentia, Defensiva or intercipientia, and Repellentia: now
medicaments appointed for revulsion, must be hot and attractive, Rep ^en^ia.
and applied to the parts opposite and remote, as I have set down in the
general method of curing of Tumors. Of this kind are fomentations,
Fomentations.
made of all sweet smelling and hot garden herbs boiled in strong wine, as
calaminth, penniroyall, myntes, lavender, tansie, time, smallage, feverfew,
sage, savorie, pellitorie of Spain; the fomentation must be very hot, the use
of them must be continued until the part become red. Sometimes, if the
as^laction of the humor be fiere, (...)
and plentiful, we are to apply Vesicatories, as in inflammations of the eyes
to the neck: but seeing there is none, who has been but initiate in the
practice of surgery, who is not fitted with a medicament for this purpose, I
mean not to leese labor, and mispend time in setting down any descriptions of
them. ^ut let me tell you, that some sorts of ranunculus, (...) in ^^^se o^ the
(...).
or crowfoot green beaten and applied to the part, are more secure than
cantharides; but the bull-foot, which is found in most pooles by the high way,
is most excellent, being beaten and applied in a wall^ut-shell, or muscles or
cockle shells, choosing the amplenesse of the shells, according to your purpose.
If in the winter time you apply cantharides, you must correct them with
Euphorbium, mustard seeds, and seeds of amie, or dill: for if a vesicatorie of
them be applied to thin and tender bodies, it will cause difficulty of urine,
which will be removed speedily, if the party drink of an almond-milke, made of
barley-water, wherewith the emulsion of the great cold seeds has been drawn,
and that warm. Besides these local medicaments, we are to use
Cupping-glasses, ^pping g^^s^^^.
sometimes without sacrification, if the party be timorous, and not very
plethoricke; but if the affluxion of humor be great, and the party strong and
courageous, let scarification be used. ^^ctions.
Frictions also are not to be omitted; but in this exercise we must begin at
the extremities, as hands and feet, and end at the trunk of the body, to move
the humor, and then to labor again from the trunk to the extremities, to
bring it downwards.

As for Ligatures, in applying them, you must begin at the trunk, Ligatures.
as about the shoulder, and articulation of the thigh, and end in the hands and
feet, making three ligatures in each extremity; above the elbow, and about the
wrest in the arm, and above the knee and anckle in the leg.

After revelling means, Defensives.
Defensives succeed: These are applied to stay the humor from flowing to the
part these must be cold, dry, and astringent, fit to purse in and contract the
vessels: these are applied to the parts adjacent, and which have less flesh,
as to the joints, and parts above the joints; for there the vessels are most
conspicuous, and so are most apt to receive the impression of the medicament:
so if the foot or hand be inflamed, let the defensives be applied to the anckle
and wrest, and so forth.

Of these defensives there be two sorts, for some are more mild, as Plantine,
the while Rose, Nightshade, The diverse kinds of defensives.
red Poppie or water of the spawne or Frogs, red wine, vinegar and water,
vinegar and oil beaten together called Oxylaeum, Ceratum Santalinum is good.
It is not amiss to have in readiness, such a defensive as this: Take of white
wax ten ounces, of the oil of Myrtils, and Quinces of each one ounce, of
Masticke powdered iij. of Bole, and Sanguis draconis beat to powder of each j.
ounce and ij drams, make up an Emplaster: in the winter you may add more oil.

Last of all, Repellentia offer themselves, Repellentia.
which beat back from the part affected, the humor: The differences of such
medicaments, taken from their substance are these. Differences of repelling
medicaments.
Some are cold and moist, as Housleekes, Lettice, Purselain, Succorie, Ducks
meat, the white of an Egg, Navel woort, Nightshade. These are mild, you may
use either the juice of these, or a Cataplasme made of barlie meal, and these
juyces.

Again, some of these repelling medicaments are astringent, cooling and
drying: these repel more strongly, than the cold and moist, for besides
cooling, whereby the natural heat flying its contrary, does carry with it the
blood, they draw together the part, and as it were wring out the humor: of
these some are weaker, as. Vine leaves, Plantaine, Horse-taile, Perwinkle, buds
of red Roses, oil of Myrtils: others are stronger, as Bole, Pomgranate pills
and rindes, the pulp of Sloes, Oaken and Owlar bark, red Wine with Alom,
Galls, the husks of green nuts: these if they be untimely used, wrinckle the
skin, increase (...) pain, indurate the humor in the part, and sometimes
return the matter to some principal part.

Things to be observed in the use of medicaments.
Wherefore if we will use aright the simples, and make good compositions of
them, we must diligently consider the temperature of the party and part, the
measure of the inflammation, the quantity of the humor flowing, the sense of
the part, the passages, and air. Wherefore the hot constitution of the party
and part require gentler topics, because the excess is not great, only heat
being added to heat; but if the part be cold, and less fleshie, it requires
stronger medicaments, because the cause must be greater: so in children end
women we use milder than in aged and strong bodies: so the greater the
inflammation is, the stronger ought the topic to be: so if the part be very
sensible, gentle means will serve; but if it be dull it will suffer stronger:
so if the veins be large, stronger medicaments are to be applied; because
plenty of blood must needs flow. Last of all according to the constitution of
the air the local means must be stronger or weaker.

Now it is time to determine, what medicaments are to be used in the beginning
of a phlegmon: Beginning of a phlegmon.
If therefore the party be offered while the blood is wholly yet in the small
veins: then repelling medicaments are to be applied. I. Because the humor as
yet is but little and thin. II. Because nature as yet is strong. III. Because
the matter is not as yet settled or impacted: If some of the humor be in the
small veins, and some be without them in the distances of the musculs, and
parts, or in the porosities of the similarie parts, we are to apply
medicaments partly repelling, partly discussing; but more of the repelling.

Nevertheless, in cases repelling, medicaments are not to be applied unto
phlegmons beginning. I. If the parts be weak, left their natural heat be
quenched: such are glandulous parts, for they are loose, and flaggie. II. When
there is intolerable pain: for then repelling medicaments would cause greater
pain, and so perhaps cause fainting and swouning. III. When the cause is
external, and causes a malignitie, as the biting of a mad dog, or of an
adder: for so the matter should be driven to the principal parts. IV. When
the fluxion is vehement, and much matter flows: for then repelling
medicaments should be fruitless, the part not being able to resist.

But seeing I have set down both the simples, and some forms of compounded
medicaments of the two kinds of Topics, I will abstain from all idle
repetition, and pass to to the augmentum, or increase of a phlegmon. In it
then we are to apply discussing medicaments mingled with repelling, yet the
repelling during the whole course of the augmentum, ought to have the dominion:
Increase.
because until the latter end of the increase, the greatest part of the matter
is within the vessels, and may be repelled; for when blood is once slipped out
of the veins, it cannot be evacuate by repelling, but discussing topics:
These are called also (...): They ought to be hot and dry in the third degree,
and of piercing substance: For first, they must make the blood thin and
fluxible: ^.8. Simpl. 5.^.9 Simpli de paronych. ^3. method. 16.
Secondly, they must convert it into vapors: and thirdly, they must evacuate
by the poores of the skin by insensible perspiration. In thin and tender bodies
in the summer time, mild medicaments are most convenient, as camomill, dill,
fenugreeke, beaneflowre, and such like. But in compact, and thick bodies,
strong are required, as, Sulphur vivum, Opopanax, Galbanum, mints, hore-hound,
wormwood, calamint. etc.

When the phlegmon is come to the state, The state.
or height of pain, tension, and heat; medicaments equally repelling, and
discussing are to be applied: because a great deal of the humor is yet in the
veins, and much without them.

When a phlegmon is come to the declination wherein pain, The declination
tension, and heat begin to abate, a discutient fomentation made of camomill
leaves and flowers, melilot, dill, tansie, sage, lavander, mints, scordium, and
such like, and the application of Diachylum cum gummis will serve, or a
cataplasme of bean flower, camomill, dill, melilot boiled in strong ale lees,
adding to the cataplasme oil of camomill, dill, and white lilies: but if the
inflammation be great, the pain vehement, the heat intolerable, the tension
and swelling notwithstanding the following of the former course, then
suppuration or apostemation is to be procured. Apostemation.


If the natural heat in the body of man be prevalent, it turns all things
to nourishment, if they be familiar unto nature; if any excrementitious part be
in them, it turns that into vapors, and expels them by insensible
perspiration; but if the natural heat be enforced to enter in single combat
with the unnatural heat upon equal terms, then the natural heat discusseth
some part, and the unnatural heat not able to corrupt the part, suffers a
mean to be wrought, The signs of the dominion of natural or unnatural heat.
that is, generation of quittour. Now unto which of them the victory inclines,
may be gathered by the qualities of the quittour. If the quittour be good, it
is white, because it is caused by the coats of the veins, arteries, nerves,
and membranes, which are in color white, and t^asmute the water into the same
color. Secondly, The signs of laudable and ill quittour.
thick, because concoction is performed by thickning. Thirdly uniforme, because
the natural heat has an absolute dominion over every part of the quittour.
Fourthly, not stinking, the natural heat enduring no putrefaction: If
contrariwise the quittour be pale, red, or black, thin, unequal, of diverse
substances, and stinking; then the unnatural heat is prevalent. Now how a
phlegmon, which must be suppurate is to be dressed, I have set down at large
in the former lecture of apostumations of hot Tumors: hitherto I have spoken of
a true bred phlegmon, engendered of sincere blood.

Now I am to give you notice of a bastard phlegmon, Of a bastard phlegmon.
which is caused by the admixtion of some other humor with blood: If choler be
mingled, it is called (...): If phlegm (...) If melancholy (...). Seeing
compounded diseases are to be discerned, esteemed, and cured by the diseases
and simples solitary, I shall not need to spend any time in discoursing of
these: If choler abound, we are to cool and moysten in a higher measure than
in a true phlegmon: If phlegm be joined we must heat more; if melancholy,
we are to use things warming and softning. They who have written of Tumors
after a phlegmon, have set down discourses of a gangren, carbuncle, and a
pestilentiall bubo, but a methodically: For a Gangren is an accident, which
does not only accompany Tumors, but wounds, ulcers, fractures and dislocations,
and that more often; of it therefore I will discourse in its proper place. As
for a schpacelus a mortification or a sideration of a part, it belongs to the
third part of chirurgerie called (...) which teaches to take away
superfluities: such as a member is by accident, when it is deprived of life,
and threatens corruption to the whole, unless it be taken away.

A carbuncle and a pestilentiall bubo are symptoms of the Pest. as a venereall
bubo of the Pox. Of these I shall be willing to discourse, when occasion shall
be offered to read of the griefs, unto the which they are to be referred.

Tumors to be referred to a phlegmon.
Unto phlegmon (...) that Tumor which is called Panus, Panis, or Panicula in
Latin, from the figure in Greek (...) is to be referred: It is a Tumor most
commonly in the glandulous parts, Celsus li. 5. c. 25.
somewhat flat, in the top whereof there is a representation of a pustle: It
has a greater heat and pain, than the bigness of the Tumor shows, it is
commonly most discussed without apostemation: because it has more choler than
blood. furunculus or (...), it is engendered of gross humors mingled with blood
in fleshie parts most commonly: See Galenti. 5. 2. in loca.
If it be mild and come to maturation without any great difficulty, it may
be referred to (...). If it be hard and stubborn to medicaments, it is to
be referred to (...).

LECT. VII. Of an Erysipelas.
HAving in my former weekly lecture delivered what I thought pertinent
concerning the first general Tumor, a phlegmon, the cause whereof was said to
be blood without the vessels offending in quantity or quality. Method now
warns me to discourse of the second general Tumor called Erysipelas,
proceeding for the most part from choler: not so much because it surpasses
either phlegm or melancholy, whereof Oedema and Schirrus are bred, in dignity
or quantity, as that it more represents a phlegmon in accidents, to wit,
heat and color.

But before I enter into a particular discourse of an Erysipelas, give me
leave to touch three points briefly, which will make all things which I shall
deliver, more plain. The first, is the signification of this term choler: The
second shall be of the diverse kinds of choler: The third shall set down the
signs of a choleric person: for such an one is most subject to this Tumor.
Colera then in Latin, and (...) in Greek signifies not the humor, which in
English is called choler or the gall; but a disease, whereby this humor is
expelled vehemently by vomit and siege. Nevertheless in our vulgar speech, and
with the barbarous late writers, it is taken for the humor it self, and so I
shall be enforced to use it. Thus much I thought to insinuate to you, that you
should not be ignorant of the proper and learned significations of the terms
of Art.

Now Bilis or Fell in Latin, in (...) in Greek, choler or gall in English is
either alimentarie, or superfluous: the alimentarie is the fourth part of the
mass of blood dry and hot, which more property might be called bilious blood:
the superfluous, which serves not for the nourishing of the body, is either
natural, or unnatural: the natural is that, which in the liver is separated
from the blood, and turned to vesicafellis. The unnatural comprehends four
sorts. under it. I. is the Vitelline, like unto the yolks of eggs yellow; but
thicker and hotter than that of the gall: II. is Potracea, which in color
represents the leeke, it is engendered in the stomach by reason of cruditie,
and eating of such meats as engender it: as gartick, onions, leeks, and milkin
Infants, who often by seege discharge such an humor: III. Aeruginosa, like
verdigrece engendered of more vehement heat, and corrupt aliments in the
stomach: IV. is (...), like unto woad; it is more green, than that which
resembles the leeke: it is caused of the aruginosa more burned, and comes
near to atrabilis.

Now, a man is thought to be of a bilious constitution, if he be watchful,
nimble, hasty, angry, and dream of fire and thunder, his urine is thin and
yellow, his pulse strong, swift, and hard, his veins are large, the habit of
his body is lean, and dry, his color yellowish: cold things refresh him.

These things being permitted, now I am to discourse of the Tumor Erysipelas it
self, of it I will set down five things: the Etymon of the word, the nature
of the Tumor, the signs of it, the prognostics of it, and last of all the
indications of curing of it. i. As for the Etymon of the name of this Tumor, it
is called (...) in Greek quasi(...): for the ancient for (...), which
signifies red, used and (...), and (...) signifies near: wherefore (...) is
nothing else but a Tumor in color, coming near to red, and tainting often
the adjacent parts: for thin and hot blood, or blood with the which yellow
coler is mingled, dies the skin with the color of a pale rose: the nature of
Erysipelas is discovered by setting down the description, and kinds of it.

An Erysipelas then is a hot Tumor proceeding from most of choler, in this
description Tumor is the genus: for this is common to Erysipelas with all other
Tumors. In that is said to be hot, it differs from Oedema and Schirrus: and
whereas it is affirmed to proceed of most choler, it is distinguished from all
the rest of the Tumors.

But here it may be demanded, whether Erysipelas be caused of alimentarie, or
of superfluous choler: unto the which question I answer, that it is to be
thought that it is caused of the alimentarie choler, if it be exquisit:
otherwise how could the yellow jaundise, and Erysipelas so much differ, if they
both did proceed from excrementitious choler: for first the yellow jaundise
possesses the skin of the whole body; but Erysipelas one part only: secondly,
an Erysipelas has always a symptomaticall fever annexed to it; but the
yellow jaundise is most commonly free from it: thirdly, in an Erysipelas there
is always pain; but in the jaundise none: fourthly, in the jaundise the skin
is of a yellowish color; but in an Erysipelas it is of a bright red color.

There are two kinds of Erysipelas, for it is either exquisit, or not
exquisit, or a true, and a bastard one: as for an exquisit Erysipelas it is a
Tumor of a bright red tending to yellow, causing little swelling, very hot with
a pricking pain, caused of alimentarie choler: this choler abounding in the
body if part of it be turned into any part, it causes an exquisit Erysipelas.
The parts which it most commonly invadeth, are the nose and face, for much thin
blood flows to these parts: secondly, the legs: for nature being moved by
the plenty of this choler sends it first to the emunctories of the groynes,
and from thence it descends to the legs, it happens in the summer; because
then choler is multiplied; but in the winter, because the pores of the skin are
shut by cold, and so insensible perspiration hindered: and because this humor
is thin, it spreads to a great part of the skin.

As for the signs of an exquisit Erysipelas, they are either taken from the
qualities of the humor which causes it, or from the differences between it
and a phlegmon. The signs taken from the qualities of the humor are these: The
pain is great and urgent, the heat notable, the color a bright red tending to
a yellowness, the tumor is small, only possessing the skin, the pulsation is
very small, and less than in a phlegmon. First, because the parts in a
phlegmon are more compressed, and it reaches deeper: secondly, because in a
phlegmon the humor is thicker, and cannot so easily be breathed out as in an
Erysipelas. The differences between a phlegmon and an Erysipelas are these. I.
A phlegmon possesses the skin, and the flesh lying under; but an Erysipelas
the skin only: the cause in an Erysipelas is the thinness of the humor, which
rather disperseth it self through the skin than heaveth it up. II. The heat in
an Erysipelas is greater than in a Phlegmon: for sometimes the cuticula is
blistered. III. The symptomaticall fever is greater in an Erysipelas, than in
a Phlegmon: because choler is hotter than blood. IIII. The pain in an
Erysipelas is lesser; than in a Phlegmon: because in it there is only a hot
distemperatute; but in this a solution of unity, besides the parts being
stretched. V. In a Phlegmon, the color is of a dark red, by reason of thick
blood lying deep; but in an Erysipelas the color is a brighter red, tending
to a yellownes. VI. In an Erysipelas there is a pricking pain but in a
Phlegmon, a heavy and stretching. VII. The skin in an Erysipelas being
pressed, yields; but in a Phlegmon it does not: The causes are the thinnes
and thicknes of the humor. VIII. In an Erysipelas the rednes vanishes away
from the skin, and it becomes white if it be press with the singer; but in
a Phlegmon it does not so. IX. In an Erysipelas there is no stretching of the
akin; but in a Phlegmon there is: Last of all, a Phlegmon setleth it self in
one place; but an Erysipelas makes the parts adjacent red by spreading. As for
the Prognostics of an Erysipelas: I. That which proceeds from natural
yellow choler is mildest: for no vehement symptoms succeed: and besides seeing
it appears in outward parts, it is to be thought that the inner parts are
discharged of this humor. II, As it is a good sign, if an Erysipelas be
driven to the outward parts, so it is fearful, if it return from the outward
to the inward parts. Aphor. 25. sect 9. III. An Erysipelas appearing in the
head is mote dangerous, than in other parts: because if the matter pass to the
meninges, it causes phrenitis or raving, if to the muscules of the neck, the
Squinancie. IV. An Erysipelas appearing in wounds, ulcers, fractures and
dislocations, is commonly mortal: if it proceed not from the application of
too hot local medicines. V. If an Erysipelas tend to suppuration, it is not
good: for then the humor must be thicker than ordinary, and the obstructions
stronger, and so the solid parts are in danger to be corrupted VI. If a bone
being bare, the adjacent fleshie parts be possessed with an Erysipelas, it is
ill: for first, the body must be troubled with sharp humors, secondly, flesh
cannot be restored by such blood.

Now it is time to draw out our forces, to encounter with this grief: we are
to meet with it with four kinds of helps, diet, chirurgeri^, internal
medicaments, and local means. As for the diet, our nourishment must be
cooling and moystning. Let the patient then care thin chicken broths, altered
with the cooling herbs, panadoes, thin oatemeale gruell, sallets of lettice,
sor^ell, puishine, and spinach boiled. If the choler be very thin, the party
may eat fresh fish, which live in clear sandy, or rockie waters, as trouts,
small pickrells, perches, and of sea fishes, the whiting-maps, and smelts, he
may eat also of the brain of a pig or it petittoes, or trotters with vinegar,
and sorrel, let him refrain from all meats which are fat and sweet: let his
drink be spring water, boiled with the bottom of a loaf, made pleasant with
some Oxysacchar. or the distilled waters of endive, or sorrel, he may use a
plain ptisan: Galen permits the patient to drink as much cold water as he
will, for this cools the body, quenches the thirst, Lib 9. method. c 5.
abateth the heat of the choler, and cools the liver: but in this case the
season must be hot, and the stomach good: with us small beer bottelled is
best, all forts of wine are forbidden. In the Summer, let the air be cool and
moist, in Winter, let it be rather hot:for in this season an Erysipelas is
caused of the constriction of the pores of the skin, by reason of cold: let all
perturbations of the mind be banished, let sleep be procured; for watching
dries the body. But if an Erysipelas be in die face, watching is best: for
immoderate and long sleep fills the head full of vapors, whereby the grief
is increased.

As for the chirurgicall helps, it may be doubted whither Phlebotomie be
necessary or no, for the decision of this doubt, these propositions shall
serve: I. If an Erysipelas invade the head, neck, or face, the Cephalica
always is to be opened: lest a phrenitis or angina ensue. II. In an
Erysipelas Phlegmonodes wherein blood increases the heat in what part of the
body soever it be, a vein is to be opened. III. In an exquisit Erysipelas in
other parts of the body we ought not to draw blood: for first, by drawing of
blood, the blood which remains, moves more, and becomes more subtle:
Secondly, the stay of choler is taken away: Thirdly, by taking away both good
and bad blood together, the party is weakened.

As for the internal medicaments, they ought always to go before the local,
if yon except two cases: I. If an Erysipelas be procured by an outward cause,
as a blow: II. If the heat be vehement, and the Tumor be far from any
principal art. In these cases we may apply a medicant cooling and moystning,
before we minister any purging medicament. If an Erysipelas appear in the
head or face, we must open a vein, apply the Leeches, minister a purging
medicament, prescribe a slender diet, and use revulsions by frictions,
ventoses, blisterings, and vomiting if it appear in the legs.

As for local medicaments, we must look about us, for if we apply cold
medicaments, the matter may be repelled to the brain, from whence Phrenitis
may proceed, or to the throat, which may cause Angina: If you be enforced by
the importunity of the patient, or standers by to apply a local medicament.
Aetius counsels to apply a Swallows nest beat to powder, lib. 14 c. 5.9.
and tempered with honey, that it may represent a liniment with a feather. This
is a safe medicament, for it only dries and repelleth not: We may also apply
the decoction of mallows with some oil of violets, or sweet Almonds. Now the
purging medicaments which discharge choler, these or such like will suffice,
Rhewbarb, Tumarinds, Cassia extracted, Electuarium lenitivum, Diacatholicon,
Diaprunum solutivum, Electuarium de succorosar. Caricostinum. If it be but a
mild inflammation, s^arpe c^ysters made of the decoction of cooling herbs, with
the aforesaid Electuaries will serve the turn.

Having set down the helps taken from the diet, phlebotomy, and the
ministration of internal purging medicaments, I must hasten to set down
convenient local medicaments: for in these you are most employed and busied:
one thing is to be observed, that we must not in any case apply astringent
medicaments, which are cooling and drying: For seeing the vapors in this Tumor
are sharp, Gal. de comp. ^ed f^genera^l. 1. c. 4.
if they be kept in, th^^ might erode and corrupt the part. Now as concerning
local medicaments, first, I will set down which they are: Secondly, how long
they are to be applied. These medicaments ought to be cooling, and moystning:
but before I name them, let me warn you, that first you refrain from
narcoticall simples, unless exceeding great pain, and in a part far from a
principal part call for them. Secondly, that you apply not unctuous and fat
medicaments, for First, they most easily are inflamed: Secondly, they stop the
pores. Now the medicaments which are to be employed, are either simple or
compound: The simples are Navel-woort, Horse tail, Knot-grasse, both the
Plantines, Ducks meat, garden Nightshade, Lettice, Purselaine, the Poppies:
First, the juice of them expressed may be applied: Secondly, the distilled
waters drawn from them, some powder of myrrh having been infused in them. We
may also apply clours wet in the juyces of the aforesaid herbs, being mingled
with verjuyce or vinegar. The compound medicaments are Ceratum infrigidans
Galeni made of lb j. of oil of Roses, and iiij. of white wax: i Simpl. 13. and
14. method 13.
this is to be washed with water and vinegar. You may add to it the juice of
Nightshade. He^r^ius has three good medicaments, the first is Castle-soape
dissolved in Spring water: The second, is Bulls dunge boiled in a frying pan
with vinegar, and a few flowers of Cammomil, and Elder, until it come to the
consistence of a liniment: The third is made of two parts of aqua spermatis
ranarum, and one part of Rose vinegar, wherein some myrrh must be infused:
these may be safely applied to an Erysipelas of the head, neck, or face; the
juice of horse dung is not only good, being applied to this Tumor, but in
sealdings and burnings also, if a little Camphyr be added to it.

The medicaments which are to be applied to an Erysipelas must be very
liquid, actually cold, and often changed: for when then become hot, they will
rather offend than profit, if they be not removed. The last thing which I
promised to set down concerning the local medicaments was, how long they were
to be applied: this we may find out by two signs. The first is, if the heat
be altogether abated, or almost: the second is, if the skin has recovered it
own color. When you perceive these two signs, you must desist from applying
cooling topics, lest the skin become livid, or black which threaten a gangren,
and sometimes mortification. If this appear, what then is to be done? first, a
fomentation is to be used, made of Calamint, Scordium, Wormwood, Peniroyall,
the lesser Centorie, and Betonie boiled in a weak lie made of ordinary ashes:
after the part is sufficiently fomented, you are to apply Hippocrates
cataplasme made of Barlie meal, vinegar and oil of Roses warm: or this, take
of the flower of Barlie, Beans, and Vetches of each iiij. of a weak lie iiij.
lb. boil these to the consistence of an emplaster, then put to it iiij. of
Oximel: if the discoloring of the part pass through the skin, and the part
be immoderately cooled, it will not be amiss to scarifie the part which only
remains. I am but in a few words to discourse of a bastard or a spurious
Erysipelas: such an one is to be thought, when with alimentarie choler an
other humor does concur.

Now seeing four other humors may associate themselves to choler, so many
kinds of a bastard Erysipelas may be accounted. If therefore some blood be
mingled with choler predominant, then (...) is caused: in this kind of Tumor
the rednes is more dark, and the swelling not so spreading: If waterish phlegm
be mingled with choler, then (...) arises: If gross blood or thick phlegm
concur with choler, then (...) is caused: lastly, if choler associate it
self with the corrosive salts of the serositie of blood, it causes Erysipelas
ulcerosum, which breaks the skin. But seeing the compound Tumors are to be
discerned by the doctrine of the simple, and that the medicaments are
accordingly to be applied, not distrusting your observations or judgments, I
will end.

Of that Erysipelas, which breaks the skin, there are two kinds, Herpes
miliaris, and Herpes exedens: Herpes miliaris is caused of a salt waterish
humor mingled with unnatural sharp choler: the signs of it are these. I.
Many pustules rise in the skin like to millet seeds. II. When they break, a
matter issues out representing quittour and sanies. III. The place has a
mingled color between red and pale; this is without danger: the medicaments
which are to be applied to this, ought to be cooling and drying, as the
Knot-grasse, Horse-taile, Plantaine, Owlar, Willow and Oaken bark, Pomgranate
flowers and rindes, Myrtill berries, red Rose leaves boiled in Tanners woose,
Vnguentum album rasis, de cerussa, de minio, Diapompholigos.

Herpes exedens, called by Celsui, ignis sacor, Lib. 5^.28.
and by some ignis Sancti Antonti: it is caused of unnatural choler, hot and
sharp, corroding the skin only, by the which sign it is discerned from
Phagedoena, or (...). Wherefore if many small ulcers appear not passing deeper
than the skin, you may pronounce this to be Herpes exedens. In the curing of
this, minister the decoction of Sarsa, and after the fomentation of it, with
Tanners woose, wherein cooling and astringent simples above mentioned, have
been boiled; apply this local medicament. cerae flavae ij. resinae pini j.
ss. terebinth. j. ol. myrtini vj. sucei Nicotiana iij. Coq. in ceratum molle.
But here a question may be moved, why the choler which causes the yellow
jaundise does not ulcerate the skin? This falls out, first, because the
choler which causes the yellow jaundise is dispersed; but in Erysipelas
united. Secondly, because the choler is natural and only excrementitious in
the jaundise, such as is contained in the Vesicula fellea, and discharged into
the guts. Thirdly, because thin phlegm is mingled with choler in the jaundise:
for this disease ends with much sweating.

LECT. VIII. Of an Oedema.
IN the subsequent discourse, which I am to deliver of an Oedema, the third
general Tumor caused of phlegm, I will use the same method which I did in the
doctrine of an Erysipelas. First then, I will set down what phlegm is.
Secondly, the differences of it: and Thirdly, the signs of a phlegmatic
person: and then I will deliver the doctrine of Oedema, for such an one is most
subject to this Tumor.

Phlegm then is the fourth part of the mass of blood, cold and moist: as
concerning the sorts of it, it is either alimentary or excrementitious. The
natural, as it is cold and moist, so it is without any foreign taste: as oil
and butter are accounted sweet, when as they have no rank taste. This humor
by the natural heat increased (as in famine) may become blood, and serve for
the restoring of natural humiditie: it ought rather to be called pituitous
blood, than phlegm.

Unnatural phlegm is that which cannot be turned into aliment: of it there
are three kinds. The first is pituita acida, sour phlegm, so called from the
taste which it leaves in the mouth, when it is spit out: This is a raw phlegm
and bred in the stomach by reason of the defect of natural heat: so that
being drawn into veins, it hardly can be altered. The second is pituita salsa,
salt phlegm, this is caused by the admistion of thin salt moisture: for of
bitter things as Aloe, and Coloquint, mingle them with thin humors as you will,
a salt taste never can be procured. In sweat, tears, and urine this taste is
manifestly deprehended: a very novice in Alchymie is able to make the salt of
urin, and one labored to procure a Patent for making saltpeter of urine, in
the time of the last Parliament: but I never heard that he made any; being, as
it is likely, deceived by his imagination. The third kind of unnatural or
excrementitious phlegm, is pituita vitrea, representing in color and
substance, moulten glass. This is very cold, thick and tough, and causes
great pain, 2. de loc. affect. c. 5.
if it be detained in any part. Galen affirms of himself, that being
troubled with a vehement pain of the belly, by injection of the oil of Rue,
was discharged of such an humor, and so the pain ceased: whereas before he
thought that a stone had stuck in one of the ureters.

Phlegmatic persons are slow and sluggish, their senses dull, they are
sleepy, they dream of waters, rain or snow, they are not easily moved to
anger, their pulse is soft, small and slow: their appetite is not great, they
are seldom dry, they by the mouth and nose void many phlegmatic excrements:
their urine is white or pale, sometimes thick; sometimes thin, the sieges often
are raw and flegmaticke: the blood by what means soever it flow from the body,
is petuitous: their body is whitish, soft and coldish, they are subject to cold
and long diseases, as the dropsy, letargie and such like, lastly they endure
fasting well. These signs show natural and sweet phlegm to abound in the
body.

Having set down the description of phlegm, and the differences of it, as
also the signs which discover a phlegmatic person, I am to discourse of
Oedema, or a phlegmatic Tumor, of it I will deliver these five points: first
the signification of the term Oedema: secondly, the differences of it:
thirdly, the prognostics of it: fourthly, the indications of curing of it: and
lastly, what Tumors are to be reduced to it. As concerning the term (...) in
Greek, in Latin Oedema, with Hippocrates and all other ancients, it is the
same with (...), which signifies eminentia, eminence or bunching out: and so
every particular Tumor may be called Oedema. But with Galen and later authors
it is taken more strictly for that Tumor which is caused of phlegm. Oedema is
either exquisit or not exquisit: an exquisit is either primarie or
symptomaticall: the primarie is caused of the natural phlegm, Gal. li. de
atra bile cap. 5.
which is contained in the mass of blood, and by reason of the too great
quantity of it, sets to work the expelling faculty to discharge it into
the weaker and depending parts. Natural phlegm is cold and moist, thin in
consistence, in color white, in taste sweetish or insipid. The signs of an
exquisit Oedema are five. I. It is soft and loose, because it is caused of thin
phlegm. Lib. 2. (...) 6.1.
II. If it be pressed with the finger, it has either no pain, or very little.
III. If it be pressed down with the singer it yields and leaves a pit, which
is the most proper sign of an Oedema. IV. It is white, representing phlegm in
color, whereof it is bred. V. It is cold without heat, because the pituitous
humor is cold and moist. Avicen calls this Tumor Vndimia. The material cause
then of this Tumor is the pituitous humor redounding in the wholl body. This
humor is caused either of external, or internal causes: the external causes
are air cold and moist, phlegmatic meats, idleness, too much sleep,
stinging of waspes, and such like: the internal are a cold and moist
constitution of the head, stomach; but chiefly of the liver. This Tumor
invadeth not promiscuously all parts; but such as are cold, weak, and loose,
such are the feet and hands, the cods, as in hernia aquosa, the eyelids: and
then in them appears an outward Tumor loose, without pain, not altering the
color of them, which being pressed with the finger quickly yields and
returns, the matteriall cause is a waterish humor mingled with flatuositie:
so the heart and liver cannot suffer any such Tumor, as neither the kidneys:
because these parts are firm and hot. As for the presages, Oedema is a long
continuing disease, because it is cold, and therefore the natural heat of the
parts affected, must be weak. II. It is not very dangerous, because the pain
is either none or very small. As concerning the curation, it is performed
either by diet, or internal medicaments, or local means: as for the diet of
such as are subject to an Oedema, if it proceed from external causes they must
be removed: the air which is to be chosen must be hot and dry, the food
must be drying: wherefore roasted meat is better than boiled, fowls and birds
which live in dry grounds; are better than water fowls, rabbets, chickens and
veale are good, mutton is better than lamb, swines flesh and fishes are to be
shunned, as also heads, brains, and feet of beasts: sallets of cold herbs are
hurtful, use biscuit bread, or good household bread baked with Anise seeds,
Fennill seeds, and Coriander seeds. Let the drink be altered with the
rasping of Quajack, Sarsaparilla, Radix chinae, Sassafras, yellow Sanders
Cummin seeds, Coriander seeds, Fennill seeds, Anise seeds, Galingal,
Nutmegs, Calamus aromaticus, some Ginger, Cinnamon, Rosemarie and Sage. The
drying diet made of these, especially in the summer time is good: sweating in
this case is very effectual, every other morning after the taking of the diet:
fasting is good as also watching, studying, and laboring: for all these dry
the habit of the body.

If an Oedema possess the hands, then walking is good; if the feet, then we
are to praescribe sitting and working with the hands. Seeing then an exquisite
diet will not serve to surprise this disease alone, we are to entertain
purging medicaments for the expugnation of it. We need not to trouble the
patient with many preparative medicaments; seeing the pituitous humor which
causes this disease is thin, waterish and in motion; First of all, no
medicaments internal are so effectual in this grief as Mercurius vitae, and
safe medicaments of antimonie: for, First they discharge the stomach of
crudities by vomiting, and so correct the cold and moist distemperature of it:
Secondly they dispatch the obstructions of the mesaraical veins and liver:
Thirdly they mightily evacuate waterish and phlegmatic humors, and so correct
the distemperature of the liver, and kidneyes.

As for ordinary internal medicaments, pilulae de hiera cum agarico acuat,
with a grain of Elaterium are good: diaphaenicon, diacarthamum, diaturbith,
pilulae de hermodaclylis, de aromatibus, cochiae. And the pills of Galen made
of coloquint aloe, and scammonie with syrupus Augustanus. As for the doses of
these medicaments, and how they are to be exhibited I will refer you to those,
who have diligently handled these things, chiefly to the practice of Martinus
Rulandus.

But here you may demand of me what is to be thought of phlebotomie? Quaest.


To this demand I answer, Answer.
that in an exquisite Oedema opening of a vein is to be shunned. I. Because in
a body cold and moist we open not a vein, such is that which is tainted with
an Oedema. II. Because in this grief there is always cacochymia, seldom
plethora: III. Because in an Oedema there is neither a malign matter, nor a
horrible symptom and so it cannot be called m^rbus magnus, or a fearful
disease: and so phlebotomie is not required. As for the local medicaments,
which are to be applied, they ought by drying and strengthening to alter the
part.

In the beginning then we are to apply such medicaments as repel, and digest:
but more digesting than repelling because the humor is cold: for in the
beginning some part of the humor is in the small veins, some in the pores of
the skin; but more in the cavities, and greater veins: toward the state of
the grief we are to use digesting means. Galen uses four things, I. A
rowlar with two ends, lib. 2. ad Glauc. c. 3. et 14. n. ethod c 4,
such as is used in fractures, first the rowler must bind the Tumor it self
more straightly; but the parts on every side adjacent more slackly, for so the
humor is wrung out from the part affected, to the parts adjacent above and
below. II. Is a Sponge, but in the use of a sponge we must see that it cover
all the affected part, otherwise at the next dressing we shall see that the
humor has flowed to the bare part: in steed of a sponge we may use pledgets of
hemp-tow; yea and double clothes. III. Vinegar, for it does consume phlegm,
and because it is subtle it peirceth, IV. Some water to moderate the sharpness
of the vinegor: If an Oedema be above sinews and tendons in a tender body
less vinegar is required. But in hard bodies and in other places more vinegar
is to be applied: if you mingle some allome with the vinegar and water, the
medicament will be the more effectual. Avicen counsels to apply lime water
with the juice of mirtils: but instead of the juice we may boil myrtle berries
in lime water.

If you boil scordium, myrtle berries, sumach, red rose flowers dried,
calamint, wormwood and penyroyall, in equal quantity of red astringent wine,
vinegar, tanners woose and lime water adding to every pint of the decoction
strained 3. drammes of allome, you shall have an excellent medicament. You may
apply also an unguent made of unslaked lime, and old swines grease.

One thing is to be noted, that the Oedematous part is to be rubbed well with a
cloth before the medicaments be applied, that they may penetrate more easily,
(...) If an Oedema in the belly according to Hippocrates after 60 days tend to
suppuration: which comes to pass because the phlegm by long staying in the
part, is altered by heat, and turned to quittour: then we are to hasten
suppuration by the application of Diachylon cum gummis: then to open it,
Thirdly to mundifie it. Fourthly to incarnat it, and last of all to procure
skinning. And seeing I spoke of these things in the curing of a phlegmon
tending to Apostemation, I will remit you to that discourse, because I distrust
not your memories.

It falls out many times that an Oedema, is a symptom of an other disease as
I have said: but chiefly of the cough of the lungs, dropsy, and cachexia or
ill habit of the body, and does possess the legs and hands: First because they
are furthest from the heart, the well spring of heat: Secondly, because they are
framed of cold parts: seeing this accident cannot be removed, unless the
disease which is the cause of it be cured, and seeing these diseases are for
the most part mortal, I will suffer such as are empyricks, and prodigal of
their own credits, to follow their own courses, and to undertake such cures.

An Oedema is thus engendered: when nature is troubled with phlegm the
expelling faculty thrusts the pituitous humor from the great vessels to the
lesser, and being kept in by the densitie and coldness of the skin, is
gathered in the musculous part, and so causes this Tumor. Hitherto then I have
discoursed of an exquisite Oedema. Now it remains that we briefly dispatch
that Oedema which is not exquisit. This is caused when some other humor is
joined with the pituitous: if blood then be joined with it, it causes (...):
if choler concur it procures (...): If melancholy, or thick and glutinous
phlegm it causes (...). In all these kinds of a not exquisit Oedema the thin
pituitous Tumor must be predominant. The other humors concurring are found out
by their own proper signs which are set down in the discourses of every
principal Tumor, so that I should mispend the time if I should go about to
set them down here. Some things I would have you to note. The first is, a
primarie Oedema is caused by congestion, for it creeps on by degrees: But
that which is Symptomaticall, an accident of other diseases, as tabes, asthma,
cachexia and dropsy is procured by fluxion: for it suddenly appears. The
second is this: If by reason of long keeping bed, either because one has had a
long and lingering disease, or because he has received a hurt in the leg, the
feet swell and become Oedematous, when by motion afterward the natural heat
is increased, this flatulent phlegm is discussed, and the Tumor cease. Quest.
One thing may be asked why Galen affirms that the liver may be possessed
with a schyrrus, and not Oedema: To this it may be answered; Answ.
that the liver by its paranchyma or property of substance turns thin
phlegm whereof an exquisite Oedema is caused, into blood; but if it receive
any thick phlegm, of that then a schirrus, and not Oedema is caused. But it is
time to adresse my self to set down those Tumors which are referred to an
Oedema: of those some are enclosed within a cystis or a membrane; and some have
no proper membrane: those which have a proper membrane are in number 3.
Atheroma, Steatoma, maliceuris. But it may be doubted from whence this cystis,
Dub.
membrane, or folliculus does proceed. Sol.
Undoubtedly it is framed of the teyes of the cutis and membrana carnosa: for
seeing the natural heat cannot concoct the matter of these abscesses, nature
does providently separate it by its proper cystis from the parts adjacent lest
it should corrupt them.

The matter which causes these abscesses and feeds them, proceeds from a
vein, which is not accompanied with an artery, and so being destitute of
vital heat, it is altogether unnatural, and cannot be assimilat to the parts
unto which it flows. Atheroma then contains a substance like unto rice*
pottage, or curds: the matter of this Tumor is thick and gross phlegm.

Steatoma is a Tumor not so high as Atheroma, containing a matter like unto
grease, or that which we call the sweet bread pancreas: blood flowing by the
vein which has no artery, and so is destitute of vital heat is easily
turned into this fattie substance. Meliceris contains a matter representing
honey: so the phlegm which causes this Tumor is thinner, than that which
breeds an atheroma, and has some choler mingled with it the heat whereof
makes the matter fluid, and liquid.

The Tumors reducible to Oedema which have no cystis, are three, psydracium,
ficus, and talpa. Psydracium is a pointed white pustale containing in it a
waterish humiditie. Ficus is a Tumor so called, First because it has a root
like unto a fig: Secondly because it contains small grains as a fig has. It
is a Tumor red, round, and somewhat hard and painful; from whence issues a
matter, like unto the seeds of a fig, if it be broken and wrung. The matter of
this Tumor is gross blood, mingled with phlegm and some waterish moisture.
Talpa or testudo is so called, because as a mole heaveth up the ground, so this
Tumor the skin from pericranium, this Tumor is larger than sicus, and is caused
of more gross humors; wherein there is little moisture.

So you have a brief description of the Tumors which are reducible to Oedema:
As for the cure of them I will reserve it until I come to that part of
chyrurgerie called (...), which shows how superfluities of the body are to
be taken away. The modern authors add to these Nata, which is a large Tumor
so called; because it represents the buttocks called nates, without pain,
consisting of soft and pituitous flesh; caused of congestion of pituitous
blood: it is seated most commonly in the neck, shoulders and back: it is only
cured by excision.

Ganglium and lupia are round Tumors of the nervous parts without pain: yet
they differ; for Ganglium is hard, but Lupia soft: 2 Lupia may be moved every
way, upwards, downward, and side ways: but ganglium toward the sides only.
Thirdly Ganglium is like to a knot of the sinew; but Lupia possesses not the
sinewie parts only, but other solid and hard-parts in hands and feet.

LECT. IX. Of a Schyrrus.
NOw are we to enter into the contemplation of a Schyrrus, the ugly progeny of
muddie melancholy, as we have discoursed of a phlegmon, Erysipelas and Oedema,
who deduce their pettigree from blood, choler and phlegm and ascribe their
being to them. But that you may heareafter discern the better the nature of a
Schyrrus, I will first set down the description of melancholy: Secondly, the
diverse sorts of it: and thirdly the proper signs of a melancholy person: which
will both lead you to the knowledge of the grief, and open the way of curing
the person possessed with this grief. Because the English tongue does
promiscuously use Melancholy, both for (...), melancholicus succus, and (...)
atra bilis, I must give you warning, that these two do much differ; for
melancholicus succus is the feculent part of the blood like unto the lees of
thick wines as Allegant, and is drawn from the purest part of the blood by the
Spleen. It is nevertheless one of the 4. nutritive humors natural to the
body, and gentle having no corrosive or stinking quality. But Bilis atra is
caused of immoderate heat, and is malign: Bilis atra.
for it burns and corrupts the flesh, it is sour and sharp, and being
powered upon the ground it boyleth and raises it up, as leaven does dough, and
has an unpleasant smell. The kinds of it.
There be 3. sorts of this: the First is caused of blood burned, and of all
others is the mildest: saccus melancholicus burned;

None of these are engendered in a sound and healthful person, whereas the
succus melancholicus is found in all persons of what temperature or estate
soever they be. The description of succus melancholicus.
Wherefore Melancholicus succus may be thus described: It is the fourth humor
in the mass of blood black and thick, yet natural cold and dry. The
differences of it.
This humor natural is either alimentarie or excrementitious. The alimentarie
nourishes the melancholicke parts, which are cold and dry; as the bones,
cartilages, and ligaments. The excrementitious or superfluous is drawn by the
Spleen.

Signs of a melancholicke person.
Now these signs discover melancholy persons; they are silent, pensive,
constant in there purposes, slow to anger; but if they entertain it, they turn
it unto hatred: their sleep is troublesome by reason of fearful dreams, as
of black things, dead bodies, death: they are sad and given to fear, without
cause; their pulls is small, slow and hard: their color is dark, their apetite
to meat and Venus is more than ordinary: they seldom thirst, because they
abound with much superfluous phlegm, their blood is thicker and blacker than
ordinary, from what part soever of the body it flow, the urine is thin and
whitest, if no melancholy be mingled with it; but if Melancholy be mingled
then it is thick, black, or of a leady color, they sweat much in their sleep;
the habit of their body is lean, rough and hard: they are subject to varices
and haemorrhoides: if such a one be presented to you possessed with a Schirrus,
it is easy to discern the disease, and of what humor it proceeds, and how
the party is to be dealt withal. So you have the description of melancholy,
the diverse sorts of it, and the marks of a melancholicke person: which things
show no small light to attain to the knowledge of a Schirrus. In my discourse
of a Schirrus, I will set down first the description of a Schirrus: Secondly
the signs of it: Thirdly the differences between it and other Tumors:
Fourthly the kinds of it: Fifthly, the prognostics of it, and lastly the
manner of curing of it.

The description of a Schirrus.
To begin then with the description of a Schirrus, it is a Tumor hard, and
without pain, caused either of natural melancholy, or thick, tough, and cold
phlegm. If the cause be melancholy, it has a leadie color; if phlegm, it
changes not the color of the skin: for phlegm is white; As for the signs of
it; I. It is hard.

Now there are four causes of hardness: the first is coldness, as appears
in Ice; this is removed by moderate heat, as by the sun. The second cause, is
dryness, as we may plainly see in the hands of Sailers, and Felt-makers. The
third cause, too great repletion, which does appear in the stomachs of
gluttons. The fourth cause, may be the combination of these, and indeed all
these concur to procure hardness in a Schirrus. As for coldness, it may be
induced either by things external, as cold air, and narcoticall medicaments:
secondly, from the part affected, Because those parts are very thick. 2. in.
Gal. 1. simp.
for schirrosities chiefly appear in the beginnings of the muscules,
ligaments, and tendons, and other cold parts: thirdly, from the humor: so the
melancholic juice, and thick and viscous phlegm: the material causes of a
Schirrus are very cold.

The second sign of a Schirrus is, that it is without pain: and this comes
to pass, either because the animal spirit cannot pass through an humor so
thick and glutinous, as that is which causes a Schirrus, or because it is
benumbed by the coldness of the humor. This is the third sign, that it is
fixed, and as it were nailed to the part, and does not move by pushing, as
Scrophula or Ganglium.

Now I will show you how it differs from other Tumors. It differs from a
phlegmon, for in this, there is great pain: from Erysipelas, because this is
not hard: from an Oedema, because this yields to the touch, and leaves a
pit. It is discerned from watrish and flatuous Tumors, because they have a
thinner, and more clear matter. The differences between it and a cancer are
these. I. A cancer is always painful, because it is caused of bilis atra, or
a dust choler; but a Schirrus is without pain. II. A Schirrus is cold, but a
cancer hot: this is caused by reason of the humors whereof they are bred. III.
A Schirrus invadeth the sollid and hard parts, as the joints, tendens and
ligaments; but a cancer the loose and flaggie parts, as the breasts, the privy
parts, and such like. IV. In a cancer, not in a Schirrus, the veins appear
full of a black humor: which for the likeness, one may call the legs of the
crabbe, as the round Tumor the crabbe it self. It is high time to set down
the predictions of the success of curing, which schirrosities are like to
have, that when such Tumors are offered to you to be cured, you may be made
circumspect and wary in taking of them in hand: succus melancholicus is warely
to be dealt withal: because it has a great affinity with a cancer, and so
may degenerate into it, if improper medicaments be applied. preceding. This is
twofold, for it is either exquisit or not exquisit: a primarie exquisit
Schirrus is that which at the first, is caused by collection of the melancholy
juice in a part. A Schirrus is thought to be not exquisit, when an other humor
is joined with melancholy. If therefore some laudable blood be joined with
it, it causes Schirrus phlegmonodes, if choler, Schirrus erysipelatodes: if
phlegm Schirrus oedematodes. Nevertheless, seeing these are compound Tumors,
and are to be dealt withal according to the doctrine delivered of the simple
Tumors, whereof they are bred: I will leave these to your own considerations.

A Schirrus epigenematicall or Symptomaticall is that, which ensues after an
other Tumor, not handled according to art, as a phlegmon or an Erysipelas: this
happens two manner of ways. I. It may fall out by the immoderate use of
local medicaments too cold, and narcoticall or stupefactive: for these
condense, and as it were congeale the humor. Secondly, this may happen by the
too continual application of resolutive topics: for so only the subtle and
thin parts are breathed out, and the thick and glutinous remain. The last
point, which in the beginning I promised to deliver unto you concerning a
Schirrus, was the manner of curing of it, receive it then, which I hope you
will well like of.

The indications of curing are taken from three things, to wit the diet,
internal medicaments and external applications. As for phlebotomie it is here
fruitles, because the humor is cold, unles the veins be very full, the blood
black, and age and strength conspire: for then it is expedient, for so the
humors in the mass of blood will be more fluxible; and the quantity being
diminished, the natural heat will the more easelie rule the residue. If a
Schirrus be caused in a man by reason of the hemorrhods stopped, then the
leeches are to be applied, if in a woman by reason of the menstrues suppressed,
then Saphena is to be opened.

As for the diet then, the meat must be of easy digestion, moistning, and
affording a thin juice: such are Chickens, young Pigeons and mountain foul,
Lamb, Veale, young Pullets and Cockrells, fed Rabbets, poched Eggs, asparagus
sallet, Spinach, Burrage, Purselaine: bread of good wheat not too much leavened
is convenient, let the drink be small white wine, or reasonable strong beer
well boiled, clear, and neither too old, nor too new, good Syder also with
Rosemarie, Burrage, Buglosse burned, and Sugar is good. Meats which afford a
gross juice are to be shunned, as old beef, all meats dried in the smoke,
venison, fish living in muddie waters, all salt meats, course bread: the
immoderate use of v^neger is hurtful: apple tarts, and warden and pear pyes
baked with Fennill-seeds and Annise-seeds will serve instead of other sweet
meats. Let the habitation of the diseased party be in a pure, hot and moist
air: too much sleep, idleness, grief and pensiveness are to be shunned.
As for internal medicaments, they ought to purge melancholy, and thick and
glutinous phlegm: but both of these are to be prepared before they be
evacuate. Those medicaments which prepare melancholy ought to attenuate or
make thin, and moisten: such are the syrups of the juice of Burrage, Buglosse,
the sy^ups of Fumiterry, Hops, and Apples, with the decoction of Balm,
Hart's-tongue, Scolopendria, Tamariske, and such like. Those medicaments which
prepare phlegm ought to be of an attenuating, and mundifying quality, as the
syrup of Isope, of Betonie, of Stechas, Oxymel, and Mel rosatum in the
decoction of Calamint, Hore-hound, Penny-royall, and such like. The humors
being prepared, then they are to be purged: melancholy is to be purged with
confectio Hamech, Electuarium, Indum, pills de lapide lazuli, the extract of
black Ellebor, Electuarium lenitivum, and the like, which may be ministered in
the infusion of Sena-leaves and Polypodie. Phlegm is to be purged with
Diaphaenicum, Diacarthamum, Hiera Pachii, Pilulae de agarico, et hermodactilis,
diaturbith and the like. The electuaries are to be ministered in a decoction of
those simples which prepare phlegm.

One thing is to be noted, that nothing is more effectual in discussing these
schirrosities, than the continual taking of the decoction of sarsa parilla,
and guajack instead of other drink, using a convenient diet, and procuring
every other morning sweating: for lignum vitae warmeth, and sarsa dissolveth
the hardness: if it perform this in nodes, which are far harder than any
Schirrus possibly can be; why should it not perform this office in a Schirrus?

Here it is no wonder if few be cured: for sundry are impatient if their
expectation be not speedily answered, and besides this, they are unwilling to
gain the loss of their health by forgoing their sensuality and pleasure,
being ventris mancipia; more careful of their taste than health.

But time calls us to speak of external applications, which are fit to be
used in the cure of a schirrus. In these you are to consider three things,
their faculties, their differences, and the right use of them. As for the
faculties then of the local medicaments they ought to be discussing and
softning, emollientia and discutientia. Repelling medicaments are not to be
used, because the humor is thick, and hard, and so unapt to motion.

Of emollient medicaments there are four degrees: in the first are those which
are gentlest; such are man's grease, capons grease, the marrow of hearts, and
calves bones, ducks grease, swines grease, sweet butter. Li. 7. c. g.
Galen advises to apply to gentle Schirrosities, a medicament made of sweet
butter, black rosin, and new wax, Dialthea simplex, is of this degree. In the
second degree are these, goose grease, badgers grease, dogs grease, old rank
oil, oil of Linseed. In the third degree, are the fat of lions, bears,
wolves, foxes, libards, and the marrow of horses, and man's bones. In the fourth
degree, are Ammoniacum, galbanum, bdellium, caranna, tacamahaca, opopanax, of
these simples you may frame unto your selves such compositions as the quality
of the schirrus, 7. ad Almans.
which you are to take in hand shall require. Rases in all schirrosites,
commends a certain cataplasme and it is excellent indeed.

The description may thus be framed, take of bdellium, ammoniacum, and
galbanum, of each 1. ounce, dissolve these in a hot martar with oil of lilies,
add of the mucilage or pulpe of roasted figs ij., of the mucilage of Linseed
and Fenugreeke, vj., make up a cataplasme, dress the schirrus with this
cataplasme once a day. Diachilon cum gummis, and emplastrum de mucilaginibus
are convenient. Riolan the father commends this medicament, take of unguentum
de althaea, of diachylon cum gummis and emplastru^ de mucilaginibus of each 1.
ounce, of the oil of Lilies vj. drammes: mingle these well together, you may
add to these medicaments some vinegar to help penetration. If a Schirrus be
above a nerve or a tendon, instead of vinegar you may use the spirit of wine.

One thing is to be observed, that before you apply any medicament, the part
affected is to be fomented with the decoction of Mallows, marsh-mallowes,
Camomill, Melilot, and Cowslip flowers in vinegar, unto which after it is
boiled, some spirit of wine is to be added.

As concerning the right use of the local means, these observations following
are worth the noting, the first is, If a Schirrus be caused of the melancholy
humor which is cold, thick, and dry, you are to apply a medicament which
warmeth, attenuateth, and moysteneth, II. If the Schirrus be engendered of cold,
thick, and tough phlegm, then the medicament ought to be warming, attenuating,
cutting, and mundifying. III. Tender persons and parts require milder; but
parts and persons harder and stronger, require more forcible means. IV. If a
Schirrus has been procured, because an unskilful person has applied
medicaments too much repelling, or discussing to an inflammation: then apply
this mollifying liniment. take of yellow wax, and ducks grease tried, of each
j.. of oil of Lilies ij. of the marrow of oxes bones ij. mingle them well
together. V. If immoderate use of drying topic has procured hardness, then
medicaments moystning are to be used: such is a catapsalme made of mallows
boiled and capons grease, or swines grease.

Unto a Schirrus these tumors may be referred strumae, wartes, corns,
leprosy. As for Strumae and the leprosy, they will require several tractats.

Wartes, if the root be small and the top broad, may be taken away by ligature;
if the root be broad they must be exterpate with medicaments. There I commend
unto you, strong aqua fortis, or lapis infernal^s relenred, these must be
applied to the wartes with a rush or a straw. The third is an experiment of
Faebricius, ab aqua pendente, and that is this; of Purselaine bruised, and the
powder of Savin make a cataplasme and apply it.

Corns first must be artificially cut, and then one of these medicaments which
I shall name, must be applied: Ammonaicum disolved in vinegar, and brought to
the consistence of cerot, emplastorum de mucilaginibus, and diachylon cum
gummis.

LECT. X. Of aqueous Tumor.
I Have delivered in my Lectures penned before the last Easter holidays what I
thought most material concerning the four principal Tumors, Phlegmon,
Erysipelas, Oedema and Schirrus, which are caused of the four humors in the
mass of blood; to wit blood properly so called, choler, phlegm and
melancholy, and so might have concluded the doctrine concerning the differences
of Tumors, as sundry others have done who have written of this subject.

Nevertheless seeing aqueous or waterie and flatuous Tumors are often
presented to you to be cured, I think it expedient to discourse of these, that
the doctrine of Tumors may be complete.

First then I will discourse of the Aqueous, and then of the flatuous Tumor.
The material cause of the Aqueous Tumor by the Physicians is called serum or
serosus humor. Of this humor there is but a small quantity in a healthful
person; no more than is fit to make the blood thin, that it may be the more
readily carried unto all the parts of the body to afford them nourishment. This
being done it is discharged through the pores of the skin, either by sweat or
insensible perspiration.

Wherefore Galen not without reason affirms all serositie to be an excrement.
^. d^nat. sa^^^tat. c. 9.


This serosity is not only of a moist and waterish substance; but of a salt
quality in like manner, yea, this serositie, urine and sweat have the same
matter: The difference of mine, sweat, and the waterish humor.
yet they differ, for Serum is that aqueous humiditie, which is contained in
the blood: and although blood be drawn, yet it cannot be discerned unless
the blood grow cold and congeale, and this thin part by the concretion of the
blood be separated from the thicker. Urine.
But urine is nothing else but the superfluity of this serositie of the blood
mingled with the waterish humiditie of meat and drink, and near the root of
Vena cava separated from the mass of blood and drawn by the attractive
faculty of the emulgent veins and kidneys, and by the ureters sent to the
bladder, there to be detained until the convenient time of excretion. So that
this kind of excretion purges the blood from waterish humidity, whereby it is
made more firm, and so more fit to nourish the parts. As for sweat and
insensible perspiration, Sweat.
they are nothing else but the excrements of the solid parts. Nevertheless,
they carry with them some obscure signs of the constitution and temperature
of the body: hence it is that a dog can find out his master, and discern
the tract of the Hare, from that of a Fox, and of one foul from another. The
causes of the increase of the waterish humor.
Some preternaturall causes will increase the serositie of blood: as meats
affording plenty of waterish humiditie, as most fruits, cold herbs, and
immoderate use of water,

The causes of an aqueous Tumor.
An aqueous or waterish Tumor then is caused of the superfluity of this
serositie detained in the body, after that it has performed its office, which
if, when it has carried the nourishment through the narrow passages: vena cava
to the parts of the body, it has not need of such store of humiditie. If too
much of this waterish humiditie be sent to the habit of the body, and move the
expelling faculty, then part of it is sent to the skin, which causes waterish
Tumors. Those which heave up the Cuticula are called Sudamina. Sundry
differences of waterish Tumors.
Those which arise in the night time are called Epinyctides. If waterish
humiditie be gathered in the codde, it causes (...), if in the navell (...),
if in the head, (...). And although neither Fallopius nor Tagaultius have made
any mention of waterish Tumors, thinking perhaps, that they may be reduced to
pituitous Tumors, yet these Tumors wherein nothing else but waterish humiditie
is contained, do plainly evince, that an aqueous Tumor is one distinct from
all others. What causes move the sending of this humor to the circumference of
the body.
Superfluity of this serositie is sent to the habit of the body: partly
because the weakness of of the kidneys does not suffer them sufficiently to
draw it: partly, because the liver is too cold, and lastly, by reason of some
error committed in the use of the things not natural, as immoderate taking of
water, and other drinks, as Wine, Ale, Beer, Syder.

The signs.
The signs of a waterish Tumor are these: First, it is sometimes more, The
places most subject to this Tumor*
cods, and the habit or compass of the body; yet most frequently in the
joints of the arms and legs: because these parts being weak, cold, and thick,
are aptest to admit such waterish Tumors. The predictions.
As for the Prognostics, that waterish Tumor which happens by reason of any
imperfection of the liver is dangerous: sudamina, as they are no ways
dangerous, so they are easily cured. The indications of curing this Tumor.
As for the curation of this grief, reason and experience have found out five
means to meet with it, to wit, a convenient diet, internal medicaments,
external applications, and manual operation. If then an universal humiditie
possess the whole body, D^et.
the diet must be drying: wherefore roasted meat is better than boiled.
Immoderation in drink is by all means to be shunned: for,

Iejunet, vigilet, fitiat qui rheumata curat.
Watch he must, and thirst, and fast,
Who means to cure a rheum in have.
And as temperance and sobriety have a promise of prolonging our temporal
lives, so are they powerful helps in curing diseases: but chiefly those which
are caused by the superfluity of moist and waterish humors. Flesh then is
better than fish, and of flesh meats, those are best which are driest: Kid then
is better than Lamb, Veale than Mutton, Rabbets and Conies are good, land foul
are better than water foul. Hippocrates himself commends Porke above Pigs
flesh: but neither of both is good: for Pigs flesh is exceeding moist, and in
Porke the fat is moist, and dissolveth the stomach; but the lean is hard, and
not easily concocted. All supping meats are to be shunned, for they multiply
moisture. Ludovicus Cornarus his diet recorded by Lessius in his Hygiasticon or
treatise concerning preservation of health, is fit for such persons. For above
the space of forty years, he rested contented every day with xij. of bread
and meat, and xiiij. of drink: when he was eighty years of age, so able he
was by the observation of this moderate diet, that without any advantage of
ground, he usually backed the fairest Italian horses. How the liver and kidneys
affected are to be cured.
One thing is to be noted, that seeing superfluous humiditie seldom
possesses the body, unless there be some fault in the liver and kidneys, you
must by all means labor to reduce them to their natural temperature. The means
to compass this, are set down by every one, who has penned the practice of
physic, unto whom I remit you, being unwilling to trouble you with impertinent
discourses.

Internal medicaments.
The internal medicaments appointed for the expugnation of this grief, are of
three sorts: for either they purge by stool, or by urine, or by sweat, and
insensible perspiration. To touch the Catharticke medicaments, Catharticall
medicaments.
such are one grain of El^terium which a scruple of pilulae coehiae, or de
Euphorbio, or Alepha^gmce: two drams of the seed of the dwarf Elder, or Ebulu^
beaten to powder, and ministered in white wine, and a spoonful of the juice of
Ebulu^, the flower deluce, of s^ldanella mingled with ij. of the syrup of
damask Roses dissolved in ij. if white wine. The purging diet is excellent if
you add to the ordinary purgatives in it, the roots of Esula major, the
berries of the bucke-thorne, and Carthamus seeds. Amongst all the simples
Mechoacan and Jalop are most commended, both for their efficacy in working,
and safety in ministering. Diureticall medicaments.
As for diureticall means, I commend unto you this medicament: take of the
ashes of Broom, and Beane-straw burned, of each a good handful: strain
through those ashes iiij pintes of Rhenish wine three times: then infuse in
this wine of the root of Sassafras sliced ij. of Nutmegs and Cinnamon, of each
two drammes, of Bay berries, and Juniper berries of each six in number, of
Cummin-seeds ij, of Fennil-seeds and Annise-seeds of each one dram and an
half, of Sugar iiij, of the spirit of Salt j. Minister every morning iiij. of
this wine strained, and so much about four of the clock in the afternoon:
the decoction also of Penniroyall, Time, Calamint, with seeds of the Melon,
Pompion, Cucumber and Purselaine made pleasant with the syrup of Althea, de
quinque radicibus, and of I soap ministredas the former, is good.

As for diaphoreticke medicines, the decoction of Guajacke, Sarsaparilla,
Diaphoretick medicaments,
Sassafras, and the China root with Agrimonie, Betony and Coriander, sweet
Fennil-seeds, and Annise-seeds carry away the bell. How effectual these
medicaments are, being judiciously used, not in this grief only; but in moist
ulcers also, and other diseases contagious, I need not to labor to persuade,
seeing there are few of this company, who have not often made trial of them:
when these decoctions are ministered, a strict diet must be enjoined, and
plentiful sweat procured, according to the tolerance of the diseased party.

The local applications.
The topicall remedies ought not to be repercussives, although the humor be
thin, because seeing nature can make no use of it, it is to be evacuated:
wherefore the remedies ought to discuss, and rarifie the skin, that vent may
be given to the humor. Fabricius ab aqua pendente commends this medicament,
De Tum p. n. p. 2. lib. 1 c. ^0.
take of Mallow leaves on handful and an half, of the meal of Lupines j. of
the oil of Dill and Camomill of each ij. with s. q. of white wine make up a
cataplasme. The Ice of unstaked Lime, and branches of the vine are good. Avicen
out of Galen, against waterish Tumors describes thus the emplaster of Mustard,
and affirms, that if this medicament prevail not, that there is but small
hope that any other will. Take of Mustard Seed, Nettle-seed, Brimstone,
Aristolochia rotunda, of the foam of the sea, or Brine and Bdellium of each j.
of Ammoniacum, old Oil, and Wax, of each j. make a cerot according to art. Let
me advertise you of one thing, that the part is to be fomented before either
cataplasme or emplaster be applied. The fomentation is to be made of a lee
made of Beane-straw, Broom, and twigs of the vine burned, with some ordinary
ashes, wherein you are to boil common Wormwood, sea Wormwood, the lesser
Centorie, Calamint, Cummin-seeds, Bay berries, Juniper berries, Scor^^^m,
Camomill flowers, Melilot flowers, and tops of Dill: unto the decoction
strained, add the sixth part of sheres Sack. But seeing I have discoursed
sufficiently of all degrees of discutient remedies in my lectures of other
Tumors: I will cease to trouble your patience with idle repetitions, commending
unto you only these few specificall remedies before mentioned. Now to come to
the last remedy appointed for rebellious waterish Tumors, to wit, manual
operation: If they cannot be discussed, as oftentimes Hydrocephalos and Herria
aquosa: then the humor is to be let out, sometimes by incision, sometimes by a
canstick medicament: then the part is to be mundified, thirdly it is to be
incarnat, and last of all cicatrized. But seeing I have handled these points,
when I discoursed of an aposteme, and that I am to set down what is singular
in every Chirurgicall operation, whereby superfluities are taken from the body,
in that part of Chirurgerie, which is called (...), here I desist, referring
every thing to its proper place.

LECT. XI. Of a flatulent Tumor.
HAving set down the doctrine of a waterish Tumor, I am to fulfill promise, to
speak of a flatulent Tumor: In Latin it is called Tumor flatulentus, The
names of it.
in Greek (...), or (...), for the Grecians call flatuositie sometimes (...),
sometimes (...).

Persons most subject to this grief.
The person in whose body flatuosities are multiplied, is often troubled with
gudlings in his sides, he belcheth often, he is troubled with singing of the
ears, his excrements come forth with flatuosity, his urine is frothie, he
finds a stretching of his belly, yet without any heaviness.

The causes of this grief. Differences of weak heat.
The causes of flatuosity are crudity and weak heat. The heat may be accounted
weak two manner of ways. I. Of it own nature, and so it has some power and
do^^^ion over the humor, and does in some sort dissolve it, but imperfectly;
and so it produces halituous vapors, which are called flatuosities, but is
not able to discuss them, and so they remain in the part, and distend it, and
that because the flatuosities are gross, and the part thick: this appears
often in the knees, and troubles Surgeons and Physicians much. II. Heat may
be accounted weak by reason of the matter it self; when as the matter is so
plentiful, that the heat cannot wholly overcome it, but leaves some vapors
undiscussed.

The differences between a water^sh and flatuous Tumor
The causes of crudity are ebriety, gluttony, a sedentary life, and flatuous
drink and meats; such are beer or ale not well boiled, pease, beans,
chestnuts, turnips, radices, green fruit, swines flesh, water foul, salt fish,
and such like. and stretching of them, it causes often intolerable pain,
whereas in waterish no pain is felt. It is discerned from an Oedema by this,
that it admits no pitting, although it be pressed: it is distinguished from
Schirrus, because this is hard, but it not: it is discerned from a Phlegmon and
Erysipelas, for in it the skin is not discolored, neither is there any
extraordinary heat felt; but in those both appear.

The prognostickes.
As for the Prognostics, receive these; If these flatuosities possess parts
very sensible, as great joints, such are the elbowes, or knees,

Why those T^mors are hard to be cured.
because these halituous spirits are gross. Secondly, because the parts through
which they are to be discussed are thick. Thirdly, because the natural heat
is weak. The indications of cu^ing.
Whosoever goes about to cure these flatuous Tumors; First, he must prescribe
a strict diet to the Patient, such as I have set down in the cure of a
waterish Tumor.

As for the Topicall remedies, the part first is to be fomented with Sheres
sack, wherein Dil, Rue, Bay Leaves, The topicall remedies.
Camomill; and Melilot-flowers, Cummin-seeds, Annis-seeds, Fennill-seeds, and
Bay Berries have been infused. Aqua vitae. or in region of the spleen,
minister unto him of the confection of Bay Berries. ii. in iii.. either good
Hippocras, or Canarie wine, wherein Cinnamon has been infused two hours before
supper. iij. or iiij. drops of the oil of Pepper, or vj. of Fenill-seeds oil
in the wig of a Sacke-posset are good. Digestion is furthered in such persons,
if they take a cup of Sack having a toast in it, and afterward eat the toast,
being first besprinkled with sugar. To such a remedy the meanest may attain
unto: you and they will better like of it, than of an^ ^emedy sold in the
Apothecaries shop. The Sack is to be taken two hours before supper.

A Table of the Treatise of Ulcers.
In this Treatise of Ulcers are set down
First those things which belong to ulcers in general, and those are either
The differences of ulcers, and so they are either Simple, or compound, and
these are either Mild, which are either Plain, or Sinous, and that Without
callositei. Or with callosity, which are called Fistulae.

Or malign, and these are either Less malign, and these are three. Herpes
exedens. Phagedaena. Nome.
Very malign, of these are 2. kinds. A cancerous ulcer. A leprous ulcer.



Or the accidents: and these are taken from things either Familiar to nature,
from hence spring four differences, to wit, an ulcer. 1. With superfluous
flesh. 2. With cariositie of the bones. 3. Having the natural color altered.
4. Varicous.
Estranged from nature, and so an ulcer is called Verminous. Lousy.


Secondly the doctrine of ulcers of some parts in particular, as of the ulcers.
1. Of the hairie scalp. 2. Of the ears. 3. Of the eyes. 4. Of the nose. 5. Of
the mouth. 6. Of the lungs. 7. Of the back, belly, and joints.

A TREATISE OF ULCERS. The second Treatise.
LECT. I. Wherein the Authors, and Definition of Ulcers are set down.
BEfore I addressed my self to discourse of any particular matter belonging to
the course of Chirurgerie, I allotted in my first Lecture, four parts to
Chirurgerie: whereof the first was (...), which teaches to unite parts
disjoined. The differences of the solution of unity.
Solution of unity I made two fold: either intelligible, to be apprehended by
reason or understanding, or sensible, which may be perceived by the very
senses. The intelligible I named a Tumor, in the which very often no solution
of unity does offer it self, either to the sight or touch, as in many
choleric Tumors, and others in their beginning. Sensible solution of unity, I
affirmed either to be in the soft parts, or in hard. As for the solution of
unity in the soft parts, I appointed two differences of it; to wit, Vlcus and
Vulnus, and ulcer and a wound.

But here, Quest.
not without a cause, a question may be moved, which of those two, in
methodicall proceeding, ought to have precedencie. It is an undoubted truth,
that the first man that lost his life was Abel, and that by wounds; so that by
all likelihood, men first of all bent their wits to find out means to cure
hurts received by external violence: for the nearer they lived to the
creation, the more pure their bodies were, no hereditary diseases being left by
parents, if you except mortality by reason of old age, which no man could
escape by reason of the sentence of death pronounced for the sin of
disobedience against Adam and his posterity by Gods own mouth: and so being
little troubled with either inward griefs, or outward sores, they troubled not
themselves about the invention of medicaments to cure these; so that by the
right of time, the treating of wounds ought to precede the handling of ulcers.
Answ.
Nevertheless, in our times my opinion is, that the discourse of ulcers, for
sundry reasons, of persons, whether they be rich or poor, rude or civil,
learned or Idiots; so that I need not to retract my opinion in ascribing unto
the tractation of ulcers the precedencie, before the discourse of wounds.

The scope.
In my proceeding, I will handle these ten points: First, I will point out the
Authors who have written laudably of this subject. II. I will set down the
definition of an ulcer. III. The causes of an ulcer. IV. The differences of
ulcers. V. The general signs of ulcers. VI. The general prognostickes of
ulcers. VII. I will set down such medicaments as are fit for all ulcers in
general. VIII. Of the general indications of curing of ulcers. IX. Of their
times. X. I will discourse of every particular sort of ulcers.

Point.
I mean not to name all who are come to our hands, and have written of this
subject; but such as are famous for their skill and experience. Hippocrates and
Galen, although they have not left to posterity particular large monuments of
this matter, yet when occasion is offered, they omit not to set down both the
indications of curing, and medicaments effectual to cure. Hippoc. in his 6.
Sect. of ulcers and fistulaes. Galen in those excellent books of his which he
penned, De methodo medendi, Lib. 3. of a simple ulcer, Lib. 4. or an ulcer with
accidents; of the orderly way to cure diseases, for the most part does
illustrate his precepts by examples borrowed from the Practice of Chirurgerie.

If you demand why he did so? Quest.


I will tell you the cause in Fallopius his words, Answ.
in his first Chapter of ulcers, Quoniam ut ait Celsus, lib. 7. c. 1. Quum
eadem est. Seeing according to Celsus, the means which Physicians use in
curing, sometimes take effect, sometimes avail not, it may be doubted whether
health may be ascribed to the good constitution of the body, or to the means
applied, but the effect of Chirurgerie is most evident. O pregnant testimony to
evince the certainty and excellency of Chirurgerie. Let those Physicians who
slight the practice of Chirurgerie, thinking themselves to be chicks of the
white hen only, consider and weigh the weight of this testimony of Celsus and
Fallupius in the impartial balance of reason. Avicen the chief of the
Arabic Physicians, handles this matter in the fourth Book of his Canon, and
the third Treatise: although he does write confusedly, yet the reading of him
will profit such as understand him, and will not be fruitless. Albucasis has
some good things, but the number of the trifles are many more. Paulus Aegineta
in his fixth Book of the Art of curing, only touches some points of this
matter, as a dog does Nilus when he drinks. Gabriel Fallopius follows, who
has written an excellent Treatise of this matter; but whosoever shall peruse
him, shall find him in sundry things intricate enough: I will bring him a new
companion, but far surpassing all other modern Writers, Minadou^, one of the
famous professors of that renowned University of Padua, in his three Books which
he penned of the curing of the deformities of the body of man: whosoever he be
who shall go about to make a parity between these two and others of the late
Writers, I shall judge him worthy of Midas his ears, and after that he has
proceeded, and been promoted in Germany, to be saluted a Doctor with four
feet. To these two Italians, I join the German Samuel Hafenrefferus, in his
four Books of the affections of the skin, in whom there are many varities, if
one with judgment discern them. The rest that can be named are of the lower
bench, as Guido a Cauliaco, and he who has only taught him to speak a little
more eloquently, Ioannes Tagaultius, in the third ^ooke of his Institutions of
Chirurgerie. Ioannes de Vico accounted the father of Emperickes. Marianus
Sanctus in the third Treatise of his compend of Chirurgeric, and Angelus
Bologuinus in his two Books of ulcers, shall bear him company. I must not
omit that painful and judicious Surgeon Ambrose Parrey, unto whom
Chirurgerie is much beholding. Vesalius also deserves praise. The two latest
who have written are the two Fabricii, Jerome and William: Hieronymus Fabricius
in the third Book of the second Part of his Chirurgicall works: Guiliel^^^^
Fabricius in his learned Chirurgicall observations, who in this course
outstrip all their fellows. These Authors of all others are most to be
perused, for in reading of them one shall become both more understanding, and
more able to perform the cures which shall be committed to his care and skill.
As for the rest, I leave them unto those who rather choose to feed upon
ackornes, than pure manchet. Riola^ the father, Jacques Guilmeau, Peccetius and
Pigra^^, although they deserve their own praise, yet in my opinion they are to
give place to those whom I have named. If any one would mispend good hours,
let him read Paracelsus his great and little Chirurgerie, which are like clouds
without rain. If you would be furnished with forests of Chirurgecall
medicaments, peruse the Treatise of the learned Hollerius de materia
Chirurgica, of Chirurgicall means, and Iacobus Dondus in his enumeration of
Chirurgicall remedies, both simple and compound.

As for those medicaments which in my proceedings I shall from time to time set
down, they shall not be a confused heap, but a choice of the best approved,
to ease you of the labor of election.

Point.
I will not stand upon the setting down of sundry descriptions of sundry
Authors, and the examination of them, because this labor would take up too
much time, and little edify you, which was appointed the end and scope of
these Lectures. An ulcer in English is derived from the Latin ulcus, and this
from the Greek (...), because it disjoyneth the part which it possesses, and
so this term, in its general signification, comprehends every solution of
unity: and so Hippocrates in his Treatise concerning wounds of the head does
entitle it.

But seeing solution of unity may proceed from two causes, to wit, an external
instrument dividing, and a sharp humor eroding, De cause morb. cap. ult.
according to Galen: there must be two differences of solution of unity
likewise according to the same Author, de constit. art. c. 6. Vulnus, a wound,
procured by an external instrument, and ulcus, an ulcer, caused of an inward
cause eroding. Thus then an ulcer is to be described: It is a solution of unity
proceeding from an inward cause eroding the part. The description.
The subject of an ulcer, I make not only the fleshy part, (whereby I
understand, not only all the parts which cover the bones) but the bone it
self also. Unto the ulcer of a bone the Author of the book de constit. art.
cap. 6. gives a peculiar name, calling it Teredo, (...), which properly
signifies the little worm which pierces wood, and consumes it. I see no
reason why the name of an ulcer may not be ascribed to the solution of unity in
a bone, if it proceed from an inward cause eroding, as the term of a wound is,
if it be divided by an external instrument, as a sword or hatchet. An ulcer
then is a compound disease: for in it there is both solution of continuity, and
loss of substance.

LECT. II. Of the causes of ulcers.
Point.
These are either antecedent or conjunct: The antecedent causes may be reduced
to four, to wit, Cacochymia, or the evil habit of the body, Contagium, or the
communication or imparting of an infecting quality, vapor or humor, by the
which an ulcer is caused in any part; a venomous moisture, as in biting and
stinging of serpents.

Cacochymia, the speculation of it does belong unto Or lastly the
distemperature of the part it self.
the practice of Physic: yet in my discourses of Tumors I set down the
signs of every humor, redounding as much as was requisite for any to know, who
only medleth with the practice of Chirurgerie. While any of the three humors
(blood being excepted) in the mass of blood contained in the veins, is faulty
and peccant in quality, it is accounted the cause antecedent of an ulcer.
Sometimes these humors are solitary, sometimes they are associate together.

Contagium, or infection, it is communicated sometimes by a rotten and
corroding vapor, and so very often, if one visit often one having Pthysis,
such vapors being mingled with the air, infect the party who visits,
especially if he draw too near to the diseased party. So ulcers of the yard
come from dealing with women whose secret parts are touched with venereall
ulcers: yea the itch it self, and scabbednesse, is gotten by either lying with
one troubled with it, or sleeping in a bed where a scabbed person has rested.



The opinion of dogmaticall Physicians concerning humors.
But the followers of Hippocrates and Galen, speak otherwise of these humors
than the Chemists do. The Galenists, make the three humors of the mass of
blood, to wit, choler, phlegm, and melancholy, to be the causes both antecedent
and conjunct of all ulcers, if they become contrary to nature. So they will
have rheumaticke ulcers to be caused of salt phlegm, Herpis exedens to be
caused of eruginous choler; cancerous ulcers of Bilis atra, which are the worst
and most deplorable of all others.

The opinion of Chemists.
The Chemists on the other part, affirm that the discourse of humors does not
manifest unto us the essence, and proper nature of any disease. So Quercetan in
his advise of curing the gout, brings in the stone, which he affirms not to
be engendered of the Galenicall humors. Petrus Severinus the Dane in his Idaea
medicina philosophicae, or Pourtrature of the philosophical Physic, wondreth
at the folly of those, who make those fantastical humors, blood, choler,
phlegm, and melancholy the causes of diseases: wherefore they out of minerals,
salt, sulphur, and mercury, fetch out the causes of all griefs. Although
Galen call sometimes humors salt, nitrous, and eruginous, yet the Chemists have
no reason to reject the ordinary names of humors, and to call contumeliously
dogmaticall Physicians Humorists, and to deny any disease to proceed from the
ordinary humors of the body becoming unnatural: for seeing that according to
Galen 1. de loc. affect. c. 2. that is to be accounted the cause of a grief,
That the ordinary humors of the body are causes of diseases.
which being present the disease continues, and which being removed the grief
cease: and seeing we perceive diseases to be caused of vicious humors
abounding, and these being expelled the grief to vanish, I see no reason why
these humors may not be accounted the true causes of griefs; and that it is a
mere folly, and an affection of novelty, to baptize these by names of minerals
far fetched; as to call that which in fevers is cast up by vomit, rather
sulphur than choler. Besides this, the Chemists are injurious to dogmaticall
Physicians, in laboring to persuade men that they by the name of a humor
understand nothing else, but a waterish substance void of all other faculty,
which should be the principles of all bodies, What a Humor is.
and the causes of all diseases: whereas every rational Physician, by the
term of a humor, understands a liquid body mixed with blood: which seeing it
is a several body of its own kind, and is more compound than water, so it
has far more excellent qualities than water. The Physicians their own
selves have set the Alchymists at work, while talking of humors, and the
causes of diseases, so much talk of the first qualities, heat, cold, moisture,
and dryness. For although sundry diseases are caused of heat, The first
qualities are not the only causes of diseases.
cold, moisture, and dryness, yet we shall find other qualities in the Humor,
which may as well hurt the body as these: for Hippocrates in his book de
prisca medicina, or ancient physic affirms, not that which is hot, cold,
moist, or soft, to be most powerful, but that which is bitter, salt, sweet and
sour, unsavourie, and sharp with some sowrenesse; these and a thousand such,
(...) being exalted in their faculties, he will have to be the causes of
diseases, and not the first qualities only: and from these the differences of
symptoms in fevers of this same kind do depend. These whilst they are
exquisitely mixed in the body are harmless, yet when one of these is severed
from the rest, and is exalted in its quality, it manifests it self, and
annoyeth man; so the corrosive salt does bewray it self in cancers, and
corrosive ulcers. Minerals are in the body of man.
Neither is it to be thought absurd, that minerals are in the body of man, for
seeing man is fed by plan^s, and beasts, which feed also upon the plants;
seeing also the herbs have their aliment from the ground, which is not alike in
all places, but often is mingled with a salt juice, and other mineral spirits,
which the beasts and herbs cannot perfectly convert into their own substance;
one can hardly think that a man can live upon these, and have no such thing
participate. So we see what variety of wines the diversity of the soiles bring
forth; and that in every wine there is tartar or argol, which appears also
very often in podagricall persons. In vomiting, sundry times substances like to
leekes, green, and eruginous, exceeding hot and sharp are thrown up, which
being received into basins, dry them with a bright eruginous color. See
histories in Shenki^^ ^ed. obser. lib. 3. ob. 62. in the third book of his
physical observations, the 62. observation. Michael Dor^^gius lib. 1. de
^edico and ^^^^^ci^a, in his first book of the Physician and physic
reports, that a certain Lawyer made such urine, as did fret the linings, as
if it had been the spirit of vitrioll; such humors appear plainly in
scabbednesse, fretting ulcers, but specially in a cancer. Wherefore Bertinus is
his third book and eleventh of his Physic, does rashly and inconsiderately
affirm, that not one whit of mercury, salt or sulphur, lies hid in the
body; for in the itch, scabbinesse, some catarrhes, inflammations of the eyes,
and fretting ulcers it may be perceived; but in urine, which is also an
excrementitious humor, the salt may be separate, and presented to the sight:
yea, besides the salt in urine, another substance the cause of diseases may be
marked: for if you take a clear urine, and suffer it to settle, a matter like
unto the powder of brick, and sometimes a white muddie substance will so
cleave to the sides of the chamberpot or urinall, that it can hardly be
sometimes washed away; of such a matter tophes in gouty persons, and stones in
the bladder, are engendered.

The ordinary humors are not the causes of all diseases.
Whosoever shall go about to reduce the causes of all diseases to blood,
choler, melancholy and phlegm, shall wrap himself into a number of
difficulties: I will desire him to yield me a reason, why he calls salt
phlegm so, seeing phlegm is said tobe cold, but this hot? Why is Atrabilis
comprehended under melancholy, seeing it is very hot, but this cold? Besides
this, if any Physician go about to cure diseases procured either by contagion,
or poison, without any great respect to the humors, he presently goes about to
minister either a Lexipharmaca, as in the plague which is gotten by contagion,
to abate the force of it, and then he addresseth himself to the preparation
and evacuation of the humors. If poison be ministered to any one in meat or
drink, which according to Cardan, commenting upon the 62. aphor. of the 4.
sect. may be suspected, if he find griping in his stomach, if he vomit and
go to stool, if within six hours the akin become greenish or spotted, then
Antidotes are ministered, and not such as respect choler, melancholy or phlegm.
Let the Humors then which are ingendered in the body retain the accustomed
names, but if an external cause make them degenerate from their nature, let
these be distinguished from the ordinary, and have their denomination from that
which alters them. If salt, niter, alome, vitrioll, verdigrease be mingled
with any humor, let it be called from the mineral mingled with it, salt,
nitrous, alominous, vitriolate or eruginous. And for this cause some late
judicious Physicians writing of malign and pestilent fevers, and considering
their notable differences, have affirmed some to participate the nature of
arsenick, some of mercury, some of hellebore, some of opium, some of the
leopards bane, some of the hemlock, some to participate of the poison of a
viper, scorpion, mad dog and such like, noting the variety of symptoms in
sundry persons.

Of the superfluous melancholy Humor.
One doubt does remain concerning the melancholy humor, whether it be only
thin and waterish, as Reusnerus affirms in his book of the Scurvie, exercit.
4. out of sundry places of Hippocrates, who calls melancholy (...), as in his
book (...), in his book de worh is, and in his first book de worh is
mulierum, or whether it be thick and earthie, according to the vulgar and
received opinion. Before this doubt be solved, some propositions are to be
permitted. I. In the Chylus there are two substances, one liquid and thin, the
other thick and terrestrial, which can no more nourish than ashes. II. Nature
does mingle these which are not sent away by stool, with part of the aqueous
and superfluous humidity caused of drink and liquid meats. So in a lie the falt
and some adust parts are so mingled, that they are not discerned before
separation.

That the spleen draws superfluous melancholy.
I say then, that this thick and feculent humor tempered with much moisture, is
to be accounted the superfluous melancholy humor, and that it is attracted by
the spleen. For firt, seeing this feculent humor is altogetherunapt to
nourish, it must be separate from the Chylus, which cannot be performed by any
other part befides the spleen. Secondly, the spleen is of a darker red color
than the liver is, which proceeds from the thick, feculent, and terrestrial
humor which it imbibeth. Thirdily, Hippocrates de aere, aq. and loc. affirms,
that such persons as dwell in fenny places are subject to passions of the
spleen. The cause is, because the waters are not pure, but muddie. Fourthly,
if the spleen did draw only thin and waterish humors, it could not be so
subject to obstructions as it is. The feculent humor mixed with much humidity,
is the cause of sundry diseases: the thin part sometimes ascends to the upper
parts, the gross to the lower parts of the body, as we see in the scurvie,
wherein the gummes are ulcerated, and the legs tumifie. The spleen being
spungeous draws much humidity to it, wherefore spleenetick persons ought to
drink sparingly, for if they bib too much, the natural heat of the part is
easily oppressed, The qualities of the waterish Humor of the spleen.
and so they become hydropick. The waterish humor of the spleen is not
insipid, but sharp and biting, and copious: so we see those who are troubled
with quartanes, about the end of each fit to sweat plentifully; and those who
are oppressed with melancholy to spit much. In the thick, feculent, and
terrestrial blackish matter, sometimes there is no excess of the spleen: in
qualities, sometimes there is, and those are two: Acerbitas, an astringent
sharpness, such as appears in green unripe fruits; and Aciditas, sowrnesse:
from these qualities intended and exalted, atra bilis becomes so corrosive.
So much I thought good to set down of melancholy, to clear the doubts which
are moved of it, and to show one use of the spleen.

To return then to the carbonary crew of unlearned Alchymists, Object.
They object thus, The rational Physicians affirm the body to be nourished by
the four humors, how can they then be causes of the diseases?

It is strange that any men should wilfully shut the eye of the mind, Answ.
understanding I mean, that they may not see the truth, seeing man, as
Aristotle in the very first words of the book of his Metaphysics affirms,
naturally coveteth knowledge, and witnesses are our first parents to their own
and our loss. No dogmaticall Physician ever affirmed any disease to be caused
of any humor of the body, as long as it continues in its own natural estate;
but then to stir up griefs, when it is separate from the rest, when it does
putrify, when foreign substances and qualities are added, which make it of a
familiar humor, a prosessed enemy to health, consisting of the natural
constitution of the body, resulting of the laudable commixtion of the four
humors natural. I have insisted somewhat long in the setting down of the causes
of ulcers, because he (whosoever he be) that goes about to cure ulcers without
the knowledge of the causes, is like one, who being blindfolded, is set to
thrash a cock.

LECT. III. Of the general differences and signs of ulcers.
OF the ten Points, within the limits of which I resolved to include all my
discourses of ulcers, in my former Lecture I dispatched three; in the first I
nominated the prime Authors, who have written of this subject: in the second, I
set down the description of an ulcer: in the third, I discoursed somewhat
largely of the causes of ulcers in general.

Now the fourth Point, concerning the differences, IV. Point.
and sundry sorts of ulcers, offers it self to be handled, and in truth the
course of nature so requires: for the form of every particular ulcer does
spring from the cause conjunct of the same: for example, a cancer ulcerate is
discerned from all other ulcers by its proper and pathognomonicall signs, all
which as effects, are ascribed to Atra bilis, impacted in the part the cause
conjunct of the same.

Here of purpose I omit the idle and fruitless distinctions of ulcers,
Differences of uncers.
set down by sundry Authors, which neither better the understanding, nor
further the curation. These only I will set down, I. From their nature
which are matteriall. The matteriall differences then of ulcers are taken
either from the nature or constitution of an ulcer, or from the subject or part
affected. From the nature and constitution, an ulcer is either simple or
compounded.

In a simple ulcer, nothing is offered which may stay the Surgeon from going
about the consolidation of it, as the cause conjunct, a cruel symptom,
adjuncts, or some disease.

Differences of a compound ulcer.
A compound ulcer wherein either some of these, or all are found, which must be
removed before unition be procured, is either of the milder sort, or malign.

The more milder sort of ulcers yield to ordinary and usual medicaments, if
they be judiciously applied.

The malign yield not, and besides have fearful symptoms: those malign
ulcers proceed either from inward, or outward causes.

From internal causes spring a cancer ulcerate, Phagedana, Nome, fretting
ulcers, and others which are called Chironia, or Telephia, which denominations
insinuate nothing unto us concerning the nature or curation of an ulcer, but
bring only unto our memory the names of these who are celebrated by Poets,
which belong more to Grammarians than Physicians or Surgeons to be known.

The external causes which procure ulcers are two, to wit, Contagium,
contagion, or a venomous quatity, vapor, or humor, comprehended under the name
of Venenum, or poison.

II. From the parts
The differences taken from the subjects or parts affected are two, for either
an ulcer possesses the outward part, and is called Externum, or outward, or it
afflicts the inner parts, and is named Internum, or inward. Other differences
are taken from the continuance, figure and quantity, are here impertinent, and
further only predictions, of the which I will speak in the prognostics of
ulcers.

V. The signs of ulcers.
As concerning the signs of ulcers, an internal ulcer is found out and
discerned by the excretion or matter expelled. As for example, if the urine be
purulent we conjecture the kidneyes or bladder to be ulcerate. Signs of the
lungs ulcerated
If purulent matter be voided by coughing, it is like that the lungs are
ulcerate; if much of such matter be rejected, and signs of an aposteme have
gone before, it is an apostematous ulcer; if the purulent matter be but little,
and no signs of an inflammation have been noted, then it is but a primarie
ulcer proceeding of erosion, by reason of a sharp humor separating the unity
of the substance of the lungs. These internal ulcers I will leave to the
consideration of Physicians, unto whom they are most commonly presented to be
cured, who very often purchase fees with no small discredit to the Art and
themselves. Only I will set down such things as tend to the curation of
ulcers of the external parts. I need not to busy my self about the setting
down of the general signs of such, seeing they are presented to the view of
the Surgeon by the parties grieved. Only let me give you warning, that you
mistake not a wound for an ulcer: into this error you may easily fall, if you
admit the most ordinary description of an ulcer, set down even by judicious
Physicians and Surgeons; which is, Riolan. Chiru^. sect. 2.
that it is a solution of continuity in a fleshy part, yielding quittor; it
skilleth not, they think; Whether it be laudable or illaudable. It is strange
that there should be set down no other difference between a wound and an
ulcer, than this, that the one is bloody, and the other purulent. Does not, I
pray you, a wound become purulent of it self, although no Chirurge on deal
with it, and may not an ulcer become bloody if incision be used, as it may
daily be seen? Frivolous it is also in my judgment, that a solution of unity
inflicted by an instrument that wounds in a bone, as a sword, may be caned a
wound, and that a solution of unity in a bone, procured by an eroding humor,
may not be termed an ulcer.

Seeing the causes conjunct make the true differences of an ulcer and wound:
The causes conjunct of wounds and ulcers.
which are an external instrument dividing, and a sharp humor eroding the
parts. Who can imagine that in a venereall ulcer, wherein these is corruption
of the bone, there should be two sorts of ulcers specifically differing, to
wit, one in the fleshy part, and another in the bone, the same humor causing
both.

But a solution of unity in the bone by a corroding is called Teredo, say they.

What then? Object.
Must a malign ulcer in the face, because it is called Noli me tangere, be
exempted out of the list of cancerous ulcers?

No. Sol.
Let this then be accounted an undoubted truth, that a solution of unity
procured in the body by a humor eroding, whether it be in the flesh or bone,
may be, yea ought to be called an ulcer, as a solution by an instrument
separating, is called a wound in both.

LECT. IV. Of the general prognisticks of Vleers.
NOw I am to descend to the sixth point touching Ulcers, VI. Point.
proposed by me in the beginning, which is of their general prognostics. The
presages.
The consideration of these will make one circumspect, when an ulcer is offered
to him to be cured, in the election of his cures: for whosoever takes in hand
a grief uncurable, he discrediteth himself, and causes the art to be
contemned by those, who are simple and ignorant, imputing the error of the
practicer to the insufficiency of the art. of flesh: but by the contrary, an
ulcer is easily cured in a person of a good complexion, who digesteth well and
does not increase superfluous moisture. is either of easy or hard curation. So
a venereall ulcer in a succulent and strong body is easily cured, but if the
party be in a Marasmus, neither the ulcer nor the disease can be cured; because
the use of desiccatives, which only avail in these infirmities, will only
hasten death increasing the extenuation of the body: in like manner ulcers in
hectic and hydropick persons are hardly cured; in these because superfluous
humidity hinders desiccation of the ulcer; in those because laudable juice
flows not to the part ulcerate. X. If tumors in ulcers suddenly vanish
without any evident and manifest cause, Hippocrates Sect. 7. aph. 21. for there
must be a strong phlegmon, and the arteries must be much pressed, so that a
gangren may be expected: howsoever of such furious blood no flesh can be
regenerate. Erysipelas appear, the bone being bare, it is no good sign, Hipp.
Sect. 7. aphor. 19. for neither can flesh be regenerate by such a sharp humor
as this, malign ulcers two forts of quittor flow; One thin, and it is called
Ichor, or Sanies; such a virulent matter issues also from the pricking of the
nerves, and corruption of the periostion. The other sort of quittor is thick,
and is called Sordes. Hipp. lib. 6. aph. 45. But to make good this Aphorism of
Hippocrates, some conditions are required: The first is, that much flesh above
the bone be not in the part ulcerate. Secondly, the humor which flows to the
part must be very corrasive. Thirdly, it must not have been dealt withal by
any Physician or Surgeon. If one or more of these conditions fail, the
Aphorism must miss of its prediction. What Galen and late Writers have set
down in the explication of this Aphorism, clear not the truth of this
Aphorism: only these conditions set down by me do. The signs which lead
you to the knowledge of a bone corrupted are these: 1. If the ulcer having
been skinned, Signs of a corrupt bone.
breaks out again, for it is likely that the bone casts out an ichorous
substance, which is the cause of this recidivation, 2. If the ulcer yield more
and thinner matter then the bigness of it requires. 3. If the brims of the
ulcer will not come in. 4. If the brims become reddish. 5. If the bone, being
presented to the sight, it appear rugged, and of a blackish color, not
smooth, or a ruddy white color. XIX. Whatsoever ulcers cast out much Sanies or
Ichorous matter,

LECT. V. Of the general curation of ulcers and their times.
HAving set down the general prognostics of ulcers in the sixth Point, now
the seventh Point concerning the general method of curing of all ulcers does
offer it self.

The universal curation of ulcers is comprised in this one proposition: All
ulcers ever desire desiccation, so Hippoc. in princ. Lib. De ulcer. and Galas.
Lib. 3. method. c. 3. for whether we go about to engender flesh, or to seal
up an ulcer by cicatrization, desiccative medicaments are still required.

Four times of ulcers.
There are four times to be observed in ulcers.

Principium, the beginning; In it the quittor is thin and waterish. Augmentum,
the proceeding; In it the quittor flows more sparingly, and thicker. Status,
the consistence; In it there is no ichorous matter, but (...), yet somewhat
thinner it appears. Declinatio, when the ulcer is in the mending hand, then
laudable Pus shows it self. The qualities of laudable qu^ttour.
It is white, being altered by the natural temperature of the veins,
arteries, nerves and membranes, whose substance is white. Secondly, it is
uniforme, not grumous or cruddy, natural heat working equally upon every part
of it. Thirdly, it is without all ill smell, seeing the natural heat has
corrected all the evil qualities of it.
The means of curing of ulcers.
The curation of ulcers is performed by two means: The 1. is the removing of
the causes antecedent. The second, is the artificial dressing of them.

Causes antecedent.
The causes antecedent are four: Cacochymia, Contagium, Venenum, and the
distemperature of the purt.



Alexipharma.

Aeidota.



The cause conjunct, which is the eroding humor, The cause conjunct.
that is settled in the part, is surprised by such medicaments as suit for the
four times of an ulcer before mentioned by.

The use of suppurative medicaments.
In the beginning then Suppuratives or Digestives are to be applied. First,
because the matter which has left the vessels, and has insinued it self
within the porosities, putrifieth: wherefore it ought to be concocted, that it
may become laudable quittor.

Secondly, good flesh cannot be procured by sarcoticall medicaments, unless
the matter be concocted; for so the ulcer is made apt to admit the generation
of flesh. These Suppuratives ought in the first qualities to be proportionate
to the temperature of the part unto the which they are to be applied, so to
parts hot in the first or second degree Suppuratives hot in the same degrees
are to be applied: for if they exceed, they are so far from strengthening the
natural heat, that they rather pervert it, making it aguish and unnatural: if
the part be temperate let temperate Suppuratives be applied.

In what ulcers Digestives are unfit.
But Digestives ought not to be applied, First, to putride ulcers; for seeing
Suppuratives are hot and moist, if they should be applied,

The uses of repelling medicines.


Sorepelling Topics are to be applied to the parts about the ulcer to repel
the matter which flows.







The mixtion of medicaments when profitable.
And for as much as I affirmed that ulcers always require desiccation, it is
not amiss to mix with the Suppuratives some driers, yet that in the beginning
the Suppuratives have the upper hand, but in the end the desiccatives.

After that the ulcer is well digested, and yields laudable quittor,
Mundificatives
Mundificatives are to be applied: for if you apply farcoticall medicaments,
before the ulcer is well digested, spungeous and naughty flesh will grow, which
will admit no cicatrization. In mundifying we must not use too sharp
medicaments, for these may cause an unskilful Physician or Surgeon to
believe that it is a corrosive ulcer. The pain which the Patient feels in
the part ulcerate will bewray this error. These three scopes being compassed to
overcome the cause conjunct, nothing remains, but to seal up the cure by
cicatrization.

How fluxion is stayed Revulsion.
Seeing most ordinary ulcers proceed from fluxion, it is to be withstood, First,
by Revulsion. Secondly, by Repulsion. In Revulsion, wherein the matter is
drawn to parts far distant, the rectitude of the part, and vessels is to be
observed. So if the ulcer be in the right leg, Revulsion is to be procured in
the right arm, if you respect the rectitude of the part; but if you consider
the rectitude of the vessels, Revulsion is to be used in the left leg, if the
ulcer be in the right: for so the communion of vessels is kept.

How revulsion is to be procured.
Revulsion is performed by attractives, and these are three; Heat, pain, and
the shunning of vacuity. Hot thing which procure attraction, are hot
inunctions, and baths: straight ligatures cause pain; but both pain and heat
are caused, Ventoses, and Vesicatories. Fontanels attract by reason of the
shunning of vacuity; for they sending out sill some substance, some other must
be drawn to fill up the place of that.

Repulsion, wherein the humor is stayed in its passage, Repulsion.
is performed by applying those medicaments, which commonly are called
Defensives: Defensives.
these medicaments are astringent and cold, and rather dry than moist in
ulcers. Now that you may know whether you proceed according to Art in the
curing of ulcers, receive this Aphorism: To know good medicaments.
When medicaments applied to ulcers do good, or at least hurt not, it is a
sign that they are convenient; but if they do harm, by making the ulcer
hotter or colder, drier or moister than is fit, then you may gather that such
are to be changed, Albucasis.
and their contraries applied.

Things which make ulcers long in curing.
To conclude this Point, nine things make ulcers hard to be cured.

I. The defect of good blood in bodies extenuate. II. The impurity of blood in
cacochymicall persons. III. Is the filthiness of the ulcer. IV. Soft and
cadaverous flesh about the ulcer. V. The malignity of the humor. VI. The
hardness of the brims of the ulcer. VII. A secret cause in the air of some
places, they being hot and moist. VIII. When the bone is corrupted. IX. The
application of unfit medicaments.
LECT. VI. Of the medicaments be fitting ulcers in general, and first of
repelling medicaments.
NOw at the last I am come to the last general Point, set down by me in the
first Lecture concerning ulcers, of the which I intended to discourse, which
is, of the medicaments befitting ulcers in general. I mean to spend this
Lecture upon this subject, to the end that you may be so furnished with good
and approved medicaments, as that you shall not need either to envy or wonder
at such as brag of secrets.

It is not unknown to your selves how many saucy and malepert Empiricks there
are here in London, who basely and irreverently speak of those who are skillful
indeed, and deserve well of the Art of Chirurgerie, (purchasing unto it credit,
and to their own selves profit and renown, by their methodicall and
successful practice) and so impudently boast of their secrets, and exalt
themselves as if they had no forehead. But surely it is to be thought, that
there is too great a distance between it and their tongue, that the forehead
cannot stop the tongue from uttering Thrasonicall speeches of themselves: it is
great pity such are so countenanced as they are. The Magistrates let them
proceed in their extravagant courses, thinking it not fit for an Eagle to
stoop to a gnat. The ruder and ignorant sort, rather consider the promise,
than the performance, thinking that there can be no cloud without rain.

That you may be the more able, not only to encounter with these confident
cowards, but to overthrow them also; I will endeavor, according to that talent
of skill which I have, to furnish you with competent both Theorie and Practice.
It is a shame for a Surgeon not to be furnished with admirable variety of
medicament, seeing nature has been so provident for him. Turn your eyes
whither you will, and behold the fertility of nature, and you shall see and
find that in her works she has not been unmindfull of you. As for plants,
you have Dioscorsdes and Galen, yea all who have written of them, witnesses;
that the greatest part of them have fallen to your share. As for the things
which lie hid in the bowels of the earth, as metals, spirits, marcafites, do
they not serve your turn? The metals for your instruments, the rest for your
medicaments. Let no man think then, that a skillful and industrious Surgeon
can by his Art perform no other cures, but such as may be compassed by the
compositions in his Salvatory. These he must have in readiness, other
medicaments he is able to fetch out of the treasure of nature, which he has at
his command. This I will make good by the setting down only those medicaments
which are known to belong to the curation of ulcers. Of these there are two
orders or ranks: for some serve for ordinary ulcers, some for those who have a
malignity annexed. Those that serve for ordinary ulcers are of five sorts, for
some are Repelling, some Digesting, some Mundifying, some incarnating, and some
Cicatrizing, and the Medicaments which perform these offices, are either
simple or compound.

The Simples repelling are these that follow.
Of these, some are of an Aqueous substance, as Water it self, Lettice, all
sorts of Succorie, Knot-grasse, Horse-taile, Perwinckle, Nightshade, Comfrey,
Purselaine, Navell-wort, House-leeke, these four yield not their juice easily;
wherefore they must be beaten in a mortar, and some verjuyce, vinegar, or juice
of Quinces mingled with them. There be some Simples not so wa^^rish as these
are, as the Plantane, Millefole, Vine-leaves, astringetred Wine, Verjuyce,
Vinegar, the fruit of the Barberry, the fruit of the Quickbeame, Sloes,
Mirtle-berries, Pomegranate-rindes, and Flowers infused in red Wine which is
astringent, Tanners Woose, which will be more effectual if these Simples
together with red Rose-leaves dried be boiled a little in it; but the Woose
must be taken when it is newly made, and before any leather be put in it. The
Leaves and Apples of the Mandrake, the Henbane, the Leaves of Stramonea, she
black Poppie, and the deadly Nightshade are more cooling than the former, but
they must be left before the part become livid, or of a leady color. If you
use the juyces or decoctions of the aforesaid Simples, which you shall be
enforced to do, if the curation of ulcers and wounds be presented unto you,
being in the country, where no Apothecarie is by whom you can be furnished
with medicaments which are fit to repel, then you mist apply to the parts
adjacent to the ulcer, pledgets of wool or tow moistened in them, then above
these stups of linen or woollen clothes, according to the temperature of the
party, and season of the year, moistened in the same and wrung; are to be
applied.

Last of all, the part ulcerate is handsomely to be rolled, the rowler having
been moistened in these juyces or decoctions. One thing is to be noted, that
it is the best course still to mingle some astringents with those which have a
waterish juice: for as these cool best, and repress the fluxion and
inflammation, so these by wrinkling of the skin repel more effectually. As you
roll up fractures, so must you roll parts ulcerate. Of this kind of rolling
I will speak in its proper place.

The compound medicaments that repel are these.
I. Oils, as the Oil of Roses made of green Oil, the Juice of unripe
Grapes, and the Juice of red Roses, boiled together over a simpering fire
until the Juyces be consumed. Last of all, infuse some Roses picked in the
Oil: the Oil of Mirtles, the Oil of Quinces, the Oil of Mastick, the Oil
of Henbane, Poppie, and Mandrake. The sallet Oil whereof these compound Oils
are made must not be old, or rank. If an inflammation has possessed the parts
adjacent, use not Oils* for they are easily set on fire.

II. Cataplasmes, made of the aforesaid Juyces, and Barley-flowre, with some of
the aforenamed Oils, or Bole, Terra sigillata, or Amber tempered with some of
the aforenamed named Oils, and whites of Eggs beaten, Vinegar, or Verjuyce.

III. Unguents, as Triupharmacum, Vnguentum album, Camphoratum either of it
self, or mingled with Vuguaztum Populeum.

IV. Emplasters, as Emplastrum de minio, the Soap Plaster, Diapalma made with
the juyces of Plantane, Horsetaile, Knot-g^asse, Yarrow, Comfrey, and
Perwinkle. When you make your Diachalcithes, reserve one part for the juyces,
which must be added by litte and little, as you bring your Emplaster to the
consistence. This medicament is second to none.

Of Suppuratives or Digestives.
Being furnished with medicaments repelling, which are to be applied to the
parts adjacent to the ulcer to hinder fluxion, you are to look for medicaments
which are to be applied to the ulcer it self: Amongst them Suppuratives offer
themselves first; Those as the former, are either simple, or compound.

The Simples are these, which are to be temperately warm and moist.
The flower of Wheat and Barley, Swines-grease, sweet Butter, Capons-grease,
Calve-tallow, ripe Oil, black Rosin, the juice of the flowers of white Lilies,
the pulp of Figs, and Raisins, the mucilage of the Marsh-Mallow, Fenugreek, and
Linseed: these are convenient, if any hardness or callosity be in the ulcer,
Saffron, Bird-lime, Pitch, Storax, Galbanum, Gummi and Lemni, the Burre-Dock,
Melilot, the Flower deluice, new Wax.

of Compounds.
Tetrapharmacum of the Ancients, which is made of Pitch, Rosin, Wax, and any of
the forenamed fats; Dialthaea simplex, Basilicum majus and minus, Vuguentum
aureum; if a little Mercury precipitate washed in Plantane, and Rose Water, be
mingled with these unguents, as a scruple with an ounce, they will be the more
effectual: for the precipitate does excellently thicken and digest any
ichorous matter. Above these, applied unto the ulcers, either upon Lint or Tow,
lay Emplastrum diachylon simplex in the summer, and Cum gummis in the winter,
if the brims of the ulcer be hard: otherwise use your Diapalma cum succis, for
there is no Emplaster comparable to this.

Of the aforenamed Simples, as your Flowers, or Meals, Pulps, Mucilages, and
Juyces, you may frame unto your selves sundry Suppuratives, according to the
temperature of the party, the condition of the ulcer, and season of the year.
Let this be an example, Take of the pulp of Figs and Raisins, of each one
ounce, of the Mucilage, of the Marshmallow, Linseed, and Fenugreek, of each two
drams; of the juice of the flowers of the white Lilly, two drams and a half;
of Barley-meale, three drams; of Saffron beat to powder, half a scruple, make
up a medicament. This is powerful in callous ulcers.

Of Mundificatives.
When the ulcer is well digested, which you shall conjecture if the quittor be
somewhat laudable, if the brims of the ulcer be soft and well colored; and
lastly, if you find no ill damp to rise from the ulcer; then you are to
address your selves to the application of Mundificatives, for if you use
sarcotick or incarnative medicaments before mundification, only loose flesh
will arise, which will admit no cicatrization.

The Simples that mumdifie are these.
Aristolochia or Birthworth, whereof there be two sorts, the long, and the
round; Horehound, Smellage, Vitrioll calcined to redness, Verdigrease,
Orpiment, Arsenick natural and sublimed, sublimate and precipitate, the yellow
Turbit, if you use it before it be washed, it is as powerful as Arsenick, or
Mercury sublimate; but much more safe, for it dispatcheth its operation
sooner, causes not so great inflammation, and is more familiar to the body of
man. Honey also mundifieth, Savin, Cockle-shels burned, Alome burned or
calcined, the flower of Verches. All Vegetables calcined mundifie, by reason of
the salt in the ashes, but some more powerfully than others, as the ashes of
Tobacco, the Vine-stalkes, and the stalks of Beans: join to these, the juice
of Celandine, the root of the Cuckow-pit, Wormwood, Centorie the les^^, Cardum
benedictus, the Beete, Colewort Gentian, bitter Almonds, Scordium, the white
and black Hellebore.

Compound mu^difying medicament.
l. 15. of Fabricem ab aqua pendente: Terebinth ij. syrup. Ros. Vel mel res ss
suci apii, iss farin. hord. and lupin. aq. q. s. ut inspicentur. That which is
call Paracelsus mundificative, is second to none: It receives these things,
Take of Honey iiij. Of Turpentine ij. Boil these with a very soft fire, until
they come to the consistence of a solt ^^guent; then take them from the fire,
and mingle with it the yolke of an Egg; incorporate all well together. If a
foul ulcer be offered unto you, mingle with an ounce of this unguent a dram of
Mercury precipitate, washed with Plantane and Rose Water, and you shall find
it to excel all other Mundificatives. In the shops you have Vaguentum
Aegyptiacum, and Apostolorum: Aegyptiacum is good to be injected into sinewous
ulcers, being mingled with Whitewine, and Melrosatum: Vnguentum Apostolorum is
best for plain, and superficial ulcers. If you mingle with your Basilicum and
Aureum precipitate, mingled with Alome calcined, you shall have a medicament
which will both digest and mundifie. Take of your precipitate two parts, and
one of Alome, and grind them upon a Painters stone until they come to an
impalbable powder. Of the enumeration of these medicaments you may gather of
what qualities Mundificatives ought to be. They are drying without astriction,
without any notable cold quality, or great heat; but of a subtle substance: by
reason of the dryness, they consume the humidity of the ulcer; and by reason
of their siccitie and tenuitie, they take away the glutinousnesse of the
quittor. These must not pass the second degree of dryness; otherwise they
would consume the flesh it self. Extersion then is the removing of filth
cleaving to the ulcer, by drying of it, and abati^^ the viscosity by the which
it cleaves to the part.

Of Incarnatives.
When the ulcer is sufficiently mundlfied, which you shall learn of Celsus
lib. 5. cap. 20. If the ulcer appear red, sensible and clean, and neither too
dry nor too moist, then it is sufficiently mundified: but by the contrary, if
it appear pale or whitish, or of a livid or black color, and want sense, and
be either too moist or too dry, then it is not cleansed sufficlently. These
signs may be seen in a plain and open ulcer.

Quest.
But you may ask, how shall we know when a sinewous ulcer is sufficiently
mundified?

Answ.
Galen will tell you, l. 4. (...) cap. 2. That you shall conjecture a hollow
ulcer to be clean, when the part begins to be more sensible of the
mundificatives than it was before.

When these signs of sufficient mundification appear, then you must go about
the incarnating of the ulcer. And although incarnation be the effect of nature
principally, that is, of the temperature of the part, from whence the faculty
of the part, the cause of all the ordinate actions of the part do flow: yet it
is requisite that the Physician and Surgeon should help nature now, being
weakened by the grief, by removing the impediments and lets which hinder the
natural constitution of the part. Nature when she is in her vigor cannot
totally convert the aliments into the substance of the solid parts, but after
she has had a care of the preservation of them, has a task to expel both a
waterish or thin, and a thick excrement by the pores of the skin to the outward
superficies of it, (as is manifest in the morphew,) when she is disabled by a
solution of unity, much less can she effect her purpose, where of the thin
excrement a humid ulcer is procured, but of the thick a sordid. Wherefore if
you will go about to cure an ulcer, you must labor to dry the humid ulcers by
desiccatives, and the sordid by mundificatives: and because in all solution of
unity, nature is ever vigilant and busy; and in ulcers to regenerate flesh, in
perfecting of which work, these two excrements must be separated; it is
manifest that there cannot be one moment defigned in the curing of ulcers where
drying and mundifying medicaments are required. Now medicaments endued with
these two qualities of desiccation and mundification in a temperate degree, are
called Sarcoticall or Incarnative Medicaments.

The Simples are these.
S. John's. wort, the Clownes-panax, Millefoile, Knotgrasse, Horse-taile, the
garden and mountain Avens, our Ladies-mantle, Sanicle, Salomons-seale, fresh
Gales, Barleyflowre, Mastick, Myrrh, Aristolochia rotunda, Harts-horne
calcined, Bones calcined, Sarcocol, Rosin, Pitch, Gummi Elemni, Butter,
Turpentine, Swines-grease, Sheep, Goats and Deeres-suet, sweet Tallow,
Olibanum. Frankincense, the powder of Snakes and Adders: these most
effectually. The green Tobacco.

The Compound are these.
And amongst the first of these, suffer me to commend unto you this of mine:
Take of Swines-grease eight ounces, of Rosin iij of Wax, and Gummi Elemni, of
each one ounce, of the juice of the aforesaid Vulneraries one pound, of the
leaves of Tobacco stamped two handful: boil all these over a soft fire until
the juyces be consumed, then strain the Unguent. Make trial of this, and
leave it when you have found out a better. You have in the shops Vnguentum
Basilicum majus and minus, and Aureum set out with glorious titles: and why
not, seeing the Farthing-tokens bear the Arms and Crown. I will show you
anon, how these cannot fit all bodies: Vuguentum de tutia is in much use. You
may use these compositions if you will, or you may frame unto your selves, of
sarcoticall simples, such compositions as you shall think most fit for your
purpose.

But let me warn you, Conditions to be observed in applying of Desiccatives.
that your Incarnatives must not exceed the first degree in drying: yet seeing
there is a latitude in this degree, for some are mild, some more harsh; you
are to apply them according to the constitution of the party, soft
constitution, milder driers are required to engender soft flesh: but if a party
be offered to you to be cured, who has a firm and dry flesh, more strong
desiccatives are to be applied. If the ulcer be in a place not so fleshy, as in
the joints, the beginning or tail of the muscules, then your desiccatives must
be forcible. Last of all, if the ulcer be large and moist, more strong
desiccatives are to be used in it than in small and not very moistulcers.

When you go about your compositions of Incarnatives for ulcers, observe these
rules: The first is, that they be neither too soft, nor two hard; for if they
be hard, the weak part cannot easily take benefit of them; if they be too
liquid, the heat of the part will cause them to spread, and fall from the ulcer:
besides these are apt to engender spungeous flesh.

The second is, that they be smooth, and equal: otherwise they will cause
pain in the part.

Of skinning medicaments.
The ulcer being filled with good and laudable flesh, now are you to skin the
part ulcerate. Nature in the womb does frame first the skin, but it being
afterward lost by any accident, she cannot repair it any more lacking seminall
matter: wherefore here, there is need of the help of Art to supply this defect.
This is done by hardening and thickening the upper part of the flesh
regenerate, until it be able to supply the office of the skin.

The Epuloticall medicaments which bring this to pass, must be, I. Cooling,
for so the thin parts are wrung out, and the thick parts are brought together,
as we may see in the ice.

II. They must be drying, for these consume the thin parts; so the hands of
Sailors, and Felt-makers, become dry and hard. Then a Cicatrix is nothing else,
What a Cicatrix is.
but flesh thickened, dried and made callous.

The qualities of Epuloticall medicaments
These medicaments ought to be drying in the third degree: for incarnatives are
dry in the first degree, because they only are to dry the excrements, which are
superfluous in the generation of flesh. Glutinative medicaments are dry in the
second degree: for they are not only to dry the excrements, but whatsoever
else flows to the part, although it be alimentary. But Cicatrizing
medicaments are dry in the third degree: for these are too dry not only
excrements, and what flows from other parts; but the natural humidity of the
part it self also. But Cathereticall or corrosive medicaments are drying in
the fourth degree: for these consume not only the excrements, and that which
flows to the part, and the natural humidity of the superficies of the part;
The differences of epuloticall medicaments.
These Epuloticall medicaments are in the like manner simple or co^pound.

The Simple are these.
Aes ustum, Lead made to powder, the Amalgama of Lead and Quicksilver beat to
powder. When you would make this melt two ounces of Lead in a Crucible, then
take it from the fire, and put to it an ounce and a half of, these will
incorporate together: when the mass is cold you may beat it to a powder. The
Pumick-stone, and Cuttellbones calcined, Stags-horne calcined white, all Bones
well calcined, the dead of Vitrioll after the spirit is drawn, well washed and
dried; it is called by the Chemists, Henricus Rubeus, and indeed it is a potent
desiccative. Talk powdered is good; to drive it into powder, you must rub it
upon a broad file somewhat fine, and then searce it; otherwise you shall hardly
do it. Terra sigillata, Bole-Armeniack, Umber, are good; and unslaked Lime,
well washed and dried, Alabaster beat to powder, Minium, Litharge, Cerusses,
Calaminaris, Tutia, the Regulus of Antimonie, Crocus Martis, Gales,
Pomegranate-flowers and rindes, the Comfrey roots, Sandarach of the Grecians,
Egge-shels calcined, the roots of Tormentill and Bistort, Swines-grease, Deeres
and Sheep-suet.

Skinning Compound medicaments.
Sundry very effectual medicaments may be made of the aforesaid Simples;
wherewith I mean not to burden you at this present, only I will commend unto
you one of Fallopius, and another of my own. That of Fallopius is thus
described, ol. ros. and ol. ompliacin. an vj. ol. myrtin. and unguent. popul.
an. iij. fol. plantag. and solan. hortens. incis. an. man. 2. Bulliant ista ad
consumpt. succorum ac colentur: colaturae add cerae iiij. Spatha liguea
misceuntur: Quum incipiunt frigere add, lytharg. aurivel argenti vj. cerussae
ij. tutiae praparat. ij. plumbicalcinati i ss. Ducantur ista in mortarie
plumbee per hor. 2. The ingredients do show what is to be thought of this
medicament. That which I use is this, sevi evilli lib. ss. axung. porc. iij,
cera, vernicis, colophon. an. ij. liquescant istasimul. Amotis ab igne ac
coeuntibus add, litharg. auri, cris usti, tutiae praeparat. Henrici rub. an.
ss, calaminaris, j. fiat ceratumexl.a. You have in the shops Diapalma,
Emplastrum de minio, Vnguentum comitissae, Desiccativum rubeum, and Emplastrum
contra rupturam Fernelii. Now seeing amongst these, some do more weakly, some
more strongly dry, the gentlest are to be applied to tender and moist bodies,
but the strongest to solid and hard bodies: wherefore neither are mild
skinners to be applied to the bodies of clownes, and artificers; nor strong to
the bodies of children, and dainty women: to these use Emplastrum album coctum.
Before I conclude this Point, two things are to be set down: the first is,
when these Epi^oticall means are to be applied. Secondly, how they are to be
applied.

As for the first, they are to be applied before the flesh be even with the
skin, according to Galen 13. method. cap. 5. otherwise the cicatrix will be
higher than the natulrall skin, which will cause deformity: wherefore they are
to be applied while there is some cavity.

As for the second, seeing always in skinning there is left a greater cavity
in the middle, than about the brims of the ulcer, stronger desiccatives are to
be applied to the brims, but milder to the middle, that the flesh be not too
soon dried. Wherefore powders and cerots are to be applied to the brims, but
only cerots or unguents to the middle. When you have cicatrized an ulcer by
methodiall proceeding, there be some persons, who will not rest so contented,
as Ladies, who make much of their skins, and whores, who gain much by theirs;
but will desire to have the Cicatrix made by any means somewhat beautiful to
the eye. I will furnish you with two medicaments, that you may be the more
enabled to fulfill their defires.

The first is this, unguent. rosat. Mesuis j. ol. de Been. ij, talci pulv. iij.
fiat li^ementum.

The second make thus, Axung. porc. aqua furum fabar. lotae j. spermatis ceti,
ij, ol. amygdal. dule. i ss. talcipreparati ij ss. fiat linementum.

Every night a little before bedtime anoint the Cicatrix with some of either
of these linements, and apply a soft linen rag moistened with the same.

LECT. VII. Of the curing of a plain and hollow ulcor, being Simple.
HAving passed through the ten points whereof I intended to speak, before I was
to meddle with the curing of any particular ulcer, now it is time to deseend to
the setting down the method of curing of ulcers in particular. I would have
you to call to remembrance the material differences of ulcers delivered by me
in the third Chapter, which were taken either from the nature and constitution
of an ulcer, or from the parts affected: from the nature of the ulcer I deduced
two sorts of them: some I called simple, some compounded. Now the simple ulcer
is to be accounted such an one, as has neither a disease, cause, or symptom
annexed to it, or complicate, besides the solution of unity caused by crosion.
Of these simple ulcers there are two kinds: for some are plain, and equal to
the natural skin, wherein only the Cuticula and Cutis are lost. Galen. lib. 3.
meth. c. 3.
Some are hollow, cav^, wherein besides the Cuticula and the Cutis, a part of
the flesh is lost. It is not needful severally to set down the curation of
ulcur planum, or aequale, a plain, or even ulcer; because in prosecuting the
indications of curing of ulcur cavum, a hollow ulcer, I must set down the
means of curing a plain one: for this is contained as a part in the other.

Seeing then there are two affections in a hollow ulcer, Indications of curing
an hollow ulcer.
to wit, solution of unity; and cavitie, three scopes of curing offer
themselves, unition, incarnation, and cicatrization. Wherefore if the quittour
be white, smooth, Secundum. Gal. comm. ult lib. Prognost. 10.
small in quantity, reasonable thick, and not evil smelling: If besides the
ulcer it self be red, and sensible, then we may go about to gender flesh, by
applying sarcoticall medicaments: But by the contrary, if the Pu^ be black,
uneven, grumous, rough and stinking, and if the ulcer it self be not red and
sensible, the ulcer cannot be incarnate, before it be prepared by suppuratives
and mundificatives. Excrements in ulcers.
Besides Pu^ which is reasonable thick, three sorts of excrements appear in
ulcers.

The first is thin, watrish, Ichor. The second is thin too, Sanies, or Virus.
The third is very thick and glutinous, Sordes.

Now the excrements which are thin moysten the part ulcerate, that it cannot
sufficiently discharge it self by breathing out the humiditie. Wherefore
Desiccatives are to be used to consume this superfluous moisture: but the
excrements which are thick cleave to the part, and hinder the addition of
flesh. After Mundisication, Incarnation
These are met withal by abstersives or mundificatives. The ulcer being
prepared by suppuratives and mundificatives, you are to engender flesh by
incanating medicaments. Two causes of the sleshingen (...).
There are two causes of this flesh which is to be procured: 1. Is the
efficient cause: This is nature it self not only of the whole body; but of
the part it self also, which is called Temperies, the natural temperature or
constitution of it: whereby it attracteth, concocteth, applies and
assimilateth the nourishment to it self. 2. Is the material cause: this is
sincere and pure blood. If the part ulcerate enjoy such, then nothing remains
but to maintain it: If the blood be not pure, ^hen it is to be altered, if it
be too hot it is to be cooled, if too cold it is to be warmed, if it be too
thin it is to be thickened, if it be too thick it is to be attenuate; if there
be too great plenty of it, it is to be diminished; if it be too little, then
it is to be increased by convenient order of diet.

The Indications of curing a simple ulcer.
To come necrer to the curarion of a simple ulcer: First, we must discreetly
order those things which are called not natural: seeing a convenient diet
preserves and maintains the good constitution of the whole body, and
temperature of the part: Diet.
Wherefore all those meats and drink which make the blood too hot, too sharp,
too thin, or too thick, are to be shunned, and those only to be permitted
which afford good juice, and are of easy concoction, especially if the
diseased party be tender and weak. Besides this they must be taken
moderately, and at convenient times. The part it self must be kept quiet:
Quietness.
for motion heateth the part. Care also is to be had of sleeping and watching:
for as watching dries the body, and consumes superfluous humiditie, so
sleeping moysteneth the parts; but those chiefly which are nervous or sinewie,
as membranes, tendons, ligaments. If then the ulcer be humid, enjoyne watching;
if it be dry, command sleeping. As concerning vacuation of the excrements, let
it be appointed that they may answer in quantity the food which the diseased
party takes. If he prove costive, either minister unto him a glyster, or give
him an ounce of Electuarium lenitivum in chicken broth. As perturbations of the
mind change the state of the whole body, so the tranquillity of it
maintains the same. A special care is to be had of the air; for it
wonderfully preserves the temperature of the part. Southerly and Northerly
winds or not fit for ulcers: for as the first moysteneth and heateth, so the
second does much cool and dry: but cold is an enemy to ulcers. So it is
observed that the air in Angieu is hurtful to ulcers in the legs, but in
Paris good. So in Pise and Ferrara it is hurtful; but in Florence wholesome.
Prognostics.
As for the prognostics of simple ulcers: If I should set down any, you might
justly think I did abuse the time: for there is none so simple, who may not
gather out of the very denomination of them, that they are most easy to be
cured, and that great skill is not required to compass the same: only let me
give you warning that the cure may be either more easy, or hard, according to
the nature of the part ulcerate, and the diet of the patient. So simple ulcers
are more easily cured in a fleshy part, than in the joint or a nervous part;
for in these stronger desiccatives are required, and in them the natural heat
is not so powerful to make use of the medicaments applied. In like manner a
simple ulcer is more easily cured in the body of a temperate person, than it is
in the body of one given to deboshry. Having set down the right use of the
things not natural, as diet, sleeping and watching, evacuation of the
excrements, the perturbations of the mind and air, I am to deliver unto you
some local medicaments for the accomplishing of the curation of these ulcers,
according to the general indications of curing set down in the fifth Chapter.

As for the digesting, mundifying, and incarnating of a simple ulcer if it be
hollow, Digesting, Mundifying, Incarnating.
these intentions and scopes shall be performed by the application of my
Basilicum: The description of it is this: Cera and resin. an. vj. picis navalis
iiij. gummi Elemni ij. Ol. Olivar. v. and semiss. vernicis clare iiij.
Seviovill. ij. Terebinth. iiss. Olib. mirrh. pultae an j. fiat unguentum ex l.
a. If you make trial of this you shall find it not a little better than the
ordinary two bearing this name, to wit, Basilicum magnum and parvum: If an
hollow simple ulcer prove sordid, mingle with an ounce of this my Basilicum two
scuruples of the cathereticall power made of Precipitate and Allom calcined: or
if you apply Paracelsus mundificative tempered with the same, you shall happily
mundifie it; but if a plain or equal ulcer be unclean, the yellow Turbith or
Precipitate washed, besprinckled, and covered with a pleadget of lint will
serve. Above these medicaments apply Diapalma cum succis, and above this a
double cloth moystened in red astringe wine, having some Allome dissolved in
it. If you be in the country, apply to the parts adjacent to the ulcer, clouts
moystened in the juyces of cooling and astringent herbs, as Plantane, Garden
Nightshade, Knot-grasse, Purselaine: If you a^bint these parts with:
Triapharmacum, and Vuguentum populeam mingled to gether, you shall prevent
fluxion and instammation.

When you have filled an hollow simple ulcer with flesh, Cicatrization.
nothing remains but to cover it. Now the cover of the flesh is the skin it
self: and as the flesh lost is to be repaired, so that which covers it. But
seeing the skin is framed in the womb of a seminall matter, it being lost it
cannot be restored by reason of the defects of matter: Wherefore we must find
out another cover. This cover is called by Artists Cicatrix: This is nothing
else but the uppermost Superficies of the flesh so dried, that it does
represent the skin. And as in ingendring of good flesh in the ulcer, laudable
blood was the material cause of it, so good flesh is the material cause of
the Cicatrix. How the Cicatrix is procured.


This Cicatrix is procured by three means, by nature it self, the air, and
epuloticall medicament.



or superstitious, Epuloticall medicaments.
or both. Seeing then the case so stands, I will only commend unto you three
medicaments fit for ^kinning of simple ulcers: The first is, Diapalma
cumsuccis. The second my Epuloticum, which I described in my former Lecture.
The third shall be Heuruius Sparadrop. The description of it is this, taken out
of his Method to Practice Lib. 1. page 81. of the Leyden edition. ol. omphacin.
and axung. porcin. an. iij. lythargyr. auri vel argent. iiij. cerussae j. Goq.
ista lento igne ad emplastri consistentiam: tum: add cerae, picis an. i ss.
colophon. ij. plumbi pulverizati i ss. fiat emplast. see. art. Sparadrops made
of this, not only simple ulcers, but parts of the body excoriat by reason of
long lying in bed caused of weakness brought by chronicall diseases.

LECT. VIII. Of the Compound, but milder ulcers, in general
IN my former Lecture, I set down what did belong to the curation of simple
ulcers, as well plain, as cave or hollow, wherein no other offense besides the
loss of the skin and flesh is found. Hereafter I am in like manner to
discourse of ulcers compounded, What a compound ulcer is.
wherein besides solution of unity, caused by erosion, there is somewhat else
that hinders the consolidation of the ulcerated part.

The differences of compound ulcers.
These compounded ulcers are either of the milder sort, or else malign. Those
of the milder sort, have annexed either a disease, or a cause, or symptoms,
which hinder the Surgeon from going about the unition of the part ulcerate.
Diseases complicate with ulcers.
Sundry diseases in the body of man may keep ulcers from healing: some from
corrupting the humors, as the leprosy and pox. I mean the French: some
hindering of laudable blood in sufficient quantity to be sent, as Pthysis, and
a Hectic f^ver: some by sending too much waterish humidity with blood, hinder
the unition of the part ulcerated. If ulcers in such persons be presented to
you to be cured, you are seriously to ponder in your mind, how hard a task is
put upon you, if any of the former diseases be complicat with the ulcers, if
you only except the French Pox in a reasonable strong body: but if the body of
one troubled with the French Pox be extenuate much, then permit the cure of him
also amongst the rest, to the charge of such as are only (...), or citizens of
the world, having no permanent habitation; and resting contented at the first
with half of the bargain made for the cure, willingly, although nor honestly,
commit the second payment to the arbitration of fortune. They during their life
time, continuing scandals to Art and Artists, it is strange, if at the hour of
their death, their consciences for the present seared, grow not tender, and
fearfully accuse them. Seeing the practice of Physic and Surgery are
severed within the Liberties of the city of London, I hold it to be the safest
course for you to leave the cure of the diseases to learned Physicians, and to
assume only to your selves, the methodicall dressing of the ulcers: for so the
whole discredit, (if any redound) will fall to the Physicians share, who cured
not the grief, the only stay of the curing of the ulcer. This is my advice,
if an ulcer complicat with a dangerous disease, come at any time to your
handling: (It is not your desire (I know) that I should set down the manner of
curing of any inward disease: for then I should be bu^ie with my siccle in the
harvest fields of other men) that then in this case, you have recourse unto
some Author, who has written most learnedly of the manner of curing that
disease which is annexed to the ulcer, and follow his indications in dealing
with the disease, if you have not the opportunity of a Physician, whose advice
you may follow.

Authors to be followed in curing the French Pox.
In the cure of the French Pox, if you int end to use the unction, be directed
by Ambrese Parrey, or Master Clowes, who, while he lived, was a famous member
of this Company If you resolve to insist the kingly, and cleanly way of curing
this disease by diet, then follow renowned Fallopius or Capivaccius. There is a
Volume in foli^ wherein are contained the monuments of such as have written of
this disease, according to the talent of skill granted unto them: I rather
would have you acquainted with these, than to range much, and imitate the
swallow, which flies much, but prays only upon flies.

As concerning the Dropsy, the Cough of the Lungs, the Hectic fever, or
Maras^^us, the extenuation of the body: if these being complicat with an ulcer,
hinder the curation of it, have recourse to the learned Works of the famous
modern Writer, Daniel Sennertus, the late Professor of Physic in Wittenberg,
who has couched in his learned books, what almost can be spoken, either by
Galenists, or Chemists, concerning these and other diseases. The Plagiary Barow
in his Method of Physic, and Bruel, are but like unto rotten reeds, appointed
for the ruin of impotent, and lame persons, if they rely upon them.

Of the causes annexed.
I will descend to the causes hindering the cure of an ulcer. These are two,
the humors that flow, and the distemperature of the part.

As for the humor, How causes in flowing are to be met withal.
if it be in flowing, then you are to meet with it with the ordering the things
called, not natural; as air, meat and drink, sleeping and watching,
evacuation and such like, and by purging of the humor offending: whereof I
spoke sufficiently in the doctrine concerning Tumors. How humors flowing are
removed. Gal. 4. method. 2.
If it has flowed to the part, and be impacted in it, then it is to be removed
by three means: to wit, by drying, expressing, and removing of the causes of
the fluxion.

You shall dry the humor, if you use sarcoticall medicaments, Aesustum, the
Pumickstone calcined, Calaminaris, Borax, the powders of Tormentill, Bistorts,
Comfrey, and such like; whereof I have spoken sufficiently before: yet Nunquam
satis dicitur quod nunquam satis discitur, a thing remarkable can never be too
much pointed at; so fluxible and gliding are the objects of our memory.

You shall express the humors: First,

Secondly, by rolling the ulcer, as Hippocrates prescribes in his Treatise of
Fractures, that it begin about the ulcer, using so many revolutions, or
windings of the rowler, as are fit, and ending in the sound part.

As for the causes of fluxion they are three; transmission, Galen. 2. de
differ. feb. 11. and 12. method. 3, 4, 5.
A part sends either moved by the superfluity of the humor, or urged by the
offending quality, or both. If the humor offend in quantity abounding, then it
is to be abated by phlebotomie, purging, slender diet, and such means as have
been delivered by me in the Treatise of Tumors, to lessen plenitude, or
Plethora, the signs whereof I delivered there also, so that I need not to
repeat them here. If the humor offend in quality, urging and pricking the part
to the expulsion of it, as the liver, which being tainted with the French Pox,
sends the humor to the groynes, yard, matrix, the fundament and throat. When
we have observed and noted the quality and nature of the humor, then we are
to go about the expulsion, or alteration of it, or both.

If the humor offend both in quantity and quality, then are we to use both
purging and altering. Now to find out the humors in quality offending, seeing
I have set down their pathognomonicall, and proper fignes, when I discoursed
of every special Turnor, I will remit you, at this time, to the places where
they were set down. If humors do flow by reason of the attraction of the
part; it is procured either by the heat, or the pain of the part. Gal. 4.
meth. 2. and 13. meth. 13.
If a humor flow to the ulcer, neither being sent from a part, nor received by
a part; but because the humor it self is eliquat, either by the vehement
perturbations of the mind, or an aguish constitution, or the exhibition of an
eradicative, or strong medicament: then the tranquillity of the mind is to be
procured, the aguish heat to be abated, and the exhibition of such medicaments
to be stayed. Having spoken of the fluxion of humors so much as is fit for our
present purpose, now I am to touch briefly the other cause of mild, yet
compound ulcers: to wit, the distemperature of the part.

The distemperature of the part.
The single distemperatures are in number four: to wit, toodry, too moist, too
hot, too cold. A dry distemperature is found out by these signs: the color of
the ulcerate part is ill-favored, not lively, little or no matter flows from
it, in touching it seems hard and dry.

This distemperature is removed by two means: First, by drawing out the
natural humidity to the part affected, by opening the passages, which before
by reason of immoderate dryness were drawn together. In this case friction is
excellent.

Secondly, dryness is removed by the application of humecting medicaments. Two
such are commended by the Ancients, pure Spring Water, and Water and Oil
mingled together.

As for the use of Spring or River-water, it must be applied luke warm, not
very hot; for if it be very hot, it discusseth; because the humors having been
attenuate by it, they are turned into vapors, and so resolved: but if it be
temperately hot, and the part fomented by it, it moisteneth.

The second medicament composed of Water and Oil, by the Ancients is called
(...). The ulcerate part immoderately dry, is to be fomented with this
medicament warm: Take either two parts of Water, and one of Oil, or equal;
warm them in a single Viall-glasse, then shake them well together, that they
may be mingled, and apply the medicament. This is a convenient Topic in the
winter, for although warm water warmeth the part during the time of
fomentation, yet after fomentation it leaves the part cold, because it drew
out the heat to the Superficies of the body: wherefore oil is excellent, for
it stops the pores and keeps in the heat. These two medicaments are to be
applied to the ulcerate part by ^^upes, spunges, or pledgets.

An observation.
One thing you are to look unto you, and to provide before fomentation, that
the body of the party unto which they are to be applied be neither
plethorick, for then too much moisture may be attracted; nor cacochymicall,
for then corrupt humors may be drawn, both which will hinder the curation of
the ulcer: use therefore first of all phlebotomie, or purgation, according as
you shall see cause.

Quest.
But you may not without cause ask, When fomentation Quefl. is to be left?

Answ.
I answer, that two things shall declare unto you the period of fomenting: the
first is the substance of the part, the second is the color: wherefore when
you see the part a little tumified, soft and moist, and of a ruddy color,
desist from fomentation, otherwise the humor attracted will be discussed.

The curation of a moist distemperature.
If a moist distemperature has possessed the part, then the flesh of the part
will be moist, spungeous flesh will be apt to grow, and plenty of excrements
will flow from the ulcer: In this case strong Desiccatives, or Sarcoticks
mingled with Basilicum aureum, or Arcaeasliniment are to be used: with an ounce
of any of these unguents you may use one dram and an half of these
Desiccatives: such are the Regulus of Antimony, Lead calcined, Calaminaris,
Bones and Horns calcined, the powder of the root of Iris, Mastick, Olibanum,
and such like. Aes ustum, the Pumick stone calcined, and Henricus rubeus are
excellent. The curation of n hot distemperature.
If the part be distempered with heat, then the part ulcerate will be
somewhat tumified, hard and red, and befides the relation of the diseased
party, your own feeling will assure you. In this case use Aqua calcis viva,
so called; but more properly Lixivium calcis vive, wherein some litharge of
silver has been boiled: you may use also snow water, wherein some of your
Vitriolum album or white Copperas has beened dissolved: In a quart of Apsame
water dissolve two drams of Roman Vitri^l, you shall have a water of the color
of a light Emerauld color fit for your purpose. In a pint of Plantan^^ water
dissolve two drams of ordinary Vitriol or Allome, and this also is a fit
medicament. Let me acquaint you with one thing, that in Redriffe a Copperas is
made of Mars or Iron, which is most sit in the cure not only of ordinary
ulcers, but of those also which are in the eyes, bladder, throat, and the
Intestinum rectum. Make trial as I have done, and you shall find that true
which I say. You see how plain I am with you concealing nothing, which may
purchase unto you credit and gain.

The curation of a cold distemperature.
If cold distemper the part, which you shall discern by its color, hardness,
sense of the patient, and your own feeling, then apply to the ulcerate part
Basilicum magnum, my Basilicum, Arcaeas his liniment upon pledgets, and above
these Diachyl^n cum gummis, Emplastrum de mucilaginibus, or Paracelsus his
Stictick Emplaster. But before the application of these, foment the part with,
a fomentation made of Sack and March-Beere, wherein Calamint, Centorie,
Wormwood, Spike, Camomil, Tansey, Scordium, Rue, and Bay Leaves have been
infused and boiled.

Of an ulcer witlrasymprome.
Now of all other, Pain is the chiefest: for first, pain by attraction
brings much moisture to the part, and so hinders the curation: Of pain.
Secondly, it inflameth the parts: Thirdly, it causes watching, fainting, and
oftentimes convulsions. How it is ceased.
Pain is removed two manner of ways: First, by raking away the cause of
pain, which is affluxion of humors: How this is to be done we have spoken
already: Secondly, by application of Anodine medicaments. These ought to be
temperately hot, and subtle. Simples of this kind are the waters of warm
baths, Camomil, Dill, Millet, Linseed, Fenugreeke, the marish Mallow, the pulp
of Cassia, Raisins, sweet Apples, and Turnips, with a little Saffron they are
effectual, Milk, Butter, Oesypum, or the greasiness of wool, Sapa, new wine
boiled to the third part, Swines, Hens, and Man's grease, the fat of Ecles and
Calves, Oil of Eggs, Earth-wormes, Foxes, Swallows, Rue and Elder: the oil
of Wax, and Sallet oil, wherein Sulphurvivum has been boiled, are excellent
in painful ulcers of the joints, Oil of Camomil, Dill, and Roses: Of these
you may frame unto your selves compositions, as occasion shall require. Take
this for an example; Farin. hord. Milis, Furfur. an. ij. Lact. recent. lb. ss.
coq. ad consistentiam cataplasmatis, tumadde Pulp. Cass. and Passul. major. an.
vj. Pulp. Pomor. redol. j. Ol. of. Lumbric. aneth. Cam^wil. and Overum an. j.
O^sypi j ss. Croci j. Make a Caraplasme. Sometimes the pain will be so great
that you shall be enforced to use narcoticall medicaments: Narcoticall
medicaments.
The simples are Opium, Henbane, Hemlock, the Apple of Peru, Mandrake: Of these
adding white Bread crumbs, Milk and Saffron, you may make Pultices: I will set
one down as an example, after which you may frame others: Lact. rocent. lb.
ss. Mic. pax. albiss. iiij. Fol. Hyosciami, Solani, Cicut. Contus. an. man. 1.
(...) ista ad cataplaswatis consistentiam: tum add ung^^^. popul. ij. Dress
the ulcer with Plantane water, wherein some Allome is dissolved, or Roman
Vitriol. Then apply Diap^^^^cumsuccis, and above it this Cataplasine. Dress
this ulcer at the least morning and evening until the pain be gone.

LECT. IX. Of the Differences of the milder sort of compound ulcers, and first
of a sinewous ulcer without any callositie.
HAving discoursed in my former Lecture of those things which make the milder
sort of ulcers to be accounted compound, to wit, a sickness, cause, or
symptom complicate with an ulcer. In this Lecture I will set down the
differences of milder ulcers, and the curation of them. These differences are
taken either from the figure or adjuncts: from the figure these. Of the milder
compound ulcers some are plain, some sinewous. I call that a plain ulcer,
wherein the skin is eroded, and the subjacent flesh, and the whole ulcer is
presented to the sight, being bare and uncovered. No compound ulcer is to be
accounted of an easy curation: because both skill and experience are required
in performing this.

And although these plain ulcers be subject wholly to the sight, yet let no
man imagine that all of them are of equal facility to be cured; for according
to the nature of the grief, the quality of the cause, and the invasion of the
symptoms, the ulcers with the which these things are complicate, are either of
more easy or difficult curation. A plain compound ulcer has three scopes in
curation of it: for first, Indications of ^uring a plain compound ulcer.
that must be removed which makes it compound, whether it be a disease, cause,
or symptom: secondly, that which is by erosion lost must be repaired: and
thirdly, the part must be cicatrized: How all these three indications are
performed, I have set down at large in the former chapter, so that I need not
to repeat any thing.

A sinewous ulcer. Sinus.
Vleus sinuosum, or a sinewous ulcer, I call that which is like to a
Cony-burrow; for sinus, or sinuositie, is a cavitie or hollownesse of parts
under the skin, separate by afflux of an eroding humor, which according to
nature were united. There be two causes of these sinuous ulcers, to wit, The
causes of it.
Apostemes lying deep along time, or not timely opened, although they be not
so deep: and wounds not well cured: for quittour lurking a long time, either
in a tumor suppurate, or in a deep wound not well cleansed, must needs
corrupt and get a sharp quality, which makes to it self these cavities,
which are not so easily filled with flesh and united: for unto the part
affected, now weakened, excrementitious humors flow, not only from the parts
adjacent, but from the whole body also, which make the ulcer hard to be cured.
These burrowes are found out by probes of silver, or lead, and wax-candles: If
there be more orifices than one, by injections. They sometimes are
superficial, Their figures.
sometimes deep, sometimes straight, sometimes oblique, sometimes there is but
one caverne, sometimes there be more.

The differences of sinuous ulcers.
Of these sinuous or cuniculous ulcers, some have either hardness nor
callositie, such I will term Vlcera cavernosa, hollow ulcers; some have both
hardness and callositie, these are termed Fistulae. The manner of curing
cavernous ulcers without opening.
First then I will show you how cavernous ulcers are to be cured, and then how
Fistula's. There are two ways of curing of a cavernous ulcer: the first is by
injection of medicaments: the second is by opening and dressing, according to
Art. If you go about to cure such an ulcer by medicaments, without opening,
then two scopes offer themselves, to wit, the filling of the cavitie with
flesh, and the agglutination of the parts disjoined. The Incarnatives must be
drying without erosion, and the Glutinatives must have astriction, besides
desiccation. Both these intentions you may perform with the injection of this
medicament following, Aq. decoct. hord. lb j. Mollis rosat. iij. Sarcocoll.
ijss. Mirrh. Thur. an. ij. Rad. Tormentill. Local medicaments.
Bistort. Symphyt. a^. jss. Balaust. j. Baccar myrt. ijss. Sumach, jss. Vini
od^rifer. vj. Bulliant ad consumptionem tres parts, ac coletur decoctum, cui
add Spirit. vini j. If you perceive that the ulcer is not sufficiently
mundified, which you may conjecture if the quittour be either stinking,
reddish, pale, blackish, or thin and warrish; then apply this medicament: Vini
in quo infusa fint marrhubium album, Centaurium minus, Absynthium, Flores
Hyperici, and Carduus Benedictus lb. ss. Vnguenti Aegyptiaci ij. Mol ros. ss.
misc. inject this. You can hardly devise more effectual medicaments than these
are for agglutination of a cavernous ulcer: The manner of dressing.
Yet whosoever shall apply them, not dressing and binding the ulcer
artificially, shall hardly cure any such ulcer: wherefore I think expedient
that I show you the way of dressing: First, lay upon the whole process of the
cavitie Diapalma cum succis, or, Emplastrum album coctum, or Emplastrum contra
rupturam: Then inject your medicament warm. Thirdly, in the orifice put in a
leaden tent, or pipe; but short, hollow, wider in the upper than lower part,
and having the brims of the upper part turned, that it may be kept from
slipping in, shut the orifice and the upper part of the tent or pipe with an
emplaster; let it be one of those named before: the emplaster must be snipt,
that it may give way to the quittour which flows out of the cavitie: above
the emplaster apply a piece of a sponge, which must be soft, moystned with the
medicament with the which you dress the ulcer, and wrung out: for the sponge
sucketh into it self the quittour, keeps the brims of the orifice dry, and
preserves them from excoriations: above the sponge lay a pledget of tow: the
lower cavitie, or from the bottom of the ulcer to the orifice it must be
bonistered. Above all lay a double soft linen cloth. Begin your rolling at the
bottom, where it must be somewhat strait, to bring the sides of the ulcer
together, both to express the quittour, and to procure agglutination, but let
it cause no pain; for it would distemper the part: toward the orifice the
rolling must be somewhat slack, that the quittour may have way to issue out.
Every third day (if much matter does not flow) dress it, loose first the
rowler, the turnings whereof are about the orifice, take away the sponge and
emplaster; first, that you may come to cleanse the ulcer; secondly, that you
may make trial whether nature does go about to agglutinate the parts: which
you shall discern, Signs of agglutination.
if the excrementitious matter abate, be laudable in color and consistence,
and have no ill smell, and if the cavitie be without pain, and without any
remarkable tumor: By the contrary, if the quittour be plentiful, ill-coloured
and stinking, if the cavitie be painful, and a conspicuous tumor appear, you
may persuade your selves that no unition is procured. Dress the ulcer
according to this manner, until perfect agglutination be caused, which you
shall know by the signs aforesaid going before, if no quittour or very little
appear in the orifice, if the cavitie be equal without tumor, and no pain
be felt: when you perceive these signs, then address your selves for the
cicatrizing of the ulcer. If after a dressing or two, thin gleeting matter
appear, yet despair not; for often times such matter is wrung out of the
parts by reason of the medicament drying: the nature of the part, as being
nervous, membranous, or glandulous; or lastly, by compressing of the ulcer by
bolstering and rolling. As for the emplaster applied to the cavitie it self,
it is to be renewed when it is defiled with quittour, or leaves cleaving.
Dress the ulcer as seldom as you can, Why such an ulcer is not to be dressed
often.
contrary to the practice of Empyricks; for often dressing does give way to
cold air, which is hurtful to ulcers, and hinders unition. Thus you may
proceed in curing of cavernous ulcers, if the excrementitious matter have way
to flow from them freely, which will be if the orifice be in a depending part,
or laterall, the cavitie or sinus being laterall also; for then, such a posture
may be appointed, as will further the evacuation of the matter: But if by
reason of other figures of the cavitie, the cavitie cannot discharge it self
of the filth of the ulcer, The manner of curing of these ulcers by opening.
then until this impediment be removed, no expurgation, incarnation, or
agglutination can be expected: wherefore way is to be made by incision or
caustic.

In what cases you are to use these means.
This you must do, first, if the cavitie be lower than the orifice, either
directly or obliquely; but not very deep. Secondly, if it go very deep
also, as in fistula's, and such ulcers penetrating in the breast, where the
cavitie most commonly is lower than the orifice. Thirdly, if the hollownesse be
very broad. In these cases way must be made by these means for the matter,
that it may be expurged; otherwise if it be kept in, it will erode the parts
adjacent, and no incarnation or consolidation can be looked for. We may make
way for the quittour two manner of ways: first, by opening the lower end of
the sinus only; Secondly, by opening the whole cavitie.

When the ulcer is to be opened only in the depending part.
The first course we are to take, if the sinus be of an enorme business, or if
it be in a great joint; for great wounds in such joints are mortal, according
to Hippocrates: or if there be great vessels, nerves or tendons of muscules in
the way, which are like to bring fearful fluxes of blood, or lamenesse: which
things skill in the Anatomy will teach you. If none of these cases hinder you,
then it is the surest way to lay open the whole cavitie, which is the second
way. These two scopes we may attain unto by two means, to wit, by causticke
and incision.

When the caustic is to be used.
The causticke we are to use, first, if the party be timorous, and will not
admit section: Secondly, if the cavitie be in a part, wherein a great scarre
may cause deformity: Thirdly, if there be fear of a great flux of blood:
Fourthly, if the diseased party be sick and weak.

The manner of applying causticks.
If the causticke be to be applied, if the situation of the part wherein the
sinus is be in the upper side, then apply your Lapis infernalis: for it
corrodeth soonest, deepest, with less pain, and will not be so apt by
running and spreading to burn the parts adjacent, or to cause a greater
solution of unity than we intended. But if the sinus be in the lower fide, as
in the sole of the foot, or in a part very depending; then I advise you to use
the causticke made of strong soap lees, and unslaked lime, which will not run.
It is an ordinary practice of some to rub the part with the Causticke stone,
and when the part is mortified then to open it: First, this is not to be done,
but when the skin is very thin; besides this, this rubbing causes far
greater pain, than the application of it to the part being defended: Be ever
of this mind in your practice, to use the mildest means; the fruits which you
reap by so doing will be respect, love, credit and gain. When you have
perceived that the force of your corrosive medicament has mortified all to the
very cavitie, then procure the fall of the eschar, with the application either
of Dialthaea simplex, or Butter without salt: there is no substance comparable
to this in this purpose. When the eschar is gone then proceed in curing of the
ulcer, as has been said, by mundificative, incarnative, and cicatrizing
medicaments.

when Incision is to be used.
If the party be courageous and strong use incision: this is sooner performed,
has less pain, and sooner will be cured. When you have made incision, arm
dosils and pledgets with a medicament which strongly dries and mundifieth;
such is this: Take of Aloe Hepatica two drams, of black Rosin and Amber, of
each a dram and an half, of Mill-dust two drams, of unslaked Lime two drams
and an half; with this powder, and the white of an Egg, and the yolke beaten
together, make a medicament in consistence representing an unguent: then apply
the medicament to the Sinus incised, filling it well that the brims may be
kept asunder. Open not the sore till the end of the second day, at the least;
for this medicament will both dry the superfluour humiditie of the ulcer, and
will excellently digest it. Afterward dress the ulcer as the methodicall
indications of curing shall move.

Internal medicaments.
If you find these ulcers thus handled not to heal to your mind, then hold
your patient to the decoctions of Sarsaparilla, Guajacke, and the China root,
with the which mingle some of your most effectual Vulneraries, as Agrimonie,
S. John's woort, Sanicle, Avens, our Ladies mantle, Virga aurea, Salomons seal,
the roots of Comfrey, Tormentill, Bistort, Horehound, Borrage and Buglosse. I
will not conceal from you the description of a decoction, whereof I have made
often proof in ulcers of the breast, joints and belly: Sols. parill. vj. Rad.
Sassafrus jss. Scob. Guajac. iij. Eupator. Scahies Tussilugin. Sanicul. Hyper.
an. man. 1. Rad. Syn phyt. Tormentill. Bistort. an. ss. Rad. Borrag. Bugloss.
an. j. Passul. major. enucleatar. iij. Liquirit. ij. Infundantur infundenda per
noct. in aq. font. fervent. lb. xxiv. sequente die coquantur lento igne cum
reliquis ad consumpt. lb. viij. Bibat aeger singul. dieb. lb. iiij. hujus
decocti: Hauriat lb. ss. mane, ac tantundem hor. quarta pomeridiana: In prandio
bibat lb. j. ac tantundem in coena: Quum sitit superest lb. j. haurienda. The
simples of this composition may plead for the efficacy of it. Let him continue
the taking of this decoction for the space of 21. days: during which time he
is to use a spare diet, and to eat flesh affording a good juice, and of an
easy concoction. As for the local medicaments which are to be applied to the
ulcer, I have spoken of them already: too much repetition will breed loathing.

LECT. X. Of the palliative cure of a sinuous ulcer with callositie in general.
IN my last Lecture which I delivered from this place, the vacation from these
exercises being at hand, I spoke of a sinuous or hollow ulcer, without a
callositie or hardness of the inner Superficies of the parts disoyned: Now the
order of doctrine requires that I discourse of a sinuous ulcer, which has a
callositie in these same parts. In times past it has been accounted a
masterpiece in the practice of Chirurgerie to cure such: In so much that
Master Boovie the Counselors father, a brother of this Company while he
lived, dwelling in Tower-street, set up above his door a new sign with this
inscription; Here dwells one who can cure a Fistula: young Hall having
acquainted him with his fathers practice. And in truth not a small skill, or
ordinary proceeding is required to effect this matter: for the greatest part
of such an ulcer lies hid, and little is offered to the eye. Besides this,
ordinary means are for the most part here ineffectuall, and so magistrall
means are required. Wherefore I have diligently labored to couch in this my
discourse whatsoever can be required in the curing of such an ulcer, as you
shall perceive in my proceeding.

First then, I will deliver the general doctrine of this kind of ulcer: then
I will set down the manner of curing of such in some particular parts of the
body. A sinuous or hollow ulcer with a callositie or hardness in the inner
superficies of the parts disjoined and separated is called in Greek (...),
from the similitude which it has with the long and hollow windy instruments
of Musicians: in Latin it is called Fistula, and so in the English tongue for
this same cause.

The definition.
A Fistula then is a sinuous ulcer, narrow and long with callositie. Here you
are to observe, that a Fistula besides sinuositie, must have callositie and
narrowness. It happens most commonly, when apostemes having been opened, The
cause material.
the inner Superficies of the parts kept asunder by a sharp humor, become in
progress of time callous. The humor which causes this callositie must be
more astringent than sharp; for it rather tanneth the part by reason of its
acerbitie, than erodeth by reason of its acrimonie: besides this, Fistula's are
for the most part indolent, unless they end in parts very sensible, as
nerves, tendons, membranes and joints. Wherefore the Chemists will have this
humor to be the Salpeter of the little world, or man, separate from the
natural salt of the Balsame, or radical moisture of the body: that this salt
is cooling and anodine, the Practicers of Physic do bear witness: for in
burning fevers it is added to Juleps, which are appointed for cooling, and
asswaging of pain under the name of Sal prunellae: It does also, by reason of
its stipticitie unite the spirits, and stay the immoderate exhalation of them.

The signs.
The signs are taken either from the essence of a Fistula, or from the
accidents. Callositie then with a Fistula, or whistle-like figure, is the
pathognomonicall sign of a Fistula. The signs taken from the accidents are
twofold: for they are taken either from the quittour, or the manner of pain.
In a Fistula the quittour is ever virulent, ugly and stinking; as for the
manner of pain it is but small, unless it be by reason of the sensiblenesse
of the parts named by me before.

The differences.
As for the differences, or diverse kinds of Fistula's, I will only set down
those, which further either curation, or prediction. Let this then be the
first difference: Fistula's either go shallowly along under the skin, or
they pass deeper to the subjacent parts. Secondly, Fistula's end either in the
fleshy parts, or they pass to the bones, or to the cavities themselves.
Thirdly, some are straight, some crooked. Fourthly, some are single, some
manyfold, yet proceeding from one orifice. These are the material, or
profitable differences of Fistula's.

The signs of the differences.
Now follows that I speak of the signs of these differences. 1. Whether
there be more callous sinuofities than one, you may conjecture by the quantity
of the quittour; for if more copious quittour flow from a Fistula than can be
expected from one Sinus, it not passing to any remarkable cavitie, it is likely
that there are more than one. The changing also of the position of the body,
and compression of the part will show this; for the flowing of the matter
having ceased, if after the changing of the position of the whole body, or one
member, it run out again, it is probable that there are more sinuosities.
Moreover, if variety of quittour flow, it is an argument that sundry parts are
affected, and more sinuosities like to be. But to what parts the Fistula
passes, receive these signs: If it pass to the fleshy parts, the quittour
appears white, smooth and plentiful; besides this, the part whereon the end
of the probe stays seems soft. If it pass to a nerve, a fattie and oleous
matter does issue out, the motion which is caused by that sinew is impaired,
and the Fistula is more painful than others are; besides, the probe touching
the sinew, causes a pricking pain, with a certain numnesse. If the Fistula
pass to the veins and arteries, yet so that the coats of them be not eroded,
then the matter which it yields is like unto the lees of Claret wine; for
blood swearing through the coats of porosities of the vessels mingled with the
quittour, causes such a substance.

If the coat of a vein be corroded, blood issues thick, of a dark color,
and without quavering and leaping; but if the tunicles of an artery be
pierced, then the blood is redder, of a more bright color, and comes forth
with ejaculation. If a Fistula reach to the bone, that which the end of the
probe touches appears hard, and yields not to the probe, neither is any
pain felt. If the probe being pressed slip, no cariositie has seized upon the
bone; for a sound bone is smooth and slipperie: If the probe stay upon it
appearing smooth, it is disposed to cariositie; but if the bone appear
unequal and rough, then it is undoubtedly carious. Besides this, the quittour
which flows from a corrupt bone is thin, yellow, and ill-smelling. So much
then concerning the signs, which show us the diverse kinds of Fistula's.

Now let me deliver unto you some remarkable presages or predictions, touching
the curing of them, that you may become circumspect in undertaking the curation
of such as shall be presented to you. Let this then be the first:

No Fistula is of easy curation. First, of the Fistula, which is not so easy
a matter, as you shall find by practice no good can be done. Secondly, by
reason of the quality of the medicaments, which are able to remove the
callositie; for these must be sharp and biting, and so cause pain: from whence
come symptomaticall fevers, and fainting very often, especially in tender and
young bodies. And thirdly, by reason of the humor, which causes a Fistula,
which yields not to ordinary and vulgar medicaments. Let this be the second.

Membrana carnosa, or at the furthest than the membrane of the muscules, or
muscule subjacent, are more easily cured than those which pierce deeper; for
those by incision may easily be cured, but these not so.



The fourth: If a Fistula no passing further than the fleshy parts, be not of
a long continuance, and that in a young and a strong body, it affords good
hope of curing: Imagine the contrary event, if contrary circumstances be
accompanied.

Vena cava, and the Aorta descending and ascending.

Intestinum rectum, and the like, are carefully and mildly to be handled, by
reason of the symptoms which often ensue, as accidental fevers, Lipothimies,
loss of appetite and sleep: all which are apt to bring an extenuation unto
the whole body, and so to defraud the part of more than requisite nourishment,
without the which consolidation cannot be effected.



Spina be carious, shun the care; for these at the length bring an extenuation
of the body, the animal spirits not being with requisite plenty communicate to
the extremities of the body.

Fistula's in the joints are dangerous; for if great wounds of the joints, even
in bodies of a good habit, be pronounced by Hippocrates to be mortal: what
shall we deem of Fistula's in these parts, where besides the enorme
dilatation that must be procured in curation, there is of a necessity an ill
complexion of the body. Secondly, seeing the joints are framed of parts very
sensible, as tendons, nerves, membranes and ligaments, exceeding great pain
must be caused by the application of corrosive medicaments, without the which a
Fistula cannot be cured, and so the party exceedingly be troubled and
perplexed. Thirdly, seeing the joints are seated in depending parts, and are
not fleshy: and so as they are apt to receive humors attracted by pain, they
are less able to discuss the humors received, partly by reason of the
thickness of the membranes, partly by reason of the weakness of the natural
heat: who may not easily perceive the difficulty of curing of Fistula's in
these parts?



nature has been accustomed to discharge superfluities of the whole body, and
not painful, but rather slovenly or sluttish, are rather to be kept open than
cured; for they preserve the health of the body, and hinder the assault of
other diseases.

An H^storie.
I knew a Gentleman who had a Fistula in ano about 20. years, yet unknown to
his wife, who lived notwithstanding very healthful to the last period of his
life: having sent for me a few days before his death, he acquainted me with
it: having taken a view of it, and perceived that it was dry, and of a livid
color, I pronounced his end to be at hand, which accordingly fell out.

Indications of curing.
Now it is time to hasten to the setting down of the curation of Fistula's in
general. In the sixth Section of the Treatises ascribed to Hippocrates, there
is one of Fistula's: In it he does speak somewhat particularly of a Fistula in
ano, and of the curing of it by ligation. Whatsoever is delivered in that
Treatise, seems to be an exscription of notes out of his Adversaria or
Note-booke, rather than a deliberate or methodicall discourse of the subject.
Howsoever, it is to be embraced rather as a pledge and sign of his willing
mind to pleasure his posterity, than a patrimony to enrich the knowledge,
and further the practice of any one, who shall go about to cure any mean
Fistula. Peruse the Treatise, and you shall find me to speak a truth, if you
show your selves impartial censurers. Seeing I have delivered unto you in the
presages of Fistula's, that sometimes it is most expedient to leave some
Fistula's uncured, I must make mention of a twofold manner of curing of them:
The one shall be called palliative or cloaked; Two kinds of curation.
the other true and real. The first affords some consolation and ease to the
patient; but the second procures perfectest health. A palliative cure, I would
have you to understand, to be when sinuositie is inwardly dried for a time, and
the orifice seems to be shut up by a thin skin, until fresh and new
humiditie bedew the inward sinuositie, and open the orifice again. This kind
of curation is most fit to be used toward those, in whose bodies a Fistula
supplyeth the place of a fontanell, to discharge superfluous humors, which
nature turns out from the principal parts, for the preservation of the
health of the body.

You shall know this manner of curing to be used, if the party immediately
before the opening of the orifice find some distemperature, and afterward the
orifice being opened, ease. To compass this manner of cure three intentions
are required.

First, convenient diet must be observed: This is performed by feeding upon
such meats as are of easy concoction, and afford good juice, and in such
measure as Leonardus Lessius in his (...) prescribes, and Ludovicus Cornarus
observed from his constant to his decrepit age. They advise moderation both in
meat and drink. Patients now adays would think themselves hardly dealt with,
if they should be stinted every day to eat no more bread and meat than a
pound, and to drink no more drink than fourteen ounces. It is an easier
matter to satisfy nature, than the appetite.

Secondly, the body is to be purged not by any eradicative medicament, wherein
Scammonie, Ellebore, or Colocynth enters; but a purging diet, or a purging
Ale; I will deliver unto you a pattern of both. Let your purging diet be thus
dispensed: Sars. iij. Rad. Tormentillae, Bistortae, and Symphyti, an. j.
Polypod. querc. iij. Hermodactyl. fol. Sen. and Semin. Carthami, an. ij. Rhab.
j. Semin. Anisi, Coriandri, and faenicul. dulc. an. iiij. Glycyrrhiz. jss.
Infundantur infundanda in aq. font. fervent. lb. x. per noctem: deinde additis
reliquis lento igne coq. ad med. atque aromatizetur decoctum cinam. j. ac
coletur: Stumat ager mane. lb. ss. calid. hyeme, ac tantundem hor. quarta
pomeridiana. As for the purging Ale receive this description. Scob. Guajaci and
Sars. parill. an. iiij. Rad. Tormentill. Bistort. and Symphyti, an. jss.
Polypod. iij. Eupat. Sanicul. Alchymill. an. man. j. Fol. Sen. Hermodactyl. an.
v. Rhab. j. Semin. Anisi, Coriand. and Fenicul. dulc. an. vj. Glycyrrhiz. ij.
fiat ex omnibus pulvis crassiuscalus indendus sacculo lan^o rara texturae, qui
suspendatur in gallon. duobu^ Zythi non lupulati recentis and fortis. Let the
Patient begin to drink of this Ale the fourth day. He is to take half a pint
in the morning, and to sleep upon it; and so much about four a clock in the
afternoon. When either of these purgatives are ministered, let the Patient
about ten a clock in the forenoone take some broth without bread, made of a
Chicken, Mutton, or Veale, wherein Mallow, Parsley, Fennill, and Succorie
roots, with some Raisins, Prunes and Dates have been boiled. Let him dine on
the boiled meat; but sup with roast meat. The purging Ale is more convenient for
aged persons, than the decoction, and for such as have a weak stomach.

Thirdly, convenient local medicaments are to be applied, to further the
drying of the sinuositie, and skinning of the orifice. I will only set down
two injections for the first. The one is this: Take of Aqua calcis, wherein
some Litharge either of gold or silver has been boiled iij. o. and of the
Syrup of red Rose leaves dried, or of the Mirtill berries one ounce: mingle
these together. The other is this: Take of Plantane water iij. o. of Roman
Vitriol beat to powder, a dram and an half: let the Vitriol dissolve in the
water: inject these medicaments warm; apply to the orifice a pledget of lint
wet in either of these medicaments, and above the lint Diapalma cum suceis.
Dress the Fistula every other day only, unless the quittour which flows
from the Fistula be plentiful. So you have the palliative cure of a Fistula.
In the next Lecture I will deliver the true and real curation of Fistula's in
general, wherein you shall hear sundry things worth the noting.

LECT. XI. Of the true curation of Fistula's in general.
NOw am I to accomplish and perform my former promise in setting down the
method of curing truly and really Fistula's in general, and the practice of
the same in the curing of some Fistula's of some special places of the body,
which require some extraordinary confiderations. Such are Fistula's in the
great corners of the eyes, Fistula's in the breast, Fistula's in ano, and
Fistula's in the joints.

The means to cure Fistula's.
The means to attain to this manner of curation are threefold; Dieteticall,
Pharmaceuticall, and Chirurgicall.

Dieteticall means.
As for the Dieteticall, I have set it down amongst other points, which are
required in the curation of an ulcer in general. It shall be sufficient to
insinuate now only, that the diet of those who are troubled with Fistula's
must be very sparing, and of meats and drinks which afford a laudable juice,
and are of easy concoction, that crudities and sharp humors flowing to the
affected part, hinder not the euration. And undoubtedly too liberal a diet,
unto the which the Inhabitants of these parts are too much accustomed, is the
cause of the recidivation of these, and other griefs.

Pharmaceuticall means.
As for the Pharm^ceuticall means, they are of two sorts, to wit, Purgative and
Consolidative.

Purgatives.
or Ale for the space of a week, described by me in my former Lecture. And
while these are in preparing, you may make for the better operation of these,
minister this or such like a portion: caric^stin. and Electuarii de succ^^of.
an. iij. Syrup. ^os. solut. cum Agari^o j. Aq. cichor. iij. mise. ut fiat
potio, sumenda cum cerp^ri^ custodi^. These two Electuaries purge the body of
thin, hot, and sharp humors; the syrup and water correst the malignitie of the
humors.

1. Consolidatives.
and tried by practice are these; Gentian and the roots of the round Birthwort,
a dram of either of these mingled with iij.. Of white wine, and ministered
every other day in the morning, and fasting three hours after the taking of
the medicament. The lesser Centorie, Osmunda regalis the root of it, Agrimonie,
Virga aurea, the white Hore-hound, the roots of Borrage, Tormentil, Bistort,
and Comfrey, Sarsaparilla, the rasping of Guajack, Plantane, Vinca, Pervinca,
and Equisetum. Of the juyces of these herbs mingled with Ale, you may make
possets; the wig whereof strained and sweetened with some Saccharum rosatum, or
the Conserve of red Roses, you may minister morning and evening to young
persons, and those who are either weak, or abhor all physical means,
whereof there is no small number now adays, who hasten by their own
misdemeanour to bring on griefs; but when they are to use means, esteem them
harsh: not knowing that God of his infinite goodness and providence toward
mankind, has appointed the means of recovering of health to be unpleasant to
nature, that man should refrain from sin, the primitive cause of griefs.

2. Compound consolidatives.
Of these simples aforementioned, you may frame unto your selves sundry
compositions: for a pattern I will set down one decoction: Sars. parill.
iiij. Scobis. Guajaci. vj. Rad. Tormentill. Osmund. Regal. Bistor. Symphyt. an.
j. Eupat. Virga aur. and si uil reslat prater consolidationem and
cicatrizationem, Summitat. Hyperic. and Sigill. Solomon. an. man. j. Passular.
Major. Exacinat. iij. Liquirit. ij. Semin. Coriand. and Fenicul. duleis, an. v.
Infundantur infundenda in aq. font. fervent. lb. xx. deinde coq. Lento igne
additis reliquis ad consumptionem lb. viij. ac coletur decoctum. If the party
be strong, let him drink three pints a day: One half pint in the morning,
and another about four a clock in the afternoon, for dinner and supper there
remains a quart. If the party be young, or cannot take such a quantity, by
reason of the weakness of the stomach, make half of this quantity, which
being vj. lb. add to the decoction of Sugar and Honey, of each lb. j. and by
gentle vaporing away some humiditie, bring the decoction to the consistence and
taste of a pleasant Julep, which minister according to the toleration of the
party. This Pharmaceuticall course you shall (I dare assure you) find
effectual to your own credit, and comfort of the patient.

Chirurgicall means to cure a Fistula.
The Chirurgicall means afford unto us five intentions.

First of all then the Fistula is to be dilated; for seldom does it fall out
otherwise, that this indication is not requisite, unless it be in a Fistula
in the cheek,

How to dilate a Fistula.
The Fistula may be dilated three manner of ways, by Incision, by putting in
tents framed of such things as swell, after they have imbibed the humiditie of
the Fistula;

Incision when it is to be used.
As for Incision, it is to be used in strong bodies, if the Fistula be not
deep and only runs along under the skin, no deeper than the membrane of
a muscule, if it be in a fleshy part. Secondly, if the Fistula have many
sinuosities: before the Incision is made, the Fistula is to be dilated by some
of the three other means, which I will deliver presently: secondly, the
medicaments which remove the callositie (whereof anon must be applied) both
these intentions must be performed before Incision, otherwise you shall
hardly know how far your Incision is to be extended, and shall leave some part
of the Callus still, which will make way for recidivation and relapse.

the sponge twisted with thread, The use of the sponge.
after that it is wrung hard and wrea^hed, far exceeds all these; for it both
imbibeth more moisture, and dilateth much more. I will acquaint you with a
preparation of the sponge, which is excellent, and this is it: Melt a roll of
your simple Melilot emplaster; when it is yet very hot, let a thick sponge
imbibe it. This sponge having so drawn unto it self the emplaster, put
between two trenchers, which trenchers with the sponge put into a strong
press, and press them hard. After an hour or two, when you think the sponge
to be cold, unscrue the press, and take out the trenchers with the sponge,
you shall find the sponge become a firm substance, resembling green cheese.
Of this substance you may cut out tents of what fashion you will: This will not
only exceedingly dilate the Fistula, by sucking unto it the humiditie; but
will also digest the callositie.



The second Chirurgicall attention.
The second Chirurgicall intention is to remove the Callus: this is bred by
reason of the influxion of an humor, not of an uniforme substance; for besides
the thin parts, which are discussed or dried, The matteriall cause of a Callus.
by both natural and extraneous heat, it must have a thick substance to cause
this callus, it being indurated: this must be either phlegm, if the callus be
white, or melancholy if it be livid, according to the dogmaticall Physicians,
the Chemists appoint it to be Saltpeter, as I have said.

Why the orifice first contracteth a Callus.
In the beginning this callositie is bred rather in the external orifice, than
in the inner sinuositie: for first, the skin which is thick of it self, sooner
grows hard than the flesh which is soft: Secondly, because nature still
labors to thrust out excrements to the skin. In progress of time Fistula's
having become inveterate, the whole passage contracteth callositie.

To know where the passage has also a Callus.
You shall know by this, whether the passage be fistulated or no: If by the
intrusion of the probe great pain is felt, and blood issues out, the Callus
is not confirmed; but if no blood follow, an little pain be felt, be sure
then that it is confirmed.

How the callosity is to be removed by medicaments.
The callositie is removed either by medicaments, or the actual Cauterie. The
medicaments are of three degrees: for some are more mild, and these are of an
emolliating and digesting quality, fit if the callositie be but small in a
fleshy part and a young body: such are Diolthaea cum gummis, and Vnguentum de
poeto. Every ounce of either of them having a dram of the Turbith mineral, or
Precipitate mingled with Allome with it, is effectual.

Secondly, some are more harsh; for they must mundifie strongly, if the Callus
be somewhat hard, and the party somewhat aged: such are Vnguentum
Apostolorum, Avicen. having Precipitate and Allome, or the Turbith with Allome
mingled with it, Aegyptiacum is stronger than this; but I should rather use the
Vnguentum Apostolorum than it, adding more of the aforenamed cathaereticall
powder to it; for it causes greater pain, and procures not so good quittour
as the Apostolorum.

Last of all, the medicaments which are to remove an inveterate Callus are
Caustic: and even of these some are more gentle, some exceeding fierce. The
more gentle are these. I. Auripigment. Sulphur. vivi, and Calcis vivae, an. j.
fiat pulvis-subtilis. II. is Pulvis sine pari, cujus haec est descriptio.
Auripigmenti, and virid. Aeris, an. ss. Vitriol. calcinat. j. Alumin. usti, ij.
fiat pulvis subtilis. III. Turbith. mineralis non loti, V^trioli v^mitivi, and
Boli orient. optimi. an. parts aequales.

Of the strongest of all I will deliver unto you two magistrall descriptions
only, far surpassing all others. I. is M. Hale his powder, who was famous in
his time for curing of Fistula's: this is the composition of it, Aquil.
mineral. Vitrioli vomitivi, and Terraerubr. oriental. an. part. aequales. II.
is this which Iuse in Fistula's and Struma's: Realgar. albi, Auripigment. and
Calcis vivae, an. part. aequales.

You may enquire how these are to be used: If you have dilated the Fistula by
incision, besprinkle the Callus with some of the powders; but if you have done
it by the second way set down by me, then use the powders mingled with
Vnguentum Populeon, wherewith arm your Fistula tent: or apply a Trochisk made
of these powders and Populeum, and afterward dried.

After the application either of the Fistula tent armed with the unguent, or of
the Trochisk, two things you are to observe: I. That you apply an anodine
caraplasme, the fellow to this which I shall now deliver unto you shall not be
found. It is also matchless in raging pains of the Gout: Lact. Vaccin. lb. j.
Mic. Pan. albi, vj. coq. ad cataplasmat. consist. tum add Vuguent, popul. ij.
Gummi Hyose. ss. Croci pulti jss. fiat cataplasma, quod applicetur parti
affectae mane and vesperi. IJ. You must not force out either the tent armed, or
the Trochisk, before they pop out of their own accord: for so they bring the
Callus out with them, and the tent with the Callus will represent a finger
within a glove. If there be many sinuofities, yet do not pierce to any
remarkable cavitie, as of the breast and belly, then you are to dissolve these
powders in some liquor, as in Aqua calcis, Plantane water, Metheglin, a gentle
Lee, Allome water, or Vitriol water. Alchymists exceedingly commend in this
case the spirit of Niter.

The second way to remove a Callus by an actual Cauterie is an invention of ab
Aquapendente: He will have an instrument like to a setting Iron to be made,
the case to answer the wideness and length of the Fistula, and to be thrust
into the bottom of the Fistula, then must the other round Iron fill the
cavitie of this, toward the point only, and be round an inch long, and be put
in red hot. It is not to stay long where pain is caused, because there is no
Callus; but to be rubbed up and down where the place is indolent, until pain
be caused by reason of the removing of the Callus by the fire. And although he
highly commend actual sire, and discommend the potentiall; yet I am not of his
mind in sundry cases: As for this invention, whosoever shall go about to
practice it, I shall hold him much like to him who is to throw at a Cock
blind-folded.

The third Chirurgicall Intention is, to mundifie the part: 3. Intention.
this medicament will performs this: Vini albi. lb. ss. Unguent. Aegyptiaci ss.
Spirit. vini, vj. misc. Inject this this warm, but once a day. You shall
conjecture that the Fistula is sufficiently mundified, if the quittour have no
ill smell, if it be uniforme, thick, and white.

Then you are to address your selves to the fourth Intention Chirurgicall, 4.
Intention.
which is to unite and consolidate the parts disjoined. To accomplish this: The
description of the consolidative Syrup.
first draw first draw by an Alembick the spirit of these herbs following,
putting so much springwater as will be three inches above the simples to them:
the roots of Aristolochia rotunda, Tormentil, Bistort, Comfrey, the lesser
Centorie, Virga aurea, Burnet, Plantane, Knot-grasse, Yarrow, and Salomons
seal. Reserve the spirit by it self: take the decoction remaining in the pot
from the herbs by straining; for every quart of this decoction take half a
lb. of Honey, and so much Sugar: This mixture being clarified with the whites
of Eggs, and strained again, let it be boiled by a soft fire to the
consistence of a Syrup. The use of it.
Take two ounces of the spirit, and one ounce of the Syrup, which mingle, and
inject into the sinuositie, and deal with it as I prescribed, when I delivered
the manner of dressing a sinuous ulcer. If any man deliver a more probable way
than this to consolidate a Fistula after the extirpation of the Callus, I shall
willingly lend him mine ears.

The last intention chirurgicall is to skin the orifice, 5. Intention.
which requires no new directions. You shall know a Fistula to be near
whole, when the humor which flows is little, thick, concocted, and the place
void of pain and tumor: If it be altogether dry, you may pronounce the
orifice to be skinned, and the Fistula perfectly cared.

From the premises you may gather that four things hinder the curation of a
Fistula. I. Is the afflux of a vicious humor. II. Is the narrowness of it,
which hardly admits the application of convenient medicaments. III. Is the
deepnesse which hinders the conveighing the medicaments to the bottom. IV.
The callositie which contemns ordinary medicaments. Seeing I have showed you
the way to remove these lets and impediments; I hope you will give me leave to
conclude this point, of the curation of Fistulas in general. In the next
Lecture I shall discourse of the curation of Fistula's in particular places,
which when I have done, I will put an end to this Treatise of Fistula's.

LECT. XII. Of Fistula lachrymalis.
IN my two last Lectures I discoursed amply enough of the nature of a Fistula,
by setting down its description and pathognomonicall or proper signs, and the
general method of curing all Fistula's indifferently. This only rests to be
done before I put an end to this point, to set down the curation of some
particular Fistula's differing only in subjects, which are the parts wherein
they are seated, wherein some special directions are required. I will only
speak of three, to wit, of Aegylops in the great comer of the eye, of a
Fistula in the breast, and last of all of a Fistula in ano.

First then I will deal with Fistula lachrymalis, the Fistula in the great
corner of the eye. In Paulus Aegineta, De Art medendi, lib. 3. c. 22. there
are words in sound much like (...), and (...); but in signification different:
He will have (...) to be a tumor or Aposteme before it is opened; but (...) he
affirms to be when the tumor is opened, whether it be fistulated or no: his
words are these: Aegilops abscessus est, qui inter majorem oculi angulum and
nares fit: qui ruptu^ si negligatur, usque ad os Fistulam aperit. I
demprinsquam ruptum exulceretur apostema anchilops appellatur. So according to
the version of Albanus Torinus, Thus it may be Englished: Aegilops is an
Aposteme between the great corner of the eye and the nose: which if it be
neglected, it makes way to a Fistula, even to the bone: this aposteme is
called Anchilops before it is broken. All modern Authors, who left any
monument of Chirurgerie, follow him. This kind of Fistula is called by the
neoterick Surgeons, Fistula lachrymalic. Because it does happen in the place
from whence tears flow.
By Avicen lib. 3. can. fen. 3. tract. 2. c. 14. the aposteme is called
Kakilus, or Akilus, and the Fistula it self, Garab, or Algarab. Fabriciu^ ab
aquapendente, de operat. chirurg. part. 1. c. 21. purposely handles this
matter, and Ambrose Parrey, lib. 16. c. 15. and Taliacotius in chirurg. curt^r.
lib. 1. c. 21. The place then wherein this kind of Fistula is seated, is the
inner corner of the eye: although it begins first at the holes of the upper
and low eyelid, from whence the tears flow.

The signs.
The signs are manifest to the senses: for first, the orifice does offer it
self to the view: secondly, by compression the quittour issues out: thirdly,
a small probe may be thrust within the cavitie to the very end of the Sinus.

The Progno. sticks.
As for the Prognostics: First then, all these Fistulas are of hard curation,
for the moystnesse of the place much hinders desiccation, which is required in
the curation of ulcers. Secondly, the part (while one is awake) is in
continual motion. Thirdly, by reason of the niceness of the part, choice of
medicaments must be had. II. If the quittour has made way for it self to the
inner passage of the nose, by that hole which passes through the bone of the
nose from the corner, then we are only to procure the shutting up of the upper
orifice, and not to go about the scaling of the bone by a fruitless labor,
which will notwithstanding cost the patient great pain and grief. III. If a
Fistula in this place become cancerous, which you shall conjecture by the hard
and livid brims, a stinging pain, and stinking virulent matter, you arc only
to use a palliative cure, applying those medicaments which are fit for a
cancerous ulcer, whereof in the curation of a cancer I will speak at large.
IV. If this continue long, it causes a consumption of the eye, called (...),
sometimes blindness of that eye, and corruption of the air, which we draw by
the nosthrils, if the quittour pass from the glandule, through the bone of the
nose to the nosthrill.

The diversities of these Fistula's.
Now to come to the differences of these Fistula's: Some are malign, the signs
whereof I have delivered in the Prognostics: Some are not malign. Of these
wherein there is no malignitie, some are without cariositie of the bone, and
some with cariositie of the bone: you shall know that there is no cariositie of
bone: First, if the aposteme was not long continuing before it brake; for if
the tumor was first an Oedema Scirrhodes, and continued a long time so before
it brake, then it is likly that the humor corrupted the bone before it brake.
Secondly, if the probe rest not upon a part hard and rugged. Thirdly, if after
dilation of the Fistula, the cariositie be not presented to the sight. If
circumstances contrary to these be offered, you may conjecture that there is a
cariositie in the bone.

The curation.
To hasten to the curation of these Fistula's: If a Fistula lachrymalis, without
corruption of the bone, be offered to you to be cured, proceed after this
manner. First of all, you are to dilate it: secondly, you are to remove the
callositie: thirdly, you are to mundifie it: fourthly, you are to consolidate
it: and lastly, to cicatrize it.

The manner of dilatation.
You shall dilate it by the Fistula tent framed (as I taught in my former
Lecture) according to the proportion of the sinuositie in the beginning: then
you shall enlarge it more by spunges prepared with the Melilot Emplaster, which
I likewayes set down, when I taught here last. This manner of dressing will
discover all corners of the sinuositie. The Fistula having been thus dilated,
you are to go about the removing of the Callus. Now in performing this there
is not so great liberty granted, as is in Fistula's of other parts. For first,
fluid and running means having a remarkable acrimonie are not safe: for
passing unto the Conjunctiva, and from thence to Cornea, they are able to erode
it, from whence an ulcer may ensue, and so the grief be doubled. Secondly,
even means solid carefully must be applied, that they go no further than the
sinuositie of the Fistula. It is not unknown unto you, what horrible symptoms
oftentimes afflict the eye, by reason of a familiar humor only exalted in
degrees of acrimonie: What mischief then is to be expected, if heterogeneall
bodies, endued with extraordinary sharpness, as these must be which remove a
Callus, do seize upon the membranes of the eye, adjacent unto the part
affected.

Some there are who cure these lachrymall Fistula's with liquid medicaments, as
with the water of Elder, or Wallwoort flowers; in every pint of these
dissolving two drams of Mercury sublimate, or more, according to the hardness
of the callositie. The proportion of mixture you must conjecture by the
continuance of the Fistula, by the age of the party, and constitution of the
body. If therefore a Fistula be offered to be cured in a body young, of a short
continuance, and of a tender constitution, then the water is to be mild; if
contrary conditions do offer themselves, then you are to make it more strong,
according to discretion. If you take two parts of Plantane water, and one part
of the spirit of Niter, you shall have an excellent Topic according to the
principles of the Chemists.

One thing is to be observed, Observation.
that these liquid medicaments be sparingly applied to the sinuositie, that no
part of them touch the membranes, to avoid the accidents whereof I spoke before.

Why solid medicaments are better than liquid.
As for mine own part, I more commend the solid mediments than these fluid: for
first, their faculty is more durable: secondly, they are more secure, because
they are not so apt to spread. If the body be young and tender, this medicament
will serve: Take Mercur. Praecipitati, aut Turbith loti ij. Aluminis calcin. j.
Exquisite misceantur. postea Unguent. popul. j. Pulveris praedicti ij.
Misceantur ut resuliet unguentum. When you apply this medicament, arming a tent
with it: pull it not out forcibly; but suffer it to pop out of it self.
Continue the application of this medicament until the Callus be removed,
which you may guess if the process of the sinuositie appear soft, and the
quittour which cleaves to the tent appear laudable.

The Callus being thus removed, Mundification.
you must mundifie it: To this purpose you shall use this local medicament:
Aq. Chelidoniae aut Rutae, ij. Syrupi e succorutae, aut Mellis rosati j. Misc.
applicetur calefactum. Dress the Fistula but once a day.

The part being mundified, Consolidation.
which you shall know by the redness and tenderness of it: Then go about the
consolidation. This you shall procure by this medicament: Aq. Plantag. ij.
Syrupi Mirtillorum, aut Ros. rub. siccat. j. Misceantur. Apply this, and renew
it but every other day; Cicatrization. How an Aegilops, with cariositie of the
bone, is to be cured.
if no remarkable store of quittour flow.

As for the skinning: Diapalma cum succis, de minio, or Emplastrum rubrum
astringens will serve.

If in an Aegilops or lachrymal Fistula the bone of the nose be corrupted by
the humor staying in the embosment, then two ways of curing are offered unto
you: The first is by actual cauterie, the second is by Incision. Peruse all
who have written of the curing of this kind of Fistula, and you shall find
that all with one accord subscribe to the actual cauterie.

The actual cauterie must represent in figure the stone of an Olive: The parts
adjacent must be defended from the fire, either by an hollow plate according
to Parrey, or a cane according to Ab aqua pendente: you may make choice of
which you will: you must effectually impresse it, to dry the humiditie, and
the sooner to procure the scaling of the bone. And although Authors, after the
application of the actual cauterie, prescribe fattie things to hasten the
separation of the eschar, yet I advise you not to use them; for the part is
moist of it self, and so the application of such medicaments would procure a
sordid ulcer: Apply therefore only pledgets, or tents dipped in red wine, and
above all Diapalma, or Emplastrum de Minio, or de Smegmate. When the bone has
cast a scale, then consolidate and skin it, as I have set down before.

It is not unknown unto you, with what difficulty patients admit the
application of an actual cauterie, to a part much distant from any of the
principal, and wherein there is but small sensibilitie. What will a patient
troubled with this grief do, if you make mention of cauterization to be made
in this place, so near the eye and the brain it self? If at any time you
make mention of such a kind of curation to a patient, to try how he does
stand affected to this operation; let me entreat you not to urge it too much,
as if the cure of the Fistula could not otherwise be compassed, if you find
the patient averse, lest you drive him away, and so you lose both credit and
gain. When in the Country I practiced Chirurgerie, sundry times this kind
of grief having been presented unto me, I ever found the patients stricken
into a terror and amasement, as soon as mention was made of cauterization;
wherefore I set my imagination at work, to find out a way to cure a Fistula
lachrymalis, less, terrible, but more sure and effectual, which I will not
conceal from you, because this grief does often come to your hands, and both
great credit and gain is purchased by performing the curation.

My manner of curing Aegilogs.
My manner of curation is this: First of all, having with a small probe bended,
found out the cavitie both upwards and downwards, I draw a line with ink
between the Glandule of the eye, and the Trochlea or the pulley, through which
the small tendon of the first oblique muscule called superior, or major, the
uppermost and greatest passes, and ends obliquely in the uppermost part of
Cornea: then I make incision to the bone; the part incised I divide with the
nails of the fore-fingers, until the incised be so much dilated, that it
will without difficulty admit a pretty pledget: this being done, I thrust in
a small Trochiske made of the Turbith mineral before it be washed, the
vomitive Vitriol, and the best Terra sigillata wrought with Populeum to the
form of a stiff paste, and afterward dried. About the Trochisk I apply a
pledget armed with Populeum, which I keep to the Fistula by an Emplaster of
Diapalma cum succis, malaxed with the oil of Henbane. Afterward filling the
orbit of the eye with little bolsters made of soft linen cloth folded, and
moystened in Aqua spermati^ ranarum caphurata, I roll up the eye. These same
dressings I use morning and evening, until the Trochisk with the Callus fall
out of it own accord: which when I perceive, I diligently view the bone, to
see how much is carious: unto it I apply the powder of Euphorbium, if the
diseased party be aged, and of a firm constitution of body; but if the party
be young, and of a tender constitution, I besprinkle the bone with Pulvis
Cephalicus. The cavitie of the part incised I fill up with a piece of the
sponge dressed with the Melilot Emplaster, as I delivered in my former Lecture:
about it I apply a pledget armed with Populeum, all which I couch down close,
with the emplaster and bolsters kept to the eye with a rowler.

This manner of dressing I continue until the scale of the carious bone cast,
which most commonly falls out about the twentieth day. When the scale is
removed, I mundifie the part with Mel rosatum, or Melrutaceum, then I procure
consolidation by the Syrup of Mirtles, or of the red Roses dried. And last of
all I cicatrize the part affected with some epuloticall Emplaster, whereof I
have set down sufficient store heretofore, and shall hereafter when I shall
discourse of an ulcer which hardly admits skinning. I have made sufficient
experiment of this manner of curing an Aegilops in sundry persons. And I truly
affirm, that I never miffed of the cure of any one with whom I thus dealt:
neither shall you (I hope) if punctually you observe these observations in your
proceedings.

When the bone of the nose is to be pierced.
It may fall out that the whole substance of the bone of the nose subjacent to
the Fistula may be carious, being of it own nature thin, and the head of the
party besides very rheumatick, so that being often cured in the opinion both
of the Surgeon and discased party, yet it does break out again. In such a
case you may demand of me, how you shall fall off from such a cure with your
own credit. To this I answer, that there is yet a Subterfuge, and a way left
to give contentment to the afflicted patient: To compass this, first dilate
again the sinuositie, until the corrupt bone appear, as has been showed
heretofore: Secondly, pierce the bone of the nose with a gimlet, that the
quittor may have recourse to the nosthrils, which are appointed as shoares to
discharge the flegmatike excrements of the brain, and to draw in fresh air
for the refrigeration of the lungs: and then cure the superjacent fleshie and
skinnie parts, as I taught you, when I set down the palliative manner to cure
a Fistula. This manner of curation being the last refuge, it will undoubtedly
give contentment to the patient: for the eyes of the beholders shall observe no
deformity external in him, and he himself shall not be able to discern the
turning of the quittor from the glandule outwardly, to the nostrill inwardly:
besides this, he himself shall perceive no smell that shall offend him; the
smell of Garlic is not offensive to those who have eaten of it.

Now to conclude this my discourse of a Fistula lachrymalis, if you perceive
any such Fistula malign, or to tend to a cancrosity, which you shall discern
by the signs set down, when I delivered unto you the Prognostics: then use
this medicament of Heurnius the father, set down in methodo ad praxin. lib. 1.
pa. 106. which he purchased both with money and entreaty, of one who got much
money by it.

This is the description of it: calaminanter usti, atque in vini aceto extincti
j. myrrha, plumbi usti ac loti an. ss. croci gr. v. opii gr. ij. aeris usti
iiij. decocti fenugraeci j. Misecantur exquisite omnia super lapidem pictorum.
If you mean to make an oinement to continue long, instead of the mucilage of
Fenugreeke, use new Swines-grease washed in Rose Water. This is admirable
eie-salve in all ulcers of the eyes: (whereof I have made often trial) whether
they be malign or no.

LECT. XIII. Of Fistula's of the Breast.
HAving spoken in my former Lecture of Fistula Lachrymalis, I am now to set
down the method of curing other particular Fistula's, according to my promise.
Of these, Fistula Thoraeis, a Fistula of the breast does fist offer it self. Of
the which Cornelius Celsus l. 7. Ambrosius Param l. 9. ca. 31. and Fabricius ab
aqua pendente de operat. Chirurgic. part. 1. c. 47. have written.

How it happens.
This kind of Fistula happens by two manner of ways: First, by reason of a
penetrating wound of the breast.

Secondly, by a Phlegmon possessing the intercostall Muscules, and the Pleura.

It is a superfluous matter to set down any signs, seeing they appear to the
eye, and are easily found out by applying the signs set down in the general
method of curing of Fistula's, to every Fistula in particular.

The differences.
As for the differences, a Fistula ensuing a wound penetrating to the cavity of
the breast, has but one orifice, the passage and sinewosity whereof is
according to the penetration of the wound; but a Fistula following after an
Aposteme has frequently more orifices than one, whereof some pass to the
cavity of the breast directly, some windingly.

The Prognostics.
To come to the Presages. All Fistula's of the breast are hard to be cured, and
that for seven reasons;



Virus of the Fistula does often corrupt the rib; and seeing the internal
substance of the rib is cavernous, and so apt to lodge corrupt matter, the
difficulty of curing is increased.





Individuum depends.



Let this be the second Prognostic: If the party afflicted with a Fistula in
the breast be fallen unto a Hectic fever, 2. Prognostic.
and his body begin to be extenuate, pronounce the grief to be incurable: for
if you use deficcative means, which are required in curing of ulcers, you
shall increase these symptomaticall griefs, and hasten death.

Celsus delivers unto us in these words, Solent quoque, etc. Fistula's use
sometimes, when they have passed by the ribs, to corrupt the midriffe; which
may be gathered by the place affected, and the greatness of pain, in this
case there is no hope of cure.

The curation.
As for the curation of a Fistula of the breast; to it three means are
required, a convenient diet, pectorall decoctions, and local applications. The
diet.
In a Fistula, which has caused neither a Hectic fever, nor extenuation of
the body, a greater variety of meats is permitted, than when these symptoms
are annexed. Howsoever meats of easy concoction, and which afford laudable
nourishment, are to be appointed for the Patient, and a moderate use of them
is to be prescribed: of these two means I have spoken amply enough, when I set
down the general curation of ulcers.

Pectorall decoctions.
As for pectorall decoctions, upon the use of which, the greatest part of the
cure of such Fistula's depends, you shall find diverse descriptions of them
in diverse Authors. The Simples whereof these Decoctions are made are these; The
Simples of them.
The flowers and leaves of Coltsfoot, Maiden-haire, the white Horehound,
Comfrey, Tormentill, and Bistort-roots, Violet-flowers, Borrage-roots and
flowers, Ellaca^pane-roots, Hyssope, Germander, the flowers and roots of
Mallows, the roots of Parsley and Fenell, Liquorice, Scabious, Valerian,
Burnet, Sarsaparilla, Guajak, the China root, Raisins of the Sun, and blew
figs: of these Simples you shall find sundry decoctions set down by Authors
who have written of wounds and Fistula's of the breast.

Amongst all others, the Pectorall Decoction of Franciscus Arcae^^ you may most
safely and securely trust unto: He white he lived, was so fortunate in the
practice of Chirurgerie, that he drew that eminent Linguist and Divine, Arrias
Montanus, very often to be a spectator of his operations. The Decoction I need
not to set down, because you may fetch it out of the Author himself, who is
translated into the English tongue.

My own.
I will not stick to commend unto you one of my own, whereof I have sundry
times made experiment. This is the Composition of it: Sars. parill. vj. scob.
guajac. v. rad. Chin. iij. rad. enuh. campan. j. capill. ve^^r. scabios. fol.
tussilag. scolop^nd. sumitat. hyper. an. man. 1. f^or. borrag. buglos. viol.
beton. an. pug. 1. polypod. iij. liqu^ it. ij. passul. major. exacinat. and
ficu^^^ pinguinu^ incisar. an. ii ss. Infunde^tur ista per noct. i^aq. font.
f^rventis lib. 24. deinde lento ig^^ coq. ad consu^p. lib. viij. a^ col^tur
decoctum. Bibat ager singulis di^bu^lib. iiij. Let the Patient every morning
about five a clock drink half a pint of this Decoction warm, and so much
about four a clock in the afternoon: at dinner let him take a pint, and at
his Supper another: the third pint he may drink between meals, The reason of
the quantity of the decoction to be taken.
Marvel at not this quantity, for a less will little avail; for strong
desiccation is required in this cure.

Things which hinder the cure
when it is higher than the ending of the Fistula.





The manner of incision.
If then the ending of the Fistula be lower than the external orifice, a lower
orifice is to be made by incision. In this incision. operation two things are
to be diligently noted: The first is the place. The second, the cautions to be
observed in the section.

The region of the breast fittest (...) incision.
As for the regions of the breast: The left side is more safe than the right: for
in this side the liver by its gibbosity bears up the Diaphragma, and does
insinuate it self to the cavity of the breast: If then either one of these, or
both should be wounded imprudently, it is an easy matter to prognosticate the
tragical event of this operation.

The place.
As for the determinate part of the breast, which is to be opened, let it be
about the beginning of the next rib, and not at the lower end of that rib,
above the which the orifice of the Fistula shows it self; for under it are
couched a vein, a nerve, and an artery.

The manner of section.
In your Section proceed thus: First, divide the skin toward the upper part of
the lower rib, then make way thorowout the incostall muscules: These things
being done, dry all things with a sponge, and put into the new orifice a
swelling sponge, both to dilate it, and to draw to it self the quittor. If you
go thus to work, you need not fear any danger, if you pass no farther than
the division of the Pleura: so that neither the Diaphragma, nor the lungs, or
the Pericardium be touched.

What is to be done if a Marasmus or Hectic fever be complicate with a
Fistula of the breast.
If with a Fistula of the breast, a Marasmus or Hectic fever complicat, the
difficulty of curing is exceedingly increased; two diseases jointly conspiring
to the ruin of the diseased party, which notwithstanding for their curation
require advers indications, the Fistula requiring desiccation; and Marasmus and
the Hectic fever craving humectation. If then a Fistula of the breast be offered
to any one of you, first of all be sparing in your promises, lest you be
accounted clouds without rain: who but an ignorant will give free raines to
liberal promises to cure a Fistula of the breast complicat with other
Deutoropatheticall greefes of their own nature hard to be cured; when as it is
a difficult matter to cure a solitary Fistula of the part?

What a Marasmus is.
Marasmus, in Latin^ Authors Marcor, is an immoderate dryness and consumption
of the whole body, by reason of the defect of the substantial humidity,
according to Trallianus. According to Galen li. de marc. Lib. 12. cap. 4.
there are two degrees of it: The degrees of Marasmus.
The one is when this extenuation of the body is in Fieri, in consuming; The
other is, when it is in Facto effe, or consummate.

Signs of it in fieri.
If it be in Fieri only; the muscules begin to fall, the skin becomes flaggie
and loose, strength and agility decay, and the party finds a manifest defect,
and impotencie in all the actions of the body, whether they be animal, vital,
or natural. Againt this degree, you may contend by instituting a diet
moistening.

The curation of this degree.
If a Marasmus be in Facto esse, or consummate; then the eyes grow hollow, and
seem to be hid in pits* the lively color of the skin fades, The signs of a
Marasmus consummate.
the skin of the forehead seems dry, and stretched like the head of a drum;
the eyelids seem heavy, and scarce able to lift themselves up, as it
happens to those who are wearied by reason of watching; the temples are
hollow: in the cavities of the breast and belly, one would think, that there
neither Viscera members contained, or guts: for the muscules are so consumed,
and the cavities so drawn in, that nothing seems to remain besides the
fibra and the skin. To conclude, one having a consummate Marasmus, seems to
be nothing else, but a walking scel^t^s. Whosoever shall undertake the curation
of such a one, and perform it, I will give him leave to give himself out for
another Savior, and to publish a fifth Gospel, which the itching cares of our
age would willingly perhaps entertain.

2. Differences of a Marasmus.
A Marasmus is twofold: For one is accompained with heat, and may be called a
dry Marasmus,

The other is accompanied with cold. The one is natural, The differences of a
Marasmus caused of cold.
and it is decrepit old age: for old age is defined by dryness, and coldness.

The other is unnatural, and it is called Senium ex m^rb^, a decay by reason
of sickness: old age comes by the course of time.

This last of a violent cause, for it follows after a burning or a Hectic
fever; and that by reason of the sickness it sefe, or by reason of the
medicaments used in the curing of the aforenamed griefs: for a Hectic fever
does not only waste the natural humidity, but the natural heat also seated
in the humidity: wherefore the heart it self, the wellspring of this heat must
become colder than it ought to be. In this case the pulse is small and weak,
and slow: in like manner the breathing is weak, slow, and cold. By reason of
the use of refrigerating medicaments appointed by the Physician in curing of a
Hectic, or a Febris Morasmodes, many times Senium ex morbo succeeds: and
this is more tolerable, because the heart being somewhat immoderately cooled,
the less of the radical moisture is spent, than would be if the Hectic had
its full course.

What a Hectic fever is.
A Hectic fever, is an unnatural heat which has seized upon the solid parts,
and wastes the moisture of them: But seeing there is a threefold moisture in
the body: to wit, blood in the small veins and arteries of every part, a dewy
substance in every part, by the which it is nourished; and gluten, which
keeps together the terrestrial substance of each part, moisteneth it, and
keeps it from falling to dust.

The degrees of a Hectic.
There are also three degrees of a Hectic. In the beginning, when the two first
humidities begin to fail, the Hectic fever is not easily discerned, although
it may be without great difficulty cured: But if the radical moisture be
consumed, as it is easily discerned* so it is hardly cured. As long as this
moisture is somewhat plentiful, sufficient to ^ntertaine the natural heat,
the body feemeth well colored, of a comely figure, and of a decent quantity.

What (...) to b^ done in (...) suma^ co^sumpti^^.
If therefore you perceive the body of any one having a Fistula in the breast, by
reason of the defect of this gluten, orradicall moisture to become discolored,
the figure to be altered, some parts bunching out, some growing hollow and the
thickness of the members to become slenderer, the flesh colliquating; leave
such a one to himself, that he may march peaceably to the period of his life.
Having delivered unto you of a Marasmus or extenuation of the body, and a
Hectic fever, so much as is expedient for you to know in your chirurgicall
practices; without the knowledge of which, you cannot possibly proceed, warily
and circumspectively, in curing Fistulaes of the breast. I am to show you what
uses you may make of what has been delivered.

The uses of the discourse of a Marasmus, and a Hectic fever.
If therefore one having a Fistula in the breast be brought unto you, whose body
seems to be nothing else but skin and bone, (as the vulgar proverb is)
acquaint him with the danger wherein he is, lest death seize upon him
unprepared. Nevertheless, if he implore your aid, of Christian charity
withdraw not what comfort you are able to procure unto him: appoint then a diet
moistening and nourishing, if no Physician be at hand, which I will set down
anon; and dress him with those medicaments which are anodyne and healing.
Inject into the Fistula Plantane-water, having some of the syrup of red
Rose-leaves dried, mingled with it; cover your tent and pledget with Diachylon
simplex. If you perceive that there is so much of the radical moisture
remaining as is able to cherish the natural heat, which you shall discern, if
the color of the body be fresh, if the figure be decent, if the proportion of
the parts be according to nature, and the diseased party can In some good
measure perform all actions; you may conceive some hope of his recoverie.

Remedice against a Marasmus.
Wherefore if a Marasmus has extenuate his body, appoint for him a diet, which
is likely to repair the natural moisture impaired. Let him then take broths
made of Mutton, Veale, or Chickens, wherein Damask Prunes, Raisins of the Sun
stoned, Currants washed and bruised, Mallow-flowers and roots, Marigold-flowers,
Cinquefoile, Cowslip flowers, and Coltsfoot leaves and flowers have been
boiled: Gellies are good, made of young Cockrels, and a knuckle of Veale; use
no other spice to it than a little Mace, and Nutmeg. Let him between meals
take Almond-milks, made of the broth of a Chicken boiled with French-Barley. It
is good for him also every morning and evening, to take a draught of Asses or
Goats-milke; or in want of these, of Cowes-milk, milked through the Conserves of
Borrage, and Buglosse-flowers; Calves and Sheeps-feet stewed with Curranes are
good: sometimes let him eat Pigs-flesh. If he have a mind to fish, grant unto
him Whiting-mops, Smelts, Perches, young Pickerels, Trowts, yea sometimes
Eeles: the Sole, Flownder and Plaice, may also be permitted; poched Eggs, and
sweet Butter without any Salt, or Almond-Butter, are good for break fast.

Remedies against a Hectic fever.
If an extenuation of the body do proceed from a Hectic fever, then you must
not only moisten the body; but cool it also. In the broths then-boyle
Borrage, and Succorie-roots, common Sorrel, wood Sorrel, Primrose, Violet,
Borrage and Buglosse-flowers* let his Sallets be Lettice, Spinach, and
Purselane, boiled in Chicken-broth. An Almond-milk made of the Decoction of
French-Barley, wherewith the emulsion of the seeds of the Pompion, Musk-melon,
Cucumber, Purselane, and white Poppie has been drawn, is excellent taken
morning and evening. Permit no Milk but Butter-milke, and that when it
begins to be a little sowrish, with a little of Sugar, of Borrage, or
Buglosse. If the diseased party complain of immoderate heat, and watching,
minister unto him twice a week Philonium Persicum, with the syrup of white
Poppie, red Poppie, Gillie-flowers, Maiden-haire, Coltsfoot, or of the juice
of Limons, or Citrons, in Aqua Spermatis Ranarum, or red Poppie. If you
perceive that by the following of these courses, the party has recovered his
strength, and a good habit of body, then you may conceive a good hope of his
recovery, and put him in good comfort: and so boldly proceed in the Cure, still
endeavoring by following the indications (as Theseus did the thread of Ariadne
to come out of the Labyrinth) to restore perfect health to the Patient. In the
beginning of the Lecture, Lappointed three indications for the curing of
Fistula's in the breast; to wit, a convenient diet, pectorall decoctions, and
local applications: I have sufficiently discoursed of the first two; the third
then remains of local applications.

Local applications.
In setting down of these I will be brief, because they little differ from the
general, if you except a few observations. You may safely dilate a Fistula of
the breast, with the Fistula tent and spnnge; but in removing of the Callus you
be wary, for if you apply the Trochisck, it must not reach to the cavity the
breast, for the point of it will relent, break, and fall upon the Septum
transversum, which undoubtedly will crode it, cause an inflammation, procure a
sharp fever, a P^raphre^i^is, and at last death it self. Apply then a tent
armed with Populeon, wherewith the Fistula powder must he mingled, as has
been taught: The Calus being removed mundifie the ulcer with Aqua calcis, and
Mel rosatum mingled together: Take heed that you inject no better medicament,
for such medicamen^^ are easily sucked in by the lungs, from whence by the
Tracha^ Arteria, they easily pass to the throat and mouth, from whence there
is felt a horrible bitterness, a desire to vomit, and an overthrow of the
appetite. Para^^ lib. 9. c. 31. affirms this to have happened unto him twice
t^ be you ware by the example ample of others. The ulcer having been
mundified, proceed to consolidation, for sores in this part are not to be long
kept open. This you shall procure by injecting two or three days the syrup of
red Rose leaves d^yes, mingled with Plantane-water; and then only moistening a
pledget wet in this syrup, or the syrup of Mirtles. Above the pledget apply
Paracelsus his Stictick Emplastrum, for in this case it exceeds all others;
for it does not only draw the brims together, but it skinneth also.

LECT. XIV. Of Fistula's of the belly and joints.
Having infisted so long in discoursing of the nature and curation of
Fistula's, you may think, not without cause, that I ought to hasten to an end.
In this Lecture I will set down the indications of curing Fistula's of the
belly and joints, and so I will conclude this point.

The differences of Fistula's of the belly.
The Fistulaes of the belly are twofold: for they are either in the Iuguinal
parts, or else in An^.

Venereall Bub^'s, either neglected, or ill cured: yea, they fall out in
plethorick and cacochymicall bodies very often, wherein there is no Neapolitane
seed: and that somewhat above the emunctorie it self; the matter not coming
to the emunctories themselves, which receive the excrements of the liver; but
being hindered, either by reason of the weakness of the expulfive faculty, or
by the crossing and thwarting of the muscules, oblique and transvers in those
places, as you, who are skillful in the Anatomy, well know. It is no wonder
that both Abscesses, and Fistula's often fall out in these places, seeing the
belly is as a draught or a sink in a house, or a keele in a ship, whither all
imparities flow. Yea, such plenty of sharp humors sometimes flows to these
parts, that perforation of the guts is caused, and that the excrements come out
at the orifice of the Fistula; a lamentable case, noisome to the diseased
party, and intolerable to the company. It falls out sometimes that some of
the Vertebra of the Spina are corrupted.

As for the Presages: The Fistula's in these places, which pass not to the
cavity of the Abdomen, are hardly cured.



Secondly, because great circumspection is to be used if you shall use either
incision, or corrosive medicaments, by reason of the fibra of the muscules, and
the branches of the Vena cava, and Aorta descending.

A history.
I visited once in Smithfield, a Preacher who had a Fistula by reason of a
Venereall b^be ill cured, who entertained for his Surgeons Master William
Clowes of famous memory, Master Authony Spademan, and William Bray, brothers of
this worshipful company while they lived. Although no convenient means were
omitted, yet the Cure came but slowly on. The diseased party impatient of
delay, and not being comforted by any certain hope of recovery, addressed
himself to one in the country, who was accounted famous for curing of
Fistula's: for Master Hall at that time had acquainted sundry with his practice
of curing of Fistula's. After the Surgeon had applied his corrosive to
remove the Callus, it corroding, the tunicles of the great vessels descending,
the eschare parting from the sound parts, in the night a strong flux of blond
ensued, which deprived him of life before the curer c^^^ come. Wherefore let me
advise you, diligently to obs^^ whether the bottom of the Fistula does reach
as deep as the great vessels, that you may avoid the like fatal event.

Vertebra of the Spina be corrupted, pronounce the Fistula to be incurable: you
shall conjecture the Vertebra to be soul, if extraordinary store of stinking
sanies issue out of the Fistula, and the party daily grow weaker, and more
extenuate, notwithstanding that you use all convenient both internal and
external means.

the diseased party is in great hazard, because the guts are thin, membranous,
and destitute of store of blood.

Secondly, because the Fistula is apt to ereepe through the distances between
the muscules, which in those places are many; to wit, the oblique and
transvers, one placed above another.

Thirdly, because in curing such Fistula's, we find little help of hand and
eye.

Fourthly, because topicall means can hardly be kept to the guts to help
consolidation.

The cure.
As for the curation of these Fistula's: If they be not deep, The removing of
the Callus.
but run along superficially, the best course is to make incision, and then
to apply one of the Fistula powders described by me, care had of the age and
constitution of the party.

The mundification.
As for the mundification, consolidation, and cicatrization of such, seeing no
special observation is required, you are to have recourse to that, what I have
copiously delivered heretofore. If the Vertebrae of the Spina be foul, you are
to promise no cure.

Nevertheless, if persons of worth will (upon good consideration) entertain
you to dress them, they finding a comfort by your pains: Make an injection of
Plantane, or Carduus Benedictus water, adding some fragrant water of
Medow-sweet, the syrup o^^^ Rose leaves dried, and the spirit of Wine, having
the tr^^ture of Aloe, Myrrh, Mastick, and some Saffron. Let your emplaster be
Diachylon cum gummis, or Paracelsus his Stictick. If the guts fall out to be
perforated, having acquainted the friends of the party with the danger, yet
despair not, but go on, and use methodicall means. Let the party eat Calves
and Sheeps* feet stewed, Sheeps and Calves heads, for they afford a glutinous
juice; Rice boiled in Milk, wherein steel has been often quenched, is also
good. Every morning and evening let the party take a draught of Allagant,
warmed with a wheat tossed, when he has drunk off the wine, let him eat the
toast. Make injection of red Wine, having a little Alome dissolved in it, and
some of the syrup of the Mirtles-berries: keep the orifice open with a sponge,
until the gut be consolidate; then proceed to the extirpation of the Callus,
mundification, consolidation, and cicatrization, as has been often heretofore
taught. Event oftentimes falls out above expectation.

A history.
Not long ago a country youth, who had an Enterocele, was bound to a Barber in
Aldersgate street; one applying to the Rupture a Trusse somewhat strait, caused
and sideration or mortification of the part, so that the excrements came out
plentifully, with much stinking matter, out of the cavity of the belly.
Notwithstanding, by diligence, and application of convenient means, the gut
was consolidate, and the youth kept alive. So much I thought good to deliver
concerning the curation of Fistula's which happen in the inguinall region.

Of the Fistula an^.
Now it follows, that I speak of Fistula's in An^, which was said to be the
second kind of Fistula's invading and possessing of the Abdomen; or the lower
belly.

This kind of Fistula very often follows after a Phlegmon in the Anus,
broken and ill cured.

There be two sorts of these Fistula's, for some pierce not the Intestinum
rect^^^, and some do: and both these are either shallow or deep.

Signs of a Fistula piercing the gut.
You shall conjecture the Fistula to pass through the Intestinum rectum: First,
if after breaking of wind, part of it make way through the sinus of the Fistula.

Secondly, if the excrements appear mingled with the quittor, or if the
quittor smell as the excrements use.

Thirdly, if injection being made at the outer orifice of the Fistula, part of
it pass within the Anus.

Fourthly, the forefinger being put into the Anus, if you feel the probe bare
it being thrust through the sinnus of the Fistula, this is an infallible and
certain sign.

As for the Presages of these Fistula's: Presages.
First, no Fistula any is of an easy curation: for this part being the jax of
the body, it affords great plenty of impurities, and much superfluous
moisture, which hinder the curation.

Secondly, if a Fistula in this place be not very painful, and noisome, by
reason of much and stinking quittor, but shuts and opens it self sundry
times, it is expedient for the health of the Patient, if such a one be left
uncured; for by this means the body is discharged of superfluous humors, and
the body kept in health. I have known this accident to have happened to
sundry, and to have continued to the end of their lives. Some I know yet living
thus affected, neither do I doubt, but that sundry of this worshipful Company
have observed the like.

The curation.
Now to come to the curation of these Fistula's: The means to attain to this
are sive: to wit, Diet, Internal medicaments, Incision. Deligation, and
Topicall means.

As for the Diet and Internal medicaments, I have discoursed sufficiently
heretofore, so that I need not, distrusting your memories, to repeat any thing.

As for Incision and Deligation; they have place when the Fistula is shallow,
but if the Fistula be deep, neither of these means are to be attempted.

The curing of Fistula's not passing to the gut.
If therefore the Fistula be shallow, and pass not to the Intestinum rectum,
after you have dilated it, and removed the Callus, upon a tent incise all the
hollownesse: then fill it with dosels, armed with a medicament made of a
restrictive powder, and the white of an egg, to keep the brims of the incised
parts asunder; for if you go about to unite the parts too soon, it may be
feared that a cavity will still remain, and make way for recidivation:
wherefore it behooveth you, to see that sound and laudable flesh be ingendered
in the bottom. Let not your incarnative medicaments be fatty, for such will
cause loose and spungeous flesh: use therefore the sanative syrup made of the
vulnerary plants, having some Pulvis cephalicus mingled with it. If the Fistula
go deep inwardly, so that you cannot use conveniently incision, dilate the
Fistula with the Fistula tent, and the sponge; then remove the Callus with a
Fistula trochisk: the trochisk being come out, and the Callus quite spent,
mundifie it with Mel rosatum, mingled with Aqua calcis: when you perceive
laudable quittor, endeavor to consolidate the part, by applying die sanative
syrup, and Pulvi^ cephalicu^ upon the tents, which you must day by day shorten,
until at the last the whole sinus of the Fistula is shut up; which you shall
conjecture by the little and laudable quittor which the Fistula yields. Then
nothing else remains, but to cicatrize the part with your Dia^alma, or
Vuguentum de minio. The cure of a Fistula piercing the gu^.
If the Fistula penetrate to the Intestinum rectum, then cutting asunder of the
whole sinus of the Fistula by deligation is most sit. But first of all, you you
must dilate the sinus, and remove the Callus, (as has been said) for so the
part which is to be bound will be more thin, and so more easily cut asunder. As
for the thread wherewith you are to bind the sinus, two I commend unto you;
first, sealing thread, which is made of the best hemp, unboyled, and unwhitned:
for it is exceeding strong, and will not rot before it has wrought its effect.
The second, is a strong thread of silk, twisted; there is no great matter in
the color, whatsoever scrupulous Authors affirm: you may use either of these
as opportunity shall be offered.

The manner: of binding.
When you go about to bind the sinus, put in one end of the thread in the eye
of a small and flexible probe, then thrust the eye with the thread through the
sinus into Intestinum rectum: this being done, put into the Anus your finger,
and with it pull the thread out of the eye of the probe, and draw it out at the
Anus, or having bent the eye of the probe, bring it without the Anus; and then
putting the thread into the eye, draw that end through the outer orifice of the
Fistula, If the sinus be not very thick and long, you may by one strong
deligation bind off all the sinus, but if the sinus be thick and long, you
must use sundry constrictions, tying still the ends of the thread with a
running knot, that it may be the more readily loosed. Some after one deligation
only, more and more draw in the ends of the thread, with a round piece of a
stick turned about. When all the sinus after division, by deligation, lies
open, go forward in the cure, as has been set down when the sinus was
incised. Now nothing remains to conclude these discourses of Fistula's, but
to speak somewhat of the curing of the Fistula's in the joints. These griefs,
what pains they procure to the Patients, and troubles to the Surgeons who
dress them, it is so well known to those who have been employed in such
businesses, that I need not to use many words to persuade any to believe this:
experience bearing witness.



oedematus; and some of the tendons of the muscules are foul, and corrupted
very often: such tumors often fall out, when Fistula's happen in the wrists and
anckles.



The manner of searching.
Before I come to prognosticate of the events, let me acquaint you with one
thing, and that is this; that if you be called to children or young persons
troubled with a Fistula, or Fistula's in the joint or joints, that you make
trial of the sinus with a Mallow stalk answerable to it: for this kind of
probation is of all others less painful, and will encourage the diseased
persons to commit themselves to you care, when they perceive that you searched
the sores so easir hoping that your proceedings will be according to
you-beginning. The small stalk of the Mallow next to the leaf is always
slimie and flexible, and so is apt to slip into the sinus, causing either no
pain, or very little.

The presage.
As for the presages: I. No Fistula of the joint, although it be without
corruption of the cartilages or bones, is of an easy curation: for first by
reason of the pain which is caused by reason of sensiblenesse of the part, and
the increase of it by reason of the sharp medicaments which must be applied to
remove the Callus, symptomaticall severs, loss of appetite, watching, and at
last extenuation of the body; and at last a Hectic fever may be procured.

II. If a Fistula of the elbow or knee, have corruption, either of the
cartilages or bones annexed, it will require a long time to have it cured: for
the joints themselves being very sensible, it must be gently dressed.

III. If in Fistula's of the wrist, the bones of it, or of the back of the
hand, be carious, you shall find the cure to be difficult: for these bones are
very spungeous, apt to receive superfluous humidity, and so are hard to be
scaled.

IV. For these same reasons, the bones of the joint of the foot and the instep
are hard to be cured.

V. If Fistula's in the wrist or instep be accompanied with large and hard
tumors of the hands and feet, pronounce the cure to be uncurable: for then the
membranes, tendons of the muscules, and bones most commonly are corrupt.

VI. If an extenuation of the body, or a Hectic fever do accompany Fistula's
in the great joints, shun the cure: for the indications of curing, which
prescribe drying and cooling, in drying increase these griefs. Besides this,
complicate diseases are more hardly cured than those which are solitary.

If you shall demand of me, Object.
what course is to be taken with those who are possessed with such uncurable
Fistula's, if you be entreated of the diseased party, or the parties friends
to do your best?

I answer, that if after some trial, Answ.
you perceive the party to be uncurable, you ought to move the party to suffer
exstirpation, and dismembring of the limme, whether it be foot or arm, before
he grow weak, and become unable to endure any such operation. In young persons
you may attempt this operation; for I have adventured it with good success;
but in aged and crazie persons be not too bold: for the loss of the radical
moisture is more easily, by diet and medicaments, restored in those, than
these: the other may, but these must die.

The topicall means.
Now to come to the Topicall means, which are convenient for the curing of
Fistula's in the joints, (for as concerning the diet, and internal
medicaments, I have spoken of them sufficiently already) you must note that you
must have good anodine Cataplasmes to assuage pain, and good, easy, and
effectual means to remove the Callus. If you apply Mercury sublimate, or
Arsenick to remove the callositie of Fistulaes in the great joints, you shall
always cause a symptomaticall fever, and sometimes a mortification of the
part, if the party be of a cacochymicall constitution.

Anodine means.
As for the means which mitigate pain, I commend unto you Fallopius his
Cataplasme which he describes in his Treatise of Ulcers, cap. 17. And it is
this: ol. ^umbrie. chamemel. and aneth. an. ij. furfur. flor. chamem. farin.
hor. esypi. an. ii ss, vius allagant. x. fiat cataplasma. Renew it every
twelfth hour.

How the Callus is removed.
As for the removing of the callosity, no medicament is comparable in parity
with the powder of Turbith mineral, before it be washed, being mingled with
Terra Lemnia, sigillata, Oriental bole, and the vomitive Vitrioll; this
composition may be applied, being made up in form of a trochisk, or mingled
with populeon, and applied upon a tent. This medicament neither procures
extraordinary inflammation, or any horrible symptom.

As for the mundification, consolidation, and cicatrization of any Fistula in
the joint, after the removing of the Callus, seeing these intentions may be
compassed by the means which I delivered in my former Lecture, I will cease to
trouble you with the repetition of them, and so will conclude this Treatise
concerning Fistula's.

If in Fistula's of the joints there be carosity of the bones, I will deliver
the means to meet with this accident, when I shall discourse of the accidents
of ulcers, before I make an end of this subject.

LECT. XV. Of Herpes Exedens.
HAving delivered unto you, what I thought pertinent of compound ulcers without
malignity, method does require, that I speak fully in like manner of malign
ulcers.

What a malign ulcer is.
Malign is that, which differing from ordinary ulcers is not easily cured. By
Gal. de erisib. l. 1. c. 3. not ulcers only, but all diseases which have a
malignity annexed to them, all called (...), and (...). As a mild grief has
a mild cause, and no horrible, or extraordinary symptoms, and yields to
ordinary medicaments: so that which is malign has a fierce cause,
extraordinary symptoms, and yields not to ordinary medicaments. These
malign ulcers doc happen, when such a (...) has possessed the ulcerate part,
that it does corrupt the good nourishment which is sent to the part affected.
The aliment sent to the part is corrupted, How the aliment of the part is
corrupted.
either by putrefaction, or a venomous quality communicated.

Then the signs of a malign ulcer are three: First, it corrupts the part
which it invadeth, either by putrefaction,





Differences of ^^^lig^^^ ulcers.
The differences of malign ulcers are these: First, these ulcers are either
ancient or modern. I call those ancient, whereof mention is made by the
ancient Authors: those I call modern, which were only known to late Writers:
such are those ulcers which appear in scorbuticall, and pockie persons,
whereof I mean not to speak in this doctrine of ulcers, because they are
symptoms of the scurvie and pocks, which cannot be cured unless the griefs
themselves be cured. Now the setting down of the curation of these diseases,
will require large and particular Treatises.

Of malign ulcers known to the ancients, some are less malign, some more
malign. Of the less malign there are three sorts: Herpes exedens, Phagedana,
and Nome. Herpes exedens (...) in Greek, (...)
being caused of thick and sharp choler, it corrodeth the skin even to the
subjacent musculous flesh. It differs from Phagedaena, because it erodeth the
skin only; but Phagedaena, both the skin and subjacent flesh. Celsus lib. 5.
cap. 28. thus describes it: Herpes fit cum cutis exulceratione, and est sine
altitudine, latus, sublividus, inaequalis tamen, medium que sanescit extremis
affectis, etc That is, a Herpes is caused when the skin is ulcerate. It is not
deep, but broad, of a livid color, uneven; notwithstanding, the middle does
heal, the brims remaining sore. Wherefore if you perceive an ulcer to spread,
and cause sundry other small ulcers, which reach no deeper than the skin, you
may pronounce it to be Herpes exedens, or Formica ambulativa, or Corrosiva.

One thing is to be noted in the words of Celfu^, ^o^a.
that a Herpes exedens may be of a livid color; and so with thick and corrupt
choler, that melancholy must be joined, which is bred of Bilis atra, and so it
must somewhat participate with a cancerous ulcer. And in truth, such ulcers
often show themselves in old persons about the beginning of the tails of the
muscules of the legs; and from these a moist noisome and stinking virulent
matter will flow, and the ulcer it self will be very painful, and rebellions.

The signs
The signs then of a Formica corrosiva are these: It only corrodeth the skin,
and so is not deep, but broad; uneven it is, and sometimes of a livid or leady
color, if melancholy caused of Bilis atra be joined with thick and putrid
choler: otherwise the brims of this ulcer, and the parts adjacent are of a
yellowish color, bewraying the humor, which is the material cause of this
kind of ulcer.

The Proguosticks.
As for the Prognostics: First, that Herpes exedens, which is caused only of
thick and putrid choler, is not easily cured. Porus biliarius must be much out
of frame, when they cannot make shift to dispatch this humor by the passages
appointed for the evacuations of it; to wit, by the guts, and passages of the
urine; but suffer it to pass to the habit of the body by the vessels which
carry nourishment; to wit, veins and arteries.



Herpes exedens, proceeding only of thick putrid choler be hardly cured, as
has been proved; then if Bilis atra be annexed, surely the curation must be
much more hard; for this is a humor which causes more fearful symptoms; as
extreme pain, greater corrosion, and rebellion to ordinary medicaments: and if
the body has gotten a habit of breeding of it, it is hard, without
regeneration, to reduce it to its natural constitution, and to hinder the
provent and increase of it. Alchymists promise much, but for the most part they
prove clouds without rain.

The causes of ulcers according to the Spagyricks.
The Alchymists will have the efficient and material causes of all ulcers, to
be the superfluity of the salt of the natural balsome of the body, consisting
of a due proportion of salt, sulphur, and Mercury. This superfluous salt being
separate from the natural balsom by the expelling faculty, it is turned
sometimes to one, and sometimes to another part of the body, according as it is
apt to be moved, according to its thinness or thickness, volatility or
fixation. It settling in the part, it is more coagulate and calcined (the
expelling faculty not being able to expel it by the pores of the skin) and so
it acquireth able to expel it by the pores of the skin) and so it acquireth a
certain corrosion, and is the cause of those ulcers, which luxe no malign
quality accompanying the salt. They will have a volatill and subtle salt, such
as is in the nettle, and crowfoot to be the cause of an Erisypelas, and Herpes
miliaris; but a thicker and more fixed salt, such as that is of the Vitrioll,
to be the causes of these ulcers, which corrode the parts adjacent: such a salt
then as it, not very thick, and thoroughly fixed, they will have to be the
cause of Herpes exedens: but such a salt as is dense and thick, and thoroughly
fixed, having some malignity, to be the efficient cause of a Phagedaena and
Nome. This is their Philosophy of the efficient, and material causes of these
ulcers. And in truth it does fitly represent to the eye of the understanding
the nature of the humor, which dogmaticall Physicians will have to be the
causes of ulcers. It is no herefie to maintain either opinion; but he
deserves both credit and gain, who shall perform the curation of those
ulcers which the takes in hand. Most Patients require rather speedy and easy
curation of their griefs, than learned discourses of them. Howsoever, these
discourses are requisite for you, who meeting sometimes with scrupulous
Physicians and Patients, shall be drawn to show your Theoricall as well as your
Practical part.

The curation of Herpes exedens.
As for the curation: Three intentions ar required to cure a Herpes exedens: The
first is, that the humor which flows to the part be stayed. The second is,
that the humor which is impacted in the part, be evacuate. The third is, the
curation of the ulcer it self by convenient means.

1. Intention purging of the body.
The first intention, which is the staying of the humor from flowing to the part
affected, is performed by purging of the body from thick choler, and Bilis
atra, if the Formica corro siva be of livid color. To this purpose prescribe
such a Potion electuar. lenit. vj. pulver. sancti j. aq. endiviae iij. Misc. ut
fiat potie. Or if the Patient be of a dainty taste, and loath electuaries and
powders, then such a potion as this which I will set down will be convenient:
rhab. j. fol. sen. iij. ziij. zinzib. ss. spicae ss. Infundantur istaper hor.
2. in aq. font. serventis vj. deinde lento igne exhalent iij. ac coletur
decoctum, in quo dissolve mannae, and syrupi decichor. cumrhab. aut syrup.
Augustan. an. j. Misc. ^t fiat potie. If the body of the party troubled with
the ulcer, be plethorick and cacochymicall, it is convenient that he take a
purgative decoction for sundry days together. I will set down such a one as a
pattern; according to which you may frame unto your selves others like unto it
in efficacy. rad. eichor. malvar. horrag. an. i ss. polypod. querc. The
d^^^tion of a dec^ction purgative.
ij. flor. borrag. bugloss. viol. an. pug. 1. fol. sen. and hermodactyl. an.
ij. semin, anisi and faenicul. dulc. an. vj. rhab. vj. liquirit. i ss.
Infundantur infundenda per noctens: in aq. font. fervent. lib. viij. sequente
die adjectis reliqui^ coq. ad medias ac coletur decoctum, quod aromatizetur
cinan: vj. sumat ager mane lib. ss. ac tantundem hor. quarta pomeridiana.
Between ten and eleven a clock in the morning, let the patient take some broth
without bread, or a caudle, or aleberrie. These medicaments must be ministered
cold in the summer time, and warm in the winter.

The second intention in curing of Herpes exedens, ^. Intention
was said to be the vacuation of the humor impacted in the part. This is
effected by cathaereticall medicaments, or such as correct spungeous flesh:
they are sharper than the strongest mundificatives.

The ^^^^^ing di^^^ents of the (...)
In the momuments of the Ancients, we find the trochisks of Audron, Polyides,
and Musa, exceedingly commended in such fretting and creeping ulcers: which I
will set down both to case you of the enquiring of them, and the better to
apprehend and understand them. The Trochisci Andronis are thus deseribed:
malicorii x. alumin. iiij. vitriol. xij. mirrh. iiij. thur. aristol. rot.
gallar. an. viij. sal. ammoniac. iiij. fiat ex omnibus pulvis. Trochises
Polyida are thus set down: malicor. vj. myrrh. viij. alumin. v. thur. iiij.
vitriol. iij. The Trochisci Musae receive these things: alum. aloes, myrrh.
vitriol. an. vj. croci iij. malicor. iiij. I should advise to calcine both the
Alome and Vitrioll, which enter into these Trochisks, because they more
strongly dry than those which are uncalcined. No substance is so fit as
Vnguentu^ populaeum to make up the Trochisks. When you are to use these
Trochisks, you are to beat some of them to a subtle powder, and to mingle some
of the powder with some convenient unguent, taking a dram of the powder for
every ounce of the unguent: but what unguents are most fit you shall hear
anon. These are the magistrall means, which the Ancients used in curing
spreading ulcers.

The Topicall means of the modern Surgeons.
The modern and neoterick Surgeons, not contented with these, have found out
other means not inferior to these: The one is Mercuric precipitate, first
nobilitate by John de Vico, and fithence his time much used by all famous
Surgeons. This powder being washed with Plantane and Rose Water, and mingled
with sarcoticall unguents, does admirably heal rheumatick ulcers in tender
persons. If it being unwashed be mingled with alome calcined, taking ij. of it,
and j. of Alome, it is a cathereticall medicament, and fit to be applied to
foul and spreading ulcers, such as Herpes exedens, Phagedaena, and Nome are.
The other medicament invented by the late Chemists, is the Turbith mineral
precipitate by the oil of sulphur, or Vitrioll; it is now much used both in
the practice of Physic and Chirurgeric; it is ministered with good success to
persons infected with the Neapolitane lues; if they have either Cephalas
Gallica, extreme pains in their heads, or venereall ulcers. As for the use of
it in the practice of Surgery, I dare ascribe to my self the invention of
it (in these parts) without suspicion of any arrogancy. After that is
precipitate and calcined, it is very white, and is an excellent escharioticall
medicament, far surpassing either Mercury sublimate or Arsenick: for it is
more safe, and is not so painful: besides this, it does not cause such
inflammations as these do, neither does it procure so promptly symptomaticall
fevers. Being washed, it is used to work these effefts which Mercury
precipitate does, but much more effectually. To cause these medicaments to
evacuate the peccant humors out of the parts affected, you are to mingle these
with Paracelsus his mundificative; taking for every ounce of the unguent, a
dram either of the Mercury precipitate, or of the Turbith mineral washed, if
the parties grieved be of a tender constitution: or a dram of either, washed
and mingled with Alumen ustum, in that quantity as has been said, if the
bodies of the persons who are troubled with the ulcers be firm and hard, such
as laboring men have. You are to continue the use of these topicall means,
until the ulcer spread no more, and be red, and very clean. Having the two
first indications required in curing of Herpes exedens, the third indication so
follows: which is the curation of the ulcer it self.

To effect this, two scopes are required: The first, is to fill up the cavity
caused by the loss of the skin. The second, is to cicatrize the ulcers.

How the cavity in such ulcers is filled up.
As for the first scope, those medicaments are to be used which dry strongly,
yet have no corrosive faculty. Paulus Aeginet. de art. wedond. lib. 4. cap.
20. has sundry medicaments for this grief: if you peruse the Author, and
confider the descriptions, you will esteem them but sorry ones. Tagaultius in
institut. Chirurgicis lib. 1. de tumoribus praet. naturam, cap. 8.
has transcribed them, whom you may see: he has done this, for no other cause
(as I suppose) than this, that he had no better of his own. Ambros. Para^^
lib. 6. c. 14. has some medicaments for this grief, which are not to be
contemned. The first is this: ceruss. and tut. praepar. an. j. ol. ros. and
adipis caprae an ij. cort. pini ss. cer. q. s. fiat unguentum. If you add to
these things some lead calcined, Pomegranate-rindes and flowers beat to powder,
the unguent will be more effectual. The second is, unguentum enulatum
Mercurio, which he commends as an infallible medicament: if to every ounce of
it you add j. of the flowers of brimstone, you shall not miss of your
purpose. He does give one good note, that if you perceive the brims of the
ulcer more and more to be eroded, you touch them with Aqua fortis, Oleum
vitrioli, or Sulphuris, for by these means, sores which seem uncurable are
often healed. Hieron. Fabric. ab aq pendent. part. 2. lib. 1. cap. 28. advises
to minister inwardly either Goats-milke, or the decoction of Sarsa pariglia,
and without all doubt both are good; but there is no parity between the
Goats-milk, and the decoction of Sarsa: there is none of this company, who is
ignorant of the faculty of Sarsa in curing all malign, and creeping ulcers:
Goats-milke may have some place, if the party be extenuare, and a Hectic fever
feared.

As for the local medicaments, he commends this cerat. succi depaeto iij.
cera citrinae ij. rosin. pini ss. ol. myrtini ss. terebinthin. j. Bulliant ista
donec consumptus sit succus tabaccae, ae fiat coratum molle. I will not stick
to communicate with you the description of an unguent of Tabacca which I use
mine own self, neithe^ ^m I ashamed to prefer it before all others of this
kind: the descriptions whereof I have seen. Thus then it is to be made:
axung. porcin. viij colophon. iiij. cer. iij. succi de pato lib. 1. paeti
contus. man. ij. coq. haec ad succi consumpt: tum add gani^^i Elemni, vernicis
alb terebinthin. an. j. ac coletur unguentum. It is an excellent incarnative in
wounds as well as ulcers: besides this, no better mundificative can be devised
in tender bodies, if one dram of Mercury precipitate washed, or of the
yellow Turbith be mingled with an ounce of it. When you perceive the ulcers to
be filled up; How (...) ulcers are skinned.
then skin them with this Desiccative of mine: Sevi dmar. lb. ss. Axung.
porcin. iij. Cer. veruic. colophon. an. ij. hisce ab ^gne amot is insperge
calaminar. in vino albo ter extinct. j. Lythargyr. Plumbi calcin. Aeris usti,
Henrici rub. an. ss. fiat ceratum. The two prime medicaments which are set
down in Anndotaries to effect this, are Deficativum rubrum, and Vnguentum de
minio, otherwise called Vuguentum rubrum caphuratum. Your Emplaster de Minio
does not come near to these in efficacy. Let this which I have delivered
serve for the discerning and curing of Herpes miliaris, or Formica ambulativa,
or corrosiva.

LECT. XVI. Of Phagedena end Nome.
HAving discoursed in the former Lecture of the first kind of the less malign
ulcers, which were said to be Herpes exedens, or Formica ambulativa, or
corrosiva, I am to procced to the other two, to wit, Phagedaena and Nome and
because they have not a small resemblance, by reason of the similitude of
Symptoms, I will jointly speak of both: and because what latter barbarous
writers have delivered of them is confused, I will labor diligently to
distinguish them, that you shall not need to fear to talk of them before the
most learned, if occasion shall be offered. These late writers, in the number
of whom are Gordonius, Buyrus, Valescus de Taranta, Ioannes de Vigo, Petrus de
Argelata, Guido de Cauliaco, and sundry others, who lived in our forefathers
times, when barbarousnesse had exiled eloquence, and ignorance learning: and
when all liberal Arts and Sciences had suffered a strange and fearful
eclips, although they set down sometimes medicaments not to be rejected; yet
I would not have you to trust much to their discourses, or to labor to imitate
their phrases. And as the Arabian Physicians do far exceed these, so the
Grecians are to be preferred unto the Arabians in their discourses, although
they come not near unto the Arabians in seeting down remedies for the griefs.

If you consider either the variety or pleasantness of them: for many ages
together here in the West, Hippecrates, Galen, Paulus Aegineta, Oribasins,
Alexander Trallianus, and the rest of the Greek Authors lay unrespected, and
the Arabians only were in request, although most rudely and barbarously
translated; which no judicious and impartial Preader of their monuments will
or can deny. Wherefore concerning these griefs, I will deliver unto you what
the Grecians, the parents of Physic, and all other liberal Arts and
Sciences, have delivered methodically: As for the medicaments which are to be
applied, I will pick out the best, which either the ancient or the modern
writers have revealed to us: neither will I conceal from you what I have found
effectual in mine own practice.

The Etymon of the name.
(...) then is a Greek denomination, derived from (...), which is edo, to eat:
so that (...) may be called in Latin Vlcus exedens: in English an eating ulcer.

The significations of it.
It signifies two things: First, it is taken for all manner of corroding
ulcers, which seize not upon the skin only, but upon the subjacent flesh also:
In this signification it is taken by the ancient Physicians, who flourished
before Galen^ time. Secondly, it is taken for a special kind of ulcer by the
later Physicians, as Galen. Comment. In aphor. 45. lib. 6. aphor. Hippoc.
witnesses. And it is fit that in discourses and writings all things be set
down distinctly; for this much helps the memory.

The descripion of it.
It being taken thus for a particular kind of ulcer, it may be described an
ulcer tumified without putrefaction, deep and corroding the parts adjacent: In
that it is said to be an ulcer tumified, it is distinguished from (...), the
third kind of eating ulcers, which corrodeth the sound parts near unto it,
without any remarkable tumor, as morat large you shall hear anon. It is said
to be deep, because It fretreth not only the skin, but the fleshy part also
unde the skin. And by this circumstance it is distinguished from Herpos
exedens, which is an exulceration of the skin only. So this kind of ulcer is
not without cause called (...), or ulcus exedens, because it eats and
fretteth the sound parts near unto it, making them of this fame condition with
the diseased.

The mater^^ cause of it.
It is caused of the bilious humor adust inclining to that melancholy humor,
which is superfluous and not natural; yet it is not to be thought that it it
very thick, as is that which procures a cancer: or so thin as that which
causes Erisypelas and Herpes. This humor, by reason of the plentifulnes of it,
does fill the brims of the ulcer, and causes a swelling to appear; but by
reason of its malignitie and acrimonie, it fretteth the parts adjacent which
are sound. Nevertheless this humor is without putrefaction, which is always
in the ulcer called (...), or ulcus depascens, an ulcer which feeds upon the
parts adjacent that are sound; for in Phagedaena there is erosion proceeding of
a malign quality without putrefaction, or corruption of the whole substance,
which is always joined with malignitie in a (...).

The signs.
Then the pathognomonicall signs of a Phagedaena are these: First, it corrodeth
not the skin only, as Herpes exedens does, but the subjacent flesh also: The
second is this, that in Phagedaemicall ulcers the brims are tumified: The third
is, that although there is erosion of the sound parts adjacent, yet there is no
putrefaction: And by these two last signs it is distinguis^ed from (...),
ulcus depascens, a consuming ulcer.

(...) in Greek, in Latin Vleus depascens, (...)
. in English a feeding or consuming ulcer. It is derived from (...), The Etymon,
Depascor, I feed upon: for it passing from the diseased parts, it seizes upon
the sound and whole parts, and feeds upon them by communicating unto them
both malignitie and putrefaction. It may be thus described.

(...), it is a corrosive ulcer; without any tumor in the brims, The (...)
endued not only with malignitie, but putrefaction, or corruption of the part,
also feeding upon the adjacent sound parts, and that deeply. In that it is
termed a corrosive ulcer or malign, it agroeth in this with Herpes miliaris
and Phagedaena. But whereas it is said to be without any tumor in the brims, I
mean remarkable, and to have putrefaction annexed, by these two signs it is
distinguished from Phagedaena, or Vlcus oxedens, an eating ulcer: for so I
think fit to name it; that in denomination also it may be known from (...)
ulcus depascens, a consuming or feeding ulcer. Last of all, where it is
affirmed that it does corrode not superficially only the skin, but the
subjacent fleshy parts also: as it has this common with Phagedaena, so by this
it is known from Herpes exedens; for this causes exulceration only in the
skin.

(...) and ^^lephian ulce^;
But seeing there is often mention made in the monuments of the ancient
Physicians, of (...), and (...), of Chironian and Telephian ulcers, as of
Galen, Paulus Aegineta, and others who follow them, it will not be amiss to
discourse a little of such ulcers: that you may know what is meant by these
denominations, and be able to answer any, if you be demanded what is meant by
these terms.

Of these ulcers thus speaks Galen. de tumorib. praeter not. c. 13. (...),
etc. whose discourse may be thus Englished: Those ulcers which consume, and
meddle with the sound parts adjacent, or about, corroding them; all these are
called Phagedaenica. So that Phagedaena is framed of the ulcer and the tumor.
Herpes in like manner does erode the parts about it; but it rests in the skin
only: but Phagedaena does extend it self as well to the subjacent parts as to
the skin. But it is to no purpose to call ulcers Chironian, or Telephian. It is
sufficient to call all such ulcers (...), Maligna: that is, of an ill condition
or quality. By this passage of Galen translated by me, you may gather three
conclusions.

The first is, that in a Phagedaena there is an erosion not only of the skin;
but of the fleshy parts subjacent also, by the which it is distinguished from
Herpes exedens, or Formica ambulativa, whereof I discoursed in my former
Lecture.

The second is, that in a Phagedaena there is a tumor in the brims of the
ulcer, whereas there is none in a (...), or a consuming ulcer, called by Latin
Authors Vlcus depascens, to distinguish it from Vlcus exedens, an eating ulcer.

The third is, that the denomination of Chironian and Telephian ulcers, do
only signify malign ulcers in general; but no special kind of ulcer in
particular. In Paulus Aegineta de art. medend. lib. 4. c. 46. bearing this
inscription of ulcers of an evil condition, which are called Chironian and
Telephian by Physicians: these words are read as I have translated them. Old
and inveterate ulcers, which hardly admit skinning, which are named (...), or
malign, some call Chironian, as if they did require the hand of the Centaure
Chiron, the most excellent in the Art of curing: others call them Telephian,
such as Telephus was troubled with, which require the helpful hand of
Achilles, who cured him. So he jumpeth with Galen, that these titles were
ascribed to all malign ulcers; but did point at no particular kind of ulcer.

Now it cannot be amiss briefly to show unto you what men Chiron and Telephus
were, seeing they are so famously recorded by the Poets: They who are Scholars
amongst you, cannot but be delighted when the studies of the youth are brought
to remembrance. Chiron.
Chiron then was one of the Centaures, which were a people who inhabited the
places near to Pelion, the hill of Thessaly. These first began to break great
horses, and to fight on horseback: wherefore the neighboring people, when it
first saw them, believed them to be strange creatures, composed and framed
partly of humane, partly of horses members: O strange simplicitie^ This Chiron
was the son of Sa^^ne and Phillyra. It seems that he was called Chiron,
because he had a singular dexterity in the manual operations of Chirurgerie:
for (...), in Greek is an hand. He taught Aesculapius the Art of curing:
Pelcus, Achilles his father, was his son in law, of whose daughter Thetis he
begat Achilles, so much commended for valor and strength by the Heathen Poets.
He taught Achilles being his grandchild, Chirurgerie, playing upon the
Citherne, and horsemanship. The two kinds of Centorie, the greater and the
lesser, Centaurium majus and minus, are named of him, whereof there is great
use in the practice both of Physic and Chirurgerie. It is like that he was
fortunate in the curing of malign ulcers, by reason of the great skill which
he had in the knowledge of the faculty of plants. He lived but 2690. years
after the creation of the world, that is, 77. years before the destruction of
Troy, which fell out Anno mundi 2767. Then 2685. years are expired sithence
famous Chiron lived. This may serve to prove the antiquity of Chirurgerie.
Posterity for his worth named the ninth sign of the Zodiac Sagittarius, who
rules the thighs, from him: From whence Virgil of the twelve Signs:

Armatusque arcu Chiron, and corniger hircus.
Chiron armed with bow, and the horny goat.
By this we may gather how virtue and learning were regarded in the rude and
simple ages, which are very little esteemed in these civil times, wherein
most men are given to enjoy their pleasures, which will cost them too dear,
when the general account shall be made.

Telephus was one of Hercules his sons, Telephus.
who being adopted by the King of Mysia who then reigned, after his death
succeeded him in government. When he would have hindered the Grecians marching
toward Troy, from passing through his country, in combat he was wounded by
Achilles; but afterward being reconciled to Achilles, he was cured by him, he
mingling with either an unguent or a cataplasme, (for Malagma signifies both)
the rust of his spear, and it is not unlikely; for there is none here (as I
suppose) who knows not the faculty of Crocus Martis in cicatrizing of
rheumatike ulcers, it drying strongly without any sharpness; unto which the
rust of old iron washed and prepared comes very near. So Achilles made
sufficient proof of his skill in the Art of Chirurgerie, which he learned of
his grandfather Chiron. Go to then, let effeminate Hind-calves despise the
Art of Chirurgerie, which so eminent a person as Achilles was, was not ashamed
to practice. From Achilles Millefole is called Sideritis Achillea, Achilles his
Star-woort: and it may be that it was one of the chiefest ingredients of the
cataplasme: surely it is an excellent healing plant. To conclude then this
point: malign ulcers who are not easily cured, are called Chironia, because
Chiron was able to cure them, and Telephia because Telephus was troubled long
with such an one.

Now time calls to go forward in the handling of these corrosive ulcers: but
before I set down the manner of curing, the predictions of the events which
are like to fall out in the course of curation are first to be set down. I.
Presages.
Neither of both these corrosive ulcers are of easy curation, what body soever
they light upon; and for three causes: for first, there is a (...), an ill
constitution and temperature of the part, by the which the aliment which is
sent to the part, although it be good, is corrupted. Secondly, a fresh supply
of noxious humors is sent most commonly to maintain the grief. Thirdly,
because the ordinary medicaments which are applied with good success most
commonly to other ulcers, in these ulcers are ineffectuall. II. If these ulcers
light upon a cacochymicall body, the case is yet worse: for the constitution of
the body must be altered before these griefs can be cured, which is a matter
of no small difficulty. III. If these seize upon decrepit persons, the case is
in a manner desperate: for in such the natural heat is weak, and the radical
moisture almost spent: so that great store of corrupt and saltish humors are
bred in the bodies of such, which being sent to the weak parts ulcerate,
increase these griefs.

The intentions of curing.
The curation is performed by three means: to wit, a convenient diet, internal
medicaments, and local applications: As for the diet, Dict.
those meats and drinks must be used which afford a laudable juice; whereof I
have spoken before: and in that measure that the natural heat may be able to
concoct them, that no superfluities be bred. Besides this, meats which are
easily corrupted in the stomach are to be shunned, as milk meats, summer
fruits, and salt meats: slimie fishes, and Swines flesh are to be shunned,
because they afford no good nourishment.

Internal medicaments.
Of internal medicaments I mean not to speak much, because this would require
a longer time than now can be permitted. If a person be troubled with an
ordinary Phagedaena or Nome, be of strong constitution and plethorick, you may
minister unto such Hiera Diacolocynthidos magistralis, Apud Rinedaeum de hieris
cap. 4.
or Pilulae aggregativae majores: If the party be weak, you may minister
Piluae stomachicae: Those which I use are these: Aloes ij. Rhab. Agar.
Trochiscat. an. j. Mirrhae, ij. Mastich. j. Syrup. Augustani, q. s. ut fiat
massula. dos. Pilul. 2. pond. ss. a primo somno: vel sumat unam paulo ante
coenam, alteram paulo antequam ineatur somnus. Whether the parties be strong or
weak, who are troubled with these corrosive ulcers, they are to use decoctions
made of Sarsaparilla, Guajack, Radix Chinae, Tormentil, Bistort and Comfrey
roots, with the which you are to join some Vulneraries, as Agrimony, the tops
of S. John's woort, Sanicle, our Ladies mantle, mountain and garden Avens,
Salomons seal.

Nomae verenderum.
Nomae of the privy parts were known to the ancient writers, as we may
perceive by Paulus Aeginetae de Art. med. lib. 4. c. 44. sub finem. In our
times they seldom are seen to proceed from any other cause, than impure
copulation. Such are often seen, in the which the whole Praepatium does
sometimes rot away. These corroding venereall ulcers require the general cure
of the Neopolitan disease, besides effectual Topics.

The application of Topicall means.
Now follows the last indication of curing these corrosive ulcers, which is
the application of local medicaments. In a Phagedaena wherein there is a tumor
of the brims, you are to apply Vuguentum populeum, and Vnguentum album
caphuratum, mixed together in equal quantity to them. The second thing which
I would have you to observe is this, that Nome, or ulcus depascens does require
stronger Topics than Phagedaena, or ulcus exedens. Mark then these
medicaments which I have picked out of Aegineta: I. Calcis viva, Vitriol.
Vomit. an. ij. Auripigmenti j. fiat pulvis subtili^ ex his. For a Phagedaena
apply the unguent of Tobacco, having some of this powder mingled with it, as
ij. for an ounce of the unguent. If you have to do with a Nome, make a
liniment of this powder and Oxymel, and apply it to the ulcer. II. Vitriol.
albi jss. Croci Martis, vj. Gahar. viij. Crocus Martis well prepared far
exceeds their Squamae ferri, the scales of iron. Receive this medicament of
my description: Calc. viv. Vitriol. albi, Auripigmenti, an j. Malicor.
Balanstior. cornu Cervi ust. Gallar. Pumicis calcinati, Alum. usti, rad.
Aristol. rot. an. ss. Croci Martis, Plumbi calcinati, aris usti, an. vj. Cum
melle despumate fiat Electuarium. Let me commend unto you an Aegyptiacum which
is not the vulgar: Primo infundantur absynthium, Cardum benedictus, Centanrium
minus, Scordium, Chamaedrys, Malicorium, Balaustia, Gallae, and rad. Aristol.
rot. in aceto fortiffimo: hujus Aceti colati vij. Aerug. v. Mell. xiiij. coq.
lento igne ad unguenti consistentiam. This medicament is effectual in
venereall ulcers of the throat, and privy parts, and in all sordid ulcers.

How long you are to use these medicaments.
You are to continue the application of these medicaments until you see the
corrosion stayed, and the ulcers red and well mundified. When you have
perceived this, incarnate the ulcers with some of the consolidatives before set
down by me. Last of all, cicatrize the sores with such epuloticall means as I
set down in my former Lecture.

In admonition.
But to shut up the delivery of these ulcers, which are of the mildest sort of
the malign, so much as concerns the knowing and curing of them: let me
advise you that you promise no sudden cure of any ulcer, if it has continued
but one month: for the bodies of the inhabitants of this Island, are for the
most part plethorick, they will observe no good diet, and will not be
estranged from the sacrifice of Venus. It is a strange thing to see what
corrupt and ugly stuff is covered by the curtains of a beautiful skin, in a
number of them. I make no doubt but many amongst you, who are least employed in
practice, have had sundry patients, who have come to you pretending that they
were only troubled with a pimple of the forehead, a red eye, a difficulty of
swallowing, shedding of the hair, watching in the night time, and pains
between and in the joints: whereas indeed these griefs were venereall
pustules, the Neapolitan Opthalmia, virulent ulcers of the throat, Alopecia
Gallica, the vigils of Venus, and last of all the pockie joint ague. It is no
hard matter to those who are judicious, to find out the symptoms of that
grief, which Vigo, the father of Empyricks, does affirm to be able to bring
the accidents of all diseases in particular, according to the diversity of the
constitution of the bodies upon the which it seizes. If therefore you see any
ulcers, in what part soever, more painful than the solution of such an unity
requires, that it yields not to ordinary medicaments appointed for ulcers,
than suspect that there is a latent malignitie. Value not therefore your credit
at a trifle, be not too bountiful in promises, lest they be required at your
hands: suspect and pronounce in doubtful cases always the worst; for the best
will save it self. Thus doing, you shall bring in no new practice. Many
practicers there be, it is uncertain whether of ignorance or policy, who
aggravate the grief of those who wholly commit themselves to them, that the
greater credit and gain may redound unto themselves, if the persons diseased
escape, and the less blame may be laid to their charge if they die. In these
proceedings there are two excellent teachers, Skill and Conscience: The first
is to enable, the second is to direct practice. So much I thought good to
deliver unto you of the three mildest kinds of malign ulcers, to wit, Herpes
exedens, Phagedaena, and Nome.

LECT. XVII. Of a Cancer and a cancerous ulcer.
WHen I ceased from reading last, I put an end to the doctrine of ulcers less
malign. Now am I to discourse of these ulcers which are accounted most
malign, and are to indeed. Of these there are two sorts, a cancerous ulcer,
and a leprous ulcer: of purpose I referred the handling of a Cancer and a
cancerous ulcer to this place, because it fitteth them best, as you may
perceive anon. First then, I will discourse of a cancerous tumor, and then of a
cancerous ulcer. A cancerous tumor is called by Galen, de tumor. praet. not. c.
12. (...), in Latin Cancrosus tumor; It may be thus defined:

The description of a cancerous tumor.
It is a tumor proceeding of Bilis atra, round, hard, unequal, of a leady
color, hot, very painful to the patient, and having full veins implanted in
the adjacent parts. For as a crab, in Latin Cancer, The cause of the name.
has a body and feet of a livid color, and whatsoever it claspeth with the
claws, it holds it firmly, so this grief is of a livid color, and so
girdeth the part which it possesses, that it seems to be nailed to the
part, and about it the full veins exquisitely imitate the feet of a crab: and
from these similitudes the tumor has its name.

In the description the tumor is said to proceed from Atra bilis, or
melancholy, or choler adust; for it signified both: The differences of atra
bilis.
for there are two sorts of Atra bilis: the one is caused of natural
melancholy adust: the other is caused of yellow choler burned, and it is much
more malign than the former. See Galen, lib. 3. de atra bile.

The efficient causes.
There are sundry efficient causes which engender these humors in our bodies:
First, a strong hot distemperature of the liver, which burns the natural
melancholy and yellow choler, and so hatcheth this Bilis atra. Secondly,
according to Galen, c. 10. lib. 2. ad Glaucon. the spleen by reason of its
weakness and distemperature, does not draw unto it self the superfluous
natural melancholy, and so staying long without it own proper place it is
inflamed and burned. Thirdly, sometimes this humor is caused of the menstruall
courses, and Hemorrhodes stopped. Fourthly, very often an ill diet breeds
this humor, as when one uses meats of an ill juice, and of a thick substance
and hot quality, as garlic, onions, leekes, snailes, venison, pease and
beans, and such like. But there is nothing more pernicious than the immoderate
use of potent and strong wines, such are all kinds of Sacks, and Greek wines,
which exceedingly burn the humors in the mass of the blood. An hot air and
perturbations of the mind set forward also this humor. But seeing there are
degrees of malignitie in Atra bilis; The cause of a Cancer not ulcerate and
ulcerate.
the cancerous tumor, or Cancer not ulcerate, is caused of the milder sort of
it; but a Cancer ulcerate is procured of that kind which is most malign.

Why a Cancer is not bred of natural melancholy.
Take heed that you imagine not any sort of Cancer to be engendered of natural
melancholy, which Galen, de art. curat. ad Glaucon. c. 10. lib. 2. affirms to
be that part of the blood which represents the wine lees, when it is made by
the liver, which is drawn by the spleen, wherewith it is nourished: for
superfluous natural melancholy causes only Scyrrhus.

The material cause of a Cancer.
Of the material cause of a Cancer thus speaks Galen, De tumor. praet. not,
c. 12. When Bilis atra seateth it self in the flesh, if it be sharp it
corrodeth the adjacent flesh, and does cause an ulcer; but if it be milder, it
procures a Cancer without ulceration. Aeginet. lib. 6. c. 45. has these
words: A Cancer is a tumor unequal, with tumified brims, ugly to behold, of a
leady color, indolent, sometimes not ulcerate, which Hippocrates calls
(...), or hidden; sometimes ulcerate: And seeing it has it beginning from Atra
bilis, for the most part it becomes ulcerate: So he.

That a Cancer can hardly be without pain.
Where you are to note, that he affirms a Cancer to be indolent, or without
pain, which is contrary both to experience and reason: Celsus also, lib. 5.
c. 28. seems to grant some Cancers to be without pain. For first,

The signs of a Cancer.
The signs then of a cancerous tumor are these. I. According to Galen, lib. 14.
method. c. 9. A Cancer in the beginning is hardly discerned: for the symptoms
are but mild, and sometimes it is no bigger than a pease, or a bean, or a
filbert-nut. II. It is hard, by reason of the thickness of the humor, which
withstandeth the touch. III. It is of a leady color, representing the color
of the humor whereof it is bred, yea the more malign it is, the more livid and
black it appears. IV. The tumor is very painful: First, because Atra bilis
the material cause of it is hot: Secondly, because no heat can breath out, the
substance of the Cancer being so compact. V. It is round, because the matter
being thick, is not so apt to fleet abroad. VI. It is unequal, by reason of
the ebullition of the humor, which notwithstanding is not equally active in all
parts of the tumor. Last of all, a Cancer bath black or livid veins extended
to the adjacent parts; for this atrabilious humor cannot sweat out of the
veins, which is the cause that they appear very full.

What parts a Cancer may possess.
As for the parts which a Cancer invadeth, although it may breed in all parts of
the body, yet it is most often seen in the breasts and matrices of women, and
in the lips and nose of the face. I have seen it also in ano, and in the top
of the yard.

Why it does possess the breast.
The breasts most promptly receive this atrabilious humor, because they are of
glandulous and loose substance: Besides, the Mammariae veins meet with the
Vterinae under the straight muscules of the belly; so that the matrix may
discharge it self of adust and feculent melancholy blood by regurgitation,
which may cause a Cancer if it pass to the dugs.

Why the matrix.
A Cancer in like manner does appear very often in the matrix, by reason of
the detention of the menstruous blood, which staying above the ordinary time
is burned. The lips also are spungeous and soft, and so apt to receive atra
bilis, the material cause of a Cancer. Galen, de art. curat. ad Glauconem,
lib. 2. c. 10. has these words: Cancerous tumors may be in all parts of the
body, but chiefly in the paps of women, which have not their purgation
according to nature. Aeginet. lib. 6. c. 45. says; A Cancer does happen to
sundry places of the body, but chiefly to the matrix and paps of women.

As for the predictions before curing, Prognostics.
receive these: I. Although Cancers may appear in all the quarters of the
year, yet most commonly they show themselves about the ending of the summer,
and during the whole time of the harvest: because in these seasons, the
melancholic exceedingly increases, and humors become adust. II. No Cancer is
easily cured; for if all ulcerate Cancers be incurable, according to Galen, c.
5. lib. de atra bile: no cancerous tumor can easily be cured, it having the
same efficient cause. III. A Cancer not ulcerate, if it has possessed any
deep cavitie of the body, as the matrix or anus, it is not to be dealt
withal, according to Hippoc. lib. 6. aphor. 38.

The explication of Hippocrates.
You must understand that he means the curing by excision, causticall means,
or ustion: for the ulcer will not admit cicatrization, and so the diseased
parties live in continual pain and filthiness, and at the last die
miserably. But he forbids not the application of local means, which
assuage pain and gently mundifie. IV. Cancerous tumors in the outward parts,
and only superficial in the beginning, may be cured according to Galen, lib.
2. c. 10. ad Glaucon. V. When cancerous tumors are come to a remarkable
bigness, they only can be cured by extirpation. VI. If a Cancer not ulcerate
has possessed the matrix, the party feels great pain in the groines, and
has often a difficulty in making of water: If the Cancer be ulcerate, it
sends out a loathsome and cadaverous smell, the vapor whereof ascending to
the heart and brain, causes sometimes fainting. VII. If the afflicted party
be weak, and the cancerous tumor be inveterate, or of along continuance, it is
not to be dealt withal with excision, adustion, or potentiall cauterie: only
lenitives are to be used to procure a palliative cure: for sundry have
continued even to their decrepit old age, with a Cancer not ulcerate.

The curation of a cancerous tumor.
Now it is time to address my self to the setting down of the curation of a
cancerous tumor: The means appointed for it are three, Dieteticall,
Pharmaceuticall, and Chirurgicall.

vinegar. Many commend a cataplasme of Raisms stoned, Rue, and the leaves of
Nightshade. This Fabricius, ab aqua pendent. commends: Solan. hort. virg.
aureae, sonchi, an. man. ij. coctis in aqua and contusis add far. siligin. lb.
j. Ol. ros. v. fiat cataplasma. The Surgeons in Italy had in Fabricius his
time, a medicament of green Frogs effectual against a Cancer, and in the
Gout: thus it is made; Take a good number of green Frogs, whose mouths fill
with sweet butter, afterward put these Frogs in an earthen pot well glazed,
having a cover, and the bottom full of holes: place this pot in the mouth of
another earthen pot placed in the ground; lute these well together, and the
cover of the upper pot: then for the space of three hours, let a gentle fire
of Charcole be set about the upper pot, to drive down all moisture and fat to
the lower: when the pots are cold, take out the Frogs out of the upper pot, and
beat them until you feel no roughness between your fingers: Last of all,
mingle the fat and moisture in the lower pot, with this substance, and keep
this mixture in a clean galley-pot. Receive also this medicament from Parrey.
Lib. 6. de tumor. praet. not. c. xxx. Theriac. veter. Succi lactuc. and o. Ros.
an. j. Succi cancrorum ss. Vitellos ovorum induratos numero 2. Ducantur in
mortario plumbeo ad unguenti consistentiam. He also in this same chapter
commends a thin plate of reed anointed with quicksilver. How often the
Cancer is to be dressed.
The Cancer is to be dressed morning and evening. So much then of a cancerous
tumor, or a Cancer not ulcerate, now am I to deliver unto you the curation of a
Cancer ulcerate.

Of a cancerous ulcer.
A cancerous ulcer is an ugly ulcer, having a most stinking smell, thick lips,
and turned outward, greenish and fretted, which yields a Sanies black, or of
a dark yellow color, and is exceeding painful Riolan the father in his
Chirurgerie, in the second Section of ulcers, c. 13. affirms this sanious
matter to be a strong poison. No death could be devised too cruel for such an
one as should give it to a man.

The signs.
The partials of the definition contain the signs of a Cancel ulcerate, so
that I need not to insist longer in the explication of this point.

The differences.
Of a cancerous ulcer there are two mean differences, Lupus and Noli me
tangere: that is in the thigh or leg, this in the face. A Cancer in other parts
of the body has no particular denomination; but does retain the general
appellation, with addition of the part affected, as a Cancer of the breast.

A Note.
One thing is to be noted, that in other countries, if a Lupus be troublesome,
they apply the flesh of an hen, chicken, pigeon, whelp, or kitling cut asunder,
according to the length: for so the fury of the disease cease, the
malignitie of the sanies is eased, and the corrosion is stayed: Sec Riolan and
Ambrose Parrey in the places before cited.

The Prognostics.
As for the prognostics: First, if a Cancer not ulcerate be of hard curation,
an ulcerate must be of an harder: Secondly, if the party be weak and
feverish,

The curation.
As for the curation, the diet, phlebotomie and purging, which I have set down
for the curing of a cancerous tumor will serve here also: wherefore this only
remains to set down the local medicaments.

Local means.
This then shall be the first: Plumbi usti and loti, Tutiae and Thuris, an. v.
Absynthii. j. ol Ros. lb. ss. Cerae, jss. Succi Solani, q.s. Ducantur in
mortario plumbeo ad unguenti consistentiam. Apply this upon pledgets of lint,
or fine tow: above this, to assuage pain, apply a cataplasme of the leaves of
Succorie, marish-Mallow, and the white Poppie beaten, and tempered with oil of
Roses.

Tagaultiut, tractat. de ulcer, c. 19. Moysten a double cloth in the juice of
the Nightshade, and apply it to the ulcer; then apply above this cloth a
pledget of tow or wool moystened in this same liquor. You may keep the juyces
of herbs all the year long, How the juice of herbs is to be kept.
by putting them in a glass, having a fosset in the bottom, and pouring oil
upon the juice, that it may be three inches thick above the juice.





Mellis verbascini, ij. pulv. Malicor. iij. ol. Nuc. j. Misc.

Fallopius is excellent: ol. Ros. and Omphacini, De ulcerib. c. 12.
an. vj. ol. Myrtini and unguent. popul. an. iij. fol. Solan. and Plantag. an.
man. ij. Bulliant lentissimo igne ad Succorum consumptionem, tum colentur:
colatura add cera iiij. hac eliquata omnia amoveantur ab igne: Quum adhue
tepent add lithargyr. vj. Cerussae. ij. Tutiae, ij. Plumbi usti ijss. Ducantur
in mortario plumbeo per duas horas. All these medicaments which I have set
down only are to stay the increase of a Cancer, and to abate the raging pain
in those Cancers which are large and deep.

The use of corrosives.
If a Cancer be but superficial, it may be eaten out with Arsenick sublimed:
The manner of the sublimation of it and use I did show, when I discoursed of
Fistula's.

The curation of a Noli me tangere.
A Noli me tangere in the lip, if it has not eroded a great quantity, it may
be cured as an hare-lip, with little deformity.

For a Cancer in the matrix or anus.
As for a Cancer in the matrix or anus, use this medicament: Stercor. bubul. lb.
iiij. herb. Robert. Plantag. Sempervivi, Hyoscyami, Portular. Lacturend. an.
man. j. Canc. fluviat. numero 12. Contundantur omnia, ac distillentur in
Alembico plumbeo, imbuatur caphura, ac frequenter injiciatur aut sola, aut cum
aqua spermat. ranar. As for the method of the extirpation of a Cancer, I will
reserve it to that part of Chirurgerie which teaches the way to remove things
inconvenient to nature, called (...).

Medicaments in the shops.
The medicaments in the Apothecaries shops fit for Cancers are, Vnguentum de
tutia, de lithargyr. de minio, De siccativum rubrum. Empyricall means.
Fabricius ab aq. pendent. de tumor. c. 3. sets down a method whereby an
Empyrick cured sundry Noli me tangeres, and Cancers in other places: and it is
this, Vitriol. lb. jss. Auripigment. Sulphur. vivi, an. iiij. Sal. gemm. iij.
cum aceto fiat pasta. In ollaterrea probe lutata siccetur in furne. With this
powder he consumed the Cancer, but by diverse applications.

How we shall know a Cancer to be exstirpate.
You shall know that the Cancer is quite extirpate, if laudable flesh appear,
like to the seeds of the Pomegranate, if it yield good quittor, and no sanious
and stinking matter: then he healed it with this unguent: Mell. despumat. iiij.
Sevi hircin. limatur. capri, an. jss. Litharg. auri, j. Misc. Another in Essex
about thirty years ago, in curing of Cancers, used only the green Treat,
and white Vitriol, for every ounce of the Treat taking j. of the Vitriol: and
by all likelihood the medicament of Pain the Smith, with the which he went
about to cure Noli me tangeres, was but a medicament composed of Arsenick,
Orpiment, unslaked Lime, Bole and sweet Butter. You see how I conceal nothing
from you.

The cause of Cancers according to Chemists.
The Chemists will have arsenicall, realgarian, and orpimentall substances
separated from the natural balsome, or composition of the body, to be the
causes of these cancerous tumors and ulcers, when they settle in the parts, and
cannot be discussed: howsoever, they represent fitly the nature of a Cancer:
for as it is, so are they of a putrefactive quality. Let no man marvel, that
sundry minerals may be in the body, seeing we see stones in the gall, kidneyes,
and bladder

The manner how to cure Cancers according to Alchymists.
For the curing of Cancers they commend Antimony so prepared, as it does not
vomit, or trouble they body; but either procures sweat, or purges downward:
and indeed it is an excellent medicament: for it changes the constitution of
the body, and mundifieth the mass of blood.

Their Topics.
As for the Topics, use the oil of Arsenick, or whereof Mercuries vitae is
made, mixed with oil of Roses in due proportion, and these two have no
fellows; for I protest, I have often made experiment of both. If any the
desirous to know, and make use of any thing which I have delivered, I will not
be nice to impart it.

LECT. XVIII. Of the Leprosy and a leprous ulcer.
NOw follows the second kind of ulcers most malign; to wit, a leprous
ulcer. But first of all, I will discourse of the Leprosy it self, and then of
the nature of a leprous ulcer.

The names of it.
The Leprosy in the Greek and Latin tongue is called (...), from (...),
scaber, rough: for it makes the skin rough and uneven: or from (...), squama,
or cortex, a scale or bark, because it sends our scales, and makes the skin
rough like to the bark of a tree. The diverse kinds of leprosity.
There be two sorts of leprosity: to wit, the Grecian and Arabian Leprosy.

The Grecian leprosity may be thus described: It is a tumor with a confirmed
hot any dry distemperature of the skin, both in the outer and inner part of it,
wherein scales, like those of fishes, are sent out: so that Pruritus, Scabies,
and Lepra Graecorum, the itch, scabbinesse, and the Grecian leprosity differ
only in degrees of tumifaction, and distemperature.

The difference between itching, scabbines, and the Greek leprosy.
In itching there is no remarkable tumor, neither does any thing fall away from
the Cuticula, unless it be fetched away by hard scratching. In scabbinesse
there is a remarkable tumor, and whether we scartch or no, both sanious matter,
and scales like to the cast skin of a snake. In the Grecian Leprosy, there
are greater tumors than in scabbines, and bodies like unto the scales of
fishes, fall from such as are possessed with this grief: so that Avenzoar
fitly calls scabbinesse Pruritum vesicalem, a blistery or powckie itching,
but the Grecian leprosity Pruritum squamosum, a scaly itching.

The signs.
The signs of this Leprosy are these: the skin is dry, rough, and full of
small knobs, which itch exceedingly, and sends out bodies like to the scales
of fishes.

The causes.
The causes of it, are either the external efficient causes, or the internal
material.

The efficient.
The external efficient, are I. unwholesome meats and drinks.

II. Slovenlinesse, sluttishnesse, and filthiness. Serenus the poetical
Physician has comprised these two causes learnedly in two Hexameter verses
thus:

Illotus sudor and inopia nobilis escae
Sape gravi scabie correptos asperat artus.
Sweat not washed away, and want of good food, often do make rough the lims,
being taken with noisome scabbinesse.

III. The menstruall courses, or hemorrhodes which were wont to flow, being
suppressed, may cause this disease.

IV. Fontanells which have long been kept open, being shut up may procure the
same.

V. Varices, the veins tumified by reason of melancholy blood, being cured,
sometimes are the causes of this grief.

The material cause.
The material causes are discerned by the color of the grief: for if the
knobs be of a livid or leady color, superfluous impure melancholy is the
cause; if they be white, or of a grayish color, then salt phlegm is
predominant, which is mingled with melancholy: and because aged persons
multiply salt phlegm, they are often troubled with this grief.

The presages,
As for the Presages, let this be the first: this grief if it be habitual, and
of a long continuance, it is not easily cured.

Secondly, if it be neglected, it may turn to the Leprosy of the Arabians.

pointed for them: for thorowout the whole year they eat cabbage salted, much
cheese, old butter, and flesh dried in the smoke, but most of all bacon. In
like manner it is familiar to Egypt: because there they eat much asses-flesh,
and drink standing and corrupt waters, if you except those who inhabit places
near to Nilus. Lucretius learnedly expresses this, lib. 6. de nature. rerum.

Est Elephas morbus qui propter stumina Nili
Gignitur, Aegypti inmedio, neque praterea usquam.
The Leprosy is a disease which is bred by the River of Nilus, in the middle
of Egypt, and no where else.

Hence it is that Moses threateneth the disobedient Jews thus, Deuteronomy. 28. verse.
27. The Lord will smite thee with the botch of Egypt, and with the emerods,
and with the scab, and with the itch, whereof thou can not be healed. In the
Hebrew Text, it is with the ulcer of Egypt, whereby is meant the Leprosy; by
the scab, he means the Greek Leprosy, whereof I have spoken. In Spain and
Africa it is more common than any where else. In the Province of France,
Delphinat, Languedock, and in Aquitane it is more frequent than in other parts
of the country, Paraeus l. 19. ca. 6. Before the time of Pompey it was not
seen in Italy, as witnesses Plin. not. hist. l. 26. c. 1.

Secondly, the Leprosy may be taken by having carnal copulation with an
infected person, see Gordon. l. wed. particul. 1. ca. 22. and Philippus
Schopfius in his Treatise of the Leprosy.

Thirdly, the Arabians, Avicen, Albucasis, and Averoes, think that if a woman
conceive while her courses flow, the child will prove leprous, but it is not
likely: for that blood in sound women is good, and after conception it is
retained to nourish the child: so that if that blood were veromous (as some
think) no man or woman could be sound.

Fourthly, this disease being often heredetary, it is propagate from the
parents to the children.

Fifthly, continual conversation with leprous persons cannot be but very
dangerous, for if one may become Pthisick, by often receiving the breath of one
who is troubled with that grief, according to Glassick Authors, much more may
one be infected by receiving the air infected with the breath of a leprous
person, which is most corrupt and stinking: wherefore lazarous persons, in
every well ordered place, dwell by themselves, that they infect not others; and
so God himself commaded, Levit. 13.4. and Numb. 12.14.

The material cause and differences of the Leprosy.
The internal material cause, by all is concluded to be Bilis atra. Now seeing
this humor is caused of three several humors altered from their natural
qualities, three kinds of Leprosy do spring.

First, it is caused of the superfluous melancholy juice burned; this Leprosy
causes the skin to be of a ruddie black color: this kind of leprosity
comes on but slowly, and has milder symptoms.

The second is of yellow vitelline choler adust: This speedily corrupts the
inner parts, chiefly the liver and spleen, and from thence palling furiously
to the habit of the body, produces horrible symptoms: in this kind of
Leprosy the skin is of a yellowish color, tending to green.

The third is caused of salt or nitrous phlegm burned: In this the color is a
palish white color, the Leprosy which is caused of this humor, is not so
fierce as the former. There be two other differences taken from the progression
of the disease: for a Leprosy is either in the beginning, or consummate.

The signs of the Leprosy beginning.
The signs of a Leprosy beginning, are these: The face seems to be of a
livid reddish color, the breathing is with some difficulty, the voice seems
to be somewhat hoarse, livid spots appear in sundry parts of the body, the
skin begins to loose its exquisite feeling, the urine is muddy and thick.
Not. hist. l. 26. cap. 1.
Pliny affirms, that it was not seen in Rome before the time of Pompey, and
began first in the nosthrill, not exceeding the bigness of a lentill, and from
thence passed to the whole body, producing spots of diverse colors, making the
skin unequal, and raising scurses, and hard scabs.

The signs of the Leprosy confirmed.
The signs of a confirmed Leprosy are these: I. The skin loses altogether its
feeling, so that you may thrust a needle through it, without any offense to the
diseased party;











Levinus Lemnius affirms, that the powder of lead calcined will swim in the
urine of leprous persons, De occult. not. mirac. l. 2. c. 52.
but sink in the urines of all others.





their hairs, you shall also pull out with the roots a fleshie substance.















Now it is time to address my self to the Prognostics, Atrabilis: now all
disease? of Bili^ atra are of hard curation.

Secondly, a Leprosy consummate is altogether incurable by Art.

Now the means of curing a Leprosy beginning, The means of curing.
are three: Dieteticall, Pharmaceuticall, and Chirurgicall.

As for the diet: The diet.
That which I delivered for a cancerous tumor and ulcer, in the former Lecture,
in this grief is also effectual, so that I need not idly to spend the time.
It is fit that leprous persons eat of the biggest Snailes dressed as Wilks, or
Perwinkles; and Frogs, and that for a month together; for this food does
exceedingly contemperate the heat of the blood: the water also distilled of
them is good to be drunk. Rodericus Fonseca commends this drink: Consult. 66.
rad. chin. j. succi limon. iij. aq. cichor. lib. vj. Infund. per diem natural.
deinde coq. in B. M. per hor. iiij. vase been clauso, decoctum postquam
refrixit coletur: This same China will serve the second time, but to the third
decoction you must have new China. The flesh of Vipers or Adders eaten, is
good: let them be boiled in water, with some salt and oil; eat both the flesh
and broth, but the heads, tails, and intrals must be taken away: the trochisks
of the Vipers or Adders are good, being ministered in Succory water: Poultry
also fed with paste made with the flesh of these, and Barley-flowre is good, if
it be used a long time; Coral and Pearl prepared, ministered in broths, are
excellent; young Hares in March are good. Isagog. c. 12.
Galen commends the Viper wine, and sets down the histories of sundry who
were cured by the use of it. And Aretaeus lib. 4. cap. 12. de signis ac causis
acutorum: but that preparations of vipers ministered in a confirmed Leprosy,
Erust. part. 4. disput. cont. Paracel and Palmarius lib. de morbis contag.
witness to be ineffectuall, for they made trial of them.

The Pharmaceuticall means are of two sorts: for either they are Catharticall,
or Specificall. Amongst the Catharticall means, j. of the extract of black
Ellebore is excellent: the next is the purgative, or Diaphoretick Antimonie:
the third is the flowers of the Regulus, ministering gr. viij. in conserve of
Roses: the fourth is the infusion of the glass it self, mingling with it a
spoonefull of the syrup of Violets; Mercury precipitate with gold is
admirable, gr. iij. are enough for a dose.

As for Specificall means, these are commended: the decoctions of the Elm,
Larix-tree, the roots of Tamarisk, Caterach, Fumiterrie, and Juniper Berries,
boiled as Guajack is, and drunken for a long time; three ounces of Strawberry
water, or of the Cuscuta, Dodder taken morning and evening. Crollius commends
j. or ij. Spiritus tartari in aqua conveniente, or gr. 7. of the spirit of salt
ministered after the same manner, gr. vj. Bezoar similiter laudantur, for it
withstandeth malignity.

Chirurgicall means.
As for Chirugicall means, they are two; Phlebotomie, and local applications:
If Phlebotomie be required, open the Saphena about the change, or the
Hemorrhodes, but take not much blood at a time, for leprous persons are weak.

As for the local means, they are either baths or liniments; this bath is
commended, Take of Crow-foot ten Baths.
handfuls, of Coltsfoot five handful, of Tabacca two handful and a half;
boil these in a sufficient quantity of spring water: use this morning and
evening, until the body yields no filth.

Of all other liniments, Roderic. Fonsec. consult. 1. Liniments.
commends this: viperas duas quas nulla part rejecta inde phialae vitrea
continent. lb. ij. Ol. ol. veter. exponatur rubru^^ and fatens, hoc ^leo
inunguentur axillae, inguina, carpi. Intu^ autem exhibeatur j. Trochis.
Exviperis, velcolubr. in iij. aq. card. benedict. and j. syrup. aceto fit curi,
per dies 14. To these ulcers apply a linement made of this oil, and
Goats-suet, taking eqnall quantity of both. We may make an effectual Oil of
our Adders to this same purpose. Oil of Adders.
Gardanus used to anoint the Spina, Joints, and Pulses of hands and feet with
the fat of Vipers, for the space of seven days in a hot-house, and affirms,
that be not only did mitigate the Leprosy, but did cure also consumptions of
the body, and the Pthysis it self. If you have not these medicaments at hand,
you may apply such as I set down for the curing of a cancer, in my former
Lecture: which require no repetition.

LECT. XIX. Of the abating of superfluous flesh.
HAving set down the maine differences of ulcers, and the method and means
how to cure them, I must discourse in like manner of the accidents of ulcers,
which may hinder the prime intentions of curing of them, and so prove a let and
impediment to you in your proceedings.

to those medicaments which are called Cathaeretica, The nature of
cathaereticall medicaments.
Auferentia, which take away the superfluous fungous flesh. These are not so
hot as either escatoricall, or septick medicants, and those which blister: yet
hot they are, and burn, although gently; being then hot and dry in the fourth
degree, they are of a thick and astringent substance: wherefore such
medicaments pierce not deep, partly by reason of their thick substance, partly
by reason of their rebated heat; wherefore these only superficially dry and
corrode the flesh. Neither do they cause any great pain, because their heat
is not very Intense, unless they be graduate by the admixtion of some other
things. So we see Mercury precipitate, or burned Alome, if either of them be
applied to any sore, to cause no great pain; but if they be used being mixed,
both to cause pain, and a small eschar. Such are Alome calcined, Shells burned,
the powder of Hermodactils, Asphodill, Vergidrasse, but Mercury precipitate
excels, and exceeds all these: for it does work with small pain, and does
by concoction make thick, thin, and ichorous quittor: yea it being washed, and
mingled in small quantity with incarnative unguents, furthereth their
operation. The yellow Turbith mineral exceeds it in faculty, for the oil of
Vitrioll or Sulphur, whereof the Turbith mineral is precipitate, is more
familiar to nature, and astringent, than the Aqua fortis, or Aqua regis,
whereof the precipitate is made.

Two Cathereticall unguents are much used, Vnguentum Apostolorum, and Vnguentum
Aegyptiacum.

Of these two, the Aegyptiacum is the strongest: Vnguentum Aegyptiacum.
In plain ulcers I would not advise you to use it, for it spreads, and by
touching the sound part causes great pain. It is effectual in fretting sores
of the mouth, and sinewous ulcers, being dissolved, either in decoctions, or
distilled waters convenient tor the kind of sore.

As for Vnguentum Apostolorum, Vnguentum Apostolorum.
if it be made according to Art, it is a cathereticall medicament in tender
bodies; but only a mundificative in those who have a firm and solid
constitution of body.

It falls out many times, How hard and stubborn proud flesh is to be abated.
that the superfluous flesh is so hard and compact, that it contemns all
cathereticall medicament, and cannot be abated by them. In this course we are
to have recourse to those medicaments which are called (...), or
Putrefacientia, or rotting the part; and to those which are named (...), or
Crustam inducentia, which leave an eschar or crust after they are applied.

As for the Escharoticall medicaments, (...)
which are called Exedentia, or eating medicines, seeing they corrupt the
natural heat, they must be hot above the third degree, and have a thick,
viscous, and terrestrial substance; wherefore by reason of their heat in the
fourth degree, they burn the part, and by reason of their thick and
terrestrial substance, the heat is kept durable and permanent. And we see that
Pepper, Onyons, and such like, although they be hot above the third degree, yet
they are not caustic; and the reason is, because although they inflame, yet
because their heat is placed in a thin and subtle substance, it is more easily
dissolved, and at last overcome by the natural heat of our bodies.

So when a Caustic is applied, notable pain is caused: Why caustic
medicaments are painful.
First, by reason of their extraordinary and exceeding great heat.

Secondly, because by reason of their terrestrial substance, they are long in
piercing through the part.

Of these medicaments two are most used: the Lapis infernalis, Lapis infernalis.
and the white Caustic. I mean not to trouble you with the setting down of
their preparations, because they are sufficiently known unto all who have
profited any thing in the study and practice of Chirurgerie.

Of these two, the Lapis infernalis is most effectual, and works most
speedily; wherefore it is most fit for making of fontanels, where it may be
conveniently applied to the upper part of the member, and be hindered from
spreading: The white Caustic.
but if a caustic medicament be to be applied to a depending part, and where
there is fear of running, then the white Caustic is most convenient. Besides
these, two other escharoticall medicaments I will commend unto you.

Mercury sublimate.
The first is Mercury sublimate, mingled with Roman Vitrioll calcined, until
it become red, and the true Terra sigillata.

Turbith mineral unwashed.
The second, the Turbith mineral mingled with these same; but whilst it is
white and not washed. These do work more gently, if they be mingled with any
narcoticall or anodine unguent, than when they are applied to any fore without
mixture. But the Turbith mineral far exceeds the Mercury sublimate, because
it is more familiar to nature, and does not cause such pain; besides, it is
not so volatile and piercing as the sublimate is, which in tender bodies
assaulting the heart it self, does cause sharp diaries, although they be but
symptomaticall.

Of the nature of Septicall medicaments.
For the suppressing of rebellious excressing flesh in ulcers, the second means
I appointed those to be which are called (...), or putrifacentia, corrupting
medicaments. These are not so hot as those medicaments which procure an eschar,
or crust, they have a more thin substance, and subtle, and have not so much
terrestreitie, or astriction. These do more easily pierce, and so cause not so
great pain: the pain which these medicaments cause is pungitive, as if
needles did prick being made red hot, and it quickly cease. And as caustic
medicaments leave the part corrupted in manner of a crust, so these leave that
which they corrupt soft, Septick Medicaments.
moist, and of a blackish color. If you will require medicaments moist, endued
with such a faculty, have recourse to the oil of Vitriol, the oil of
Sulphur, Aqua fortis, and Aqua regis. But if you will have solid and hard
medicaments, then call to aid all sorts of Arsenick, as the white, yellow, and
red, passing under the names of Rats-bane, Orpiment, and Roses-ager.

Septick Vegetables.
As for the Septick Vegetables, because they rather mortify the inward parts,
if they be ignorantly or maliciously ministered, then abate proud flesh in
ulcers, as Dryopteris, the Fern of the Oak, and Aconitum, or Leopards-bane,
and such like, I will leave them to the consideration of the Italian and
Spanish poysoners.

Whether superfluous flesh may not be taken away by instruments.
But being appointed to read a Chirurgicall Lecture, and having only made
mention of abating of superfluous flesh in ulcers, by the application of
topicall medicaments, you may demand of me whether this may not be effected
by Chirurgicall instruments, as actual cauteries, and incision-knives and
razors. Truly hitherto I have deferred the mention of this kind of curing,
because God of his bounty in these later times has in all faculties revealed
many things which were kept from our forefathers. If a patient resolute offer
himself to a skillful Surgeon to be cured, let the Surgeon, When
instruments are not to be used.
in Gods name, in extremities use iron and steel: yet let me advise him not to
be too forward in three cases. I. If the party be of a tender constitution,
and unwilling for if a Surgeon do altogether urge these extremities, he may
lose his patient, who is prompt to hearken to the Syrenian speeches of deluding
Knaves and Queanes. II. If you cannot handsomely come to the part, as if the
ulcer be sinuous. III. If the superfluous flesh require not only abating, but
drying also, it being mavelous moist, then the medicament is better than the
instrument, because it dries more powerfully.

Now to end this Lecture, I will deliver unto you a medicament of famous
Fallopius, which is effectual both in correcting of stubborn superfluous
flesh, and in curing of Cancers: the description of it is this: Arsen.
cristallin. De ulcerib. c. 18
and Citri^ an. ss. Aristol. rot. Aerugin. an. j. Opii, ij. Axung. porcin. jss.
Misc. Ut fiat unguentum. One thing I had almost let pass, to wit, the
description of cathereticall lint; use this of Fallopius his description: Aq.
Plantag. Ros. Ibid.
Solani an. iiij. Opii, j. Medullapanis, ij. Mercur. ssublimat. iiij. super
porphyritidem triti. Omnia haec commixta bulliant ad consumptionem medietatis:
deinde colentur per pannum crassi^sculum. Fila excerpta bulliant aliquandin in
hoc liquore, postea eximantur, exprimantur, siccentur ac serventur ad usum. So
much then concerning abating of superfluous flesh in ulcers.

LECT. XX. Of the scaling of corrupt bones.
Having in my last Lecture set down the fountains from whence all the
accidents of ulcers do spring, and having discoursed of the manner of curing
of an ulcer, wherein there is excrescense of superfluous flesh, which was set
down to be the prime accident flowing from things according to nature, I must
be carried to the second accident, proceeding from things according to nature,
which is the cariositie of the bone.

Now seeing the bones are the stays and props of the body, appointed not only
for local motion; but for the parts also which further this action, as
muscules, veins, nerves, arteries, I am with the greater care to set down the
curation of an ulcer, with the cariositie of a bone, seeing so many things of
importance do depend upon the curation of such an ulcer. In running over the
whole course of Chirurgerie, I have resolved upon this first trial, to set
down only the general practices, which they who are judicious may apply to
all persons and parts in special. In handling of this accident, I will set
down these four points. I. The causes which procure the cariositie of the
bones. II. The signs of a corrupt bone. III. The prognostics or an ulcer,
wherein there is a cariositie of the bone: And IIII. Of the means which are to
be used for removing of this accident.

The causes of the corruption of the bones.
Now the causes which procure the corruption of the bones, are either external,
or internal. The external causes are two, to wit, too great cold, 1.
External.
and too great heat: for as too great cold does quench the natural heat of the
bone; so immoderate heat, by discussing the natural humiditie, dries and
corrupts the bones. 2. The internal.


The internal causes which most frequently produce this accident, are in
number three. The first is a glutinous and superfluous humiditie, first
softning, and then corrupting of the bone, which oftentimes does cause a
distortion of the member, and a protuberance of the bone, which I have sundry
times seen, and have noted not to have proceeded from any venereall cause.
Such an humor seized upon one, whose name was James Wilkinson, who dwelt near
to me when I practiced in the city of Chester, and caused a bending outward of
both the shin-bones, or Ossa tibia: this happened to him when he was above
sixty years old: neither did this accident either cause nocturnall or
diurnall pain, or hinder his going. Before this did befall him, he had a
great evacuation of blood (by reason of the rupture of a vessel in his left
kidney) together with his urine, of the which I cured him by the decoction of
some of the Myrobalans.



bones very often are found to be carious, when the parts covering the bones,
as the Cuticula cutis, and Membrana carnosa are found whole. So when Nodes
invade the Citizens of Naples, they appear most commonly in the Os frontis, or
in the Vlna, or Tibia, and that between the joints: Who is able to give a
demonstrative reason of this invasion? He undoubtedly who is able to show why
the Loadstone draws Iron, and the Amber and Jet Chafe.

The signs of the corruption of the bones.
The signs discovering the cariositie of a bone, are either sensual, or
intellectual.

The sensual are in number five.

I. Is if the bone appear black and fretted: 1. Sensual.
Blackness is caused by the corruption of the natural temperature, by the
which it is kept always white with a ruddy glimps, or of an horseflesh color
almost. Cariositie is caused by the acrimony of humor fretting the substance of
the bone.

II. Is, when the bone being felt with a probe, does not appear smooth, but
rugged.

III. Is, if the probe slip not being guided into the bone; for then the
Periostium must be gone, and so the bone either more or less corrupted,
partly by reason of the air, partly by reason of the quittor settling upon the
bone.

IV. Is, if the flesh ulcerate above the bone appear soft and spungeous, or of
a livid color, it is to be doubted that the bone is corrupted: for when the
bone is carious, the flesh is made soft and corrupt, so that any one may thrust
a probe through it, without any great annoyance to the party.

V. Is this: if a tent or pledget reaching to the bone stink the next day when
it is taken out, there is just occasion offered to suspect that the bone is
carious.

2. Intellectual.
The intellectual signs are in number four.





III.



As for the Prognostics: Aphor. 45. sect. 6. Prognoses. 1.
Of such ulcers as are accompanied with cariositie of the bone, receive these.

I. No ulcer accompanied with the cariositie of the bone is of easy curation:
for it has a malignitie annexed to the solution of unity.







The fifth shall be this Ulcers in the great joints, as the elbowes, knees, or
ankles, wherein there is a cariositie of the bones, with loss of the
cartilages, are for the most part uncurable, because the pain in the joints is
great, depriving the diseased persons of their natural rest and sleep, and so
of good digestion and concoction of their food: besides this, they seldom fall
out alone, but bring with them a Marasmu^, or extenuation of the body.

How the ^tio^^ o^ a bone (...) is to be cured.
Having set down the causes, signs, and presages of the cariositie of a bone,
I am to show the way how the cariositie is to be removed. To perform this
task, two things are to be done: First of all, the bone is to be laid bare,
and no less of it than is to be sc^l^^: Secondly, the scaling of it is to be
procured by conv^^^^^^ means.

How the bone is to be laid bare.
The discovering of the bone is to be procured three manner of ways; to wit,
by Incision, Exesion, or Dilatation.

As tor Incision: (...) By incision.
we are not to use it where the bones lie deep, and have muscules, tendons,
veins and arteries above them, as in the thighs and arms chiefly to the inner
parts. Secondly, although the bones lie not deep, if they have many tendons
above them, we cannot use Incision safely: such ate the bones of the
Metacarpium, or the upper distance between the wrist and fingers, and the
bones of the Metapedium or Metatarsus, which are articulate with the toes.

2. By exesion.
Exesion is performed by potentiall cauteries; as Lapis infernalis, the white
Caustic, the powders set down by me, when I discoursed of Fistula's and
cancerous ulcers.

Where potentiall cauteries are not to be used.
These are not to be used where many tendons or nerves are, lest they deprive
some parts of their motion, and cause convulsions, by reason of the great pain
which they, procure, as also symptomaticall fevers. Potentiall cauteries are
most convenient, when there is cariositie in the Cranium, the Ulna, or Tibia.

3. Dilatation.
Dilatation, or enlarging of a narrow sore, by stretching out the circumference
of it, is performed by such things as swell, when they have imbibed any
moisture, as the roots of Gentian, the pith of the Eldar, and spunges brought
close together, either by thread, or the Melilot Emplaster.

When this is convenient.
These are fit to be used in ulcers which possess the back of the hand, or the
instep of the foot. The bone being by some of these means laid bare, I am to
show you how the bone is to be scaled.

How the bone is to be scaled.
This is to be performed three manner of ways, to wit, by medicaments,
instruments, or actual cauterie.

1. Desquamatorie medicaments.
The medicaments which procure the scaling of a bone ought to be very drying,
and of a subtle and thin substance: for the found bone, being assisted and
strengthened by such drying medicaments, sends forth of it self flesh, which
being increased, separateth the corrupt bone from the sound.

Degrees of desquamatorie medicaments.
These Desquamatorie medicaments are of three degrees. For some are mild, as the
root of Peucedanum, or Sowfennill, Aristolochia rotunda, the root of Iris, and
Myrrh: these will serve if the cariositie of the bone be but superficial,

Avicenna, which is composed of equal parts of Aristolochia rotunda, Iris,
Myrrh, Aloe, the rind of the plant Opopanax, whereout the gum issues, the
Pumick stone calcined, the refuse of brass melted, and the bark of the
Pine Tree. All these being beat to powder may be applied alone, or mingled
with honey. Of this nature also are Aqua vitae, and the root of Dracontium or
Dragons. De ulcerib. c. 22.
Fallopius has two medicaments to this purpose: the first is this, Rad.
Peucedani, Indis, an. j. Euphorb. j fiat ex omnibus pulvis: qui excipiatur
pasta panis molli, atque ossi corrupto applicetur. The second is this: Rad.
Peucedan. Aristol. rotund. Opopanac. Enphorb. an. ss. Terebinthiae j. Cera ss.
Aceti j. fiat cerat. ex p. a. These and such medicaments are to be used, when
the cariositie is somewhat deep, and the party of reasonable firm
constitution of body.

Aqua vitae having the tincture of Euphorbium, the oil of Cloves, or Petroleum
wherein some Camphir is dissolved, Aqua fortis, Aqua regis, the oil of
Sulphur, and the oil of Vitriol, and Roman Vitriol calcined. These are to be
used when the cariositie is deep, and the constitution of the diseased party
stubborn and strong. When these medicaments are applied, the fleshie parts
adjacent must be very well defended, otherwise pain and inflammation will be
caused. If the sores be well dressed, and these medicaments judiciously
applied, the bones will scale within the space of forty days.

The scaling of the bones by instruments.
wherefore in this case we must have recourse to instruments: the chiefest of
these instruments are the Mallet, and Cheesels, the sign of the cariositie
removed.
and Raspatories: First then, the corrupt part of the bone is to be knocked off
with the Mallet and Cheesell until you come to the sound bone; which you shall
know if the bone bleed, and appear white and firm, according to Celsus. Lib.
8. c. 2. What mallet best.
Secondly, the bone is to be made even with the Raspatories and smoothed. In
this case a leaden Mallet is best; for it is weighty, and causes a lesser
noise: this being done, some of the aforenamed medicaments must be applied
according to the constitution of the party; How ulcers of the head, wherein
both the tables are carious ought to be handled.
for by it you must be led.

In ulcers of the head it often falls out, that both the tables of the soul
are so^le, so that you shall be enforced to remove a great piece of the
C^anium: here you must use the How bones corrupt are to be scaled by the
actual cau^^^^.


The third way to scale bones, I named to be the actual cauterie: Of it I
will set down three documents: The first shall be, when it is to be applied:
The second shall direct where it shall be applied: The third shall teach, how
the sore is to be dressed after the application.

As for the first: When it is to be applied.
It is to be applied when superfluous humiditie flows to the bone; this you
may conjecture; First, by the moist and cold constitution of the body of the
person affected:



The second document shall be, where it is to be applied: Where it is to be
applied.
you may apply it safely to the Ulna and Tibia laid bare.



Ambrose Parrey used when he had dismembered one in the joint of the elbow: the
dismembered party found great ease and comfort by the application of it: See
the History, Lib. xj. cap. Xxv. What forms of cauteries you are to use, the
figure of the ulcer will show you. When the actual cauterie is applied, you
are to be acquainted with the manner of dressing of the bone, which was the
third document.

How this is to be done, 3. How the bone is to be dressed after cauterization.
Guido a Cauliaco teach you in his own words: I (quoth he) after the
application of the cauterie, apply for the space of three days oil of Roses
tempered with the white of an egg, and for three other, it mingled with the
yolk of an egg: and afterward Butter with. Mel rosatum, and ever above these
applications some mundificative until the bone scale. Afterward, I incarnate
and consolidate the part with Avicens medicament, which I delivered unto you
amongst the medicaments exfoliative of the second degree. Fallopius counsels
after cauterization to use pledgets moystned in Rosewater and the white of an
Egg, to hinder inflammation for some few dressings: then to apply to the bone
the medicaments exfoliative.

Where the actual cauterie is not to be used.
Beware of the use of the actual cauterie, if the Scull, or any of the
Vertebrae of the back be foul, by reason of the brain contained in the first,
and the Spinalis medulla contained in the second; which being inflamed by the
heat of the actual cauterie, will bring alienation of mind, and convulsions.

LECT. XXI. Of a discolored and varicous Ulcer.
THe two last differences of ulcers taken from things according to nature, were
said to be an ulcer, wherein the natural color is altered, and an ulcer
varicous. First then I will discourse of the ulcer, wherein the color is
altered, and then of an ulcer varicous.

(...) An ulcer having the color of the part altered.
As for an ulcer having the skin adjacent, and the substance of the part
altered. The unnatural colors which possess the part altered are most
commonly four; the red, yellow, livid, and black colors.

The red color proceeds always from heat, I. The red color.
causing, an inflammation.

The efficient causes of it.
The external efficient causes of it are superfluous hot garments, too thick
boulsters, rowlers made of wool, or of hard and stubborn linen cloth, the
hot season of the year, too strait ligature, the use of hot meats and drinks,
surfeiting, venerie, troubling the mass of blood, extraordinary motion of the
part, perspiration hindered by reason of the suffocation of the part, or
incuneation of the humor, and solemn evacuations suppressed, as of the flowing
of blood from the hemorrhoidicall veins in men, or the menstruous blood from
the veins of the matrix in women, by the error of the Surgeon, applying
things actually and potentially cold.

The material cause.
The material cause of this color is blood offending: How blood may offend.
Now the blood may offend two manner of ways, to wit, in quality, if it be too
hot or fervid; or in quantity, if the body be plethorick. The curation.
In removing then this red color, one of the symptoms of inflammation, our
first care must be to remove the external efficient causes.

The diet must be moystning and cooling, The diet.
until this accident be removed: wherefore broths made of Chickens, or Veale,
wherein Sorrel, the sour three-leaved Grass, or Allejujah, Endive, Succorie,
Purselaine, Lettuce, and such like have been boiled, are very convenient. If
the diseased party delight in roasted meat, let him use for his sauce, sippets
with the juyces of the common and wood Sorrel, with a little vinegar and Sugar.

The season of the year.
If the season of the year be extreme hot, let the room wherein he remains
be hung with sheets, which must be still moystned with spring water: In this
case it is good to garnish the windows with the Meddow-sweet, called in Latin
Regina prati, and Gaul called Myrtus Brabantica.

Of the garments. Rowlers.
Let his clothes be neither heavy, nor heating: Let the rowlers be of soft
linen cloth, and moystned in Rose, Eldar Vinegar, and fair Spring Water,
taking two parts of the water, and one of the Vinegar: Rolling.
Let the rolling be somewhat slack, only to keep the local medicaments to
the ulcer; for strait ligure does cause pain, pain attraction of humors, and
the attraction of hot humors inflammation. Venerie. Violent motion. Suppression
of solemn evacuations.
The party must abstain from sacrificing to the Cyprian Dame: yea, he must
abandon every violent motion. If this symptom be caused by reason of the
suppression of any solemn evacuations, as the staying of the menstruall
courses in women, or the suppressing of the Hemorrhodes in men, the accustomed
flowing of these are to be pro^^ed again.

How the menstruall courses are to be procured.
The menstruall courses are to be brought down; first, by opening of the
Sap^ena in what foot it is most conspicuous; and secondly, by exhibiting the
powder of steel, either in form of Lozenges, or of an Electuarie or in
infusion in while wine.

How the Hemorthodes are to be opened.
The Hemorrhodes must be opened by application of the Leeches, and ministration
of Aloeticall medicaments. That medicament, which by Paracelsus is called
Elixir proprietatis, and by others Pilulae pestilentiales Arabum; composed of
Aloe, Myrrh, and Saffron, are excellent. These may be taken sundry mornings
together. But seeing these things are at large set down by those who have
written of the practice of Physic, I have only pointed at the best
indications, which serve for the curing of these griefs, and the rather
because the sp^^lation of them does belong to another Faculty and Art, to wit,
Physic.

How the material cause i^ to be dealt withal.
If the material cause of this symptom, which is blood, offend in quality,
being too hot, then it is to be cooled by a refrigerating diet, which I at
large set down, when I discoursed of a phlegmon, to the which place I remit
you. If in quantity it offend, first Phlebotomie, or opening of a vein is to
be used, and blood drawn, as the age, constitution of the party, and nature
of the grief shall require. Secondly, the part it self is to be scarified,
and other Ventoses or Leeches to be applied, that the blood may issue out
plentifully to discharge the part.

Of the livid color. Its causes.
A livid, or leady color in an ulcer follows. Two causes produce a livid
color in ulcers: the first is black blood impacted in the part: The second is
external cold, or defect of the natural heat.

How lividitie from black blood is to be cured.
This livid color does happen most frequently by reason of black and corrupt
blood settled in the part, for as a bright red color under white, causes a
lively blue, or azure color, as we may see in the veins of sound and
healthful persons; so black under white causes a livid, or a leady color.
This accident is to be removed by scatification, and application of the
Cupping-glasses, Horns, or Leeches. Afterward the scarifications are to be
somented with Oxymel dissolved in Cardum Benedictus water.

How lividitie from cold is to be cured.
If the lividitie proceed from cold, you shall perceive it by the cold
constitution and temperature of the part. In this case you are to apply such
local medicaments as are able to reduce the natural heat and complexion.
Fallopius in his Treatise de tumoribus, c. 26. de Gaugraena, affords a
notable one, and parible, which is this: Take an ordinary Turnep, and a
Rettish-root of reasonable bigness, grate or scrape these two, and add to
them of the powder of Mustard Seed one ounce, of the powder of Cloves three
drams, of the oil of Lin-seed, and Wall-nuts very old, so much as is
sufficient, and make a pultice, which apply warm; he calls this cataplasme,
Medicamentum optimum and divinum, A most excellent and divine medicament; with
the which he affirms himself to have cured many: so that you need not to
doubt of the efficacy and certainty of it: and the ingredients seem to
promise no less.

Of a black color
The last unn^^^rall color is a black color: this may proceed either (...)
heat or cold. If it has proceeded from heat, then an inflammation went before;
if from cold, then lividitie did precede. The first betokens adustion; but
imperfect: so we see wood, before it be perfectly burned, and incinerate, or
turned to ashes, to become black. And in a Carbuncle, the lower part is of a
dark^ed, the middlemost black, and in the top there is a white pustule, the
heat beginning the adustion in the lowermost, increasing it ill the middlemost,
and perfecting the adustion in the top: for it is the property of fire or heat
to mount up, and to be most effectual aloft. If before blackness lividitie
did appear, it is to be feared, that the part begins to be mortified at the
least, if any feeling or heat remain: If these cannot be perceived, then you
may boldly say, that a Spacelus or Mortification has possessed the part.

How this accident is to be removed.
In both these cases, first, the parts are profoundly to be scarified:
Secondly, they are to be fomented with the decoction of Worme-wood, the lesser
Centorie, Scordium, Carduus Benedictus, the flowers of Camomil, Melilot, and
tops of Dill boiled in a gentle Lixivium. Thirdly, fill the incisions of the
scarifications with some of the medicament following using a feather: Oxymell.
simpl. ij. Vuguent. Egypt. iij. Spirit. vini, ij. Miseeautur. Fourthly, this
cataplasme is to be applied warm: Farin. fab. hord. and erobi, an. iiij.
Lixiviimitioris, lb. iiij. coq. haec ad cataplasmat. consistentiam: tunc add
Oxymell. simpl. ij. Unguent. Aegyptiaci, j. Omnia probe misceantur. Continue
the use of this medicament, until the parts be brought to their natural
temperature and color: then proceed as has been set down, when I spoke of
the curing of a compound ulcer.

Of Varices.
Having set down the methodicall curations of the three first accidents taken
from things according to nature; to wit, of abating superfluous flesh, removing
of the cariositie of the bone, and reducing the natural color to the parts, I
am to show how the fourth accident Va^^^^s, or the tumefaction of the veins,
by reason of supernuous gross blood are to be cured.

Its names.
This accident is called in Latin Varix, from the similitude and likeness
which it has with the protuberances which are seen in trees above the bark,
called Varices: according to Avenzoar, lib. 2. tract. 7. c. 25 Albucasis
Chirurg. part. 2. c. 93. calls this affection Vitis, or the Vine, because
these pass along the parts by windings, as the vine does: In Greek it is
called (...), or as it is found in Pollux (...). It is called by Hippocrates
(...), and by Aristot. 3. de histor. animal. 11. and in sundry other places.

The description.
This affection may thus be described: A varix is a dilatation of a vein
causing a tumefaction of it, with windings and tortuositie arising in one or
more parts of the body. It is called the dilatation of a vein, because the
dilatation of the artery is called (...). This particle (causing a
tumifaction) is added, to exclude veins, which are naturally big. Galen de
Method. medend. lib. 14. c. 13. numereth this affection amongst the diseases
which proceed from the quantity increased. It may be accounted a disease,
because the actions of the parts which it possesses are hindered; for if it
possess the legs, they become extenuate, and by reason of the heaviness of
the humor, they become flow in motion. If this affection invade the stones, the
party becomes barren.

Its causes.
The causes of it are either internal or external. According to Aristotle, the
material cause is blood, The material.
being impregnate with spirit, he does affirm it to proceed from blood, Lib.
3. de histor. animal. c. 19. Aristotle's opinion.
where he notes that women are not troubled with varices; because they turn
out their superfluous blood by their natural fluxes, and that they are less
troubled with the hemorrhods in like manner. And although this does prove true
in most women, yet there may be sundry women found, who both have varices,
and are subject to the hemorrhods. He thinks that the blood in the varices
is full of spirits; and therefore pronounces, Sect. 6. problem. 3. and Sect.
4. problem. 21. that they who have their testicles varicous are barren, because
the spirits of generation pass to the varices, and so leave the seed
unfruitful, being deprived of spirits. Galen and Hippocrates his opinion.
But Hippocrat. 3. de articul. text. 4. and 6. aphor. 21. and Galen. 4. de
compos. medicament. 2^ gnra^, think that the material cause of varices, to
be gross and flatuous melancholy blood: yea, both Galen and Avicen are of the
opinion, that the vatices may sometimes be caused of laudable blood, only
offending in quantity, and dilating the coats of the veins.

The antecedent causes.
The antecedent causes are in number four.

I. Is a melancholy and pituitous temperature: so they who have a bad spleen,
are most subject to this disease.

II. An hairie and an hard habit of the body.

III. The masculine sex: for women are not so frequently troubled with this
affection, because monthly they discharge all superfluous blood, if they be
healthful: as has been said out of Aristot. 3. de histor. animal. c. 11. and
sect. 10 probl. 29.

IV. Either ripe or old age: for according to Hippoc. in Coac. praenot. they
happen not before the fourteenth year of the age, in the legs; although even
children may have varices in the testicles. Why Eunuchs are not troubled with
the varices, Arist. sect. 10. probl. 29. yields a reason; because they are
deprived of seed and spirits. Avicen does add to these sharp diseases going
before: for in these the thinnest part of the humors being spent by sweat,
insensible perspiration, and discussion procured by Art, the thicker part being
turned to some particular places, may procure the varices.

The primitive causes.
The primitive causes are these.

I. A thick and impure air; because it does weaken the legs, and makes them
the more apt to receive superfluous humors. And for this cause Hippocrates
affirms, that men who dwell in the Western parts, are frequently troubled
with this affection, and ulcers in the legs.

II. Immoderate exercise: so we may see Footmen and Porters often to have
varices.

III. Long standing: according to Averr. 6. collect. 2. From hence Iuvenal
says; Fiet varicosus aruspex: He shall become a varicous Sooth-sayer: for they
who took upon them to find out future contingents by the flying of birds,
were enforced often to stand along time.

IV. Thick wine and gross food: such are old flesh salted, or smoaked, pease
and beans.

The presages.
As for the presages, let this be the first:

I. If varices appear in those who are mad, by reason of the melancholy humor,
the grief cease.

II. The varices mitigate gibbosities, or bunchings in any part of the body:
for the humor which causes them, is by these means averted from maintaining
of them.

III. The varices appearing either in the right or left testicle, help a
squeeking voice; the humor being turned from the breast to the testicles,
according to Hippocrates, in the 5. Sect. of his Epidemicks. This may happen
for two causes. I. By reason of the content which is between the spiritual
and genitall members. II. Because baldness, stutting, lisping, and a squeeking
voice, according to Hippocrates in the same book, are melancholy affections.

IV. They who never become bald, have not large varices. And again, if in
those persons who are bald, large varices appear, hair will grow again,
Hippoc. 6. aphor. 34. and Arist. 3. de histor. animal. 11. But you must
understand this of the varices of the testicles, called Hernia varicosa. The
cause of this is the consent of the brain, and of the genitall members, which
is so great according to Avenzoar, lib. 2. tract. 3. c. 1. that castration does
impair both wit and courage. Then humors melancholic being gathered in the
testicles, vapors ascend to the head, which afford sufficient matter for
producing of the hair. And in women their courses being stopped, vapors ascend
to the chin, from whence a beard does bud out. As Hippoc. 6. Epidem. sect. 8.
does report of Pha^tusa the wife of Pythe^^, who got a beard by reason of her
husbands absence from her.

V. Varices caused by reason of some grief of the spleen, are not to be
cured, lest the diseased party fall into some melancholy disease, according to
Avicen 22.3. tract. 2 c. 8. for seeing the matter is lodged in the spleen, and
the varices of the legs are stopped by curation, the humor must be turned to
some other parts.

VI. The varices are hardly cured by medicaments, according to Avenzoar, lib.
2. tract. 2. c. 2^. Although they may be cured by Chirurgerie without danger
of life, according to Celsus, lib. 7. c. 22. This is true, if the varices be
caused of too copious laudable blood, otherwise not for the reason before
assigned. The curation.
The curation, which is the last point, is performed by two indicutions, to
wit, by discharging the body of the thick and melancholic humors, and taking
away the tumified veins.

The first is performed by appointing a convenient order of diet, and the
administration of fit medicaments.

The second is performed by Chirurgerie.

The diet.
As for the diet, gross, tough, and flatuous meats are to be shunned; as Beef,
Goats-flesh, Venison, Oysters, Fishes fed in muddie waters, old Cheese, Beans
and Pease, Lettice, Coll-wort, Cabbage, and all those things which Galen does
forbid in melancholy diseases, 3. de loc. affect. c. 7.

As for Phlebotomie, Phlebotomie.
the liver or median is to be opened in the arm directly opposite to that leg
wherein the haemorrhods are, or Leeches are to be applied to the
haemorrhodicall veins, chiefly if blood was wont to issue from them.

As for purging, Purgation.
Lenitives mixed with those which purge gross humors are often to be
ministered: Take this for a pattern, electuar. lenitiv. vj. pulv. sancti j.
syrup. de cichor. cumrhab. j. misc. ut fiatpotio.

The chirurgicall curation.
The Chirurgicall curation of the varices is performed by two means, ustion,
and exsection; ustion is to be used when the varix is straight, and not much
tumified.

The manner of ustion is this: Vstion.
Incise the skin until you come to the vein, and separare it from the parts
adjacent, then shunning the brims of the wound, cauterize the coat of the
vein: four inches from this ustion do the like, and so still until you come
to the end of the varix. This being done, dress these ustions as you use to
dress parts burned.

Excision is to be used when the varix is crooked, Excision.
and has windings, according to Celsus: but in my judgment a straight varix
is better cured by excision than that which has windings and creeks, because
it is more easily separate, and will admit a more beautiful cicatrix: whereas
in cutting the other there must be horrible pain, and an ugly cicatrix must be
left.

The manner of excision is this: Excision.
you are to begin at what end of the varix you will, and to separate the vein
from the adjacent parts, until you come to the other end, then bind the vein
hard at each end, and cut off what remains between the two ligatures: this
being done, the brims of the wound are to be brought together, and to be healed
with glutinative medicaments. Plutarch in the life of Marius writes, that he
having this grief in both his legs, submitted himself to this manner of cure;
and when he had put forth one, did constantly endure the excision of the varix
in it, that no man should have doubted of his valor: but when the Surgeon
would have done the like in the other leg, Marius answered flatly, that he
meaned not to buy beauty with such pain: it is not to be thought that any in
this our tender age will admit either of these two operations.

The Auchors way of curing.
If a varicous ulcer be offered unto you, which contemns ordinary means, my
counsel is, that you take up the varix above and below, as you do the veins
of the temples in inflammation of the eyes, and open it between the
deligations, that the blood may be discharged out of it. This operation any one
will admit, if he be not too tender.

LECT. XXII. Of a verminous and lousy ulcer.
IN my last Lecture having delivered unto you the two last differences taken
from things according unto nature, yet changed from the natural constitution,
to wit, of a discolored and varicous ulcer; now I am to set down the
differences of ulcers taken from things aliene to nature, and strangers. These
are two; worms, and lice; from the first, an ulcer is called verminous; from
the second, lousy. How the worms are called.
The worms which breed in ulcers may more fitly be called Maggots, in Latin
Termetes and Galbae, as those of the guts are called (...) in Greek, or
Lumbrici in Latin; as we sinde set down in a learned Epistle of Alexander
Trallianus entitled (...), de lumbricis, of worms in the belly, translated by
that famous and learned Physician Hierony^^us Mercurialis, which he annexed to
his Treatise written of the diseases of children.

Their generation.
They are engendered of putrid humors, in unclean and sordid ulcers negligently
dressed, but most frequently in hollow, deep, and sinewous ulcers: for in such
the quittor is longest lodged, and the putridinall heat is greater. And for
this cause they are seen often in ulcers of the ears, for the quittor is
there long detained by reason of the windings and labyrinths of the care.

The material cause.
The matericall cause of these maggots for the most part is a pituitous
excrement, as Paul. Aeginet. witnesses, lib. 4. cap. 17.

The efficient.
The efficient cause is heat, and that of two sorts: The one is extraneous, and
putrifactive, causing corruption of the humors.

The other is natural: Seeing, according to the Philosopher, lib. 3. de
generat. animal. cap. 2. nothing can be produced of putrefaction only, unless
concoction put to its helping hand. Then in a verminous ulcer which is
preternaturall, there is putrefaction, heat, and the ulcer it self, besides
the worms the effects of the first two.

The signs.
As for the signs, they are three: The first is the sense of sight,

Motus undosus, like unto the waves of the sea, contracting and extending it
self.





Against the use of instruments.
When you go about to cure such an ulcer, attempt not the taking out of the
maggots with any instrument, for your labor will be fruitless, and the pain
of the Patient great: and grant that you take many away with your instrument,
yet you must leave the putredinall heat, and the corrupt humor, for the
breeding of more.

Against the use of the actual cautery.
I wonder that even great Authors make mention of the application of the actual
cautery in this case: they might be borne withal, if these ulcers were
plain, and shallow; for so the superfluous humidity might be dried, and
putrefaction removed: but they with an unanimous consent confess, that these
maggots are most commonly bred in sinewous and hollow ulcers, (as has been
said) and most frequently in the Summer time, and Southerly winds blowing; and
so a great heat would be induced, and the Patient put to great pain, if they
could reach to the cavity of the ulcer, which cannot be.

The curation.
These worms then must first be killed, and then they will issue out of the
ulcer without any difficulty.

The medicaments.
Those things which kill these worms, do it either of a manifest, or hidden
quality.

From a manifest quality.
They which kill them by their manifest quality must be bitter, such are
Worme-wood, Southerne-wood, Calamint, Aloe, the Fern, Buls-gall, the Meal of
Lupines, the Leaves of the Peach tree, Capers, the Roots or distilled Water of
the Roots of the Couch-grasse, called Gramen canarium, Horehound, Scordium,
Mugwort, Centorie the lesser, Mints. Of these you may make decoctions, whereof
you may find sundry descriptions in the monuments of those who have written of
this subject. Ambrose Parrey, lib. 12. cap. 8. sets down this medicament:
absynth. centaur. minor. and marrhub. an. m. 1. decoq. in lib. 1. aq. font. ad
lib. ss decoct. coletur: In quo dissolve aloes ss. unguent. Aegyptiac. iij. he
puts in the decoction ij. of Aloe, and j. of Aegyptiacum: but who may not
perceive the quantity of these to be too great? This of Riolan the father, in
hi^ Chirurgerie, de ulcerib. cap. 8. is excellent: Ellebor. alb. rad. cappar.
gentian. dictamni, alb. an. ij. cen^aur. minor. scord. absynth. marrhub.
calaminth. an. man. ss decoq. in sufciente quantitate aquae font. ac coletur
decoctum. In lib. 1. colaturae dissolve mellis ij. Aegyptiaci j. Above the
ulcer he advises to lay Vnguentum Apostolorum. If a tent may reach to the
bottom, use this commended by Fallopius in his Treatise de ulceribus cap. 21.
ascribed to Archigenes, as also Ambrose Parrey, in the place before named:
cerussae pol^^montan. an. ss. picis liquid. q. s. ut fiat linimentum:
Pellamountain.
This cannot choose but be effectual, for the faculty of Tar is known even
to hunts-men and shepherds.

Medicaments killing worms from a hidden quality. (...) Minerals.
As for those medicaments which kill worms from a hidden quality in ulcers;
they are taken either from Minerals, or Vegetables.

Amongst the minerals, all waters endued with the qualities of Mercury or
Antimonie are effectual: wherefore you may use Aqua aluminis magistralis of
Fallopius, set down by him in his Treatise of the French Pox thus; Cap. 93.
aq. plantag. and ros. an. lib. 1. alum. and Mercur. sublimat. an. ij.
pulverizat. Aqua alu^^^in^^ magistralis.
These are to be mingled together, and being put into a separating glass, the
half of the water is to be breathed away: Pallopius counsels the glass to
be set upon a gridiron, and coals to be put under: but the safest way is to
have this done in a pan, with some sand set upon a little furnace. After that
the half is breathed away, the separating glass is to stand five days, and
then the clear water is to be powered off, and kept for use.

The use of it.
It is not to be used alone, but mingled sometimes with a double, sometimes
triple, sometimes quadruple quantity of Rose, Plantane, or Night-shade-water.
The ablutions of Crocus metallorum precipitate, and the Turbith mineral, are
effectual: Vitriols of all sorts, dissolved in fair Spring Water, and having
some Camphire added, are very good: for they not only kill the worms, but
powerfully correct the putrefaction in ulcers.

Amongst the vegetables which kill worms, Vegetables.
by a hidden and unknown quality, the Tobacco does carry away the bell, and
not only the juice of the green, but the decoctions of the dry also, do
effect this, being applied to the ulcers by injection, or moistening the tents
or pledgets with the same. Seeing you may find this medicament, whose faculty
and operation are certain, I will not trouble you by setting down a
rabblement of uncertain toys: unguentum de Paeto, having some Mercury
precipitate mingled with it, is excellent in such ulcers.

Of worms in the belly.
Seeing worms in the belly, by eresion, cause ulcers in the guts; in so much
that worms have often come out at the navell and groynes, whereof you may
read memorable histories set down by Schenkius in his third book Page 407.
titul. de lumbricis, it will not be a thing impertinent to discourse briefly of
them, seeing they often trouble children, and procure sometimes death.

Their names.
These worms are called in Creek (...), and (...), f^rae, because they cruelly
torment the body; in Latin Lumbrici.

Their efficient cause.
The efficient cause is the temperate heat of the guts, for the intemperate heat
rather does burn the humors, than produce any thing of them.

The material cause.
The material cause, is the inconcocted part of the Chylus, sent away to the
small guts from the stomach, and left undrawne by the mesaraicall veins to the
liver, there to receive the form of blood. This part of the Chylus being
crude, and left in the intestines, mixed with the pituitous humor, is elaborate
by the temperate heat of the guts, and the form which lay hid in this matter
before, is brought forth afterward by this heat: and according to the diversity
of the latent forms, sundry sorts of worms are bred. In the aforenamed title
of Schenkius, you may read of the stupendous figures of worms, set down by
learned and famous men, in their monuments, who have seen them.

^he differences swormes.
As for the differences of them: they are either ordinary, or extraordinary.

Of the ordinary there are three sorts: (...). Ordinary.
The first is Teretes, the round ones, not unlike to the earth worms in
figure, but in color different: for they are whitish.

The second are called Ascarides: these are like unto the worms which grow in
cheeses, and maggots in flesh: they are for the most part bred in the
Intestinum rectum.

The third kind is called Lumbricus latus, Taenia,
the broad worm; and Taenia, which in Greek is called a swaddling band, by
reason of its figure, for it is broad and long, and it has sundry joints. This
worm will be of a strange length. Plin. lib. 11. not. histor. cap. 33.
affirms that some have been thirty foot in length. Conciliator. diff. 101.
says, one avoided such a one fifteen foot in length. Alexand. Benedictus, in
prooem. lib. 21. practica, says he saw the like. If you desire greater variety
of such histories, peruse Schenkius his observations, Lib. 3. page 411. I my
self when I was in the Newrie, a town in the North part of Ireland, being
desired to visit a young man who had a Fistula in Perinaeo, and whose body was
exceedingly extenuate; when I had ministered a dose of 2. gr. of Mercur. vitae
to him, he avoided such a worm, tucked like a ^rabtree cudgel, about the
thickness of a childs finger, and fifteen foot in length, he kept it in a
little pewter basin for my coming: when he was in voiding of it he was in
great fear, thinking that his guts came out.

The signs. Of round ^^^mes.
As for the signs of worms: You shall know any one to be troubled with round
worms by these signs: The party fi^deth gnawing, and pinching pain in the
belly, has gnashing of the teeth, chiefly in the sleep; is troubled with a dry
and continual cough, the nosthrils itch, wherefore children having them, are
still picking their nose; the face is evil colored, the cheeks are sometimes
of a red, sometimes of a livid color; the eyes are hollow, the mouth is
waterish, the breath is strong, there is a desire to vomit, the hicket
oftentimes, hunger, pain, and heaviness of the head, drowsinesse,
convulsions, starting in the sleep, stretching of the belly; but an
extenuation of the rest of the body; horrible dreams, looseness of the belly,
ugly and stinking ^^crements do fall out. This is holden for an experiment, if
water be powered upon the stomach in the morning, the party being fasting, he or
she shall find a drawing on of the belly, by reason of the shrinking of the
worms, shunning cold. All these fignes are not found in every person, but some
in sundry.

Of Ascarides.
If Ascarides, or small worms, be bred in the Intestinum rectum, a horrible
itch troubles the party, and they are often seen in the excrements.

Of Tania.
If Tania, or the long broad worm be in the guts, the party has an insatiable
appetite, the body consumes, and some substance does come from it like to the
seed^ of a cucumber. The falling ficknesse oftentimes proceeds from the round
worms, but seldom from the broad, and the Ascarides.

The predictious.
Let us now come to the presages which the diversity of worms afford.

I. The Ascarides, if they be small, they are of all sorts less dangerous, for
they are farthest from the noble parts, and are most easily killed, by
clysters, or injections of bitter things. It is otherwise if they be big, for
then they are engendered of a worse matter.

II. The Tania is of all others the worst, because it is biggest, and hardest
to be killed.

III. The bigger are worse than the lesser, and many more dangerous than few,
and the red are worse than the white.

IV. If in the beginning of sharp diseases round worms come out alive, they
betoken pestilent diseases.

V. It is good if round worms come out, either when the crisis is at hand, or
in the declination of the disease.

VI. If in persons not sick, worms come out either at the mouth or nose, it
betokens no harm, because this they do for lack of food.

VII. If this happen in sick persons, it is an ill sign, for it argues the
malignity of the matter, which the worms labor to shun.

VIII. If worms expelled seem to be be sprinkled with blood, it is an ill
sign, for it shows the guts to be ill affected.

The curation.
As for the curation, it is performed by two indications; the first is by
killing of them; the second by expelling of them killed.

Medicaments that kill worms.
They are killed either by internal medicaments, or external applications.

The internal medicaments are either simple or compound; the simple are either
Vegetables, or Minerals, or Animals.

The most powerful amongst the simple vegetables are these: Corallina, the
dose of it is j. The seeds of Tansie, and the common worme-seed, the dose of
them is j. the juice of Vervine; give a spoonefull, the juice of Scordium,
Wormwood, the lesser Centorie, Carduus benedictus, or Beer or Ale brewed with
these, Garlike, the roots of grass.

As for compound medicaments, let this be the first: corallin. lumbric.
terrest. nasura corun cervi, semin. santonici, and tanaceti an. j. rad.
dictamnialbi, rhabarb. agaric. trochiscat. an. ij. fiat ex omnibus pulvis: dos.
j. The second shall be that medicament, which Quacksalvers in Germany, call
Panis vitae, the composition is this: mustacei iiij. semin. santonici v. mellis
puri q. s. ut fiat pasta: dos. ss. ad j.

The medicaments taken from minerals: Mercur. crudus, dos. ij. Mercur. dulcis,
dos. a. gr. iiij. ad 20. secund. rationem, atatis and virium, Mercur. vita,
cujus dos. a.gr. ss. ad gr. ij. vitrum antimon^i, crocus metallorum, inpulvere
vel infusione.

As for external applications receive these as patterns: I. aloes hepat. ij.
fellis taurini iiij. absynthii contus. iiss. fiat cataplasma applicandum
umbilico. II. farin. lupin. j. myrrh. aloes an. j. pulp. colocynth. iiij. croci
j. fell. boum iss. aceti acerrimi ss. mese. Applicetur cuminum pultum cum fell
tauri, quod commendat. Sebastian. Austrius lib. demorb. infant. morb. 42.


The death of Herod by worms is extraordinary, Act. 12.
which is set down by Saint Luke, undoubtedly to show what subjects may offer
to honor their Princes, and what Princes ought to assume unto themselves of
right. Herod having begun to persecute the Church, caused Saint James to be
killed, and Saint Peter to be laid up in prison. After he had done this, the
third year of his reign (as witnesses Josephus antiquit. lib. 19. cap. 7.)
he went to Caesarea to keep some plays in honor of Casar. The second day of
his plays, when he had given an answer to the Tyrians and Sidonians, who sued
after his favor, he being offended with them: the people cried out, The voice
of God, and not of man. O Herod, why did thou accept of this gross
flattery? Had it not been sufficient to thee to have assumed subordinate
Majesty, and truth in thy declamation, which was (I make no doubt) in some
points of it failing? Lo, whom prosperity could not bring to the consideration
of his carriage, Gods visitation did. Worms, not presented to view of men,
begun inwardly to torment him, and eat up his intrailes; which caused him to
burst out into these lamentable speeches; En ego ille etc. Behold, Iose^h^^a^^^
lib. 18. cap. 13.
I whom you called God, am by fatal necessity commanded to leave life, it
proving you to be liars, and I, whom you saluted as immortal, am violently
drawn to death. Being horribly tormented, he died the fifth day, although the
people put on sackcloth, and made supplication for him. So much Josephus. O
that Christian Princes would not so much labor to delight the ears of the
people by eloquent speeches, as to administer justice. And although they think
themselves secure enough from such a judgment in this life as befell this
tyrant: yet let them not doubt, but that there must be an account made after
death, where every debt must be paid with interest. I have delivered unto you
what I thought fit concerning a verminous ulcer, now I will in few words
deliver the doctrine of a lousy ulcer. A lousy ulcer.


The efficient muse.
The efficient cause of lice, is the natural temperate heat, mixed and
concurring with the heat putrefactive.

The material cause, is the excrements of the third concoction, or
assimilation, which are hot; but not sharp, or malign. This is the opinion of
Galen lib. 1. de compos. medicam. secund. loca cap. 7. and Avicen. lib. 4. fen.
7. tractat. 5. cap. 26. That you may the better understand this opinion, you
must understand, that when blood is turned to the nourishment of the parts,
diverse excrements are produced: of the which, some are discharged by insensible
perspiration, some by sweat, some cleave without to the skin, as the morphew,
and the filth which cleaves to the soles of the feet, called Strigmenta; and
scales in the head and other parts: some stay within the Cuticula; and these
are either sharp, and of a malign quality; and these cause shedding of the
hair, or they are destitute of both these qualities, and they produce lice.

The differences of the lice.
The differences of these lice are two: For some are most commonly without the
Cuticula, and some within the Cuticula; of those that are without, some are
familiar, as the common sort; some are called (...), feri, wild and cruel
ones.

The ordinary.
As for the ordinary and familiar, most commonly in boys and girls, they
swarm in ulcers in the neck below the future Lambdoides: but sometimes, and in
some persons, they possess the distance between the Cuticula and the Cutis,
divelling and separating the one from the other. If one will know what store of
these movables may issue out of the Cuticula one person, let him read Amatus
Lufitanus cent. 3. curat. 58. and schol. ad curatione^^ ea^de^^, where he
reports, that one of good note in Lisbon called Tabora, was so troubled with
them, that two Negroes had enough to do to discharge him of them, and to carry
them to the sea; and that at the last they procured his death.

The (...), or feri, the crab-lice, Crab-lice.
are most commonly engendered in the arme-pits, and in the forests of Venus in
nastie men and women.

Those which are always found under the Cuticula, are called Syrones, unknown
to the Grecian Physicians: Syrones.
they draw a trench, as Moles do in the earth, under the Cuticula^, leaving
watery pustules behind them, as they march: their seat (when they rest) is
easily discerned at the end of the trench, where when the Cuticula is opened,
they may with the point of a sharp pin or needle be taken out: they resemble
nits in cheese, and if you place them upon the cover of a book of black
leather, in the Sun, they will pass along the cover with a mavelous
agility; as often I have made trial my self.

The Prognostics.
As for the Prognostics. I. They who are troubled with any kind of lice are
nastie persons.

II. In a Hectic fever, they show that one is entered into the third degree of
it, and so is uncurable.

III. In persons not diseased if they abound, you may advise them to keep
their hands from their mouth, and to labor to be cleanly.

When the lice swarm over the whole body, the disease is called (...), a
pediculis, from lice.

The curation.
Three intentions are required for the curation of them: Phlebotomie, Purgation,
and local applications.

As for Phlebotomie, the sex, age, Phlebotomie.
constitution of the party, and strength, with the rest of the indications are
to be observed.

When you purge, use rather minerals than vegetables, Purgation.
because they more strongly evacuate, and are of a more subtle, durable, and
penetrating faculty. These same will serve to hinder the increase of these,
which I set down as powerful to kill worms.

Local medicaments.
As for local applications, Amatus Lusitanus in the place aforementioned,
affords two: The one is a medicate vinegar; the other a liniment: The
description of the vinegar it this: Lupin. amar. pug. iij. Staphisagriae pug.
ij. Let these be boiled in a sufficient quantity of vinegar, with it moysten
the whole body: The liniment is thus made: Staphisagr. part. 2. Sandarach.
Grac. part. 1. Salis petrae partem dimidiam, postquam ista fuere infusa in Oleo
Raphanino, part. 2. and Aceti acorrimi, part. 3. fiat linimentum, quod
illinatur toti corpori. Lib. 3. c. 3.
Paulus Aegiueta affirms, that he found good success in the application of
oil and vinegar.

As for the Crab-lice, the waiting-maids of Venus rest contented with the
application of an unguent made of sweet Soap and Quicksilver. If any one be
desirous to know more of the mystery of these movables, I will advise him to
repair to the Pilgrims of the tribe of Gad, in the Summer time to be found by
Coleman hedge, and thorowout the whole year in Batne-Elmes barn. If any be
desirous to read a learned and philosophical discourse of this subject, let
them have a recourse to Minadous, lib. 2. c. 9. de turpitudinibus.

LECT. XXIII. Of Ulcers of the Hairie Scalp.
SEeing I have set down the general doctrine of ulcers, sufficient to
instruct any one how every ulcer in particular parts is to be cured; yet
seeing some ulcers in these parts require some special considerations, I will
run through them to shut up the Lectures of this year: Nevertheless, I mean
not to omit any thing which shall seem material. I will begin at the ulcers
of the head, partly because some are uncurable of them, and that it is
necessary that you know which be such; partly because it were a foul shame,
that women should go beyond a Surgeon in this business, who confidently
take upon them the curation of these ulcers.

Differences of ulcers of the head.
The ulcers of the head are of two sorts: for some are moist, and some are dry.

The nature of these griefs and names.
The moist are two, Achor and Favus. These dispositions of the head are called
by the Arabians Sahafati, by Avicen. 7.4. tract. 3. c. 1. Serap. lib. 1. tract.
1. c. 3. Avenzoar, lib. 1. tract. 1. c. 7. and they are nothing else but small
ulcerate tumors of the whole skin of the head, caused of sharp excrementitious
humors. All small tumors, in Latin Tubercula, by the Arabians are called
Bothor. So then as the Cuticula, or the scarf skin, is the seat of Pthiriasis
or the lousy malady, so the place of these griefs is the whole skin, both
the Cuticula, and the Cutis.

The material causes. The diverse kinds of sharp humors.
The material cause is a sharp excrementitious humor.

Now sharp humors are of two sorts: for some are sharp of their own nature, as
choler: and some by accident. By accident, humors may become sharp two manner
of ways. First, by exustion and putrefaction, as Bilis atra, and melancholy
not natural excrementitious. Secondly, by admistion of a sharp humor. These
ulcerous tumors of the head may be caused, not only of simple sharp humors of
their own nature, but also of humors made sharp by accident.

The Chemists opinion concerning the material cause.
The Chemists will have the salt of Vitriol to be the material cause of these
ulcers. See Joan. Faber Chirurgia Spagyrica, c. xv. Achor so called according
to Alex. Trallianus, lib. 1. c. 8. because from it a sanious quittor called
(...) does flow. Galen in his book of tumors thus discourses of it: Achor
also is a small ulcer in the skin of the head, Achor, what it is.
you may think that it is caused of salt and nitrous phlegm, out of it
flows a sanious matter, which is not altogether waterish, nor so viscous and
thick as honey, which appears in those ulcers which are called Favi; for in
these there is a certain tumor, and sundry holes, out of which flows a
matter like unto honey. He also in his Lib. 1. de co^^pos. Pharmacorum secund.
loc. affirms the holes in this tumor to be less than are those which are
called ^^avi, and that out of them flows a thin humor with some clamminesse.
Oribas. lib. 4. ad Eunap. c. 4. thus speaks: Achor is seated in the skin of
the head, and has but small holes, out of which a thin and reasonable viscous
Sanies does flow. That affection which is called Favus is like to this; but it
has greater holes, which contain a matter like to honey. Trallianus lib. 1.
c. 9. subscribeth to these in these words: We must know also that Cerion,
(which is Favus in Latin) is a grief like to Achor, yet differing in
bigness: for the holes out of the which the humor issues, represent the
honeycomb: wherefore by Ancients it was called (...). The like has Paulus
Aegineta, lib. 3. c. 3.

The differences between Achor and Favus.
So that Achor differs in three points from Favus: for first, in it the tumor
is lesser: secondly, in it the holes are lesser: and thirdly, the holes in
Favus are conspicuous; but in Achor not. Aetius lib. 6. c. 68. has these
words: Achor is seated in the skin of the head, and has but small holes, out
of which a thin and viscous Sanies does flow. The grief called (...), or
Favus, is like to this, wherein there are large holes, out of which issues a
matter thick, like unto that which is contained in honey-combs: wherefore it is
called (...). Favus, what it is.
As for Favus, or (...) in Greek, Actuar. lib. 2. de dignose. morb. c. 5. thus
describes it: Small ulcers arise in the head thick, and red like little dugs,
of the which, that which is called (...) has but small holes, which sends
out a clammie Sanies; but (...) or Favus has greater holes, which contain an
humor like to honey.

Out of these passages, which have been alleged out of these ancient and
learned Authors, these descriptions of these two ulcers may be gathered: Achor.
Achor is an ulcerous tumor of the skin of the head, red and dug-like, having
small holes, Favus.
out of which issues a thin and viscous Sanies. Favus is the like ulcer, yet
wherein the holes are larger, containing an humor in thickness resembling
honey, from whence it has its name.

The primitive causes.
The primitive causes are in number two: corrupt nourishment, and contagion: of
the first I have discoursed heretofore, of the second there is no doubt to be
made: for it may be daily seen, that these griefs are communicate by contract
and frequent conversation.

The material cause.
The material cause is a sharp and fretting humor, viscous in both these ulcers
yet thinner in Achor, than it is in that which is called Favus. Galen and
Aegineta in the places afore-cited, affirm it to be a salt and nitrous phlegm.
The Chemists affirm them to proceed from the salt of the vitriol of the lesser
world, or man.

The conjunct cause.
The cause conjunct is the same humor impacted in the skin of the head.

The signs of these two are these: First, Signs.
in both these tumors there is an itching, and a tumor. Secondly, holes appear
in both, but in Achor lesser, in Favus greater. And although Lice are often
seen in both, yet it is proper for Favus to have scales.

The presages.
As for the Prognostics, receive these.

I. Young persons are most subject to these griefs, and amongst these children
most frequently: The causes of this may be two. First, because they may have
received many impurities in the mothers womb, which when they are come to the
light, the natural heat increasing, they lat our to expel; or it may happen
by reason of the corrupt milk of the Nurse, who uses an ill diet.

II. These ulcers, if they have continued long, and have much altered and
corroded the skin, when they are cured, they leave behind them baldness of
the parts affected.

III. These griefs free children from the falling sickness, according to
Hippocrates, Lib. de sacro morbo, and Avicer. 1.3. c. de Epilepsia. For the
humor which might cause this disease, is sent from the inner to the outer parts.

IV. If these griefs be hereditarie, they hardly can be cured: seeing this is
true in all other maladies, how much more certain, when to the humor a
malignitie is joined, as in these, as all must confess.

The Indication. of curing.
The means which are appointed for the curation of these griefs, are of two
sorts, Physical and Chirurgicall.

The Physical are three; 1. Physical.
A convenient order of Diet, Phlebotomie, and Purgation.

As for the Diet, Dieteticall.
that is most fit, which was set down in the Lecture delivered concerning the
curation of Leprositie: for by some this is accounted a particular Leprosy.
All surfeiting, strong and sweet wines, sharp, and salt, and fried meats are to
be shunned; and such as afford a gross and impure juice, as hard Eggs, Fishes
living in muddie waters: Purselane, according to Avenzear, exceedingly
furthereth these griefs.

As for Phlebotomie, Phlebotomie.
two indications may induce you to use this: First, a Plethora of the whole
body: Secondly, much corrupt blood settled in the vessels of the head. If there
be a fulness in the whole body, then it is fit to open the Medians of both the
arms: it skilleth not much at which you begin: Let some days pass between
the opening of the one and the other: Let the strength, age, time of the year,
and the like circumstances show you, what quantity of blood is to be drawn.
If much impure blood be congested in the head, open the Cephalica, the veins
under the tongue, the Vena frontis, yea and the arteries of the temples; for
they powerfully derive corrupt blood and foul spirits from the head.

Purgation. General.
As for Purgation: If this must be general, then no medicament is better than
Confectio Hamech, or Hiera Diacolocynthides, with the syrup of Rose solutive
with Agarick in Betonie, Eyebright, Strawberrie, Cowslip, or water of the
black Cherries. Receive this description as a pattern: Confect. Hamech, aut
Hier. Diacolocynt. iiij. Pulv. sancti ij. Pulv. Holland. j. Syrup. ros. solut.
cum Agarico j. Aq. praedict. iij. Mise. ut fiat petio. If the party affect
pills, these or such like you shall find very effectual: Pilul. aurear. and
aggregat. an. j. Trochiscor. alhand. pultorumgr. vij. spirit. Vitriol. gutt. 5.
Formentur pilul. j. quae de^ureatur. These purgative medicaments are to be
ministered once every week, until the pa^^^e be cured.

If you go about particularly to purge the head, Particular.
use Sternutatories made of white Hellebore, and the best and strongest
Tobacco, with a little of the powder of the seeds of sweet Marjerome and
Lavender; or use Gargarismes: This water drawn by a quill into the nostrils,
which I will set down, is very effectual: Pulv.Lap. magnet. amp; calamin.
an. ij. Virid. aeris and Euphorb. an. gr. vj. Lap. haematit. j. Succini albi
ss. Aq. major. j. Misceantur. Let this medicament be kept in a glass, and
drawn into the nostrils every morning, or every other morning, as the
patient is able to endure.

Chirurgicall means.
The Chirurgicall means are the artificial dressings of the ulcers with local
medicaments. To attain to this, two things are to be noted: The first is, what
medicaments are to be applied: The second is, how they are to be applied. As
for the qualities of the medicaments, they ought to be astringent and
repelling: when I discoursed of tumors, I set down an ample catalogue of them,
whither I send you, because I hare idle repetitions.

How persons of ripe age are to be dressed.
But seeing some magistrall compositions are required in the curation of these
griefs, which often prove very obstinate and stubborn, I will not leave you
unfurnished, but will deliver unto you some which are very effectual.
Compound unguents.
The first is this of mine own: Butyri recent. lb. ss. Axung. porc. iiij. ol.
Scorpion. ij. Sulphur. vivi, Helleb. alb. and nigri, Rad. Enul. pulveriz. an.
ss. Calcis viva iij. Mercur. crudi jss. Misc. ut fiat linimentum. The second is
that of Gordonius, described by Rinodaus, Dispensator. medic. lib. 5. sect. 1.
thus: Elleb. alb. and nigr. Sulphur. viv. Auripig. Litharg. Calc. viv. Alum.
Gallar. Fulig. Ciner. Clavellat. an. ss. Mercur. and virid. ar. an. ij.
pulveriz. and pulv. coq. in Succ. Borrag. Scabios, Fumar. Oxylap. and Aceti,
an. iij. ad Succorum consumpt. deind. addantur Ol. veter. lb. j. Piccis liquid.
ss. Cer. liquat. q. s. ut siat linimentum. I have made trial of it, and have
found it effectual. If you but consider the ingredients, you cannot but allow
of it. The Author commends it in a scald head, all manner of scabs, and in
Mulum mortuum it self.

The artificial dressing. The pulling out of the hair.
When you are to apply these unguents, which was the second point of the
Chirurgicall means: First, you are to mark whether the roots of the hairs be
corrupt or no; for if the roots be corrupt, they must be pulled out: you shall
know this by pulling out of a few, and observing the roots: for if the roots be
thicker than ordinary, and moist, you may in be assured that they are corrupt:
they are to be pulled out children, that you may the better apply your Topics:
In aged persons not only to this end; but to open the skin also, and to make
it more perspirable, that the corrupt humors may be the more easily corrected
and spent.

Pulling out of the hairs.
The hairs are readily pulled out, by application of an Emplaster of red wax
newly made, drawn upon lether, and lying to the ulcers twelve hours.
Secondly, above the unguents you are to apply Sparadrops made only of wax, to
save the unguents, and keep them to the sores without much waste. Thirdly, you
are to foment the sores with red wine, or Tanners woose, wherein Pomegranate
flowers and rindes, Myrtill-berries, and Sumach, with red Rose-leaves dried,
have been infused in a pot set by the fire side, before you use the unguents.

How children are to be handled.
If children be offered to you to be cured, you must have a care that you use
gentle medicaments to them, and that their caps be so tied to their heads,
that they cannot pull them off. For children receive these Topics: the first
shall be that of Minadous, in his Treatise De turpitudinibus, li. 2. c. 10.
which he learned of a woman, who professed the curarion of these griefs: Of
the Mastickt ee.
Sulphur. vivi. Litharg. Argent. pulverizat. an. j. cum aceteros. teranturac
levigentur, tuus add Terrae l^^^^ae pulv. ss. Succi Plantag. and Limon. an. j.
Ol. Lentiscin. and Myrtini. an. j. Misc. ut fiat linimentum. If the ulcers in
children prove obstinate, use this of mine: Pomati, ungnent. Popul. and Vng.
albi caphurat. an. j. Ol. de vitell. ovorum ss. Ol. Scorpion. ij. Mercur. crudi
ss. Misc. in unguentum. You may add jss. of Alome calcined and beat to powder,
if you will have it stronger. These ulcers are to be dressed once in 24.
hours, and toward the night: for then the medicaments will prove most
effectual. If these ulcers be very moist, and apt to be enflamed, by the
application of an unguent, then you are to use a medicament made of the
abstersive powders, which the Ancients called Smegmata contempered with Oxymel
simplex: such are the Ellebores, Sulphur vivum, S^aphesager, the Pumick-stone,
Cuttle-bones, the roots of Iris, and Aristolochia rotunda, and Barley-meale:
these being beat to powder, and by the admixtion of Oxymel simplex brought to
the consistence of a liquid Electuarie, must be applied to these ulcers, and
above the medicament a cap of Ivie-leaves sowed together be set.

Having spoken sufficiently of the two kinds of moist ulcers, which are found
in the head, Achor and Favus, it is time that we reason of the dry ulcer of
the head, which properly is called Tinea.

Of Tinea.
This is a crustie ulcer, fretting the skin like a Moth (from whence it has its
denomination) without any great store of moisture, corrupting the roots of the
hair, and sending out of the skin a dry filth which stinketh: Videatur Hieron.
Mercurial. c. 14. de morb. cutan. But Petrus Joan. Faber, in his Chirurgia
Spagyrica, thus describes it, c. 15. de Tinea: It is a peculiar phagedaenicall
and cancerous ulcer of the head, caused of the salt of the Vitrioll of the body
of man, which fretteth the skin, and produces scales, sometimes white, and
sometimes yellow. The material cause, and the manner of the generation of it,
he thus prosecuteth. The Vitrioll in the great would, while it is calcined in
the fire, it is coagulate into a mass; either white, if the calcination be but
moderace; or yellow, if the fire be increased. So in the little world (he
means the body of man) the Vitrioll, when it is separated from the Balsome of
the body, it marches toward the skin of the head, which it corrodeth, and
above it produces a crustie and scaly substance. Thus he: and I protest very
probably.

The material cause.
And if it be true which Galen and Aegineta affirm of the material cause of
Achor and Favus, that it is a sharp nitrous phlegm, as has been said, it may
very probably be affirmed, that the material cause of Tinea is Phlegma
vitriolatum, Phlegm endued with V^^rioll, yet grosser than that which is the
cause of Achor and Favus. Cap. de Tinea.
Avicen, Mercurialis, and the rigid Galenists affirm the melancholy humor to
be the material cause, accompanied with some sharp humiditie, which pricking
the expulsive faculty, moves it to drive out the humor to the skin of the
head, and so to cause this ulcer: but this opinion carries no show of truth:
for first, this grief most commonly seizes upon phlegmatic persons:
secondly, it cannot be apprehended, how melancholy, either by the admixtion of
any humor, or by any degree of heat in the body of man, being of it self
black, can produce such a colored ulcer* to wit, white or yellowish.

Primitive causes.
The primitive causes are four; Errors committed in the things not natural,
Hereditie, the corrupt Milk wherewith children are fed, and Contagion or
Infection.

The signs are dry crustie scales most commonly white, sometimes yellowish, or
of an ash color, or greenish, never black altogether.

As for the presages: let this be the first.

I. This ulcer is hard to be cured, because it is malign and venomous.

II. Inveterate ulcers of this kind are more malign, and harder to be cured,
than those which have but lately invaded any person.

III. When they are cured, they often leave behind them Alopecia, or Ophiasis.

IV. Sometimes they end into the Leprositie, and pedicular or lousy disease.

V. If in a Tinea the skin be hard, or of a shelly substance, and send out many
scales, and the hair fall by reason of the corruption of the roots of them, it
is of all others most hard to be cured.

VI. If this ulcer being once cured, return, pronounce it to be of hard
curation: for there must be some seed of this malign malady firmly impressed
in the brain.

The curation.
In the curation of this grief, two indications offer themselves: The first is
the removing of the causes; but seeing the causes are either primitive or
conjunct: The primitive causes are removed, by rightly ordring those things
which are called Res (...) naturales: The cause conjunct is taken by purgation
and phlebotomie. As for Phlebotomie and purgation, although that may suffice
which I have delivered in setting down the healing of Tinea and Favus, yet let
the insinuate this unto you, that it is expedient that once a quarter you open
the Cephalica, two days before the full of the Moon, and that for purgation
you call Mercuriall medicaments to aid, when Veget^^^s will not serve. Parrey
is of the opinion, Lib. 16. c. 2. de Tinea.
that the means which are used in curing of the French Pox, are effectual in
curing this grief: Use these then, Mercurius sublimatus dulcis, Turbith
mineral, Mercury precipitate dulcified, Mercury coagulate, and fixed by gold
and silver.

The application of the Fopicks.
The second Indication is the curation of the ulcer it self by local means.

Things to be noted before the application of lo^^ll medicaments.
But before you go about to apply any local medicaments, observe these
passages: First, that you meddle not with tender children, if they have a
malign Tinea, until they be able to abide sharp medicaments; for you shall
vex both them and their parents, and so shall procure a dimission to your
selves. The mean time you may use a liniment(...) espying things which might
hurt the body, The excellency of the hearing.
that we may prevent and shun them: yet the hearing excels it, for it is
Disciplinae sensus, the Sense of learning, according to Aristode, and the
entertainer of faith: for faith is bred by hearing, according to the Apostle.
And as the sight furthereth invention, so by die hearing, things invented are
communicated to others. Besides, by hearing, the perturbations of the mind, as
anger, envy, wondering and such like, are most stirred up.

The causes.
The causes of the ulcers of the ears, are either antecedent, or conjunct.

The antecedent is either external, or internal.

The external causes are two; External.
to wit, a blow, or a fall: for by reason of either of both these the parts may
be contused, and from hence quittor bred, which being stayed long within the
cavities of the ear, and having the eare-wax, and other sharp excrements of
the brain, mingled with it, may erode the parts.

The internal cause is a sharp humor sent from the brain to the cavity of the
ear, Internal.
which first of all causes apostemation.

As for the Prognostics, ^^ciages.
let this be the first: These ulcers are not to be neglected; for if the
curation be prolonged, deafness may ensue.

II. If greater plenty of matter issue out of the ear than the part of its
own self is likely to afford, then you may pronounce that the greatest part
of it is sent from the brain ill affected.

III. If before matter issue out of the ear, the party feel pulsation, and
great pain, you may pronounce that a Phlegmon has invaded the part.

The differences.
These ulcers are either without any excrescence of flesh, or they have
excrescence.

The curation.
In the curation of ulcers of the ears, it is requisite that ever before the
application of any local medicaments the head be purged by cephalicall pills.
Purgation.
Receive a description of those which are very effectual. pilul. aggregatar.
and an. rear. an. j. trochiscor. Alhandal. and diacrid. an. ss. spirit.
vitriol. q. s. ut formetur nassula. Ex hoc massa efformentur pilul. iiij.
deglutiat. duat hor. 5. Matur. sequente dio sumat totidem. Exactis 4. horis a
sumptione pilularum capiat^^ sculum sine pane, prandeat autem hora consueta.

Application of local means.
In the application of local medicaments, these five points are to be observed,
according to Petrus a Largelata Medicus Bononiensis. (...). 5. tract. 9. c. 9


I. Let no sharp medicament be put into the ear before the body be well
purged, lest we procure a fever, and cause an attraction of humors. II. Let all
medicaments which are powered into the ears be neither too hot, nor too cold;
for they being (for the greatest part) framed of spermatick parts, they can
hardly endure any excess in heat or cold. III. Let all the medicaments which
are to be powered into the ear be of a liquid substance, that they may enter
the deeper. IV. After the party is dressed, let him or her lie upon the sound
ear, the ill affected ear being stopped with cotton or wool for a good space
of time. V. Let not fattie medicaments be either powered, or injected into the
ear, for it is composed of spermatick parts, and such things will cause a
sordid ulcer.
The local medicaments which are fit to be applied to ulcers of the ears,
wherein there is no superfluous flesh, are these: Trochisci Andronii in aceto
sambucino dissoluti: Haec autem est little descriptie: ^^la^st. vitri^l.
aristol. gallar. an. ij. alum. mirrh. sali^ Ammon. an j. Excipiantur omnia
melicrate and fiant trochisci. If you boil Crocus Martis in strong wine
vineges, nutill both come to the consistence of a liniment, it is a good
medicine. The Sanative syrup made of the vulnerarie plants, as, Selfe-heale,
our Ladies-Mantle, Avens sanicle, Salamons-seale, Plantane, Horse-taile,
Yarrow, Knotgrasse is very effectual, not only in ulcers of the ears, but in
all hollow ulcers in like manner, if Balaustia, Pomegranate-pils, Sumach,
Mirtle-berries, and red Rose-leaves be added. These medicaments are sure, and
such as you may trust into. In the winter time, if you boil a sufficient
quantity of dry Tobacco in strong Ale, and boil the decoction strained, you
shall have an effectual medicine, chiefly if the ulcer be foul, and have
worms, which you may conjecture by intolerable itching, which they will cause
by their motion. If these ulcers afford great store of quittor, they must be
dressed every four and twentieth hour; but if they yield but little matter,
it will be sufficient to dress them once in two days.

The curation of the ulcer of the ear with excrescence of flesh.
If falls out sometimes, that if ulcers in the ears continue long, that
superfluous flesh does so increase in them, that it fills up all the cavities
of the ear, and causes deafness. This happened to a gentlewoman of the race
of the Fittons in Chester, when I practiced Physic and Chirugerie there.

An experiment of the Authors.
I thus cured her: First, I ministered unto her Cephalickpils.

This being done, I consumed the spungeous flesh by often application of the
Fistula-powder, so that it did not not touch any part in the circumference.
This powder I set down in that Lecture, wherein was set down the methodicall
cure of a Fistula.

Thirdly, I made in jection into the ear, made of two ounces of white Wine,
one dram of Aegyptiacum, and half an ounce of Mel rosatum.

Last of all, I healed, and cicatrized it with my vulnerarie syrup dissolved in
Plantane-water.

If such an accident come to your hands, proceed thus methodically, and you
shall undoubtedly bring to pass that which you shall go about. So much I
thought good to deliver unto you concerning the dignotion, and curation of
ulcers of the ears, which often prove troublesome to the Patient and
Surgeon, and loathsome to others, who approach to the party grieved, by
reason of the evil smell, which the ulcer sometimes sends forth.

Of ulcers of the eyes.
Now I will come to the ulcers of the eyes, which ought exquisitely to be
handled, seeing the sense of sight, the instrument whereof is the eye, is so
pleasing and necessary to all persons. Of all the ulcers of the eye, Fistula
lachrymalis, or Aegylops, first does offer it self, but seeing I amply
discoursed of it, when I delivered the doctrine of Fistula's, I will remit you
to that Lecture.

Three points of the general doctrine.
In this my discourse of the other ulcers of the eyes, I will first set down
the general doctrine of them, and then descend to the particular handling of
each one of them.

In the general doctrine, I will deliver three things: to wit, their causes;
secondly, their prognostics; and thirdly, the indications of curing of them.

The causes, are either external, or primitive, or internal.

The external causes are two; to wit, a blow, or a contusion by reason of a
fall.

The internal causes are sharp and eroding humors.







The methodicall general intentions of curing these griefs, are in number
four; Good order of diet, Phlebotomie, Purgation, and the application of the
Seton or Fontanell for revulsion and derivation.

The manner of curing these three ulcers in particular.
Having dispatched the three points which the general doctrine of ulcers does
contain, I am come to set down how each one of these ulcers in particular is
to be cured.

As for the differences of them, they are either mild, or malign. The mild
are either of the Adnata, or Conjunctiva, or Cornea, or uvea. The ulcers of
Conjunctiva most commonly proceed from Ophthalmia.

Of it then I will speak, beause it most frequently seizes upon the eye:
Ophthalmia what it is.
(...) in Greek, but Lippitudo in Latin, according to Galen 4. de medicam.
local. cap. 4. is an inflammation of that tunicle of the eye which is called
Adnata.

The differences of it.
There be two kinds of it: One properly so called, proceeding from inward
causes.

The other proceeding from external causes, which properly is called (...), or
Perturbatio.

Again, Ophthalmia vera is either more mild, when only the Conjunctiva is
inflamed or vehement, when as the eyelid besides is red, turned up, and
somewhat ulcerate.

How it is bred.
This grief is thus bred, according to Cassius Medicus 66. probl. medic. When
humors are impacted in the eye, they stop the passages, and keep in the heat:
the heat kept in, burns when it cannot breathe through, and inflameth the
humors; and these inflamed, cause Ophthalmia, and hinder the sight; for the
Conjunctiva being inflamed, great pain and heat are felt in the eye. These draw
humors into the eye: the humors attracted being dispersed through the eye,
trouble the humors and spirits; and these being troubled, of a necessity hinder
the sight. The eyes are subject to these affections, according to Arist. probl.
7. sect. ultim. and Alex. 1. probl. 35. because they are moist, and (...), very
passable.

The causes of Ophthalmia vera conjunct.
All sorts of humors may cause a true Ophthalmia, but sundry ways; for hot
humors, as blood and choler, of themselves cause great inflammations; but small
inflammations may be caused of cold humors mixed with hot.

The primitive causes are the heat of the Sun, Primitive.
pain of the head, a burning fever, dust, smoke, great cold binding the part,
blows upon the head, blustering winds, ebriety, venery, and according to
Paulus, oil. It brings an Ophthalmia, because it cleaves fast to the
tunicles, and so stops the pores, and to the heat is kept in, and inflameth
the eye.

Why in hot regions the inahbitants are more frequently troubled with these
inflammations.
Hippocrat. lib. de aer, aquis and locis, writes, that they which inhabit the
South, and hot regions, are easily assaulted by such diseases, and easily
cured: and by the contrary, that they who dwell in the Northern parts are not
so easily tainted with this grief, but are more hardly cured: Avicen yields
the reasons for this, saying, that they who dwell under a hot climate, have
their heads full of vapors and humors, which being resolved by the hot air,
fall to the eyes, and being there stayed, cause an inflammation, which
afterward is easily cured. First, because their bodies are more perspirable.
Secondly, because they have still a loose belly. But in cold regions, although
they have plenty of humors in their heads, yet they are congealed, and do not
so promptly flow to the eyes; but if they come to the eyes, and be there
impacted, they cannot so readily be discussed, by reason of the thickness of
the skin, and constriction of the pores. So inflammations of the eyes happen
more frequently in the Summer to those who have their heads stuffed with vapors
and humors, the heat colliquating them, and turning them to the eyes. In like
manner in those diseases wherein there is an ebullition of the blood,
Ophthalmiae are forerunners, as in the small pox, measles, and sometimes the
plague, hot and sharp vapors being carried up to the head.

The general signs of a true Ophthalmia.
As for the signs of an Ophthalmia; they are general, or particular.

The general are these: according to Galen. 4. de medio. loc. 4. and lib. de
totius morbi temporib. and Rhazes lib. 9. ad Almans. a swelling of the eye, a
redness of it, pain sometimes pricking, sometimes corrosive, sometimes
tensive, flowing of tears.

The particular.
The particular signs of a true Ophthalmia are these: a great tumor and pain,
horrible heat, turning up of the eyelids, show a great inflammation.

These accidents, in a more remiss degree, show a milder Ophthalmia: Signs of
the parts sending.
if the humor proceed from the stomach, then the party will desire to vomit: if
from the head, the headache, vexes: and seeing the humor may be sent both from
the vessels within, and without the Cranium, if the veins of the forehead, and
the rest of the face be full, if the arteries of the temples beat, and if the
eyelids be heavy, then the humor comes from the vessels without the Cranium;
but if none of these symptoms appear, and yet the party often neezeth, and
finds itching in the nose, the humor or vapor is sent by vessels within the
Cranium.

Signs of the humors sent.
Signs of the humors sent are these: If blood be it, the eyes and face will be
red, the veins will be full, the pain will be gravative, the matter that
flows will not be very sharp. If it be a vapor or flatuofity, there will be
a finging in the ears, and a tensive pain. If it be pituitous blood, the
tumor will not be very red, but whitish, less heat and mean, great heaviness
of the eye and eyelids; the eyelids in the night time will be glued together.
Why in an Ophthalmia the eyes cleave together in the night time.


This happens for three causes: First, because in the day time the eye is
still in motion, and suffers not the humor to cleave to the eyelids.

Secondly, because moisture is multiplied in the night time.

Thirdly, because the humor does concoct in the night time, grows thick, and
so is more apt to cleave to the eyelids, they then being immovable. If choler
be the cause, there will be but little redness mingled with yellowness, the
humor which runs from the eyes will be thin, the pain will be pinching. If
flatuosity or a vapor, then none of these signs will appear, yet the eye
will be somewhat swelled, and a noise will be noted in the ears, and no
humidity flow from it.

The predictions.
As for the predictions: I. An inflammation coming of external causes, is more
easily cured than that which comes of an inward.

II. When a continual pain of the head is joined with Ophthalmia, and
coutinueth long, blindness most commonly ensues.

III. If in an inflammation of the eye, the humor which flows from it be
thick, it will not long continue: for it betokens the benignity of the humor,
and strength of nature.

IV. If a mild sever, or a lask, 6. Aph. 17.
seize upon one troubled with Ophthalmia, it cease within a short time, the
humor being discussed by the first, and revelled by the second.

(...) If the tumor of the eye be great, the pain vehement, and the matter
which flows from the eye be copious and thin, the Ophthalmia is like to
continue long; but short if signs contrary to these appear. Thus much then
concerning the causes, signs, and prognostics of an Ophthalmia vera shall
suffice.

Ophthalmia spuria, what it is.
Now it remains, that we speak a word or two of Ophthalmia spuria, a bastard
Ophthalmia: This is caused only by external means, whereof we have spoken
sufficiently before, when we set down the primitive causes of Ophthalmia vera.
And if the accidents, as inflammation, redness, and the like, be but moderate,
it will easily cease, and without great difficulty, by removing the
extrinsecall causes, and applying cooling waters, as Rose Water, or
Plantane-water, with Camphire.

The curation of Ophthalmia vera.
In the curation of Ophthalmia vera, some precepts are to be observed before the
application of local medicaments.

Precepts before the application of Topics.
I. The party must eat and drink sparingly, abstain from venerie, and keep the
body soluble.

II. Let the party be kept in a dark room, and let the sleep be moderate;
because immoderate sleep draws vapors to the head.

III. Let the objects, which the party beholds, be green, blew, or black.

IV. Let anger, serious cogitations, and motion be shunned.

V. If the hair be too long and heavy, let be polled.

VI. Let the drink be small Beer, or Barley-water, wherein have been boiled
Fennell-seeds, Coriander-seeds, and eyebright.

VII. Let meats salt, vaporours, sharp, and hard of digestion be shunned.

VIII. If the party be strong, open first the Median, then the Cephalica, then
the Vena frontis, and those behind the ears, and in the temples, if the
inflammation be great: if circumstances will not admit Phlebotomie, apply
Ventoses to the shoulders, and thighs; and Fructions an^ ^^^gatures to the
arms and legs.

IX. Purge according to the humor offending, as choler with Pilulae cochiae, or
electuar. de succo ros. phlegm with Diaturbith cum agarico, or Diaphanicum, or
Diacarthamum.

X. If you use fomentations, Fomentation.
these five things are to be observed: 1. That the body be clean, otherwise
the matter (being scattered by fomentation) will run to the eyes. 2. The matter
must be discharged into the eye, and not in motion. 3. That it be used when the
matter is thick, for it attenuateth it. 4. That it be used in the declination
of the grief. 5. No astringent fomentations are to be used; for they wedge in
the humor, and exasperate the grief.


XI. To stay the fluxion, you are to apply a strong defensive to the forehead
and temples.

Opiaticall medicaments.
XII. Opiaticall medicaments not well corrected, are not to be used; for if they
be but weak, the may procure a little ease for the time, but the fluxion and
pain will return more fiercely: if they be strong, they may cause inevitable
blindness, by hindering of the influence of the visive spirit.

The local medicaments.
The local medicaments must have three qualities; for they must be somewhat
astringent, cooling, and anodine; such are the water of the white of an egg,
the mucilage of Fenugreek, and Quince-seeds drawn with Rose and
Plantane-water, with a little Saffron; Trochiset albi Rhasis sine opio (unless
the pain be very great) dissolved in Violet, or Succorie, or Eye-bright-water.
What I have spoken, I would have you to understand it of an ordinary Ophtholmia.

The venereall Ophthalmia.
If you perceive it to be venereall, or a symptom of the great Pox; then you
must cure the grief, and then the accident will cease: If after the using of
these means, the ^^hthalmia prove rebellious, you must blister the neck.

The use of the Seton.
If this will not serve, you must apply the Seton, or make a Fontanell in the
neck or arm; but the Seton is most effectual: for first, by reason of the
great pain which it brings, it makes a stronger revulsion: Secondly, it
discharges the humor more plentifully, it having two orifices, but the
Fontanell only one.

LECT. XXV. Of the rest of the ulcers of the eyes.
NOw order requires, that I should set down the doctrine touching the ulcers
of Cornea.

Superficiarie ulcers of Cornea.
These are either superficial, or deep, corroding the substance of the Cornea.

Caligo, a mist in English.

Nubocula, this is deeper than Achlis or Caligo, yet narrower, and whiter.

about the circle Iris, possessing part of the white, and part of the black of
the eye: without the* Iris it appears red, but within the Iris white.

Aetius(...) this is a superficiary ulcer also, which makes the Cornea rugged
by erosion, and to be of an ash color, resembling a lock of wool, for the
which cause it is called of Avicen, the woolly ulcer.

The three kinds of deeper ulcers of Cornea.
Of the deeper ulcers of Cornea there are three sorts:

The first is called (...); and it is an ulcer of the Cornea* hollow, narrow,
without filth, like to a round p^^cture: in Latin it is called Fossula; Fovea,
a pit.



Cornea, is called (...) by Aetius; by Scribouius, Largus ustio; and by others
inustio; and it is an impure, and crustie ulcer of Cornea, through which
sometimes the humors of the eye come out, when it is made clean, by cleansing
medicaments applied.

These ulcers of the Cornea of the eye, Prognostics.
whether they be superficiarie or deep, are not to be slighted, but carefully
to be dressed: but those especially which have deeply seized upon the substance
of the membrane, lest they corrode through the whole membrane, and so the humors
issuing out, the eye sink, and both deformity, and inevitable blindness ensue.

The material cause of these ulcers.
For the material cause of these ulcers is a salt and nitrous humor, as Paulus
Aegineta speaks, Lib. 3. c. 22.

The falling down of uvea.
It the Cornea be quite through corroded, then the uvea falls down: this
disease of uvea is called (...), uvea procidentia.

Four kinds of it.
Of this disease there are four kinds:

caput musca, the head of a fly, and of Avicen, Formiculis, like the head of a
pismire.

uvea, or uvatio.

m^lum, the apple-like rupture.

uvea fall down and grow hard, brawnie, and flat, it is called (...), clavus,
the naile-like rupture. All these four kinds of the rupture of uvea for the
most part are uncurable: Predictions.
only the apple-like, and grape-like rupture, if the roots be small, and the
party be of a good constitution, may be by binding cured, to takeaway and
mitigate the deformity of the eye. For if the sight be taken away before by
these breaches of uvea, the deligations will not restore the sight, which must
be intimate to the party before you go about these operations, that he think
not himself deluded, having hoped for the recovery of his sight, as the reward
of his patience, in enduring the manual operations.

The alteration of the body.
Seeing all ulcers of the eyes argue a cacochymicall body, for they are caused
of sharp and corroding humors, the constitution of the body must be altered,
not suddenly, by laboring to remove the whole cause at once; but (...), and
that is according to Galen. li. 9. meth. medend. when by little and little that
is discharged which is faulty, that that which is good may succeed in its
place. Wherefore you are to shun all strong catharticall means, lest they
procure vomiting, which is very prejudicial to weak eyes, such as are those
which are ulcerate. The body having been gently purged, nature very often does
correct the refidue of the humor, by turning that part which is benign into
nourishment, and expelling that which is superfluous, by stool, urine, and
sweat. Those twelve observations which I set down in the deliverie of the
curation of Ophthalmia vera, I commend unto you in the curing of the ulcers of
the eyes also, which need not any repetition.

Local medicaments.
To set down all the local medicaments, which are delivered by the Ancients in
curing ulcers of the eyes, were a fruitless labor.

Nevertheless, I will furnish you with a few approved medicaments. To
superficial ulcers of Cornea.
Then in superficial ulcers of Cornea, use These: I. su^xi tu^. fanicul.
chelidon. ^uphragia an. ij. vini albi poten^i^ iij. sa^chat. cordi iij. aloes,
sarcocoll. an. ^^. fellis capan. ij. Distill these, and use the water.

II. ^q. chelidon. and rutae an. iss. aq. ros. j. croci metal. j. fiat infusio.

III. succi saenicul. ruta an. iij. mell. vptimi ij. exponantur soli inclusa
vitro stricti orificii probe obturato per mensem tempore astive. Vtemdum ho^
medicamento abjectis foecivus.

IV. axung. porci aq. ros. ubluta ij. caphura ss. turiae praepurar. gr. x.
al^^s pulv. j. sacchars candi gr. xvj. fiat collyrium.

For deep ulcers.
In deep ulcers of Cornea tunica use this of H^urni^^, which he bought at a
deate rate, and which he has set down method. ad praxin, lib. 1. page 106.
^^laminar. ter. usti ac bis in vini aceto extincti j. myrrhae, plumbi usti ac
leti an ss. croci gr. v. opi^ gr. ij. aeris ust^ iiij. decocti fanugraeci j.
terantur omnia supor lapidom pictorum ac fiat collyrium. Having first made
clean the eyes with a sponge dipped in the mucilage of Fenugreek and Linseed,
dress the ulcerate eyes twice in the forenoone, and so often in the afternoon.

Collyrium de plumbo described by Rinodaeus, set down by him in Dispensatorio
medico lib. 5. cap. 11. de collyriis, is an effectual medicament. plumb^ ust^,
antimon. turiae lotae, aeris usts, gumm^ Arabici, tragacanthi an. j. opii ss.
fiat ex omuib ut pulvis ex quo cum aqua resacea formentur trochises: dissolve
one of them in Plantane and Purselane water, and dress with this medicament
the eye. Purging of the body.
When you are a dressing the ulcers of the eyes, minister once a week a purging
medicament. If you use Pil^, minister (according to the advice of the Arabiane)
Pilula alephanginae, or Pilula lucis majores and minores, or de agari^^,
minister a dram made up into four Pills, which are to be covered with silver
foil: or use this pill; Spcoier. hier. ss. Diacridii ij. Trochiscor. Alhaxdal.
v. Cum Syrupo Augustano fiat massa. One pill of this composition weighing
twenty grains, will purge sufficiently. If the party cannot swallow pills,
minister to him this potion: carieostin. and Electuar. lenitiv. an. iij. Pulv.
sancti ij. Fulv. Holland. j. Syrup. ros. solutiv. cum Agarico vj. aq. Beton.
Faenicul. aut Euphrag. iij. Misc. ut fiat poti^.

The ordination of the things not natural.
To these medicaments both inward and outward, the, right use of those things
which are called Non naturales must be joined, or else the curation will be
protracted and prolonged.

The Air.
The Air then must be temperate in its first qualities, as being neither too
hot, nor too cold, too moist, or too dry. It is not good to abide in the heat
of the Sun, nor the beams of the Moon, or any open air: the party is to
shun Southern and northern winds: for the Southern wind, according to
Hippocrates, troubles the sight, aphor. sect 3.
causes hardness of hearing, an heavy head, dull senses, a lazy body,
because it begets gross spirits. And the Northern wind is very sharp, and
therefore it stingeth and pricketh the eyes: neither must the air be too
lightsome; for it scatters the spirits.

The bread must be made of clean wheat, Bread.
well-leavened, and somewhat salted, wherein may be put Fennill, Anise, and
Coriander seeds: for unleavened bread is accounted hurtful to the eyes.

As for flesh-meats these are good: Flesh.
Chicken, Capon, Hen, Partridge, Phesant, Pigeons. Larks, the Pie, the Swallow,
and the Goose-flesh are accounted good for the sight.

As for fish, Trouts, Rochets, Pearches, and Pickerels, Fish.
of fresh water fish may for variety of diet be admitted: of salt water
fishes, Whiting-mops, and the Smelts are accounted the best. Baked and fried
meats, strong spices, as Pepper, Ginger, Mustard, and the roots of the
Horse-rettish are not to be used. To meats minister this composition in stead
of salt: Euphragiae, Semin. Faenicul. an. j. Cinamomi and Macis, an. j. Salis
communis j. fiat ex omnibus pulvis. All bulbous roots, as Onions and Garlic;
and P^lses, as Pease and Beans, are to be rejected; as also moist and ^^w
fruits: Stewed Prunes, and Pears, or Quinces preserved, are permitted after
meat, to stay the ascending of vapors to the head, and the Marmalade of
Quinces, with some Anise-seeds, Fennill-seeds, and Coriander-seeds Comfits.

As for drink, Drink.
no liquor is more convenient than six shillings Beer, neither too new, nor
too stale, having had a bag of boulting-cloth hung in it, filled with
Eyebright, Fennill-seeds, Betony, Rosemarie, sweet Marjerome and Sage.

If the party has been accustomed to wine, Wine.
let him use some small wine, not sharp or vaporous, wherewith some good
spring water must be mingled, and Borrage-flowers, and Burnet-leaves are to be
put into the cup: and this will serve for two purposes: for the color will
comfort the eyes, and the herbs by their property will repress the
vaporousnesse of the wine. The less one does drink the better will the Patient
be, and the sooner cured. A small kind of Mead made after this manner will
not be amiss: Aq. font. lb. xv. Mellis optimi lb. j. Faenienl. Euphrag. an.
man. j. Macis j. Coq. adtertiae partis consumptionem semper spumam auferendo,
Sleeping and watching.
actandem colando. Immoderate sleep fills the head full of vapors, and
immoderate watching does spend the spirits, cool the brain, and hinder the
sight. It is good to go to bed three or four hours after supper, and to rise
early, and to walk softly up and down the chamber, to comb the head, Exercises.
pick the ears, and to empty the excrements. Much reading is not good,
especially after meals, and weeping is very hurtful.

The body must still be kept soluble with lenitive clysters of Diacathol. the
syrup of Althaea, Solublenesse.
and the oil of Lilies dissolved in the ordinary decoction appointed for
clysters. Take this for a parterne: Diacathol. jss. Syrupi de Althea ij. ol.
Lil. albor. ij. Decoct. communis pro clysterib. viij. Misc. ut fiat clyster. If
the party will not admit a clyster, then minister half an ounce of Electuar.
lenitivum, in seven spoonfuls of broth made of a Chicken. After meals use this
or the like digestive powder: Semin. Faenicul. and Coriand. Saccharo semel
incrustatorum, an. j. Cort. Citri, and Myrobalan. Kebul. condit. an. iij.
Euphrag. siccat. ij. Macis j. Sacchari rosat. Tabellat. jss. fiat ex omnibus
pulvis. Dos. cochl. 1 a singulis pastibus.

Hitherto I have delivered unto you the differences of mild ulcers; Of malign
ulcers of the eyes.
now I will speak of the diverse kinds of malign ulcers of the eyes. These
are either not contagious, or contagious. The not contagious are two; Noma, and
Vlcera cancrosa. The contagious are three; Carbunculosa, Venerca, Morbillosa.
Of these in order I will discourse briefly.

Noma, or Vlcera depascentia are malign ulcers, Noma.
which sometimes begin at the corners of the eyes, sometimes at the white, and
sometimes seize upon the hornie membrane. In corrupt bodies they fret
exceedingly, and go forward in such sort, that oftentimes they consume the
parts adjacent, as the muscules and lids of the eye: Signs.
from them flows a stinking slimie matter: the pain is grievous, and the
diseased party has an accidental fever.

This ulcer is dangerous, Prognostics.
and seldom cured without deformity and loss of the sight: wherefore my
counsel is, that you foretell the danger, if such ulcers be offered to you
to be cured.

The local medicaments.
Only I will acquaint you with some local means, having spoken sufficiently
of the general intentions. Apply then to the ulcer the juice of Plantane.
Horse-taile, Knot-grasse, Nightshade, and Yarrow clarified with Honey, and the
whites of Eggs: Dress these ulcers morning and evening, dropping a few drops
into the affected eye, covering the eye with a cataplasme made of Vngn^^^^um
ros^t (...), the pulp of a Quince boiled, and some ^y^e of P^pp^es. If these
ulcers prove very malign and corroding, you may correct them by instilling
some oil of Vitriol, or Sulphur, mingled with Plantane-water, taking only the
fourth part of it. To assuage the pain use this cataplasme: Mala Cydonia
numero 2. Sedi major. et Solani hortens. ana man. ij. coq. in s. q. Lact.
muliebr. vacc. capr. aut asinae, addatis Croci j. ac fiat cataplasma.

A cancerous ulcer.
Vlcus cancrosum, a cancerous ulcer follows, which the Chemists pronounce to
be caused of an Arsenicall salt, and it is like to be so: for in this ulcer,
besides corrosion, there is a septick or putrefactive quality. It begins in
the black of the eye.

The signs.
In it the black and white of the eye are reddish, lines seem to be sent from
the black to the temples: the Patient refuses food, by reason of the exceeding
great pain, a thin darkish and sharp humor flows from it, and it is
exasperate, by reason of the application of sharp medicaments.

You an only promise a palliative cure of this malign ulcer, Prediction.
by the application of anodine means, after you have used the general
indications before specified. Paulus Aeginet. lib. 3. c. 22. affirms it to
be an uncurable evil. He counsels to feed the Patient with milk,
panado's, and other meats of a good juice, and of an easy concoction.

Local means.
Mild eye-salves are also to be applied, as this: Mucilag. Semin. Cydon. et
Palicur. Aq. ros. extract. j. Trochisc. albor. Rhas. cum opio j. fiat collyrium
quod tepidum applicetur. Renovetur mane et vesperi. Desuper applicetur hoc
cataplsama. Pome cocta number. 3. Cassiae recent. extract. ss. Croci j. Lactis
mulieb. j. Albumen ovi unius: fiat cataplasma. So much then concerning the
handling of malign ulcers of the eyes, Malign ulcers proceeding of contagious
diseases.
wherein there is no contagion.

Ulcers which are caused of contagious diseases follow, as the Small Pox, the
French Pox, and the Plague: If you fear that the Small Pox are like to cause
ulcers in the eyes, Of ulcers caused of the Small Pox.
before any did appear in the body; if the party feel pain in the eyes, and
cannot open the eyelids, then are you to apply gentle fomentations to the
eyes, Topics.
as the brest-milk of a sound woman, having a little Saffron mingled with it;
or the Mucilage of Fenugreeke, Lin-seed, and Quince-seeds, drawn with
Rose Water, having some Saffron added to it. You shall not need to look for
any other medicaments in these ulcers.

Venereall ulcers.
If the ulcers be venereall, caused of the great Pox: then with all expedition
are you to go about the curation of the maine grief, lest blindness quickly
ensue, and then to labor to cure the ulcers of the eyes, which are but only
symptoms of the disease. Rinod. in dispensat. med. lib. 5. c. 11. it sets
down an excellent eye salve for this purpose, ascribed to Lanfranck by the
Neotericks, which he could not find in the works of Lanfranck (as he
confesses) so that by all likelihood it is a magistrall receipt. The
description of it is this: Vini albi lb. j. aq. Plantag. and rosarum an. iij.
Auripigment. ij. Virid. ar. j. Aloes, Myrrh. an. ij. Terrantur ista subtilosme,
and fiat collyrium.

Of the ulcer caused of a pestilentiall Carbo.
I will add a little of the ulcer of the eye, caused of a pestilentiall Carbo,
or Anthrax, and so end. In this case, first there arises a small tumor in the
eye, hot, hard, painful, and contagious, caused of a thick, burned, and
venomous humor: It is hot, the unnatural heat causing an ebullition of the
humor: It is hard, because the heat burns the humor: It is contagious, by
reason of the venomous humor which causes it: when it yields matter it
stinketh, by reason of the putrefaction of it.

The symptoms.
It is accompanied with watching, drought, internal heat, raving, and the urine
is sometimes of a fiery color, sometimes thick and troubled.

The curing of it.
If these symptoms appear, then are you first of all to minister such
Antidotes as are fit for a pestilentiall fever, as Th^riaca Andromachi,
Antid^^m de sangui^ibus, Electuarium de ovo, and such like, to tame the
venenositie of the matter, and then to proceed to the curing of it. If you
perceive (...) call the capital instrument, the gibbous or arched part being
blunt, and having a back; but the belly being as sharp a a razor: when you have
compassed all the part united, having turned the back of the instrument toward
the eye lid, cunningly separate the parts united, neither offending the
eyelid, nor any tunicle of the eye. But if either of these must be touched,
it is best that the eye lid suffer, than any tunicle: for it may more securely
suffer the injury. When this operation is performed, if you be not vigilant in
keeping the parts separate asunder, they will easily unite again. as Celsus
notes.

In setting down the operation, Celsus calls the instrument Specillum:
Specillum.
As for that instrument which goes commonly amongst the Ancients, under the
name of Specillum: It did absolutely represent your ordinary Spathula's, being
on the one end narrow and round, to serve for a probe, ending in a round small
button, to hinder it from offending, when you are to try the depth of an
ulcer, or wound, and on the other broad and flat, to spread your unguents: of
the broadest end Galen speaks, Method. 13. c. 5. where he advises to
besprinkle an ulcer with the powders, using lato Specilli mucrone, the broad
end of the Specillum, or Spathula.

A note.
One thing is to: be noted, that if (you fear that in putting in of the
instrument into the eye, to comprehend the parts united) you fear to hurt any
part with the point, then it is requisite to arm it with a little wax, that it
may be like the end of a probe.

The local medicaments.
To the parts thus separated, apply a Collyrium made of Plantane-water, and
Tochisci albi Rhasis sine opio: dissolving in an ounce of the water, a dram of
the Trochisces. Keep the parts asunder with small dosils of lint put between
the parts disjoined, laying upon the eye a couple of boulsters crosse-wayes,
moystened with the aforementioned medicament, and then rouling it up: Dress the
eye morning and evening, to hinder unition, and hasten the cure, until the
incised parts be cicatrized, and no fear left of cleaving together again of
those parts, which by manual operation were severed.

LECT. XXVI. Of Ozaena.
HAving set down the ulcers which ordinarily possess the ears and eyes, I
must not let those pass which sometimes trouble the instruments of the other
two senses, to wit, smelling and tasting, which are the nose and the mouth. Of
all the ulcers of the nose, I will only speak of Ozaena, omitting the rest;
because they require no singular consideration: for the general indications of
curing of ulcers, will serve to lead any man to the curation of these.

The Etymon.
Ozaena has its denomination from (...), which according to Celsus, lib. 3. c.
11. is Foetor oris, the stinking of the breath.

What it is.
Of it Galen, de comp. medicam. sec. loc. lib. 3. c. 3. so discourses:
Polypodes are bred in the nostrils, which are tumors unnatural: but Ozaenae
are a kind of ulcers, etc. First of all, I will speak of the Ozaenae, which
are produced of the influxion of sharp, and putrid, or rotten humors. These
humors, if they be only sharp, they produce ulcers hard to be cured; but not
of a grievous smell: Out of Galen then you may gather, that Polypodes are only
tumors in the nose, but Ozaenae are ulcers. Secondly, The differences of
Ozaenae.
that there are two sorts of Ozaenae; the one is of these which erode, being
caused of the influxion only of sharp humors, but stink not. The other is of
these which smell grievously, and are caused not only of sharp humors, as the
former; but such also as have putrefaction annexed to the erosion. Actuar. lib.
2. (...) c. 10. so speaks of this kind of ulcer. Ozaena does manifest it
self by its very name, which (...) corrupt and evil juice. Secondly, that he
use great moderation in the use of wholesome and convenient food.

How fasting is profitable.
Fasting often in this case is very requisite: First, because it dries the
habit of the body: Secondly, because it furthereth concoction: Thirdly, because
by fasting those vapors are digested, which otherwise would mount up to the
head. And although in the beginning, while the body is fraughted with sharp
humors, the sore may be exasperated by fasting: yet after that the body is
clean, and discharged of such humors, by frequent evacuations, you shall find
the commodity of fasting: howsoever, the dinner must not be riotous, and the
supper very spare.

The second Physical mean is Phlebotomie: Phlebotomie.
If the body be plethorick: First, open the Cephalica of the right arm in the
Spring and Summer; but of the left, in the Harvest and Winter: Then three or
four days afterward open the veins under the tongue, which will serve for
derivation of the humor, as the former did for revulsion of the same.

The commodities of it.
This must much further the curation: For first, Phlebotomie impaireth the
quantity of the humors contained in the mass of the blood: Secondly, it
makes way for the receiving of better blood into the vessels, which of a
necessity must ensue after the appointing of a convenient diet, and exquisite
purging of the body, which immediately after Phlebotomie is to be performed.

The third Physical mean appointed for the curation of an Ozaena, Purgation.
was said to be purging of the body by catharticall medicaments: for vomitive
medicaments are not so convenient as the catharticall, in the diseases of the
head, unless the stomach be foul, and pestered with raw and corrupt humors,
which require a long time for concoction: Vomitions (as is confessed by all
Practisers) send up vapors to the head.

Their kinds.
These purging medicaments are of two sorts: for they are either vegetable, or
mineral.

The vegetable purgatives.
As for the vegetable medicaments, they must be of the strongest, which are
appointed for disburdening of the head of ill humors: such are Agarick,
Turpetum, Coloquint, Scammonie, the black Ellebore. But seeing the purgative
simples are seldom ministered alone, I will show unto you what compounded
medicaments are fittest to be used in this case. The compounded purgative
medicaments are either Pills or Potions.

As for the Pills: Pills.
If the humors be mixed then use E^tractum Panchimagogic^^ of Paracalsus, or
the Pilula e^tracta R^u^^^; of them minister half a dram for a dose: Let the
Patient use this medicament twice a week. If chole^ and phlegm corrupted be
the material cause of the ulcer, then minister the pills called Sine quibus
esse no^^. If thick and gorsse humors be the cause, ministe 1 Pilula a^^^a, and
coctia. It corrupt phlegm be the cause, minister Pilulo de Agarito. Of these
pills minister one dram for a dose: let the number of the pills be according to
the swallowing of the Patient.

If the Patients be hard to be moved to the stool, you may acuate, and make
the pills more effectual, by adding to every dose of the pills some grains of
the Trochisces of A^^andal, and three grains of Dacrydium.

If the party cannot swallow pills, Potions.
then you are to minister potions. The Electuaries most fit for this purpose,
are Diacatholicum, Caricosti^^m, Diaph^^^icum, Elect^ar^um de succo rosarum,
Confectio Hamech, Diac^^rhamum. Of these Electuaries, and convenient syrups,
and distilled waters, or decoctions, you may make potions fitting the
constitutions of the parties grieved.

For one of a choleric constitution minister such a potion: Caricos^i^. and
El^^tu^^. de s^^c^ res. an. iij. Syrup. de C^^bor. cum (...) j. aq. Endivia
iij. Misc. ne fiat potio.

If the party be of a phleg^^^^^ constitution, minister this potion: Diaph^^.
and Di^, an. iij. Syrupi ros. solut. cum Agarico j. aq. Beton. iij. Misc. ut
fiat potio.

If the diseased person be of a melancholy temperature, then minister this
potion: Confect. Hamech iiij. Diacartham. iij. Syrupi Augustani j. aquae
Fumariae iij. Misc. ut fiat potio.

Thus you may purge the body with vegetable medicaments, if the body of the
diseased party be weak, or if you fear the use of minerals. But let me
insinuate so much unto you, that the mineral medicaments, if they be well
prepared, are most effectual, and if they be ministered by a skillful
Practiser, howsoever they are slighted and despised by those, who glory of
the denomination of Galenists, amongst whom some may be found, whose skill is
inferior to the envy of an understanding man.

Mineral medicaments.
The mineral medicaments are more subtle and piercing than the vegetables, and
sooner alter the complexion of the party unto whom they are ministered. These
medicaments are most commonly taken from Antimonie and Mercury.

The Antimonie which purges most by stool is excellent. Antimonie.
The Sulphur of Antimony drawn by Art from the recrements of the Regulus is
good; as also the Regulus it self calcined and fixed with Sal-peter, and
brought to a white powder. The glass of it, and Crocus metallorum, are not so
convenient and secure, because they procure strong vomitions.

There be diverse preparations of Mercury which are very effectual; Mercury.
as Mercury precipitate, with Aqua fortis, the oil of Vitrioll, or Sulphur,
with Gold or Silver, or precipitate alone, without the addition of any thing.
There is none of any note amongst you, who is not able by one preparation or
another of Mercury, to procure salivation.

These Mercuriall medicaments are effectual, as well in an Ozaena which is a
primarie disease, or of it self, as in that which is a symptom of the French
Pox. You have heard what diet is most convenient, and what internal
medicaments are most effectual in curing of an Ozaena: The last point which I
propounded unto my self to attain to the curation of this ulcer, was the
right use of the external medicaments.

The external medicaments.
These are in number two; to wit, the local medicaments, and the actual
cauterie.

As for the local medicaments, they are either waters, or decoctions, or
unguents: But before you apply any medicaments to mundifie, incarnate, or
cicatrize, you must labor to remove the crustie substance, How the crustie
substance is to be removed.
which does fix it self in the forepart of the Ethmoides, or Os Cribriforme:
and that for two causes: First, because the brain is hindered from discharging
of the residue of the malign humor, which causes the ulcer, and so the
curation is protracted: Secondly, because the medicaments cannot touch the
affected parts, and so no alteration can be procured.

For the removing of the crustie substance, I commend unto you two medicaments:

The first is this: Ol. A mygdalarum dulcium j. Spermat. Ceti ij. exquisite
misceantur:

The second is this: Axung. Vrsi j. Pinguedin. Taxi ss. ol. Semin. lin. iij.
Mise.

The manner of the applying of these medicaments.
You must thus dress the Patient: Turn his face upward, and let his head be
bent backwards, then morning and evening with three feathers tied together,
drop still some of these medicaments warmed in a Sawcer, into the nose, and let
the party grieved still draw in his breath, until he feel the taste of them
in his mouth.

When you have perceived that the crust is soft, morning and evening let him
snuff up into his nostrils some of this sternutatorie powder: Ellebor. albi,
Nigilla, Tabacc. an. j. Rorismar. Salv. an. ij. Moschi gr. ij. fiat pulvis
subtilis. Let him snuff a little up into his nose every morning, after you
have moystened the crust with some of the medicaments set down before. When
part of the crustie substance is fallen out, dress it still after this same
manner, until all the crust is spent: The medicament, to be applied.
then proceed to the application of the medicaments named by name.

Use these waters.

I. Waters.
First, the pre-eminence shall be given to Aqua alumini^ magistralis of
Fallopius allayed with Plantane, or white Rose Water.

The second shall be this: Aq. Plantag. Card. Benedict. Caras. nigror. and
fragor. an. iii. Spirit. Vitriol. i. Misc.

The third shall be this: Aq. aurifabror. and gemmar. quercus an. iiij. Alum.
ij. Exquisite misceantur and depurentur.

The fourth shall be this: Aq. Alum. and Plantagin. an. iiii. Mercur. dulcis
ii. Digerantur in cinerib. calidis per her. 2.

^I. Decoctions.
As for Decoctions, I commend unto you these:

I. Flor. ros. rub. pug. ii. Balanstior. ss. rad. Tormentill. i. fol. Plantag.
Polygon. and Vinca pervinc. an. pug. 1. Boil these in six ounces of
spring water, until the half be consumed; strain then the three ounces
remaining, and dissolve in them one ounce of Melrosatum.

II. Rhois Coriar. lb. ss. Alumin. ii. coq. ista ac clarificextur albumine ovi
unius, ac colentur. Colaturae add mellis rosat. Syrup. Myrtill. and deros.
rub. sicc. an. i. I will not trouble you with great variety, as I might out of
the monuments of the Ancients; seeing these will suffice, or else none.

The manner of using of waters and decoctions.
The waters and decoctions you must inject by a fyringe warm, to make your
topics answerable to the air, which is drawn by the nostrils in the first
qualities, to wit, moist and hot: moist, I say, actu, but potentia, drying;
seeing ulcers require such medicaments: seeing both waters and decoctions being
applied, do quickly evaporate, and leave the part affected dry, and thirsting
for other topics.

The unguents.
The unguents shall offer themselves; I will not supererogate in this point, but
will only deliver unto you such as shall be effectual; and what is deficient
in number, shall be supplied by efficacy. Receive this as the first, out of
Daniel Sennert. med. pract. lib. 1. part. 3. sect. 4. c. 1. plumb. usti,
lithargyr. an. i. ceruss. bol. Armen. balaust. an. ss. ol. ros. myrtin. an. ss.
cerae alb. i. Ducantur ista in mortario plumbco, donec acquirant unguenti
confistentiam. The second shall be this: unguent. de tutia, and unguent. albi
caphurati, an. i. ol. myrtill. et cydon. an. ii. Mercur. dulcis i. ss.
pulverizati. Misceantur. These ulcers are to be dressed twice a day, morning
and evening.

Cancerous ulcers.
Cancerous ulcers also seize upon this part. This grief hastened the end of
that famous Mathematician, Mr. Hariot, with whom I was acquainted but a short
time before his death; whom at one time, together with Mr. Hughes, who wrote of
the Globes, Mr. Warner, and Mr. Turperley, the Noble Earl of Northumberland,
the favourer of all good learning, and Mecaenas of learned men, maintained
while he was in the Tower, for their worth and various literature. But seeing
those documents, which I delivered for the curation of cancers already, may
suffice, I will only set down the description of an effectual water in this
grief, which is this: A water fo^^ cancer in the nose.
spermat. ranar. et limacum, an. lb ii. gemmar. quercus, et hederae terrest.
an. iiii. Extilletur aqua e stillatorio communi, unde prolici solet aquarosacea
in recipiens, cui immissae sint caphurae calcinatae ii. Inject this water into
the nose, and lay to the sores either double clouts, or lint moystned in this
water, as you shall think most fit, morning and evening.

The application of the actual cauterie.
It rests only now that I speak a little of the application on of the actual
cautery, which was said to be the second external mean in the curing of an
Ozaena: this mean is only used when the sore is rebellious to powerful
ordinary means; which happens either by reason of malignity, or too much, or
superfluous humidity: When it is to be applied.
for according to Hippocrates aphor. lib. 1. aphor. 6. Against extreme griefs,
extreme remedies are best.

The uses of it.
The actual cautery is applied for two purposes:

First, to cause an eschar by impressing of it upon the ulcer.

Secondly, it is used only to dry the ulcer, by often applying of it, still
desisting before the party feel any pain, by reason of extreme heat.

The pipes.
If you mean to procure an eschar, both the ends of the pipe by the which the
cautery is carried, must be open; but if you intend desiccation, the end which
you apply to the ulcer, must be shut.

If you have procured an eschar, the fall of it is to be procured as I did show
in removing of the crust: this being done, proceed in curing of the ulcer as
has been taught.

If only you have caused desiccation by iteration of the application of the
actual cautery, the manner of curing is not to be altered.

LECT. XXVII. Of the ulcers of the mouth.
NOw am I to discourse of such ulcers as befall the instrument of taste, which
is the mouth.

The limits of the mouth.
It begins at the lips, and reaches to the beginning of the windpipe, and
the Gula, or mouth of the stomach.

The uses of it.
It has four uses: I. It serves for breathing, it sending fresh air unto the
lungs, and discharging fuliginous vapors sent from the heart by the Arteria
venosa.

II. It receives the food, and having prepared it by the chewing of the teeth,
and the mandible, it sends it to the stomach there to be chylified.

III. It serves for speaking: the external and internal parts of it serving
for the framing of the voice.

IV. It serves for the discharging of the excrements of the brain, by
spitting out of the excrements of the lungs by expectoration, and of the
excrements of the stomach by vomiting.

Seeing then the uses of it are so manifold and necessary, it behooves me to
discover such diseases (belonging to our purpose) as deprive us of one or more
of these commodities which it affords to us. But seeing some of the parts of
it are external, as the lips; and some internal, as the teeth, gums, roof,
the tongue, the almonds, the uvula: I will only meddle with the ulcers of the
lips, roof, tongue, almonds, uvula, and the ulcers of it beyond the uvula, as
only being proper to my intention.

Of the ulcers of the lips.
I will begin first with the ulcers of the lips: how hurtful the ulcers of the
lips are, you may gather from the commodities, which they (being sound) afford
to man.

The commodities of the lips.
The lips afford a sixfold commodity to the life of man:

I. They serve for the convenience of eating and drinking, for they keep in
the meat until it be chewed. II. They beautify the face if they be well
fashioned. III. They keep in the spittle of the mouth. IV. They keep the teeth
and gums from external injuries. V. They serve for the framing of the speech.
VI. They serve for kissing, the earnest penny of lust.
And although the benefits which do redound unto us by the lips, being well
affected, may be hindered by sundry means: yet I will touch only but two
sorts of solution of unity befalling to the lips, as proper to the subject
which I have in hand, which are the chaps of the lips, and the ulcers of the
same.

The chaps of the lips.
Fissura labiorum, or the chaps of the lips, proceed from a salt, sharp, and
drying humor, which causes these narrow, but long small ulcers, Their cause
material.
which are hot and painful, chiefly when the party speaks, eats, or
laugheth.

These chaps, ^^^^ictions.
although they may without any great difficulty be cured in persons of a
laudable constitution, yet in cacochymicall bodies they will give you somewhat
to do: in so much that the Patient will wonder and fret, that such toys and
trifles cannot more speedily be cured; for so they term such griefs,
considering not the quality, but quantity of the grief.

The curation of these.
For the curation of these, I will commend unto you two medicaments of my own,
which I familiarly use: The first is this: cer. flav. ij. ol. ros. mell. and
axung. porc. in aq. ros. lot. an. iij. litharg. argenti, myrrhae, zinzib. pulv.
an. j. fiat linimentum s. a. First, moisten the part with the parties own
spittle, and then anoint the part affected with the liniment: it is effectual,
not only in chaps of the lips, but in other chinks of Fissurae in what part of
the body soever they be; and it cures speedily.

The second is a Pomatum, the description whereof is this: Pomae numero 3.
quibus infige cariophyll. ss. styrat. calamit. iij. benzoini ij. labdan. iss.
calam. aromat. cinamom. an. j. axung. porc. lib. ij. aq. lavendul. and ros. an.
iiij. Moschi, civetae an. gr. iss. Indantur ista vasi terreo satis amplo, ac
calore B. N. evaporentur aquae, and colatur pomatum, quod in vase puro
servetur. You may conjecture the efficacy of this medicament by the
ingredients.

Ulcers of the lips.
As for the ulcers of the lips, they are either mild, or malign.

For the mild.
As for the mild ulcers, this ointment described by R^^odaus, Antidot. lib. 5.
sect. 1. cap. 11. which he calls Vnguentum de minio, or Vnguentum rubrum
caphuratum, is very effectual: compos. haec est: minii triti iij. lithar.
argent. ij. cerussae iss. tut. iij. caphur. ij. ol. ros. lib. j. cer. albi,
iij. fia^ung. ut ^rsprascribit. This unguent is effectual against even old and
inveterate ulcers, in what part soever of the body they be.

For the malign.
If you perceive an ulcer of the lip to be malign or cancerous, which you may
conjecture if the color be livid, or blackish, if the brims be hard, if the
heat and pain exceed the quantity of the ulcer, and if it yield a sanious and
ill smelling quittor; then are you to look about, and to espy which are the
most powerful medicaments.

When I discoursed of a Cancer, a Nome, and a Phagedaenicall ulcer, I delivered
unto you choice of local medicaments: for such ulcers, if they happen to
invade the lips, at this time I will only deliver unto you a description of a
distilled water, and of a magistrall unguent.

The water is thus to be made: fol. plantag. solani hortens. veronic.
sempervivi major. and minor. an. man. iij. albumina ovorum conquassata num^ro
xij. alumin. contus. lib. ss. caphur. iss. Extuletur aq. calore balnei:
fomentetur cancr^su^^, aut malignum^lc^^ hac aqua, quae and facici ruborem
tollit. The description of the unguent is this: plumbi iij. fundatur in
crucibulo, eique addatur Mercur. iss. postquam refrixit man. in pulverem
vertatur massa, cui add unguenti de tutia vj. terebinthin. ij. terebinthin. j.
ol. myrtil. iss. fiat unguentum quod ulceri post fotu^ applicetur. Deligetur
ulcus singulis diebus quoties opus est. If you find the ulcer to be rebellious,
and not to yield to these very convenient and effectual means, then are you
to apply such medicaments as I have set down for the curation of Nome,
Phagedaena, and Cancer, when I discoursed of them, whither I remit you, to shun
tedious and fruitless repetition.

The ulcers of the Palatum.
To the ulcers of the lips, the ulcers of the Palatum, the roof of the mouth
must be annexed: It is rawted, that the air being repercussed, the voice
should be the sharper: it is wrinkled and rough where it covers the bone, Its
figure.
that it might the more firmly cleave to it, and the better stay the meat
whilst it is in chewing.

The instrument of tasting.
Now seeing all the internal parts of the month are inducd with the sense of
tasting, but chiefly the membrane which covers the tongue, The instrument of
feeling.
and have the exquisite sense of feeling, by reason of the nervous fibers,
whereof they have great store, you are to have a care that your local
applications be not distasteful and loathsome, seeing the parts will abhor
them. If then the wrinkled skin, which covers the Os palati, be ulcerate:
first, touch it with Aqua Fallopii, allaied with Plantane-water, if it be
foul; or with this: aq. plantag. card. bonedict. and spermat. ranar. an. iij.
melius ros. ij. ol. sulphur. aut vitriol. j. Misc. Having touched the ulcer
with either of these waters warmed sufficiently, apply this medicament: syrup.
e ros. rub. siccat. e baccis myrts, and de succo granatorum an. j. ol. vitriol.
ss. Misc. Seeing the part is moist, and will not admit any deligation, you are
to dress it the more often. If you perceive the Os palati to be bare, then
mingle some of this powder following, mingled with these syrups: far. hord.
rad. irid symphyti, tormentill. an. ss. mastiches, boracis, sarcocoll. an. ss.
fiat ex omnib us pulvis. If the rough skin unite, as I have often seen, then
have you obtained your desire.

What is to be done when Os palati falls out.
If a small piece of the Os palati fall out, using these incarnative using these
incarnative means, and keeping the brims of the ulcer raw, you may bring them
together; but if a large piece of the bone come away, there is no hope of
unition. In this case, you are to cause the party to wear a plate of silver to
supply the defect of the bone, that his speech bewray not the loss of it.

The third internal part of the mouth, which uses to be ulcerate, Of the
government of the tongue.
is the tongue. The tongues of Angels are not able to express what benefits
do redound unto man by the right ordering of the tongue, and what harms and
inconveniences again, when we give it free reins to lash out. The frequent
exhortations set down in the holy Scripture to the first, and dehortations
from the second, may make us wary in our discourses and conferences. It is that
part of the body by the which God is chiefly glorified; by it we praise and
magnify him, as godless persons blaspheme him with it we confess our sins,
by the which we provoked him to anger; and again, we power out our prayers
with the tongue to obtain remission for them.

The uses of it.
The tongue affords four benefits to the body. I. It is the instrument of
tasting, by the benefit of the membrane wherewith it is covered.

II. It utters the speech, by the which we communicate our wants to others,
and implore aid in time of distress.

III. It helps chewing, by gathering of the meat together, and tossing it to
and fro, it turns also the meat down to the stomach.

IV. It serves for licking. To omit that in our infancy we could not suck
without it: so we see, that if the fraenum of it come too near to the tip of
it, the sucking is hindered, and it must be cut. The children who have this
infirmity, are said to be tongue tied. The flesh of it is spungeous, How mild
sores of the tongue are cured.
that it might receive the qualities of the sapors, and the more accurately
judge of them.

If the sores of this part be but ordinary and mild, this medicament will
serve if it be often washed with it: hord. mundat. iij. rad alth. ij. liquirit.
iss. Bulliant ista in lib. vj. aq. font. ad mediat ac coletur decoctum, cui
admisce syrup. viol. tussil^g. and scabiosae an jss. ac serva in mundo vase ad
usum.

Of malign ulcers of the tongue.
It falls out sometimes, that sores in this member prove malign and very
fretting, causing one of those ulcers which are called, (...) and (...) as it
happened to the late Lord Mayor of London, Ralph Freeman. He lacked neither
Physicians nor Physic, yet old age, weakness, and the malignitie of the sore
hindered the procuring of his health, which his Physicians and Chirurgeans aimed
at and wished for. The ulcer was so corrosive, that it fretted asunder the
veins and arteries of the tongue, on that side which it possessed, and caused
a great flux of blood, which exceedingly weakened him, for that present causing
a strong syncope, so that afterward nature could not recollect her self. When
such griefs befall great personages, their case is worse than that of the
poorest in the like infirmities, because Physicians and Chirurgians are not
permitted to use the like liberty in the application of medicaments to the
one, as to the other. If the like case fall out hereafter at any time, I advise
you so to use medicaments borrowed of the vegetables, as that you contemn not
the minerals: What hurt I pray you can come from the use of Merc. dulcis, and
Merc. praecipitat with gold: None I assure you: for these medicaments are
familiar to nature, and are true balsams for malign sores.





Of ulcers of the Uvula.
Now time admonishes me to come to the ulcers of the Uvula, or gargarion.

Of mild ones.
If they be mild and ordinary, the former medicaments set down for the
curation of the tongue will suffice.

Of fretting ulcers.
But if it be a fretting ulcer, first you are to admonish the patient of some
accidents, which may ensue: and those are two in number.

The first is, Prognostics.
that if the Uvula be wholly fretted away, the party shall hardly be able to
speak clearly and distinctly. Howbeit both Bauhinus in his Theatr. anatomicum,
and Guillelmus Fabricius Hildanus cent. 2. observe. 21. do affirm that in some
they observed it to have been lost, not leaving any defect in their speech.

The second accident is, the danger of pthisis, or cough of the lungs, for this
is to be feared, seeing the member which did hinder the roushing in of the cold
air into the lungs, and put back from the breast humors distilling from the
head, is wholly taken away. Having acquainted the patient with prognostics,
proceed to the curation.

The curation.
This is performed either by the application of convenient medicaments, or else
by cutting it away.

1 By medicaments.
As for the medicaments, use first this gargarisme: fol. plantag. veronic. et
sigill. Salom. an. man. 1. scord. orig. centaur. minor. an. man. ss. Bulliant
ista in lib. 2. aq. font. ad consumpt. lib. 1. and coletur decoctam, in quo
dissolve oxymellis simplicis iij. Then touch the sore morning and evening with
this liniment: ung. Egypt. ss. alum. pulv. ss. mell. ros. ss. Misc. applicetur
mane and vesperi.

If it proceed from a veneriall cause, use this topic twice a day: aq. card.
benedict. and plantag. an. vi. aq. fort. i. Misc. you may also use the blue
water, which you may buy for threepence a pint after the silver is separate,
after solution, and has no other metal in it, but a little of Venus. If
these means will not prevail, then you must wholly cut it away.

But according to Valescus de Taranta, Lib. 3. cap. 3.
you must observe these five things before you go about this operation.

1. You must purge the body well. 2. No humor must be in flowing to the part.
3. You must not attempt this operation as long as there is hope that other
medicaments will prevail. 4. Go not about this operation, unless it be
small about the root, for if it be thick, and red, or blue, such a flux of
blood may ensue, as will strangle the party, and cause fainting. 5. Mark how
much of a necessity must be cut off, for a little remaining will both further
the speech, and repel the cold air from the lungs. If after the cutting of it
off, a flux of blood ensue, either apply astring or else cauterize it with the
Uvula spoone made hot.
Ulcers of the almonds.
If the Tonsillae or almonds be ulcerate by reason of the influxion of sharp
humors, which your eyes can discern, the tongue being pressed down by your
spathula, carry in mind these prognostics.

The Prognostics.
I. If the ulcers be without a fever, they are the more safe.

II. If these ulcers happen in the summer, they sooner spread.

III. If these almonds become scirrhous they are hardly or never cured.

IV. These ulcers as all other ulcers of the mouth, require stronger
desiccatives than the ulcers of the external parts; First, to hinder them from
spreading. Secondly, because they are still kept moist with the spittle.

For the curation of these ulcers, I will deliver unto you two local
medicaments: The first is the decoction of the root of the devils bit to be
used in steed of a gargarisme. The second is a liniment to be applied after
gargarization tried by Seanertus, and set down medicin. pract. li. 2. c. 22.
centaur. minor. rad. irid. stercor. canini. an cum melle despumato fiat
electuarium. As for the faculty of a white dogs turd read Galen. li. 10. de
simpl. med. facult, c. de sterc^re canino.

Ulcers of the throat.
If the throat beyond the Uvula be ulcerated, use this water instead of a
gargarisme as a certain experiment. aq. plantag. li. 1. ros. rub. flor.
arantior. an. j. pulv. Mer. subli. ij. digerantur in arena per hora^ quadrantem
ac coletur aqua, The curation.
quae in vase vitreo servetur ad usam. If by reason of these ulcers the party
cannot swallow any solid meat, minister to the patient mercurius duleis for
four mornings together, and you shall perceive a wonderful effect. Give it in
new milk.

Lect. XXVIII. Of the ulcers of the lungs.
SEeing the lungs very often become ulcerate, a solution of unity in the
substance of them, or an apertion of the vessels of them which are the branches
of vena arteriosa, and arteria venosa, being caused by a wound: I must not let
such ulcers to slip untouched.

The cause of the ulcers of the lungs after a wound.
The causes of ulcers of the lungs after a wound inflicted may be assigned two:
to wit, a solution of unity in the substance, and vessels of the lungs, and
the effusion of blood into the h^llownesse of the breast, you shall discern
the lungs to be wounded,

Signs of the lungs wounded.
I. First, if frothie blood issue out of the wound, and mouth by coughing, which
show some of the vessels to be wounded, and opened.

II. Secondly, difficulty of breathing troubles the party wounded.

III. Thirdly, the pain of the sides is grievous, which he felt not before.

IV. Fourthly, it is more easy for the patient to lie upon the wounded, than
the whole side: So that often he can speak readily so lying, but being turned
upon his sound side. he can but with pain and difficulty speak.

Signs of blood poured out into the capacity of the breast.
You shall perceive and gather blood to have been poured out into the capacity
of the breast by these signs.

I. First, if a heavy weight seem to press down the midriffe.

II. Secondly if the party breath with great difficulty.

III. Thirdly, if the fever increase.

IV. Fourthly, if the wounded party void blood at the mouth.

V. Fifthly, if the breath of the party stink after a while, for that
betokens the blood to be turned into quittour.

VI. Sixthly, the wounded person can only lie upon the back.

VII. Seventhly, the party has a desire to vomit, and striveth to rise, from
whence ensues fainting; for noisome vapors arising from the clotted blood
turned into quittour assault the heart, and weaken it exceedingly, and dissolve
the faculty of the stomach.

Whether after a wound of the lungs an ulcer will ensue.
After that the wound is inflicted, and that you have dressed it so long a time
as you have required in former times for healing of a penetrating wound of the
breast, (which will be shorter in the summer, than in the winter: for heat
helps digestion) you may fear than a fistula at the least, or a putrid ulcer
of the lungs will ensue: chiefly if a thin sanies, and not a laudable
quittour do flow out, far in quantity exceeding the bigness of the wound.

Why wounds of the lungs send out much quittour.
Why in wounds of the lungs, so much quittour every day is sent out these are
the causes.

I. The vicinitie and neerenesse of the heart, which being the welspring of the
vital blood,







The prognostics.
Now that you may the better foresee and foretell to the patients the events of
such ulcers, I would have you to mark these prognostics which I shall deliver
unto you.

1. All ulcers of the lungs are hardly, or with great difficulty cured, and
that for four causes.

1. Because the musculs of the breast, lungs and heart, are in perpetual
motion: now motion hinders consolidation, as all by experience know.

2. Because the lungs are only environed by the Pleura, the skin inwardly
investing the ribs, which is endued but by small store of blood, and being a
spermatick part, to wit, a membrane, is not easily united; and that only by
the second intention.

3. Because local means cannot be kept to these ulcers, by rolling,
bowlstering, and emplastering, as they may to the ulcers of the external parts.

4. Because the orifice of the ulcer is not most commonly in a depending part;
but either parallel, or higher than the ulcer. How hard a matter it is for
quittour to ascend, I leave it to your consideration.

5. If the party pine not away, if he expectorate easily, if he fleepe
reasonable well, if he digest his meat, if his stools be orderly, if the
quittour be indifferent good, you may conceive some hope of the cure.

6. But if the diseased parties breath smell ill, if he consume, if the
quittour which flows from the ulcer stink, if he has a grievous cough, and
difficulty of breathing, if a lingering putrid fever troubling him chiefly
toward night, and hindering his sleep, follow him, if his appetite decay, and
the concoction of the aliments be empaired; if a rotten piece of the liver, or
of the branches of the wind be thrown out at the mouth, if he have a whistling
voice as if he spoke through a cane, his case is desperate.

7. If his hair fall, which happens by reason of the want, and corruption of
the nourishment: if the nails grow crooked, the flesh of the tops of the
fingers being spent, if the cheeks grow to be of a leady color; but when
after meat they seem ruddy, vapors mounting thither, if the feet begin to
swell, the natural heat being spent, if lice multiply by reason of the
corruption of the humors, you may pronounce, that a diarrhea or humorall flux
ensuing, the party shall depart.

VIII. Although some have lived many years who have had an ulcer of the lungs,
Lib. 3. sen. 10. tract. 5. c. 18.
as Avicen reports, that he saw a woman who lived twenty three years, or
thereabout, with an ulcer of the lungs. And as Matthew. de Gradil. in 9. Rhas. c.
54. affirms, that he saw a woman who still was busied about the fire, who
lived twenty eight years; yet be not you too forward to take in hand such
persons as have ulcerate lungs: for the curation is uncertain, and that for
four causes.

Why the curation of the ulcers of the lungs is uncertain.
I. By reason of symptoms which ensue, as are a lingering fever, and consumption
of the body.

II. Because the quittour which is contained in the spongious substance of the
lungs, cannot be voyded by expectoration without coughing; which does much
trouble the lungs, and exasperate the grief.

III. Because the medicaments which are ministered to cure these ulcers, cannot
come to the lungs in their full force.

IV. Because the fever and consumption of the body require those things which
are moystning, but the ulcer those things which mundifie, and dry.

If it chance that by Art and good luck you cure an ulcer of the lungs, charge
the party that he walk circumspectly in the course of the residue of his life;
for many times when the ulcer has seemed to have been cured, yet the cicatrix
being removed by the ill carriage of the patient, the ulcer has gotten
footing, and been the cause of untimely death, as Galen witnesses, 4. de loc.
affect. c. 5.

The indications of curing.
When you go about to cure such ulcers, you are to propose three indications
curative to your selve.

The first is, the appointing of a convenient diet.

The second is, the ministering of fit pectorall decoctions.

The third is, the artificial dressing of the ulcer.

The di^^*
As for the diet: the party having an ulcer of the lungs, must eat meat of an
easy concoction, because nature is much weakened; of good juice, lest
putrefaction be increased; and lastly, of much nourishment, because the body
in this grief is most commonly much extenuate: only I will briefly touch some
kinds of food which are endued with these qualities.

The first that offers it self is Milk, Milk.
for it nourishes the body, it affords matter to blood, it corrects the
acrimony of corrupt humors; with the wheyiest part it mundifieth the ulcer,
with the cruddy part it consolidateth, and with the buttery part it moystneth,
and stays the desiccation of the body. Woman's milk is most familiar: By the
sucking of a woman's breast I saw a Welsh Gentlewoman called Mrs. Price,
recovered of a P^hisis, who could not turn her self in her bed, by reason of
weakness, and could not take any other food. Asses milk is thinner and more
wheyish, and so more apt to mundifie. Goats and Cowes milk obtain a mean
between these two.

But lest it corrupt in the stomach, you are to dissolve some sugar or honey in
it.

You are to minister it only when the stomach is empty, and no other meat is to
be taken before it be digested; otherwise it will crud, become sour, and be
corrupted.

So much of it is to be given, as the stomach of the party can well digest:
wherefore first prescribe the lesser quantity, and ascend to a greater.

Abstain from appointing of it, If the party be feverish, have the headache,
and be troubled with flatuosity.

Snailes, Crabs.
Snailes and Crabbes are much commended in this grief; nevertheless, seeing
they are of a thick, terrestrial, and slimy substance, and afford a corrupt
and excrementitious juice, it may be doubted whether they be good or no: to
omit that they are of hard digestion; the broth of them boiled in milk, and
sweetened with sugar, and mingled with other brothes, may be good; for so the
nourishment will be the more solid.

Pectorall decoctions.
As for pectorall decoctions, I will not trouble you with any great variety of
them; only I will set down a few; but the paucity shall be recompensed with the
efficacy.

I. rad* enul. ij. scob. guaiaci lb. ss hyssopi, marrhub. albi, an. man. ij.
polypod. liquirit. an. i ss ficuum incisar. passul. major. exacinat. an. iij.
Infundantur infundenda per noctem in aqu. font. fervent. lb xviij. deinde
additis reliquis coq. ad consumpt. lb vi. ac coletur decoctum, quod
clarificetur additis sacchari and mellis an. ij. croci i. atque iterum coletur:
utatur aeger hoc decocto loco consueti potus.

II. rad. chin. iiij. symphiti, tormentill. irid. an. i. capill. vener.
tussilag. scabios. marrhub. albi. hyssopi, an. man. i. flor. viol. borag.
buglos. an. pug. i. flor. herbae paralays. pug. ij. flor. alth. pug. i ss.
caricar. ping. iij. liquirit. ij. semin. coriand. anis. an. vi. Infundantur
ista ut superiora in pari quantitate aquae, ac decoq. ad consumpt. lb vi. ac
coletur decotium, quo utendum loco consueti potus.

Every morning the patient is to take half a pint of either of these
decoctions warm, and to eat a lozenge of saccharum rosatum tabellatum, or two
drammes of the conserve of red roses, being a twelve-moneth old.

The artificial dressing.
Now I am come to the artificial dressing of ulcers of the breast.

The medicaments which are fittest for dressing, are Injections by a large
syringe.

As for the simples whereof the injections are made, Injections.
they must not be of bitter things, as Wormwood, the lesser Centory, or
Carduusbenedictus; for as judicious and diligent Ambros. Paraeus notes,
Chirurg. lib. 9. c. 31. these bitter things being injected, are first drawn in
by the spongious substance of the lungs, and from thence are sent by the
trachea arteria, to the throat; where such a bitterness is felt, that it
causes a desire to vomit; so that they rather hurt than profit.

These injections are either abstersive or consolidative.

Abste^s^^^ inject^^^.
Of abstersive injections I will set down a few, as a pattern, by the which you
may make others.

I. marrub. alb. hyssopi, scabios. an. man. ss. c^qu. in lb iij. aqu. font. ad
medietat. consumptionem, ac coletur decoctum; quod postea clarificetur addit.
mell. lb ss. atque iterum coletur.

II. aqu. hord. lb i. mellis ros. ij. sacchari rubri iij. Mise. bubiant 3 aut 4
ebullionibus ut injectio clarificetur, quae postea coletur.

If you perceive that the ulcer is sordid, and affords much matter, you may
add either of ungnentum Aegyptiacum, or the oil of Sulphur, or Vitrioll, so
much as you shall find fit to cleanse the ulcer.

When you perceive that the ulcer is sufficiently mundified; which you may
gather, if laudable quittour flow, The consolidation.
and in no great quantity; then hasten to consolidate the ulcer: I will in this
case furnish you also with effectual topics, and but a few: the first shall
be this:

decoct. pectoral. iiij. syrupi e ros. rub. sicc. i ss. fiat injectio.
Consolidative medicament^.


II. head. terrest. flor. and fol. symphit. sanicul. plantag. polygon. millefol.
vinc. pervinc. Equiseti, hyper. eupat. beton. valerian. an. man. ij. limaces
numero 40. cancros fluviatil. numero 10. Addita aqu. pluviali: instituatur
distillatio in alembico, ut extilletur aqua. aqu. hujus lb ss. syrup. myrtill.
and e ros. rub. siccat. an. i. ss. syrupi granat. i. Misc. ut fiat injectio.

The manner of dressing.
These injections must be warmed when they are to be used. Into the orifice
which is in the breast somewhat must be put to keep it open: this then is to be
performed either by a tent, or a pipe made either of gold or silver.

The materials of the tents are three; Tents.
lint, fine tow, and a sponge. Lint is altogether unapt, for it is apt to fall
asunder after that it is made up into a tent: if therefore a p^cce of it part
and rest upon the diaphragma, it must putrify there, and send noisome sents
unto the heart, which cannot but bring faintings, and at the last shorten the
life.

Good tow then is better than it, because it cleaves fast together; but the
sponge is best of all, because it does not only cohere firmly, but draws also
strongly the quittour, and does imbibe it.

It is good so to form the tents, that the outer end being broader than the
inner, it may be stayed from slipping in: it is not amiss to halter them with
thread for this same purpose.

The use of a pipe.
A pipe is best of all; it must be of thickness proportionate to the orifice,
having two stays to hinder the slipping in of it into the cavity of the
breast; and sundry holes somewhat large about the end, to give way to the
quittour. It must also be somewhat arched, lest the lungs butting against it,
should suffer any hurt. The outer hollownesse of it is to be stopped with a
sponge dipped in aqua vitae and wine mingled together, and warmed, and wrung.
Above the tents and the pipe apply emplastrum de minio, or diachalcithes.

If the ulcer run much, it must be dressed twice a day; but if it run
little, once dressing will serve.

You may demand of me, Quest.
when the tents and pipe are to be left?

I answer, when the ulcer yields but a small deal of quittour, Answ.
and that good; and seems to be almost dry: for siccum est sano proximum,
that which is dry comes near to that which is whole.

If you keep the orifice of the breast too long open, it will fistulate.

What course is to be taken if the body grow lean.
It falls out many times, that in ulcers of the breast, the diseased person
grows lean. In this case you are to permit the party to drink some Almond
milk made of chicken broth, wherein have been boiled Pompion, Cucumber, and
Muskmelon seeds, with Mallow roots, Cowslip flowers, Succory flowers, and
Marigold flowers, between meals, and in the night time after two a clock; or
minister a dram and a half of this powder which I will set down, every
morning and evening, in six ounces of one of the pectorall decoctions, which I
described in the beginning of this Lecture.

The description of the powder is this: semin. papav. albi i ss. gu^^^^i
tragac^^th. far. ^robi an. ij ss. semin. alth. portul. cucum. melon. pepon.
pla^tag. hyoscyam. alb. an. iij. coral. rub. praparat. perla^. pr^parat.
succini albi praeparat. an. i ss. liquirit. iiij. sacchari r^sat. tab^llat. ad
pondus ^mnium: fiat pulvis.

If these courses being used faithfully, do not prevail, acquaint the diseased
parties friends with the dangerous estate wherein he is; for no other
medicaments are like to prevail.

Lect. XXIX. Of the ulers of the back, the abdomen, and joints.
NOw I am, according to my promise, to deliver the last Lecture appointed for
this year, and withal to shut up this Treatise of Ulcers; that when I shall
ascend to this place again, I may begin to handle a new subject, which will
be of wounds. And although one might rest contented with that which has been
already delivered concerning ulcers; yet that none may justly say, that any
thing absolutely necessary, has been omitted, and to further the practice of
those which are not so well versed in the curing of all particular ulcers, I
will briefly set down some notes concerning the ulcers of the back, the
abdomen, or lower belly, and of the joints.

Ulcers of the back.
Vlcera dorsi, or ulcers of the back, most commonly fall out after (...), or
cedematous phlegmons, wherein morbi acuti ex decidentia end.

Now that you may the better understand what I mean, I must digress a little,
and briefly show you what diseases are termed morbi acuti, and how many kinds
of them there are.

Which are to be accounted sharp diseases. Three kinds.
Morbi acuti, or sharp diseases, are properly called such as with great
expedition, force, and danger, go on to their status and extremity of the
symptoms, as may be gathered out of Galen 2. aphor. 19. and 23.

Now there be three kinds of these morbi acuti, or sharp diseases; for they
are either peracuti, very sharp, or acuti simpliciter, simply sharp, or acuti
ex decidentia, or sharp diseases ending into other griefs.

Peracuti end at the furthest the seventh day, and they are of two sorts,
exquisite peracuti or perperacuti, or exquisitely very sharp, which end the
fourth day, and non exquisite peracuti, which are not exquisitely very sharp,
which continue till the seventh day.

Now the simpliciter acmi in like manner are of two kinds: for they are either
exactly so, and end for the most part the fourteenth day, or not exactly so,
which may continue till the twentieth day. You may, and (I make no doubt) do
see examples of these in burning and pestilentiall fevers almost every week.
Last of all are acuti(...), ex decedentia, which may be prolonged to the
fortieth day: Diseases which continue longer than forty days are called morbi
chronici, or di^ur^i, long or lingering diseases. Some of these chronicall
diseases may end in sixty, some in eighty, some in an hundred, some in two
hundred days: some may continue a whole year, some seven years, some twice
seven years.

I saw a Scottishman whose surname was Johnson, Histor. 1.
a sadler by profession, who followed the Court in Queen Elizabeth's reign,
who was troubled twelve years with a quartan ague without intermission:
neither can I affirm that it left him during his life time.

I being in the I Will of Shepey in Minster street curing one Clover an aged man,
II.
whom I dismembered, there was a girl brought to me, of seven years of age,
which for the space of six years was grievously tormented with an exquisite
quartan. The life's of these personages may be well termed living deaths. Some
of these lingering diseases again continue in boys until the fourteenth year
of their age, and in maids until their courses flow: as the falling sickness.

Apostemes and ulcers of the back.
Now to come to apostemes of the back, which leave ulcers after they are brought
to suppuration and opened; They are for the most part critical translations of
humors, sent in morbis acutis ex decidentia, sharp diseases which continue
until the fortieth day, or on chronicall diseases the continuance of which is
uncertain, sent from the inner either noble or ministerial parts from within
outward, the Physicians say this to be done, per diadosin: whereas if noxious
humors be turned from without inward, as in pestilentiall and veneriall buboes,
they affirm this to be done per metastasin.

Critical ending of griefs.
Critical ending of griefs, are either performed by excretion or translation of
the grief.

By excretion nature does expel the peccant matter sundry ways,

II. In translation, the peccant matter is not altogether discharged out of the
body;

But seeing the humor may be sent from the outward parts to the inward, and
from the inner parts to the outward, this last translation is most secure; for
if this first be done in malign and contagious diseases, as in the Pox and
Plague, all understanding practisers pronounce either death, or protraction of
the cure.

When therefore these apostemes appear either in the back, or one of the great
joints, which afterward degenerate into ulcers, the motion of the matter by
nature is laudable doing it by translation, seeing she cannot by excretion,
partly by reason of the weakness of the principal parts, or by the plenty, or
hard concoction of the humor.

But this is the misery, that the friends or kinsfolks of such a diseased
person think him or her to be altogether safe and secure, when they see them
eased by the translation of the humor, and therefore to spare charges call not
for skillful Physicians, and Chirurgeans, by whose skill and diligence the
motion of nature might be furthered. And so it falls out many times, partly
by reason of the thickness of the skin, as in the back, or by reason of the
thickness of the skin, and compactnesse of the membranes as in the joints,
that the vertebrae of the back are corrupted, and the cartillage, and tendons
of the joints before remedy is sought for.

But that you may meet with these hide bound patients, and keep your selves
from incurring danger or discredit, mark these prognostics which I will
deliver unto you.

The prognostics of the ulcers of the back.
1. If after inquisition you find that a tumor in the back continued a long time
before it did break of it self, or was opened, suspect the ulcer to be of
hard curation: for it is likely that the vertebrae of the back are foul.

2. If the vertebrae be foul, which you may easily find out, by your finger
or probe, the case is desperate: wherefore take heed that you promise not
curation.

3. If in ulcers of the back you see the parties body day by day to become more
and more extenuate, advertise the parties friends of the danger: for it is an
evident argument that the principal parts are weakened, and cannot wholly
discharge the humor which offends.

Why ulcers in the upper part of the Spina are of easier curation, than those
of the lower.
4. Ulcers in the upper part of the Spina dorsi are more easily cured, than
those in the loins: Because the abdomen or lower belly sends out more
superfluities than the thorax or the breast, which is the middle cavitie.
Secondly, because they are nearer to the heart, the sun of the little world,
who by his heat it able to consume much superfluous humiditie.

I think it will not be unpleasant to you to hear me confirm that which I
have delivered unto you in my last prognostic, Histories.
by true relation of the events which befell me when I practiced in Wales in
the like griefs: seeing examples leave a deeper impression in the mind, than
precepts, and lead best to the curation of external griefs.

In Denbigh town there was one Richard Price an Haberdasher, son to John
Price, who kept the principal Inn of the town, who after he had been
troubled with a chronicall diseases, felt in his back a little below the
shoulders blades, a tumor still increasing in the outward parts, as he was
eased in the inward, until at the last it grew to the bigness of a penny
loaf. I having been called unto it by opening of the Aposteme, and using
methodicall indications, cured the Patient. This man (as I hear) having given
over his trade, still keeps the Inn which his father did.

In this same Town about the same time, a lusty young man, whose surname was
Owin, whose father was a retainer to Sir John Salisburie, had the like tumor in
the Vertebrae of the loins, after a lingering grief: I having been entreated
by the truly worshipful, Sir John Salisburie, (who had not an ordinary skill
in the knowledge of the plants, and in performing chirurgicall cures) took a
view of the young Gentleman. After mature deliberation, I told Sir John and
the young man's friends, that there was much quittor in the tumor, which must be
discharged; and that the event of the curation would be uncertain, if the
matter were let out, for the reasons above specified. At the entreatie of Sir
John Salisburie and the young man's parents and friends, I opened the Aposteme
which was in the Vertebrae of the loins: And although no means were omitted,
which seemed unto us effectual, for the recoverie of the young man's health,
and that the Vertebrae of the loins were not foul; yet he fell into a
Marasmus, or extenuation of the body, being otherwise a proper and valiant
young Gentleman; and so ended his life before age called for his dissolution,
to the great grief of his parents, having no other son but him, and the
commiseration of the worthy Knight. I have delivered unto you my observations
in this grief, whereof I hope you will make good use: you having occcasion
ministered to be wary, by the examples of others, which is no mean benefit.

How the Haberdasher was cured.
How I performed the curation of the first Patients, now I will declare unto
you: First, I purged his body with a gentle medicament: It was this; Electuar.
lenitiv. iiij. Electuar. de succo ros. ij. Syrup. ros. solutivi cum Agarico j.
aq. Cichor. iij. Misc. ut fiat p^tio. Secondly, I applied the Lapis infernalis
to the depending part of the tumor: Thirdly, I opened the Aposteme, making but
a small orifice through the eschar. Fourthly, every day I dressed the sore,
still suffering a little of the quittor to flow out, until all was discharged.
Fifthly, I used a mundifying injection, until I perceived the sore to be
clean, not stinking, and to afford both laudable, and small store of laudable
quittor. Sixthly, I used a consolidative injection, and boulsters somewhat
thick, to compresse the sore.

The description of the injections.
The mundifying injection was this: Vini albi lb. j. mellis rosati iij.
Vngi^en^. Aegyptiaci ss. ^isc. ut fiat injecti^ usurpand^ calid^. The
consolidative injection was this: aq. Plantag. iiij. Syrupi ^yr^i^i and e ros.
rub. siecat. a^. ss. Trachisc. albor. Rhos. sine ^pio ij. Misc. ut fiat
injectio applicanda item calida: All such injections must be warmed; for cold,
as Hippocrates witnesses, is hurtful to the Spinalis medulla. The Emplaster
which I used was Diachylon cum gummis. By these means I cured the party in
three weeks space.

Of the ulcers of the Abdomen.
Now the ulcers of the Abdomen, or of the lower belly, do offer themselves
only to be but compendiously touched. Seeing there are three parts of it,
Regio epigastrica, ^^^ilicalis, and hypogastrica, the upper, the umbilicall,
and lower region: I am to show unto you what parts in these regions most
commonly suffer ulceration.

1. Of an ulcer penetrating of the stomach.
I saw the stomach of one Mistress F^r^e, together with the muscules perforate
by the erosion of a sharp humor, in the Howlt, a town distant from Chester
five miles: the meat, drink, and chylus came through the perforation: the ulcer
also smelled strongly. I being unwilling to deal with her, prescribed some
local means, which wrought but small effect; for she died of a Marasmus, or
extenuation of the body, within a short time: the ulcer hindering the
chylification of the aliment, and so defrauding the body of nourishment. My
opinion was then, and now is, that ulcers penetrating into the cavitie of the
stomach are mortal, although wounds of this kind be sometimes cured: for in
the second there is but a bare solution of continuitie; but in the former there
is a solution of continuitie, having annexed to it the sharpnes and malignitie
of the matter. Here in London, 2. Of an ulcer of the liver.
in the Inn a little above Fleet-conduit, one Richard, who wa Tapster of the
Inn, had for a long time a great pain in the right side of the epigastricall
region of the Abdomen: in progress of time there appeared a great hard tumor,
causing a sharp fever: at last the Phlegmon breaking of it self, sent out
great store of quittor. I then being lodged within the sign of the Naked Boy,
a little below the Conduit, and being of his familiar acquaintance, was sent
for, finding him in a strong fever, and having difficulty of breathing, the
tumor of the liver hindering the free motion of the Septum transversum, the
instrument of natural respiration, I pronounced his grief to be mortal, and
so it fell out: for although no rational means were omitted, fit to have
recovered the party, if the grief had been curable, yet the party died. It
were but a fruitless labor to set down the medicaments which were used,
seeing they prevailed not.

This history I thought good to set down, that you may imagine what the event
is like to be, if you be called to the like grief.

Of an ulcer of the navell.
If falls out sometime, that superfluous flesh grows above the navell, if it
be slackly bound, and be left somewhat long, which does become ulcerate: This I
saw once in Tavestock, a town in the West Country, in Devonshire, in a child
of Master Moons, a Draper of that town. I having been called to the cure,
first bound off the navell by a strong ligature, afterward I cured it by the
application of Vnguentum de cerussa.

A penetrating ulcer of the groine.
In the groine after a Phlemone of it opened, oftentimes an ulcer is left
penetrating through the oblique and transvers muscules of the Abdomen: If you
perceive such an ulcer, pronounce it to be not of easy curation, chiefly if it
fall out to be after a venereall Bubo: For first, there is morbus cum causa, a
grief having the cause annexed: Secondly, it corrupts the Fibers of the
muscules: Thirdly, it corrupts sometimes the Vertebrae of the loins, in
which case all medicaments are fruitless, because the grief is mortal: This
happened to a young woman, An History.
who dwelt with the Lady Lucie, whom Master Napkin dressed, and opened after
her death. Both M. Doctor Gifford and I were called to view the sore sundry
times; and although means were used for her recoverie, yet they did not
prevail; so that she died of a Marasmus, the body becoming extremely
extenuate; although she seemed to be of a firm and thick habit of body, when
the tumor first appeared. If any such tumors come to your hands, after they are
brought to maturation, use the general means prescribed for the curation of
Lues venerea, lest the like event happen to you.

Of ulcers of the joints.
I will touch briefly the curation of ulcers of the joints, which differs but
very little from the curation of ulcers in other parts, saving that they
require medicaments of more desiccation without any sharpness, and more
powerful anodine cataplasmes for asswaging of pain; which is an inseparable
accident of ulcers, seizing upon these parts.

The Topics.
Apply then to the sore Desiccativum rubeum, and anoint the brims with this
liniment: Unguent. popul. and albi Caphuratian. j. Ol. Cydonit. and Papaverin.
an. ss. Misc. ac fiat liniment. ex art. Before you apply your medicaments,
foment the part with a fomentation made of Sumach, Pomegranate pills and
flowers, red Roses dried, and Myrtle-berries infused in astringent red wine,
being put into a long and narrow galley pot, and set in a warm place, or in a
posnet having in it boiling water.

In curing of these ulcers often purging is required, to stay the flowing of
sharp humors; but seeing every purgative medicament is not of like efficacy,
I will set down one as a pattern, after the which you may frame others:
Caricostin. and Elect. de succo ros. an. iij. Syrup. ros. solut. cum Agaric. j.
aq. Cichor. iij. Misc. ut fiat potio: You may either detract from the quantity
of the purging Electuaries, or add to them what you shall think fit, after you
have diligently considered the strength of the party: with this I will end the
Lectures for this present, and finish the Tractation of Ulcers. When God shall
permit me to ascend again into this seat, I will begin the Lectures of wounds.

FINIS.

