A brief relation, of what is happened since the last of August 1598. by coming
of the Spanish camp into the Dukedom of Cleue: and the bordering free
Countries, which with most odious and barbarous cruelty they take as enemies,
for the service of God, and the King of Spain (as they say.)

Heereunto is adjoined a Translation out of Latin, of a Letter of the Emperors
Ambassador, to the Admirant of Arragon, the General of the said Army: With
his answer.

Together with a description of the VVhale of Berckhey, or the great fish which
stranded or came on shore at Berckhey in Holland, the third of February 1598.
With anotation thereupon.

Also a Letter of the Emperor of Germany, to the Admirant of Arragon, General
for the Archeduke Albertus, in the Countries of Cleue and Munster, etc. With
the Admirants answer.

The conspiracy of the three Bishops.

The death of the Earl of Brook.

The Admirants Letter to the Counsel of Gulich touching the death of the said
Earl.

The list of the Soldiers levied by the Protestant Princes of Germany.

Faithfully translated out of the Dutch copy Printed at Roterdam.

Imprinted at London by John Wolf, and are to be sold at his shop in Popes
head Alley, near unto the Exchange. 1599.

The situation of the lands of Cleue and Munster, Where the Spanish forces now
are.
map of Cleve and Munster, illustration of a whale.

A brief relation of what is happened since the last of August 1598. by the
coming of the Spanish camp into the Countries of Cleeue, etc.
DOn Francisco de Mendossa, Admirante d'Arragon, etc. General with Earl
Frederick van den Berge, as Marshall of the camp belonging to the Archeduke
Albert, in the Beginning of Septe^b. last, An. 1598. came to the River of
Rhine, at Orsoy, with 62. Ensigns of Spaniards, 19. Ensigns of Italians, 2.
Ensigns of Irishmen, 4. regiments of Wallons, containing 43. Ensigns, 4.
regiments of Germans of 42. Ensigns, together with 168. Ensigns of
footmen, which in all is esteemed to be 22. thousand footmen, with 2.
thousand horse comprehended in 28. companies, as well Spaniards, Italians,
Netherlanders, and others: with these troops the aforesaid Admirant, desired
to be let into the little city of Orsoy situated upon the Rhine, a mile
above Berck, and being by the Marshall of Cleue (who protested as Neutrall)
denied, he began to seal the city, Orsoy taken.
which the Citizens perceiving, being affraide, let his people in, upon
promise, of only passing the Rhine. But he forgetting his promise, began to
strengthen the city, and caused 10. Ensigns of Wallons, and 3. regiments of
Spaniards, with 12. companies of Horsemen, to be passed over the Rhine, and
over against Orsoy at Walsem, he caused a strong Sconce to be made. Upon the
Castle of Orsoy lay some Soldiers belonging to the Prince of Cleue, to the
which the Admirant went himself in person, with three Friars and a hangman,
having many halters in his hand, with which he threatened the Soldiers, that
if they would not deliver up the Castle, they might confess themselves, for
that there was a hangman ready to hang them, The Castle summoned and yielded.
so that the Soldiers were forced to yield the same up unto him: also all
other Forts and Cities thereabout he caused to be summoned, taken, pilled and
ransomed, not favoring the cities of Alpen and Meurs, which had obtained a
letter from Albertus, that they might remain as Neutrals.

By letters written out of the Camp, was understood that the Admirant had
taken Orsoy the 10. of September, with intent to remain there, and to
strengthen the same on both sides of the Rhine, before that he would attempt
any thing else. The Camp did as then nothing else but ouerrunne, and rob the
land of Cleue as enemies: by some prisoners was understood that they meant to
winter in the Neutrall Cities, to spare the Brabanders and Flemmings, that the
Soldiers daily by want of money run away. That the heads in the camp
were different. Earl Frederick counseled to go toward Ouer-ryssell, but the
Admirant would pass down along the Rhine. The Citizens of Orsey, made
pitiful moanes and requests to their Lord the Duke of Cleue, to obtain of
the Admirant that with wife and children they might peaceably depart, leaving
all their goods and wealth behind them, for they were by the Spaniards forced
to work like slaves.

The 25. of September, the citizens and chief in Cleue land, concluded that
the redeliuery of Orsoy should with all diligence be procured, and that if in
case the Admirant denied to do it, that as then with all expedition, means
should be sought to levy men, for the defense of the Country, which of many
was little esteemed.

The last of September, the The chief Counselors and officers touching
martial causes.
Creyts, at Dormont being assembled, concluded to send the Earl of Lip to
the Admirant to procure the rendering of Orsoy.

There was great want of money and victuals in the Camp, for the Country above
five miles round of Orsey was destroyed, insomuch that the soldiers ran away
in great number, as well Spaniards as other.

The sixth of October, some part of the Camp departed to the Castle of the
Earl of Brook, situate on the Roer, who notwithstanding that he showed all
good neutrality and that he defended his liberty they forcibly besiedged,
beshot, took and pilled (as enemies) his Castle, and place of residence or
dwelling, his wife and children they conveyed to a monastery: the Soldiers of
Cleue and Berge, with the housekeepers, which were flee into the Castle,
contrary to their promise and agreement, they flew in the field, after they
were with their consents departed from the Castle. The Earl himself they used
as a criminal prisoner, and notwithstanding that he answered himself as being
a Noble man belonging to the Empire, and appealed thereupon, and that he had
yielded up the Castle upon condition of life, lands and goods saved, for
himself and those which were with him upon the same: The Lord of Herdenbergh
with a Preacher murdered in the Castle.
they forced him to go to Mass, and as they fell in disputation thereabout,
they there slew his Nephew the Lord of Herdenbergh with a Preacher.

This Castle of Brook being thus as enemy taken, without in any sort
respecting their promise, that it was yielded upon condition of life and goods
saved. The Admirant of Arragon, Don Francisco de mendossa, durst well defend
the same to the Counsel of Cleue, that it ought not to be badly taken what
his men did, that there was occasion given: And that those of Cleue and Berge
ought not to revenge all what happens, but ought much rather to have
patience, in hope of a good end of those miseries, which now they endured
through need, for the common good, and that there ought no enmity to be
showed, to the end not to bring themselves in the danger of the furious and
bitter arms of the angered Soldiers, which were thereby moved. Moreover the
Jesuits make themselves heard, that those which resist them, do make
themselves subject to the cruel punishment, and that they are rewarded
according to their merits, and that they have punished them to the example of
the others, to the end that none should do so any more, but hold themselves
in dutiful obedience, and forberance in this especial need.

The eleventh of October when this happened, the Admirant set some number of men
to Buricke situated on the Rhyne beneath Bercke over against Wesell: the
Citizens being Neutrals refused to yield up their City, but seeing that they
would force them, were constrained to yield, and were thereby ouercharged with
great numbers of soldiers.

On the same day happened the most detestable murder, of the Earl of Brook,
after he was risen from the Table in the evening, The Earl of Brook murdered.
and walking in the Court of the Castle, there came two Soldiers of the
Garrison to him; asking him if he would walk into the Garden, whereto he
condiscending they went out of the Castle Gate thorough the Garden, toward the
Water mill, where one of the soldiers at unawares, gave the Earl a great
blow, with a half Pike upon the head that he felled him, the Earl crying O
Jesus: which done he drew out his sword and thrust it through him, whereat he
cried once again O Jesus. One of the Earls servants being by, ran away and
leaping down into the mill-damme saved himself.

The fourteenth of October the Duke of Cleue sent his deputy to the Camp of
the Count Maurice, Counsel of State, and of the war, protesting that all
what the Admirant did to them, did not happen by any consent of the country,
but by meet force, and against his will and the country. This yet
notwithstanding the opinion in the united provinces was, that the Spaniard
would not attempt those things in the land of Cleue, without the expres consent
of the emperor, according to the Admirants charge given him by the king of
Spain, and the Archeduke Albertus, and confirmed by the Emperor in Anno 1596.
who then willed him to that end to have his forces ready, that they ^ought well
seek to get all the land of Cleue into their hands, and to hold the same,
with the Prince thereof, inwardship, and so to assure themselves, the lands
should not fall into the hands of the Princes of Brandenborgh and Swezbrugh,
the which by right of marriage might pretend to be the nearest heirs, all
which, those of Spain and Austria would (...) hinder, because they are of the
reformed religion, and might in(...)re to the united provinces. Of these and
such like complots, the united Provinces have diverse times advertised the
Counsel of Cleue, and to prevent these complots, they had also proffered to
make certain agreements to the freeing of the river of Rhine, and as then
thereby to have withstood these invasions, but it was at that time not esteemed
nor believed.

This common opinion was in a moment more and more spread abroad and confirmed
in the thoughts of searching spirits, because that news came, that the cities
of Diuxlaken and Holt were likewise taken, together with Essen Wynendall, and
the Forte or house of Hullen, using them most odiouslie, killing and murdering
all those which they knew to be of the reformed religion, and enemies to their
enterprises: also they broake the new Neutrality which was granted to Meurs,
and lodged 8. companies of Horsemen therein.

The Admirant also besought the city of Bockholt, that he might lay 500. horse
in their city, and to those of Borckum 300. horse.

He also besought those of Wesel to take in 2000. footmen of his, and 1000.
horse: or else that they should make up 200. thousand Crowns, and a months
bread for his Camp, and to deliver hostages at Burick, that the Count Maurice
should attempt nothing about Wessell and Lip, with many other such unseemly
and shameful demands and fearful threats: vaunting himself of the fact
of the Earl of Brook, threatening to use all other in like sort: yea to use
the Earl of Lip, no less then the Earl of Brook, and that therefore, they
should not trust upon any aid, for that there was none in the Dutch nation
which should dare to touch him. The citizens of Wessell being in great fear
and distress were forced upon the 22. of October, to come to an agreement,
that they should give for their city, and the city of Rees, 150. thousand
Gilders, and a thousand measures of Rye, and caused a Bridge, to be made over
the Lip which was accordingly effected upon the 23. of October. Those of
Santen promised 18. thousand Gilders, and other places more.

With this money he paid his men which had long called for money, and passed
the Lip, and sent all about the cities of Munster for money: Also they
raunsomed many Gentlemen's houses, many whereof they most wickedly ransacked
and pilled. They also robbed the villages of Winterswicke and Alten etc.
commanding those of Emmerick to make a bridge over the Water of Hetter. Also
he sent some men with Ordinance toward Rees, demanding the city for a
time to lay his men in, upon their refusal he caused more Ordinance to be
brought to it, and so feared the city, Rees taken.
that they were forced to yield it up to him, without any respit of an hour,
to assemble their citizens: and laid in the same city to the costs of the
citizens 8. Ensigns, he also took all the Castles there abouts.

Upon the second of November, the Admirant demanded passage for his Ordinance
through Emmerick by which means he made himself master of the city and
leaving a great number of men therein, departed with his camp to Elton. Also
he took Yselborgh where many citizens were wickedly murdered. The Prince of
Cleue had his Ambassador by the Duke of Lorraine, who besought the Duke to
write to the Admirant and to the Regent at Brussell, that the country might be
freed from this trouble. Also he undertook to move the King of France (the
land of Cleue being concluded in the peace) to that end to send to Brussell.

A copy of the Letter which the Emperors Legate wrote to the Admirant.
ILlustrious and worthy Prince, it is known as well to your excellency, as to
me, what at two several times has been between us done and effected: First
in the city of Gelder, when your excellency first approached these countries
with your camp: and afterward, when by charge and commandment of his
Imperial majesty, I treated about the marriage of the illustrious prince of
Cleue, Gulich and Berge, with the daughter of Lorraine, I have declared, that
the said illustrious duke of Cleue, is very badly, and unreasonably dealt
withal. The city of Orsoy being forcibly taken from him, and the kings
soldiers run unbridled, using all manner of cruelty, in murdering,
spoiling, and burning, as enemies and robbers, not favoring the lives nor goods
of many. And where before I steadfastly believed, that a Prince (whose word
ought to be sure) and had by so many promises bound himself, would be found
true, as concerning that the city of Orsoy should within 10. or at furthest
within 20 days, be discharged of those expenses, and redeliuered.

Item that the Camp should be removed out of these Neutral lands, as soon
as Berke should be rendered. And the more did I believe that this should have
been fully accomplished, because that the same has at diverse times bin
promised and confirmed, by word and sealed letters to the Illustrous Prince of
Cleue and his sister. I now find my self greatly deceived, since I perceive
nothing but breaking of promises and needless delays, yea more, there is
nothing followed upon the promises, but foe-like enterprises, and the just
contrariety of the said promises. For being departed I have understood, how the
one City after the other has been forcibly taken, and others constrained to
pay great sums of moneys and quantities of corn: all the which coming to
the Court I found to be true: and more over hear and see some Cities taken,
and other some with great cruelty forced to pay great exactions. Any one, who
willingly would have his country freed from such troubles may easily judge how
the Emperor (in whose behalf I am here appointed, to take care for the
country and the Prince thereof) with all the other German Princes: yea all
other Princes of Europe, will be moved at the report hereof, for this is a
matter which touches them in general. The house of Lorrayne shall by this
marriage be joined and bound to that of Cleue: also the house of Lorraine,
shall by a new brotherhood be knit to the King of France. And many Princes, do
belong to this house as well by blood as marriage.

Therefore one ought to take care, that all these together, be not vexed nor
urged by the great dishonor and shame which is done them, and so to renew and
tear up the old wound, which is yet scarce whole, which I wish his
Catholic Majesty, (as being one of his welwillers) to look unto.

Where are there any so unwise and unexperienced that understand not, that it
greatly hinders and disturbeth the service of God, that a Catholic Prince,
who has with such zeal and innumerable charges defended and vphelde the
Catholic religion in the midst of the streams and storms of heresy,
should be thus suppressed and spoiled, and his kindred be despised? That
leaving the enemy unassaulted, the whole power of the war with the worst and
basest rascals that can be found in the world, shall be bent against the Kings
couzens and blood kindred. That the Churches should be pylled, and the
Monestaryes robbed: the spiritual men thrust away and beaten. The young
Virgins (devoted to God) ravished, and all holiness tredden underfoot.

Also that the Ambassador (which among the heathens are free) are with
public force apprehended, as is happened to my own person, and the
Ambassadors of other Princes, some days past when I came by water to Cleue.
Where can any one (I say) be found so simple and senseless, that does not
perceive and mark, that this stretches to the dispising and hindraunce of
Religion?

Besides, that which is greatly to be doubted, that is that the honor of the
renouned house of Austria, will be despised of every man, the which until now
for their justice, and kindness, the simplicity of their enterprises, and
honorable deeds, has been favored over all, as also, because they have
always wisely shunned, the suspicion, of friends or foes, of bearing arms in
any wrongefull wars: yea it is to be suspected, that the Catholic King,
and all other raisers and authors of those cruelties, shall be by God most justly
punished, the guiltless blood which they spyll. crying for revenge. For (O
beloved) what prosperity are those to expect which themselves favor nothing,
nor leave nothing vnspoiled: which lay their hands upon (and molest) their
kindred as strangers, their friends as enemies, the worthy as malefactors,
and the guiltless as the guilty?

I am forced by my office to advertise his imperial majesty of these bloody
tyrannies, even in a row as they are happened. I admonish and earnestly pray
your honor, to desist from using of violence henceforward, but to the
contrary to give and render again to the hands of the illustrious Prince of
Cleue, his taken Cities, Castles, and forts, to transport your Army for some
other continent, to make amends and restitution of the damages done, and to
give no occasion of further displeasure or discommoditie. All the which
although it were, lawful, just, lawdable and beseeming to a Prince, yet will I
by the bearer hereof, expect a reasonable and discreet answer, I commit your
Honor to the protection of God.

From Cleue the last of October, 1598. Understood. Carolus Sonderpuhill, Legate
of his Imperial Majesty.


The Author.
In sooth, I believe that this Ambassador means well enough, and would willing
see the Carte go upright, but his Lord and master is not of that mind. For
were it otherwise, and that he were displeased therewith, wherefore does he
not deal earnestly with his brother Albertus? who must confess to have given
his Lieutenant the Admirant commission and charge, to take the cities of
Cleue, to rob them, and murder the people by multitudes, etc. Or he must
say, that the Admirant had done all without his consent and commandment, and
of propria authoritate: Has he then done this without commandment? he ought
then to punish him well for it, and to set the cities of Cleue and Munster in
their freedom again, and to recompense their damages. But it appears daily
more and more, that the court of Spain, the Emperor and his brethren, as also
the Pope, are well agreed, and that all is but dissimulation, they faining to
be displeased with the things whereof they are causers. I will therefore to the
delight and service of the Reader, yet join heereto the copy of the Admirants
answer.

Superscription. To the Noble and worthy Lord, Carolus Sonderpuhill, Knight of
Jerusalem, Counselor and Legate of the Emperor: my especial goodfriend.
NOble and Worthy Lord, we have with all reverence the seventeenth of
November, received your honors Letters, dated the last of October, we have
also understood each point of the same. First we commend and praise your honors
service and care, in the executing of the commandment of his imperial
majesty, touching the increasing of the honor and welfare, of the Illustrous
Prince of Cleue, and the defense of his countries and subjects. Your honor
seems at this present justly displeased, by reason of many faults and
misdemeanors, which (being first beheld and not sufficiently grounded) would
greatly agrauate the Kings camp and us, except that from the beginning and
first enterprise, the cause could be proved, that those which are accused
should have sought and procured, misery and calamity, instead of help and
counsel, insomuch that these troubles must be moderately applied to the
circumstance of the matter and cause, of the time, of the place, and necessity.
I wish that your honor were well informed of the estate of this matter, and of
the right wherewith his royal Majesty makes those wars, of the meekness
which is used therein: as also of the good affection and service of his royal
Majesty, and the Estate of the Empire, together with their judgment of the
cruel tyrany of the obstinate. Item of the necessity of this enterprise, and
the things which are happened: as of needful maintenance, the situation of the
places of the illustrous Prince of Gulich, the necessity in altering of the
^p^, according to the oportunities of the wars: Item of the good deeds of his
royal Majesty, and of his true affection, as also of the most illustrous
Prince of Gulion, and the whole Empire. Of all which, and many other causes, if
that your honor were fully according to the truth informed (which we hope
shall shortly happen) we doubt not in the least, but that your honor would as
freely and willingly as other, understand the whole reason and disposition
hereof, imputing the fault of the trouble to the authors, and wholly excuse
his royal Majesty, yea and have compassion of them, since that for their
great and laudable deeds, they are vnreasonablie and falsely belyed and blamed.
Your honor should also interpret for the best, excuse and defend our deeds,
affections and care, before the Prince and his subjects, in respect of the
furthering of the discipline, and the patience of the unease which we endure,
by reason of the greatness of the camp, and the differing of pays. Also your
honor could double the service showed unto the illustrious. Duke of Lorraine
and other Princes, and daily with all diligence and care, hinder the fear of
the difficulty, and un ease of the French Kings side, who is to be feared in
the Empire, and will not seek the advancement of the Prince of Cleue.

Your Honor should also move his imperial majesty, and the estates of the
Empire, to the joining in this war, against the common perrill of Christendom,
to wit, against the causers of this great mischief. But this all shall more
manifestly, by the deed and experience of the matter, as also of the royal
Majesty, and the illustrious Archeduke Albert, and our care, together with the
estates of the Empire and other Princes, he brought to light, we esteem
according to the opportunity of the time, to have sufficiently satisfied the
illustrious Prince of Cleue, Gulich, etc. by our last letter, which also we did
imparte to your honor, and also esteem that they ought by the same to be
found good: what touches the rest, I beseech your honor, by the love and
goodwill which you bear, to his imperial Majesty, to his royal Majesty, to
the Archduke Albertus, and the Illustrous Prince of Gulich (which by fraternity
are bound together) as also by the love which your honor bears to the
preservation of the Catholic religion, yea whole Christendom, to continue
constantly in the good affection and reason, as your honor has already begun,
to be ayding with his counsel and deeds to the common causes and us, and to
guide and govern the matters with the illustrious Prince and his counsel
according to your wisdom. We beseech God to grant your honor health,
constancy, mercy and strength, to finish such a holy piece of work.

From the camp before Deutecum the 12. of November. 1598. Understood. Your
honors wholly devoted. Don Francisco de Mendossa, Great Admirant of the Realm
of Arragon, Marquess of Quadelles, de Valde penas, of the Stately
Calatrononian order, Steward of the Catholic King, as also Counselour at
Stands, and of the Martial affairs, chief Steward in the Court of the most
Illustrous Archeduke Albertus: And Captain General of the Carrabins.


IS not this an evident and reasonable answer, justly might we every where
be exclaimed on, and called barbarous and bastardes, not worthy of the name of
Netherlands, if we should resign to the Spaniardes (whereof the most part
are but Baptized Jews) our right and freedom, which to mayntaine, so many
thousands of virtuous men have lost their lives, and the earth been dyed with
their blood, have we no compassion on our selves? let us call to mind the
misery which our wives and children are to expect, if that we be mastered by
the Spaniards, either by force, or their deceiptfull treatise of peace. We are
bound to take care for them, since they themselves have not the wit: Let us
then make it appear that there is yet a valliant Lions heart amongst the
Netherlands, for the preservation of the true Catholic Religion, or
privileges and freedoms, and for the turning off of slavery and servitude.

Upon the 7. of November the Admirant assaulted the Town of Deutecum in the
County of Zutphen, Deutecum taken.
and by appointment the Soldiers departed it with their weapons, he marched
forwards toward the Forte of Scuylenburch, situated in a bogge, which he
also took. The Admirant having want of all things, durst not adventure any
further: For being that he had denied safeguard to the Country people or Boores
of the County of Zutphen, to dwell quietly, but allowed them time and leisure,
to fly with their corn and cattle into the strong Cities: he found no
victuals for his Camp, and were forced in steed of bread to eat
Colwort-stalkes, clodded blood of beasts, and what else they could get.

About this time there was an assembly in the City of Dortmont, of the
Deputies of the Princes and Lords, belonging to the Westphalian Creyts, whereof
the Chief is the Earl of Lip, whether all the complaints of the Neighbor
countries were brought. In which assembly was resolved, to write Letters on the
13. of November to the Emperor, and to the four Princes Electors, of the
Rhyne, that they also might write to the Emperor, and to the Admirant, and at
Brussell to the Cardinal Andrew of Austria, Governor of the Netherlands.
Appointing to meet again at Collin in January.

When the Admirant, by the resistance of Count Maurice, and the Camp of the
united Provinces, had been forced to retire. Fearing want of victuals and other
necessaries, he departed the 16. of November for the Bishopric of Munster,
leaving five Ensigns at Deutecum, with a Banner of Horsemen of Mendo a
Spaniard.

The Earl Fredricke took Bockholt, and also Borcken, Bockholt and
Borckentaken.
where they dealt very badly with the Citizens. From thence they departed for
Schermbacke and other places as Dortmont, Essen, Dorsten, which they shot at,
Coesuelt, Steenwort, Rekelinckhuesen, and many Gentlemen's houses. They were
also twice before Oostdorp, but were feign to retire: those of Ham resisted
them also valiantly. They threatened the Bishopric and county of Osnaburgh
with fire, demanding an hundred thousand Dollars, but it was denied, and they
took Soldiers to them. Barlote was sent to Emmerick, where on the 23. of
November he would with more men be let in: but being that there were three
Ensigns belonging to the Earl of Bye, the Citizens with their (forced)
help, held Barlote out. Who thereat greatly spyted at his departure from
thence, threatened the City greatly. To excuse this refusal there was sent the
Deacon with certain of her persons to the Admirant, declaring that Neutrality
had been granted them, and that there was no reason the same should be broken.
The Admirant gave for answer, that the time, the service of God and the King
required such, and therewith they ought to have patience: Whereupon the Deacon
replied that it would be a great shame and reproach before God and the world,
and to the name of the Catholic Spaniards, that all promises and contents may
be broken and answered with the service of God and the King, The Admirant is
by the Deacon, reprehended for being an vpholder of Jesuits, in breaking his
word and promise.
and with the estate of matters, which things the Turks and Moors did not do.
And so doing yt it was no marvel, though the united Provinces would not trust
to any peace, since that neighbors and friends are so dealt withal. The
Admirant was greatly enraged and ashamed at these words, sending the
Ambassadors away, but not without peril of their persons

Shortly after the tenth of December the Spanish Garrisons were forced to
abandon Emmericke by the Count Maurice with the Army of the united Provinces,
where the Admirant lay at Rees with three thousand men, and Barlot at
Doornicke, and diverse other there abouts, and could not hinder the same. For on
the 4. of December, some of the Count Maurice his men marched up above Rees,
and thrust the ditches through, which notwithstanding were guarded by
soldiers, they scarce being able to save themselves from the water, and were
feign to be carried in boats out of the houses wherein they had hidden
themselves: and Emmericke was succored to keep themselves Neutrall, taking in
some of their Princes soldiers for their defense.

In this sort the Spanish Camp forced the Cities of the Bishopric of
Munster, to take in their Garrison, also the Bishopric of Essen ouerrunning
the houses and Castles belonging to the Earl of Benthem and Scouwenburgh,
taking, pilling and ransacking of churches and monestaries, robbing all the
country people, with an unruled crew of Soldiers, surprising, afflicting and
murdering them with such horrible cruelty, that it is impossible to express
it, and all under the color of the service of God and the king.

The Protestant princes assembled again in January at Collen, for they are so
tormented yt many of them are constrained to abandon their houses, well
perceiving what they ought to fear. Those of Osnaburgh denied the Spaniards
the demanded ransom of the City, opposing and defending themselves with
their Lord and Bishop (who is of the house of Bruynswicke) against the
Spaniards.

The like is done by those of the city of Munster and take in soldiers to
their aid, so that the enterprise which the Spaniards had undertaken (by the
winking or eye shutting of the Prince Elector of Collen), is failed them. It is
manifest that they procured to make the house of Austria great, and that they
would see that all the Netherlandes, Cleue and Gulich with their neighbors,
might fall under the same, rather then that they should be inherited by
Protestants or their lawful Princes. Hereupon the Princes had appointed to
meet at Ausborch in December last.

The cities in the Dukedom of Cleue were persuaded, that the Spaniardes would
not any more undertake any seedges or to surprise any thing more by violence:
wherefore those of Calcar, Goch, Cleue and others, resolved, to resist the^ and
to stand by, and asist one another, to defend themselves with their weapons,
and not to let in their enemy: yet notwithstanding that those of Calcar are
great Catholics, and their Citizens greatly inclined to the old Religion.
They were most fearfully assaulted by this Catholic Spanish camp. For when
the citizens had begun most valiantly to resist and defend themselves, and
beat down their enemies: there was no remedy nor favor found, but were after
the most rigorous sort so assaulted, and enemy-like battered, their gates
thrown down, and after many lives lost, the City was taken upon the
Christmas even last, which brought such terrible astonishment to the other
cities, that the people fled in great heaps, and were forced in the cold
winter to leave the country. By reason whereof those of Goch sent Ambassadors
to the Admirant at Rees, to make an agreement with him, as also did the other
cities: but it was in vain, he sends his men thetherwards and deceiptfully
entered Wees, (lying an hours going from Goch) which they ensconced strongly
and summoned the city of Goch to take in 500. footmen and three companies of
horse of his: Many citizens flying were defended by the horsemen of Nimmeghen,
insomuch that the enemy durst not touch them upon the Plain between Goch and
Cleue. The soldiers were suffered to enter, but as the horsemen being come
before the city, the entrance was by the Citizens (in shutting their gates)
hindered, whereat the chieftaine of the said horse threatened the^: mean while
the citizens got sauegard from the Prince and Emperor, which is the cause that
in February there returned many of Goch thetherwards again. What will follow,
time and experience will teach: But it seems that the Admirant, knowing well
enough how he stands with the house of Austria, will not pass much for
sauegards, but will prosecute his intent.

For conclusion we will (for this time) commit the cause to God, beseeching him
to preserve and defend al lovers of the patrimony, from al such imoderate,
cruelty of the Spanish tyrants, which are never glutted with spilling of
guiltless blood, and more then brutall rauishing of young Virgins, and chaste
matrons, and unmeasurable murtherous robberies, Their obstinacy, which they use
to their free Countries is so great, that it cannot be thought nor expressed in
more odious sort, but they will surpass all in wickedness, not respecting any
of what religion soever, young or old. This (loving and kind Reader) is a
fair glass for us, wherein we may speculate and ouercast what we should he
to expect of these notable gallants, if they should suppress us. Therefore let
every one, watch and pray to the omnipotent God, for mercy and assistaunce,
that he will give us all a valient united heart, whereby we may prevent all
these said cruel tyranies of the Spaniard. To his honor and glory, and the
good and salvation of us all. Amen.

The Whale of Berckhey. Or A description of the great Fish which stranded or
came on shore at Berckhey in Holland, the third of February 1598. With a
brief relation of such things as happened thereupon and since the same.
I
IT is most certain and true, I will for breuities sake, omit al signs and
tokens which have happened in the heavens, or the air, at diverse times, and
will only tell some histories of some Sea Monsters, being that the subject of
our writing, is of a Sea Monster. In the time of the Romish Pope Eugenius the
4. (as Bapt. Fulg writes) there was taken on the shore, a Sea-knight, whose
shape was much like a man, excepting that on his head he had two small horns,
and but two fingers on each hand, his feet like tails, and at his arms he
had two little wings, like unto those of a Bat. Heerevpon presently ensued the
bloody wars which the Dolphin of France, son to Charles the 7. made
against the Switzers by the instigation of the said Pope Eugenius, who would
(against the Emperor Sigismund his will) have had the synod which was
appointed at Basel, to be held in Italy. Also the said Pope was the cause that
Ladislaus the young King of Hungary, broke the truce which was made with
Amurath the Turkish Emperor, in discharging him by his Papal power, of the
dear and great oathe wherewith the said peace was confirmed and assured,
wherewith Amurath being moved and spited, assembled a mighty host of horse,
men and footmen, to revenge himself upon Ladislaus. It chanced that both
armies joining together, the Turks began to faint, which Amurathe perceiving,
lifting up his eyes and hands to heaven, said: See Jesus Christ, this is the
truce which thy Christians (in swearing by thy name) have made me. If now thou
be a rightful God, defend thine and mine honor. These words were no sooner
spoken by Amurath, but the Hungarians and the Polonians were put to flight, and
the most of them slain: amongst the rest the King Ladislaus and Iulianus
Cesarinus, the Popes Ambassador. This happened near unto Varna, Anno. 1444.
the 10. of November, according to the writing of Bonfino lib. 6. c. 3. Shortly
after this, Eugenius was deposed, and a Duke of Sauoye set in his place. You
that say that one is not bound to keep any oathe or faith unto Heretics,
chawe and rechawe this accident. An other example. In Anno. 1281. it happened
that some Fishermen caught in their net a Sea Monster, much like a Lion, which
as soon as it was above water, began to moan and lament, as a man that is
grieved, and was brought alive to Rome to the Pope Martin the 4. Shortly after
ensued the Sicilian Vespers, which is the time when (in the Papistrie) are sung
the Vespers, there being through the intisement of Pope Nicolas the third, and
through the complot of the king of Arragon (on the Easter day) murdered all
the French garrisons, which the French king had in Sicilia.

In the year of our Lord 1522. there was seen at the sea side near Rome, a
Sea Monster, having the face of a woman with great breasts, her hair all
entangled, with long ears like a Beagle, but in shape more like an Ape then a
man. At that time Sultan Soliman, sun to the Turkish Emperor Zelim, besiedged
the Knights of S. John which kept Rhodes, and so strongly assaulted them, that
he made himself master of the whole Island.

A little before that, Posthumes Albinus the Roman General, with his whole
army, was by the French discomfited: It seemed in many places, that the Sea
was on fire, which was a sign of the ensuing burning war, which at that time
was kindled in many places of the world.


that God has often declared through tokens and signs in the air, the earth,
and from the deapth of the seas, that his mighty hand was raised, to punish
lands and nations, for their wickedness, by war, pestilence or famine:
peruse the holy Scriptures, read the old Chronicles, and that which I tell
you here will be manifest unto you: and yet although every man can epsy a
token, yet can none divine what they signify. It has pleased God Almighty to
hide that from us, thereby to keep us more in awe and fear.

II.
For when that in the year 1598, the Sea had vomited a mighty Whale on our
shore at Berckhey, who in every ones sight was horrible to behold, I also was
amazed and admired so rare a thing, and (as all the rest) doubted that some
strange matter would ensue thereupon, and that God was displeased: but no one
could imagine what would follow, nor what God had ordained thereby. Until that
out of Brabant there came tumbling a pamphlet, wherein at large the full
signification thereof was disclosed, no otherwise but if God had told the
writer what he had disposed.

III.
I held my peace, my mouth and my pen, hoping that God ere long, would show
that he had not caused that Whale to strande in Holland, as a token that he
meant to reduce these Netherlands under the yoke of that cruel monster, who
seeks nothing else but through fire and sword, to destroy these excellent
countries, he is like a Whale, who whatsoever he catches in his chops, he
swalloweth, teareth, and deuoureth without mercy, for I have hoped always
that God would make the Spanish tyrant starve for hunger, like the Whale did
after two days and three nights.

IIII.
This Monster was 24. else in length, 22. teeth he had, which all like horns
long and sharp fitted the one within the other in the hollow vault of his
mouth, his eyes small, standing deep within his head, Membrum virile.
the thing was great and long, two finnes he had, each of two else long, and
broad and, he had a tongue of huge bigness, in his throat lay a monsterous
bladder like an Ox gut, which vomitted abundance of filthe, which with great
streams flowed from his body, in so much that what through his stincke, and
what through his bigness, he was most horrible in every ones sight.

V.
This all fits right well with Signor the Admirant, who ( Conueniunt rebus
nomina sepe suis.

The General of the male-co^tentish camp, is, Franciscus Mendosus Admirandus
Arragonie Marchio Quadelles Valdepenas etc Mendosus, a, um, is as much as a man
that is full of lies or faults: Admirandus, a wonderful and notable fellow:
Valdepenas, is as much as one who greatly plagueth and molesteth other men,
and shall in the end, greatly be punished for the same. And that these names
agree with his conditions, he showed as soon as he was passed the Rhine, for
having taken the city of Orsay, and the Castle yet holding out, he went
himself in person accompanied with a hangman, and a Friar, to the castle,
threatening them, that if they were not resolved to render up the Forte, they
might prepare themselves to be confessed, and that the hangeman was there ready
to hang them: nay more, himself took the halters out of the hangmans hands,
and lifting them on high, showed them unto the besieged. I believe not, that on
our side, there be any captain or commander, that would have helped the
hangman so well in his office. "That which some esteem for a great misery and
calamity, ( viz. to leese house and lands) those of Cleue and Munster, esteem
it a great happiness, and are very glad, that in abandoning all, they may
escape bare and naked out of the tyrants hands.


as his name signifies) is parlous gallant, with 24000. men he passed the
Rhine, and first took Orsay. Every one was affrighted through out all the
land, each city imagined that they leueld at them, yea seemed that at a
clappe he would have taken all the Cities which lie here below on the bank.
But it was not so, the case goes otherwise, he whetteth his teeth in the lands
of Cleue and Munster, "where he so abuses both men and women, that no body can
endure by him.

VI.
By the small eyes of the Whale, is signified the little foresight and
unadvisedness of the Admirant, who was so greedy to convey his great host
deeper into the country, that he took no care for his food, All wise
Generals, forecast, where and from whence the camp may be best victuailed: but
this wonderful fellow coming over the Rhine when the Corn was ripe, would
not give the countrymen of Zutphen any sauegarde, whereby in lying peaceably in
the country, they might have victualed the Camp. But willingly gave them
respite and leisure, to fly into the strong Cities: insomuch, that shortly
after, his Soldiers through hunger were constrained to eat
Coletwort-stalkes, and clodded blood of beasts: roots, and herbs, etc. And
whilst that the land was full of food and victuals, they said, it is not
royal, nor honorable enough, for the King to take contribution of his
subjects: but now when the clownes were fled, he grants them sauegarde.
for the Country people fled, and conuayed the Corn and cattle away,
insomuch, that Signor, through famine was constrained to eat Colewort stalks,
for they could not get any bread: yet when this hungry crew, came into the So
I call the cities of Cleue and Munster: but truly the Spaniards does not now
esteem or hold them for Neutrall, but as his own, and respects them no
more then he does Deutecum, which always heretofore has been on our side.
And even as the Pope did give this king of Spaines predecessors, the land of
America, (whereof the Heathen king Artibalyba greatly wondered saying: Surely
this Pope must needs be some great fool, to give my country and cities,
wherein he has not a foot of right, to an other.) Even as great right and
reason has he to give Albertus (who is one of his best sons) the Lordships
of Cleue and Munster, if so it may please his holiness: But to whom soever the
said Provinces belongs of Cleue and Munster, the Spaniards supposes to have
good right in them, saying that at the time when Knipperdolincke and John
Becolt of Leyden, with the Annabaptists in Anno. 1533. had made themselves
master of the City of Munster, the Bishop being not able enough to take the
City again, and to beat out the Annabaptists, he besought those of the
house of Burgundy for aid, promising that himself and his subjects at any
time thereafter, should be thankful unto them for it. Now is it the right
time (said the Spaniards) to accomplish that promise, and therefore they
think they may lawfully call in their debts and to pay themselves. See how
easily a staff is found when one will beat the dog, if one cannot find a
straight one, a crooked one will serve the turn.
Neutrall cities and there lodged in Some poor Citizens, which with their
hands and the sweat of their brows get their living, are pestered with ten,
fifteen, yea twenty soldiers in their housen, other some 25. 30. 36. more or
less, which eat and consume all what the miserable Inhabitants of the
neutrall cities, are able any way to get. My Lords they sit at the table
making good cheer. The host like a Page must stand behind them, bare headed
to serve them, yea he must see them with money, before they will vouchsafe to
touch one bit of the good meat which is set before them. Where Signior the
Spaniard has any government, there the Gentlemen and Citizens of the Cities
must stand with cap in hand, and bow themselves to a filthy rotten, pockie,
Spanish basketmaker, and such a one must be called Signior, as is worse then
the most basest Boore in all the Netherlands.
heaps, listen what they did: Brown bread, and powdered flesh they scorned to
eat, throwing it at their hoasts feet, Yea so wicked and immodest are these
pockie abominable wretches, and heathnish Christians, that they will not
respect wenches of eight, nine, ten, eleven, or twelve years of age.
and through their villainies they have undone many a maid and honest woman.

VII
Through the unnecessary and ugly tongue of the whale is signified, When our
ships the last year were come into the Pepper country, and that the Heathen
King at Bantam for a sum of money had granted them traffic in his country,
he notwithstanding soon broke his promise, seeking to destroy our men,
contrary to his oath and promise. Whereof being reproved, and demanded the
cause thereof, he answered that he had no bone in his tongue, and that he
could turn and wind the same at his will and pleasure, this may likewise be
applied to the Spaniard, for he breaks his oath and promise as often and when
he lists. And being he cannot condemn those of Cleue and Munster of heresy,
and that the old rule of the Concile of Trent (faith ought not to be held unto
heretics, can take no place there, The Admirant, when complaints are made
that he has not held his promise, answers. The service of god and the king
require so much, that I cannot keep my promise. Has he not cause and reason
enough, think you, to break and violate the oath. It is even with the
Spaniards as it was whilome with the ambitious heathens, Julius Caesar, and
others, which were wont to say: Si violandum est Ius, regnandi causa violandum
est. Alpen, Anholt, and Meurs, unto which the Cardinal under his hand and
Scale had granted neutralitie, have notwithstanding by the Admirant been taken.
that the promises which the Spaniarde makes us, are vain and of no worth.
It is stink, it is filth, burning and murdering which sticks in his heart,
and herewith his mind is stuffed and puffed up like the belly of the whale,
with filthy infection. The Spaniard seems to have mind upon nothing so much,
as upon the Romish religion, and the furtherance thereof. In so much that his
Catholicque Majesty, the king of Spain is esteemed to be the truest and
faithfullest servant unto the Romish seat. Under this hypocritical veil,
they seek to cloak their insatiable ambition, covetousness, and bloodthirst.
Every where that they lie in Cleueland, they do no more favor the
Catholicques, then those of the reformed religion or others, yea the places
could be named where they have broken the Churches and monuments which by our
people were leaft undefaced.
Show of holiness and pariurie are the two sins, wherewith he purposes to
subdue the Netherlands. He has heretofore done many an exployt, but since that
his deceit came to light a very little. Al his devices are deceit, enormious in
each ones sight, every one fears his cruelty, be they protestants I speak of
some such Papists, which having tasted the Barbarous cruelties of the
Spaniards, know full well that they favor none, but even such over which they
have no power. Those which long and wish for the victory of the Spaniards wish
for their own destruction, be they whatsoever they may be,
or Papists, they know his dealings.

VIII.
The Whale lying on the strand, every one that came thither shortened his tail,
cutting a piece thereof. The Spaniardes tail is also well shortened, for by
reason of the hunger which the poor Soldiers endured, many have dyed, and
many other have been slain by our men, also many fled away, both by day and
by night, insomuch that his host is lessened by the one half, When the enemy
marched up to Deutecu^, his excellency forsook the place where he lay,
ensconsing himself upon the dyke in battle arraye, a long while expecting
the enemy, who with his camp lay at Elterberch, about a half league from
our camp. The enemy every moment was at an allarum, where his excellency
never made any, neither was this lusty Spaniard so bold as with his great
army, once to assail our little heap. This is the right sitting under the
defense of the highest, and to dwell under the shadow of the almighty, Psalm
91.1. Many of judgment and understanding, esteem, and hope that the Lord of
hoasts has ordained this year many great victories to his excellency, as in
the year last past.
without any hurt or hinderance to ours. Oh a shrewd knock for these blood
thirsty hounds, how unadvised was he, that counseled them to come into these
watery lands, in the which already they have endured so great shame.

IX.
As heretofore the warlicke Roman The renowned Hanniball had at diverse times
discomfited the Roman boasts, especially the victory which he obtained by
Cannas in Apulia, is worthy of memory, where so many thousands of Romans
dyed, that Hannibals soldiers besides other spoils, got from the hands of the
slain, three bushels of Rings, and if Hanniball at that time had followed on
his victory, he might easily have taken Rome, and subdued all the Roman
Empire. Shortly after he came with his army (which always was wont to
vanquish,) into Italye, at which time the Romans made Q. Fabius a Dictator,
who perceiving the insatiable desire of Haniball, his experience and order in
the wars, ensconced himself well, and would not for any thing give Hanniball
battle, but lay still, by reason whereof he was of every one esteemed a
coward, but he cared not for that, and so long he lay still with his forces,
until Hannibals Camp, with the long lying had consumed it self, and came to
shame, whereof the Romans gave him this praise.

Vnus homo nobis canctando restituit rem.
Fabius in sitting still, vanquished the valiant venturous Hanniball. So has
also our Lord the noble Count Maurice showed his great experience in the
martial affairs, in driving the enemy with all his mighty troops out of
the land, without blow or shocke. O noble blood of Nassau, O prince of Orange,
might thou once cast down thy eyes and bebolde how Jack of Spain is
bearded by Good reason had Earl Peter of Mansuelt, to say (when he heard that
the Prince of Orange (of laudable memory) had a son borne, whose name was
Mauritius,) If this child have his Fathers wisdom, and the valor of his
Graund-father Mauritius the Prince of Saxony, he will give the King of Spain
enough to do.
Maurice thy son, might thou once see how he has clipped and shortened
his tail, thy heart would rejoice, and thy joys be redoubled, in beholding
thy sons valor and virtues.

X.
Next to Earl Adolph of Nassau was made Emperor in Anno 1292. and reigned 6.
years, maintaining great wars against Albertus duke of Austria.
Adolph of Nassau came to the Empire Albertus, a Prince of the house of
Austria. Adolph suffered each one to keep and hold his goods and lands, each
their Cities and their people in peace. And being that the History whereof
we have here spoken, is worthy of memory, for the resemblance of the matters
which happen now, and being that it is above three hundredth years ago that
they happened, and therefore not so well known, I will for the delight of the
wel-willing Reader, rehearse the sum thereof, as it is written by Josias
Smilers, lib 1. de Repub. Heluet.

Albertus was a great enemy and an enuior of the freedom of the Switzers, he
had many children. All which he intending to enrich, sought to stretch out his
commandment far and nigh about his Empire, and has rent and torn diverse
Lordships from the same, and joined them to his house, as his own: he was
very troublesome and dammageable unto all his bordering neighbors, he feared
not, nor was not ashamed, (with dishonorable and lawless reasons) yea with
open might to demand and make his own, that which belonged unto others. The
spiritual persons which were rich and wealthy, he endeavored to bring the
matter to such a pass, that they should sell him their rights, or that they
would acknowledge him and his children for ever, for their hereditarie
Defendors, Lords, and Protectors. Also he besought the Earls and Barrons of
Switzerland to acknowledge the Lords of Austria for their Landlords, which
before were subject to none but to the Roman Emprour.

He also forcibly detained the paternall inheritance of his brothers son,
over whom he was appointed Tutor. Some cities did Albertus (what through
prayers, fair promises and threats) tear and separate from the Empire, and
clouted them to the house of Austria. But the most part have denied his
importunate requests, and would not in any wise submit themselves to him.
Shortly after that the Ambassadors were returned, many of the Cities and
Lordships of the Switzers sent unto him certain persons, beseeching his
Imperial Majesty that it might please him, to confirm them the rights and
preuiledges which his predecessors had granted them. Whereupon in great rage
he answered, that he would do that which they requested, even as they had
granted him his demaundes: and further, that he had ordained certain
Governors which he would send them, and by them they should understand his
will more at large. And for Governors, he appointed one named Grislerus, and
another named Peregrinus Landenbergius. These Governors of the Emperors at
the first dealed very kindly and discreetly with the people, thereby seeking to
steal the hearts of the communaltie, and to make them obedient to Albertus.
But seeing that they profited nothing that way, they assayed what cruelty and
tyranny would work. For breuities sake, we will pass over many things
wherewith Albertus Governors tried the good Switzers, and only tell what
Grislerus has done, who was Governor of Switz and Vri. He builded a strong
Castle by his Lords command near Altorf, which in their tongue he named Twing
Vri, etc. Which is as much as the yoke by which those of Vri shall be brought
to the uttermost slavery and obedience. This Castle being finished, he caused
within Altorff to be set up a high Pole, and upon the top, a flat Cap,
commanding that every man with uncovering of the head and bowing of the knee,
should honor the said Cap, as much as if the Emperor or himself in person
were present, knowing well that those which hated the Emperor and him, would
never do the same, but he did it to the end that he might have occasion to
attache those which were suspected. It chanced that one William Tell, at
sundry times passing by the Cap, honored not the same, which being reported
to the Governor, he sought to excuse himself, in saying, that he knew not
that the matter was of such importance. But Grislerus not content heerewith,
took one of William Tells sons (whom he knew the Father loved best, and
laying an Appell upon the childs head, said, unless then you shoot of this
Appell without hurting the child, thou shall dye. The Father answered that he
would rather dye then adventure it. Well (quoth the Governor,) except that
thou do it, both thy self and thy son shall dye. William Tell perceiving,
that prayers would take no place there, took the Bow into his hand, and there
through Gods help, shot off the Apell without touching the child. The
Governor had marked that William Tell had taken two arrows out of the Quiver,
whereof the one he had stuck at his girdell, wherefore he asked what he meant
thereby. William Tell answered, that he meant nothing thereby but that it was the
order of Archers. The Governor not content therewith, would needs know the
ground of the matter, promising him, that if he would tell him the truth,
his life should not be touched. William Tell upon these promises, said: that
his intent was (if he had slain his son with the one arrow) to have killed
the Governor with the other. O wicked wretch (quoth Grislerus) thy life will I
not take, but I will commit thee to a prison, where thou shall see neither
sun nor moon, nor speak to any body, and there thou shall end thy days.
And causing his hands and feet to be bound, took him with him in a ship going
from Vri to Cusnac. When being in the midst of the lake, there arose such a
mighty storm, that they esteemed themselves lost, the Mariners not being
able to guide the Ship, abandoned the same, to the mercy of the winds and the
waters, and Grislerus in this distress, asked if there were no means to get a
shore, whatsoever it might cost. Whereupon one of his servants replied, that he
doubted not but they should get a shore, if William Tell might stand at the
Helm, for he was a strong man, and very expert at Sea, which they hearing,
unbound William Tell, and set him at the Helm, where he labored greatly to
bring the Ship near the land, which within a while did: and espying a great
Rock (which at this day is yet called Tells Rock) he steered the Bark fully
thereupon, and at the approaching, leaving the Helm, and catching his bow and
arrows, leapt over boorde upon the Rock, and withal his might launching the
Bark again, ran into the country, and the Bark after long tossing, some
days after got to Brunnen, from whence Grislerus travailed toward Cusnac by
land. William Tell being well acquainted with the ways, hid himself behind
certain bushes in a Valley, through the which he knew Grislerus should
pass: and having his Bow in a readiness, at the tyrants passing by shot him
thorough, which done (because that he would not be taken) he fled to some
chief persons which he knew to be great enemies of the Emperors and
Governors, unto which he declared the matter, and having consulted upon it,
took heart, and by little and little, drove all Albertus officers out of the
land, thereby recovering their lost freedom, which until this day they
hold. Compare our Albertus with his Cardinals flat Cap, to this Albertus
whereof we have spoken, and you shall find, that two Eggs laid by one Hen
cannot resemble one another better. Behold the end.


As Soon as Albertus got the Scepter in his hand, he made strife and debate
in Switzerland. The which with subtlety, and afterward with strife and
odio^s practices he sought to join to his house. But Albertus aimed amiss,
the valiant sturdie Switzers have (for their countries freedom) spared neither
goods nor blood, they joined together and played the men, until such time as
they had banished Albert out of the land.

XI.
The noble blood of the house of Nassau, His excellency having driven the
enemy out of Emricke rendered the same willinglye into the hands of the Duke of
Cleue, without any ways touching any one in life or goods.
holds yet the same steps which Adolph long ago showed them. Albert likewise
follows the paces of his Graund-fathers, who tyrannized Switzerland: he
seeks to tear and separate the land of Cleue from the Empire, as every one
may see. These bloudsuckers were not contented, in having taken the good Earl
of Brooks Castle, and imprisoned him, but have against their promises most
wickedly murdered him, and burnt his body to Ashes. Oh cruel tyrants: but O
worthy Earl, who in dying in the right belief, did witness the true
religion with thy blood. The goods of this good Lord were publicly with the
sound of Drum and Trumpet, sold in the camp, even as the soldiers are used
to fell the booty and pillage, got of their open enemies.
When the Earl of Valkensteine and Brook, etc. would have defended his
country, he was imprisoned, murdered, and burnt to Ashes. You Princes of the
Empire, how long will you suffer this, how long will you sleep with open eyes,
is it not yet enough, the Spaniarde himself says, that you are Lions That
some think that Albertus with his ayders, upon the writings and requests of
any King or Prince, would leave and abandon the confederate cities, is in
vain; But will do as of late years did the Earl Tunis of Oldenborch, who
having forcibly taken the house or castle of Dolmerhorst with the
appurtenances. Those of Spier, in the Emperors name, wrote unto him, that he
should render the same again to those unto whom it did lawfully belong. The
Earl having received the Letters (after the contents read) held them a
prittie while to his ear, saying. I hear no Gunnes, as if he would have
said, what I have purchased by force of arms, I will not suffer to be taken
away again by papers.
but bite not.

XII.
O thou God of hoasts, vouchsafe mercifully to behold thy country, and defend
the same with thy strong arm, against these half white Moors: Suffer them
not O Lord, to execute the rancour of their hearts, against the people which
thou have chosen for thy heritage. It is true that we deserve to be wholly cast
from the sight of thy sacred face. We have deserved to be robbed of thy holy
word, which now thou teach us: yet Lord for thy names sake, favor us yet
and always, show thy mercy to thy Church.

XIII.
O you states of the united lands, who have chosen for your Lieutenant the
Count Maurice, melt all your spirits together, beseech GOD continually to
increase in you (through his goodness) the spirit of Concordia res parue
crescunt.
concord It is an old saying: Romanus sedendo vincit.
wisdom and Woe to the land whose king is a child, either in years or
understanding.
understanding to the building of his church, and the countries good. But first
seek for Gods kingdom, further (by all means) his Church, then will he cast
his blessing upon this land, and abolish all Achitophels complots: and at your
souls departure from hence, receive them up to him in his celestial dwelling.

Religio vere ligat, Where the hearts of men are not through the bond of true
religion bound together, there is no foundation. Therefore, all those which
seek the countries welfare, must also and especially procure the furtherance
of the true Catholic reformed religion, in every place where it is possible,
setting wise and learned men to preach the same, and ordaining good Schools,
wherein youth may be well educated and taught, not only in speech and
sciences, but especially in the true religion, to which end the Imperial
goods ought to be used, which done, there shall be no occasion given to the
enemies of the religion and the patrimony, to say, that we drive away the
Monckes and Friars, not so much through zeal of religion, as because we might
get the fingering of the spiritual goods.
FINIS.
THE LETTER OF THE EMPEROVR OF Germany, to the Admirant of Arragon, General
for the Archeduke Albertus, in the Counties of Cleue and Munster, etc. With the
Admirants answer.

The conspiracy of the three Bishops.

The death of the Earl of Brook.

The Admirants Letter to the counsel of Gulich.

The list of the Soldiers levied by the protestant Princes of Germany.

Faithfully translated out of the Dutch copy Printed at Roterdam.

Imprinted at London by John Wolf, and are to be sold at his shop in Popes
head Alley, near unto the Exchange. 1599.

A Letter of the Emperor Roduphus the second, to Don Francisco de mendozza,
Admirant of Arragon, General of the army of the King of Spain, in the Lands
of Gulich and Cleue, touching the damages by him done in the Empire.
I Rodulphus by the grace of God the second, chosen Roman Emperor, at all
times an augmenter of the Empire, in Germany, Hungaria, Bohemia, Dalmatia,
Croatia and Sclauonia etc. king, Archduke of Austria, Duke of Burgundy, Steyr,
Keredten, Gray and Wittenberch, Earl of Tiroll etc. send greeting to the
well-borne, our especial beloved Don Francisco de mendossa, Admirant of the
kingdom of Arragon, Marquess of Quadelles, Knight of the Calatranonian order,
Commander at Valazenas, General under our beloved brother Albertus Archduke
of Austria: also to V. N. and N. to all and every Regiment, Admiranty,
Coronels, Captains Lieuetenants and Commanders of Soldiers horse and foot,
of what nation, State and condition soever unto which these our credible
letters may appear, be showed or declared, to such as remain in our Empire,
or the Fortresses, ground, bottom, Cities, Towns, Sconces, and Rivers of the
same, by Water or Land, we make known, that our Princes and Lords of the
Netherlandish and Westphalian Croytes especially the high-borne John Wilhem,
Duke of Gulich, Cleue, and Berge etc. our beloved Nephew, who of a longtime
most obediently had made known and highly complained unto us in what manner
you Admirant, with a great Host, Force and Might, yea above 30000. armed men,
are departed out of Brabant in the end of the month of September last past,
and presently taken your way through the Dukedom of Gulich, in the same month
forcing, and besetting his City of Orsoy, and after that, you have sent
certain thousands of horse and foot over the Rhyne, where they have cast a
Sconce, and on both sides of the same, taken all the cattle and beasts, great
and small, spoiled the flat land, and besides this oppressed the poor people
with imprisoning, ransoming, burning, and murdering in such odious sort, as
the like has not been heard heretofore of any: insomuch that the greater
part of the inhabitants and subjects have been forced to abandon their
housen, lands, and all else, what with their great labor they have been able
to get: heerwith not satisfied, but have sent the soldiers into the country
of Berge (being a place appertaining to the Duke of Gulich and the late
W^eringen of Dau^ Earl at Valkensteyn, dwelling upon the house called Brook,
have assailed the same, and notwithstanding that the Earl of the house had
rendered up the same upon condition of lives and goods saved; have murdered
diverse of the said soldiers, and the Earl himself who had the Admirants
sauegarde, they held some days imprisoned and upon a time (by the will and
consent of the Captain who lay in the house) being gone to walk abroad,
they have must wickedlye murdered him. Mean while, the army has taken and
forcibly marched through some cities of Glene, as Burich, Dinslaegen, Holt,
Rees, Emmerick, with other Forts, Gentlemen's housen and Villages, appertaining
to the said Dukedom, the which some of them, they have with their Ordinance
beaten down, destroyed, ransacked, forced and devoured, amongst which were
many spiritual and temporal persons, without favoring any one, but plaging
and tormenting them to the uttermost, some with imprisonment, other with
strangling, and such like, together with the violating and deflouring of
women, damsels and maids, in more filthy or beastlye sort then ever has
been heard, and have moreover so oppressed the City of Wesell, that they
have been forced to pay 150. thousand Dollars, the one half ready, and the
other at short time, together with 1000. measures of Rye, which they have
been forced to promise to the Cheeftains of you the Admirants camp; over and
above the houses and Lordships, as Kruydenberch, Weyfflyck houen, also the
Princely Gentlemen's housen and Forts, as Lhan, Windendal, Dusport, Noisan,
Impel, Dornich, Lack^unsen, Woremsemmerwogen, and also reduced the Duke of
Gulich himself, with his court, to the extremest and the uttermost poverty,
with many more other places, which have been with force taken, ransacked and
spoiled, whereof we have a great number of specifications sent us. Also some of
the army have vaunted to dare to suppress and drive away the Duke in person.
Above all this you Admirant with your Spanish soldiers, have attempted to
beset some Cities in the Province of Munster, and those which denied your
demands, you have by force compelled and taken; also you have caused the said
bishopric, with the Episcopal governor and counsailor of the same,
Alexander vay Vehellen as uppermost, to be presented with a quarter letter, and
besides the same, you have taken and surprised the Dukedom of Cleue, together
with 30. Cities and Bourghes, as well of Munster as Cleue, to the use of your
Soldiers for your winter Camp, and also wholye spoiled the bishopric of
Essen and Weerden: also there are daily used in the strengths and Lordships of
Gelder and other bordering neighbors, such robbing, and raunsoming, that no
husbandry nor trade of merchandise can be excercised. Wherefore we are
constrained, as also are all the other princes, the which thereunto have greatly
solicited and beseeched us, and since that you have undertaken and attempted
such an unreasonable enterprise and have not in any wise been willing, by
admonishments and warnings to abstain thereof: but that you Admirant without
any respect, have fallen upon the peaceable countries of the holy Roman
Empire, and those which are sworn to the same, with such an army, yea without
any leave or warning: we nor any of our Princes, Lords and estates, nor any of
all the other Netherlandish government, expected any such enimitie of the King
of Spain, and less at the hands of our most dearly beloved brother Albertus
Archeduke, etc. but to the contrary, have always trusted upon good and
friendly neighborhood, where now you have suppressed the lands (subjects of
the Empire) with your soldiers, made the same to pillage, and wholly spoiled
and empouerished it, notwithstanding that we have heretofore at diverse times,
written our minds thereof unto you, as also to our beloved brother Albertus.
Whereby it seems that you little esteem and care to follow any our aforesaid
warnings and admonishments to the least point, as you ought: wherefore it
behooves us to have a sharp and nearer regard and to use other means for the
same. And therefore we command you Admirant of Arragon, together withal your
Chieftaines, Commanders and Soldiers, as well in particular as general, in
virtue of the power of the Imperial Roman Majesty, as subjects to us and
the holy Empire, upon pain of life, where they may be found, and to the
others, ours and the Empires high and low subjects, allies vassalls, etc. or
which are situated under us and the holy Empire, upon pain of ours and the
holy Empires Curse and excommunication together with the loss of their
Benefices, Privileges, Freedoms, dignities, loanes, lands and goods, in
what place soever under us, and the Holy Empire, or their allies, they may lie
or remain, which shall transgress the same, to execute them without need of
any further declaration. Earnestly and stricktly commanding, and willing, that
you and every one of you unto which these our letters, Vidimirte and credible
writings shall appear, or be showed, or declared, with all your soldiers,
without any other conduct, to depart from ours and the holy Empires
territories and ground, and to discharge the same, abandoning all Cities,
Forts, Gentlemen's houses, villages, strengthes and Sconces, which you have (as
aforesaid) taken from the Duke of Gulich, the Bishopric of Munster and us,
and the state of the Empire, howsoever they be named: and that you make
restitution of all losses, and pay the damages, by you done and caused, and to
those of Wesell and others, the forced moneys, charges and ransomes, without
any rebatement: and to the end that you Admirant may show and make known that
the death of the Earl of Brook has been without your consent or will: you
shall render again unto the Countess, (wife to the said late Earl) all her
taken goods, moneys, Jewels and plate, or else the full worth thereof, to
reestablish and set again in their first estate, the molested spiritual and
temporal persons, without misusing them any further. And to take heed,
henceforwards, not to attempt any thing in the way of enmitye against the above
named, nor any other subjects of ours, or of the States of the Empire in any
sort whatsoever. At your perils, and behave your selves accordingly which we
admonish you very earnestly.

Given at our Castle of Podecray the 30. of the month of December. 1598.
Rodulph. V.L. Cardino. Ad mandatum, Ces. Marst. Arnd. Hanniwalt. in Dosso.


An extract of the answer of the Admirant, upon the Emperors Letter, as the
writing makes mention.
THat he is not to make any account of this nor other letters and writings, and
that if the Emperors forces stood on the one side of him, and the holy Father
the Pope, on the other side with his excommunication, commanding him again to
depart, that he would not for all that obey them, as having a Lord, who had
commanded him to do this exploit, except that by force of Arms he were
forced to resolve otherwise.

A conspiracy made between the 3. Bishops, viz. the Bishop of Bamberch, the
Bishop of Wirtzburgh and the Bishop of Saltzburgh, to bring the Spanish
inquisition into Germany, and what ensued thereupon.
WHereas the Bishops of Bambergh and Wirtzburgh (both lying in the Main in
Frankenland) had made a great conspiracy and complot, intending to bring and
reduce the Romish Empire (especially Germany) under the damnable Spanish
inquisition, they met together at Witzenburgh, to confer about it, but God
through his mercy discovered and broke their conspiracy, by the sudden death of
the Bishop of Bambergh, in whose closset, and in the Chauncery at Bambergh,
were found wonderful practices and devises, whereupon some of his Counsel
were imprisoned: It was known that there was a day limmitted, upon the which
diverse Nobles and others, should have been murdered, having the said two
Bishops together with the Bishop of Saltzburgh, held great correspondence with
the Spanish Admirant of Arragon, to introduct the said Spaniards into Germany,
and in that sort to make a destruction of the Evangelists: But all was by the
Bishop of Bamberghs sudden death detected. The bishop of Wirtzburgh being
ridden on hunting, fell from his horse, by which fall he burst his arm, and
was be^ides to bruses with the fall, that he lies on his deathbed. The Bishop
of Saltzburgh has since had the half of his Palms burned whereby we see how
strangely God has punished these (...) Bishopps, and brought the treason and
(...) in (...), who by their devilish practices seeks t^ranize (...) all the
world. God, through his wonted mercy (...), manifest and anihilate their wicked
enterprises, to the praise and glory of his Holy name. Amen.

The death of Maurice Oan-Hun, Earl of Valkensteyn and Brook, etc. most
wickedly murdered by the Spaniardes, according to the report of one Goehaert
Hensgen his servant, being present at his death.
IT is known unto each one that upon the 16. of October last, the Admirants
men came before the Earl of Brooks Castle, the which they demanded to be
delivered up into their hands, and that the Earl should Casheere his
soldiers, for he had some number of Cock feathers, (certain men of war so
(...)) The Earl answered that he stood upon his Neutrality, and that they
ought to leave him vnmolested: they not caring for that, would have him
dismiss his people, and to commit himself under their defense and protection,
withal bringing thither four pieces of Ordinance, wherewith they compelled
them to ^der themselves, life and goods saved. When now they had entered the
Forte^ they took the Countess and her little children, and conveyed them away
into a monastary. The Soldiers of Cleue and Berge (with other people fled
thither) being departed, were (notwithstanding the conditions and promises)
pursued, str^^e and robbed, The Earl himself they held prisoner, and used
him very hardly, compelling him to go to Mass, with other such like
molestations. Moreover, certain days after the taking of the Castle, being in
disputation, they murdered his Nephew, the Lord of Herdenberch, together with a
Preacher.

And by reason that diverse mutterings are abroad of the death of this Earl, on
sundry manners, I will here recount the same according to the confession of his
own Servant, Gochaert Hensgen, at Duseldorp the fourteenth of October.

Upon Sunday the 11. of October in the evening, the Earl being at Supper, had
with him a Captain (a brave man of person) together with his Justice, and his
Steward: having all supped together, he went out to walk in the Court, where
presently came to him two Soldiers of the Garrison, in blew Cassockes, asking
if it were his pleasure to go abroad to walk and take the air? whereupon he
replied I: the one of them ran up to the Captain but came presently again,
and so went together out of the Gate: the said Earls servant followed them
through the Garden, where the Soldiers denied to let him have something in
this hand, for the which he asked his said Servant: yet taking up a little
stick, he passed along toward the Water Mill and the fish ponde, where some
fish lay caught.

The Earl beckoned to the one Soldier to take it up, who stood still, whilst
the other at unawares stroke him a mighty blow on the head with a half Pike:
insomuch that he fell to the ground, crying O Jesus: which done, the Soldier
drew his sword, and therewith thrust him thorough, whereat he cried once again
O Jesus, but so fayntly that he could scarce be understood: mean while the
other soldier caught up a flaile before the Mill, wherewith he stroke at the
Earls servant, who perceiving it, (being near the ditch) leaped down into
the damme, so that the blow did but touch his shoulder, from whence with great
labor (the soldier still thrusting at him) he got to land on the other side,
and so escaped. There were two other soldiers in the Garden, which were
commanding the Gardener and the Fishermen to bury some dead bodies which were
slain at the taking of the Castle, and were appointed by the murderers to
stay there. This is as much as yet is come to light of the Earls death, whose
body (as some say) was afterward burned in a Barn.

A Letter of the Admirant of Arragon, to the counsel of Gulich, touching the
death of the Earl of Brook: Written two days after the taking of the
Castle. Translated out of Latin.
NOble, mighty, and honorable Lords and friends, some days past we have
answered two of your Letters, which were brought unto us by the noble Henrye of
Boorloe, whereby you wrote that no occasion of complaints, or of any harm
should be given by the Camp, in the places about the Rhine, or other lands,
appertaining to the illustrious Duke of Gulich, and that you also through your
wisdoms and experience, through mere goodwill and desire of the common good,
and his Majesty's service, you had well considered that the King of Spain, not
of any will or desire, but through mere need of the common danger and
welfare, did make these wars, and brought his Camp there, and that through
delay of payment, the Soldiers were through need, forced to run seeking
of herbs, and elsewhat, for their food and living: the force of all which
disorder was not to be to the reproach of the king, nor the Chieftaines of his
Camp, but to those which were causers thereof, and that ought not presently to
be revenged, with killing and murdering, but one ought to endure much, upon
hope of a good end of the manifold mischiefs and miseries: the which would not
only be pleasing unto us, but promised that the king, and the illustrous
Archeduke would be mindful of it, and excuse the same as the necessity
required. And it is wished that all others, which owe all such service, to use
the self same way either through themselves or their people, and in all
modedestie to join their willing minds and furtherances to our actions.

And whereas we have from the beginning (to the common good) made our minds
known, publicly and privately declared our goodwill, to the Earl of Brook,
by words, messengers and Letters. At last (after many great complaints, of the
misrule and had dealings of his men) we received of him a Letter in Dutch, the
contents whereof we scarce understanding, and yet by interpretation found them
somewhat bitter, and estraunged to amity, we answered him again in Latin
(which is common to all nations, and understood of all) that he would send us
the meaning of his Letter, with his mind, to the end that we might the better
answer him, and to convert his mind and ours to the common service, which we
hoped he would have done: and expecting certain days his answer, there came
daily more complaints and outcryes to our ears, of the murders, slaughters,
and all manner of Barbarous cruelties done to our Soldiers and others
persons, by the said Earls cockfeathers (or soldiers so called) to our great
grief and compassion, which all notwithstanding we (still expecting his
answer) despised, and have not any ways consented to any harm of his by word
or deed, until at last, by reason of the tumult of the whole camp of the
chief captains and others, of all nations upon these never heard cruelties,
of slaying and murdering against the guiltless persons of our camp, by the
Earls people, we concluded to send him our third writing, containing our
displeasure, of his foe-like actions, wondering that he answered us not,
declaring that it would be a great shame and dishonor to the royal camp, to
suffer such indignity to remain unpunished, wherefore we requested, that he
would punish and dismiss all such cockfeathers and murderers, or else deliver
them up into the hands of the Justices to punish them, and that for the rest
he should settle himself to all amiable service. These letters we gave unto a
Spanish Colonel, causing him to take with him, soldiers and ordinance,
suspecting the Earls continuance of obstinacy, yet with charge, that coming
to the Castle, he should summon the Earl upon the contents of the Letter, and
in friendly sort to speak unto him, and with all honor and reverence to
declare him our minds: upon the which if he should seek any further delays,
make refusal, or any show of enmity, that then the Colonel should martial
wise, forciblye take him, yet with such condiction, that if in case the Earl
should bethink himself better, and should by deeds show the same, that then
his person, wife, children and his household should have all their goods and
heritages saved.

When now the Spanish Colonel, sought by all friendly means to come to the
Earls speech, and to accomplish the contents of the Letters, and that the
Earl again sought diverse needless delays, they betook themselves on both
sides to arms: whereby ensued, what in such like tempestuous assaults of angered
soldiers by so many wrongs, is used to happen: yea often against their
Commanders will, the more because his Camp was of many sorts of peoples,
whereof the greater part, yea the whole Camp was greatly encouraged by the
barbarous cruelties, slaughters, murders and damages suffered: which the Kings
people esteemed to be done by the counsel of the neighbor countries, with
which they were in League.

Jesuits
There was a third sort of people in the Camp, the which according to right and
reason, disclosed, gave and appropriated to every one his acts, with the
causes thereof, accusing the Earl the more because that for many years has
showed himself a defendour and vpholder of all sedition, with change of
religion, not only setting the Countries of the Illustrous Prince at
contention, but also himself raysde seditions, in the other common Lands,
having ever since the wars, conspired, consulted and traded with the enemies of
the commonwealths rest, of the religion, and of the Empire, and they account
the Authors and men of such bad events, to be more dangerous and damageable in
a common wealth, then those which through their instigation vnwittinglye give
themselves to arms, and so fall into like fault, insomuch that the common
opinion is, that therefore the said Earl not only, according to the law of
arms, but also according to the law of God and man, has received his reward
according to his deserts, and that others by his example will take warning, and
the people be moved to obedience: we notwithstanding (according to our
natural kindness) have had compassion upon his and the poor peoples mishap,
that they have not followed good counsel in time, and therefore have we
related your honors the same at large, not that we will answer the fact, or
that we desire (in the least point to have the authority of the illustrious
prince of Gulich or yours, to be deminished (which we rather with all honor
seek to augment) but that we might in strengthening your wisdoms, procure,
that with the like sorrow they will bewail the anger of God, and the madness
of men, and to pray steadfastly, for that which is needful, for the good and
quietness of the commonwealth and the religion, and with diligence to foresee
therein, as need requires, wishing also that you will interpret and publish
the whole to the best: In the which we beseech God to strengthen your Honors,
and long to continue you in good estate. From Orsay the viii. of October 1598.

In this sort was the Earl of Brook murdered in cold blood, and his death
answered.

Read and Judge.
A List of the troops of men of war, furnished by the German Protestant
Princes, in the defense of the Spanish Forces, and their bloody and tyranicall
enterprises, all ready begun in Westphalia, and the Neighbor Countries.
HEnry Duke of Browneswick makes out. 3000. horsemen, and 9000. footmen. The
Duke of Lunenburch. 1000. horse and 2000. foot. The Duke of Brandenburch
Prince Elector. 2000. horse and 4000. foot. The Bishopric of Maghdenburch.
1000. horse and 2000. foot. The Duke of Saxony Prince Elector. 2000. horse and
4000. foot. Wirtzenburch. 1000. horse and 4000. foot. The Marquess of
Antzbach. 1000. horse and 4000. foot. The Count Palatine of the Rhyne. 1000.
horse and 4000. foot. The Provincial Earl of Hessen. 1000. horse and 3000.
foot. The Count of Lip. 500. horse and 1000. foot. In all 13500. horse and
37000. foot.
For the payment of these Soldiers shall be used the gathered contribution
against the Turk.

FINIS.

