A FAIR WARNING.

DECLARING THE COMFORTABLE USE BOTH OF SICKNESS AND HEALTH.

Delivered in several Sermons at Saint Mary's in Dover, by John Reading
minister and Preacher of Gods word^

Psalm 66. 16. Come and hear, all ye that fear God, and I will declare what
he has done for my soul.

LONDON, Printed by Bernard Alsop, for John Hodgets. 1621.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE LADY LVCIE COUNTESS OF Bedford, increase of true
blessedness.
Right Honorable,
THese* Meditations are the issue of my former sickness and recovery, wherein
I learned that holy man's quid retribuam Psalm. 116.
domino, yet as borne to priuacy they lay scattered till bone came to his bone,
and the finewes laid on, his spirit moved me to prophefie upon them, which
comfort us in all our tribulation, that we may be able 2. Cor. 1. 4.
to comfort them, which are in any affliction, by the comfort wherewith we our
selves are comforted of God: with which 2. Sam. 10.
Embassy I hane sent them into the world; yet there are many whose mouths are
sheathes to Hanuns razors, wherewith they shave and cut off, to disfigure the
most holy intents. Be pleased therefore (most noble Lady) to grant them the
patronage, which like a sanctuary secureth from the pursuit of tongues, that
which is called you^s. What they carry in them every part attends to give an
account, as you shall view them: therefore I will not open my sackes by the
way; but as they are, commend them to your honors acceptance, and you to the
mercies of God in Christ Jesus, in whom I rest

Your honors most humbly devoted in all duty, ^o. Reading.

A FAIR WARNING.
Behold thou art healed, sin no more le^t a worse thing come unto thee. John.
5. 14.
CHrist Jesus is the true Physician, the Scriptures a field, the precepts are
medicinable Origin, super leuit.
plants; as we pass over, Omnium medicinarum thesaurus diuinae scripturae
Chryso^t ho: 36. in Ioh. 5.
and tread on many unconsidered simples, which by others gathered, we begin to
think useful, so we read, we hear: the Scripture is a full store house of
the souls physic; as medicine to the healthy, such is Gods word to the
worldly man, neglected and set aside, if not loathed: but the wise provide
against the time, and cause the elder to serve the younger; health, sickness;
providing for, if not preventing.

This branch I have in hand is a Catholicon, and more (if some general name
might be had) in respect it has to the distempers, both of soul and body,
sin no more, Si quis in anima languor, non tam exterioris frondis aut
corticis, quam succi interioris hausta virtute sanatur. Origquo sup.
thy body shall be sound, ^inne no more thy soul shall be healed. An
Aphorism as much unknown to learned Hippocrates, as his to the most unlearned
Empericke. So that how ever we esteem it, it concerns all: here the whole
may have instruction, the sick comfort: let us take it to heart, that we may
hear this eccesanatus es.

Christ, who took all occasions to save, came up to the feast, it seems of *
Passover: where then the greatest Irenaeus.
concourse of people used to be, there was in Jerusalem a Epipha^ius.
poole called Bethesda, having five porche^, in which lay many sick and
infirm persons, expecting the moving of the water: for an Angel at a certain
season went into the poole and troubled the water, after which whosoever first
stepped in, was made whole. Among all that lay there of the ^icke multitude,
blind, halt, withered, Christ picketh out the only man whose case was
desperate, his disease habitual thirty eight years, and he so poor, (which
to the sick is a second sickness) that he could get no man to put him into
the water, but before he could creep^ in, he was prevented of health by
another healing, Christ ever near his, when they seem furthest from help,
comes to him will thou be healed? to show his disease mixed a disaffection of
body and soul, where desire to be cured is part of the cure: he meekely
replied, Sir I have Pars sanitatis velle sa^ari Sen.
no man: not daring to ask it seems he hops to obtain help, because
Jesus questioned with him. It is neither the blewnesse nor depth of sins
wounds, or effects can hinder his mercy: they commend it more. It was the
Saboth therefore those external men among the Jews quarrel. Jesus
withdraws himself to let them consider Non inforum non in porticus concessit
non voluptati, non otio indulsit, sed in templo versa. tur. Christ. hom. 37.
the author by the work done: the Jews enquire, the man healed cannot yet
resolve them of his (...). But after comes into the temple (a fit place, for
thanksgiuers) Christ like a careful Physician not only cures, but
prescribes, Behold thou are healed, sin no more. As if he had said, thou
know not w^o has cured (...). Behold thy Physician, thou know not why,
consider it, thou will forget: behold and remember, thou have sinned and been
smitten, I have freed thee of both: thou have sinned, I have forgiven thee; but
take this for a Fair Warning; I have but gently corrrect thee, but if thou will not hereby be warned, I will lay on an heavier hand. Sin no more.
Admonet and minatnr. Cht. hom 36. 16.


The parts are two.

1. An admonition, Behold thou art healed sin no more. 2. An in^ermination,
lest a worse thing come unto thee.
In the admonition there is a particle of excitation and rouzing to a^tention.
Behold, and the object is double.

First, what God has done, thou art healed. Secondly, what he must do, Sin
no more.

Behold: Do tho^ consider what is done unto thee? where God sets this
Index and finger, it usually points out some serious matter, and awakeneth
our best attention, apt to pass by things of greatest moment without Quod
sanatus erat, as propter quod.
due consideration. And contented with this note; I would pass on, but that it
stands a^ the door of my text importuning my stay.

This Ecce is not so much to show that he was healed, as why he was healed:
which because some know not, some render not, some remember not, some apprehend
not: obserue^re scopes of this Ecce: 1. Ecce inst^uctionis, non secus se habet
haec vita qua^ (...) and somnium. Chrysostom To. 5. sermon de van. and breuit. vitae,
videntes non videmus, audien^s non audiemus, inanes and va^ae re^um species,
teneri videntur and non tenen^ur.


1 The first is an Ecce of instruction to the ignorant. 2 The sec^nd of
reprehension to the unthankful. 3 The third of remembrance to the unmindful.
4 The fourth of consolation, to the afflict^d.
The first s^eweth us the great ignorance of man, not knowing the good or evil
he has man's life is like a scene a dream. Fantasy playe^ the Circe framing
us imaginary beings and estates. Seeing we see not, hearing we he^re ^t idle
and inconsta^t apparitions, and dreams of things which come and go, approach
and vanish, offer themselves to our embraces, yet like a vapor fly the most
careful possessour.

(...) seem to (...) what ^ey have not, So^e take Amb. l. 7. Ep. 44.
thi^e (...), thou ^ast much goo^s (...) strange word of a worldling) but they
are like a^ hungry ^an dreaming, and behold Ier. 29 8.
he eats, and when he wal^eth (...) soul is ^mptie: or like a Auaro tam
deest quod habet qua^ quod non habet. ad P^ul in ^p.
thirsty man dreaming, and lo he is drinking, and when he awaketh, behold he
is faint and his soul longs: some seem to want that they (...), the
co^etous ^qually (...) what they have or have not, the Horselsach two daughters
in their Prou. 30. 15.
hearts, love of the world, and unsatiate desire of having, so eagerly cry
give, give, so g^pe they for more, that they taste not what they have received.

Some are not what they seem: the prosperous wicked almost deceive the
afflicted righteous* and enforce a strange Psalm. 7^. 13. 14
dream, Certainly I have cleansed mine heart in vain, and washed mine hands
in innocence, for daily I have been punished, yet as a dream when one
awaketh; so shall God soon make the image of these happy seeming men most
despised.

Some seem not what they are, the Saints but dream of sorrow, seeming to be
unhappy men which they cannot Mat. 5. 4.
be* they see the evils showed, but in a manner, as Job was terr^fied with
dreams* (...) was troubled with these heavy ephi^lts which seemed to oppress
him yet confesses when I awake I (...) satisfied with thine image. Psalm. 17.
9. 15. Psa. 55. 4* 5. 6.
Again, he dreamed of perils, then his heart trembled within him, and the
terrors of death fell upon him. Then he Sibi visus est per quietem inte^dum
supra nubes volitare. Sueton.
wishes, O that I had wings like a (...), then would I (...) away and be at
rest. The ambitious, mean time like C^sar a little before his death, dream of
resting in the clouds, so dreams make fools have wings, whilst they are
falling*

Some seem well who are sick, Agags dream, surely 1. Sam. 15. 32.
the bitterness of death is past. La^dicia was blind and poor Reuelat.
and naked, yet she say de she wanted nothing. It was Ioh. 9. 41.
the Jews disease: but now ye say we see, theresore your (...) remains:
others perceive not the good they have, not so much as the blind man, one
thing I know, that I Ioh. 9. 23.
was blind and now I see: this is the sum of all: some understand not the
evil, others not the good they have, both need this (...) to instruct them,
for how can aany, either be sollicitous to avoid the evil or thankful for
the blessings which he has, but knows not.

The use warns us not to (...) over the benefits we Use.
have without due valluing them: for want of this, what ever we have, our
estate is irksome to us. Hence that foolish affectation of others miseries,
whilst we not contenred to be happy, because we see not how happy we were,
if we were (...); make a good (...) evil to us, for want of wisdom to manage
it: in our own lots we only recount the inconveniences we suffer, we lease
out our benefits unconsidered. In others we propose the good they seem to
have, which we prefer before our own, because we see what they seem, Optat
Ephippia bos piger.
we feel not what they suffer. The husbandman would be a tradefman, the
tradesman student; the beggar would be rich, the rich noble, the noble a king,
neither well knowing, that every estate is blessed to a good man, but God has
fitted us with such as he knows best for us. This ecce, is to tell us, that
the envy which attends greatness, and with an hundred eyes watches honor,
fighting with it, as the serpent with Hercules in the cradle and infancy,
commends the quiet of a mean estate, and that it is safe sailing in the
haven: that it is no secure being on those pinacles of the Court or Temple,
where we can neither rest without fear: nor come down without falling. If we
will give ambition feet to stand upon the good we had, this ecce will give
place to a second of reprehension. Ecce in the second place tells us that man
is unthankful for the mercies received: to the ungodly, Ecce repre* hensionis.
God said, What have thou to do to declare my statutes. An unclean heart is
(...) altar for Gods praises: but to the Psalm. 50. 14.
righteous, offer unto God thanksgiving. God only accepts Chrysostom. in
Psalm. 50.
what he gives; that is, mercedem virtutis, mercedem virtutem, a reward of
virtue, blessings, virtue a reward, thankfulness.

Some know not that they are to learn, the first ecce was theirs: others
learn not that they are to know, the thanks they owe to God, but sacrifising
to their own net, leave the Heb. 1. 16.
maine point undone, for which God did all for them, that is, thou shall
glorify me. Psalm. 50. 15.


This behold-therefore discovers our defect in beholding, we have need of as
many (...) as we have days or hours, every minute we receive, few look
back to the giver: the tracts of Gods benefits to^ards us are as Omnia te
aduersum spectantia.
the feet of the beasts to the Lions den, all look toward us b^t non^ back
(...); we receive of him what we have and are, he clothed us, we feed at his
universal ordinary, but like shifting theeuish customers we must be followed
with an ecce, you have not paid.

Moses acknowledged there were no people under Deuteronomy. 47. 32. 33.
the heavens, more blessed then Israel. David said he had Ier. 2. 6.
not dealt so with (...): yet they said not where is the Deuteronomy. 9 13.
Lord that brought us (...) of the la^d of Egypt? but were an Isai. 1. 2.
obslinate, a (...) people; no wonder if the heavens Psalm. 19. 1, Et olim iam
dictum est, and assidue etiam nunc dicitur cognouit bos. Basil. proem. de
i^dicio dei.
are called to witness, ( they declare the glory of God) and the earth, for
all creatures in their kind are thankful; give the beasts they will know
thee, the ox, the tu^tle, the storke, all shall judge man: give the very earth
it will be abundantly thankful; give man, you must give him an ecce, heaven,
earth, all creatures hold their courses* man only is exorbitant.

Christ did many wonders for the Jews: see the use they made of it, and by
their error, we shall discover our way; some unthankfully neglect him, some
maliciously Deuteronomy 32. 6.
persecute him. O foolish people and (...), do ye so reward the Psa^m. 78. 25.
Lord? again, I fed them with Ma^na, with water also out of the stony rock.
I say abridgeth all, (...) could haeue been Isai. 5.
done more that I have not done? See their requital, They gave me gall to
eat, when I was thirsty they gave me vinegar to Psalm. 78: (...):
drink: their vinegar was sharp to his sense, their vnthank^ulnesse was more
distasteful to his soul; unthankfulness was condemned and punished with death
among the heathens: what wonder then if it be ever hat^full to God and men; no
unkindness so bitter as where our well meaning loves bids us look for love
again.

All this commends to our use David's (...) quie, praise the Lord O my soul.
How often falls that sweet Psalm. 103.
Chorus and bearing to his heavenly song; O that men would therefore praise the
Lord for his goodness, and declare the wonders that he does for the children
of men. All good men are thankful. David had tasted of his mercy, and Psalm.
116.
pre^ently says, Quidretribuam? What shall ^ render? The heart of a good man
is like the image in a glass, with eyes ever fixed on the eye which beholds
them, (...) Gods eye falls on his miseries, his looks up to Gods mercies.
There are many reasons for it. First, God gives freely, and Gratiarum de
cursus cessat vbi recursus non fuerit it. Bern. in cap. Fe^an. sermon. 1.
only expects ou^ thanks, not that they can benefit him, but that he might
give more. Secondly, the course of grace stoppes where is no recourse of
gratitude. Thirdly, that perishes which is done for unthankful men, by which
means, they are not only, not bettered by the good they receive, but made
worse by all they have. Fourthly, the Saints remember they are the sons of
God, and his dear children: and the greater bands of love, the more (...)
ingratitude. It was not mine enemy says the Psalmist, for then I could have
borne it: but that a familiar friend had done him dishonor, is the very
strength and sum enforcing the justness of his complaint, (...)
And thou my son, said Caesar, Brutus poynard of Sueton.
all the conspirators was dipped in the Serpents gall: for Non quia iniuriam
patitur irasc itur sed quia tu secisti Chrysostom.
the adopted sons of God to sin is to grieve the holy spirit of God. It was
not so much the Rom^n lance, not so much the spiteful (...) which cried
crucifige, which piersed Jesus sides, as that cursed abstract sin, with it
we Heb. 6.
crucify again the Lord of life, at this he cries, and thou one Nimis durus
est qui dilectio nem si nolit impendere nolit rependere.
of the twelve. He has a stony heart who neither can love first nor requite
the loving: to render good for evil is an action divine; to (...) good for
good humane, to repay evil for evil, brutish; but to recompen^e evil for
good is devilish.

Unthankfulness is the very center to which all these black lines of sin
are drawn; every sin is an ingratitude against God, by so much more
detestable, by how much greater Gods goodness. Whence it is not hard to
gather, that of all Gods creatures, the Devil is most unthankful, and wicked
men next. Behold therefore what thou do, and thou shall see what cause thou
have to be thankful, it becomes well the just to be thankful; He is very
unjust who is not thankful.

The third Ecce is a Remembrancer. Most men are ^: Ecce recordationis.
large in vows and intents, but of unfaithful memories: you shall have many
with Jacobs vows, in Jacobs estate, beginning his Pilgrimage, then they dream
of a Ladder to Heaven, think of the ways of God, but with their two Droues
find no leisure for Bethel, the House of God: if they have this Ecce of
remembrance, it is but as that fraudulent Votarie sacrificed his almond shells
in stead of half his vowed gains, as much time as they esteem cast away.

Wonderful were the mercies of God upon the House of Israel, then sang Moses
and Miriam, but they suddenly forgot his (...): the sweet Singer of Israel has
abridged the story, He was so merciful, he forgave their misdeeds, Psalm. 78.
12.
many a time turned he his wrath away, many a time did they provoke him, they
thought not of his Hand, and the day wherein he delivered them. So young Samuel
sleeping in the Tabernacle, answered Gods calls for the present, but presently
fell asleep again: therefore God often awakeneth, often remembers. It is
true with man there are a burdensome kind of Benefactor^, which do not so much
speak of their benefits because they have done them, as do the^ that they Plin.
sec. l. ^. ep. Pomp. Saturn.
might speak of them: these but purchase hate with a price.

The Ancients painted friendship extending both hands, one giving, the other
receiving, she ever looking toward the receiving hand. It is for giuers to
forget, and receivers to remember; but our infirmity requires Gods frequent
vpbraidings: therefore says Ambrose on these words, I pardon, De Poenitent. l.
2. c. 6.
and remember not iniquity; but do thou remember, I recount not what I have
forgiven, but remember, that thou may amend. Boast not thy self as if thou
were innocent, lest thou prove more guilty, the more thou (...) thy self. God
appointed first fruit* offerings of this Ecce of Remembrance to be performed
with this recognition, I acknowledge Deu, 16. 1, 2, 3.
this day unto the Lord, that I am come into the country which the Lord swear
unto our Fathers for to give us; a Syrian was my father, who being (...) to
perish for hunger, went down into Egypt, and (...) there with a small
company, and grew there into a Nation: and now lo I have brought the first
fruits of the land which thou have given me. How often does God look on men's
adversity, and labor, ease their shoulders from the burdens? how often does
he exchange their despised care, careful penury, for favors, honors, riches,
fruitful possessions; but where are our firstfruit-offerings? How many does he
restore to health? I say not, Where are the other nine? but where is the one
man of ten, of an hundred, which remembers himself to come back to God?
Betwixt these two limits of weal and woe, the distance is like the passage to
Elysium, there is a Let^e by the way, whose sleepy waters once tasted, we soon
forget, not only a Syrian was my father, but even our first fruits, our
acknowledgement of Gods mercy. Messala forgot his own name, say the Historians;
says not our experience the like? we have our Messala's, who in the Land of
Promise soon forget their name, derived from their hungry Syrian father. I
must say more, we are all Messala's, and in the violence of sins lethargy
forget the excellent Name? nay, nature of man: all creatures were made for man,
and whereas they have only four muscles to turn their eyes round about, prone
to the earth, man has a fifth, to pull his toward Heaven; yet man more
forgetful then all, must often be put in mind of Gods benefits.

The righteous God has so done his marvelous works, that they ought to be had
in remembrance: God delivers, and only says as Joseph, Remember me when it
shall be Genesis 40. 14, 23
well with thee, yet Joseph i^ forgotten; the danger is, we will not then do
well when we are well. God charge the Israelites that they should not then
forsake him, when Exodus 10. 17.
they came to the fruitful p^ssessions. He that is in any great danger cries
with Pharaoh, Take away from me this death only. He that is in a stresse at
sea will call on God and rouse up others like Ionahs Mariners. He that is
under the Cross s^ith, as the thief on the Cross, Lord remember me? He that
is si^ke, perhaps has learned of David, all the d^ and all the night to call
upon God. He that is poor and sells his pity, moving plaints for bread
sends out the name of God before every petition: there is no danger of his
memory now; but take him, take all these laden with Gods bounty, when of all
times a man would think they cannot now forget God, having their hands full of
his benefits, and then Joseph is forgotten; then they find no time to think
of God: so some men like the Siphius naturally soft, are hardened with oil.
Others like dishonest debtors, the more they owe, the more they shun the
presence of their creditor As our eyes too near ^he object cannot see it,
there must be a proportionable ^istance, so when Gods blessings are even upon
us, then we are in danger not to see them. God therefore often ta^eth them from
us a while, that we may learn to w^igh by want, who could not by possessing
them. The Lynx Hi^ron. Plin. de lupis grega rijs l. 8. c. 22.
has excellent eyes, but so bad a memory, that but looking back he forgets
what he pursued: such are we in ^ffliction q^icke sighted, but if we look
back on prosperi^ie we forget all: ^ew days we keep in memory deliverances
from mise^ies some years old. No wonder if ^od often beat us treuant like non
proficients, long lear^ing soon forgetting: dull and frail memori^s must be
^olpen with frequent repetitions: therefore he humbled ^srael he tells the
cause, remember the Lord thy God, if Deuteronomy (...).
^hou forget, (...) day you shall surely perish: if ever ^orgetfulnesse deserve
the rod, it is when we remember ^ot the Lord, he never forgets us, in the
corn, in the fruits of the earth whilst we sleep, or think not of him, he
never forgets us* our fields ^elvs we must remember him, our houses,
garments, children, health, peace, all creatures, cry remember your Creator;
amidst so many remembrancers, it were many shames to forget God.

Some excuse themselves by the fraylty of their memory, yet forget not their
losses, their pains: you shall have some man lament the loss of one tooth
twenty times, who never had it in his heart to thank God for many other left,
for his hands, legs, or eyes: is the loss of one limme so great, are not the
use and integrity of many worth thanks? Some fault their age, yet forget not
their treasure: our delights are our memories darling, can a mother forget her
child?

Others challenge Nature of partiality, yet without a tutor remember injuries.
Memory the souls Notary registreth wrongs in Marble, favors in Ice, which
the least warmth of prosperity dissolueth. Long we remember evils, benefit^ not
long: our minds are Lymbecks, anger Antisthen. (...) Laert. l. 6.
the fire, all goodness is soon distilled, we only retaining the vselesse
dregs, in which, his art of forgetting were worth all our time: it is a sure
mark of an unsanctified memory, to be forgetful of all but that we should
forget: such is the unthankful man's mind; as he said of his gout, would I
work? I have no hands: would I walk? Dole^dum est and manus and pedes habeo.
I have no feet: must I smart? pain finds me hands and feet. For God, he
has no memory at home; for sin, for the world his wits are ever about him.
But is thy memory indeed broken and unfaithful? use it like a bankerout, give
no day but enforce present payment: defer not a day to be thankful, lest
after many fair warnings, a worse evil arrest thee a careless debtor. If
this ecce has remembered you; another attends to comfort you, which 2. ^m.
18. 27
comes as David said of Abimaaz with good tidings.

This ecce is de^iued from the foregoing three, we could 4. Ecce consolationis.
not be disconsolate, if we knew, acknowledged, and remembered what God does,
and has done for us.

All the afflictions of the children of God are but healing stripes: I smite
and heal (says God) he wounds with infirmity, but heals with ^aith: a
sickness to health, D^t (...). 39.
as Christ said of Lazarus, this sickness is not unto death: Percussit
^mitate sanauit fide. Ambr. ad Belic.
it has more smart then danger: when Jason Pheraeus friends had given him
over, he found help at his enemies hands, whose stroke opening the impostume,
only killed the disease: our sickness is but Ias^ns wound, Plus aculei quam
periculi. ib. Medicinam inuenit ex host.
the* faithful stripes of a loving God. Therefore are the righteous often
called Gods children, babes, little babes: God deals with us like wayward
children: we are froward, if we taste affliction, if then God gives such
medicine, he often gives an ecce of comfort. As if he said, be st^ll my child
it will make thee well again. Behold thou ar^ healed.

When the Lioness fights for her whelps, she is Use.
observed to cast her eyes toward the earth, lest she should Plin. l. 8 c. 16.
fear the danger of hunters spears: when we are to encounter Ne venabula
expauescat.
with afflictions, losses, sickness, for our dearest souls, we must not look
on the misery so much, not on Satan's fiery iauclins (they may perhaps affright
us) as fix our eyes on heaven, on the mercy of God. David found comfort in it,
I will lift up mine eyes to the hits, even to God Psalm. 121.
which made heaven and earth: when betwixt the two armies he was to enter the
dangerous lists, his eye was not so much on the ouergrowne champion of Gath, as
on the Lord who delivered him from the paws of the Lion and the Bear. We
easily faint like cowards at the sight of blood when our memory apprehends a
present fear, an absent succor, a terror seen, a refuge out of view, a
present sickness, a san^tus es to come. Therefore in every trial consider not
so much what thou suffer for the present, as what thereby thou shall enjoy
for the time to come.

The Thracians for every good and prosperous day, laid up a white stone, for an
adverse, a black; so one day judged of another, the last of all. It is true of
mortal men, none are absolutely happy; yet he is abundantly happy who cannot
finally be unhappy: perhaps the worldly man judges as the Thracians did
calculate, by externals, happy are the people which are in such a case, where
there is no complaining in the streets. David otherwise judged, happy are the
people (though there be complaining) which have the Lord for their God: he
knew that though the last day made absolutely happy, yet that happiness is
begun from the day we receive the one white stone with a new name, our
redemption written: from thence we Reu. 2. 17.
must learn to comfort our selves with this, behold we are healed, what ever
we suffer, it shall work for our Romans 8.
happiness.

The Arimaspi were said to have but one eye, and all their business to fight
for gold. Carnal men's hearts have but one eye, one thought, and that for
riches. Therefore they are comfortless in their trials, because they want an
eye for heaven, at least this ecce to shake off the scales, and open that they
have, as Dauiel opened his window toward Jerusalem the City of God, who saw
the comfort through those clouds of fear ^ Saint Stephen saw the Act 7. 56*
same, when nothing but inevitable execution presented Videte quam oculata sit
fides quam lyn^eos habet oculos. Bern. in Epiph.
it self to his eyes, then he witnesses to the eye less faithless
spectators, Behold I see the heavens open: see how full of eyes is faith, had
we Saint Stephens faith, his sight, could we see heaven open to the afflicted,
we should have his immovable affiance: we are comfortless in our trials, as
Elishas servant was at first, for want of seeing our comforts.

Antiphon was judged to have weak eyes, because he saw no farre-distant
objects, yet could discern his own image by the most slender reflection of the
air: that we^ are so curious sighted to the very appearances of miseries in
our selves, not seeing the solid comfort in God, she was we are tender eyed,
therefore we often say what Magdalen once, they have taken away my Lord. In our
sorrows we John 20.
know not our Jesus talking with us: the reason is, because the sense of
present evil, has many doors to give it entrance into the soul; the eye,
the ear, the taste, all the body is sensible of pain, like Hannibals house
full of doors: but unseen comforts enter through faith the only door,
leading to the door of life Christ Jesus. So has man's soul a small window
above to receive light from heaven, but the door, the passage for earth is of
three heights; the more need have we to clear this little window toward
heaven, that we may see the comfort which follows in the next place.

THE SECOND SERMON.
Thou art healed.
WE have hitherto seen the excitation, the stirring up our attention, in four
points; first discovering to the ignorant the good they have; the second,
reprehending the unthankful; the third, remembering the forgetful; the
fourth, comforting the afflicted.

Next, we are to consider what God has done in restoring his health.
Chrysostom notes the humility of Christ, not saying* I have healed thee, but
thou art healed. If man do well consider the works done, they will lead him
to their author, Thou art healed. There is an health of Soul t^t he cured, who
became like the Pelican in the Psalm. 102. 6.
Wilderness, smiting his breast, and recovering us, By his 1. Pet. 2. 24.
stripes we are healed. There is an health of Body, I doubt Tho. Aquin. part.
3. q. 44. a. 3. 3.
not but he had here a respect to both, as in a like Cure, Matthew. 9. 2. where
he uses them as conuertible terms, Thy sins are forgiven thee, or Arise and
walk.

Most men have health as Souls, by which though they live, move, and
understand, yet not many understand what, whence, or for what end they have it.
Which three points, as God, time, and your patience shall give me leave, I will
consider.

Health so much differs from health, that what it is, I Quid sanitas in esse.
cannot without distinction describe. Health in it esse and proper being, was
that vncorrupt disposition of body in man's innocence, when the four first
qualities in Man, as a City (...) unity in it self, by their brotherly
(...), fortified him against all assaults of Pains, Aches, Sickness,
Weariness, Decrepednesse, Old Age. Then was no ambition among them: but though
they were by their beings contrary, yet united into one being of a right
temper, they strove not, but so (...) each other, that the euenly-diuided power
kept peace betwixt them all, till the ambitious mind taught them to (...): then
Heat and Cold, Moist and Dry, eagerly as it were fighting for soueraignetie,
by restless civil wars overthrew Man's body, the little model of a State,
never ending their intestine quarrel, till the great Usurper Death entering
through the breach of sin, surprised all.

Since sin was borne, a thousand life-killing Maladies Quid sanitas in
existere.
fore run, as if they were sworn Harbingers to Death. So that Health in it
existence and present being, is assaulted with many Infirmities, Distempers,
Surfets, untimely Accidents, a thousand Gates are set open to Death: And him
that escapes from the sword of Hazael, 1. King. 19. 17.
shall Iehu slay, and him that escapes from the sword of Iehu, shall Elisha
slay. If a man live free of all these* Old Age comes in the Maine Battle,
with Legions of Diseases; an irresistable all-subduing power.

I wonder what. Democritus it was, and in what merry mood; how he (...) his
cares asleep, how he forgot his first language, or understood not his last
adue to the world, when he described a Man to be a Creature apt Homo est animal
risibile.
to laugh; Man borne with tears, living with sorrow, dying with grief. Nature
(said one) which armeth all the Creatures, cast out Man naked in the day of his
Nativity, to tears and crying. Thus happily borne, he (...) natus iacet
manibus pedibusque devinctis flens animal caeteris (...), a (...) vitam
auspicatur.
lies bound hand and foot a weeping little Master of all the Creatures,
beginning his life with punishment. And now Diseases swarm, Paenae militant in
me. Lyra vices and exercitus contra me Iun. and (...). velut copiae aliae aliis
succedentes.
Changes and (...) are against us, and as much variety of Medicines, and those
overcome with novelties in Diseases, making it a part of sickness to perish by
skill, it being easier dying of the Pli. l. 7. Proem.
Disease, then too much remedy. (...) and frail is man's health; Few and evil
are the days of my Pilgrimage, said good Jacob: half our life is like death;
as death represents sleep, so sleep death. The unripe days of froward
Infancy are hardly to be reputed a life; wherein though we live, we think not
of living: neither of Old Age, the second Childhood, the Age of Sorrow and
Care, wherein we have so little pleasure, as often we learn Est etiam morbus
aliquis per sapientiam mori. Plin.
of Jonah to inuit that un welcome guest Death, that coldhanded last and
furest Physician for all Diseases, whom others in vain strive to rob of some
hours possession. Add to these the sickly hours our stronger years have
told; how many spent in sin (for I can neither call that health, when either
the pensive mind makes the body sick, or the pampered body the mind:) and if
the vnhealthie are to be (...) (as one said of Seamen) betwixt Ne immortale^
in nobis morbum ^ret. Basil.
the living and the dead, we shall find, that he who has reckoned many years,
has lived but few, and those evil. That our days are evil, we cause; that
being evil, they are few; Gods mercy provides.

At the best, external health is but a delaying the malady for a little time:
the Period is set, our lives Glasses ever run: in our best strength we
decay. Hezekiah may have fifteen years pieced unto his life, yet he must
dye: The Heavens may stand still, yet the day Josh. 10. 13.
must end: Lazarus may live some posthume days, yet must come to the Grave
again: The giver of Natures Laws only can dispense with them; but we run
toward our ends, no Age, no Estate, no Place can (...) us.

Hormisda discovered Constantius vain confidence in the pomp of the then
triumphant Rome, when asked of the Emperor, what he thought of the pomp of
that glorious Id (...) tantum placuisse, quod didicisset, ibi quoque homines
mori.
City, he replied, it only liked me, that I have learned, that men do also
dye at Rome. Artemidorus men of Taproban, living long, and never sick, are
truly the Citizens of the heavenly Jerusalem, where no inhabitant shall Isa.
33. 24.
say, I am sick. But in this life there is no absolute health: Revel. 22. 3.
we are borne drawing death from our first original, and Aug. de Ciu. Dei,
(...). 13. c: 13.
bearing natures corruption, and contention or victory in (...)
our members. The same point of time gives an exordium to our living and
dying: our life is but a lamp lighted at our birth, which may have some
violent blast to put Theophrast. apud La^rt. l. 5.
it out, or wind to spend it; but though neither untimely death extinguish, nor
heart-eating sorrow consume, yet there is but a proportioned oil of life,
which will soon burn out.

Shall we then be impatient, and wish we had not been? Use.
This life is a time of trial, be contented a while with thy Haec est istorum
flenda, sed non reprehendenda c^ditio. Bed. in Ioh. Deuteronomy. 12. 9.
discontents, he that now sows in tears, shall reap in joy. Shall we build
great hopes on these sands? Eternity is a surer rock: set not up your rest
here, for as Moses told Israel, Ye are not yet come to your rest, the short
epitome of life forbids to begin long hopes. There is nothing firm, not in
health it self, (health the riches of the poor and the blessing of the rich)
vain hopes of worldly men, Vanae spes hominum in hoc seculo, quae ea quae non
sunt tanquam quae sunt, sequenda arbitrentur.
pursuing that which is not, as if it were. It is one thing of that which I
have wondered at, to see aweake sickly man, a drunkard, and the lame and
unhealthy, covetous and unjust, even with dying hands laying hold on other men's
goods. There is no comfortable possession without health, nor stabilitie in
health: health so weakly Amb. l 7. ep. 44
fortressed from a world of infir^es, that even in the hour in which we call
it ours, and say, Soul take th^e ease, we are fools, if we know not they
may take ^way our souls. Thou can not hold a vapor in thine hand, and life
is but a vapor appearing for a little time, and suddenly Iam. 4. 14.
Habes iterum aegrotare and mori.
vanishing. Suppose thou has^ overcome a dangerous disease, thou must be sick
again, and dye: there is no escape from the pale Sergeant; Death is that only
Creditor, which ha^ no Bankrupt Debtor. Agree with thine Matthew. 5. 25.
adversary quickly.

Shall we blame the giver of Life for our lives shortness? The very Heathen
esteemed that a great blessing. I will add the reason: God is herein
merciful, not only cutting off judgment, by shortning the time of our
transgression, but by our times shortning, and healths vn^, deterring us from
sin. He that dares evil in the way to the Judge, in an health so (...), a
life so short, what would he not dare, if he were sure his judgment were far
off? You have seen what our health is. See from whence.

God is the giver of health, he says it: I am the Lord A quo sanitas.
that ^ealeth thee. Again, he heals all thine infirmities; Exodus 15. 26.
Psalm. 103. 3.
of Soul, remitting all sins to one; of Body, he is a preserver as well as
a Creator: and though second ^ses have their place, yet till he say, I will he
(...) cleansed, Matthew. 8.
be thou sound, no means can be effectual. (...) is the Ambr.
true Physician, whose Cures are not of (...) Art, but Mal. 4. 3.
certain Power: Health is under his wings, and (...) Cures free. Good
Physicians are Gods Vice-(...) toward Iul. dixit de art. medic. (...) le.
(...) med.
the Body, their skill is sacred; and (...), who disclaymed to be the Lawyer,
(...), who made me a (...)? honored the Physician, in many (...), (...)
himself a Physician: therefore they are worthy of honor and reward. (...) may
teach the unthankful so much: but they (should there be any such) who betray
(...) ^ents health to a (...), and (...) (...) Plin.
(...) fatis, (...) a poor remainder of a (...) life to the grave, that they
may take the (...) of Mortis (...).
death; they are but the (...) car^, to (...) upon them: the (...) to a (...)
Profession: they have not learned of Christ the compassion he had on all that
came unto him. The poor Haemorrhois had experience perhaps of both: when she
had spent all on Physicians, she but touched the hemme of Christ's garment, and
was healed. He proved himself Matthew. 11. 3.
the Messiah by this argument to John's Disciples; the Si vulnus curare
desideras medicus est, si graveris ini^, iustitia est, si mortem times vita
est- De Virg: l. 3.
lame are made found, the blind see, the lepers are cleansed, the deaf hear.
I conclude with Ambrose words, We (...) all things in Christ: if we are sick,
he is a Physician; if sinful, he is righteousness; if we fear death, he is
life.

We must vsd this Lesson thu^; in all our sickness to have recourse to God
through Christ Jesus: he has not left off the care he had of his; if in his
state of humility he was so powerful, fear not, now all power is committed
to him: he keeps the very bones and dust of the Saints (...): is (...) God
of the dead, and not of the living?

There are three ^orts of people which have need to learn (...) Lesson.

1. (...) so impatient, that if God answer not when they would, they will with
S^l to Endor, with A^ to (...), to the Devil, to healing Witches 2. King. 1. 2.
for help. It is true, Satan is a cunning Mountebanke, and Wizzards and good
Witches keep his shops, who to kill a superstitious Soul, are suffered to
cure the Body. These may be admired like the Peloponnesian Physician Trans^t:
nomen in carnificem. Plin.
at Rome, for his first Cures, but experience will name them (...), cruel
Butchers. I may say as he of the M. Cato. de Medic. Athen.
Athenians, they have sworn to kill all their patients with Physic. 2.
Others Asa like neglect God, and trust to the Physician: though such men use
lawful means, yet they err as the former, but with this difference; they
made the Devil their God; these, other Creatures. 3. Others neglect the good
means which God has given, and so tempt God in the foolish hazard of their
life. They say their days are numbered; so were Saul's and Judas days, yet they
were guilty of murder: and if not to save, be to kill, what are they less who
obstinately refuse probable means of recovery? Some say, because they are not
certain: they must know there are many reasons why the same means obtain not
always the like good effect.
First, if none should fail, too many would ascribe their health to the
creature.

Secondly, God reserueth some Cures, in which he will more immediately discover
his own hand: there were many Widows in Israel in the days of Elisha, but
only unto one was the Prophet sent; many lepers in Assyria, but Naaman only
healed; many here sick, and of diverse diseases, Chrysostom. to. 3. hom. 35.
but this one cured by Christ; God sees good to show his presence in few.

Thirdly, to some he gives not health presently; to others, Quod
longinquitatis curatione memoriam eius altius in animis nostris impressam
velit, Basil. ^reg. fus. disp. c. 55.
not at all: either by the difficulty of the cure to leave a deeper impression
of his mercy; or to exercise them who are not yet of patience proved and
approved: they will have an hundred medicines, and none endured an hour; they
will be of Naamans peevish temper, to prescribe God and the Physician; they
will be well, how, and when they list, or else they cry, Are not Abanah and
Pharpar, Rivers of Damascus, better then all the waters of Israel? they will
repine and murmr against God himself.

For these and the like causes, God gives not the like effect to all; yet that
exempteth none from the lawful use of his Ordinance: he hears not all, yet
all must pray; the Word profits not all, yet all must hear; God is
displeased, if the means he has prescribed be neglected: albeit by the
powerful effects of his hidden judgments he teach us to distinguish betwixt
the first cause and the second; that to be trusted to, this to be used. God
gave health to Hezekiah, yet the Prophet applies the plaster. What is lordan
to a leprous (...)? What, Siloam? What, a troubled Bethesda to every disease?
The Angel stirred, but God healed, his Ministry, Gods power. It Curando per
modum imperii Aquin. part. 3. q. 44. a. 3.
is to be observed, that Christ in his healing did not only use his Divine
power, but opposed something belonging to his Humanity: to teach us, that we
must neither neglect the means, nor forget God, the giver of Health. Which
leads me to my last consideration of Health.

The true use of Health is with every faculty of Body 3. vsus, salutis.
and Soul to honor God: Praise the Lord, O my Soul, and all that is within
me praise his holy Name. So David: Psalm. 103. 1.
The Lord was (...) to (...) me, therefore we will sing my Song all the days
of our life in the House of God. So said Hezekish; by this means we shall lay
up a good provision (the treasure of a good conscience) against the time of
Sickness, as Joseph stored up in plenty against a Famine.

There are two Nations of finnes, eternal foes to the people of God, like Moab
and Ammon, begotten of Genesis 19. 35. 36.
those two base Daughters of Health in their Fathers forgetfulness,
Drunkenness and Lust: of either of them may be said that of Ambrose concerning
her dancing, Quanta in vno facinore sunt crimina, l. 3. de virgin.
How many faults were in that one Wickedness? Many think their health given
them, to make them able to power in much strong d^inke* and themselves borne to
Tanquam ad perdendum vnia geniti etiam premio invitatur aebrietas.
devour Wine, and eat up the fruits of the Earth. When Nilus (...), it
makes* Egypt fertile: Gluttony and Drunkenness is our Nilus, which (says
Basil) like a dispersed River ouerflowing her Banks, pubescere facit peccata,
does ripen sin. We might have instance Nos numerus sumus and fruges
consumere nati.
in Noe, Lot, Esau, Israel, but that this Age, robbing the Dutch of their
intemperance, as all other Nations of their once-esteemed proper vices,
abounds Sermon. de abdi: rerum.
with example. We lack, in eue^ie corner of the Land, an Academic of Cynicks,
to be angry with the Laert. l. 6.
betrayers of their strength, destroying their own health in sacrificing to
others. It was but a fable of Circes, which this monstrous age makes true.
Intemperance is our Circes which transformeth men into variable sorts of
beasts: which like the (...), do fight and kill with their cups, the bloody
enemy not destroying so many as the drunken friend. One said drunkenness is
the death of the memory ^he spoke enough, the drunkard forgets his friend,
his state, his health, his reason, himself, his soul, and God not his. How
should he then remember Prou. 23. 29. 32.
the end, woe and sorrow. It goes down pleasantly but in the end it will bite
like a Serpent, and hurt like a Cockatrice whose deathfull eye if thou foresee
not will kill thee.

Others give their healths to harlots: among all the Idiots the wise man
considered, this one void of understanding* Pro. 7. 23.
going like the fool to correction, like the Ox to the slaughter: ambitiously
begging, and dearly buying repen^ance at the best, or going on till a dart
strike through his liver. The Ambassadors replied wisely to Lysimachus (...).
Demosth.
showing in his arms, the wounds he received when he played with a Lion,
Demetrius has more dangerous marks in his neck which Lamia gave him; no
beast so cruel as an harlot, none other can bite the soul: I find Eccles.
72. 8.
more (...) then death, the woman whose heart is as nets and snares* the curses
of the damned, and malice of the devil, are not so hurtf ll, as the flattry
and love of a whore: she consumes the estate, rotteth the body, kills the
soul: she brings a man to a morsel of bread, shame and dishonor, she
causes many to fall down wounded, and the strong Prou. 7. 26. 27
men are all (...) by her, her house is the way to the grave, which goes down
to the cham^ers of death. This is the fire which Job. 31. 12.
deuoureth to destruction: God will judge them, they shall not Heb. 13. 4.
inherit heaven, but the lake which burns with fire and brimstone. 1. Cor. 6.
9.
Revel 21. 8.
Such is the reward of them which abuse their health: some think if they
follow such pleasures as the world calls lawful, they owe God no tribute for
their health. Pleasure like Ionahs gourd is of a short and pleasing growth but
when God has provided the worm to bite the root where is then Joseph's
provision? Some sacrifice all their time to Mammon: but take such a man on his
death bed, shall thy wealth now deliver thee from hell? Where is Ios^phs
provision now? the cause why many are so comfortless in their sickness, is
because they make no good use of their healths. If thy health did not cor^upt
thee, thy sickness could not dismay thee: but so easily does the bodies health
make a diseased soul, that some call it Aduersitas nulla confringit, quem fae.
licuas non corrumpit. Aug.
not amiss a vicious health: multi tutius aegrotassent, Sickness had been
more safe for many. How much better had it been for David to have been sick
in bed, then sending his eyes, such unlawful embasses to Barthsheba. How much
better for them (which now tormented in Vitiosam sanit atem. Orig. hom. 1. in
Psalm. 37.
hell fire wish it too late) never to have been free from sickness, that at
least, their torments might have been less: Learn by their evil, how to use
the good thou have; let this part teach theethe next: Sin no more le^t a
worse come unto thee.

THE THIRD SERMON.
Si^ne no more.
Physicians forbid that diet which caused Causa morbi inuenta curationem
inuentam esse putant. ^ic.
the disease; and the cause found, they esteem the cure found. By this
admonition then we learn; that, Sin Basil. sermon. quod Deus non sit author
mal:
is the cause of sickness: death entered into the world through sin, and
sickness fore-ran death in the same passage. It was never said before, C^rsed
be the earth for thy sake, Genesis 3. 17.
in sorr^w shall thou eat thereof. Never did any hear I will greatly increase
thy sorrows: sin like the Grecian stratagem, though it were let in by a
small-seeming breach, yet her bowels were laden with a world of armed
mischiefs, which set open the souls gates to the destroyer: and 2. King. 5.
27.
sins infection is stamped as deep as Gehaza's leprosy, to Ipsi nobis vincula
nectimus.
thee and to thy seed for ever: so that we have framed our own snares, we
walk in the fire we have kindled, for the Ambr. de paen l. ^. c. 14.
wickedness of Jacob is all this. Michai 1. 5. Therefore Mich. 6. 13
will I make thee sick in smiting thee, because of thy sins. Scot. sup s^c.
sent. did. 31.
Sin is that morbida qualitas: the infection of the soul and body. David was
sick for it, there is no sound part ^. Chron. 21. 12. 19.
in my flesh because of my sin. Much more Iehoram his bowels fell out for his
his sins. Misery comes not forth Job. 5. 6.
of the dust, To sickness and all those previous dispositions of death, in
labor, weariness; in old age, faintness; and as many more as are allied to
sickness Paena non po* test esse sineculpa, (...) innocentia, no^
accidissetmors quilibet translatus esset in Paradisum.
sin gave being: for the punishment could not have been without the crime. Al
miseries are the undoubted child: e^ of sin; sin is that Eve, that
grandmother of every malady: sin is that world envenoming Dragon, not so
little as that whose tail swept over a third part of heaven. Great was the
inf^ction of Egypt, on the land, on Scot. ib. did. 19.
the waters, on the trees, on the corn, on the field, on their houses, on the
earth, on the air, on man, on beast, but still Reu. 12. 4.
G^shen was excepted; but sin went over all. For sin the earth is cursed, it
is her sickness, every creature groneth and trauelleth in pain, a general
contagion. The mischief staieth Romans 8. 22.
not here, but flies up to the clouds, and there sometime lxion-like
begets monstrous Centaures, fiery eruptions, Josh. 10. 11.
air infecting meteors, thunders, storms, tempests: Psalm. 18. 13.
^ometime it makes that dewie region of clouds like Abimelech: house barren,
every womb shut up: then Gen 20. 18.
our heaven is as brass and our earth iron, then the Lord Deuteronomy. 28. 23. 24.
gives us dust and ashes for rain. All is little that can be said to this one
thing. Christ's soul was very heavy even unto Mat. ^6. 38.
the death for sin. He was wounded for our (...), Isai 53.
and broken for our iniquities: all his sorrow was for sin, not his, but
ours. All our debt has been paid by obedience of sufferings, not ours but his;
yet we suffer because we sin yet. Christ who for us over came the malice of
sin, prescribes sin no more. It was sin made thee sick, when he said,
thy sins are forgiven thee, he began the cure where Mat 9. 2.
the malady began.

We often put the fault on guiltless nature: we think Use.
why were we borne to miseries? we blame our bodies constitu^ions: Ahab
imputed his fault to the Prophet, but it is thou Ahab, thou sin and thy fathers
house, the devils ugly family, which trouble all Israel. We accuse the
distempers of the years: But man suffers for his sin, have Lament. 3.
thou not procured this unto thy self? Diseases are all begotten Ier. 2. 17.
29.
of that misshapen hagge and fearful Incubus sin. Ex peccatis morbi
generantur* Chrysostom. ho. 37. in Ioh.
Shall I then be discouraged in my sickness, or judge others plagued of God
in theirs? not so, all are not in firm for sin, though none without: some
against sin, some for probation and exercise, as Job whom God pronounced
Propter peccata languebat. Bed.
just: Some that the glory of God might appear. Therefore they asked amiss
who had sinned, John 9. Ne extollantur in donis Dei. ibid.
Neither he nor his parents had sinned, which must be referred to the
immediatnesse of his maladies cause. He had Veniunt and probandae patientiae
causa Chrysostom* ib.
deserved the evil, but God aimed especially at his own glory in the cure:
See thou a man afflicted? leave him to God who best knows why he strikes:
his judgment is always just, though oft^n secret. See thou a Ambr. l. 9.
(...). 75.
wicked man healthy and strong, envy him not, his misery Bed. Saepe occulto
hominibus iudicio sed nunquam iniusto.
is to come, but when we are chastened, we are corrected; that we might not be
condemned with the world. Art thou afflicted? ever think thou suffer less
then thou have deserved. 1. Cor. 11. 32


To conclude; this one lesson well learned, would be a Si penso malum quotidie
quod feci non est tantum quod patior grauius est quod commisi leuius quod
tolero. Aug. med. e. 38.
good means to prevent many errors, many evils of body and soul: you shall
have some man, if his body be never so little disaffected, send in as much have
for the Physician as Gehazi ran to the Shunamites son, ( if thou meet any
salute him not) if he sin, he deferreth, dissembleth, or perhaps it has a
noli me tangere, none may touch it: if he sin it pleases him, if he be sick
nothing can comfort him: O perverse affection of the ignorant man, his body is
to him as David's beloved child, bewailed with tears; his soul like the Jews
friends* whose death they solemni zed with instruments of music: the reason
is, they observe not what dangerous: effects sin works to body and soul:
therefore they strive with the effects, but touch Neglecto sonte malorum
rivulos purgare conantur.
not the cause. Will thou be healed? remove the cause, the effect will cease:
sin is the fountain of evil, first cleanse that, Sin no more, for God
smites for sin; which Chrysostom. in Man 4. hom. 14.
brings me to a second consideration of sickness.

God smi^h with sickness thereby to restrain the fury Cur D^us immittit
morbos?
of the wicked, and to instruct the righteous: Egypts Exodus 9. 10.
plagues, the pestilence in the camp of Israel, the murmurers, Number. 16 49.
the Philistim; Emerods, Gehazi^ leprosy, Herod's 1. Sam. 5. 9.
worms show the one, Job, David, H^zekiah, with many 2. King. 5. 25.
others like this present instance, marked with an (...) sanatus Act. 1^. 22,
23.
Job. 42. 5, 6.
es, Sin no more, prove the other. My discourse is especially Psalm. 119. 71.
addressed to this. Isai 38. 20.


Affliction has three daughters; like Jobs last three given Job. 42. 14.
him after his trialls, more beautiful then the former: Exercise, purging
sin; Prob^tion, giving approbation; and Reward crowning our labors.

God gave a life free from all sickness and p^ine: when man abused that gift,
he afflicted him with many i^firmities, by correcting the body, the baser part
to amend the more excellent: like a good Physician; if an obstinate disease,
Extrinsecus ferro and igni vtitur. Chrysostom.
the Spleen, or Dropsy, will not be cured with potions and light medicines, he
uses lancing and cauterizing Ioh. ^. 15. (...)
without. So are our sicknesses like Christ's Scourges, which he made to drive
the buyers and sellers out of the Temple, I mean those cursed Brokers, which
sell us to Sin, Security, and Neglect; in which our luxuriant 1. Sam: 26.
11, 13, 14.
minds full fed, soon fall asleep: then comm^h God, as Daui^ to Saul
sleeping, and takes away the spear and pot No^ vltionis exequtio, sed
absolationis operatio. Amb. de poen. l. 1. c. ^.
of matter, our strength* and nourishment; but ^lling to us a far off, shows
plainly he did not take advantage to kill, but to awaken us. Do I desire the
death of a sinner? Why will ye die, O house of Is^e? Look how a father
pittieth Cu^ morbo no^ cum aegro di^icat. Basi^.
his own child, so is God merciful to his: he correct^th, but his indi^ation
is not execution of reueng^, Qu^d Deus no^ sit auth. malorum.
but working of p^rdon: Like a good Physician, he fights with the disease,
not the diseased. Christ wept for Jerusalem, before he took up the Rod. Look
how wise Luke 19. 41.
Ecce (...) and (...). Iun. and. Trem.
parents punish their childrens fa^ks, but suffer with their persons, how anger
goes betwixt the child and the fault like the s^king (...) and (...) l^pe
betwixt Abraham's Genesis 15. 10, 17
divided Sacrifice: which Gr^gorie expresses thus; Sic culpam ^uam in^equor,
vt te diligam, ^ic persona^ diligo vt culpae viti^ non amplectar. l. 1. ep. 33.
Venantio.
I repreh^d thy faul^, that I may love thy person, s^ l^e thy person, that I
may not be guilty of thy crime: So God sends sickness, yet as David his
battles against Absalom, with this charge, Deal gently for my sake with the
young man. God corrects his, but often as the Persians beat their Princes
Clothes, not their Princes. Infirmities are Gods 2. Sam. ^8. 5.
well-ordered troops, which strongly charge the disorderly affections of a
rebellious mind: yet to these he says as concerning Job, Lo he is in your
hand, but save Job. 2. 6.
his life.

Sin is the water as in a Pericardium compassing our heart, which should be
the Altar of God; sickness like Eliahs fire sent from Heaven, licketh it up,
consuming that 1. King. 18. 38.
fomitem peccati, abounding in a full and healthie body: Therefore he gives a
little rebated sorrow, as Physicians Plin.
Venenum hoc remedia secum habet, l. 11. c. 35
poison; which, as one says of the Cantarides, carry a remedy with them, and
is an external antidote against eternal weeping and gnashing of teeth: so
sovereign a medicine, that even the weak have desired it; Reserve me In Psalm.
37. ^om. 1.
not to utter darkness (said Orige^) rather correct me, O Lord.

Mauritius guilty of the blood of twelve hundred soldiers (through his
covetousness vnransomed and put to the sword) having been terrified with many
^arefull predictions, and ghastly apparitions; humbly be^ought the Lord, that he
might have his punishment in this life: which he obtained, not in a little
sickness; but first seeing the Empress his Wife and dear Children butchered
at Phocas command, he only said, Righteous art thou, O Lord, and just is thy
judgment: and Iu^us es domine and rectum iuditium tuum
with the like constancy himself soon after suffered death. Good men do so
much love God, and hate sin, that they had rather suffer famine to beat
down their bodies, ^icknesse to weaken them, heavy afflictions to bruise
them, then sin should reign over them: men willingly drink a bitter draught
to cure them: Vt per amaru^ poculum ad dule edinem aeternae salutis redeant.
Greg.
Therefore said Ambrose, blessed be God who vouchsafed to correct his servants,
that he destroy them not: and concerning Gods words of Job, he says
resoluedly, Let the Serpent eat my flesh, let him grind my body, only let
God Qui vult servulos suos castigare (...) perdat. l. 1. ep. 28.
say of me; I deliver him into thine hands only, keep his soul. Such is the
power of Christ, at his command the ravenous Lion must keep his own prey in
safety betwixt Conterat corpus dicat and de me trado tibi and tantum modo
animam eius custodi. ib
his teeth, he may vlcerate the flesh, but he must keep the soul. Let him be
always ^uill, that God may be ever gracious, who turns that malice into our
good: who thereby kills our sins.

Shall I then repine at mine infirmities? God sends Carne^ vlcerat sed
custodit animam. ib.
sickness against sin as Ioab besieged Abel, only for the traitor Sheba,
whose head thrown over the wall the Use.
war was end^. Sin is the Sheba which God pursues, 2. Sam. 20. 20. 21.
if we deliver it up God will soon raise the siege. Fear not affliction if
thy ^nne hurt thee not: Bubbles filled with air break themselves, it is their
weakness; beat Nulla nocebit aduersitas si nulla dominetur iniquitas.
an Adamant with an hammer, it breaks not: a small affliction breaks the
heart of a wicked man, but nothing can destroy the righteous: no affliction
shall hurt where Nemo laeditur nisi a seipso.
no iniquity reigns. So true is that no man is hurt but by himself: Or^gen
thus says of the enemy, Sin Chrysostom. To. 5. Peccata vires hostibus prebent. ^.
Iudic. hom. 3.
gives him a breach to enter, and power to kill. Sin is that Delilah, which
cutteth off our strength, and delivers us into the power of affliction, it is
the souls traiterous Catiline, O happy state, this heap of mischief O
fortunam rempub. si quidem hanc sentinam huius v^bis e^cerit.
cast out, one only Catiline drawn out, the Citi^ seems eased and
refreshed. What evil or impiety can be devised or thought of, which he
conceived not? Against such danger God fore-armeth Cicer. Orat. 2. in Catilin.
us by sickness: Every father can tell why he uses the Rod: Correct thy
son, and he will give thee rest, Prou. 29. 17. Heb. 9. 4.
he will amend his faults: before God's Ark were laid up Mann^ and the Rod,
not Manna without the Rod, mercy without stripes; for his stripe^ convey his
mercy to us by amending us. Such wanton Adoniahs, who from their youth must not
have so much said to them, as, Why have ye done so? may prove fair, but very
seldom good. 1. King. 1. 6.
David was better instructed with the terrors of God from his youth up;
therefore confesses, It is good for me that I Psalm. 119. 71.
have been afflicted, that I might learn thy Statutes. You see the first
daughter of Affliction.

The next is Approbation. God gives his children Plin. 7. c. 2.
such trials, as the Psylli in Africa were said to cast theirs (...).
before Serpents, which hurt them not, if they were legitimate; or as they were
reported, to throw their infants upon the Rhene, which drowned the adulterate
blood, but rendered the unstained to the careful mother again: Iul. ep maxim*
so God proves us, that he may approve us, to the intent, 1. Pet. 1. 23.
that we might know what he knew before all Worlds, Romans 8. 35.
that we are borne of an immortal seed, and no affliction Dum tenuitas in
corpore pallor in vultu, virtus patefacta est. Tho. Aquin. in Mat.
can separate v^ from him. Night puts not out, but more clearly shows the
stars: a thin and sickly body shows the patience of the godly, so are
our losses gainefull.

Cast all thy care upon God: thou art in the hands of a Use.
faithful Creator, who will not deal ouer-roughly with thee. He said of
Israel, in all her troubles he was troubled, Isai* 63. 9:
and that he bare them and carried them continually. Again, as an Eagle
stirs up her nest, ^uttereth over her birds, takes Deuteronomy. 32. 11; 12, 13.
them and bears them on her wings; so the Lord alone Sentientem quid rapiat
in Ganymede, and cui ferat, parcentem vnguibus etiam per vestem: Plin. l. 34.
c. 8.
carried them on the high places of the earth, but as Leocras made the Eagle,
carrying Ganymede so tenderly, as if he had known what she was carrying, and
to whom, onel^ griping his clothes with her tallons. Sickness and pains are
the sharp tallons, in which God takes us up to prove us, but so gently, that
he hurts not. That makes the experienced Saint entertain Gods corrections
with alacrity, o si mihi leui daret salutem vulnere. Amb. de virg. l. 3.
whilst to the wicked man they are as dreadful as some inexorable Sergeant to
a bankrupt Debtor. David says God shall suddenly shoot at them, and they
shall be wounded, but the good man shall not be afraid for any evil tidings, nor
for the flying arrow. Though the good and bad indifferently seem the mark at
which death shoots, sickness, yet to the good man's heart the Lord says as
the Prophet to Ioas^, Behold the arrow of the Lords deliverance; 2. King. 13.
17.
pains are to them the arrows of the Almighty, ( David and Job were very
sensible of them) but like Ionathans 1. Sam. 20:
arrows, shot to warn, not to wound. Blessed is the just (mark the man) what
ever he suffer, his end Psalm. 37. 37.
shall be peace: he is comforted in his bodies infirmity 2. Cor. 4. 16.
and decay, by the sense and assurance of his inward Barba comaeque canitie
posita nigru^ rapuere colorem: pulsa fugit macies, abeunt vallorque situsque
met. l. 7.
man's renewing: death to him is but like (...) sword in old Aeson's throat,
letting cut the old blood to renew his age, an age which in spite of time
shall never be old.

The good and bad must be sick, and dye, and both return out of deaths
lightlesse prison, but like Pharoahs Genesis 40.
servants, one to honor the other to execution: even death approves the
righteous, wherein Christ is our advantage, Phil. 1. 21.
and death so bitter-sweet a gain, that even they which fear it, desire it:
Let me die the death of the righteous, and Numb. 23. 10.
let my last end be like his, said the unrighteous Prophet. Sickness is the
suburbs of death, death the gate of Heaven (a loathed Gate to so desired a
City:) Opinion and humane failtie for a time shuts the Saint from his
desires, but when the Angel of the Lord shall call us, as Peter out of prison,
these chains shall fall off, and those Act. 12. 7. 10.
Iron Gates which lead to the City, open by it own accord, and give an easy
passage. Then especially shall God approuevs: then we shall know, that all
these bodily pains are like the Babylonish fire, in which the Children Dan. 3.
22. 27:
walk safely, and their Tormentors only perish; and like the Red Sea, in
which the Egyptian is drowned, Exo. 14. 28, 29
but the Israelite passes through them, to his long desired rest.

Here is Afflictions second daughter; a Naomi, though Ruth. 1. 20.
she would be called Marah: the reward is next, the joys which grow among the
thorns of sorrow; and they are seven sweet Babes of an ill*looking Mother.

The first is, Sickness weaneth us from the love of the World: Israel loved
her bondage too well, though she groaned under it; God suffered her to be
afflicted, to Ecce mundus turbat and amatur, quid si tranquillus esset?
force her to seek a better rest. We find many inconveniences in the World,
yet we cleave to it; what would we do, if there were none? How would they
love a fair Rahel, who (...) so much on a bleare-eyed Leah? extremity of
pain is the only Wormwood which God lays to the breast, to draw our loves
from this infected Nurse, the World, which we only enjoy in health; without
which, all earthly joys are but as Messes of Meat set Ecclus. 30. 18.
upon a Grave.

Secondly, it brings us more acquainted with death, and makes him less
feared, by how much more familiar: how bitter is the remembrance of death to
the always healthie? health and prosperity make us desirous to live.
Antigonus soldier healed of a long-felt infirmity, proved a very Coward; for
which being reproved, he replied, Thou, O King, have made me so, who by giving
me Tu me minus audace^ (...) quod ijs malis me vindicasti quibus a me vita
co^temptui habebatur.
health have taken away the contempt I had of life. Discontents have strange
power to make us love death (so through a dark and false Medium, the ugly may
seem fairer:) (...) desires the death from which he fled; a little heat made
Jonah wish to die: short p^nes have so overcome the wicked, that they have
changed them for death eternal; and so much discovered the Saints infirmities,
that they have loathed not only their present being, Ier. 20. 14.
Job 3. 3.
but what they have been. Death seems better Ecclus. 30. 17.
then a bitter life, such force have short pains: but who Subire semel satius,
quam cauere semper* Suet vit. Iul.
was ever so fearful, that he had not rather once fall, then ever hang by the
hands; once dye, then ever fear death, and live in pain?

Thirdly, it makes Gods mercy in health better understood: if all were day,
the light; if all Summer, even that season would be unpleasing to us: the good
we Aug. de Ciu. Dei, l. 14. c. 17.
have, is commended by some annexed contrary: the pain of the disease known,
the pleasure of health is sweeter. We never rightly account what we owe to
God for health, save when we beg it in sickness.

Fourthly, it brings us to God in amendment of a misspent life: we have
instance in many, of whom I may fay, their extremities amended them, their
prosperity Confessus in fluctibus negauit in terra emendauit aque quem terrena
deflexerant.
corrupted them. As Ambrose says of Peter and Jonah, he confessed Christ on
the waves, but denied him on the land; and Jonah fled Gods presence, seeming
safe, but found a Chapel to pray and praise God in the belly of the Whale.
Many being in health, endeavor to fly from God, but in some desperate
sickness they learn to sing Aegra anima deo propinqua Greg. Naz. ep. 190:
their De profundis; sickness mendeth that good man, whom health marred: When
I afflict them, they will seek me early. Ephraim bemoaned himself, Thou have
chastened Hos. 5. 15.
me, surely after that I was instructed, I repented. God Ier. 31. 18, 19.
cures a dissolute heart as the Prophet did Ierico Waters, 2. King. 2. 20, 21.
by ^asting in salt, sharp, biting remedies.

The fifth is Patience: which as one said of Learning, is (...)
an Ornament in prosperity, and a Refuge in adversity. It is good for a man
(says the weeping Prophet) to bear the yoke Arist.
in his youth: he puts his mouth to the dust, if there may be Laert. l. 5.
hope; he gives his cheek to him that smites him. It seems Lament. 3. 27.
a strange saying: Is it good to be afflicted, that I may learn patience? see
the reason: It is a rare thing to see a man externally prosperous, patient; I
grant he may have a disposition to patience, he may discourse like some bookish
soldier of the wars, which never saw fight: but patience is the child of
adversity: and considering the manifold calamities to which every man in this
life is subject, no ways to be avoided, but by patient bearing them, it
seems to me no paradox, that without outward or in ward adversity, it is not
easy for a man to be happy. They judge amiss, who think a man can be
patient without trials, or happy without patience: that such a man may seem
happy, we know; that he is generally unhappy, we may learn. Chrysostom
says well of prospe^tie, De amore De and (...), To. 5.
It has brought in grievous Masters and Tyrants to the (...). To omit the
multitude, and speak of this one, (...) animae suae heroes tyrannosque invexi^.
Impatience is a very Tyrant, worse then (...) and his Taske-masters, for it
suffers not a man to ^nioy any thing he has: Has the impatient man riches?
he enjoys them not, who is impatient for that (...) has no more: has he
friends? either he loses them by his impatience, or else enjoys them not
with whom he is displeased (...) has he a fair and prosperous estate? what
is that to him who is not pleased with it? has he health? his minds
distemper robs him of the use of it. In a word, the impatient man possesses
nothing (except he possesses other things which possesses not himself:)
Christ says, By your patience (...) your souls; without Luke 21. 19.
patience you cannot enjoy your selves: such is the impatient man's case. Mark
the man: neither understanding, will, memory, neither hand nor tongue serve
him, all are In homine impatiente dominatur ira and furor, and eum possident
(...). in Luc part. 2.
slaves to passion; and whilst he thinks he has all things in having his
froward humor, indeed Impatience has him, but he has nothing, not so much as
himself. Now trials bring forth patience, and the quiet fruits of
righteousness; which follow in the next place. Romans 5. 3.


Sixthly, it works to the children of God a peace passing all understanding of
a natural man; that is, a calmness and quietness of mind in the experience
of Gods mercies. Where the seditious Gra^us was s^aine at Aug. de Ciu. Dei, l.
3. c. 25.
Rome, the Temple of Concord was built: so, there God foundeth in our hearts
the Temple of Peace, where our peacelesse sins are buried with Christ, and
our impatience in our sufferings.

Seventhly, the last is the reward, whereof this life tastes only first
fruits, a cluster from Eshcol; the assurance of a Numb. 13. 24.
better life in this lives decaying: Our light afflictions for a 2. Cor. 4. 17.
moment causing unto us a greater weight of eternal glory.

As Samson said of his Lion of Timnah, Out of the eater Use.
came meat, and out of the strong came sweetness: So will I Judge. 14. 14.
conclude this point: What stronger then Sickness, or more devouring then
Death? or so sweet as Heaven? Behold, Happy is the man whom God corrects:
therefore Job. 5. 17, 18.
despise not thou the chastening of the Almighty, for he makes sore, and
binds up, he wounds, and his hands make Salus cum gemitu coniuncta est.
Greg. Naz. orat. 17.
whole. He makes whole by wounding. It is for children and fools to imagine
Frosts, Storms, and Rain, either the offspring of Chance, or vselesse
effects of Nature: the wiser know, that milder Winters are the undoubted
Parents of sterilitie and contagion: Storms, which seem the Diseases of a
distempered Sky, do purge the Air; and the dewie Clouds are Gods Clepsydra,
his Bottles to water the Earth: so is it in man. And the Saints weeping eyes
are Gods Clouds, to make fruitful a penitent heart. Faint not at thy trials,
but be zealous, Re^. 3. 19.
and amend. Sin no more.

THE FOVRTH SERMON.
Sin no more.
WE have considered in the last place, the cause of Sicknesses, and the reasons
why God afflicts with them; as also what effects they work in them to whom
they are sanctified: It remains, that I also show the end why God delivers,
and bestows health upon us.

God delivers from Sickness, that being thereby warned, we might sin no
more. There are many reasons dissuading from sin: let us consider a few of
many. Let the first be this present Doctrine.

First, God gives us health, that we might avoid sin.

Secondly, there is nothing of it own nature evil, but Genesis 1. 31.
sin: ere sin was borne, God saw all his Creatures, Contrary to the dream^
of the Maniches.
even the Angels, which falling, became damned Devils, the Beasts, the
Serpents, and all that he had made, and lo it Aug. de Ciu. Dei, l. 11. c. 22.
was very good: nothing created, is evil; sin is a non en^, a privation of
the good was made. Malum itaq^e proprie tantum est peccatum. Basil. Quod Deus
non est author maloru^.


Thirdly, only sin is against Nature, a very Monster of the Soul, as
Monsters are said by the Naturalist to be the error^ of Nature: our nature,
which sin corrupted, is (of it self) good; and to good: nothing but (...)
evil is contrary: Sin therefore primarily being the only ^uill, is so
only contrary, and destructive to Nature.

Fourthly, Sin i^ cont^ie to God: nothing of that he made, is contrary to
him, for all beeings are in him; and God made all, sin only excepted: by
sin we oppose Gods soueraign^e, not by nature, but by Aug. de Ciu. Dei, l.
12. c. 3.
corruption of will; having no power to hurt God: our will to hurt makes us
Gods f^s: our nature therefore it is not Ioh. 8. 44. 1. Ioh. 3. 8.
but our sin that contrarieth God, evil only being contrary to good.

Fifthly, it makes us children of the Devil, not Non carnis originem ducendo,
sed per imitationem* Bed.
by Propagation, but Imitation; not by Generation, but by doing his works of
Rebellion against God.

Sixthly, Sin only hurts us: the vice that ^aketh Aug: quo sup. l. 12. c. 3.
us oppose God, is only our own hurt, no ways Gods; because it corrupts
our nature, of it self good. Sin Mark. 9. 18. 22.
is like that evil Spirit in the possessed, tearing and raging, Isai 64. 5.
and ^asting us into the fire. Infinite are the miseries Isai 59. 2.
borne of sin: it makes God angry with us, Prou. 3. 33.
it separateth us from him, it draws the Curse of the Isai 1. 15.
Lord upon our Houses, it shuts out our prayers Deu. 28. 58, 59
from Gods ears, it subiecteth us to all Miseries, Sicknesses, Pains, Death:
I have not yet said all; Doctores Nouatianorum se MVNDOS appellant. Ambr. de
poen. l 1. c. 1.
when all Warnings will not serve, a worse thing shall befall the Sinner;
which, like Tamerlans ^able Flagge, comes in the Rere and last part of my
Text.

But is there any perfection in this life? Can any Parvulos omnes sine peccato
nasci and electos in hac vita tantum proficere posse vt SINE PECCATO exi^am.
in, this life be without sin? The Iusticiaries affirm it; the Nouatians
said they were (...); the Pelagians denied Original Corruption, and said, the
Elect may be without Sin in this life: a man not sinning, but where shall we
find the man* Come to the Saint^, thou shall hear them crying, Bed. exposit,
in 1. Ioh. 1.
enter not into i^dgement with thy servants O Lord. Again, Psalm. 143. 1. 2.
we all have ^one astray like sheep: again, I see another Isai. 53 6.
law in my members, Leading me captive unto the law of sin. Romans 7. 23.
There is not aiust man upon the earth that does good and sins Eccles. 7. 20.
not: then who can say I have made my heart clean, I am Prou. 20. 9.
pure from sin? Sin no more. O wretched man that I am Romans 7. 24.
who shall deliver me from the body of this death? How heavy Nullus mayor est
dolor quam is qui peccati mucrone vulnerat co^scientiam: grauia mi fili, grauia
nimis sunt delictorum pondera. Ambr. l. 5. ep. 18.
are the burdens of sin? how smartfull the wounds of a guilty conscience?
give me any grief it is easier: it is for thy sake sin the Saint often
cries, I desire to be dissolved. For the contagion has i^fected every part,
and dispersed it self through my veins: all my thoughts, wo^s and works,
relish of thee: if I examine my best actions, I find them faulty: in my
prayers, suggestions, and profane wanderings fall upon mine heart like the
fowls on Genesis 15. 11*
Abrahami sacrifice. In my hearing distraction, in my alms vain glory, or
some sinister respect, which like the the worm at Ionah^ gourd, ^ateth up the
life of goodness; as (...) men said of the Philistims, Behold we are afraid 1.
Sam. ^3. 3.
here in (...), how much more then if we come to Keilah, against the ^rmies of
the Philisti^s? If sin assail us in our bestactions, how shall we deal with
it in other? how fayst thou then, O Lord, finne no more? Lord thou know Si
peccatum meum esset atra mento conscriptum forsitan delerem: nunc autem
scriptum est in stilo ferreo. Origin.
my thoughts, my heart fails me because of my sins, and I desire nothing in
the world like this, that I might sin no more. If my sin were written with
Ink, I could perhaps put it out; but now it is written in mine heart like
(...), with an Iron: pen. Lord if thou will thou c^nst mak^ me clean.

The tables of the law were written and broken; and written again by the
finger of God. God wrote the law s. Ier.
in man's heart; sin brake these Tables, and now we are Exodus 32. 19.
the writing of the ^ame. God whoing ing^ueth in the fleshy Exodus 34. 1.
Tables of the h^rt, by the same Spirit of his, whose finger Deuteronomy. 10. 4.
writing in the dust (where finners are written) did cancel 2. Cor. 3. 3.
and put out the hand writing of sin, and acquitting of Ierem. 17. 1^.
others accusations, blessedly dismissed and gave a qui^tus est neither do I
condemn thee: go and si^ne no more: Ioh. 8. 8. 11.
how did she not sin being humane? how did she fulfill Nihil peccare solius
est dei.
his command if she did sin? none live which sin Amb l. 1. ep. 3.
not. Therefore Gods family says not, I am whole, I need Ambr. de paen. l. 1.
c. 4.
no Physician, but heal me O Lord, and I shall be whole, save me and I shall
be saved. When of old God brake Isreal's Ier. 17. 14.
yoke she said, I will no m^re transgress; she said it, but as we say it,
only as Ambrose said of Calanus answer to Alexander, L. 2. ep. 7.
^raeclara verba, sed verba, excellent words, but words, excellent constancy,
but the constancy of a man: for she did sin more and more.

But says he not, Whosoever is borne of God sins not: yet there is no man
that does good and (...) not. None? 1. Ioh. 3. 9.
Eccles. 7. 20
no not one: These two come like Esau and Jacob with (...)
the face of enmity till they meet, and are reconciled. Romans 3. 12.
All sin, would God we had no proof for it: yet the just sin not: which
we understand not as Bede of mortal sins or the violation of Charity, but
as the Spirit of God, the best interpreter of himself; If I do^ that which I
would not, I consent to the law, that it is good, now then it Romans 7. 16. 17,
is NO MORE I THAT DO IT, but the sin that dwells in me. The regenerate in a
right sense sin not; they ^inne not, because they do that they would not,
and where they will, they would not will the evil which sin ^raweth them to.
There is a sin then which makes the saint of God groan, an inhabiting, Romans
8.
Romans 6. 12.
not a reigning sin, an inmate, not a king. The righteous Psalm. 32. 1. 2.
sin not, that is, God covers their sins, Penitus ea tollit vt non sinit
quorum memor non erit. Amb. l. 5. ep. 19.
and imputes them not, he takes them quite away, which he will no more
remember, as he said of the Edo^ites, they shall be as if they had not been,
there shall be no remnant of them: though he cast not out these Obadia, 16. 18
Iebusites all at once: yet sins receiving their deathswound, by little and
little bleed to death all our life after, like a desperate enemy fighting in
blood, and striking with dying hands.

The Separatists seek a spotless congregation, forgetting our mothers
confession, I am black O daughters of Cant. 1. 5.
Jerusalem, but comely. Black, that is dis-coloured with (...).
sins, but comely with the beauty he puts on her An tist. Laert. l. 6.
who calls her his fair one. Calisto in the fable fled her fellow Beare^,
forgetting her own ill shapes. They Cant. 2. 10, 13.
Vrsaque, conspectos in montibus horruit v^sos.
fly us sinners, themselves by so much greater sinners, by how much more
forgetting they are ^nners: they look for a Church not on earth to be found.

Saul sought A^ses and found a kingdom: they seek a kingdom not to be
found, but shall find, I will only say, men like themselves: Gods Church like
Jacobs flock consists of spotted sheep, saints, but full of blemishes.

Be not discouraged, if thou see sin lives: thou can Use.
Galat. 5. 17
be but partly spirit, and the ^lesh will lust against it: Aug. de ciui. dei.
l. 3. c. 26.
after the building the Temple of Concord (...) Rome, the slaves wars
engarboyled their ^erritories: afte^ we have erected the Temple of peace in a
good conscience, and in a good part subjected sin, yet we must look for the
slaves wars, the rebellion of inordinate affection, which in this life will
never leave us secure conquerors. Our righteousness consists (says
Augustine) rather Aug. quo. sup. l. 19. c. 27.
in the free remission of sins, then of virtues perfection, witness that
daily prayer which Christ taught us, Forgive us our trespasses. Here some
infirmity or other creeps on the best Conqueror, our sins subdued by a
dangerous conflict, deny us all security, and keep us busied in a continual
and careful command: And thus concl^deth, man's justice is to have God his
Lord, himself his subject, his soul master of his body, and his Phil. 3. 13.
14.
reason over sin, either by subduing or resisti^g it. Paul said, I count not my
self that I have attained to it, but I follow. We but follow perfection in
this life we obtain it in the life to come. At Rome the temple of vest was
placed out (...) in hac vita sequimur, assequimur in futura*
of the gates: so it is with us, we have here no rest, especially no truce with
sin, no rest from it, that is reserved for heaven: he forgiueth here* but
purges from all when he brings us into that life* in which the saints neither
will nor can sin any more. Death shall end sin: death is a true viper, it
ki^th i^ wicked parents, though Gods children (by the men's of Christ) like Paul
at Melita, shake it off In qua pecca^ nec v^lint vl^a nec valiant. Bed. e^. in
John. 1.
into the fi^: sin is deaths mother, but the hasty kind (...) through her
mothers bowels. Sin began death, death ends sin; death came into the world
through sin, sin goes out of the world through Act. 28. 5.
death. At death the Lord will tell us as Moses of the reuengefull (...). 14.
13*
Egyptians. Fear not: ^ohold the deliverance of the Lord which he will show to
you this day, the sins ye have seen, ye shall never see them again.

This sin no more then, seems to respect a comparison betwixt his life past
and to come; and the same is required Cur iustus non sit, qui contra
iniustitiam suam iam per lachrymas saeuit Bed. in 1. Ioh. 2 (...), post sapio,
vt Plat. in Gor. (...).
at our hands, that we sin no more. That is, first that we repent us of our
sins, of which I shall hereafter speak. We cease to be sinners when we
doctruely repent that ever we have been sinners.

Secondly, (as much as possibly we may) we must change the habits of our
mind. True repentance is not a bare confession, but a change of our former
mind and In Graeco sono paenitentiae nomen non ex delicti confessione, sed ex
animi de mu* tatione compo situm est. Tert. aduers. Marcio^ (...). 2. c. 24.
purpose upon a better consideration: the converted young man answered, his lewd
acquaintance well, wondering why he knew her not: she saying, ( Ego sum) sed ego
non sumego: I am not now my former self.

Thirdly, we must take heed we fall not back to our (...) sins. Sin like
Aetna's fire has some intermissions* but when we think it extinguished, it
flameth out a fresh: the more we sin, the more difficult the cure, but Amb ^e
paen. (...): 2. c. 10.
relapses are most dangerous. When the proud Tyrant Amurath, secure of victory
thought the battle done, his danger was begun in his lives ending, a Christian
soldier Interualla sua habet. cum desaeuijsse crediter redit.
supposed slain, rose up and stroke him to the heart, When we are secure and
think right worthily of our selves, some sin or other, will as it were, rise
from the Si accidat in eodem vulnere iterum and saepius vnl^eretur quantis
potest cruciatibus medicari. Origin.
dead, and fall upon us dangerously.

Fourthly, we must be heartily displeased with our sins: sin like the poison
of the Aspe affects with a drowsy delight where it hurts mortally: some
among the Triballs (said Pliny) if they were angry could kill with their eye:
that which he said of them, thou shall thus find Non nocet cui non placet
peccatum, Greg. l. 7. c. 2.
true of sin: be angry with it and thou killest the heart of it. Sin is a
wanton fondling, if it be not loved it will die.

Lastly, strive against thy sins: if thou yield not thou have overcome: In
Gods esteem we cease to be what we unwittingly are: sin leads the Saint
like a captive Nonne ita istud est ac si quis captivum victae vrbis populum
abducat Captiuus abducitur, sed inuitus. Amb. de paen. l 1 c. 4.
Israelite to Babylon. He goes but against his desire, he deuiseth how he may
return; to another purpose says Gregory, that good soul is gone home, which
languished abroad. This is the sum: give not thy consent to sin, but if
thou have consented, let it not please thee: if sin have pleased thee, be
now heartily displeased, that sin ever pleased thee: in this life God Illa
bona anima ad suam patriam peruenit, quae in patria laborabat aliena. l. 6. cp.
19 Plut. vit. Brut;
looks not so much for a man not sinning (such is our fraylty, such his
mercy) as unwilling to sin, repenting, resisting sin, endeavoring not to
sin. As Brutus wrote to the Pergamenians, when they had given his enemy
Dolabella money, if you have done it willingly, you confess you have offended
me* if against your wills, show it then by giving me willingly.

So says the Spirit in effect, as ye have yielded your Romans 6* 19.
members servants to uncleanness; even so now, yield your members servants to
righteousness: show that you sinned unwillingly, by serving God more
willingly. Sin no more. To which observe these rules of practice.

1 Remember always thou art in the presence of God. This ^eple knew him not
that healed him; but (...)
Jesus knew him, and the cause of his disease. The Samaritan John 4. 29.
Cave tibi ob praesentiam eius. Iun. and Trem. Exodus 23. 21.
woman acknowledged, he told her all that ever she had done. God told Israel he
would send his Angel before them to keep them in the way, but says he,
beware of him, and (...) his voice, and provoke him not. Set up the Arc that
Dagon may be cast down. Remember that the eye Prou. 5. 21.
of Jesus is ever upon thee. if thou look he should protect Eccles. 12.
thee; provoke him not: we forget God when we Math. 12.
dare sin: remember ever thy ways are before the eyes of the Lord. 2
Secondly, remember that all thy thoughts, words, and actions shall come into
judgment. 3 Thirdly, bury not the checks of thy conscience; the conscience is
an excellent counselor, and will deal faithfully: if all the world would
flatter thee, thy conscience will neither flatter nor conceal, neither give
rest, Isai. 48. 22.
till sin, like Jonah be thrown out: the devil sleeps in the sinners
bosom, but gives no true rest. Ion^hs sleep was the ships unrest. 4 Fourthly,
guard the passages of thy soul. Keep thine heart with all (...). Job will
teach thee a part, who Prou. 4. 23.
made a covenant with his eyes; the Recabites a part who drank no wine:
Solomon a part, who said, Consider diligently what is before thee, otherwise
thou putst as it were Prou. 23. 23.
thy knife to thy throat, if thou be a man given to the appetite, be not
desirous of dainty meat, for it is a deceivable meat. The Iud. I 2. 5. 6.
senses (like the passages of Jordan taken by the Gileadites) watched by the
temperate, would cut off many sins: we must do by sins as with some strong
fort, if it cannot be forced we must cut off all forragers, and so starve
Sapienter illicita superat qui didicerit non vti concessis. Greg. l. 7. ep. 39.
the defendants. Lust and drunkenness live at full tables, pleasure is the
Nurse of sin; if there be a famine of temperance they are gone to soiourne
also here. He wisely overcomes things unlawful, who has learned not to use
the lawful. Paul will teach thee an excellent part, in avoiding inconvenient
talk: our Savior has comprised Ephesians. 5 4.
all in this one, Watch that ye enter not into temptation. We perish like
Isbosheth sleeping whilst we dream of 2. Sam. 4. 5. 6.
no danger. Fifthly, let every sin be the more heartily repented, by how
much oftener it assayleth: if sin will needs dwell with thee, use the
deceiuer, as Israel the Gibeonites, Josh. 9. 3. 23.
cause it to hew wood and draw water for the house of God; sin draws water
when it makes us weep bitterly for that we have offended: it heweth wood,
when it enflameth us with a zealous anger against our selves, and with an
hearty desire and care to serve God the more, the more we consider we have
offended him. Sweet waters kill the Purple, sin is that Purple, and Plin. l.
9. 46.
tears the purest water: not as if repentance were the primarie isntrumental
cause of our sins remission. Christ's blood kills sin to Gods judgment,
repentance to our conscience, till we repent we shall never be assured of our
sins forgiveness. God for the merits Fecisti quod boni parents vt cito
ignoscercs sed OBSECRATVS nam antequam rogareris, non erat ignoscere sed factum
approbare. Amb. l. 6. ep. 43.
of Christ forgiueth, but with this condition, that we repent, which he also
gives. That which Ambrose speaks to Sisynnius will express it: Thou have
done like a good parent, soon forgiving, but being first entreated; for to
give pardon before it be asked, is not to pardon but to approve the fact: as
fathers loves forgive their children faults, yet their submission is expected,
that they may say we forgive. So God looks that we repent that he may have
mercy: repentance is the gate of Ianua regni penitentia est.
heaven: a gate leading to the door of life, Christ Jesus. Ne in ipsa
penitentia fiat quod postea indigeat paenitentia.

But lest we repent of our repentance, observe, that repentance must be done
speedily, truly, thoroughly, and constantly.

First speedily, in the days of thy youth: sin gains Amb. de paen. l. 2.
c. 11.
strength by age: blessed is he that dasheth her children young as dying A^rath
of Scanderbeg: this ^aytour should have been suppressed in that newness of
his estate: give thy sin no time. Repent speedily. Amb. 10. l. com in Luc. 22.


Secondly, repent truly. The more thou sinnest, weep Lego quod fleuit, non
lego quod satisf^cit.
the more, abyssus, abyss^m vocat. D^pth of sin a deep sourse of tears: as
Peter wept; of whom I read he wept, I ^ead not that he satisfied: as the sinner
wept, Luke 7. Si eam aequare non possumus scit dominus Jesus and infirmis
subuenire. Amb. de paen. l. 2. c. 8:
Or if thou can not equal her, (God knows how to supply the weak) yet let
thy sorrow be true. Some have tears at command, yet weep like Apollo^ statue
without sense: it is not formal penance, (hypocrisy can resemble grace,
Vibius may be like Pompey.) It is not a thousand Aug. l. 3. de ciu. dei. c. 11.
stripes, not the clothes, nor back, but the heart must be Joel. 2. 13.
rent. As for the hypocrites which tender God a counterfeit Qui foris
praetendunt intus oppugnant.
sorrow, God shall pay them with true.

Thirdly, repent thoroughly. That is, of every sin. We will be content to
leave ^ome gainelesse sins; but Ambr. ^
we spare one Agag of our Amalekite^ designd to death. In 2. King. 11. 2.
the slaughter of our sins we snatch up one as Ieh^sheba caught up loash and
his Nurse, with that we run away that it may reign over us: though we hear
it reproved and the danger preached, yet of it our heart cries, (...) Agripine
of her son Nero (when the Astrologers told her at his nativity, he should be
an Emperor, but should kill his mother) occidat dum regnet; Let him kill me
so he may reign. Iehu destroyed B^al out of Israel, but 2. King. 10. 38. ^9.
from the sinne^ of Jeroboam he departed not: God commands concerning
sin, as (...) by his first edict against the Jews, in all his Provinces to
(...) Ester. 3. 1^.
out, to kill, and to destroy them, both y^g and old. Quid prodest cuncta
^unijsse si per vnum locum, pernitiosus hosti praebeatur accessus?


What avails it to fortify all the Citadell, if we leave open-some posterne
gate to a vigilant enemy? I conclude as the Orator of his Catiline, if of so
great a rabble of Traitors, he only be taken away, we may perhaps a while
seem freed of fear and car^: but the danger Greg l. 7. ^p. ^10.
will reside, shut up in the veins and bowels of the state; so sick men, in
their hot fits, at first seem eased Cic. Orat. 1. in Catilin.
by a draught of cool water, but afterward more vehemently burn. And this
sickness of the Commonweal, eased a little with his only death, shall grow
more desperate by his fellows lives.

Fourthly, Repent constantly: It is not hanging the head for a day, which God
accepts; as our sins are Isai 58. 5.
continual, so must our repentance be: We smite our sins as Iehoash smote
the ground with his arrows, 2. King. 13. 19.
three times, and so we cease, where we should have smitten till we had
consumed them. Sin is an hardy and puissant foe, and will not so be
overcome. It is not easi^ (said Amurath to his discomforted souldier^ before
Croya) without bloody hands to put the yoke on the fierce enemies neck. The
very cause of our easy falling back into sin, is, that we charge it
cowardly, and soon give over the pursuit. In these four Channels, Repentance,
like the River of Paradise, waters a zealous heart; and all make a fifth rule
of Practice.

A sixth is, Abstain from all appearance of evil. The Devil is subtle, and
makes the way to Hell easy. Sin like Eliahs Cloud on Carmel, is not to be
seen at first, when Satan suggesteth, and after it appears but in the
bigness of a man's hand: but if we fly it not, there is a noise of much Rain:
the full Vialls of Gods Wrath. Come not near her dwelling, it is ill jesting
with sin: as Delilah acted sin, so sin plays the Delilah: (...) makes
love at first, at l^st she cutteth off our strength, and causes to be put out
the strong man's eyes: so that he that at first was not afraid of appearances of
evil, presently grows impudent, and cannot or will not see the greatest
sins.

Seventhly, Take away all occasions of sin. Moses Vt omnia impietatis
aboleret ve^igia.
stamped the Idol into powder, to take away occasion of Idolatry. Not only
Ba^li Image, but the Groves, and Amb* l. 7. ep. 57.
his House, ought to be beaten to the ground: for sin is an importunate
solicitour, like Ben-badads crafty Messengers, 1: King. 20. 33.
it watches diligently to catch any thing of us: if we acknowledge the least
acquaintance, it not need be entreated to take hold of it.

When Pharaoh saw there was no remedy, but the Israclit^s would leave his
service: he gives way, only says he, leave your cattle behind you. He
knew that would occasion their return; but Moses said, I will not leave one
hoof: the devil desires we but leave something to bring us back, though
we leave him for a time: But we must resolve with Moses, not to leave the
least.

Origin speaking of the cleansing the Leper, understands S. Leuit. h^. 8.
omne quicquid e mortui operis.
by the shauing the hair, the cutting off all that belongs to the dead
works of sin. All occasion must be cut off, that the souls leprosy may be
cleansed. Theseus shaued off his comely locks, that his enemy Plut. vit.
These. ne ansam preberet.
might catch no hold. If it be as dear as thine Hand, or Eye, Christ says cut
it off, pull it out, if it occasion thee to offend. There is nothing so dear
as Salvation, nothing more dangerous then Opportunity and Occasion. When we
have even departed from the danger, and are gone, Occasion comes posting
after, like the old lying Prophet of Bethel, and tells us, An Angel spoke 1.
King. 13. (...) 18.
unto him, saying, Bring him back again: but if we go back, Gods
Judgments lie ready in our way to destroy us.

Eighthly, let not thy affections be governors of thy will: It is a weak
Master, where Servants rule the Family. The affections are like the Mamalukes,
which the Turks in Egypt at first entertained for slaves, to serve them in
their Wars; who finding their own strength, abandoned their Masters, and
became Lords of Egypt. Affections are like the Fire and Water, necessary and
excellen^ Servants, but tyrannous Masters: A man given to passion, and
appetite, has no more rule of himself, then a Drunken or Mad man. Affection
is a Lesbian rul^, it will fit the most crooked design: Ask Affection, it
will tell thee, nothing is sweeter then Revenge; it will say, Drunkenness is a
pleasant life, Covetousness is Parsimonie. Consult not therefore with thy
Affections, but rule them by the Word of God.

Ninthly, resolve every day to win something from thy self. The very Lions
are tamed, and by little and little forget their savage mind. Thou may say,
I am of an intemperate and angry disposition: It were shame to say, thou art
by nature worse then a Beast: They are made gentle, or less in industry then
their Keepers; even they tame their cursed Masters, and by serving them, at last
make them tractable Servants. Some esteem this impossible, because having
suddenly assailed to subdue some affection in themselves, they have failed. Be
contented, Qui Iocum summum ascendere nititur gradibus non saltibus eleuatur.
Greg. l. 9. ep, 71.
gain constantly from sin, though by littles at once: they which climb
high, content themselves with small steps: it is no easy leap to Heaven;
the foot of Goodness stands like Jacobs Ladder, on the ground, of little
beginnings, though the top reach Heaven. Genesis 28.
Vnde irrepsit morbus inde remediu^ intret auris prima mortis ianua prima
aperia^ae and vitae. Bern, in Cant.


^he last Rule is, Hear the Word, and pray. Among the Ceremonies of cleansing
the Leper, Origin observes, That the right car^, the thumb of the right hand,
and the great toe of the right foot must be touched with the blood of the
Sinne-offering; signifying, that all our actions must be holy, and that we must
no more run back to the errors of youth: The right ear Vt munda sint opera
nec vltra lapsus iuventutis incurrat.
must first be touched, that is the means to purify the rest. Whether it
signify we must not come to Gods Word Malcus-like, with a left ear, an ear
not fitted, S. Leuit. 14.
but a right ear^, an ear to a prepared heart: Ioh. 18. 10.
Such an ear had Lydia, whose heart the Lord had Act. 16. 14.
opened: such had they, who were pricked in their hearts, when they heard
Peter: such ears and hearts Act. 2. 37.
only are they; to which he says as to the deaf, Mar. 7. 34. (...), Be
opened: such have they to whom he addresseth his often repeated admonition,
Let him that has Reu. 2. 7* 11. 17. 29. and 3. 6. 13. 22.
an (...) (a right (...)) hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches; for
the words of God are life unto those that Prou. 4. 22.
find them, and health unto all their flesh. To this right Libellum que
insidiarum libellis caeteris.
care we must have a right hand: we must not put the Word into a sinister, a
left hand, as C^sar did the poor Quos sinistra manu tenebat quasi mox
lecturus. Suet. C: Iul. Caes.
man's Petition, discovering the Conspiracy, meaning to peruse it at leisure.
We must presently lay it to our Consciences, lest we find not another hour
to repent in. We must also have a right foot, lest (...) offer the sacrifice
of Fools. To such the Word is the Eccles. 4. 17.
Fire, to burn out the Dross of Sin; the Hammer Ier. 23. 29.
Heb. (...). 12.
to break the Heart of Stone; a lively Word, sharper Quovis gladio vtrinque
incidente. Erasm.
then any two-edged Sword, cutting off Sins Hydra head.

But if the Word have such power, why then (may our Mother now say) (...) not
the health of the daughter of Ier. 8. 22:
my people recovered? Is there no (...) at our Gilead? Have we no Physician
here? The Word is not now locked up in an unknown Tongue: those dumb Astomi,
mouth-lesse Prophets, have not now the watch over our flocks. These are the
periods of Time, in which the Lord has powered out his Spirit. If ever Age
abounded with Blessings of Peace, and Security, Preaching, and enormious
living, for many; then this much more (give me leave, the Lord has spoken,
even Amos 3. 8.
of late from Heaven, Who can but prophecy?) the proud still enlarges his
desire as Hell: still the Oppressor Habac. 2. 5.
does store up Violence, borne (as one said of ^sius) to Pride and Cruelty.
The false Weights and Amos 3. 10.
Measures are still in our Houses: the horrible abuse of Gods blessings, in
Surfeiting and Drunkenness, are still amongst us: still the Sweater rages,
and that apish Zeph. 1. 8.
affectation of strange Apparel possesses the giddie multitude, begging from
the hands of Time and Oblivion the life of the Oppian Law: such a ripeness of
all Oppius legem (...) ne superfluo ornatu mulieres Romanae vterentur. Pompon.
sins, assuring us, the great Harvest of the World is nigh* sins most
abounding, where Gods grace has most abounded, as if he had not said, ye are
healed, Sin no more. Yet all come to hear: why are they Laet. de Leg.
not reformed? There are many reasons for it. Some are deaf Adders, which
cannot be charmed: that Serpent lays one (...) to the Earth, the other he
stops with his tail. Preach to the Covetous, one (...) is upon the Earth,
on his Business: the other a fore-stalled Opinion has stopped, and the Sons
of Thunder cannot Qui male audit sacrilegium (...) solet.
open it. Wandering thoughts are the ^arings, of which others frame their
Idol, and they have no place for the Amb. ^. 7. ep. 56
Arc. To some the Word is a mystery: the God of this World has made such a
Covenant with them, as Nahash 1. Sam. 11. 1.
the Ammonite offered the Gabesh-Gileadites, putting 2. Cor. 4. 4.
out their right eye; and they have no understanding for God. Wonder not then,
if so many go from Church unmoved. Put a thousand pieces of Metal together,
and none will move for the Lodestone, save only the Iron, none other have
sympathy with it. Aethiops (...) bal^, Lib. 2. ep. Dornit. 101.
says Gregory, of the unconverted Persian; he went in black, and black he
came out again. It is the misery, the madness of an Age so wicked, to be
deaf, lest they should be cured: as Augustus Caesar said of Galb^'s (...)
crooked back, I can admonish, I cannot mend thee: we Hippocr. ego monere te
possum corrigere non possnm.
can warn; if you will not amend, then go up and pro^per: but if the end of
sin be peace, then say the Lord has not spoken by us: go on, but a worse
thing will happen 1. King. 22. ^5. 28.
to you. As they shall not be heard who will not hear, so neither shall
hearing profit them which will not pray. Prayer wounds sin; prayer beat down
the Amalekites; prayer is that weapon of Samson, which first lays the enemy
Judge. 15. 16. 19
heaps upon heaps, and after refreshes us with the waters of comfort.

Hitherto you have heard the Admonition; the Intermination is next.

Now as Is^ai said of David, there remains yet a little 1. Sam. 16. 11, 12.
one, I cannot say the rest: it will prove of a lovely countenance, and comely.
visage, because it will present you the fearful end of impenitent sinners,
lest a worse thing come unto thee.

This part comes like C^shi to David, and speedily 2. Sam. 18. 31.
delivers the message.

He that is not bettered by light afflictions, but falls Qui suppl^cio non
fit melior tanquam stupidus quidem and contemptor grauiorem sibi poenam
praeparat. Chrysostom. hom. 37. in Ioh. 5.
back to his former sins, shall have greater judgment b^fall him. God shall
wound the ^irie scalpe of such a one as goes on sti^ in his trespasses. But
rel^pses into sin are most dangerous: The seven worse Spirits entering into
the heart, swept with a little formal Repentance, make the end of that man
worse then the beginning. God healed Niniuie by the ministry of the Prophet
Jonah; but presently (...) became a Mistress^ of Witchcra^e, Psalm. 68. 21.
then God utterly overthrew her. When God had corrected Israel, h^ concluded, I
said surely, thou will Nah. 3. 4. 7.
fear me, thou will (...) instruction; but they (...) ^rly, and corrupted all
their works: then God determined to Zeph 3. 7. 8.
power upon them his indignation, fierce (...), and the fire of his (...). If
you should run through their History, you should find their last plagues
greatest: all their Captiuities were light to this last disper^ion of above a
thousand and ^ue hundred years.

God at first but shows the Rod; and if a fair Warning will not serve, he
strikes, and if the correction of a Father will not avail, he puts on the
person of a severe Judge. You may read it at large, Le^iticus 26. If you will
not obey me, then will I also do this unto Ver. 14. 19. 21.
you, I will appoint over you Terror, Co^sumption, and the burning Ag^, to
consume the eyes, and make the heart heavy. And if ye will not for these
things obey me, then will I punish you seven times more, according to your
sins: and if ye walk stubbornely against m^, and will not obey me, then will
I bring seven times m^re plagues upon you: yet if by these ye will not be
reformed, then will I mit^ you yet seven times for your sins. Again, Yet if
you will not for this obey Ver^. 27.
me, I will also chastise you ^uen times more, according to your sins. Of the
same argument you may read more Deuteronomy. 32. 34.
Deuteronomy. 28. 15. His Judgments had such like course with Exodus 7. 23.
Phar^h; when the fair Warnings could not enter into his heart, he comes
near to himself, and firstborne.

God sends Judgments as he did his Angel to Balaam: If we will not see him
in a broad way, he will yet stand where we pass n^r him: at first perhaps he
but ^oucheth our goods, if that mend us not, he comes to our bodies with
sickness; if that fair warning will not Deuteronomy. 32.
serve, he has heauyer judgments stored up, a worse thing to befall us.
Immedicable sores must have desperate cures. This worse thing is reducible to
four kinds.

1* The same or other plagues more heavily inflicted, as has been said. 2.
The second is often public shame: sin like Samson spoils the Philistim^, to
pay the Philistims, but with much difference: it robs us of the white robe
of Christ's ri^hteousnesse to pay us with shame; shame is the only physic for
a proud heart.
Augustine says boldly of a more private shame; that too much liking himself
was the cause of Ada^s fall, desiring more he became less. Therefore I dare
say, It is Aug. de ciu. dei. l. 14. c. 13*
good that the proud should fall into some broad and disgraceful sin^e,
thereby to take a dislike of themselves, who fell by too much liking
themselves. Peter's sorrowful dislike of himself, when he wept, was more
healthful (...) his soul, then his unsound pleasure he took in himself
Psalm. 83. 16.
when he presumed. Therefore of the enemies he says, Fill their faces with
shame that they may seek thy name O Lord.

Thirdly, a worse evil may be; a giving over to a reprobate mind, as it
falls to the wicked: or delivering Romans 1.
to some sharp trial for a time; such as God often gives his dearest children.
See it in Job, David: Consider it you that are well read in the black
characters of a troubled conscience. The worst of evils is the last; the
torments of hell, prepared for those who will take no warning: Tophet, set on
fire by the breath of the Lord, Lakes of Fire and Brimstone. The torments of
Hell are expressed as the Reu. 21.
joys of Heaven, not as they are, but as we can for the present understand:
only thus much we know, the torments of the damned are pains and miseries of
every kind, extensiue, without remission, hope, help, or end: Nature and Pain
shall hold a continual conflict, and yet the one never overcome the other. In
this lives Aug. de Ciu D^, l, 19. c. 28.
sickness either the Pain is Victor, and so Death expels the sense of it;
or Nature conquereth, and drives out the pain: but there Pain shall afflict,
and Nature suffer ete^.

This is the woeful effect of sin. Christ wept for others sins, and Elisha
for others danger. If we could Use 1.
but see as far as Hell, or truly consider the torments of 2. King. 8. 12.
the damned, we would even weep as often as we see men sinning. It is a most
wicked io^ that some ^onceiue when they see others sinning: this is to clap
hands at the Devils victories, and to be glad for Gods dishonor and our
brother^ miseries.

Trust not sin, she pl^yeth the Panther, allureth with a sweet breath, but
hides her ugly head: she shows Use 2.
the adulterer fill of love, but hides the rottenness of Pliu. l. 8. c. 17.
the flesh, cas^ing off to final impenitencie, and a worse evil in Hell: she
shows Ambition the large object of his des^, but hides the downfall;
tells the Oppressor of goodly Lordships, but hides the downfall of Heaven:
in all, as from our Savior he would have hidden a part of his scriptum est,
so from the (...) he concealeth a part of this prohatum est, a worse thing will
befall thee. Never flatter thy self then in sin. Thou Mat. 4.
have overcome one sickness, one a^ction, if that amend thee not, thou but
flyest a Lion to meet a Bear, one evil to meet another. Amos 5. 19.


It is vain for night watching adulterers to boast of their stolen hours,
their judgment sleeps not vain: for the covetous and deceitful to rejoice
of their illgotten treasure, they work like industrious Bees, and fill their
cells with the sweet savor of gain, and yet shall soon be smothred up with a
Sic vos non vobis: your selves, not for your selves gotten. It is vain for any
to hope the worst shall not come, because it is not yet come. When Julius
Caesar mocked Spurnia the Augure, (who bad him beware of the Ides of March,)
saying the Quod sine vlla noxa adessent (respondet) venisse sed non
praeterijsse: (...).
Ides were come without any harm; he answered, it is true, they are come, but
they are not yet gone. The vision is not always of an Almond ^od: God often
expects a maturity of sin as in the A^orites: judgment sometimes follows
sin a loofe off. Many years after the Ier. 1. 11:
Amalakites pay for the evil they did the children of God. Genesis 15:
Ioab and Shimeis hoarie heads suffer the worst part when 1. King. 2.
their parts are almost done. The Ostrich is said to hide her eggs in the sand,
and forget the^: which hatched by heat of the Sun, she knows to be her own.
Long we hide, but our judgments are hatching by the power of heaven, which our
conscience shall again acknowledge our own.

Thou have been healed; take a fair Warning, Sin no more. Sins after
warning deserve greater punishment: Sin no more, Sin is like drunkenness,
the merry madness of few hours, but the worst part is eternal. Wherefore
make strait steps unto your feet, lest Prudenter faciunt qui calamitatibus
erudiuntur. Greg. Naz. orat. 17.
that which is halting be turned out of the way. It is a dreadful thing to
fall into the hands of the living God, who will not justify the sinner. Wise
and blessed are they which take his warnings, and profit by their
chastisements, who being tried in the furnace, learn of David, it is good for
me that I have bee^ afflicted. Psalm. 119. 71.
Illic Apostolorum gloriosus Chorus, ill^ Prophetarum etc. Cyprian de
mortalitate Reuelat. 22.


Heaven is our country, life a Sea of troubles, affliction the wind which
fills the sails homeward: The Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, and holy
Martyrs stand on the shore to entertain us. They are secured from mortality,
fear, sin, curse, sickness, death: he will open unto us the gates of the
heavenly Paradise who has broken Ipse aperiat nobis I anuas Paradisi, qui
co^fregit, portas inferni. Au. Sermon. 122. de temp.
the gates of hell, even our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus; To him, with thee O
Father of mercy, and the holy Spirit, be all honor and glory in heaven and in
earth, for ever and ever*

Amen.
FINIS.

