THE MANVALL of the Anatomy or dissections of the body of Man, Which usually
are showed in the public Anatomicall Exercises. Methodically digested into 6
Books By Alexander Read, D; of Physic London, sold by F. Constable, at his
Shop (...)Church, near (...)163^


THE MANVALL of the Anatomy of dissection of the body of Man, containing the
enumeration, and description of the parts of the same, which usually are showed
in the public Anatomicall exercises.

Enlarged and more methodically digested into 6 Books.

BY ALEXANDER READ, Doctor of Physic, a Fellow of the Physicians College of
London, and a brother of the Worshipful Company of the Barber-Chirurgeons.

LONDON, Printed by J. H. for F. Constable, and are to be sold at his shop
under Saint Martins Church near Ludgate. 1638.

CAROLO Magnae Britanniae Monarchae, Hiberniaeque ac Galiae Regi potentissimo
fausta omnia precor.
EN offero Majestati vestrae lucubratiunculas istas Anatomicas. Munus fate or
te minime dignum, quem Deus ad supremum fere honoris in terris culmen evexit.
Nihilominus si omnia justo trutinae examine pensentur, quivis aequus arbiter
pronuntiabit eas ad te properare debere. Cogitaverat pridem apud se Majestas
vestra quam utile, imo necessarium huic Reipublicae sit multos habere peritos
Chirurgos, sive Pax alma floreat, sive Bellum ingruat. Quapropter ea sanxit, ut
doctus aliquis ac peritus Medicus communion is hujus fratribus ex suggestu,
singulis aiebus Martis, huic exercitio destinatis praecepta artis traderet ab
auditoribus excipienda, atque Anatomicis dissectionibus temporibus constitutis
praecsset. Quum ea munia mihi obeunda ante aliquot annos commissa fuissent,
animadverti illorum inrebus anatomicis profectum mire tardatum, quod nullum
haberent compendium Anatomicum, lingua vulgari emissum. Ut huic desiderio
occurrerem compendiolum tale inlucem emisi: ex cujus lectione tyrones fructum
aliquem percepere. Verum quum proficientibus visum fuisset nimis jejunum sumpsi
id iterum in manus, ac copiosius de humani corporis partibus disserui. Quum
itaqque secunda cura refictum in lucem emittendum sit, ad quem potius, quam ad
vestram Majestatem tendet, quae primae foeturae autrix fuit. Nec est quod
verear me audaciae, aut inverecundiae crimen incursurum: Quum mihi securitatem
promittat eximia vestra comitas atque affabilitas erga omnes, quae omnium
amorem conciliant, ut dignitas regia timorem. Quae duo Sceptra Regibus firmant.
Unum hoc opellae huic ex hac Dedicatione promittere possum: Eam gratiorem
omnibus futuram, quod tanti ac talis Regis nomen sibi praescripserit. Scribebam
Londini 4. Calend. October. Anni ab exhibito in carne Messia, supra millesimum
sexcentesimum tricesimi septimi.

Vestrae Majestatis cultor humilimus ALEXANDER REIDUS
Scoto-Britannus.
The Number and Contents of the Books.
THe first Book contains the description of the parts of the belly, and has
27. Chap.

The second Book contains the description of the parts of the breast, and
has 9. Chapters.

The third book describes the head, and has 16. Chapt.

The fourth sets down the veins, arteries, and sinews of the limbs, and
has 7. Chap.

The fifth sets down the bones, and has 10. Chapters.

With the sixth Book of muscles, and a Table of the figures.

Fig. I.


Fig. II.


THE FIRST Book of the lower cavitie called Abdomen.
CAP. I. Of the division of the parts of the body of man in general.
ANatomy is an The description of Anatomy.
artificial separation of the parts of the body of section, practiced to
attain to the knowledge of the frame of it, and the use of each part. In
Anatomicall exercises first, the whole carcass does offer it self: then the
parts.

The whole has four The regions of the whole.
regions, to wit, the fore and back parts, and the laterall, which are the
right and left.

I call the whole that which contains the What the whole and a part signify.
parts, and a part that which is contained in the whole, according to the most
ample acception of the term part; for in a more strict acceptance a part is a
body solid cohering with the whole endued with life, and framed to perform
some function.

A part then must be Things required in a part being strictly taken.
solid, the humors then cannot be numbered amongst the parts, because 1
they are fluid.

Secondly, it must 2
have life, and so the extremities of hairs and nails are not to be accounted
parts.

Thirdly, one part 3
must not nourish another, and so the blood, fat, and spirits are not parts.

4
Fourthly, it must have a circumscription.

5
Fifthly, it must be united with the whole.

6
Sixthly, it must have some action and use.

The principal differences The differences of parts.
of parts are taken either from their nature or functions. From their nature,
parts are said to be either similary or dissimilary.

A similary part is that What a similary part is.
whose particles are of the same substance and denomination with the whole: as
every portion of a bone is a bone. It is otherwise called a simple part.

Of simple parts there The number of simple parts.
are ten in number, to wit, the skin, a membrane, the flesh, a fiber, a vein,
an artery, a nerve, a ligament, a cartilage, and a bone; they are comprehended
in these two lines.

Cartilago, caro, membrana, arteria, nervus;

Vena, ligamentum, cutis, os, lentissima fibra.

To these a tendon, Of a tendon.
which is the principal part of a muscle, may be added; for the substance of
it is simple, without any composition.

Of the former simple The differences of simple parts.
parts some are simple indeed, and these are in number seven; the skin, a
membrane, the flesh, a fiber, a ligament, a cartilage, a bone. The rest are
only simple to the eye or sense, and not to reason, for a nerve (for example)
is composed of many filaments, covered with a membrane.

A dissimilary part is What a dissimilary part is.
that whose portions are neither of the same substance, nor the same
denomination, as a muscle, in the which are flesh, a nerve and a tendon. It is
otherwise called a compound part, and an organicall part.

In an organicall part Things to be observed in an organicall part.
four particles are found; First, the chief 1
particle, as the crystallin humor in the eye.

Secondly, that particle, 2
without the which the action cannot be performed, as the optic nerve.

Thirdly, that which 3
furthereth the action, as are the membranes and muscles.

Fourthly, that by the 4
which the action is preserved, as the eyelids.

Of organicall parts The degrees of an organicall part.
there are four degrees. 1
The first is made only of the similars, as a muscle.

2
The second receives the first kind of organicall parts, and other similaries,
as a finger.

3
The third admits those of the second degree, as the hand.

4
The fourth is made of the third and other parts, as the arm.

Parts from their function The differences of parts taken from their function.
are said to be either sustaining or sustained. The bones sustain the frame
of the whole body, the rest are sustained. Now these are the cavities or the
limbs.

CAP. II. Of the circumscription, regions, substance, and parts of the abdomen.
OF all the parts of the body which are sustained, we are to begin dissection
with the cavities: First, because they offer themselves to the view in the fore
region of the body.

Secondly, because they being moist, and apt to receive the impression of the
external heat, soonest putrefie, and send out noisome smells. The cavities are
appointed to receive the principal parts, and those which minister unto them.
Wherefore there are three cavities according to the number of the principal
parts. The head is for the brain, the breast is for the heart, and the belly
for the liver. And because this cavity is most subject to putrefaction, you are
to begin at it. Now four things concerning it offer themselves. First, the
circumscription or bounding of it. Secondly, the regions of it. Thirdly, the
substance of it. Fourthly, the special parts of it.

As concerning the circumscription of it, it is severed from the breast by the
midrife. It is bounded above by the cartilago ensiformis, and beneath with the
share bones.

The regions of it are three, the uppermost, middlemost, and lowermost. The
uppermost which is bounded between the mucronita cartilago, and three inches
above the navell, about the ending of the short ribs, has three parts: The
laterall, which are called hypochondria, or subcartilaginea, because they be
under the cartilages of the short ribs. In the right hypochondrium lies the
greatest part of the liver, but in the left the spleen, and greatest part of
the stomach. The third part is that which before lies between the two
laterall parts, and is properly called epigastrium, because the stomach lies
under it. In this part remarkable is the pit of the breast, which is called
(...) or scrobiculus cordis, by the modern Writers. The middlemost part
extends it self from three inches above the navell, to three inches under
it. The fore part is where the navell is, from whence it is called regio
umbilicalis. The two laterall parts have no proper denominations. In the right
are contained intestinum caecum with part of Colon. In the left part of it, a
portion of Iejunum and the rest of colon. The rest of Iejunum is under the
navell. The navell in man is wrinkled, as the forehead of an aged woman; but in
other creatures it is only a hard knot without hairs, having no wrinkle. It
has no laterall parts, having no proper names, although Laurentius lib. 6.
Histor. Anatom. affirms it to have, and give them names; in this region is
contained the whole hungry gut.

The lower region called (...): This region 3 The lower region.
has three parts, the laterall, and the middlemost: The laterall which reach
to the hypochondria, are called (...), because they are the seat of lust, which
is called (...). By Hippoc. they are termed (...), because they being placed
between the hanch-bones and ribs, are lanke, and seem to contain nothing. In
Latin they are called Ilia.
Ilia, because the iliam intestina lies under them on every side. Besides this
in the right part are placed portions of the colon, and caecum intestinum,
which are tied together. In the left part are contained a great part of the
colon, and the intestinum rectum.

The fore part of the hypogastrium by Aristot. lib. I. Histor. animal. 3. is
called (...), which Gaza calls Abdomen and Sumen. Under it lies the pubes,
which word signifies both the hairs, and the place where the hairs grow,
which appear to budde in girls the twelft year, but in boys the fourteenth
year, when way is made for the monthly courses and seed, the skin being there
made thinner, the heat increasing in them. At the sides of the pubes appear
(...), or inguina, Inguina.
the groines. Under this middle region, are contained the bladder, the
intestinum rectum, and the matrix in women.

The hindermost parts The hindermost parts.
are called lumbi the loins, and they reach from the bending of the back to
the buttocks called nates ab innitenda, because when we sit, we rest upon them.
The fleshy part on each side is called (...), a palpando, from calling or
clapping. In the right loyne, the right kidney; but in the left, the left
kidney is contained.

CAP. III. Of the common containing parts of the belly.
THe common containing parts of the belly are four, the skarf-skin, the skin,
the fat, and the membrana carnosa.

The skin in man is called cutis, but in beasts aluta, in Greek it is called
(...), and (...); either (...), because it is easily flead off, or from (...),
seeing it is the end and superficies of the whole body: Of all the membranes of
the body, it is the thickest.

It has a double substance; the one is external 1 Culitula.
called (...), (...), because it is placed upon the skin as a cover, but is
termed cuticula in Latin; for it is as large as the skin, and more compact; for
watrish sharp humors passing through the skin are stayed by the thickness of
this, and so pustules are caused. In man it is as the peelings in onions. It is
without blood, and without feeling.

Three causes concur to the generation of it; to wit, the material cause is
a viscous and oleous vapor of the blood. The internal efficient cause, the
natural heat of the subjacent parts, raising it up. The external efficient
cause is the external coldness, partly of the air, partly of the skin it
self: It is engendered even as the thin skin in milk, and fat broths: It is
hardly separate from the skin with a knife; but easily in living creatures, by
a vesicatory, and in dead persons by fire, or scalding hot water.

1. The use of it is to defend the skin, which is of an equisit sense, from
external immoderate, either heat, or cold. In cold weather it breaks the
cold, that the perspiration should not be altogether hindered: In hot weather
by it compactnesse, it hinders too great perspiration.

Secondly, to be a middle between the skin and the object of feeling.

Thirdly, to stay the ichorous substance from issuing from the veins and
arteries; for this we see when the cuticula is rubbed off by any means.

The true skin is six 2
times thicker than the skarfe skin: in children, women, and those which are
borne in hot contreyes, it is thinner, but in men, and in those who inhabit
cold countries, it is thicker.

The Negroes become black, because they having a softer skin, and large pores
and loose, many vapors of the adjust humors, which are raised with the sweat,
the grosser substance whereof by reason of the excessive heat, being dried and
burned, caused the blackness of the skin; for their infants are not borne
black, but redish; and they afterwords become black, the cuticula growing in
them as in us.

The skin in the forehead and sides it is thin, thinner yet in the palm of the
hand, but thinnest of all in the lips and cods. In the head, back, and under
the heel it is thickest. Under the heel, the cuticula in some will be as
thick as a barley corn.

The pores will appear in the skin in the winter time, it being bared; for
where they are, the cuticula will appear as a Goose skin.

The skin has an action, to wit, the sense of feeling.

Pinguedo, (...), est humor 3. Of fat.
mor oleosus nostri corporis a calore moderato subjectarum illi partium
elevatus, ac inter membranam carnosam ac cutem concrescens, quae parts sunt
densiores ac frigidiores. Ejus Its kinds.
2. sunt species, axungia (...), and saevum sive (...).

They differ, for first, axungia is in beasts not horned, which are full
toothed; but saevum in beasts not horned, which are not full toothed.

Secondly, axungia is easily melted, but not so easily congealed; but saevum is
not easily melted, but is easily congealed.

Thirdly, grease is not brittle, but tallow is. The fat under the skin is
grease; but in the caul, kidneies, the heart, the eyes, and about the joints
it is tallow.

The uses of it are these: First, it defends the body from the air; So
Apothecaries when they mean to preserve juyces, they power oil upon them.

Secondly, it preserves the natural heat.

Thirdly, it furthereth beauty by filling up the wrinkles of the skin.

Fourthly, in the muscles it fills up the empty places, it is under the
vessels that they may pass safely; in the entrals it helps concoction, in
the buttocks it is as down in a pillow.

Membrana carnosa or 4 Membrana carnosa.
(...), so called in man, not that it is in him fleshy, but nervous, and so
nervea; but because in beasts, which the Ancients used most commonly to
dissect, it is endued with fleshy fibers, in the birth it is red, but in those
of ripe age white; in the forehead and neck, it is more fleshy. Within it is
bedewed with a viseuous humor, to further their motion by keeping the
superficies of them, from desiccation, which otherwise might fall out by reason
of their motion. It is of an exquisit sense, whereof when it is pricked with
sharp humors it causes groouing: such as are felt in the beginning of ague
fits. First, it preserves Its uses.
the heat of the internal parts. Secondly it furthereth the gathering of the
fat. Thirdly, it strengthens the vessels, which pass between it and the
skin.

CAP. IV. Of the proper containing parts.
THe proper containing parts are the muscles of the belly, and the peritonaeum.
Of the muscles we have spoken else where, a page 24 ad 35.and 245.and 256.

Peritonaeum is tied above to the midrife, below to the share and flank bones,
in the forepart firmly to the transverse muscles, but chiefly to their tendons
about the linea alba, behind to the fleshy heads of these muscles loosely and
the membrane of the nerves, which come from the vertebrae of the lovnes. The
end of this firm connection is to press equally the belly, for the expulsion
of the ordure and breathing. If this connection had not been, the peritonaeum
would have become wrinkled, the muscles being contracted. If it had not been
loose tied to the fleshy parts, the contraction of them in the compression of
the belly had been hindered.

As for the proceeding of it, Fallopius will have it to proceed from a strong
twisting of sinews, from whence the mesenterium has its beginning. Some will
have it to proceed from the ligaments, by the which the vertebrae of the loins
and the ossacrum are tied together.

Picolhomineus will have them to be framed of those nerves which spring out of
the spinalis medulla about the first, and third vertebrae of the loins, which
are tied together by both the menings, when they march further: Here it is
very thick, because it was to be much extended.

It is double every where, but chiefly about the vertebrae of the loins, where
between the duplications lie the vena cava, the aorta, and the kidneies. In
the hypagastrium two tunicles are apparently seen, between which the bladder
and matrix lie. All the parts which receive nourishment from the vena cava, are
seated between the coats, as the before named parts; but those which receive
nourishment from the vena porta, as are they which serve for concoction of the
nourishment, are not, the umbilicall vessels also are placed in the duplicature
of the peritonaeum, that they may march the more safely.

To the beginning of the productions of the peritonaeum, the inner coat
cleaves firmly, and shuts the hole, by the which the spermatick vessels
pass from the lower part of the belly. If this be broken, the outer coat is
relaxed, and so a rupture is caused.

The Peritonaeum is thickost; First, where there are maniest humors, to hinder
the breaking of the subjacent part, and issuing out of them, as above the
stomach.

Secondly, where many vessels, and spirits are, as above the spleen.

Thirdly, where much stretching is required, as above the bladder, matrix and
stomach.

CAP. V. Of the Omentum.
THe parts contained Of the parts contained in the lower belly.
serve either for nutrition, or procreation. As for the parts serving for
nutrition, they either serve for chylification, or sanguification. The
principal efficient cause of chylification, is the stomach; but the adjuvants,
are the caul and the pancreas.

The principal efficient causes of sanguification, are the liver, and spleen,
but the other parts are the adjuvant causes. Of these some receive the
excrements of the chylification, as the guts. The excrements of the
sanguification are two, choler, and the watrish humor. The thin choler is
received by the vesica fellea; but the gross choler, by the meatus
cholidochus: The watrish humor is turned to the kidneys, and from thence to
the bladder, by the vreters.

The parts appointed for procreation, are the genitals, both in men, and women.
Next then to the Peritonaeum is the Omentum, or caul, in Greek it is called
(...) because it seems to swim above the upper guts. The Arabians call it
Zirbus.

It is composed of two Its substance.
membranes. The uppermost does spring about the bottom of the stomach, from
the common coat of it, and is tied to the hollow part of the liver and spleen.

The lowermost does Its connection.
spring from the Peritonaeum, immediately under the midrife toward the back,
and is tied to the hollow part of the liver, to the midrife, to the duodenum
intestinum, to the unequal part of the spleen, and last of all, to all that part
of the colon which marches under the stomach.

It has veins only Its veins.
from porta gastroepiplois dextra and sinistra: they are inserted into the
upper membrane; but epiplois dextra, and postica in to the inferior membrane.

It has so many arteries Its arteries.
from ramus soeliacus, and mesenteruus. It has Its sinews.
small sinews from the costale branch of the sixth pair. It has much fat: if
it be plentiful, and the caul reach to the os pubis, in women it causes
sterility, by compressing the mouth of the matrix; in men it causes a rupture,
by relaxing the peritonaeum: This rupture is called epiploenterocele.

In figure it represents Its figure. 6. De Anat. administ.
a Faulkners pouch, according to Galen: The mouth is round, and the bottom is
made by the two membranes joined together. This will appear if you fill it
with water, by Galens advice.

It is then of substance The reason of the frame of it.
membranous, that it might admit dilatation, and extension. It is thin, that it
should not burden the subjacent parts; it is compact to hinder the dissipation
of the internal heat, and to repel the external cold.

The fat is about the veins and arteries, to The fat.
strengthen them, from being compressed by the repletion of the belly, and
other motions. When the stomach is full, and the guts empty, the upper membrane
is raised, the lower remaining in its own place; but if the guts be full, and
the stomach empty, then the lower membrane rises up, the upper remaining in is
town place. It is tied to the stomach, being a middle part between the colon
and the spleen, and that it should not totter from side to side. It is tied in
the right side to the colon and liver, but in the left side to the spleen.

It has its beginning Its beginning
from those parts unto which it is tied, that it might receive veins and
arteries from thence for blood, and life. The lower part is free and untyed,
that sometimes the upper, sometimes the lower membrane might rise up.

The uses of it are three: First, it cherishes the internal heat of the
stomach and intestins.

Secondly, it ministers nourishment to the parts in time of famine, Galen. de
us. part. li. 4. c. II.

The third is to contain the humors flowing from the intestins, which the
glandules cannot receive wholly at one time, Hippoc. lib. de glandalis.

Creatures which have An observation.
no caul, help the concoction, by doubling their hinder legs and resting their
belly upon them, as Hares and Connies.

They who have had a Another.
portion of it cut off, because it was corrupted, having fallen out, by reason
of a wound received in the abdomen, have afterward a weak concoction, and are
enforced to cover the belly well. See Galen. lib. 4. de usis. part. 9. where he
proves this by example.

CAP. VI. Of the Guia.
THe Gullet or weazand The marching of it.
is an organicall part, which begins about the root of the tongue, and
passes from thence directly between the windpipe, the vertebrae of the neck,
and the four first vertebrae of the breast, upon the which it rests; but when
it is come to the fifth vertebra of the breast, it gives way to the trunk of
the great artery descending by turning a little to the right side: afterward
accompanying the artery to the ninth vertebra, there it is raised up by means
of the membranes from the vertebra, and marching above the artery, it passes
through the nervous body of the midrife, and is inserted into the left orifice
of the ventriculus, about the eleventh vertebra of the breast.

It is called properly The names of it.
(...), quia angustus and longus. See Aristor. I. histor. animal. 16. It is
also called (...), (...) quod cibum ad ventriculum vehat.

It is framed of three Its structure
membranes. The first is the uttermost and common compassing the two proper,
which it has either from the peritonaeum according to some, or from the
ligaments of the vertebrae of the neck and breast upon which it rests. The
second is the middlemost, and it is fleshie and thick, and has only
transverse fibers. The third is the innermost, and it is membranous, and has
only small and straight fibers.

It is joined to that Its connection.
membrane which covers the throat, palate, mouth and lips; so that before
vomiting, signs in the lips will appear.

It has veins both from The vessels.
the vena cava, and the porta: for it has sprigs from vena sine pari while it
is yet in the breast; but where it is joined to the ventricle, it has some
twigs from ramus coronarius, which proceeds from the porta.

It has Arteries from the intercostal arteries, and ramus caeliacus coronarius.

Nerves it has from the sixth pair, which are carried obliquely for fafetie,
as Galen notes 6. de usu part. 6. and are very many; which is the cause that
the parts about the upper orifice of the ventricle are so sensible.

It has four Glandules; Its Glandules.
two in the throat, which are called Tonsillae, or almonds, common to the
Weazand and the larynx, which prepare the pituitous humor to moysten them:
other two it has about the middle of it toward the back about that place,
where the aspera arteria is divided into two branches, under which it lies.

The weazand serves The use of it.
as a funnell to carry meat and drink to the maw, for it receives them by
dilating its proper internal coat, and turns them down by the constriction
of the middlemost coat, and the muscules of the Pharynx.

CAP. VII. Of the Ventriculus or stomach.
THat part which we Its denomination.
term the stomach in English, in Latin is called Ventriculus, to distinguish
it from the great ventricles. In Greek, (...) and (...) from its cavitie.

It is placed immediately Its situation.
under the midrife, which it touches, wherefore if it be too full, it causes
a difficulty of breathing by hindering the motion of it. In the forepart, and
in the right side, it is covered with the hollow part of the liver: in the left
side by the spleen; toward the back by the aorta, the vena cava, and the
pancreas, which further its heat.

The bigness of it is Its bigness.
commonly such, as is capable to receive so much food at one time, as is
sufficient for nutrition. It is less in women than in men, to give way to the
distention of the matrix. They who have large mouths, have large stomachs.

It is joined with the Its connection.
gula on the left side, where its upper orifice is; it is tied to the duodenum,
where the lower orifice is on the right side. The bottom is joined to the
upper part of the caul.

The substance of it is Its substance.
membranous, that it might admit distention and constriction. It has three
membranes. The first is common, which it has from the peritonaeum about the
upper orifice; it is the thickest of all those which spring from the
peritonaeum, the fibers of it are strait.

The second is fleshy, and the fibers of it are transverse, under which a few
oblique and fleshy lie.

The third is membranous, endued with all kinds of fibers, the straight are
most conspicuous and plentiful, to embrace the food firmly, until
chylification be perfected, as the second membrane has oblique to expel the
chylus.

It has also two orifices. Its orifices.


The one is in the left 1
side, called sinistrum wider than that in the right, that meat not well chewed
might the better pass; It is called in Greek (...), Cor, from whence the
pains which happen in it are called (...) and (...). (...), because there is a
great consent between it and the heart, by reason of the twigs of nerves,
which proceed from the same branch, which do spring from the sixth pair
communicate to both, so that one being affected primarily, the other must suffer
by consent.

This has orbicular fibers, that the meat and drink being once received within
the capacity of the stomach, it might be exactly shut, lest fumes and the heat
should break out, which might hinder concoction.

The other by the Grecians is called (...), janitor, or doore-keeper, because
it as a Porter does make way for the Chylus to descend to the duodenum: It is
not wide as the other orifice, because it was only to transmisse the elaborate
Chylus: wherefore besides its transverse fibers, it has a thick and compact
circle representing the sphinter muscule, that it might the more easily open
and shut.

It has veins, first from Its Veins
the trunck of vena porta, and this is pytoricus ramus, or from the branches of
the same: wherefore from ramus splenicus it has gastrica, from whence
Coronaria springs; Gastroepiplois sinistra, and vas breve, from the ramus
mesentericus. before it be divided it has Gastroepiplois dextra.

It has Arteries from Its arteries.
ramus coeliacus, which do accompany every vein.

It has many Nerves from the sixth pair, which with the gula passing through
the midrife cross one another; for the right sinew does compass the left and
fore part; but the left, the right and hinder part of the stomach. So that the
upper part of the stomach is of an exquisite sense. These three vessels pass
between the common and proper coats, and end in their orifices in the
internal membrane.

It is the seat of hunger, The cause of hunger.
and soonest does feel the defect of aliment: for blood being spent in the
veins, upon the nourishment of the body, the fibers of the internal membrane
of the stomach are contracted, and so this pain which is called hunger is
caused.

The action of the stomach Its action Chylus.
is Chylification: now Chylus is a white juice reasonable thick like Barley
cream, wrought by the faculty of the stomach out of the aliments. This is
chiefly elaborate by the heat of the stomach, yet the adjacent parts putting
to their helping hands; as in the right side, the liver; in the left, the
spleen: above the midrife, below the guts, before the caul, behind the
trunckes of vena cava and the aorta. This heat of the stomach is temperate,
and somewhat moist, that this concoction might resemble boiling.

Of figure, it is round Its figure.
moderately, partly that it should not take too much room, partly that it might
receive much. It is somewhat long and has two orifices higher than the
bottom, lest fone should have been in the bottom, the alime^t unconcocted
should have issued out of it.

CAP VIII. Of the Intestines or Guts.
THe guts are called The etymon.
in Latin Intestina, in Greek (...). They begin at the Pylorus, and end in
the fundament.

They have a round figure, The figure.
that they might contain sufficient nourishment.

They are of a membranous Their substance.
substance, that they might readily constriction and dilation.

In length they are six Their length.
times as long as the whole body.

They have three coats, Their coats.
one common from the Peritonaeum, but mediatly; for in the duodenum, and that
part of the colon which cleaves to the stomach, it proceeds immediately from
the lower membrane of the caul; but in the jejunum, ^leum, the rest of the
colon, and the thick guts it proceeds from the membranes of the mesenterium.

They have two proper, to retain, and expel readily; The outermost is
membranous, the innermost nervous, although it seem to be fleshy, by reason
of the crusty substance, with the which it is lyned; which is framed of the
excrements of the third concoction of the guts themselves. It is also glased
with a mucous substance, which is nothing else but an excrementiticus fleamy
substance, bred in the first concoction: This furthereth the expulsion of the
faeces, and hinders excoriatio^, which might be caused when sharp humors
pass through them.

This internal membrane The fibers.
in the small guts has oblique fibers, but the external transverse, because
these are appointed for the retention and expulsion of the chylus. But in the
thick guts, the inner membrane has transverse, but the outer has oblique and
straight, because they are appointed for the expulsion of the excrements: The
inner membrane of the small guts is full of wrinkles, to stay the chylus from
passing too soon. Between the common coat and those which are proper, the vena
and arteris Mesaraicae march.

The veins flow from the Their veins.
porca, although not from the same branch: For the duodenus surculus is sent
into the duodenum, and the Haemorrhoidalis, to the left part of the colon, and
the whole rectum, as the dexter mesentericus is sent to the jejunum, caecum,
ileum, and the right part of the colon. Epiplois postica, is inserted into the
middle part of the colon, which marches transversly under the stomach;
besides these a sprig from the ramus epigastricus of the vena cava is sent to
the intestinum rectum, which makes the external haemorrhoidal.

The Arteries spring The Arteries.
partly from ramus Caeliacus, partly from both the mesentericae, to the
duodenum, and the beginning of Iejunum, a sprig is sent from the right ramus
Caeliacus: but to the rest of the Iejunum, to ileum, caecum, and the right part
of Colon mesentericus superior: to the left part of Colon, and to the
intestinum rectum, mesentericus inferior is sent. At the last, epiplois
postica, which rises from the lower part of Arteria spleaica, which is the
left branch of arteria caeliaca, is sent to the middle part of Colon, which
lies under the stomach.

Nerves they have from The Nerves
the sixth pair: the duodenum has small twigs from the stomach, which go to
the Pylorus. The other guts have very many, which spring from the branch, which
is bestowed upon the roots of the ribs: but the intestinum rectum, about the
podex has four twigs from the fifth conjugation of those which spring from the
os sacrum. This is the cause why so great pain is felt in the Colon, and
rectum, when they are ill affected.

The guts have fat The fat.
without, and not within.

The guts are of two The differences of the guts.
sorts; for they are either thin or thick.

The thin which have The thin.
thinner membranes are in number three.

1
The first is duodenum, because it is thought to have twelve inches in length.
It does pass directly under the stomach to the beginning of those guts which
begin to be gathered by the mesentereum, for this is tied with it.

2
The second is Iejunum, or the hungry gut; for in dead carcasses it is for the
most part found empty; partly by reason of the multitude of the veins, partly
by reason of the acrimony of the choler, which proceeds pure from the liver.
In length it is 12. hands breadth and three inches, and as broad as the ring
finger. The internal membrane is longer than the external; for it has
innumerable orbicular, and transverse wrinkles to stay the chylus. It begins
on the right side, under the colon, where the dnodenum ends, and the guts
begin to be wreathed, and filling almost the whole umbilical region, it ends
into the ileum: of all other guts it has greatest store of veins and arteries;
and by these you may find the circumscription of it. Meatns biliaerius is
inserted into the beginning of this gut which sends choler from the gall,
which pricketh the guts to hasten expulsion.

3
The third is Ileum, it has thinner membranes than the rest of the tenuia. It
is seated under the navell, and fills both the Ilia. It is the longest of all
the guts, for in length it contains 21. handbredth, but it is the narrowest
of all, for it is but an inch in breadth. It has fewer wrinkles than the
jejunum, and lesser, which about the end of it scarcely appear.

It begins where both smaller and fewer veins appear, and ends about the
place of the right kidnie, where it is joined both with the intestinum coecum,
and colon. The external coat of the tenuia intestina is more thin and fleshy
than the internal. It has transverse and orbicular fibers, with a few
straight to strengthen the transverse. The internal coat it has partly
straight, partly oblique fibers. Yet fewer straight than the crassa intestina
have. These guts have a motion inch as worms have when they crawl, or leeches
when they suck, to draw downward the chylus: for it is not in our power to send
this away, as we do the excrements. The crassa intestina have not this motion,
and by reason of this motion the upper part of the gut may be wrapped in the
lower, which causes the sickness called Ileos or convolvulus.

Now follow the Intestina The thick guts.
crassa, the great guts, they are three in number also.

1
The first is called Coecum (...), the blind gut, because one end of it is shut,
so that at the same orifice the chylus passes, and returns. In man it is
like a thick round worm coyled together. It is bigger in an infant than in a
man, four inches in length and one in breadth. It is not tied to the
mesenterium; but being couched round, it is tied to the right kidnie. In sound
persons it is alwais empty. In four footed beast; it is always full of
excrements. Apes have it larger than a man, Dogs larger than Apes; but Conies,
Squirrels and Rats, largest of all, if you consider the proportion of their
bodies.

2
The second is Colon, (...): because it detaineth the excrements. It has it
beginning from Ileum and coecum, and mounting up by the dextrum ilium, when it
comes to the liver, it passes transversly under the stomach to the left ilium,
and from thence to the beginning of os sacrum.

It is tied first to the right kidnie in the right side, by the external
membrane, then in the middle to the bottom of the stomach, and at the last unto
the left kidney. In length, it is of seven hand breadth, and seven inches. It is
the broadest of all others, that it might contain all the excrements.

It has cells, which spring from the internal tunicle of it; These cells are
kept in their figure, by a ligament half an inch broad, which passes through
the upper and middle part of it all along; this being broken or dissolved,
the cells appear no more. Their use is to hinder the flowing of the excrements
to one place, which would compresse the parts adjacent.

It has a value where it is joined with ileum, like to the Sigmoides in the
Sinus of the heart. This value so stops the hole which is common to the
ilcon and colon, that flatuosity cannot ascend to the Ileum, much less
excrements regurgitat. If one would find this cut, let him power in water into
the intestinum rectum, and hold up the guts. The water will stay when it is
come to the value, if it be found. If this value be relaxed by sickness,
excrements may regurgitat, and expelled by vomit and clysters, also come to
stomach.

The third is Intestinum rectum, the straight gut; it has its beginning where
the colon ends, and ends where it makes the anus: it is of a (...) in
length, not so wide as the colon, the muscle (...), is at the end of it: It
has thick and fleshy external coats, and so a solution of unity in it may the
sooner be united. It has many transverse fibers, few oblique, and some
straight. It has veins not from Porta only as the rest; but from the trunck
of the cava descending also, which make the external Hemorrhoidall.

The guts have a threefold use, for first they all concoct the Chylus sent
from the stomach better.

Secondly, the small guts digest the Chylus.

Thirdly, the thick guts expel the excrements.

CAP. IX. Of the Mesenterium.
THe substance is membranous, First, that it might be light, and should not
press together the vessel by its weight; Secondly, that it might be extended
into all dimensions, by reason of the fibers; Thirdly, that between the
membranes it might the more readily gather fat.

It is of a circular figure, which is most capable, that it might answer the
length of the guts, and keep them within a small compass and place likewise.

It is framed of two proper membranes, one above another, strong enough, and
one common, between which and the proper the vessels pass safely to the guts.

The veins are called Mesaraicae, these spring from ramus mesentericus, dexter
and sinister branches of the Vena porta.

It has also two arteries, the one superior, the other inferior branches of
the arteria mesenterica, which pass as the veins do.

As for the nerves, it has two on each side, springing from the branches of
the sixth pair, which go to the roots of the ribs; others it has from those
which spring from the spin lis medulla, between the first, second, third and
fourth vertebra of the loins.

That the vessels might pass safely without ruption, Nature has placed
glandules between Glandules.
the divarications of the veins and arteries.

The biggest of these The biggest.
is about the center of the mesaraeum, where the distribution of the vessels
begins.

If this become scirrhous, the extenuation of the whole body ensues, because
the passing of the chylus is hindered: lean persons have larger glandules than
the fat, because the fat does sufficiently guard the distribution of the
vessels, and preserves the heat of the vessels.

The arteries bring spirit; but the veins do bring both the chylus to the
liver, and nourishment to the inner parts; but not at the same time: As we
take breath by, and let it out by the same instruments, but not at the same
time: see Galen 3. facult. not. 13. and 4. de us. part. 14. So at one time the
liver draws from the belly, and at another time the belly from the liver.
When the guts are full, the chylus is sent to the liver; but when they are
empty, they draw nourishment.

It has two parts, Mesaraeum, (...), and (...), quas! (...). The first tyeth
the small guts together; the second the thick.

The Mesaraeum is in the The bigness of the mesaraeum.
circumference 3. yards, but a span in breadth.

It springs from the Its beginning.
ligaments of the vertebrae of the loins, by two roots; the largest about the
first vertebra; the other lesser, about the third. It was fit that it should be
tied strongly to these ligaments, lest it might have been torn by violent
motions, or be pulled from thence by the weight of the guts being full.

And as plants draw their nourishment by their roots from the earth, so living
creatures which have blood, draw their nutriment from the guts, by the
mesaraick veins. Wherefore lest they should suffer ruption, Nature would have
them to pass safely between membranes.

The use of it then is to carry safely the vessels which pass to the guts.

It is tied before to the small guts; but behind to the first and third
vertebra of the loins, from whence it springs.

It is called (...) and (...), quasi (...).

(...) is that by the Mesocolon.
which the thick guts are tied together. Hippoc. 6. Epid. and Galen. 4. Aphor.
6. make mention of this. It is tied in the right side, to the right part of the
Ileum; but in the left side to the left part of Ileum, and the muscle Psoas:
before it is tied to the colon, and rectum intestinum.

CAP. X. Of the venae lacteae.
THis is the opinion of all the ancient and modern Writers, concerning the
mesenterie, and the mesaraicall, if you except Caspar Asellius, who by his
diligence found these veins, which he calls lacteas, because they contain
Why so called.
a white juice, which is nothing else but the chylus elaborate, which they
carry from the small guts to the liver.

Their beginning seems Their beginning.
to be in the Pancreas, for there they all meet, and are strangely implicate
and twisted together: from thence they pass upward to the liver, and downward
to the small guts: so that the Pancreas is a more excellent part than it has
been hitherto taken by other Anatomists: and as the mothers blood before it be
sent by the vasa umbilicalia to nourish the Infant, is first committed to the
placenta uteri, to draw from it all impuritie: so then these venae lacteae,
discharge their impurities before they carry the chylus to the liver in the
Pancreas.

They are inserted into the small guts, Their insertion.
and have nothing to do with the stomach. They pass into the capacity of the
guts, and end in the wrinkled crust, with the which the internal membrane of
the guts is lined with their spongious heads like to Leeches, by the which they
draw to themselves the chylus.

From the small guts Their progress.
they march between the two membranes of the mesenterium, sometimes severed
from the other vessels, sometimes joined with them, sometimes directly,
sometimes over-riding them, making a Saint Andrews cross through the
glandules, until they come to the Pancreas, where they are inexplicably
twisted one with another: from thence having greater branches, they pass by
the sides of vena porta to the cavitie of the liver, where they are spent by
ending there by small twists: and so it is most likely that sanguification is
performed by the substance of the liver, and not by the veins: the grosser part
of it being sent to the branches of vena porta, and the subtillest to the
branches of vena cava;

They differ from the The difference between them and the ordinary mesaraicall
veins.
ordinary masaraicall veins;

First, in bigness, for these are bigger, but those are more in number, for
they are twice as many: for more chylus must be sent to the liver to make
blood of for the nourishment of the whole body, than blood for the nourishing
of the inward parts only.

Secondly, the values Their values.
which are seen about the endings of these, are placed from without inwards,
but of those from within outward. The reason of this diversity is this: the
venae lacteae suck the chylus from the guts which ought not to return, but the
ordinary mesaraicall send blood, and sometimes excrementitious humors, which
ought not to come back again.

If you would find How to find them out.
out these veins, you must feed a dog with milk, and five or six hours
afterward dissect his belly; then by stretching the mesenterie you shall
perceive them.

That the ancients did Why the Ancients did not find these out.
not find out these veins, the cause is, either because they dissected beasts
after they were dead, or after that the chylus was distributed, or they did
presently take a view of the mesentery; but made some stay about the inspection
of some other part.

They have no trunck, Why they have no trunck.
because they were to end in the liver, and to go no further. From this part
many diseases spring; first, because it is composed of two membranes, having
innumerable veins and arteries, and so it may contain many impurities;
secondly, because it has many glandules, which as a sponge imbibe
superfluities.

CAP. XI. Of the Pancreas.
IT is called (...), and (...). It is the biggest glandule of the whole body,
and very red, like unto soft flesh, from whence it has its name.

In figure it is ovall, three or four inches in length. It is placed in the
left side toward the spleen; above the stomach rests upon it: below, the
membranes of the peritonaeum lie, unto which it is firmly tied. It does keep
within it self ramus splenicus, the left branch of arteria coeliaca; the
nerves which pass from the sixth pair to the stomach and the duodenum.

It has a membrane from the peritonaeum, by the which it is covered and holden
up.

It has three uses. First, it staieth the liver lest it being distended by too
much meat and drink, should be hurt by the hardness of the vertebrae of the
back.

Secondy, to keep the vessels passing through it, from ruption.

Thirdly, to keep these same from compression, when the stomach is to much
stretched by meat and drink.

CAP. XII. Of the Liver. Now follow the parts appointed for sanguification,
whereof the Liver is the chiefest.
THe substance of the liver seems to be a red fleshy mass. In the first
formation of the birth, it is framed of blood wizing out of the veins, and
there coagulating about them.

The substance of the liver is so set about the branches of the vena porta and
cava, that it fills up all cavities and does firmly stay them; keeping them
open from pursing together, and in comely order that they be not confounded. It
is the thickest and heaviest of all other entrals.

It is bigger in man than any other living Its bigness.
creature, if you consider the proportion of his body; for it was fit so to
be, seeing man was to have greatest store of blood, lest spirits should fail
in performing the functions of the soul, wherewith man is most copiously
furnished. Besides, seeing he has but one liver, the bigness was to
recompense the number: we may guess of the bigness of it by the bigness of the
fingers.

It is covered with a very thin membrane, which springs from the second
ligament of the liver, which cleaves firmly to the substance of the liver. If
it be separat at any time by a watrish humor issuing out of the vessels from
the fleshie substance, watrish pustulls by the Grecians called (...), are
ingendered. If these do break, the water falls into the cavity of the
belly, and causes that kind of dropsy called ascites.

It has veins as well from the cava as the porta.

The branches of the Its veins.
cava are distributed for the most part through the gibbous part; but those of
the porta, into the holow part: yet so that the branches of both are joined by
inosculation to deliver the purest blood to the vena cava, for the nourishing
of the vital parts, and the grosest by the branches of the porta, or the
nourishing of the natural. There seems to be three times more of the twigs
of the porta, than of the cava within the liver.

Amongst the midst of the branches of the porta, some little veins march; which
afterward be coming one twig, end in the vesicula fellea, that the bilious
humor may be sent to it, before the blood enter into the vena cava.

It has only few arteries, Its arteries.
which springing from the right branch of the coeliaca end in the hollow part
of the liver, where the vena porta comes out.

It has two nerves, but Its nerves.
very small, because it has but a dull sense. One comes from the branch
which is sent to the upper orifice of the stomach; the other from that branch
which is dispersed through the roots of the ribs of the right side.

As for the figure of it, Its figure.
it is almost round, the upper part is arched and smooth; and so framed that it
might not hurt the diaphragma.

The lower part is hollow to receive the stomach, which is of a sphericall
figure.

In the upper and unequal Its ties.
part, which is distant but one inch from the diaphragma, to give way to it
when it is dilated in breathing, and to the stretching of the stomach, it is
tied first to the diaphragma, by a ligament membranous, broad, and strong,
which springs from the peritonaeum, where it covers the midrife in the
lower part. It passes transversly by the liver, to the hinder parts, by this
ligament; it is stayed from faling down. It is called the suspensory.

Secondly, in the fore part it is stayed by two ties; by the first it is tied
to the mucronata cartilago, to hinder it from faling to the back parts, when
we stretch our back: This ligament is broad, double, and strong; and springs
from the peritonaeum, and gives the liver its coat.

Into this coat the 2. sinews are implanted according to Galen, lib. 3. de loc.
effect. cap.. 3. and not into the substance of the liver, so that according to
Galen, 4. de us. part. cap. 13. it has but a dull feeling, such as plants have
to embrace that which is profitable, and to leave that which is unprofitable.

By the second it is tied to the navell; this is the umbilicall vein, which
when the infant is borne ^eeseth its hollownesse, and becomes a ligament.
This staieth it from being pulled upwards.

Thirdly, it is tied to the short ribs, by small fibers, to keep it steady. In
the hollow part it is tied by the mesenterium, to the ribs by the vena cava.

It differs from the Its differences from the liver of beasts.
liver of beasts, in that it has seldom any lobes, yet the hollow part of it
has a fissure or chink, wherein the umbilicall vein is implanted, and two
small bunchings out in the right part where the vena porta marches out, which
Galen calls (...), gates.

Besides these there is A little lobe.
a little lobe of a softer and thinner substance, than is the rest of the
liver, and is covered with a membrane: It is tied to the omentum by this lobe,
by the which Spigel. de human. corp. fabric. lib. 8. cap. 12 thinks that
waters may be discharged out of the liver into the caul.

It is placed in the Its situation.
lower belly in the right side covered with the ribs for safety, and in the
middle of the trunck of the body to send blood equally to the upper and lower
parts. The stomach is cherished by it, and the spleen; But because it is a more
noble part than the spleen, it is placed in the right hypochondrium.

The proper action of Its action.
it is not only to further sanguification, perfected in the veins, as all
ancient Anatomists aver; but to sanguifie the chylus, carried to it by vena
lacteae, as Asellius has proved.

One thing is to be noted, A note.
that the substance of the liver, in the unequal part, where the vena cava is
lodged, is softer than that which is in the hollow part, where the vena partae
is: for there it may be more easily separate from the vessels, than here; and
not without cause: for the roots of vena portae ought to be stayed by a harder
substance, that they be kept wider; but the roots of the cava with a softer,
that they might the readier be filled, stretched, and slacked.

CAP. XIII. Of the vena portae.
SEeing the roots of the veins which Nature harh appointed to furnish blood,
the nutriment of the body, have their roots in the liver: Having discoursed of
it, method does require to set down the doctrine of them.

Although there is but The veins of it.
one artery to impart life, yet there are two veins, the vena portae and cava.
Because come require a grosser blood for nutrition, as those parts are, which
serve the nutritive faculty, which are, the liver, the gall, the stomach, the
spleen, the p^^^^us, the ^^^e^^tum, the guts, and the mesentery. For unto the
rest as the kidn^ies, bladder, and those which are appointed for procreation,
the vena cava sends branches.

It is fit to begin with the vena portae, because Vena portae.
it goes no further than to the parts contained in the abdomen, and not to all
those neither.

It is so called because Why so called.
it seems to enter into the liver, by the two fleshy bunches, called portae,
gates.

This does differ from How it differs from vena cava.
the vena cava.

First, in substance; for the substance of this is thicker and blacker, because
it is nourished with thick and black blood; but that of the vena cava, is
whiter and thinner, because it is nourished with a thinner and redder blood.

Secondly, the substance of the vena portae is harder than that of the cava:
which ought to be softer, because it ought to be more apt for dilatation and
constriction; first, because it contains a more movable blood; partly because
its thinner, having much serosity mingled with it; partly because for the most
part the branches of it are accompanied with the branches of the great artery,
whereas the branches of the porta are far enough off, if you except ramus
splenicus.

Thirdly, the truncke of vena cava is larger than that of porta, because it
nourishes more parts, as has been said.

Fourthly, the porta has more roots within the substance of the liver than the
cava.

The roots of the vena portae and cava are joined by the unition called
Anastomasis How inosculation is performed.
or inosculation. This is performed by two ways: First, when the ending of one
does meet with the end, of the other: as the epigastricae venae meet with the
mammariae in the lower side of the muscal recti.

Secondly, when one branch resting upon an other, do cleave together, having a
hole in the middle. This inosculation is seen in the roots of the vena portae,
and the cava.

One thing is to be noted, A note.
that there are many of the twigs of the vena portae, which touch not those of
the cava: Because the purest part of the blood was only to be carried to the
vena cava, and the thickest, to remain in the vena portae. By reason of these
Anastomases, in famine nourishment is sent from the habit of the body, by the
vena cava, to nourish the internal parts.

Bauhin affirms, that there is a common conduit to the roots of vena portae
and cava, which in it cavity will receive a small probe. In these veins, besides
blood, excrementitious humors are also contained in diseased persons, which
sometimes are sent from the whole body by the vena cava into the guts, and
sometimes communicate to the vena cava by vena portae. How the inosculation of
these veins is found out.


To find out the radication and inosculation of these veins, you must boil the
liver until it become soft, and so with a wooden or bone knife separate the
substance from the vessels; for a sharp knife is not fit.

Now to come to distribution The distribution of vena portae.
of vena portae, i has parts. 1 Radices, the roots. 2. Truncus, the trunck. 3.
Rami, the branches. 4. Surculi, twigs.

As for the roots, first Its roots.
from the circumference of the liver, small capillar veins march toward the
inner part of it, and by combination becoming greater, they make up five
branches. These about the middle of the hollow part, yet toward the back
joining together make up one root, which at the last coming out of the liver,
about the eminences, called portae, fame that trunck which is called Vena
portae.

This trunck parting a Its branches.
little from the liver before it be severed into branches, it puts forth
two twigs, the one being small, and springing from the upper and fore part of
the trunck, as soon as it parts from the liver, is inserted into cystis
fellis, about the neck of it, and spr^ed by innumerable twigs, through the
external coat of it.

Vesalius affirms that there be two of these twigs, from whence some call
them cysticae gemellae: But this is a matter of no great moment. This twig may
be called surculus cysticus, or Vesicalis.

The second twig is bigger, but lower. This springs from this same forepart,
yet toward the right side, and is inserted into the bottom of the stomach:
from hence it sends many sprigs toward the hinder part of it toward the
back.

It may be called pistaricus more properly than gastricus, seeing there are
other branches which are called gastrici. Having sent forth these 2 twigs, the
trunk passes down, and bending still a little toward the left side, it is
parted into two remarkable branches; whereof the one is called sinister or the
left, seated above the right, but lesser: the other is dexter, or the right,
lower than the left, yet larger: the left is bestowed upon the stomach, the
omentum, a part of colon and the spleen: the right is spread through the guts
and the mesenterium: the left is called vena splenica, but the right vena
mesenterica.

The vena splenica has Branches of Vena splenica.
two branches before it come to the spleen, the superior and the inferior.
The superior is called gastricus or ventricularis. This is bestowed upon the
stomach, the middle twig conspassing the left part of the orifice of the
stomach like a garland, is called coronaria: from the lower branch two twigs
do spring the (...) this does send other twigs to the right side of the lower
membrane of the omentum, and to the colon annexed to it. This is called
epiplois, or omentalus dextra: the other is spent upon the lower membrane of
the omentum which tieth the colon to the back, and upon that part of the
colon, it is called epiplois, or omentalis postica: when the ramus splenicus
has approached to the spleen, it does send our two other twigs, the uppermost
and the lowermost: from the uppermost vas breve springs which is implanted in
the left part of the bottom of the stomach commonly: from the lowermost two
twigs issue.

The first is called gastrve piplois sinistra, this coming from the lower part
of the spleen toward the right side, is bestowed upon the left part of the
bottom of the stomach, and the upper and left part of the omentum.

The second springs most commonly from ramus splenicus, but seldom from the
spleen; and passing along according to the length of the intestinum rectum, it
is inserted into the anus by many twigs. This is called Haemorrhoidalis
interna, as that which springs from the vena cava is called baemorrhodalis
externa.

Now follows vena. Vena mesenterica
Mesenterica, or the right branch of vena fortae; before it be divided into
branches, it sends forth two twigs.

The first is called Gastroepiplois sinistra, this is bestowed upon the right
part of the bottom of the stomach, and the upper membrane of the caul.

The second is called Intestinalis, or duodena: It is inserted into the middle
of the duodenum, and the beginning of the jejunum, and passes accordin gtohe
length of the^. This branch as soon as it passes from the back, it enters
into the mesenterium, and passing between the membranes of it, sends forth
those mesaraicall veins, which send nourishment to the inward parts.

It is divided into two branches, to wit, Mesenterica dextra, and sinistra:
Mesenterica dextra, placed in the right side, sends a number of branches to
feed the jejunumcaecu^, and the right part of the colon, which is next to the
kidney and liver.

It has foureteen remarkable branches, but innumerable small twigs. One thing
is to be noted, that the greater branches are supported by the greater
glandules, and the smaller by the smaller glandules. Mesenterica sinistra
passes through the middle of the mesenterium, and that part of colon which
passes from the left part of the stomach, to the intestinum rectum.

The chief use of the The uses of it.
vena portae is to nourish the parts which are appointed for nutrition with
thick and feculent blood: It ought to be thick, that it might be the hotter;
for heat in a thick body is more powerful.

The second use is to further the sanguification of the liver.

CAP. XIV. Of the Vena cava, dispersed within the tru^k of the body.
WIthin the trunck of the body, the vena cava has two trunkes; one called
ascendens or going up, the other descendens or marching down.

The ascendens passing through the nerves part of the Diaphragma, it marches
upward undicided, until it come to the jugulum: yet by the way from its sides
it sends two twigs.

The first is Phrenica, 1
this is inserted into the midrife and heart, from ^ence springs the
coronaria vena which compasses the basis of the heart as a garland.

The second is vena sine 2
pari, so called, because it has not a fellow in the left side as other veins
have. It does spring about the fifth vertebra of the breast from the hinder part
of the vena cava in the right side. This going down, it marches toward the
Spina: when it is come The branches of vena sine pari.
to the eighth or ninth rib above the Spina, it is divided into two branches,
to wit, the right and the left; the left is inserted most commonly in the
middle of the left emulgent vein. By this branch blood, on watrish or purulent
matter may be discharged by urine; the right twig is implanted either into the
trunk of the cava, or into prims lumbaris.

This being done, the vena cava ascends up to the jugulum being strengthened
by the mediastinum and the glandulous body called thymus. Here the vena cava is
divided into two remarkable branches, from whence those veins spring which are
sent to the head, to the arms, and some muscules of the abdomen. One passes
to the right side, the other to the left; the one is called subclavius, because
it marches under the cannel bone with in: The other is called The branches of
ramus subclavius.
axillaris when it is come to the arm pit, from the upper part of the ramus
subclavius two remarkable branches proceed: the internal and external
jugular, in man the internal is biggest, but in beasts the external.

1
The internal jugular comes out about the articulation of the cannell bone
with the sternum; then it joyneth it self with the soporall artery, and the
recurrent nerve, and with it hinder and greatest branch accompanied with the
soporall artery, it enters with the cranium at the hole of the occiput, by
the which the sixth pair of nerves commenth down, it enters into the first
and second sinus of the dura matter.

The external jugular 2
mounteth up to the ear under the skin, and the quadrat muscule which pulls
down the cheek along the neck: from this branch spring the veins which are
opened under the tongue.

From the lower part of ramus subclavius, spring four branches. Sprigges
springing from the lower part of ramus subclavius.


The first, Intercostalis superior, one on each side; it is small, and comes
out about the root of the bifurcation: then passing down by the roots of two
ribs, it bestowed twigs upon the distances of these two ribs.

The second is Mammaria, this marches forwards toward the upper part of the
breast bone: then it goes down by the sides of it, and when it is come to
cartilage mucronata about the sides of it, it comes out: from thence it
passes straight ways under the right muscule to the navell, where by an
anastomasis it is joined with the spigastrica ascendens: from hence comes
that great consent between the matrix and paps.

The third is Mediastina, because it is bestowed upon the mediastinum, together
with the left nerve of the diaphragma, according to its length.

The fourth is Cervicalis, or Vertebralis. This passing through the holes of the
transverse processes of the vertebrae of the neck, is bestowed upon the muscles
of the neck which are next to the vertebrae.

CAP. XV. Of the Gall.
THe Gall, called in Latin Vesicabiliaria The description of it.
or Folliculus sellis, is a dissimilary part, in figure representing a pear,
hollow, and appointed to receive the thin yellow choler.

It is about two inches Its bigness.
in length.

By its upper part it is Its connection.
tied to the liver, which does afford it a hollownesse to receive it; but the
lower part, which hangs without the liver, it rests upon the right side of
the stomach, and the Colon, and does often die them both yellow.

It has two membranes, Its membranes.
the one common, which is thin and exterior, without fibers. This springing
from the membrane of the liver, it only covers that part which hangs
without the liver; The other membrane is proper.

This is thick and strong, and has three The fibers of the proper membrane.
sorts of fibers, the outtermost are transverse, the middlemost oblique, and
the inner most straight.

This membrane is larder and thicker in the neck; but thinner in the bottom.
Within it has a mucous substance, engendered of the excrements of the third
concoction of the membrane, to withstand the acrimony of the choler.

It has two parts, the The parts of it.
neck, and the bottom.

The neck is harder than the bottom, and higher in situation.

It from the bottom by degrees growing narrower and narrower, at last ends
in the ductus communis, or the common passage of the choler, to the beginning
of the jejunum.

This elongation of the neck of the vesicula fellea, is called meatus cysticus,
because it springs from the cystis.

The choler is carried How the choler is carried to the gall.
to the neck of the cystis, by many small veins near to the roots of the vena
portae about the midst of them, and is discharged into the cavity of it about
the upper part.

The meatus cysticus Its values.
has three values looking from without inwards to hinder the recourse of the
choler to the liver.

The other passage Meatus hepaticus.
which carries the thick and corrupt choler, as that which is called vitellina,
aeruginosa, porracea, etc. is called meatus hepaticus; because it passes
straightway from the liver to the ductus communis.

This passage has no What beasts have this passage only.
values, both these discharge their choler by the common passage into the
beginning of the jejunum, when the small guts are discharged of the chylus.

Beasts which want the vesica fellea, have this meatus hepaticus, as Hearts,
Hynds, and fallow Dear, and those which have a whole hoof.

The meatus hepaticus passes through the roots of the vena cava, by innumerable
branches, which being gathered together become one branch and being united with
the meatus cyslicus make up the communis ductus, which is inserted into the
beginning of the jejunum obliquely between the two membbranes of the intestine
about the distance of two inches before it perforat the second membrane.

The vesica fellea has for nourishment called cysticae gemellae.

For life it has sprigs Its vessels.
of arteries proceeding from the Caeliaca. To afford sense it has a small
thread like a sprig of a sinew from the sixth pair.

Many times stones are Of the stones in it.
found in it, but they being lighter than those of the bladder, swim above
the water.

The use of these two The use of the passages.
passages, is to draw all superfluous choler from the chylus, and to turn it
into the guts, where it affords benefits to nature:

For first by its sharpness The uses of the choler.
it moves the intestines to turn out the terrestrial excrements in due
season.

2
Secondly, by reason of its thinness it does cut and cleanse the small guts of
fleame, which there is plentifully bred.

3
Thirdly, by reason of its dryness it hinders the increase of putrefaction.

4
Fourthly, it furthereth concoction in the intestines by increasing their heat:
nevertheless, naturally there can be no passage to carry Why choler is not
carried to the stomach.
choler to the bottom of the stomach.

1
For first, by reason of its acrimonie it would corrode it.

Secondly, it would 2
cause the crude nourishment to pass into the duodenum.

Thirdly, it would procure perpetual vomiting. 3
If it fall out that choler be carried to the bottom of the stomach by any
passage than this, the party vomiteth choler, and is termed (...), but if it be
inserted into the end of the jejunum, then bilious dejections follow: and such
a one is termed (...).

One thing I would A note.
have you observe; that the porus biliarius passes by a straight course to the
ductus communis, and not to the vesicula fellea, which thus you may show: put a
cathaeter into the neck of this passage near the liver, the guts will be
blown up, and not the vesicula. Again, put the cashaeter into the common
passage, and both the cystu fellis, and the meatus chelidochus will be blown
up.

If you would find How the values are found out.
out the three values of the vesicula fellea, press the choler with your
fingers from the bottom toward the neck: whre you find the choler to stay,
there the values are.

CAP XVI. Of the Spleen.
THe Spleen or Milt in English, in Greek is called Splen, and Lien in Latin.

The substance of it is flaggie, Its substance.
loose, and spungious, net-like, which is the cause that it may imbibe much
superfluity, and so become exceedingly swelled.

This substance is covered Its membrane.
with a membrane borrowed from the peritoneum, which is inserted first into the
straight line of the milt, and then covers the whole Spleen: It is thicker
than that of the liver. First, because it has a looser substance. Secondly,
because it has more arteries which require a strong membrance to defend them.
The staight line is in the hollow part, where the vessels of the Spleen do
enter into it.

In Infants newborn Why it is red in Infants.
it is of a red color, because they have been fed with elaborate blood: but in
those of a ripe age it is somewhat blackish, being boiled, it represents
clareth wine. In man it is bigger, thicker, and heavier, than in beasts; for it
is six inches in length, three in breadth, and one in thickness; yet according
to Aristotle, 3. histor. animal. 16. a convenient little one is better than a
big one.

In figure it is somewhat Its figure. Its seat.
long like an Oxestongue,

It is seated in the left hypochondrium: So Hippocrat. 6. Epidem. calls it
the left liver, and Aristot. 3. part. animal. 7. the bastard liver, but is
seated somewhat lower, because it was to draw the terrestrial part of the
Chylus, before it come to the liver by ramus splenicus, that the blood may be
made thinner, and purer, for such blood causes men to be wiser. 2. de part.
anim. 2. It is all couched within and under the short ribs; so that in
healthful persons it cannot be felt; only if it be inflamed, a pulsation may
be felt.

It is tied to five parts, Its connection.
to the midrife and left kidney by small membranes, by it hollow part which
gives way to the stomach being distended to the upper membrane of the
omentum, and to the stomach by vas breve. In its arched part it is tied to the
back, so that dints remain in it by the impression of the ribs.

It has veins for nourishment from ramus splenicus; Its vessels.
for life it has arteries from ramus caeliacus sinister: but five times more
than veins; for great heat is required for the elaboration of thick blood.
These vessels enter into the spleen where the straight line is in the hollow
side. They join often by anastomoses.

The arteries besides life afford unto the The uses of the arteries of the
spleen.
spleen two benefits.

1
First, they increase the natural heat of it, that it may the better concoct
the grosser part of the Chylus which is sent unto it by the ramus splenicus.

Secondly, they further the expulsive faculty of it.

Now the spleen sends By what ways the spleen sends it superfluities to
the kidnyes.
its superfluities to the kidneys by two ways.

First, by returning of 1
them by ramus splenicus, to the vena portae, and from thence to vena cava, from
whence they are sent to the emulgent veins.

Secondly, by a shorter 2
passage they are sent from arteria caeliaca to the aorta, and from thence to
the kidnyes by the emulge^t arteries.

Last of all, it has small twigges of nerves from the sixth pair, which are
bestowed upon the investing membrane, but are not communicate to the substance:
wherefore it must be but of a small and dull feeling: so that the pains which
sundry ascribe to the spleen, are to be referred to the adjacent parts.

The use of the spleen, as also of the liver, The use of the spleen.
is to further the elaboration and concoction of the Chylus: for it is a
bastard liver according to Arist. 3. de Hijtor. animal. 7.

The sanguification of How the sanguification of the spleen differs from
that of the liver.
the spleen differs in two points, from that of the liver.

First, in the material 1
cause, for the spleen makes gross blood of the more carthy part of the
Chylus; but the liver far purer of the thinner and more benign part of the
Chylus.

Secondly, it differs in the final cause: for 2
the liver sanguifieth to afford nourishment both to the vital and animal
parts, but the spleen only to maintain the natural parts, and not all of
them neither.

Nature would have Why the natural parts are nourished with gross blood.
the natural parts to be furnished with gross blood by the branches of vena
portae, partly to increase their heat; for heat in a thick body is stronger;
partly to afford them nourishment answerable to their substance, for it is
thick.

CAP. XVII. Of the kidneys.
THe kidny is called Their denomination.
in Latin Ren, from (...) to flow: because the serofity of the blood does flow
through the kidneys, to the ureters, and from thence to the bladder.

They are in number Their number.
two, not so much for the poysing of the body, as for their use and necessity;
that one being stopped, yet the cleansing of the blood might be performed by
the other.

They are seated in the Their places.
loins under the liver and spleen, and rest upon the muscles called (...),
which move the theyght about their heads; under the which large nerves are
couched. Which is the cause that a big stone being in the kidny a numnesse is
felt in the foot of that side; the muscle (...) being pressed down by it. They
lie behind the guts. The right kidnie has the coecum; but the left the colon
above it. In man the right kidnie is lowest, by reason of the greatness of the
liver, and bigger also than the left; yet it is not so fat as the left, by
reason of the vicinity of the liver, whose heat hinders the increase of fat.

In figure they resemble Their figure
the asarum leaf or kidnie bean, toward the loins they are gibbous, but
hollow toward the guts.

As for their connection, Their connection.
by the external fat membrane they are tied to the diaphragma, and the loins:
By the emulgent vessels to the vena cava, and the aorta, and by the ureters to
the bladder.

They are in length about five inches, Their bigness.
in breadth three, and in thickness one; yet they are somewhat broader above
than under. They are smooth in the gibbous part, but unequal in the hollow
part, to let in and out some vessels.

The parts are two, to Their parts
wit, the external and the internal; The external are the membranes; these
are two.

The one is common Their membranes.
and external, borrowed from the peritonaeum; within the reduplication of
which, the whole kidnie is lapped; and therefore it is called renis fascia.
This membrane is compassed with copious fat; so that the kidnie seems to be
the fattest of all other entrals, according to Aristotle 3. Histor. Animal. 17.
Although each one be exceedingly fat; yet some part of the kidney will remain
uncovered about the middle.

This fat about the kidnie The uses of the fat of the kidneys.
has a threefold use. First, it is instead of a pillow.

Secondly, it receives as a sponge the excrements.

Thirdly, it furthereth and keeps in the heat.

Before you deprive the kidneys of this tunica adiposa with your nails, about
the upper part of the kidnie you are to observe a large glandule, which has a
sprig from the emulgent vein and artery, Renes succenturiati.
for nourishment about the middle of it.

In figure it represents Their figure.
a half moon, and is not unlike a kidnie; from whence it is called ren
succenturiatus.There is one on each side in the upper part of the kidnie
resting upon the tunica adiposa.

It is strongly tied to Their connection.
the septum transversum.

The substance of it is more flaggy than that of the kidnie.

It has nerves from Their nerves.
the plexus retiformis, or net-like texture, framed of the twigs of nervus
costalis, and stomachicus.

It seems to be framed, partly to fill up the vacuity which is between the
kidneys and the diaphragma: partly to be a pillow to the stomach, in the place
about the emulgent vein and artery.

The second membrane The proper membrane of the kidnyes.
is that which is internal and proper. This springs from the common coat of
the vessels which enter into the kidnyes; for as soon as the vessels approach
to the kidny they leave their external coat. It can hardly be separate from
the substance of the kidny.

The internal parts The internal parts.
are those which are contained within the proper membrane. In these sundry
things are remarkable.

First, the color of The color of them.
the kidny, which is very red.

Secondly, the substance Their substance.
of the kidny, which is thick, hard, and compact as the heart almost, but not
so fibrous.

Thirdly, the dispersion The emulgent vessels.
of the emulgent vessels throughout it; first they enter by paires into the
hollow part of the kidny. Then each branch is divided into four or five lesser
branches, and these again into lesser, until at the last they become capillar.

These being spread sundrv ways through the substance of the kidny, toward the
gibbous part at last they end at the tops of the Carunculae papillares, or teat
like fleshy substances, into the which they pour the serosity of the blood,
that it may pass through the tubuli or water pipes, to the infundibulum.

The fourth is that which is called pelvis or infundibulum, the tunnel, which
is nothing else but the ample cavity of the vreter within the kidnie.

Fifthly, the tibuli or fistulae vreterum, the water pipes of the vreters offer
themselves which are most commonly in number ten; four in each end, two being
still joined together, and two in the middle according to the number of the
carunulae papillares. These are placed in the arched part of the infundibulum.
Now the ends of the pipes about the infundibulum are called cribrum or the
sive. These water pipes proceeding from the infundibulum become a little wider,
and end in the gibbous part of the kidny, with a wide round mouth receiving the
carunculae papillares, by the which their mouths are stopped, and the
watrishnesse of the blood issues out into them, as milk out of the teats.

Sixthly, Carunculae papillares are to be considered. They are small fleshy
bodies, somewhat harder than the substance of the kidny, resembling the teats
of women's paps, from whence they have their denomination; they are of the
bigness of a pease somewhat broad above; below round. If you divide them
through the middle, you shall perceive a smooth haire-like passage from the top
to the end.

They are in number answerable to the number of the tubuli, which receive them.

To find out these parts before named, you must How these parts are to be found
out.
divide the kidney in the hollow part, putting a thick probe into the pelvis.

Incision being made to the infundibulum, first you shall see the tubuli, then
the Carunculae papillares.

The kidneys have two sorts of veins. Their vessels.


First, the two called adiposae, because they are spread through the tunica
adiposa, and are covered with the fat, and afford matter for the fat. The right
of these springs from the emulgent vein; but the left from the vena cava.

Secondly, the two emulgentes, so called from their action. These are large,
and spring from the trunck of the vena cava descending between the first and
second vertebra of the loins. These being carried transversly are implanted
into the hollow part of the kidneys, being divided into two branches.

The left is somewhat higher, as also the left kidney; but the right is
somewhat longer. It has a value to hinder the return of the serosity to the
trunk of the cava.

Fallopius was of this How matters gathered in the cavity of the breast are
discharged into the ureters.
mind, that a branch of a vein passes from the vena sine pari to the left
kidny, by the which quitiour and water may be discharged by urine. But it is
more probable, that these matters are first drawn in into the trunck of the
aorta, by its inconspicuous pores, and from thence sent to the kidnyes, by the
emulgent arteries.

These are in number The arteries
2. one in each side, which accompany the veins, to the kidny slope ways.
Whither when they are come, they are divided in two branches, whereof the one
is implanted in the lower, the other in the upper part of the hollow part of
the kidny.

The nerves on each The nerves
side spring either from ramus stomachicus, and that is but one and small, and
is spread through the proper coat; from hence arises the consent between the
kidnyes and the stomach. So that vomiting is troublesome in nephriticall
diseases.

One may think that nature has afforded arteries larger than was requisite to
afford life to so small bodies, as the kidneys are: But it was fit so to be,
for the passages were to be parent, which were to discharge the heart and
arteries of serosity.

The artery lies between The place of the artery.
the vein and the vreter; partly to hasten the blood to the kidney; partly
speedily to discharge the watrishnesse.

The veins and arteries are not joined with the water pipes: for if you put a
catheter into the ureter by blowing the vessel will not swell.

CAP. XVIII. Of the vreters.
THe ureters, in Latin meatus urinarii, are called in Greek (...), either
from (...) to piss, or (...), because they keep the urine.

There is one in each Their number.
side.

They are white vessels, Their substance.
like to veins, yet they are whiter, thicker, and more nervous. They reach
from the kidny to the bladder.

They have two coats, Their coats.
the one common from the peritonaeum, the other proper, from the external or
common coat, it has capillar veins and arteries.

It has few oblique Its fibers.
fibers, but most straight. It springs from the bladder; for it cannot be
severed from it easily, as from the kidnyes.

Yet it differs from How the ureter differs from the bladder.
the bladder in two things.

First, in that the bladder has three coats, but it only two.

Secondly, the bladder has all sorts of fibers, but the ureter has most
straight, few oblique.

They are inserted in the back and lower part of the bladder not far from the
muscle sphincter, between the two proper coats of it about the length of an
inch.

This insertion is oblique Why the insertion is oblique.
to hinder the regurgitation of the urin, when the bladder is either
compressed, or distended with urine. Although the ureter does not ordinarily
exceed in compass a barley corn; yet when stones do pass, it becomes
sometimes as large as a gut.

CAP. XIX. Of the bladder.
THe bladder is seated Its place.
in the hypogastrium, in the place called pelvis.

Of substance it is Its substance
membranous: becanse it was to admit large stretching.

The membranes of it Its membranes.
are three. The first is from the paeritonaeum: for it is lapped within the
reduplication of it.

The second is thicker and endued with many straight fibers, which Aqua pendens
will have to be a muscle serving for the compression of the bladder, as the
sphincter serves for constriction.

The third and innermost is white and bright, of exquisit sense, as they can
witness who are troubled with the stone.

It has all sorts of Its fibers.
fibers.

Within it is covered with a mucous crust, Its crust.
an excrement of the third concoction of the bladder. This does mitigate the
acrimony of the Urine.

It is perforat in three Its perforation.
parts, to wit, in the sides where the ureters are to let in the urine, and
before to let out the urine.

The bladder has two Its parts.
parts, to wit, the bottom and the neck.

Both these in figure Its figure.
represent a pear.

The bottom is upholden How it is upholden.
by the navell: First, in the middle by the ligament called vrachus, which is
the cause sometimes that they who have a great stone in the bladder, complain
of great pain about the navell.

Secondly, by the umbilicall arteries dried laterally.

If the bladder were Why man's bladder is snspended.
not suspended, a man going straight up the bottom of the bladder would
compresse the neck, and cause difficulty in making of water.

In man it lies between Its heat in man and woman.
the os pubis and the intestinum rectum. In women between the neck of the
matrix and os pubis.

The bladder of man differs from the bladder How the bladdes of man differs
from the bladder of beasts.
of beasts in two things. First, the bladder in man is couched within the
redoplication of the peritonaeum, but in beasts it is loose, and only is tied
to the intestinum rectum.

Secondly, the bladder of man has fat without; but the bladder of beasts none.

In it stones are Why stones are ingendered in it.
promptly engendered, because the heat of it is compact: So red hot iron
burns worse than the flame of fire.

There is a great consent between the bladder Why there is a consent between
the bladder and kidneys
and kidneys. So that in diseases of the kidneys, difficulty in making of water
sometimes happens: The causes of this consent are two.

First, the communion of office, for both serve for the excretion of urine.

Secondly, the similitude of substance; for both the inside of the kidneys, and
the bladder are membranous.

One thing is to be noted, An observation.
that a bladder is bestowed only upon such creatures as have bloody lungs, and
the hotter Why the bladder in man is big.
the lungs are the bigger the bladder is.

So man according to his stature, has of all living creatures the biggest
bladder. According to Aristot. lib. 1. Histor. Animal. Because the bladder is
of a cold temperature; therefore in deadly diseases of it, sleepiness
oppresses the patient, according to Hippoc. 6. epidem.

In the neck only the The muscle sphincter.
muscle sphincter does offer it self to be considered: whereof read in the
doctrine of muscles.

It has veins and arteries Its vessels.
called Hypogastricae, implanted on every side of the neck, which are
immediately divided into two branches; whereof the one is bestowed upon the
bottom; but the other upon the neck.

It has remarkable Its nerves.
nerves; partly from those of the sixth conjugation, which pass by the roots
of the ribs, partly from those which spring last from os sacrum.

The use of the bladder is to contain the urine, like a chamber pot, until
the time of excretion come when the bladder is full.

CAP. XX. Of the generation of blood.
FIrst of all every nourishment receives a preparation in the mouth. If it be
solid, it is chewed by the teeth, from the mouth by swallowing, it is turned to
stomach. It being embraced How the Chylus is made.
by the stomach, and kept for a while, is turned into chylus, partly by the
specricall heat of the stomach it self; partly by the heat of the adjacent
parts, but chiefly of the liver, spleen, and caull.

The chylus being made light by concoction it rises up, and passes to the
pylorus, and procures the opening of it. This being opened the stomach by its
transverse fibers, thrusts the chylus into duodedum. From hence it passes
more and more downwards by degrees. The wrinkles of the small guts hinder the
sudden passage of it, to procure an equal concoction of all the parts of it.

In the mean time the venae lacteae draw from the small guts, whatsoever is
alimentary of the chylus. While the chylus thus passes to the liver, and is
come to the diverication of the vena portae, the spleen by a natural faculty
by the ramus splenicus, draws to it self the thickest and most terrestrial
part, yet the purest only may come to the liver.

When the chylus is come to the liver, the choler is sent either by meatus
cysticus, to the gall, or to the jejunum by meatus hepaticus.

The blood being perfected, the grosser part is carried by the branches of the
vena portae, and the splenicall to the nourishment of the parts appointed for
nutrition; but the purest part is carried to all other parts for their
nutrition; and because much watrishnesse is mingled with the blood, that it may
pass without difficulty by the narrow passages of inosculations to the vena
cava (seeing the serosity is unapt to nourish) it is sent by the emulgent veins
and arteries to the kidneys, and from thence by the ureters to the bladder.

CAP. XXI. Of vasa praeparantia in Man.
HItherto we have handled the parts appointed for nutrition: Now it follows
to run through the parts ordained for generation to continue man kind.

The genitals are of The differences of the genitals.
two sorts; of the male, and female, and so it was requisite for procreation;
for this action requires an agent and patient: seed and menstruall blood.

The first is the palace of the plasmatick spirit. The second asfordeth supply
of matter to the spirit, to draw out the admirable frame of the regions and
parts of the little world.

In man some of these The parts of the genitals in man.
parts afford matter for the seed, to wit, the four vasa praeparantia: some
elaborate this matter, the corpus voeri coesum: some make the seed fruitful,
as the stones; some carry the seed back again, and make it pure, as those
which are called vasa deferentia: some contain the seed, and an oleaginous
matter, as the vesiculae seminalis, and the prostates; some discharge the seed
into the matrix: This is done by the penis.

Vasa praeparantia, Vasa praeparantia.
which prepare matter for the seed, are of two sorts, veins and arteries.

The veins are two. The right springs from the trunck of the vena cava, a
little under the emulgent.

The left proceeds from the emulgent.

The arteries spring The arteries.
from the trunck of the aorta; these vessels being a little distant one from
another, are tied together by a thin membrane, which springs from the
peritonaeum, and meet often by the way by inosculation. These vessels are
greater in men than in women, and the arteries are bigger than the veins:
because much heat and plenty of spirits are required for the seed. They enter
into the groyne obliquely carried together with the muscle cremaster, between
the two coats of the peritonaeum.

In curing of a rupture by incision, if the muscle cremaster do fall out to be
bound by the ligature, spasmus cynicus ensues.

These vessels do end The ending of the vessels.
about the beggining of the testicles, and from hence are called (...), and
make up that part which is called corpus varicosum, paraslaca, and plexus
pampiniformis. From the stones to it many small fibers pass.

The corpus varicosum is Corpus varicosum.
framed of the twisting of the vasa praeparantia; which makes a long, thick,
glandulus, but hard welt without any remarkable cavity, which passes to the
bottom of the stone, and from thence to the vas deferens, where it ends.

Here the venall and arteriall blood being elaborat in these admirable
windings, is further prepared, a quality being imparted from the seminificall
faculty of the stones.

CAP XXII. Of the stones.
THe stones in Latin are called Testes, because they testify one to be a man.

They are glandulous Their substance.
bodies, flaggy, soft, and white, without any cavity, full of small veins and
arteries, such as are not in any part of the body.

They are in number Their number.
two, and therefore in Greek are called (...).

Their figure is ovall, Their figure
the right is hotter, and better concocteth the seed. Wherefore by Hippocrat.
it is called (...), a begetter of the male.

The left stone is more full, and has a bigger vein; yet the seed, which is
there eleborat, is more watrish and colder; because it proceeds from the
emulgent, and is called of Hippoc. (...), because it begets the female. In
the stones there are to be considered their coats, substance, and use.

Their coats are four. Their coats


First, bursa seroti, and it is nothing else but the skin covered with the
cuticula: And because it cleaves firmly to the Membrana carnosa under it, so
that they seem to make but one coat, it comes to pass that in cold, it does
contract it self, and becomes wrinckled.

In the lower part it The line.
has a line according to the length, whereby it is divided into the right and
left side; this line is called sutura, or a seame.

The second is called by Rufus, dartos, because it may easily be flead from
the tunica vaginalis; by the ancients it was called erithroides: because it
appears to be red be reason of the fleshy fibers wherewith it is enterlaced.

This arises from the membrana carnosa; which here is more thin and subtle
than else where, and stored with veins and arteries.

The third is elythroides or vaginalis: because it contains the stone as a
sheath. It is a thick and strong membrane, having many veins. In the outside it
is uneven, by reason of the fibers, by the which it is tied to the dartos; but
in the inner side it is smooth. This is nothing else but the production of the
peritonaeum.

The fourth is (...), the nervous me^orane, called albuginea form its color;
It is white, thick, and strong, framed of the external tunicle of the vasa
praeparantia. It is immediately wrapped in the stone, between these two the
water is contained in Hernia aquosa.

The substance is described in the beginning of the chapter. Each stone has
one muscle called cremaster, from (...) or (...), which is to hold up; because
it pulls up the stone in the act of generation, that the vesses being
slacked, may the more readily void the seed.

This muscle is nothing else but the lower part of the oblique muscle,
ascending near to os pubis, which outwardly wrapping the production of the
peritonaeum, is carried to the stone.

These muscles in sickness and old age become flaggy, and so the scrotum
relaxeth it self, and the stones hang low.

The uses of the stones are three:

The first is to elaborate the seed by reason of the seminificall faculty
resident in the parenchyma of the stones; for they turn the blood, which is
brought by the vasa praeparantia into seed, for the most part; the rest they
reserve for their own nutrition.

The second is, they add heat, strength and courage to the body, as gelding
does manifest; by the which all these are empaired.

Thirdly, they receive the superfluous humidity of the seed, by reason of their
glandulous substance.

CAP. XXIII. Of the vessels that carry the seed, and those that keep it.
VAsa deferentia, the vessels which carry the seed, in color they are white, in
substance sinewy, having an obscure hollownesse; from hence they are called
meatus seminales. They spring from the lower end of the parastatae. These mount
up by the sides of the Vasa praeparantia.

When they are come within the cavity of the belly, they turn back again, and
pass to the backside of the bladder: between which and the intestinum recta
they pass until about the neck of the bladder, being somewhat severed, and at
last being joined together, but not united, are inserted on each side in the
glandulous bodies called prostatae.

Before they come thither Vesiculae seminales.
they are joined to the Vesiculae seminales; These in figure represent the cells
of a pomegranat or honey comb.

These contain an Their substance.
oily and yellow substance; for they draw unto themselves, that which is fatty
in the seed.

They are more in number, that the oleous substance should not forcibly and
plentifully be powered into the vrethra; but should gently and slowly pass from
one unto another by windings, and at last be powered into the conduit of the
yard by a hole which is shut up with a fleshy substance, partly to stay the
involuntary effusion of it, partly to hinder the regurgitation of it. It being
powered into the urethra chiefly in the time of carnal copulation, does moysten
it that it shrink not, and suffers not it to be offended by the acrimony of
the seed or urine. The Vasa deferentia passing by these, go to the glandules
called prostatae, by the which they are compassed.

When they are come to The use of the caruncule in the urethra.
the urethra a caruncule as a value is set before the orifice of each of them:
partly to hinder the coming of the urine into them; partly to hinder the
involuntary effusion of the seed.

Under and by this caruncule The holes by the which the seed passes to the
urethra.
on each side there are three holes through which the seed passes into the
urethra. These holes are discerned easily in a gonorrhea inveterat; although
not so easily in a found person.

The seed does pass through these inconspicuous passages, as quick silver
through lether, by drops. The seed having been made subtle and spirituous by
sublimation through the vasa deferentia ascending is able to pass through in
conspicuous passages.

Prostatae or glandulae seminales, Prostatae.
are glandulous bodies, placed between the neck of the bladder and the
intestinum rectum. Although there is no conspicuous passage, by the which the
seed passes into the urethra: yet the thick membrane which wrappeth in the
prostat where it leans upon the urethra, is thinner and has many pores,
which are dilated by heat in the act of generation, and may be seen in an
inveterate gonorrhea.

A continual dilatation of these procure an uncurable gonorrhaae.

The sphincter of the bladder co^passeth these glandules. In drawing of a
stone, if these parts be torn, the party becomes barren.

The distance between the root of the cod and the podex is called perinaeum:
Perinaeum.
because it is still moist with sweat. The Pubes, scrotum, and perinaeum Why
these parts in man are hairy.
in men, are furnished with hair: because glandules are placed there, which
receive plenty of superfluous moisture: a part whereof they send to the skin
for the generation of hair. Why corrupt seed is worse in a woman than in a man.
If the seed chance to be corrupted in man it causes not so fearful
symptoms as in a woman: because the seminary vessels are without the
hypogastrium in man; but in woman within.

CAP. XXIV. Of the Yard.
IT is called in Latin Penis a pendendo, The description of it.
because it hangs without the belly, and it is an organicall part, long and
round; yet somewhat flat in the upper part, seated about the lower part of os
pubis, appointed for making of water, and conveighing the seed into the matrix.

It is framed of such a substance as might admit distention and relaxation.

The parts of it are either Its parts.
common or proper.

The common are three, the scarf skin, the skin, and the membrana carnosa.

It has no fat, for it Why it has no fat.
would have hindered the stiffness of it.

The cuticula is of a The cuticula and culis.
reasonable thickness: The skin is somewhat thick, flaggy when there is no
erection; but stiff when there is.

The membrana carnosa The membrana carnosa.
is somewhat sinewy.

The proper or internal The internal parts.
parts are these: The two nervous bodies, the septum, the vrethra, the glans,
four muscles, and the vessels.

The two bodies are The two bodies.
long, hard, and nervous. These within are spongious, and full of black blood.
The spongious substance seems to be a net like texture, framed of innumerable
twigs of veins and arteries.

This black blood contained in these laterall ligaments, being full of spirits
waxen hot by the sting of Venus, does distend the parts.

These two laterall ligaments Their beginning.
where they are thick and round, spring from the lower part of the share bone.
In their beginnings, they are separate one from another, and represent the two
horns of Pithagoras his Y, that the urethra may pass between them.

But as soon as they Septum lucidum.
come to the joining of the share bone, they are by the Septum lucidum everted.
It is nervous and white.

It arises from the upper part of the commissure of the os pubis, and
upholdeth the two laterall ligaments and the urethra as a stay. The like is
found in women to uphold the cunnus. Under these lies the urethra.

It is of a substance nervous, The urethra
thick, loose and soft, like to that of the laterall ligaments. It begins at
the neck of the bladder: yet it does not spring from it, but is joined to it
only, and so passes to the glans. If you boil the bladder and it, it will
separate it self from the bladder.

It is framed of two Its frame.
membranes, the one is internal with the which the glans is covered, it is
bred of the thin membrane, which covers the nerves of the prick. It is of an
exquisit feeling, that it might feel the acrimony of the seed, and cause
pleasure; chiefly in that part of it, which lies between the prostates.

The external is fleshy and has many fleshy transverse fibers. The middle
substance is fungous and full of black blood, that it might suffer distension
and relaxation with the laterall ligaments.

At the beginning of it Its muscles.
there are three holes, one in the middle largest, and two lesser, in each side
one, from the passage, which is sent from the vesicula seminales, to the
vrethra.

The muscles are two in each side, and so four in all. Of these collateral
muscles, the one is shorter and thicker, and springs from the appendix or
knob of the coxendix. under the beginning of the laterall ligament, and
ascending obliquely, is inserted into the same, a little below the beginning of
it; this serves for erection.

The second is longer and smaller, proceeding from the sphincter of the anus
fleshy.

This passes straight under the urethra, and is inserted about the middle of
it, in the side of the prick. These two muscles dilate the lower part of the
urethra for miction and ejaculation of the seed. As the first muscle is termed
erector, so this is called accelerator, or hastener.

This has a substance agreeable with that of the penis: for this in erection
is drawn toward its beginning, and the erection ceasing, it becomes lanke.

Glans is the extreme part; Glans.
it is somewhat round compassed with a circle as with a garland. It is soft,
and of an exquisit feeling, by reason or the thin skin, with the which it is
covered. About the root of it, where it is joined with the nervous bodies,
there is a little pit. In the which if any sharp humor be lodged, as in
gonorrhaea virulenta, great pain is caused.

The Glans is covered with praeputium, the fore Praeputium.
skin; it is framed of the reduplication of the skin.

The ligament by the Fraenum.
which it is tied to the glans in the lower part of it, is called fraenum the
bridle.

Of the vessels, some The vessels
are cutaneous, some pass to the inner parts of penis.

The Cutaneus veins and arteries spring from the pudendae; these entering at
the root of the prick they pass by the sides toward the back of it, and are
conspicuous enough. The vessels which bestowed upon the inner parts of Penis,
come from the Venae and arteriae hypogastricae, about the roots of the laterall
ligaments. Here the arteries are remarkable, which are wonderfully despersed
through the body of the penis: for the right artery is bestowed upon the left
side, and the left upon the right side.

It has two sinews Its sinews.
from the os sacrum. The lesser is bestowed upon the skin: The largest mounting
up under the share bones to the root of the yard, between the laterall
ligaments, it is bestowed upon the muscles, the rest of the body of the Penis
and the glans.

Of the Genitals in Woman. CAP. XXV. Of the Cunnus.
THe Genitals in a Woman have four distinct parts; to wit, the Cunnus, the
matrix, the stones, and the spermatick vessels.

Cunnus is that part The particles of the Cunnus.
which offers it self to the sight before section. In it eleven particles
are remarkable.

1
1. Pubes, that particle where the hair does first bud out; which ordinarily
falls out the fourteenth year of a woman's age, the upper part of this which
buncheth out, and is most hairy, is called Veneris mons.

2. Is Rima magna, the 2
great chink; it begins at the os pubes, and is but an inch distant from the
anus. Wherefore it is larger than the cavity of the neck.

3. The Labia or lips, 3
by these the internal parts are covered, as the tongue and teeth by the lips.
These are framed of the common integuments of the body, these have pretty store
of spongious fat.

4
4. Are the Alae, or Nymphae, the wings, these appear when the lips are
severed: These are two productions framed of a soft and spongious flesh, and
the reduplication of the Cutis, placed at the sides of the neck: Being joined
above, they compass the Clitoris. In figure and color they resemble the comb
of a Cock.

5
5. Is Clytoris, this is a nervous and hard body: within, full of a black and
spongious matter, as the laterall ligaments of the yard. It is framed of three
bodies. The two laterall are ligaments and spring from the internal knob of
the Ischium. The third is between these, this arises from the joining of os
pubis; at the end of it is the glans, which has a superficial hollownesse,
and is covered with a very thin skin, as a Praeputium, which springs from the
joining of the Nymphae. And as it does represent the prick of a man, so it
suffers erection, and falling; It may be called a woman's prick. In some women
it has been as big as a man's.

6
6. Under the Clytoris above the neck a hole is to be seen, by the which a
woman makes water.

7
7. After the Nymphae four caruncules resembling the leaf of the myrtle shrub,
are to be seen: Whereof that which is uppermost, is largest and forked, that
it might receive the end of the neck of the bladder, the other is below: The
other are on the sides. All four keep back the air, and all other things,
from entering into the cavity of the neck, and by tickling the genital of man
cause the greater delight. In women which have not borne children, they are
most conspicuous.

These caruncules are framed of the reduplication of the fleshy neck of the
genitall.

8. Behind the caruncules 8
appears a cavity in the lower part of the neck of a reasonable largeness,
framed by nature to stay the seed powered into the neck from too quick
slipping out.

9
9. In Virgins these caruncules are joined together by a thin and sinewy
membrane interlaced with small veins, cleaving orbicularly to the sides of the
neck, having a small hollownesse in the middle, which will receive a pease, by
the which the menstruall blood passes: Sometimes it is hollow like a sive, it
is called hymen.

10. Behind these caruncules 10
and the hymen appears a chink, under the orifice of the bladder between the
two wings, which is the entrance into the neck.

11. Now the neck is 11
nothing else but that distance, The neck.
which is between the Cunnus, and the mouth of the matrix.

In women of an ordinary Its length.
stature, it is eight inches in length.

The substance of this Its substance.
part is hard, without, fleshy; within membranous, and wrinckled like to the
inner skin of the upper jaw of a cowes mouth.

First, to cause greater pleasure in the act of generation.

Secondly, the better to retain the seed.

Thirdly, to admit the greater dilatation in travel.

The neck is seated in Its seat.
that cavity of hypogastrium, which is called pelvis, between the bladder and
intestinum rectum. It has two membranes; if you cut them transversly, you
shall perceive between them a spongious flesh: such as is found in the laterall
ligaments of the Penis. This causes it to swell in the act of generation,
innumerable sprigs of veins and arteries affording plenty of spirits.

The hypogastricall Its vessels.
veins are inserted into the neck of the matrix: from thence passing to the
mouth of the matrix. As soon as they come to be implanted into the substance
of the uterus, they lose their own coats, which are bestowed upon the first
membrane of it. From thence by small pipes (such as are found in sponges) but
wreathed blood is carried to the matrix: by these veins the terms issue into
the neck of the genitall.

A large branch passes from arteria hypogastrica to the neck. A sprig of it,
but wreathed is communicate to the resticle, passing thither between the two
membranes of the body of the matrix: This sprig is winded to hinder it from
ruption, when the matrix is enlarged, a woman being with child.

CAP. XXVI. Of the Matrix.
THe Matrix was appointed by Nature to be the field of nature, to receive the
seeds of man and woman for the procreation of man, and the continuation of
mankind.

It has two parts, os uteri, The parts of it.
the mouth of the matrix, and fundus the bottom.

The mouth is a hole The month of it.
at the entrance of it, which like a mouth may be dilated, or pursed in: this
entrance is but a transverse line, which when it is exactly opened becomes
round.

This orifice, although in the act of generation it may be so dilated, that it
will receive the glans of a man's genitall; yet after conception it is so
closely shut, that it will not admit the point of a bodkin. When a woman is
delivered, it so opens it self, that it makes way for the infant, be it
never so big. In those who have been mothers, it is like to the mouth of a
whelpe. The cancer of the matrix most commonly begins here, because it is
somewhat fleshy: within this orifice a long knobby substance is placed, to help
the shutting of the orifice the more exquisitly. About this knobby substance,
small holes are to be seen, which seem to be the ends of the ejaculatory
vessels. Its figure.


In figure it is like a pear or a cupping glass.

In Virgins even of a Its bigness.
big stature it exceeds not the bigness of a walnut. But in those who are
with child, it does dilate it self into that capacity, as is able to contain
the child.

It was to be small, because Why it is small.
the seed in quantity is but little, which it ought to embrace and cherish.

It has no distinct cells No distinctcelles in it.
as the matrix of a beast has; only a line, as in the tongue and cod, does
separate the right side from the left. In length from the orfice to the
extremity of the bottom, it is thought to be three inches.

The internal superficies is rough the better to keep the seed.

The matrix is framed Its frame.
of two membranes, the external springs from the peritonaeum, and is the
thickest of all other, that spring from it. It is smooth and slippery if you
except those parts where the spermatick vessel enter into the matrix, and
where the ligaments go out. The internal membrane is full of small holes,
where the matrix covers the intestinum rectum.

When the courses flow, they are easily seen; but not when they cease. The
Ancients did take these to be the mouths of the veins and arteries.

And because they resemble Acetabula.
in figure the measure appointed for the selling of vinegar, they called them
Acetabula or Cotidones. By these holes the menstruall blood issues.

Above at the sides of Cornua uteri.
the external membrane two little bunches, such as are seen in stirks or
hayfers, when the horns begin to bud, are to be marked. They are called cornua
uteri.

For nourishment it Its vessels.
has both veins and arteries.

Of these the veins are The veins.
bigger than the arteries: the veins spring from two branches on each side: one
branch comes from the vasa praeparantia: this does descend, and is spread
through the whole matrix: but chiefly through the bottom: and seeing the sprigs
are implanted in each side, the right are coupled with the left by inosculation.

The other branch which comes from ramus hypogastricus, does ascend from the
lower parts, and is sent partly to the orifice, partly to the bottom. These are
larger than those which spring from the vas praeparans. Both these being
despersed through the substance of the matrix are united by inosculation also.

Some will have the menstruall blood to flow from the twigs, sent from Ramus
hypogastricus when a woman is with child: being persuaded by the Aphorism of
Hippocrates lib. 5. Aphor. 51. that nothing can flow from the cavity, the
orifice being so shut that it cannot admit the point of a bodkin; but the word
(...), signifies only co^nivens, or shut together, as the eye lids are. And
although in the first months the orifice be exactly closed; yet when a woman
is great with child the orifice gapeth a little, and is shut with a mucous
seminall substance, which does repel the air, and lubricate the orifice in
the delivery.

It has arteries also, Arteries.
which spring from the preparing arteries, and from the hypogastricae, as the
veins did; these accompany the veins, and are distributed as they are.

The sinews first do The sinews
spring from the sixth conjugation: they are small, and are bestowed upon the
bottom: then from the pares which spring from the os sacrum.

These are bestowed partly upon the lower part of it, and partly upon the
Cunnus. These are larger, because in the act of generation great delectation is
required.

By these vessels, arteries, veins and nerves, the matrix has a consent with
all the rest of the body. And although the veins, and arteries seem to be
small in women which are not with child; yet in those who are with child, by
the affluxion of blood, they will sometimes become as thick as a finger. Yea in
such the matrix which otherways is membranous, as has been said, becomes
in the last months thicker and softer: so that about the upper part of the
bottom, unto the which the placenta uteri is tied, it becomes almost two
inches thick.

The matrix is only tied to the adjacent parts laterally: Iti connection.
for above, fore, and after, it is free that it might admit dilatation, and
descend or ascend in the act of generation.

Now the ligament Its ligaments.
are in number four. The two uppermost broad and membranous are nothing else
but production of the peritonaeum, which tie the matrix to the ossa ilii.

They are loose and soft, that they might admit dilatation with the matrix,
when a woman is with child, and constriction when she is not.

These carry the vasa praeparantia and deferentia to the matrix, and lap up the
stones: they represent the wings of a bat, or the sails of a ship spread
abroad. These keep the matrix steady in its own place, that it neither ascend
not descend.

The two lower ligaments are nervous, round, and hollow; they spring from the
sides of the bottom of the matrix, near to the vasa deferentia, which they
touch; they go down to the groynes, by the production of the peritonaeum
strengthened by glandules: And being dilated like a membrane, they bestow one
part upon the clytoris: The residue passes to the knee, in the inside of the
thigh by the Membrana adiposa, this is the cause why women after conception
feel pain in the inside of the thigh.

These ligaments ferve not only to stay the matrix, but because they are
hollow, by them noisome humors of the genitals are sent to the glandules of
the groines. So after impure copulation, the seminary vessels being infected,
the contagious humor, by these ligaments is sent to the groynes: from whence
arise bubones venerei.

CAP. XXVII. Of the stones and the seminary vessels.
WOMEN have stones as Men The differences between the stones of a woman and of
a man.
have; but they differ in eleven things.

1. In situation, for they are placed not without the hypogastrium, as in men;
but within it: that they might be the hotter and more fruitful. 2. In
quantity, for they are lesser. 3. In their frame, for they are composed of five
or six bladders, which make them uneven: whereas the stones of men are smooth:
these bladders contain an humidity like to whey; but it is thicker. 4. The
stones of women have no cremasters; but are stayed by the broad laterall
ligaments, called the bats wings. 5. They have no prostates. 6. They differ in
figure, for in man they are ovall; but in woman flattish. 7. They have but one
membrane; whereas man's has four. 8. In substance, for they are more soft and
flaggy than in man. 9. In temperature, for they are more cold than man's stones:
and contain a thin and watrish seed. 10. In women they are tied to the sides
of the uterus by the two upper ligaments, which are loose and membranous. 11.
In women which are not with child, they are placed above the matrix, two inches
distant from it.
The seminary vessels Its veins.
preparing, are four, two veins, and so many arteries.

The vein of the right side springs as in man, from the trunck of the vena
cava under the emulgent; but that of the left side springs from the middle of
the emulgent of the same side.

Both the arteries spring from the descending trunck of the great artery. Its
arteries.
These veins are not united as in man, before they come to the stones, but are
divided into two branches. Whereof the greater being stayed by the membranous
ligament, is carried to the stone; but the lesser ends in the bottom of the
matrix in the upper part, for the nutrition of the matrix, and the embryo.

These vasa preparantia The difference between these and those in men.
differ from those in men in these things.

First, they are shorter than in man, by reason of the shortness of the
passage: but they have more wreathings where they make corpus varicosum, about
the stone, that the seed may be the better prepared.

Secondly, they pass not whole to the stones as in man; but are divided in the
mid way, as has been said.

One thing is to be noted, An observation.
that the spermatick veins receive the arteries as they pass by the sides of
the uterus, that the blood might be the better elaborat: for if you blow up the
vena spermatica, both the right and left vessels of the matrix are blown up.
From hence you may perceive the communion of all the vessels of the matrix.

The Vesa deferentia Vasa deferentia.
spring from the lower part of the stones. They are firm, white, and nervous.
They pass by the membranous ligament to the matrix, not straight, but
wreathed; that the shortness of the way might be recompensed with the
multitude of windings. Near the stones they are somewhat broad. When they have
marched a little, they become narrow, and about the matrix they become broad
again, and end in the cornua and capacity of it. Amongst these vessels the
last to be considered is Tuba Fallopiana. Spigeltus Tuba Fallopiana.
calls it Vas coecum, lib. 8. cap. 20. because it has but one orifice, as
the intestinum coecum annexed to colon; this springs from the cornua or
bunches, and resembles the end of a trumpet, and passes obliqaely, over
against the stone carried by the membranous ligament, and compasses the stones:
but it neither proceeds from the stones, neither is inserted into them: And
as in its beginning it is open; so in its ending it is shut.

Riolan will have it to be the end of the ejaculatory vessel, ending within
the matrix. He observes that within it is to be seen a long, white and sinewy
body, which he will have to be the continuation of the ejaculatory vessel. He
notes also that a small sprig does pass but wreathed from the ejaculatory, by
the sides of the uterus to the orifice: by the which women with child spend
their seed in the act of generation; which Spigelius denies in the cited
place, and checketh Laurentius for affirming such a passage.

THE SECOND Book of the Breast.
CAP. I. Of the common containing parts of it.
HItherto then of the lower belly, the seat of the natural spirit, and of the
parts appointed for nutrition and procreation: Now it follows that we handle
the middle cavity the seat of the vital spirit, which contains those parts
appointed for the cherishing of the natural heat, the distribution of the same
to all other parts of the body, and the cooling of it, if it exceed the
natural degree.

This ventricle is seated in the middle, The situation of it.
between the uppermost, which is the head, and lowermost, which is the belly:
for it was fit, that it should be so, that the heat passing through all, and
bestowing life should equally be bestowed upon all the parts of the body.

It is severed from the The limitation of it.
head by the neck; from the belly by the midrife. It is bounded in the forepart
by the brest-bone, and cartilages. In the sides by the ribs: Behind by the
vertebrae of the back.

The figure of it is ovall, The figure of it.
somewhat flat before and behind, whereas in beasts it is somewhat sharp: So
that only man lies on his back. The substance of it.


It is partly bony, partly fleshy, that it might admit motion, and yet not
styfle the heart; the fleshy parts being suspended by the bony.

The fore part of it is The parts of it.
called sternum, the sides costae, and the hinder parts dorsum. The parts
whereof it is composed, are either containing or contained. The parts
containing are either common or proper.

The parts containing The common containing parts.
common are in number four, Cuticula, Cutis, Pinguedo, and Membrana carnosa.

The scarf skin, and 1.2. Cuticula.
skin of it do differ from those in the belly: for it is hairy under the arm
pits, and above the pit of the heart: the skin of the back is both harder and
thicker, and so is less hairy.

Secondly, the skin of the back part is of an exquisit feeling: first, because
many twigs of sinews are bestowed upon it from the Nervis, proceeding from the
spinalis medulla: secondly, by reason of the muscles of the breast placed there,
which have many tendons, and so are very sensible.

As for the fat, it is 3. Pinguedo.
not plentiful here as in the belly: first, because the natural heat here is
sufficiently preserved without it: secondly, because it would have hindered the
motion of the breast. Only here it is somewhat yellowish.

The Membrana carnosa 4. The Membrana carnosa.
here in the forepart of the neck is more fleshy than in other parts, chiefly
where the musculus quadratus is framed, which pulls down the cheeks and
lips.

CAP. II. Of the Dugs.
THe proper containing The parts of the breast.
parts are either external or internal. The external are in number three,
the dugs, the muscles, the bones. The internal proper containing parts are
three in like manner, the pleura, the mediastinum, and the pericardium.

Dugs are granted to both the sexes, in men The paps of men.
they are framed of the cutis, the membrana carnosa, fat, and the nipple, and
serve only for beauty, and are called mammillae.

If in man a whitish substance representing milk, be found in the nipples,
which has been seen, as witnesses Aristotel. 1. Histor. Animal. 12. it is
unprofitable, and unapt to nourish.

The paps in women besides these parts, The parts of the paps in woman.
have remarkable vessels, glandules and pipes, to contain the milk perfected
by the glandules.

The glandules are The glandulous bodies.
many, not one; that the milk might be the better elabored. There is placed
above the rest, one somewhat bigger under the nipple. Between these are placed
innumerable veins and arteries, which receive blood from the matrix the
material cause of milk.

When these are full of blood, the milk is made by the property of the
substance of the glandulous bodies, and their temperament. The milk perfected
is sent to the tubuli lactiferi or conduicts of milk, these end in the nipple.

The veins are of two The veins.
sorts, for some are external, some internal. The external spring from the
axillar branch, and are placed under the skin, which covers the dugs to
nourish it, and are called Thoracicae superiores, or the uppermost breast veins.
The internal or inferior called mammariae, spring from the rami subclavii.
They are in number two, whereof one does match downward straight by the sides
of the breast bone. When they are come to the macranata cartilago, they pass
out of the breast, and go downward by the lower part of the musculi recti. When
they are come to the umbilicall region almost, they are joined with skin, by
sundry inosculations, with the venae epigastricae, which meet them there.

These venae epigastricae, spring from the external ramusiliacus, and by a
straight way pass upward under these muscles. From this same branch, spring
the vena hypogastricae which are inserted into the neck and bottom of the
matrix.

There are arteriae mammariae The arteries.
in like manner, which spring from the rami subclavii, and go down to the
navell. Whither when they are come, they are united by inosculation with the
Arteriae epigastricae ascending.

They have nerves from the fourth intercostall nerve, Nerves.
which about the middle of the rib, perforating the intercostall muscle, is
divided into four branches, which are sent afterward to the pectorall muscle,
the thicker passing to the nipple.

Between these glandulous The fat.
bodies and vessels plenty of fat is placed to procure smoothness and equality
to the paps. If this be wasted either by sickness of old age, the dugs become
flaggy.

The paps are of figure The figure of the dugs.
round; both, that they should be more capable of milk, and less subject to
brufings.

In number they are Their number.
two, that if one should fail, the other should supply the defect.

In Men, Women, and Their situation.
Apes, which carry their young ones in their arms, they are seated in the
breast: 1. That the mother should take pleasure by beholding the child. 2. That
by the talking of the mother, the child should learn to speak, and be endued
with reason. 3. That being near to the heart, they should receive plenty of
heat. 4. For beauty. 5. For convenient giving of suck, for the child cannot
presently go when it is borne; but must be borne in the arms and applied to
the teat. 6. For the commodity of the act of generation. 7. For the defense of
the vital parts. 8. For the incitation of lust. 9. To be a receptacle of
excrementitious humors. So women are often troubled with cancers.


The nipple is placed in Of the nipple.
the middle of the dug, where the milky conduits end. It is a round body
standing out, that the infant may take hold of it with the lips. It is of a
fungous substance, that it may admit distention and contraction. It has many
holes: which appear when the milk is pressed out. It is rougher than the other
parts of the dug, that the infant may the more firmly hold it. It is of an
exquisit sense, that the nurse should find some pleasure, when she gives suck:
It is framed of the reduplicatio^ of the skin.

Now the milk which What milk is.
is drawn through the holes of it by the Infant, is nothing else but a white
liquour, engendered of the venall and arteriall blood, sent from the matrix,
and altered by the glandules of the dugs; in taste pleasant, which is easily
cincocted by the stomach, and does speedily and plentifully nourish.

As for the muscles, they are set down in the Treatise of Muscles, Cap. 15.

The bones, which were said to be the third proper external containing part,
are set down in doctrine of bones.

CAP. III. Of the proper internal containing parts.
THese are in number three, the Pleura, the Mediastinum, and the Pericardium.

The Pleura has its denomination from the ribs, under which it is placed, and
so it may be termed in English the costall membrane.

It is a membrane, Its substance.
white, thin, hard, resembling the Peritonaeum

Spigelius de human. corp. Fabr. lib. 9. cap 3. will have it to be thicker and
stronger than the Peritonaeum, contrary to the opinion of Riolan, who affirms
the Peritonaeum to be thicker and stronger; because it is appointed for the
sustaining the weight of the guts.

It is every where double: the inner part is Its parts.
thickest, smoothest, and as it were bedewed with a watrish humor, that it
should not hurt the lungs by its roughness: This watrish humor does spring
from the vapors raised from the blood condensed, by respective coldness of
the membrane. The outer part is thinner, yet rougher; that it should cleave the
more firmly to the ribs.

As for its figure, without Its figure.
it is arched, within hollow: Above it is narrower, below broader, chiefly
toward the sides: From it spring some sinewy fibers, by the which the lungs
are tied to it. If these be too strait, the motion of the lungs is hindered,
and so an uncurable difficulty of breathing procured.

Above it is perforat in Its holes.
five places, to give way to the vena cava, and the aorta ascending, the gula,
the windpipe, and the nerves of the sixth pair. Below where it covers the
midrife, it is perforat in three places, to give way to vena cava, and the
aorta descending, as also to the gula.

It is framed of the Its beginning.
membranes, covering the spinalis medulla; for those joining with the sinews of
the breast, growing broader, produce it.

It has veins and arteries The vessels.
for nourishment and life, and nerves for feeling.

On each side it has Veins.
12. veins; whereof the two uppermost spring from the higher intercostall
branch, and the ten lower from the vena sine pari.

Some many arteries are in like manner; Arteries.
whereof the four uppermost proceed from the superior intercostall, and the
inferior eight, from the hinder part of the aorta, descending.

It has twelve nerves Nerves.
in like manner; whereof the fore branches which spring from the vertebrae of
the breast, are bestowed upon the forepart; but the hindermost branches are
bestowed upon the muscles, which are placed upon the back.

These vessels are placed The seat of the vessels and the pleuresie.
between the duplication of the pleura, and the pleuresie it self is not
seated in this place only; but between the pleura also, and the intercostall
muscles. It Its uses.
has two uses: First, to wrap in all the vital parts: Secondly, to defend
them from all external injuries.

The second membrane Of the Mediastinum.
is the mediastinum because it stands in the middle of the breast, and
divides the right side from the left.

In has not only a duplication as the pleura has, but is double also; for
one is in the right side, the other in the left. They are united according to
the longitude of the vertevrae of the back; but severed toward the sternum.

In the cavity between Observation
these parts of the mediastinum, one may be deeply wounded, without any great
danger of death. Such a wound you shall easily discern; First, if small store
of blood issue out. Secondly, if no breath come out.

This cavity is seen when the Cartilago xiphoides is removed. In the dropsy
of the lungs, and when corrupt mattet is gathered, the sternum here may be
tripaned.

The substance of it is Its substance.
membranous, yet thinner and softer than the pleura. The inner side toward the
lungs is smooth, and has fat about the vessels; but the exterior is rougher,
by reason of the fibers, by the which it is tied to the pleura.

It reaches from the Its largeness.
throat to the midrife.

As for its vessels, veins Its veins. Its arteries.
and arteries, it has from those called mammariae, but small, and from vena
sine pari.

It has one special vein called mediastina, which springs from the lower
part of ramus subclavius.

The nerves called stomachici Its nerves.
pass by the reduplication of it. It has three uses: First, it divides the
breast and lungs in two parts, that one being wounded the other should be safe.

Secondly, it holds up the pericardium firmly, wherein the heart is
contained, that it should not rest upon the backbone when we ly upon our back,
or that it should fall upon the breast bone when we bend our selves toward the
ground, or touch the ribs when we ly upon our sides.

Thirdly, it gives a safe passage to the vessels which pass by it.

The third proper containing Of the pericardium.
part is the pericardium, so called because it compasses the whole heart,
whose figure it has, for it is pyramidall. It is so far distant from the
heart, as is sufficient to give way to the motion of the same, and the
containing of the waterish humor.

It has two membranes: Its membranes.
1. Outer from the mediastinum, it is Its connection.
tied before and behind to the pleura; from Its beginning.
whence both the mediastinum and pericardium originally spring. 2. Inner from
proceeding from the external tunicles of the vessels of the heart: for within
the pericardium the vessels lack their common tunicle, it having been spent
upon the pericardium.

The external membrane is fibrous; but the internal is slippery, but firm
and thick. The motion of it is secondary from the heart.

It leans more to the Its situation.
left side than to the right, and more to the fore than back part. It cleaves
so firmly to the nervous circle of the midrife, that it cannot be separat from
it without renting, to direct the motion of the heart.

It is perforat in five Its holes.
places. In two for the entering in, and passing out of the vena cava. In three
for vena arteriosa, and arteria venosa, and the passing out of the aorta.

It has small veins Its vessels.
from the phrenicae, the axillar. No arteries appear, because it is near
enough to the heart.

It has two uses: Its uses.
First, to keep the heart in its own place, whether we bend our body
backwards, forwad, or to either side.

Secondly, to contain the watrish humor, which is sundry ways profitable:
for first, it tempereth the heat of the heart: Secondly, it moystneth the same:
Thirdly, it makes it slippery: Last of all the pericardia defends the heart
as an armor from all external injuries.

The watrish humor The watrish humor in the pericardium.
which is contained in the pericardium, is like urine: yet not sharp or
saltish. If it be thock and slimy, is causes the heart to be hairy. If it be
too copious, it causes the painting of the heart, which is cured by
phlebotomy. It is too plentiful in those who have obstructions of the
mesaraicall veins, liver, or spleen: for in such the thinnest part of the
chylus only is drawn for nourishment, and so the blood becomes watrish.

Some think it to Its generation.
proceed from a seminall aquosity, even from the first generation: as the air
within the ears is from a flatuous. Others think that it is enge^dered of
vapors raised from the blood, and waterishnesse of the veins and arteries of
the heart, and condensed by the respective coldness of the membrane, and by
his mean the peritonaeum and the pleura seem always bedewed with moisture.

It seems that the first beginning of it is a seminall humidity, and that is
maintained afterward by the vapors.

Sometimes also there The bloody water in the capacity of the breast.
is contained in the capacity of the breast, a bloody water to moysten, and
temper the heat of the lungs.

It is caused partly of the vapors raised from the vessels, partly of that
portion of drink, which passes to the lungs: and by reason of this, water and
blood did flow from the side of our Savior, pierced.

CAP. IIII. Of the truncke ascending from the Vena cava.
NOw the parts contained in the breast, are either vasa or viscera, the vessels
or the entrals.

The vessels are in number four, the vena cava, the vena arterialis, the
arteria venosa, and the aorta or arteria magna.

The first is the The Vena cava.
vena cava or magna, because the hollownesse of it is great. It has its
beginning from the liver. The orifice of it is three times as large as that of
the aorta: being received by the right care of the heart, it is expanded into
the whole right ventricle of the same.

About the orifice of it Its values.
are placed three values called trifulcae or tri^uspides: because arising from
a large foot, they end into a narrow top representing barbed arrows.

Their situation is from without inward, so that the blood may be let in, but
not return. They proceed from a membranous circle, annexed to the orifice:
They cleave to the septum of the heart, toward the point of it be strong
fibers ending in round caruncules.

If you would see these as the rest of the values, cut transversly the
ventricles of the heart near to the basis, and then they will appear.

It has two trunkes, The trunk ascending.
one descending, and this is that which is caused of a number of small veins,
appearing in the hollow part of the liver, which meet about the middle of it in
one trunck still decreasing in number, and increasing in bigness.

The other ascending, this is procured by a number of small veins, springing
from the unequal part of the liver, which end in like manner into one trunck
about the middle of it.

This is bigger than the descending, because all the upper parts are fed by
this only; whereas most of the parts contained in the abdomen, are nourished
by the vena portae.

Although it be not The laterall sprigs of the trunk ascending.
divided into branches until it come to the throat; yet it does send forth
sundry sprigs from the sides.

The first is called phrenica, 1. Phrenica.
one in each side It is inserted into the diaphragma, which is called (...), by
a number of twigs, and from thence it bestows twigs upon the pericardium, and
mediastinum.

The second is called Coronaria, so called because like a garland it compasses
the basis of the heart. It sends sundry twigges to the outer parts of the
heart; but chiefly to the left: because it needs greater store of
nourishment, by reason of its stronger motion.

This has a value which hinders the return of the blood, to the vena cava.
This springs from the cava, before it enter into the heart, and the blood is
somewhat thick, and not attenuat in the ventricles of the heart; for the
substance of the heart, being hard, and firm, was to be nourished by blood
somewhat gross.

The third is called (...) 3. Vena sine pari.
or sine pari, without a mate, because it has not a fellow as other veins have
in the left side, if you except those beasts which chew the cud.

This springs from the cava, as soon as it is come out of the pericardium.
It passes out of the hinder and right part of the vena cava, about the fifth
vertebra of the breast. It does not descend straight way: But coming a little
forward, it returns toward the spina.

When it is come to the eighth or ninth rib above the spina, it is divided into
two branches, to wit, the right and the left: Then passing by the division of
the midrife, which is between the two productions of it, they are spread through
the abdomen. Of these two, the left is inserted into the left emulgent.

By this way Fallopius By which way matters in the breast are discharged.
will have watrish, pu^ulent and bloody substances to be discharged, which
sometimes are contained in the breast; while these branches march downward: In
each side ten sprigs bud out, which march through so many distances of so many
of the inferior ribs.

In the lower part of the rib, there is a groop to receive the sprig. Wherefore
when you make incision in an empiena, come not near to this part. From this
vein other small twigs also proceed; which afford nourishment to the spinalus
medulla.

These are called costales inferiures, or the lower intercostals. The vena sine
pari thus being framed, the cava ascends to the jugulum, strengthened by the
media stinum and the thymus; which is placed in the uppermost part of the breast.

Here the vena cava The divarication of the vena cava.
is parted into 2. remarkable branches: From whence all those veins spring,
which are sent either to the head or arms. One branch marches to the right,
another to the left side, while they remain within the breast, they are called
subclavii, because they march under the cannell bones; but when they are come
to the arm pit, they are called axillares.

Before they come to Sprigs proceeding from the cava within the breast.
the arm pit, sundry sprigs spring from them.

The first is intercostalis superior, 1. Intercostalis superior
. this arises from the root of the divarication, and passing by the roots of
two ribs, bestows twigs upon the distances of the two upper ribs, as the vena
sine part did: there is one in each side.

The second is called mammaria; 2. Mammaria.
this marches forwards toward the upper part of the bone of the breast. From
thence it goes down by the sides of it, and when it is come to the cartilago
mucronata, about the sides of it, it passes out of the breast, and marches by
a straight way under the straight muscles to the navill, where it is joined
with the vena epigastrica ascendens by inosculation: which is the cause of that
great consent, which is between the paps and the matrix. This before it leave
the breast, it bestows one branch upon the cartilaginous distances of seven of
the costae verae, where the sprigs of the vena sine pari end. From these
branches proceed some other remarkable twigs, which are bestowed upon those
muscles, which are seated upon the breast, and the dugs.

The third is called Mediastina, 3. Mediastina.
because it is bestowed upon the mediastinum together with the left nerve of
the midrife, according to the length of it.

The fourth is called Cervicalis or vertebralis. 4. Cervicalis.
It is large in each side, marching upwards obliquely toward the back part, it
comes to the transverse processes of the vertebrae of the neck, where passing
through the holes of them, it bestows branches upon the muscles, which lie
above the vertebrae.

The fifth is called Muscula inferior, 5. Muscula inferior.
because it is spent upon the lower muscles of the neck, which stretch out the
neck and head.

The sixth is the internal jugular, 6. The internal jugular.
this arises where the cannell bone is articulat with the sternum. This joined
with the nerve recurrent, and the soporall artery, marches by the side of the
windpipe, to the throat.

The seventh is the external jugular, this marching up under the skin, and the
qoadrat muscle, which pulls down the cheeks, comes to the ear. This in
beasts is bigger than the internal: otherwise than it is in man.

CAP. V. Of Vena arterialis, and arteria venalis.
THe second vessel in the breast is Vena arterialis. Vena arterialis.
It is a vein from its office: for it carries natural blood to the lungs by
the right side of the wind pipe: It is called an artery, because the coat of it
is double, not single as that of veins. It does spring from the upper part of
the right ventricle of the heart, and is implanted into the substance of the
lungs by the right side of the windpipe.

The third vessel is arteria venalis. Arteria venalis.
It is called an artery, because is carries arteriall blood; but a vein,
because it has a single coat as a vein. It arises from the upper part of the
left ventricle of the heart, and is implanted into the substance of the lungs
by the left side of the windpipe.

The Vena arterialis The values of these two vessels.
has three values called Sigmoides, from the figure of the great sigma, which
answers the Latin S. the figure is this C. They look from within outward,
to let out the blood; but to hinder the return of the same.

The Arteria venalis has two values called mitrales, because they are like a
Bishops Miter. They look from without inward, to let in blood carried from the
vena arterialis. They are bigger than those of vena cava, and have longer
filaments, and to strengthen them many fleshy snippets are joined to them.

It has two values only, that the fuliginous vapors might the more readily be
discharged.

It has also but a single thin coat, partly for the same purpose, partly
because the blood sent from the vena arteriosa is cooled by the bronchia of the
lungs before it enters into arteria venalis it needs not so thick a coat as
an artery, and because veins only carry in blood, and arteries carry out,
therefore arteria venalis is placed in the left ventricle, and vena arterialis
in the right. Both these vessels not far from their beginning, are divided
into two branches, whereof the one passes to the right part of the lungs, and
the other to the left; and each of these is subdivided into other branches,
until at the last they end in small threeds.

The greater branches accompany one another, so that the vein still marches
with the arteriae joined together by many inosculations or anastomoses.

Between them the branches of aspera arteria march. These vessels are great,
because the lungs by reason of their perpetual motion require much nourishment.

First, the blood is How the blood is carried to the left ventricle of the
heart.
carried into the lungs by vena arterialis, and from hence to arteria venalis,
by sundry anastomoses, and from hence to the left ventricle of the heart. Where
being made spirituous, it is sent by the aorta, to impart life to the whole
body.

One thing is to be noted, that no air in its proper substance is carried to
the heart: for the blood contained in these two vessels, is sufficiently cooled
by the bronchia passing between them.

The blood is cooled, How the blood is cooled.
First, by staying in the lungs while it is in passing.

Secondly, by touching the bronchia cooled by the attraction of fresh air: And
thirdly, by the continual motion of the lungs.

One thing is to be noted, that in arteria venosa a little below the values
there is found a little value ever open. It being removed, there appears a
hole, by the which the blood passes freely from the vena cava to it, and
returns by reason of this anastomosis; that the blood in the veins may be
animat.

CAP. VI. Of the great artery, and first of the trunk ascending of the same.
THe fourth vessel is the great artery called aorta; because it receives the
air. It springs from the upper part of the left ventricle of the heart,
where it is largest and hardest.

Before it come out of Coronaria arteria.
the Pericardium, it sends two small twigs, from each side one: which
compass the basis of the heart like a garland, and send down according to the
length of the heart other twigs: These are called Coronariae. These twigs are
more in number, and larger about the left ventricle than the right, because it
requires greater plenty of nourishment, by reason of its stronger motion,
which digesteth much blood.

It is placed between The situation of the aorta.
the wind pipe, and the vena cava, tied to the mouth of the stomach, passing
under the trunk of vena arteriosa upward, Its trunkes.
when it has pierced the Pericardium, it is divided into two trunks; whereof
the one is called truncus ascendens, the ascending trunk: The other descendens,
the descending.

Of these two the descending is largest, because it ministers life to more
parts.

This ascending trunk The branches of the trunk ascending.
before it pass to the arms, is divided into two branches, whereof one
passes to the right, the other toward the left arm; they are called
subclavii rami, because they march under the canell bones. When they are gone
out of the breast, they are called Axillares. From both the lower and upper part
of both these branches, sundry sprigs do spring.

From the upper part From the upper part.
proceeds intercostalis superior, which bestows twigs upon the distances of
the uppermost four ribs. From whence others are sent to the adjacent muscles
and the spinalis medulla.

1
From the lower springs From the lower part.
that branch, which is called Cervicalis, but more fitly Vertebralis; for it
springs behind where the vertebrae; from thence marching upwards it bestows
twigs upon the spinalis medulla, which enter by the passages, by the which the
nerves, as also upon the muscles, which are placed in the hinder part of the
neck, and at the last enters into the Cranium, by that hole, by the which the
spinalis medulla descends from the brain.

This with its fellow when it is come to the sell of the wedge-like bone on
each side of it, between the first and second pair of sinews, having been
divided, cause Plexus choroides.

2
The second, the Arteria mammaria, which accompanying the Vena mammaria is
joined with the epigastrica arteria, ascending by inosculation about the navell.

3
The third is that called Muscula, and is distributed upon the muscles of the
neck.

4
The fourth is the Soporall, one on each side; so called, because if they be
stopped, sleep does immediately follow.

These soporall arteries when they are come to the throat, they are divided in
two branches, to wit, the external, which is lesser, and the internal, which
is larger.

The external bestowed twigs upon the muscles of the face, upon the roots of
all the teeth of the lower jaw, having entered into the cavity of the mandible,
and going out upon the chin.

The internal branch when it has about the throat, it has bestowed twigs
upon the tongue and larynx, about the lower part of the skull, it is divided
into two branches, whereof the lesser and hindermost accompanying the branch of
the internal jugular marches toward the hindermost part of the skull, and
entering at the second hole of the nowle enters into the hollownesse of the
dura matter.

The foremost and the largest, when it has entered into the cavity of the skull
through it proper hole in the parietall bone, and is come to the sell of the
wedge-like bone, it makes rete mirabile, which in beasts is large, but in man
very obscure.

CAP. VII. Of the descending trunk of the aorta.
THE descending trunk of the aorta about the fifth vertebra of the breast
bending toward the left side marches downwards toward the last vertebra of
the loins.

In this march it sends forth sundry branches, which are these:

1. Intercostall inferior The branches of the trunk descending.
arteries in number eight.

2. Phraenicae two. 3. Caeliaca one. 4. Mesenterica superior. 5. Emulgentes
two. 6. Spermaticae two. 7. Mesenterica inferior. 8. Lumbares.

The inferior intercostall 1. The Inferior intercostals.
arteries, acco^panying the veins and nerves of the same denomination march
according to the length of the lower part of the ribs, where there is a
hollownesse to receive them, and in the true ribs end where the cartilages
begin; but in the short ribs they go a little further, even to the sides of
the lower belly.

These send sprigs by the holes of the nerves to the marrow of the back, and to
the muscles which rest upon the vertebrae of the back.

These not only afford By what way quittour and water is sent from the br(...)
the (...).
spirits and blood, to the intercostall muscles; but carry also quittour and
water gathered in the cavity of the breast, sent by the trunk of the aorta to
the bladder, by the emulgent arteries, according to Spigelius lib. 6. cap. 4.
whereas Fallopius will have these m^ters to be sent by vena sintpari; but this
a shorter way.

Phrenicae are two, 2. Phrenicae.
one on each side: they spring from the trunk as soon as it is come out of the
cavity of the breast, and being spread into many twigs, whereof the most are
bestowed upon the lower part of the midrife, where the vertebra of the back
are; and some also upon the upper part, which afterward pass to the
pericardium, where it cleaves to the midrife.

Caeliaca is one, so called 3. Caeliaca.
because it sends twigs to the stomach. This springs from the forepart of
the trunk. This bestows branches upon the stomach, liver, gall, caul, the
duodenum, the beginning of the jejunum, to a part of Colon, to the Pancreas,
and spleen.

Mesenterica superior does arise a little below the caeliaca, accompanying the
vena mesaraica. It bestows many twigs upon the hungry and ilium gut, as also
upon that part of Colon, which lies between the hollow part of the liver, and
the right kidny. So that this branch is bestowed upon the upper part of the
mesentery.

5
The Emulgent arteries are two; the right and the left. They spring from both
the sides of the trunk under the former, where the first and second vertebra of
the loins are coupled by a ligament. The left is lower than the right. These
when they are come to the kidneys are divided into two branches, which are
inserted into the cavities of the kidneys, and by innumerable small twigs are
spent upon the substance of the kidneys. The use of these, besides the common,
is to discharge the serosity of the arteries, whereof they have great store.

6
Spermatica or seminales, the Seminary; they are in like manner two, which
spring from the forepart of the trunk.

The left artery does not spring from the left emulgent artery as the vein
does. These marching downward, accompany the veins of their side. In men they
are carried to the stones by the productions of the peritonaeum; but in women
when they are come near to the stones, they are divided in two branches,
whereof the one is bestowed upon the stones, and the other upon the bottom of
the matrix, in the sides of it.

Mesenterica inferior, it 7
springs about the os sacrum, from the trunk a little above before it sends
forth the rami iliaci. It is bestowed upon the left part of the Colon, and the
rectum, and accompanies the Hemorrhidicall veins to the anus.

Lumbares rami, the 8
Loyne branches, in number four; They spring from the back-part of the
descending trunk of the aorta. These pass to the vertebrae of the loins, and
their marrow by their holes, as also to the adjacent muscles. Some things here
offer themselves to be observed.

1. That when either the colicke is changed into the gout, or contrariwise the
gout into the colic; if the lest happen, then the humors are sent from the
crurall arteries to the trunk, and from thence to the mesentericall branches
of the arteries; and from thence to the guts. If the first happen, then the
humors pass the contrary way, Read Hip. 6. Epid. Sect. 4.

2. If the colic turn either to a palsy, or falling sickness, as it may fall
out, according to aegenet. lib. 3. cap. 43. then the humor does return from
the Colon by the mesentericall arteries, to the trunk, and from hence to the
Lumbares, which being filled compresse the adjacent nerves: from whence
difficulty of going insueth; which may be called an imperfect palsy. If the
falling sickness be pr^cured, the humor is sent to the groyne arteries, and
thence to the brain.

3. Clysters may purge the whole body: for the clyster moistning the whole
Colon, may by the twigs of the arteries draw noisome humors from the trunk,
and when purgation is caused by anointing the navill (which often falled out in
using the unction for the pox,) or vomiting by ministering a clyster, wherein
white hellebore is, first the arteries draw the force of the medicaments, and
this same faculty againt does purge by the arteries.

9. Arteriae sacrae, or 9
those branches which go to the os sacrum. They spring from the lower part of
the trunk, before it sends out the Rami ili^ci. They are somewhat large. They
marching downward, and leaning upon the os sacrum, enter into the holes of it,
and so pass to the marrow and hinder part of the same. By these the matter
which causes the colic may pass to procure the palsy of the legs.

Iliace arteriae, these arising 10
below the former about the lower vertibra of the loins, and mount above the
vein, lest it should be hurt by the hardness of the os sacrum, in their
continual motion.

They being in number two large branches, called Arteriae iliaca or flancke
arteries, and marching downward to the thigh obliquely they represent the
Greek Y. inverted. These a little below the division of the trunk are
subdivided into two branches, to wit, the internal or lesser Iliaca, and the
external or greater.

The internal has two branches: The one is called Glutaea, and with a vein of
the same denomination, and is bestowed upon the muscles, which make up the
buttocks: The other is called Hypogastrica.

This is large, this being carried directly to the lower part of the os sacrum,
in men it bestows twigs to the bottom and neck of the bladder, and to the
straight Gut; but in women wherein it is larger, it sends plenty of twigs
upon the bottom and neck of the matrix besides the former parts. The external
or greater has two branches.

The first is called Epigastrica. It springs from the outer part of the
artery a little before it pass through the Peritonaeum, and turning upwards it
mounteth upwards by the inner side of the straight muscle of the belly: and
about the navill it is inosculat with the arteries descending.

The second is called pudenda, this is but a small branch, and when it is come
out of the Peritonaeum, it passes obliquely by the joining of the os pubis,
and is bestowed upon the skin of the secret parts.

One thing is to be noted, A note.
that the Arteria umbilicalis springs from the internal Iliaca, and going
along the great artery, is firmly tied to the bladder by strong membranes.

When the child is in the belly, it is hollow; but without hollownes when the
infant is come.

About the orifice of The values.
these vessels. II. values are to be seen, if the ventricles of the heart be
dissected transverse near to the bajis. Of these some are called trisulcae,
and resemble a barbed arrow, some semilunares or Sigmoides, because they
resemble a half moon, or the Greek leetter called C. Those bend inwards,
because they are set before the vessels which carry in blood.

These bend outward, because they are appointed for the vessels which carry out
the blood.

The Vena cava has three Trisulcae; but the Arteria venosa two.

The Aorta, and vena arteriosa have three Sigmoides.

So much then concerning the vessels of the Breast: now follow the entrals.

CAP. VIII. Of the Heart.
OF these there are four: the Heart, the Lungs, the Windpipe, and part of the
Gullet. In the explication of the heart; First, the Swadler is to be
considered, and then the substance of the heart it self.

The Swadler, called Pericardium or Capsula cordis, is a membrane wrapping in
the whole heart, having the figure of the same, having such distance from the
heart, and to contain the watrish humor. It is perforat in five places for
the coming in, and going out of the vena cava, and for egresse of the other
three. The substance of it is thick and firm. The outer superficies is
fibrous; but the inner, smooth and slippery. It is tied to the Mediastinum, and
adjacent parts by sundry fibers. It does cleave firmly to the sinewy circle of
the midrife; but not so in dogs.

It has its beginning from the tunicles, which compass the vessels which
proceed from the pleura; for between the heart and the pericardium, the
membrane from the pleura is wanting. It contains a watrish substance, not
sharp for the refrigeration and humefaction of the heart: As in the cavity of
the breast a moisture is found like water and blood, mingled together. So from
the side of our Savior pierced, water and blood did flow.

The Pericardium has veins from the phrenicae and axillar. No arteries
appear; because it is near enough to the heart. It has small nerves from the
left recurrent.

As for the heart, the substance of it is compact and firm, and full of fibers
of all sorts. The upper part is called (...) has a small nerve from the sixth
conjugation for feeling; but not motion, for it moves of it self: of all the
parts of the body, it is the hottest; for it is the well spring of life, and by
arteries communicates it to the rest of the body. The heart has two motions,
Diastole, and Systole. In Diastole or dilatation of the heart, the conus is
drawn from the basis, to draw blood by the cava to the right ventricle, and
air by arteria venosa to the left ventricle. In Systole or contraction, on,
the conus is drawn to the basis.

First, that the vital spirit may be thrust from the left ventricle of the
heart into the aorta.

Secondly, that the arteriall blood may be thrust into the lungs, by arteria
venalis.

Thirdly, that the blood may be pressed to the lungs, in the right ventricle
by vena arterialis.

The parts of the heart are either, external or internal. The external are
the ears.

The ears are annexed to the firm substance of the heart about the basis of
it, before the mouths of the vessels. They are of a nervous substance for
strength, yet thin and soft, for the easier contraction and dilatation: the
left is thicker than the right. When they are distended, they are smooth; but
being contracted they are wrinckled.

They are storehouses of the heart: for they first receive the air and blood,
lest they immediately rushing into the heart might offend it, and they
strengthen the vessels. These ears are two in number: the right which is
greatest, this is before the vena cava, and the left the lesser, before the
arteria venosa.

They are called ears not from the office of hearing, but from the likeness;
they representing the figure of an ear. Death approaching, when the heart is
immovable, they move; so we see that a small gale of wind, which moves not
the tree moves the leaves.

The internal parts of the heart are the ventricles or cavities, and the
septum.

The ventricles are in number two, the right and the left.

The right is larger than the left, yet the left has thicker sides, and within
is more unequal than the right.

The right ventricle receives blood from the vena cava, to be sent by vena
arteriosa to the lungs, and reaches not to the conus.

The left ventricle is not so wide as the right: yet the fleshy circumference
is thrice as thick as that of the right. It does elaborat the vital spirit of
the blood and air drawn in by arteria venosa.

The septum, so called because it separateth the right ventricle from the left,
is that thick and fleshy substance set between the two cavities.

Riolan will have the matter of the vital blood to pass through the holes or
porosites of it, from the right to the left ventricle, but that hardly any
instrument can show them: First, because they go not straight, but wreathed.
Secondly, because they are exceeding narrow in the end. He affirms that they
are more easily discerned in an Ox heart boiled.

CAP. IX. Of the Lungs, Windpipe, and Gullet.
AS for the lungs, the substance of them in Infants, whilst they are in the
womb, is red and compact; but after birth because they begin to move with the
heart by heat and motion, this substance begins to be more loose and
spongious, and of a pale yellow color, that they may the more easily rise, and
fall to receive the air, and expel superfluities.

The substance of the lungs is covered with a membrane communicated by the
pleura: for the vessels as soon as they enter into the substance of the lungs,
they leave the coat which they borrowed of the pleura, and leave it for
covering of the lungs. This membrane is porous, to give way to impurities,
contained in the cavity of the breast, to pass through the loose substance of
the lungs, to be discharged by expectoration.

When the lungs are blown up, they fill the whole cavity of the breast.

In figure they are like to an Oxes hoof. The outer part is gibbous; the
inward hollow: the lungs are divided into the right and left part, each of
these has two lobes, seldom three, with the which as with fingers they
embrace the heart. Nature has ordained this division, that if one side of the
lungs should be hurt, the other might discharge the office.

The lungs and breast are divided by the benefit of the mediastinum, which is a
double membrane framed of the pleura; for the pleura beginning at the back,
passes to the sternum by the sides: when it is come to the middle of the
sternum, it directly from thence passes to the back again.

The cavity which the reduplication of the pleura leaves here is above wider,
but toward the back narrower and narrower, until the membranes be united.
Penetrating wounds going no further than this cavity, are not deadly. The
mediastinum is softer than the pleura.

The lungs are joined to the sternum by the mediastinum, behind the vertebra of
the back: toward the sides to the pleura by fibers sometimes they are tied,
which causes difficulty of breathing. It is joined to the heart by vena
arteriosa, and arteria venosa.

The lungs have three vessels, vena arteriosa, arteria venosa, and trachaea
arteria: these two marching together have between them inserted a branch of
the trachaea arteria, carrying air to cool them.

On this is to be noted, that the vessels of the lungs differ from those in
other parts of the body: for the veins have the coats of arteries, that no
alimentary moisture should breathe out: and the arteries have the coats of
veins, that the vital blood might the more speedily pass, with the fuliginous
excrements, and the pure air come in more plentifully.

The lungs have no faculty of themselves to move, but follow the motion of the
breast, to shun vacuity; for when the breast does dilate it self, the lungs
are filled with air and raised up; and when the breast contracteth it self
they fall. That the lungs follow the motion of the breast, this experience
shows: Let one receive a penetrating wound in the breast, if the air enter
in, the lungs cannot move, because the vacuity of the breast being filled with
air, the motion of the breast ceasing, the motion of the lungs cease also. A
few twigs of sinews come to the membrane; but none to the substance: for they
might have caused pain in the motion of the lungs.

CAP. X. Of the Windpipe.
THe third entrall contained in the breast is trachaea, or aspera arteria,
fistula and canna pulmonis, the windpipe. It is a pipe by the which the lungs
as bellows draw the air, for the refreshing of the heart, and send out
fuliginous vapors, turned out from the heart by arteria venosa. The substance
of it is cartilaginous, because by it living creatures cause their noises, and
soundings, and so it must have been hard; yet not so hard as a bone, because
the motion had been painful. It is not framed of one whole piece, for then it
would have remained still in one positure, and could not have suffered
contraction and dilatation. Wherefore it is made up of sundry round cartilages,
which are tied together by ligaments, which in men are more fleshy, is beasts
more membranous.

The fourth part of these cartilaginous ringes toward the gullet is wanting,
and is supplied by a membranous substance, that swallowing of solid things
might not be hindered.

It consists of two parts: the upper is called larynx, the lower bronchus;
because it is bedewed with some part of the drink: for if you give to a dog
saffron disolved in milk, if you presently kill him, and open the lungs, you
shall find some part of this mixture.

The branches of the windpipe disseminat through the lungs, as placed middle
between vena arteriosa, which is in the hinder part, and arteria venosa, which
is in the forepart: which are joined by anastomosis or inosculation. It is girt
with two membranes. The externallis thin, and cleaves fast to the ligaments of
the rings, and guides the recurrent nerves thither. The internal is thicker,
and preceedeth from the membrane, which covers the roof of the mouth.

This being strong, is not so easily offended by salt rheumes, and shin
liquours. It is very sensible, that it might be the more easily moved to send
forth things offensive. It is also bedewed with an unctuous humor, to
withstand the injury of sharp things, and to cause the voice to be more
pleasant. So if salt rheumes bedew this membrane, the voice becomes hoarse; if
this humor be dried in fevers, squeeking.

Larynx is the upper part of the windpipe. When the gullet bends downward in
swallowing, this starteth upwards to give way to swallowing; it has five
cartilages.

1. Scutiformis, or buckler-like, for within it is hollow, but without
embossed. That part which sticks out is called Pomum Adami, Adams apple.

2. Annularis, because it is like a Turkish ring, and compasses the whole
larynx: In the hinder part it is broad, and thick.

3. And 4. Guttalis, because it resembles that part of the pot, which is
called gutturnium. These two being joined together, make the chinke, which
fashioneth the voice. This chinke is called glottis, or lingula, the little
tongue.

5. Is Epiglottis, being set above the glottis; it shuts it. It is of a soft
substance resembling a tongue, or the leaf of the wood-bind, and on every side
bound with a membrane, proceeding from the mouth.

The Larynx has veins from the external jugular, arteries from the Soporall,
and nerves from the recurrent branches of the sixth pair.

The glandules of the larynx are either superior or inferior. The superior are
two, one on each side of the uvula or gargareon, which are called vulgarly
amigdalae or the almonds; these receive humidity from the brain, which they
turn in phlegm to moisten the larynx, throat, tongue, and gullet, and to be a
mean for tasting: for tasting cannot be performed without moisture. They are
seated about the root of the tongue, covered with the skin of the mouth, and
receive veins from the jugulars. The inferior are in number two, one on each
side of the lower part of the larynx, they are fungous, and larger in women
than men.

The larynx is framed for the voice, the remote instruments of the voice are
the breast and lungs; the nearer, either prepare, as the windpipe; or help, as
the sinews and muscles; or keep it, as the throat and mouth; or immediately
form the voice, and that is glottis, for the air being blown out forcibly by
the lungs, it beating upon the chinke, shut reasonably, procures the voice.

CAP. XI. Of the gullet.
OEsophagus or gula, the gullet, is that part by the which as a funnell, meat
and drink are turned down into the stomach. It is framed of three tunicles.

The first is very thin, and appears destitute of fibers; this it has from
the peritonaeum, common also to the stomach; the other two are proper: whereof
the middlemost is more fleshy, thick and soft; it has straight and long fibers.

The innermost is more sinewy, and harder, the fibers of it are transverse and
circular. Veins some it has from ramus coron rius, or round branch of the
porta, and some from cava. Arteries it has from the caeliaca, and the truck
descending of the Aorta. Nerves it has two sprigs of the sixth pair It is
joined with the throat and larynx by the skin of the mouth which is communicate
to it, and the stomach: to the spondils of the back, the windpipe, and the
parts adjacent by membranes, which arise of the ligaments of the back.

To the hinder part a glandule grows to cause more easy swallowing by
moystning the part. It has four muscles.

The first is the circular called by Galen, Sphincter, whereof we have spoken.

The second and third are but small ones, seated in the throat, and proceeding
from the palate of the mouth, are implanted into the beginning of the gullet.

The fourth proceeds from the inner part of the chin, and is inserted into
the gullet. In swallowing, then first of all the circular muscle purseth it
self, from whence it comes to pass that the oblique fibers of it, which
pass from the gullet to the windpipe, are made transverse, and so the larynx
is lifted up, and the gula goes down. So that as this muscle does embrace the
which is to be swallowed, and bears it down; so the fourth seconding this,
does receive it and send it further toward the stomach, that it returns not.

About the top of the breast, there is a glandulous body, spongious, white and
soft, called thymus and lactes: In a calfe a dainty morsel. It holds up the
branches of the vena cava, and aorta ascending; Which pass to the arms, and
saves them from touching the bones.

CAP. XII. Of the neck.
THe neck, cellum, joyneth the breast and head together. It is long, to help
the voice: so those living creatures which make no noise, have no neck, as
fishes; but those who have a long neck, make a huge noise, as geeses and
cranes. The inner parts are the vessels which pass to the head, the windpipe,
and the gullet with others. The outer are the parts common of the body, and the
muscles of these, I will speak in the discourse of muscles. The parts
remarkable in section are these.

1. The soporall arteries. 2. Internal jugulars. 3. The recurrent nerves
between these. 4. The larynx or wind-pipe-head, framed of five cartilages. 5.
Glottis the chinke of it. 6. Epiglottis the cover of the chinke. 7. Uvula,
which is a red, fleshy, and fungous substance. It is covered with the
reduplication of the skin of the roof of the mouth. 8. Gula or favus, the
mouth of the stomach. 9. Tonsillae, the almonds, these moisten the mouth for
chewing, and tongue for tasting.
The description of the recurrent nerves, you shall find where the sixth
conjugation of nerves, proceeding from the brain, is set down, cap. 3. of the
head.

THE THIRD Book, of the uppermost cavity of the body, the Head, Caput in Latin.
CAP. I. Of the Brain.
OF the Head there be two parts: That which is hayry called Calva, the scalp,
and that which has Fig. III.
none, termed Facies the face.

The Scalp has four parts. 1. Sinciput, the forepart beginning at the
forehead, and reaching to the coronall suture.

2. Occiput, the hinder part possessing the di^^^^ce between the future
Lambdoides, and the first vertebra of the neck.

3. Vertex, the crown, that which is between the former two, somewhat arched.

4. Tempora, the temples, which are the laterall parts, between the eyes and
the ears. The parts whereof the scalpe is framed, are either containing or
contained.

The parts containing are either common or proper.

The common are the scarf skin, the skin, the fat, and membrana carnosa.

The proper are either soft or hard.

The soft are two: the muscles and pericranium. Of the muscles we will speak
in their proper place.

Pericranium is a membrane thin and soft, proceeding from the dura matter,
passing through the futures of the head, covering the scull. The hard containing
part is the scull. Look for it in the Treatise of Bones.

The parts under the skull contained, are the meninges, the membranes, which
wrap the brain, and the brain it self.

The membranes are two. The first is called dura meninx or dura matter, the hard
membrane, it does loosely lap in the whole brain and there is some distance
between it and the skull, to give way to the motion of the brain. It has two
membranes. That next to the skull is harder, rougher, and of less sense,
because it was to touch the skull. The inner is smooth, whiter, and bedewed
with a waterish humidity: It seems to spring from the lower part of the
skull, because it cleaves fast to it.

It is tied to, with the pia matter and the brain by the vessels: but to the
skull by small fibers arising of it self, passing through the sutures, and
framing the pericranium It is fourefold where it parts the cerebrum from the
cerebellum. In the crown of the head, where it parts the brain into the
right and left part, it is doubled; and because this reduplication in the
hinder part is broader, and forwards becoming narrower represents a sicle,
it is called falx.

By these foldings the Sinus or ventricles are framed, which are receptacles of
plentiful blood and spirits. They are in number four.

The first and second begin about the b^^sis of the occiput at the sides of
lamb doides, where the veins and arteries discharge themselves.

The third is long, and passes to the nose, and is framed of the former two
joined together.

The fourth is short, and between the cerebrum and cerebellum goes to the
penis: This arises where the former three meet.

This beginning is of some called T^r^ular.

From hence veins do pass for the nourishing of the brain; for from the
sinus, veins creep upward to the cranium, and by the futures to the
pericranium, and downward to the pia matter, cerebrum, and cerebellum.

These veins cleave by a thin tunicle to the sides of the sinus; seeing these
cavities have pulsation, these veins supply the office both of veins and
arteries. These contain great plenty of blood, seeing the brain being large,
and in continual lacks much nourishment. The great bleeding at the nose
happens by reason of the third sinus opened.

Pia matter or dura meninx immediately wrappeth and keeps in the brain.
Whereofore it is thin, soft, and of exquisite sense.

Cerebrum or the brain, is of a substance moist and soft to receive the
impression of similitudes: for it is the place of imagination and memory.

The life is not in the whole body, of color it is white. It has the figure
of the skull. In the forepart it has bunchings out, called precessus
mammillares. In the upper part it is full of foldings, as the guts have, to
carry safely the vessels. In weight it contains 4. or 5. lib. and is as big
again as an Oxes brain.

The parts of the brain are these, the outer, and the inner.

The outer of a grayish color, or between white and yellow, is of a softer
substance, and compasses the inner.

The inner is more solid and whiter, called Corpus callosum. This has two
parts: the one is somewhat round which has the figure of the skull: the other
is that which proceeds from it.

In the large round part, the three ventricles are contained. The other
proceeds of the round, and contains the fourth ventricle called calamus
scriptorius. In this ventricle the animal spirit seems to be made, for it is
pure and clean; but the other ventricle, full of impurities, having under them
the glandula pituitaria, for evacuation of them.

The brain is the tower of the sensitive soul. In contraction it sends the
animal spirits into the nerves dispersed through the whole body: by the which
it communicates the faculty of feeling and moving.

In dilatation it draws the vital spirits from the soporall arteries, and
the air by the nostrils, so that the matter of the animal spirit is arteriall
blood, furnished with the vital spirit and air. It may ^e thought that the
animal spirit for sense, is contained in the outer are softest part of the
brain but for moving in the inner more solid and white part.

The brain has five branches of veins, from the internal jugulars: whereof
some enter into the ventricles of the dura matter, others are spread through the
menings, and the substance of the brain, out of the cavities of the Dura
matter. It has four arteries from the soporals, and those of the neck.

The portions which proceed from the inner part of the brain are cerebellum,
and spinalis medulla.

Cerebellum or the little brain, is composed of two round laterall parts,
making up as it were a globe, it has two worme-like processes, one is seated
at the forepart, the other at the hinder part of it, to hinder the obstruction
of the fourth ventricle, by the compression of the cerebellum.

The Spinalis medulla is of a harder substance than the brain. It is divided
into two parts, the right and the left, as the brain is: which are severed by
the dura matter immediately wrapping it, so that the palsy sometimes invadeth
but one side. About the sixth and seventh vertebra of the breast, it begins to
be separate into diverse twists, which ending into small hair like substances,
represent a Horse-taile. This will appear if the marrow of a beast or man
newly killed, be put in water, and suffered to stand for a while. It is
compassed with 3. membranes: The next to it is from the pia matter, the
middlemost from the dura matter, and the outmost from the ligament which binds
the forepart of the vertebrae.

One portion of the Spinalis medulla is within the skull, four inches in
length, above the great hole of the occiput; from whence all the sinews spring,
which are ascribed to the brain: the other is without the skull, from whence
the 32. pair do spring.

CAP. II. Of other parts to be seen in the Brain.
BEsides those parts named, sundry others are to be showed: whereof, 1. Is Rete
mirabile, so called from the wonderful knittings of the twigs of arteries,
proceeding from the soporall about the basis of the brain at the sides of the
sell of os sphaenoides: In this is the first preparation of the animal spirit.
2. Glandula pituitaria so called because it receives the thick pituitous
excrements from the ventricles by the infundibulum, and so is placed at the end
of the infundibulum in the sell of the sphaenoides. It is harder than ordinary
glandules; above it is hollow, below round: It is covered with the pia matter:
the excrements which come to it sometimes it turns down to the palate of the
mouth: sometimes it suffers to slip down by the holes, seated in the lower
part of the cranium. By shutting the infundibulum it keeps in also the
animal spirits. 3. Septum or Speculum lucidum divides in the upper part the
ventricles: It is loose and wrinckled, but if spread out it is clear: some will
have it to be a reduplication of the pia matter, some a thin portion of the
brain it self. 4. Fornix or testudo is the lower white part, where the
ventricles are joined. It is triangular and under the corpus callosum. 5. Nates
are the two portions of the roots of spinalis medulla, proceeding from the
cerebellum: these are uppermost and largest. 6. Testes are the two small
portions proceeding of the roots from the brain: these are lowermost. 7. Vulva
is the long chinke between the prominences. 8. Anus, is nothing else but that
space which is caused of the meeting of the four trunkes of the spinalis
medulla. 9. Glandula pinealis or penis, so called from the figure: for it is
like a seed of the pine apple, or a little prick: it is set about the
beginning of the hole, which passes from the middle ventricle to the fourth.
It is of a substance somewhat hard, and is covered with a thin skin. 10. Plexus
choroides vel reticularis. It is a texture of small veins and arteries placed
between the fore ventricles, and the testudo or fornix. As the animal spirit
is first prepared in the rete mirabile, so it is more elaborat here, and
perfected in the fourth ventricle: but kept in the whole brain, as in a
storehouse.


CAP III. Of the seven paires of sinews.
BEfore I set down these paires, I advertise you of one thing: that all the
sinews of the body spring from the spinalis medulla as it is rooted within the
skull, or extended to the spina, and not from the brain.

The first pair is made up by those which are called optici or visorii: so
called because they bring the opticke spirits to the eye. They spring from the
nates, they meet about the sell of os sphaenoides: not by simple touching or
intersection, but by confusion of their substances, and mutual penetration.
Then being divided, they pass to the center of the eye: these are big, thick,
and soft.

The second pair is framed of those called motorii oculorum, this pair
springs from the innermost part of the beginning of the prolongation of the
spinalis medulla. In the beginning it is like to one cord: which is the cause
that when one eye moves, the other moves also. This pair is lesser and
harder than the visorii: It accompanies them. This together with one branch of
the third pair which passes to the jaw, passes through the long hole, not the
round; and is inserted into the muscles of the eye and eyelids.

The third pair is made up by those called gustatorii, because the twigs of
this pair being carried to the membran of the tongue, cause the sense of
tasting. This pair proceedet from the root of spinalis medulla. As it arises
it is divided into two large branches, whereof one is carried to the orbit of
the eye, by the hole of the second: The other being carried out of the skull,
by the holes of the lower jaw bestows twigs upon the muscles of the lower
lip, and every tooth.

The fourth conjugation begins about the place of the former but being less
and harder, accompanying the other, and passing through the same hole, is
implanted into the membrane of the palate of the mouth; this serves also for
tasting.

The first conjugation, the auditorii make up: this pair beginning somewhat
below the other, it marches by the sides of the basis of the brain, and
entering into os petrosum, is divided into two branches; the greater being
inserted into the end of cochlea or the hole of hearing, is the instrument of
hearing. The lesser being carried down to the first and second vertebra of the
neck, it sends twigs to the proper muscles of the larynx: from hence arises
a dry cough sometimes when we pick our ears somewhat deeply.

The sixth pair is called vagum, because it bestows branches to sundry parts:
and amongst the rest to all the parts of the belly, which require sense. For
these being soft parts, did not require hard sinewe from the spinalis medulla.
It rises a little below the former, each filure being straitwayes united; it
passes out of the cranium, by the hole of the back part of the head, by the
which the internal jugular enters: then going down by the sides of the
windpipe, above the throat it is divided into two branches, whereof the one is
bestowed upon the upper muscles of the larynx, the bone of the tongue and
throat. The other marching further, is separat into two branches, to wit, the
right and the left; each of these have branches; the Recurrens and Stomachicus.

The recurrent are called also reversivi or recursivi, and vocales, because
they descend and ascend again, and being cut, hinder the voice.

The right is winded about the axillar artery, as about a pully: The left about
the trunk of 2the aorta descending, afterward does mount up to the beginning
of the muscles of the larynx.

The seventh conjugation, which moves the tongue, is the hardest of all: it
has it beginning, where the cerebellum ends, and the spinalis medulla
begins. In its beginning it has diverse sprigs, which afterward are united,
and passing through it own oblique hole, is annexed to the former pair; not
mingled by strong membrans for safety. Then being severed it sends most of
its twigges to the tongue; but fewest to the muscles of the larynx.

To these 7. two more may be added.

The first of them beginning from the side of the beginning of the spinalis
medulla by a small twig, marches forwards between the second and third
conjugation; and by the hole of the second conjugation; on passes to the orbit
of the eye, and is spent upon the muscles which draw the eyes upward.

The second conjugation may be called Olfactoria, the cause of smelling. The
finews of this pair slip out of the brain about the cell of os sphaenoides.

Then to these are annexed processus mammillares or papillares, teatlike
processes: They are in number two, and are white, soft, broad, and long, bigger
in beasts of exquisit smelling than in man, as dogs. These are instruments of
smelling, and not the nose, or the inner tunicle of it.

CAP. IIII. A new way to find out the parts within the skull.
BY lifting up the brain, and beginning at the lower part, first appears the
beginning of spinalis medulla yet within the skull. The cavity of this is
called calamus scriptorius. To this cerebellum is annexed. These being seen
about the conjunction of the opticke nerves there appears, 1. Retemirabile.
2. Glandula pituitaria. 3. Infundibulum, whose top is called pelvis. Septum
luciduduos primos ventricule dirimens. Fornix sivet to studo corpori calloso
conjuncta, above the third ventricle. Nates are two round knobs of the roots of
spinalis medulla which spring from the cerebellum, under these is anus. Testes
are two small prominences of this same medulla, as it rises from the brain.

These are lower, and smaller; the other are higher, and bigger. Vulva, is a
long pit between the eminences. Plexus ^horoides or reticularis, it is a frame
or twisting, made of small veins and arteries between the four ventricles,
and the testudo. At the beginning of the hole which passes from the third
ventricle to the fourth, Glandula pinealis or penis is seated.

CAP. V. Of the face, and first of the parts containing of it.
I Have spoken of that part of the head which is decked with hair. Now am I to
speak of that part which is not altogether garnished with hair: In Latin it
is called facies, because it causes one to be known: and Vulius, because it
discovers the will. The face begins, where the hair cease to grow in
the head, and reaches in the end of the chin. The upper part is called from
the forehead, because it bewrays the mind which in Greek is called (...).
According to the order of dissection it is divided into the parts containing
and contained.

The parts containing common, are the cuticula and cutis. It has no membrana
carnosa, nor fat; but only between the muscles. The two muscles of the
forehead, about the eye brows are thickest, and seem to be united: but above
they are a little separat. The sides adhere to the temporal muscles; and
because the skin does firmly cleave to them, therefore the eye brows, and skin
of the forehead are moveable.

Of the second proper parts, the bones, they are set down in the doctrine of
bones.

The parts contained are the four instruments of the senses, to wit, the eyes,
the ears, the nose, and mouth, wherein is the tongue the organ of tasting.

CAP. VI. Of the outer parts of the eyes.
THe eye in Latin is called oculus, because it is hid within the eyelids. The
hole wherein the eye is placed is called capsa, or cava, but barbarously
orbita: for this is nothing else but the print which a wheel moving leaves in
dirt or dust. The eyes are in number two, that if one should be lost, yet we
should not be blind.

The parts of the eye, are either external, or internal.

The external are in number one, the eyebrowes, the hairy arches where the
forehead ends, the seats of disdain and pride. Each eyebrow is framed of the
skin, the muscle, fat, and hair.

They are in figure oblique, the end toward the nose is called cap^^ or the
head: the other toward the temples is called cauda or the tail.

2. The eyelids, palpebrae. They are framed of the skin, the musculous fleshy,
the pericranium, and the grasely welt. The hairs in them are called cilia:
they hinder the falling of small bodies into the eyes; those in the upper
eyelid turn upwards, those in the lower eyelid downward. In man the upper
eyelid which moves, is biggest; but in birds the lower is largest.

3. The corners of the eye. The larger is toward the nose, the lesser toward
the temple. In the larger corner the glandula or caruncula lachrymalis, the
fleshy glandule is placed (which stays the involuntary shedding of tears)
before the hole which passes into the nose. The fistula in it is called
aegylops.

CAP. VII. Of the muscles of the eye.
THe inner parts of the eye are six in number; the Fat, the Glandule, the
Muscles, the Coats, the Humoun and Vessels.

The fat is placed about the eye for three causes First, it defends the eye
from cold. Secondly, it keeps it from the hardness of the bone. Thirdly, it
fills up the distances of the muscles to further the quick motion.

The Glandule is seated in the upper part of the outer corner, and lodged in
the fat, still full of a dewy substance, wherewith the eye is moystned to
further the nimble motion of it.

The muscles of the eye are in number six, whereof four are straight, and two
oblique.

1. Of the straight, is attollens or superbus, in the upper part. 2. Opposite to
this is called deprimens or humilis. 3. About the greater corner, is called
adducens or bibitorius. 4. Is about the lesser corner, and is called abducens
or indignatorius.
All the strait muscles proceed from the brims of the bone, making the hole for
the opticke nerve, and cleave fast to the cornea, by a broad and thin
aponeurosis.

The first of the oblique is called superior, or trochlearis. It rises near
the hole of the opticke nerve, it ends in a small cord, which passes through
the cartilago trochlearis, or pully-like cartilage, and ends obliquely in the
upper part of the cornea, it draws the eye toward the bigger corner.

The second of the oblique is called obliquus minor, or gracilis, and teres,
and brevis: it arises about the chink joining the two bones of the mandible,
and passing from the greater corner transversly compasses the eye, and almost
meets the tendon of the other oblique muscle in the upper part. It draws
the eye toward the lesser corner.

When all the muscle move alike, they keeps the eye immovable The oblique
muscles sorowling of the eye are called amatorii, and circumactores.

CAP. VIII. Of the tunicles of the eye.
THe tunicles of the eye are accounted six. 1. Conjunctiva or adnata, so called
because it cleaves fast to the eye, and the eye is kept firm by it within the
orbit, that in violent motions it be not thrust out. It covers the half of
the eye circularly.

2. Is cornea, so called because it is like a lantern horn in firmness and
brightness. In the hinder part it is thick, and dark, toward the forepart it
grows thin, that it may be the more bright. As the conjunctiva proceeds
from pericranium; so this springs from the dura matter.

3. Is uvea, because it is like to the husk of a grape, which is smooth
without, and rough within. This is of sundry colors, that it might represent
to the crystallinal colors. The inner side is very black, that a weak light
might the better be seen by the crystallin humor: for light in a dark place
shines more brightly. This blackness is only the excrement of blood. This
membrane covers not the whole eye, as cornea does; but being hollow in the
forepart, does make the pupilla, so called from pupula: because when we behold
our selves in the apple of ones eye we seem babes. It is nothing else but the
hole of uvea. The circle about the pupilla is called iris, from the diversity
of colors which it has.

From this circle proceeds the dilatation and constriction of the pupilla.
The going and coming of the light, causes these motions. If you boil an Oxes
eye you may separate the iris from the uvea, with the point of your knife: from
this circle under the uvea, small threeds spring, compassing the waterish
humor: which being let out, these threeds vanish away, and are dissolved, the
circle remaining. Beneath in the compass of the uvea, by reason of these
threeds, a cataract grows.

This texture of filaments, is called by some tunica ciliaris; but improperly:
and by some interstitium ciliare. These filaments are so called, because in
figure they are like to the hairs of the eyelids.

4. Is membrana pupillaris, the membranous circle compassing the pupilla: for
first it may be separate from the uvea, as has been said: secondly, it has
it peculiar fibers: thirdly, it has its peculiar motion, whereby the pupilla
is dilated in clear light, and contracted in obscure.

5. Is tunica cristaloides, which is nothing else but a membranous congelation,
covering the forepart of the crystalline humor: It is very thin and bright as
a looking glass, that in the superficies of it, the visible forms might
appear as in a looking glass.

6. Is aranea or retina because it resembles a Spiders web or net: this is
nothing else but some filaments, wherewith the vitreous humor is interlaced,
and kept together. These filaments being by incision much separated, the
vitreous humor runs as thin water.

CAP. IX. Of the humors of the eye.
THe humors of the eye are in number three.

1. Is Humor aqueus, the watrish humor. It is not only set before the
crystallin humor; but it compasses also the vitreous humor round about: for
if you cut the eye in the hinder part, it runs out no other ways, than if
the forepart were incised. Where it is placed before the crystallin humor, it
is a defense to it, to weaken the brightness of the external light by
hindering the sudden entering of it. And it is as a spectacle to it, to
represent to the crystallin the species visibiles. Although it be a spermaticke
part, yet part of it in man may be let out (as we see in the cowching of a
cataract) without any great hurt to the sight. In a chicken if it be let out by
pricking, it will be repaired in fifteen days.

2. Is Humor Crystallinus, the crystall-like humor: it is of a compact watrish
substance, somewhat plain before, that some space might be for the receiving
of objects; but round behind where it sticks in the vitreous humor. It is
seated nearer to the pupilla, that the sight might be more clear and full.

3. Is Humor vitreus, so called, because it is like to moulten glass. In
quantity it does exceed the other two: that it might afford nourishment to the
crystallin, the chief instrument of the sight.

First, it is like a soft pillow to the crystallin.

Secondly, it staieth the visible formers which might escape the crystallin,
and so it is placed hindermost.

Last of all the vessels of the eye are to be touched: The veins external
appointed for the nourishment of the eye, proceed from the external jugulars:
The internal from plexus choroides. The arteries external spring from the
external branches of the soporall on each side: the internal proceed from
rete mirabile.

There be two nerves appointed for the eye: one serves for sight, called
opticus; the other for motion, called motorius: whereof sufficiently has been
spoken before.

CAP. X. Of the ear, and first of the outward ear.
IT has two parts, the outer part called Auricula, and the inner cavities with
their furniture. Of the Auricula, some parts are common, and some proper.

The common are Cuticula, Cutis, Membrana nervea, Caro, and Pinguedo in the
lobe. The cutis is tied to the cartilage by a membrane: in the lobe it is more
fleshy and fatty, in the rest of the ear between the skin and cartilage,
there is but small store of fat.

The proper parts are the muscles, veins, arteries, sinews, and the cartilage.
The muscles of it are either common or proper. The common are three.

1. Is a part of the frontall muscle, which rising from the end of it, and
passing above the temporal muscle, is inserted in the upper part, to draw it
upward. 2. Is a part of the cutaneous muscle, ascending to it above the
parotides, to draw it down side-wayes. 3. Is a portion of the occipitall
muscle, reaching to the ear, and implanted in the back part of it to pull it
backward. It has but one proper muscle proceeding from the processus
mammillaris. Which lurking under the ligament of the ear is inserted in the
root of the ear, to pull it backward. The last proper part of the ear, is the
cartilage. If it had been bony it had been subject to breaking; if fleshy, it
had not been so sit to beat back the sound: this cartilage is tied to os
petrosum, by a strong ligament, which rises from the pericranium, toward os
mammillare, to stay it up: in man the ligament is but one and continual; but in
beasts there be two or three, according to the bigness of the ear. The veins
come from the external jugulars: The arteries from the carotis or soporall:
The sinews from the second pair of the neck. It is here to be noted that a
branch of the soporall passes by the antitragus of the ear, to the upper jaw,
from whence the vital spirit is carried to each tooth. In horrible
tooth-aches, if this branch be cut a sunder, immediately the pain cease, the
sharp humor being intercepted.
The outward ear is always open, because we have ever need of this sense. It
is a beauty to the head, it is a defense to the brain, by mode rating the
sounds, that they may gently move the tympanum, and it gathers the sounds
dispersed in the air.

CAP. XI. Of the four cavities of the ear.
ALl those four cavities are seated in ospetrosum.

The first is called meatus auditorius, the passage for hearing. It has
turnings to hinder the violent rushing in of any thing to the tympanum. It is
oblique, that the vehemercy of a strong sound might be moderat: It is lastly
narrow to hinder the going in of small creatures. Wherefore it has also hairs
and earewax, to be as lymed twigs to entangle them. It marches obliquely
upward, that if anything should go in, it might the more easily return, or
be brought out: it ends at the tympanum. This membrane is very dry, that it
might give the better sound. It is thin and clear, that the sounds may the
more readily be sent to the internal air. It is strong, that it might be the
more able to resist external violence. It has a cord, for strength and
stretching, no other ways than the military drum.

The second cavity, is called by Vesalius pelvis, the tunnel of the ear; and
by Fallopius concha, the perwinkle from its figure. The furniture of this
cavity serves for three purposes: for motion, for transmission of the sounds,
and for expurgation of the excrements. For motion the three little bones, the
ligament, and muscles do service. The three little bones are these, malleolus,
incus, stapes, having their names from the likeness of other external things.

Malleolus or the little hammer is somewhat long and cleaves to the tympanum
by the ligament.

The second is Incus the anvill, not only for the figure, but for the use
also; because like an anvill it receives the strokes of the malleolus moved.

The third is Stapes, the stirrup. It is in figure triangular. In the middle
hollow, to give way to the passing of the air to the labyrinth. These cleave
together on following another in order. These little bone serve for uses.

1. They strengthen the tympanum that it be not torn by the violence of the
air. Therefore the hammer with one of the feet of the anvill, lean upon the
drum.

2. That these beating against the tympanum, might the better deliver the sound
to the auditory sinew.

3. That these bones being shaken and beaten against the drum, might frame the
diversities of sounds, as the teeth, the distinction of words and letters.

These bones have neither cartilage nor marrow.

2. They have no periostium.

3. In Infants they are as big and perfect as in men.

4. They are paced up by a ligament the second instrument for motion, that
being shaken by the internal air moved by the external, the sharper sound
might be caused: of the instruments appointed for motion, the muscles are the
last.

Whereof the one is without the drum above in meatus auditorius, whose tendon
is inserted into the center of the tympanum, against the which, the malleolus
is inserted, to draw it outward together with the hammer. The other is within
the drum in os petrosum, inserted by a double tendon into the hammer to draw it
back. Near the tympanum above, a narrow hole appears, which is an entrance
to a cave, having many partitions not unlike to the honey combs. This is full
of internal air. About the end of this cavity directly against the tympanum,
there are two perforations called fenestellae, or little windows: whereof the
one is ovall, the entrance to the labyrinth: the other lesser, the beginning of
cochlea.

Last of all, there is in this cavity a small cartilaginous passage from the
ear to the palatum: to purify the internal air. This cavity has a value,
that there might be egresse, but no regresse.

The third cavity is called labyrinthus, having sundry windings, from whence it
has its name: all which returue to this same cavity. There are six
semi-circles in this cavity. The end of these windings is to cause the air
passing through narrow slreits to make the greater sound, or to mitigate the
sound, which was redoubled within the pelvis as an Echo, by passing through
these circulations.

The fourth cavity is called cochlea, or the wilke of the ear, from the
figure: because it has three, sometimes four wreathings; within these there
is a chinke by the which the sound passes to the brain and the bilious
excrement falls into the ear.

Hearing is thus caused. First, the air received in the first cavity, does
gently move the tympanum, which being shaken tosseth the three small bones
joined to it; then the kind of sound is impressed into the internal air,
which having the quality of the sound, and circular by the windings of the
labyrinth, to make it pure is conveyed through the cochlea, and delivered to
nervus auditorius, that the animal spirit may present it to the common sense,
the judge of all species and forms.

CAP. XII. Of the Nose.
THe skin cleaves so fast to the muscles and cartilages, that it can hardly
be severed without renting.

The muscles are seven: whereof one is common and six proper. They only move
the cartilages of the nose. The veins come from the enternall jugular. The
arteries from the soporals, and the finews from the third pairs. The bones of
the nose are in number four: the cartilages five: the inner membrane which
covers the sides of the nose proceeds from the dura matter, passing through
the holes of the ethmoides. The muscles membrane, draws in the nostrils. The
hairs strain (as it were) the air, and keep out insects.

From the red and spongious fleshy portions, with the which the distances of
the spongious bones are filled, the polypus springs. The upper part of the
nose which is bony, is called dorsum nasi: the ridge, spina: the laterall
parts, where the cartilages are, are called alae or pinnae: The tip of the
nose, globulus, orbiculus, and pyrula: The fleshy part next to the upper lip,
columna. The uses of the nose are eight.

1. By it the air is taken into the brain, for the generation of the animal
spirits. 2. The lungs draw in by it the air, for the refreshing of the heart,
and the generation of the (...) tall spirits. 3. That by it smells might be
carried to precessus mammillares. 4. By it the brain discharges excrements.
5. It furthereth the speech. 6. It beautifieth the face. 7. It parts the eyes
that the one should not see the other: which would have hindered the sight. It
is a defense into them also, and staigth the visible species. 8. By fleering up
it expresses anger: and in the Hebrew tongue is taken for anger.
CAP. XIII. Of the Mouth.
IT is called Os, from the letter O: In pronouncing of which it opens it
self. The mouth that serves for breathing: Secondly, for receiving of food:
Thirdly, for speaking and lastly, to discharge the excrements of the brain,
lungs, and stomach: It begins at the lips, and reaches to the throat.

The parts of it are either external or internal: the external are labia or
the lips, from lambo. They are in number two: to wit, the upper, and lower;
they have to further motions, thirteen muscles, whereof eight are proper, and
five common to the cheeks and lips. The lips are of a fungous substance; the
skin does firmly cleave to the muscles. They are covered within with a tunicle
common to the mouth and stomach. And from hence comes the trembling of the
lower lip before vomiting. The lips serve first for the convenience of eating
and drinking. Secondly, for the beautifying of the face, if they be well
fashioned. Thirdly, to contain the spittle in the mouth: Fourthly, to keep
the gums and teeth from external injuries. Fifthly, to keep the gums and
teeth from external injuries. Fifthly, to serve for the framing of the speech.
Sixthly, to serve for kissing. The conjuction of the lips make the laterall
parts of the mouth, which are called buccae, the cheeks.

The inner parts of the mouth are these. 1. Gingivae or the gums. They are
fleshy, destitute of motion, to keep the teeth in their sockets.

2. The teeth, which are bony, both to chew the meat, and to fashion the
speech: each tooth has two parts; one without the gum, called Basis; the other
within, called Radix, or the root. The root below receives a little vein,
artery, and nerve.

The incisores and canini have but one fang: The lower molares have two fangs;
but the upper molares, three. In children from the seventh month, until two
years be complete, twenty teeth come out, now one, then another. Of these
teeth some are called incisores; the first fore teeth in number four in each
gum: some canini adjacent to these, on each side one. The rest are called
molares.

3. The third internal part of the mouth is palatum, or the roof of the
mouth: It is vauted, that the air being repercussed the voice should be the
sharper. It is wrinckled and rough above the bone, that it might more firmly
cleave to it, and it might the better keep the meat, while it is a chewing.

4. And 5. Of the almonds, and uvula, I have spoken in the discourse of the
neck.

6. Of the internal parts is the tongue, in Latin called Lingua a lingendo,
from licking.

The flesh of it is spongious, that it might receive the qualities of the
sapors, and judge of them. In figure it is pyramidall. The tunicle with the
which it is covered, proceeds from the dura matter. Veins it has from the
external jugulars. Under the tongue they are called ranulares, from their
color. The arteries come from the carotides. Sinews it has from the third and
seventh pair. The muscles which move it are six. It is divided into two parts
by a line going along it, and so in hemiplegia, only one half may be
affected. Of the ligaments, the lower is called fraenum, and franulum. If it
be extended to the top of the tongue, it hinders sucking in children: and
from this they are said to be tongue-tyed. In this case the ligament is to be
cut. The tongue has four uses.

1. It is the instrument of tasting. 2. It utters the speech. 3. It helps
chewing by gathering of the meat, and tossing it to and fro, and turning it
down to the stomach. 4. It serves for licking.

The fourth Book. A description of the veins, arteries, and sinews of the Lims.
CAP. I. Of the veins of the Arm.
RAmus subclavius, or the branch of the vena cava, ascending under the cannell
bone, when it is come to the arme-pit, it is called axillaris; and it parts
it self in two veins, the cephalica, and basilica.

The cephalica in beasts does wholly spring from the external jugular; but in
man it receives only a spring from the external jugular. Wherefore in diseases
of the head, it is not without cause opened. It passes through the upper and
outward part of the arm, to the bending of the elbow: where it is divided into
two branches; of the which one, joining with a branch of the basilica, makes
the mediana. Wherefore the slope branches, which usually are opened about the
bending of the elbow, are only branches of the cephalica, and basilica, which
meeting make the median. The other branch of the cephalica marching, according
to the length of the radius, reaches to the hand, through which it is spread;
but chiefly that part which is between the ring finger and the little finger.

There the Salvatella is placed, which is to be opened in melancholy diseases.
The basilica passes through the inner and lower part of the arm, accompanied
with the artery and nerves.

About its beginning it makes the thoracica, which having three or four
sprigs, and passing under serratus major, and the subscapular muscle, it is
tied to the upper intercostall, and about the spina dorsi is inosculat with the
twigs of vena sine pari. Basilica about the bending of the elbow is divided
into that which is called subcutanea, and that which is called profunda.

Profunda the deeper, is annexed to the artery about the bending of the elbow,
not under. Then passing between the focils it is carried to the hand by the
outer part of the ulna.

The subcutanea or the shallowest branch near to the bending of the arm,
being turned off to the outer part of the ulna by the length of it, it is
carried to the hand.

The Modiana passed to the inside of the hand by the middle part of the ulna.

CAP. II. Of the arteries of it.
RAmus subclavius so called, as that of the vena cava, when it is come to the
arme-pits, it is called axillaris. It accompanies the basilica: for there is
no cephalicall artery. Near to the arm holes, it yields that artery, which
is called thoracica, from thence being carried to the bending of the arm, it
is parted into two branches, which pass to the inner side of the hand: for the
outside of the hand has neither muscles nor artery.

The one of these resting upon the radius, is that which is felt about the
wrest.

The other marching by the ulna is with its fellow spread through the hand.

CAP. III. Of the sinews of the Arm.
OUt of the perforations of the four lower vertebrae of the neck, and of the
first two of the back, six sinew: spring, which by the muscle called scalenus,
are carried under the cannell bone to the arme-pit, where they are twisted
together; from these the four uppermost accompanying the basilica and the
artery under the deltoides muscle, are scattered through the inner side of the
arm. The fifth and sixth, turning up under the rotundus major, are inserted into
the hinder muscles of the shoulder blade. Four remain which passing along the
arm, are spread into the elbow and hand.

1. Being carried under the inner side of the biceps does join it self with
the cephalica. 2. Being undivided and thicker, goes down to the bending of the
elbow, being covered with fat, and there is under the artery and the basilica;
but about the wrest it is above the vein. About the wrest it is divided into
ten branches, imparting to every finger two sprigs, which pass along the
sides. 3. Being entire also, is carried all along the elbow by the wrest to the
little finger: where divided into four twigs, it is bestowed upon the outside
of the hand. 4. Being thickest of all is carried from the artery and veins by
the back side of the arm to the radius; where being joined with the
Cephalica, it ends at the wrest.
CAP. IV. Of the veins of the Foot.
THe crurall vein sends a branch to musculus triceps called Tschia, and is
divided into four branches: of the which two are in the inside of the thigh,
and so many in the outside. The one of the external is sent to the fat of the
thigh, the other passing according to the length of musculus suterius to the
ham, and from thence to the inner anckle, makes the saphena. Of the inner
branches the one lying high is joined with the crurall artery, and passing
through the outside of the ham, is carried to the outer anckle: the other lying
deeper, as it passes bestows twigs to the adjacent parts, and about the ham,
makes the poplitea; from thence being carried between the focils by the chinke
of the inner anckle, is bestowed upon the soale of the foot, as the saphena was
upon the outward parts. The veins have values within like to a half moon;
without they are like knots: they are most commonly two together, one on each
leaving some distance between, partly to strengthen the coats of the veins,
partly to rule the motion of the blood.

The arteries have no values in their progression, that the vital spirit may
speedily as the beams of the Sun pass to the furthermost parts.

CAP. V. Of the arteries of the Foot.
ARteria cruralis or the crurall artery, a little below the groyne does send
two branches through the muscle triceps to the gloutii, or muscles of the
buttocks. Afterward it sends two to the forepart of the thigh; then
undivided, it passes to the ham; where it is divided into two branches,
whereof the one passes by the side of the outward part of tibia above the
muscle peroneus, and is bestowed upon the upper part of the foot: The other
entering into the solaeus, and passing to the pterna, is dispersed through the
soale of the foot. The saphena is not accompanied with an artery, and the nerve
is not very near unto it, so that it may be safely opened.

CAP. VI. Of the Nerves of the Foot.
FRom the three lowermost vertebrae of the loins, two sinews spring in the
forepart of the thigh, severed first, and then being united, pass to the
groyne. There it is divided into five branches, compassed with a membran, which
dispersing themselves on every side into the muscles of the forepart of the
thigh, even to the rotula, there being cannot be discerned, unless the muscle
psoa be rent; within the which they lie hid. Then besides these you shall see
another small nerve passing the ovall cavity of os pubis, to be spent upon the
triceps. Through the back part of the thigh, a great and thick nerve passes,
framed of three, which spring out of the three upper holes of os sacrum, and
being carried by the sinus of os isthium, through the inner and back muscles of
the thigh, to the ham, there it is parted into two branches.

The one goes down by the belly of the tibia unto the pterna, bestowing twigs
as it goes, passing by the chinke of the inner ankle to the soale of the foot,
it is severed into as many branches as there are toes. The other branch
marching upon the perone, is carried to the instep of the foot by the outer
ankle. By reason of this great nerve, they who are troubled with the sciarica,
find pain not only about the joint of the thigh; but in the leg also, and
foot. About the beginning of this nerve, another issues out of the third hole
of the os sacrum, and being carried above the ridge of the os sacrum, it
brancheth it self into the muscles of the buttocks, and those which bend the
tibia.

CAP. VII. Of the nerves of the spinalis medulla.
IF you invert the brain, you shall perceive 4. roots of the spinalis medulla,
2. from cerebrum, and so many from cerebellum: these joined together make it
up. It is of the like substance with the brain, but besides the two membranes,
wherewith the cerebrum is compassed, this has a third strong and nervous,
proceeding either from os occipitis, where it is joined with the spondils; or
from the ligaments of the vertebrae; this strengthens the spinalis medulla,
and keeps it from tearing in violent motions. From the beginning to the end
it grows narrower and harder, so that when it is come to the end of dorsum,
it ends in small threeds like a horse tail, that no danger should be in
that part where the whole spina is bended.

The nerves of the spinalis medulla, are framed of sundry filaments twisted
together, and covered with a thin membrane; and as they come out of the holes
of the backbone nature does compass them with a thick and firm substance,
which so firmly clip the fibers of the sinews, that they cannot be severed.
Beside the sinew comes not out of that hole, directly opposite to its
beginning; but out of the lower.

And when it has passed through this hole, it does not enter presently into the
rib, which is next; but into the lower. Which when it has touched being
divided, it turns the lesser twig toward the spina, and the greater toward
the forepart. Out of this spinalis medulla twenty eight paires of sinews
spring, seven from the neck, twelve from the back, five from the loins, and
four from the os sacrum.

The first Conjugation of the neck, does not spring from the sides of the spina
as the rest; but from the fore and hinder part, and comes out between the
occiput and first vertebra. The fore branch is bestowed upon the muscles of the
back side of the head, and the muscles of the vertebra of the neck.

The second conjugation, by the hindermost branch turned up, ascends to the
skin of the head, the ears, and the muscles, but by the foremost branch it is
carried unto those muscles which are common to the second spondill, and the
occiput.

The third conjugation sends its foremost branch to those muscles which bend
the neck: but the hindermost to the muscles which raise up the neck and head.

The fourth conjugation sends its lesser, and hindermost branch to the
muscles of the neck; but the foremost and largest to the muscles which lift up
the shoulder blade and the arm.

The fifth conjugation with it lesser twig turns to the hindermost muscles of
the neck: and with the greater joyneth it self with the twigs of the fourth
pair.

The sixth pair by the lesser and hindermost branch passes to the hindermost
muscles: but with the foremost and biggest to the arm, and the diaphragma.

The seventh with the greater branch passes to the arm, but with the lesser
to the hindermost muscles.

As for the nerves of the back, each of them has two branches; one lesser,
which is sent to the muscles of the back, and one greater, which is bestowed
upon the intercostall muscles.

One thing is to be noted, that the sinews which proceed from the vertebrae of
the short ribs are bigger than those which are communicate to the upper
intercostall muscles. Those about the middle of the rib, are divided into two
twigs, whereof the uttermost is carried outward; but the innermost inwardly
along the rib. These nerves were to be biggest, because they are distributed
both to the muscles of the belly, and to the parts contained in it.

As for the nerves of the loins, each pair of these has anterior and
posterior branches, which are spent partly upon the muscles of the loins, and
hypogastrium; partly upon the legs. The lumbares nervi or sinews of the loins
meet, and are mingled with the costales. Whereby it comes to pass, that the
parts which are contained within the peritonaeum, have their strength from the
spinalis medulla, as their sense from the brain: for according to Galen, cap.
5. lib. 16. de us. part. the costall nerve is a sprig of the sixth conjugation.

As for the nerves of os sacrum, the first pair has two branches, as those of
the loins, to wit, the anterior and posterior; but the rest of the paires
before they come out, are double on each side: and on each side one nerve
marches forward, and another backward. The uppermost three, which are
anterior, go to the leg: The two lowermost passed to the muscles of the anus
and bladder.

Fig. IV.


Fig. V.


Book V. Of the Bones.
CAP. I. Of the nature of a Bone.
Four causes concur to the perfecting of a bone. First, the efficient cause
is the ossifick faculty of the spirit; unto whom the natural heat ministers.

Secondly, the material cause is twofold; the one is of generation, the other
of nutrition. The matter of generation is the seed, which does consist of a
thick humor and the spirit. The matter of nutrition is double, the remote is
blood, with the which all parts of the body are nourished: The immediate cause
is the marrowy juice in the spongious bones, and the marrow it self, which is
contained in the cavities of big bones. In the small cavities of the smaller
bones, the marrow is white; but red in the ample cavities of the large bones.
The marrow is not covered with a membrane, as the marrow of the back: and
therefore it is unsensible contrary to Parrey.

By the small holes in the ends of the bones, the veins and arteries enter, but
no nerves: for they only feel by the How bones feel.
benefit of the periostium.

Thirdly, the form of 3
the bone is twofold, the essential is its dry and cold temperature. The
accidental is its figure, which for the most part is round or flat.

Fourthly, the final cause is double: The general is that which serves the
whole body, and it is threefold. 1. Is to establish the soft parts. 2. Is to
give figure to the parts. 3. Is to further the motion of the body. The special
is that which is proper to every particular bone.

Of the premises such a description of a bone may be gathered.

A bone is a similary The description.
part most dry and cold, unflexible, compacted of the thickest part of the seed
by the spirit; the natural heat concurring to afford stablenesse, and figure
to the whole body.

CAP. II. An enumeration of the bones of man's body: and first of the bones of
the Head.
ALl the bones of the body of man belong either to the head, the truncke of the
body, or to the lims.

The bones which make up the head united are called Cranium, from (...) a
helmet, because as a helmet it defends the brain. It is also called calva,
and calvaria.

The bones of the head are either proper or common.

The proper bones are in number six.

1. Os frontis, coronale, inverecundum, os puppis, the bone of the forehead, it
reaches to the coronall future above. There are two cavities in this bone,
between the tables above the eyebrowes. Wounds in these hardly admit
cicatrization. This bone has three holes, one internal in the scull, above
the spongious bone, two outward about the middle of the eyebrows, to give way
to the sinews, which pass to the forehead.

2. And 3. are called ossa syncipities, vel verticis, to other, parietalia,
arcualia, bregmatis.

4. Os occipitis, basilare, os prorae, os memoriae, os pixidis, to the Gracian
(...), the noddle. It is the thickest of all, and has five holes. One big
near the first vertebra of the neck. The other four serve for letting out of
sinews, and letting out of veins and arteries.

5. and 6. are ossa temporum petrosa, parietalis. These have six holes. The two
external, which make the passage to hearing are biggest, the rest are small.
Within the passages of hearing are seated three bones on each side; Malleus,
incus, stapes: The hammer, anvill, and stirrup.

Os Iugale or Zygomatis placed under the eye, is no several bone, but is
framed of the processes of two bones, to wit, petrosum, and the maxilla united
by an oblique suture.

The bones common to the head and upper jaw, are two.

1. Os spoenoides, cuneiforme, or wedge-like bone, to others paxillare, os
colatorii, palati, basilare. It has sundry holes for vessels to pass. 2. Os
spongoides, spongiosum, spongiforme, (...), cribriforme, or Cribrosum, the
spongious or sive-like bone. It fills the cavitie of the Nostrils.
The Jaw-bones are two, the upper, and the lower. In these are placed the
sockets for the teeth, called alucoli, loculi, fostulae, praesepiola,
mortariola.

The upper Jaw is framed of 11. bones, five on each side fellows, and one
without a fellow.

1. Is almost triangular, it makes up the lower part of the orbit of the eye,
the lesser corner, a part of the os jugale, and mala. 2. Makes up the greater
corner of the eye from whence there is a hole that passes to the cavity of the
nostrill. This bone is small, thin, clear, slightly cleaving to the other: So
that it is seldom found in sculs dug out of the ground. Here fistula
lachrymalis is seated. 3. Makes up the greatest part of the roof of the
mouth, and the arched part, wherein the teeth are inserted. 4. With his fellow
makes up the bony part of the ridge of the nose. These two are severed by a
suture. Within they are rough to receive the cartilages; within these there is
a bone cleaving to the process of the spongious bone, dividing the nostrils:
it is called septumnarium. 5. Is placed at the end of the palate of the mouth
where the holes of the nostrils pass to the throat.
To these Columbus adds a tenth. He will have it to be like unto a plough,
and to disjoyne the lower part of the nostrils.

Of the lower Iaw.
The lower Jaw has but one bone. It resembles the Greek letter (...), or a
bow. It has two holes, the one is more backward and larger: through this pass
some nerves from the fifth pair to the roots of the teeth, as also a small
vein and artery. The other is more outward, not so round; through the pass
some sprigs of the sinews to the lower lip. You may pass through these holes a
brissell.

CAP. III. Of the Teeth.
THere be three ranks of teeth. Those of the first rank are called incisores
incisorii, cutrers, and (...), because they show themselves when we laugh;
there be most commonly four of them in each jaw, they have but one fang, and
so easily fall out. These first make way out of the gums; because the tops of
them are sharpest.

Those in the second rank are called canini or dogs teeth, from their length
above the rest, hardness, and sharpnes. In each jaw there are but two, on each
side of the grinders one. They are called oculares, or eye-teeth, not that they
reach to the orbit of the eye: for they mount not higher than the nostrils; but
because sprigs of the nerves, which move the eyes, are carried to them.

These in the third rank are called molares, grinders, because like milles they
grind the meat. Most commonly they are twenty in number, five in each side of
every jaw. Of these the two hindermost are called genuini, and denta
sapientiae, because they show not themselves until man come to the years of
discretion, to wit, the 28, 30, yea even to old age it self. In some they
never appear. Those of the upper jaw have more fangs than those of the lower.
First, because they hang. Secondly, because the substance of the upper jaw is
not so firm, as that of the lower.

The teeth come out in man the seventh month, and sometimes more slowly, but
in beasts sooner, because they are to eat solid meat. Of these teeth ten in
each gum, to wit, the four grinders, the two dogs teeth, and four grinders,
do cast. The fore teeth cast the four, five, and six year of the age, the
hinder flower. The teeth as they are worn by use, so they grow again, until
the decrepit old age: for if a tooth fall out, and grow no more, the tooth
answering it grows logner: Nature laboring to fill the space of the lost
tooth.

As concerning the feeling of the teeth, first of all, they rather receive the
impression of the first qualities, to wit, heat and cold, and rather of cold
than heat, contrary to the fleshy parts. Secondly, not the whole tooth; but the
inner part toward the root, which is more soft by reason of the sinew in the
cavity of it, and the membrane. The hard outer part is insensible.

CAP. IV. Of the bones of the trunk of the body.
THese may be divided into those which are seated between the bones of the
head and the rump bone, and those which are placed between the last vertebra
of the spina and the thigh bone. Those which are seated between the head
bones, and the rumpe bone, are either anterior, laterall, or posterior.

The bone in the forepart is called os pectoris, the breast bone, and os
ensiforme, because being long and broad, and ending into a pointed cartilage,
it represents the daggers of the ancients. It is called also sternum, because
it is laid above the ribs, and leans upon them. It is composed of three
parts. 1. Is the highest bone, large, thick, plain, yet unequal, above
arched, resembling the pummill of the dagger. It is called by some Iugulum, and
superior furcula. It has two cavities. 1. Is in the upper part, to receive the
tops of the cannell bone. 2. Is within, about the middle, to give way to the
windpipe going down.

The second bone is narrower, and has sundry cavities for the receiving of the
grissils of the ribs.

The third is broader, and ends into the cartilage, which is called
Cartilago, (...) or sword-like cartilage, and mucronata, because it is pointed.

The pit, which here appears outwardly is favea or scrobuculus cordis, the
pit of the heart.

The bones of the sternum are distinguished by transverse, and are joined
together by cartilages.

The ribs are in number 12. whereof some are called vera, genuinae, legitimae,
lawful, and ribs indeed: because they are more arched, and reach to the
sternum: Some are called nothae, spiriae, adulterae, illegitimae, short or
bastard ribs.

The true ribs are in number seven, they are round and bony where they are
joined eith the vertebrae of the back; but grisly and broad where they are
joined to the breast bone. In the lower part they are hollow, to receive a vein
and an artery. In making incision there to discharge quittour out of the cavity
of the breast we must shun this part. The inner side is smoother than the outer
by reason of the pleura.

The bastard ribs are in number five, so called because they are short less
arched, touch not the sternum, and are softer They only are joined with the
vertebrae of the back, and end in long cartilages, which turning upwards cleave
together, except the last, which cleaves to none, to give way to the liver,
spleen, and upper guts. All the short ribs give way to the distention of the
belly.

The bones of the back part of the trunks joined, are spina dorsi: so called
because the hinder part of it is sharp. It reaches from the head to the rump
bone. It is composed of 24. verterae 7. of the neck, 12. of the back, and five
of the loins. Every vertebra is hollow within to receive the Spinalis medulla,
and at the sides to give way to the sinews. The first two vertebrae of the
neck are joined to the head by ligaments. The first is called Atlas, because it
stays the head. It has no spina. The second is called the tu^ner because a
process like unto a dogs tooth round and long rising from it, and inserted
into the first vertebra, is the cause that the head and first vertebra, turn
about it. If a luxation fall out here, it is incurable. The third vertebra of
the neck is called (...), the rest has no names.

The vertebrae of the back are in number 12. receiving so many ribs: these are
full of holes, but small to give way to the nourishing vessels. The process of
the eleventh is straight, and the twelfth is called the Girter. The vertebrae
of the loins are five. These are more apt to move, than those of the back,
that we may the more easily bend our selves toward the ground.

Now the bones which are between the lowest vertebra of the loins, and the
thigh bone are in number three.

1. Ossacrum, the great bone, the stay of the back; it is triangular, broad and
immovable: smooth, and hollow in the forepart; but bunched and rough in the
hinder part. It is framed of five bones called vertebrae, not for that they
serve for motion as the vertebrae, but because they are like to them; in aged
persons they seem one bone, but in children they may be separated. The holes
in this are not in the sides, but before and behind, which are greater, because
the sinews that pass are greater. 2. Is Os coccycis, the cuckoes bill, from
the likeness of it, or the rump bone. It is framed of three of four bones,
and two cartilages. The connection of it is loose. In men it is bent inward to
stay the intestinum rectum; in women outward, to make way in the time of birth.
3. Is Os coxae or innominatum. It is at the sides of os sacrum, and is framed
of three bones os ilii,pubis, and ischii joined together by cartilages, until
the seventh year; In aged persons it seems one bone.
Os ilii, so called because it receives the small gut called ilium, it is the
first part uppermost and broadest, joined to os sacrum by a strong membranous
ligament, although a cartilage go between. The unequal and semicircular
circumference of it, is called spina: the inner part hollow and broad, is
called costa: The outer part having unequal lines, is called dorsum. This is
more large in a woman, than in a man.

Os pubis or pectinis, the share bone; it is the fore and middle part. The two,
being one on each side, are joined with a cartilage more loosely in women, so
that in the time of birth they gape, and give way to the infant.

These with the os sacrum, make that cavitie with is called pelvis.

Wherein the bladder, the womb, and some guts are contained.

Ischion or coxendix is the lower and outward part of os coxae, wherein is the
cavity which receives os semoris. The cartilagineous process of this bone is
called supercilium. The ends of this bone are further a sunder in women than
men, and so the pelvis is larger.

CAP. V. Of the Cannell bone, and the shoulder blade.
THe bones of the trunk are either those of the arms or of the legs.

The bones of the arm are either above the joint of the shoulder, or under:
above the joint are two.

1. (...), because they shut the breast, and like a key lock the shoulder
blade, with the breast bone. It is also called ligula, the binder, os furcale,
or furcula superior, the upper bended bone, the cannell bone. These two bones,
one in each side, are seated at the top of the breast bone transversly. In
figure the represent the great Roman S. for they seem to be framed of two
semicircular bones; but placed one opposite to another. Toward the throat they
are arched; but below hollow. 2. (...), because it makes the broadnesse of the
shoulder; the barbarous authors call it spatula, the shoulder blade. It leans
upon the upper ribs, toward the back. It is almost triangular. The outer part
is arched: the inner hollow. That part of the shoulder which is joined with the
clavicula is called (...), or humeri mucro, the point of the shoulder. The
adjutorium is joynted in the superficial cavity of the neck of this bone.
CAP. VI. Of the bones of the Arm.
THe arm has three parts, the shoulder, the elbow and the hand.

The shoulder has but one long, round, and strong bone, called os humeri, the
shoulder bone.

The upper part of it is joynted with the shoulder blade, but the lower part
with the two bones of the elbow. The Elbow has two bones.

1. Ulna, the yard, because we measure with it. In the upper part it is joined
with the lower part of the shoulder bone: In the lower part it is articulat
with the wrest, by a cartilaginous substance. The barbarous authors call this
bone focile majus, the greater focill. 2. Radius, the small bone, called by the
barbarians focile minus, the small focill. In the midst it is a little parred
from ulna, between which there is a small ligament. Above the ulna receives
Radius but below the Radius receives ulna. The upper part of this bone is
joined with the outer process of the shoulder bone; but the lower part is
joined with the wrest bone at the greatest finger. The upper part of this bone
is smaller than the lower, quite contrary to the frame of the ulna.
The hand has 3. parts.

1. Carpus, by the Arabians Rasetta, the wrest bone. It is framed of a cluster
of eight bones, which have no proper names; yet differing in bigness and
figure. They are so tied with strong ligaments arising from the processes of
ulna, and radius, that they seem but one bone.

First, they are cartilages, and afterward become spongious bones. Of these
bones four are above joynted with ulna and radius: but the lower four are
joined with the bones of Metacarpium.

Here you are to observe the ring-like ligaments appointed for the safe
carrying of the tendons of the muscles, which move the fingers. The inner
strengthens the tendons which bend the fingers; but the outer the tendons which
extend.

2. Metacarpium, the distance between wrest and fingers. This has five bones
reckoning amongst these the first of the thumb. These bones are joined with the
bones of the wrest by ligaments, but with the fingers by articulation. They are
within hollow, and contain marrow.

About the middle they are a little parted, to give way to the muscles called
Interossei.

The fingers have fifteen bones, for in each finger there are three. And
although the first bone of the thumb has been reckoned amongst the rasettae,
yet because it has a more plyant articulation, it serves for the first bone
of the thumb. In the bones of the fingers, the first is bigger than the second,
the second than the third. About the joints they are thicker; the knobs there
are called (...), and nodi. In the inside of the fingers, there are ligaments
pipe-like, by the which they are united. The points of the bones toward the
nails have no processes.

CAP. VII. Of the bones of the Legs.
THe Leg as the arm has three parts: the thigh, the shanke, and the foot.

The thigh has but one bone, which is the biggest and longest of all the bones
of the body. The forepart is somewhat arched. Above it is articulat with the
coxendix: and it is kept in by a round ligament. The neck of this bone has two
processes for the insertion of muscles. Rotator magnus and Parvus, the greater
and lesser rowler: It is articulat below with the tibia, for the strengthening
of this joint, that the thigh bone may be kept in the forepart, there is
appointed a bone. It is called Mola rotula patella, the whirle-bone. In
children it is grasly. It resembles the bosse of a bucklar: for it is bunched
without, and hollow within, where it is lyned with a cartilage. It is
strengthened by the tendons of some of the muscles of the thigh, unto the which
it cleaves.

The shanke has two bones.

1. Tibia, focile majus, canna major, the greater focill. In the upper part it
has a process, which is received by the hollownesse of the thigh bone. It
has also two long cavities for the receiving of the two prominences of the
thigh bone. To make these cavities deeper, there is joined by ligaments a
moveable cartilage, soft, slippery, and bedewed with an unctuous humor. It is
called cartilago lunata, the moonelike cartilage. These cavities are separat by
a knob; from the top of which arises a strong ligament, which is fastened to
the cavity of the thigh bone. The sharp forepart of this bone is called spina.
In the lower part of this bone there is a process without flesh, which makes
the inner anckle Malleus internus. 2. Perone fibula, or brace, because it
seems to unite the bones of the shanke, focile minus, the small focill,
cann^s minor sura; The upper round part of this bone reaches not to the knee,
but the lower part reaches further than the tibia. In the middle these two
bones are parted to receive muscles which move the foot. The fleshlesse
appendix of the lower end, causes Malleolus externus, the cuter anckle.
The Foot has three parts. The first is that which reaches to the bones
articulat with the toes, called pedium seu taulus: the second comprehends the
bones articular to the toes called metapedium or metatarsus: the third
comprehends the bones of the toes.

The bones of pedium are seven.

1. Talus, os balistae. It is articulat with the appendix of tibia. It
receives the top of Os calcis. 2. Calx, calcaneu, the heelbone, it is the
greatest and thickest of the bones of the foot. It is joined to talus, and os
cubiforme: into this the great tendon, composed of the tendons of three muscles
of the shanke, is inserted. 3. Scaphoides, naviculare, the boat-like bone, it
is joined with Talus, and the three hinder bones. 4. Cuboides, ostessarae, it
is larger than the rest. It is set before the heelebone, and is joined to it.
The other 3. are called Cuneiformia, wedgelike bones. They are joined with the
naviculare.

Motapedium has five bones joined to the bones of pedium.

The bones of the fingers are fourteen, because the great toe has but two
bones: they answer those of the hand.

Of the seed bones.
These are like to the seeds of sesamum, and therefore are called sesamoidea or
sesamina: they are round and somewhat flat. They cleave to the ligaments under
the tendons. They are reckoned to be twelve in every hand and foot: but it is
hard to find a certain number of them. The two which are found about the first
joint of the great toe are most remarkable. Two are found in the hamme about
the beginning of the two first muscles, which move the shanke. They are found
also in the carpus, metaoarpium, pedium, and metapedium.

CAP. VIII. Of the sundry ways by the which the bones of man's body are coupled
together.
THey are coupled either by joynting or growing together. Joynting is either
for manifest or obscure motion. The joyntings which serve for manifest motion
are three.

1. Enarthrosis is when a large head of a bone is received into a deep cavity,
as the thigh bone with the hip-bone. 2. Arthrodia, is when the cavity which
receives is shallow, and the head of the bone flat, such is the articulation
of the lower jaw with the temple-bone. 3. Cynglymus, is when the same bone
receives, and is received. This falls out three manner of ways.
1. Is when a bone is received by a bone, and receives the same. This is seen
in the articulation of the shoulder bone with the elbow-bone. 2. Is when a bone
receives one bone, and is received of another. So in the spo^dils of the back:
for the bone in the middle receives the upper, and is received by the lower.
3. When the process of the bone being long, and round, is inserted into
another bone, and so is turned about in the cavity, as if it were an axel tree:
so is the second vertebra of the neck with the first.
Articulation for obscure motion may be observed in the joining of the ribs
with the spondils, and in the bones of the wrest and anckle.

Bones grow together either without some middle substance, or with it. Without
some middle substance they are coupled three manner of ways. 1. By a line, as
the bones of the upper jaw and nose are coupled; this is called, harmonia. 2.
By a suture as the bones of the scull are united. 3. When one bone is fastened
within an other as a nail in wood: this is called, Gomphosis, and so are they
fastened in the gums.

If bones grow together by a middle substance, it is either by a cartilage,
this unition is called synchondrosis, so are the share bones joined; or by a
ligament, which is called synneurosis, and so the thigh bone is joined to the
hip-bone; or by flesh which is termed syssarcosis, and so is the bone of the
tongue joined to the shoulder.

CAP. IX. Of a Cartilage.
A Cartilage is a similary The description.
part dry and hard, yet not so as a bone, flexible, which a bone is not, framed
to stay the soft parts, and to repel the injuries of external hard bodies. 1.
Then it staieth the soft parts. 2. It defends them. 3. They cover the ends of
the bones, which have a loose articulation. 4. They knit bones together: as is
seen in the share-bone.

The differences are taken first, from the figure; so the cartilage of the
brest-bone is called ensiformis, and those of the Larynx sigmoides like C.

2. Some are solitary not joined with other bodies, as those of the ears and
eyelids: some are joined, as most of the rest.

3. Some still continue cartilages, some degenerat into bones: as in women, the
cartilages of the ribs, which ly under the breasts: for these growing very big,
they become bony, the better to hold them up.

They are in sundry parts of the body. 1. In the head there are four, to wit,
of the eyelids, nose, and ears; and the trochlea of the eye. 2. In the breast
there be three, to wit, the cartilages of the larynx: the small pipes of the
windpipe, dispersed through the lungs, and cartilago ensiformis. 3. The long
ribs are joined to the sternum by cartilages. 4. The vertebrae of the back are
joined together by cartilages. Last of all sundry are seen in the
articulations, which are loose, and in the conjunction of bones.

CAP. X. Of a Ligament.
A Ligament is a similary part without feeling, in substance mean between a
cartilage and a membrane appointed firmly to knit the joints.

Of the ligaments some are membranous (such are those who inviron the joints;)
some cartilagineous, as those which are between the joints, as is seen in the
articulation of the thigh bone with the coxendix.

Ligaments are to be found in diverse parts of the body.

1. The bone of the tongue has two strong ligaments, one on each side. Besides
on each side it has round ones by the which it is tied to the adjacent parts
to stay it in the middle of the mouth.

Secondly, the tongue has a strong membranous ligament in the lower part about
the middle of it. About the end of it the fraenum is to be seen, which if it
come to the fore-teeth, it hinders the motion of the tongue and speech.
Children being so troubled, are said to be tongue-tyed, and must have it cut.

3. The ligaments which tie the vertebrae of the breast and loins, the ribs
with the vertebrae, and the ribs with the brest-bone, are membranous.

4. Sundry are to be seen in the belly. The first tyeth the os ilium to os
sacrum. The second tyeth the os sacrum to the coxendix. The third joyneth the
share bones, and is cartilaginous. The fourth compasses them circularly, and
is membranous. The fifth compasses the hole of os pubis, and is membranous.

5. In the arm these appear. 1. Five tie the adjutorium to the shoulder
blade. 2. The bones of the elbow, ulna and radius, are tied first one to
another, secondly to the shoulder bone, and thirdly to the wrest, by membranous
ligaments. 3. There are two annular ligaments, which being transverse, direct
the tendons which pass to the fingers. They are two. One in the outside for
the tendons of the extending muscles; the other in the inner side, for the
tendons of the contracting muscles. 4. The bones of the wrest, back of the
hand, and fingers, have membranous ligaments. 5. In the leg these may be found
out.

First, the thigh bone is tied to the Coxendix, by two ligaments.

Secondly, the lower end of it is tied to Tibia and Fibula by six ligaments.

Thirdly, the Tibia is joined to the Fibula, by a membranous ligament.

Fourthly, tibia and fibula are joined to the ankley by three ligaments.

Fifthly, the ankley is tied with the bones of the foot by five ligaments.

Sixthly, the bones of the instep and toes are tied with such ligaments as
those are which are seen in the hand.

An Explication of some terms which are found in Anatomicall authors in the
doctrine of bones.
COtulae, or (...), not Cotyledones, acetabula, are called deep cavities in
the articulations of the bones. If the hollownesse be shallow, they are called
glenae or glenoides, from the form of the cavities of the eyes, which appear
when the eyelids are shut. Epiphysis, appendix, adnascentia, additamentum, is
called a bone which grows to the end of another bone. It is of a spongious
substance, and at the first gristly for the most part; but in time grows
bony. It may be seen in the shoulder blade, both the focils of the legs both
at the knee and foot, and in the thigh bone where the rotator magnus is.
Apophysis, in some bones caput, in some Cervix, in some Tuberculum, in some
Spina, in some mucro, is a part of a bone not added, but bunching out above the
smooth superficies. It is also called Ecphysis, processus, productio,
extuberantia Supercilia or labra, are called the upper brim^ of the cavities of
the joints.

As for the number of the bones of the body of Man.
COmmonly they are holden to be 246. accoding to this distich.

Add quater denis bis centum
senaque, habebis
Quam te multiplici condidit
osse Deus.
The head has 8. The upper Jaw 11. The lower Jaw one. The teeth are 32.
sometimes 28. The spina has 24. Os sacrum has most commonly 5. The ribs are
24. The brest-bone is composed of 3. The cannell bones are 2. The shoulder
blades are 2. The flanck bones are 2. In the arms there are 60. In both the
feet 64. Os hyoides of the tongue 1. The small bones of the ears 6. The two
great toes have four great seed bones. The number of the small feeed bones is
uncertain.
If with some Anatomists you reckon twenty four small seed bones in the two
hands, and so many in the two feet, besides the two great ones of both the
great toes; If you add in like manner the two small bones in each ham, and the
eighth bone in each hand, between the Carpus and metacarpium, and the bony
substance annexed to the cuboides in both the feet in old persons, you shall
have fifty four more, which being joined to 246. make up 302. expressed thus:
Ter centum and binis compactum
est ossibus istud,
Quod cernis corpus; non
est quod plura requires.


If you find one more, that breaks no square.

FINIS.
The explication of the first Figure.
1. The hairy scalp. 2. The forehead. 3. The ear. 4. The eyes. 5. The nose. 6
The mouth. 7. The chin. 8. The temple. 9. The cheek. 10. The arm. 11. The
hand. 12. The breast. 13. The sides. 14. The belly. 15. The genitals. 16. The
thighs. 17. The knees. 18. The legs. 19. The feet.

The explication of the second Figure.
1. The back part of the head. 2. The shoulder. 3. The elbow. 4. The back. 5.
The buttocks. 6. The hams. 7. The calies of the legs. 8. The ankles. 9. The
insteps. 10. The heel.

These two Figures are to be placed as they stand in order immediately after the
Title before the first Chapter.

The explication of the third Figure.
1. The musculous skin of the head. 2. The muscles of the arm. 3. The muscles
of the breast. 4 The muscles of the belly. 5. The muscles of the thigh. 6. The
muscles of the legs.

This Figure is to be placed before the first chapter of the Treatise of the
Muscles.

The explication of the fourth Figure.
1. The bones of the head. 2. The bones of chain of the back. 3. The
shoulder blade. 4. The ribs. 5. The Os sacrum. 6. The thigh bone. 7. The bones
of the knee. 8. The bones of the legs. 9. The bones of the feet.

The explication of the fifth Figure.
1. The shoulder bone. 2. The elbow bones. 3. The bones of the hand. 4. The
bones of the back. 5. The heele-bone.

These two Figures are to be placed in their order immediately before the first
Chapter of the book of bones.


