Mephibosheths HEARTS-IOY Upon his SOVEREIGNS SAFETY.

To be imitated by the Subjects of this Land upon the happy Return of our
Prince CHARLES.

Delivered in a Sermon in the Church of Great Yarmouth in Norfolk, the 19. day
of October. 1623.

By THO: REEVE Preacher of Gods Word there.

LONDON Printed by Aug: Math: for Robert Milbourne and are to be sold at his
Shop at the great South door of Saint Paul's. 1624.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL THOMAS THOMSON and LEONARD HOAMES Bailiffes of Great
Yarmouth. AND TO THE ALDERmen and the rest of the Commons, of that worthy
INCORPORATION.

MEPHIBOSETH'S Hearts-Ioy upon his Sovereigns Safety.
Text. 2 SAMUEL 19.30. Yea let him take all, seeing my Lord the King is come home
in Peace.
OH how joyful was the safety of Isreal's Worthy! David's danger being great,
his delivery gracious, En quanta exultatio, quanta congratulatio! Behold how
great exultation, how great congratulation was there for it! His Subjects come
to behold him like the Darling of Heaven, the Delight of the Earth; for where
the Finger of God had wrought so wonderful a Preservation, oh how are the
peoples hearts set on fire to come and admire it! their feet are like Hindes
feet to set forward unto it, and their eyes are like the Lions, but
halfe-sleeping, till they have enjoyed a sight of it. What is our King past
this peril? Is David that was given over for dead yet alive? Cur in Tentorijs?
Why stay we still in our Tents? Let us out, and salute him, that so we may
make the world to ring with our Joy, and the Sky to resound with our gladsome
melody, singing in songs, and warbling forth with the lowdest, loftiest
streynes. En Gaudium Cordium Oculis Reuisum! En Gloriam Israelis, Gloria
spirantem! En Regem A Rege Regum Protectum! Behold the Joy of our Hearts
returned to the sight of our Eyes! Behold the Glory of Israel breathing yet in
Glory! Behold our King by the King of Kings protected! For this end ye may see
the GRANDIES, Peers, and all sorts of People issuing forth, Vt Apes*
Praesepibus, like a swarm of Bees out of their Hiues, to see and solemnize so
miraculous and memorable an accident. Israel spurring on one another why they
should be so Verse 10
slow; Verse 15
Judah coming down to Gilgall to meet the King and conduct him over Jordan.
Nay not so much but that dead Dog Shimei that before had rayled and reviled
upon David and cast stones Verse 16
hasted, and came down; yea and as if he had thought it vnfiting to come
alone, he gathers up the people of the Country, and appears Magna stipante
caterua With a great train at his heels, for he brought a Verse 17
Thousand men of Benjamin with him. And is here all? No, Zibah servant of the
House of Saul is there with no small retinew, but has his Verse 17
fifteen Sons, and twenty servants with him: Nay, behold a man ready to go
dwell with the Worms, creeping forth to see this sight, one that was capularis
senex, a man as mellow for the Grave, as the Summer Apple for the Pomary, which
for very pure Age had neither Verse 3^
taste of his meat, and drink, nor could hear the voice of Singing men and
Singing women, yet he cannot keep in; for Verse ^^
Barzillai the Gileadite came down from Rogelim, and went over Jordan with the
King, to conduct him over Jordan. Oh gracious DELIVERANCE magnificently
selebrated! Oh HAPPY FAVOR of GOD accompanied with WORTHY OBSERVANCE from men!
Oh but amongst all these loyal Subjects full of such ardent expressions of
Joy. Vbi MEPHIBOSHETH filius Jonathae? Where is MEPHIBOSHETH the Son of
Jonathan? What does he not remember the ancient love and strict covenant that
was between his Father Jonathan and David? 2 Samuel 17.
Jonathan loved David as his own Soul, and a vow was made that there should
be firm love 1 Samuel 42.
between them and their seed for ever, and when Jonathan was dead David wept
and mourned for him, 2 Samuel 26.
Woe is me for thee my brother Jonathan: very kind have thou been to me, thy
love to me was wonderful, passing the love of women. How are the mighty
overthrown, and the weapons of War destroyed? Now then, Vbi MEPHIBOSHETH
filius Jonathae? Where is MEPHIBOSHETH the Son of Jonathan? Proverb.
Thy Fathers friend shall thou not forsake, says Solomon. But what are all
sparks of old love extinct? Are all kindly affections perished? Are there no
remnants of the former amity and unity? Vbi MEPHIBOSHETH filius Ionathae?
Where is MEPHIBOSHETH the Son of Jonathan? Quid cogitas? Quid moliris? What
plots, and devises have thou in thy head? What art thou casting about for the
Kingdom? So Zibah indeed inform that MEPHIBOSHETH stayed at Jerusalem, hoping
that the 2 Samuel 3.
House of Israel would restore to him the Kingdom of his Father: but they were
but in blandae mendacia linguae, the whisperings of a false tongue. Zibah
played the Foxe-part; for MEPHIBOS: was an honest man, and here is found in the
middst of this Chapter full of the commendablest devoyre, as the Son is in
the middst of the Planets full of Radiant splendour: Now because MEPHIBOSHETH is
the party upon whom I must fix my chief discourse; Let us make his
Description in this Chapter as the entrance to the rest, as Salomons Temple had
a Beautiful Gate before the going in.

Three things are remarkable in him.

First, His mournful behavior till the Verse 24*
He had neither washed his feet, nor dressed his beard, nor washed his
clothes, from the time that the King departed until he returned in peace. Oh
rare spectacle of prime fidelity! What is he else but a MIRROVR of a
True-hearted Subject? How could a man express more passionate respect unto his
Prince?

Secondly, His innocence from the least Zibah; For, he stay at Jerusalem for
the revolution of the Scepter unto Saul's stock in his person? No, Absit, Far
be it from him, his innocent heart never harbored such a wretched thought.
There was laid to his charge a thing that he knew not; for he counted himself
bound for ever to David for his life, and means, that out of mercy he had
vouchsafed unto him: For Verse 2
All my Fathers house were but dead men before my Lord the King, yet did thou
set thy Servant among them, that did eat at thine own Table. Siccine igitur
rependam? What therefore for such gracious favors shall I return such black
requital? No, if it please the King to understand the truth, there was one
went between me and home, that Sycophant Zibah dealt perfidiously, and
fraudulently with me, for I spoke to him (being my servant) to saddle mine Ass
that I might at the first have gone with thee, Verse 26
and drunk of the same cup, but he went and took the beast for himself,
and left me at home, through lamenesse, not being able to follow; and thus
what with his presents, and glozing speeches has he raised up an evil report
against me; But, oh King, thou have wisdom enough to see his subdolousnesse,
my uprightness; to thee therefore do I refer it, Verse 27
My Lord the King is as an Angel of God, do therefore thy pleasure. Thus
MEPHIBOSHETH assoyle and acquit him self from the imputation of that bitter
slander, showing that he stayed not at Jerusalem to stir up sedition, nor
upon this occasion of David's troubles to work his own ends, and advantages,
but was constrained there to remain, and all the while of the Kings absence
continued a peaceable and well-wishing Subject.

Thirdly, His generous answer upon David's too too moderate satisfaction; for
before upon Zibahs smooth tale David had given away all MEPHIBOSHTHS Lands to
Zibah, ^ Sam. 16
Behold, thine are all that pertained to MEPHIBOSHETH. But now perceiving
MEPHIBOSHETH to be guiltless he thought it unmeet, unreasonable, but that
some restitution should be made him, therefore adiudge he, ^erse 29
Thou and Zibah divide the Lands: Now though Zibah deserved rather to have been
divided in pieces, then to have any division of the Lands; yet, does
MEPHIBOSHETH carry himself discontentedly? No, Non frendet, non labrum mordet;
He shows no token of dislike, for see his notable demeanor, nay, hear his
resolute and Laudable answer. It is not my goods, says he, that I care for,
but the Kings life, and therefore (that I may appear to be what I plead for, a
well affectionate subject) My Lord the King being come home in Peace, I am so
ouerioyed with it, that I respect no wordly wealth, and that I may manifest it,
I submit my self to thy determination, that Zibah should have half my means,
nay, that he should possess the whole portion. Yea (says good MEPHIBOSHETH)
Let him take all, seeing my Lord the King is come home in Peace.

This Alablaster Box of MEPHIBOSHETHS matchless answer do I purpose to open
amongst you, and to power out the precious Spiknard in the same, that the whole
house may be filled with the savor of it, and all of us incited to some
semblable ioyfulnesse upon the happy return of our Illustrious Prince.

In the words there are two parts. A wonderful transporting. A cause of weight
importing.


1 The wonderful transporting, Yea let him take All. 2 The cause of weight
importing, Seeing my Lord the King is come home in Peace.
First, for the wonderful Transporting, Yea let him take All.

This Transporting seems to be wonderful for three respects, of The Person
Him, Yea let him The Proffer Take, Yea let him take The Portion All, Yea, etc.


First, for the transporting as it seem wonderful in respect of the Person.
Him. Let him, Zibah. Had it been some ancient friend, or entire approved
acquaintance, it had been less marvelous, but Let Him. What the
treacherousest Miscreant that ever MEPHIBOSHETH had against him? He that had
bruised his heel, empeached his credit, that dead fly that had made the sweet
ointment of his fame to stincke? That faithless wretch who being one of his
own Household, had laid a wound under his side? What Let him? Yes, Let Him,
says MEPHIBOSHETH:

Observe.
Oh, what see we here but a heart offended, relenting, and inclining to peace?
Was he ever grieved against Zibah? Were it so, yet Nescit odisse, he knows
not how to hate: as David will keep his eyes from looking upon vanity; so
Mephibosheth his heart from muzing upon vengeance: He will pour coals of fire
upon his Enemies head for, Let Him.

How choice and conspicuous is this Pattern? How many amongst us can thus hide
reproves in our bosoms? and when our cheeks are nipped, our faces smitten,
long furrows made upon our backs, not feel the smart of the same? No, it was
a true speech of Laert. lib. 5. cap. 1.
Aristotle who being demanded, what was the first, and what was the last thing
that waxed old, answered, Gratia and Jniuria: a good turn first, a bab turn
last: because of kindnesses we are so soon forgetful, but of unkindness,
valde tenaces such long remembrancers. Prou. 19.11.
The glory of a man is to pass by an offense, but this glory is esteemed of
many the greatest ignominy: for, what forget an indignity, bury a greeuance,
oh this were a Dastardly thing indeed? no, wreacke our teene, feed our eyes
with the ruin of our Adversaries, this is manly, this is glorious: -- scribunt
in marmore laesi. The dust is no fit Register for wrongs, but they write them
in Tables of Marble, and til they see due repaiment there is no true content;
an eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth, we are rather Esaus then
Mephibosheths: As it is reported of Herod. lib. 5.
Darius that having received an abuse from the Athenians, he shot up an arrow
into Heaven, and fell into an extreme rage, withal commanding one of his
servants that every Supper time he should say, Here memento Atheniensium,
Master remember the Athenians. So fares it with us upon the least ill turn,
we fall into furious behavior, and use all means whereby the memory of such
things might remain fresh with us continually. But oh in the mean while where
is the power of divine grace? Have we so learned Christ? Is this the light
that Gods blessed truth instructs us in? No, The Iam. 3.17
Wisdom that descend from above is peaceable, easy to be entreated. Prou.
24.29.
Say not, I will do to him as he has done to me, I will recompense every man
according to his works. Romans 12.2
Be not overcome with evil, but overcome evil with goodness. Away then with
those vindictiue and implacable Spirits, which boil with nothing but rancour,
and thirst after the overthrow of their foes, and adversaries. Oh let Aspes
have these galls, but in the bosoms of Saints let them never be found!
Amongst us let there be rather Jndolentia then Jnuidia, yea so tractable and
flexible let us seem to be to our deadliest enemies, that we be ready rather
to benefit them, then infest and mischief them. See here a renowned example,
Zibah had grossly, deeply, basely abused Mephibosheth; yet see his sweet
nature, to this man will he be courteous, For, Let him take all.

Now let us come to the Proffer. Take. Had it been let him enjoy a gracious
look, or a good word it had been much; but let him Take, what see we here
but a most fair Proffer? Observe.
Would Mephibosheth thus to his enemy part with some of his Estate rather then
stand, after David's judgment given, contending? Oh, might not this serve to
charm our wearisomlesse Law-wormes, which are given to interminable Suits, and
many of them not (as Mephibosheth might have stood out here for) due right,
but for such Possessions as have been tyrannously gotten, and are violently
kept. How many of these are there whom no Judges mouth can satisfy, nor Iuries
equally chosen, and impartially dealing can bring to a cessation of their
troublesome Courses? No, there are such, which of their Rights are never
resolved till their estates begin to be dissolved; the Lions cannot endure to
part with spoils gotten once into their jaws: for let evidence and oath
declare never so clearly; yet they see nothing, they yield nothing, but bend
themselves to another pleading, another trial: many there are that have these
grievous Vexators continually molesting them, as the Poets feign Prometheus
had a Vulture continually gnawing at his heart, whose lengthened Suites are as
famous as Bellum Decommale Troiae, as the ten years Siege of Troy. Ye may
know by some Sergeants and Councillors fat cheeks, if there be not such a
pestilent breed; for who know not these are the Pleaders good Benefactors? Let
a Lawyer be never so poor at the first; yet, if he can but happen upon such
a Booty, a wilful Richling, the lean Kine will soon eat up the fat; the
Offerings of Moloch at the seven Aumbries were never more costly and
chargeable, (save that of the living Child) then the Lawyers Oblations; as
Pharaoh made the Israelites gather straw, and make brick for him; so these
make their Clyents to gather and spare, rack, rend and tear to discharge
their Writs and Fees. I speak the truth in the Lord, I lie not. Yet let the
expenses be never so great, where there are great Spirits, men will not be
daunted; many there are that had rather spend half of their means upon such,
then to part with a quarter to make restitution for their il-gotten goods: and
whereas God has given men wealth to maintain good Neighborhood, and to live
comfortably in their own Families, rather then these men will satisfy what
conscience requires, if either their own power or their Counselors wit can
withold it; let Hospitality be neglected, and the whole family eat the bread of
carfulness.

Oh curuae in terris animae and coelestium inanes. But for these endless
contentions, are not the Pleaders as deep in the guilt, as the gains? Yes. Who
know not that many of them when they see the cause never so clear against
their Clients, and in Conscience they ought to wish them to stir no further,
but to let the honest man have his due; yet seeing hope of profit coming, they
tell them this Demurre may be made, and that Quirke of Law pleaded, which fuel
being administered, a great flame soon breaks forth: therefore as a Pardall
meet with a Lion to beget a Leopard; so the Pleaders conioyne with their
Clyents to breed unjust wearisom Suits; when the Clients are at their wits
end, and their spirits wax blunt (for want of knowledge of any further scruple
to be found and stood upon) to prosecute further quarrel, they go to these as
the 1 Samuel 13 20.
Israelites went to the Philistimes to sharpen their Mattockes and their Axes:
and is it not much for these to disanimate Clients desirous of contention? Yes,
it is as hard for Lawyers not to incite men to Suit, as it is for Panders not
to entice men to uncleanness, they know what will come of it, Incidit in
Scyllam qui vult vitare Charybdin.

He that will eschew in this kind an evil conscience, there will be small
custom, little commings in, he must walk in a thried-bare gown, and course
up at Terms without buxome Attendants, and this Lawyers fever commonly worse
then the claws of Beelzebub. All this while I trust I am not run into
Scandalum Magnatum, but have only endeavored to break Capita Draconum: I
thought it conscience, meeting them thus rightly, to smite them friendly, it
may be a means to do them more good then to break their heads with precious
balmes, and to justify their abominable courses with the Eccl. 7.7.
Songs of Fools, as Solomon calls flattering speeches in a bad cause.

Thus ye see how I have reproved the indefatigable Contender, and the
heartening Pleader, and can there in this any injury be done to either? Horat.
No, Arcades ambo -- both of them deserve the black Coal.

Well if this Fire can kindle it may be a means whereby there shall be no long
variances, but quick agreements, though it be with loss; like to the course
of Mephibosheth here, whom David adjudged to diuid the Lands with Zibah; now he
being of no proterne refractary disposition, nor having no prompting Ploydon at
his elbow to tell him he might make more work, and bring about again,
yielded something, as ye may see already, in this Proffer, for Accipiat, Let
him Take.

But now let us come further, and consider the Portion. All. Let him take All.
Not Half, Observe.
but All: What see we here but that ingenuous people, good natures perform
more then is required, wheresoever this virtue shines, it is a kind of a
bright Image of God, for he use to give more abundantly then we can ask or
crave. As Solomon desired but wisdom of him, and not only that is vouchsafed
him, but 1 Kin. 3.13.
Also (says the Lord) J have given thee that which thou have not asked, both
Riches and Honor, so that among the Kings there shall be none like unto thee
all the days of thy life: and this good God good people desire, endeavor to
resemble, as Ruth. c 2.
Booz when Ruth craved leave to gleane in his Field, not only granted what she
requested but added, that she should have victuals and sustenance with his
Servants: So 2 Samuel 24.
Araunath when David desired but to buy the Threshing-floor, yet he offered
(though afterward David would not accept any thing but upon purchase) most
freely, Let my Lord the King take and offer what seems him good in his eyes,
behold the Oxen for the burnt offering and Chariots, and the instruments of the
Oxen for wood, and it is said, All these things did Araunath as a King give
unto the King. In like manner Neh 5.
Nehemiah when the people complained that they were oppressed with the Usury of
their brethren, did not only cause that to be released, but would not take
the bread of the Governor, and maintained a hundred and fifty Jews
continually at his Table: so that so prompt are all well devoted persons that
they exceed expectation; and are not their practices answerable to Christ's
counsels? Yes, Mat. 5.40.^1.
If any man will have thy coat, let them take thy cloak also, and whosoever
will compel thee to go with him a mile, go twain. How much are they to be
blamed then, who are so far from doing more then is desired; that they are
backward to do that which is meet and requisite, which satisfy no lawful
desires but slenderly and grudgingly; yea, with a repining, and cheerelesse
Spirit do they stretch out their hand to any good duty, and were it not
happily that shame may move them, or authority force them, they would turn the
All into Nothing. Nabal sent David's messengers away with an empty answer, and
Dives will not vouchsafe to Lazarus so much as the crummes: and so indeed if
many might have their own wills, little it is that should be given to Poor,
Church or State, be the occasions of demanding never so forcing, the reasons
of requiring never so just. But at last, let such be ashamed of their
nigardizing, and endeavor to have bowels enlarged, so that they may not only
fulfill, but exceed just motions, let them not be too much set upon the world
like Mephibosheth, there Let him take All.

Thus much for the wonderful Transporting briefly handled, because I aim not
now so much at Explication, as Application.

Let us now come to the cause of weight Importing, wherein there are three
things likewise to be considered, The Man Matter Measure
The Lord the King is come home In Peace.

First for the Man, Since my Lord the King. Was this the inducement that made
him so free? no, some good thing that happened to his Lord the King. Then from
hence observe, Observe.
that both the Persons, and blessings of Kings ought to be precious in the
peoples eyes, and accounts: for if they be enriched with any singular favor,
this ought to be to them singular Joy. Oh whenever Heavens Power is gracious
unto them, they should even be rapt and ravished with the same? For a rotten
member is that that feel no comfort when the HEAD is anointed with Balm, all
should seem sweetly to participate of the Superiors felicities. 2 Samuel 18 3.
Thou art worth ten thousand of us, and therefore whatsoever beneficial thing
such enjoy for glory and dignity should be highly esteemed of all them that
belong to them. Oh wretched they therefore which have little mind of their
Lords their Kings, either concerning their persons or blessings, they live in a
Common wealth, as in a house over which they remember no Master to be set; for
let the distillations of Gods love be never so plentiful, it works in them no
admiration, no delectation. But what are such divided branches? If not, Why do
they not rejoice in the sap of their Root? every one should stand blessing
of himself in the happiness of his Sovereign, as we use to bless our selves
when we behold the Sun rising in brightness. Thus fared it with
Mephibosheth here. Let him take all since my Lord the King.

But is David here called Mephibosheths Lord and King? Why so? for two reasons.

1. For Defense. 2. For Command.
First, for Defense: For gracious Sovereigns must be the Peoples
Lord-Protectors, by their power they must preserve them in safety, as the
Cherubims kept the way of the Tree of Life with the blade of a fiery sword
shaken. The Lord cries out against the Zach. 11.17.
Idol Shepherd that left the flock; so indeed a miserable thing it is when the
Prince has no care of the welfare of his poor Subjects, they must carry their
people in their bosoms, and Numb. 11 12.
as a Nurse carries a sucking Child; that is very regardfully and tenderly,
ready to shelter them from them that seek to mischief them, and to hold them
up in their Princely arms from falling into any dangers: It is not enough to
be known to be a Sovereign as Augustus Caesar was, by taxing his whole
Dominions; but chiefly in safe garding the peoples Persons and Estates.

Secondly, they are Lords and Kings for command, for what are they to be used
only as walls of an House to keep out dangers, or as Floodgates to keep
out Inundations, Indeed so many; too many carry themselves unto them, they are
nimble to dispute what a Sovereign stould do; but they cannot hit of the
vein to conceive what he should have, how he should be respected, how
reverenced, how obeyed; for their honors are slightly given them, their
commands coldly performed, their Tributes murmurringly paid, and all things
wherein their Kingly Sovereignty consists, faintly executed. Where is now then
that of our Savior, Math. 22.21.
Give unto Caesar that which is Caesar's; and that of the Apostle; Admone eos
Principibus and Potestaribus subditos esse, Tit. 3.1.
Put them in remembrance that they be subject to the Principalities and
Powers. Famous is the commendations of Mutezumaes Subjects, who durst not look
upon his face for very reverence, and if he did but send his Ring from his
finger to the greatest Commander under him (as it appeared in the dismal Story
of Qualpopoca at the instigation of Cortez) in all the Dominions of the
Mexicane Empire, though it cost him his life, out of obedience he would not
deny to come, and whatsoever by way of Tribure he demanded, or by Edict
published, all his people with the greatest alacrity showed their loyalty. Oh
therefore, as we ought to pray unto God that our Sovereigns with all care,
conscience, compassion may defend us: So we ought to beseech God to give us
grace that in all submission and subjection we may obey them.

But are the Lords and Kings for defense of us and for command over us? then
who see not here the necessity of Royal Authority? for, how should we ever
be in safety of our lives without their defense? and how would we ever live
in any virtuous manner* without their commands; take away the first, and we
are but like Sheep without a Shepherd, ready to be torn in pieces by every
beast of prey; take away the second, and we are but like wild Asse-Colts,
snuffing up the wind at our pleasure, prone to do nothing but that which is
good in our own eyes: Siccine habet? goes the matter thus? Let no man think
then the Calling of Princes to be only a matter of State and Pomp, where they
might sit in a Chair of Magnificence, wear a Crown, shake a Scepter, but of
use and worth. Romans 13.4.
He is the Minister of God for thy good, Rom 1^.4. Let those mean conceits
therefore of the Regal Office be banished, ever think highly of this
Ordinance; for ye see it is not so much for Superiority and pre-eminence, as
it is for vtility and emolument.

Now let us come to the matter, is Come home, Since my Lord the King is come
home.

Quid deinde? What of that? Is that so great a matter? Yes, with Mephibosheth
it was a motive of great validity. Observe.
From hence then who see not, that the absence of Princes from their people, is
a great darkening of their joy? For, how can they miss them but with as great
want as the want of the Sun out of the Firmament? the Wife without her
Husband has no solace, nor the Kingdom without the King any true comfort; how
can the Corner stone be taken from the building, and not great deformity? how
can the chief string be wanting from the Instrument, and not faint Music?
So, how can there be any hearty delight when the Lord the King is not in the
midst of the people? 1 Samuel 9.
Did Saul think that if he were wanting but three days, that his father
would begin to sorrow for him, and not much more the Subjects even languish in
themselves when their Princes are in remote Parts: Psalm. 82.
I have said ye are Gods: Oh, how do the People rejoice in the presence of
their Gods, be it but to eye them, and behold such royal Vessels wherein the
rich Treasures of their bliss and happiness are stored up. So that seeing the
presence of Princes is so great a comfort, Mephibosheth here you see had
matter enough to be wonderfully affected. For The Lord his King was come home.

Now let us come to the measure, In peace: Seeing my Lord the King is come home
in peace.

This word peace I know has many acceptions; but if my judgment fail me
not, for these three things it is here put.

First, for freedom from former dangers; that whereas before David was in great
straits, he is now escaped out of them, Gods rod and staff having comforted
him when he was almost walking through the shadow of death, as the Israelites
had many Egyptians pursuing after them, but when they looked back they were
all drowned: So, though this royal Prince had many fears and terrors marching
after him; yet now if he look back, they are all swallowed up, David is now
in peace.

Secondly, for health of body, That David is not come home to lie on a Couch,
or to be wrung with some pangfull Disease, that he needs not the Physicians
to prescribe recovering Receipts, but that he find his body in good temper,
and himself every way healthfully disposed. David is thus in peace.

Thirdly, for the good liking of his Subjects. That coming into his
Territories he is not enforced to take Castle, nor to enter into conditions of
peace for the settling himself in his Kingdom, but that all his Subjects as
yet are well affected to him, and that Mephibosheth see not a man that lifts up
his head, or threatens future molestation unto him. David is in peace.

But is this the extent of Mephibosheths weighty cause importing? is this that
fill up the Cup of his delight unto the brimme? Then who see not that Subjects
can never have perfection of comfort in their Princes, unless all their
dangers be removed, if they be not in peace, how stould the people be in
joy? It is a prepostrous thing for the Subjects foreheads to smile, when the
Sovereigns forehead hangs down; yet how many are there that can be
delightsome and mirthfull enough, in the midst of their Rulers perils, and can
triumph in the midst of their troubles? For my own part, I think these know
not what it is to have a Superior Power over them, for then the People with
their Kings would like those two famous Twins, weep when they weep, and
laugh when they laugh: Mephibosheth I am sure did so, all the while the King
was in danger ye heard how disconsolately he behaved himself, as though he
had been a man careless of himself; and does he express any joy, when is
it? when he sees his Lord the King in health and happiness, safety and
security. For, Let him take all seeing my Lord the King is come home in Peace.

Thus at last have I run short descant upon the celebrious ensign, notable
carriage of Mephibosheth. Oh Mephibosheth, with renown would I still follow
thee, I would I could blow a silver Trumpet in thy praise, and set a Crown of
immortal honor upon thy Head. Floreat, splendeat semper Mephibosheth. Let
Mephibosheths esteem ever flourish, ever flourish, and let it glister like
Phosphorus in his brightness.

Quid vltra, What yet remains? To see whether we have such joyful cause,
that so we may betake our selves to the like joyful carriage. Indeed to the
Letter we cannot hold; but we can come as nigh to it as the Princely Eaglet
come to the Kingly Eagle; for not the Lord our King is come home in peace, but
the Lord our Prince is come home in peace: As for the Lord our King, he being
old stayed at home, in the midst of his Nobles, wearing the writhen, platted
Crown of Thorns in taking care for the welfare of his People, hearing and
answering foreign Embassages, and consulting how there might be a speedy
concluding of the troublesome affairs of Christendom, and as his chiefest
work fitting himself for his grave, and preparing his Soul for God. As for
the Lord our Prince he being yet young, and the Scepter being not yet in his
hand, he undertake hard Voyages, and being accompanied with some few Nobles
(yea Ipse vno graditur comitatus Achate) venters to see the fashions of other
Countries. Virgil.
and the lustres of other Courts. Well then, though the Lord our King went not
forth, so that we might rejoice at his coming home, yet it was Filius Domini
Regis, Adolescens secundus, Spes Imperatoris, Jmperij, the nearest to him in
blood, the dearest unto him in love, the pleasure of his eye, the stasse of his
age, the joy of his life, he for whom he sacrificed both morning and evening.
So that upon the person we need not much to stand.

But what was the Lord our Prince in any great danger like David? Yes, he
might say with Paul, that he was 2 Cor 11.
Jn perils often, in perils by Land, in perils by Sea, in perils by Robbers,
in perils in the City, in perils in the Wilderness, in weariness and
painefulnes, etc. Doubtless so great were his dangers that there might have
been but a hand-breath between him, and death; and had not the Lord sent his
good Angel with him, as he did Raphael with Tobith he might have miscarried
between Nineveh and Rages. 1. For who know not that his passage over was
troublesome. 2. His speedy iournying very wearisome. 3. His possibility of
being discovered in a strange Country, something dangerous. 4. His ventring
through Dales, Forests, solitary Plains, hazardable. 5. His living so long in
a Kingdom (and that in the scorchingest time of Summer) not agreeable to his
Nature, and when (as it is reported) a Plague ouerspread the Land, perilous. 6.
And at last (after his sumptuous entertainment, and belike Magnificent welcome)
having with honor and mutual respects taken leave of the Court of Spain,
entering into his Navy (then with what more uncertain Horat.
Myrtoum pauidus nauta secat mare) by Winds, Tempests, Rocks, Sands, etc. He
might have miscarried, or wandered along while upon the Seas, for Virgil.
Errabant acti fatis maria omnia circum, was it said of the Trojans.

But is there any such sad news (at which our ears would have tingled, our
eyes dropped out of our heads, our hearts broken within our bosoms, yea, we
even given up the Ghost as Phineas wife did to hear that the Ark of the Lord
was taken) to be at this time published amongst us? No: behold better news,
welcommer tidings, for to the joy of the King, the delight of the Nobles, the
comfort of the Clergy, the recreement of the whole Land, the Lord our Prince is
come home in Peace.

1 To the joy of our King. For Omnis in Ascanio charistat cura Parentis: no
doubt all the Kings Care was settled upon the safe return of his Charles; yea, I
doubt not much, whether (after he had sent for him, and his Return was
determined) his Eyes took any quiet rest, or the meat that he did eat were
sweet unto him, or the light he did behold pleasant, till it pleased God to
grant him a sight of him; as David cried, Oh my Son Absolon, Absolon, my
Son, my Son, would to God I had dyed for thee. So, doubtless, our King
groaned within himself, Oh my Son Charles, Charles my Son, my Son, would
to God I might set mine eye upon thee.

2 To the delight of the Nobles: For, must not they needs be ioyed to see the
Mirror of Lord their Prince, come home in Peace.

3 To the comfort of the Clergy. The whole Shiloh rejoice in it; much mirth and
melody is there at Naioth for it, yea every Priest and Leuite is ready to sing
Hosannah in the highest, to hear of it. He has been, is, and we hope ever
will be our Fulcimentum, and therefore he formerly has been, now is, and ever
shall be our Delectamentam.

4 To the Recreement of the whole Land. Throne by Election, as he is by
Succession; doubtless, their votes should be given for him: and as the Elders
of Israel went and seized Iephtah out of the Land of Tob, and said, Judge. 11.^
Come and be our Captain: So he should be seized out of what place soever he
remained in, and with the like entreaty, Veni and esto nobis Rex, Come and be
our King. What Nation would not be glad to have such a one if it might be to
sit in their throne? He bears in him the Image of a Ruler as Zebah and
Salmanah said of the brethren of Gidion that they looked like the Children of a
King. Judge. 8.18
What can be desired in him (set aside a freedom from that natural, humane,
hereditary frailty, that we are all borne with, and shall ever be burdened
withal) but in some measure, yea in an eminent degree in him may be espied?

Fear of Isaac is that that he worships, from the God of his Fathers will he
not depart. Doubtless of the mind of Ischyrion, Sexcenties potius mori quam
quicqua^ de Religione amittere. That he had rather dye six hundred deaths then
lose the least syllable of his profession: his praise is in the Gospel, his
Fame spread throughout the Christian World for his constancy to the Faith he
has been brought up in, no leagues, nor bonds of Affinity will make him
mutable.

Peace fitting himself for the times of War, showing in his tender years good
testimonies of sprightly courage and puissant valor, like to be Mart Ferox,
and vincinescius armis.

Cyrus has had so many a worthy Zenophon to instruct him, and he himself by
Nature taking delight scarce in any thing more then in the company of the
Learned and being of the number of them that do even -- Impallescere chartis,
Persius.
by all sort of Learning, endeavoring to adapt himself for his Throne, which
God in his gracious appointed time is like to bestow upon him: and as it was a
great help to Paul that he was brought up at the feet of Gamaliel, for his
knowledge of the Pharisaicall Profession: So doubtless a great help for all
kind of Knowledge has it been to our Prince, to have been brought up at the
Feet of so sage and discreet a Parent: for who knows not, that Jacobus noster
Rex and Magus, Rex and Philosophus? Yea the Mirror of the World concerning
Wisdom, either in Church or State Points. Oh who can imagine then that the
Father that desires to leave this Son the Successor of his Kingdoms and
Fame, but he will ouerlay him with the purest gold he can, and as he has
communicated to him his humane nature: So likewise will he endeavor to infuse
into him his intellectual spirit, that he might live in him when he is dead,
and shine in his Son when he is gathered to his Fathers. And beside, has he
traveled so far only to see Cities, and to embrace Compeeres? No
doubtless, that old Nestor knew well enough what he did when he parted for a
while with his Son, he considered that by this Voyage he should be much more
enabled for Rule and Government by his diligent observing and careful marking
of the fashions, and governments of other Nations: So that being by nature
studious, by education so well trained up, and having been thus long amongst
the Wits of the World, and the Crafts-masters for all sort of Discipline, and
Policy, he cannot but have Crura thymo plera.

Tiberius was wont to say) that was gotten with the tears and groans of the
people; for he has shown himself hither toward of a Princely disposition,
and to be no gripple gatherer.

-- Patrem sequitur sua Proles.

man's cause? No, he hates them all right sore, and has not dissembled to be
their good friend when opportunity have been given. And if they have been
under his own wing, how soon has he chased them from him? For how many of
his Attendants, if he have once perceived them to be of any deperdit debaushed
carriage, and in their execrable manners grew incorrigible, how soon has he
dismissed them.

So now then, En Principem, behold your Prince: Oh, how should that people be
even transported that have received by the mercy of God such a Prince out of
danger in safety; me thinks their hearts should leap for joy to hear such
tidings of him, and they should go up and down their streets, and with the
greatest melody sound it abroad as their Paean, Principem iterum habemus,
Principem iterum habemus, We have our Prince again, We have our Prince
again. The Woods have not destroyed him, the Floods have not devoured him, the
Air has not infected him, Principem iterum habemus. Principem iterum habemus.
We have our Prince again, We have our Prince again. I read upon happy
events, many people wonderfully affected, When Abraham had received that Divine
Promise, that Sarahs womb that seemed dead should wax fruitful, and that
she should be the Mother of many Nations, and that Kings should come of her,
Genesis 17.1^
He fell on his face and laughed: And was it not thus with Jacob? Yes, when
news was brought him that Joseph, whom he thought long before to have been
torn in pieces by a wild beast, to be yet alive, and by the Chariots that
were sent he plainly perceived it. Genesis 45.27 21, v.
The spirit of Jacob revived, and he said, I have enough, Joseph my son is
yet alive. And were not the Jews in this degree of excessive gladsomnesse?
Yes, for when Mordecai was exalted, and the cruel Edict of Haman reuersed, and
comfortable letters sent in the stead Est. 8.
All the City of Shusham rejoiced, and there was joy and gladn^sse, a Feast and
a good day. And shall we not find Rhoda, and the Saints of God at Peter's
miraculous deliverance out of Prison, just in this case? Yes, Rhoda hearing him
knock at the door, and by his voice knowing it to be him Acts 12.14, 16.
Opened not the door for very gladness, and when the Saints saw him, they
were astonished.

And not only in the Sacred Scriptures, but in Sacred Histories this
extraordinary joy we do find upon extraordinary events. Eusebius. P^^p. Hist.
lib. 9. c. ^.
Eusebius reports, that when Maximius the Eastern Tyrant had sent commandment
to his Presidents, that the Christians which were persecut^d should be
released, that the noble Champions of godliness which before were in the
Mine-pits, passed through every City with valiant and cheerful courage, with
unspeakable joy, and replenished with inexplicable liberty of mind, and that
they sung Songs and Psalms in the midde highways, in the market places, and
all frequented Assemblies. Eusebius. ibid. c. 9.
In like manner it is reported that Constantine having conquered Maxentius that
truculent oppressor coming to Rome, immediately with cheerful countenance,
and from the heart he was received of all both Men, Women and Children,
Senators, and other Noble Personages, and of all the People of Rome with
gladsome shouts, and unspeakable joy, as a Deliverer from opppression, and
general Benefactor to all. Socrates Scholast Ecc. Hist. lib. 7. c. 23.
So likewise when by the Prayers of Theodosius that virtuous Emperor the
usurping Tyrant John was brought to his end by valiant Aspar, all the people
set all at naught, and passed the Theater, (where before they were celebrating
their shows and spectacles in Circo) sounding out thanksgiving together with
the Emperor with one voice, and straitway went to Church, and spent there the
whole day: so that all the City seemed to be but as one Church. And not only
in sacred Scriptures and in sacred Histories, but among the Heathens upon
occasions of happy betides, much expression of joy have been manifested. It is
reported that when the people of Rome heard how Germanicus (whose life and
welfare they much feared) was in safety; as if they had been overcome with the
news, they went and rent open their Temple doors, and cried out, Salua Patria,
Salua Ciuitas, saluus Germanicus. Our Country is safe, our City is safe,
Germanicus is safe. And of Cicero we read, that returning from banishment in
the Consulships of Pompey and Lentulus, that Tanta fuit vrbis laetitia, vt
(quasi auulsa sedibus suis Roma) omnis aetas ordosque hominum obuiam
procederet. That there was such rejoicing in the City, that Rome was as it were
shaken and plucked from her seat, all ages and orders of men going out to meet
Cicero. What should I seek to abound? The drift of my speech is, that as it is
natural to all men with memorable chances to be delighted, so we for this
late favor of God vouchsafed unto us should be, supra modum dulcedine laeti.
fraught and replenished with joy beyond measure, even fall on our faces and
laugh, have our Spirits revived within us, have amongst us a feast and a good
day, yea in the highest manner we can express our Iubiliation and exultation?
Oh they have dead hearts that are not now quickened, dumb mouths that do not
now sound forth joyful out cries: if ever there were a time for the Timbrell
and the dance, this is it, the return of our Prince into the Land should be
like return of life into a swounding body; we should have as much gladness
for the having of him, as we should have had sadness for the wanting of him;
if he had perished, how should we have mourned? being preserved, and in all
sort of peace returned, how should we triumph? our joy should be like the joy
of Harvest; yea men that are dividing spoils should not be more cheerful
then we: Our Savior says in the Gospel If these should hold their peace,
the stones would speak; so if we should not rejoice, the senseless Stars
would teach us joy.

Our Prince went out with a wonder, and came home with a wonder: out with a
wonder; for the Thames your Channel, many other places in the Land strangely
ebbed and flowed, as if the waters had been out of course, that a Prince of
such matchless worth should be wafted ere long over them to pass through many
dangers: came home with a wonder, for being past all his dreads, and arrived
again upon his own shoares, the fame of his return being scarce spread
throughout all the parts of this Kingdom; yea the very day the tidings came
amongst you, the two great Lights of Heaven in an astonishable manner appeared,
there being three Moons in the night, three Suns in the Morning, to signify
unto us that the Heir apparent (if my conjecture be not too curious) of three
Kingdoms was now in safety rerurned, yea that the Lord our Prince was come home
in peace. Therefore as Solomon says, Go to the Pismire O thou Sluggard; so
go to the Lights of Heaven and lighten thee unto joy, O thou dull-hearted
Subject.

But I must needs confess I need not be overmuch vehement for this duty in
this place. Fot as the Woman from the wall commended the City of Abel, that it
was a faithful and peaceable Daughter in Israel: so for this I may safely
commend you, that you have shown your selves full of ardent love and
surpassing joy; yea, as Jacob said of LuZ in respect of the divine Vision of
the Ladder, which reached up to the Heaven, and the Angels ascended and
descended upon it, that it was no other but the House of God, and the Gate of
Heaven: So, having beheld the Ladder of your joy reaching as it were with the
excelse and sublime exultations to the height of Heaven, and yours^lues
ascending and descending upon it, I cannot but acknowledge, that this is no
other but a Port where the King and Prince have true-hearted and free-hearted
obeisants. Who that did but see or shall but hear of the number of people that
here was met once before and now again, such a marvelous Congregation, as if
your Houses were emptyed to fill the House of God, and besides your Church-ioy,
your Streets-melody, your Instruments of Music, your Banners displayed, your
Ordnance roaring, your Bonefires flaming, but must needs confess that ye have
been very forward to give unto this successful, prosperous, long-wished for
betide due solemnity? Many Daughters have done worthily, but thou surmountest
all; All, considering the bigness or rather smalnesse of the Town: Many of
your aged Fathers, with countenances astonished, and with drops of joy
trickling along their cheeks, acknowledging that such triumphing they did
never behold: Well, your works shall praise you in the Gates, your egregious
acts gain you Illustrious Fame, they shall make your friends to extol you,
your enemies to admire you, and both friends and enemies in all your wants
ready to relieve you. Go on therefore thus loyally and affectionately to
celebrate the return of him, who came from Strangers Borders with honor, and
who ought to be received into our Coasts with rauishment.

But will some say Corda tremunt, Interiora quatiunt, our hearts tremble, our
inwards shake within us, we cannot be joyful as we would, because though our
Prince be come home in peace; yet we shall never be in long peace under him; for
a Spanish Match will come, and then the Papists they fear may draw him from
his Religion. Curse not the King, no not in thy thoughts; so curse not the
Prince in thy private conceits, conjectures. He has deserved the best opinion
and worthiest estimation of us. Has he been constant to the faith in Spain,
and will he here be a Reed shaken with the wind? Did he there so stoutly
stand, and will he here so readily fall? No doubtless, the heart of our
Prince is more confirmed against the Romish Church then before; the sight of
their Abominations have bred in him greater detestation. And howsoever the King
for some ouertures to us vndisclosed, may purpose, yea prosecute the Match; yet
the heart of the King, as Solomon says is deep, we cannot search it, he has
some high and deep Project in hand; but harmless, no doubt, is his intention
to us; and persuade your selves both King and Prince know the Beast and his
Locusts well enough; they will take heed of bowing their neck under that heavy
unsupportable Yoke, the miserable examples of their Predecessors, their
Neighbors, their selves, cannot out of their hearts: therefore though so far
as we through our dark creuises can discern, could wish matters might go
otherwise, and we would give the eyes in our heads to obtain it; yet because
we see but the outside of things, and the inward secrets we cannot ransacke,
nor pry into, there being such wise Pilots at the Stern, let us commit all
unto them with quietness, trusting that they will not suffer the ship to
miscary. And therefore let this stone of offense be removed, let us not be
troubled with any fears of great miseries ensuing; we are like to sit under
our own Vines, and our own Figge-trees in peace, and therefore let us
confidently and intrepidly go on to be ioyed; yea even ouer-ioyed with the
enjoying of that Jewel which a while we wanted, for this let our hearts be
enflamed, our spirits filled with marvelous iucundity; yea let us even know no
measure nor moderation in the comfort that we take in the same, beside a
little, let us endeavor to track Mephibosheths steps in forgiving, and giving.

First in forgiving; for as he forgave Zibah, so let us forgive: 1. Our
enemies. 2. Our Debtors.

Our Enemies: For how unsightly a thing would it be that they with come to
rejoice at the same Temple, and which go triumphing in the same Streets,
should look with evil aspects, like Malignant Planets, one upon another?
Where there is joint Rejoicing* there should be joint Reconcilement; Oh how
acceptable would it be to the Lord, our Prince if he might be welcomed home
with the Nobles and Commons, laying down all their private spleenenes? They
could not be more joyful to see him in Peace from Dangers; then he to see
them in Peace from Grudges: their hearty concord would without all question be
his hearty consolation; but if their eyes look cheerfully upon him, but are
ready to look asquint one upon another, and their mouths shoot in joy of his
Return, but are ready to glow with Rage, and to spew out scandals, ignominies,
opprobrious, calumnious speeches one against annother; if they clap their hands
in his honor, but ready to smite with the fist of wickedness, as the Prophet
says, or to strike their hands in token of indignation as Balack did against
Balaam: How great a a quenching will this be to the Lord our Prince, for that
true full joy he should take in the Peoples Melody-makings? Oh therefore let
all bitter roots be plucked up, all old greeuances removed, all indignities,
abuses forgiven, be Mephibosheths.

Our Debtours: For, can we truly rejoice in our Princes Return, and yet
suffer others to mourn in the House of Bondage? Is their means wasted, their
Estates so decayed, that they are not able to satisfy, and yet will ye suffer
them in Prison, rather to pine away then yield to release them? oh remember
this is not a time with all rigor and extremity to exact debts; therefore now
let us ease burdens, free enthralled men, and give them liberty upon this
gladsome tidings.

Secondly, in giving, and that toward the Poor, and Prince.

First, toward the Poor. For upon this occasion should not rich men's houses
be like the Courts of Charity? Yes, for a Nabal he is indeed, that now eats
his bread and his flesh only amongst his Sheepe-shearers, therefore bring
forth the raiment for the naked, the silver for the needy, the sustenance for
the hungry and thirsty, give Portions to seven and likewise to eight.

To the Prince. For this voyage must needs have been costly and chargeable.
Princes whenever they travel must be Liberal to honor the State from
whence they come: and should not these expenses be made up by us? Yes,
whenever he call we should have our presents ready; for will we bestow
nothing but a little sounding of Cornets, and Sackbuts, Powder and shot,
Bonefires and ringing of Bells? This were poor congratulation, cheap welcome.
Let our Coffers therefore be opened, our Estates set forth, and seeing the Lord
our Prince is come home in Peace let him take amply, freely.

But amongst all these Solemnities, let us not forget the Fat of the Peace
offering. How came the Lord our Prince thus home in Peace, but by the
Providence of God? Give unto God therefore that which is Gods, Let him take 1.
Present Devotion. 2. Future Duty.

First, Present Devotion. For, Bring unto the Lord oh ye Sons of the Mighty,
bring young Rams unto the Lord, ascribe unto the Lord the honor due to his
Name. Come into his Courts with Thanksgiving, and show your selves glad in
him with Psalms. Let not so precious a benefit be received without praise, nor
so Gracious a Favor without condign commemoration. It becomes well the Just
to be thankful. Let his name be extolled, his mercy magnified.

Secondly, Future Duty. For has not God tried by his favors to Win us, by
his blessings to draw us unto him? Yes, the Lord might have paid us home at
one stroke, but he has spared us, to see if we will open our eyes and see his
goodness, open our ears and hear his will, open our hearts and follow his
precepts; Oh therefore with the Cords of his love let us be pulled unto him,
let this unspeakable favor bring us unto unfeigned duty: Yea, Seeing the Lord
our Prince is come home in Peace, let him take All. All Service both of Body
and Soul.

By this time I trust I have taught you how your Cup might run over with the
oil of gladness, and how you might rightly and fully discharge what belongs
to you upon this blessed Event.

What last shall be done? Let us set our mouths toward Heaven, and implore
Divine assistance for after times for our Prince. The Lord water him with ye
dew of Heaven, endew him with his further graces, cause his face still to shine
upon him, his mercies still to keep him, his Spirit still to direct him, that
our joys may abound under him, our happiness increase as his years increase,
that if this worthy Prince survive that matchless Father, as now we receive
him with Triumph into the Land, so then we may receive him with Triumph into
his Throne, and at last he may be received by the Angels, and Archangels with
Honor and Glory into Heaven. Amen.

FINIS.

