THE Solace of SION, and Joy of JERUSALEM. Or Consolation of Gods Church in the
latter age, redeemed by the preaching of the Gospel universally. Being a
godly and learned exposition of the Lxxxvij. Psalm of the Princelye Prophet
DAVID: Written in Latin by the reverend Doctor VRBANVS REGIVS Pastor of
Christ's Church at Zelle, in Saxony. 1536.

Translated into english by R. Robinson Citizen of London, 1587.

Joel 2. verse. 32. But whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be
saved. For in Mount SION and in Jerusalem, shall be deliverance as the Lord
has said, and in the remnant whom the Lord shall call.

Psalm. 45. ^egina a dextris ^^i. etc* verse. 9. Psalm. 113. Qui facit mulierem
orba^ habitare cum familia sua, matre^que filiorum laetam fore. verse. 9. ^ex
concupiscet ^ecorem tuum. ^. verse. 11.

^^es 2. ^a. 2. heb. 9 ^ay. 49.
Qui Structor Ecclesiae suae est, Angul ^risque Lapis,
Rex SION and Salem, Leo Iudae, Flosque Iessae.
Nutritiosque creat Reges, Nutricesque Reginas,
Ecclesiae suae, protegat (inquam) CHRISTVS:
Reginam ELIZABETH, Scuta and Regalia sua.
^^at* 3. ^eb. 13.
Liberae vt SARA^* filij multi fiant.
Donec nos in SION Dei, Ciuitateque Viui,
SALEM sic Caelesti coagaudea^nus omnes.
CIVITAS LONDON. Ps. 101. Annu^cictur in Sion nomen Domini and laus eius in
Jerusalem verse. 26.

Ex omnibus Ciuitatibus edificatis (O Deus) san^



To the Right Honorable, Sir George Barn Knight Lord Mayor of the City of
London, and to the Right worshipful his Brethren the Aldermen of the same,
Grace, Mercy, Peace and plenitude of Temporal and eternal Beatitude in Christ
Jesus our Lord and Savior Everlasting.
KNOWLEDGE of GOD by his holy will, word, and works omnipotent conceived, Faith
in his heavenly providence, presence and promises al sufficient perceived, and
obedient thankfulness for his inestimable bounty, benefits and blessing
permanent received (Right Honorable, Worshipful, and Reverend in the Lord) as
they are three most excellent plants of divine virtue; of whose fruit if our
first Parents in Paradise, had taken, tasted and disgested aright, (as they did
of a contrary) not only their solace there had been without Sorrow their
joy without anoy, and their life without death, to the inspeakable solace and
infinite joy of the eternal GOD their Creator: But also both they and all
their posterity had been freed from the thraldom of Satan, sin, Death and
Hell from time to time even for ever. For thereby in steed of knowledge,
wilful boldness: for want of faith, incredulytie: and for obedi^ i^^o pain,
prosperity into adversity, health into sickness, life into death, and blessings
into cursings: Albeit the same our omnipotent Creator, merciful Redeemer and
gracious sanctifier, according to his holy will, word and work, by his heavenly
providence, presence, and promises by hi^ bounty benefits and blessings,
afterwarde^ (finding better fruits of knowledge, repentance, faith, and
obedience in the^) comforted and confirmed both the same, our first sinful
parents and their seed after them* videlize^ SETH, ENOS, KAINAN, MALALIEL,
^ARED and ENOCH with long and happy days upon earth. Of which seven ENOCH
especially even alive (the rest of the fathers beholding the same) was from
thence translated into heaven, not only for a repentance unto the nations in
this life but also to signify the immortality of the bodies* and souls of the
Lord elect after this life everlastingly: And hereupon the best approved
Interpreters and writers gather that as the Lord in six days created the
world, and ^ested the seventh day: so the same should endure six thousand
years, and the seventh thousand should be the Sabath of eternal rest: and as
the first six Fathers from ADAM to ENOCH died by course of nature, and the
seventh was translated alive into Heaven, so during the first 6000. years
death should rai^^^n the world but in the 7000 should begin the ^^^^^ednesse of
life in the world everlasting.

Here then conseque^^^ (after ENOCH) we now ^^^ mundi (...)*
for our time have great cause of consolation, To remember how yet in the first
age, God calling NOAH (a rest or ceasing) with his famelye into the Arc, and
they obediently entering were saved when all the world besides were consumed.
Genesis 6 And how in the second age of the word, SH^^ (the renoumed) of whom the
first Jews came, and IAPHETH (enlarged) of whom the first Gentiles came, both
the sons of the same NOAH, should (being blessed) join hands together
toward the building of the earthly SION and heavenly JERUSALEM: when their
brother CAME (crafty) for his disobedience was accursed Genes. 9 Anno Mu^di 2000.
And his children the Cananites an idolatrous and wicked people were confounded
in their presumtuous building of the earthly BABEL. How also the second age
expired, and in the 23. year of the third beginning* ABRAHAM (the father of a
multitude) being called by God out of the City of HARAN in Mesopotomia, into
Palestine eue^ there amongst the infidels received the promise concerning
Christ incarnate of his seed, that the world should by him recover the
blessings that it lost through ADAM: Genes, 12. Which was by the will of God
more amply performed in the Lords covenant unto David (beloved) of the tribe
of IVDA, the youngest son of ISHAY: Who from keeping of sheep being called to
be a king ruled in SION and in JERUSALEM with great solace and joy of his
people: a Conqueror of their enemies, a comforter of their friends, and as a
princely divine (...) Lords anointed, received the effectual promise
concerning Christ^ incarnate to come of his (...), and the sure and safe
stability of his everlasting kingdom. 2 Samuel 7. and though he builded not the
Lord a material Temple, yet he endeavored most religiously to advance Gods
glory in his congregation with de uine service and worship, according to the
holy will of the Lord, solemply celebrating the same with heavenly harmony of
sacred songs, and with Psalms of prayer and praise: appointing ASAPH, H^MAN,
IDITHVM, and the sons of KORACH, most skilful Musitions, to play upon and
sing to melodious instruments, with sweet solace and joy in the Lord. After
whom SOLOMON (peaceable) his son succeeding being appointed of the Lord to
build and beautify the Temple, for religion, wisdom, wealth, power, and
prosperity, incomparably flourished at the first: But in his elder years
forgetting God and falling unto Idolatry, he procured Gods displeasure, the
hatred of his enemies and decay of his kingdom. And in the third age the Lord
thinking upon his promise made unto David aforesaid, by his providence ordained
the most godly, wise, prosperous and victorious Anno mundi ^^oo. Regni Asa. 10
kings of IVDA, as Asa, Iosaphat, Ioathan, Ezechias, and Josias, and after
them, Cyrus, Darius, and Artaxerxes, kings of Persia: with Zerubbabel, Ne
hemias, and Esdias, their helpers to build the Lords house, destroy all
Idolatry, bring the people out of Babilonical thraldom, and set them forwards
in the way of the promised heavenly SION, and Jerusalem In whose days also the
Lord stirred up his holy Prophets Esaias, Jeremy, Ezechiel, Daniell and the rest
to pronounce unto the Nations his holy will word and works, to preach unto al
true believers his providence, presence, and promises in his church and
kingdom by Christ, and his Gospel of everlasting salvation. In the fourth age
of the (...) the Prophets Christ Jesus the son of God came into the world for
the salvation of al true believers: who^ anno Christi. 1. Anno mu^ di, 3970.
the very Gentiles of the ^ast, at his first coming acknowledged and
worshipped, the Jews afterward scatered here and there among the Gentiles,
and many of their Rulers believed in him. Though the Pharisees, Scribes and
Hipocrites with other wicked Jews despised his doctrine and persecuted his
person, and his Apostles also: of whom the denying Peter, a penitent Pastor
among the Jews; and the persecuting Saul a convert Paul among the Gentiles,
were also mighty messengers and workmen of their master Christ, when with
the^ the other Appostles and many christian Doctors, Martires and members of
the Primitive Church, under 12. persecutions for the same causes and effects,
lived and died the faithful servants of Christ, and Inheritours of the
promised heavenly SION and Jerusalem. And as even in that age the Roman
Antechriste began his kingdom to constitute man's traditions a boue Christ's
institutions: whom Tyrants, Epicures, Sophisters, and manifold miscreantes
vpheld and had Anno Christi. 1004, Mundi 5004.
in honor. So even then and in the fifth age of the world the Lord God stirred
up good and gracious Emperors and kings, godly spiritual persons, and
religious members of his Church, to settle and defend his truth and advance
the glory of his heavenly kingdom, to the subduing of the same Antichrist. And
now are almost 600 years entered into the sixth age of the world, the Lordin his
holy will, word and work perfourming his providence, presence, and promises in
his church and kingdom everlasting (by gathering the same out of every Nation,
the faithful of his flock) who shall partake with him of the celestial solace
and infinite joy in the heavenly SION and* Jerusalem, in the Sabbath of
eternal rest. Toward the well wishing whereunto (Right honorable worshipful,
and reverend in the Lord) like as the Apostle Paul writ his loving salutatio^s
unto the Romans, at that time the chosen church of Christ, and (amongst some
of them engrafted in the true faith before himself was called) prayed the^ to
salute VRBANVS his fellow helper in Christ: So do ^ ^om. 16.
most humbly, and heartily, reverently, and dutifully reco^mend unto your honor
and worships godly and favorable acceptations of this short, but sweet Psalm,
this little but learned labor, published by so faithful a fellow helpen of
Paul, this VRBANVS REGIVS or kingly Citizen of Christ in our time. who as he
being present in spirit, though absent in body for two years, sent the same
in latin as a token of remembrance unto the worshipful Senators of Hamborow,
his friends: So I a poor Citizen of LONDON, and well willer of your worships my
good benefactors, do dedicate and consecrate this my translation of the same
In perperuam Mnemosina^ pro^ptitudinis meae in praecatione and praxin pro
pietatibus vestris. And so humbly beseeching your honor and worships to accept
my great good will in so small a substance, though great in effect. I heartily
pray for the happy and long increase of Gods benefits and blessings upon this
City terrestiall and for the end les perfruitio^ thereof with Christ the
immaculate La^b* ^^^el. 5.
his Angels, elders, and thousands thousands of his elect unto whom with the
father and the holy Ghost, they incessantly shall ascribe all power, and riches,
and wisdom, and strength, and honor, and glory, and praise. For ever, and
ever. So be it.

Your honors and worships humble Orator. Richard Robinson.

The Lxxxvii Psalm. according to the Hebrews: Whereof the Title is attributed A
Psalm or Song of the SONS of KORACH.
Tom^ 2. op^ rum suoru^ interpretant^ Psalmo^.
AUGUSTINE said well, that this Psalm was very brief in circumstance of
words, but great in substance of all the sentences. For whereas it has but
seven verses only, yet notwithstanding it describes profoundly the Church
of Christ, the Heavenly Jerusalem, the spiritual Sion, as the fruitful Mother
both of the Jews and Gentiles: what a one, and how large she shall be, when as
she shall not only have Citizens from among the Jews, but from among the
Gentiles also, throughout the whole world. And out of this Psalm learn we
that Article of our faith, I believe there is one Catholic holy Church, the
Communion of Saints: And I suppose this is even very specially necessary for
this ou^ age, that we may exactlye learn, and daily handle this Article out
of the holy Scriptures, least we be seduced either by the ^ certain sect which
believed that Christ should reign 2^000. years only.
Anabaptists and Chiliasts of our time, carnally understanding the predictions
of Prophets concerning the Church: either else be carried away with admiration
of their glorious and stately Titles, who at this day thruste forth into
Christians the inventions of man's brain, for, and in steed of the true
worshipping Chiliastae in ^gipto exorti anno mundi. 261.
of GOD, under pretense of the Church. As if the Church (of whom we daily
make mention in the Apostolic Creed) were either a worldly pollicye, or the
Author of infinite tradicions, which at Anabaptist^, in Germania. anno Christi*
^534*
this day false and tyranicall teachers of this latter age do cast (as it were
snares into the consciences of christian people, (like as the Prophet Ezechiell
in his 13. Chap. speaks of those deceivers) That they might slaye the Souls
of them which die not, and give life to the souls that live not: in lying to
my People which believe their lies* Verse* 19.

The Lxxxvii Psalm. verse. 1. Her foundations are upon the holy Hills. Pars 1.

The Lord loves the Gates of Sion more, the^ all the dwellings of Jacob. Pars 2.

PAVLE the Apostle wrote in 1* Cor. 10. That all things happened to the Jews
in Type or figure (as it were) unto a People Tipicall or figurative: wherefore
we will herehence enter our purpose, from the Type unto the truth, and from
the shadow unto the Light it self. What notable thing soever is any-wheare in
the Scripture mentioned as touching Sion, Jerusalem. The shadow^ of the Law
without says cannot be vnderstood^
Judah and Israel, what so divine promises of Christ and his everlasting
Kingdom are any wheare set down) all this does the carnal People of the
Jews refer unto themselves, and the earthly Sion and Jerusalem. Wherefore in
these and such like Prophesies, the Jews notably flatter themselves, and most
arrogantly despise the Gentiles in comparison of them selves. Because as S.
Paul says 2. Cor. ^. Those Gentiles have the ^o^e^i^^ untaken from their
hearts, as in the reading of the Old Testament, and the Kingdom of God is
taken from them. They also err not knowing the Scriptures, neither shall the
Veil or Covering of their ungodly ignorance be taken away, except they first
be converted unto the Lord. verses 14. 15. 16. So ^as whiles they embrace not
JESUS of Nazareth for their true Messiah or Savior, fore promised in the Law
and the Prophets, and sent unto us from God in the last w^ek of the years
which Daniell declares Cap 9. verse. 27.) but imagine themselves another
Savior or Sacrifice offered I know not whom) it is impossible for them to
understand the sacred mysteries of the Gaspell in the Prophets, which are not
understood but by the government and guide of ye spirit of Christ, who
speaks in the Prophets. And none have the spirit of Christ, but they which
believe in Jesus Christ.

Wherefore, also in this Psalm as yet still pleasantly dream they, of that
same ancient Cittye of Sion in time past overthrown and laid waste by the
(...)* ^ (as Daniell also witnesses) never to be restoryd again. But the
Church of Christ which has the holy Ghost, and thereby also true
understanding of the Scripture, knows indeed, that, Jerusalem and Sion was
in time past beloved of God: For, at Jerusalem was the Priesthood of the
Levites, the Sanctuary propiciatorie, a place dedicated for religion or true
worshipping of God, that same notable treasure of sacred Scriptures, the Law
and the Prophets, wherein is the Gospel of eternal salvation. And in
Jerusalem was the Kings royal Throane, upon the which should sit that same
true King of Israel, the Messiah which was to be born of the seed of David:
but, all this should come to pass in a certain other order, then other Kings
had their government:

In this Sion were glorious things begun: For the same Ruler over Israel
(Jesus Christ) came into this Sion, and into his holy Temple. Malachy. 3:
Therein preached he the unsearchable Riches of his grace: Therein began he
that mighty Kingdom of his, by the word of his Gospel and by his spirit,
which was miraculously powered upon his Apostles in Sion. The Law and the
Prophets were in that place accomplished: For, Jesus of Nazareth the son of
David after the flesh, the true Messiah came into Sion, riding vhon an Asses
Colte, ^at. 21. Mark. 11. ^^ke, 19. ^ohn 12.
the true and eternal King of Sion: and in the same City celebrated the true
feast of Passover, and near unto the same offered up himself to GOD his
Father, the full accomplishment of all figurative sacrifices: the sacrifice of
true redemption, and the very immaculate Lamb died he at the feast of Easter
for the sins of all the world: and all this did he the alone high Priest,
who with one only oblation purchased everlasting redemption unto Israel.

Out of Sion afterward plentifully issued the Gospel of Gods grace into ^say.
2.
the world, by the Apostles: And the Primitive Church, which at the first was
but very small in number, went Micheas. 4*
out of Sion, and dispersed her self into the four parts of the world, that
the Scriptures might be fulfilled, Concerning the calling of the Gentiles unto
the grace of the Gospel. The Church (I say) knew e^^n the earthly Sion to ^ee
for a season beloved and preserved of God, until Siloh, (that is) the promised
Savior came into her: and out of her (by the remnants of Israll saved:) should
Sion the true Church of Christ come forth into all the world, as the mother
of all true believers in Christ. And she also knew even that same Sion in
Canaan to have been a figure of the true Sion, the Church of God dispearsed
throughout the world, which is the heavenly Jerusalem: As it is also said by
S. Paul 13. Hebr. Ye are come unto the hill of Sion, and to the Cittye of the
living God, the heavenly Ierualem etc.

Although therefore the Holy Ghost fore-prophested these things touching the
earthly Jerusalem, and the earthly Sion, as by a Type or Figure: yet he
entitled this Psalm especially of the true Sion, the Church of Christ, which
is to be gathered from among the Jews, and Gentiles also: neither had he
respect only unto the earthly City, and her walls of stone, but unto the
spiritual Cittye, and her spiritual Scituacions, and unto far greater
matters, then the faithless Jews could conceive of. The holy Ghost chieflye
recorded this, touching The holy City the new Jerusalem, descended from
Heaven, prepared as a Bride, trimmed for her Husband: Apoc. 21. verse. 2. And
as S. Paul says in the former Epistle and 11. Cap. Heb. Having the foundations
of the City, whose Builder and maker is not man alone, but GOD himself made
man, verse. 10,

The holy Ghost premeditated this, as concerning the true foundation of Sion,
The lively stone, of men indeed refused, but of God chosen, and had in
reputation. Mat 21. He foresignified the Ephesians. 2. The foundation of the Holy
City.
lively stones also builded ( upon the approved corner stone, chosen,
precious, and lively.) as that spiritual house, the Tabernacle and Temple of
the living God. Yea, he prefigureth The Mountain of the house of the Lord,
prepared in the top of the Mountains, exalted above the Hills: whereunto the
People shall run, and many nations shall make haste, as it were unto a Fort of
refuge, to learn the ways of the Lord, and to walk in his paths. Micheas
4. verse. 1 and 2.

He in whom and for whom God has promised true and assured benefits unto
his elect, is King not of this world, By Christ we are nombre^ amo^st the
Citizens of the heavenly Jerusalem*
or an earthly person, but is spiritual, heavenly and eternal.

Wherefore, the elect ones of GOD are not to look after the benefits of this
world, for the which we neither were baptized, nor have believed. But we must
seek for the assured good things vncorrupt and eternal.

Undoubtedly Augustine says very godlily, writing upon the 91. Psalm. We
are not Christians, but for the world to come: Let no man hope for the good
things in this life, let no man promise him Augustin' i^ psalm. 91.
self the prosperity of the world because be is a Christian. No City upon
earth (which shall soon perish) must we look for, but the true City, whose
wall and foundation God himself is: upon whom all the prayers of the godly
ones do rest, of whom, (in the exilement of this life) they are continually
mindful, as of the true Country: To the possession whereof they refer and wholly
bend all the deteminations and deeds of their life. For they seek after true
glory* honor* and blessed immortality, which they find not in Cities and
transitory benefits of this Country, but in the heavenly Kingdom or City
of God. Herehence has this Psalm that same his abropt^ beginning, for it
says. Her foundations when as not withstanding there is not any one word
goes before in the verse, concerning the same City. Wherefore the Pronoune
Relative (Her) is to be referred unto the Church of God: which he now not as
a Guest or inhabitant David.
but as a fellow* Citizen of the Saints and household Servants of God, (by the
spirit reueiling) saw with the eyes of Faith, and sore sighed after with
most seruent prayers: as he which knew that there is no rest, peace, life, nor
salvation without the Limittes of this City of God.

Such cogitations Christians have, ( whose conuersations are in heaven) as
Paul says, Philip. 3. Who when they are risen from the death of sin, seek
for and are careful after heavenly things and not earthly things. Colos. 3.
Who also ^ay with S. Paul. Now live I not but Christ lives in me. The world
is to me crucified, through Christ and so am I to 2* Gallat. 20. verse.
the world. Galat. 6

Therefore this same Citizen of the What mane^ Citizens they of the heavenly
lerusele^ be
heavenly Jerusalem, meditating many things with himself, of the blessed City
of the holy ones (being full of the holy Ghost) bursteth out into the words
of this Psalm: which Psalm is a continual testimony of the godly cogitations
of that man, concerning the Article of the faith, I believe the holy Catholic
Church, the Communion of Saints: For, what thing we love from our heart, of
this we think continually, and we keep it not in secret: but we af^ewards
spare no speech even unto the full publishing thereof, according to that
saying: Out of the abundance of the heart, the mouth speaks. Math. 12. verse.
34. David therefore says. Her foundations (understand of the City) which I
love with most earnest mind, wherein but (unknown to me) I am yet made safe
or preserved by hope: wherein for ever (the Savior of the world so
vouchsafeing) I shall still remain, are in the hill of Holiness, for so says
the Jew, we should say in the holy Hills.

Cities of this mortal life, be they In worldly or humane thing nothing
perpetually firm.
fenced or defended with how strong so ever muniments or Bulwarks, are yet not
withstanding builded upon the sand: For whatsoever man's hand builds, the same
can it also cast down. Therefore, Citizens of earthly Cities cannot dwell in
sufficient safety: all their Riches, yea life, and finally whatsoever they
have, are laid open to their enemies. Wherefore we rightly then say, that no
earthly City has her foundation in the The holy City has all things
perpetual, firm and ^ure in the Hills.
Hills: For although no enemies assault the same, yet time is the consumer of
things, and corruption at length wastes those things which have been in this
world most strong: but the foundations of this City are sound, firm, and
perpetual, because they are in the Hills.

What then? are not earthly Cities also in the hills? is the City safe which
is situate on the hills? Why then says the Lord by his Prophet Abdias, To
the Abdias. Cap. 1
Hills of Seyr, and the dwellers thereon* The pride of thy heart puffed thee
up, because thon dwelst in the clefts of the Rocks, whose habitation is hie,
tho^ say in thine heart, who shall bring me unto the ground? The Lord makes
answer to the bragging of the Edomites: If thou exalt thy self as the Eagle,
and make thy nest among the stars, thence will I bring thee down (says the
Lord) And surely though Jerusalem were in the old time builded in the mount
Sion and the little hills: yet notwithstanding it was easy to be assaulted
and beaten down of their enemies* the Chaldeans and the Romans.

All earthly buildings be they never so strong and stablished in the hills and
Rocks, are yet builded upon the sand: Because they shall in time fall to y^
ground and perish. Wherefore the Prophet here speaks of other hills, as the
Hebrew Carass*
^oun declares, which signifies holiness Therefore those foundations are in
the Hills of holiness.
hills of holiness, that is, not in earthly hills, but in the Heavens. For y^
fou^datio^ which this city has, Is that immouable Christ* is the foundation
of the church
Rock (Mat. 16.) whereupon the Church is builded, and stands to the utmost
against the gates of hell. Whereof the Apostle mentions. No man can lay any
other foundation, then that which is laid even Christ Jesus* 1 Cor 3. Wherefore
the Apostle when he speaks of that blessed City, shows openly this
foundation: and says. Those Citizens (that is Chistians) Ephesians 2 verse. 20.
21. and 22.
are builded upon that foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Christ Jesus
himself being the Head corner stone, in whom, what building soever is coupled
together, grows unto an holy Temple in the Lord: In whom ye also are built
together, to be the Habitation of God* by the Spirit.

The City is holy, firm, and eternal, Why the City is called holy.
and it has Citizens eue^ the holy ones as the Apostle every where calls
them: For although they be sinners born, yet in that City they are regenerate
of water and of the spirit: yea, They are justified by faith, and sanctified
by the name of 1 Cor. 6. verse. 11.
Jesus, and by the spirit of our God. And all things which are without this
City are profane and abominable before God. In this City only is true
holiness, (as the Phophete Abdias says verse. 17) But upon mount Sion shall
be delierance, and it shall be holy. And the Prophet Esaias declares, Cap.
4, Then he that shall be left in SION* and he that shall be left in
Jerusalem shall be called holy, and every one shall be written among the
living in Jerusalem, when the LORD shall wash the filthiness of the daughters
of Sion*

verses 3. and 4. The Lordeloueth the Gates of Sion* etc. Pars. 2*

THis latter part of the first verse shows how fatherly the Lord loves us
for Christ's sake, the foundation of this City* upon whom We are beloved of
God* for Christ's sake.
we are builded, as a spiritual house.

The Lord says he loves the Gates of Sion (that is) the Church of Christ.
For, we are beloved of God, for his sons sake* Through whom we have obtained
reconciliation: when as (before we were not yet reconciled through the death of
his son) we were the enemies of God. Ephesians. 1. Romans 5. And he loves us above
all the Tabernacles of JACOB: So much as to the figure or outward show
pertains, we know out of the Law of Moises* how the Gates of the earthly^
SION or the City Jerusalem was so ordained for the worshipping *of GOD
^erusale^ was ^rdained for ^euine service
in the old age, That it should not be lawful for any to offer sacrfice, but
with in the sanctuary of the City* Deuteronomy. 12. 2. Par. 6.

Wherefore, although there were many Sinagogues in Canaan, and many places
whereunto the people resorted by companies, yet not withstanding Jerusalem
alone had the Temple, and Palace royal of David, and was called the holy
City, as the Prophet Esaias shows cap 52. Put on thy Garments of beauty O
Jerusalem, thou holy City: for henceforth there shall no more come into thee
the uncircumcised and the unclean ver. 1 And in his 26. Cap. he says, The
Citizens of that City, are called an holy people, redeemed of the Lord.
verse. 12. And this Prophet David in his 78. Psalm sings The LORD has chosen
the tribe of IVDA, the hill of SION, whom he loved. verse. 69. Al those things
which are spoken of the earthlye Jerusalem, in figure, are to be referred unto
Christ's Catholic Church: which spiritual City the Lord loves above all the
dwelling places of Jacob, which long ^goe were shadows and figurers, things
temporal, by which notwithstanding the heavenly City of Christians (ever
during) was here shadowed.

verse. 2 Very excellent things are spoken of thee thou City of God,
always.

IF we learn this verse aright, we shall moreover recite y^ Article of the
Catholic Church in the Simbole of our Creed, daily not vainly and without
faith: For, the Church is in this place called the City of God. But some would
say, is not God every where? yea even among the Turks, why the^ is the Church
only (that is) the congregation of Christians, called the City of GOD? For,
Esaias the Prophet says Cap. 66. Heaven is my seat and the earth is my
footstool.

I answer, God is every wheare by God though he be every where by power and
eslence yet he is by grace present with the (...)
power and essence, but not every whear by grace, but in Christians only, who
believe in Christ the Mediator: Thereis God said to dwell in his Church,
because the Church is that peculier people of God, sanctified in the blood of
Christ* and consecrated to God in Baptism, by the holy Ghost: that it may be a
lively Temple and Tabernacle of God, wherein he dwells, whereinto he powers
out his holy spirit with his guitts, and on which he bestows (through Christ)
incorruptibility and eternity. For, as touching Christians, God specially
faith in 26. Leuit. I will set my Tabernacle in the midst of you, and my
soul shall not loath you: I will walk amongst you, and I will be your God, and
you shall be my people. verse. 11 which place ye holy Apostle S. Paul 2 cor 6.
refers unto all Christians which are the people of God and the true Church
of Christ. ver. 19 And ye holy Evangelist S. John. in revel. cap 11. writes.
Behold, the tabernacle of god is with me^, and he will be with the^, and they
shall be his people, and God himself shall be their god with the^ And the
Prophet Ezechiel says cap. 37. My tabernacle shall be in the^, and I will be
their God, and they shall be my people verse. 27. After this manner do the
Prophets call Christians the City of God: As it is in the 46. Psalm, The
riches of the flood shall make glad the city of god the most highest has
sanctified his Tabernacle God is in the midst of her there fore she shall not be
removed, God will give help unto her and that right early.

And hereupon Aurelius Augustinus that reverend and most exercised divine in
Scriptures, when as he did confute ye Romans blasphemies (by reason of the
irruptions of ye Goathes) slaundering the way of truth, calls the Church,
that is the congregation of Christians (because she is predestinate to reign with
God for ever) the city of God, as in his first book unto Marcellinus
appears, for, he was persuaded by the sacred Scriptures, yt there were two
cities: One, the church of God which (here amongst the ungodly in this (...)
world) living by faith in Christ, has her perigrination or soiourning from
time to time and place to place: the other is of this world, or pertains to
the Devil, which has y^ ungodly ones, not believing in ye gospel of christ,
vessels of wrath, prepared for everlasting destruction with the devil and his
angels. He deriueth y^ City of God as beginning at Abell, who was a Soiourner
in this world, by grace predestinate unto life, by grace a Stranger on (...)

The other he brings from Cain the murderer, which was first borne a
Citizen of this world, of whom it is read, that he builded a City: But of
Abell a Pilgrim in this world, we read not that he builded any City.

This City then of the holy ones is from above, although it brings forth
Citizens hear in this world, in whom it lives Stranger-like, until the
time of her Kingdom come: when as she shall gather together all her Citizens
rising again to life even in their bodies, when the Kingdom promised shall be
given them, where with their Prince the King of all holy ones they shall
reign world without end, as the said Augustine diligently handles in Lib
15. Cap. 2. De Ciuitate Dei.

The Psalmograph therefore here says* Very excellent things are spoken of
thee, thou City of God: Now except we sleep all too sluggishly, and
neglect our benefits to come, it shall well please us to search out and
discern, what glorious things these may be, which are spoken off, touching,
or in the Church of (...) spoken of v^ which ^e leeue in Christ, and confess
Christ.

First and for most, who has at any time explaned this praiseworthy Title
even by dignity, That Christians are called Christians are called the City of
God
the Cittye of God? For in this one Title all good things are understood,
namely, y^ she inioyeth very good Laws, Her Excellent Members*
a most wise Magistrate, faithful and mosts learned Teachers, inuintible
Warriors a quiet and most obedient People, true Peace, and Safety, true
Holiness, Righteousness, true Joy, sure or certain knowledge of special
things, and brieflye true life and Salvation: for so is this City called,
because God dwells in her, as in his own house, his beloved and holy
Tabernacle. And where God after this manner dwells by grace, I pray is, what
good things may be wanting? does not such a one dwell safely? And the City
so safe insulteth with S. Paul against her enemies on this manner: If God be
on our side, who can be against us. Rom 8.

Wherefore, if God be King and Lord in her, there must ueedes be in her absolute
felicity by all means: that is to say, Righteousness and everlasting
salvation. Christ the king of glory with all his good graces dwell in the
Church: by good right then does Paul, first a persecutor, and afterward a
builder and defender of the Church, call her glorious, as in Ephesians 5.

And what are these Glorious things which are spoken of in or touching this
Church?

The Church is called The holy and beloved spouse of Christ. Ephesians 5. whom The
glorious Titles of the holy Church.
(as Oseas says) Christ the king of glory has married unto himself for ever,
in righteousness, in judgment, and in mercy and co^passio^ and faith, that she
may know how he is the Lord. cap 2. verse. 19 and 20. The Church is thus
diversely also called. The City of the living God. Heb 13. Esa. 60. The city of
the great king, a beautiful place, and the joy of all the whole earth. Psalm.
47: verse. 2.

The people that dwell therein shall have their iniquity forgeuen. Esaias. 33.
verse. 24. The body of Christ. 1 cor. 12. Ephesians cap 1. The pillar and ground of
truth. 1 Timothy 3. Mount Sion, the heavenly Jerusalem. Heb. 12. verse 22.

The hill of the Lord, the holy hill. Esaias. ^. and 63.

The Temple of God. 1 Cor. 3. verse. 17.

The Horn of salvation exalted in the house of David, the servant of God. Luke
1 The house of God. Heb 3. 1 Timothy 3.

The house of Jacob, the seat of David. Esaias. 9. Luke 1. A City sought out, and
not forsaken. Esaias. 62. verse. 12.

Of this Jerusalem it is said Psalm. 147 Thy God has made the Bars of thy
Gates strong: he has blessed thy Children in thee: He sets peace in thy
borders, and satisfies thee with the flower of wheat. verses. 13. and 14.

The Queen on the right hand of God in a vesture of gold of Ophyr, wrought
with needle work: Psalm 45.

The King shall have pleasure in thy beauty. ibidem. verses 9 and 11,

Of this City (says the Lord) I will be a wall of fire round about her, and
will be the Glory in the midst of her. Zach. 2. In Sion will I give salvation
and my glory unto Israel. Esa. 46. verse. 13.

The vineyard of the Lord. Esa 5. verse. 1

The Sister of Christ, Canti^: 5. verse. 1.

My Dove is alone, and my undefiled Cap, 6. verse. 8.

The Garden enclosed, a Spring shutivp, and a Fountain sealed up. Cantic. 4.
verse 12

An Orcharde of Poungranets, with sweet fruits. etc. Cantic. 4. verse. 14.

The peculier people of Cod, and folowers of good works. 2. Titus. ve. 14.

A Sprituall House. 1 Pet. 2. cap. verse. 9.

A holy Priesthood. 1 Pet. 2. cap. verse. 9.

A Chosen Generation. 1 Pet. 2. cap. verse. 9.

A Royal Priesthood. 1 Pet. 2. cap. verse. 9.

A Holy Nation. 1 Pet. 2. cap. verse. 9.

A People which have come out of darkness into light. 1 Pet. 2. cap. verse. 9.

The Heritage of God. Esaias. cap. 19.

Of this City it is said. I will make an everlasting covenant with you, even
the sure mercies of Daui^d my faith servant. Esaias 60.

The Nation and Kingdom which will not serve thee, shall perish from the earth
Esaias. 60.

I will give my law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts,
and I will be their God, and they shall be my people. Jeremy. 31. verse. 33.
And they shall all know me from the least to the greatest, and I will forgive
their iniquity and remember their sins no more verse 34.

But to know GOD is eternal life. John 17.

The Lord builds SION. Psalm 102 verse. 16.

In SION is the Lords name declared, and his praise in Jerusalem* ibidem. verse
21.

The blessed of my Father. Math. 25. For whom the kingdom of God is prepared
from the beginning of the world. verse* 34.

The Chlldre^ of God. Hosea 1. John. 1 Galat 3. phil 2.

The Heirs nf Christ, and Co-heires with Christ. Romans 8.

The fellow-Citizens with the Saints, The household servants of God. Ephesians 2
verse. 19.

The Vessels of glory. Rom 9. verse 23.

As Lights shining in the world, 2 phi verse 25.

Judah and Israel. Hosea 1. Romans 2. and 9. Which names are full of mysteries,

The Children of promise. Gallat 3. verse 29. 4. and 28.

The Children of SARA the free

woman. Gal. 4 verse. 31.

The Church builded upon the Rock, against which the Gates of Hell shall not
prevail. Math. 16. ver. 18.

Called Christians as of the Lord Christ.

Act. 11. verse. 26.

The seed of Abraham, Gal 3. verse. 29.

The kingdom everlasting of the Messiah. Abdias. cap. 1. ver. 21. 2. Pet. 1.

The brethren of Christ. Psalm. ar

The holy ones. Romans 1.

The new man. Ephesians. 2.

New Creature in Christ. Gal. 6.

A Garland of glory shall thou be in the hand of the Lord, and a royal Diadem
in the hands of thy God Esa. 62. verse. 3.

And thou shall be called Hiphzibah (that is) My delight is in thee. verse. 4.

Of her it is said by the Prophet Esaias cap 54, Fear not, for thou shall not be
a The favor of God toward his Church.
shamed, neither shall thou be confounded. verse. 4. For a moment, in mine
anger, I hid my face from thee for a little season, but with everlasting mercy
have I had compassion on thee. says the Lord thy Redeemer. verse. 8.

My mercy shall not depart from thee neither shall the covenant of my peace,
fall away (says the Lord) that has compassion on thee. verse. 10.

Of her again, Esaias. 60. I will make thee an eternal glory, and a ^^y from
Generation to Generation, verse. 15. Thou shall call Salvation thy Wa les, and
Praise thy Gates. verse. 18. The Lord shall be thine everlasting light. verse. 20.

Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely. Jeremy. 23. verse, 6. And
in Esaias again cap 49. Though a woman for get her Child, yet will not I forget
thee O SION. verse. 15. Behold, I have graue^ thee upon the palm of mine hands
thy walls are ever in my sight. verse. 16.

Briefly, out of Sion was the true Messiah, and Savior of Israel looked for,
The Messiah promised ^^^ of, SION.
as David sings in the 14. Psalm. Who shall give salvation out of SION unto
Israel? verse. 7.

And S. PAVLE says Romans 11. Out of SION shall he come which shall deliver.
etc. verse. 29.

And GOD by his servants the Prophets and Apostles throughout al y^ Scriptures
has spoken glorious things in figures, and evident promises: For she has
Promises of this present life, and of the life to come. 1. Tim, 4.

After this manner has the greek text as in Latin ( de te of thee) But the
true meani^^ of ye Hebrew has ( in te) in thee: ^ar.
and this preiudiceth nothing to us, for both are true. Those excellent things
which I have made mention off, are spoken of the Church, by the Prophets and
Apostles, and in the Church: For, what other thing are they, but sacred holy
mysteries of the Gospel, touching everlasting life and salvation, which surely
are daily preached and sounded forth both of the Church, and in the Church,
that by hearing of so great matters, faith might come unto us and by Faith,
Justification and Salvation.

The Hebrew text adds Selah which Selah.
S. Jerome translateth Semper, always: For, the Church as a Bride glorious in
her Husband, shall evermore be preached off: glorious things shall be spoken of
her and in her shall be continually sung the ineffable glory of the
everlasting grace of God in Christ our Lord.

And so the Jews for the most part interpret the word Selah for everlasting
like as it is evident in their Epitaphes, as the Jewish Epitaph is in Hebrew,
at Basil, His soul continue in Paradise, Amen, Amen, Amen For ever and ever.
For it is understood by that verse in the 84. Psalm. They shall praise thee
for ever and ever: And so likewise by Thargus the Hebrew writer upon this 87.
Psalm.

Rabbi, Aben Ezra expounds it for truth or truly. David Kimhi writes, Ama.
that it is a token of lifting up the voice, in this Psalm from the root, to
lift up. Salal.
So as indeed by this persuasion, the cogitacio^ of ye mind is moved ernestly
to way and consider a great matter: for in this place it is a worthy little
verse, to the meditation whereof, all the powers of the mind may be profou^dly
and earnestly moved. For our matter is now in making, we The Riches of the
church
are that Church, the excellent City of God, concerning which so glorious
things are spoked off: Al which things are promised and surely given us from
God in Christ: For so great and vnspaakeable are they, that the Prophet Esaias,
and the Apostle Paul write of these. That for them which love God, such
things are prepared, which neither eye has seen nor ear has hard, neither
yet the heart of man conceived. Esa 64. 1 Cor. 2.

Now let us join the Hebrew phrase In what points the Church of Christ is
glorious.
unto the Greek te^t, and you shall see a goodly consonancy, Glorious sayings
are there of thee, but, in thee, O City of God. For without thee, and of thee is
all evil spoken. For those same glorious things which are spoken off touching
ye Church, are undoubtedly not spoken of her, but in the Church: for without
the Church* the world, that is, the congregation of the ungodly, the spouse of
the devil, the enemy of Christ, with her Ruler is not glorious but speak mere
and extreme infamies or slanders of the Church. Without the Church (where the
Gospel is scorned and hissed out of doors) so sounds the verse, Reprochful
things are spoken of thee O city of Satan? For so also ye ungodly ones flatter
themselves that they are the Catholic Children of God, the ancient Christians
and the City of God: But others (not honoring the Pope) them do they call the
children of Satan: yea, they condemn the Gospel of the grace of God, or as the
damnable doctrine and error of Satan.

At Augusta, one of those Papists a Doctor of the Popes Divinity by
suggestion, in presence of Duke* Maurice cried out upon the^ which believed in
ye Gospel of Christ, (which he called the new Doctrine) as persons infamous,
and unworthily requested rightly to bear witness of y^ Truth before Judges or
Magistrates as we say in Duch, Sie sollen mir zukey ^er warheit odder zeugknus
gut genug sein. So Paul that most excellent light of the Church, was
conte^ptibly reckoned for a Sower of strange doctrine. Acts. 17.

Paul and Silas were called Disturbers of the whole world. ibidem

And^n times past as it appears in ye Apollogie of Tertullian against the
Gentiles, the Christians were of Gentiles named The Church of God is railed on
by the ungodly ones
murderers, Church-robbers, incestuous persons, public enemies, murderers
of Infants, procurers of wicked lusts, Bawdes, and Asse-heades: in that they
worshipped an Asses head as it were a God: which suspicion Cornelius Tacitus
had stirred up.

The assemblye of Christians to the Supper of the Lord was counted of the
ungodly ones, a Faction.

Christians were named the cause of all public mischief, and of all
inconvenience amongst the people of the world: If the river Tiber rose up to
the walls: Christians bearing the blame of all evil happes.
If the river Nilus flowed not up over the fleldes, if the Skies stood still,
if the earth quaked, if ever any Famine or pestilence were, by and by it was
denounced, Cast those Christians to the Lions. Finally, Christianos ad Leonem.
they were reprochfully called unfruitful in their business, and not good for
any thing. They were also called, Sarmentitij and Semitij because being bound
to a block of great weight, standing upright and compassed about with fire
wood they were Not^.
brent to ashes: And for this cause also they were accounted desperate, and
cast away.

In Ciprians time there was among the enemies of the Christians one
Demitrianus, a man of great name, which said, that all misschiefes whereby the
world was tossed and turmoiled, was to be imputed unto the Christians, for that
the Boddes of the Gentiles were not worshipped amongst them: And then it was an
offense to be a Christian.

Iulianus the Apostate in respect of reproach called the Christians Galileans,
as Nazianzenus writes.

The Jews at Rome called the Christian faith and that congregation, a Set,

Of this sect (say they unto Paul) it is known unto us, that in every place,
men speak against it. Act. 28.

Christ the head of the Church, the husband and foundation thereof, heard
himself called of the Jews,, a Samaritane, aSeducer and deceiuer of the
people, one having a Devil, and a sedicious person. And in our time such as
believe the Gospel and reject the doctrines of men disagreeable to y^ Gospel,
(y^ I may omit infinite other slanders) are called of the ungodly ones
Lutherane Heretics: But Christ the husband of the Church, in this world
despised and abject, (such is his unsearchable wisdom) turns even these
slanders also into glory for the Christians. For who had not rather hear
ten hundredth thousand reproaches of the vnprais-worthy Gentiles and ungodly
persons abominable before God (and that for the name of Christ) then to bear
the state of a king, and enjoy at ease all the honors and benefits of this
world ^

This one blessing of Christ confounds all the cruel curses of this world.
Blessed are you when men revile you and shall speak all evil against you for
my names sake falsely: Rejoice and be glad, because your reward is great in
heaven. Math. 5. verses. 11. and. 14.





FIrst of al, the names of the aforesaid Nations must be declared, and the
meaning of the Prophet shall more easily appear: Rahab therefore is a Surname
which Esaias also in his 30 chap. gives unto Egypt, because it was a proud
People, in whom when the Jews put their hope and confidence, they were
deceived.

Wherefore Esayas says, For the Egiptiansare vanity, and they shall help in
vain. Their (Rahab or) strength is to sit Cay
still.

And in the 51 chap. Art not thou that same (Arm) that has smitten the proud
(Egypt?) Arnobius and Augustine understand by that same Strumpet in Jericho,
those y^ are wise in their own conceits:

Unto the other Doctors Rahab seems to signify rashness and insolency or
pride wherewith the Egiptians* are by good right entitled as the special
Enemies of the the Jews. And Thargus the Hebrew writer in this place has
Mitsarri that is to say Egypt for Rahab. Mitsarri. Raab.


Those persons called Allophili (as it is in y^ Greek translation) are
Philistines For the Hebrew text has Phelesser, which Phelesser.
S. Hierome translateth* for Palestine.

And the same Hierome upon the first Chapter of Amos, gives to note that the
70 Interpreters called the Philistines always Strangers borne: For wheresoever
(says he) in the old Testament w^^ read Strangers borne, they are to be
understood not commonly, as touching all foreign Nations, but properly of
Philistines which now are called (...)

These Nations, that is to say Egiptians, Babilonians, Palestines, Tyrians and
Ethiopians were well known to the Jews for their Neighborhood and for their
malignant minds toward them.

Hereby therefore y^ Prophet teaches in the person of God, that the before
mentioned people, although hitherto they knew not God and were manifestly
ungodly and accursed (as all other Nations being without hope, and wanting
knowledge of God in the world) shall yet notwithstanding be received into the
grace and favor of the Gospel. As if he said I will remember those Nations
amongst them which will know me: that is, amongst my elect and true
Christians, which know and worship me by Faith in Christ. Blessed is he which
God so thinks upon, that he is written in the book of life, and what manner
of life soever he led before, he yet through grace by Christ may be reckoned
amongst the people of GOD, that is, the Church of Christ,

Our Scholemaister D. Martin Luther, that he might also open the mister^^ of
the calling of the Gentiles, in this place unto the ^ares of y^ Germans does
th^^ translate it, Ich will predigen lassen Rahab vnd Babell, das sie mich
kennen solle^: that is to say* I will let pr^^ch Rahab and Babylon that they
may know me.

And this rightly and perspicuously so he does: For, that this is the rule of
a good Interpreter, S. Jerome writing unto Summa and Fretela teaches us: That
he might express the phrase of an other language in the propriety of his own
tongue, which thing also amongst y^ ancie^ts y^ be slearned writers have done:
as Tully in Protagora Platonis* and in Oeconomi^o Xenophontis* and in
Demosthenes his oration against Aeschines, and many others. In which place
hear that folly bragging of the outragions Sinagogue is beaten back whereas it
cries, Abraham is our father, we are the heritage of GOD, the Gentiles are
accursed. John. 8, verse. 39.

For it is a clear and evident Testimony of the calling of the Gentiles out
of The Gospel pertains un to al nations.
the whole world, to the Gospel of Christ: For by the calling of the aforesaid
Nations, in this place are all other Nations also to be understood wheresoever
they be thronghout the world.

And like as the Prophets do prophesi^ of the grace of Christ to be imparted
unto the Nations that the kingdom of Christ may be Catholic or universal:
Therefore not only shall God remember the posterity of ABRAHAM, after the
flesh, but also the Gentiles in the whole world, out of whom by faith he
makes the sons of Abraham, that if not in consanguinitye, yet in the same
Faith they may resemble their true believing father Abraham: Therefore does
the Apostle call Abraham the Father of all the faithful by Circumsision, that
unto them also Righteousness might be imputed, even as (unto him believing
the promise concerning Christ) Faith is imputed unto righteousness. Romans 4.
16. verse. 9. 7. Gal. 3. verse. 7. 22.

The Law works nothing theare nor the generation as touching the flesh: For
the promise happened not unto Abraham, by the Law, nor to his seed, That he
should be the heir of the world, but by righteousness of faith. Like as in
3. cap. Gal. verse. 7. he says, They which are of faith, are the Children of
Abraham.

We understand here, that the flesh has no prerogative in respect of
justification but faith in Christ: Wherefore we which were taken from among
the Gentiles, and (which as the same Apostle says) were once far off, are
now made near by the blood of Christ. Ephesians. 2. verse. 13.

Who from out both Jews and Gentiles has made one, and has broken the stop
of the partition wall. verse. 14.

Now we both through him have an Entrance unto the Father of mercies by one
spirit. verse. 18.

This does the promise of God in this Psalm, I will think upon Rahab and
Babylon. etc. that is to say, I will call and take unto me Children from out of
all the Nations in the world, and not out of Canaan only: which surely ought to
be reckoned by good right amongst the glorious things which are spoken off
touching the Church of Christ.

For the Apostle also in the third chapter to the Ephesians, fearmeth the
calling of the Gentiles into the Church or Congregation of ISRAEL, a Misterye:
which was not always known unto the Sons of men, but is reueyled unto the
Holy ones, the Apostles of Christ and his Prophets, by his holy spirit,
namely that the Gentiles are fellowheires with the Jews, members of one body,
and Coo-partners of the promise of life in Christ.

And the Prophet David here adds in the end of this verse Lo, there is he
borne (that is to say*) the people of the nations* before remembered:

Where are they borne? I answer, whereas he reconeth up by the name of those
Nations* it is certain, that he speaks of them which are now borne: but he
affirms* the mystery of regeneration To be by water and the Sperite, as in
John 3. And he teaches also that those Nations borne anew theare, that is (
within the gates of SION, in the city of God) have given their name unto
Christ, forsaking their Idols, and are to be converted from darkness unto
light, and from the power of Satan unto the true and living God that they may
also receive forgiveness of Sins, and inheritance amongst them which are
sanctified by faith in Christ.

Verse. 5 And of SION, it shall be reported, that many are borne in her: And he
even the most high shall stablish her.

IN this place the translation (as S. Hierome says to Summa and Fretela)
according to the places, times and pleasures of old writers, differs from
the Hebrew verity: For, that says, Unto SION it shall be reported, many are
borne in her. But the Greek translation has it thus, The Mother Sion shall
say many persons are borne in her. Finally, the west church has now for a
long time read, Shall Sion say many are borne. etc? The notable negligence of
the Popish Prelates for spiritual matters in this Authors time
In which place not without cause do we detest the negligence of the Prelates
of the Church, in whose power at this day consists the chief regard of
things who do surmount the Princes of the Empire both in wealth and revenues:
much more are equal unto them, and yet in so many ages not even one has been
sound who at the charge of the Church goods, has reformed the exemplars of
the Bible or at least wise the Psalter* within all the Churches is song nights
and days: such faithful Stewardes of God are they for sooth? But let us
suffer them to fill up the measure of their Fathers indeed, the Pharisees: who
even themselves with like periurye governed their Sinagogue in time past so
long, that whiles they would not repent them, they utterly perished from the
face of the earth.

First, we will show forth what meaninges the Hebrew Text has. Of SION it
shall be reported, that is, of the Church of Christ it shall be preached,
Many are borne in her. That is every one that is regenerate by the Spirit,
is borne in that SION: For, in Without the Church of Christ is no salvation.
the Church are, the word of life, and the Sacraments of our salvation.

Wherefore, they which remain out of the Church, are the Children of wrath,
the Children of old ADAM, yea carnal The Sons of Adam.
Children dead in sins and subject unto eternal damnation.

But they which in SION address or reedifye the Cittye of GOD, do find the
Gospel of Salvation, and the Sacraments by the which they are borne anewe
and are made the Children of grace, the Sons of GOD, and new men, are raised
up from the Death of We are regenerate, by the Gospel and Sataments.
Sin, and made Spiritual heirs of eternal life.

The Hebrew Phrase is, Vir and Vir, Homo and Homo, for the word Vnusquisque.

Luther whom the Spirit of Christ taught, by most grievous tribulations not
only to singe with the voice, but also with the spirit and truth, expressed
this verse to the Germans, understanding on this manner: Man wirt von Zion
sagen, das aller ley leut drinne^ geboren werden. It shall be said of Sion, all
Nations shall be borne therein: which we out of the Hebrew text do thus
expound, Vir and Vir, that is, every one in whatsoever Nation he be borne, at
length yet again he is borne anewe in SION. As Peter also in the Acts Cap.
10. says, Of truth I perceive that GOD is no (...) of Persons, but in every
(...) that fears him and works Righ^^ousnesse is accepted with him. verse.
34. and 35.

According to ye Greek edetion we read, The mother Sion, y is ye church which
is the spiritual mother (For within y^ church we were borne a new with w^ter
and of the Spirit, and in the lap of the Church, as infantes are in their
mothers belly:) And first we are nourished with milk, and afterward with
strong meat that is with the word of God preached unto us according to our
capacity: until we all meet together in the unity of faith and knowledge of
the son of God, unto a perfect man, and unto the measure of the age of the
fullness of Christ* as the Apostle S. Paul says Ephesians. 4.

Unto this spiritual birth by or from God, had Esaias respect: with whom in his
49. they, The Church (marueiling at the multitude of her Children) cries thus:
Who has begotten these? Seeing I am barraine, and desolate, a Captive and a
Wanderer to and fro, and who has (...) them?

And the Lord God answers her, (...), I will lift up mine hand to the
Gentiles, and set up my Standerde to the people, and they shall bring thy
Sons in their arms, and they shall carry thy Daughters upon their
shoulders, ibidem. verse. 22.

And the Apostle S. Paul in the 4. Gal speaking of the Church says, But
Jerusalem which is above is free, which is the Mother of us all: For it is
written, Rejoice thou barraine that bear no Children: Break forth and cry
thou that traueilest not: For the desolate has many mo children then she which
has an husband. Esaias 54.

Augustine in this place understands by the word Homo, Christ, by reason of
the disposing of the nature humane taken upon him: which though it have a
godly ser^e or meaning, yet is it not spoken in place.

Arnobius (not marking the Hebrew sense, Homo and Homo) understands Adam
begetting sons which may possess the earth, and Christ begetting sons
which may possess the Heavens: But these words make nothing for the purpose.
For, he rehearses before, diverse nations* purposing to show that not only
the Jews but also the Gentiles (wheresoever in the world they be) shall fully
attain to that City of God, and shall be borne anew in her, that this second
and spiritual birth may not only pertain to Israel, after the flesh, but
without respect of any person even unto all Nations: For, by the Commandment
of Christ, The Gospel was to be preached unto all Creatures. Which thing
since it brings regeneration, all Nations are altogether to be admitted into
this City, That they might be borne anewe (as Peter says) not of mortal
seed, but of immortal seed, by the word of the living GOD, which abides for
ever. 1. Peter. 1. verse. 23. For so our Lord himself opens opens unto us
all the Prophesies touching the salvation of the Gentiles in Math. 8. and Luke.
13. Many shall come from the East, and the West, from the North, and the
South, and shall rest them with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the Kingdom of
GOD. Matthew. 8, verse. 11* Luke. 13. verse. 29.

We have also in this place a most strong weapon against the arguments of
the Jews, and those which embrace Iudaisme: who do wrest and arrogate the
promises (made unto this Spiritual SION) to them and to their earthlye
JERUSALEM: as if these so great co^mendations were spoken of the earthly
City. And in our age the new Donatistes and sect of Chiliastes, most
foolishlie also dream with the Uncircumcised, promising themselves earthelye
things: where the Spirit of Christ promises in the Prophets (with most
sweet allegories) spiritual and celestial things. Unto which fanaticall
persons also the most delicate Table of the word of GOD is turned into a
Snare and Trappe, yea into an offense and Retaliation: Their eyes are darkened
that they see not, and their backs are always made crooked, that they see
nothing but earthlye things, whereas mere Celestial things are promised
unto the elect ones of GOD. For those Nations whom the Prophet and Psalmograph
here reckons up, and affirms to be borne in SION for a truth are not
borne in that earthlye SION and JERUSALEM: Wherefore we do most necessarilye
understand the verse to be set down as concerning the Spiritual SION.

For so the Apostles and Evangelists The kingdom of Christ is spiritual.
(as the Interpreters of the Prophets taught by GOD) have instructed us to
understand and handle the Oracles of the Prophets on that manner. Christ the
spiritual king, a high Priest of good things to come, promised in the
Gospel unto a spiritual people, things spiritual and eternal and not mere
temporal good things. wherefore, as Augustine writing upon the 39. Psalm
admonishes us: Let no man promise himself that, which the Gospel promises
him not: The scrip tures promise us not in this world but tribulations,
persecutions, Calamities, increase of sorrows, abundance of temptations: to
these things let us specially prepare us, least unprepared we utterly fall.
These says he.

That half verse, ( The most High, even he shall stablish the same) has in
it more consolation, then our slender capacity can comprehend: It is a certain
special thing of those glorious ^ytles which are declared of y^ City of God.
For, what can be spoken more glorious and more excellent of the Church of God
then that the same is not founded and estabished by humane hands, strengthes
or counsels, but of the self same GOD the workmaister and preserver of all
things. For even he Jesus Christ the son of the highest God, the power and
wisdom of God the father was sent to be a Rock and foundation, a Wall and
covering of this holy City. Here upon it follows, that this City shall
always be safe, from the tyranny of death and of the Devil, which has
dominion over Death: much more then shall she be safe from ^ickle fading and
britle power of this world. For, seeing that God himself is the founder,
confirmer, and defender thereof, it cannot be destroyed nor subverted, yea, the
foundation of this City shall stand unshaken or immovable, even to the
utmost, and for ever. As it is in the 47. Psalm. God has founded the same
City, (his Church) for ever. verse. 7. Therefore although it be oppugned or
assaulted of most cruel and most mighty enemies without all t^uces, namely of
Sin, fear of Death, the Deuell, the World and the Flesh, yet it shall not be
cast down at any time, but it shall stand firm and mighty through Christ. Who
is a fiery Wall in the compass of his new Jerusalem: And he that touches
her, touches the apple of Christ's eye, as Zachary says. Cap. 2. verse. 5.

Hereupon learn we that the building of that City is not begotten, continued,
God is the master builder of the Church.
and confirmed with any strength of men, but with the alone power of God: For
he has laid y^ first stone, and not only frames in order all the building
thereof, but also keeps and preserves the same: Altogether it depends of
y^ same God, not of us, least any man should boast thereof. For whiles the
ungodly is converted unto Christ, he The Church of God is beutified by Christ.
is builded upon Christ, he is made a lively stone of that spiritual building,
but he is converted by the alone power of Christ: whiles Christ sends his
Gospel, gives hearty sorrow or repentance, faith and his holy spirit. As without
the Spirit of Christ we can do nothing Ioh. 15. And the Apostle Paul openly
confesses in 2. Tim. 2. The beginning of our justification is of God and not
of our selves.
That the beginning of repentance is not in our power, but is given from above:
If at any time (says he) God give the^ repentance to know the truth, and
recover themselves from out of the snare of the devil, wherein they are holde^
of him at his pleasure. ver. 26. If God then lay y^ foundation of this cito, y^
is, if he make the^ of y^ children of wrath, y^ children of grace, and not they
themselves, If God draw sinners unto him and freely justify them for Christ's
^ake, y^ they may be converted from their ungodliness, and believe, and in
believing may be made fit stones to y^ building of this spiritual Sion: If he (I
say) ^ay y^ stones himself and polish Freewill i^ nothing in the c^s^ of
Justification
them, and build and stabli^h the whole City also, I pray you what glory has
free will ^^ y^ case of Justification? Has not he which builds and confirms
this City all y^ glory? whiles y^ holy Ghost begins in us Justification, and
conserueth the same, to the 1. Cor. 1. verse.
end y^ he which glorifieth, should not glory in y^ Law, nor in Works, nor in
Strength, but in y^ Lord? When as No man can come unto Christ the corner Stone
of that building, except the heavenly Father do draw him Ioh. 6. And no man can
come unto John. 6.
the Father but by this corner Stone Jesus Christ. Ioh. 14 Here are the new and
old Pelagians New and old Pelagians confounded.
confounded and utterly fall down which go about to build and ground this city
by their own works, merits and passions which blasphemously affirm that Grace
is given according to our merits* and most arrogantly cast away the grace of
Christ. The opinion of ^choole Doctors in meriting (...)
If a man shall ask of these how they are converted? They answer, they do y^
which is in their power to do, and endeavor toward well doing with natural strength
or ability of understanding and will, and so they merit Prima^ gratiam de
congruo: And when freewil is helped of grace (by deed brought forth from
freewill and grace) they affirm, Their opinion of meriting ex Condigno.
that they deserve everlasting life. de condigno. Now, some men are ashamed of
such blasphemous doctrine, and deny that they ever taught so, to the end they
might deceive simple souls. But I appeal unto So is that book of the master
of the Sentences called.
the books of the Adversaries, I imagine no untruth: Let the school Doctors
be perused over (in did. 25 26. 27. 28.) of the second, touching thcological
Sentences and you shall there see that same where upon S. Paul speaks in the
2. Coloss. verse 8. saying: They have spoiled us What it is to build the
Church of God upon ^u nane er^^^^.
through Philosophy and vain deceiving. But, truly, so to extol the nature of
man (not yet borne a new through the spirit of Christ,) what other thing else
is this then to desire to build and ground the Church by their own powers and
strengths without Christ the foundation? For, to build and ground the City of
God, is no other thing, but, of ungodly ones, to make godly ones, to translate
sinners from out of the kingdom of sin and death, into the kingdom of
righteousness and salvation, to pardon sins and to implant members of the Church
justified to build upon the Rock Christ, and in the faith of Christ and hope
of the gospel so to preserve them, yt they may not fall away, but continue still
in the faith. And this work (as Augustine strongly proves in his book de Bono
perseuerantiae) is the gift of God alone. Therefore y^ alone most high
builds, bewtifieth, stablisheth, and preserves this city, as al scriptures
do bear witness. Not unto us Lord, not unto us (in Psalm. 115. verse. 1.
ye beginning, continuance and conservation of justification) but unto thy
name, give the glory. We will gladly confess then, that all foundations of
salvation, which hitherto evil bewitched persons have devised by man's wisdom,
(to the end that we should be justified and saved by them) are not only
ruynous, but also the very deuowring gulf of hell: whereinto are over whelmed
so many as embrase not Christ the head and foundation: so many as by the
works and traditions of men go about to build and establish this City. For
they are most pestilent builders, such as in times past the Phariseys and
Scribes were: who when they ought to have been builders (most unfaithfully
reitcted the corner stone, without the which the spiritual building cannot
stand at all.

Learn moreover, that the Church shall The Church of Christ is eternal.
still continue always, though infinite offenses daily escape in her, which
threaten destruction and downefal to the city of God. For, we which are
citizens of so excellent a City do even yet make war (as it seems) in a
doubtful battle, and more inffrmity ^^e^ strength is seen in us. And that
bewtiful City is obscured with innumerable kinds of Cross and infirmity in
this world. Satan assaults the same by a thousand sleights: The members and
Apostles of Satan disturb the same with errors: Tyrants with open hostility
invade and spoils the same. But this is our consolation, (what manner of form
soever this City bears in this world) god who has founded and stablished
the same is of more might then all the enemies which assault it.

Wherefore she shall still continue invincible, and at length most gloriously
(in the power of her chief founder, and King, Christ) she shall triumph over
al her enemies, the world, the devil, and death* which thing David saw in y^
spirit* and sings in y^ 62. Psalm. He (eue^ god) is my strength and my
salvation, etc. verse. 7. And he exhorts the Church y^ she would always with
confidence flee for refuge unto her founder, saying. Put your trust in him
always, etc. ver. 8.

Verse. 6. The Lord shall rehearse it when he writes up the people, that he
was borne there. Sela.

NOw see in what estimation Christians are had, whether Jews or Gentiles, when
they are borne a new in SION: God himself has registered them in the book of
life and does reckon them up name by name, as his peculiar people, as his
inheritance purchased with the precious blood of Christ. The Lord (says he) in
writing the people born a new in Sion, shall reckon them up among the Catalogue
of his saints or Children: Out of this book of life shall he number or name
them, saying. There was he borne, namely in Sion. This is the Citizen
prescribed and predestinate unto ye number of ye heavenly citizens: him do I
know, and acknowledge as a Citizen of my City*

Luther translateth it thus: Der herr writ predigen laslen in allerley
sprachen, das cleretlich auch claselb, gebcren werden. which may thus be
englished. The Lord will let preach in all manner of speeches, that some shall be
borne there.

That was begun by the Apostles in the day of Pentecost, when being inspirtd
Acts. ^.
by the power of the holy Ghost from above, they published forth ye great works
of God, in diverse languages: and the same thing comes to pass at this day, and
shall be accomplished in the world, even to the fullness of the Messiah his
kingdom.

O holy and most lovely Register: For Through faith in Christ we are enrolled
in the Book of life.
they that shall be on this manner enrolled by God in the Catalogue of his
Saints (who are partakers of the Sacrament of regeneration in SION, and are
made alredie Citizens) ought not to doubt of Gods grace toward them, and of
their salvation: For the gifts and callings of God are such and in such
manner. That he can never repent him of them. Romans 11 If thou beleeuest in
Christ, thou find thy self in the book of life, Thou art a Citizen of ye
heavenly JERUSALEM thou art borne of God. Concerning such, Christ says. Luke.
10. Rejoice that your names are written in the heavens. Them does he
acknowledge and reckon as his household: For although there is nothing Whom,
God is said to know.
unknown to God, but al things are evident before the eyes of God, yet, he is
said in the scriptures to know those persons, whom be loves as his Sons,
which do the will of their Father, and shall dwell in the house of their father
for ever. 1. Ioh. 2. So. S. Paul. 2. Tim 2. says, The foundation of God
remains sure, and has this Seal, the Lord knows who are his. And in John
10. Christ calls his sheep by their names and brings them forth unto the
Pastures of life. But as touching the ungodly he says, I never knew you. Math
7.

And in the end of this verse the word Sela is added: To the intent that not
so much the word it self as the cogitations and meditation of so blessed a
writing and mystery of our Regeneration might be understood: Least so great
matters should be negligently as it were ouerlooked.

For if we be wise we will always The profi^^ we have of our Baptis^
consider most earnestly the grace or benefit of our Baptism: That we are
baptized unto the redeeming death of Christ Jesus, whereas all our sins, and
even death the reward of sins are utterly swallowed up. We ought never to
forget, that in SION we are well borne who were first evil borne in the
Babylon of this world: Namely the children of wrath, enemies of God, accursed
and the bondslaues of satan. And will you hear that excellent Citizen of this
blessed SION, Paul, how much he esteems this his allotted happiness? how
worthily he esteems the most ample gift of our regeneratio^^ 3. Tit. But
(says he) when the bountifulnes and love of God our Savior, toward man
appeared not by the works of righteousness which we had done, but according to
his mercy he saved us by the washing of the new birth and the renewing of the
holy Ghost Which he shed on us abundantly, Tit. verse. 4. 6. 7.
through Jesus Christ our savior. That we being justified by his grace should
be made heirs, according to the hope of eternal life. This is a true saying.
And S. Peter 1. Pet. 3* says. To the which Pet 3.
also the figure that now saves us (even Baptism) agrees, not the putting
away ^ers. 21. and 22.
of the filth of the flesh, but in that a good conscience makes request to God
by the resurrection of Jesus Christ. Which is at the right hand of God gone
into heaven, and swallowing up death that we might be made heirs of eternal
life. Therefore our dullness is to be abborred who (for so great a grace of the
fountain of regeneration wherein we have put upon us Christ and God having
now elected us for his children borne a new unto the life celestial, in the
number of his Citizens) do not continually render him thanks: And finally who
do not endeavor our selves that being cleansed by the blood of Christ from our
sins we might live, soberlie, justly and godly in this present world.

Glory be to God our most merciful father for the exceeding riches of his
longanimity, whereby he inuiteth us unto repentance and a life worthy of
baptism, and continually bears with sinners. The same God perform in us, so
as with worthy thanksgiving we may always remember That, we are born there in
Sion: That is in the Catholic Church by the spirit, and that there by faith
we may fully continue in the same City, wherein both Prophets and al righteous
souls eue^ before the incarnation of the Son of God, are regenerate or borne
a new by the Circumsition of the heart: which Consists in the Spirit, and
not in the letter, whose praise is not of men but of God. Romans 2. verse. 29.

Verse. 7 The Singers also and Trompeters shall he rehearse: All my fresh
springs shall be in thee.

HEre again the Translations varrie: The Hebrew text has Kehillim, which some
do translate as it were for shalmes, others, like as they which dance for joy:
H^lal in dad signifies to lead the Dance, to rejoice. And where the Hebrewe
has Migniny. (my fountains or welsprings,) y^ Greek word signifies (an
habitation): although this variety does nothing impugn the Catholic veri^y,
for both of them are taught as true. Yet it is very good to descerne the
meaning of the Prophet in the sacred phrase: for, where as the Greek
translation which is read in the Church at this day is not the pure or sincere
translation of the 70. Interpreters, but is varying and corrupt, we do well by
y^ counsel of S. Jerome, if in the reading of the Law and the Prophets we
shall return unto the Original, That is, unto the Hebrew language: The meaning
then of the Prophet David in this verse (according to the Hebrew phrase) is,
And the singers are there (understand in that SION) whereas people of all
Nations are borne a new, and not the Jews only. But what sing they?
Undoubtedly these glorious and most magnificent works of God, which he as the
most high founder and preserver of the Church works in the Church to the
salvation of the Church.

And seeing that those things which God promises and performs in Christ to
and for his church, are such and in such manner, that they exceed al humane
perseverance, and understanding of all creatures How other joys do begin in
the Spirit.
in respect of their excellency, The Prophet says here That those singers in
SION are like unto them which dance for joy, who for the immoderate joys y^
they have conceived by the preaching of y^ Gospel, do even leap and dance for
joy. But he speaks of a spiritual joy which issues out of faith in Christ,
(whiles we are persuaded of the holy Ghost that our sins are abolished by the
death of Christ) that we are so reconcyled unto God the Father by his son
incarnate, suffering for us and risen from death to life, that he would
vouchsafe to be our Father for ever and ever. This grace or benefit of
adoption so cheerfully comfort Christians, that they despise all worldly
joys in respect of the sincere joy of the Spirit: And do est^eme them as no
other thing else then lamentation and sorrow. Which thing it self Spiritual
persons will testi^^e, who have felt sometimes in their consciences both the
wrath of God, and also his mercy in Christ promised, and have fasted the
sweet word of God, and the virtues and effects of the world to come. Wherefore
he says not only The singers, but he adds there are also, Trompeters, that
he may more clearly express the greatness of that spiritual Joy.

And where as he adds ( Al my fresh springes shall be in thee) he speaks of
the manifold and diverse graces or gifts of the holy Ghost, which the father
for his sons ^ake most abundantly powers out upon The spirit o^ God
imparteth his gifts most ^ichlie unto his Church.
his Church: neither in deed do those Welsprings flow elsewhere, without his
Church although the most gracious God, does even power out also upon the
Gentiles diverse gifts of body and soul, yet the welspring of Christ's grace
justifying, the Welspring of grace, of knowledging our sins and of
acknowledging gods goodness, The welspring of spiritual peace and true Joy, The
welspring of thanks, of prayers and thanksgiving, the welspring of the gift of
daily praising the Lord that welspring most largely opening to y^ ^^^te of
Charity, and the residew of the Welsprings of the gifts of the holy Ghost flow
not nor gush not out in the wilderness of the ungodly ones, but in the
enclosed and most pleasant garden of the Church: concerning which welspringes
every where we read many things in the Scriptures as in the 68. Psalm. He is
gone up on high, he has led captivity captive and given gifts unto men. verse.
18.

In elder days before the fullness of time had appeared. when as yet the elect
ones looked for the Messiah and savior (and that with doubtful desires to come
in y^ flesh, those welsprings of Graces then flowed in SION, and in the
Synagogue of the people. For, In Jury was God known, Psalm. 76. ver. 1.
and his name was great in Israel.

The Gentiles were an horrible and dry Desert, without knowledge, how to
glorify God: as in Romans 1. Concerning whom is said in the Psalm. Power out thy
wrath upon the Gentiles which have not Psalm. 68. and (...). 10. ver. 25
known thee. In the Synagogue or Congregation was the sacred Scripture, therein
was the true understanding of the Prophecies concerning Christ which should
come, yea the Prophecyes, Faith, Hope and other free gifts according to the
reason of that time.

Now when Christ the salvation of God was sent into the world, not a few
little ^iding streams and small wellsprings of the gifts of the Holy Ghost,
but the wide windows of heaven being opened, great floods and seas of free
gifts plentifully flowed forth in the Churches of Christ: And the predictions
of the Prophets were in deed fulfilled, as touching the most ample effusion
(of the spirit of the Messiah glorified) in and upon his Church: as in the
foresaid 68. Psalm. He has given gifts unto men. ver. 18. And as in Esaias. 12.
verse. 3. You shall draw out waters with joy out of the fountains of the
Savior, And as in the 32. Chap. verse. 15. Until the Spirit be powered upon
us from above, and the wilderness become Carmel, or a fruitful field, and the
plentious field be counted as a Forest. ver. 17. And the work of Justice
shall be peace, even the work of Justice and quietness and assurance for
ever. verse. 18. And my people shall dwell in the tabernacle of peace, and in
sure dwellings and in safe resting places. And as it is said in the 44. Cap.
verse. 3. And I will power out water upon the thirsty, and floodes upon the
dry ground: I will power out my spirit upon thy seed, and my blessing on
thy buddes. And they shall grow as among the grass, and as the Willowes by
the ryuers of water. verse. 4. And again in the 35. Chap. verse. 6. 7. thus. In
the wilderness shall waters break out, and ryuers in the Dezart. And the dry
ground shall be as a Poole and the thirsty as Springs of water. Also as the
Prophet Ezechiel in his 36. Chap. says. verse. 25. Then will I power clean
water upon you, and ye shall be clean: yea from al your filthiness, and from
all your Idols will I cleanse you. A new heart also will I give you, and a new
spirit will I put within you: and I will take away the stony heart out of your
body, and I will give you an heart of flesh. ver. 26. There speaks h^e of
Baptism and of the holy Ghost which in Baptism is bestowed upon us. Moreover
in the Prophecy of Joel Chap. 2. as it is said: And it shall come to pass that
after this* I will power out my Spirit upon al flesh ver. 28 And in Acts* 2.
appears. Finally as in the Prophecy of Zachary and 13. Chapter is written.
And in that day there shall be a fountain opened, to the house of David, and to
the inhabitants of Jerusalem, to wash away their sins and filthiness ver. 1.

This Fountain is Baptism and the holy Spirit, with his gifts, whereby also
comes the washing away of spiritual uncleanness, and the knowledge of the
Scriptures to the edifying of the Church. Unto this fountain of water of life,
flowing out to life everlasting, are we called by Christ in the 7. of S. John's
Gospel. If any man thirst, let him come unto me and drink: Who so believes
in me (as the Scripture says) out of his body shall flow even fountains of
lively water: Which thing he spoke as concerning the Spirit, which true
believers in him were to receive and enjoy,

To be brief, in Sion, (that is) in the Church, God himself dwells as in
his spiritual Temple: what marvel is it then, if in the Church only lively
fountains or welsprings of al gracesd^ burst forth and water this Paradise
unto fructifying in this Spiritual SION? We do here find assuredly the word
of God in a Catholic sense, the spirit of Christ faith, true righteousness,
remission of sins, peace of Conscience, Joy of the Spirit, Love, and
fulfilling of the law, and what soever spiritual benefits may be: Because
we find the never failing fountain of all benefits God himself, who is the
most lively blessedness. But the Gretians do read this verse, thus, The
dwelling in thee is as it were of all them that do rejoice.

The Prophet David here speaks of a Spiritual Joy which true believers
only in Christ, do possess: Concerning which S. Peter in 1. Epist. Chapt. 1
says: Whom ye have not seen, and yet love him, in whom now though ye see
him not, yet do you believe and rejoice with joy unspeakable and glorious. ver.
8 Receiving the end of your faith, even the salvation of your souls. verse. 9.
True joy cannot be but where the sorrowful person is delivered from all evils.
The greatest mischiefs are, to be cast away from god, to remain in sin, to
suffer the tyranny of death and to be reserved to eternal damnation. For all
the evils of this world being compared to these horrible and eternal evils are
even scracely shadows of Evils.

But true deliverance from undoubted True joy is in the Church alone.
and greatest Evils may no where else be found, but in SION, as it is said by
the Prophet Joel. 2. Chap. Every one which shall call upon the name of the Lord
shall shall be saved. For in Mount Sion and Jerusalem shall be deliverance (as
the Lord has said) and in the remnant, whom the Lord shall call. verse. 32.

No where else then but in the Church the true SION can there be true joy:
Wherefore the dwelling or habitation of al them (which truly rejoice by
reason, their sins are forgiven the^ through Christ and salvation by him
restored unto them) is in SION alone: They that are with out Sion, are in their
sins, therefore they are the bondslaues of death and the devil. When as
therefore they lie in most grievous and eternal pains enthralled, what place
of true joy may be there, yea, though they fully and wholly possess in the
mean time even all the pleasures of this world?

Mark also that he says ( Of all them The righteousness of Christ pertains
not onl^ unto the Jew but also to the Gentile
that rejoice,) is to understand, not only that the Jews, but also the
Gentiles are to be admitted to the true Joy of SION, by the promise of God:
which thing the Scripture every where witnesses. In ye 46. Psalm. The Gentiles
are called by name unto this heavenly joy. O clappe your hands together all
ye people, O sing unto God with the voice of melody. He is the great King
over all the earth. verse. 1. and 2. And Paul in 15. Romans Praise the lord all ye
Gentiles, and laud ye him all people together. verse. 11. And the Prophet Esaias.
Chap. 11. The Gentiles shall put their trust in him: according to the
translation of the 70. Interpreters. And this Prophet David sings in his 63.
Psalm. The righteous shall rejoice in the Lord and put his trust in him, and all
they that are true of heart shall be glad. verse. 10. Behold he says not, the
lewe only shall rejoice in the Lord but the just: is no man just then but the
Jew? Ask of Paul, who in Romans 3. teaches, That the Jew is not justified by
the works of the Law, but by faith in Christ the righteous and only
iustifier. And by and by he after that says. Is he the God of the Jews
only? Is he not also the God of the Gentiles? verses. 29 30. Yes of the
Gentiles is he also God, which justifies Circumcision by faith and
vncircumfition through faith. And in the 9. Romans ver. 30. he says: What shall
we say then? That the Gentiles which followed not righteousness, have attained
unto righteousness, even the righteousness which is of faith.

Here the Scripture openly teaches (so far as unto justification
pertains) that there is no difference between the Jew and the Gentile: all
have sinned, and have need of the glory of God, but by the alone grace of
Christ they are justified. And as S. Peter in Acts 15. confesses, god (so much
as to justification belongs) made no difference between the Jews and the
Gentiles. verse 9. If he made no difference between them, if he also justify
the Gentiles by faith in Christ, even then again shall the Gentiles be found
just by Christ: If they be just, then also do they rejoice in the Lord, they
rejoice in SION: They have as well their dwelling place as the Jews the flesh of
Abraham have in SION: out of which city no man is excluded but by that
incredulity which with the unfaithful Jews he rejects, because they
embraced not Jesus Christ the king of SION, Whom the Father himself (as David
says) appointed Psalm. 2.
ruler over Syon his holy hill: And placed him as the head of the Gentiles.
Psalm. 17.
Therefore the dwelling place of all which truly rejoice, (that is to say of
Christians) is in SION, namely the Church of Christ: concerning which joy of
y^ Christians, the Prophet Esaias thus Prophecyeth in the 51. Chapter. Joy and
gladness shall be found in SION, thanksgiving and the voice of praise. ver. 3.
And the redeemed of the Lord shall return and come with joy unto Sion, and
^uerlasting joy shall be upon their heads they shall obtain joy and
gladness, and sorrow and mourning shall flee away. ver. 11. I even I am he that
comfort you, Who art thou, that thou should fear a mortal man, and the son
of man which shall be as withered grass. ver. 12. Which true and perfect joy
(never to be taken away from us. Ioh. 16.) Christ our Lord and God (who be
blessed for ever) vouchsafe to give us hereby true faith in him, and in the
world to come by the clear and manifest beholding of him. Amen.

They that impugn our Catholic faith, which we have confessed six years
agone, in a very great assembly before y^ he Church neither at Seuenhilled
(...), nor, yet a (...) Mo^^rchy.
Emperor and States of the Roman Empire at Augusta, and will have themselves
accounted only Catholic, do tie the Church to the Seuenhilled Babylon, and
so describe her, that she may be seen and p^rceiued with our very eyes, as if
indeed she were a worldly Monarchy, wherein a visible head and Uicar
general might bear rule: They (I say) with their finger point at that
Spiritual SION. But the Scripture both here in this place and elsewhere often
enough teaches, that the Head, the builder and King of that Sion is Spiritual,
and the City Spiritual, not earthly, also the Citizens of that glorious City
to be new creatures in Christ rejoicing, singing and leaping for joy, not
openly ryding on stately steedes, in kings Palaces, and al prodigality of
this world, but in the Spirit: for, being saved through Titus. cap. 2.
hope (as S. Peter says) with inward joy, they look for that blessed hope and
appearance of the glory of the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ in the
day of our full redemption. But in the mean time, they weep and lament in this
world: Contrariwise the world rejoices and is glad. And as Christ says, in
the world they Find affliction, but in themselves Ioh. 16. ver. 33
peace, through Christ the ouercommer of the world. For, if a man behold the
Church according to her outward show, she shall not beseem the dwelling
place of them which rejoice, but a loathsome prison of sorrowful and afflicted
persons. Therefore the blessings of that spiritual habitation do exceed all
understandings, and are not perceived with fleshly eyes: And the ungodly ones
in this world ac^ not worthy to see no not even the least citize^ of this holy
City* ado^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^ her true blessings which we have in Christ. The
World sees the outward man which is corrupted, but he sees not the
heavenly Jerusalem with her citizens borne a new of the Spirit.

The rich glutton in Luke. 16. sees, Lazarus a beggar, full of sores, and
famished with hunger at his gate: but I pray you what carnal eye sight, yea,
what humane reason would know so wretched and abject a person in outward
show to be the beloved child of God to reign with Christ, and whom the very
Angelical Christians lie covered with figures of calamity.
Spirits did attend upon? with such figures of calamity lie Christians
covered in this world. The Apostles those most excellent and noble Princes in
Christ's kingdom, how afflicted were they in the kingdom of this world? They
seemed outwardly the vylest persons of all men, they were buffited with blows,
they wandered uncertain coasts, they were railed on and became as the most
loathsome things of the world. Where (I pray you) were then the eyes which
could perceive such and so great compeeres of the heavenly kingdom? finally
how unknown was Christ (...) unto the children of this world, in y^ Synagogue
of his people? For as it is said by Peter, if carnal eyes could have seen
and known the Lord of glory, the Jews would not have crucified him. And in
the 32. Psalm. he tells us what manner of person he was reputed in the world.
I am a Psalm. 22. ver. ^
worm (says he) and no man, a reproach of men, and the outcast of the people,
all they which see me, have laughed me to scorn. verse. 6.

This one thing therefore let us be care full of, That we may still continue in
the City of God, (even by faith in Christ) let us redily embrace affliction,
as the companion of the Gospel and for the name of Christ as the heavenly
watchword and badge of his kingdom, let us not esteem or pass any thing,
what blind judgments of this world are given upon us, but let the
determination of ye holy Ghost touching us in this Psalm be only set before
our eyes. videliz. The Lord loves the gates of SION: what shall the most
pestilent envy of the enemies then hurt us, which cries that we are gone
back from God, and from his Church? The Lord himself (...) wherein we are,
although then in the sight of the Children of this world she seem outwardly
vile and a dongeon, yet is she an excellent and impregnable city. The
Adversaries reproach us with errors, but hear, they that acknowledge Christ do
well understand, that all fountains of Gods graces do flow in this City of God
Therefore even then also does the sound doctrine of Christ, a right and true
faith, yea good works indeed and study after godliness here hence flow forth
likewise. yet doubtless faith is far more lukewarm in us the^ is expedient. But
we must pray unto the Lord, and that instantly, that what he has mercifully
begun in us he would make perfect the same. That we seem not to have received
in vain so great grace of God in our Sion, and that the most glorious name of
Christ be not for our sakes blasphemed: According to Peter's admonition
therefore. Let us abstain from fleshly 1. Pet. 2. ver. 11.
lusts which strive against the Soul, and as strangers and Pilgrims in this
world, (whose glory passes away) let us seek with earnest desire after a future
and permanent City. Wherein (as S. John says) There shall be no more death* nor
mourning nor crying, nor sorrow, but God shall wipe away in her all tears from
the eyes of his true believers. Apoc. 21. verse. 4.

Let the Children of this world take The Authors comfortable Conclusion to the
elect of God.
their delights in earthly Cities, and fill their minds with pleasures which
shall soon have an end, for they shall be consumed from of y^ earth* which now
they unjustly occupy and enjoy: Let us (whom Ephe^. ver. 1^.
God has called to the rich glory of heavenly inheritance) seek for things
which are above. Where Christ our king and Colos. 3. ver. 1^*
high Priest sits at the right hand of God. Which the same King of glory
vouchsafe to accomplish and perform: For into this City (concerning which so
glorious things are spoken) except we beer in this life do enter by Faith, we
shall not possess the same in Deed, when this world shall have an end: which
without doubt shall not long endure.

FINIS.
Vrbanus Regius.

Psalm. 135. Praised be the Lord out of SION, which dwells in Jerusalem:
Praise ye the Lord. verse. 6.
R. R.


