A True and Exact Relation of the most remarkable passages which have happened
in the I Will of REE, commonly called Saint MARTINS Island, since the 6. of August
last past to the 24. of the same.

Wherein is also declared, in what state our Army (under the Command of the
Duke of BVCKINGHAM his Grace) is in.

As also how it fares with them of the Fort, with the great hopes of the
sudden surrender thereof, being driven to great want both of victuals and
water.

Together with The description of the several works, both offensive and
defensive about the Fort. The names of diverse Persons of quality both slain
and hurt on the French side. The present state of Rochell, and the bordering
places about it. The willingness of those of the Religion to adhere to the D.
of Buckingham, with the preparation of the French King to oppose them.

Written in French by a French Gentleman of special account in the I Will of Ree,
to a person of note here in England.

Faithfully translated out of the French.

LONDON Printed for Nathaniell Butter dwelling near S. Austines Gate, 1627.

A True and Exact Relation of the most remarkable passages, which have
happened in the Jle of REE, commonly called Saint MARTINS Jland, since the 6.
of August last past to the 24. of the same.
SIR,
I doubt not but that you are informed of all that which has past in this
Island of S. Martin, until this present time, by reason of the good
acquaintance which you have at Court: Nevertheless, I cannot leave in regard
of your love which you have expressed to me, to make you participant of all
what is both here and in France past of late.

They of Rochell having as it was differred as long possible unto them to
declare themselves, intending to get great store of Corn into their City,
which they had about it, nevertheless they find themselves now forced to do
it, by reason of the cruel and hard usage of their enemies, which have not
suffered them to get one half of it into it, and are now come so close to it,
that hardly shall any man get any more into it by Land, for the Duke of
Angoleine inquartered himself on Saturday last at Estre, with three thousand
foot, and a great number of horse, which are dispersed, besides many other foot
throughout the Province of Rochell, which make there much spoil. The common
Counsel of the said City being thereupon assembled, they resolved to send
presently for aid to all their neighbors and friends and at the same time
they sent some of their Commissioners to this Island to crave my Lord Duke and
Monsieur Soubise to assist them speedily with five hundred Frenchmen which we
had here, to aid them to raise up again the Fort of Tasdon, of which their
enemies would make themselves Masters: and they were yesterday promised, and
sent unto them under the command of Monsieur de Loudriere. But there were some
that before their departure would show their valor by an Action, which
Monsieur Sabignae Valouso did undertake, and executed their enterprise on the
last Sunday about the evening, with five and twenty men. They of the Cittadell
being brought to great extremities, and compast round abound with trenches,
which hinder them to get any refreshments, did keep with great care a pit in a
half Moon, which furnished them every day with six or seven pipes of good
water. The said Monsieur de Sauignac went about eleven of the clock in the
night time to assault the said half Moon, and at the same time went three or
four soldiers of great resolution to throw some great bottles with Trane
oil into the said pit, which they did, so that according to the relation of a
soldier of the Cittadell, who surrendered himself yesterday, the said bottles
being broken in pieces at the throwing in, the said oil has infected and
spoiled it, that hardly the water of it will be good at any time to be used.

If the said Monsieur de Sauignac had not been hurt. I believe that they
should have taken the said half Moon, for he was hurt by a bullet of a
pistol in his Groine, of which I hope that he shall shortly be cured, and
besides himself there were two of his wounded, but he and his slew eight or
ten of the Enemies, and a battalion of English which seconded our Frenchmen,
lost eight soldiers, and had betwixt twenty and thirty hurt, amongst which
the Lieutenant of the Colonel Boroughs was one. In the same night did the
Shalops of our Army which wait every night abroad, that none may go in or
out of the said Cittadell, did take a Barque of ten tons, which came to
bring into it Bread, Wine, Meal, Pease, and Porke, besides another Shalop, in
which were seven or eight men of note, and as many sailers, which were carried
by a wicked man of this Island who is a Papist, both the Shalop and the men were
drowned, except three, which were more happy then the other, having been
thrown into the Sea, and hurt in their heads with many musket shot. They being
brought to the Land, I went at the dawning of the day on the border of the Sea,
to see our Soldiers embarked, I did there a good turn to the said Gentlemen,
for I drew them out of the hands of the Soldiers, to make them to get lodging,
and to be cured by the Surgeons. Besides the Conductors called Morrisiers and
the Mariners, there were drowned these Gentlemen, Monsieur Artaignan, Cornet
of the Company of the Kings horse which carry little muskets, who was much
beloved of his Majesty. Monsieur de la Tournelle, who was a Gentleman of the
Duke of Bellegard. Monsieur du Clos, Lieutenant of Monsieur de Contamines,
which was slain at his landing, with two or three of his servants. The names
of them which are escaped are these which follow here: Monsieur de Iony Son
of the Governor of Breast, Monsieur de Saint Michael Ensign Colonel of the
Regiment of Champaigne, and Monsieur de Grandry Gentleman of the Duke of
Bellegard, which came hither to get honor, and as we understood had promises
of some places which might first fall void. My Lord Duke and Monsieur Soubise
visited the said Gentlemen on the same day they were landed.

For to keep a good order I ought to have begun with the murder, which has
been intended against the person of my Lord Duke of Buckingham, which matter
happened as follows.

A young man of Blois being in the said Cittadell during the space of two
months, he being a resolute and courageous fellow, and hearing many of the
Propositions which were made amongst the French, he offered to fire one of the
Ships of his Majesty of Great Britain, if they would furnish him with a
Shalop and other necessaries for that purpose, yea he offered to fire the Ship
in which my Lord came, and did still lie in the night time as our enemies
conceived.

A certain Captain whose name is Castellan, perceiving this said young man to
be so courageous and resolute, thinking him fit to perform a wicked deed, he
propounded unto him, that if he would go and murder my Lord Duke of
Buckingham, that he could easily do it by Land, and get a great reward, and an
in comparable glory.

This fellow accepted to do it, upon condition that Monsieur Thorax (the
Governor of the Citadell) would condescend to it; the said Captain assuring
him of the consent of Monsieur Thorax, the said Soldier goes in the night
time out of the Citadell on the sixth ot August, carrying with him a very short
Dagger, but broad and of a good edge. But he being perceived and taken by our
Horse, he told unto them that he came with an intention to serve on our side,
which being not believed by them, seeing that he was of the Romish Religion, he
was carried to Monsieur Soubese, and he suspecting him, sent him as a Prisoner
to the Provost: Being there Examined, he persisted constantly in his first
Tale: but at last when he was threatened to be Tortured, unless he would
confess the truth, he begun to change his color in his face, and grew very
pale, and prayed that he might be carried to my Lord of Buckingham, to make his
Grace acquainted with matters of great importance: He being come to his Grace,
he told him that which is here above reported, with diverse other circumstances
which I conceal here for some good reasons, and he was caused to set his hand
to his deposition. My Lo. Duke sent word the next day to Monsieur Thorax in the
Citadell, and gave him to understand, that if he would send unto him three or
four of them of his Garrison, in which he put most trust, that they should
come safely, and that he would make them to see something, which he desired
they should communicate afterward unto him: The Governor sent thereupon
presently six of h^s most trusted friends, and amongst the rest the Barron of
S. Surie: But the above mentioned matter being showed unto them, they denied it
flatly, and the Prisoner maintained it against them, and thereupon returning to
the Citadel, some that mistrusted the matter, murmured against the Governor,
and others which thought well of him, defended his credit and honor.

They having made this report unto the Governor, he protested that he was
innocent in the said matter, and sent again after dinner to our Camp, both
his own Brother and Baron of Surin, besides the Captain Castellan, which
labored there both with fair speeches and great oaths to take away this ill
opinion and conceit of the Governor, as they termed it. But the Prisoner
persisted still in his former saying, and maintained his deposition as before.

They requiring thereupon that he should be put to the torture, ours laughed
at it, saying, that it is but given to them which deny a crime, and not to such
as confess it.

They entreated thereupon that we would put him to death, with a protestation,
that in case he did not recall his saying before his death, that they all
there would in such case suffer themselves to be hanged after him, and that if
it were required, they would yet cause ten other to come, that should stand
to the like condition.

Their offer was at that time refused: but my Lo: Duke sent them word the next
day, that he would cause the miserable wretch to be put to death, if they would
send him the said Castellan, upon condition that he might do with him what he
should be pleased to do, if the said prisoner should not recall his deposition
before his death, but persist in his accusation, and that he would give way
that they should give him such a Confessor as they should like best: besides
ten of their Gentlemen which should be witnesses of that which should pass.

But they of the Citadell refused to send the said Castellan, alleging that he
was there very necessary for the service of the King: whereby it happened that
many which doubted of the matter the day before, did then firmly believe it.

I did not think in the beginning to extend my self so largely in the
relation of the particulars of the abouementioned matter, but many are sometimes
glad to learn the circumstances of a business or accident, to judge the
better of the matter.

I believe that if they can send Letters from the Court of France to that of
England (as they report here, that there is good passage) that they will do
their best endeauours to make you there to believe many idle and frivolous
tales. But concerning me you shall have nothing from me but truth according
to mine own understanding and knowledge.

My Lord Duke knows now very well their devices, and laughes them out
sometimes with much grace, when he speaks to any of the enemies of their
great force both by water, and by land, of their undoubtful succor, and of
their imaginary armies in diverse parts of France, which should amount according
to their calculation to more then 50000 men, which are now come to eight or
nine thousand, for the most: And although they were so strong as they report,
they were not able to hinder us of the taking of this Cittadell and that within
the space of fifteen days, or three weeks.

The common soldiers which are in it have now but one biscuit in a day, and
once water, and the Gentlemen and Captains have not much more. It is true that
this retardment is troublesome, and not only hindered our designs, but makes
them likewise more difficult to effect, and shall therefore be more glorious if
we atchieue them. I think that there shall be a good occasion given to us in
these parts; for almost all the forces of the French King march toward Rochel,
and there are already fourteen Companies of the Regiment of the Gardes,
besides many Swissers, and a great deal of ordnance. Many are resolved to
succor them, although the passages are well stopped. They have seized upon the
person of Mons. de Beaulieu d'Ampierre in his own house, fearing that he
should molest them, as he has done in the former wars. We have already means
to make them to restore him unto us, and we hope shortly to have more. We are
certified that the Duke of Rohan is very strong in the field, and that he
intends to go to Montauban on the 25 of this month. Seeing that the City of
Rochel has now in a manner declared it self, I doubt not but that all the
rest of the Religion which are in France which before expected to learn what
they should do, will shortly make some attempt.

Here are lately some arrived from Rochel, which report that our soldiers are
there happily arrived, and received with great joy. It is true, that their
little delay has made them to gather great store of good provision, by which
the City is furnished for the space of a year, or more. And in this Island
there shall be wine enough gathered, notwithstanding the wastes and spoil
which the soldiers and Mariners have made. We are likewise assured that this
night there have been sunk three Shalops which were coming to the said
Citadell, which shall make them to lose all desire to venture any more in such
a manner. This is all most-what we have of any importance at this present time.

For to trouble us with other particulars of no moment, it is not needful,
namely concerning them which have either been slain or hurt of both sides, as
in the rencontres, skirmishes, and with the Cannon shot and casting of granads,
and other things of lesser importance, which would require a whole volume to
write them all together down.

Now at this instant are here arrived some Commissioners of Rochel which are
come to confer with my Lord Duke and Mons. de Soubise, to make him acquainted
with that which is Saturday last past betwixt them and the D. of Angoulesme,
who has made fair offers unto them, and did yesterday send into the said City
Mons. de Comminges, who commands the Fort which is called Lewis, protesting
that if they will cause the English to remove, that good contentment shall be
given to them, and all the Protestants of France.

At S. Martena in the Isle of Re the 26 of August, 1627 new style.

This same day, 17 of August Mons. de Brissac a Gentleman of the Religion is
come out of the Citadell, with some other Gentlemen, to retire home with the
permission of my Lord Duke and of Mons. de Soubize. They confess that in the
Citadell they suffer great incommodities, but they think they may yet keep it
a whole month, or thereabout. Eight Soldiers which have fled out of it, and
are come to us, affirm that they are at their last breath. My Lord Duke is
loved and admired of all men for so many great and excellent parts which are in
him.

SIR I sent you eight days ago a little packet, and having now occasion to
acquaint you with more news, I will impart unto you such as I have at this
present. Since that time we have not received any other but good news.

They of Rochel have begun to make their works out of the gate of S. Nicholas
near which lies their Fort of Tadon to hinder the aproaches of their Enemies
inquartering. Although they have not as yet made any open declarations, they
govern themselves nevertheless as if were joined. The Priests and chiefest
Papists have already forsaken the said City, and there come daily some
soldiers in it, which are there well received and lodged. A declaration of the
French King being lately sent unto them, which forbids very strictly to
adhere or join with the English, they would not publish it, knowing very well,
that unless the English succor had come, there was a resolution taken to
subdue them this Summer. We expect here shortly 5000 men from England, and if
they come, we will undertake some other enterprises then the taking of the
Citadell, which is now at the last gasp, notwithstanding that they expect
succor from Marans both of men and victuals within the space of two days, as
they say. Their Ensign of the Colonel, of which I made mention in my former,
has by reason of the negligence of his keepers, three days ago made an
escape. His Companions were carried to the Ships board by good fortune: for
they were all three as a recompense given to that brave English Captain, who
was hurt with Mouns-Savignac.

We have four days ago sent into the Citadell all the women and children of
those of this Borough, which are in the Citadell, which were retreated into it,
in lieu of so many Gentlemen and Soldiers, which have forsaken it, but they
may serve them to dress their meat, for they have lately killed and salted
the remnant of their horses. They of the Fort are now so environed with our
trenches, that a dog cannot come into it.

There shall now an offer be made unto them to surrender themselves within the
space of a few days, and after the expiration of them there shall no
composition be made with them as it is here reported.

For those which are in the Fort de la Pree, they are so little regarded, that
we assault them not, but kill and take them only when they come abroad, and
dare go into the next villages for refreshments.

This is almost all the matter of importance which I had now to write. All the
news which come from Paris are much to be suspected. Both there and in other
places of France there are rumors spread abroad of Massacres against the
Protestants, I pray God to preserve them. It is likewise reported that the
French King is to come in person to besiege Rochel with 40000 men: But if the
30000 men shall timely come, which the Protestants expect, they will find them
work enough.

The Duke of Soubize has lately received very good news from Languedock and
other places, the particulars whereof are not yet come to my notice. At the
next occasion I shall acquaint you with them, and of such things as shall fall
out from time to time.

From the Island of S. Martin the 24 of August, 1627 new style. To us the 14.
I Have heard now news of Capt. Gifford since I came from Portsmouth, where I
parted from him when he was ready to go on board his ship. I enquired for him
after the battle, but he was not landed, neither is his ship yet come into the
Fleet. I pray God it be not cast away. You may let my Godfather know this, but
none else. I pray remember my duty to him.

Capt. Talbot is not slain, therefore put out his name from among the dead.
Sir George Blundel dyed at Rochel of the wounds he received in the sight.

Sir Charles Rich was shot in the shouldier, but there is no danger of death by
it. It is reported confidently at Bordeaux, that we lost 3000 men at our
landing, and the French but 70. I have escaped many dangers since I parted from
you, I thank God, both by sea and land.

The enemy plays upon the Town wherein we are continually with his ordnance
from the Cittadell, which is less then musket shot from the Town, and we
play upon the Cittadell, having three batteries by land, and one by sea.

I have escaped narrowly from being slain by the shot both of the Cannon and
Musket, and diverse other ways, I thank God, I hope he has reserved me for a
better end, and I pray heartily he would preserve me from sudden death.

My lord Duke has gained a great deal of honor in this employment, and is
sometime blamed for hazarding so much his own person. Our house wherein he
lodges has been twice shot through, and his Barge-roome shot through and
through.

We took one that was encouraged by Mons. de Thorax, and others in the
Cittadell to kill our General: he had about him a short Poniard, and did
confess that he was resolved by that or some other way to kill my L. Duke
within a fortnight.

From Pindennis Castle in Famouth, Aug. 21.
We have received news from the D. that Sir Ralph Shelton by killing a brave
Monsieur hand to hand in fight of both the armies, is made a Lieutenant
Colonel to Sir I. Radliffe, who is made Colonel.

FINIS.

