Remedies for diseases in Horses.

Approved and allowed by diverse very ancient learned Mareschalles.



Imprinted at London in Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Lucrece, by
Tho. Purfoote. 1576.

To the right Honorable, and his singular good Lord, the Lord Robert Dudley,
knight of the honorable order of the Garter, Maistie of the Worst, and one of
the Queens majesty's most honorable privy Counsel.
YOur large renown and well deserved praise
(Most noble Lord) in prudent shall profounde,
In marcial feats, whose like in these our days
By just account scarce any where is found,
Joined with th'zeale borne to your country ground,
Has pricked me forth, and much has moved me,
My poor good will to show in some degree.
And for because your Lordships office is
Most worthily assigned by our Queen,
To view and see that nothing be amiss
About her horse and stable as I ween^,
But that the same in time may be foreseen,
Unto your Honor humbly I present
This Treatise small, to further that intent:
Beseeching you to take this in good part,
Even as the same with single mind is meant:
Way not the gift, regard the geuers heart,
My travail shall happily be spent,
And you also resemble verament
That worthy ^ing, that took with thankful mind
A draught of water of a simple hind.
Although this volume small do seem in sight,
No little foulte yet therein shall you find,
A Lark in worth does far surmomit a Kite:
A grain of gold by doom of each man's mind,
A pound of lead to pass is aye assignde:
The Diadem in value far exceedes
Great massy rocks: fine flowers large stinking weeds.
This little book shall teach you soon to know
The Original cause of each infirmity,
That in an horse by any means may grow,
The name, the place of every malady,
And how you shall the cure thereto apply:
So as you may by remedies found,
Preserve his health, and keep him safe and sounds.
For though you have a comely Courser great,
And Pegasus unto his sire he have,
Though passing trim the trodden ways he beat,
With lofty look that trotteth fine and brave,
With rain as round as hare can wish or crave
As trimly tread, can yarke above the ground,
And seemly saulte and turn both light and round.
Although he can the Galliarde gallope to,
Pass the Carrier, the Cornettie can dance,
Can fetch the Capriol, and other tricks can do,
As brave and fine as any hence to France:
What does avail these virtues to advance,
By diligence thus brought to perfect frame,
If afterward he fall diseasde or lame?
Which to prevent this little Treatise use,
That shall (I trust) in danger him defend.
As time does serve vouchsafe it to peruse:
And so most humbly here I do intend
My leave to take, beseeching in the end
Almighty Jove, whom you both love and serve,
Your Lordship long in honor to preserve.
Your L. most humble T. Purfoote.

Remedies for diseases in Horses.
1 Stuffynge or cold in the head.
Keep his head and body warm, let his drink be warm water mingled with
wheat meal, and fenell seed bruised. Blow up into his nosethrilles by some
small cane or reed, the poulder of Ellebor, commonly called Sneesyng poulder,
and Peper myxt together. Take also a pint of good Malmesey, the whites and
yolks of five new laid eggs, one head of Garlyke bruised small, Peper,
Cynamone, and Nutmigges beaten into fine poulder, a preaty quantity of sweet
butter: mingle them all together, and give it him warm to drink three days
together: and let him not drink in three hours after every time he
receives it.

2 The Poze.
TAke Orpiment and Sulphur, burn them on the coals, and by some preatie
tonnell cause the horse to receive the fume thereof into his nose. Or blow up
into his headde the poulder of Ellebor and Peper, as is aforesaid.

2 The Poze.
TAke ye oil of Bays and Butter mingled together, and squyrt it warm into is
nose thrilles, and hold his headde high, that it may the better run into
his head: keep his head and body warm, and let him drink nothing but warm
water, mixte with fenell seed, and wheat meal as is aforesaid.

3 Dymnesse of sight.
TAke a sharp hot iron, and make there with an hole under the dim eye,
distante the space of one ynche: and thruste the said iron unto the bone, that
the humor may issue out.

3 The watery eye.
LEt him bludde on the veins under the eye, then wash the eye twyse or thrice
in the day, with good clear white wine, after that blow into ye same eye the
poulder of Tartar, Salgem, and Cuttle bone of like quantitee. Or, Take the
yolke of an egg roasted hard, myxe therewith the poulder of Cummyn, and bind
them hot to the eye and let them so rest a night or more.

3 The Hawe.
CVte out the Hawe, and annoint the eye.vi. days together with Salade oil,
the marrowe of sheep shankes, and salt mixte together.

3 The Web.
ANnoynte the eye with the marrowe of Goats shankes, or Dear shankes, and
Rose water mixed together. Or squirte into the eye the juice of the bearies or
leaves of ground yuie, or of other yuie, mingled and strayned with good and
clear white wine. Or, Blow into the eye, the poulder of black flynte but see
that the same poulder be exceedynge fine, and so fine as is possible to be made.

3 Blude shotten:
TAke one dram of Synoper, one dram of pure honey, and so much of wheat
flower, myngle them with fair water, so that they may be lyquide and thynne,
then seath them with a veraye soft fire, until that they be thycke, like unto
an oynctement, and there with annoynte the eye. The white of an egg laid upon
the eye: or the juice of Chelydyn dropped into the eye: or the croppes of
briers sodden in good white wine, and the eye washed therewith be very good,

4 The Lampas.
TAke an yronne crooked like unto a bugle, heat it in the fire, and let him
bludde on the sore part of the roof of the mouth, where it is most swollen,
rub the place after that, with salt and sharp vyneger.

4 The swellyng of the palate.
Prick the roof of the mouth with an hot iron, that the humor may issue
out abundantly: then annoynte the place with honey and onyons boiled together:
or wash it with vyneger and salt as is aforesaid.

4 The Barbes.
CVt out the pappes or bigges clean by the roots, with some sharp
instrume^te: after that, wash the place with salt, Tartar, and sharp
vyneger, myxte together.

4 The Tongue wounded.
IF the tongue be wounded, either with the bitte or by any other hap. Take
English honey, salt larde of like quantity, vnsleked lyme a little quantity,
and a little quantity of the poulder of Peper, boil them on a soft fire, and
stir them well together, until that they be thick like unto an oynctment:
then wash the wound with white wine warmed: after that annoint the wound with
the said oynctment twyse in the day. Put no bytte in his mouth until he be
perfectly whole.

5 The Vynes.
When they be full ryppe, slytte the skin, and take them out clean by the
roots: And to heal them, strowe on the place, the poulder of honey and
vnsleked lyme burnte together.

6 The Strangles.
Use the foresaid practice as before for ye Vines: if the wound bleed over
much, take sharp vyneger and salt, and diepe therein the flocks of woollen
clothe, and put them into the wound, and let them so rest three days:
than wash the wound with white wine warmed: after that annoynte it with Oil
and Tar myxed together.

7 Starkenes of the neck.
THruste through the fleashe of the neck with a sharp hot iron, in five
several places, every one distant from the other three inches: (but beware of
hurtynge the synewes) then rowell the foresaid places, either with horse hear
flax, or hemp.xv. days.

8 Wrounge on the wethers.
IF the place be much swolle^ and festured, the^ perce it with a sharp hot
iron in many parts on both sides of the neck, and put into the same tents of
lynnen cloth dieped in warm Salade oil. And to heal it strowe thereon the
poulder of honye and lyme burnte together.

9 Swollen back.
CLippe of the hear on the swollen, place then take a good handful of the
blades of leekes beat them in a mortar together with Barrowes grease, the^
heat them in some vessel, and lay them hot on the swellynge, and clappe
thereon the sadle, but ride him not until he be perfytely whole.

10 Naue galle.
IF the skin be broken, wash the place first with warm vyneger, then
strowe thereon ye poulder of honey and vnsleked lyme burnte together.

11 Spur galle.
Wash the place with water and salt, or with warm vyneger, and bind on the
place, the croppes or leaves of nettles stamped.

12 Hyde bound.
FIrst bath his body with warm water, wherein baye leaves be sodden, then
annoint him all over with oil of Rue or Camomill, and rub his skin well,
that the foresaid oil may synke in, and that his skin may be souple and
lymbre: after that give him this drink. Take Carretts. gum Tracacanth, Rue,
wild Mynte, of every of them one ounce and an half, Persely, Sec^ula Campana,
wormwood, of every of them like quantity, beat them, and seath them in water,
and give it him to drink warm with some Malmesey.

13 The Spauan.
CLyppe of the hear: the^ take Mustarde seed, the great Mallowe root, Ox
dunge, so much as thou shalt think necessary, and so much strong vyneger
as shall suffice, myngle the^ and beat them well together, and make thereof a
soft plaster or oynctement lay it upon ye Spauen, change it eueninge and
morning, and bind it in such sort to the Soraunce with some piece of
clothe, that it may not fall of, or be removed: and when the Spauen is clean
gone, lay upon the place a plaster of Pitche, and take it not of, until it
falls of by it self.

14 The Splent.
Use the same practice as is showed before for the Spauan. Or, Burn the
Soraunce in the mids and ouerthwarte, after this form following. Four
hours after take Cowes dunge new made, and Salade oil myxte and well beaten
together: and there with annnoynte the foresaid places. But note this, that
you shall hardly cure the Spauan or Splent, but at their beginning. Or, Slitte
the Soraunce all the length of it and let it bleed: and when it has left
bleeding, cast the horse, and keep him down in such sort that he may not
styre, and power into the place that is slytte Boares grease made scaldynge
hot. But first make about the slitte a coffin with claie, to keep in ye said
grease upon the said slytte, and so let it rest, until it be cold, then let
the horse rise and with one dressyng it will rid ye Soraunce clean away,
without any eye sore or blemishe.

15 The Curb.
YOu may use the practyse before for the spaue^ or splent. Or slytte the Curb
all the length, then take a piece of lynnen cloth, and weat it in wine made
hot, and strowe thereupon Verddegrise hot upon the said slit, and bind it so
that it fall not away.

16 The Crepanchies.
TAke a quantity of vnsleked lyme, half so much of black soap, and so much
of strong vyneger as shall suffice, make thereof an oynctme^t, and annoynte the
place withal, and let not the said oynctment be rubbed of, until a day or
two be passed, and it will destroy and kill the Soraunce: the^ wash the place
once or twice with warm wine, after that heal it as you do other wou^des.
Keep the place clean from filth and mire.

17 The Paennes or Pains.
Use the foresaid practice showed for the Crepanchies. Or, Take Peper, Garlyke,
Colewoortes, and old Barrowes grease, make a plaster thereof, and lay it to
the Soraunce, and within a few days, it will heal it.

18 The swellynge of the Coddes.
TAke Bean flower, wheat meal, cummyne, and Barrowes grease make a plaster
thereof and spread it all over the rods.

19 Cloyed or prycked.
PAre the hoof to ye quick where the hurt is, and lay to that place flare or
hardes dieped in ye white of an egg: after that stuff ye hole with salt
beaten small, mingled with Veruin and strong vinegar, and cover it with flax or
hardes diped in very strong vinegar. If a stubbe, nail, or any other such like
thing be run into ye foot, pull it out: then hold up his foot, and power
into the wound hot scaldynge oil Olyfe, and when that is cold, power into
it hot Terebe^tyne, and that being cold, strowe upon it the powlder of
Sulphur, lay thereupon a bolster of flax, then shoe him, and keep his foot
from mire and water. And for all hurtes of the foot. Take tallowe, the poulder
of Sulphur, Mallows, and very strong vyneger, boil the^ together until they
be thick, like unto an oynctme^t: lay the same to the foot, as hot as he
can endure it, and so let it rest xii. hours. If ye foot festureth by
evil curing, or for want of lookynge to it in due time, then pare the hoof
under the foot unto the quick, and use the practice before prescribed.

25 Enterferynge, hewynge, or breaking.
Sometime it comes of weakness, ye remedy thereof is, to feed thy horse well:
if it comes of any other cause, the round paringe of his hoof, and the well
shooynge shall help that fault much.

21 Shouldred.
IF thy horse by any hap be wrinched on the shoulder, rowel him on the place
that is grieved cross wise, the one ouerthwarte the other walk him evening
and moringe softely, that the humors may flow thither and issue forth, and
thrust out the same humors often times in ye day with thy hands or skotch
the place with an hot iron all the length of the shoulder, and ouertwhart in
such sort that ye scotches may be comely, and no disfyguringe to the place:
use the same practice for every wrinche or swellynge.

* Broken leg. 22.
FIrst bring the bones into their right places: then wrappe the^ about with
unwashed woulle pulled from the sheep back, and roll it with rolls of
lynne^ colth dieped in oil and vyneger, the^ sple^te it with splentes on three
of ye sides, and bind the^ ha^dsomely, and let the^ stand still so.xl. days,
unless by occasion thou shall be enforced to change ye rollers, to new bind
the fore said splents: but always keep the place moist with vyneger and salet
oil: after.xl. days (if the bones be grown well together) remove all the
foresaid things, and anoint dailye the place with some sewet. And note this,
that all bones broken above the kenee, be for the most part incurable.

* The Scabbe, or Maunge. 23
IF it comes of abundaunce of bludde or humors, then let him blud on ye
neck vein, and cowell him under ye neck that ye humurs may issue forth: then
rub his body all over with an hard hear cloth, or corrie comb, until it
bleedeth, after that annoint his body with this oinctement. Take Sulphur,
salt, and Tartar, of every one of them like quantity, beat the^ and temper
them with very strong vyneger, and the like quantity of oil, and therewith
anoint him.

Or take very strong vyneger, the urine of a bore under.xii. years of age, and
the juice of Humlocks mix them together and wash thy horse therewith

24 The Fistula, or the Pole yuell.
TAke vnsleked lyme, and Arsenike of each like quantity, beat them together
into very fine poulder, put thereto the juice of garlike, oynio^s, and
walwoorte, or Dane woorte, of like quantity, and honye, so much as the juice
of the foresaid three, boil them on a soft fire, and styre them well
together until they be as thycke as an oynctment: then wash the Soraunce
with very strong vyneger, and fill the hole full of ye fore said oynctment
twice in the day, and bind something about the mouth of it, that the said
oynctment may not run out. Or, Take Orpiment, vnsleked lyme, Verdegryse, of
each like quantity tpe^er the^ with the juice of Paretarie, blake ink, honey,
and strong vyneger, of like quantity, boil them, and stir them well
together until they be very thick: the^ make thereof rolls (as it were
suppositories) and put them into the holow place of the said Soraunce. Note
that thou shall never heal a Fistula or Canker, until thou shall have killed
it at the bottom: when it is killed, healle it, strowe on it or put into it
the poulder of Sauyn, or the poulder of honey and vnsleked lyme burnte together,
or Tar and oil myxte together.

25 The Farcyn.
LEt him bludde at ye beginning of his disease, but in no wise in ye mids
thereof: the^ burn those places where yt shall epsy any swellyng or Farcyn to
appear. (Note: that it is much better to burn an horse with copper the^ with
yro^ instruments) then heal the foresaid burninges with Tar, Oil, and
Honey mixte together: and give him with Malmesey ye poulder of D^apente
hereafter in ye end showed. Or, give him four ounces of the poulder of
Walwoorte or Danewoorte, with a pint and an half of good wine three days
together. After that take half an ounce of Aloes, one ounce of Centaure, one
ounce of Opoponax, beat them al into fine poulder, and give them him to drink
in a pint and an half of wine warmed, wherein the roots of the foresaid
herb called walwoorte, or Danewoorte have been boiled. Use to ride him often
until he be all on a sweat. And when he is cured put him to pasture, for ye
running in pasture in the open air is very good.

26 The Canker.
TAke Sauyn, Bay salt, and Rue, sta^pe them together with Barrowes grease and
lay this oynctment to it until it be killed, which thou shall know by the
whytenes: then heal it, as is before prescribed for the Fistula.

27 The Festure or Tetre.
TAke a snake, cut of ye head and tail, throw them away, ye rest cut in
to small pieces, roste them on a spitte, take ye grease that droppeth from them,
in still the same hot upon the Sorau^ce, and it will heal it wunderfully in
very short time, but touch none other part with the foresaid oynetment but
only the Soraunce.

28 An Vlcere.
TAke Copperas and ye leaves of Lillies, beat them well together in a mortar
with swynes grease, therewith annoint the sore and it will heal it. Oil Olife
instilled hot upon it, or the poulder of Galls strowed upon it, is very good.

29 An inpostume or mattrie sore.
FIrst when it is ripe lance it under the Soraunce after the figure of a new
moon, as thus, ^ for that manner of incision is best to cause the matter to
issue forth: then wash it with warm vryne, after that annoint it with tar
and oil myxt together. Note that the launcing of it with an hot iron, is
better, then with a cold knife.

* Wounds. 30
TO heal wounds, Take.viii. dra^mes of Terebe^tine, four dra^mes of new
virgin ware, melte the^ in anewe pewter vessel, stir the^ well together, and
when that they be well molte^ take the^ from the fire, and by and by whiles
they be hot, power into the^ half a pint of good white wine, the^ after they
be cold throw away ye wine, and annoynte thy hands with oil of Roses, and,
work the ware and Terebentine well together. After that put the^ into the
pewter vessel again, then put to the^ half an ounce of the gu^me of fur
tree, and three dra^mes of the juice of betony, seath the^ together until the
juice of Betonie be wasted, then put to it.iiii. dra^mes of womans milk, or
the milk of a red cow, and seath them once agyne until the milk be
wasted, and so keep it for it is very good. Or, Take Rosemary, and dry it in
the shadow, beat it into fine poulder, wash the wound with vyneger, or the
vryne of a child, and strowe thereon the foresaid poulder: or the poulder of
honey and vnsleked lyme burnt together.

* Wounds or sore. 30.
TAke wormewoode, Mayoram, Pimpernel, Calamynt dried, Olibanum, beat them all
into finepouldre, then take wax and barrowes grease and boil them on a soft
fyte until they be as thick as an ointment or salve, make a plaster thereof
and lay it upon the soraunces.

* To draw out a stubbe, thorn, or iron out of the flesh. 31.
TAke reed roots, stamp them with honey, or take snayles without shelles,
commonly called slugges, slampe them together with butter, fry them and lay
them to the pla^e, and they will draw out the thorn, stubbe, or iron. When
the thorn, stubbe, or iron, is come fourth, lay upon the wound the white of
an egg, by the space of xii. hours, and after that, heal it as it is showed
before for wounds.

* Ache, pain, or swellynge in the sinews. 32.
TAke the flower of Line seed, Terebentine, and honey, of each like
quantity, boil them with white wine until they be thick like unto an oynctment,
lay them upon the grief, and spread thereon a piece of cloth.

* Short wynded. 33.
TAke Nutmigges, Cloves, Gala^gale, Cardamomu^, or Grains of Paradise, of
every of the^ three dra^mes, Carraway seed, and Fenigreke somewhat more in
quantity the^ the four a foresaid, a like quantity of Saffro^, and half an
ounce of Liquorize, beat them all into very fine poulder, put unto the^ a
pynte of good white wine, and the yolks of four eggs, beat them all well
together, and then give them to thy horse to drink: let him stand with his
head hanged up high one whole hour, that he may not cast out ye foresaid
drink: after that, either walk him, or ride him softely, but let him not eat
or drink all that day after, nor the night before, to thinte^t that ye said
drink may the better work on him: and ye next day put him to pasture,
that ye coldness of ye gras may somewhat abate ye heat of ye foresaid drink.
Or, Take Capill^s Veneris, Ireos, Ash keys, Liquorize, Fenigreke, and
Reiso^s, of eueri of the^ one dram and an half: graynes of Paradise Peper
sower Almons, Baurach, Nettle seed, aristol ochia, and Coloquintida, of every
one two dra^mes, Algaricum one dram and an half, honi two.li. dissolve them
with water wherein Liquorize is sodde^, and give him to drink thereof three or
four times, and it will help him, if that the disease has not long continued
upon him.

* The Cough. 34
TAke the whytes and yolks of two eggs, three ounces of oil Olyfe, two
sponeful of Bean flower, one ounce of Fenigreke, one sponeful of the powder of
Enula campana, mingle all these together in a pint of good Malmesey, and give
it him to drink three days together. Or, Take Tar, and Barrowes grease, or
fresh butter, mingle them together and give thereof to thy horse.iiii. times
in.vii. days: that is, the frist day, the third day, the fyfth day, and
the seventh day.

* The Bottes. 35
TAke the bowelles of ayounge pullet, and give them to thy horse to swallowe
down warm, and let him neither eat nor drink in four hours after. Or,
give him the croppes of Sothernwood to eat with his prouender. Or, give him
woorme seed, or brimstone, or the powder of Sauin to drink with ale, beer,
or Malmesey.

* The frettynge of the beally. 36
Annoint thy hand with Salade oil, butter: or grease, and thruste it in at
his fundament, put out the hard dunge that lets the passage of the
excrementes: after that, with some clyster pipe conueigh into his intrailes
water and salt mixed together. Or make a suppositorie of honey and a quantity
of salt, of good length, and as byg as an heunes egg, and put it in at his
fundame^t. Give him to drink the poulder of Centaury or woormewood with
malmesey.

* The Squynte or Fulre. 37
Keep him from labor: let him drink very seldom, and that very little and
warm, mingled with wheat meal: and burn him with an hot iron about the
nauyll: the^ give him to drink a pint of red wine, with the poulder of a
Nutmigge, half an ounce of Synamone, and as much of the rind of a
Pomegranate.

* Lunge sick. 38
TAke the bludde of a young suckynge pygge, and give it thy horse to drink
whiles it is warm. After that take one headde of Garlyke, bray it, and mingle
it with butter, or Barrowes grease, make balls thereof and give them to thy
horse to swalow down: then take half a pint of malmesey, four new laid
eggs, and three ounces of honey, mingle them together, and give it him to
drink three days together.

* The Yalowes. A disease of the heart, and to be discerned by the eyes. 39
First pull out with thy hand the hard clottered dunge (as is before
prescribed for the frettyng of the bealy) tha^ give him a suppositorie, made
with salt, honey, and maiorame, as is there also showed. Let him bludde in the
neck vein, and staunche not the bleedynge until thou shall see the bludde
pure and good. Then give him to drink three ounces of Myrre beaten into fine
poulder, with a pint of good malmesey. Some use to take ye juice of yuie
leaves mingled with wine, and squirte it warm into his nosethrilles. Let his
drink be cold water mixed with Vitrum, and feed him with grass or new hay,
sprinkled with water and Vitrum mingled together.

* Languishe.
TAke half a pint of good malmesey, and as much of the bludde of a young
sucking pigge, give it him warm to drink. Or, give him malmesey with the
juice of Feuerfew. Or, take an ounce of Sulphur viue beaten into fine poulder,
the weight of one penny of the poulder, of Myrre, beat them well together with
a new laid egg, and give them to drink with half a pint of good malmesey:
use it for it is very good.

* To provoke an horse to stale.
TAke five long oynions the sharpest that thou can get, or garlike: bruise
the^, and thrust them in at his fundament so far as thou can, and put some
thereof into his yard: after that ride him, or gallop him. Or, take the
grou^des or the cleye of horse urine, mingle it with white wine, and squirt it
in at his nosethrilles.

* To make Diapence. 42
TAke Gentum, Aristol^chia, Mirre, Bayberies, and the shauinges of Elephantes
tooth of every one like quantity, beat all together in fine poulder, and give
a spoonefull of the said poulder in a pint and an half of good malmesey. It
helps and preserves from al inward maladies and infections. Therefore
beneuer without the foresaid poulder, and as soon as thou shall espy thy horse
drooping or droowsy, give him thereof as is aforesaid, and thou shall find
the virtue thereof.

* The poulder of honey and lyme. 43
Take such a quantity of vnsleked lyme as thou shall think best, beat it
into fine poulder, then take so much honey as shall suffice, mingle the^
together, and make as it were stife paste of them in the form of a thick cake
or lofe, then put the same cake or lofe into a hot burning fire, and burn it
there until it be glowing read and through burnte, take it forth, when it is
cold beat it into fine poulder and use it: it dreth, heals, and skynneth
meruaylously well

FINIS.
END

