THE Sermon, which Christ made on the way to Emaus to those two sorrowful
disciples, set down in a dialogue by D. Vrbane Regius, wherein he has
gathered and expounded the chief prophecies of the old Testament concerning
Christ. *

At London, Printed by John Day dwelling over Aldersgate and are to be sold
at his long shop at the west door of Paul's. Anno. 1578.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.

To the right honorable Lord Mayor of the City of London, the right
worshipful the Aldermen his brethren, and the Citizens and communaltye of the
same City, W. Hilton wishes all heavenly wisdom, grace, and health in the
Lord Jesus Christ.
COnsidering that Master Frederus, the latin translator of this heavenly
Sermon had bouldly dedicated his labors being but a latin translation to three
noble Dukes of Germanye, and thought it a work well worthy their heroical
patronage, I could not observing decoru^, se^d the same abroad, being now
Englished under a baser patron, the^ I found it latined. For so should I have
promoted yt (...) out of the haule into the kitchyen, which neither haules, nor
earthly habitations can worthily entertain. Wherefore right honorable, and
worshipful Citizens though England may well be called (...), a land of great
Lords, for the multitude of nobles in it, and consequently easy to find an
English patron, to match those three German protectors: yet have I chosen
to dedicate these my simple labors, to this noble City of London, and the
honorable, and worshipful Citizens thereof. And that for diverse causes: some
whereof be these. First to give this precious pearl a patron, whom of mine
own experience I know to be equal, nay far superior to all his German
protectors, both in nobilitye, and antiquitye. For I would wish that good, and
Godly books, should find as good enterteinement here, as else where. Secondly
to help the book it self to better efficacy, and greater operation amongst
many, by dedicating it to many. For such is man's nature, that it easily
admits, mindefully retayneth, and highly estemeth yt, which good will
gratefully offers. Thirdly to do honor to this honorable City. For worthy
works are said, as well to magnyfye their patrons: as to amplifye their
authors. Fourthly to make some semblance betwixt ye patrons, to whom it is
offered and this puple which seeks at your hand to be defended. For this is a
grave, and godly dialogue, well agreing with the persons of grave, and godly
men, and matrons, such as many of this City are, and all ought to be. And
lastly I have dedicated this translation, (such as it is) to London: Because
Londiners of all ye lay people of this la^d, have most leisure to read, best
will to hear, greatest desire to learn, rediest wits to conceive, soundest
Judgment to decerne, and most love to good books, and therefore most worthy of
that honor, and profet, which this way may rise of good and godly writings.
Luke. 9.26.
And yet to promise that this dedication, and book, shall bring you either
honor, or profit I cannot, unless both your Citizens take it thankfully, your
City protect it faithfully, and your deeds express it lively. This dare I
promise, and say, yt all men, if they will, may by reading, imbrasing,
believing, John. 8.51 1. Ione. 5.1.
and following the doctrine of this little book, escape hell, and obtain
heaven. Revel. 12.12. 1. Pet. 5.8 Luke 22.31.
For where as the devil, first by a sencelesnes of sin seeks to lead the
unregenerate to hell: and secondly by ye horrors of their sins would bereave
ye godly of heaven: Ephe. 2.12.
And thirdly whereas man is altogether (...) and can neither save himself from
ye one, nor obtain ye other: but is, as an Ethiopian, in reading the remedy
ignorante of the remedy, Acts. 23. Luke. 24.16.
and as a Cleophas that talking with his savior, knows not his Savior: This
one precious sermon, or dialogue, (by Gods grace) does help all these evils:
as by your patience I shall show.

For whereas first the devil, that subtle serpent, seeks by keeping men in
a sencelesnes of sin to lead them hedlong to hell: here may be gathered, that
for sin there must follow death, the reward of sin. Romans 6.23.
And such as is the work, such must be ye wages: but sin is infinite,
therefore must needs follow death which is infinite. And this death, must be the
death either of the offe^der man or of the suerty Christ, apprehended by faith.
If it be the death of the suertye Christ, then is it infinite in preciousnes:
but if it be ye death of ye offe^der man, the^ is it (horrescorefere^s.)
infinite in horriblenes. And who now shall the devil hereafter entise to sin:
seeing every sinner in sinning does either kill himself, or crucify Christ.
Surely I think men will not buy dross so dear. I think Christians will not
(...) leese the kingdom of heaven for a short pleasure, Genesis 25.33.
nay pain of sin. I hope men will learn to be wise by Esaw, and not sell
their byrthright of heaven for a vile pleasant sin, and very cold mess of
pottage: yea I think the very worldling, unclean person, and atheist (whom
the devil by this way, chiefly haunteth after) will here make a pause, and
say with Demosthenes (...) (nay (...)) (...). I will not buy repentance so
dear: which if it please God, they do, then this sermon has well stopped up
the devils former way.

Revel. 12.12.
Secondly, when men begin to repent, satan seeing that his kingdom is but
short, besturreth him in his other way (to wit,) he seeks by fear of Gods
wrath, by horror of their falls, and by sight of their sins, to drive the
godly to despair, John. 5.25. and August l. 4. de trinitate. c. 3. Revel. 12.4.
and that especially while they are but yet setting first foot forward to God
by repentance, while they are but yet green from the former resurrection,
while they are but yet in the new birth, 1. Pet. 1.7.
and while they be but yet weak, and unacquainted with the fiery trialls,
Deuteronomy. 8.3.
with the Lords battayles, with Gods crosses, and with the spiritual
conflictes, in which our old Adam, our natural man the fleshly lusts, must
in this life be crossed, consumed, mortified, and slain. But here are opened
unto them, the flowers of the prophets, and the chief promises of God
concerning Christ, Romans 15.4.
which as they are of themselves by the testimony of the new testament, the
marrow of the word, the kernel of the scriptures, the Joy of our hearts,
Math. 4.4.
the stafe of our lives, the food of our souls, and the power of God unto
salvation, to all that believe: so does there in opening of them, appear a very
paradise of al spiritual pleasure, love, hope, and peace, the sweet ryuers of
Eden, which flow so plentifully in this sermon, that they expel all fear of
desperation, and so stop that other second way, whereby the devil seeks to
devour the children of God. For though the Godly be thus assailed by Satan,
and that in the greennes of their new birth, and though the Devil torment them
with griefs, and fear them with death, hell and Gods judgments: yet shall
they find in this sermon such, so great, and so sweet, promises of god in
christ, yt there is no soul so fearful, though most fearful, no faith so
weak, though most weak nor any man so ignorant, doubtful, and hartlesse,
though he be most ignorant, doubtful, and hartlesse, but yt he may in this
sermon gather such heart, receive such hope, and grow unto such knowledge,
strength and stabilitie, that if he will but come, and either hear it, or
read it, he shall return as did Cleophas, leap like an heart, walk like a
Lion, and stand like a rock which cannot be moved with any surging sea of
temptation.

For that learned bishop of Germany doctor Vrbane Regius has here so displayed
Christ, with ye kingdom of Christ, and the mercies of god in christ, that if
any sad Cleophas, do but covet to come to Emaus, Emaus signifies the bright
morning.
(ye bright morning) of the knowledge of Christ, and his kingdom, and will
bring but so much good seed with him (by gods grace,) as that he has a desire
to know Christ, to hear Christ, to enjoy Christ, and to reason and read of
Christ, (for this is faith,) yea though he be heavy, and sorrowful, and come
weeping: yet shall he in this book so meet with Christ and hear such a
sermon of Christ, that it will last him, and not leave him, until he come to
the true Emaus in deed, the bright knowledge of Christ: and there shall his
blind eyes be opened, Cleophas signifies all glory. Gene. 10.9
and he shall see, know, and acknowledge Christ to be his savior, and shall
return a right Cleophas in deed, and bring such shows of faith, hope, and
peace of conscience with him, that Nimrods net shall be broken, the pray, (man's
soul) shall be delivered, the fear of death, and desperation, shall be
abandoned. And of this you may fetch (if you will) aprobatum est, out of the
gospel of Saint Luke. Luke. 24.13
For he makes mention of this sermon, and shows both when, where, why, to
whom, and out of what Christ made it, and what effect it had in it. Thirdly
whereas (I said) we are by nature, Acts. 8.23.
vnperceiuing Ethiopians, which reading the Prophets, understand not the
Prophets: this little book will well serve us for a Phillip, a sound
interpreter of the prophets. For it does so draw the vale and curtayne of the
letter, that it manifestly shows the precious perle Christ, Math. 13.44. and
45. Jesus signifies a Savior.
hidden under the letter: and it so plainly discovers the field of ye old
testament, that it leads us by ye hand to our Jesus, yt great treasure,
hidden in the law, and the prophets. Yea it does so plainly prove Christ to be
Christ that both the ignorant Gentiles, and obstinate Jews, may know, and
acknowledge, Christ to be Jesus, the savior of the world.

But because we are subject to many enymies, crosses, and temptations, and so
have need of comfort: and because also, when we both have, hear, and read of
comfort, John. 20.25
we be as Thomas was, hard receauers of Comfort: I think it needful, that
for the better obtaining of comfort, we use two things in the reading of good
books, and the holy scriptures the cornu copia of all comfort.

Math. 21.22.
The first is that before we read, we pray. For as of ourselves we are, and have
nothing: so to faithful prayers, is made a promise of all things. The second
is that in all our private reading we apply ye word to our selves and take
that which is there spoken, and read to be spoken to us, or him that reads
it: for else shall we neither have our lives mended, nor our souls comforted by
the word, and then the word, leeseth his fruitful effect. But if when we
see, and hear, Ephraim, Jerusalem, and Judah, or the scribes, and pharisees
threatened, and reproved for their sins, we will in place of them, put in our
own selves, and names, and know it to be spoken to us (as it is in deed if we
be like the^, Jeremy. 5.9
) then no doubt we shall read to our amendment. Again if when we see promises
made, and comfort given, and forgeuenes granted to Judah, Jerusalem, and Sion,
or the Church, we will in place of them suppose, or put in our own names, and
persons, and both believe, and know, that those promises, forgeuenes, and those
comforts are made, set down, and given us, and every one of us that hear or
read them, (as they are in deed if we believe them, Romans 15.4.
) then shall we find in this sermon, and other holy scriptures such salve for
our sores, and such comfort for our hearts, that sin shallbe subdued,
despair shall be removed, and our heavy hearts shall be comforted.

And here I will pass over the just praises which this book deserves, both
in excellency of the matter, as god has given it, and in laudablenes of the
manner as Vrbane has handled it. For in that it contains ye prophecyes of
Christ, and the promises of God, true salvation unto all that believe (a wine a
man would think, ve^dible enough amongst the depraved, and dead sons of
Adam) it does sufficiently approve, and promote it self. (...). Only this I
think meet, that before I end, I put you in remembrance, that we are all by
nature wicked, and the children of wrath, and death, Ephe. 2.3.
and must without the knowledge of those things which are set down in this
book, dye as we be, and be as we dye, even without Christ, firebrandes of
hell. But now to return where I began I beseech you honorable, and worshipful
Citizens, that as you have heard my dedication was not without cause: so now ye
will grant me a petition, or two which do not exceed reason. The first is
that (God having his dew praise for all his goodness) ye would both pardon this
my bouldnes, and also vouchsafe my simple labors (about the heavenly word) no
worse entertainment, and protection, then ye use to show to your earthly
peuples.

Secondly that if ye reap any profit by this work, ye would give deserved
praise to two learned, and well lived doctors of this church namely M. Barnard
Gilpin of the North, and M. John Fox of the South. Whereof this godly, and
painful father moved me to translate it: and the other great Moecenas has
brought up me poor sinner to this little I have, and many other learned men to
the Churches commoditye. And lastly I beseech you in the Lord, that you will
take pity upon your wives, your children, your selves, and your souls, to wit,
that you will by hearing, believing, and practicing the word, seek to be safe
from Satan, that seeks to sifte you. Furnish your selves, and your familyes
(I pray you) with spiritual armor. Give your inward man, but every month one
of these articles for his repast, and let it be well digested. Let the spirit
once rule over the flesh, and let Christ's spouse the soul now at the last, be
as well bewtified, as the Devils co^cubine the world. (...). Eschew evil, and
do good. Recte iudicate, qui iudicatis terram. Judge and govern well, and
rightly, ye that be magistrates, least the Lord remove your candlestick. Handle
not (O ye rich men) those, that fall into your lappes, with rigor and
extremity: and give not your selves (ye poor men) to sinister and double
dealing. Delight not I beseech you (ye me^) in ye multitude of your riches: nor
(ye women) in the furniture of your houses: watch ye which have charge in your
callinges, and keep your selves clear from the blood of your families. Let
not your wives, children, and bodies, so have their wills, and pleasure,
Ezechi. 3.18
that your souls (which must answer for it) suffer woe, and pain. (...). O
lay hold, lay hold upon discipline, and put away pride, covetousness, lying,
swearing, and cursed dealing from among you. And all these shall you quickly,
and easily do, if you will pray heartily, if you will read the word
diligently, and if you will apply it wisely. Which the Lord Jesus, that dyed
for you work in you. And the blessed Lord God, which has caused all holy
scriptures to be written for our learning: grant that we may all in such wise,
hear the^, read, mark, learn, and inwardly digest them, that sin and
distrust, may be removed from us, and we may in all our extremities be
comforted, and ever hold fast the blessed hope of everlasting life, which he
has given us in our Savior Jesus Christ, who ever preserve you and his whole
Church. Amen.

Your honors in the Lord W. Hilton Scholemaister at S. Anthonyes.

A brief ingresse to the Christian Reader.
AMongst all sorts of studies, and labors belonging to the life of man, as
there is none comparable to the searching of holy scriptures: so in reading
thereof diligent regard ought to be had. First with what mind, and to what end
a man reads them. Secondly in what sense, and after what meaning he
understands them. Touching the first, as the scriptures, and word of God of
his nature is holy: so is it requisite no man to resort thereunto, otherwise
then with an holy mind: nor to read them, but to a blessed purpose. That is,
to profit in a spiritual intelligence: to learn the true will, and worship
of God in his word: to increase in faith: and to search out the kingdom of
life.

This done, the second consideration is to be had, for the true sense, and
right understanding of the same. Some there be, and that not a few, who
entering the study of the sacred scriptures, have not all peradventure the
right meaning of the holy ghost therein contained. The good Enuch in the Acts
of the Apostles, was well occupied in his kouche, reading the prophetical
scriptures, yet he understood not what he red, before an expositor was sent
him. Thapostles themselves had the scriptures, and red them: yet how far from
the meaning thereof were they, before their senses were opened? So the Jews,
and Saracens to this day do haunt the scriptures, but for lack of true
understanding, in what blindenes do they yet remain? They which in reading the
mystical scriptures, do see nothing else but the literal sense, and outward
history thereof, though they think to see something, yet in very deed see
nothing. Albeit I denay not, but in the externe letter, and historye of the
old testament, there is a certain verity of things so done, as in the letter
is specified: yet under the same letter, and historical truth, lies an other
more secret, and mystical truth, which must be opened. For as the scriptures
of the former testament, were written most by the prophets, so have they no
doubt, a prophetical meaning. And as all the scriptures were inspired by the
holy spirit of God, so carye they a spiritual understanding secretly covered
under the visible letter.

As for example the eating of the Apple, and casting out of paradise: the
slaughter of Abell, by his brother Caine: The flood, and Arc of Noah: the
promised blessing in the seed of Abraham: The unknown generation of
Melchisddech both king, and priest: The son of Abraham, given, and borne by
promise, with the inheritance cast upon him: The whole discourse, and story of
Joseph: The tipicall lamb, with his blood sprinkled, and bones unbroken: The
passage through the red sea: The hard rock gushing out in water springes:
Manna: The brazen serpent: The whole course and life of Moses: The land of
promise: The works and death of Sampson: The victory of Gedeon: The kingdom
of David: The tabernacle, and temple of Solomon, with the propitiatory, and the
Arc: The rapting up of Elias: The casting up of Jonas: Yea the giving also of
the law it self, in outward tables, upon the penticoste day, that is, fifty
days after the deliverance. These I say, with a number such other things
more, which from time to time, happened amongst that people, although in fact,
and historye they bear a truth in deed: yet notwithstanding, under the same
historical truth, as under a veil, or curten lies hid other matter of higher
mysteries, and greater priuities: which if they be well discussed, shall rapt a
man's mind into more perfect knowledge, of spiritual contemplation. According
as we read, to happen to S. Austen by hearing Ambrose expounding the miseries
contained in the oulde testament.

So that the prophetical Scriptures may well be resembled, in a manner, to the
person of their own master, that is, to Christ himself. Who being here in
earth, if a man look only upon his outward shape: his humble poor estate in
this world: his quiet, and simple demaynour: his paynefull travails, the
manifold afflictions, and tentations of his werisome life: his sharp cross,
and reproachful death, and look no further, he shall see no great matte in him
But draw this curtain of flesh a little, and with a further insight view well
what lies within, and there shall appear an other manner of matter: There
shall thou behold the glory of the kingdom of God, the admirable wisdom, and
omnipotent power of the Father, the conquest of Satan, hell, and the whole
world, with all the pride thereof, and the fulness of the deity, there
corporally dwelling, as S. Paul himself both did see, and testify. In much
like sort, the scriptures written, and inspired by God, if they be sought for
no further, but for the literal meaning only, or outward precepts of life,
they little avail to salvation. But if the mystical tipes, and manifest
oracles of the law, Psalms, and prophets be thoroughly opened, what light, what
life, what knowledge give they? without which I see not, how the faith of a
Christian man can stand sound and sure. And therefore the Lord himself, when he
would give faith to his disciples, either opened the scriptures unto the^, or
else opened their eyes, to understand the scriptures.

And therefore, Doct. Vrbanus Regius, thauthor of this treatise, is well worthy
of thanks, and commendation, for this his labor, in opening to us such
scriptures, as the Lord Jesus appears in his talk to have opened to his two
disciples going to Emaus. And in like respect, no less commendation also is of
his part deserved, and of our part to be recounted, to this our good brother,
and learned scholemaister, Hilton, who at request has taken pains to
translate the same, into our english country speech, for the better
instruction of such, as have not ben brought up in the skill of the Latin
tongue. Accept therefore well in worth gentle reader, the laborious travail of
this godly man, and read it as the Lord shall give thee time, and leisure: upon
a more fruitful matter, thou can not employ thy diligence. For when all
other things shall fail thee, only faith in Jesus the Lord, is that must
save thee, both body and soul. Read and pray. The Lord Jesus hear thy
prayers, and bless thy reading. Amen.

Yours in Christ Jesus fellow laborer John Fox.

The translator to the Christian Reader.
WHereas Doctor Vrbane has here set down, the doctrine which our Savior
Christ taught his disciples on the way to Emaus, in a dialoge, and not (as it
seems) in a sermon, as both in this book it is called, and in deed it is,
(for every godly dialoge, such as this is, is a sermon, or rather a great many
sermons) think it to be done (beloved reader) for thy profit, and good
insa^ple. For though this familiar kind of talking, be not the most glorious
kind of oration for the teacher: yet is it the most commodious way of
instruction for the learner. And here behold, how the godly bishop sought more
thy profit, then his own praise. Again it is a good insample for all, that
have charge of others, thus to instruct them, and reason with them in
diuinitye, and commonly after they have hard a sermon, that so they may see how
their younglinges hear, and bear away the sermon, which they here. But married
men especially have in this dialoge a good ensample (as good bishops of their
houses) to instruct their wives, and to have such talk with them at home, as
may be to the use of edifiyng. Then which nothing is more comely, nothing more
fruitful, nothing more necessary.

For as man, and wife, are the Image of Christ, and his spiritual church: so
ought there communication to be of heavenly, and spiritual things. And they
which will use this way of domestical instruction, shall reap the fruit
thereof, even to have their wives co^forts, not crosses, and helpers, not
hinderers of their godly proceedings: yea they shall have the^ (though they be
but women) by this means as great defenses to their houses, families, and
people, as was Lot to Sodom, as was Phenies to Israel, and as Moses was to
the Jews, when he stood in the gappe, and turned away the wrath of the Lord.
But women children, and families co^trarily used, do show contrary fruits, and
work contrary effects. And here if any aduersarye of the gospel, hold that
such hye matters, would not be handled in such homely dialogs with women, send
them to the example of Christ in the gospel, and the apostles in the Acts, who
are Vrbans warrant in this matter. And if they require examples of doctors they
shall find that Hilarious in his book to his daughter Aphra, Ambrose to his
sister, Hierom to Principia, Hedibia, Algasia, Eustachius, and Paula, and Saint
Augustine to his mother, have all used the like participation of hye mysteries
with women as Vrbane has here done in this dialoge. And therefore can it not be
said, but that this manner of teaching is godly, profitable, and usual.
Wherefore receive it, read it, and pray beloved reader, that thou may
profit in it, to Gods glory, and thy salvation.

The principal contents of this book discoursed at large in their places
quoted, as follows.
OF the knowledge of Christ, how necessary it is. 2.3. Of the gospel, and
doctrine thereof. 4.5. Of original sin, and the promises of grace. 12:14. Of
Christ his kingdom, and of the Jews. 17.20. Of the figures of Christ in the
old law. 2.24.25. Of the Genealogy of Christ. 28. Of the City Bethleem,
where he was borne. 29. Of the virgin Mary, and Christ's conception. 33 36. Of
Christ his name. 37.39.86. Of his former coming, how base. 41. the time thereof
63. Of his eternal Godhead, 70. and humane birth. 84. Of his flight into
Egypt, 90. Of his minesterie, that he should be a king, priest, doctor,
mediator, redeemer, and judge of the world. 91. Of his miracles. 97. Of his
death, descending into hell, resurrection, kingdom everlasting, and
commodities thereof. 98.
FINIS.
Certain places of the Scripture expounded.
cap. ver. Fol. Genesis.
3 15 I will put enmity between thee, and etc. 7 26 4 By my self have I sworn.
11 46 10 The scepter shall not depart. 16 49 11 He shall bind his Asses. 20
Psalms.
8 4 What is man that thou. 98 22 1 My God my God why. 106 110 1 The Lord said
unto my Lord. 112 Prouer.
8 22 The Lord has possessed me. 71 Esaias.
2 1 It shall be in the last days. 115 4 2 In that day shall the. 117 8 13
Sanctify the Lord of hosts. 118 7 14 Behold a virgin shall conceive. 33 11 1
But there shall come a rod. 119 10 And in that day the root of Iesse. 121 12 3
Therefore with joy shall. 122 13 14 The Palace shall be forsaken. 125 21 And
the Lord went before him. 117 26 19 Thy dead men shall live. 123 27 2 In that
day sing to thy vineyard. 124 35 1 The defeart and the wilderness. 126 42 1
Behold my servant, I will stay. 47 5 He that created the heavens and. 51 52 13
Behold my Servant shall prosper. 137 53 1 Who will believe our report. 157 60 1
Arise Jerusalem. 150 17 For bras will I bring gould. 152 61 1 The spirit of
the Lord is with me. 55 62 8 The Lord has sworn by his right hand. 156 Jeremy.
31 31 Behold the day is come says the Lord. 171 Ezechias.
37 1 The hand of the Lord is upon me. 175 21 And say unto him, thus says the
Lord. 176 Daniell.
2 34 I saw a stone cut of a mountain. 35 2 44 And in the days of these
kings. 63 9 24 Seventy weeks are determined upon. 62 Micheas.
5 2 And thou Bethleem Ephrata. 29 Zephany.
3 8 Therefore wait ye upon me. 199 Aggias.
2 7 Thus says the Lord of hosts. 202 Zachary.
3 8 Hear now O Iehosua the hye priest. 205 9 9 Rejoice greatly O daughter
Sion. 42 Abdias.
1 17 But upon mount Sion shall be deliverance. 190 Matthew.
2 6 Thou art not the least. 29 John.
1 1 In the beginning was the word. 72 8 58 Verily Verily I say unto you,
before. 31

FINIS.
A Dialogue of Vrbanus Rhegius, upon the Sermon which Christ made out of
Moses, and the Prophets, to those two his Disciples, as they went from
Jerusalem to Emaus, immediately after his Resurrection, wherein the prophesies of
the old Testament concerning Christ: are godly, and plainly expounded.
Vrbanus. WHy are you sadder (wife Ann) then you were wont to be, and specially
on this Easter day, when all Creatures ought infinitely to rejoice, and triumph
with Christ raised again to life? What trobleth your mind? Why do you sigh so
often? Do you not know that Jesus Sirach wills us to pluck up our hearts in
holiness, and to drive al heaviness away from us? Jesus Sy. 30.23.
Sorrow (says he) has slain many, and there is no profit therein. Do you not
know, that S. Paul also bids us always, Phll. 2, 18.
rejoice in the Lord?


Anna. I know it well, but sorrow, and sadness are not both of one kind, neither
be our minds always pensive upon one, and the same occasion. Does not the
same Paul also say, yt there is a godly sorrow, or heuines, which causes
repentance unto salvation, not to be repented of: and co^trarily a worldly
sorrow, which causes death? 2. Cor. 7 10.



Vrbanus. You say well in deed. But what is the matter (I pray you) that you
are so full of heuines? What is it that trobleth you thus?


Anna. What was it that trobled, and vexed those two Disciples, Cleophas, and
his companyon, as they went to Emaus?


Vrbanus. O, they had very great causes to be sad. For as the^, their hearts
were al blinded with the darkness of ignorance, and their faith was little, and
slender, and they had not a sufficient, and perfect knowledge of Christ,
although they had now a long time professed themselves to be his Disciples.


Anna. And the same thing also is the cause of this my heaviness. For, in as much
as I am baptized into Christ's death, A holy greyfe.
and am adorned with that most glorious, and sacred name of Christ, and am
called a Christian: It greeueth me, that I find not my heart furnished, and
endued with such plentiful, and sound knowledge of Christ my Lord, as it ought
to be.


Vrb. There be more then you, that in this behalf bewail their infirmity, you
are not alone sick of this sore, you have a good many partakers in this grief,
which taste with you of this cup. True it is, there is much, and often mention
made of Christ, and he is diligently preached, and many famous things are
honorably, and truly spoken of him: and yet there be very many which
nevertheless have not yet perfectly, and plainly known him as they ought.


Anna. But seeing I have so great cause of grief, I cannot cease sorrowing
before my eyes be opened, as the eyes of those two disciples were, which went
to Emaus, that I may have the true, and full knowledge of Christ. For I remember
I have heard you many times say, that there is no art, no knowledge, nor no
wisdom more excellent, necessary, nor heavenly, then the knowledge of Christ,
because that knowledge brings with it everlasting righteousness, and salvation.


Vrb. I confess I have always taught so, and so say I still, and ye same also
will I both say and teach while I live, and my profession is so to teach, and no
otherwise. But there be some fantastical, and giddy heads, which set aside
Christ's humanity, and will be aloft, and so climing into the very heavens,
busely endeavor themselves to search and try out, what the everlasting,
infinite, unmeasurable, and incomprehensible Deity of God is occupied about.
And marvelously, and busely, they beat their brains, by sharpnes of wit, to
attain to those things which in the Scriptures are set down: of the essence,
or being of God: of the persons of God: of the understanding and knowledge of
God: and of predestination, and other like. Where it is much more necessary and
meet, that we give our selves wholly over to learn, to find out, and to know,
what Christ is: and who he is. For, seeing that most high and infinite majesty,
has abased it self so extremely low, as that he vouchsafed to descend into the
lowest parts of ye earth to us: and took our flesh upon him: and became man,
that he might deliver mankind, which was in bondage and thraldom of
everlasting death: and having delivered it, bring it to heaven to the glory of
the immortal, and everlasting life: Seeing (I say) thus stands the case, it
is not meet that every man should make, and appoint for him self his own
ladder, whereby to mount up to God, to the glory of his majesty: but it
becomes us to use that ladder, and those steps, which God the father him self
has ordained, and appointed for that ascension, and we must go in by that
path, Christ the way to god.
and way which God the father him self has showed, and by which he would have
ye passage to heaven lie. Truly, our Savior Christ, in John said gravely, and
for great causes, I am the way, and the truth, and the life: No man comes
unto the Father but by me. Ioh. 14. v. 6.
If there had been another, and shorter way: if there had been an easyer or
redyer asce^tion to heaven, God had never, and in vayn sent his only begotten
son into the world: neither would he have suffered him to take our miserable,
and frail nature upon him, for this end only, yt he should (being made man and
after death raised to life) ascend to heaven, and carry us men with him to his
father.

The holy Scriptures call Christ a Peacemaker, a Mediator, a Priest, an
Advocate, a Shepherd, a Way, a Candle, a Lanthorn, a Light, a Master, a King,
a Head, a Redeemer, a Iustifyer, and Life itself.

With all these names and epithetons, does the holy Scriptures adorn Christ.
And why I pray you? Verily because we can neither come to God the Father: be
reconcyled to him: or have any thing to do with him by any other means or way,
but only by Christ, very God, and very man. To be short, God cannot, will not,
nor suffers not him self to be apprehended, or found of us without a
Medyator. If you will come to God: if you desire to see the face of his divine
majesty: if nearly, truly, and thoroughly, you long to know God, then you must
needs, first, well, and perfectly know Christ our Mediator: if you set light by
the knowledge of Christ, you shall never find God.

Esaias. 66.14
Esaias says, that God has set Christ's humanitye before us, and displaid it, as
it were a certain, and glorious ensign, or streamer, wherewith he might call,
co^gregate, and gather together his Children out of the world to him self. And
S. Paul says, that: Mat. 11.27.
In Christ does the fulness of all Deity dwell bodily. Col. 2.9.
Yea Christ him self says: a. All things are given me of my Father: and no man
knows the Son, but the Father: neither knows any man the Father, but the
Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal him. And immediately after these
words, he allureth us to come to him, saying: Come unto me all ye that are weary
and laden, and I will ease you. Wherefore I have always both said, and taught,
that we must both learn, and know Christ. And I would to God, I had so shrill,
loud, and strong a voice, and so many tongues, and mouths, that I might sound
out, and fill the wholl world with this doctrine: God also says: Esaias. 53 11.
By his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many: that is to say, in
the knowledge of him, or when he shall be known. To know and understand Christ,
is the most marvelous, and chiefest knowledge, and understanding of all
knowledge: for this knowledge alone cleanses us, justifies us, and makes us
free from al sin: and therefore the Apostles in all places preach this
knowledge, and understanding of Christ, to all congregations: and they speak of
it, and beat it still into the peoples ears, How needful it is to know Christ.
as the principal point, and chiefest article of the wholl Scripture. And Paul
of purpose does often use this word in all his Epistles, as in the second to
the Collossians: Cor. 2.1.
I woul ye knew what great fightings I have for your sakes, and for them of
Laodicea, and for as many as have not seen my person in the flesh. That their
hearts might be comforted, and they knit together in love, and in all riches of
the full assurance of understanding to know the mystery of God, even the
Father, and of Christ, in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom, and
knowledge. And ye same Paul, to the Corinthians who were puffed up with worldly
wisdom, and knowledge, braggeth of no other skill, and knowledge, then that he
knew Christ crucified. He therefore which knows this Christ well, is passing
well learned, and has the knowledge of high and great things: He which knows
him not, is rude and ignorant of that knowledge which may well and truly be
termed knowledge: He which knows Christ, the same knows God the father,
and is delivered from the horrible tyranny, raging might, and cruel violence of
Satan, and is freeed from sin, from death, and from everlasting damnation:
He which knows not Christ, knows neither him self, nor God, he is
bewitched, and blinded, he is an Ethnic, and Turk, he is inwraped in the bands
of Satan, and subject to his Tyranny, yea he dwells and abides in his
sins, in death, and in everlasting damnation.

What more horrible torment, what more grievous los, and what greter misery can
there be, then to be in the thraldom, and power of Satan, and to be all
together given over, both in body and soul, his bondeslaue for ever?
Wherefore, not without great cause are they heavy, and sad, which know not
Christ, because they being overwhelmed, and drowned in all calamities, have not
any that can either help them, or save them. They also want that great, and
excellent knowledge, which with true joys fills both heaven, and earth, and
is our only salvation of body, and soul. As Christ says in John: John 17.3.
This is life eternal, that they know thee to be the only very God, and whom
thou have sent Jesus Christ: for, 1. Cor, 1.23.
Christ crucified, is, to the Jews a stumbling block, to the Gentiles folishes:
but to the chose^, that is, to the true godly, and faithful, he is the power,
and wisdom of God.


Anna, By the grace, and goodness of God, I believe these things which you say:
but my faith is slender, and weak, and my knowledge, in the marucilous, and
great mysteries of God, is not so great as it ought to be. And great darkness as
yet so covers the eyes of my soul, that me thinks I can but hardly see them,
as it were a far of, dimly, and through a darck cloud: and therefore I have good
cause to be sad: and I heartily desire of God, that he would lighten my heart
with such knowledge, that the true light may shine in my mind: and that Christ
also would so feed me, that I may heartily rejoice in the Lord as those two
discyples did, when Christ had instructed them, taught them, and given the
bread unto them.


Vrb. If you ask that heartily, and earnestly, Christ will not forsake you, nor
reject your prayers: he has commanded that we should ask al good, and
necesssary things of him, and he has mercifully promised that he will hear
us. But first of all he teaches us, to seek the kingdom of heaven, and the
righteousness thereof: and he cries, saying: If any man thirst, let him come to
me, and drink.


Anna. It is no marvel then that those two Disciples were glad, seeing that
Christ the fou^tain of life, was then present with them, and made so wonderful,
and excellent a Sermon to them, whereby they knew him, and were filled with joy,
and friendly told it, and communicated it with the other Disciples, saying:
Verily the Lord is risen again. Would to God I might hear such a Sermon,
surely there is nothing in the world I had rather hear, then that Sermon which
he made out of all the Prophets, and in which he manifested him self out of the
hid treasures of the Sacred Scriptures to his Disciples, that they might
perfectly know him, and be partakers of all perfect, and true joy. That Sermon
I say, that most excellent Sermon without all controversy, was of al other
most comfortable, and full of power.

If we knew those things, or if those things had been kept to the
posterities, which Christ then spoke, no precious Jewel, nor Treasure were
comparable to them: and if that Treasure were hid at the uttermost end of the
earth, or beyond, we ought to endeavor, and procure with all speed possible, that
it might be transported, and brought to us.


Vrb. The danger is past. I understand that you earnestly desire to learn
Christ, and to know what the holy Ghost in the holy Scriptures did forespeake
of him and peradventure: you think that it cannot be known what Christ spoke
then: and happily you think the catholic Church lacks that most comfortable
Sermon: and that none have known what ye sermon was, but those two disciples
which heard it, in the way to Emaus.


Anna. I thought so in deed: and how could I think otherwise: seeing it was
nether left in writing by them that heard it to the posterity: nor delivered
to us, as it were by hand,


Vrb. You are deceived. Christ had greater care over his church, and thought
more carefully of the safety thereof, then that he would defraude and deprive it
of so excellent a sermon. For, for that cause most especially was Christ sent
of the Father into the earth, that he might teach this sermon, to all the
Children of God. You see not now Christ face to face, but you hear his words
and voice by his Evangelists, and in these same writers of his gospel, you
hear that sermon, which he made then to those two his Disciples. What? have we
not that incomparable and great treasure of his sacred word, and Prophets?
besides this, we see in the acts of the Apostles, how the Discyples understood
the Testimonies, and writings of the Prophets concerning Christ: and how they
prophesied by the inspiration, and motion of the Spirit of truth, which was
promised them before the death of Christ: and being sent unto the^ on
whitso^day, taught the^, and put them in remembrance of all things which were
written of Christ, and which Christ before his death, with his own tongue had
taught them. And look what soever the Holy Ghost taught them, it tended only
to this end: That they might know Christ, and by Christ know the Father, and
through this knowledge, be justified, and saved.


Anna. It is possible then, as far as I perceive, to know what that Sermon was,
which Christ made to those two Discyples, as they went to Emaus, wherewith he
made their hearts so burn within them. But if I also might come to the hearing
of that Sermon. Oh, I would desire nothing in comparyson of it: nay, I had
rather hear that sweet Sermon, then have all the pleasures in the earth, and
joys of the world.


Vrb. You may easily conjecture what that Sermon was, seeing he expounded all
the Prophets, beginning at Moses. Does not Luke, I pray you, eloquently, and
plainly testify, that he expounded to the^ all that is written of him in the
wholl Scripture? Lukc. 24.
It was the Prophesies therefore, which are written in the Scripture, of Christ,
which he interpreted unto them, which is nothing else, but even the very Gospel
it self, which he commanded his Discyples to preach, and spread even to the
worlds end. For, this Gospel is the doctrine of Christ, the Son of God, which
tells why he was made man, and declares to us the eternal counsel of God
the Father, and his great good will to us, in promising so redely that he will be
our Father: and in imbrasing us with more then a Fatherly affection: and in
vouchsafeing to knowledge us for his dear Sons: but only through his only
begotten Son Christ.

This Gospel teaches us also, that the Father so ordained, that when the
fulness of time was come, Christ should be born true man of the seed of David,
and that he should dye on the Cross, and rise again from the dead, to the end
he might purge man's sins, pay the raunsom for them, destroy, and take away
death, bring us to everlasting life, reconcile his Father to us, and ascend
into heaven, and sitting there at the right hand of his Father, begin his true,
and everlasting kingdom, where we shall reign, and rejoice with him for ever.

Into this glory would his father have him to enter by his own pain, passion,
and opprobrious death of the Cross: That by this means he might deserve the
same glory for us. This was done at Jerusalem, under Herod, Pontius Pilat, and
Caiphas, when Tiberius Caesar was Emperor, and so were the Prophesies
fulfilled, which are written of him. Now he sits at the right hand of Gods
Majesty, and being Lord of all, he defends, and governs his Church, that is
to say, all godly, and truly believing men, by the holy Ghost: and in the last
day he shall come in his Majesty, to judge the quick and the dead, and shall
give everlasting Life to those that believe: But he shall throw hedlong down
into hell, amongst the multitude of Devils, all those that at that day, shall
not have believed the Gospel.

And he does by his Ministers daily declare unto us, these his Merits, Works,
precious Passion, Resurrection, and Ascension into Heaven: That those which
believe of Christ the son of God, as the scriptures do speak of him, might
be delivered from the burden of their sins, be reconcyled to God the Father,
and live with him for ever in the glory of Christ. And for this cause
especially does the gospel move us, and call us to repentance, to the end, that
we may be heartily sorry for our sins: that we may abhor, and detest our
sins: and with all our endeavor fly al things that might move us to sin:
seeing our sins could be taken away by no other Sacrifice, but only by the
most precious blood of Christ, which he shed for us, that he might cleanse us,
and deliver us from sin, death, and hell.

And furthermore, the Gospel promises remission of sins, and everlasting
life, to all that believe in Christ, and refuse not this Gospel, but with all
their heart faithfully receive the same, using it reverently, and holyly. And
thus of mere grace, without all our deserts, only for the works, and merits of
Christ, (if we believe in him) are we washed from our sin, beutefyed with the
holy Ghost, and are justified, sanctified, saved, and made heirs with God, and
coheyres with Christ in his kingdom, and live for ever.

We also hear the Gospel with a godly devotion, we trust in Christ, and we
believe him to be the only Savior of the world. And then also, are we angry
with our sins, and detest, and abhor them, we repent us, and are sorry, that
through our sins we have offended God, we begin better to frame our lives,
and we love God with all our hearts, which has bestowed his great, and
wonderful mercy, and his unspeakable, and infinite goodness in Christ Jesus his
Son upon us: we love also our neighbors, even as Christ loved us: and we do
our diligence that we may (as becomes holy children) lead a chaste, holy,
modest, sober, and innocent life, after Christ's example: and so for the love
of righteousness, and godlynes, we do all good works: saving that, while we are
in this flesh we have not the full feeling of our frailtye, and sin: and that
our faith, and knowledge of Christ, that is, of the great, and incomprehensible
mercy, love, care, grace, and benefits, which in Christ, and for Christ, are
freely given, and bestowed upon us, is not full perfect, and pure in this life,
but while we live, does still grow, and increase.

And we must also fight, and strive continually, while we live with the flesh,
and mortefie, renew, and reform our old Adam, until the Image of God be renewed
again in us, and until we shall have put on that most beutiful, and holy Image
of Christ, like as before our receiving of faith, and regeneration, we did
bear that evil favored, and horrible Image of the old Adam.

Now you have heard what Christ taught his two Disciples. And without doubt,
the Apostls afterward taught the same things which Christ did teach, and
confirmed the doctrine of Christ after the same sort, by the Prophets wrytings.
For the holy Ghost had sufficyently instructed them thereto, as plainly
appears in the Acts of the Apostles.


Anna. As far then as I perceive, Christ preached nothing to those two
Discyples out of the prophesies, but the very pure doctrine of the Gospel,
whereby they might learn: what Christ was: for what cause he was sent into this
world: what he did: what he suffered: what he meryted by his suffering: and how
we might have benefit by his Merits: and what was to be hoped, and looked for
of him. This then, no doubt, was it, that comforted them so, and made their
hearts so glad.


Vrb. And have not these things, I pray you, sufficient matter enough to make
our hearts joyful, and glad: as when we understand what inestimable, and great
riches of his grace, God in his Prophets has promised to us sinners: and when
we see those promyses of him fulfilled now in the Gospel, and daily also to be
in fulfilling: and seeing we have Christ himself, the very Son of God, a
most sure pledge of the performance of those promyses, may we not well (I say)
rejoice, and be glad?


Anna. I am very desirous to hear of you (if time serve you) the order of
Christ's Sermon, out of Moses, and the other Prophets, What, and how in every
place they prophesyed of Christ, that thereby I may, when my faith is
strengthened, have joy in the Lord. And though you spend some time in
explicating these prophesies, yet happily it may be a work worth our labor,
and you shall never a whit misspend the time: nay, I think the time that is so
spent, godly, profitably, and very necessarely spent: seeing S. Paul warns
us, yt the Col. 3.16.
word of Christ should dwell plentifully in us.


Vrb. We read in the acts, that Paul made a long Sermon of Christ, out of the
Law, and prophets, even from the morning til night. Why then should not we
speak often, much, and willingly, of our Lord Jesus Christ, our only, and
incomparable Treasure, with whom we shall live, and dwell for ever? But first,
note what Luke writes in his last chapter, where he says, when Christ had
blessed, broken, and given the bread to his Discyples, their eyes were opened,
and they knew him. And a little after he says: that Christ opened their
understanding, that they might know the Scriptures.

Wherefore we also must pray to Christ, that he would feed, and refresh us with
his bread of the knowledge of him: Pray before we read or hear the word.
that he would drive away the thick clouds of our unbelief: yt he would mend,
and take away our ignorance, and dulnes: and that he would send down into our
minds, the light of his holy spirit, whereby we may learn to know him out of ye
holy scriptures. Paul says, 1: Cor. 2.
we have not receued the spirit of the world, but the spirit which is of God
that we might know the thing which is given us of God. Let us therefore pray
with humble, and fervent hearts.

A prayer.
Almighty God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, our Father, and the Father
of all mercy, and God of all comfort, and consolation, have mercy upon us:
hear us we beseech thee, O God for thy dearly beloved son Jesus Christ's
sake, for all his works and benefits which he has done for us, and for his
precious passion, and death, which he suffered for the redemption of us. Send
thy holy Spirit of truth into our hearts, that it may give, and ingraft in us,
true, and constant faith, so that the light, and brightness of thy Gospel, and
the glory of Christ may appear unto us, and lighten our hearts, that we may
learn, and understand the unspeakable, and abundant riches of thy mercyes. O
Father of glory, give us thy Spirit of wisdom, and bring us to the knowledge
of thee, and thy dearly beloved Son Jesus Christ.

Open, and lighten (we beseech thee) the eyes of our minds, and understanding:
That we may perceue what is the hope of our vocation, and what is the rich
glory of our heavenly, and everlasting Heritage, which in Christ, and through
Christ, thou have given us: That by true faith, understanding, and knowledge of
thy eternal wisdom, which is Jesus Christ, we may in deed be made, as we are
called, true christians: That we may worship thee always in Spirit, and truth:
And that we may now, and for ever show forth thy glory, whereby thou have
blessed us in Christ our Savior.

Grant this, O Father, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.


Anna. Amen.


Vrb. Now, Christ being our governor, and our good guide, let us begin the
treatise, and opening of the matter which we have taken in hand. But first of
all (wife) see you harken with as great reverence, diligence, and desire, as if
Christ were present, seeing Christ says: Luke. 10.
He that hears you, hears me. And look also, that you believe al things
which shall here be spoken, and declared unto you, to be as true, and certain,
as if Christ himself, visibly, and in his bodily shape, had spoken them unto
you out of the Prophets. And as if he should in his own person, declare unto
you by his own mouth, how, and for what cause, it was convenient he should be
born, suffer, dye, and rise again, and so ascend into his glory.


Anna. Begin then (Husband) at Moses, and tell me I pray you, what he wrote of
Christ.


Vrb. Moses has written much of Christ, as Christ himself witnesses in John:
where (speaking to the Jews) he says: John. 4 46.
If you had believed Moses, you had also believed me, for he wrote of me. And
Moses even in the beginning, as soon as, heaven, earth, and man, were made,
says, that the Serpent (to wit) Satan, deceived Eve: and entyced her to make
a lie: and seduced her: and she afterward persuaded, and deceued Adam: and so
(God being despised, and set aside) brought him, and threw him headlong into
the same calamity: and thus they believed a lie, wherein they committed an
horrible offense, because they broke Gods commandment: and did not obey the
Lord their God as their duty was: but were obedyent unto the Devil, which from
the beginning is a liar, and a mankiller, into whose power, and tyranny they
fell both in body, and soul by their transgression, and disobeydience: and so
death (by the sin of Adam) came in both upon Ada^, and al Adams posterity: in
so much, that by the just judgment, and justice of God, all men should have
entered, by the death of this body, into everlasting death. And thus did death
through sin mightily reign in all the world.

Alas, what is more horrible then this power of sin, and this extreme
calamity which casts us into everlasting damnation? What burden is there
heuyer, or harder then this? and what more cruel mischief could there have
happened then this? But God here, in the midst of this danger being mindful of
his mercy (as the Prophet says of him) found a most present, and soueren salve
for this sore: to wit, he offered us his grace, and promised that he would
pardon our sin, and destroy death by a certain marvelous mean: to wit, by his
only begotten Son, who when the fulness of time, that is to say, when the
determined time was come, was sent into the earth from heaven, and salued this
sore, that is to say, redeemed, and delivered the poor prisoner mankind, out
of the tyranny, and power of darkness, and Satan: and that after a strange, and
secret sort. For he took upon him the shape of a servant, and being made man,
subject to all misery, calamity, and troble of this life, yea and death it
self, (but yet free from all fault, and pure without sin,) vouchsafed to dye
for us, that he might by his death take away our sins: and he rose again from
the dead, and threw Satan, all conquered, and overcome, underfoot: and
bereued him of the spoil, and pray, which through his false lie, he had
brought into the bondage of sin, The first promise of grace.
death, and damnation: that is to say, he brought mankind again into the
kingdom of God, which is, the kingdom of health, and everlasting life. This is
the first promise of grace: Genesis 3
I will put enmity betwixt thee, and the woman, and betwixt thy seed, and her
seed, He (that is to say, the seed of the woman, for so is the Hebrew text)
shall break thy head, and thou shall bruise his heel.

In these words God promised his Son to the world. And this promise is the
Gospel it self, that is to say, most merry, and pleasant tidings of Christ. Adam
being now drowned in sin: and the child of wrath: and being both in body, and
soul subject to the curse, saw nothing but everlasting damnation: and
therefore his conscience was miserably trobled, vexed, and tormented, so that
in this his agony, he was almost come even to desperations door. For he felt no
kind of comfort, but the horrible torment of everlasting death, and bitter
greef of heart. For he had cast him self by disobedyence into the tyranny of
Satan, and was now become his prisoner, and servant through sin.

But as soon as God had promised to him the seed of the woman, straight way he
conceived hope of life: and believed that god of his grace, and mercy, would by
that promised seed save him, and deliver him out of Satan's tyranny. C. Romans 1
The Gospel therefore is the promise of life, in this seed of the woman, or
through this seed.

Thus then God promised his natural sone, which should be born of a woman,
(but without sin), that he might tread down, and break Satan's head, that is
to say, that he might overthrow Satan's power and kingdom, which is the
kingdom of sin, and death, and that he might tread underfoot, overcome, and
destroy sin, death, and hell. Gal. 3.
This promised seed is Christ, as Paul says. The words of this promise be
but few, The mysteries of the promise in the seed of the woman.
but they contain many and great mysteries. First, they show us yt God should
take upon him man's flesh. For if that seed had been nothing else but man, he
could never have broken the head of Satan, (that is) have abolished sin, and
death: and, have subdued, and destroyed, Satan him self.

Furthermore, these words import, that this seed should not be subject to any
sin: neither be naturally conceived, after the manner of man, and of man's
seed but by the holy ghost: and that, this seed should not be born as al
other mankind is, of a woman that had known a man, but of a pure virgin.
Therefore is he not here called the seed of man, but only of woman.

Also, seeing he would deliver, and make mankind free from the tyranny of
Satan: (sin being taken away) it was needful that all sins should first
be purged: and that he should first satisfy the high, and, severe justice of
God, (and so this seed, or this son of this woman is set in the place of a
captive man) and seeing all mankind for sin was appointed to dye: it was
determined that he, to wit, this seed of the woman should suffer death, that by
his death, he might pay, and discharge the sins of mankind: That, we being
delivered, from the power, and tyranny of Satan, might be reconciled to our
God, by a sufficient purgation, and satisfaction.

Now then, if he ought thus to tread down the head of Satan, to wit, abolish
death: it could in no wise be, yt he should still abide in the grave: but seeing
he should dye for out offenses, leaving this frail, and temporal life, it was
very necessary that he should rise again from death, and begin, and posses
another everlasting life. Otherwise, he could never have delivered man from so
great, and horrible a calamity, wherein he was. Neither could man have been
saved, unless satisfaction had been made for his sins: and unless death had bin
overcome: and eternal life so obtained, and given, that neither sin, death,
nor Satan, could further hurt us. Furthermore as the Text here makes mention:
there is enmity betwixt Christ, and that Serpent the Devil. And by this same
Text we know which of them should get the victory: to wit, the seed Christ with
his servants, he shall overcome, and tread down Satan that venomous Serpent.
And although that Serpent do never so deadly sting the heel of Christ, and
the true Church (that is) persecute, and tempt them: yet Christ being both far
greater, mightyer, and stronger then he, does return Conqueror from the
bataile, and caryeth away the victory, and in the end tryumpheth with the whole
Church (that is with the true godly believing,) which shall reign, and live with
Christ forever. And thus in this promise is foretold (as you see) the birth,
passion, and resurrection of Christ, together with the victory, wherein Christ
broke the force of Satan, sin, death, and hell.

And though in hid, and figurative words, yet such, as admit no other sense,
but truly, and plainly import that, which we have said. Christ is prefigured,
and prophesied of in the Scripture, two ways. Sometime in darck, figurative,
and hidden promises, and types. Other sometimes, in manifest promises, and
expres, and plain words. Therefore all promises which followed this in the
Bible, did betoken this seed, and are to be applied to this seed, and are made
more manifest, and known, until Christ put on our flesh, and fulfilled them.
Some Latin Bibles in this Text of Genesis, have it: She shall tread down the
head of the Serpent, not he, nor it. Whereupon it grue, that this promise was
taken to be spoken of Mary, as if she had trodden down the Serpents head. But
this promis can in no wise be referred to Mary. The Hebrew tongue says not
She, but It, does perform this work. And the same Text does understand the seed
of the woman. For thus says the holy Ghost, in that Sacred tongue wherein the
Prophesies were written. Vben sarecha, Vben sarach hu ieschupcha rosch. That
is, I will put enmity betwixt thy Seed, and the Seed of her, (that is to say,)
even the seed of the woman shall tread down thy head. For it is evident, that
Hen does not signify her, but Him, or It, and this is the proper, and right
signification of this word. TO at is the Caldey bible.


* Thargum, has it thus: between thy Son, and her Son. which words do
express, and declare the meaning of this Text more plainly, and perfectly. For
it is meant only of Christ: by him alone, and by no other Seed, nor man, is
Satan overcome, sin abolished, and remission of sins, and life recovered,
and freely given. Adam, and all Adams children, (that is to say) all mankind
had been damned, and subject to Satan's tyranny, and had perished eternally in
hell: unless that seed had bin promised, and given us.

He which rejects this seed, and trusts not in him with all his heart, he
perysheth, he is undone, he is ordained to damnation, he is the bondslaue of
Satan, (how great so ever he be) both in body, and soul. But he that layth
hold of this seed here promised by faith: he escapes the tyranny of Satan,
and is delivered from death, and eternal damnation: with him al things go well,
because he shall be the Son of God, partaker of everlasting salvation, and heir
of life, which lasts for ever.

Here must we diligently mark, Only by Christ not by our selus or works are we
sauid.
that God does promise help, deliverance, and sure victory of Satan, death,
and sin: but not without our Mediator, not for our own sakes, not by our own
strength, not for our own virtues, not by our own wisdom, not by our own skill,
not for our deserts, or worthiness. By, or for what then? Not by, or for any
other thing, but only this seed of the woman, that is, Christ alone our (...)
Mediator. To this word, or holy promise, must we trust, which if we do, there
is no doubt, but that God, by Christ, will deliver us out of the power of
Satan. Which thing the holy Ghost does fully witness by many testimonies in the
new Testament, where he says, that Christ is our Priest, our high Priest, our
Righteousness, our Mediator, our Redeemer, our Life, our way, our Light, our
Truth, our Savior, and the Conqueror of the Prince of the world: And one, that
has given us again a great deal more fully, and absolutely, those things
which we lost in Adam, then, before we had them. And this does Paul very
notably set forth to the Romans, where, making an Antithesis betwixt Adam, and
Christ: Sin, and Grace, he says: Romans 5.15.
But yet the gift is not so as is the offense. for if by one man's offense
many be dead, much more the grace of God, and the gift by grace which is by one
man Jesus Christ has abou^ded to many.

Genesis 3.15
The Latin text has Insidiaberis calcaneo eius, (that is) Thou shall lay wayt
to sting his heel, as the seventy Translators did translate it. But the Hebrew
text has it. Veathath teschu phennu akeb (that is,) Thou shall rent or bruise
his heel. The holy Ghost does use in both the places, in the Hebrew tongue
only this word, scoph. But, Rabbi Solomon, gives this note: In as much (says
he) as this word which is here used, is twice set down in this promise, it is
as much to say, as with hissing to assail, or to hiss as does an Adder which
hissingly assayleth a man, and puffingly blows upon him, and has not yet
stinged him: And this interpretation has a very good sense, here very fit, and
agreeing with this place. For although that old Serpent be most cruel, Fear
not though the devil fish he cannot bite.
and enuyous against us, and although he hate us still most deadly, and strive
against us, and tempt us every way, yet has he not power at his pleasure, to
hurt us as he would. For, it is but only with vain hissing that he assayleth
Christ, and his Church. And the enmity which is betwixt that old Serpent, that
unclean Spirit, and Christ, and Christians, both has, and will show it self by
many, and plain signs, and persecutions. For that sinful Serpent hissed upon
Christ, when he was made man, very bitterly, and enuiously, and he pricked, and
hurt his heel grievously, at what time the Jews being set on fire with a most
deuilish envy, hatred, cruelty, and spitefulnes, rushed like mad men upon
Christ, and first horribly, and intollerably, beat him, and then nailed him to
the cross, and lastly, most shamefully killed him. Yet was this foul Serpent
so far from extinguishing, and ouercomming Christ, that, by that very means,
whereby he went about to hurt him, he overthrew him self, and destroyed his own
kingdom, and power. For then he lost all the right, and ability, which he
had, either to trouble, appeach, or accuse, the true believers in Christ.

And though he (as his nature is) sting, and hiss at all the Children of Adam,
and miserably vex, grieve, and torment them with temptations, lies, heresies,
persecutions, sins, and death it self: Yet all that he can do against the
godly, though he be never so enuyous, and wicked, is nothing else but hissing:
yea, he is so far from hurting, or harming them, that he greatly even profits
them, when he kills them, and thinks to hurt them.

For, by that hissing, wherewith he assailed the Seed of the woman, he brings
mankind out of this miserable, and wretched world, into most happy, and
everlasting blessedness. And the woman's Seed, that is to say, Christ, who
himself also, under the shape of a Serpent, was lifted up in the wilderness,
does in the mean time, break his head, and beat it all to powder. Who so ever
does behold this Christ with holy eyes, and puts all his hope and trust in
him, Satan with all his poysened hissing, and biting, can never a whit hurt him,
in that appertains to the health of his soul. He may in deed toss us with
temptations, and puff upon us with his poisonful hissing, and throw us into
the puddle of sin: But Christ is ready at hand to help us, and to heal the
wounds, which we receue of the Serpents biting. He forgeueth us our sins, and
strengthens us with his holy spirit, that Romans 6.14.
Sin has not henceforth dominion over us, and he restores us again to life,
that by this temporal death, we enter not into everlasting death, but sleep in
Christ, which is our life, in whom, both in body, and soul, we shall live for
ever: So that both truly, and godly, it may, and ought be said, that the
Gentiles, and the unbelieving only, be they that dye, and not the faithful in
Christ.

This is most certain, and sure: Christ, by his desert, has wrought this thing
in us, and is the Author of this great, and wonderful benefit. Satan can do
us no harm, he cannot any way hurt our souls, but shall be thrown as subject
under our feet. For Christ has overcome that our enemy, bereft him of his
pray, and daunted all his force.

This victory, which Christ has got of Satan, and obtained in his manhood for
man's salvation, does Paul set forth in the Epistle to the Hebrews, where he
says: Ebr. 2.
For as much then, as the children were partakers of flesh, and blood, that is,
(for as much as men did spring of Adam) He (that is Christ) also himself,
likewise took part with them, that he might destroy through death, him that had
the power of death, (that is the Devil) and that he might deliver all them,
which for fear of death, were all their life time subject to bondage. For he
in no sort took the Angels, but he took the seed of Abraham.

The promise which was made to Adam was the Gospel.
And thus that comfortable promise which was made to Adam, was the Gospel, and
only comfort of Ada^, and all the holy Fathers unto Noe, and Abraham. This
promise the Fathers believed, and by this promise were they justified, and
saved. For all their trust was fixed on Christ, which was to come: for whom
they waited and whom they believed should be their only savior and redeemer,
who should come to deliver them out of all calamities, and danger, both of
life and death. And therefore were they, as good Christians, as we: saving
only, that we do not now look for that promised seed, but perfectly know
that he is come, and has already broken the serpents head. And this victory,
which Christ has of the serpent, (to wit) the promise of life by the Gospel,
is now openly preached in the world, to the justification, and salvation of all
that believe his Gospel.

The promise renewed to Abraham.
This promise of the seed of the woman, after many years, was renewed to Genesis
12.3. and 18.28. and 21. and 18.
Abraham, where is plainly declared, what commodity this seed should bring
unto the world. You may read this promise in Genesis: and it was made also to
Genesis 26.4.
Isaac, and Genesis 28.14.
Jacob.

The words of the promise he these. By my self have I sworn, says the Lord,
in thy seed shall all the families of the earth be blessed.

Here again is Christ promised. And this is that famous, worthy, and excellent
promise, which both the Prophets, and Apostles have continually given out
honorably commended, and largely amplifyed, as the clear Son: and very voice
it self of the Gospel: and true testimony of Christ: and which they have
declared, and esteemed to be as a most precious pearl. whatsoever the Prophets
do prophecy of Christ, it flows out of this promise, as out of a Fountain.
For the especial duty, and travel of all Prophets, is, both by figurative
speech, and plain promises, to foreshew that Christ should come: and to extol,
and diligently beat into man's ears, his eternal kingdom of grace,
righteousness, innocence, life, and everlasting salvation: and to inflame, and
stir up al men to wait watchfully for his coming. And this must be well, and
diligently observed.

Paul to the Romans, says: that Romans 1.1
the Gospel of God, concerning Christ, was long before promised by the
Prophets, in the holy Scriptures. And Peter says in the Acts: Act. 3.24.
All the Prophets, from Samuel, and thenceforth, as many, as have spoken, have
likewise foretold of these days. That is to say, they told of that most
desired, and wholesome time: of the new, and everlasting Testament: and of the
eternal, and infallible mercy of God, promised to David. Esaias also does
prophesy, that Esaias. 53 10.
Christ should come to deliver us, from all our miseries, and calamities: And
he tells, by what means, and way, he should deliver us out of those trobles.
The Prophets also, accuse the people, and urge the law, and threaten the
punishment, and wrath of God, against the hard hearted, and unpenitent: They
have also prophesied many things, which properly belong to the coming of
Christ: and with all, they mix earthly kingdoms, and governments. The end of
threats in preaching.
But yet the end of all their prophesies, reprouings, and thretnings, have only
respect, and relation unto Christ. For they did but study, and endeavor, by
those means, to keep the people in obedience, and to make them fear God, and
keep order: and sought to prepare them, and make them ready for the coming of
Christ: and to bring them to akknowledge their sins: and to terrify their
consciences, that by the confession of their sins, and feeling of Gods wrath,
their hearts might be prepared to receive, and embrace Christ, as the true, and
only Savior of the world. And the wholl old Testament, is nothing else, but a
certain forerunner, (as I may term it) and such a preparatiue, or readynes,
for the new Testament, that the way to Christ, might be made straight, and
plain, against his coming: and that the entering to him, might be readyer.

For, as a Scholemaster, with sharp admonitions, great threatenings, hard
beating, and rough correction, does reform, and frame his masters Son, with
whom he is put in trust, and whom he has to teach, that in the end he may
become an honest householder, and a profitable member of the common weal: so
does the old Testament, make us ready, to receive Christ, and bring us to
Christ. And after this sort does Paul speak, of the law, to the Galathians,
saying: Gal. 3.24.
The law was our Scholemaster, to bring us to Christ. And to the Hebrews, he
says: Heb. 10.1
The law has a shadow of good things to come, and not the very Image of the
things. And in the seventh chapter, he says: Heb. 7.18.
The commandment that went before, is disanulled, because of the weakness
thereof, and unprofitableness, for the law made nothing perfect, but was the
bringing in of a better hope, made perfect, whereby we draw near unto God,

Christ, therefore, our chief treasure, and that our most precious (...) (that
is) Jewel, must be sought for, of us in the Prophets, as we read in the Acts,
that he Act. 17.1.
was sought for at Thessalonica. For without all doubt, there is nothing in the
Prophets, which does not represent Christ, and his Church, and agrees with
him: As Christ himself does witness in Luke, saying: Luke 24.44.
These be the words, which I spoke unto you, while I was yet with you, that all
must be fulfilled, which are written of me, in the law of Moses, and in the
Prophets, and in the Psalms. And in Peter, it is plainly declared, that the
Prophets did not look for the temporal kingdom of Israel, what the Prophets
looked for.
and for the mortal, ruinous, and empty pauilion of this life, and state of
this world: but that they chiefly respected ye everlasting kingdom of Christ,
and the heavenly life. Peter's words be these: 1. Pet. 1.10.
Of the salvation of souls, the Prophets have inquired, and searched, which
prophesied of the grace, that should come unto you, searching when, or at what
time, the Spirit, that testified before of Christ, which was in them, should
declare the sufferings, that should come unto Christ, and the glory which
should follow. Unto whom it was revealed, that, not unto themselves, but unto
us, they should minister the things, which are now showed unto you, by them,
which have preached, unto you, the Gospel, by the holy Ghost, sent down from
heaven, the which things the Angels desire to behold, etc.

Thus far speaks Peter. And to this end also, Ignatius (not only in title,
but in deed a true and famous Bishop) wrote, a thousand, and four hundredth
years ago, to the Magnesians: The Prophets (says he) were Christ's servants
(who foreseing him in Spirit) both waited for him, as their master, and in
hope looked for him, as their Lord, and Savior, saying: he shall come, and save
us. And Tertullian, a thousand three hundredth years ago, interpreting that
sentence, says: Christ is the seal of all the prophesies, fulfilling all
things, which the Prophets in old time did foretell of him.


Anna. I pray you tell me, the meaning of the promise, which God made to
Abraham.


Vrb. In that promise (if it be inwardly, and thoroughly searched, and pondered)
the sum of the holy Gospel, with the pith, effect, and all the mysteries of
Christ, are comprehended. For, first you shall find enclosed, and depending
upon it. Luke. 24.47.
Repentance, which is the first part of a Christian man's life, as Christ him
self teaches us. For if all people in this seed, Repentance the first step
to grace.
be blessed: It necessarily follows, that al nations, (that is to say, all
men) which sprung of Adam, are without it accursed, and abominable before God.
And this is so, only because of sin.

It is needful, therefore, that first of all, there should be in us repentance.
For, Psalm. 51.5
in sin are we conceived, and born. And, Romans 5.12
by one man, sin entered into the world, and death by sin: And so death
went over all men: forasmuch as all men have sinned, and by the offense of one,
the fault came on all men, to condemnation. This fault, is original sin,
which to us (the children, and posterity of Adam) comes of natural
infirmity successively: and dwells in us all, and comes with us in our
first carnal birth, by which all our nature is corrupted, defiled, deformed,
depraved, and made offensive. What we are by nature.
So that we, by nature originally, are naturally wicked, and ignorant, both of
God, and our selves: we believe not God: we trust not God: we seek not after
God: and we neither dread Gods thretnings, nor regard his commandments: And
finally, we, by nature, neither fear, nor love God. For by sin, our nature
is wholly blinded, depraved, and corrupted.

And therefore, the holy Scripture calls this nature, the natural man (that is
to say) flesh, not yet regenerate. The natural man.
And it says: That the Genesis 8.21.
Lust, and imagination, of man's heart, is evil, even from his youth up. And ye
Apostle says the same in these words: 1. Cor, 15 22.
In Adam, all men dyed, And in the Epistle to the Ephesians, he says: Ephe.
2.3.
That by nature we be the children of wrath. And to the Romans, he says: G.
The natural man is fleshly, and sauoreth the things of the flesh: And the
affections of the flesh are death, and enmity against God. And to the
Ephesians, he says: Ephe. 2.1
We were dead in sin. And in ye same Epistle, descrybing at large, the
cursednes, miseries, and calamities, of the carnal man, he says: We live in
this world, by nature, al ignorant, without hope, and with out God: and walk in
the vanity of our minds, having our senses, and minds darkened, and alyenated,
from the life of God, etc. And in the first Epistle to the Thessalonians, he
says: 1. These. 4.5.
The Gentiles know not God. And the Psalmist says: Psalm. 116.11.
Every man is a liar. And Jeremy says: Ier. 17.9
The heart is deceitful, 1. Cor. 2.14.
and wicked above al things, and iuscrutable. And Paul, to the Corinthians,
says: The natural man perceives not those things, that be of the Spirit of
God: for they be foolishnes unto him, nether can he understand them.

Thus then, the whole nature of man, is by the first sin of Adam, disobedient,
infected, bestained, corrupted, depraved, and in the very first nativity,
defiled. Further, when man is grown up to age, and begins to have judgment
of things: in continuance of time, by the force, and inclination of this
original sin, he rouleth, or desires to roll him self, in all kind of
voluptuous pleasure: in every foul sink of sin: in every durty puddle of
detestable acts: and in all kind of uncleanness: as we see with our eyes. But
now, where so ever sin is, there, by and by, follows the curse, and all
kind of misery, calamity, danger, and siknes: And to be breef, death it self,
as it is said in Genesis: Genesis 3, 19.
Thou art dust, and unto dust thou shall return. And again: Genesis 2.17
Whenever thou shall eat of the tree of knowledge of good, and evil, thou
shall dye the death. And S. Paul to the Romans, says: Romans 6.23.
The wages of sin, is death.

Thus, then, we learn first, by this promise, to acknowledge our misery,
calamity, and cursednes, and the wrath, and judgment of God. Which thing, is
more largely spoken of, in other places of Scripture. The law.
By Gods law, is required of us, perfect obedience, sincere purity, true
godlynes, and perfect love of Religion, with true fear, and knowledge of God:
as also, that we should perfectly love him, put our whole trust in him, praise
him, and glorify him: and also, that we should love, embrace, and help, our
neighbor, and do what we can, for him. To be short, it is required of us,
that we love him as our self.

Such ought we to have been, and so pure were we created: But now, we bear the
Image of our earthly Father Adam, and are by his horrible fall, infected with
original sin, and so naturally, we are ungodly, and sinners, and without the
knowledge, and fear of God, and nether believe, nor love God.

Moreover, we set our selves against our neighbor, and love him not, as we
ought. For when we be offended, but even lightly, we hate him deadly. Thus are
we full of envy, and gilty of all kind of wickedness. Wherefore, seeing by nature,
we be void of al such virtues, as the law of God requires in us, (as, that we
should fear God, believe God, love God, glorify God, and also, faithfully, and
intierly love our neighbor:) And seeing, we thus obey not the law, as we
ought, the law of God, does pronounce a most terrible sentence against us,
saying: Deuteronomy. 27.26.
Cursed is every man, that contynueth not in all things, which are written in
the book of the law, to do them. And again: Psalm. 119.21.
Cursed be all they, that do err, from thy commandments. Also, Mat. 19.17.
if you will enter into life everlasting, keep the commau^dements. But who
either keeps, or ever has kept, the commandments, or done that, which the
law requires? Bring me but one, if you can, of all the Children of Adam, which
of his own natural strength, could ever keep, but the first commandment, do
the best he could? Nay, you shall never, of them all, be able to bring me, one:
For in deed, none ever did it: Nay, we all do the contrary, for, such as the
tree is, such is the fruit. And how pleasant, and pretty, the fruit of the flesh
is, that is to say, of the natural, or carnal man, if it please you, you may
see in the Epistle to the Galathians, where Paul, by the way, has set down,
though not all, yet a few of the works of the flesh, as. Gal. 5.19 The fruits
of our flesh naturally.
Adultery, Fornication. Vnclea^nes, Wantonness, Idolatry, Witchcraft, Hatred,
Debate, Emulations, etc. And he adds, they which do such things, shall not
inherit the kingdom of God.

The law, therefore, of God, does wound, hold captive, grievously oppress, and
accuse, all the children of Adam, of impiety: and it lays to our charge, that
foul offense of rebellion, against Gods majesty: and, it conuicteth us to be an
ungracious kind of creatures, full of professed malice, and wickedness, and
subject to eternal damnation, ungodly (...), unfaithful, passing wicked
worldlings, and contemners of God, and man: and this law exacteth at our hand,
perfect obedience, sinceere godlynes, strait vprightnes, and a pure innocence
of life, according to the commandment of God.

Seeing then, the law of God, does thus examine our life, and our manners, it
plainly appears, both what kind of men we be, what our faults, and offenses
be, and how huge sinners we be. And forasmuch, as we have not fulfilled the law
of God, and continued in all things, which are written in the book of the law:
it necessarily follows, that the curse hangs presently over us, and that,
we be. Gal. 3.22
concluded under sin.

Thus lies wretched mankind, thrown down, damned, and subject to everlasting
death, and the reason is, for that he is accursed. The curse of the law, Where
then be papistical merits?
is the fault, and the punishment, and both present, and eternal indignation,
wrath, anguish, affliction, death, and everlasting torment in hell fire. If
this, then, be the condition of our estate, (as in deed it is, if we believe
the Scriptures, witnessing of the calamity, and horrible fall of Adam, and his
posterity) then must of necessity, all presumption, and trust in our own
strength, worthynes, merits, natural hability, and good works, give place, and
vanish away: and true humility, and unfeigned repentance follow. For, of what, I
pray you, can man glory? how can he presume? what can he attribute to his own
strength? and how can he brag, if he have right feeling of this curse? and so,
that he see, he is become an Apostata, a traitor, and a runnagate from God, and
altogether the Devils thrall, lying captive under the power of sin, death,
and malediction. And such in deed is his estate. For, he is conceived, and born
in sin, and he cannot, so much of himself, as think well, wish well, or do
well: but being prove, and bent, only to evil, to vice, and to all wickedness, he
does nothing but sin.

Now, he which does rightly feel, the immutable, and very severity of Gods
wrath, to him, the world it self is an unpleasant prison, neither does it
grant him rest, or comfort, at all, til he be free from these bands, and
curses.

Wherefore, the holy Scripture, upon good cause, The cause why we are threatened
with the law.
does most diligently, and earnestly, urge upon us, the law, to this end: that
man, thus all blinded, peruerst, and malicious, may, by the law, be drawn, to
know him self, to see his misery, and to feel the curse, and his incorporated
wickedness, and the judgment of God: So that, by the lively feeling of his sin,
and gods wrath, he might humbly, and truly, with a troubled Spirit, and
contrite heart, reverently with submission, fly to the throne of grace, and
call for mercy, and help of God, and with all his heart, run unto, and embrace
Christ, his only Savior, the blessed seed of Abraham.

To such, verily, is this blessed seed sent: which, after this sort, with a
troubled Spirit, and a broken, and humble heart, acknowledge, and confess their
sins: and, which heartily repenting, are grievously, and terribly vexed, and
afflicted in conscience, because they have sinned.

To whom Christ was sent.
To these, I say, is he sent: that, having taken away the curse, to the which,
they were subject, he might deliver them, from all perils, and calamities, both
of soul, and body. For, there is none, that desire, or receive Christ, but
these poor ones in Spirit. And this do Paul's words import, in the Epistle to
the Romans where he says: To. 3.20.
By the law, comes the knowledge of sin. And to the Galathians: Gal. 3.24
The law was our Scholemaster, to bring us to Christ, that we might be made
righteous, through faith. And in the same place he says: The law began, and
was given, 430. years, after the holy promise was made to Abraham, and that,
for transgression until the seed, came, to whom it was promised, etc.

All natures strength, all wisdom, all free will, all good laws, and all
creatures, yea, Gods law it self, (because of man's infirmity) could not
deliver, justify, and free man from this curse: But of necessity, this blessed
seed, Christ, must needs be sent to deliver us, from these evils: and deserve
for us, and also, give us, the holy Ghost: else, had man still remained,
altogether (...), that is to say, helples.

Therefore, Paul, in the same place, excellently disputing of the law, and
Christ, says thus: Gal. 3.21.
In deed, if there had a law bin given, which, could have given life, then
truly, righteousness should have been by the law. But the Scripture has
concluded all under sin, that the promise, by faith of Jesus Christ, might be
given to them, that believe. But, before faith came, we were kept under the
law, and shut up unto the faith, which should afterward be revealed, etc.

The law, indeed, may show us our sins, convince us, accuse us, and condemn
us of sin, and it may bring us under the curse: but it can never deliver us
from the curse. The law, was chiefly given to this end, that by terrifying our
hearts, The end why the law was given.
it might stir us up fervently to desire, and fly unto that blessed seed
Christ, in whom we find, and receive all things, which the law requires of
us, to wit, perfect obedience, innocence, righteousness, the fulfilling of all
laws, and the holy Ghost, with all his gifts, as faith, love, fear, and
charity toward our neighbor, with such like. The wholl Scripture does nothing
else, but teach us thoroughly to know Christ, earnestly to desire Christ, heartily
to crave help of Christ, faithfully to believe in Christ, and truly to love
Christ. But this we cannot do, unless we first feel the curse, and acknowledge
our miseries, sickness, and sin. When we have once the lively feeling of these
things, then with all greedy desire of heart, we gape for that blessed seed,
because he only, and alone, both can, and will clearly altogether take away
this curse. If the Jews had known this, and believed, they had never so
despised, and crucified Christ: And if the Pharisees, and Hipocrites of these
days, and we, knew these things, we would utterly despair of our selves, and
of our merits, and of all man's strength, in which there is no bealth, or help
at all, whereby we may look for the obtaining of justification, and salvation:
nay, we would not in all these put either hope, or trust: but would fly to
this seed, where present help, and aid is found.

If our sins do not thus plainly appear by the law incurable: foolish, and
blind reason, straight way dreameth, that she can salve this sore, and that she
her self can deliver us from sin: yea she does assay, by her works, to
deserve Gods favor, nether will she acknowledge this blessed seed, nether is
she moved with any desire of him, nether does she any thing esteem of the great
promises of God, by which only, we (most miserable creatures) are delivered
from these evils. Wherefore, first learn, and know this: that, Faith saves.
as Abraham was justified before God: so, surely must we also be justified:
but, he was justified by this seed Christ, in him he believed, and in him had
he all his hope, and trust of salvation reposed, being persuaded, that by this
seed, he should obtain the blessing. Gen 15.6
And that was counted to him for righteousness. Paul therefore, concludes, and
mightily affirms, that we must covet this seed, saying: Romans 4.13.
The promise, that he should be the heyr of the world, was not given to
Abraham, or to his seed, through the law, but through the righteousness of
faith. For, if they which are of the Law, be heirs, faith is made void, and
the promise of none effect: For the law causes wrath: for where no law is,
there is no transgression, therefore is the heritage, given by faith, that it
might come by grace, and the promise might be sure to all the seed, not to
that only which is of the law, but also to that which is of the faith of
Abraham.

Secondly, in this mere promise, the great and infinite grace of God does
appear. For, our desert, or worthynes did not deserve, that God should
vouchsafe to be made man of the seed of Abraham: but it was the mere grace,
and mercy of God. Of his mere grace, he promised Christ, and of his mere
grace, he performed his promise, by sending of Christ: the law, and the works
of the law, never deserved it. For, you see here that God promised this
blessing, to the Patriarch Abraham, Cause why God made the promise before the
law.
430. years before the law was given to Moses: which he did, least man should
attribute some thing, in the work of life, and salvation to him self, and so
glory in his own merits: for grace is not mingled with works, it is without
all our deserving, and before all our good works.

Thirdly, for as much as God would lay the cause of his blessing, and grace,
which we receive, upon Christ, and through him will only bless, whom he does
bless: It necessarily follows, that, without Christ, there is neither
blessing, righteousness, life nor health: and that, all that are without Christ,
be accursed: because they remain in sin, death, and damnation. We may well
think, there was some weightye cause, that moved our gracious, immortal, and
high God, to speak a thing of such weight, and a thing which is so full of
consolation, where in he binds himself, with an oath, that he would, through
this seed, give us his blessing and life everlasting. Ought not (I pray you)
the whole company of Angels, with all kind of men, and all sorts of creatures,
both in heaven and earth, with great reverence, holiness, pietye, and with
unspeakable, and infinite joy, hear their Lord God, speaking these words,
and promising such precious gifts? Paul says. Heb. 6.17.
God willing more abundantly, to show unto the heirs of promise, the
stablenes of his counsel bound him self with an oath.

And do you not here see, that he, both promises, and also swears? but if
then any could obtain this blessing, (that is) life and salvation without
Christ: why has God promised, the blessing in Christ, so earnestly, yea, and
that, with an oath? Wherefore I see not, why, any should think, he can believe in
God, and yet is not in the Christian faith.

No in deed, there is no true faith, The christian faith only the true faith.
but the Christian faith. All other opinions be errors. God will take none for
his, unless he be in this seed. Christ, (that is) if he be not a Christian,
if he believe not in Christ. Nether in deed, shall we ever, any where, find
the favor of God, true innocencye, righteousness, satisfaction for our sins,
help, counsel, life, and salvation, but only in this Christ. The Fathers
believed in him, before he was made man, and were saved.

In him also believe we, and are saved. And in this promise, also, is proved
the humain birth, death, resurrection, and eternal kingdom of Christ, which
all belong to this blessing, in which all happiness is promised. For this
benediction, in the seed of Abraham, is liberty, and absolution from sin:
and deliverance from death and everlasting damnation: and on the other side, it
is pure innocencye, righteousness, fulfilling of the law, and renewing of the
image of God in us with securitye, joy, peace, and life everlasting. What more
can you desire? In this Christ is all righteousness included, and all kind of
cursednes excluded. And therefore the Apostles diligently urge this promise and
every foot, Act. 3.25.
recite, and repeat it.

But the deliverance, from this curse, Gal. 3.8.
is marueilously wrought, (to wit) by the infamy, and slander of the cross.
For so says Paul. ^^al. 3.13.
Christ redeemed us from the curse of the law, when he was made a curse for us.
This was done on good fridaye, when he hong on the cross before the Jews, and
the gentiles: as if he had been forsaken of God, and all his creatures. Pe.
2.24.
He bore our sins, in his body upon the tree of the cross, that we being
delivered from sin, might live in righteousness. For it is written in Deuteronomy. in
Ebrew, that holy tongue. Deu. 27.23.
The curse of God is on him, that is hanged. For so does the Ebrew. word
signifye.

The 70 interpreters did translate it. He is accursed, that hangs on tree.
(that is) 1. Cor. 1.23.
He is a stumbling block to the Jews, and folishnes to the Gentiles: but even
this Christ, to the Jews, and also to the Gentiles, which are called, is the
power, and wisdom of God. Nothing appears more foolish, and fond, unto
natural reason, then, that it is said, god would, in man's nature, suffer this
shame: but so it seems good to God, as Paul witnesses. For seeing by
wisdom, we know not God, in the wisdom of God, it pleased God, by the
foolishnes of preaching, to save them, that believe.

If the mightiest God, so abased him self, for us, most unthankful sinners
that he vouchsafed to descend into the lowest parts of the earth, and to
suffer the greatest shame, that could be, for us: consider, and way I pray you,
how grievous, heinous, great, and monsterous our sins are: and how patiently,
moderatly, and in good part we ought to take the affliction, and cross, which
is laid upon us for them: seeing through Christ, the curse is to us now turned
into a blessing. This seed Christ, which was first promised to Adam, and then
to Abraham, did God often renew afterward, to other also of the fathers, after
Abraham. For he promised it to. Genesis 26.3. and 28.14
Isaak: and then to Jacob: and the promise of Christ was again renewed in the
49. of Genn. to the Patriark Jacob, who, a little before his death, did thus
prophecy of Christ. Ge. 49.10.
The scepter shall not be taken from Judah, nor a law geuer from his feet, till
Siloch, (or he that must be sent) come. And he shall be the expectation, of the
Gentiles, and the people shall be gathered unto him In this promise is notably,
and plainly declared, and described the time when Christ should be looked for:
as also what his state, and condition should be, or what a kind of kingdom,
he should have.


Anna. I pray you teach me, plainly to understand this promise made to Jacob.


Vrb. This word Schebet, or scepter, signifies, Called Thargun^ What the
scripture signifies.
as you know, princely or kingly power, or gouerme^t. The Caldes bible uses
this word Schultan, that is, empire, or power. God did so ordain, among the
Jews, that their kings should always be of the tribe of Judah. And beside
this worldly authority, or pollitick government, the Jews had an other
spiritual authority, or ecclesiastical government, which was of ye tribe of
Leui. These were priests in the law, and prophets, and doctors. But as some
suppose, Sanhedrim, those 70. Elders in Israel, which Moses does choose in ye
xi. of Numbers. The Jews by these 2. Magistrates, were governed. But this
office of kings priests, or elders, was not of any longer continuance, but
till Christ, the true king, priest, and doctor of the Jews, should come. Hear
the Patriark Jacob, prophesying of ye firster coming of Christ Jesus our Lord,
says: Judah, or the people of the Jews, shall have kings, or governors, of
the tribe of Judah: which shall govern them, and they shall have doctors, till
Christ himself come, their true king and doctor. And so the Jews had Kings,
Judges, or Princes, and doctors of the tribe of Judah, almost even unto ye birth
of Christ. But when he was borne, it must needs follow, according to this
prophecy, yt this princely dignitye of the tribe of Judah, and office of the
priesthood, should end.


Anna. Was not this princely dignity, taken from the Jews, long before
Christ's birth, when, for 60. years long, they were prisoners at Babylon,
under a king of the Gentiles? for Christ, as the^, was not come. And if I be
not deceived, the Jews, in disputations, with us Christians, make a jest at
this prophecy of Jacob, obiecting that captivity.


Vrb. The Jews, in this place, as in many other are deceived. For in all the
time of the captivity, the kings stock nevertheless remained in Iechania,
who being delivered from captivity, was with great power honored as a king,
and after the captivity of Babylon, all these princes of the tribe of Judah did
reign and rule. Zerubabel. Ioanna the son of Resa. Abner Semei. Nagid Artaxat.
Amos Scyrath. Arses. Resa. Judas Hercanus. Eli Mattathias. Agai Hesli.
Mattathias Siloia. Ianus the 2. Hercanus. Misciola. Josephus the 1. Asar Maath.
Massoth Naum, and Josephus Minor.


After these did reign, but not of any continuance, the Afmonites, or
Machabies, Judas, and Ionathas, his brother, Simon, John, Hircanus, Priscus,
Aristobulus, John, Alexander, and Alexandra his wife, and Hercanus, whom Herod
slew, and by violence, usurped the kingdom: Herod.
This Herod was not a Jew borne, but an Aliant, an Edomite, son to
Antipater, of the City Ascalon. He obtained at Rome, of Octauian Anthony,
that by the authority and help of the senate, he might be king of the Jews:
but with much ado, he hardely subdued them, and brought them to acknowledge
him, for their king: They rebelled diverse times, and conspired his death, that
so they might shake of the yoke of a gentle king.

But when he had sore weried them, and grievously oppressed the^, about thirty
years, still wrestling with him, at last after many bickeringes, and
conflictes, he hardly began quietly to rule, and have full princely government,
without any rebellion of the Jews, who by extreme force, were compelled to
acknowledge him their king. At the same time, when Herod was king, and had
taken the scepter from the Jews, and when all their power was dawnted, then
came, this Siloh, or Christ, Mat. 2.
and was borne at Bethleem, as Matthew the Evangelist says, who alleges the
testimony of Micheas the prophet. Wherefore the true Lord and king now being
come, the Jews kingdom had an end.

But here must we diligently mark what kind of kingdom Christ's should be, and
how great his power should be: which thing ye Patriark does herin set forth,
when he gives him so royal, holy, and famous a name, calling him Siloh. For
Siloh does signifye rich, happy, Siloh.
fortunate, and one, which in all things he takes in hand, has good
success, and to whom all things fall out, as he wishes and desires.


Anna. There is one thing yt troubles me much, wherein I cannot resolve my
self. I doubt not at all, but that ye promise in Genesis 49. was fully
performed, and so, that there is not a letter, or titell of it left
unfulfilled: For whatsoever God promises, that must needs be performed. For
who can let it? But seeing that prophecy of Jacob says, that the princely
power should continue with the tribe of Judah, even until the time that Siloh
should come: and seeing you a little before said, that this princely dignity
after ye death of Ianus Hircanus, came to the Machabies, and afterward to
Herod, I would know, why the scepter did not tarry with the posterity of Nathan
until Hely. Were not the Machabees of the tribe of Leuy? and not of the tribe
of Judah? How therefore came Schebeth into their hands? by what right got they
the kingdom, and held it?


Vrb. Seeing we certaynely know, and believe that this prophesy, Of the
Machabees government in Judah.
which the Patriarch uttered by the instinct of the holy Ghost, is performed,
so that no one title thereof is left unfulfilled: like as both the time of
Christ's nativity, and also Herod's regement doetruly agree and iumpe upon: I
trust we may without danger reverently reason of this matter in the faith and
fear of God.

It was meet that this prophesy should be so fulfilled, that it might agree,
with this Siloh Christ, according to his firster coming into the world: and
that it might not disagre with other prophesies of Christ, and of his estate or
kingdom. But the Prophet Zachary says, Why Christ was poor at his firster
coming.
the firster coming of Christ shall be Eni, (that is to say) poor, needy, base,
contemned, and despised. Now then if Christ had been borne at such time, as
some of king David's stock had yet set on the princes throne, and so Ioachim,
Mary, and Joseph had been in authority, and come to the kingdom with full
sail of worldly pomp, where should that base and beggarly maunger in Bethleem
have bin found? where should his flight into Egypt have been seen? and where
should other notes, and tokens of Christ's humility, and of his wretched, and
miserable state in the time of his ministration, whereof the prophets foretold,
have appeared? Wherefore that short authority, or government, which the
Machabees had in the kingdom of the Jews, does not hinder the performaunce of
this prophecy.

Gods providence perchance would have it so, for certain causes: first, it
was meet and convenient, yt this tribe, a few years before Christ's birth,
should lose most of his dignity, and that it should become base, vile, and
despised, and as it were, faline, and not esteemed of the world: that Christ
might be borne, (as a spiritual king of the tribe of Judah, and stock of
David,) poorly without great sterre, and worldly pomp: as it is signified in
Esaias where he says, Esaias. 11.
There shall come forth a rod of Iesse, and a graffe shall grow out of his
rotes. The Ebrew text uses the word Gesa, which Aquila, Symmachus, and
Theodotio, translated into greek (...), (that is) a stock, a bole, a dried
tree, or a staff. To the intent they might signify, that long after the
captiuitye of Babylon, when there was none of ye stock of David to sit on the
kings throne: that the^ Mary, and Christ out of Mary, should spring, as out of
a dry stock, as Ierom says. Now this prophesy must needs have been fulfilled:
and therefore must the house of David, before the birth of Christ be deprived of
all kingly glory, and be contemned, and counted, as it were an old,
unprofitable, and withered, balke: which came to pass in those 129. years, in
which after Ianus Hircanus, Asmonay, that is to say, Judas with his kinsfolk,
nephews, and posterity, executed the office both of the spiritual, and
secular power. In those years the house, and stock of David, came to such
poverty, and contempt, that it was thought a thing impossible, yt so great a
king should come out of that so dry a root, being now so long withered, and
dead. For when the trib of Iesse was most contemned, then was Siloh, Christ,
borne, in the vile, and abject Bethlee^, the City of David. And therefore the
Jews, when Antiochus began to vex them, and when the Machabees took upon
them the priestly, and kingly dignity, might easily have coniectured, and by
evident signs have seen, that the time was now at hand, in which Siloh, should
come.

Moreover there is no cause, why that short time of the Machabees reign should
trouble us, (neither is it much to the purpose) for though they were not at all
of the tribe of Judah, yet did they govern in the place of the tribe of Judah,
and David, and provided for the tribe of Judah: and defended, and preserved that
tribe, and Benjamin, together with the priesthode, and their religion, even
unto the time wherein Siloh came. For the tribe of Judah had neither kings, nor
princes, neither of them selves, nor of their stock, and kindred, neither yet
any of their affinity that bore rule: but it was altogether under the
subjection of others. Judah, and Benjamin returned from Babylon, the tribe of
Leui was mixed with these tribes, as the minister of the Lord. And after this
sort Judah obtained, and had rule of the politic government.


Anna. You have satisfied, and resolved me, in that doubt of the Machabees.


Vrb. The parents of Christ, being of the stock of David, were removed from
the government, not long before the birth of Christ, and like it was so to be
Gods will, that before that time, both those principalities of the Jews (to
wit) both the spiritual, and temporal dignity of the Priests, and Princes,
should come to one tribe or person seeing Siloh was at hand, who being the
anointed of the Lord, should be both a priest, and king in Israel, and should
purchase us the blessing, and him self reign for ever.


Anna. Might not the Jews here say, that Siloh nether is, nor signifies that
promised Messiah, and so wrast this promise from us, and deride it. For they
perchance will allege, that there is another kind of prince of passing great
prosperity, specified and foretold here in this place: so wilful, unflexible,
and (...). (that is) stifnecked be they, when the are urged, and convinced with
the invincible Scriptures.


Vrb. They cannot allege any thing, that has any show, or face of truth: so
plain apparaunt, and forsable is this prophesy, with the falling out, or
fulfilling of it: neither, does it agree with any other: nor can be applied to
any other, but only to Christ. For Christ began his kingdom after the same
form, and manner in all things, as the prophet foretold: yea and even about
that time, that the scepter was taken from Judah. And now since that time ye
Jews for this 1576. years, and more have had nether prince, nor prophet: and
as well that secular, as ecclesiastical government has his end. Besides these,
their own Master, and Doctor Schlomo, (whom they cannot gaynsay) affirms,
that Siloh, in this place, is and fignifieth Messiah. And you know that
Thargum has Messiah, in stead of Siloh. What soever therefore the Jews hear
object, it is nothing at all, but their foolish hasting, doltish obstinacy,
egregious impudency, and malicious perverseness.


Anna. But how can you gather the state, and condition of Christ's kingdom out
of this word Siloh?


Vrb. Well, and easily, if you diligently consider these words that follow.
And the people shall be gathered to him, or to him shall the Gentiles flow in.
(for so is it nerer the Hebrew text). For by these words we learn, that
Christ's kingdom is a spiritual kingdom. For to him shall many nations
convert: or come and flow into him, and obey him: and that not by compultion of
sword, or armor, but willingly, and gladly. Other of the Jewish kings have
borne the secular sword, and with it have subdued, and bridled men, and that
both in their own kingdoms, and countries, and also oftentimes in their
borders adjoining, and yet is there not one of them now remaining, but in order
they have all ended their days.

What a king Christ is.
But this Siloh rules, and holds the scepter, not for a short time, as the
other kings of the Jews did: but for ever, (that is to say) he raygneth for
ever, and his kingdom extends, and spreads it self, not over one only
part of the world, not into Judah only: but over all ye earth. And this he does
not by dint of sword, nor with puissaunt armies of soldiers: but only by his
word: for his kingdom is a marvelous, Christ rules by his word.
and spiritual kingdom, where the subjects come (...), that is, with lusty
courage, willingly, cheerfully, redily, of their own accord, and with great joy
of heart, submit themselves to this king.

Wherefore in subduing them to him, he neadeth neither sword, nor weapon. For as soon as he speaks but his word (which of all things is most sweet, and
pleasant) straightway they, which be his, hear his voice, and willingly, and
gladly, follow him. For he entreats all yt be his, courteously, and gently,
and rules not imperiously, and tyran like: but offers himself most gently,
seruisably, and redily, to help, ease, and deliver all men. And this his
spiritual kingdom does Moses famously, with figurative speeches paint out: as
both what the order of it should be, and how it shall be governed, saying. Genesis
49.11.
He shall bind his asses fool unto the vine, and his asses colt unto the best
vine, in wine shall he wash his garment, and his cloak in the blood of grapes,
his eyes shall be red with wine, and his teeth white with milk. All these words
have a mystical sense, and speak of the administration of the word, and
gospel, because our Messiah, through the holy spirit rules his kingdom, by
his word, in which he speaks such things of Gods great love toward us,
(which gives us his son to deliver us from all misery, and calamity both of
body, and soul) as are most acceptable, comfortable, and pleasant to the ear:
which as soon as man does hear, he greatly reioyseth, and runs to Christ,
and with a holy violence, as it were forsably, enters in unto him, and
voluntarily submits, yeldeth up, and dedicateth him self wholly to him, Mat.
11.2.
as appears in Mat.

But now give care, and mark what Siloh does import: and why he would by this
name understand Christ. This noble personage is so rich, prosperous, and
flowing with abundance of all good things, that none of the kings of the
Jews, Why Christ is called Siloh.
nay not all the kings ca^ match him, or compare with him alone. And Christ's
kingdom is another, and clean contrary kingdom to the kingdoms of other
kings, and shall be governed after another sort, then earthly kingdoms be: nay
all other kingdoms must give place to this king, which out of doubt could not
be, if this Siloh should have bin a king, whose kingdom, and princely dignity
enduring but a short time, had ended with the kings: as the kingdom of David,
Solomon, and the rest did: or if this kingdom of his should have looked for
another king to succeed him: as did the kingdom of Judah wayt for him. It must
needs therefore be, that here should be a marvelous great change of kings, and
that this king, whose coming is here foretold, should be clean another kind of
king, and prince, then others were: otherwise the Scriptures would never have
named him Siloh, which signifies (...), that is, a most blessed, happy, and
fortunat Lord, who in all things he goes about, has passing prosperous succes.
Here then in this word may Christ's death, immortality, and eternity be
gathered, if it be well, and thoroughly pondered. For first he was to be true,
and natural man, and consequently mortal: for he was to come of the tribe of
Judah, being of the seed of Abraham, and son of David. Secondly, he was to be
immortal, and should rise again from death, and live for ever: because the
scripture (describing him) says, he shall be a royal prince, far differing
from other kings, and much more honorable, mighty and great, then all the
former princes of Judah, which orderly succeding one another reigned unto his
coming. This king commits not his kingdom to any other to rule, neither
has he any successor, he yeldeth not to any man, but having once taken the
scepter in hand in Herodes time, he rules and reigns a king for ever. Which
could not otherwise be, but that he should first die, and having put of this
miserable and short life by death, rise again, (death being overcome) to
immortality, and live for ever: That the scriptures might be fulfilled, and
that Christ might be such a king, and Siloh, as to whom, not only the Jews
might cleave, but also whom all the world might acknowledge, receive, and
worship for their God and king: And finally, that he might after this sort be
true man, and king of the stock of David, and yet nevertheless immortal,
invisible, and eternal, and reign after this sort, in faith spiritually for
ever.


Anna. If Cleophas, and his fellow had well understood this prophecy, which
was the testament of that their Patriark Jacob, they had not been so offended
at Christ's death.


Vrb. Indeed this prophecy might sufficiently have instructed them, and they
might have learned plainly enough out of it, how Gods will, and purpose was,
that Messiah, or Siloh should be put to death, and yet not remain in death,
but rise again to deliver Israel, and reign for ever. But they, as yet,
believed not the prophesies: as these their words of incredulity do
sufficiently argue, and declare: where they say. a. We hoped it had been he,
that should have delivered Israel. Luke 24.
For their hearts as yet wauered, and were unconstant, and they supposed, that
Christ had been utterly extinct, and dead for ever, and themselves clean
frustrate of their hope. For, seeing Christ himself was now put to death, they
dreamed, that he could neither help, nor deliver other men from death: and
therefore Christ says unto them, O fools and slow of heart to believe all
things, Luke 24.
that the Prophets have spoken. Ought not Christ to suffer these things, and to
enter into his glory?


Anna. Wrote Moses nothing else of Christ in Genesis?


Vrb. I have determined to expound those prophesies only, which most
specially, plainly, and evidently speak of Christ. For if I would explicate,
and run through all the mysteries, and types which are in Genesis, I could
find many more of Christ, and his church.


Anna. Moses in the 14. of Genesis briefly describes Melchisedech. I have
often heard you say that Christ was called Melchisedech. I pray you tell me
why he was called so?


Vrb. There is an excellent, and comfortable mystery of Christ in Melchisedech,
in the 14. of Genesis And Paul in the seventh chapter to the Hebrews does
famously, and aptly expound the same, saying. Heb. 7.
Melchisedech the priest of the most high God, is a figure of our Lord Jesus
Christ, to whom God the father faith thus, in the 110. Psalm. Thou art a Priest
for ever after the order of Melchisedech.


Anna. What was Melchisedechs order in his priesthood?


Vrb. The state, and order of his priesthood is marvelous, and altogether
differing from the state of the priests of the law. In the law of Moses there
was a priesthood of the tribe of Leui. That priesthood offered up sacrifice,
and prayed for other, and for themselves, and they taught the law of God, in
which every man might see his sin, and the curse due for his sin. But this
priesthood could deliver none from their sin, or from the curse. Moreover,
there were many Priests, that succeeded one another, for they died, and others
came in their places, neither was there any one that still enjoyed the office
of priesthood. Melchisedech.
But Melchisedech was a marvelous priest, of whom Moses speaks but little:
But the holy ghost expounds the same more at large, in the 7. to the Hebrews,
saying: Melchisedech by interpretation, is the king of righteousness, after that
he is also king of Salem, (that is) king of peace, without father, without
mother, without kindred, and has neither beginning of his days, neither end
of life, but is likened unto the son of God, and continues a priest for
ever: Moreover, he blessed the Patriarch Abraham, who notwithstanding had the
promises of the blessing of God. All these were fulfilled in Christ, Psalm. 110.4
as David witnesses, saying. The Lord has sworn, and will not repent, thou
art a priest for ever after the order of Melchisedech: (That is to say) Thou
art a priest clean after another sort then Aaron, and his successors were. For
they were mortal men, who by the commandment, or law of God could condemn,
and bring al men under the curse: but could not deliver, or quit any man from
the curse. And such were both their sacrifices, and the priesthod itself, yt
they could not take away even the least sin that is: But thou O Christ art
the true Melchisedech, the everlasting, and true king, and priest. And this
must you after this sort understand. Christ in earth has no father, and in
heaven no mother: he is everlasting God, and also immortal man. And in this
order, neither went any before him, nor shall come after him. He was not made
priest according to the law of the carnal commandment, but after the power of
everlasting life, who truly blesses us, and delivers us from our sins, and
from eternal death, and gives us everlasting life. He is Malchizedek and
Malchischolam (that is) a king of righteousness, who is our righteousness, and
does justify us before God. He is also a king of peace, because by him only we
have peace with God. As Paul says to the Romans and the Ephesians. Romans 1. Ephesians. 2.



Anna. Undoubtedly in this mystery, as in the other before, is to be
understood, that Christ should first die, seeing Paul to the Hebr. says, Hebr.
7.
that this true Melchisedech Christ of the tribe of Judah, should be borne a
very true man, and yet nevertheless immortal, who should live eternally, yt he
might help us everlastingly. But Cleophas and his companion did not understand
nor believe this. For if they had, they would never have been so pensife, nor
offended at Christ's death.


Vrb. In deed they had prophesies, figures, and testimonies enough of the
scriptures, out of which, they might have gathered, that Christ should first
dye. And they had but even three days before eaten the Paschal lamb, The
Paschall lamb.
which by Gods commandment they ought Exo. 12.6
to kill and eat without leven. They took also ye blood of the lamb, and
therewith they oynted, and sprinkled ye two side posts, and the upper post of
the doors of their houses, which was a toke^ of grace For when God killed all
the first borne through all the land of Egypt, the Jews were safe in their
houses. For upon what door so ever the Angel saw the blood of the lamb
sprinkled he past it over. This lamb with his blood was a figure of the
immaculat lamb Christ, which was slain, and offered for us, by whose blood we
be delivered from death. S. Paul fitly and aptly expounded this figure, 1.
Cor. 5.7
saying. Christ our passover is sacrificed for us. Therefore let us keep the
feast, not with old leven, nether in the leven of malitiousnes, and wickedness,
but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth.


Anna. It might manifestly, and easily, by this figure, appear, that our
passover, or pascal lamb Christ should be slain, and that his blood should be
shed.


Vrb. They might have learned out of the 23. of Esaias who was the true lamb:
but their eyes were holden, neither could they understand the scriptures, till
Christ him self opened their hearts.


Anna. Has Moses any more tipes, or figures of Christ in his books?


Vrb. He has, and that a great many: but I will only expound those, that be
most principal, as they stand in order. In the 25. of Exo. there is a notable,
delectable, Caporeth. a figure of Christ.
and beutifull tipe of Christ in Caporeth. God commanded Moses that he should
cause the arc to be made, and be covered within, and without with gold: and
that upon the upper part above, he should put the mercy seat, made of pure
gold. You know that this word Caporeth is derived of Ciper, Christ is the mercy
seat.
and signifies a peace offering, a reconciliation, or the place of mercy. This
is a worthy mystery: For God promised to the children of Israel, that he
himself would dwell in that mercy seat, and that he would make answer, and
say his mind to the people out of it. This same mercy seat both is, and
signifies Christ Jesus our Savior.


Anna. How may we know that Christ is meant by that Caporeth, or mercy seat?


Vrb. The holy Ghost by Paul does so expound this figure to the Roma: where he
says. Romans 3.
All have sinned, and are deprived of the glory of God, but are justified
freely by his grace, through the redemption which is in Christ Jesus, whom God
has set forth to be a reconciliation, (or a peace offering, (...) (that is the
mercy seat) through faith in his blood. And to ye Ebrews. where he speaks of
the hye priest Christ, which is moved with the feeling of our infirmities, he
says: Heb. 14.
Let us go boldly to the throne of grace, that we may receive mercy, and find
grace to help in time of need. And so did Moses in his mercy seat lively,
and plainly paint forth Christ in his humanity, in whom alone all we find
both mercy, and God him self: as Paul says to the Colos. Col. 2.
In Christ dwells all fulness of the Godhead bodily. Of this Caporeth, Christ,
God himself talks with us: as Christ in John says, Ioh. 7.
My doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me. Christ is ye everlasting word
of the father, and his only begotten son true God. If we see, and hear
Christ, we hear also the father: Ioh. 14.
as Christ witnesses in John, saying: f. Phillip, he that has seen me, has
seen my father also: do thou not believe, that I am in the father, and the
father in me? We have here large scope, and matter ministered to speak of this
Caporeth: but I may not tarry in figures, because I would come to the manifest
and plain prophesies of Christ, and especially to those which speak of his
death, and resurrection. Let this therefore suffice concerning Caporeth. For, by
Christ we be reconciled, and at one with God, There is no God but Jesus who in
a Savior therefore fear not thy sin.
and by him we receive forgiveness of our sins: to be short, in Christ we
find, and obtain God himself: as we read in the new testament: for there is
no other God, but Jesus Christ.


Anna. What is writ of Christ in the third book of Moses?


Vrb. Whatsoever is spoken in Leuiticus of ye outward priesthood of Aaron, and
of all kind of sacrifices, of the sheding of blood, and of forgeuing of sins,
all these were nothing else but figures of Christ our true priest, which by his
true sacrifice offered upon the cross, has redeemed us, and purged us from
oursinnes.


Anna. How may we know that?


Vrb. The new Testament does well interpret, and expound these figures to us:
and it applies them all to Christ: but above the rest, the epistle to the
Hebrews, in which Paul plainly declares, and teaches, that Aaron the priest,
and the whole priesthood in the law, with all the rites, sacrifices, offerings,
clensings, orisons, doctrines, reconciliatio^s, propitiatio^s, sprinklings of
blood, and other fit figures for that purpose, do plainly set forth, and
prefigure unto us Christ. For what things soever were then done, they were
only shadows, and types of the new testament, and of Christ: because that
then there was no true reconciliatio^, forgiveness of sins, or righteousness in
that outward priesthood, and sacrifices. Dumb, and brute beasts were then
offered, whose blood (as Paul says) cannot take away sin. There were many
sacrifices, effutio^s of blood, and washings in the law, which were but tipes
and shadows, and could make no man perfect within, in conscience. Hebr. 10.
They were only figures, and memorials of sins, and of the forgiveness of
sins, which we have only by the blood of Jesus Christ as it is written to
the Hebrews: They were only exercises of outward discipline, holiness, and
justification of ye flesh, which being but given until the time of reformation,
were then to have the full end, when he should come, which by these types and
figures was prefigured.


Anna. I would gladly hear how Aaron with his priesthood, and sacrifices, do
signify and prefigure Christ. And I pray you expound me every parcel of it
orderly.


Vrb. I will. But that you may, as in a table plainly see it, and that the
matter may the better be understood, and perceived, I have here under set down
the figures of the old testament, with the fulfilling of them, and the truth of
the new testament set over against them.

A Table containing the figures of the old law, and things in deed figured
thereby.
The Figure. The things figured. 1. AARON with his priesthood, in Leuiticus. 1.
CHrist, and his everlasting priesthood in the whole epistle to the Hebrews. 2.
Aaron the hie Priest in the law. 2. Christ a high priest in the whole epistle
to the Hebrews. 3. Aaron teaches the law given by Moses which accuses us, and
works wrath. John. 5. Romans 4. 3. Christ teaches the Gospel, which excuses
and defends al true Christians, and gives the^ mere grace. Ioh. 1. Grace,
and truth by Christ. 4. Aarons doctrine was the letter written with the finger
of God in tables of stone. 4. Christ's doctrine is spirit and life, and the
christian faith written in the fleshly tables of the heart by the holy ghost.
John. 6. Iere. 31. 2. Cor. 3. 5. Aaron prays for the people. 5. Christ is our
Mediator and aduocat, and prays for us. To. 8.1. Tim. 2. 6. Aaron bears the
sins of the people, the 3. book of Moses. 6. Christ is the true lamb of God,
which bears the sins of the world, and paieth the ransom for them. Ioh.
1. 7. Aaron offered up beasts, and blood of beasts, for the sins of the
people. 7. Christ offered up him self for the sins of the world, and shed his
own blood for them. Ebr. 9.

There be five kind of sacrifices in the law. All kinds of sacrifices were
fulfilled in Christ. 1. The Holocaustum was consumed with fire. Leui. 1. 1.
Christ is our true burnt offering, burning in the fervent fire of love toward
us, and gives himself wholly for us, that he may thereby deliver man holily.
2. The offering up of sacrifice in Leuit. 2. 2. Isichius understands by the
offering of the sacrifice, the manhood of Christ, and Jerome also understands
Christ, who is the bread of life. Ioh. 6. 3. The peace offering. Leuit. 3. 3.
Christ is our true peace offering Romans 5. 2. Cor. 5. by the death of the son
we are reconciled to God. Col. 1. he has set at peace by the blood of his
cross all things, etc. 4. The offering for sins Leu. 1. 4. Christ is our
true offering for sins committed, and duty omitted. 2. Cor. 5. To. 8. 5 The
offering for transgression. Leui. 6.7. 5. For our sins he laid down his life:
the Lord laid upon him the iniquity of us all. Esaias. 53.

Figures. The truth and the thing figured. 1. The blood of beasts was shed in
the law, to purify sins. Heb. 9. Leui. 9. 1. Only the blood of Christ Jesus,
the son of god, which he shed on the cross, does purge us from all our
sin. 1. Ioh. 1. Heb. 9 2. The high priest once, and no more, every year,
entered alone into the holy of holiest, or into the second tabernacle (Leui. 16.
Exodus 30.) by the blood of beasts, with which yet notwithstanding, he could not
either justify, or purify any man. 2. But Christ an high priest of good
things to come, once entered not into a tabernacle, made with hands, but eue^
into the very heavens, into the presence of God, by his own blood, whereby he
reconciled us, purified us, and obtained for us everlasting life. Heb. 9. 3.
Aarons sacrifices of necessity ought to be most pure, clean, and perfect
without either blot or spot. 3. Christ of all the sons of men, had neither
spot, blotte, nor blemish being conceived of the holy ghost, and borne of the
pure virgin Mary. Esaias. 53.

These sacrifices, and shedings of the blood of beasts in the law, signified
the precious and incomparable death of Messiah, because he in the nature,
shape, and state of man would once be slain, and offered up, to wash away our
sins. Here must we first, well, and diligently observe: that the sacrifices
of the law, with the blood thereof, cannot in deed purge, or take away any
sin, neither reconcile any man to God. They were only figures ordained, and
instituted of God, yt they might represent unto us, that, only, and true
sacrifice, and reconciliatio^ of the new testament, that is to say, Christ on
his cross, by whose only sacrifice, sin was truly, and verily purged,
cleansed, and washed away, and certain (...), that is, redemption is obtained.
Secondly, that, if only by the death of Christ, sin be truly purged, and
washed away, then by it alone shall death be vanquished, and extinguished, in as
much as death is the reward of sin: and where no sin is, there death can
have no power. Thirdly, this also does follow by a firm and invincible
consequence, that Christian beleuers, who have part of this sacrifice, are
truly delivered from their sins, and shall by it also, (though in body they
dye) yet be restored again to life. All the priests of the law died
successively, neither could they deliver themselves, nor others from sin and
death: but Christ has no successor, because he is always one, and bides for
ever a priest of the everlasting (...), priesthood, by which he both can, and
will save us for ever, and by which he purchases for us everlasting
redemption, Heb. 7. and 9. Wherefore all which are his, that is, which believe in
him, shall be fellow heirs with him of everlasting life. Mat. 22.32.
He is not God of the dead, but of the living. And therefore they also must
needs by Christ rise again from death: but if we should rise again from
death, and enjoy everlasting life: it was needful yt he should first rise
again from death, and be the Lord of life: as Esaias says: Esaias. 53.10.
When he shall make his soul an offering for sin, he shall see his seed, and
shall prolong his days.

Here the Prophet teaches, that Christ, after he had finished his sacrifice on
the cross, should live, and reign with his church for ever, and never die as
other priests, kings, and lords did. Must not a godly heart of necessity,
here conceive much joy? when he sees, and considers, how plainly, how
clearly, and how directly, under the shadow of these figures, both the death,
and the resurrection of Christ, and all faithful christians are signified, and
set forth: and also when we see by what means it pleased God to redeem the
captive world, and to 2. Cor. 5.18.
reconcile it to him by Messiah, his only begotten son? We read in the book
of Numbers, which is ye 4. book of Moses, that Moses by the commandment of
God erected in the wilderness a brazen serpent, The brazen serpent a figure of
Christ.
which when the children of Israel should behold, they should be restored to
their former health, although they were stinged with the deadly wounds of the
fiery serpents: and should not die of the poison, and stinges: Ioh. 3.14
And so was it meet that the son of man (as Christ says) should be lifted
up that all they which believe in him should not die but have everlasting life.
In this figure of the serpent, the cross, and wholesome death of Christ,
together with the fruit, and use of the same, that is to say, our deliverance
from death, is very well and fruitfully prefigured.


Anna. By this figure also, Cleophas and his fellow, might have coniectured, and
seen, that Messiah should die, and afterward rise again to everlasting life.


Vrb. They needed not in deed have bin so pensife, neither yet have wauered,
doubted, or bin so offended about Messiah as they were, if they had well known
Gods purpose, and predestined ministry of Christ. Nevertheless, they had
plainer, and liuelier prophesies of Christ in the Prophets then these, out of
which they might more certainly, and evidently have gathered the death and
resurrection of Christ.


Anna I pray you go through, and explicate to me the rest of the prophecies,
which Moses has of Christ.


Vrbane. Saint Peter in the third of the Acts, recites out of Deuteronomie.
18. a famous prophecy of Christ, and worthy to be remembered, where Moses says
thus to the people: The Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a Prophet like unto
me from among you eue^ of thy brethren, unto him shall you harken: and who so
ever will not hearken unto my words which he shall speak in my name, I will
require it of him says the lord. It is evident and certain, that in this
text, Christ is that prophet of who^ Moses here makes mention. For the holy
ghost himself does apply it to Christ, speaking by S. Peter. And the multitude
which was refreshed with meat, speaks after this sort of that excellent
prophet in John, where the Greek text is thus, John. 6.
(...). That is to say: This verily, and without all doubt is ye self same
prophet, which is to come into the world, according to the prophesies of the
prophets. Luke also says: Luke 7.16.
A great prophet is raised up amongst us, and God has visited his people.

And here is to be noted, that Christ should first be a true man, and
consequently be partaker of death. And then he says. A Prophet like to me of
your brethren.

Secondly ye see, that Christ also should be a doctor, and should bring into
the world the word of God his Father, the word of life, the holy, and saving
Gospel. Here you see he speaks spiritually of the kingdom of Christ.

And thirdly is to be noted, Note ye that refuse to hear the word.
that he which does disdayn to hear this word of life, and will not believe it,
shall bring upon him self the judgment, and wrath of God: And that God for yt
man's unbelief, will visit him in his indignation, and will plague him with
horrible punishments. Of this is Paul a witness: to the Thessalonians, where he
says: 2. These. 1.7.
When the Lord Jesus shall show himself from heaven, with his mighty Angels in
flaming fire, rendering vengeance unto them, that do not know God, and which
obey not the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, which shall be punished with
everlasting perdition from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his
power, when he shall come to be glorified in his saints, and to be made
marvelous to all the^ that believe And Peter also in the Acts (when he has
recited the words of the prophecy) adds these words. Acts. 3.23.
It shall be that every person, which shall not hear that prophet, shall be
destroyed out from the people. The Latin translation in Deuteronomy. says it thus.
If any man will refuse to hear the words of this prophet, God will be
revenged of him. By which words we see, that there must be a Judgment. By all
which it follows, that Christ should not remain in death, but rise again to
life.


Anna. What is there written of Christ in the other prophets: as in Samuel,
David, Esaias, Jeremy, and Ezechiel, etc.


Vrb. They prophecy sufficiently of all things, which is nedeful for us to
know. As of the genealogy, or stock of Christ, according to the flesh.

Of the city where he should be borne.

Of the pure virgin Mary, his blessed mother.

Of the manner, and circumstances of his conception, and nativity:

Of his name which should be given him.

Of his firster and poor coming into the world.

Of his condition, and lowly life, which should be void of all worldly
ostentation, and when that coming of his should be.

Of his double birth, whereof one was Eternal of his Father, and of his true
Godhead: the other temporal of the undefiled Virgin Mary, which never knew
man.

Of his flight into Egypt.

Of his office, that is to say, that he should be our King. Priest, Doctor,
Reconciler, Mediator, Shepeherd, Redemer, Deliverer, and Judge of the world.


Of his miracles.

Of his shameful, and reproachful (but unto us most wholesome and happy) death.

Of his descending into hell.

Of his glorious resurrection, and of the causes, and unspeakable commodities
thereof.

Of his passion, and resurrection, that is to say, of his marvelous victory,
wherein he overcame, and destroyed therefore Matthew calls Christ the son of
David, Math. 1.
the son of Abraham. Hear you see that Christ came of the tribe of Judah, and
Matthew reckeneth up some of Christ's ancetors, or progenitors, from Abraham to
Joseph, which was Mary's husband, Luke. 2.
and of the house, and line of David. So that we may plainly see, that God
stood to his promise, and very faithfully performed that which he had promised
to Abraham, and David, in sending that blessed seed Christ.


Anna. I know that Matthew wrighteth a Cataloge of Christ was not the son of
Joseph: but seeing Christ was not the son of Joseph: but only of Mary, the
pure virgin, which never knew man, being conceived by the operation, and virtue
of the holy Ghost, without man's seed, not after the common, and natural
order, of man's conception: as the text in plain words does testify, saying: of
whom, yt is, In this 1. chapter of Math. the relative is ye feminine gender,
and therefore is referred to Mary, and not to Joseph.
of the which Mary, was borne Jesus. I do not yet understand how Christ can
come of the stock, and lineage of Abraham, and so of David. For what I pray you
does Joseph's kin, or family make to Christ's birth, seeing Christ was not the
son of Joseph. In deed if S. Matthew had recited Mary's ancetors, and
progenitors, from Abraham to Marye, so it might have appeared very evidently,
and plainly that the promise had been fulfilled: or if S. Matthew had proved,
and declared that Marye had been David's daughter, or of David's house, then I
think there would have been no cause of doubting: but (for all my simple
capacity) it would have been both esy and plain, and yet I would not you
should think I speak this as one yt doubts any thing at all of the truth of
the Gospel.

For I believe verily, that all which is in the scripture is most true: and I
yield unto God such dew honor, that I believe, that his word is (as it is in
deed) the truth it self, and such a sound certaynty, and sure foundation as
never shall be removed. But I say it, because I earnestly desire to learn some
certain ground, and proof out of the holy scriptures of this matter, whereby my
faith may be strengthened.


Vrb. In as much as Matthew says, that the virgin Mary the mother of Christ was
betrowthed to Joseph, he needed not reckon up the petegrees of the woman, or
the genealogy of Mary: for it was sufficient to set out Joseph's petegree,
whereby it is of it self plain, and certain, that Mary was of the tribe of
David, and so Christ the son of David. For as Hierom says, the scripture
does not use to draw the petegree of the woman. This is the truth of the
matter: Joseph, and Mary were both of one tribe, to wit, of the tribe of Judah.
For Joseph took Marye (who was his cousin) to wife, according to the law of the
Lord in Nume, the words of the law be these.

Number. 36.6
They shall be wives to whom they think best, only to the familye of the tribe
of their father shall they mary. So shall not the inheritance of the children
remove from tribe to tribe: for every one of the children of Israel shall
join himself to the inheritance of the tribe of his fathers. And every
daughter that possesses any inheritance of the tribes of the children of
Israel shall be wife unto one of the family of the tribe of her father: that the
children of Israel may enjoy every man the inheritance of their fathers,
neither shall the enheritance go about from tribe to tribe: but every one of the
tribes of the children of Israel, shall stick to his own enheritance, as the
Lord co^mmaunded. Here now it appears, that (in as much as Joseph, and Mary
were spoused together) they were both of one tribe, and family. For she could
not marry any man, unless he were her cosen, or of his own tribe, and lineage.
If therefore Joseph be of the tribe of Judah, Mary his spouse is also of the
tribe of Judah. Wherefore S. Math. in that he drew the genealogy of Christ, from
Zerobabell, and Abiud, coming down to Joseph, the husband of Mary, drew it
well, and truly, according to Moises his law. Yet S. Luke draws this
genealogy from Zerobabell by Resa, Iohanna, Judah, or Joseph, Semei, til he came
to Hely, and so to Ioakim, who was ye father of the virgin Mary, the blessed
mother of God. And this genelogy is also both true, and very well drawn. You
heard a little before a prophesye out of Esaias, which says. Esai. 11.1
There shall come a rod of the stock of Ishai, and a graffe shall grow out of
his roots, and the spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him. Here the Prophet
sin, death, and hell.

Of his glory, and his ascending into heaven.

Of his Eternal kingdom, as both of what sort it should be, and how he
should reign.

And of his other second or latter, and glorious coming in the last day to
Judgment.


Anna. There be me thinks many articles of Christ in the prophets: did Christ
(I pray you) expound the^ all to those two disciples, Luke. 24. Which is about
seven miles and a half of english miles.
on the way betwixt Jerusalem and Emaus? which town, as the scripture
witnesses in Luke, was but threescore furlonges distant from Jerusalem.


Vrb. Christ as I think only expounded those prophesies, which are written of
his passion, death, resurrection, and glory. Because in those, that is to say,
in his passion they were most offended, supposing, in so much as they had seen
him end his natural life upon the Cross, there had bin neither counsel,
hope, nor help left in him for Israel to look for: and for this cause were
they so sad. They sorrowed and were pensive because they knew not, nor thought
not, that Messiah ought first to suffer that vile, and ignominious death, and
rise again, and so enter into his glory, redeem the world, and remain our
God for ever, as I have said before. But when they now understood the
prophesies of his passion, and resurrection: and when they had learned by the
prophets, that it was gods will and ordinance, that Messiah by dying should
become Lord of life, and death, they had no further cause to sorrow, and
therefore their hearts were so joyful, and their hope so sure, that they could
not hide their joy, but uttered, and participated it with their fellow
disciples, which were at Jerusalem.


An. God be praised for ever. Verily we have no perfect or right joy in deed,
unless first we be well, and thoroughly acquainted with Christ's death, and
resurrection: which if we surely believe, and have them inwardly by faith
grounded within us, they not only expel all mistes, and clouds of sorrow,
but also make us triumphantly rejoice in the Lord. And although Christ perhaps
opened no prophesies to those two disciples, but only of his passion, and
resurrection: yet would I feign hear what else the scripture has prophesied of
him concerning those things, which you have already summarily, gathered into a
Catalogue, and certain articles: that I may herby have a more sensible, and
sure feling of Christ.


Vrb. It shall be no great labor for me to recite, and expound them all, whereby
the rather, we may have every part of the Sermon, which Christ the^ preached:
and I will do it so much the more willingly, and diligently, because S. Luke
says, Christ begone at Moses, and interpreted unto them all scriptures,
which were written of him. That Sermon then must needs have been a good long
sermon, if he expounded all the scriptures to them, and therefore my
explanation of them will also require some time.


Of the stock or genealogy of Christ.
Anna. GO to then, first say what the scripture has of Christ's stock.


Vrb. That Christ is the son of Abraham, and David
You have hard before, that he should come of the seed of Abraham: and the
prophesye in the 18. of Deutero. declares, that he should be born of ye Jews
to whom the promise was made, and this was no small prerogative: nay there was
none like it, as Paul witnesses to the Romans, saying. Romans 9.4.
The Israelites are they, to whom pertayneth the adoption, and the glory, and
the couenauntes, and the giving of the law, and the service of God, and the
promises, of whom are the fathers, and of whom concerning the flesh Christ
came, who is God over all, blessed for evermore. Amen.

This promise in process of time did God make to David by the prophet Nathan,
that of his seed should Messiah come, saing. 2. Kings. 7.12.
When thy days be fulfilled thou shall sleep with thy fathers, and I will set
up thy seed after the which shall proceed out of thy body, and will stablish
his kingdom: he shall build a house for my name and I will stablish the throne
of his kingdom for ever, and I will be his father, and he shall be my son.
Also in the psalms it is said. Psalm. 132.11.
The Lord has sworn in truth unto David, and he will not shrink from it,
saying. Of the fruit of thy body I will set upon thy throne.

This same promise is also extant in the 89. Psalm. And tolled, magnified, and
exalted, for the wonderful, marvelous, holy, and divine nativity of the
noble, and maiesticall son of God Jesus Christ, by whose means this poor
village obtained, and got this worthy name, and great honor. For what I pray
you be walls though high, and fair towred? what be bulwarks, though great
and strong? what is circuit, though most ample, and large? what is popularitie?
or what is the bravery and glistering bewty of building, and workmanship of
any City, to the glory, prerogative, and privilege of that poor town
Bethleem, only in that it was the bringer forth, and native soil, (according
to the flesh, and humayne nature) of the most mighty, magnificent, and
omnipotent God our Messiah. And therefore S. Matthew inspired with the holy Ghost
justly prefers it before other Cities, saying. Math. 2.
Thou Bethleem, in the land of Judea, art not the least among the princes of
Judah. And the 70. translators also (as Hierome witnesses) red this place thus.
And thou Bethleem, the house of Ephrata, art not the least, that thou should
be amongst the thousands of Judah. The Calde text says thus: Thou Bethleem
Ephrata art not much behynd, and but little inferior, but that thou may be
reckoned amongst the thousand houses of Judah. Bethleem in deed, was a little
town in ye tribe of Judah, once called Ephrata, as it appears in Genesis: But
if we will diligently, thoroughly, Genesis 35.
and truly ponder the Ebrew text or true sense, we shall see (in my judgment)
that the prophet Micheas, and the Evangelist Matthew, plainly, and thoroughly
agree in one sense, without any differing or iarring at all. S. Hierome
interprets this Hebrew word Zagir. Thou art a little one. But these words of
the Prophet, Zagir liheioth, may be translated also thus: It is but a trifle,
a small thing, a thing of nothing, and a thing to to badde base, that thou
should be counted amongst thousands of Judah. And this is the true and natural
sense of these words. Thou Bethleem Ephrata art far greater, and
excellenter, yea better, and of more fame, then that thou should be reckoned,
or numbered amongst thousands, or princes of Judah. Such honor as the other
cities have, is to base and vile for thee, and nothing correspondent to thy
dignity: thy renown and majesty is of more glory, then that the princely
praises of these cities can sufficiently set it forth: nay, no tongue can
speak, nor pen express the praises that are due to thee. If you will thus
construe the Prophets words, you shall find, that the Evangelist spoke the
self same thing which the prophet meant: for it is all one in sense to say:
Thou art not lest amongst the princes of Judah: And to say, it is a very base,
and small praise to value thee with the common princes, and thousands in Judah.
And the cause why, is showed immediately after, in these words. For out of
thee shall Messiah come. And this glory, and honor of this little town, was no
small glory, but a most splendent and famous glory: yea, it is such, that it is
not lightly to be esteemed, but before al other to be praised and preferred.

And where the prophet has these words, In thousands of Judah, Exo. 18.25.
it must be thus understood. Moses in Exodus makes a law, that one tribe, or
prince should be head over a thousand: for he divided the people into hundreds,
and thousands. The prophet then says thus much in effect: Thou Bethleem
Ephrata, which have scarcely on thousands of men in thee (for it was but a
little City, and not populous, nor much replenished) shall nevertheless, for
all thy baseness, yield and bring forth us as a prince, or Lord, which shall
govern all Israel. For in thee shall be borne etc.

Furthermore in this prophecy is to be noted, that by this word Moschel, or
prince, no other can be meant, but only Christ, or the promised Messiah, whom ye
Jews always understood in this place. For in the second of Matthew, when Herod
ernestly enquired of ye Scribes, where Christ should be borne, they answered
him out of this prophecy, that Bethleem in Judah should be the place of his
birth. And they recited this text for authority. But where the Hebrew word is
Moschel, that is, lord or prince, there the Calde Bible has Meschihah, which
is to say, Christ: and Rabbi Salomo^ does thus interpret it: Out of thee shall
come to me Messiah the son of David. And this I thought good to put in here
as an addiphet prophesies that Christ should be born of the tribe of David:
for Iesse, or Ishai (as the Ebrew word is) 1. Kings. 16.19.
was David's father.

All these things were fulfilled, and then the Angel Gabriel having saluted
the virgin, said: To him, that is Christ, Luke. 11.32.
shall God give the throne of his father David. And Paul to the Romans says: Romans
1.3.
Christ according to the flesh was borne of the seed of David. And again. 2.
Tim. 2.8.
Remember that Jesus Christ, made of the seed of David, was raised again from
the dead according to my gospel. And ye woman of Canaan in Mat. confesses the
same, crying, Math. 15 22.
O lord, thou son of David, have mercy on me. Also those two blind men sitting
by the high way side, when they heard that Jesus passed by, cried aloude,
saying: Math. 20.30.
O Lord, the son of David, have mercy on us. In like manner on Palm sunday,
ye multitude cried, saying: Math. 21 9.
Hosanna the son of David. Blessed is he, that comes in the name of the
Lord. And in Matthew, the Pharisees confess, that Christ is the son of David.
Math. 22.42.



Anna. I thank God, I am as sufficiently satisfied in this point, as heart can
wish: wherefore, now (I pray you) recite some places which make mention of the
city, in which Christ vouchsafed to be borne here in earth.


Of the City wherein Christ should be borne.
Vrbanus. MIcheas the Prophet, in that prophecy which he has of Christ,
names the city, saying: Mich. 5.2
And thou Bethleem Ephrata art little to be amongst the thousands of Judah: yet
out of thee shall he come forth unto me, that shall be ruler in Israel, Mat. 2.1.
whose goings forth has been from the beginning, and from everlasting. Here
you first see, ye Bethleem in Judah was the place where Christ should be borne.
As in Matthew, the Scribes at Jerusalem declared to Herod out of this chap. of
Micheas, that this Bethleem should be the place, where he should be borne. This
prophecy was fulfilled in the 42. year of the reign of Augustus Caesar, the
Emperor of Rome, when ( Cirenius being the President of Syria,) there was a
public decree given forth, that all the world should be taxed. Now when the
time of taxing came, every man resorted to his own city, whereby it came to
pass that Joseph, in as much as he was of ye house, and line of David, and
Judah, went up together with his wife Mary from Nazareth out of Galile, into the
land of Judah, to ye city of David, which is called Bethleem, that he might so
show his duetifull obedience to the magistrate: and so it fell forth by Gods
providence, and ordinance, yt while they tarried there, ye time of her travel
came, and she brought forth her first begotten son, ye true King and Lord of
Israel. The history of whose birth Luke sets forth in his 2. chapter.


Anna. Matthew in deed cites this prophecy of Micha: Mich. 5.2.
but where Micheas says: Math. 2.6.
Thou art little to be amongst thousands of Judah, or little in thousands of
Judah: Matthew says: Thou art not the least in, etc. How (I pray you) must these
two textes be reconciled.


Vrb. The Prophet Micha speaks of Bethleem, and considers the case it was
then in, when he lived: for being compared with Jerusalem and other gorgeous,
and populous cities in Judah, it appeared as then contemnable, little, and of
small countenance. It was the^ to Jerusalem and Samaria, as if I should at this
day compare Fridberg in Germany, with the famous city Auspurge, or Ware with
London. But S. Matthew writes of Bethleem as it was to be esteemed in his
days, when this prophecy was fulfilled, and Christ was borne, and openly
known to the world, and so in this place he prayseth it, and prefers it
before the other cities. For if one should have looked only on the walls,
territories, and circuit of this poor town Bethleem, it would in comparison
of other stately and mightily replenished cities of the country, appear a
base, and mean village. But if we according to the majesty of the matter,
ponder, and consider the high honor that God vouchsafed it (in that the
Messiah the only savior of the universal world would be borne in it) we shall
then in deed see, that it is not to be judged, and esteemed the lest, but that
of all the cities, even of the whole world, it only rightly bears away ye
price, and praise, and before all other is to be preferred, extolled, addition,
and overplus, least any thing should lack. Because the Jews themselves did
understand in this place the true Messiah, which is no other but Jesus Christ:
and yet to say the truth, it had been sufficient, or more then sufficient to
any godly man, that the Evangelist applies, and appropreateth this to Christ.

Furthermore where the Prophet says, that this Moschel, shall be the true
governor of the Israelites: he shows hereby, Feudatory, is one that holds
of an other.
that this Prince should not be a fudatory, or vassal (as the lawyers term
it) but the true Lord, and king of Israel, whose vassayls, nay, servants,
Saul, David, Solomon, Roboam, and all the other former kings were. For
Moschel in Ebrew signifies properly, a Monarch, and a mighty pearls Prince,
of whom all other do hold, and he of none, but has every soul subject to
him. And lastly, he gives us to understand, how royal a Lord, and Prince he
is: In that he says, his forth goinges have been from the beginning, and from
everlasting: by which words, the Church always understood the birth of Christ
to be from everlasting, of the deitye of his heavenly father incomprehensible,
and vnscrutable. For the Scripture makes mention of a two fould birth of
Christ, whereof one is temporal, to wit, Christ's double nativity.
when at the determinated time he was according to his humanity, borne true
man of the virgin Mary in the City of Bethlem: The other eternal according to
his divine nature, without compass of time, without beginning, and from
everlasting.

Both these natiuities the prophet here touches: and by these last words, he
proves his true divinity, saying: his forth going etc. As though he should
say, behold, and hear O Bethlee^, what a kind of Lord thou shall bring forth.
Certainly in thee shall be borne a true man: but yt his birth is not his first
beginning, and original. For he was even always without beginning, before the
world was made: nay, before the foundations of the world were laid, even from
everlasting.

Whereof it truly follows, that he is true, and natural God. For there is no
creature without beginning, but every one has his time of creation, and takes
his first beginning at some time, before which it was nothing. Now then if his
forth going be from before beginning, very well and truly is that thing hear
understood, out of which he went, (to wit) God the father.

And thus the prophet very plainly, and excelle^tly shows, that this Prince
(according to his nature, in which his forth going was without beginning) is
our only true, and natural God, the son of God, which took not his
original with time, nor had not his beginning, when time begone, neither was
made with the world, when it was made: but is as Paul says. Col. 1.15.
The Image of our invisible Cod, the first borne of every creature. For by him
were all things created which are in heaven, and earth, things visible, and
invisible, whether they be thrones, or dominions, or principalities, or powers:
all things were created by him, and for him, and he is before all things, and
in him all things consist. And John says. John. 1.1
In the beginning was the word and the word was with God, and the word was God.
This was in the beginning with God. by it were all things made, and the word
became flesh, (that is) was borne a natural true man. Basar.
For the Ebrew word Basar, in holy scriptures, signifies, as one would say, the
whole man, both in body, and soul.

Christ also in John says, to ye Jews. Ioh. 8.58.
Verily, verily, I say unto you, before Abraham was, I am. And here mark that
he said not, I was: but, I am. In the which phrase of speech he would signify
unto them his eternal, and divine nature. For the state of all creatures is
such, that at one time, or other, they are made, and have their beginning, and
are limited, and bordered with some end of time. And the time also was, in
which the creature yet was not, and when it was not made: there was also a
time when it was made: as Abraham was not in the time of Noye, but he was in
the time of Melchisedeck. But with God it is far otherwise. For the Godhead
is unmeasurable, infinite, and everlasting: it can not be comprehended, nor
contained in time, and of time, which vanishes, perishes, passes and
slippeth away and never stands in stay. The godhead has no former, nor
latter time, no time past, nor no time to come, as the creature has: and
therefore Christ speaks of his divine, and eternal nature, in that one word,
or syllable of the present time, saying, I am. For in deed, eternity is for
ever, and has neither former, nor latter time, beginning, nor ending.

The vacabond, and unbelieving Jews supposed, and judged that he was no more
but bare man, and such a one, as Abraham, or Elias was: neither could they
abide to hear the mysteries of Christ's words, or give credit to them. They
dreamingly thought it could not be possible, that he should have seen Abraham,
seeing it was full two thousand years, and more, betwixt Abraham's departure out
of the world, and Christ's coming in the flesh into ye world: neither did they
know, or understand the scriptures, which teach and foreshew, that Messiah
should not only be borne in Bethleem in time: but also that his forth going was
before all time, as Paul testifies to the Hebrews, saying: Jesus Christ
yesterday, and to day, Heb. 13.8.
and the same also even for ever.

Here then if you will well weigh this prophecy, you may see in it, both the
death and resurrection of Christ, which necessarily is to be required, yt he
might reign and rule eternally, and spiritually. For in as much as it was
determined, that he should be borne of the stock of David, a perfect, and very
natural man in the city of Bethleem: it was not to be thought strange, though
he should dye, as well as David, Solomon, and other men did. What meruail is it
(I pray you) to see a natural man die? certainly the corporal, or vital life
can not always endure. Nevertheless, for all that, in as much as he should be
the true, and chief Lord of Israel, it can not be, that he should be subject
to death, or yt death should vanquish, or deteyne him: but that of necessity he
must rise again from death, and live for ever.

And therefore is he compelled by temporal death, to leave his mortal life:
for how can mortal man come to immortality, least first he put of his mortal
body, which can not be done, but by corporal death. And thus it behooved him to
change this frail, corporal, and corruptible life, into a spiritual,
invisible, immortal, and incorruptible life, that he might become the true,
and everlasting Lord of all the Israelites, as well, of those that before had
been, as of those, that the^ were, and afterward, at any time should be: and
that he might also begin his true, eternal, and spiritual kingdom: the
administration whereof, is not after the manner of men, nor yet consists in
worldly matters. And therefore John says: Ioh. 12.24.
Verily, verily, I say unto you, except the wheat corn fall into the ground,
and die, it abides alone: but if it die, it brings forth much fruit.


Anna. O good Lord, though it be not seen, and known of fleshly eyes: yet how
full of sweet comfort, and consolation, how full of marvelous maiesticall,
and divine wisdom, and deep mysteries, is the sacred scriptures. O how great,
and unspeakable wisdom, and knowledge lies hid under the letter? how truly
said David: 2. Psalm. 119 103.
O how sweet are thy promises unto my throat, yea sweeter then honey unto my
mouth. By thy Commandments have I gotten understanding: therefore I hate all
wicked ways. Thy word is a lantern unto my feet, and a light unto my paths.
O, I say, what a tresure of knowledge, and wisdom, and what precious pearls
of everlasting life, lie hid in the words of God? how does it flow with
understanding most abundantly, and intelligence, far passing man's capacity?
what sound, present, and abundant comfort, may a godly man conceive of this
holy word? If these two disciples, after this sort, had known the person of
Christ, in this prophecy of Micheas, they had not been so offended at his
death: but had understood, and received comfort. Because God had so ordained,
and provided all these things to come to pass: and had so determined, that the
cross of Christ should be the glory, and triumphant victory of all true
Christians. But in as much as you have showed me the scriptures, concerning the
place of his birth: Say also (I pray you) what is written of his Mother.


Of the Virgin Mary the Mother of Christ, and of Christ's conception.
Vrbane. WHen Pekah, the king of the ten tribes, which fell away in Israel,
and Rezin the king of Syria, made war upon Achas the fifteenth king of Judah,
and murdered, and spoiled the inhabitants of the country, purposing, and
determining to remove Achas, and place an other in his kingdom: then the holy
ghost (while these two kings with detrune^t, and bloodshed, had all to defaced
the land of Judah) prophesied, by the Prophet Esaias, Esaias. 7.14.
Of the blessed Virgin Mary, that she should bear the child Christ. And
although those kings were very cruel upon Achas, and were both mightily and
marvelous bloudily bent against him: yet did not God for all that suffer them
to prevail against him, and his poor tribe of Judah, because he would
faithfully perform, and pay that which he had promised to David, even that
Messiah should come of his house, and lynage. He comfort therefore Achas ye
king in this peril, purposing to quicken and confirm his faith by this
miracle, to the end he should not fear his enemies. For God promised, that he
himself would aid him. But Achas was an Idolater, and an hypocrite, neither
did he receive that for a sign of Gods help. Wherefore God rejected that
wicked king, and yet nevertheless published the miracle, and gave the sign to
the house of David, which was the sign of true help, and deliverance from the
horrible, and everlasting calamity, and misery, wherein all we were wrapped,
even death, damnation, and the tyranny of Satan. These be the words of ye
prophet: Behold, Esaias. 7.14.
Haalmah (or a Virgin) shall conceive, and bear a son, and his name shall be
called Emanuel, or Immanuel. Lo, here you see, yt he prophesies of the Virgin
Mary, and her son Christ our Savior. And here the holy ghost tells us,
that Messiah should not be borne (after the manner of all the other sons of
Adam) of the seed of man, but only of the pure, and undefiled virgin Mary. And
therefore, his birth is not as ours is: unclean, defiled, and infected: but
holy, pure, and free from all blemish of sin. Because he is that blessed seed
of Abraham by which only, and by no other, all we wretched children of Adam
(conceived and borne in sin) must be cleansed, blessed, sanctified, and
justified from all the filthiness of our sins.

Moreover, the words of this prophecy do plainly paynt out the manner of his
conception, signifiyng that he was not conceived of man's seed, but that Mary
only, by the virtue of the holy ghost, conceived. For here is promised that a
child should be borne, and yet the mother remain a pure virgin. And yet here
is no mention of any father, because it might be a famous sign and miracle.
Luke. 1.31.
The Archangell Gabriel did rightly expound this prophecy in Luke. For, after
he had saluted Mary, he said: Lo, thou shall conceive in thy womb, and bear
a son, and shall call his name Jesus. He shall be great, and shall be called the
son of the highest. And when Mary, doubtful of these things, asked how that
could be, seeing she had not known a man: the Angel by and by answered, Luke
1.35
and opened unto her a singular, strange, and supernatural way of conception,
saying: The holy ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the highest shall
ouershadow thee. Therefore also that holy thing, that shall be borne of thee,
shall be called the son of God.


Anna. This by the gift and grace of God, I believe constantly. Neither do I
doubt, but that Christ was borne of a pure and chaste virgin, seeing the holy
ghost himself does bear witness of the same. Math. 1.
And S Math. alleges this place out of the seventh chapter of Esaias, and
interprets this Ebrue word Haalmah, Virgin: which interpreter we both ought,
and may certaynely believe.

But, whereas that faithles, and obstinate people the Jews, enemies to Christ,
exclaim, saying that Haalmah does not signify a virgin, but a maid, or young
woman already married to a man: and whereas they contemn the virginity of Mary,
and falsely accuse it, as feigned: and seeing they also wrast this prophecy other
ways, then to Mary, (according as our friend Rabbi Antonius Margarita told us)
I pray you let me hear how, these false Jews may be refuted, and convinced
out of the old testament: For they deny the authority and testimony of the new.


Vrb. The Jews (as utter enemies to the purity of the gospel) object in deed
many things against this prophesy, but al without ground, and reason. But that
you may better understand the meaning of this prophecy, I will first expound
unto you certain Hebrew words, and clear the controversy in some principal
points, whereof the ground of the controversy does depend. The Jews have
three words, which signify maids: the first is Naerah, which signifies a
young woman, maid, or no maid. For, as Rabbi Lizhak Nathan testifies, the true
signification of this word is generally, Youth.

The second word is Bthulah, which (as ye same Rabbi says) signifies, a pure
shamefast virgin.

The third word is Haalmah, which in this place the prophet uses of Mary, as
most proper and fit for the purpose. For it signifies a virgin, whose
virginity is pure and untouched, but ripe, marigeable, and able to bear
children. And it is worthy the observation, that this word is never taken in
holy scripture for a young woman that has known a man. This also is as well
worth noting, that Haalmah does not signify generally every maid, which is
pure, and untouched: Keep in your young maidens if you will have them virtuous
Haalmah^ as the virgin Mary was.
but (as S. Hierome notes) a virgin close kept in, whom the parents
diligently, carefully, and watchfully retain and keep in at home. This may be
gathered of the word Schoresth. For Alam signifies to hide, cover, and keep
out of sight. And so is Mary called haalmah: not only because she was a pure
and undefiled virgin, but because the yo^g maid which is diligently and
vigilantly kept up of her parents, is for the most part godly, and holily
brought up, and virtuously instructed. And the Prophet could not have used a
word more to the purpose, and fitter for this place, the^ this word Haalmah,
which most properly agrees with Mary. For Bthulah signifies indifferently any
maid, as well younger, as older, whether she be fit for child bearing or not.
There be many maids well stricken in age, of threescore, or threescore and ten
years old, and so unfit for to bear children: but the prophet would here
declare, and set forth a virgin, both young, marigeable, and fruitful.

Secondly, the Jews all without reason, standing upon no ground, but only
desirous to make braule, being in heart obstinately, impudently, and wilfully
blinded, and hardened, cavil, and falsely say, that haalmah signifies a young
woman, which in marriage has already known a man. But they may be convinced,
and proved liers out of the old testament: In which, haalmah never signifies
a young woman, that has had the company of man, but only a pure, chaste, and
undefiled virgin. Genesis 24.43. Virgin.
As in Genesis, Rebecka, when she was not yet married to Isaac, is called
haalmah. And as then certainly she had never known man: but was a pure, and
chaste virgin, as the words of the text, and history manifestly, and without
question do prove and convince. The text in Exodus uses the same word, Exodus
2.8
in ye same sense, speaking of Meriam Moises his sister: and so does it in ye
67. psalm: and in the Canticles. 1. and in many other places, which were both
laborious to recite, and yet not greatly needful in so plain a matter. But
the Jews allege an other thing: to wit, yt this prophecy imported, and was
meant of king Achas his son, Ezekia: and they say, that he was given to the
house of David as a sign, by which they might know that they should be once
delivered from those two kings Rezin and Pekah.


Anna. They that faithfully believe the Gospel, be not troubled with this
objection at all. Yet am I desirous to hear how it is refuted.


Vrb. The text in the 4. of the kings, and 16. chap. wipeth away this
objection. And I marvel much at the shameless impudency, and malipertnes of ye
Jews in this place, that they be not afraid, so grossly and manifestly to lie.
The history of ye holy scripture testifies plainly, yt king Achas reigned in
Judah but 16. years: In which time this was prophesied, as appears in yt 7.
Achas. Hiskia.
of Esaias. After Achas was Hiskia placed on his father Achas his trone, to
govern the people. And he began to reign when he was 25. years of age. Now
confer these together, and you shall see that this prophesy could not be
fulfilled in Hiskia. For he was.9. years old when his father began his reign.
And so it appears plainly, that Hiskia, (of whom they falsely affirm this
prophecy to be given) was at least 9. years of age, when this prophecy was
published. How now I pray you, can this prophecy then be either spoken, or
thought of Hiskia? What need many words? The Jews be blinded, and their
hearts are hardened, neither have they any knowledge, or understanding of the
holy Scriptures. God be merciful unto them. Amen. Mary a pure virgin.
Thus have you heard, that the mother of Christ was a pure and undefiled
virgin, and that this conception was not after the manner of other men, by
carnal copulation, but by a new, strange, and marvelous manner, even by the
holy ghost: and yet the virginity of his mother, pure, and perfect.

And so the prophet Daniel beholding her with spiritual eyes, says in the
vision of the 4. monarchies, that Dan. 2.34.
he saw a stone cut of a mountain without hand. Which words, the holy
church, ever, yet to this day, interpreted of Christ, and his blessed mother
the virgin Mary. For Christ in deed is that stone, which without hands (that
is) without the seed, or help of man was taken out of the pure body of Mary.
For so the holy, and godly doctors of the primative church, as Didimus
Ambrosius, Hierom, Augustine, and Irenaeus took it. Ambr. upon Romans 10. Hier.
upon Dan. 2. Aug. upon John. tract. 9. cap. 2. Iren. li. 3. cap. 8. against
Valent. What Immanuel signifies.
And so does the holy church now take it, consenting, and agreeing with these
godly doctors. Now, where as the son of this virgin is called Emanuel, or
Immanuel, it ministers great and infinite comfort to the godly. For Immanu,
does signify with us, and El, signifies God: because God is now with us, and
amongst us, not only through his grace (as he is always, in every place, and
as he was in times past with our fathers) but he is with us otherwise, after a
new and singular manner, to wit, in a bodily presence, or in his present body:
For God is become man. And as Paul says: Col. 2.9.
In Christ dwells all fullness of the Godhead bodily. That is, God is not
only in Christ, in power, and grace, as he is in all other holy, and godly men:
But very God himself dwells in the holy manhood of Christ, even as in his
temple: so that both God and man is in Christ one person. And as Athanasius
says in his Creed: As the reasonable soul and flesh is one man: August. lib.
13. de trinit. ca. 19.
so God, and man is one Christ* That is, as Augustine says: Of things which
God made, this is the most gracious, that man is joined with God in unity of
person: and in heavenly things the highest truth is rightly attributed to the
word of God. What greater honor, and more excellent dignity could our human
nature have, then to have God himself descend from heaven out of his high
majesty and glory, and come into the earth, and take into unity of person, not
angels nature, but man's nature, even the seed of Abraham, Hebr. 2.
and so become true man, that by yt means he might bring our nature to the
glory of the blessed, and everlasting life: and as it were having now laid
apart his power, wisdom, and dietie, show himself altogether as myld, meek,
lowly, loving, tractable, and duetifull to us, as if he were our servant, and
bondeman. bought with our money. Phil. 2.6.
For as Paul to the Phil. says: When he was in form of God, he thought it no
robbery to be equal with God: but he made himself of no reputation, and took
on him the form of a Servant, and was made like unto men, and was found in
shape as a man. He humbled himself, and became obedient to the death, eue^ the
death of the cross. Tit. 3.4.
And to Titus he says: that the goodness and (...) (that is) love toward men
of God our Savior appeared. The love of God toward man.
Truly yt was an infinite and great (...). For how could he by any means set
forth the flagrant affection of his love toward us more, then both sweetly,
and lovingly to embrace our miserable and human nature, and also earnestly
seeking our salvation, vouchsafe to be made man.

Be not these (I pray you) especial arguments, and sure signs of his great
mercifulnes, good will, love, and infinite affection toward mankind? Surely he
would not have become man for any other cause, but only that he might
plentifully pour upon us (unworthy wretches) his unmeasurable, What good we
have by the incarnation of Christ.
incomprehensible, and unsearchable treasures, with the infinite riches of his
abundant goodness, and grace. Verily, we may now truly say Immanuell, God is
with us, seeing he is not only graciously with us, and amongst us, as a
creator, and governor with his creatures, moving, renewing, nourishing, and
preserving all things by his power: But also in that he is man, and for our
cause only, to ye end he may make us partakers of his kingdom, Christ with us
after a new manner.
and life everlasting, and so is with us after a new and peculiar manner.

Before time he dwelt with his creatures only as God: But now he is with us men,
as man: yea, he is a heavenly man, and a human God. What sounder, greater,
truer, or fruitfuller comfort can there be in all affliction and calamity then
that God in this sort is with us? Romans 8, 31.
who now (as Paul boldly says) can be against us? If God after this admirable,
unspeakable, incomprehensible, and marvelous manner of his manhood, had not been
with us, we needed not have looked for life: For there had been neither hope,
nor help, counsel nor comfort left for man to look for, who, by reason of
sin, is in so great and horrible danger of eternal death. But we may now in
the Lord always rejoice, and we ought (...) always to give thanks to Christ our
God, for this great mystery of his holy and saving incarnation. For now our
mortal nature has a certain, and sure hope, nay it has so sufficient, and
precious a pledge of life, that it cannot waver or doubt: But that, together
with Christ, it shall live for ever. For (as Athanasius, that godly and
ancient Doctor says, touching this matter in his book of the passion of
Christ) the mortal body was joined to the immortal, and corruptible man was
coupled with the incorruptible word. Wherefore death by the word which
descended from heaven in Christ is abolished, even as stubble is of the fire
consumed.


Anna. Blessed be that Haalmah for ever amongst all women, and blessed be the
fruit of her womb our true Emanuel, world without end:


Vrb. Amen.


Anna. You promised to expound me the name of Christ, and to open the
prophesies in the scriptures, which spoke of it long before.


Of Christ's Name.
Vrbane. CHrist in the holy scriptures has many names, and all of them most
sweet and comfortable, as is this Emanuel, of which you heard even now out of
the seventh of Esaias. But there be two especial and chief names which the
scripture gives him, Jesus is a comfortable name.
which we will first handle. The former of them is Jesus, a name most proper,
and agreeing with him, and most comfortable to us. This name is an Hebrew word:
for the Hebrews say, that Ieschuah, or Iehoschuah, is as much to say, as
health, a savior, or keeper, and it comes of the word Iascha, which is,
saved, or delivered, or else it may come of Hoschia, that is, he has saved,
kept, or delivered. This royal or glorious name agrees not with any so truly
and fitly, as with Christ. He justly in deed, and by good desert is honored,
and called by this name: for he only it is, that delivers and saves us from
all calamities, both temporal and eternal.

And thus does the Angel interpret this name in Matthew, where he says to
Joseph. Math. 1.20.
Joseph, thou son of David, fear not to take Mary for thy wife: for that
which is conceived in her, is of the holy ghost: she shall bring forth a son,
and thou shall call his name Jesus, for he shall save his people from their
sins. And when Hanna the high priest, and Caiphas, and Ioanne, and Alexander,
and as many as were of the kindred of the priests, asked Peter and John in the
Acts, by what power, and in what name they helped the lame man: Acts. 4.6.
Peter answered by the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth. For in deed there is
none other name under heaven given unto men, in which we can, or must be saved.


Anna. Zach. 3.26.
Is not the high priest in Zachary also called Jesus? how comes that to pass?
or how can this so divine and glorious a name be given to him?


Vrb. The high priest in that place is only a figure of Christ, and therefore
has he this name given him. For Joshua the son of Nun, Joshua. 1.1. Deu. 31.23.
is called Joshua, because he was a figure of Iehoscuah, Jesus. And although God
gave the people of Judah many benefits, and commodities, and increased them
maruelously by these men's means, yet were they all but only temporal, and
terrestrial gifts, which they received of God by their hands, and very
trifles in deed, in comparison of the great gifts, and benefits, health, and
help, which God through Jesus Christ has now given, not to one people only,
but to all the world. For Christ delivers us from eternal misery, from
sin, from death, and from everlasting damnation, and gives us innocence,
health, life, and eternal salvation. This name therefore fills heaven, and
earth with unspeakable joy, because by this name comes true, and present
help in all troubles, and certain salvation from all calamities: As Peter
says in the Acts. Acts. 10.43.
To him give all the Prophets witness, that through his name all that believe,
shall receive remission of sins. To conclude, this in deed is true help,
true life, and true liberty.

What I pray you is the aid, and help of all ye world, and worldly creatures,
in comparison of this? can they deliver a man from any sin? can they give any
man eternal life? can they save ones life? or raise one from death? or deliver
one from the devil? a fig they can? But our Christ only is he that can help
the world, neither can he only, but also will, and does that which he can.
Wherefore he only, and none other is that true Jesus, which both in body, and
soul, and in life, and death helps, aydeth, delivers, and with eternal
life blesses all yt believe in him. This true help, and health, and this holy
name full of all comfort, and consolation was oftentimes foretold of by the
prophets. As in Iere. ye 7. where Israel confesses that there is no help any
where, but with God. And there amongst other he says. Ier. 3.23.
Truly in the Lord our God is the health of Israel. In the holy tongue it is
Theschath (that is) thy savior, help, or health.

Thus have you heard, that life is promised to the world, Acts. 4.12
in no other but only in Jesus Christ, as Peter says in the Acts. Wherefore it
may be supposed yt where so ever mention is made in the Scriptures after this
sort, of the aid, help, or salvation of God, that there, Christ is to be
understood. Christ also in Esaias comfort his church, and promises her the
service and ministry of the Gentiles, and kings: and amongst other he has
these words. Esaias. 60 16.
Thou shall suck the milk of the Gentiles, and shall suck the breasts of
Kings, and thou shall know, that I the lord am thy savior, and thy redemer,
the mighty one of Jacob. What other redemer do we here understand but Jesus
Christ, who^ all the godly know, and believe, to be promised, and given of God to
redeem, and deliver the world. Also in the 43. of Esaias it is said. I am the
Lord thy God, the holy one of Israel thy savior. In both these places the name
of Christ, Meschiah is used, which comes of the Hebrew word Iascha, that is,
saved. And in the 45. of Esaias, it is said: Esaias. 45 ^7.
Israel shall be saved in the Lord, with an everlasting salvation, you shall not
be ashamed, nor confounded world without end. And here the word Thescuah in
Hebrew is used. And yt which is said here, is in deed fulfilled in the true and
spiritual Israel, that is, in the Catholic church of Christ, which finds
everlasting life, health, and help in Christ Jesus.

Wheresoever also we find in the Psalms Ieschuath, cha, which signifies thy
savior, or salvation, there Augustine always understands Christ, our alone
savior: as in the Psalm 119. and in many other, which for multitude I cannot
recite: For we see the^ every where. Rabbi, Ishak, Nathan, has gathered a
great many of them together in his Perusch, Aleph, and Beth, which you may read
if you will.

But here I would not have you ignorant, that some men think Iehoschuah and
Jesus, The deriuation of the name Jesus.
not to be both one: For they say that Jesus is derived of the Hebrew word
Iesch, which (as Capnio interprets it) signifies, is: or else of the true and
proper name of God, Jehovah, which signifies such a one as has not, or
borrows not his being of any other, but is of himself: as Christ says to
the stubborn Jews in John. John. 8.58.
Before Abraham was, I am. Whereby is proved that Christ is truly and properly
so called, and else no man. For God calls himself, I am that I am. where
telling Moses what is his name, he says: Exo. 3.14
I am that I am: Thus shall thou say to the children of Israel, I am has sent
me unto you. Hereupo^ some suppose this name Jesus to be the very name of God
Tetragrammaton, which in the holy tongue is written with four letters, namely,
Iod, hoe, uof, hoe. In stead of which name the Jews for religion, and
reverence sake, use this word Edonai. Now if we put in this letter schin, with
these four letters, they will make the word Ieheschu, or Jesus, which properly
signifies God himself, or the divine essence. For God promised in his
prophets, that he himself would come and save us. And we in our true, and
undoubted Catholic faith believe, yt Christ is true, and natural God, which
both made, and preserves all things, etc. Wherefore this holy, and royal name
Jesus is given only to him. By which, the Angel Gabriel said, he should be
called, when as yet he was not conceived by the holy ghost. This most holy name
was given him openly, when he was circumcised: neither has it, ought it, or
justly can it be given to any other, but only to our true Messiah. For the
scripture witnesses, that he is very God in man's nature.

Paul to the Phil. says: Phil. 2.9.
f. Christ had a name above all names. And what name can yt be but only the
name of God? and thus much of his former name Jesus.

Now the other of the two names, The second name is Christ.
which in the scriptures be commonly given to Christ, is Messiah, which word
signifies anointed, and belongs to a king. For in the law ye kings were
anointed, as well as priests. Yet was not Christ anointed after the manner of
other kings, but after a strange, and peculiar manner: so that he is a Messiah
peerlesse, to whom there is not an other like. Of this strange vnctio^ of his,
which is proper to himself, the Prophet Esaias, and Christ himself in Luke,
says thus in these words. Esaias. 61.1. Luke. 4.18
The spirit of the Lord is upon me, therefore he has anointed me. Here he
speaks not of a corporal unction, or of baulm, where with all they
accustomably anointed themselves on their heads, hands, and iointes in their
mirth, and bankets, and wherewith they consecrated their kings and priests:
Christ would not have us think that he was anointed with such a corporal
unction. For he says: The spirit of the Lord is upon me. He speaks therefore
of the unction of the holy ghost, with which he was anointed to be an holy and
everlasting priest and king, which the 45. Psalm notes in these words Psalm.
45.7.
Thy God has anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows. That
is, God has consecrated and anointed thee a priest, and king, not with
earthly baulme (for thy kingdom is not of this world): but with the spiritual
oil of gladness, that is, with the holy ghost, by which likewise all men,
believing in Christ, are consecrated and ordered for spiritual kings, and
priests, and are made partakers of this oil of gladness: but yet mesurably.
As for Christ, he was anointed without measure, more abou^dantly, ple^tifully,
liberally, and infinitely, 1. Cor. 12.8 Romans 12.3.
then all Christians in the world: For we receive the spirit but after a
measure, one being beautified with one gift, and another with another, every
one enjoying his own particularly, and no man all universally. But the spirit
of God was given to Jesus without measure. He is full of grace and truth, and of
his fullness have all we received. Christ is as much to say, as anointed.
And here it appears, that Jesus is not a common (...) anointed: But that
chief (...), Christ, or Messiah, which was promised in the scriptures, should
come into the world, and all to bewater and replenishe it with his grace: As
the Prophet Daniel prophesied: Dan. 9.24.
Seventy weeks are determined upon thy people, and upon thy holy city, to
finish the wickedness, and to seal up the sins, and to reconcile the
iniquity, and to bring in everlasting righteousness, and to seal up the
vision, and prophecy, and to anoint the most holy. And a little after, he
calls Christ by his proper name, saying: After 62. wekes, Christ shall be
slain, etc. But of this prophecy God willing, I will speak more at large in
another place. Thus also may you read in the Gospel, where, when John Baptist
had showed Christ to Andrew the Apostle, and had said, John. 1.36. and 41.
Behold the lamb of God: Andrew said to his brother Simon, We have found the
Messiah. And by and by Phillip, in ye same place says to Nathaniel: We have
found him, of whom Moses did write in the law and the Prophets: And Nathaniel
said unto Christ, Rabby, thou art the son of God, thou art the king of
Israel. This Messiah did all Israel, carefully, watchfully, and heartily desire,
and wait for. For they had heard so much of Messiah in ye scriptures, that
they had conceived a good, and certain hope, and doubted not but that at his
coming, they should be delivered from those perils, calamities,
discommodities, and violences, which they suffered: and from all other injuries,
and evils, which either publicly, or privately vexed them: And they hoped
also, that al things should, after the coming of Messiah, go well with them,
so that they, and all theirs should have a most happy, and prosperous state,
even a world of wealth, and a flowing sea of all felicity: As it may evidently
be gathered of the woman's words of Samaria in the gospel of John, which said
to Christ. Ioh. 4.2
I know Messiah shall come, which is called Christ. When he is come, he will
tell us all things. Jesus said unto her: I, that speak unto thee, am he.

Consider now here with your self how great, true, pure, and precious comfort
we may take of these two names of Christ. Jesus, signifies salvation, or a
savior: or else imports the same that the word, God, does. Christ signifies
anointed.
And Christ or Messiah, is as much to say, as anointed. For there is
understood in this name, the unction of grace, and mercy, which God promised
unto us in his son. And now what would we more? what can we wish more? or
what need we more? nay, what is there that we have not, if we be once anointed
with this ointment. For if we constantly believe, and be thoroughly persuaded,
that God has given us Christ to be our priest, and our king, to the end he
may be our salvation, consolation, justification, and redemption, then
undoubtedly it must be as we believe: Because he has firmly promised that he
will do it, if we believe it. He cannot lie, or deceive us, because he is ye
very truth it self. Wherefore if we will steadfastly, and faithfully believe those
things, which he has promised, by that faith shall we be justified, and saved.


Anna. O good God, what exceeding comfort do we conceive, and what great joy,
and pleasure have we in hearing these words. God our gracious father vouchsafe
to give us a true, and constant faith, least we reap no fruit of this his
infinite offered grace, and favor.


Vrb. Amen.


Anna. I pray you take pains to recite the other names, which are given to
Christ in the scriptures. For I feel my heart refreshed, and filled with a
marvelous and incredible kind of comfort, sweetenes, and pleasure, which rises
of these two names: and my faith is well increased, and confirmed with a good
knowledge, which I have here gotten of Christ.


Vrb. It were a tedious thing to explicate them all, one by one: and again
they offer themselves to be opened in their due places in the prophesies, which
are of Christ: yet will I not stick briefly to recite the^ here without
further exposition of them.

Christ is called
A king, in Zachary. 9.9. An everlasting Priest, Psalm. 110.4. A propitiatory,
(...). Romans 3. A reconciliation. Hebr. 4. (...) a reconciliation for the sins
of the world. 1. John. 2.28. A deliverer, and redemer. Esaias, 48.20. and 60. 16.
Mat. 20.28.1. Cor. 1.30. A redemption, (...). Luke 1.68. Our mediator. (...).
1. Tim. 2.5. Our advocate, (...). 1. John. 2.1. A sacrifice and offering for
sin, both in committing, and omitting any thing against Gods commandment.
Esaias. 53.10. An offering, and a sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor to God for
us. Ephesians. 5.2. The lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world. John.
1.36. Our righteousness, knowledge, sanctification, and redemption. 1. Cor.
1.30. The light of the world. John. 12.46. Our master. John. 13.13. The
servant of God, that is obedient to the commandment of God for us. Esaias.
42.1 The way, truth, and our life. John. 14.6. Our resurrection. John. 11.25.
The beginning, and the first borne of the dead. Col. 1.18. The first begotten
amongst many brethren. Romans 8.19. Our hope. 1. Tim. 1.1. Our brother. Psalm.
22.22. Hebr. 2.12 Mat. 28. 10. Our shepeherd. Ezech. 34.23. John. 10.11. (...),
the chief shepeheard. 1. Pet. 5.4. The door of the sheep. John. 10.7. The
bread of life. John. 6.48. Our rock. Math. 16.18. Our peace. Ephe. 2.14. The
stone that has seven eyes upon it. Zach. 3.9. The stone which was cut out of
the mountain without hands, which became great, and filled the whole earth.
Dan. 2.34. (...), the end of the law, the perfection, and fulfilling of the
law. Rom 10.4. The head of the church. Ephesians. 22. and 5.23. The true vine.
John. 15.1. The stone, which is become the head stone in the corner. Psalm.
118.22. and Act. 4.11. The righteous branche, or branche of righteousness.
Iere. 23.5. The Lord of life. Acts. 3.15. The Lord of all. Acts. 10.36. The
king of glory. Psalm. 24.7. The righteous one. Romans 3.26. and 5.7. Esaias. 51 6.7.
Acts. 3.14. and 7.52. 1. John. 2.1. Mat. 25. The hope of glory. Col. 1.27. The
heir of all. Heb. 1.2. The prince of the kings of the earth. Apoc. 1.5 The
word of life. 1. John. 6. Immanuel, God with us. Esaias. 7.14. Mat. 1.23 The
everlasting word, of the father. John. 1.1. The wisdom of God. 1. Cor. 1.24.
The power of God. 1. Cor. 1.1. The image of the invisible God. Col. 1.15. The
first borne of all creatures. Col. 1.15. (...), the brightness of the glory of
God. Hebr. 1.3. (...), the express image of the substance of God the father,
Heb. 1.3. True God, and eternal life. John. 5.20. The Lord of Zebaoth, that
is, of hosts. The seventy Translators interpreted it (...), that is, almighty,
as Hierome notes upon Zach. 2.8. The angel of the Testament. Mal. 3.1.
Wonderful. Esaias. 9.6. The geuer of counsel. Esaias. 9.6. The mighty God. Esaias.
9.6. The everlasting father. Esaias. 9.6. The prince of peace. Esaias. 9.6. The
son of righteousness, Mal. 4.2. The judge of the quick, and the dead.
Acts. 10.42.


Christ has these, and many more most sweet epithites, and goodly figurative
names, given him in the Scriptures, which would be both long to recite, and
here not much needful.


Anna. It is incredible to believe, what light, what understanding, what
comfort, and what consolation, I have received even of this bare, and brief
recital, and catalogue of these epithites, and names of Christ. But what
unspeakable joy, what marvelous profound knowledge, and what plentiful, and
abundant consolation would then follow (even as out of a full fountain) to us,
if these Heroycall titles were thoroughly opened, and every one particularly in
his place expounded.


Vrb. These epithites in deed, plainly, and evidently declare, though not
fully, both the quality, and quantity of Jesus Christ our Lord, as what kind
of one, and how great he is: and they tell us what comfort, and help we may
hope to have at his hands. But it were a very tedious travel at this time, to
handle every name at large, according to his dignity: they shall be expounded
(God willing) more commodiously and fitly together in an other place, in the
openyng of the Prophets.


Anna. You promised also to say some thing of the former coming of Christ into
the world. If your leisure serve, I would see you perform that your promise.


Of the former coming of Christ into this world, and of his humble
conversation, and being here on the earth, and also of the time of his coming.
Vrbane. THis article in deed is worthy to be diligently expounded, and well
understood. If the Jews had well understood this article, and believed it, they
had never fallen so horribly: or if they would yet either understand it, or
believe it, they would not be so greatly offended at Christ as they are, neither
would they so obstinately persist thus long in their blyndnes as they do.
Before Christ's coming, and in Christ's time, they of all men in the world,
gloriously vaunted themselves of their great knowledge and understanding of the
holy scriptures, as a thing in which they excelled al men, and yet were they
utterly ignorant of this especial chief point, and article of scripture: to
wit, of Jesus Christ, how, after what sort, and for what cause he should come.
They in their carnal understanding dreamed, that Messiah should come into ye
world, as a mighty Monarch, with a puissant and huge army of men, and that in
worldly pomp, power, bravery, and dignity, The Jews error.
he should exceed all other kings of the earth, and with dint of sword subdue
Goym (that is, all nations) and bring them in subjection to the Jews, and that
he should establish his princely throne at Jerusalem, in the land of Canaan,
and give the Jews al wealth, riches, dignity, ease, and plenty of all worldly
pleasure. These things did they in their doltish judgment grofly look for at
the hand of Christ: so utterly ignorant were they of the heavenly and
spiritual blessings promised in Christ. Wherefore, carnally construing all the
prophecies of Christ, they promised themselves in him only the external,
momentany, frail, brickle, and transitory riches of this short life.

At this day also the Jews retain these, and much more doltish dreams, and
fantasies of Messiah. For oftentimes at Ratisbone and other places I have
disputed with them of Messiah and his kingdom: But I could never here any
thing of them, but mere doltish dreams, carnal imaginations, and ridiculous
foolish fables. S. Hierome writes much of the errors of the Jews, how they
looked for an earthly kingdom in Christ, and many other gross and foolish
fantastical fancies, which I would never have believed, if afterward I my
self had not heard them with my ears.

But it is no marvel to see them, which are thus wrapped in darkness, and
bewitched with all madness, fowly and foolishly err: The church.
seeing they neither be, nor can abide to be in the catholic church of Christ,
in which only, and else not, the holy ghost does reveal unto me^ the
understanding, and true meaning of the scriptures. And this is the cause that
they understand no part of divinity, neither have any sound judgment at all
in their Bible books. For where gods holy spirit is not, there must needs the
mysteries of the holy scriptures lie hid.

The Jews devise and dream only of the earthly land of promise. But the
Scripture speaks of much more excellent, high, and glorious things, then is
any Judea or Jerusalem, though it were of Iemmes or beaten gold. The Prophets
with their spiritual eyes looked far above this world, 2. Pet. 3.
up into heaven, where we shall need neither perle, gold, meat, nor other
necessaries of this mortal life, but inherit everlasting life with celestial
joy, and felicity: As S. Peter says, the Prophets speak of our salvation.
But let us see what the holy ghost says of Christ's coming and humility, in
Zachary where he writes thus, Zac. 9.9.
Rejoice greatly O daughter Sion, shoute for joy O daughter Jerusalem: behold,
thy king comes unto thee, he is just, and saved, poor, ryding upon an ass,
and upon a colt, the fool of an ass, and I will cut of the chariots from
Ephraim, and the horse from Jerusalem, the bow of the battle shall be broken,
and he shall speak peace unto the Heathen, and his dominion shall be from sea,
and from the river unto the end of the land. Thou also shall be saved,
through the blood of the covenant, I have loosed thy prisoners out of the pit
where in is no water.

Note here first and foremost, that the holy ghost by the prophet in this text
shows us an inestimable and infinite joy, to wit, that Messiah our only
help in all our distress, and the salvation of our souls, which was promised
us so long before, should come unto us. And therefore to the end to awake us,
and that we should shake of our sleep, and attentively, and diligently
consider what, and how great a thing he does here handle, and how worthy a
thing it is, which is here foreshewed to come to pass, He says, Rejoice,
rejoice greatly thou daughter Sion, and shoute forth O daughter Jerusalem, etc.

By daughter Sion and Jerusalem, he does understand the people of Jerusalem:
but seeing that Sion, and Jerusalem were a figure of the catholic church, and
seeing that not only the Jews, but even the Gentiles also should be partakers
of this great and infinite joy: I will apply these words to the whole church,
which consist both of Jews and Gentiles. He says, lift up thy voice, and
rejoice. Here must needs some passing and wonderful matter be understood, in
that yt holy ghost provoke us so earnestly to shoute out and rejoice. Behold,
that is to say, awake, awake, take heed ye sleep not, or play the slothful
sluggardes: Look you leese not, or despise not this opportunity offered you.
Awake take good heed what I tell you, give ear, give ear, the state of your
soul and salvation is here in hand: give ear.

Thy king comes to thee: This is, (...), the cause of this great joy. Our
king comes to us seking his lost people, which were led captive by ye wicked
spirit, and horrible tirant into the kingdom of hell, and everlasting darkness
to perish for ever. In which deadly danger, grievous peril, and great
calamity, man was so blinded, so far past understanding, and so ignorant,
that he would not acknowledge his misery and wretched state, neither see the
present danger of everlasting death, The madness and blindness of our nature.
nor yet desire, help, counsel, or remedy: But would (such was his madness,
security and blindness) have tarried bondslaue in the tyranny of Satan, and died
captive to the devil, if this our king being moved with mercy toward his
people standing in such danger, had not presently helped us. He saw yt we could
not deliver our selves out of this kingdom of sin, neither shake of that
cruel tyranny of satan: and that the devil through his great might and
strength would have ouercommed us, and so have possessed his palace in peace,
because that in man there was no such strength, no such force, no such
subtletie, neither any such devise, that he could wynd himself out of the
misery wherein he was wrapped. Wherefore, Christ seeing this and taking compassion
of this our miserable state, came down to us, that he might deliver us out of
this bondage and thraldom, and set us at liberty.

We never desired, nor required him, neither did our deserts move him. What say
I? did we move or desire him to come? nay, our hearts could not once think of
him, nor desire his help, or comfort: such was ye blindness wherein we were
drowned. We came not, we fled not for help to him of our selves, for nothing
was so far past our reach. We could do nothing less, it was not in our
ability, such was the corruption of our nature, such, so dark, and so dim
clouds of deprauation possessed our minds. No, no, this our king came to us,
for we neither, could, nor would go to him. The cause why he came, and what he
does with us, what profit he brought us, and how needful it was that he
should come to us, the Prophet adds, saying: He comes to the just and
saved, or, he comes unto the just, and a savior. This is that great joy,
this is the cause of our rejoicing, and triumphing. We were through our sins,
wicked, and guilty of all iniquity, and defiled with all kind of vice,
wickedness and impiety, and ordained to everlasting death, and adjudged to
eternal damnation, and yet could we not help, or quite our selves from it.
But Christ our king comes to us: he brings us salvation, and he justifies,
and delivers us from all dangers.

This our king was not only just, innocent, Christ righteous and just, for our
sakes, and to our use.
and free from all offense and spot, for, and concerning himself only: but he
gives also his righteousness, and innocence to us. In so much that through him
we are counted righteous before God, if we believe in him, as Paul says: Romans
3.26.
he only is just, and justifies others. This word just, must not here be
understood to be that exact and perfect justice, by which God judges the
wicked, Just.
and punishes the hard hearted. For, this severe justice does sore afray us
poor sinners and offenders against god. Yea it brings heuines and vexatio^
of heart, and drives us to desperatio^, neither does it any thing less the^
work joy, gladness, and rejoicing in us. But the Scripture uses for comfort
sake, to call Christ, just, or righteous. as well in the old as new testament.
For he only among all the sons of men is just and righteous, and so just and
righteous, that thorough him alone, we are counted before God, just, innocent,
and righteous.

God the father calls Christ by this name, Esaias. 5 3.11. Zach. 9. Act. 7.52.
1. John. 2.1
and says in Esaias: My servant is righteous. And so says Zachary, Steven, and
John. And S. Paul says the same to the Romans in these words. Romans 5.19.
For as by the disobedience of one man (yt was Adam) many were made sinners,
eue^ so by the obedience of one, shall many also be made righteous, We could
not of our selves, or by our works justify or redeem our selves: but we are
made righteous by ye only grace of Christ, and faith in him, which in holy
scripture is called the righteousness of God (that is) by which we are accounted
righteous before God. Faith is the righteousness of God.
Which righteousness he himself does work in us, when by his holy spirit he
does make us righteous and without blame.

The prophet also calls Christ our savior, and that rightly: for first he
justifies us, and whom he justifies, Romans 8.30.
he both saves, and gives the^ everlasting life. And this is ye manner of his
work in us. By his gospel he calls us, justifies us, and then saves us.
The Jews do here in this prophecy object the Hebrew word Noscha, which our
translator calls a Savior: and they say it signifies saved, or delivered,
passiuely. But this need not trouble the godly. For that same word in that
holy tongue is used also actiuely in this same signification, in which the
Latin translator does here use it, calling it a Savior, or deliverer. And the
70. Translators do nothing differ from our interpreter. For they use in this
place this word (...), which signifies saving. The Jews also before the
coming of Messiah at Babylon understood this word actiuely. For their Thargum
has it thus, sakai vporik, which is to say, innocent, a deliverer, or savior.

Christ poor.
The prophet also calls him Poor, the Hebrew word is Any, which signifies
careful, contrite in heart, sorry, tormented, humbled, and one of a lowly and
humble mind, in whom is no hautines, no cruelty, no pride, no swelling: But one
in whom is all meekenes, lowlines, humility and myldnes: and one whose good
will toward others is such, that he is much troubled and grieved at their hurtes
and misfortunes. Whereupon, S. Matthew (alleging this prophecy) uses (...),
that is, meek. And of this his meekenes, and humblenes, he gave some
testimony, when he rode to Jerusalem upon an ass. And yet for all this, the
highest and chiefest estates of Jerusalem did so tirannically hate him, that as
envious bloudsuckers, they sought all occasions they could to kill him. But
Christ nothing moved with their envy, and as it were not regarding his death,
(which he knew certainly the princes of Jerusalem, with the Pharisees and
Scribes, went about) did (this present danger of his life not regarded) even
from his very heart bewail both the blindness of the men, and the calamity and
destruction of the city: yea, they were the greatest things that troubled him.
For his bitter tears sufficiently witnessed both his grief for them, and good
will toward them. This his heavenly heart (which appeared so mild and so
pitiful toward his neighbor) was far from all ostentation. Christ's humility.
For he nothing esteemed riches, worldly train, pomp and vanity: as
appears by ye whole course of his life, which he led here in lowlines,
poverty, trouble, grief, danger, and grievous sorrow, and he himself is witness
of this, where he says: The Foxes have dens, Luke. 9.^8
but the son of man has not where on to lay his head.

But this his humble entering into the city, all without ostentation, does
plainly enough argue his humility and poverty. Zachary says not that he rode
to Jerusalem like an armed emperor, reioicing and triumphing in scarlet, in
purple glistring robes, and in cloth of gold, upon a lusty palfrey magnifically
sadled, and princely trapped, with a great troop and guard, that he might amase
men. The prophet says not that Christ came so: But he says, he sat upon an
ass, a beast which is vile, poor, contemptible, and ridiculous. And in that
his so doing, he showed a very great, lowlines, humility, modesty and meekenes:
yea such, that no man need be afraid of him. This was fulfilled upon Palm
sunday, when Christ sent his disciples to fetch an ass with her colt from
Bethfage unto mount Oliuet, Math. 21.2
and came into the city upon her, as the evangelist Matthew says, witnessing of
the fulfilling of this prophecy.

It follows in the prophet: And I will cut of the chariots from Ephraim, and
the horse from Jerusalem. Here the prophet shows the nature and condition of
Christ his kingdom. For seeing he had called Christ a king, which should come
unto his people, he must also have a kingdom. But mark, what, and what manner
of one his kingdom is. It is not an earthly, or a worldly kingdom, neither is
it ruled or governed and maintained by hosts of men, munition, or man's power
and strength, nor by any such means as earthly kingdoms are ruled and governed.
And therefore he says, yt he will take away and destroy their chariots, horses
and bows. Which kind of munition in this world, princes use, either to
establishe their kingdoms, or to repulse the force and violence of their
enemies, which either seek the upper hand or else to increase and enlarge the
territories of their own dominions. Esaias also describes the kingdom of Christ
much after this sort, saying: Esaias. 2.3.
The law shall go forth of Sion, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem, and
he shall judge among the nations, and rebuke many people: they shall break
their swords also into mattocks, and their spears into sithes: nation shall
not lift up a sword against nation, neither shall they learn to fight any
more. By Ephraim, Zachary understands the ten tribes of Israel, which being
under Roboam, fell away from the house of David to Jeroboam, and set up a
kingdom of their own. Whereby the Prophet means, that when Christ should
come, these two kingdoms Judah and Israel, should not continue any longer
divided, but be made one, under the true king Christ. Which thing came then to
pass, when Christ and his Apostles preached in Galily, and in all those
countries, even to Jerusalem: and when Christ ye true prince in Israel gathered
together into the unity of the Christian faith, all his people by preaching of
his Gospel.

Zach. 9, 10.
It follows, And he shall speak, or he will teach peace etc. That is, Christ
will not establish, or preserve his kingdom with armor, because he is called
the king of peace. He shall reign and govern his kingdom not as the world does:
but spiritually by his word, in which ye very true peace, safety, tranquillity,
health, and chief felicity is preached and delivered, not to the Jews alone,
but to all the whole world, even the Gentiles also. This peace does far, and
infinitely excel ye peace of this world. The peace of Christ.
For it is a most perfect peace with God our most mighty Lord. He which is at
peace with God, to wit, with whom God is well pleased, and to whom God is
favorable, merciful, and gracious, that man may stoutly stand without fear.
He is out of danger, he sayleth in safety: and he as one sitting on an high
rock, or a sure and invincible tower, may look, and laugh at his enemies
below: and he both may and ought heartily to rejoice, and be merry in the Lord.
And such now be we: for we have peace with God, or toward God, through Christ
our only mediator and advocate: As Paul witnesses to the Romans saying: Romans
5.10.
We were reconciled unto God, by the death of his son. Ephesians. 2.14
Christ is our peace, which has made of both one, and has broken the stop of
the partition wall, in abrogating through his flesh the hatred, that is, the
law of commandments, which stands in ordinances, for to make of twain,
one new man in himself, so making peace. And that he might reconcile both unto
God in one body, by his cross, and slay hatred thereby, and came and preached
peace to you which were a far of, and to them that were nere: for thorough
him we both have an entrance unto the father by one spirit. Esaias also has
delectably and pleasauntly prophesied, that Christ and his Apostles, should be
the joyful messengers of that most happy peace, saying: Esaias. 52 7.
How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him that declares and
publishes peace, that declares good tidinges, and publishes salvation,
saying unto Sion, thy God reigns. The pleasant tidings of the gospel.
The Apostles declare the true peace, they tell unto us out of the Gospel most
joyful and good tidings, (to wit) that God will be no more angry with us, but
will be our merciful father, through his son Christ, who has pacified and
mitigated his wrath, and brought us peace, as Paul says: Col. 1.19
It pleased the father by his son Christ, to reconcile all things to
himself, and to set at peace through the blood of his cross, both the things
in earth, and the things in heaven. This comfort does God in his gospel give
us by the apostles and ministers of his church. And of this peace the scripture
in sundry places makes mention, as in Esaias, where it is said. Esaias. 9.7.
The increase of his government and peace, shall have no end. And Christ in
John says unto his disciples. Peace I leave with you, Ioh. 14.27
my peace I give unto you. And because they should not dream of a carnal
peace, he by and by adds: Ioh. 16.33.
Not such peace as the world gives, give I unto you. In the world you shall
have affliction, but be of good comfort, I have overcome the world. It
follows, and his dominion shall be from sea to sea. Here he describes how
far the bonds of Christ's kingdom should reach: what limits it should have,
and how great it should be: (to wit) he shall not only be lord and king of the
Jews, but also of the Gentiles, and so of the whole world, according to the
Psalm, Psalm. 24.
The earth is the lords, and all that therein is, the round world, and they
that dwell therein. And Abdias witnesses that Christ's kingdom extends it
self over all that dwell upon ye earth according to the exposition of Thargum,
which says: from the waters unto the end of the earth. In which text, by
waters we understand Jordan, which is a worthy and famous river in Canaan.

It follows. Thou also by the blood of thy covenant have delivered the
prisoners out of the pit, wherein is no water. The prophet in the former
words, said, that the kingdom of Christ should be spiritual, vile, poor,
miserable, and of no beauty in the eyes of the world: and yet for all that the
king of this kingdom should justify, and save his people: And his help should
be so great, and auailable, that both the Jews and Gentiles in all the world
should feel the sweetness of his grace: and that this king should make them be
at peace one with an other: nay, which is more, he says, yt for this kings
sake they should have peace with God. These be excellent things, and such as
pass all other. But now seeing the kingdom of Christ is spiritual, and does
not stand on worldly power, vain glory, or any other earthly thing: Perhaps
some may think and ask, how, and by what means and way then did he mean to
work such wonderful things. The Prophet answers this objection, We are
delivered by blood.
saying: It shall be wrought by blood. Our redemption shall cost this king much,
for he shall be constrained for payment thereof, to shed yt which is most
precious, and best beloved unto him, eue^ his most holy and precious blood, by
which only he delivers and cleanses us from all our sins, 1. Ioh. 1.7. 1.
Pet. 1.19
and so redeemed us.

And where he says, thou have delivered thy prisoners by blood, etc. He does
allude, and has respect to Moses, who after the same sort in the old
testament sacrificed with blood: and by the blood of the old testament brought
Israel out of Egypt. And it is as much, as if he should say, thou bring thy
people out of bondage, even as Moses brought ye people of Israel (which was a
figure of the church) out of Egypt. Christ and Moses.
But thou do it more mightily, royally, and maruelously then Moses did. For
that blood in the old testament, was nothing but a figure of thy blood. But
thou made a new testament, and thou did make and confirm a new grant,
of grace, not by the blood of beasts, but even by thine own blood, by which
thou did not deliver a few or certain number of men as Moses did: but an
innumerable people (to wit) all that believe in Christ through out the whole
world: and thou bring them out of that most dark and dangerous Egypt, the
tyranny of Satan and everlasting damnation: No rest in hell and sin.
which in deed is a place without water (that is) in which is no recreation, no
refreshing, no comfort, no rest. For when the sinner being in the bonds and
chains of sin under the law, is in state of damnation: then feels he
nothing but fear, terror, trembling, dread, horror, anxiety, abashment of
heart, desperation, and death it self gnawing upon him. Neither finds he any
help, counsel, comfort, or remedy, either in the world, or worldly creatures,
unless he be sprinkled with the blood of this new testament (that is) unless
he believe, that Christ (as ye Gospel teaches) has shed his blood to pacify
Gods anger for his sins, and wash them away. This if the sinner believe, then
is he through that faith by which he believes that Christ shed his blood for his
sins, delivered out of that lake, to wit, his conscience, and he has comfort
and rejoices in ye lord. This prophecy does also plainly tell us, Romans 5.11.
that Christ our king should suffer death, because he could by no other means,
but through his blood, deliver, justify, and bring his captive people into
everlasting life. But he could not have delivered his servants from death, if
he had continued still in death. And therefore it was needful that he should
rise again from death, and va^quish and overcome death. This knew not these
two disciples going to Emaus, and therefore they were (as you hear) offended at
Christ's death, and they supposed yt all their hope which they had conceived of
Christ for the deliverance of Israel, had been quite frustrate.

Now then you see in this prophecy, that Christ's conversation at his former
coming, Christ's former coming.
should not be stately, or lofty, but lowly, contemptible, humble, and modest.
For there was nothing to be seen in him, but gentleness toward poor sinners,
with much misery, grievous calamity, great storms, and heavy burdens of
persecutions, afflictions, and tribulations, yea and at the last, death it
self, all which he suffered for our sakes. But you shall hear of this Christ
more out of the same prophet: who says, u. Zach. 3.1.
And the Lord showed me Iehoschua the high priest standing before the Angel of
the Lord, and Satan stood at his right hand to resist him, and the Lord said
unto Satan: the Lord reprove thee O Satan. Now Jesus or Iehoschua was clothed
with filthy garments, and stood before the Angel, and he answered, and spoke
unto those that stood before him, saying, take away the filthy garments from
him.

In this prophecy, the high priest in the law, who was called Iehoscua or
Jesus, is set down apparailed with filthy garments, and he is a figure of
Christ, the true high priest, who although he was true God, yet did he so
humble himself, yt he vouchsaued to put upon himself man's flesh, yt he might
bear our sins in his body on ye cross, he himself being free from al sin.
But he has borne our infirmities, and carried our sorrows: We are they for whom
he so abased, dejected, and humbled himself: and for whose sakes he would be
counted vile and abject, Psalm. 22.5.
as David tells us, saying: But I am a worm and not a man, a shame of men,
and the contempt of the people. All they that see me, have me in derision, they
make a mow, and nod their heds, etc.


Anna. What have the other prophets written of the servile and humble habit,
and conversation of Christ here upon earth?


Vrb. It will be long to speak of all, I will touch some, and that the
chiefest. Jeremy says, that ye Jews did acknowledge and confess their
faults, for which they were afflicted with all kind of troubles and
calamities, Iere. 14.7.
and amongst other words he has these. Lord our rebellions are many, we
sinned against thee O the hope of Israel, the savior thereof in the time of
trouble. Why art thou as a stranger in the land, as one that passes by to tarry
for a night. Why art thou as a man astonished, and as a strong man that cannot
help. Yet thou, O Lord, art in the midst of us, and thy name is called upon
us, forsake us not. In this prophecy the Jews complain that they are in
great distress, and woeful calamity, and that they are forsaken of God: or else
that he semes to be alienated, and turned from them, and not to regard them.
But this only was their comfort, that God was in Sion, and Israel, and that he
had chosen Israel for his peculiar people. Because he had defended them from
the hurtes and harms of their enemies, and dwelt among them as he had promised
them in Leuit saying: Leui. 26.11
And I will set my tabernacle among you, and my soul shall not loathe you: also
I will walk among you, and I will be your God, and you shall be my people. But
now they were forsaken, and God did so handle them, as though he disdayned to
walk and dwell any longer amongst them, and as one all weary of his way, which
had but turned in unto them, as into an Inn, and by and by departed. And thus
the Jews understand this text. But the old church a 1000. years ago, as S.
Hierome says, understood these things of Christ, and believed that the prophet
did foreshew in these words the ministry or office of Christ. Because he
should at the time appointed, take upon him the flesh of man, and walk in this
earth, as Paul affirms, saying: Phil. 2.6.
Who being in the form of God, thought it no robbery to be equal with God.
But he made himself of no reputation, and took on him the form of a servant,
and was made like unto men, and was found in shape as a man. To wit, he did so
humble himself, that he lived in this earth as a stranger or pilgrim, neither
had he any place where to abide: Luke. 9.57.
As Luke witnesses in his 9. chap. where the Samaritans refused him, and when
one said unto him, I will follow thee whersoeuer thou go: He answered, the
foxes have holes and the birds of the heaven have nestes, but the son of man
has not whereon to lay his head. And in Matthew, Math. 8.34
The Gergesenes desired him that he would depart out of their costs. Wherefore
in this prophecy he is called Ger and Nidham, that is, a pilgrim and
stranger, having no abiding place, nor house or certain place to dwell in. For
at his nativity, an ox stall was his inn, and the manger his cradell. After
his birth, he was constrained to fly into Egypt. And when he had begun the
office of his ministry, he went out of Galile into Judah, and again out of
Judah into Galile, now going from this city unto that, and then from that to
another. And although he was the lord and governor of ye whole earth, yet
wandered he in this earth from place to place, now hither, now thither, even as
a pilgrim, or stranger, or as a wayfaring man that asks lodging for a night,
Esaias. 9.6.
and has nothing of his own. And although he was mighty (as Esaias does call
him) which could deliver himself and others out of all danger: yet in all the
time of his being here upon earth, he would not show his might, strength and
power: but became weak and poor, as the Jews (flouting him upon the cross)
said in the gospel of Matthew, Math. 27.41.
He saved others, but he can not save himself, if he be the king of Israel,
let him now come down from the cross, and we will believe him: he trusted in
god, let him deliver him now if he will have him.

But harken now what Esaias prophecieth of the former coming of Christ,
foretelling how humbly and lowly he should behave himself here in the earth.
Behold (says the Lord by Esaias) my servant, Esaias. 42.1
I will stay upon him mine elect, in whom my soul deliteth: I have put my
spirit upon him, he shall bring forth judgment to the Gentiles, he shall not
cry, nor lift up, nor cause his voice to be heard in the street: The office of
Christ.
a bruised reed shall he not break, and the smoking flax shall he not quench:
he shall bring forth judgment in truth, he shall not fail, nor be discoraged
till he have set judgment in earth, and the Isles shall wait for his law.

Here Esaias describes the person of Christ, and tells what his conversation
should be here in this earth, all the time of his travail in his office or
ministry: how he should take upon him our sins: how he should satisfy for
our faults: and how he should with all gentleness and mercy, use us poor
wretches which deserved nothing but pain, and punishment: and how he should so
entierly love us, that no man need be afraid of him, dread him, or tremble at
the presence of him. But all men may rightly look, crave, and hope for
comfort, aid, and help at his hand. But we will weigh every one of the
prophets words in order, for they are full of great and infinite comfort.

First, God the father names Christ his servant, because it was the will of
our heavenly father, Christ our servant
that his only begotten son, (man's flesh being taken upon him) should come
down to us to be our servant: which thing Christ himself witnesses in
Matthew, saying: The son of man came not to be served, Math. 20.28.
but to serve and give his life for the ransom of many. And Paul says: He
took upon him the form of a servant, Phil. 2.7.
and became obedient unto the death, even the death of the cross.

Is not this now a wonderful, incredible, and great submission and humility?
May we not here conceive a most plentiful and perfect comfort, and singular
hope: seeing the true and natural son of God, nothing neding our help, would
so humble, and debase himself, that being our lord, he did vouchsafe to
become our servant, and took upon him, and bare our heavy lode and burden of
sin, and put himself in our place, and suffered death for us, and paid our
dets which we our selves should have paid.

If at this his coming he had showed himself lordlyke, and had come in the
mighty power and greatness of his godhead, and had used and showed his might,
and majesty, where should we poor wretches and miserable sinners have
appeared? whither should we have fled? or with what face could we now approach,
and come so often into his sight, seeing we so oftentimes offended him, and know
so much evil by our selves? but now seeing he comes in such humility like a
servant, and shows such humblenes, modesty, and gentleness in his person, may
not we hope to receue of him grace and forgiveness of our sins, yea, although
we were drowned in a most deep whirle poole of sin, and though we were
guilty of never so much wickedness? Truly this service of Christ, is to God a
most delectable, acceptable, and precious service, which he greatly estemeth,
and deliteth most to have offered unto him.

And this order Paul keeps in preaching Christ. De does not first extol,
magnify, and set forth the great and wonderful power, and majesty of Christ:
but he first preaches that crucified Christ, and tells us that of his own
free will he became weak for us, and humbled himself most lowly for us, and
was despised and abased for us. And when he has well beaten these things into
his auditors ears, then he shows into what power, and divine dignity he was
exalted through his humility. As we may read for example in the 2. chap to the
Philip.

It follows: I will stay upon him. The Hebrew word Asmech does signify, to
put under, to under proppe, to lay ones hand on a thing, to lean to, or stay
on a thing so that the substance and stay of the human nature in Christ, may
very well be here understood: to wit, that his humanity is united to his
deuinity in unity of person, Col. 2.9.
according to S. Paul's saying to the Col. In him dwells all the fulness of
the godhead bodily. Let him therefore which seeks God, seek him in no other
place, but in this chosen servant, nay, rather in our only lord Jesus Christ,
and in him he shall not seek God in vain, but shall find him most
fruitfully. In him only shall he feel the fatherly love of God toward us.

Ephesians. 1.5.
It follows: My elected. Christ is the true elected, and dearly beloved son
of God, whom God so tenderly, dearly, and ardently loves that for this his
beloved, elected, and only begotten sons sake, He has through Christ Jesus
beloved, chosen, and predestined us, that he might adopt us to be his
children, which were worthy nothing else but heavy wrath and sharp punishment.

Math. 3.17
It follows: In whom I am well pleased. The father from heaven spoke these
very same words in Matthew, and can we then doubt any thing hereafter of the
grace of God in Christ. If God the father be well pleased in Christ, surely he
will be well pleased in all them which are his sons, and which do believe in
his son Christ, as the gospel every where teaches us. John. 3.34
I have put my spirit upon him, and so it is said in John. The Lord has not
given him his spirit by measure. Psalm. 45.7
For he was anointed with the oil of gladness, above his fellows. And John
says: The spirit descended from heaven like a dove, and it abode upon him.
Esaias. 61.1.
And Esaias says: The spirit of the Lord God is upon me, therefore has the Lord
anointed me, etc.

Esaias. 42.1.
He shall bring forth judgment unto the Gentiles. Here Esaias sets forth the
person of Christ in very pleasant and loving words, saying: He comes unto us
not as a prince swelling in pride, or hautines of heart, bragging himself of
his regal power, and desiring, and neding the praise and help of men, but he
comes as a gentle, mild, and courteous teacher, who deliteth to instruct us,
and to bestow and pour forth upon us all his dignities, benefits, and
gracious goodness. And here he speaks of Christ's doctrine (that is, of the
gospel) saying: that it should not only be preached amongst the Jews, but
through ye whole world, even amongst the Gentiles also. And he calls the
gospel, or the doctrine of Christ, his judgment, The gospel is Christ's
judgment.
because the holy ghost by the Gospel rebukes the sins of the world, and
rejects, and condemns ye righteousness of the whole world, and all the
strength and merits of this our sinful and corrupted nature, and teaches us
that they are all folish, and of none effect to the deserving of the grace of
God and everlasting life: and that they deserve not the name of that
righteousness, which is allowed before God, and which may be set against his
severe judgment. And in this gospel he sets forth, and offreth unto us the
righteousness of Christ which is ye alone and only most true and perfect
righteousness, which is able to cou^teruail ye wrath of God. And he bids us
trust in Christ, which thing alone does justify, and make us acceptable before
God. There be many sayings and testimonies like to these (concerning ye calling
of the Gentiles to the gospel) plentifully set forth in ye scriptures in every
place, as Psalm. 17.18.21.45 56.64.66.71.85.45.101.106. 116. Esai.
2.9.11.27.42.49.51.54.55.60.65.66. Iere. 3. 16. Hosea. 1.2. Mich. 4.5. Zeph.
2.3. Zach. 2.8.9. Math. 2.21. 28. Luke 2.23. Ioh. 10. Acts.
2.10.11.13.14.15.18.22.26.28 Romans 3.4.9.10.11.15. Ephesians. 2.3. Col. 1. 1. These. 2.
1. Pet. 2.

It follows in the Prophet. He shall not cry nor lift up his voice. That is,
Christ shall not come after the manner of a mighty Prince, swelling in pride,
Esaias. 42.2.
neither like a tyrant vaunting of his power and might, which makes all men
fear and dread him: but he shall come like a most loving, and comfortable
teacher, and as one which will rule, and govern his kingdom with all humility,
facility, courtesy, and gentleness. And therefore his voice shall not be
fearful, fierce, rough, severe, or cruel: but sweet, loving, comfortable,
pleasant, joyful, and amiable. He shall have none of that stately, high
minded, disdainful, and hauty behavior, which the princes of this world show
and use: Who if they go a progress or travail any where, are mightily guarded,
and have about them great troops of horsemen, footmen, timbrels, trumpets,
shawmes, horns, The humility of Christ.
and cornets: so that every man must needs quake, and be afraid to hear, and
see such a stir: there shall no such a do and hurly burly be seen in, or
about Christ: he shall not cry: he shall not turn any man away with bitter,
hawry, and cruel words, neither shall he disdain, terrify, and drive men
away with his hye, proud, and great looks: but he shall show himself humble,
modest, gentle, loving, and lowly unto all men: he shall use himself most
friendly and seruisably to every body: and finally, he shall draw all men to
him: he shall not seek the applausions of the people: he shall not desire the
praise of the common sort: neither shall he as one puffed up with the desire of
vain glory, do things for a brag or show: as worldly potentates do: but he
shall despise all worldly po^pe, yea, he shall fly honors even due unto him: he
shall reject all man's praise and glory, as it plainly appears in the 12. of
Math. Where when he had wrought many and wonderful miracles, and had restored
many to their former health, and had wonderfully showed forth his great power
toward the miserable afflicted, Math. 12.20.
he straitely warned them that they should not make him known.

A bruised reed shall he not break. The majesty, pomp, and power of earthly
princes does terrify the poor afflicted,, A comparison of Moses and Christ.
The operation of the law is fear and anguish.
miserable and wretched people: but Christ is such a lord and prince, and such
a doctor and teacher, as makes no man afraid, and shows himself in nothing
at all, cruel, or tirantlike. Moses does sore terrify the weak and tre^bling
consciences of me^ by his law. His word is a fierce and manacing word, and his
doctrine is a hard and heavy doctrine. For he requires of us most pure
innocency, and obedience to the law of God, which in deed we have not, The
operation of the gospel is joy and peace.
do not, and are not able to do of our selves. And therefore he pronounces a
terrible sentence and curse against us, and makes us subject to the eternal
curse. But there is no such thing heard in Christ, all his speech is amiable,
sweet, pleasant, and delectable: yea such as may greatly comfort troubled
consciences, and hartles, and amassed men. His word is the gospel, yt is, the
most gladsom, sweet, and ioifull message, which preaches nothing else to heavy
hearts, but grace, joy, blessing, and forgiveness of sins. He casts us not
away for our weakness, which oftentimes staggereth: he forsakes us not for
our little faith which sometimes wauereth: neither puts he us back for our
infirmity, which yet dwells in us abundantly: but he calls us, and of his
own good will allureth us to come to him, that he may comfort us, refresh us,
help us, confirm us, and arm us against al tempests of temptations. Is not
this a sweet and comfortable saying: Come unto me al ye that are weary and
laden, and I will ease you. Take my yoke on you, Math. 11.28.
and learn of me that am meke, and lowly in heart, and you shall find rest unto
your souls, for my yoke is easy, and my burden light? And in the same place
he compares himself to a physician. For when he eat with Publicans and
sinners, and the Pharisees repined at it, and thought that it became him not,
and was not lawful that he should have any doings with the^, and that they were
altogether to be hated and abhorred: Christ answered and said. Math. 9.11.
The whole need not a physician, but they which are sick. For I am not come to
call the righteous, but the sinners to repentance. And the whole story of
Christ's doctrine, through the whole history of the gospel, is nothing else but
a declaration of his marvelous humanity, of his incredible courtesy, of his
exceeding goodness, of his bountiful liberality of his great good will, and of
his favorable benevolence toward us conte^ned, abiected, faint hearted,
sorrowful, sickly, and miserable me^. Whom I pray you did he for his weakness
refuse? Whom did he for his low estate and baseness despise? Nay, who^ did he
not (if they desired help) help? Did he not receive, and most gently entreat
Peter, although he had forsworn him? Did he not show himself most gently,
lowly, John. 8.11.
and loving to Zacheus, to Magdalen, to ye Samaritan adultres, Who be the
bruised redes.
and to ye thieues hanging on the cross, with many other, though they had most
deadly sinned, and offended him. These, and such like, are those bruised reeds
and smoking flax, which must not be terrified, broken, nor quenched: but
cherished, stre^gthened, comforted, and repaired. And so Christ does in deed:
for he uses all them most tenderly which are weak, which are laden (with the
burden of their sins) and which are oppressed with poverty, or any kind of
calamity. And when he has gently and voluntarily drawn the^ unto him, he
takes the^ up, comfort the^, cures the^, restores the^, confirms them,
and readily helps, and delivers the^ even with his own hand. And ye prophet
prophesied long before, that he should in deed be such a one, Psalm. 72.4
saying: He shall judge the poor of the people, he shall save the children of
the nedy, and shall subdue the oppressor, he shall deliver the poor when he
cries: the nedy also, and him that has no helper. He shall be merciful to the
poor and nedy, and shall preserve the soul of the poor. And this he does now
still by his ministers, which preach the gospel to the poor in spirit, as well
as he did then.

He shall bring forth judgment in truth. This world also has his judgment:
but it both is deceived, and does deceive. Because it sees nothing, but yt
which is apparent to ye eye: but Christ sees yt inward secrets of the heart,
and judges the very thoughts of man. The world, for the most part does not
rightly judge an hypocrite, whose heart is spiteful, ambitious, and foul with
other vices and unclean desires: but it takes him to be a holy, and innocent
man, and one which leads a holy life. But Christ judges not according to ye
external show, for his judgment is infallible, How we must judge.
and perfect. And he teaches us to judge after ye same sort, yt when we judge
either our selves, or other men, we should not look to the outward face, but
behold and examine ye inward man, and heart it self. For in our selves we must
first diligently consider that foul vice, which is the root of all vices,
namely, self love: We must look upon the incredulity of our hearts: and we
must search our hearts, which want all fear, faith, and trust in God. For when
these capital faults, diseases, and hellish furies are put out, choked, and
quenched, then those outward faults are easily reformed.

He shall not faint, or be discouraged (or) he shall not be pe^siue, or careful,
or wayward, or intractable: that is, he shall not be troublesome, nor fierce: he
will not drive me^ from him, through ye austeritie, or fiercenes of his
cou^tena^ce: he will offend no man with his high, and hawty words: but he shall
have a great and continual desire to show himself, humble, lowly, gentle, and
easy to be spoken unto. To be short, he will do every thing, and seek always
how he may set judgment in the earth: that is, how he may finish his work:
that he may truly execute and perform the office committed unto him: that he
may adorn, Io. 23.5.
and set up equity and judgment in the land: That is, that he might correct,
reprehend, amend, punish, and take away ungodliness, wickedness, and sinful
deeds: and that he might teach, instill, advance, and commend godliness and
virtue in all men, to make the^ fly the evil, and do the good.

It follows. The Isles shall wait for his law: Esaias. 42.4.
That is to say, his doctrine shall be further spread, and be published in more
regions the^ the law of Moses was, which only was kept within the borders of
Jury. This doctors doctrine shall be further spread. For even the Gentiles (which
he here means by the Isles) shall, and do look for that doctrine, that is, it
shall go through the whole world. The Hebrew word Thorah, which the Translator
interprets law, signifies also doctrine, and may well be so translated. Now
the^ this Thorah or doctrine of Christ, is that saving doctrine of the gospel,
which ministers unto us true joy and comfort, and gives a present help and
salve for every sore and sickness that happens unto us. Matthew alleges this
prophecy, and afterward says: Mat. 12.21.
In his name shall the gentiles trust, according to the Greek translation of
the 70. interpreters, who have rightly expounded this prophecy. For in the
Gospel the name of Christ is published, preached, and said to be our most ready
and alone help, aid, sauegard, and salvation in all miseries and necessities.
As Peter says to Cornelius the Ethnike, showing him ye right way of salvation:
ye words be these. All the Prophets give witness to Christ, that through his
name all that believe in him shall receive remission of sins. Act. 10.43.
Neither by any other name, but by ye name of Christ be sins forgiven: through
his merits only, and not any of ours, have we forgiveness of our sins: by his
merits only be we sinners forgiven. Christ alone, 1. Cor. 1.30.
and none but Christ is our righteousness.

But let us go forward with the prophecy out of the same chap. Esaias. 42.5
Thus says God the Lord: He that created the heavens, and spread them abroad:
he that stretches forth the earth, and the buddes thereof: he that gives breath
unto the people upon it, and spirit to them that walk therein. I the lord have
called thee in righteousness, and will hold thy hand, and I will keep thee, and
give thee for a covenant of the people, and for a light of the Gentiles, that
thou may open the eyes of the blind, and bring out the prisoners from the
prison, and them that sit in darkness out of the prison house.

Behold here, and see how plainly, sweetly, and graciously God the father
sets forth his son Christ: yea, how excellently he describes his person,
and his office. He does not say, he should be an angry and imperious Moses, or
some fearful or proud prince, who with his hie looks should amase me^: he does
not say, his son at his coming should be such an one: but he says that he
should be a mild and officious doctor and teacher, which should study and seek
for nothing else, but to bring his bywanderers into the right way, to teach and
instruct the ignorant and rude: and to bring them that are in error unto the
truth (which may save their souls): John. 8.32.
and to comfort, erect, fortify, and to encourage the faint hearted, sad,
sorrowful, astonished, and men driven to desperation: and to certify them of
gods free mercy, and great grace: and to deliver them from al dangers, and
calamities both of body and soul. And least any man should doubt of these so
great, excellent, and infinite benefits, which here he promises by Christ, he
speaks first and foremost of his great and incredible omnipotency, saying:
that he is the Lord which makes all things, which fostereth all things, and
which cherishes, refreshes, governs, and guides all things. But if he can
do these things, (as certainly he can) then can he also perform this that he
promises. As if he should say thus: as surely as I have made heaven, and
earth, so surely, and truly will I call or send Christ into the earth. Christ's
righteousness.


I the Lord have called thee in righteousness. We were all unrighteous, and so
void of all righteousness, that of necessity one must needs be sent of such
righteousness, that he might in our behalf satisfy gods justice, and teach us
true righteousness, and print it in our hearts. This one, is Christ the son of
God in whose mouth is found no deceit: he is the author and lively pattern of al
righteousness: nay, he is perfect and very righteousness it self: and he by yt
his most perfect righteousness has redeemed us most righteously, from Satan's
tirannicall power, and al other maladies. God called him yt he might teach us,
and not teach us only, but also endue us with true righteousness, for, without him
there is no righteousness.

I will hold thy hand, and I will keep thee. Luke. 2.34
Although Christ be the stone of offense, and sign which is spoken against
(for we see Satan and the world with all their power, wisdom, and hypocritical
holiness, set themselves, jointly against him: yea, and that with such strength,
diligence, force, and violence, that oftentimes the outward face of the true
church appears miserable, and seems not able to stand and save it self from
such strong enemies, which are so forsable, cunning, subtle, and deceitful:
so that it is not much unlike, but the Gospel should be trodden down and be
destroyed) though, I say, Christ be thus spoken against: The faithful are safe
in all storms
yet notwithstanding shall Christ and his word, with all that believe his word
persist and gloriously flourish. Where as the adversaries of Christ and
christians, with all their subtle devises, shall be brought to extreme calamity,
be destroyed utterly, fall horribly, die miserably, and perish eternally. And
yet does not man's strength and power here fight against men (for then the
victory should be uncertain, and our state unstable and weak) but the mighty
hand of God the father, which creates, and preserves all things, does keep,
and uphold Christ, and therefore he cannot be overcome, moved, or destroyed.
For who shall take him out of the hands of him that made all things, which is
almighty, and lives for ever? And this is a great comfort. For, the church
being in this world of men so contemned, with perils so endangered, with
ravening wolves so environed, and with the wiles, deceits, subtilties, and
crafty inventions of the adversary so compassed and assailed. And although this
king and lord of the catholic church, came into this world as a mild doctor,
without any such po^pe as worldly princes use: so that the world supposes,
that there is no strength, power, aid, or help for us in him: yet have we on
our side, a most mighty and invincible strength, with certain and present aid
and succor, even ye right hand of the Lord, which takes up, defends,
sustaineth, strengthens, and keeps Christ, and all that believe in Christ.
Christ is given of God for a sign that God is at one with us


And I have given thee for a covenant of my people. Though Christ and his
church be very contemptible, and have no beauty at all in the sight of the
world, yet in this have we true fortitude, sure safety, great security, sound
stability, and all comfort, that God has promised that he himself will be our
father, and that he has made us his children.

But now least we should despair, lest we should be driven to doubt of this so
great grace, and least we should sometime stagger about this his so fatherly
dealing, and ready good will toward us: He has given us for a gage, and
pledge, his only begotten son, and with him has he established, and
confirmed the league of his promised grace. With what greater, and more
precious pledge (I pray you) or with what more vndissoluable league could he
ratify unto us his promise of granted grace? Christ the only son of GOD,
and himself true GOD, is come unto us, 2. Cor. 1.20
and is made our atonement. All the promises of GOD in him, are yea, and are
in him, Amen.

To be the light of the Gentiles. This also the holy Ghost speaks by the
mouth of Simeon, Luke 2.32.
saying: Mine eyes have seen thy salvation, which thou have prepared before
the face of all people. A light to be revealed to the Gentiles, and the glory
of thy people Israel. Ihon. 1.9.
Also John says: That was the true light, which lighteneth every man that
comes into the world. And Christ says: John. 12.46
I am come a light into the world, that who so ever believes in me, should
not abide in darkness.

Note therefore here, that where Christ is not, there is nothing but horrible
and deep darkness, and terrible blindness, and (which is worse) whote enmity
against God.

That thou should open the eyes of the blind, etc. This did Christ perform
both bodily and spiritually. For, to them that lack their eyes, he gave bodily
sight, and to all us which are blind, (that is to say, which neither know God
nor our selves, by reason of our corruption and blyndenesse taken of Adams
fall,) he does give spiritual eyes, and does spiritually lighten us, with the
true knowledge both of God, and our selves. He delivers us also from the
captivity of Satan, which were captives and bondeslaues of the law, sin,
death, and the devil. And he delivers us from all these cruel enemies by
his truth, if we believe his word, when we hear it preached.

An other prophecy also like to this have we in Esaias: where he prophesies
likewise of the kingdom of Christ, saying that he should be no carnal lord, or
prince of this world: but a spiritual King and doctor of his Church. The
words of the prophecy be these.

Hear ye me O Isles, Esaias. 49.1.
and hearken ye people from far. The Lord has called me from the womb,
and made mention of my name from my mothers belly, and he has made my mouth
like a sharp sword, under the shadow of his hand has he hid me, and made
me a chosen shafte, and hid me in his quiver, and said unto me, thou art my
servant Israel. For I will be glorious in thee. And I said, I have labored
in vain, I have spente my strength in vain, and for nothing: but my judgment
is with the Lord, and my work with my God. And now says the Lord that
formed me from the womb to be his servant, that I may bring Jacob again to
him, though Israel be not gathered, yet shall I be glorious in the eyes of
the Lord, and my GOD shall be my strength. And he said, it is a small thing
that thou should be my servant, to raise up the tribes of Jacob, and to
restore the desolations of Israel, I will also give thee for a light of the
Gentiles that thou may be my salvation unto the end of the world.

Here do we see that Christ being sent from his father, as a doctor, calls
unto him not only ye Jews, but also all the nations of the earth. And lest any
should be offended at his base and homely countenance which he should bear
amongst men: he makes mention of his calling, saying, that God has called him
even from his mothers womb, to be a doctor of his church. Wherefore, he says,
his mouth is a sharp sword, that is, he is a teacher, whose doctrine is
forceable, and mighty in operation, which can move, draw, stir, renew, and
change men: and further, a doctrine, which searches ye inward secrets of the
heart, and pierces the hidden parts of the breast, according to that of Paul.
The word of God is lively, Hebr. 4.12.
and (...), The force of Gods word.
mighty in operation, and sharper then any two edged sword, and enters
through, even to the dividing asonder of the soul, and the spirit, and of the
joints, and the mary: and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the
heart: neither is there any creature which is not manifest in his sight. Well
therefore, and truly is his mouth or doctrine called a sword. For it cutteth to
the quick, and it searches, examineth, and tries most diligently and exactly
all things, it roteth out all ye evil affections of the mind, it opens the
filthy sores of sin, and launceth the festered impostumes of our foul
affections, and renueth and changes the mary and bones of man, (to wit) whole
man. And with the same his sword, that is to say, his mighty word, he
subuerteth and sacketh Satan's kingdom, and destroys his whole army (to wit)
sin, the law, and hell. His doctrine also is true, firm, invincible,
constant, stable, and mighty. For as an arrow which in his flight cannot be
holden or stayed, Satan's army.
and which leueled, never misseth, but hitteth the very mark: even so his
word once uttered, cannot be called back. His doctrine also is sure, strong,
and mighty, and chaseth the adversaries away, and breaks and seuereth all
things as it were with a sharp shot arrow: Math. 22.34.
so that no man is able to stand or speak against it. Were not the Pharisees
and Saduces put to silence at the mighty and divine doctrine of Christ? In so
much, that none was able to answer any thing: neither durst any from that time
forward, ask him further question. For he was not such a teacher as was
Moses, and the priests of the old law and testament, which were his
ministers. He taught not as they did, but as ye lord himself, who is mighty in
authority and majesty, both of person and doctrine, and who excels his
adversaries, and can very easily so overcome, beat down, break, and pierce
their hearts, that either with their mouths stopped they should be confounded,
or else with admiration amassed, they should be astonished. As we read in John,
where the servants of the Pharisees, and high priests, being demanded wherefore
they took not Christ, answered. Never man spoke like this man. Ioh. 7.46.
They were sent to have laid hands on Jesus, and to take him: but when they
heard him speak, they were so overcome with ye majesty, and power of his
words, that they could neither touch him, nor hurt him. Herod thought to have
murdered Christ in the cradle, and the Jews daily went about nothing else but
to kill him, but the hour was not yet come. God the father defended him with
his hand.

He is also the servant of God, because of the office, ministry, and service
which he does, shows, and performs for us, to wit, because he bears, and
takes upon him our sins, and shedeth his blood for us, as he witnesses of
himself in John, saying: Ioh. 14.31.
As my father commanded me, so I do. And in an other place he says, Father I
have glorified thee on the earth. John. 17.4.
I have finished the work which thou gave me to do. His father also called
him Israel, because he should be a more mighty and better Israel then ever
Jacob was. For, the posterity and children of Jacob were for the most part, of
the carnal Israel, which glorifieth not God. But Christ begets true
Israelits which are strong and mighty in God, and with God, by whom the name
of God is praised.

But here Christ does by and by complain, that few acknowledge this his
benefit and service given and offered us: and that this voluntary service and
gracious benefit of his was evil bestowed and quite cast away on many. As it
is written in John: He came unto his own, Ihon. 1.11.
and his own received him not. The Apostles also complain on the same, Esaias.
53.1.
saying: Who will believe our report? Yet this comfort him, that this labor
and work of his was the work of God the father, who would finish it well, and
save his servants, and comfortably end it, and give the gospel such
success, that it should be very fruitful, and not return in vain, although
the number of them that truly loved it seemed but small. The Lord knows his
in whom the Gospel is mighty. Although the most part of men would not hear
him, but die in their errors: some yet notwithstanding, who believed the Gospel
were delivered and saved, unto whom the father sent him, that all Israel should
not perish. And although al ye Jews received him not, yet for all that was he
not forsaken of every one: nay, God the father has many more servants in the
earth, amongst whom he will have him glorified. For he was to be ye master,
teacher, and savior of the Gentiles also, and all people, which dwell in this
world. The words of this prophecy, Paul and Barnabas pronounce with great
boldness against the obstinate and stubborn Jews dwelling at Pesidia in
Antiochia, which withstood those things which Paul had spoken: Act. 13.46.
but Paul and Barnabas said boldly it was necessary that the word of God
should first have been spoken unto you, but seeing you put it from you and judge
your selves unworthy of everlasting life, lo we turn to the Gentiles: for so
has the Lord commanded us, saying, I have made thee a light of the Gentiles,
that thou should be the salvation unto the end of the world. Paul speaks
of this calling of the Gentiles to the Ephesians, where he calls the Gentiles
inheritours also, Ephe. 3.6.
and of the same body, (...), and pertakers of his promise in Christ by the
gospel. And Christ says in Esaias: Esaias. 61.1.
The spirit of the Lord God is upon me, therefore has the Lord anointed me, he
has sent me to preach good tidings unto the poor, to bind up the broken
hearted, to preach liberty unto the captives, and to them that are bound the
opening of the prison. To preach the acceptable year of the Lord, and the day
of vengeance of our God, to comfort all that mourn: To appoint unto them that
mourn in Zion, and to give unto them beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for
mourning, the garment of gladness, for the spirit of heaviness, that they might
be called trees of righteousness, the planting of the Lord, that he might be
glorified.

Luke in his gospel says: Luke 4.16.
that Christ on the Saboth day entered into the synagoge in the city of Nazareth
as his custom was, and stood up to read, and there was delivered unto him the
book of the Prophet Esaias, and when he had opened the book, he found this
place of Esaias, now recited, and when he had red it he closed the book, and
gave it again to the minister, and sat down. And the eyes of all them that
were in the synagog were fastened on him, then he began to say unto them. This
day is this scripture fulfilled in your ears. And they all bare him witness,
and wo^dred at the gracious words, which proceeded out of his mouth Thus does
the Lord apply this prophecy to himself, to whom it only belonged. He is not
here described as a mighty king in worldly power: but as a teacher and
minister, which in this world should be of base state, and as a servant, whose
whole study, travel, care, and diligence, is totally set to serve, redeem, cure
and keep, such as be miserable, afflicted, sorrowful, and broken in heart.


Anna O this is a noble and famous prophecy, and certainly worthy to be well
considered, inwardly pondered, and deeply fixed in the minds of all the godly.
Wherefore I pray you expound it, and declare me the meaning of it, verbatim, as
you did before, to the end I may both the better understand it, diligentlier
consider it, and the longer remember it.


Vrb. Esaias does passing well, and plainly here describe Christ, and better in
deed then tongue can utter, and in such words, as whereof a man may conceive
especial comfort. Go to then, as you desire, let us examine every word
particularly. Where as the Prophet says in the person of Christ. The spirit of
the Lord is upon me: He signifies, that he was consecrated, anointed, and
ordered of his heavenly father, to be our priest and teacher, that we should not
doubt, but whatsoever Christ says and does, it is the word, and deed of the
holy ghost. And then he says: Therefore the Lord has anointed me. Kings and
priests in the law were chosen, and called to their offices by anointing.
Wherefore it was convenient, The vnctio^ of Christ.
that Christ, in as much as he was the true and eternal King, and hie priest,
should be anointed: but not with oil wherewith the body is anointed, but
with the holy ghost the fullness of all grace. Of ye which annoynting, the
Prophet speaks in the Psalms. But to the end we might know what kind of
ointyng that was, and what a king and priest Christ should be, he adds, To
preach good tidings unto the poor, and to comfort all that mourn.

Here the Jews, being deluded by that fanaticall spirit, conceived a vain and
folish opinion of their Messiah, to wit, that he should come with a worldly
train, in corporal magnificence, and princely pomp, after the manner of
earthly kings: and that he should be fearful to his foes, and reign corporally
here on the earth, and give the Jews such abundance of worldly goods, that
they should exceed in all pleasure, wallow in all corporal wealth, and be
lords of all the earth, etc. Such an one is ye Iues Christ, and no dout a
goodly trim Christ. And yet are not the Jews alone in this error, but eue^
some also at this day, which in name are called christians, but not Christians
in deed, are deceued with this fa^sy. For now that Christ is brought to light,
and the doctrine of the gospel every where known, many are found yet so
fleshly hearted, that they seek and look for nothing else in Christ and the
gospel, but worldly wealth, security, ease, quietness, dignities, honors, and
abundance of all things. And so playing the Jews, devise unto themselves a
Jewish and carnal Christ, which should here in earth, only, give them
pleasures and worldly wealth: Ioh. 6.26.
as the Capernites did in John which followed Christ only, for the feding and
filling of their bellies. They regarded not faith nor heavenly riches, which
are the gifts that Christ specially does give. And so do our vagabonds now a
days with us, which only gape and hunt for other men's meat, and seek nothing
but ease. As for the grace of God, true righteousness, godliness, and a good
and sound conscience, they neither at all know the^, neither are they desirous
to have the^. But if they know any fautors and lovers of the gospel, to the^
they have them, saying thus with themselves: We shall now be well: here shall
we get both ease and maintenance: here shall we scrape up so much money as will
find us, that we need not labor: we will desire these godly men's aid and
alms. We shall not surely (say they) want their help, they will bestow their
liberality upon us. For the gospel teaches love, which is liberal, and
bountiful and always ready, and bent to help, and support every man. There
are at this day many such evil men and beggars, which seek not the setting
forth of the gospel, but their own ease, and how to live idly, and so get
themselves to good protestants to whom they vaunt and set forth themselves
under ye name of the gospel, falsely pretending religion, and say that for
professing of the Gospel, they are fallen into those perils and poverty, and
they feign themselves to be for the words sake spoiled of their goods. And thus
under the pretense of religion they deceive many good men which think
themselves of duty bound to help them, both with their goods and bodies and
all that they can, ministering unto them, both meat, money, and apparel. False
Gospellers.
This kind of people creep into all places where the gospel is taught, and
they love it for none other cause, but only for the maintenance of their idle
life. If it were not, that under pretense of the Gospel, they can fill their
bellies, they would utterly despise it, and spit at it. And here I speak no
untruth. I know what I writ. I have known many which have been robbed of much
money by these smelfeasts and gredy gospellers, which under pretense of the
gospel, only for the belly sake and ease, falsely profess themselves to be
religious. Wherefore seeing that Satan cease not by his members thus to
slander the gospel, and in this behalf to deface it: We must as we can cure
this sore, and bewray and discover these circumcilians, and detect their
subtleties and deceites, that every man may take heed to himself, and trust
not (to his great hinderance) every one that falsely professes the gospel, and
goes a begging under the color of religion. We see it often that these
vagabonds come crouching, whining, and weping to the favorers of the gospel,
and complain, that for profession of the word they are driven out of their
cities, and houses, and spoiled of their lands and substance, etc. And so
cloking their lend and wicked life, with the name of the gospel, abuse it to
the satisfying of their bellies, and gredy appetites, and crave help for
Christ's sake, for the gospels sake, and for brotherly love, and charities
sake. And yet will they not be pleased with an indifferent good alms, but crave
(as it were of due) sometime money, sometime victuals, and sometime one thing,
and sometime an other: and by this their importunate begging, fill their
bags. And when we have helped them with our liberality and cherished and fed
them long: at the last, we find them to be runnagates, deep dissemblers, and
vile wicked persons, and nothing less in deed then that which they do pretend.
Every place is now full of such idle vagabo^ds and naughty fellows. Some of
them also be so impudent, that they go even to the preachers, and creeping into
their bosoms, make them by their importunate begging, not only give them and
help them of their own charge, but also, in Christ's name gather for them the
alms of other citizens, yea even the benevolence of the whole congregation,
with which those that be poor in deed, should be relieved. There is almost no
culion, no varlet, no peddler, no aleknight, no glutton, or gredy fellow, which
cannot brag, set forth, and help himself under a false color and name of the
gospel. Carolostadians and Anabaptist.
And which is strange. The Carolostadians and Anabaptists, who profess a
wonderful kind of modesty, moderation, straightnes of life, temperancy, and
holiness, when as they are for herisie driven out of their own country, come
to us and are never satisfied. Nay, they are never pleased if you give them
never so much. There is no Inn that they can or will take in good part. And as
for meat, these delicate and disdainful fellows will have none set before
them but that is of the best and finest. This kind of men is most mischievous
and wicked of all men. For they be most dangerously corrupted in opinion, and
err shamefully in the article of faith, and very impudently and obstinately,
either hold openly, or nourish privily, most seditious, and pestilent opinions.
But besides this, their life and manners, are so ill, so dishonest, so folish,
so without grace, so clounish, and so rude, that the most barbarous people of
the Turks, and Jews, are in life and manners to be preferred before them. And
such though they be, yet nevertheless, so great is their impudency,
dishonesty, impiety, and wickedness, that under ye name of christianity and
the gospel, they desire, and also look that men should feed, cherish, and
clothe them, and give them entertainment with the best. And thus they require
and seek nothing else in Christ, but these temporal goods, commodities and
pleasures of this life, even as did the common people of the Jews. As for the
gospel, they neither care for it, seek it, nor love it, as by many infallible
arguments appears in ye most of the^.


Anna. Wheresoever Christ is conversant and taught, there must needs Judas be,
also who regards nothing but the bag and thinks, of nothing but how to fill
his purse and his belly, and seeks nothing but means how by fraud, shifts,
wiles, and guiles, he may enrich himself with his thirty pence, and betray
innocent Christ. And so now a days do these brainsike, foolish, Papist,
Anabaptist, and Jews all in one error.
and mad heds. And yet they be not alone, for in ye same number with them, may
we put also the papists. For what else I pray you do they, and have they sought
in Christ all their time, but temporal riches, carnal commodities, and worldly
dignities.


Vrb. Well, let us here leave these vagabonds and ill men, and let us return
to ye interpretation of ye prophets.


Anna. To that am I most ready, for I had rather hear of my Christ my lord,
then of their villainies and wickedness, which for a time were colored and hid
with the cloak of religion and profession of the gospel, but now God be
thanked, well discovered, and brought to light. Wherefore I pray you go to the
exposition of the prophets.


Vrb. Esaias understands an other kind of Christ, he sets him forth after an
other sort then this fantastical and folish kind of people do. He says not
that he should stand on his pantophles in princely pomp and magnifice^ce,
either yet be a prouider only for the belly, or a minister of pleasures: but he
says yt he should come as a preacher and apostle, Christ a preacher.
who should rule his empire by the word and spirit. And to the end we should
not look for any magnificence, carnal pomp, pride, or worldly insolency in
Christ. Esaias says, He comes to preach good tidings, or the gospel, to the
poor: that is, to the afflicted and men oppressed with calamities and
miseries. Christ comes to the poor and miserable.
Worldly kings and princes have nothing to do, and vouchsafe not to deal with
the feeble, vile, contemptible, deaf, lame, blind, wretched, poor, afflicted,
miserable, and diseased persons, but they are delighted in ye company of the
healthful, handsome, pleasant headed, well mannered, beautiful, iocund, ioly,
rich, honorable and courageous courtiers. I say, they love and desire the
company and presence of such, that they may serve them, honor them, and be
delighted with them. But Christ came into this world for ye miserable and
afflicted, yt he might comfort, encourage, heal, help and deliver the^. For
Christ is not such a poor and simple king as erthly kings be, who stand in
need of other me^, and must needs have their help, counsails, comfort, service
and ministrations: Christ is no such king, but an everlasting king, a rich
king, a plentiful king, a king of wonderful great power, majesty and might,
who is the welspring, author, and giver of everlasting life, and therefore
stands in no need of our service, riches, or obedience. But he is a king of
such great mercy, goodness, liberality and bountifulnes, that he has not these
great treasures and glorious riches for himself alone, As a miser on his money.

Which think themselves rich and strong in righteousness and holiness as did the
Phararasies.

Luke 18.10.


lying on them like a covetous (...) miser and pinch penny, but he makes them
common unto us, and largely and liberally bestows on us these his great
substance, wonderful treasures, and precious Jewels. Wherefore he comes not
to the strong and mighty: but to the afflicted, poor, and sinful. S. Luke
translateth ye Hebrew word Enonim (...) (yt is) to the poor. And ye 70.
Translators use this same word (...). Whereupon it is likely ye the Hebrew text
which the seventy interpreters followed has not Enonim, but Eniim of Eni, which
word Zachary has in his 9. chapter. And that word signifies poor, heavy,
humble, oppressed, brought low, of base condition, and afflicted. But howsoever
it signifies, whether poor, or afflicted, all is one, for by both these words
are meant those, Luke 4.18. Math. 5.3. Math. 11.5 Luke 8.8. Who be the poor in
spirit and who not.

These be ye good ground which is spoken of. Luke 8.8. A happy heauynes. Luke
8.8.


who^ Christ in Math. called poor in spirit (who receive the gospel and to
whom the gospel with fruit is profitably preached.) Which have broken and
contrite hearts, and troubled consciences: which feel the burden of their
sins, and taste of ye wrath and judgment of God: which are horribly afraid of
gods indignation, and for fear thereof begin to dread, quake, and tremble: and
which incessantly long, and look for the grace and help of God: and which with
ardent, great, and continual prayers desire and crave nothing else but yt they
may be delivered from their sins, and obtain the grace and favor of God,
these men which are thus affected, are most fit scholars and disciples for ye
doctrine of the gospel. And these are that good ground in Luke which brings
forth fruit.

On the other side, they which do not acknowledge their sin, which see not
their misery, which fear not God, which desire not his grace, and which covet
not his mercy (such as be the hard hearted and blind children of this world,
holy hypocrites, and (...) secure fellows, which know not how to repent the^
of their sins) These I say, desire not, regard not, and weigh not Christ and
his Gospel. And therefore does Christ pronounce a sharp sentence against
them, saying: The whole need not a Physician, but they which are sick. Math.
9.12
I am not come to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance. By these
righteous in this text, are meant such as be negligent, proud and hautie
spirits, which are bewitched by a false persuasion of themselves, and think
that they be already just, and do not acknowledge their sins. And therefore are
presumptuous, careless, and stubborn, and feel not their own miseries, and
remember not (as they should) death, the day of judgment, and the wrath of God
to come. Fear of perdition a sign of election.
All which must needs come upon this world, but being deeply drouned in carnal
security, have their minds busied about nothing but the transitory things of
this world, and are nothing touched with the desire of the life to come, and
everlasting salvation.

The Prophet teaches in the words followyng, what the fruties of this gospel
are, and who these poor and afflicted are, True joyful tidings
saying: That I might bynd up the broken hearted. These tidings are in deed true
joyful tidings: these are comfortable and pleasant news to hear: these
tidings are full of consolation. Moises and his law teaches us to acknowledge
our sins, and the curse due to us for our sins. This knowledge of the law
terrefieth our consciences. For, the law only shows and reueleth sins, but
it takes them not away, but leaves them still in our remembrance. And where
sins be, there death has dominion, there is tre^bling, fear, horror,
heaviness, and desperation, so long as the conscience, which is the place of
torment, and storehouse of sin, is disquieted, and fears death. Such then
as feel their sins, are the contrite in heart, and most afflicted of all men:
these see their misery, calamity, and danger: but to heal themselves, and to
deliver them selves out of such danger and miseries, they are of themselves in
no wise able. But when as Christ comes accompanied with the healthful
preaching, and doctrine of the gospel, then comes their comfort, and
consolation. Because the gospel offreth and freely gives forgiveness of sins,
true holiness, and everlasting life to all that faithfully believe. For thus it
says, speaking unto the poor sinner: If thou be a sinner, if thy conscience
be troubled, if thou be afraid of death, and if thou fear gods judgment, mark
what thou must do. Fly unto Christ who only can, and will of his own good will,
save and deliver thee. For to this end, God the father sent him. Believe in him,
and for his sake all thy sins shall be forgiven thee. For he took thy sins
upon him, and he suffered and satisfied for them. When thou have thus done, then
is thy conscience, merry, pacified, and quieted. Because it has through faith
taken hold of Christ, who has taken away the hand writing of an evil
conscience, None need fear or despair for his sins.
which was altogether against us, miserably tormented us, grievously vexed us,
and daily disturbed our peace, and has blotted it out, and nailed it to his
cross, so that there is no cause why the man that believes in Christ should
quake, tremble, or fear for his sins, or should fly from God as a severe
judge. For God is now become favorable unto him, and has forgiven him all his
sins for Christ his sake, in whom he believes. And this faith in Christ
brings present help, and consolation to the penitent heart: it comfort and
strengthens the man that before was dismayed: so yt now he may plainly know,
yt God for Christ's sake, will not herafter be a severe, and fearful judge unto
him: but a loving, mercyful, and tender Father. And this is the true, and
perfect binding up, and healing, and curing of sick, wounded, and feeble hearts.
For, the heart never finds true, and sound comfort, grace, and life, but in
Christ Jesus.

It follows That I should preach to the bond liberty. By disobedience, we
were made servants, and bondslaues of Satan, and so should have remained for
ever, if Christ had not delivered us. But he became (...), the price of our
redemption, and he by his death, Psalm. 68.16. Col. 2.15.
delivered us from that captivity of Satan, as David says: He went up on
high, and led captivity captive. And, has spoiled the principalities, and
powers, and has made a show of them openly, and has tryumphed over them in
the same cross. That is, Christ overcame those Princes, and powers of
darcknes, which had thrown down man into the kingdom of sin, death, and
damnation: and by his own power, he has spoiled them of their pray, as Saint
Luke says: Luke 11.22.
The stronger overcame the strong man being armed, and keeping his palace, and
took away all his armore. That is, Christ delivered mankind, and took his
servants out of the power of darcknes, Zac. 9.11. Esaias. 42.7
and brought them into his kingdom of light, as you have heard before, out of
Zachary, and Esaias.

This pardon, redemption, or remission, has Christ himself given forth, and
preached in his gospel, and he has commanded his Apostles, and all the
Preachers of the gospel, to teach the same even unto the end of the world. For
what else is the Gospel, but such a Sermon of Christ, as tells us that he did
fight a combat hand to hand with Satan, and has in the same open combat,
not fraudulently, and deceitfully: but valiantly, and with a divine force
subdued, overcome, and conquered the devil, and by that victory has so
delivered, justified, and for ever saved us (which were once his captives,
bound under sin, and death) that we may now have peace with God, and being
delivered from that tyrant, be brought to heaven, and raygne with God our
heavenly father, as blessed Children for ever.

It follows: To the captives freedom. By the word of God it is plain, that
we are sinners, and that we are as it were, We be prisoners under ye law, till
Christ deliver us.
cast into a prison, or iaile, from whence nether by the force of nature, nor
by all the good works in the world, we can deliver, and save our selves. We
ought in deed to lead pure, and unspotted lives, and still to be doing good,
and fly from evil: and the law requires the same at our hands: but our
sinful nature, is slow to good, and far from fulfilling the law, and makes
us live according to our carnal desires, and concupiscens, which even from our
youth up is al ways bent, and ready to evil. Whereupon, it comes, that the
law is more urgent upon us, and still enforces, compels, and commands us
to do good and threateneth death, and destruction, to them that do evil, and
so it happens to us, as Paul, said to the Galathians. Gal. 3.23.
Before faith came, we were kept under the law, and shut up unto the faith,
which should afterward be revealed.

When we look into our hearts, and diligently consider how disobedient,
stubborn, and repugnaunt we are by nature to the law of God, then we plainly
see, that the sacred law is nothing else, to all us which are under the law, and
as yet not justified by faith, but a prison, The law a prison.
in which for all our striving, and wrestling, will we, nil we, we are
imprisoned, and shut up. For how soever we profess, and make a show of
holiness, and grauitye in our selves, with sober, and discrete manners in the
eyes of men, even as though we kept the law: yet in deed, and from the heart,
we do nothing so plainly, so obediently, and so cherefully as we ought: but
we, as men enforced, and constrained, do hipocritically all that we do with
unclean, and filthy hearts. For the law by threats restrayneth us from open
crimes, and offenses, and it urges, binds, and restrains us very
extremely, so that we do not steal, commit adulterye, murder, slander,
blaspheme, nor curse any body: but yet in the heart, (where the well spring, and
chief root of all our works are,) does fleshly concupiscens boil, foam,
wrestle, and strive to burst out into il deeds, and the more we bridle it, and
wrestle against it, the more it rages, and boyleth, and becomes more violent
strong, heddy, rash, unruly, and stubborn. And as it happens in great fluds,
whose force, and course we see by stopping, and staying with ra^pires wax
greater, and more vehement, so that they will not suffer the^ selves to be
stayed, or stopped, but at the last with great force, and violence, break up the
rayles, rampires, and water work, and flow forth a main: so it happens
here. For when the law binds, and keeps in the lusts, and fleshly desires
of the heart with fear of punishment, that they dare not discover, or show
themselves: then fretteth the flesh inwardly, and abhors the law, as it were
a prison, desiring to be set free, and at liberty from it.

When therefore, the law of God has done his office in man, then sees he in
what danger he stands. This misery, and wickedness of man's nature (in as much
as it is not only, not able to keep ye law of god, but also does utterly, even
abhor it,) can not well according to the greatness thereof, be either spoken in
word or conceived in mind. Well then, the confession of such our wickedness,
malice, and blindness, breeds in us humility, when we see our selves in great
danger: when we see our selves to be no body: when we see yt we are not able,
to keep gods holy law: and when we see such filthy, and unclean works, spring
from yt pestilent, filthy, The works of the flesh cannot be called good. Romans
7.14.
and stinking podle, to wit ye heart, which is a rebel, and wa^teth ye faith
and fear of God. Wherefore ye works of ye flesh can not truly be called good
works, neither do they satisfye ye law of god, For the law is spiritual. And
therefore it must be spiritually fulfilled with the heart, and spirit. When we
have thus confessed our miserye, then crave we the mercy of God, and then do
we earnestly desire, to be delivered from the curse of the law, and to be made
righteous. And the more truly, and thoroughly that we acknowledge, and feel our
misery, and calamity, so much more earnestly, and zealously, do we crave, and
desire Gods help. But in all these evils, we find nether help, nor comfort, any
where else, but in Jesus Christ. He is the fulfilling, and end of the law, to
all that believe. If Christ do not help us in this case, Noe help but in
christ
then do we still abide, and remain captives under the law in this torment
and prick of conscience. But the Father sent him for this cause, as Esaias hear
witnesses, that he might preach, and bring deliuerau^ce to those that be thus
captive under the law. Which thing he then performed, when he became accursed
for us, upon the cross, that thereby he might deliver us from the eternal
curse of the law: And when he him self preached the Gospel saying. Gal. 3.13.
Mat. 11.28 John. 3.16
Come unto me all you that are weary and lade^ and I will ease you. And: God so
loved the world, that he has given his only begotten Son that who so ever
believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life. For, God sent not
his Son into the world, that he should condemn the world, but that the world
through him might be saved. And who so believes in him is not condemned.

It follows. The acceptable year of the Lord. Christ says in Luke that,
Luke 4.18.
He was sent to preach the Gospel, to the poor, that is to comfort the world
with glad tidinges. The acceptable year of the Lord
Esaias prophesied the same in this place (saying) that Christ should preach,
that joyful or acceptable year, to wit, that after those doleful days, the
happy year should come, the time of Gods grace, the new testament which
Christ him self preached unto us, in which, we shall hear nothing but mere
grace and forgeuenes of our sins. This is yt most happy year of Jubilee in
which is published by the gospel, The year of Iubile.
full, perfect, everlasting, and continual liberty, and freedom from all our
sins. Which thing Zachary song thus in Luke. God has raised up a horn of
salvation, Luk 1.69.
unto us, in the house of his servant David. That is, the kingdom of
salvation, as he spoke by the mouth of his holy Prophets, which were since the
world began, saying: That he would give us deliverance from our enemies, and
from the hands of all that hate us. That by Christ we might receive forgeuenes
of all our sins. This is even so fulfilled, for Christ has both preached,
and daily does preach, and also by his Evangelists, and Ministers, shall preach
the same unto the end of the world, as he speaks of that year by Paul, who
says: We therefore, as workers together beseech you, that you receive not the
Grace of God in vain. For, 2. Cor. 6.1.
he says: In an acceptable time, I have heard thee, and in the day of
salvation, I have succored thee. Behold, now is (...) the acceptable time,
behold, now is the day of salvation.

Is not this a sweet, and pleasant doctrine, to a troubled, and terryfied
conscience? Here you see not one word that says, that Christ should be a
terryble Judge, or one of whom we should be afraid. But every word declares
him to be a most merciful, and sweet preacher of glad tidings.

But now it follows: The day of revenge of our God. This judgment is of the
wicked.
This is fearful, and yet it nothing touches them that believe in Christ. For
this is not spoken against the believers in Christ, but against the adversaries
of Christ, which will not believe in Christ: Who, because they contemn this
Jubilee, and year of grace, and because they refuse the blessings offered in
Christ, shall suffer the curse, and be abiects from God, as men that shall
never, either feel, or enjoy, any hour, or moment of that acceptable year,
and blessed time. And, seeing they would neither hear, nor see, the sweet
Savior Christ, they shall both perceive, and feel the foul, and horrible
Devil Satan, whose tyranny, they shall never shake of.

That I might comfort all that mourn. This is the fruit of this preaching of
Christ, that all that mourn, and are sad in heart, which were oppressed with
contynuall, and exceeding anguish, lying Captives under the Law, Sin, and
death, may now receive comfort, and be refreshed, in as much as they see, that
now they be released from their sins. Wherefore, their mourning, and sorrow
vanishes, and in place thereof comes comfort, and consolation. And as they
were in unbelief (before they received the gospel) wild, crooked, unprofitable,
and barrain trees of unrighteousness, Hier. 17.6.
and, as Jeremy says, Wild brambles, heth in the wilderness, or bushes in the
desert, the unfruitful ground of this world: The operation of faith
So, by faith of the Gospel, and this consolation, they shall be most pleasant,
and fruitful trees planted by ye water side, which take such deep root in this
moisture, that, though even the greatest heat of tempation should assail them,
yet do they not fear, fade, or fall away, but their leaves flourish still, and
are green, and wyther not in the dangerous drought, or scorching heat of
so^mer, but in their due time bring forth their fruit. For, as they believe in
heart, so do they co^fes with mouth. Such as is the inward faith, such is the
outward confession, and so do they preach forth without ceasing, the goodness
of the Lord.

It would be long to rehearse all that this Prophet only has prophesied of
the ministry, and humility of Christ, in his former coming, and there be many
things also spoken of this matter in other places, and titles of Christ? But,
in good sooth, how say you? is not this an exceeding humility, and lowlynes of
Christ? that he would vouchsafe to become such a king, whose kingdom should
lie on his own shoulders, (that is to say) who had all us wretched sinners, and
our sins laid upon his shoulders? He bare us in his cross, and offered him
self a sacrifice for our offenses, why Christ is painted with a cross on his
shoulders.
and after this sort lovingly sought his lost sheep, and brought it into the
way. And this is the cause that they paynt the child Christ with a cross on
his shoulders. Worldly Princes in their kingdoms, are bravely painted,
adorned, and set forth in their colors, and in sundry rich attyres, with their
arms blazed, and heads gloriously crowned, holding a Scepter in the right
hand, and a round apple in the left. And well so, for they are Lords of the
world, and therefore they vaunt themselves gloriouslye in worldly magnificence,
and corporal things: But, Christ overcomes in his Cross, and rules his
kingdom by his word, and spirit in hidden, and invisible things, after an
unknown, and secret sort.

Danyel prophesyeth that Christ shall be a Prince, and have his peculyar
people. But, he prophesyeth in ye same place, yt the Jews should deny him, and
kill him. Dan. 9.25. Joel. 2.23.


Joel caleth Christ the Rain, or Doctor of righteousness, as one sent for the
same purpose, to teach us the true righteousness of God.

Malachy calls Christ the Angel, or Messenger, of the testament. Or, Mal.
2.3.1,
as the seventy Interpretors translated it, the Angel of righteousness.

Many such sayings as these, are in the Prophets, by which, nothing else is set
forth unto us, but the ready will of Christ to help, and save us, with his
lowlynes, gentleness, hu^blenes, and mercifulnes, in his former coming.

And, here I could recite all the prophesies which are written of his passion,
how he humbled himself to the death, even to the death of the cross: and many
other things, which the Prophets foretold of the spiritual kingdom of Christ,
and how he now governs us. But these prophesies will offer themselves more
fitly in another place, where (God willing) they shall be expounded.


Anna. All the prophesyes of Christ's passion affirm that humble conversation
of Christ, in which (for our sakes) he walked in this earth. And therefore let
us proceed, and search, when this former coming of Christ should be.


Vrb. First, I will speak of that sweet prophesy of Dan. which plainly shows
the time, Dan. 9.24.
wherein Christ would come. Seventy weeks are determined upon thy people, and
upon thine holy City, to finish the wickedness, and to seal up the sins, and
to reconcile the iniquity, and to bring in everlasting righteousness, and to
seal up the vision, and prophesye, and to anoint the most holy. Know
therefore, and understand, that from the going forth of the commandment to
bring again the people, and to build Jerusalem, unto Messiah the Prince shall be
7. weeks, and threescore, and two weeks, and the Street shall be built again,
and the vale in a troublous time.

And, after threescore, and two weeks, shall Messiah be slain, and shall have
nothing, and the people of the Prince that shall come, shall destroy the City,
and the Sanctuary, and the end thereof shall be with a flood: and unto the end of
the battle, it shall be destroyed by desolations: and he shall confirm the
covenant with many, for one week: and in the midst of the week, he shall
cause the Sacrifice of the oblation, to cease, and there shall be in the
Temple, abomination, and desolation. Or (on the wings, or at the wings,
shall stand abomination of desolation,) and that desolation, shall continue
unto the end, or consummation of all things. Or, (it is decreed, that
desolation shall continue unto the end.

This Prophecy is something dark, and it is understood, and expounded
diversely, both of the Jews, and Christians. And therefore, must we in
entreating, and expounding of it, bestow the more time. And worthy it is
dilygently to be handled. For it is one of the chefest, and notablest
Prophesies that we have of Christ. So great misteryes of our God, Christ Jesus,
does it open unto us. I will therefore set down the same in certain Articles.

First of all, must be noted, that the Prophet Danyell prophesyed this in the
captiuitye of Babylon, when Nabuchodonizor the king of Babylon, had led away
the Tribe of Judah, Hier. 25.11
into Chaldaea, and the Jews were captives seventy years, of which, Jeremy
prophesyed.

In this captivity, the Jews were much vexed, and troubled. For this was their
greatest, and heauyest cross, that, being amongst the wicked Goim, (the
Gentiles) they were commanded to lay away the true worship of God, which is set
down in his word. As appears in the Psalms: where the Jews complain, and
witness their heauynes, saying: g. By the Ryuers of Babylon we sat, and there
we wept when we remembered Syon. Psalm. 1 37.1
We hanged our harps upon the willowes in the mids thereof. Then, they that
led us Captives, required of us songs, and mirth, when we had hanged up our
harps, saying: Sing us one of the songs of Syon. How shall we sing (said we) a
song of the Lord, in a strange land?

In these afflictions, and miseries, Daniel began to co^fes his own sins,
and the sins of his people, and to pray heartily every day to God for his
captives: that for his mercy sake, he would vouchsafe to pardon the^ their
offenses, for which they were led away captives: and that he would help them,
yt being come into their own land, they might restore the true worship of god,
which had been so long neglected. Daniel praying thus, is heard, and the
Archangell Gabriel is sent unto him, who showed the time appointed, Gala. 4.4.
or fullness of time (as Paul calls it) to wit, the time of Messiah, in which
Christ should come, and bring with him all joy, and true happiness. He told also
the number of years, to wit, how long it should be to the former coming of
Messiah, in which he should come into the world, and happily begin his
everlasting kingdom.

Secondly here is to be noted, that the former coming of Christ was two ways
revealed unto Daniel. First a far of, and something darkely (to wit) under
what Monarchy of the world, Christ should come. Afterward, more nigh and
plainly, and so perfectly, that he might well know the very year in which
Christ should begin his kingdom. For Daniel by the revelation of the holy
ghost, expounds to the king Nabuchodonizer, a wonderful and marvelous dream
of the four Monarchies, or kingdoms of the world, to wit, of the golden,
silver, brazen, and iron kingdom. But that you may the better understand these
things, know you that God told Daniel that there should be four kingdoms or
Monarchies in the earth, which should continue unto the end of the world, to
wit, that all earthly power over Kings, Princes, Dukes, Barons, and other
magistrates should four times be changed, and given to sundry nations. These
are those four Monarchies or kingdoms. The 4. Monarchs of the world.


The first is the Assyrian and Babylonia^ Monarch, in Assyria, and Chaldea.

The second, the Persians and Medes, in Persia and Media.

The third, the Grecians or Macedonians in Grecia.

The fourth and last (in which Christ should come, and the world should have
his end) be the Romans. These four Empires or Monarchies, are also reveled in
the 7. chap. of Daniel by four beasts, of the which the first is a Lion, the
next a Bear, the third a Leopard, the fourth a terrible beast without name,
having iro^ teeth. Thus says Daniel in his 2. Dan. 2.44.
chap. And in the days of these kings shall the God of heaven set up a kingdom
which shall never be destroyed, and this kingdom shall not be given to an
other people: but it shall break, and destroy all these kingdoms, and it
shall stand for ever. Where as thou saw that the stone was cut of the
mountain without hands, and that it brake in pieces the iron, the brass, the
clay, the silver, and the gold, so the great God has showed the king what
shall come to pass hereafter.

In this prophecy, is the time prefigured in which Messiah would come and
begin his kingdom by his Gospel and holy spirit. First, in an humble and base
habit, Christ is ye stone cut out of the mountain without hands.
but afterward at his latter coming, in glory and power. S. Hierome upon this
text says, that in ye end of these kingdoms, a stone (that is our lord and
savior Christ) was cut from the mountain without hands (that is) he was borne
of the virgin Mary without the seed of man. Wherefore it is manifest, that
Messiah in his former coming in great humility, would not come in the flesh
and begin his kingdom, before ye last Monarchy which is the Romans Empery.
For Daniel says in the days of those kingdoms, that is, when the three first
Monarchies be ended, and the fourth and last (that is, the Roman Monarchy)
does flourish and rule the roste, and when it is tossed and troubled with
tumults, then shall the kingdom of Christ be erected and begun, and it shall
destroy the Romish empire. But it is to wit, Christ's kingdom shall abide for
ever. All other kingdoms of the world have their borders limited, and their
days numbered, which being expired, the kingdoms decay and come to naught. But
that great and mighty kingdom of Christ shall have no end, it shall never be
dissolved, but shall abide for ever and ever, Christ is king of all nations.
Dan. 2.34.
neither shall it be in a part or corner of the world, as in Europe, Affrike,
or Asia, but in the whole world. As Daniel witnesses, where he speaks of the
image that Nabuchadonizer saw, saying: Thou beheldest it, till a stone was
cut (of the mountain) without hands, which smote the Image upon his feet
that were of iron and clay, and brake them to pieces. Then was the iron, the
clay, the brass, the silver, and the gold, broken altogether, and became like
the chafe of the summer flowers, and the wind carried them away that no place
was found for them, and the stone that smote the Image, became a great
mountain, and filled the whole earth. This stone is Christ, to whom is given
all power, as well in heaven as in earth, that he may rule with power in every
place. And Daniel says again in the 7. chapter, (where ye four Monarchies
are understood by four beasts) that Christ should come and bear rule in the
time of the fourth Monarchy, that is, when the Romans should rule. Let us now
gather by the seventy wekes in the 9. chapter, when the time should come, and
how long they had to look for Messiah, and when he should begin to rule.

By this revelation of Daniel, the Jews are plainly and mightily convinced,
that Christ according to ye Prophets foretelling, is already come on thousand
and five hundred years ago. For first, the angel says in the 9. Dan. 9.24.
chapter (out of which I recited the words of ye prophecy before) that there
were seventy wekes determined and appointed for the people of the Jews, and ye
holy city Jerusalem, after which 70. wekes, the people and priesthood of the
Jews should cease. And the whole state of ye kingdom should be destroyed. For
after yt time appointed, God determined that al Jerusalem should be ouerthrown,
and that ye Jews should be partly blinded, and partly destroyed. The weeks of
years.
We must also understand that the angel speaks not here of such wekes as
consists on seven days. For so seventy wekes would scarce make two year.
But he speaks of such wekes, as seven year do make but one weke, and so
seventy wekes do make four hundredth and ninety years. For so the scripture
speaks in other places. And the same phrase and manner of speaking, is used in
Leuiticus. Luke 25.8
And so also al men endued with the spirit of prophesiyng have hitherto
continually understood it.

Note diligently by the words of the prophet, how great things should happen
in the days of Messiah, and how wonderful the power of his kingdom should be.
These are the words of the prophet. Dan. 9.24.
To finish the wickedness, and to seal up the sins, and to reconcile the
iniquity, and to bring in everlasting righteousness, and to seal up the vision,
and prophecy. There had been Moses, and many other doctors of the law, who had
taught and commanded them to do things honest, and godly, and forbidden
things that were evil and wicked: but none of them all did any thing prevail.
For sin once reueiled by the law, The wickedness of our nature without grace.
became greater and more sinful. For nature without grace, though she be never
so much admonished, or instructed unto honesty and godliness, and though she be
never so much moved, and pricked forward unto piety and obedience toward God,
will yet for all that play her wonted prankes, and run her old race, followyng
her fancy, and going on as she was wont. Nay thenceforth after such
admonition, she becomes worse and worse, more unhappy, wicked, and more
inflamed by heat of lust to offend. So then sin remained and could not be
taken away, but as Paul witnesses to the Galathians, our offenses afterward
became greater, heavier, and more, and more without ceasing. How needful it
was that Christ should com Acts. 13 38.
And therefore was it needful that Messiah him self should come and mend this
matter, and bring help with him: otherwise, our case had been worse and worse,
and we had fallen into greater and greater evils. As Paul preached in the
Acts, saying: Be it known unto you therefore men and brethren, that through
this man is preached unto you the forgeuenes of sins. And from all things,
from which ye could not be justified by the law of Moses, by him every one
that believes, is justified. For Christ was therefore sent from the father, and
made man, that he might satisfy for the sins of all men, and obtain for us
the holy ghost, and eternal life: and so indue us with perfect righteousness,
Faith the righteousness which is available before God. Romans 3.21.
which before God is auaylable, (to wit) with the christian faith, of which,
the law and the prophets foretold many things. And so it was meet, that the
visions and prophesies should be fulfilled, that is, it was convenient, that
those things should come to pass, which the Sears, or Prophets (which were
inspyred, and illuminated by the holy Ghost) had seen, and foretold of Messiah.
For all the Prophets, Math. 11.13.
and even the law it self, prophesied until John.

And, the holiest of holy, or most holy, shall be anointed at that time. This is
Christ the Lord, and king of all holiness, who was sanctyfied by the holy Spirit
far above his fellows, and was called, by God his heavenly father in his
baptism, his well beloved son. He only is to be heard as the true Preacher,
Lord, and Master of all the Prophets. His word is to be imbrased. To him only
with tooth, and nayl must we cleave. And upon him only must we believe.

Seeing then Christ was to be looked for within seventy weeks, that is, within
490. years, at which time he should begin his kingdom: We must here search
where, and when, these seventy weeks should begin, and then we may certainly
know the meaning of this prophesy.


Anna. When then do these 70. weeks begin?


Vrb. Mark diligently the words of the Angel Gabryel, he says thus: Dan.
9.25.
from the going forth of the commandment, yt Jerusalem should be builded
again. That is, from that time that they were commanded to repayr, and restore
Jerusalem. The Angel himself does plainly expound it, and he begins at that
year, wherein it was decreed, that Jerusalem should be restored. Now must we
search the reigns, and the successions of kings and kingdoms out of
Historiographers, and out of them, the number of years will plainly appear. We
will therefore take these 70. years, to begin at the second year of king
Darius, which was called Long-hand. For that year the Lord spoke by the
Prophets Haggeus, and Zacharyas, and commanded that Zerobabel should build
the Temple: as we read in the first chapter of both the prophets.

The same commandment also, 1. Esdr. 6.28.
did this king Daryus give, (that we spoke of,) and then went forth also his
Edict for the reedifying of the Temple. And the account does well, and justly
agree, if we begin our computation there. For from that time, in which that
prophesy was uttered by Haggeus, unto the baptism of Christ, when he took
upon him his ministry, and began the regyment of his kingdom, or new
Testament, (for this Angel here describes him to be a king, whose youth, and
childhood being past, and now already come to man's state, might, as a king,
take into his own hands the rule of his kingdom,) from that time, I say, unto
Christ's baptism, were almost 483. years. Out of which years, we may make 69.
of these yearly weeks, and every one of them shall contain 7. years, of
which Gabryel here speaks, saying: Until our Lord Christ come there are seven
weeks, and 62. weeks, that is, 69. weeks. Thus therefore, must we reckon.
From the 2. year of king Darius, unto Alexander ye great, are 145. years, by yt
account of Metastenes. From Alexander the great, unto the nativity of Christ,
are 311. Luke. 3.23.
years. From the birth of Christ, unto his baptism were 30. years. These years
by addition gathered up make these 486. year, which are contained in 69. wekes.


Anna. As far now as I understand this reckning, and account: there are three
years remaining, which I pray you, tell me how they must be accounted? Do not
these years make your account imperfect?


Vrb. In such kind of reckning, every day, and hour cannot be so exactly
numbered. It cannot be, but yt in such computations, there will be some od days,
more, or les. For, it happens oftentimes in histories, that half a year is
taken for a wholl year. The time (therefore) which remains, is to be included
in the other years: and yet no inconvenience shall happen in our prophecy of
Messiah, seeing yt we have so sure testimonies, and good ground of scripture for
ye principal matter.

Some men count these 70. weeks, from the 20, and last year of Cambises,
father unto Daryus, who suffered Nehemias to come to Jerusalem to reedefy the
City. Nehe. 2.6.
And, there was two years between the 20. of Cambyses, and the 2. of Darius.
For, when any great, or worthy thing is done in three years, or is a good long
time in doing, we use often to contain, and set it forth, as done in one of
the three years, or at one time, saying, such a thing was done this, or that
time. And so must we say here. God commanded, the second year of Daryus, that
Jerusalem should be reedefyed: that is, at, or about those times, when Nehemias
was sent back by Cambises, and began to reedefy Jerusalem. For, it was a worthy
work, nay, a wonderful worthy work, and many there were which began it: yea,
the Angels them selves urged, and furthered the work. But they did not all
begin it at one time, and hour. Zach. 1.12.


The Angel Gabryell divided these 70. weeks into three parts, in every one of
which three, was some notable thing done. In the first seven weeks (says
Gabryel) that is, in 49, years the walls, and streets of Jerusalem shall be
builded, but in a troublesome time. For, the Samaritans, Saneballat, Tobias,
and others there abouts stayed, and hindered the building all they could.
Whereupon, the Jews were put to great trouble, and care, and brought in great
danger, and distres. You know how the Jews said unto Christ in John: Forty
six years was this temple a building, John. 2.20.
and will thou rear it up in three days?

Then Danyel says, after 62. weeks shall Messiah, or Christ, suffer death.
Plainly giving us to understand what should happen when these 69. weeks were
ended, and when Christ had begun his reign: to wit, a great, and wonderful
thing shall then chance. Christ shall then be crucified: as it came to pas in
deed, in the 4. year after the 69. weeks, and after he began to preach.
Wherefore, Jerusalem shall at last come to naught, and be wasted, and utterly
destroyed, and the people of the Jews shall be cut of.

These things were all fulfilled 40. years after the ascension of Christ, when
Titus the Roman Emperor, Son to Vespasyan, after long beseeging Jerusalem,
at the last overcame it, and miserably destroyed it. As Christ had told them
before with bitter tears, weeping for the miserable, and horrible calamity,
and overthrow, which he saw hang over the City, because she knew not the time
of her visitation. For, Luke 19.42
Christ says in Luke: the days shall come upon thee, that thine enemies shall
cast a trench about thee, and compass thee round, and keep thee in on every
side, and shall make thee even with the ground, and thy children which are in
thee, and they shall not leave in thee a stone upon a stone, because thou
knew not the time of thy visitation. And, Titus did this same which Christ
foretold: as we read in Josephus, which saw all the doyngs with his eyes. For
Titus beseeged the City so that no Jew could escape. The circuit of the wall
was thirty, and nine furlongs: and when he had entrenched them, he handeled
them so miserably, that with hunger they were constrained to eat beasts dung
dried, girdles, shoes, and skincouerings of shields: yea, they sought their
food in Iakeses: And one woman roasted, and eat her own child for extreem
hunger. Many also in that City flew, and butchered one another.

The destruction of Jerusalem.
Besides this, the plague also was so whot amongst them, that lodgings, houses,
and all the streets, were filled with dead bodies. To be short, this
unthankful City tasted so much of Gods wrath, for their forsaking of Christ
our Savior, that we have no example like it. Those that dyed, and those that
were murdered in the City, in that war, were ten hundredth thousand: beside
seventy thousand more, which were sent bondslaues into Egypt, there to moyle
all their lives in intolerable toil like beasts. They which were under
sixteen years old, were sold more cheap then dogs: and as Egesippus
witnesses, thirtye Jews were sold for a penny. Titus burned the Temple, and
sacked the City, and laid it even with the ground.

Thus were the Jews driven out of their country, and scattered abroad in the
world, in which (as vagabounds) they have wandered up and down these 1576.
years, hardened in heart, and stricken with blindness, a most miserable people,
having neither kingdom, nor priesthood. And all because they neglected, and
utterly despised the time of grace, wherein Christ visited the^. Wherefore, now
they look in vain for the former coming of Christ, since the which coming,
there is already past a thousand, and five hundred years, and mo, as it was
promised to our fathers from the beginning of the world: their Temple also, and
sacrifice were utterly abolyshed, and taken away: because Messiah himself, is
come in his own person, and all the figures are fulfilled. Chrysostom says in
his second oration against the Jews, that they went about to reedefy the
Temple, and to do sacrifice as before. First, under Hadryan, then, under
Constantine, who cut of their ears, and last of all, under Julian the
Apostata, which reprobate, in despite of the Christian Religion, nourished, and
helped the Jews, and gave them great store of money (that they might after the
fatal destruction of the Temple, build it again) and procured for them workmen,
and money. But when the workmen dug to lay the foundation, great flames of
fire burst forth amongst the laborers as they were a digging, Fire out of the
ground burned the Jews.
which destroyed them, and made them leave of their work. For, the word of God
must needs continue inviolable, and true. God foretold, that both Jerusalem,
and the temple should be destroyed: and that the sacrifice should cease, and
that ever after, all things there, should be a desert, and wilderness. Al which
every man may see, is come to pass. And yet for all this the blind Jews cannot
abide to see, and acknowledge their error.


Anna. But whether will you refer the last week of the years?


Vrb. That last week, or those last seven years, is that time, which follows
after those 69. weeks, in which, as I said before, Christ should be slain. And
it came so to pass. The Angel says, he shall confirm the covenant with many
for one week. The gospel of Christ was preached boldly, and freely, with great
succes all those 7 years: And Christ him self preached the gospel with great
power, and wrought miracles unto the 4. year. And so also after him, did the
Apostles by the power of the holy Ghost, preach the same Gospel, and taught
that everlasting covenant of Gods grace, (the new covenant, and promise which
God made, to wit, that for Christ's sake he would be merciful, and fatherly unto
us, love us, and acknowledge us for his dear children, and quite blot out al
our sins out of his remembrance) and in the midst of the last week, which
was the fourth year after Christ's baptism, he was cut of, or slain. For ye
Jews had denied, and clean forsaken him saying unto Pylate, we have no king
but Caesar. When therefore, that true sacrifice, that true oblation Christ, (of
whom Moses, and the Prophets had spoken before, whom also the figures of the
Law did point out) was now come him self, and had once by one Sacrifice, wyped
away the sins of the wholl world, and puryfied us from al our sins by his
own precious blood, as Paul says to the Hebrews: then was it meet that that
figurative, and shadowlike oblation of the Jews, together with the corporal
worship of God in Judah, should have an end: seeing that he him self was come,
of whom all those had been but figures.


Anna. What means Danyel, where he says, the abominations of desolation
shall stand at the wings?


Vrb. Al Interpretors do not yet expound these words alike: and yet so, that
the prophesy is not hurt, strayned, or dammaged. Some by the wings, understand
the Cherubin in the Church, where the Images should stand: othersome take it to
be the chief, or honorablest place, and top of the church: and they say that
Pylat set the Eagle, which is the Ensign, or Banner of the Emperors of Rome,
upon the pinnacle of the Church. But the Jews abhorred that Ensign of the
Romans, who they called profane Gentiles, and they very opprobriously, called
it an abomination. Now, abomination is such a thing as we detest, and abhor
as a dead, putrified, and foul stinking carrion.


Anna. Is it that, which they call Gilul, Schikutz Scheketz?


Vrb. It is it in deed. For, as often as the Jews see an Image, they spit at
it saying: Scheketz.


Anna. What the word Jew signifies.
The pore wretches might spit at themselves, for they are abhominably deceived.
They are called Jews, that is, Confessors, and yet they will not confess the
truth. For, they might fall to consydering with them selves, and think what
should be the cause, that they have wandered in banishment, now more then a
thousand, and five hundred years, and yt God has clean depryued them of his
word. For, though they read never so much, yet understand they nothing, because
the veil is over their hearts, 2. Cor. 3.15.
as Paul says.


Vrb. This prophesy, in deed, proves that the Jews are marueilously blinded,
and indurated. For, they might by this prophesy have learned the time of Christ
his first coming. The Angel here plainly shows that Messiah should come
between the captivity of Babylon, and the last destruction of Jerusalem. For,
he reckneth plainly, how long Jerusalem, and the temple, should from that time
forth continue, and stand: And he says, that 490. years were determined, and
he tells us in expres words, that then, almost in the end of those years,
after 62. weeks, to wit, in the midst of that yearly week Messiah should
come in his own person, and be cut of, and killed, and that the Sacrifice
should then cease, and desolation come, and abide for ever upon them.

Now, the Jews plainly know, that the captivity of Babylon was to be ended
before two thousand years were past: and they also know, that both the Temple,
and the City of Jerusalem was wasted, and destroyed by Titus the Roman
Emperor, and that they could never since yet be restored, and repaired. They
must therefore, confess, will they, nil they, (seeing that these 70. weeks are
fully past, and seeing they may with their eyes view, and behold the desolation,
and destruction of their City, which now has continued above fifteen hundred
years, sacked, and desolate,) that Messiah is already come. Neither can they
allege any thing (yt has any face of truth) of any other man that was killed,
or slain, in that last yearly week, but only of Jesus of Nazareth, the true
Messiah, our only Lord, and God. And therefore they have nothing at all but
their obstinate perverse blindness, malice, and hardness of heart to allege,
whereupon they may say, they ought yet to look for the former coming of
Christ.


Anna. I pray you what answer made Isaac Leuy unto you, at Rentzburgh
concerning this prophesy of Danyel, with whom I am sure you spent six hours
or there about, in disputation?


Vrb. He brought out of his Nezacon, a doltish, Nezacon is a book in which all
ye arguments of ye Jews against us Christians ar set down and it signifies
victory
and folish co^putation of years, without any good ground, it was a very
trifling toy, and far more fenceles, and foolish then an old wives tale. For,
the Jews understand no histories: nay, they be further to seek, and more
ignorant in them then children. He could therefore, allege nothing, that had
any face of any thing, but showed him self a very Ass. Verily (to speak a
truth) though he be counted a great doctor with the Jews, I found nothing at
all in him. In deed, I saw there in him, what a horrible plague it is, when God
strikes his enemies with blindness. And, who so ever are so blinded, are in a
most darck night, and thick, and horrible cloud. And then easily, without help
of an interpreter, I understood the words of Paul to the Romans, where he
writes thus of the incredulity, and blindness of the Jews What then? Israel
has not obtained that he sought: Romans 11.7.
but the election has obtained it, and the rest have been hardened, according
as it is written: God has given them the Spirit of slumber: eyes, that they
should not see, and ears, that they should not hear, unto this day.


Anna. God grant that their eyes may be opened, that with us, they may
acknowledge, and confess our Lord Christ.


Vrb. Amen. For, I trust that before the last day many Jews shall be
converted. For, this saying of Paul to the Romans, Romans 11.25 The Jews shall
become christians.
is of some importance: Partly obstinacy is come to Israel, until the fulness
of the Gentiles be come in, and so all Israel shall be saved, as it is written:
The delyuerer shall come out of Syon, and shall turn away the ungodliness from
Jacob. And this is my covenant to them, when I shall take away their sins.


Anna. This prophesy of Danyell sticks still in my mind. And I cannot forget
that last yearly week. For, When the fulness of time was. Gala. 4.4.
it is in deed that most gladsome, and happy time wherein God sent us his only
begotten Son into this world. But I pray you, does Paul call this week, the
fulness of time?


Vrb. Paul does call it so in deed. For, this last week may rightly, and
truly be called the fulness, or fulfilling of time, which God has appointed
for the gracious visitation of the world, into which he sent his only begotten
Son, made of a woman, and made under the law, or subject to the law, Gala.
4.4.
that he might redeem them which were under the law, that we might receue the
adoption of the sons: or, that by adoption we might become children.

Those seventy weeks may also be numbered, and gathered by the time of the high
Priests regiment in Jerusalem, unto the preaching of Christ, and the Apostles.
And we must begin (if we account thus) at the first year of the high Priest
Iehoscua, when he was disinist of Assuerus, and came out of captivity into the
land of Judah. For, Gabryell says in the prophesye of Danyel: that after
Danyell began to pray, the word went out when he prayed for the people in the
first year of Daryus long hand. And, from the first year of Darius long hand
(under whom Iehoscua the high Priest bare office 20. years) to the time of the
Apostles (after the resurrection of Christ, when sin should have an end, and
when iniquity should be blotted out) are found by computation 70. yearly
weeks, that is, 490. years. And thus I gather mine account.

Iehoscua the high Priest, after his return out of captivity, was high Priest
20. years. His son Ioachim was Priest 48. years. Eliasib 21. Ioiadad 24.
Ioathan 24. Iaddua 10. Onias Priscus 27. Simon Priscus 13. Eliazarus 20.
Manasses 27. Symo^ Iustus 28. and Onias 39. years. And after him came Judas
Machabeus, and ruled 5. years. The^ Ionathas his brother 19. Simon 8. John
Hircan 26. Aristobulus 1. John Alexander 27. Alexandra his wife 9. and Hircane
ye last 34. years. And after him reigned Herod by the commandment, and
auctority of the Senate of Rome, This man thruste him self into the Iewishe
kingdom, quite against the Jews will, and he ruled 37. years. And in the 30.
year of the reign of this Herod, Christ lived 33. years, and a half here upon
earth.
was Christ our Savior borne, who lived in this earth 33. years, and a half.
Now gather these years together, and add to them 3. or 4. years more in which
the Apostles preached the gospel of Jesus Christ, after they had received the
holy Ghost on whitsonday, and then shall you find these 70. yearly weeks, to
wit, those 490. years: Of which Daniel speaks in his 9. chapter. But now if
you find seven or eight years overplus: yet is there no cause why you should
doubt. For it happens oftentimes that in registring ye years of kings, some
time one year is taken for two, or two for one. For we see often that the last
year of one king is the first of the next king following. And so it comes to
pass, that in gathering up of years, they call and make one year two.


Anna. Now I understand the words of S. Peter, 1. Pet. 1.10
where he says: Of which salvation the Prophets have inquired and searched,
which prophesied of the grace that should come unto you, searching when, or
what time the spirit which testified before of Christ, which was in them
should declare the sufferings that should come unto Christ, and the glory that
should follow.


Vrb. Peter in deed speaks especially of Daniel, who not only prophesied of
Christ as other prophets did, but has above all other perticularly poynted him
out, because he numbreth the days and years, and shows and sets down the
very time of his coming, prophesiyng how far he was of, or how long it should
be before he came. He also manifestly and clearly describes what should be
the state of the world at yt day, and who should be head ruler in the world, or
where the monarchy should remain, (to wit) that ye Greeks and Persians
kingdom should then be ended, and the kingdom, which was the last should
begin to flourish, so that Christ should come in the time of the Romans rule,
even when they most flourished. This divine and plain prophecy of Christ does
wonderfully confirm our true, and catholic faith: and maruelously, and
soundly comfort our consciences, because we see presently in the world
before our eyes those things finished, which in this prophecy were so
plainly, clearly, and orderly many years ago declared.


Anna. Are there any more textes in the other prophets, which foreshew the
humility, lowly conversation, and former coming of Christ into the world? I
pray you if there be, recite the^, for I long to hear the^.


Vrb. There are many testimonies thereof, both in the Psalms, and Prophets.
But seeing we have to speak of it in other places, as in the article of ye
death and passion of Christ, and else where, I will defer it until such time
as we shall handle those matters.


Anna. Go to then (I pray you) tell me what ye prophets have said of the two
fold nativity of Christ: (to wit) of his eternal, and temporal birth, and
also of his divine nature.


Of the twofold birth of Christ, the one of the father eternal, and of his
true divine nature: and the other temporal, and of his mother Mary, a
perpetual pure virgin.
Vrbanus. I Doubt not but that you remember the prophecy of Michea concerning
the temporal and eternal nativity of Messiah, which we fully declared
before. And therefore I think it needless here to repete it again. There you
heard that Christ is not only a true man, but also very God, and that the
divine and human nature in Christ are united in unity of person. Of the which
unity of person, the godly man Athanasius in his Creed, which he drew out of
the holy scripture, writes very godly, and well: And as he confesses in his
Creed, so with him the whole Catholic church does now think, and believe.


Anna. I pray you recite Athanasius words touching the person of Christ. That
I may confirm my belief in this weighty article of my faith, and therein
think and believe godly and rightly.


Vrb. These be Athanasius words of the son in his godhead, Christ is God.
according to his divine nature and substance. There is one person (says he)
of the father, an other of the son, and another of the holy ghost: but the
godhead of the father, of the son, and of the holy ghost is all one, the
glory equal, the majesty coeternal. The father uncreate, the son uncreate,
and the holy ghost uncreate. The father incomprehensible, the son
incomprehensible, and the holy ghost incomprehensible. The father eternal, the
son eternal, and the holy ghost eternal, yet they are not three eternals,
but one eternal. As also there be not three incomprehensibles, nor three
uncreated, but one uncreated, and one incomprehensible. So likewise the father
is almighty, the son almighty, and the holy ghost almighty: and yet they are
not three almighties, but one almighty. So the father is God, the son is God,
and the holy ghost is God: and yet are they not three Gods, but one God. So
likewise the father is lord, the son is lord, and ye holy ghost is lord: and
yet not three lords, but one lord. For like as we be compelled by christian
verity to acknowledge every person by himself to be God and Lord: so are we
forbidden by the Catholic religion, to say there be three gods, or three
lords. The father is made of none, neither created, nor begotten. The son is
of ye father alone, not made, nor created, but begotten. The holy ghost is of
the father, and of the son, neither made, nor created, nor begotten, but
proceeding. So there is one father, not three fathers: one son, not three
sons: one holy ghost, not three holy ghosts. And in this trinity none is
before, or after other: none is greater nor less then other. But the three
persons: be coeternal together, and coequal. So that in all things (as is
aforesaid) the unity in Trinity, and the Trinity in unity is to be
worshipped. He therefore that will be saved, must thus think of the Trinity.
Furthermore, it is necessary to everlasting salvation, that he also believe
rightly in the incarnation of our lord Jesus Christ. For the right faith is,
that we believe and confess, that our lord Jesus Christ the son of God, is
God and man. God of the substance of the father begotten before all worlds,
and man of the substance of his mother borne in the world, perfect God and
perfect man, of a reasonable soul, and human flesh subsisting. Equal to the
father as touching his Godhead, and inferior to his father as touching his
manhood. Who although he be God and man, yet he is not two, but one Christ. One
not by conversion of the godhead into flesh, but by taking of ye manhood unto
God. One altogether not by confusion of substance, but by unity of person. For
as the reasonable soul and flesh is one man: so God and man is one Christ.
You must thus understand this. These two natures, God and man in their own
substance do not perish, decay, or change: but both of them continue whole
and perfect in Christ, which is but one person and not two. So you hear that
Christ the natural son of God is always continuing in the father, with the
father, and begotten from everlasting of the father, whose eternal generation
can neither be comprehended with reason, nor expressed with words, but is
incomprehensible, and cannot with man's tongue be uttered, as the Prophet Esaias
says: Who shall declare his age? Esaias. 53.8.
Which words the old and godly doctors (as Cyrillus and other more) understood
to be spoken of the eternal nativity of Christ. And the Nicene and
Consta^tinopolitane counsel taught us out of the scriptures to think and
believe of Christ after ye same manner, saying. We believe in one lord Jesus
Christ, the only begotten son of God (that is, of the substance of the
father) begotten of his father before all worlds, God of God, light of light,
very God of very God, begotten, not made, being of one substance with the
father, by whom all things were made, who for us men and for our salvation
came down from heaven, and was incarnate by the holy ghost of the virgin Mary,
and was made man.

Now mark what the perpetual and firm foundation, and undoubted truth of
holy Scripture says, concerning the everlasting nativity of Christ. Solomon
in his Proverbs says thus of Christ's nativity. The Lord has possessed me in
the beginning of his way: Prou. 8.22.
I was before his works of old. I was set up from everlasting, from the
beginning, and before the earth. When there was no depth, was I begotten, when
there were no fountaynes abounding with water, before the mountains were
settled, and before the hills was I begotten. He had not yet made the earth, nor
the open places, nor the height of the dust in the world. When he prepared the
heavens, I was there, when he set the compass upon the deep, when he
established the clouds above, when he confirmed the fountaynes of the depth,
when he gave his decree to the sea, that the waters should not pas his
commandment, when he appointed the foundation of the earth: then was I with
him as a nourisher, and I was always his delight, rejoicing always before him,
and took my solace in the compass of his earth: and my delight is with the
children of men. Cyril. lib. 1. cap. 15. Cypri. against the Jews, li. 2. cap.
2.
The old and sound writers, as Cyril, and Cyprian understood this of Christ:
saying, that Christ was the everlasting word, and the pure wisdom of God the
father, by which he made all things both in heaven and earth. Like as S.
Augustine says in his exposition upon this Psalm. Psalm. 104.24. 1. Cor. 1.30
Col. 1.16. Heb. 1.2.
O Lord how manifold are thy works, in wisdom have thou made them all. And
Paul calls Christ the righteousness and wisdom of God. And says: that by
Christ all things were created, and that God by the son made the world.
Whereupon the Hebrew tongue called him Amon, because he was, and wrought with
his father as a most witty, and excellent workman in framing the heavens and
earth: and by this eternal wisdom the father created all things. But this
wisdom was neither made, nor created: because it is not a creature, but the
creator himself, and yet begotten of the father from everlasting.

And he greatly delights to be with me^. Which thing he plainly declared in
that great work of his saving and holy humanity, which he took upon him for
us. This wonderful great grace and salvation S. Paul calls (...): Tit. 3.4.
Love toward man, because the son of God (although he stood no need of
us) loves us with such an ardent zeal, that for our sake he vouchsafed to
become man, and was like to us in all things, except sin, from which he was
pure. He truly took upon him our nature, that he might be in us, and we have
everlasting life in him.

But I need not bring many proofs and testimonies for the confirming of the
everlasting nativity of Christ. For where so ever the Scripture entreats of
Christ's true Godhead, there does it also firmly, and without question prove
his nativity to have been without beginning. For if he be God, and yet not the
father (as the scriptures do plainly, Christ's eternity.
notablely, and distinctly make difference of the persons by their properties
in Diety, then is he another person, and not God the father, and yet no new,
nor strange God. For, seeing that there is but one eternal God, it cannot be
said, that God the Son is younger then God the Father, as naturally it is
amongst creatures, that the begetter should be before the thing begotten. God
cannot be comprehended in time, but is everlasting, and immutable: and therefore
the son in eternity, must be like the father. So yt, it cannot be said, there
was a time in which the son lived not, and was afterward made. It may be thus
said of creatures, but not of the eternal word, which was before all
beginning, and was with God, and the same word was God, Ioh. 1.3.
and all things were made by it. Therefore, Christ is the only begotten son of
God, as God begotten before all time, the natural son of God, because he
has the same nature, which the father has, who begot him, as Hilary says. We
may make similies, not agreeing in deed in every point to so great a mystery,
yet such, as whereby we may, after a sort, understand these great mysteries as
far forth as man's mind can conceive of them. Well then, to make a simile to
express Christ's eternity with the father: If this visible and corporal
sun in the firmament, had been without beginning, then the bright and
beautiful light of the sun, or the sun beam, which comes and issues
out of the sun into the whole world, had likewise also been without beginning
as well as the sun, and yet the sun should not proceed from the beam, but
the beam from the sun, and the sun never the more should not have been
before the beam, but both together at one instant, and from everlasting.


Anna. I pray you give me some testimonies out of the Scriptures for the
godhead of Christ?


Vrb. When Moses that worthy prophet, by the holy spirit begins his book,
and speaks of ye creation of all things, he makes mention of the son of
God, and calls him the word. Genesis 1.1. The godhead of Christ.
In the beginning (says he) God created heaven and earth. And God said, let
there be light, and there was light, and God saw the light that it was good. In
these words we may first see the person of the father, where Moses says: God
created, God spoke. And afterward we may also see the person of the son. For
he is not only God, but he speaks the word, which word was with God in the
beginning, and is the second person in the godhead. And seeing that God by that
speaking or word, created all things: it follows necessarily, that the
word which he spoke was before all creatures, and that it was also God. And
the word could not be a creature, seeing God by the word in the beginning made,
and created all things. In as much then, as the word was not a creature, and
seeing it was with God the father before all time, and al creatures, when as
yet there was no creature made, it follows of necessity, that the word is
eternal, and true God. For what thing so ever is neither creature, nor
contained in time, nor has beginning, that must needs be true God: seeing
that between God the creator, and the creature there is no mean: but what so
ever has any being, is either uncreated, or created, either ye creator, or
creature: If therefore, ye word which God spoke be no creature (for by the word
al creatures were made, and so the word was the maker of all things made) it
follows that this word must needs be true, and eternal God. Ioh. 1.14.
And this word is the son of God, which in time became man as John says: The
word was made flesh, that is, true and natural man. And the evangelist John
begins his gospel which this text of Moses, where he says thus of the
blessed dietie of Jesus Christ. Ioh. 1.1.
In the beginning was the word, and the word was with God, and that word was
God. The same was in the beginning with God, all things were made by it, and
without it was made nothing that was made. This testimony proves evidently and
strongly, that Christ is true, and natural God: for that word is very Christ
which in time was made flesh.


Anna. I pray you husband do so much as expound these words more plainly, for
they far exceed my simple wit and capacity.


Vrb. Nay, not this article only, but all the articles of our christian faith
far pass, and exceed man's wit and reason. But if you can subdue your reason
to faith, you shall easily perceive, The difference of the belief in heavenly
and worldly things.
and understand them all. For it is not in this respect in spiritual things,
as in worldly matters we first perceive and know a thing in our own reason
before we believe it: But in ye mysteries of the sacred word, the understanding
of these articles proceed of faith, and we must believe before we see the
reason: According to that of Esaias, Esaias. 7.9.
If ye believe not, surely ye shall not be established.

But let us interpret and expound these words, In the beginning, that is,
when the creatures which before were nothing, took their beginning to be
something. For before that beginning of the creatures, there was no beginning.
For as then there was nothing but god alone, who had no beginning, but was from
everlasting. The word was in the beginning. Do thou mark? The godhead of
Christ.
He says not the word begun in the beginning, but he says, when all things
did begin, the word was already before with God. The substance, or essence of
the word took not then his beginning, or began not when other creatures began,
but it was then there present when al things were made, and all things had
their beginning by ye word. And the word was with God, without god there was
nothing: therefore of necessity it must needs follow that the word was with
God. Note diligently, that John says well and plainly, The word was with God.
For he does there plainly and distinctly separate the person of the word, or
of God the son, from the person of God the father. If any thing was with god
before the beginning of creatures, Christ the second person in godhead.
then was he not alone. But what I pray you was with God? the word was with
God, but something to be with God, is not God to be alone. Therefore of
necessity must that word be another person, the^ that God is, with whom it was
in the beginning.

It follows: And God was the word. You know that God says thus in Deuteronomy.
Hear O Israel, Deuteronomy. 6.4.
the Lord our God is Lord only, or is one God. If therefore he be one God, it
follows, that God himself is essentially that same word which was in the
beginning before all creatures: whereby you see that this word in essence, is
God himself, or that God himself is the word. And and thus you see here the
true and natural godhead of Christ. Ioh. 1.14.
For Christ is the word. And again in the 8. of John, where ye Jews said
unto Christ, who art thou? He answered, saying: Verily eue^ the same that I
said unto you from the beginning: (...). etc.

Ioh. 8.25.
This was in the beginning with God, Do you not here see how that in the
beginning ye word was with God, and God was that word? These words do plainly
and clearly prove, yt there is one only nature of gods essence: But not one
only person, and yet nevertheless that person is true God without beginning, and
without ending.

Ioh. 1.3. Christ is God without beginning uncreated.
All things were made by it. These words do sufficiently prove, that the same
word Christ is God, and the maker of all things which are both in heaven and in
earth. If all creatures were made by him, then without all doubt he himself was
not made, neither is to be accounted in the number of things made, all which
had their beginning, and substance of the word.

It follows. Without it was nothing made that was made, as Hierom reads
this text. If then without him nothing was made, how could he be created or made,
without whom nothing was made? By all these it is plain and manifest, that this
word is true God: and yet not of himself, but, of the father: and yet not in
time, but before all time from everlasting, and for evermore without al other
creatures. Seeing therefore yt this eternal word the true and natural son of
God took upon him ma^s nature, and the same is Jesus Christ of Nazareth: then
Christ is true God. These (out of all doubt) are most strong, sound, and
invincible arguments, and undoubted proofs of Christ's divinity against
Sabellius, Arrius, Eunomius, Martion, Manicheus, Valentinus, Eutiches,
Nestorius, Appolinares, and other blinded and bewitched heretics which are
autors of horrible heresies: who while they will open, entreat, or speak of
such great and high matters (which far pass man's capacity) not by the ground,
Reason is to be abandoned in deuinitie.
and certainty of God his word, but by ye fantastical, folish, and erroneous
speculations, and opinions of their own brains, have fallen into horrible and
detestable errors and heresies. It is therefore necessary that we in no wise
admit, and take reason for our guide or ground in this matter, but only follow
the word of God, and with tooth and nail stick to it by faith, and fully
persuade our selves yt that is most true: and by it speak, and judge al we
judge. But if we will refuse and neglect the word, and take upon us by the
sharpenes of our own wit and reason to understand these articles, and by our
senses perceive, comprehend, and measure them: then shall we fall from error to
error, until we be quite gone from the truth.

Well, let us hear more testimonies concerning the godhed of Christ. The 45.
Psalm. 45.6.
psalm describes the deuinitie, humanity, and spiritual kingdom of Christ, and
his promise made to his spouse the Church, notably in these words. Thy throne,
O God (or thy seat) is for ever and ever. The scepter of thy kingdom is a
scepter of righteousness, thou love righteousness, and hate wickedness,
because God, even thy God has anointed thee with oil of gladness above thy
fellows. Hebr. 1.8.
The prophet here calls Christ true God. And this verse does S. Paul recite
to ye Hebrews, where he proves the godhead of Christ. You hear also yt Jesus
is man, whom God anointed more plenteously then his fellows, (that is) endued
him with his holy spirit, and blessed him with many more and richer blessings
then his fellows, to wit, then the beleuers in Christ. This must be understood
of his manhood: for he was anointed according to his manhood, unto ye
everlasting kingdom and priesthood by the holy ghost. Christ according to his
humanity has fellows, who^ in the psalm. he calls brethren. Psalm. 22.22.
Romans 8.29
And Paul to the Romans calls Christ the first borne amongst many brethren. But
he has no fellow according to his godhead, but is the only begotten and
eternal son of God. Christ's rod or scepter.
His rod or scepter is the gospel, with it he reigns and rules, that is,
with the rod of direction, and straight scepter of eternal and true
righteousness, which comes by the gospel, that is, faith in Christ: by which
also we receive the holy spirit, which brings us the right way, not by ye
biewais, and wrong paths of man's doctrine, but by the strait compendious, and
most faithful pathe unto life, true felicity, and God himself.


Anna. May not the Jews here object, that ye godhead of Christ can not be
fully and sufficiently proved by this psalm? seeing that this word Elohim
according to the Analogy of that holy tongue does not only signify God, Psalm.
8. 1. King. 2.
but may be attributed also to Angels and Judges?


Vrb. I confess that this word Eloha may sometimes be attributed unto
creatures: but in this psalm all the circumstances do truly and manifestly
prove, that Elohim betokens here, Esa. 42.8.
only the true, natural, and eternal God, because he says, Lord thy seat or
throne, or thy kingly seat. Do you mark how he speaks here of a seat? This
everlasting kingdom or empire, or this kingly seat cannot belong unto any
creature, but only unto ye true God, who in many places of the scripture says:
I am the Lord. The godhead of Christ.
Therefore Elohim here does signify yt true and everlasting God which has an
eternal seat.

And in this place the godhead of Christ is most evidently and truly proved
against those stifnecked Jews, who are compelled, will they, nill they, to
confess that this psalm speaks of Christ. Paul also proves ye godhead of
Christ by the 2. psalm. Where the father says unto the son. Thou art my
son, this day have I begotten thee. And although all the godly be called in
the scriptures sons of God: yet Christ in this place is ye son of God after
an other sort. We are the sons of God by grace, Tit. 3.5.
and by the washing of the new birth, or ye lauer of regeneration: but Christ
is the true and natural son of God, begotten of the substance of the father
before al worlds, from eternity. And Paul speaking of this prerogative says:
Heb. 1.5.
Unto which of the Angels said he at any time, thou art my son? If he speak
not these words unto any Angels, much less spoke he them to any man. God
created the Angels, and he created us also, and by his word and spirit he has
begot us a new, and by this new birth we are become the children of grace: but
unto Christ he says, this day have I begotten thee. Saint Augustine in his
commentaries upon the 2. psalm. says, that this word this day does signify and
declare the everlasting birth of the son. And although this day set down
there in the prophecy, may be thought to signify the time when Christ was
borne according to his manhood: yet because this day signifies a presence (for
in eternity nothing is so past as though now it were not, neither is any thing
to come, as though it had not already been: For what so ever is from
everlasting, is always: it is understood deuinely, according to this saying,
this day have I begotten thee: whereby our true and catholic faith sets
forth unto us the everlasting generation of the power and wisdom of God, which
is the only begotten son of God. And diverse other godly and holy doctors, as
Arnobius, Hilarious, Cyrillus, Chrysostomus, and many mo understand this verse
thus. Heb. 1.2. Kin. 7.14 or of Samuel.
S. Paul also to the Hebr. recites the words which are in the 2. book of the
Kings, where God the father says thus of Christ, I will be his father, and he
shall be my son. This cannot be properly spoke of Solomon, because God had
promised David a son or seed which should spring out of his own loins. And
the circumstances of ye places do plainly prove that this was spoken of Christ.

But Paul by these words goes about to prove that Christ is a son far
above, and differing from other sons, and that God said this to no angel, much
less to Solomon. How then can this otherwise be, but that Christ must needs be
the natural son of God? For ye adoption and calling of us children which
believe in Christ, is only given us by grace, as John says: Ioh. 1.12. Psalm.
97.7
As many as received him, that is Christ, to them he gave power to be the
sons of God (to wit) to such as believed in his name. Hebr. 6.
And Paul also cites this verse: worship him all you gods, or angels out of
ye psalms. These are his words: And again when he (that is his father)
brings in his first begotten son into the world, he says, and let all the
angels of God honor him. This verse speaks of ye kingdom of Christ, which is
above all things both in heaven and earth, which kingdom is prepared by ye
gospel, by which Christ is made known to the world, and the world is become
his inheritance, which heritage ye father promised to give him in the 2. psalm.
And although the condition of angels amongst all creatures, is of all other
most noble, yet are they commanded to adore this king Christ. But to be
adored, is that honor which is only due unto God, and not unto any other. For
seek ye scriptures, and you shall find that the angels never adored any but God
alone. Paul also to the Hebr. Reave. 19.10
proves ye godhed of Christ out of the 10. psalm. saying: And thou lord in the
beginning have established the earth, Hebr. 1.10. Psalm. 10.
and the heavens are the works of thine hands. They shall perish, but thou
do remain, and they shall wax old as does a garment, and as a vesture shall
thou change, or fold them up, and they shall be changed, but thou art the same,
and thy years shall not fail. The holy ghost teaches us here (as you may see
by his minister Paul) that this psalm in this place speaks of Christ (as may
be gathered both out of the argument, and whole tract of the psalm) to wit, how
that king whom the apostles had preached through all the world, should be
feared of all kings and kingdoms of the world, and that he is God himself, who
framed, and founded both heaven and earth. And although the creatures change
and perish, yet this God abides still in himself, and is immutable and
eternal, but we shall find all these things in Christ. And therefore
undoubtedly he is that true God which is both preached, and feared through the
whole world.

The names also of God, by which the Scriptures speak of God, give us (if we
mark them well) a most firm, and strong argument to prove the deuinity of
Christ. X. names of God.
S. Hierom unto Marcella has noted names by which the scriptures call God. The
first is El, that is, mighty: the 2. Elohim: the 3. Elohe, that is, God: the 4.
Zebaoth, which ye 70. interpreters translated into Greek (...). But the learned
doctor Rabbi Aquila does translate it of Hosts. The scripture uses always to
add this maiestical name Iehoua, Edonai, that is, lord or God. Edonai Zebaoth,
the lord of hosts. 5, Elion, that is, ye most hie: 6. Eheieh Escher, Eheieh,
Exodi, that is, I am yt I am: the 7. Edonai, yt is, lord. 8. Iah: 9. Jehovah.
These two last names do only signify God in his holy, eternal, and unchangeable
essence. The x. name is Schaddai, yt is, strong by himself, or of himself
sufficient, and able to do al things as s. Hierom expounds it. Genesis 17.1
And God calls himself so in Genesis saying: Eni, El, Schaddai, which S.
Hierome translated into latin thus, I the lord all sufficient: But ye 70.
interpreters use for Schaddai, (...), yt is, god. And this translation is true,
though Schaddai in deed signifies almighty, Esaias. 42.8.
and not properly god, yet seeing none is almighty, but only god, their
translation is good.

Now mark what god says in Esa. I am (says he) the lord, or Jehovah, this is
my name, and my glory I will not give to another, yt is, I am the true god.
This name and honor is only due to me, this does belong to me alone and to no
creature. But if now this excellent and hie name Jehovah may be proved by the
prophets to be given properly to Christ, then by an infallible argument and
good consequent is Christ proved to be true God. For it is sure and manifest,
yt this name Jehovah is ye proper, and essential name of god, and signifies
nothing but one true God in his holy essence and majesty, which none of the
other x. names does, but only this name Jehovah and Iah, which Iah in my
judgment, signifies the same yt Jehovah does, for they spring both out of one
root.


Anna. I pray you what is the root of this word Jehovah? whence has it this
wonderful signification?


Vrb. Jehovah comes of this word Hoiah, or Houah, The etymology of Jehovah.
and Houeh, which words in ye Hebrew tongue has ye same signification yt our is
has in english, and is spoken of nothing unless it have a substance, or be
something. You know yt when god would send Moses into Egypt to bring the
children of Israel out of Egypt into ye land of Canaan. Moses speaks unto
god, saying: Exodus 3.13
Behold, when I shall come unto the children of Israel, and shall say to the^,
the God of your fathers has sent me unto you. If they say unto me what is his
name: there god answered unto Moses, saying: Eheieh, Escher, Eheieh, yt is, I
am that I am, and he said, thus shall thou say to the children of Israel,
Eheieh sent me unto you, yt is, I am, has sent me unto you. Here you see
whence this name Jehovah is derived, to wit: from Eheieh. And it is in ye
Hebrew tongue Tetragramaton, which is a word of 4. letters after ye writing of ye
Hebrew, to wit, these, Iod, hoe, uau, hoe, and it signifies being, or he which
is. For god alone (if you speak properly) is such that he has, or boroweth his
being of none other. Al creatures are something, and have a substance, but they
have it not of them selves, but of God the almighty creator, and Eheieh. He
gives all creatures, and things their beings, and he nourishes, fedeth,
comfort and keeps al things. And therefore, Rabbi David Renchi says: the
scripture calls almighty God Iah, because he is the maker of the world, and
the cause of the worlds being. But I will now recite certain places where the
scripture calls Christ Jehovah, that is god: and the^ you shall know why
Christ said in Ioh. to ye Jews. Verily, verily, I say unto you, before Abraham
was, I am. Here he calls himself by that name Eheieh, by which God called
himself, when he talked with Moises in the 3. of Exodus.

David in the 23. psalm, calls Christ the lord of Zeaboth, in Hebrew it is
Iehoua Zeaboth, that is, the God of hosts, or almighty. As s. Hierom writes
upon the 2. of Zach. That the 70. interpreters translated it, (...), that is,
almighty. And the church doubts not that the 24. psalm. was made of Christ,
and that Christ is there called ye lord of Zebaoth. If therefore this name be
given to the alone, true, and natural God, and to none other: then is this
testimony undoubted and most true, yt Christ is true and natural God. Neither
can the Jews though they be never so stifnecked, and hard hearted, allege any
thing here to ye contrary. Christ says in the 2. of Zach. Jehovah Zebaoth, the
Lord of hosts has sent me unto the nations. Here Christ himself (whom God ye
father sent into the world, yt he should not only call the Jews, but also the
Gentiles by ye gospel, unto his everlasting kingdom, and give the^ everlasting
salvation) speaks and calls himself Jehovah Zebaoth, which words signify
almighty God alone. And again Zach. says: and the lord my God or Jehovah shall
come, Zach. 14.5
and all the saints with him or with thee. This also is spoken of Christ, and
of his latter coming to judgment, as s. Hierom says. And the church
understands this place so unto this day, to wit, that Christ our lord Jehovah
shall come with his angels, Mat. 25.31
as it is written in Math. in these words. When the son of man shall come in
his glory, and all the holy angels with him, then shall he sit upon the throne of
his glory. Zach. says: and who so will not come up of all the families of the
earth, unto Jerusalem to worship the king, Zach. 14.17
the lord of hosts, eue^ upon them shall come no rain. The Prophet speaks
this of the^ yt will not believe in Christ, nor acknowledge and worship him in ye
church, for their king, lord, and God. And he says, that he will punish them
with a heavy and horrible plague, to wit, he will take away from the^ the dew of
his holy word, which happened to the Jews, that so they might wither, decay,
and perish.

When I see a Jew, and hear him opening and expou^ding the scriptures, O good
God what misery, and what horrible ignorance do I hear and see? surely man's
tongue can not utter ye miserable darkness yt their hearts are wrapped in, and the
incurable hardness of heart, and lamentable captivity of their errors, in which
Satan mightily holds the^. You have in this prophet diverse places more, in
which Christ is called true God by the name of Jehovah. David also speaks
thus of ye ascensio^ of Christ. Psalm. 46.5
God is gone up with triumph, even the lord or Jehovah, with the sound of the
trumpet. Are not these most plain and sure testimonies of the godhed of
Christ? Psalm. 68.4.
And again he says, Prepare the way for him that rides upon the heavens, as
it were upon an horse, his name is the lord, or Iah, and rejoice ye before him,
or exalt him that rides upon the heavens in his name Iah, and rejoice before
him. In this psalm David speaks again of Christ, which place the holy ghost
by s. Paul to ye Ephesians. expounds of Christ. Ephesians. 4.8.
And here again is the essential name of God set down in this psalm^ For the
Hebrew words are these. Solu, Iorocheb, Baeraboth be Iah, Schmo. And here (as
you see) is set down the right name of God Iah, which has the same
signification that Jehovah has, that is God. Esa. 33.21.
And Esaias says: The lord or king Jehovah is our judge, Jehovah is our law
giver, Jehovah the lord is our king, he will save us. Here Christ is three times
called God, which is not so plain in ye common translation. For in ye common
translation Jehovah is translated lord, which word is general, and common to al
those which have power and rule or government of any others. But Jehovah is the
proper name of God alone, neither is it general or common to others, as this
word dominus is with the Latins. The prophet prophesied of the state and
condition of the christian church, to wit, how it should have great peace, and
tranquillity and quietness, under our lord Christ. And he adds this (...),
because ye church shall have god himself to be her judge, law giver and king,
who also will be our help and aid. He is our judge not to co^demn us, but help
us, and save us from the ungodly, whose judge he also is after another sort.
Psalm. 2.12.
As is described in the 2. psalm. saying: Lay hold on discipline (or kiss the
son) least he be angry, and ye perish in the way when his wrath shall suddenly
burn. The^ shall his judgment and wrath wax hot only against ye unbelieving
and ungodly, but when he speaks of us, yt believe in Christ, he says: Blessed
are al they that trust in him. He is our law giver, but far differyng from
Moses. Who gave ye law of god to ye Jews in tables of stone, but could not
make his people by ye law righteous. For he could not give power and strength
to do and perform ye law. But our law giver both teaches us what is right and
holy, Eze. 36.26.
and also gives us a new heart, and his holy spirit, as he promises by Ezec.
The finger of god writes his law in our hearts, 2. Cor. 3.3 Ier. 31.33.
yt we may with joy and pleasure do ye will of ye lord. He is also our king, for
he rules us in spirit and truth, and defends us. And his holy spirit
comforts us, as Esa. says: Fear not, for thou shall not be ashamed, neither
shall thou be confounded. For thou shall not be put to shame. Esa. 54.4.
For he that made thee is thy husband, whose name is the lord of hosts, and
thy redemer, the holy one of Israel shall be called the God of the whole
world. He speaks this of Christ and his church. Paul says to ye Ephesians.
Christ is the husband of ye church. And here again he calls him Jehovah
Zebaoth, Ephesians. 5.23.
(yt is) God almighty. And afterward he calls him by another of the names of
God, Elohe, which also signifies god. And this prophesy is fulfilled eue^ from
ye apostles time unto this day, and is now also daily in fulfilling. For all ye
godly beleuers in Christ Jesus, do in one spirit and faith confess through ye
whole world, yt Jesus of Nazareth is our lord Christ, and very true God to be
lauded and praised for ever. Amen. The scripture is full of these testimonies
of yt name of Jehovah. Let us therefore hear more. Esaias says: This is our God,
Esa. 25.9.
we have waited for him, and he will save us, this is the lord Jehovah, we have
waited for him, we will rejoice and be joyful in his salvation. This prophesy
does properly appertain to Messiah. He shall destroy death for ever: and then
shall ye church in ye time of ye new testament say, Jesus of Nazareth is our
God, who only will bring us health and salvation. For now this doctrine or
preching, to wit: that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners, is
spread abroad through ye whole world. 1. Tim. 1.15
And Pet. says: We believe through the grace of the lord Jesus Christ to be
saved, Act. 15.11
eue^ as our fathers did believe. And Esa. says: Be ye strong, fear not,
behold your God comes with vengeance, Esa. 35.4
even God with a recompense, he will come and save you. Cypr. 2. li. cap. 6
This prophecy speaks also of Christ. Whereupon Cypr. cites it against ye
Iues. For ye prophet by and by recites those miracles which Messiah should
work here upon earth. Who be the poor in spirit.
And ye holy ghost here commands all the preachers to comfort the poor in
spirit, to wit, all those which truly repent and are heartily sorry for their
sins, and which are amazed and stricken down, and quake at ye wrath and
judgment of God. And he bids them preach unto the^ diligently the gospel,
ye glad tidings of the lord: saying, yt god himself does come to take vengeance
of his enemies, and to deliver us from the tira^ny of our sins. As it came to
pass in the fulness of time, when the only begotten son of god came into this
earth unto us in his own person, and took upon him man's nature, and suffered
death for our sins upon the cross, and rose again from death, and thereby
satisfied for our trespasses, and delivered us from our sins and death.

This was done by none other but by Jesus Christ of Nazareth ye true son of
God, who at the time appointed became man, and therefore he is called by this
most worthy and comfortable name, Mat. 1.25.
by which ye prophets called him long before. And ye angel in Math. names him
Ieschuah or Jesus. It is also worthy noting, and full of comfort, yt where
these prophets speak of ye help, by which we are delivered from our sins,
there they use ye very root or Schoresch, from whence this most comfortable
name Jesus is derived. As Esa. in the 25. says, the prophet Ioschienu, and in
the 35. he says, Ioschaechem. And these words come of Ioscha and Hoschia,
which is, delivered, to help, to redeem. Ier. 23.
Iere. fore-speaketh of Christ's kingdom, and calls him ye true bra^ch of
David. And he adds, he shall be called Jehovah of our righteousness, that is
the name by which they call him our just God. The doctors of ye Jews
themselves, as Rabbi Kimchi and other confess, yt the prophet speaks here of
Christ, and of his kingdom. And Thargu^ says: Akemle David Meschiah de Zadika
ia, yt is, I will raise up or bring forth a Messiah for David, which is Christ
the righteous. Here God promised to David long after ye death of David a stock
or branch of righteousness, which should set up true rightousnes. This branch, is
Christ. And there he tells what his name should be, and he calls him by the
name of god. For he sets down yt holy name Jehovah. This testimony does
convince ye wicked Iues and damned Arrians of a devilish heresy: And it soundly
declares, that Christ is not only true man borne of the stock of David after
the flesh, but also the only true and natural god.


An. I remember yt you were wont oftentimes to say, yt amongst the brief and
short sentences of the holy scripture, you never had more ready and perfect
help, and comfort by any then by these words. Our righteous God, or Christ the
God of our righteousness. You say yt this sentence is your most precious iuel,
which ye would not change with many millions of worlds, if there were so many
worlds. For you say it is the pith of ye whole gospel. Wherefore I pray you
good husband expound and open me the same with all diligence, that I may also be
partaker of that rich treasure and precious iuell. For all things ought to be
common between us, seeing that which is yours, is also mine.


Vrb. Phil. 3.7.
Why might I not say with Paul. Those things that were va^tage unto me, the same
I counted loss for Christ's sake, yea doubtless I think all things but loss,
for the excellent knowledge sake of Christ Jesus my lord. Note that Paul here
flies to the faith, and refuses his own righteousness and merits.
For vvho^ I have accounted all things loss, and do judge the^ to be dong,
that I might vvin Christ, and might be found in him, that is not, having mine
own righteousness which is of the law, but that which is thorovv the faith
of Christ, even the righteousness which is of God thorovv faith, that I may
know him and the virtue of his resurrection. I have had no affliction, no
grief, no wound of heart, though it were very bitter, in which this saying of
Ier. did, and could not comfort and refresh me. For what storm of temptation
soever assaileth me, Christ the God of our righteousness, is a comfortable iuell.
what tempest of affliction soever rises and rages upon me, when my sins vex
me, when ye horrors of death shake me, and when ye pains of ye everlasting
lake be present before me, and appear in my mind: by and by I run hither, and
in this iuel I find yt only heroical helper, which both will and can deliver me
from al perils and dangers. For he is yt true God Jehovah. Learn here what to
do in temptation, and ye danger of desperation.
He became also true man, yt he might bear my offenses, die for my sins, and
give himself and all yt ever he had for me. When my conscience begins to
despair, and says, how wilt you stand before God? and how wilt you escape
everlasting death? thou art a sinner, and the stipend and wages of a sinner is
nothing else but wrath, ire, affliction and torment, both in this life, and in
the life to come? When I am thus I say, shaken with these forceable and violent
temptations, I run to this saying, my iuel and sacredanker. This saying, is my
sword, my complet harnes, my chief armor, and my strong tower of defense, and
then I burst forth into these words, and say, I co^fes it is true (ah alas) it
is to to true, yt I am a miserable sinner as far as belongs to my self and my
own person, and therefore have I deserved very sharp punishment, but God
promised to send us sinners a bud of righteousness, but of the stock of David,
Christ our righteousness.
and that he should be God and also our righteousness. And he has long since
performed this his promise made unto sinners, in that he gave and sent his
son to us, that he might be our righteousness, 1. Cor. 1.30
which words Paul uses respecting only this posy. Wherefore although I know my
self most guilty of many diverse heinous and heavy sins, yet will I not
discourage my self or despair. For in sacred baptism I have put on Christ our
salvation given of god, by whom he has both promised and given unto us
everlasting life. That Christ out of all doubt is holy enough. And seeing he is
mine, although I be never so laden with sin: yet for all that, in as much as
I have repented, and do repent me heartily of my sin, and seeing that I do
lament that ever I sinned, I have sufficient to answer my sins, to wit, that
everlasting righteousness, even Christ himself with his passion and
resurrection, which is freely given me of God. Christ our propitiatory
Him may I set forth to answer the heavy and grievous wrath of God, and behind
him as a true propitiatory, may I hyde, and shroud my self, and so be and
remain untouched either of sin, death, or Satan. For the innocence and
righteousness of Christ is infinite, everlasting, invincible: yea it is more
mighty then all the sin of man: and able to answer for all sin if there were
a thousand mo worlds of sin. His life was such, so proper, and so passing
forceable and mighty, yt it got the victory over death, sin and hell. To be
brief, no tongue can tell, nor heart think, what treasure, what riches, and what
wealth it is to us, that Christ the true and natural son of God is become
our righteousness. If he had been righteous and holy for himself alone, then had
it profited us nothing. But now seeing he needed not be righteous for himself,
but is become righteous for us: who I pray you, if we believe this faithfully,
and if we persuade our selves herein certainly, ca^ hurt us? who can make us
afraid? or what can make us despair? nay, may not we with Paul holily triumph,
glory, and say. If God be with us, Romans 8.31.
or on our side, who can be against us? who spared not his own son, but gave
him for us all to death, how shall he not with him give us all things also? who
shall lay any thing to the charge of gods chosen? it is God that justifies, who
shall conde^n? it is Christ which is dead (for us) yea, or rather which is risen
again, who is also at the right hand of God, and makes request also for us?
Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? Behold how full of heart, how
proud in holiness, and how courageous this sentence made s. Paul? Lo what
strength, and what stomach it ministers unto him, in so much, yt he feared
himself nothing, but stood stoutly vndiscouraged with any evil or temptation?
may not we the^ likewise recreate and solace our selves therein? If Christ be
our righteousness (as he is in deed) then must needs all our sins be forgeuen
us, and then God himself accounts us righteous, for Christ's sake. For before
this righteousness of his, can no sin remain, but must needs be quenched out,
even as a little spark of fire is put out in the great sea. The death of the
godly is but a sleep.
And if our sins be blotted out, then is death also so choked, that the death
of the godly is but a sleep, and a ready way unto immortallity: and then has
Satan no more power over us, but we being clothed with ye righteousness of
Christ, are become the sons of God, and shall with Christ inherit everlasting
life.

Chrysostom says upon John. 2. Who so ever has Christ, has all wealth and
treasure. For he has perfect holiness, which he may set against the law and
judgment of God, true life to set against death, and everlasting salvation
against damnation: As Paul says. Christ is the end or fulfilling of the law
for righteousness unto every one that believes: Romans 20.4
who so believes in him is righteous. Paul took such a holy pride, and trust
in these words of Iere. that he was not afraid to jest at death, sin, and
the devil, 1. Cor. 15.55.
saying: O death where is thy sting? O grave (or hell) where is thy victory?
The sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin is the law. But thanks
be unto God which has given us victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. Lo,
Christ as you see is our righteousness, and his righteousness and victory over
sin, death, and hell, is given unto us, that it may be our own, and that we
may challenge it by right for our own. O would to God yt all which do profess
the name of Christ did thoroughly understand and believe this.


Anna. O how happy were we, if these so excellent and precious words of God
were so depely printed in our minds, yt we could surely ground them in our
hearts. This saying hereafter shall also be my iuell. And God grant me faith,
that I may ever keep it in my heart. Ame^. Ier. 23.6.
But why do you translate these words Edonai zid kennu, the lord of our
righteousness, or the lord our righteousness, and not rather our righteous God as
the common translation has it?


Vrb. Some do read it, our righteous God, but seeing S. Hierom reads it out of
the Hebrew, ye God of our righteousness, I had rather follow him. For so is it
fuller, and has more force to make us know Christ, and to comfort us. And so
has the holy ghost by s. Paul translated it, saying: 1. Cor. 1.30
Christ of God is made unto us wisdom and righteousness, and sanctification, and
redemption: He that reioiceth, let him rejoice in the Lord. Christ is also
called God in other places, as in Esaias: where ye prophet calls Christ El,
whereof comes Emanuel, or Immanuel. Esa. 9.6. Esa. 7.14. Mat. 1.23. Esa. 7.
and 9.
Which words the holy ghost expounds in Math. God with us. For El signifies
God, and although it does properly signify strong, yet in Esa. it signifies
the true and natural God, who of himself is stro^gest of al, yea, very strength
it self. The 70. interpreters translated it, ye mighty God. Christ is also
called God, in Zach. who says: And he showed me Jehovah the high priest,
standing before the angel of the lord, and Satan stood at his right hand to
resist him. And the lord said unto Satan, the Lord reprove thee. This angel and
Jehovah, or God, Christ called an angel Esa. 9.
is the only begotten son of God, who appeared to the prophet in the form
of an angel, and is often called an angel, as Esa. The angel of the great
counsel. (For he was sent into the world by the everlasting counsel of the
holy trinity.) This angel Christ is here called by ye proper name of our true
and natural God, that is, Edonais or Jehovah.

And thus you see by these plain and manifest words, that Christ is very true
and natural God. I might bring more places out of holy scripture like unto
these, where Christ is plainly and simply called God: but you shall find them
in reading your self. There are also many testimonies by which the godhed of
Christ is plainly declared, although this name God be not alwais expressly set
down. For the circumstances, do mightily prove that even he, of whom the
scripture in that place speaks, is true God, as God says in Esaias. Esa. 43.11
I, even I am the Lord, and beside me there is no savior. Here God himself
says, that there is none other Moschiam, deliverer, or savior, but only he.
And this name Savior, both in the old and new testament, is alwais attributed
only unto Christ. It follows therefore, that Christ is true God, or Jehovah.
And this testimony proves the godhead of Christ, as well as if in plain and
manifest words he had been called God. For when we write or speak of the
prince of any country or province, then it is all one whether we say here
stands ye right lord, heir, and governor of this country, or here stands
he to whom this land or province belongs, or to whom this region is subject
by the commandment of God. If therefore the whole country or dukedom belong to
none other but to the ruler thereof only, then is the meaning of both the
sentences one. If there be none other savior but only God, and yet Christ is
our alone savior (as the scripture says he is) then must it needs follow that
Christ is God.

Ier. 17.5. Romans 9.33.
The scripture also says in Jeremy. Cursed be the man that trusts in man. And
Paul says: He that believes in him (that is, Christ) shall not be ashamed, or
confounded. And John says, Ioh. 3.18.
He that believes in Christ shall not be condemned. All the whole Gospel
requires faith in Christ. Faith is a work of the first commandment, which
is due to none, but only to the sole and true God. If therefore we must believe
in Christ, as we daily say when we repeat the christian creed (I believe in
Christ our lord, etc.) It follows yt he is true God. For if he had not been
true God, ye scripture would never have commanded us to honor him as God: But
seeing yt the scripture commands us to honor him as god, it must needs be
that he is God. Ioh. 5.21.
As Ioh. says: The father has committed all judgment unto the son, because
that al men should honor the son, as they honor the father. But the father
is honored in faith, love, fear, hope, and invocation. For we believe in him,
love him, fear him, put our whole trust in him, and call upon him, and such
like. This is the honor due to God only. But the son must be honored after
the same manner, and therefore he is very God. Many such reasons may be
gathered, as we read in Hilary, Ambrose, and Augustine, but specially in Cyril.
in those 14. famous books which he entitled, the treasure against the Arrians.

There is also a testimony of Christ's godhed, Esa. 11.10.
in the 11. of Esaias, where the Hebrew text is thus. The nations shall seek unto
it, or shall make inquisition after it, that is, Christ. The 70. interpreters
have thus translated it, the Gentiles shall trust in him (yt is, in Christ.) He
speaks here of the root Isai or Iesse (that is, Christ) which thing must
needs be confessed, because none can deny it. If then the Gentiles must put
their trust in him: and yet must we trust in none but the true God, because
none but he can, or will save us, it follows by a consequent, that Christ is
very God. The Evangelist S. John is full of such arguments, whereby the godhead
of Christ may be proved by his divine works. Ioh. 5.21.
Like as the father raises up the dead and quickens the^, so the son
quickens whom he will. Whereby it is plain, that the son is God. For to
raise up ye dead to life, is a work of an infinite power, which none can do
unless he be true God. But seeing that Christ raises up the dead to life, by
his own power, as well as the father, it follows yt he is true God. It is also
said in John: Ioh. 5.19.
What so ever thing the father does, the same does the son also. Whereby is
proved that the father and the son, are both of one essence, nature, and
power. Therefore the son is true God, and does as well create as the father.
And in the same chap. As the father has life in himself, so likewise has he
given to the son to have life in himself. We creatures have life, but not of
our selves. For it is given us of God by grace. But the heavenly father has
life in himself, so yt he himself is essentially life it self, neither has he
taken it of another, neither gave he life so unto ye son, as he gives it
unto creatures, as though he had not had it before, or as though he had been
without it, and afterward received it of his father as other creatures do, nay,
there was no such giving. For ye son in his godhed has not his life after yt
sort, but ye father begot him from everlasting of his own substance and
essence. And thus the father borrowed his substance of none. And whatsoever the
son is, or has, the same he is, and has of the father. The father who is
very life in himself, begot the son, who also in like manner is very life in
himself, as s. August. says: And Christ is the very son of God, John. 11.25
therefore true God. And so says Christ in Ioh. I am the resurrection and the
life. Whereby it follows, yt Christ is true God. For he is life in deed, and
makes the dead to live: which thing is not ye work of a creature, but only of
God. And Christ says in the x. of John: John. 10.18
I have power to lay down my life, and have power to take it again. Which
thing he did on Easter day, when by his own proper power and might, he rose
from the dead. This is the work of God, and he attributes and takes it to
himself. For he says: I have power, etc. We also shall rise again, but we
have no power to raise up our selves, as Christ raises himself: but he through
his own proper strength and virtue, does raise us up.

Christ also is omnipotent, but none but God is omnipotent, therefore Christ is
God. Paul proves his almighty power to the Phil. where he says: Christ shall
change our vile body, Phil. 3.21.
that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body, according to the
working: whereby he is able even to subdue all things to himself. Zach. 12 10.
Therefore must he needs be almighty, and so of necessity true God. God says
in Zachary: I will pour upon the house of David, and upon the inhabitants of
Jerusalem the spirit of grace, and of compassion, and they shall look upon me
who^ they have perced.

Here God speaks. For to give the holy ghost, is the very office of God. And
the same only Lord God says: He was nailed on the cross, and pierced through
the side. And did not the very same happen unto Christ hanging upon the cross?
John says: One of the soldiers with a spear pierced his side, John. 19.34
and forthwith came there out blood and water. Seeing that God and man is one
person in Christ: therefore does the Scripture, because of the unity of
person, use this phrase or manner of speaking, 1. Cor. 2.8.
as Paul says to the Corinthia^s. They would not have crucified Christ, the
Lord of glory. Whole christ suffered.
For the person of Christ is not to be divided, or sundered. We must not say,
man Christ suffered for us, man Christ was slain for us, but God, and man,
that one person, the Lord of glory, and majesty, was crucified, and dyed for us.

The Godhead or deuinitie of Christ is every foot in the new Testament proved
and confirmed out of the ground of the old Testament. Paul in the Acts
says: Take heed therefore unto your selves, Act. 20.28.
and to all the flock, whereof the holy ghost has made you overseers, to feed
the church of God which he has purchased with his own blood.

Bid says in his Commentaries on these words: Paul is not afraid to call
it, the blood of God, for the unity which is in the two natures of our Lord
Jesus Christ. Wherefore he is called also, the son of man which is in heaven.
Let therefore that Nestorian heretic cease to separate the son of man from
the son of god, and let him not make to himself two Christ's. John Baptist
says thus concerning Christ. John 1.34.
I saw and bare record, that he is the son of God.

Let us note here that which Cyrill notes upon John, to wit, (...).
that the Greek article does declare the person Christ to be the very son of
God, after a peculiar sort. We are the children of God adopted by grace: but
Christ is the only true and natural son of God, begotten of the substance
of the father, who was prefigured and set down in the types of Moses law,
who also was prophesied of by the Prophets.

God so loved the world, that he has given his only begotten son, that
whosoever believes in him, John. 3.16.
should not perish, but have everlasting life. Saint Cyril says upon these
words. He gives forth in these words, that he is true God by nature. For it
must needs be, that the only begotten son of God, being like to the father
must also be God, who has not only the external honor of childhoode, as we
have, but is in deed the very same which he is said to be. Christ also in
Ioh. said unto the Jews: John. 10.29
None is able to take the^ (my sheep) out of my fathers hands: I, and my
father are one: for which saying, the Jews being about to stone him, said:
Thou being a man, make thy self a God. Here the Jews plainly understood, yt
when Christ called God, his father: and when he said, I, and the father are
one, yt then he called himself true God, and the natural son of God, who is
like to his father, as s. Augustine says upon these words. Ioh. 20.28
And Thomas simply calls Christ God, saying: Thou art my lord and my God.
Here again s. Cyril admonishes us to note these words well, as they were
written in the Greek tongue, in which the new testament was written. The Greek is
thus: (...). Both the words lord and God, have their proper articles. Whereupon
it may easily be gathered and understood, that Christ is not called lord or
God, as ye angels, and men in office and authority are called gods, but after
another proper and peculiar sort: for he is ye true and natural God. But it
would be long to repeat all that is in John concerning this matter. And this I
tell you, that all the gospel of John, almost every chap and verse is nothing
else, but a testimony of Christ's Godhed. Wherefore my council is, yt you highly
esteem Ioh. gospel, that you heartily love it, and that with all diligence you
read it, and read it again. Romans 1.2
Paul says, that god had promised his gospel before by his prophets in the holy
scriptures, concerning his son Jesus Christ our lord And here after a
peculiar sort, he calls Christ the son of God, Romans 9.5.
even his natural son. And he says, that Christ concerning the flesh, came
of the ancient fathers, who is God over all, Tit. 2.13.
blessed for ever, Amen. We look for that blessed hope, and appearing of the
glory of the mighty God, and of our savior Jesus Christ. And to the Phil. he
says: Phil. 2.6.
Christ being in the form of God, thought it no robbery to be equal with god,
but he made himself of no reputation, and took unto him the form of a
servant, and was made like unto men, Col. 2.9.
and was found in shape as a man. And to the Col. In Christ dwells the fulness
of the godhead bodily. That is, as Theophilact expounds it substantially, or
essentially: so that God and man are one person, and not two sons of god, but
one son of God, one Christ. ^. Ioh. 2.20.
And Ioh. says, We are in him that is true, yt is, in his son Jesus Christ.
This same is very God and eternal life. There are many mo testimonies of
Christ's true godhead. But seeing it would be great trouble, and also ask long
time, to speak of them al, I pray you at this time be content with these.


Anna. You have alleged sufficient testimonies concerning Christ's divinity,
and I have oftentimes heard you in many and long sermons thoroughly ground and
prove it: but you have never done, you make no end, if you once begin, and
have occasion and opportunity to speak of this doctrine and article.


Vrb. Some me^ (little conversant in heavenly things) perhaps will think that I
have spoken many needles words, and labored long about a little. But take you
good head (my wife) that you have no such cogitation, think not this a light
matter, and hear it not so, yt it go in at the one ear, and run out at ye
other: but learn it perfectly, and digest it inwardly. For ye godhed of Christ
Jesus, is ye most high and necessariest article to be known in all deuinitie,
which the devil (ye wicked spirit, the father of lies) has gone about in his
members to take from us, and to destroy ever since ye apostles time. He assaied
it by yt wicked and ungodly heretic Cerinthus, in John the Evangelists dais,
and afterward by other of his ministers, the bewitched and blind enemies of
piety, as Arrius, Euzoius, Achilla, Eunomius, and Paulus Samosaten: and he
does now assail it by yt folish and fanaticall sect of Anabaptists. Mark
therefore and observe diligently this, A necessary point of faith.
that no man can be justified and saved, unless he believe yt God himself
became man, and that ye everlasting word which was with God his natural son,
took man's nature upon him at ye time appointed, and is not a creature, but
true God, ye almighty creator. He which does not believe this, must needs die,
and perish in his sins eternally. For he has not the true life, to wit, this
everlasting word, ye son of God, without which there is no true life. For in
him only is life. If Jesus Christ were only man, and not God, so that the
manhood of Christ were only a person of himself without God, the^ could he not
deliver us from sin, death, and hell, though he himself were never so holy
and free from sin: neither had the prophesies been fulfilled, which witness
(though in hidden mysteries, and figures, yet in sure, infallible, proper, fit,
plain, and manifest words) that God himself should become man. But behold
here (I pray you) the crafty subtleties and deceites of yt wicked and devilish
seducer Satan: Satan goes chiefly about to deceive us in the unity of Christ's
person. He that seeks God without Christ, finds him not in mercy.
who (because he knew, that God could not be found without this humanity of
Christ, but only in ye humain nature of Christ, and else not) goes about to
seduce and wrap men in this error, that they should not believe Christ to be
true God, to the end that poor sinners should seek God without Christ, and so
never find. He which is in this error, and is seduced by this misbelief,
thinking Christ to be only man, and not true God, he has no Christ, he has no
savior, he has no deliverer, no redemer, no life, and to be brief, no God.
For he faineth to himself a Christ, which is no Christ, who can neither help
him, nor deliver him: and he seeks god without Christ, where he will not be
found. Whereupon it follows, that such a man which thus seeks God, The
devils chief desire.
cannot escape everlasting damnation. And this Satan chiefly trauaileth, this
he endeuoreth, and at this mark does he altogether shoot, that by that means
he may cast us into everlasting perdition, and destroy us. Look therefore unto
your self, the world draws to an end: these be the last days, the
dissolution of al things is even at hand, and Satan sees that his judgment
and comdemnation is very nigh, and therefore he bestirreth him, he finds all
means he may, he deuiseth all ways he can, and he uses all ye force he has,
to hurt Christ and Christians: yea, he goes about by his force and erroneous
doctrine, to seduce all yt are baptized in Christ, and to entise them from
Christ, and to bring the^ into utter danger of their souls. Of all things he
cannot abide the sound and pure doctrine of Christ. And therefore it stands us
upon to watch, and daily and hourly to exercise prayer, and reading of the
holy scriptures.


Anna. All laud and glory be unto God for ever. Now I see by the grace and
goodness of God, how much it avails us well and thoroughly to know this article,
and to print it in our hearts, and I will do my diligence to make our children
perfect therein. O good God, how much lies upon this article? and what a iuell
is it truly to believe the godhed of Christ? It were better to forswear and
deny al ye creatures in heaven and earth: yea, it were better to die a 1000*
deaths, then once to doubt but even one jot of the godhed of Christ. But go to
and prove yt other nativity of Christ which was temporal, in that he was true
man, and borne of Mary, who remained a pure virgin after his birth?


Vrb. You have already before heard somewhat of Christ's temporal nativity,
Christ's second nativity.
where we spoke of ye tribe of which Christ should come, and of Mary the
blessed mother of God. And I expounded the 17. chap. of Esaias, where it is said,
yt Jesus the son of Mary, should be called Immanuel, that is, God with us: as
also the prophecy of Mich. Now we have more of this nativity in the 9. of
Esa. The words are these. For unto us a child is borne, and unto us a son
is given, and the government is upon his shoulder, and he shall call his name
wonderful, counsailor, the mighty God, the everlasting father, the prince of
peace, the increase of his government, and peace shall have none end: he
shall fit upon the throne of David, and upon his kingdom to order it, and to
establish it with judgment, and with justice, from hence forth even for ever:
the zeal of the lord of hosts will perform this.

In this prophesy of Christ is set forth both his temporal nativity,
ministry, kingdom, and also the order of the whole government of his kingdom.
First he says: unto us a child is borne, and unto us a son is given, that we
may know that this birth of Christ, That Christ and all yt Christ is ours.
with all that Christ is, has, or does, (thorough the fatherly good will of
God) is ours, and done for the health, commodity, salvation, and use of us
poor sinners, which are borne in this world of the flesh, sinful, and
ungodly, children of wrath, and miserable offenders, even from our mothers
womb, and therefore most worthy of everlasting damnation. But here is borne
such a son, whose nativity is holy, and pure, full of blessedness, and
salvation, and he is borne for our sakes, (to wit) that he may help us, and
bring us health, and all true happiness, and that by him we may be cleansed,
newborn, justified, and preserved from the spots and filthy staynes, which
we had in our first nativity of Adam. Like as the church in Germany, has now
a great while song on Christmas day.

Ein kindelein so lobelich is it vns geborn heute, von eyner Iunckfrawen
seuberlich zu trost vns armen leuten, were vns das kindelein nicht geborn, The
christmas caroll at Geneua.
so weren wir alzumal ver lorn, das heil is it vnser all. Eia du sysser Jesus
Christ, das du mensch geborn bist, behijt vns fijt der hell, etc.

That is, a child most highly to be praised, and yet never as he deserves, is
this day borne of an unspotted virgin, for ye comfort of us miserable men:
where as if this child had not been borne for us, we had all utterly perished,
for he was borne for the help, health, and deliverance of us all. Wherefore
most sweet Jesus Christ our child most comfortable, (which for our sakes humbled
thy self, and vouchsafed to be made man) we beseech thee to deliver and defend
us from ye tyranny of the devil.

This is the meaning of this Germains song, which I here recite, because it
contains and expresses ye effect of this prophecy, in full, grave, and
plain words, and because it shows the piety of our forefathers, and their
true faith in Christ. First, here the holy church says, yt a child was borne
for a special comfort for all mortal me^. And furthermore it says, that for us
and for our sakes, he was borne. For he had no need, neither was there any
cause why he should be born for himself. For what need stands god of any
creature? Secondly, ye church here declares and sets forth the fruit and
use of Christ's nativity, to wit, our salvation. For unless this child had been
borne for us, we had abidden still in our sins, neither could we have
delivered our selves, but had all died eternally. Thirdly, the church
confesses, that this savior or salvation happened to all: which thing Simeon
confesses in Luke, Luke. 2.30.
saying: Mine eyes have seen thy salvation, which thou have prepared before
the face of all people: 1. Tim. 2.6.
to be a light to lighte^ the Gentiles, and to be the glory of thy people
Israel. And Paul says: Christ Jesus gave himself (...), a ransom for all
men. Fourthly, the church, speaking of the kingdom and power of Christ,
confesses the true manhood, and godhead of the child Jesus, beseching him and
desiring him for his names sake (which is Jesus, that is our savior, or
deliverer) that he would preserve and keep us from eternal death. By which song
the church confesses, this child to be king, and most mighty lord over sin,
death, and hell. Which seeing it is true, it must needs follow, that he is true
God, and that our health and salvation is in his hand and power, and that he
only can and will save, and deliver us from hell fire.


Anna. What means this which this prophet Esaias says, his government or
kingdom is on his shoulders?


Vrb. Did you never see the image of the child Jesus painted, as if he went
down from heaven unto Mary, bearing the cross upon his shoulders?


Anna. I have seen it often, but that signifies his passion. What other thing
did he bear in his cross, but us miserable and wretched sinners, 1. Pet. 2.14
Ioh. 1.29.
and the heavy burden of our sins. John says: This is the lamb of God which
takes away the sins of the world. He is ye good shepeherd, which sought the
lost and wandering sheep, Luke 15.4.
and having found it, carried it home upon his shoulders. We also are the
kingdom or principality of Christ. For Peter calls us a royal priesthood.
(...), 1. Pet. 2.9.
yt is, a people redeemed, or peculiar unto Christ. Christ is that (...), Mat.
2.42. Psalm. 118.22.
the chief corner stone (or to be placed in ye chief corner) upon whom all
the other stones, the spiritual building, to wit, the whole church stands,
and leans. For the church is builded on Christ, Ephesians. 2.20.
as on a most sound and sure rock.

The Calde text is in this place of Esaias thus: He (that is, this child) shall
take upon him the law that he may fulfill and keep it. This text out of doubt
has in it notable comfort. For our corrupt and sinful nature, Romans 8.3.
could not with all her strength keep the law of God. For it is a law yt
commands such high and great things as homo (...), the natural man cannot
perform. And therefore God sent his derely beloved son Christ Jesus, yt he
might fulfill the law, and be the fulfilling thereof to all yt truly believe in
him, who, although they should be most miserable sinners, yet for Christ's
sake, should they be accounted as righteous before God, as if they themselves
by their own righteousness had fulfilled it, and that he might deserve for us,
and give us the holy ghost, which might heal, reform, and restore our
wounded, decayed, and corrupted nature, so that even our nature also might by
the spirit of Christ keep the law, without which it could never have done it.

6. comfortable names of Christ. 1. Pele, yt is wonderful.
Now follows vi. most notable, and worthy names, or titles of the child Jesus
used in this prophecy. First he is called Pele, that is admirable, wonderful,
merueilous, or doing merueilous things: and he is in deed marvelous in his
person, merueilous in his doyngs, and his kingdom is merueilous, and he
defends, and governs it merueilously: His person is marvelous, because he
is true man, and yet nevertheless holy, and everlasting God, borne after a
strange manner, to wit, of yt virgin, without man's seed: all his works are
merueilous, for being a child of xij. years old, he disputed with the learned
and great doctors in the temple at Jerusalem.

But after when he came to man's state, he wrought such wonders, and strange
things, as no other man could ever do, as Nichodemus witnesses in the iij. of
John. He gave sight to ye blind, and made the deaf to hear: he drove wicked
spirits out of the possessed: he cleansed ye leprous, he healed all manner of
sickness and diseases: he raised the dead to life: he fed many thousands with a
few loves: he commanded the sea to be quiet, and straight way it waxed calm:
he forgave sins: he restored men both body and soul to life and health: and
when of his own free will, he had for our sakes suffered death, he by his own
power rose again from death. But look I pray you, A strange way of our
deliverance.
by how strange a way it pleased him to deliver us from Satan, and to bring us
into his kingdom? When he would deliver man from death, and give him
everlasting life, he became man himself, he yielded himself to death, and was
buried, and tarried in the grave, unto the third day. Was not this a very
marvelous thing? what can be more marvelous? it is he thorough whom we
shall have everlasting life, whereunto the Prophets, and the Gospel bear
witness: And Paul calls the Gospel, 1. Tim. 1.
the promise of life in Christ.

Now consider with your self, how wonderful all things be, and whether it is
merueilous or no, that our King, about to erect his kingdom, redeem his
servants and deliver us from all evil, casts himself into extreme misery,
yeldeth himself to be crossed, afflicted, reviled, and opprobriously killed. He
becomes poor to enrich us, he becomes shameful, ignominious, and suffers
upon the cross, to exalt us to honor and glory. And he promises to give us
power and strength against our enemies, where he himself used no power, nor
force against his foes, but was of the^ taken, bound, whipped, crouned with
thorns, crucified, and killed: To be brief, he promised to help us, when he
himself upon the cross, calling for help, cries (as one helpeles,) My God,
my God, why have thou forsaken me? And where as he had said, that who so
believed in him, should not see death for ever: yet he himself both suffered
death, and was buried in the sepulcher.

Here if we were led by humayne reason, we should with Cleophas and his
companion say: We hoped that he had been the redemer of Israel, which should
have saved us all, but now he himself is dead? How shall a dead man save us?
and how can he which is slain have an everlasting kingdom? You see how this
name Pele, was not without special cause given to this child who^ it does by yt
name of savior represe^t. For so he is in deed the true savior and redemer,
which delivers us from all our sins and miseries. And so it pleased him by
his poverty to bless us with spiritual riches, by the tauntes and checkes
which he suffered to deliver us from everlasting shame, by his cross to bring
us to eternal honor and glory, by his weakness to give us eternal strength,
and by his death to give us a flourishyng life, and to abolish our death by
dying himself.

All these he has done, and daily does in us, when he makes us like himself:
that is to say, weak in body, but strong in spirit, base, low, and
contemptible, (...), very ofscouringes before the world, but the vessels and
instruments of glory in the sight of GOD. And thus he suffers us to dye, that
the Infidels may think there is no difference between a Christian and no
Christian, as Turk or Jew. But yet our death is precious in the sight of the
lord, neither does he suffer us to abide in death. All these things are great,
marvelous, wonderful, and far passing our reason, and understanding, yea, far
exceeding all ye strength, power, effect, and working of our nature.

2. Ioetz, yt is counsel.
An other name is Ioetz, that is council. For though this Pele does lead and
govern us thus wonderfully, and by his cross and ignominy makes us glorious:
yet are we ignorant, rude, fayntharted, and fearful, and therefore is it
necessary that he merueilously provide for, cou^sail, and help us. For it is
not in our power and strength to endure and stand in trouble, and persecution.
But what counsel gives he? verily clean contrary to the world. The world
wills us, Christ cou^selleth contrary to the world.
to beware, fly, and eschew ye cross and affliction, and to revenge our selves:
But Christ casts his servants into trouble and vexations: and therein tries
them, as gold is tried in the fire and furnace: But yet so that he comfort
them always most lovingly, as it appears in Ioh. where he says unto ye
Apostles. Be of good chere, John. 16.33.
I have overcome the world. And a little before he says. Ye shall weep and
lament, and the world shall rejoice: ye shall sorrow, but your sorrow shall be
turned to joy, and your joy shall no man take from you. What else, That is a
poticaries shop.
I pray you is ye whole sacred scripture, but a plentiful and rich
Pharmacopole, whence we may fetch present help, and most fruitful and sound
comfort, for all sickness, calamities, and evils: as Paul witnesses saying:
Romans 15.4
what soever things be written before time, are written for our learning, that
we through patience and comfort of the scriptures might have hope. For he
which speaks in the scriptures, is almighty, and both can and will help us
always. His word is not spoke in vain, but al things are done which he has
promised. Yea the holy ghost himself, which is the spirit of truth, is our
comfort and help. For thus we read in the book of wisdom: Wisd. 16.12
O Lord, neither herb, nor plaster healed the^: but thy word which heals
all things, has made us safe. And Ionathas the high priest says unto the
Spartanes: 1. Match. 12 9.
We Jews stand no need of the society and friendship of the Gentiles, having
the holy books, which are in our hands, for our comfort. And now, I pray you,
what trouble, what affliction, what calamity, or what danger in all this world,
ca^ be so great (how great so ever it be) against which the word of god, that
most wholesome and holy gospel cannot minister, and give most holesom,
ple^tiful, perfect, and sound consolation and comfort: seeing that it
promises, not only corporal, but heavenly help. And the promises thereof are by
Christ confirmed, established, and sure, yea, and Amen. If you read, and better
read all the works of the Heathen philosophers, you shall find nothing in them
(and yet their whole study and travel was to find some comfort against death)
wherein you may take true comfort. All their art, al their knowledge, all their
wisdom, and all the remedies that ever they found, are nothing if they be
compared, but with these two comfortable sentences in Mat. The first is, Mat.
10.28 1. Comfort against death.
Fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul. Here
you see the immortality of ye soul, of which the Ethnikes speak, even as
blind men of coulors. But the words following (which is the second) are not
vttred by any philosopher, but by Christ himself, 2. Comfort against death.
the everlasting truth, and very true life. Every one (says he) that believes
in the son of God, has everlasting life, and I will raise him up in the last
day. Ioh. 6.40.
Here you have the resurrection or rising again of the flesh, of which ye
Gentiles, and the whole world, with all their wisdom had no knowledge. Go to
then, if any be in the agony of death, or assailed with the tempests of
persecution and affliction, either else vexed and pinched with ye bitter dolors
and terrors of conscience for his sins: as soon as he shall lay hold on these
two sentences by faith, and lay them up in his heart, he shall find comfort and
have true and plenteous consolation. For he has forgiveness of his sins, and
sure hope of everlasting life: nay rather, he has life already, because he is
in Christ, and Christ in him.

This in deed is true counsel. For all men's counsels and consolations are
vain, momentany, and cannot help and deliver us in extremity, peril, and
danger: but the counsel of the lord does abide and continue for ever. God the
father commands us to hear this counsailor, saying: Hear him. The 70.
interpreters have expounded this word Ioetz, the angel of the great counsel,
Mat. 17.5.
beautifiyng Christ with ye notable and apt epitheton, giving him ye proper
title. For Christ is ye legate and angel of the great counsel, of the triple
unity and most holy trinity, and is also ye eternal wisdom of ye father. The
third epitheton or name of ye child, is El, and it signifies strength,
fortitude, 3. name is El, strength
or God: as the 70. interpreters have translated it (...), yt is, ye mighty
god. This name contains a singular comfort. For it tells us, yt Christ does
not only provide for us by ye word of his gospel, but also is present with us,
and does mightily help us, and faithfully perform to us those things which in
his word he has promised us. For he gives us ye holy ghost, who gives us
faith and confirms us with his word, yt we may depend upon him and constantly
cleave to him, as to a most strong rock, and so in all adversities and
calamities, stand steadfast and immovable, against ye assaults and injuries of
our enemies, so ye at the last we may overcome them, and vanquish them, and
with ye Psalmist rejoice and say: ye lord our God is my strength. Psalm. 18.6.
Phil. 4.13.
And with Paul to ye Phil. I am able to do al things through the help of Christ
which strengthens me.

4. is Gibbor that is Giant.
The fourth name is Gibbor, yt is, the lord, or giant. In the former names we
are taught, what manner and mean Christ uses, and how he handeleth us when he
will bring us to his kingdom. First of all he handles us straightly, and
mortifieth our old Adam, which seems unpleasant to the flesh, and works al
things so by contrarieties, yt our reason is confounded, and knows not how to
vnwynd it self. Secondly, he comfort us by his gospel. Thirdly, he is
present with us in all his might and strength, and delivers us out of al
extremities and peril. But this 4. name tells us how Christ uses and
handles his and our enemies. Christ is called in the scriptures Gibbor, yt is,
lord, or giant, for his invincible might and power. For seeing he is king, and
will govern his kingdom peaceably, he must needs suppress, and vanquish the
enemies of his kingdom, that christians may live safely without fear and
hurt: but he cannot beat down and break the force of his enemies without great
power, seeing Satan with the world and sin, with death are most horrible,
ugly, strong, and outrageous enemies. Death is stronger then the whole world.
Job 4.24.25.
And Satan as Job witnesses, is of such might and strength, that al men in ye
world are not to be compared to him. He is the prince of all ye children of
pride and disdain. And he is that strong man armed, that keeps his palace,
Luke 11.21.
so that all that he possesses, is in peace. But Christ is much stronger, who
overcomes the evil spirit, Col. 1.13. Psalm. 19.5.
and delivers us from all power of darkness, whereof David says. He reioiceth
like a mighty man or giant, to run his course. Christ has overcome death and
the devil, and now alone the lord of all things is with great triumph rightly
honored by these titles. He is lord to who^ every knee does bow, Phil. 2.10.
Romans 24.9. Ioh. 3.8. Collos. 2.15.
and lord over the quick and the dead. And John says: Christ the son of God
appeared that he might loose the works of the devil. And Paul to the Col.
says: He has spoiled the principalities and power, and has made a show of
the^ openly, and has triumphed over the^ in the same cross. He is called in
Esaias Maher schalal, yt is, make have to pray. As if one should say a quick
spoiler? and Hashbaz, yt is, Romans 7.14.
make have to spoil, or a spedy spoil. We were ye miserable servants of ye
devil, sold under sin, 2. Timo. 2.26.
and he held us under his tyranny, and molested us at his pleasure and will.
The^ came the mighty giant our lord Christ, a lion of ye tribe of Judah, and
fought with that prince of darkness (which had rule over death) and got the
victory, and by his death destroyed the power of the enemy, and set us (being
delivered out of his tyranny) at liberty, according to that of John. If the
son shall make you free, Ioh. 8.36.
you shall be free in deed. The 5. name is Abiad, that is, a father for ever, 5.
name is Abiad father.
or always, and evermore a father world without end. By this name we feel and
perceive, the mercy, clemency, pity, and grace of this child toward us. Because
he will not be such a king amongst us his poor people, as at whose majesty the
godly should be amassed, fear, quake, and tremble: but he loves us fatherly, he
embraces us lovingly, and he will norish, defend, and cherish us singularly.
And as a godly and loving father, In Christ nothing but love:
is by ye instinct of nature well affected to his well-beloved son, and as he is
careful over his child, alwais thinking how to provide for him honestly, how to
bring him up virtuously, and how to instruct, frame, tech, chaste^, govern,
rule and defend him fatherly, and make him apt and fit for his heritage: So
does Christ in his kingdom with us. Here is nothing but natural love and fatherly
affection toward us, nothing but a vehement love, nothing but a care and desire
to do us good, and nothing but infinite benevolence toward us. But in this
simile, there is great difference between a worldly father, and Christ our
father. For we have much greater, better, and fatherly gifts of Christ, the^
any beloved son has of his earthly father, though he be a most loving
intreater of his children. The earthly father which is not (...), in deed
loves his children, cares for them, fostereth them, cherishes them, fedeth
them, and brings them well up: yet this care, regard, good will, and diligence
of earthly parents is temporal, and cannot continue, and abide for ever. And it
happens oftentimes, that when the children stand most need of their parents
help or counsel, then are their fathers constrained to leave them and dye.
But Christ is always our perpetual, everlasting, and eternal father: for he
suffered once for us his children, and now he suffers no more. And he neither
can nor will leave us without help, he both can and will maintain, feed, care
for, keep, and defend us here, and for ever. God prepares us here for his own
inheritance, yt after this temporal life, we may live with him for ever. And
hereunto accords very well the translation of the 70. interpreters, who call
this word Abiad, father of the world to come, or of ye life that shall be, to
the end they may thereby signify the mystical resurrection into life
everlasting of all that believe in Christ. At which time shall be plainly opened
and reveled, in what honor and dignity the godly shall be, and how derely Christ
has loved them, how he has embraced them, Abiad, a comfort in the hour of
death.
and what care he had over the^. Let therefore every godly man keep this title
of Christ in his mind, when death approaches, and he shall find thereby a
singular comfort. For then he knows that Christ is not only here, but shall be
for ever a most loving father. Which thing Paul knew very well, and was
thereof thoroughly persuaded, yea he had so grounded it in his heart, that eue^
in death he was of good courage, saying: Christ is to me life and death, Phil.
1.21.
is to me advantage, I desire to be loosed, and to be with Christ. Why then do
we not desire to be dissolved? why then are we not desirous to die? how
happens it that we fear death? truly because we do not firmly and constantly
believe the scriptures, and because our faith is weak, and little. And because
we let not this heavenly and divine comfort of Gods lively word (where Christ
is called a father for ever) so depely and thoroughly sink into our hearts, and
because we do not meditate so of it, and do not so well understand it, nor so
steadfastly believe it as Paul did. For our hearts would not so fail us as they
do, if we believed, and certainly knew what a God, what a King, what a life, and
what a father Christ is unto all those that faithfully believe.

The name is Sarscholam
name is Sarscholam, that is, a prince of peace. Christ has a kingdom wherein
is peace, security, safety, and freedom from death, Satan, and all other
dangers. But here is all the labor and travel, to come unto, and to attain to
dwell in that everlasting kingdom. If we be once there, then are we safe without
gunshot, then are we sure, and then are we in a most happy state. If sin
prick us in our consciences, Christ is by and by at hand, and defends us. He
took our sins upon him, and satisfied for them, and became our righteousness.
He put out (as Paul says) the hand writing of ordinances that was against us,
which was contrary to us: Collos. 2.14
he even took it out of the way, and fastened it upon the cross. Of this true
and heavenly peace, the scripture speaks in many places. As to the Romans where
Paul says: Romans 5.1.
We have peace toward God, through our lord Jesus Christ. Sin had made us the
enemies of God, as Paul calls us in the same place. But Christ himself wiped
away our sins, and reconciled us unto God, so that now he is not an enemy or
judge unto us, but a well-beloved father. For if when we were his enemies, Romans
5.10
we were reconciled unto God by the death of his son, much more (being
reconciled) we shall be saved by his life. And not only so, but also rejoicing
in god through our lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have received the atonement.
And now in Christ Jesus we which once were far of, Ephesians. 2.13.
are made near by the blood of Christ, for he is our peace This therefore is
true peace, when we have peace with God through our mediator, and peacemaker
Christ. For what would the peace and friendship of all the world, and worldly
creatures avail, and profit us, if God were our enemy and angry with us: but
if God (who takes more care for us, and loves us better then any father does
his children) fight for us: if we be at one with him: if he wish us well, and if
he profit us, what can now hurt us? how can the earth with all the creatures
therein, even once touch us? Thus you hear yt when we believe in Christ we have
this peace with God thorough Christ, so that we may now say: Romans 8.31. Psalm.
121.4
If God be on our side, who can be against us: and he that keeps Israel, will
neither slumber nor sleep. Wherefore, although we have affliction in this
world, John. 16.33
yet have we perfect peace in Christ our peacemaker, (...) and (...), our
Sarscholam, that is, the prince of peace or peacemaker. He obtained and merited
peace for us with God the father, and gives us his spirit, ye spirit of peace,
that we may also have peace with our neighbor. Ioh. 14.27
He wishes us this peace saying: Peace I leave with you, my peace I give you,
not as the world gives it, etc. He also preserves us that we be not hurt of
our enemies, and that we may be safe from all dangers.

By these epithetons and names of Christ, many mysteries are to be noted, as yt
he is true God, and that he should die, because he was borne a man: but that he
should not abide in death, because he was to reign eternally. Whereby is plainly
and truly proved, that both Christ and we shall rise again. For we which believe
in Christ both are his members, enheritance, and kingdom, and shall be for ever.
The son has prayed for us, and his prayers are heard. The father has given
us his son, and with him shall we dwell for ever. Our mansion house, our
lodging, and our abiding place is already prepared. And Christ says in Ioh.
Father I will that they which thou have given me, Ioh. 17.24
be with me, even where I am. In the words following, the prophet Esaias
prophecieth of the everlasting kingdom of Christ, how it should be great
(seeing he was to be king not only of the Jews, but even of the Gentiles also
dispersed through the whole world) and how he should daily increase and enlarge
his dominion even to the last day: and how he should execute, confirm,
establish, and for ever preserve and govern the same by justice and judgment:
but of this part of the prophecy I will speak more by Gods grace, in the
title of the kingdom of Christ. You have heard before where I expounded the 5.
of Micheas, and the 2. of Luke where, and how the child Christ should be borne.

Well then, Christ was borne at Bethelem Judah, in December, in the midst of
Winter, and was swadled and laid in a manger. For Joseph and Mary could not be
lodged in any Inn, for there was no room for them. The holy prophet foretold
this sacred and blessed birth of Christ, as you have heard. And the angels from
heaven afterward did declare it unto the shepeheardes in Luke, where the angel
says: Be not afraid, for behold, Luke 2.10.
I bring you tidings of great joy, that shall be to all the people, that is, that
unto you is borne this day a savior in the city of David, which is Christ the
lord. And straight way there was with the Angel a multitude of heavenly
soldiers praising God, and saying, glory be to God in the heavens, and peace
in earth, and toward men good will. The shepeherdes which saw this birth of
Christ, published, and showed it abroad. The star also in the East, and the
wisemen which came thence unto Bethelem were witnesses of the birth of Christ.
Simeon also and Anna in the temple saw this child, who was ye promised author
of our salvation, and they bare witness that Messiah was present. And this does
the whole church of Christ believe, confess, preach, and declare through all
the world, and the name of God is preached, and praised in every place. And
these glad tidings (to wit) that Jesus Christ our salvation is borne in
Bethelem, is preached in every place. And Jerusalem, that is, the catholic
church does rejoice and skippe for joy: for this nativity brings unto us all
felicity, salvation, and consolation.


Of Christ's flying into Egypt.
Anna. WHat say the Prophets of Christ's flying into Egypt?


Vrb. Matthew says in his 2. chap. when ye wise men of the East returned from
India, they returned into their own country an other way, and went not to
Herod. After their departure, the angel of the lord appeared unto Joseph in a
dream, saying: arise, and take ye babe and his mother and fly into Egypt, and
there lie until I bring thee word, for Herod will seek to destroy him. So Joseph
rose, and took the babe, and his mother by night, and departed into Egypt, and
was there unto the death of Herod, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken
of the lord by his prophet, saying: Out of Egypt have I called my son. This
prophecy is thus set down in Hosea. Hos. 11.1.
When Israel was a child, then I loved him, and called my son out of Egypt.
Here the prophet speaks of Israel, yt is, the Jews, and of his son Jesus
Christ. He says, that God loved the Israelites. Which thing he sufficiently
declared by many and wonderful benefits. He brought the^ up, nourished them,
and always cared for them, even as a father cares for his child. He made them
a great, mighty, and famous people. And although their unkindness deserved far
otherwise: yet notwithstanding he faithfully performed always the promises
which he had made unto the^. All these things were done for Christ's sake yt
most blessed seed, which he had promised unto Abraham. This Christ, this seed,
according to the flesh, was to be borne of ye tribe of Judah. And therefore he
brought his people Israel by Moses and Joshua out of Egypt, ye house of bondage
into ye la^d of Canaan with a strong hand and mightypower. For it was his good
pleasure, yt of this people Christ the savior of the whole world should be
born as he promised before by his prophets. But now after yt, when Christ our
savior in the fulness of time was borne, and had for a time by flying into
Egypt shrouded himself from the wrath of Herod, who had commanded all ye
infants to be slain, God brought him thence again into ye land of Israel. Mat.
2.19.
Of which Math. says: But when Herod was dead, behold, the angel of the lord
appeared in a dream to Joseph in Egypt, saying: arise, and take the babe, and
his mother, and go into the land of Israel, for they are dead which soght the
babes life. Then he arose and took the babe and his mother, and came into the
land of Israel. But when he heard that Archelaus did reign in Judah in stead of
his father Herod, he was afraid to go thither: yet after he was warned of God
in a dream, he turned aside into the parties of Galile, and went and dwelled
in a city called Nazareth, that it might be fulfilled, which was spoken by the
prophet, which was, that he should be called a Nazarite.


Anna. What speaks the prophets of the ministry of Christ?


Of the ministry of Christ, how he should be a king, a priest, a doctor, a
peacemaker, a mediator, a shepeheard, our redemer, and judge of the world.
Vrbanus. THe prophets witness that Christ is our king, priest, teacher,
master, peacemaker, redeemer, mediator, and high judge. God says by David:
Psalm. 6.7.
I will declare the decree, yt is, the Lord has said unto me thou art my son,
this day have I begotten thee, ask of me, and I shall give thee the heathen
for thine inheritance, and the ends of the earth for thy possession. Here god
ye father says, yt he had ordained his son Christ to be king in Zion, that
is, in the whole catholic church. For Zion was a hill in Jerusalem, whereon
king David's palace stood. It is also a figure of the whole catholic church
through out ye world. The son makes mention of his preaching and doctrine,
saying, that he would preach and declare him self to be the son of god unto the
whole world, and that he had all power given him not only to be Lord, and king
over the Jews, but also over the gentiles, that is of all the Christians in the
world, and that all they which believed his preaching should be his peculiar
people, over whom he would reign for ever. And again David says: Give thy
judgments unto the king O Lord, Psalm. 72.1.
and thy righteousness to the kings son: yea, all kings shall honor him, and
all nations shall serve him. This Psalm speaks of the true Solomon Christ,
that he should be the greatest, and most mighty in ye earth, before whom all
other kings should do homage. So Christ also is called a king in the 89.
Psalm. But we will speak more of these in the title of Christ's kingdom. Psalm,
89.27 Esa. 33.22.
I will make him my first borne higher then the kings of the earth. Esa. says:
The Lord is our judge, the lord is our lawgiuer, Ezec. 37.24 Eze. 14.16 John.
2.23. Christ the doctor.
the lord is our king, he will save us. We read the like in Eze. and Zach. And
Joel also says: Be glad then ye children of Zion, and rejoice in the lord our
God, for he has given you a reign or teacher of righteousness. This reign or
teacher is Christ Jesus our only master and doctor, as it is said in Math. One
is your doctor, to wit, Christ, Math. 23.8
and all ye are brethren. He is not such a teacher, or such a master as Moses
or we are. For he preaches not ye gospel to ye outward ear only: but he
gives us by ye holy ghost, ye true holiness in our hearts spiritually, which
before god is auailable, to wit, faith in him. Which Paul calls, Romans 3.22.
the righteousness of God. For faith in Christ is the work and gift of god in
us, which is imputed to us for righteousness. Romans 4.3 Genesis 15.6.
Again David says, our instructor shall be adorned with many blessings. This
instructor is Christ, who in deed is truly blessed. For all yt believe his
doctrine, by him are delivered from the curse, and are made the children of god
for ever. He washes us with the gracious welsprings of his gifts, and teaches
us in our hearts that we may be taught of god, and know the father by ye son
in who^ consist true blessings, and everlasting life. You have heard before out
of ye 61. of Esaias, that Christ was sent by ye father to preach ye gospel to the
poor afflicted. As he confesses in Luke, Luke 4.43.
saying: that he should preach the kingdom of God to other cities, for
therefore was he sent. Wherefore Esaias calls him the light of ye Gentiles, and
the gospel the light of the world, because he illuminateth us which sit in ye
deep darkness of folly and ignorance, with true knowledge and the holy ghost. For
naturally of our own strength, we neither know god nor our selves. The woman of
Samaria says in Ioh. Ioh. 4.25
I know well that Messiah shall come, which is called Christ, when he is come he
will tell us al things. Deu. 18.15
And therefore Moses calls him a prophet, because he should teach ye word of
God unto his people. Esa. 49.2.
Christ also says in Esaias. He has made my mouth like a sharp sword, yt is, I
will execute my ministry by ye word, which shall be effectual, and pierce like a
sharp sword. Ioh. 18.37.
And he says to Pilate, that for this cause he was borne, and for this cause
he came into this world, that he should bear witness unto the truth. And he
adds: Zach. 9.10.
every one that is of the truth, hears my voice.

He will speak peace unto the heathen. To be brief, al ye gospel of Ioh.
witnesses, that Christ came to teach us ye truth. And therefore he sends the
holy ghost to teach us ye pure verity, whereby we might be delivered from our
sins, and be redeemed from the kingdom of Satan. You have heard before in ye
prophet Esa. that Christ should be called Ioetz, Esa. 9.6.
that is, a counsailer. For he teaches us which be rude and ignorant: and so
provides for us by his doctrine, yt we may overcome our enemies, and eschew ye
that is evil. God himself commends this teacher and master unto us by his
word from heaven, Christ we true shepeherd. Math. 17.5 Psalm. 110.4
and commands us to hear him. For he taught (as Mat says) as one having
authority. And ye Psalmist says: The Lord swear and will not repent, thou art a
priest for ever after the order of Melchisedech. All the priests with their
sacrifices in ye old testament, did foreshew the true Christ and everlasting
priest. And Paul to the Hebr. does with a plentiful spirit explicate and handel
this: saying, that it is spoken of ye priesthood of Christ. And he declares with
what faithfulness and diligence Christ executes the office of priesthood for
us, to wit, he prays and makes intercession for us to God the father, he is
our mediator, and reconciler, he teaches us the way of truth, and gives him
self a sacrifice and oblation for us, and blesses us. Al with functions, and
offices of the priesthood were lively, prefigured by the Leuitical priesthood
in the law, and by Moses, and by that wonderful priesthood of Melchisedech.
Wherefore in all things it became Christ to be made like his brethren, Heb.
2.17.
that he might be a merciful and a faithful high priest in things concerning
God, that he might make reconciliation for the sins of the people: for in
that he suffered and was tempted, Hebr. 4.14.
he is able to succor them that are tempted. Seeing then that we have a great
high priest, which is entered into heaven, even Jesus the son of God, let us
hold fast our profession: for we have not an high priest which cannot be
touched with the feeling of our infirmities: but was in all things tempted in
like sort, yet without sin. Let us therefore go boldly unto the throne of
grace, that we may receive mercy, and find grace to help in time of need.
Christ took not to himself this honor to be made the high priest: but he
that said to him, thou art my son, this day begat I thee, gave it him. As
he also in an other place speaks. Hebr. 5.6.
Thou art a priest for ever, after the order of Melchisedech, which in the
days of his flesh did offer up prayers and supplications with strong cries,
and tears unto him, that was able to save him from death, and was also heard
in that which he feared. And though he were the son, yet learned he obedience
by the things which he suffered, and being consecrate, was made the author of
eternal salvation unto all the^ that obey him, and is called of God an hie
priest, after the order of Melchisedech. Ioh. 17.9
In the 17. of John. Christ prays earnestly for the whole church. Read the
whole chap. and you shall see how faithful a priest Christ is. And Paul to the
Hebr. shows the difference between the priests of the law, Hebr. 7.23.
and Christ our heavenly priest, saying: Among them many were made priests,
because they were not suffered to endure by the reason of death: but this man
because he endures ever, has an everlasting priesthood: wherefore he is able
also perfectly to save them that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to
make intercession for the^. For such an hie priest it became us to have, which
is holy, harmless, undefiled, separated from sins, and made higher then the
heavens, which needs not daily, as those high priest to offer up sacrifice
first for his own sins, and then for the people. For that did he once when he
offered up him self. For the law makes me^ high priests, which have
infirmities: but the word of the oath that was since the law makes the son,
who is consecrated for evermore. And in the 8. chap. he says: We have such an
high priest that sits at the right hand of the throne of the majesty in the
heavens. Hebr. 9.15.
And in the 9. chap. he says: Christ being come an hie priest of good things
to come by a greater and more perfect tabernacle, not made with hands, that
is, not of this building, neither by the blood of goats and calves: but by his
own blood entered once into the holy place, and obtained eternal redemption for
us. And in the same place he calls him a mediator of the new testament.

Heb. 9.1.
Also in the 10. to the Hebr. Paul says, every priest appears daily
ministering, and oftentimes offers one manner of offering, which can never take
away sin: but this man after he had offered one sacrifice for sins sits for
ever at the right hand of God, and from henceforth tarieth till his enemies be
made his footstool. For with one offering has he consecrated for ever the^
that are sanctified.


An. If he must be an everlasting king, and if the father has confirmed it
with an oath, the^ can he not abide in death, but must needs rise again and
live everlastingly. For how could he otherwise deliver us and bles us
eternally. This might have comforted Cleophas, and his companion if they had
understood the scriptures.


Vrb. Truly we have a plentiful and unspeakable comfort laid up for us in the
hie priesthood of Christ. Christ on hie priest that pleases God.
For if ye son of God be our priest, and if he make intercession for us,
sitting at the right hand of God, then are we happy, and in good case. For this
priest out of doubt pleases God ye father. For ye father himself consecrated
him, and installed him in this priestly dignity. And Christ has offered up for
our sins a sacrifice, such, and so great, as had been sufficient for ye
deliverance of many thousand worlds, and he obtained and purchased al things
necessary for our salvation, and he teaches us by his spirit. What hurt then I
pray you can sin do us? seeing it is purged, and wiped away. That satisfaction
of his is ours, if we believe in Christ, and acknowledge him for our priest, and
sacrifice for sin. What has death to do with us? and how can it hurt us? this
priest has by his sacrifice broken and beaten to powder ye cruel and horrible
sting of death. Besides all this, Christ is our eternal king, who in all
dangers can deliver us. Both these two offices, to wit, of priest and king
belong duly to him, the true and first begotten son of god the father, and the
blessed virgin Mary.

We also by faith in him are made priests (as Pet. witnesses) yt by faith we
may be bold to go to the father, and as children ask those things of ye father
which we desire. And ye apostles out of this ground of ye 110. Psalm, as is
before said, borrowed their doctrine of Christ, as yt he brings us unto God,
reconcileth us unto God, and as a Mediator makes intercession for us unto God,
yt we may with a sure trust and joy of heart, make our prayers unto the father in
the name of our eternal high priest Christ. As Paul says. For there is one
God, 1. Tim. 2.5.
and one mediator between God and man, which is the man Christ Jesus, who gave
himself a ransom for all men. 1. Ioh. 2.1.
And John says: My babes, these things write I unto you, that you sin not, and
if any man sin, we have an advocate with the father Jesus Christ the just, he
is the reconciliation for our sins, and not for ours only, but also for the
sins of the whole world. And Paul says: Ephesians. 2.8. Ephesians. 3.12.
Through Christ we both have an entrance to the father by one spirit. And
again: by who^ we have boldness, and entrance with confidence by faith in him.
Christ also says: Verily, verily, Ioh. 16.23.
I say unto you whatsoever you shall ask the father in my name, he will give it
you. So Paul makes his prayer through Christ, as our high priest, by whom,
and for whom, only we, and our prayers are acceptable unto God ye father. As it
is said to ye Hebr. Hebr. 13.75
By Jesus Christ we offer the sacrifice of praise alwais to God, yt is, the
fruit of the lips which confess his name. Furthermore, it is worthy marking,
that where ye prophets do promise to the people of God deliverance from sin,
death, and al other evils, yt there Jesus Christ is promised. For we see this
is the purpose of God, that he will not help any, deliver any, nor be gracious
to any, but only for Jesus Christ's sake. As Peter says in ye Acts. Acts. 4.12.
We have salvation in none but in Jesus Christ: For among men there is given
none other name under heaven, whereby we must be saved. Now look on ye
prophecy. Christ our savior.
For both the name and work of Christ is lively described in it. He is called
Iehoschua or Ieschua, yt is, a savior, who must deliver, help, and save.
Which word we find written in ye prophets, sometime with more, sometime with
fewer letters, but yet significatiuely, and plainly set down. Psalm. 98.3. Psa.
119.81
David says: All the ends of the earth have have seen (Iescuah) the salvation
or savior of our god. And in the 119. he calls him often Teschuatecha, that
is, a deliverer, or a savior.

It follows. My soul faints for thy salvation. In all these places the
prophet shows how heartily he desires Christ, and how earnestly he looks for
Christ's coming: as S. Augustine says upon this Psalm. And here you see yt
Christ the only savior was ever even from ye beginning of the world, Christ
was the hope of the Prophets.
ye only hope and trust as well of the fathers, and elected (in Christ) in the
old testament, as he is now our god, our hope, and our comfort in the new
testament. For no man can attain salvation, unless he believe in Christ, and
be a christian. Esa. says: My righteous one, Esaias. 51.5.
or my righteousness is nere, my salvation goes forth. My salvation shall be
for ever, and my righteousness shall not be abolished. Here this name Ieschua,
or Jesus is often repeated: for the prophet speaks in this text of Christ.
Esa. 52.10.
And again he says: The lord has made bare his holy arm in the sight of all
the Gentiles, and all the ends of the earth shall see the salvation of our god.
And again: I, Esaias. 43.11
eue^ I am the lord, and beside me there is no ( moschia, yt is) savior. There
be many such testimonies as these, in Esaias 33.46.66. and in many other places.
He is called in ye 54. of Esa. a redemer. For he that made thee is thine
husband, or he shall rule over thee which was thy maker. Esa. 54.5.
His name is the lord of hosts or Jehovah, Zebaoth. And thy redeemer, the holy
one of Israel shall be called God of the whole earth. Here this word Goel is
used, which signifies a savior or deliverer, which epitheton in the
scriptures, is alwais attributed unto Christ. And Es. says: Esaias. 59.22
The redemer shall come unto Sion, and unto the^ that turn from iniquity in
Jacob says the Lord. Romans 11.26
S. Paul to ye Romans cites this text of Christ our only deliverer in Sion. And
therefore Ose says thus. Ose. 13.14.
I will redeem them from the power of the grave, I will deliver them from death?
O death I will be thy death, O grave I will be thy destruction. Death where is
thy sting, and hell where is thy victory? But we will speak more hereof in
another place. And yet mark here by the way, yt this word Goel or redemer in ye
prophets, signifies not only man but also very God. And therefore is he much
more mighty then sin, death, and hell, and he both will and can save, and
deliver us. And thus upon such a sure and sound foundation, as you see, is our
catholic faith grounded.

Now note ye doctrine of the Apostles grounded and stayed upon these
testimonies of scripture in the new testament. Paul says, Christ is our
redemption. 1. Col. 1.30 Gal. 1.4. Ephesians. 1.7. Col. 1 1. these. 1.10. Tit. 2.13
Luke 2.11. Christ our sheepehed. Psalm. 95.7.
Christ gave himself for our sins that he might deliver us from this present
evil world. We have redemption by the blood of Christ. Christ delivers us
from the wrath to come. We look for that blessed hope, and appearing of the
glory of the mighty god, and of our savior Jesus Christ. Unto you is born this
day in the city of David a savior which is Christ the lord. The new testament
is full of such sentences. Again ye Psalmist witnesses yt Christ is our
shepeherd, and that we be his sheep, and that he carefully keeps and
preserves us, and fedeth us in his pleasant pastures, unto everlasting life.
And he speaks only of Christ, saying: Psalm. 95.6
Come let us worship and fall down, and kneel before the lord our maker. For
he is our God, and we are the people of his pasture, and the sheep of his hand.
And ye 100. Psa. says thus. Know ye that eue^ the lord is god, Psalm. 100.3
he has made us and not we our selves, we are his people, and sheep of his
pasture. Esa. says: He shall feed his flock like a sheepeherd, he shall gather
the lambs with his arm, and carry them in his bosom, Esaias 40.11.
and shall guide the^ with young. And Christ in Ioh. calls himself that good
shepeheard, which gives his life for the sheep, and he promises them eternal
life, saying: No man shall pluck them out of my hand. And Luke says: John.
10.28. Luke 15.4. Hiere. 31.10
He is a faithful shepeheard which seeks the lost sheep, and when he finds
it, he lays it on his shoulders with joy, and brings it home. Iere. says:
He that scattered Israel will gather him, and will keep him as a shepeheard does
his flock. For the lord has redeemed Jacob, and ransomed him from the hand of
him that is stronger then he. This is not to be understood of the carnal, Zach.
13.7.
but even of the spiritual Israel whether they be Jews, or Gentiles. And
Zach. says: Arise O sword upon my shepeherd, and upon the man that is my
fellow, says the lord of hosts, smite the shepeherd, Mat. 26.13
and the sheep shall be scattred. Christ himself expounds this prophecy in
Math. calling himself the shepeherd: and says, All you shall be offended by me
this night, for it is written, I will smite the sheepeherd and the sheep of
the flock shall be scattred: but after I am risen again, I will go before you
into Galile. Ezechiel inueying against the unfaithful, and false prophets in
Israel, whith taught not the word of God sincerely and uprightly, but preached
ma^s doctrine for the word of God, Ezech. 34.11,
and fed themselves, but not the sheep, says: Behold I will search my sheep,
and seek them out as a shepherd searches out his flock, when he has been
amongst his sheep that are scattered: so will I seek out my sheep, and will
deliver them out of all places where they have been scattered in the cloudy and
darck day. I will feed thy sheep says the Lord. etc. Christ teaches us in
John who is the true sheepeheard to whom the sheep of duty belongs, who
also will keep, and defend them from al dangers. Wherefore he says not simply,
I am a shepherd but (...). For ye Greek is more effectual, yt is, I am even
that good shepeheard. As if he had said, the prophets have spoken of a good
shepherd which should be so faithful, and so mighty, that he both would and
could deliver his sheep from al peril. That good shepherd is now here himself.
I am even ye good shepherd. There are many other shepherds but they are
hirelings, for they are not careful over their sheep: they are not faithful
and diligent in their cures: but I am yt good shepeheard, and I give my life
for my sheep. God the father speaks more in yt place of ye prophet, Eze.
34.23.
concerning this shepeherd, saying: I will set up a shepeherd over the^, and he
shall feed them, even my servant David, he shall feed them, and he shall be their
shepeheard. This is not spoken of king David the son of Isa^ (for he was dead
long before ye time of Ezech.) but it is spoken of Christ ye true David, of
who^ David was but a figure, and of whose lineal descent it was prophesied that
Christ should come. Again, God says: Ezec. 37.23
They shall be my people, and I will be their god, and David my servant shall be
king over the^, and they al shall have one shepeherd. This is spoken of Christ
whose servants we all are in the ministry of preaching: but he is yt true
shepeherd with who^ we shall find a safe place of refuge, succor, help, health, and
pleasant pastures, with all other things necessary for this life, and for the
life to come. Paul speaks thus of this shepeherd to ye Hebr. Hebr. 13.20
The God of peace that brought again from the dead, our lord Jesus the great
shepeherd of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting covenant. And
Pet. 1. Pet. 5.4.
says: When the chief shepeherd shall appear, ye shall receive an
incorruptible croune of glory.


An. But where do ye prophets witness yt Christ should be ye judge of the world,
both of Jews and Gentiles? Christ a Judge.



Vrb. The new testament is an exposition and interpretation, and a clear light
of ye old testament. Christ says in Ioh. The father judges no man, John. 5.22.
but has committed al judgment unto the son, because that al men should
honor the son, as they honor the father. The father also has given him power
to judge, because he is ye son of man. The church alwais understood these
words to be of ye last judgment, when the dead shall rise again, and the judge
shall give to every one as he has deserved. 2. Cor. 5.10
Paul says: We must al appear before the judgment seat of Christ, that every
man may receive the things which are done in his body according to that he has
done, whether it be good or evil. Christ therefore died, and rose again, Romans
14.9.
and revived, that he might be lord both of the dead and the quick. And is
ordained of God a judge of quick and dead. Act. 10.42.
Now look on ye prophets, what, Christ the Judge.
and after what sort they speak of that judge, who shall justly judge the
whole world. And you shall easily perceive that it is none other, but our Lord
Jesus Christ. And this is most true. This is most infallable, John 5.22. Act.
10.42.
For Ioh. says. The father has committed all judgment to him. And Peter
says that god ordained him to this end. And so does the new testament expound
and understand the Prophets in all places where they write of Christ: neither
need we be moved with this, that the scriptures do give judgment only unto God.
For this is no matter, this repugneth not our saying, for Christ is yt true
god. And in as much as he is God he receives now nothing which he had not
before, seeing that he is of one essence, power and majesty with God the Father
for ever. But in as much as he is man he receives power from the father to
judge al things as Cyril says. Now then let us see what the prophets foretell
of this mighty judge. David says. Psalm. 9.7.
The Lord has prepared his throne (in heaven) for judgment, for he shall judge
the world in righteousness, and shall judge the people with equity. We easily
understand this text by the 17. chap. of the Acts. where Paul preaching to the
Atheniences says, God admonished all men to repent because he has appointed a
day in the which he will judge the world with righteousness by that man whom he
has appointed. Psalm. 50.1.
Again David says. The God of gods eue^ the Lord has spoken and called the
earth from the rising up of the sun unto the going down thereof: out of Sion
which is the perfection of beauty has God shyned. Our God shall come and shall
not keep silence, a fire shall devour before him and a mighty tempest shall
be moved round about him. He shall call the heaven above and the earth to
judge his people. The 70 interpreters have translated it thus. God shall come
(openly, even our god) and shall not keep silence (any longer.) The Church
takes this to be spoken of the latter coming of Christ: For he will not then
come to judge the world in a base form or habit hiding his godhead: but at ye
last day he will come with great power. Thus says Austine. Furthermore that
shining beam or beutiful brightness of God is Christ Jesus, and he bursts
forth, and shines out of Sion, that is out of the tribe of Judah the house of
David, Mat. 25.31
and will come openly in great power and majesty accompaned with all the Angels.

At his first coming he came secretly and humbly, without any great ado: for
it was his will to be judged and slain for our sakes, even as a sheep
appointed to the slaughter. Esa. 53.7. 1. These. 4.17.
But in the last day he shall come with great power and magnificence, and shall
descend from heaven (as the most mighty and high God, and judge of all) with a
shout (...), and with the voice of the Archangell, and with the trumpe of God.
And again: Such a shout as sailers make.
He shall be reveled from heaven with his mighty angels in a flaming fire,
rendering vengeance unto them yt do not know god, and which obey not unto the
Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ.

And in Matthew it is said: Mat. 25.31
He shall sit upon the throne of his glory, and before him shall be gathered all
nations, and he shall separate them one from another, as the shepeherd
seperateth the sheep from the goats, and he shall set the sheep upon his right
hand, and the gotes on his left: then shall the king say to them on his right
hand, come ye blessed of my father inherit ye the kingdom prepared for you
from the foundations of the world: but then shall he say unto them on his left
hand, depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire which is prepared for the
devil and his angels. And again David says. Give thy judgment to thy king O
god, and thy righteousness to the kings son, Psalm. 72.1.
then shall he judge thy people in righteousness and thy power with equity. This
kings son is Christ he judges the yt world here by the word, and ye spirit, he
punishes the wicked and defends the godly. But in the last day he will
execute that just judgment and punish them everlastingly which refused the
gospel, and would not acknowledge him to be their king: and again David says.
Psalm. 97.1.
The Lord reigns, let the earth rejoice let the multitude of the Isles be
glad, clouds, and darcknes are round about him, righteousness, and judgment are
the foundations of his throne there shall go a fire before him and burn up his
enemies round about, his lightninges gave light unto the world, the earth saw
it, and was afraid, the mountains melted like wax at the presence of the lord,
Psalm. 96.13
at the presence of the lord of the whole earth. And again he says: The Lord
comes to judge the earth, he will judge the world with righteousness and the
people in his truth. Esa. says: Esa. 66.15
Behold the Lord will come with fire, and his chariots like a whirlewynd, that
he may recompense his anger with wrath, and his indignation with the flame of
fire. For the lord will judge with fire and with his sword, all flesh. And Zach.
says: The lord shall go forth and fight against those nations, Zach. 14.3
as when he fought in the day of battle, and his feet shall stand in this day
upon the mount of Olives, which is before Jerusalem on the East side. And the
mount of Olives shall cleave in the midst thereof, toward the East, and toward
the West: there shall be a very great valley, and half of the mountain shall
remove toward the North, and half of the mountain toward the South. And ye shall
fly unto the valley of the mountains. For the valley of the mountains shall
reach unto Azal, yea, ye shall fly like as ye fled from the earthquake in the
days of Vzzia king of Judah, and the lord my God shall come, and all the
saints with them.

Here Zachary prophesies of the second coming of Christ at the last day, how
that he shall come as a captain or Emperor to assail and destroy his
enemies, Christ is a judge but of the wickod.
and that his last coming shall be so fearful, that every one if they could
would be glad to fly. It will be fearful in deed unto the wicked and
unbelieving, who the^ shall be no longer able to withstand Christ. Then shall
their rage, and insolency against the Godly with their tyranny, and savage
bitterness, and cruelty, which they have used against the members of Christ have
an end. For there is ordained for them an everlasting prison, even continual
torment in hell fire for their wickedness. Then all their might, all their force,
all their pride, all their cruelty, all their contumacy, and all their
threats, shall cease, neither shall they afterward be able to persecute, or in
any wise hurt Christ or his servants as before that last day they had done.
They shall then suddenly unawares be cast down from the face of God, and the
glory of his fortitude, into everlasting destruction. For that is the day of
redemption in which Christ (as Paul says) shall be glorified in his saints, 2.
these. 1.10.
and be made marvelous in all the^ that believe. The scripture uses such
similitudes as these in discribing Christ's coming to judgment, 1. these. 1.16.
as in Paul to the These. For when Christ shall come to judgment, our enemies
shall be slain, and put to flight. The wicked world and Satan shall in ye
turning of a hand, even in one moment become very firebrands of hell, and so
continue for ever. Then shall death be swallowed up in victory, then shall all
the Godly be taken up in clouds to meet the Lord God in the air, 1. these. 4.17
and so shall we ever be with the Lord.


Anna. We may easily perceive, and gather by these prophesies of the
everlasting kingdom, and priesthood of Christ, yt he should be both a mediator
to pacify God and turn away his wrath from us, and a shepeherd and redemer,
which alwais in all places, might feed us and save us, and at the end justly
judge the world. Moreover there was no doubt but Israel was truly redeemed,
seeing Christ had suffered. For in as much as God in Christ had promised such a
blessyng to the world: it was not possible that Christ should abide in death,
but then truly in deed live for ever. But these two disciples understood not
those things which ye prophets had written of Christ, (as Christ obiecteth unto
them) and therefore they were not sad without cause. But now I pray you let me
hear what the prophets have written of Christ's miracles?


Of Christ's miracles.
Vrbanus. THe prophet Esaias prophesies thus of Christ: Esa. 35.4.
God comes with vengeance, even god with a recompense he will come and save
you, then shall the eyes of the blind be lightened, and the ears of the deaf be
opened, then shall the lame man leap as an heart, and the dumme man's tongue shall
sing. This prophecy was fulfilled 1576. years ago, Mat. 4.23.
when Jesus Christ true God and man, went about healyng all diseases and
griefs of the people, in ye country of Galile. And Christ himself says in
Math. unto John's disciples. Go and show John what things you have heard and
seen: the blind receive sight, and the halt go, Mat. 11.4.
the leprous are cleansed, and the deaf hear, the dead are raised up, and the
poor receive the gospel. You see also in ye history of the gospel, how this
prophecy is fulfilled in the 8. of Mat. Christ cleansed the leprous, Math. 8.3
he heals the Centuria^s servant, and restores the sick of the palsy. He
delivered Peter's wives mother being sick of a fever. Math. 9.6.
In the 9. He healed an other sick of the palsy. He restored the dead to
life again: he healed the woman of the bloody issue: he gave sight unto the two
blind men. And in the 12. of Math. he made a poor man see: he made ye du^me
speak, ye deaf here: he cast forth a spirit, and restored ye dry hand: and in
ye 15. of Math. he healed the Cananites daughter which was troubled with a devil:
he restored ye lame, the blind, ye deaf, the dumme, the maimed, and many other
diseased, to their former health. And so by these his mighty acts and strange
maruels, he shows yt he was ye true Messiah, Esa. 25.8. Mat. 9.25 Luke 7.25.
Ioh. 11.44
of whom Esaias writes thus: He will destroy death for ever, or he devoured it,
or swalowed it up: For he called the dead to life again: As the princes of the
sinagogs daughter, the widows daughter, and Lazarus which had lain in the
grave 4. days and did stink. The raising of these to life, was a foreshewyng,
certification, confirmation, and sure argument of his true resurrection from ye
dead. Of which we in ye last day also shall be pertakers when ye lord shall
su^mon all ye dead raised out of their grave before his tribunal seat, in the
twinkling of an eye. We may find his other miracles and wonders which he
wroght, est down in ye evangelists, so yt it is not needful here to speak any
more of them.


Anna. Now I know why you still apply and include those miracles yt Christ did
in ye gospel (as his restoring of the sick to health, and the dead to life) in
ye article of ye resurrection of the dead, to wit, yt we may more surely aod
deeply by these miracles, imprint and ground in our hearts the hie mystery of
ye last rising again of the body, and yt we may thereby confirm and keep ye
faith, and hope of our resurrection. But now explicat and prove out of ye
prophets, ye other articles of Messiah, to wit, of his passion, desce^ding into
hell, resurrection, and of his kingdom.


Of the death, descending into hell, and the glorious resurrection of Christ,
of the causes and infinite commodities, of his passion, resurrection, and of
his everlasting kingdom.
Vrbanus. THese in deed were the chief articles which Christ taught Cleophas
and his companion, as they went to Emaus. And seeing the holy prophets prophecy
of these ministeries of Christ in one place, and annexe them together: we will
also speak of them together, and as it were knit them up in one, and open them
severally or jointly as the prophesies give occasion. And first of all let us
hear ye worthy prophet David in the 8. Psalm, where he says: Psalm. 8.4
What is man that thou art (so) myndful of him? and the son of man that thou
visitest him? for thou have made him little lower the^ God, and crowned him
with glory and worship, thou have made him to have dominion in the works of
thine hands: Thou have put al things under his feet: all sheep and oxen, yea,
and the beasts of the field, the fowls of the air, and the fish of the sea,
and that which passes thorough the paths of the seas. O lord our lord, how
excellent is thy name in all the world? This psalm (which the new testament
does soundly open unto us) prophesies of Messiah, saying: that it should come
to pass, that for a time Christ should be humbled, debased, and as it were
forsaken of God the father. And that time was the space of 3. days, when he
was taken and delivered to the Jews and Gentiles, and when they beat him with
whips, crouned him with thorns, crucified him, killed him, and buried him. The
Hebrews text is thus: Vathechasrehu meat meeloim, that is, for a time thou
sufferedst him to be without God, or thou shall suffer him a while to be
forsaken of God. For it seemed that God had forsaken him all the time of his
passion, even unto the third day, because he suffered him to be slain, and
buried. And the Jews thought that Christ had been dead in deed, and utterly
destroyed. Neither did they understand that comfortable decree of the Lord, how
that therefore he sent his son that he might by his cross reconcile his
father to us, and that Christ suffered not of constraynt, but was willingly and
gladly obedient unto his father, even unto the death, the death of the cross.
The Greek text is thus. As Paul also cites it to the Hebrews in the 2. chap.
where this Psalm also is applied to Christ) (...), that is, Psalm. 8.5
Thou have made him a little inferior to the Angels. The Caldee Bible has in
that place, mi maleachia, that is, from the Angels. As our Lord said unto
Peter, when he had cut of the ear of the high priests servants, Mat. 26.23
and so thought to help Christ, Think thou that I can not now pray to my
father, and he will give me more then 12. legions of angels, how the^ should
the scriptures be fulfilled, which say it must be so? Christ would here stand
great need of help, yt thereby he might succor us. For, for our sakes he came
into ye earth and humbled himself: and suffered himself to be forsaken, and to
want al help, so yt no angel could help, Heb. 2.8.
or deliver him. Paul unto the Hebr. expounds these words of the Psalm. and
applies them unto Christ, saying: For in that he has put al things in
subjection under him: he left nothing that should not be subject unto him: but
yet we see not all things subdued unto him, but we se Jesus crouned with glory
and honor, which was made a little inferior to the angels through the suffering
of death, that by gods grace he might taste death for all men: for it became him,
for who^ are al things, and by whom are al things, seeing he brought many
children unto glory, that he should consecrate the prince of our salvation
through afflictions, for he which sanctifies, and they which are sanctified
are al of one. And so the prophet marueleth yt this true man, and son of man
was for ye little time of his preaching and passion here upon earth forsaken,
conte^ned, humbled, or abased: but after a little, that is, after 3. days
highly glorified, honored, crouned, and made lord of al creatures in heaven and
earth: And yt afterward his name became renomned, famous, and admirable,
through the whole world. As Paul out of this Psalm. teaches at large to ye
Ephesians. where he says: Ephesians. 1.17.
That the god of our Lord Jesus Christ the father of glory might give unto you
the spirit of wisdom and revelation, through the knowledge of him, that the
eyes of your understanding may be lightened, that ye may know what the hope is
of gods calling, and what the riches of his glorious inheritance is in his
saints, and what is the exceeding greatness of his power toward us, which
believe according to the working of his mighty power, which he wrought in
Christ, when he raised him up from the dead, and set him at his right hand in
the heavenly places, far above al principality and power, and might, and
dominion, and every name that is named not in this world only, but also in that
that is to come: and has made al things subject under his feet, and has
appointed him over all things, to be the head to the church which is his body,
even the fulness of him that fills al in all things. Many mysteries of our
faith are contained in this Psalm, to wit, Christ's passion, resurrection, and
dominion which he has over al creatures, both in heaven, and earth, and what
the fruit of Christ's works, to wit, of his passion is. For he was by his
passion to deserve, and give us infinite benefits, that all which believe the
gospel might be delivered from Satan's kingdom, and have place with God in heaven
and be ruled, and saved by Christ for ever. But yet here in this world by faith
under the cross: but after this frail and miserable life openly in glory. The
kings of this world, Christ's strange government.
do get, govern, keep and establish their kingdoms by the sword, and force of
arms, ouercomming and vanquishing their enemies: but this king after a new,
strange, proper, and clean contrary manner begins, governs, and fortifieth
his kingdom: to wit, by suffering, and dying on ye cross. For in that he was
killed, he kills and overcomes his enemies. This passing and exceeding
great submission and lowly humbling of himself even to the death of the cross
does, and preuayleth more then the force, sufferings, strength and might of all
creatures could have done. For it overcame Satan, it swalowed up death, and
obtained worthy honor and glory. As Paul says to the Phil. Phil. 2.8.
Christ humbled himself and became obedient unto death, even the death of the
cross, wherefore God has also highly exalted him, and given him a name above
every name, that at the name of Jesus should every knee bow, both of things in
heaven, and things in earth, and things under earth, and that every tongue
should confess that Jesus Christ is the lord, unto the glory of god the father.


Anna. Seeing the scriptures set down so many mysteries of our faith, briefly
and in one place, (for now I hear in this 8. Psalm. the passion, resurrection,
ascension and kingdom of Christ all in one, and the self same place
comprehended, and fully touched) I would have you expound and teach the use of
the death and resurrection of Christ, and what his kingdom is, briefly. And
thus in reciting ye prophesies concerning these articles, as they offer
themselves, you shall find an indifferent easy way, so that you need not over
labor and weary yourselfe, as of late you have done. The fruit of Christ's
death and resurrection



Vrb. The fruit and commodity of this most precious death and glorious
resurrection of Christ, is the redemption of mankind from al evils, and
calamities, and man's victory over death, the devil, and damnation. So that now
by Christ's infinite and great merits, and by his deserts, and not by ours, we
obtain forgiveness of our sins grace, peace with God, perfect holiness, the holy
ghost with his gifts, and yt blessed adoption, by which we are the children of
god, and he our father: and that after this short life we look for the
resurrection of our flesh, in which we shall receive both in body and soul and
immortal, and incorruptible inheritance: an inheritance that shall not fade,
even life everlasting, and the eternal kingdom of Christ which was promised us
in the law and prophets. But all this we receive only in Jesus Christ the seed
of Abraham and David, according to the flesh, who purchased and deserved all
these things for us. This is daily preached to us in ye gospel, and all me^ are
called unto this grace, none is excluded, none refused.

The Evangelists and Apostles, as the true expounders of the Prophets, do
worthily in all places of the new testament, preach and declare out of the
prophets this fruit of Christ's passion. Paul to the Romans says: Christ was
delivered to death for our sins, Romans 4.25.
and is risen again for our justification. And again in the same epistle:
Romans 5.8.
God sets out his love toward us: seeing, that while we were yet sinners,
Christ died for us. Much more then being now justified by his blood, we shall
be saved from wrath thorough him. For if, when we were his enemies, we were
reconciled to God by the death of his son, much more being reconciled, we
shall be saved by his life. And to the Cor. he says: 1. Cor. 1.30
Christ is made of God unto us, wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification,
and redemption. In these few words, he opens and declares all those things
which Moses and the prophets wrote before of the offerings, sacrifices and
oblations which were offered for the peoples sins, and offenses. These
sacrifices and oblations could reconcile none unto GOD, neither cleanse any man
from sin, but were only figures of that most precious sacrifice the blood of
Christ. It was he that should reco^cile his father to us, and by his precious
blood cleanse us from all our sins.

2. Cor. 5.15
Paul to the Corrinthians says: Christ dyed for all, that they which live,
should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him which died for them
and rose again. God made him which knew no sin, to be sin for us, that we
might be made the righteousness of God in him.

And to the Gallathians he says: Gal. 1.4.
Christ Jesus our Lord gave himself for our sins, that he might deliver us
from this present evil world, according to the will of God even our father, to
whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.

And again. Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the law, while he was
made a curse for us: for it is written, Gal. 3.13.
Cursed is every one that hangs on tree.

And to the Ephesians he says: Ephesians. 1.7.
By Christ we have redemption thorough his blood, even the forgiveness of
sins, according to his rich grace.

And again he says: But now in Christ Jesus, ye, which once were far of,
are made nere by the blood of Christ: Ephesians. 2.13.
for he is our peace which reconciled both unto god in one body by his cross.

And again: Christ has loved us, Ephesians. 5.2.
and has given himself for us, to be an offering and a sacrifice of a sweet
smellyng savor to God.

And to the Collos. he says: Col. 1.20.
God by Christ reconcileth al things to himself, and sets at peace through
the blood of his cross, both the things in heaven, and the things in earth.

And again: God raised Christ from the dead, Colos. 2.1^.
and you which were dead in sins, and in the uncircumcision of your flesh,
has he quickened together with him, forgiving us all our trespasses, and
putting out the hand writing of ordinances that was against us, which was
contrary to us, he even took it out of the way, and fastened it upon the
cross, triumphing in himself over all principalities and powers in the same
cross.

And to the Thessal. he says: 1. these. 4.13
I would not brethren have you ignorant concerning them which are a sleep,
that ye sorrow not even as they which have no hope: For if we believe that Jesus
is dead, and risen (again) even so them which sleep in Jesus, will God bring
with him.

And to Tim. he says: 1. Tim. 1 15 1. Tim. 2.5.
Christ came into this world to save sinners. And again: There is one God,
and one mediator between GOD and man, which is the man Jesus Christ, who gave
himself for a ransom for all men. And again: 2. Tim. 1.9
God saved us, and called us with an holy calling, not according to our works,
but according to his own purpose and grace, Gods purpose and grace, not our
works the cause of our salvation. Tit. 2.11.
which was given us through Christ Jesus before the world was, but is now made
manifest by the appearing of our savior Jesus Christ, who has abolished
death, and has brought life and immortality unto light, through the gospel.
And to Titus he says: For the grace of God that brings salvation unto all
men, has appeared, and teaches us that we should deny ungodliness and
worldly lusts, that we should live soberly, and righteously, and godly in this
present world, loking for the blessed hope and appearing of the glory of the
mighty God, and of our savior Jesus Christ, who gave himself for us, that he
might redeem us from all iniquity, and purge us to be a peculiar people unto
himself, zealous of good works. And to the Hebr. he says: Heb. 2.14.
Forasmuch then as the children were partakers of flesh and blood, he also
himself likewise took part with the^, that he might destroy through death, him
that had the power of death, (that is, the devil) and that he might deliver all
them which for fear of death, were all their life time subject to bondage. For
he in no sort took the angels, but he took the seed of Abraham. Wherefore in
all things it became him to be made like unto his brethren, that he might be
merciful, and a faithful high priest in things concerning God, that he might
make reconciliation for the sins of the people. For in that he suffered and
was tempted, he is able to succor (all) them that be tempted. In the same
place the Apostle says: that Christ by the grace of God tasted of death for
all men. Hebr. 2.9.
Read the whole epistle to the Hebr. but especially the 5. 7. 8. 9. 10. chap.
concerning Christ's priesthood and sacrifice: for it is in deed a most worthy
and precious treasure. 1. Pet. 1.3.
Peter says: Blessed be God even the father of our lord Jesus Christ, which
according to his aboundaunt mercy, has begotten us again unto a lively hope,
by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead.

And it follows: You are not redeemed with corruptible things, as with silver
and gold, from your vain conversation received by the traditions of the
fathers: but with the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb undefiled, and
without spot, which was lord before the foundation of the world, but was
declared in the last times for your sakes, which by his means do believe in
God that raised him from the dead, and gave him glory, that your faith and hope
might be in God. And again: 1. Pet. 2.24 1. Pet. 3.18
Christ himself bare our sins in his body on the tree, that we being
delivered from sin, should live in righteousness. Christ also has once
suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, 1. Ioh. 1.7. 1. Ioh. 2.1.
that he might bring us to god. And Ioh. says: The blood of Jesus Christ the
son (of God) cleanses us from all sin. And again: We have an advocate with
the father Jesus Christ the just, and he is the reconciliatio^ for our sins*
and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world. 1. Ioh. 3.8.


It follows: Your sins are forgiven you for his names sake. And again: For
this purpose appeared the son of God, that he might loose the works of the
devil. 1. Ioh. 4.9
And again: In this appeared the love of God toward us, because God sent his
only begotten son into the world, that we might live through him. Herein is
love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his son to be a
reco^ciliation for our sins. To be brief, this is the pithe of all the
Apostles preaching. And this is the sum of their doctrine, that we obtain
forgiveness of all our sins, and everlasting life, by none other but only by
Jesus Christ, and by no other work, but by his most precious death and
victorious resurrection. Therefore Peter with great boldness instructing the
Jews concerning Christ, Act. 4.10.
comprehends all the whole matter briefly in few words, in the 4. chap. of
the Acts, where he says: You have crucified Christ, whom God raised from the
dead. This is the stone which was cast aside of you builders, which is become
the head of the corner, neither is there salvation in any other. For among men
there is given none other name under heaven whereby we must be saved. 1. Cor.
15.3.
And Paul to the Cor. says: Christ died for our sins according to the
scripture, and was buried and rose (again) the third day according to the
scriptures. And if Christ be not raised again, then is our preaching vain,
and your faith vain. Ye are yet in your sins, and so they which are a sleep
in Christ are perished. If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of
all men the most miserable. But now is Christ risen from the dead, and was made
the first fruits of them that slept. For since by man came death, by man came
also the resurrection of the dead. For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ
shall all be made alive.

S. Augustine has a learned and worthy saying: namely, Lib. 4. de trinit. lib.
3 Man's resurrection twofold.
that one resurrection of Jesus Christ (says he) has given us two
resurrections, to wit, one spiritual from our sins, and the other corporal.
For when as Christ rayseth us up from the spiritual death of sin, by his
holy Gospel, and lighteneth our hearts with ye knowledge of Gods grace and our
sins: When he pardons our sins, and when he gives us the holy ghost,
then do we rise from our wickedness, and are counted righteous in the sight of
God. This resurrection is here in earth by faith in Christ, which we receive
when we hear his word in the holy gospel. As Christ says in John: Ioh. 5.28
Verily, verily I say unto you, the hour shall come and now is, when the dead
shall hear the voice of the son of God, and they that hear shall live. Which
words are spoken of the rising from our sins, as S. Augustine expounds
them. The other resurrection which Christ has deserved, wrought, or obtained
for us by his resurrection, is that resurrection of the body which shall be in
the last day. Ioh. 5.28.
Of which John says thus. The hour shall come, in the which, all that are in
the graves shall hear his voice: And they shall come forth that have done good
unto the resurrection of life, but they that have done evil, unto the
resurrection of condemnation. And Paul says to the These. If we believe that
Jesus is dead and is risen, 1. these. 4.14
even so them which sleep in Jesus, will God bring with him. For this say we
unto you by the word of the Lord, that we which live and are remaining in the
coming of the Lord, shall not prevent them which sleep. For the Lord himself
shall descend from heaven with a shout, and with the voice of the Archangel, and
with the trump of God, and the dead in Christ shall rise first. The^ shall we
which live and remain, be caught up with them al in the clouds, to mete the
Lord in the air, and so shall we ever be with the Lord, wherefore comfort your
selves one another with these words.


An. I have oftentimes been tempted about our resurrection, and these
cogitatio^s grievously vex me. Christ did rise in his own power and strength
as true God, but how shall we poor wretches rise, which cannot remove or drive
away from us even the lest sickness that happens to us: wherefore I beseech you
tell me how Christ's resurrection makes us to rise.


Vrb. Whose sins were they which Christ did bear?


An. It is manifest and certain, that he bare our sins.


Vrb. What manner of nature was it which Christ took upon him?


An. It was our nature. For we believe that he took upon him our very human
nature.


Vrb. Wherefore did the son of God take upon him our nature in the vnio^ of his
divine and everlasting person? why did he take upon him our sins?


An. He became true man for our sakes, and took upon him our sins, yt he might
be a true oblation and sacrifice for them on the cross, and wipe them away,
and reconcile God the father unto us.


Vrb. I hear you say that our sins were the cause of Christ's death: but
what hurt did sin unto us men?


An. It brought upon us an horrible destruction and decay of al man's strength,
as well of body as soul, together with everlasting death and condemnation.
Christ's resurrection raises us.



Vrb. Seeing then that Christ by his death satisfied for our sins, and
suffered death for them, that he might put them away: it is not to be doubted,
but that he also abolished and destroyed death, which had rule and dominion
over us. But if he destroyed death in us (as I say he did,) it follows well,
that we shall rise again to life. For he did not these most worthy works (to
wit) that he suffered, yt he dyed, yt he rose again, for himself, or for his own
cause (for he is innocent and free from all sin, so yt he had no need to do any
of al these for himself: nay, there was no cause why he should do these things
in respect of himself, or in his own behalf) but for us. Yea, whatsoever he
did or suffered, he did it and suffered it al for our sakes and profit, and he
gave us yt his victory over death. This therefore is a good conseque^t. Christ
died for our sins, and rose again for our justification. Therefore shall we also
rise in our flesh: otherwise should we deny the virtue and operation of Christ's
passion and resurrection in our nature, and be worse and more wicked the^ Turks
or Ethnikes which deny Christ.


An. Now you bring into my remembrance the 15. cha. of the first to the
Corrinthians, which you do so highly and often commend unto me: wherein you say
yt Paul has so coupled and joined Christ's and our resurrection together,
that they can in no wise be separated.


Vrb. That chap. has such and so much sweet and sound comfort in it, yt I
wish all christians in ye world would well and faithfully remember it. Paul in
that cha. reasons thus. Christ is risen from the dead, therefore shall we also
rise again from the dead, because he dyed and rose again only for our sakes,
and for our salvation. If we should still abide in death, then the death and
resurrection of Christ had nothing profited us, neither had they wrought any
alteration in our nature: but we had still been (and should so have continued)
in death even as in our earthly father Adam we were borne to die. But god
forbid it were so, our hope is sure. For as it is certain that Christ rose
from death, and sits at ye right hand of God, so certain is it yt we shall
rise again, because Christ is our head, our bridegroom, our redeemer and our
life. And therefore wheresoever Christ remains and is, there must needs we
also be and abide for ever. There is no cause why you should dout, left Christ
our head should leave us his beloved members and spiritual body here behind
him in earth. Mark what Paul teaches us in the 5. to ye Ephesians. Note how he
binds us and tieth us to Christ. We are (says he) the members of his body,
Ephesians. 5.30.
of his flesh, and of his bones.


Anna. Blessed be God our loving, favorable, and heavenly father for ever, and
ever, for these infinite riches of his grace. These words of Paul do greatly
comfort and joy us, for if we be ye members of Christ and of his flesh, surely
there is no doubt, but as Christ did rise again in his own body, even so shall
we also rise again in our bodies unto everlasting life, by the power of the
glorious resurrection of Christ.


Vrb. This is as certain as you see now your self, and hear your self
speak.


Anna. But the condition and state of our bodies shall not then be such as they
be now: for now our bodies eat, drink, sleep, and are subject to wearines. We
eat, digest and wax hungry, and they that do not eat and drink, must needs
decay and die. But though we do eat and drink, yet can not these earthly
meats or drinks maintain our life here for ever. For when we be old and
sickly, and when our stomachs leese their natural heat and disgesture, then
can neither meat nor drink help, preserve, or prolong our life: But when ye
natural health and strength is gone, we end our days and die. It must needs
therefore be a strange kind of meat, which we shall eat in ye world to come,
which makes us live for ever. And ye condition and state of our body which
shall be then, must needs be far differing from this, and much better and more
excellent and happy, and blessed, the^ either heart can think or we desire.


Vrb. Paul has taught this evidently, plainly, and manifestly in his epistle
to ye Phil. where he says: Phil. 3.21. Our state after the resurrection. 1.
Cor. 15.
Christ in the last day shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned
like unto his glorious body according to the working whereby he is able even to
subdue al things unto himself. Lo both in this place, and to ye Cor. he says:
ye our bodies in the last resurrection, shall be pure, clear, and unspotted, and
like the stars of the firmament, and like the sun and moon. And among other
things he says: that this body of ours is as a grain of corn sown in the
earth in corruption, and is raised in incorruption: it is sown in dishonor
and raised in glory: it is sown in weakness, and is raised in power: it is
sown a natural body, and is raised a spiritual body (yt is to say) our body
here is a natural body, and to ye fustentation thereof, The dishonor which sin
brings neither have the godly any other after this life but only this.
we must (if we will live) eat, drink, sleep, digest, and purge. And the same
body is weried, and in the end corrupts and fades. And therefore as soon as
yt soul departs from the body, the corpse begins to smell and putrify, so
yt no man can abide ye stink thereof. This is ye dishonor which for sin is
laid upon ye body. But in the last day ye lord will tra^sfigure our body into
such brightness, and make it so beautiful, yt it shall be like the sun, and so
shall always abide and continue a firm, sound, and immortal body, without bodily
meat, fed of god for ever. And therefore says Paul, pointing as it were to his
body with his finger, this corruptible body wherein I now stand, sit, walk, and
speak, this same body I say, must put on incorruption, and this mortal must
put on immortality. When this corruptible body has put on incorruption, and
this mortal has put on immortality, then shall be brought to pass the
saying that is written: Death is swalowed up into victory,


Anna. Now I have heard the fruit of Christ's passion and resurrection, which I
take to be this: That what Satan in Adam, and our nature by sin had corrupted,
and destroyed, ye Christ by his death and resurrection, has recovered and
restored, to wit, he has destroyed sin and overcome death, and given life, yt
we which believe in Christ, may be delivered from our sins, freed from the
tyranny of death and the devil, and be made heirs of everlasting life. Now show
me what manner of kingdom Christ's kingdom is, which is so magnifically set forth
and promised unto us in the law, prophets, and evangelists?


Vrb. The kingdom of Christ, which is promised in ye prophets, Christ's
kingdom.
is a spiritual kingdom, and not of this world, it is a kingdom of everlasting
blessedness, mercy, truth, righteousness, peace, life, wisdom, light, joy,
security, liberty, and everlasting salvation: in which Christ ye king of glory
being taken up into heaven, and exalted at ye right hand of god does by ye
gospel, and the holy ghost in faith reign, and inuisibly govern, and defend al
yt believe in him, even in ye midst of their cruel and deadly enemies, to wit,
the world, Satan, heretics, persecuters of the church, sin, and death.
Moreover, he is our intercessor in heaven to god the father: he forgiueth us
our sins: he se^deth his holy spirit into our hearts: he renueth and
repayreth our corrupted, depraved, and decayed nature, and he restores in us
ye most beutiful image of god, which through sin was blotted out, and
destroyed in us. To be brief, he sanctifies us, defends us, and preserves
us in all dangers, and evils: and so he in this life even unto ye day of
judgment gathers up into his kingdom (which is ye true catholic church of
the godly) the children of God dispersed throughout ye whole world. He
overcomes in them sin, death, and the prince of this world: and by this
means he prepares, and makes the^ ready for that great and glorious day of our
full and perfect redemption. And although ye godly die in ye mortal body, yet
will he raise the^ all again at ye last day, and they shall live with Christ
for ever. But until ye day both ye evil and ye good, the godly and the ungodly
shall be mixed, and dwell together, and ye ungodly will colourably seek to bear a
face and outward show of godliness, An hypocrite.
and will also be taken in place for godly: nay they will be the chief in this
earth, and sit as magistrates, and vaunt themselves to be the heads of the
church, as Annas, and Caiphas did in Christ's time: yea they will root out,
curse, and vehemently persecute the true godly to the uttermost. For in deed
the true church is so hidden in this world, ye some times in great temptations,
it cannot for a space see it self.


Anna. What means ye miserable people the Anabaptists? what madness moves
them to seek to co^gregate a church hear in this world, which should be pure,
unspotted, undefiled, and without all blot, and where in they will have no
sinner? seeing yt eue^ the godly offend, and fall in many things, and ye greatest
part of those which are called christians, are mere hypocrites, and very wicked
me^.


Vrb. These miserable me^ understand not the scriptures. And therefore they
know not what is the true church, what manner of church it is, or what ye state
of ye true church is in this world. Christ only is he which at the last day
shall purge the chafe (yt is the ungodly) from the good wheat (which is the
godly christians.) In the mean time yt godly are compelled here to dwell, and
live among the ungodly. And yet shall they not have any disco^mo^ditie, or
loss thereby, if they learn not at the^ to live, and be ungodly. The godly may
bear publik offices, and have such politic functions, as the civil magistrate
does ordain, so long as they be not commanded, and compelled to do yt that is
contrary to the commandment of God, and his holy word: yea they both may with a
safe conscience, and also ought (as far as belongs to ye body and temporal
goods) use al humane and public ordinances, and co^tracts which make for yt
maintenance of this life and society. If so be they may be suffered to keep, and
retain the true doctrine of ye saving gospel, and live as it co^ma^deth.


Anna. Seeing you have already described the kingdom of Christ, I pray you
discover me the kingdom of Satan. Satan's kingdom.



Vrb. Satan's kingdom is quite contrary unto the kingdom of Christ: it is a
kingdom of everlasting perdicion, of lies, of death, of sin, of ignorance, of
blindness, of darkness, of heaviness, of affliction, of sorrow, and of
continual captivity, and damnation. And this kingdom of condemnation begins
in this world, and has in it all the ungodly, which will not believe, and obey
the Gospel, in whom the evil spirit works, Ephesians. 2.1.
and is effectual. Ioh. 14 30
And thereupon is called in John, the prince of this world, and the god of this
world. This spirit blinds the mynds of yt unbelievers, so yt they see not ye
most clear light of the gospel, of the clearenes of Jesus Christ, 2. Cor. 4.4.
which is the image and caracter of God.


Anna. How does Satan reign in this world?


Vrb Luke 11.21 2. Tim. 22.6.
He is ye strong man armed in his house, of who^ Luke speaks, who keeps ye
wicked in his hand, and has the^ in his power, and drives the^ whether he
will at his pleasure. Paul says he binds the^, and holds the^ in strong
lies, errors, and darkness, and bewitcheth their hearts, and casts the^ hedlong
into al wickedness, filthiness, and uncleanness, and moves and inflameth the^ to
all ungodliness. Satan is alwais an enemy, and an adversary unto true christians
in all their godly enterprises and procedings. He stirs up falls teachers,
and draws many into horrible heresies. He alwais makes and moves sedition,
bloodshed, war, strife, brauling, grudging, debate, and hatred. He never
slepeth, he is always watching, and he daily traueleth and labors very
sedulously, and all to this end, yt he may hurt man and bring him into some
misery and destruction of body, soul, name, and goods. He stirs up most
cruel persecutions and sharp storms and poisonfull hatred against ye godly. To
be short, what evil, calamity, wickedness, abominations, and diuelishnes is
done in all ye earth: he is the causer thereof: and to speak at a word, he
hinders as much as in him lies, the gospel and kingdom of Christ, and
laboreth both day and night, with all his might, with hand and foot, with tooth and
nail, yt the territories thereof be not augme^ted and enlarged. Christ
defends his church.
But al his force, studies, and practices shall be frustrate. For we have on
our side with us the angels, ye good spirits of god, which repugn and resist
Satan. Yea we have Christ himself with us, who is a fiery and brazen wall about
al yt faithful, yt the evil spirits do the^ no harm nor injury, but that they
may be in safety and with out danger. Satan is an horrible enemy, and in deed so
forceable, yt unless god by his holy angels hindered and destroyed his devises,
and withstood and resisted his assaults, there should be no family in ye whole
world, in which he should not every day cause and work wickedness, slaughter,
calamity, tumultes, sorrow, debates, mourning, and all kind of mischief: nay
rather, he would disturb, destroy, dissolve, overthrow, and make a confusion
and havoc of the whole world: he is an everlasting, irreconcilible, bloody,
deadly, and sworn enemy to all the godly. And he makes (...) bellum, continual
war without any truce upon the godly, even to the last day. And therefore we
must both morning and evening, and every day give thanks to God because yt of
his fatherly mercy toward us, he does so wondrously, so mightily, and so
gloriously defend and keep us from so cruel, horrible, mischievous, mighty,
and noisome enemies.


Anna. We ought so to do in deed. And I will do it with all my heart, and with
all diligence as my duty is. For we are bound to be thankful to our good
father, God almighty, because he has in such great dangers so carefully
provided for us, and preserved us from all enemies and evils. For we have often
seen how these wicked sprites lay wait for us, and seek by all means to
endamage, undo, and destroy us. But God has openly frustrated all their
assaults. And now I pray you recite and expound the prophesies of the mystery
of our faith, to wit, of the death, resurrection, and kingdom of Christ, which
we have now in hand.


Vrb. I will first begin to recite the testimonies of the Psalms, as I have
done before. For of all the prophets David is the flower: for he prophesies
much, plainly and evidently of Christ, (who should be born of his family or
tribe, according to his humanity) Christ's kingdom.
and of all his works and mysteries. You have heard before how ye kingdom of
Christ was described in the 2. Psalm. where God the father did not only
constitute his son king over the Jews: but also gave him ye Gentiles of ye
whole world for his inheritance. Whereupon it follows that Christ should not
abide in death, although he died as true man of the seed of David. For it was
requisite yt according to the decree and statute of God the father, he should
be king over ye whole world. Which thing could not have been in any corporal
and worldly manner, as the Jews dreamed yt Messiah should rule and have in this
world a great and corporal kingdom. And therefore it was necessary that the
state and condition of Christ's kingdom should be altogether of another sort
then ye kingdoms of this brickle and frail life are. Christ's kingdom was to be
everlasting, and he which is in yt kingdom, shall for ever have everlasting
righteousness, peace, safety, life, felicity, and eternal salvation. And
therefore he ends ye psalm. with this (...), (conclusiue exclamation) Blessed are
all they which trust in the lord. But he speaks not of a temporal blessing
here in this world. For the king himself, and his chief nobles, his well-beloved
prophets, and apostles had no great plenty here of worldly wealth, and pleasure
of this life, but were miserably afflicted, and always subject to many grievous
perils and calamities. In the 3. Psalm. David says, I take my rest and sleep,
and I rise again, for ye lord sustaineth me. The old church a thousand years
ago, understood this prophecy of the true death and resurrection of Christ, as
appears by Arnobius. Psalm. 14.7.
And again David says: O give salvation unto Israel out of Sion when the lord
turns the captivity of his people, then Jacob shall rejoice, and Israel
shall be glad. Here David in sprite desires, and godly, and fervently prays
Messiah, who only is called in the holy scriptures the true savior and
redeemer, seeing both the Jews and Gentiles by him are delivered from all
evils and perils, that they may through him, and in him enjoy everlasting
blessedness.

S. Augustine also takes these words to be meant of Christ. And take this
(wife) for an infallible rule for you in the scripture, that in so much as
there is but one only deliverer given of God unto men, by whom they may be
justified and saved, that Christ is truly, properly, and certainly meant,
signified, and understood in all those and such places, where there is mention
made either of salvation, savior, redeemer, or deliverer, whether it be spoken
in figures, or plain and manifest words. For seeing Israel and Jacob, that is,
the catholic church being congregated of the Jews and Gentiles, should be glad
and rejoice in Christ, they must live in peace and security. That cannot be,
unless such troubles be taken away, and the conscience be comforted, and death
abolished. These words therefore importe, and plainly show, yt our redemer out
of Sion (or as it is in Thargum, our redemption and salvation which is Christ
himself) shall take away and destroy all those things that trouble and afflict
yt godly, to wit, an evil conscience, tribulation, sin, persecution, and all
kind of vexation, and death it self, etc. For of necessity he must lead
captivity, captive, that is, he must overcome Satan, who has us in captivity,
and he must deliver us from his tyranny. Christ in the Psalms says: My flesh
also does rest in hope: For thou will not leave my soul in hell, Psalm. 16.10
or in (the grave) neither will thou suffer thine holy one to see corrupto^.
Thou will show me the path of life. In thy presence is the fulness of joy, and
at thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore. We can have no surer nor
better expounders of the prophets, then the Apostles and Evangelists.

And Peter and Paul have expounded this prophecy to be meant of Christ, saying:
Act. 2.31.
that he should dye and be buried, but not corrupt and rotte, as our sinful
flesh does: and that his blessed and divine soul should not be cast in hell or
grave, but be united again to the body, and that he should rise again from
death, and sit at ye right hand of God, and give us everlasting life. It was
meet, yt he should be the first fruits of the^ which were dead, that by his
glorious resurrection, he might open us the true gate unto life, and make the
way for us, 1. Cor. 15.20.
by which we also must go to him. But Peter and John, and the other Apostles,
Ioh. 20.5.
before Christ's rising again understood not this, although they had heard it
oftentimes until they saw the lord alive again. Wherefore it is no wonder
though Cleophas and his companion understood it not.

David says: O lord my God I cried unto thee, Psalm. 30.2.
and thou have restored me: O lord thou have brought up my soul out of the
grave: Thou have revived me from them that go down into the pit. Arnobius,
and Augustine understand this prophecy of the death and resurrection of
Christ.

And again he says: God shall deliver my soul from the power of the grave:
for he will receive me. Selah. Psalm. 49.15.
The church understands these words also, to be meant of the death,
descending into hell, and risyng again of Jesus Christ.

And in another place he says: Psalm. 71.20.
Thou have showed me great troubles and adversities, but thou will return and
revive me: And will come again and take me up from the depth of the earth. These
words also does Arnobius expound of the death of Christ, of his descendyng
into hell, and of his resurrection. And again in the 86. Psalm. Christ says to
God the father: Psalm. 86.13
Thou have delivered my soul from the lowest grave. S. Augustine, and with him
the whole church of Africa understand this to be undoubtedly meant of the
descending of Christ into hell, and of his rising again. The 22. psalm does
more fully and plainly then any other, describe the passion, resurrection, and
everlasting kingdom of Christ. And there are ye very same words in which
Christ in his great agony, and his extreme necessity, called unto his father
upon the cross. And that psalm describes Christ his passion, and also sets
forth the fruit of his death and resurrection, saying: Psalm. 22.1
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me. All they which see me, have me in
derision, they make a mo, and nod their head, saying: He trusted in the lord,
let him deliver him, let him save him, seeing he loves him. They perced my
hands and my feet, I may tell al my bones, yet they behold and look upon me.
They part my garments among them, and cast lottes upon my vesture.

Behold, how exactly, how lively, how truly, and how excellently the holy ghost
foretold Christ's passion, using the very same words which ye Jews used, when
they mocked Christ hanging on the cross. And the Evangelists are witnesses yt
al these things happened in his passion, which were fore told of it. And they
recite the very same words to ye end they may prove, yt it was the good will,
both of God the father and the son, that Christ suffered, seeing the holy ghost
prophesied many years before, that all these things should happen unto Christ.
Yea the spirit foreshewed also, that Christ by this his passion should enter
into his glory, and be lord over al things. As before ye have heard in ye 8.
psalm. But in this 22. Psa. 22.22.
psalm. he says. I will declare thy name unto my brethren, and in the midst
of the congregation will I praise thee. Do you see? he shall first suffer his
passion, but he shall not bide in his passion, and death. For even the^ shall he
magnify his fathers name, and make it famous and well known through the whole
world, by this glorious and famous preaching of Gods mercies, in that he spared
not his own only son, but gave him for our sakes to the death of the
cross, that we might thereby obtain the benefit of everlasting life. For so
it follows in the psalm, The poor shall eat and be satisfied: they that
seek after the lord shall praise him, and their hearts shall live for ever. This
eating and satisfieng of the poor, is a spiritual satisfieng, when the poor
sinners eat the true bread of heaven, that is, when they hear the gospel of
Christ's humanity, passion, A spiritual eating.
and resurrection, and keep it in their hearts by faith. For then are they fed
by it unto everlasting life, according to that of John. Ioh. 6.51
I am the living bread which came down from heaven, if any man eat of this
bread, he shall live for ever. Neither can man's conscience be otherwise
satisfied, and set at quiet, that it be not vexed and troubled by any other
thing, but only by Christ apprehended, by faith. It follows.

All the ends of the world shall remember themselves, Psalm. 22.27
and turn to the Lord, and all the kindreds of the nations shall worship
before thee. For the kingdom is the lords, and he rules among the nations.
This is, when men by the preaching and doctrine of the Gospel, are put in mind
of gods great benefits, and are constrained to acknowledge, worship, confess,
glorify, and call upon Christ their lord, who is appointed of God the father to
be the head of all things, and king over all nations of the whole world. Here
have ye the kingdom of Christ, which is the holy catholic church spread over
the face of the whole earth. And now in all things and places, where that evil
spirit the devil before ruled by lying, (having seduced all people, and led
them into all kinds of errors and idolatry, Ephesians. 2.
that they might be (as Paul says) without Christ, without the word, without
hope, and without God in the world) there I say, in those parts shall Christ
now be heard.

It follows, their seed shall serve him, Psalm 22.30
and the lord shall be preached from age to age. But if Christ shall have seed,
that is to say, spiritual children borne by the gospel, as well of the Jews
as Gentiles (as you see by this text, he must) then can he not be overcome by
death, nor abide in the grave. For how could he then regenerate and congregate
the Gentiles together into the catholic faith, and rule such an empire which
should fill the whole world, whose dominion should not extend through one
piece of the earth only, but thorough the whole circuit of the wide world, and
so continue for ever world without end? For whosoever believes in Christ shall be
partaker of everlasting life. Wheresoever therefore the prophets set down the
kingdom of Christ, saying, that it shall have continual peace, health, and
felicitye, there is set down, and in deed declared, the death and resurrection
of Christ, and all christian men. For if Christ shall be a king, and set up and
have an heavenly and everlasting kingdom, it must needs follow, that he
should leave this temporal and mortal life by death, and ascend into that
everlasting and glorious kingdom of heaven, and so could not be kept in death.
He must also of necessity have some people over who^ he might be Lord and king,
and whom he might rule and govern. Wherefore his people also can not abide in
death, but must with their eternal king live for ever. I would have you make
much of this Psalm. Psalm. 22.
For I tell you this is a notable Psalm, and most comfortable of al other
psalms.

Again in the 69. psalm, the prophet does plainly and manifestly speak of
Christ's passion, and the fruit thereof, Psalm. 69.4.
saying thus in the person of Christ: They have hated me without a cause. I
restored that which I took not. The rebukes of them that rebuked thee, are
fallen upon me. They gave me gall in my meat, and in my thirst they gave me
vinegar to drink.

Christ our surely.
Here is set down the end of Christ's passion and cause, why he would suffer,
to wit, that he might pay our debtes, and bear our sins upon the cross. He
was our pledge and surety, and when we could not perform, and pay that which
we ought, he paid our debtes for us. If we should have paid our debtes our
selves (that is) if we should have borne our own sins, we should al have been
cast down into the deep pit of hell, and perished everlastingly.

You hear it also in this place foretold, how the tormentors should crucify
and handle him, and how they should give him gall and vinegar to hasten his
death, or rather to increase his pain and torments. Which thing plainly
appears in the Gospel in Matthew, Mat. 27. Mar. 15. Luke 23. John. 19. Psa.
41.9. John. 13.28.
Mark, Luke, and John.

And David prophesies in the 41. psalm, how Judas should betray Christ,
saying: My familiar friend who^ I trusted, which did eat of my bread, has
lifted up his heel against me. And John cites this prophecy, where he
speaks of Judas his treason. And in ye same psalm, hard after, Christ
requires of his heavenly father, that he might rise again, and ascend into
heaven, and that after his resurrection, he might be exalted unto ye right hand
of his father, saying: Psalm. 41.10
Therefore lord have mercy upon me, and raise me up, so shall I reward them.
Place me in thy sight for ever.

And in the 40. Psalm, David prophesies of the destroying, and abrogating of
the Jews sacrifice, and he speaks of the true sacrifice of Christ: by which
he reconciled God unto us, and fulfilled all his fathers will, and satisfied
the law. These are the words of the prophet in Christ's person: Psalm. 40.6
Sacrifices and burnt offerings thou did not desire: (for thou have prepared
mine ears) burnt offerings, and sin offerings have thou not required. Then
said I (that is Christ) Lo I come. For in the roll of the book (that is, in
Moses and ye prophets) It is written of me, I desired to do thy good will O my
God. Yea thy law is within my heart. I have declared thy righteousness in the
great congregation.

And afterward he prays his father, that he would not forsake him in his
cross and affliction, saying: Withdraw not thou thy tender mercy from me (O
Lord) let thy mercy and thy truth always preserve me: for innumerable troubles
have compassed me. Our sins Christ's sins.
And a little after he calls our sins, his sins. Not for that he did ever
sin, but because he took our offenses upon him, that he might purge them,
and suffer for them, even as if they had been his own.

And this verily is a wonderful and unspeakable kind of mercy and goodness.
These are his words: My sins have taken such hold me, that I am not able to
look up, yea, they are more in number, then the hears of my head. Therefore my
heart has failed me. O GOD, let it please thee to deliver me, O Lord make
haste to help me.

And in the 118. Psalm, David prophecieth excellently and notably of Christ,
telling us how ye Jews should reject him, and especially those amongst them,
which would be counted most learned and holy (to wit) the Scribes and Pharisees.
And yet nevertheless should he attain to excellent honor, and gather together
both the Jews and Gentiles, into one spiritual building of the catholic
church. Psa. 118.22
These be the words: The stone which the builders refused, is the head of the
corner. This was the lords doing, and it is marvelous in our eyes, this is
the day which the Lord has made, let us rejoice, and be glad in it. The
Apostles and Evangelists do diligently expound this prophecy, and they cite it
of Christ in many places, Act. 4.11. 1. Pet. 2.4 Mat. 21. Ephesians. 2.20.
saying: that Christ alone is the rock and corner stone, on whom, when we are
builded by faith, we may strongly stand against all evils, storms and
tempests that rise against us. The Jews when they had sealed up the grave
stone, thought that Christ had been utterly extinguished: and the two disciples
also which went to Emaus, doubted the same: but Peter thinks and preaches
far otherwise, Acts. 2.36.
saying: Let therefore the whole house of Israel know for a surety, that God
has made him both Lord and Christ. This Jesus I say, whom you have crucified.
Acts. 5.30,
Again he says to these folish builders: The God of our fathers has raised
up Jesus whom ye slew and hanged on a tree: him has God lift up with his right
hand to be a prince and a savior. etc.

But now ye shall hear what worthy and notable things David prophesies of
Christ's glory in the 18. Psalm, Psalm. 18.43.
where Christ says: Thou have delivered me from the contentions of the people.
Thou have made me the head of the heathen. The calling of us Gentiles.
A people whom I have not known, shall serve me. Out of all doubt the spirit
of God speaks here especially of Christ, against whom his own proper people
did kick, in that they would not have him to be their king. And therefore are
they forsaken, and Christ is made the king and head of all nations in the
world. Which came to pass after the resurrection and ascension of Christ,
where he was, by the preaching and teaching of the gospel, published and
preached through the whole world: and became famous, and was acknowledged for
a king.

David in the 21. psalm speaks of the eternal and spiritual kingdom of
Christ, and of his great and princely honor, and tells how miserably his
enemies should end, saying: Psalm. 21.1.
The king shall rejoice in thy strength O Lord: yea, how greatly shall he
rejoice in thy salvation? Thou have given him his hearts desire, and have not
denied him the request of his lips. Selah. For thou did prevent him with
liberal blessings, and did set a crown of pure gold on his head. He asked
life of thee and thou gave him a long life, for ever, and ever. His glory is
great in thy salvation, dignity and honor have thou laid upon him. For thou
have set him as blessings for ever. Thou have made him glad with the joy of
thy countenance, because the king trusted in the Lord, and in the mercy of the
most high, he shall not slide. Thine hands shall find out all thine enemies,
and thy right hand shall find out them that hate thee. Thou shall make them
like a fiery oue^ in time of thine anger. The lord shall destroy them in his
wrath: and the fire shall devour them.

Here again we see that Christ after he had humbled and debased himself,
should be exalted above all things, as the true king of eternal blessedness
and felicity: and that the enemies both of Christ, and Christians, should
perish eternally. Wherefore it is something strange, that those two disciples
were so offended at Christ's suffering.


Anna. It is a strange thing in deed yt they understood not their own
prophets. For seeing they were Jews borne, they should not have been ignorant
of any of those things. But peradventure the carelessness and slothfulness
of the churchmen or priests was the cause that the Jews had so little
knowledge of Messiah, and his kingdom. I remember I have heard you say, that
when Christ came into the sinagogue, the Scribes and Pharisees had laid aside
the holy Scriptures, and taught and urged the doctrine and traditions of men.
What marvel the^, if the rude and unlearned people knew not the Scriptures,
seeing they which boasted themselves to be the rulers of the church were
blinded, and understood them not. Mat. 15.14



Urban. It is as you say: for you see in Matthew how at that time those blind
guides set aside, and despised the commandments of God, and preferred the
doctrine and traditions of me^ before the word of god. Satan has alwais his
false prophets among ye children of God, and he sows and spreads his
errors in all places.


Anna. God the father keep us, and destroy the devises and assaults of that
enemy. But now go on, and open the prophesies which be in the psalms.


Vrb David prophesies in the 24. Psalm, that Christ should be a most mighty
and puissaunt prince in all the world. And there he commands yt all worldly
princes and potentates should open the gates and doors of glory, unto this most
maiestical king, and that they should on each side go out of his way, yt he
might have a wide and large way to walk in. For he says, he is the almighty
God, that most mighty and puissant lord, strong in battle. Psalm. 24.7.
These are the prophets words. Lift up your heds you gates, and be ye lift up,
ye everlasting doers, and the king of glory shall come in. Who is the king of
glory? The lord strong and mighty, even the Lord strong in battle. Lift up
your heads ye gates, and lift up your selves ye everlasting doors, and the
king of glory shall come in. Who is the king of glory? The Lord of hosts he is
the king of glory Selah. Psalm. 29.10
And again he says: The lord does remain king for ever. The lord shall give
strength unto his people: the lord shall bless his people with peace. This god
shall rule for ever, Jesus Christ, and no other, whose kingdom only shall remain
for ever. Esaias. 9.7.
Neither is his kingdom an earthly kingdom, wherein Israel according to the
flesh, reigns in the land of Canaan, as the Jews dreamed, but it is an
heavenly kingdom. For David says not here, that the lord will give his people
cities, fields, grounds, meadows, vineyardes, wealth, and riches: but he
says, he will give them strength, fortitude, and power (to wit) the power of
the holy ghost, which is the spirit of strength and fortitude. He says that
he will bless his children with peace, and he blesses them in deed with that
true and eternal peace, and enricheth, and increases them in all heavenly
gifts.

The 72. Psalm also does excellently prophecy of this heavenly kingdom of
Christ, showing what kind of kingdom it should be, to wit, a kingdom of
righteousness: a kingdom in which should be perfect true holiness without
hypocrisy: a kingdom of true peace, wherein nothing is done contrary to law and
equity: a kingdom whereas no man has wrong, but al things be wrought and done
(...) by true justice, equality, equity, and clemency: a kingdom where all
peace, quietness, humanity and just dealing florishe: and a kingdom where the
poor afflicted, oppressed, contemptible and wretched, find present help,
comfort, and consolation. And further he says, that this kingdom, wherein true
life dwells, is so wide, that it extends it self, not over Judah only, but
over the whole world. For thus says Solomon:

Give thy judgments to the King, O GOD, Psa. 72.1.
and thy righteousness to the kings son. Then shall he judge thy people in
righteousness, and thy power with equity. The mountains and the hills shall
bring peace to the people. By justice he shall judge the poor of the people,
he shall save the children of the needy, and shall subdue the oppressor. They
shall fear thee, as long as the sun and the Moon endures from generation
to generation.

He shall come down like the rain upon the mowen grass, and as the showers
that water the earth. In his days shall the righteous florishe, and abundance
of peace shall be so long as the Moon endures. His dominion shall be from sea
to sea, and from the river unto the ends of the land. They that dwell in the
wilderness, shall kneel before him, and his enemies shall lick the dust. The
kings of Tharses, and of the Isles shall bring presents. The kings of Sheba and
Seba shall bring gifts, yea, all kings shall worship him, all nations shall
serve him. For he shall deliver the poor when he cries, the needy also, and
him that has no helper. He shall be merciful to the poor and needy, and
shall preserve the souls of the poor: he shall preserve and redeem the
souls from deceit and violence, and dear shall their blood be in his sight,
yea, he shall live, and unto him shall they give of the gold of Sheba (or
Arabia) they shall also pray for him continually, and daily bless him. His name
shall be for ever. His name shall endure as long as the son: all nations shall
bless him, and be blessed in him.

It was needful that Christ should rise from death, that this prophecy might
be fulfilled, that he might begin, enlarge, establish, and preserve this his
most ample and wide kingdom for ever and ever. And the holy ghost in the 45.
Psalm also sets forth Christ and his kingdom with wonderful glorious words,
calling Christ true God. Which testimony Paul also cites to ye Hebrews,
saying: Hebr. 1.8.
O God thy throne is for ever and ever. The scepter of thy kingdom, is a
scepter of righteousness, thou have loved righteousness, and hated iniquity.
Wherefore god even thy God has anointed thee with the oil of gladness above
thy fellows. Read the whole Psalm, for it does excellently set forth Christ
and his spiritual kingdom, in which both sin, death, and Satan, yea, and
else whatsoever afflicts, and troubles the godly, are extinguished,
destroyed, and overcome, and in their places is given everlasting life.

Also in the 47. Psalm, the holy ghost very sweetly and comfortably sets
forth Christ's ascension, Psalm. 47.1.
glorification, and ample kingdom, saying thus: All people clap your hands,
sing loud unto God with a joyful voice, for the lord is high and terrible, a
great king over all the earth. God is gone up with triumph, even the Lord with
the soundes of the trumpet. Sing praises to God, sing praises, sing praises to
our king, sing praises. For god is the king of all the earth. Sing praises
every one that has understanding. God reigns over the heathen: God sits
upon his holy throne.

In this Psalm all nations are stirred up to laud and praise the Lord, who in
Christ reigns now over all the world. If then all these things ought to be
accomplished through the whole earth: it could not be yt Christ should continue
in death, especially seeing it was prophesied that Christ should deliver the
world out of the bands of death, and himself be exalted, and placed in the
highest type of honor, and glory. The prophet David also speaks of the
battle and victory of Christ in the 68. psalm. telling how he overcame death
and Satan, and by his mighty and divine power, delivered al the^ from Satan's
tyranny, which were his captives, and ascended into heaven. And this psalm. Ephesians.
4.8
Paul cites to the Ephesians. saying: He ascended up on high, he led captivity
captive.

S. Augustine here understands by captivity, captive, even death it self
which held al ye children of Adam, as sinners in captivity, and mightily ruled
over them: yea even over good christians, which lay bound and captive under the
yoke and captivity of Satan, but by Christ's death and resurrection are
delivered and redeemed.

David says: Psalm. 93.1.
The lord reigns and is clothed with majesty, the lord is clothed, and girded
with power. The world also shall be established, that it cannot be moved. Thy
throne is established of old, thou art from everlasting: the floudes have
lifted up O lord, the floods have lifted up their voice, the floods have lifted
up their waves. The waves of the sea are marvelous through the noise of many
waters, yet the lord on hie is more mighty. Thy testimonies are very sure,
holiness becomes thy house O lord for ever. Here God the holy ghost
prophecieth of the kingdom of Christ, to wit, how Christ the king of all glory
so wonderfully keeps, surely establishes, and strongly fortifieth his
kingdom, yt it cannot fall and be ouerthrown, although the sea of this world by
violence and huge storms invade it, set upon it, and seek clean to subvert
it. The Jews did all they could upon good Friday, quite to extinguish this
king. And now that he is risen again from ye dead, both Jews, Gentiles,
Turks, heretics, and false christians, with the world, and Satan, and al
their power resist him and his kingdom. They forge most impudent and shameful
lies against him: they lay snares by subtleties to entrap him: they fill all
places with slaughter of him: they assay every way to hurt him: and they do
the worst they can, both by force and cunning against him. But though they try
every thing, they shall prevail nothing. Al their devises shall be frustrate: al
their travail shall not prevail: yea all their power shall not profit them:
for he died once, and henceforth dies no more. Now he sits at the right
hand of God above ye heavens: and is the everlasting and eternal God himself,
whose throne is builded, and stands on so sure a foundation and ground work,
that it cannot be moved or ouerthrown. Yea the very gates of hell cannot
preuail against the poor church, in as much it only depends upon this head
Christ, that glorious king of heaven, that most sure and immovable rock. Mat.
21.44
He which falls on this stone, shall be broken, but on whomsoever it shall
fall, it will grind him to powder. Seeing then ye habitatio^ of this king shall
endure for ever, it must needs follow, that he shall both live for ever, and
also give everlasting life unto us.

Psalm 99.1.
Again David says: The lord reigns, let the people tremble, he sits
between the Cherubins, let the earth be moved. The Lord is great in Sion, and
he is high above all people. They shall praise thy great and fearful name,
for it is holy, and the kings power that loves judgment, for thou have
prepared equity, thou have executed judgment and justice in Jacob, exalt the
lord our God, and fall down before his footestoole, for he is holy.

This king is Christ, who rules the church which is the spiritual Sion
thorough the whole world: He has placed his throne in a high place, even in
the very heavens, and all the earth is his footestoole, and he rules for ever.
But Satan and the world being set on evil, cannot abide this. And when they
are not able to throw down Christ from the seat of his majesty, they fret and
fume against the godly, and cruelly persecute them.

But for all that, they cannot take away their salvation, although they
endeavor it never so much. For where this king is, there shall all those be
also which believe in him. The ungodly cannot hurt the godly.
Therefore the ungodly cannot hurt the righteous, so as may truly be called
hurting. For when they kill them, and take their lives from them, which to the
world seems the greatest hurt that can be, then do they most profit them.
For death is unto them the gate and ready way to life, but the enemies of Christ
and his church, shall in the end be thrown under foot, trodden down, and be
more vile and filthy, then any rubbish, dirt, or dung.

Psalm. 102.15.
And again David says: Thou will arise, and have mercy upon Sion, for the time
to have mercy thereon, for the appointed time is come. For thy servants delight
in the stones thereof, and have pity on the dust thereof. Then the heathen shall
fear the name of the Lord, and all the kings of the earth thy glory, when the
Lord shall build up Sion, and shall appear in his glory, and shall turn unto
the prayer of the desolate, and not despise their prayer. This shall be written
for the generation to come, and the people, which shall be created, shall praise
the Lord, for he has looked down from the height of his sanctuary: out of the
heaven did the lord behold the earth, that he might hear the mourning of the
prisoner, and deliver the children of death.

In this Psalm we see how earnestly the godly Christians, which were before
Christ's nativity, did in feruency of prayers look for his kingdom, wherein
only, or else not, sins are pardoned, and death is vanquished.

These true Christians desire and pray, that Zion, that is the church, may be
builded every where, and the glory of Christ seen and propagated through all
the world, as did David, Samuel, and the rest of the Prophets, who with
spiritual eyes saw long before, that Messiah should first be debased, but
afterward exalted and glorified through the whole world. Neither were they
offended at the humility and passion of Christ, which of his own free will he
would suffer, because they understood the purpose of Gods works, to wit, that
he would make Christ the Lord, and head of the church, and that he would with
great admiration build up Sion the holy church through all the world. They
desired to see such a king, and his great kingdom revealed unto them by the
spirit: yea, to see him even with their corporal eyes, as Christ witnesses in
Luke where he says: Blessed are those eyes which see that ye see. For I tell
you that many Prophets and Kings, Luke 10.23.
have desired to see those things which ye see, and have not seen the^, and to
hear those things which ye hear, and have not heard them.

And again David says: Psalm. 110.1
The Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou at my right hand, until I make
thine enemies, thy footestoole. The Lord shall send the rod of thy power out
of Sion, thou ruler in the midst of thine enemies. He shall drink of the
brook in the way, and therefore shall he lift up his head. In this Psalm is a
most comfortable prophecy of Christ, how he must be placed at Gods right
hand, that is, that he shall be exalted unto most high glory, honor, dignity,
and power. But yet so, yt before he must drink of that brook, that is, of the
cup of his passion, and so by it pass into his glory. Wife, look you have
this psalm in great price, and love it derely, for it sets forth unto us
two special things: wherein true, and sound consolation, and al our salvation
does consist, What it is to sit at the right hand of God.
to wit, the everlasting kingdom, and divine power of Jesus Christ. He sits
at the right hand of God: that is, he has all power, he is most mighty, all
things are in his hands, he is, (and that even according to his blessed and
glorified humanity) lord, and king of all things both in heaven and earth, and
all things are in his subjection. Therefore it well follows, that he is able
to deliver us from all necessities, and calamities, both temporal and eternal:
neither can any creature do us harm, if we be in the kingdom of Christ by
true faith. God swears. Hebr. 5.
Moreover, God the father assuredly promised by an oath, that he would give us
Christ to be an eternal priest. Here is Christ upon Gods oath appointed to be
our priest, and he is touched with the feling of our calamities no less, then
if they were his own. He has purged and taken away our sins by his own
sacrifice upon the cross, and has reconciled us unto the father, yea, he does
still make intercession for us with his father (...) without ceasing, and he
teaches and gives us by his word and holy spirit, all things which are
necessary, for the obtaining of everlasting health and salvation. Wherefore
although Christ according to his humanity, was the son of David, that is, his
son by flesh and blood: Christ David's lord, and yet his son.
yet nevertheless David says, that Christ is his lord, not only according to
his divine nature, as he is the creator and lord of al things, but also (as
saint Augustine says) according to yt his human nature, glorified, in which
he sits at the right hand of God. For he is ye everlasting king of Israel,
which truly erected, and for ever established, and confirmed the kingdom of
David. Christ the true Melchizedech.
Moreover he is a true priest, and the true Melchisedech, who only could, and
ought to give that everlasting blessing, for that he is that blessed seed of
Abraham, in which only we are blessed, that is, we are delivered from sin,
and death, and are justified, and saved. Christ in Math. Mat. 22.43
puts forth this question to the Pharisees which were puffed up with an opinion
of their own learning, saying: Why did David call Christ his Lord, who was his
son, that is to say, of his stock? But although they seemed learned unto
themselves, and although they swelled with the pride of their own knowledge,
yet they were ignorant of this, which they ought especially to have known.
Again David says: Psa. 103.29
The lord has prepared his throne in heaven, and his kingdom rules over all.
And again: Thy lord shall reign for ever, O Sion: Psalm. 146.10.
Thy God endures from generation to generation. He says: Thy lord O Sion
shall rule for ever. He speaks not here of any earthly kingdom in earthly
Sion, but of that everlasting Jerusalem. And in the 103. Psalm he witnesses
ye same, where he says thus: Psa. 103.29
The lord has prepared his throne, not in Canaan, but in heaven. And again:
All thy works praise thee O Lord, Psa. 145.10
and thy saints bless thee, they show the glory of thy kingdom, and speak of
thy power, to cause his power to be known to the sons of me^, and the glorious
renoume of his kingdom. Thy kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and thy dominion
endures throughout all ages. All these things are spoken of Christ and his
kingdom. In the 89. Psalm. the kingdom of Christ is called an heavenly kingdom,
where the prophet speaks of the promise made by God unto king David in the 2.
of the kings, 2. Kin. 7.12
where God promises that he will give a son to David, which shall be a
peculiar, notable, worthy, and excellent king, a king of all kings, whose
kingdom shall never decay: and wherein is forgiveness of sins, and everlasting
mercy, and therefore both life and health. For where sins are forgiven, there is
the tyranny of death quite abolished, and destroyed. And here we have true
health promised for this kings sake, borne of ye seed of David, according to the
flesh, in whom that eternal covenant of grace is made and established. The
words of the Psalm be these: Psalm. 89.1.
I will sing the mercies of the Lord for ever, with my mouth will I declare thy
truth from generation to generation. For I said thy mercy shall be set up for
ever, thy truth shall thou establish in the very heavens. I have made a
covenant with my chosen, I have sworn to David my servant. Thy seed will I
establish for ever, and set up thy throne from generation to generation. Selah.
Righteousness and equity are the stablishment of thy throne, mercy and truth
goes before thy face, blessed are the people, that can rejoice in thee, they
shall walk in the light of thy countenance O Lord, they shall rejoice
continually in thy name, and in thy righteousness shall they exalt them selves
for thou art the glory of their strength, and by thy favor our horns shall be
exalted. For our shield appertains to the Lord, and our King to the holy one
of Israel. I have found David my servant, with my holy oil have I anointed
him. Therefore my hand shall be established with him, and my arm shall
strengthen him. The enemy shall not oppress him, neither shall the wicked hurt
him. But I will destroy his foes before his face, and plage them that hate him.
My truth also and my mercy shall be with him, and in my name shall his horn
be exalted. I will set his hand also in the sea, and his right hand in the
floudes. He shall cry unto me, thou art my father, my God, and the rock of my
salvation. Also I will make him my first borne, higher then the kings of the
earth. My mercy will I keep for him for evermore, and my covenant shall
stand fast with him. His seed also will I make to endure for ever, and his
throne, as the days of heaven. But if his children forsake my law, and walk
not in my judgments: If they break my statutes, and keep not my
commandments, then will I visit their transgression with the rod, and their
iniquity with strokes, yet my loving kyndnes will I not take from him, neither
will I falsify my truth. My covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that
is gone out of my lips. I have sworn once by mine holiness, that I will not
fail David (saying) his seed shall endure for ever, and his throne shall be as
the sun before me: he shall be established for evermore, as the Moon, and as a
faithful witness in the heaven.

Behold how certain and sure gods grace is to us in Christ, Though we sin
often, yet will not god destroy us, but fatherly correct us.
and for Christ Jesus our king. Although we sin very often and much, yet shall
not sin condemn us, if we bide in Christ. For what soever ye Lord has spoken,
it is the very truth it self, and cannot but come to pass, and be as he has
said. For though we be most unworthy wretches of our selves, and have no merits
but sin and wickedness to the attayning of so great grace and goodness of God,
yet this is our stay and comfort, that God has promised us these worthy
benefits, not for our deserts or worthiness, but only for his mercy sake in
Christ. Wherefore those things which be here promised, are most sure, and
certain, as also ye state of our salvation is certain because it stands and
depends on the everlasting mercy, and truth of Gods promises, of which he can
never repent him, nor unsay, or recant the same.

In the 111. Psalm he says: He has sent redemption to his people, Psalm.
111.9
he has commanded his covenant for ever.

Here is Christ promised that he shall be our deliverer, 1. Cor. 1.3
or redemer, neither is there any other savior but Jesus Christ alone. Exodus
15.1.
This Psalm was song in Judah for a thanksgiving on Easterday, The Paschall
lamb a figure of Christ.
when they eat the Paschall lamb, because God had delivered them out of the
captivity of Egypt. But that temporal or corporal deliverance, and the lamb
was nothing else, but a figure of the true and everlasting deliverance, and of
our true lamb Jesus Christ, by whose blood we are delivered, and brought out
of hell and everlasting captivity, into our heavenly country.

In the 113. Psalm he prophesies of the glory and honor of Christ's
kingdom, telling what a one, and how great it shall be thoroughout all the
world: For he says: From the rising of the sun, to the going down of the
same, the name of God is glorified. Which thing can not otherwise be, but by
the catholic faith, that is, that the Gentiles should hear the gospel of
Christ, and thereby acknowledge and set forth his grace and goodness, which is,
the sacrifice of praises which the Christians offer.

The words of the Psalms are these: Praise the Lord O ye his servants, praise
the name of the Lord, blessed be the name of the Lord from henceforth, and for
ever. The name of the Lord is ever praised, from the rising of the sun to the
going down of the same. The Lord is high above all nations, and his glory
above the heavens. Who is like unto the Lord our God that has his dwelling on
high, who abaseth himself to behold things in heaven, and in earth.

Likewise the 117. Psalm says, that the whole world, both Jews and Gentiles
shall magnify Christ Jesus, and honor and acknowledge him for their true God in
his kingdom: in which is is all felicity, mere grace, mercy, forgiveness of all
sins, true righteousness, true peace, true comfort, and true joy, and
everlasting life. The words be these: Psalm. 147.1
All nations praise ye the lord, all ye people praise him: for his loving
kindness is great toward us, and the truth of the Lord endures for ever. And
the 130. psalm also sets forth to us ye grace of God in Christ, which God
has promised us in him our true propitiatory, and reconciler. Psalm. 103.7
David says in that Psalm. Let Israel wait on the Lord, for with the lord is
mercy, and with him is great redemption, and he shall redeem Israel from all
his iniquities. All this must be understood of Christ: for the new testament
is the kirnell, the perfect and full interpretation of the old. And the new
testament witnesses in every place, that there is no other deliverer, savior,
or reco^ciler, but Jesus Christ: and it teaches us that our reconciliation and
redemption comes only, by Christ, who is the alone sacrifice and satisfaction
for the sins of the whole world. Wherefore take this for a sure rule in
scripture which never fails, that wheresoever deliverance, reconciliation,
redemption, remission of sins, or the grace of God is promised in the prophets,
there always (though the name of Messiah or Christ be not expressed) must we
needs understand Christ, and his death, and bloudsheding, and absolute
sacrifice. For these great things, to wit, forgiveness of sins, reconciliatio^
etc. are prepared, gotten, and obtained by no other means, but only by the
sacrifice and death of Jesus Christ. And these are almost the chief prophesies
which David has concerning Christ.


Anna. Whac has Esaias prophesied of Christ, and of his passion, resurrection,
and everlasting kingdom?


Vrb. False prophecy of Christ and his passion, etc.
After David, is the notable and worthy prophet Esaias, who has prophesied both
plainly and truly, of all the mysteries of Christ. In his 2. chap. he
describes the spiritual kingdom of Christ, yt is, the catholic church,
saying: that it shall be ample and glorious through all the world among the
Gentiles, by the preaching of ye gospel, by which men do acknowledge the grace
of God in Christ, and be converted, and do willingly, and joyfully serve, and
worship the Lord. His words be these. Esa. 2.2
It shall be in the last days, that the mountain of the house of the Lord
shall be prepared in the top of the mountains, and shall be exalted above the
hills, and all nations shall flow unto it, and many people shall go and say:
come, let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of
Jacob, and he will teach us his ways, and we will walk in his paths. For the
law shall go forth of Sion, and the word of the lord from Jerusalem, and he
shall judge amongst the nations, and reserve many people, they shall break their
swords also into mattockes, and their spears into sithes, nation shall not
lift up a sword against nation, neither shall they learn to fight any more. O
house of Jacob come ye, and let us walk in the light of the Lord.


Anna. The prophets use a strange kind of speaking, when they prophecy of
Christ's kingdom: for they speak of some temporal or politic kingdom here
in this earth. For Esaias says, that the whole world shall run together to the
hill Sion in Jerusalem, and there shall all the world hear the word of God,
and there shall be no more war in the earth, but true, perfect, and everlasting
peace amongst all men, and yet this is impossible, and incredible.


Vrbanus. The prophets have their (...) and peculiar manner of speaking, but
when they prophecy of the kingdom of Christ, the^ especially they use strange
and figurative words and rare speches, which are full of figures, and
similitudes, as if they should speak of corporal kingdoms on earth, and of
the great and mighty potentates of this world. But I told you in the beginning
of this our talk, out of the first of Peter, that the Prophets speak of a
much more excellent thing, then at the first sight their words seem to import
unto men, which are not well seen in scriptures, to wit, they speak of
eternal salvation, and of Jesus Christ the son of God, how he should come
into the world, and be borne of the virgin Mary, true man, of ye stock of
Abraham, and David, and how he should bear the sins of the world, and by his
death take away our death, with all our iniquities and sins, and how he
should rise again from death, and receive all power in heaven and on earth,
and give unto all faithful christians his eternal kingdom with life
everlasting: which kingdom of his shall contain such glory, as eyes have not
seen, ears have not heard, neither has entered into the heart of man, as Esaias
says.

Esa. 64.4.
In so much, that all majesty, might, magnificence, brightness, beauty, power,
riches, glory, dignitye, honors, worshippes, pleasures, joy, peace,
tranquillity, comfort, fortitude, strength, and vigor, yea, life in this
world. And to be short, what pleasure or happiness so ever this visible and
frail world contains, are not all so much as a shadow in comparison of the
glory to come in the kingdom of Christ.

Wherefore, seeing the Prophets speak of such great and marvelous things
(promised us in Christ) as far pass all our understanding and capacity, and
are so wonderful, that even the Angels in heaven are glad and rejoice at them:
they are constrained to use similitudes and comparisons, and to speak as if
they spoke of corporal states, and earthly things, of worldly kingdoms, and of
corporal honor, peace, glory, and such other: that by the visible, temporal,
and known things, which are set forth to our eyes and senses, they might move
and draw us to consider, and with hearty prayers to desire those spiritual,
invisible, and eternal things, for the possession, and enjoying of which, we
together with the angels are ordained. For we must wander here a time, as
strangers or pilgrims in this visible world: but at the last, we shall be made
like to the angels, and be placed in the spiritual and heavenly kingdom of
Christ, in the fellowship of Angels.

And here, if we well consider the prophesies of the Prophets, we may easily
understand and judge by the circumstances of these writings, that they speak
of the spiritual and heavenly kingdom. For they attribute such great things
unto the kingdom of Christ, as are not to be found in any earthly kingdom. As
in that they say that the king of this kingdom shall be poor and contemned in
this world, and shall teach, suffer, dye, and be buried, and yet for all that
by this means become a great and victorious prince over sin, death, and
Satan, and reign a king for ever. But what a happy thing is it, that we have
the new testament, the writings of the Apostles, and Evangelists, which are
the most sure and true interpreters of the Prophets? But now when we hear in
the new Testament that the kingdom of Christ is not of this world, but
spiritual, heavenly, and eternal, we must needs understand the Prophets
according to the exposition thereof, which if we do, we can never err nor be
deceived.


Anna. I pray you tell me what Esaias means by these his figurative words?
what is that of which he speaks? which is that house of God? whether run the
Gentiles?


Vrb. I need not expound it, for Paul expounds it to the Hebrews, where he
says: Hebr. 12.22 Mount Sion.
You are come to the mount Sion, and to the city of the living GOD, the
celestial Jerusalem, and to the company of innumerable Angels, and to the
congregation of the first borne, which are written in heaven.

Here we see that the earthly mount Sion, the house of David, and the earthly
Jerusalem is nothing else but a figure of the spiritual mount Sion, and the
heavenly Jerusalem, that is, of the catholic church of all the elect.

Into this mount, and to this true Jerusalem, which is the house of the living
God, all nations come on heaps. The holy ghost was sent from heaven in ma^s
sight manifestly into this earthly Sion, and Jerusalem: In it also was the
gospel preached, by Christ and his Apostles: There also began the church by
the revelation of the new testament: and so the doctrine of Christ went out of
Sion, and tarried not only there, but was published through all the whole world,
that ye heavenly Jerusalem being spread through all nations, might be builded
again, as Christ witnesses in Luke, where he says: It behooves Christ to
suffer, Luke 24.7.
and to rise again from the dead the third day, and that repentance, and
remission of sins should be preached in his name among all nations.

This should begin first at Jerusalem, whether all nations come on heaps to
hear the gospel preached. How far and wide did eue^ Paul himself by
preaching spread the Gospel? how many people leaving the erroneous and
idolatrous race of their ungodly life, run then into the mount of the lord,
that they might learn his law and gospel? For the lord judged among ye
nations, when by the spirit and gospel, he reprehended ye world of sin, that
they might acknowledge their wickedness and repent, and desire the grace of
Christ, and so be made faithful christians, and by faith have inward peace
with God. Swords among christians are turned into shares, when they enjoy
through the gospel celestial peace, when their hearts conceive true and
perfect peace with God, The peace of christians and to be thus affected, is a
sign of gods child.
and when they live peaceably with their neighbors, and always study peace.
Christ's kingdom is thus at peace. Me^ are humble, and submit themselves one
to another, they do not braule and strive bitterly and enuiously about trifles,
but are merciful toward their neighbors oppressed with calamity, and they show
the^ selves gentle, pitiful, lowly, and humble unto al men, and ready to
maintain justice, equity, and upright dealing, they know not how to feign or
dissemble, but are plain, simple, and merciful dealers with all men. etc. And
to be brief, they are true Israelites, in who^ there is no deceit or fraud,
because Christ their king blesses and governs them by his holy spirit, and
renueth and regenerateth them, and makes them which were bloodthirsty and
envious, very myld men and patient sufferers of all harms that happen: so that
being hurt, they hurt not again, nay, they wish well unto their enemies, they
bless them that curse them, and do good to them that hurt them. Forasmuch
then as appertains unto themselves, they need no swords, but only for the
infidels and wicked, which must be ruled and restrained by the sword, and by
force, least that, the godly and good livers be oppressed, and hurt by them. As
Esaias says of the kingdom of Christ. Esaias. 2.4.
They shall do no hurt, neither do any injury in my holy hill, because the
earth shall be filled with the knowledge of God, even as the sea with flowing
waters. And Micheas prophecieth of the peace which shall be in the kingdom of
Christ, saying: But they shall sit every man under his vine, Mich. 4.4. Hos.
2.18.
and under his fig tree, and none shall make them afraid. And Hose says: I
will make a covenant for them in that day, (that is, when Messiah shall rule)
with the wild beasts, and with the fowls of the heaven, and with that that
creeps upon the earth, and I will break the bow and the sword, and the
battle out of the earth, and will make the^ to sleep safely. And Zachary
says: Zach. 9.10
I will cut of the chariots from Ephraim, and the horse from Jerusalem, the
bow of the battle shall be broken, and he shall speak peace unto the
heathen. These things are not to be understood corporally and grossly, as the
blinded Jews, and Chiliastes did dream but spiritually of the heavenly peace,
in the spiritual kingdom of Christ. If therefore the Gentiles through all ye
world, according to this prophecy, ought to run unto the Lord into the church
or christian religion, and receive the doctrine thereof, and be partakers of
that true peace: it was needful that Christ should rise again, that he might
erect, restore, and establish that great kingdom which consists of the Jews
and Gentiles. For as yet the Gentiles when he dyed, knew not who he was. Nay, the
very Jews themselves could not abide this their king, whereupon the prophet
warns even the Jews in the end of his prophecy, saying: O house of Jacob,
Esaias. 2.5.
come ye and let us walk in the light of the lord, that is, in his gospel,
and in the faith of Christ. And Esaias comfort the people of the Jews
prophesieng unto them, that although ye Jews should suffer a great
destruction, and have a miserable fall, yet many of the Israelites should
escape all those evils, and obtain that everlasting joy, and incomparable
comfort, which God promised, saying: Esaias. 4.^
In that day shall the bud of the Lord, be beautiful, and glorious, and the
fruit of the earth shall be excellent and pleasant for them that are escaped
of Israel. Then he that shall be lost in Sion, and he that shall remain in
Jerusalem shall be called holy, and every one shall be written among the living
in Jerusalem, when the Lord shall wash the filthiness of the daughter of Sion,
and purge the blood of Jerusalem out of the midst thereof, by the spirit of
burning.

In these words the prophet foretells how glorious and honorable this
kingdom of Messiah should be. And he speaks properly of the times of the new
Testament, wherein Christ adourned his kingdom his Church, with beauty above
measure, and with all the gifts of the holy ghost. Ephesians. 5.26.
For he washes, cleanses, and sanctifies his daughter Sion: that is, the
church, 1. Ioh. 1.7.
with holy baptism, by his blood. He mortifieth the old Adam by the spirit
of judgment, and of fire. And seeing that the church her self must fight
here in the flesh, against most wicked and vile enemies: and seeing that she is
here on earth in great danger, Christ her almighty king does promise her,
comfort, defense, aid, and help in all adversities, and calamities, that she
may be safe under the protection of the most high. For he shall be a cloud
for his church in the day time, and a fire lightnyng it in the night, as he
visibly delivered his people out of the house of bondage, as we read in Exodus,
where it is said:

Exo. 13.21.
And the Lord went before them by day in a pillar of a cloud, to lead them
the way, and by night in a pillar of fire to give them light, that they might
go both by day, and by night, he took not away the pillar of the cloud by
day, nor the pillar of fire by night, from before the people.

Note here that the prophet calls our Lord Christ, the budde or blossom of
God, and the fruit of the earth, because Christ is the son of God naturally,
and also the true son of man, to wit, of the perpetual and pure Virgin Mary,
of the tribe of David. He is called the fruit of the earth, Christ the bud of
the lord, and the fruit of the earth, that is God and man. Genesis 2.7.
because he took his holy humanity of the daughter of Adam, which Adam was
made of earth.

This prophecy the Jews understood both in Babylon, and afterward also of
Christ. For Thargum Jonathan says: At this time the Messiah of the lord shall
be our joy, and glory.


Anna. Cleophas and his companion by this prophecy might easily have
understood that Israel should not quite perish, because Christ died. For if it
was meet that he should be the fruit of the earth, that is to say, natural
man, what marvel is it then if he died. But in that he was the budde of the
Lord, it was not possible that he should abide in death. For then should God
himself have remained in death, which thing is impossible. Wherefore he was
able both to raise up and deliver himself and other from death.

Moreover, seeing that not all which were in Jerusalem and in Sion, but the
remnant only should be holy, and numbered amongst the elect: it must needs be
that there were some wicked men in Jerusalem, and so consequently enemies to
Christ. For holiness and wickedness cannot agree. What maruayle was it then, that
these prophayne, and wicked bishops, and princes delivered Christ to death?

But yet for all that, he was able to deliver Israel, yea death it self was
the way and mean, whereby God had determined to save Israel, as the Prophets
have said, and yet not by force, armor, and the sword (as the Jews dreamed)
but even by his holiness as it seemed good unto the Lord. But it appears in
Luke, that those good disciples as then, Luke 24.16
neither knew nor understood the person and ministry of Messiah, to wit, that
he both could and should by death destroy death.


Vrbanus. You say well, and therefore does Christ call them fools, and slow of
heart to believe and understand all things, which the prophet spoke of Messiah.
But mark what Esaias says of Christ. First, Esaias. 8.1.
he gives Christ this worthy warriors name, calling him Maher shallal hash
baz, that is, have thee to pray. He calls him so because of his almighty
power, which no man can withstand. And therefore if he will do any thing, he
need not much time to the performance thereof, as we do which be but only men.

Moreover, he is a mighty Lion, of the tribe of Judah, Reave. 5.5
which casts down and destroys all our enemies even with his own
strength, and mightily delivers us from their tyranny.

In the same chapter Esaias prophecieth also that many shall be offended by
Christ, saying: Sanctify the Lord of hosts, and let him be your fear, Esa.
8.13
and let him be your dread, and he shall be as a Sanctuary.

But as a stombling stone, and as a rock to fall upon, to both the houses of
Israel, and as a snare, and as a net to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and many
among them shall stumble, and shall fall, and shall be broken, and shall be snared,
and shall be taken.

Here you see that although Christ be yt most precious (...) or corner stone of
the spiritual building to everlasting life (and therefore came into this world
that he might open our eyes and deliver us from all calamities and everlasting
evils:) Yet many are hardened and blinded when Christ is taught, and many be
offended and stumble at yt doctrine, Christ no cause of our sal.
and so cast themselves into everlasting destruction, but altogether without
Christ's fault. Much like to the working of the sun, which greatly hurts
the running sore, or bleared eyes, with his beautiful and bright beams: but
yet this fault is not the su^ne, but in their own infirmity, for to the whole
and sound eyes, Math. 11.6
the light thereof brings pleasure and delectation. Blessed is he (says
Christ in Math.) which shall not be offended in me. But the world is offended
at these things, by which it might receive help, and comfort. The world goes
about to reject Christ. But even as a vessel of clay or earth being hurled
against a rock or stone is broken, so the man that kicketh against Christ is
shiuered and broken in pieces. As it fell forth in Israel when the doting
Saduces, and the famous hypocritical Pharisees were offended at Christ. And it
is even so also now at this day, and shall be until ye worlds end. For he shall be
a stone of offense to many, and yet he no part of the cause: as the new
testament does expound this prophecy. For in Luke, Simeon says to Mary.
Behold he is appointed for the fall, Luke. 2.34
and rising again of many in Israel, and for a sign which shall be spoken
against. These things needs not much opening: for we plainly see that many are
offended at the wholesome doctrine of Christ: as these frenzy and fanaticall
Anabaptists, like folish Pharisees, which cursed Christ as touching his person
and ministry. And it has always ben so. For the Jews said in the Acts unto
Paul at Rome. Acts. 28.22
As concerning this sect, we know that every where it is spoken against. Here
the blinded Jews call the true christian church, and the right gospel of God,
a sect, eue^ as now the Papists call it an heresy.

Paul expounds this prophecy to the Romans, showing that Christ should be
unto the Jews a stu^bling stone, saying: Romans 9.31.
Israel which follows the law of righteousness could not attain to the law of
righteousness: and wherefore? Were not they circumcised? Did they not sacrifice?
kept they not fasting days? did not they keep holidays? and did they not the
works of the law? Yes forsooth, they were altogether occupied therein. But
Paul makes answer, that therefore they obtained not true holiness, because they
never sought it by faith in Christ, but as it were by the works of the law:
that is, they did strive to come unto God, and to be made righteous without ye
help of Messiah, Romans 9.31.
which was impossible, and so they have stumbled at the stumblyng stone, as it
is written: Behold, I put in Sion a stumbling stone, and a rock of offense. And
every one that believes in him shall not be ashamed. And Peter says: 1. Pet.
2.4,
You are come unto the lord, as to a living stone, disallowed of men, but
chosen of God, and precious: and you as a lively stones be made a spiritual
house and holypriesthood to offer up spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God by
Jesus Christ. Wherefore it is contained in the scripture, Behold, I put in Sion
a chief corner stone elect, and precious, and he that believes therein, shall
not be ashamed. Unto you therefore which believe, it is precious: but unto the^
which be disobedient, the stone which the builders disalowed, the same is made
the head of the corner, and a stone to stumble at, and a rock of offense, even
to them that stumble at the word, being disobedient, unto the which thing they
were even ordained: of which Esaias speaks in his 28. chap.


Anna. If these two disciples had known that the savior of Israel should have
been so handled, and that his kingdom and word should have been so dealt with
all, they would never have been so offended at the death of Christ.


Vrb. Christ is also described in the 11. of Esaias, and there is foreshewed
where he should be borne, according to his humanity: and he tells what manner
of king, and what manner of kingdom and people, he and his should be. The words
of the prophet are these, Esaias. 11.1.
But there shall come a rod forth of the stock of Iessa, and a graft shall
grow out of his roots, and the spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him the
spirit of wisdom, and understanding, the spirit of counsel, and strength
the spirit of knowledge, and of the fear of the Lord, and shall make him
prudent in the fear of the lord, for he shall not judge after the sight of his
eyes, neither reprove by the hearing of his ears, but with righteousness shall
he judge the poor, and with equity shall he reprove, for the meek of the
earth: and he shall smite the earth with the rod of his mouth, and with the
breath of his lips shall he slay the wicked, and justice shall be the girdle of
his loins, and faythfulnesse the girdle of his raynes. The Wolf also shall
dwell with the Lambs: the Leopard shall lie with the Kidde.

In this prophesy, first, you have Mary and Christ her son: Because Mary was
of yt tribe of Isay, who was David's father. This is that king of whom mention
is made. Then afterward he declares how he should ordain, and set up so
mighty and eternal a kingdom, and how he should continue it. It is a heavenly
kingdom, and therefore stands no need of corporal, and earthly armor,
neither can such invention keep, and preserve it. The graces of the holy ghost.
But the holy ghost by his gracious gifts rules this kingdom, and works all
goodness in it: his works and gifts are wisdom, wherwithall he teaches us to
acknowledge god: and instructs us in things that pertayn to true godliness,
and to a life which pleases god: and he techeth us what Christ is, and what he
does for us, and how much he profits us. He gives us also understanding,
that we may be able to judge, what a holy life is, and what is ungodly and
wicked, and what is consonant and agreing to true religion, and what is
repugnant thereunto: He also helps us, by his good, ready and wholesome
counsel, that the godly may know how they ought to behave themselves under
the cross, and suffer al things patiently, and valiantly, yea he ministers
consolation to the sorrowful, and afflicted, he gives us also strength in
tribulation, and affliction, that we may have steadfast hearts, and that we may
valiantly overcome all evils, and adversities: he gives unto every one
knowledge, and wisdom that the godly man in the kingdom of God, may know how
to use him self toward every man, whether he be strong, or weak in faith.

He gives us also the fear of God, which is the beginning of true wisdom.
And by yt we see that our god reigns and governs his people far otherwise,
then earthly kings do. For earthly emperors cannot see ye inward parts of the
heart, and in ye innerchamber of the breast, and those things which lie hid
within, whereby it comes oftentimes to pas, that they judge some man good and
honest by the eye and ear, which is a very wicked man in heart. But Christ our
king being one, which searches all men's hearts, judges truly, as the history
of ye gospel witnesses in Matthew, where he has to do with the pharisees, and
in that and diverse other places sees their secret thoughts, and regards not
that their false visor and show of godliness: But reproves yt falls show of
holiness, and fained integrity: And according to their deserts calls them
hypocrites. Mat. 23.13


But what kind of subjects I pray you has this king and who be his people.
Verily their title, The title and cognizance of Christians.
and cognizance (which Christ himself did also bear in the 9. of Zacharye) is
here upon earth, poverty, affliction, and misery. Here you see a spiritual
kingdom: if it had been a worldly kingdom, the^ should not the king have been a
poor, miserable, and wretched king, but a rich, honorable, pompous,
magnificent, and cherefull king: his subjects also should have been mighty,
honorable, and flowing in delights, and commodities in this world, but in this
kingdom all things are spiritual, and yet shall they not always be poor,
miserable, and afflicted: it is but for a time, that they shall be here thus
crossed, and follow their master Christ in suffering affliction. For as a
king after his trouble, and persecution, becomes great, and ascends to the
highest step of honor: so shall all the godly after their crosses (here) at
the last day become glorious, as the children of God.

But in the mean time (as Saint Paul says) we must dye unto the world, we
must be afflicted, persecuted, and contemned in the world, Col. 3.4. We are
crossed that our old Adam may be mortified.
for our true life is hid with Christ in God. When Jesus Christ which is our
life, shall appear, even then we also shall appear with him in glory.

We are crossed that our old Adam may be mortified.
In the mean time, our old, and crooked Adam must here be chastned, and kept
under by the cross of affliction. For the flesh, and old Adam shall not
inherit the kingdom of Christ. Contrarily, there must be erected in us true
holiness, that is, faith in Christ, seeing that God even for Christ's sake
pardons our sins, and by grace in Christ justifies us, and takes us for
righteous. Neither is the rod, or scepter, of this our king, Christ's scepter
with which he rules. Christ's scepter, the word, smites, the earth, the old
Adam.
earthly, but heavenly, namely, his holy, and saluing word, and holy ghost:
and with this rod before the last judgment, he smites the earth that is our
old Adam, which is from the earth earthly. He rebukes, smites, and punishes
our wickedness, that we being accused by the word of Christ, may hate, and fly
sin, and turn to better life, and afterward live godly, and virtuously, all
the days of their life. He does by his word also hurl down, all earthly, and
erroneous opinions, by which, men are seduced. He smites, consumes, and
kills (as Paul says,) Antechrist, With the spirit of his mouth. 1. These.
2.8
For as Gods kingdom here is not of this world, euenso also his armor is not
worldly, but spiritual, to wit, righteousness, faith, and truth. For we fight
against the power of hell, and sathanicall army, Faith is our righteousness.
Esa. 11.6
by faith in Christ, which is our righteousness, and by prayer, proceeding of
faith, which God hears, as he has promised.

But where the prophet speaks of wolves and lambs, that is a figurative and
dark speech. For the prophet regards not these brute beasts: but he gives
us to understand, that the church should be congregated of sundry sorts of
men: and that those which before had been at deadly fead and enmity amongst
themselves, The Wolves dwells with the lambs.
should by the gospel become so great friends, meek, and secure, that they
should not one mean harm to an other. This is the fruit of the preaching of
the gospel, to wit, the wyld, rude, and savage Gentiles, with the cruel and
swelling Pharisees, and the mighty potentates of this world, are by the gospel
mollified, tamed, humbled, converted, and brought into the church of Christ.

It follows in the same chapter of Esaias. And in that day, Esaias. 11.10
the root of Ishai, which shall stand up for a sign unto the people, the
nations shall seek unto it, and his rest shall be glorious. And in the same day
shall the lord stretch out his hand again the second time, to possess the
remnaunt of his people which shall be left of Ashur, and of Egypt, and of
Pathros, and of Ethiopia, and of Elam, and of Chimer, and of Hamath, and of the
Isles of the sea. And he shall set up a sign to the nations, and assemble the
dispersed of Israel, and gather the scattred of Judah from the 4. corners of the
world. etc. Here the prophet foretells how ample and large the kingdom of
Christ shall be: and he shows us what shall be the state of the time of the new
Testament, to wit, that although ye root of Eshay, which is Jesus Christ the
son of David, be despised and refused of his own people, yet should he be so
glorious, so mighty, and so famous a king, that all the people throughout ye
whole world should worship and honor him. For he should be set up for a sign or
banner, Christ our banner, set up for us to look on in the battalle of a
troubled conscience. The brazen serpent.
upon which all men in battle fasten and set their eyes. This is a most
comfortable ensign which makes the heart joyful, constant, and bold, and it is
a sign of victory. This sign is our king Jesus Christ, lifted up and exalted
upon the cross, by which cross Satan is overcome, and our souls delivered.
And as the Jews in the desert did run unto the brazen serpent, which Moses set
up, when they were deadly wounded of the serpe^ts: even so Christ is set up
before us, and unto us, that all men may fly to him, and with faith look upon
him, and steadfastly behold him, and so be healed of that deadly sickness of
sin, and overcome the power of darkness, thorough the might and power of this
sign Christ crucified.

But it is especially to be marked that ye prophet says: All nations shall seek
unto him. The 70. translaters have interpreted these words thus. Which shall
rise again to be the king of the Gentiles: that is, of all people in the earth,
in him shall the Gentiles trust. Like as the patriarch Jacob said, according to
the exposition of the 70. translaters in these words. Siloh shall be the hope
or expectation of the Gentiles. Genesis 49 The Gentiles called to be ye people of
God.
Here have we a plain and evident testimony of the calling of the Gentiles to
the grace of the gospel. For they shall enquire after Christ, or seek him, as
their only savior, and put all their hope and trust in him. What else is this,
but that they shall acknowledge Christ to be true GOD and true man, of the
stock of David. For hope in the first commandment, is the honor due only
and soly unto the true and living God. And thus the kingdom of Christ
according to this prophesy, shall be as wide and large, as the whole world, so
that the Jews shall be the least and smallest part of Christ's kingdom. And
even all the Jews understand this chapter of Messiah, who should recover and
restore the kingdom of Israel.

And where as the Prophet says: His rest shall be glorious: that is, his death
and burial shall be glorious, for his body is neither corrupt, nor rotten. He
died an innocent, whose death brought all us the children of Adam, out of
eternal death and shame, into everlasting honor and glory. For Christ by this
his most holy and sacred death, entered into his glorious and everlasting
kingdom, and so after his death, began his reign in life.

Christ's burial a glorious rest.
And when as the Jews supposed that he was dead in deed, and quite
extinguished, and al those things which he had promised and spoken to be vain,
and of none effect, as Cleophas also and his companions supposed: then being
risen from death to life, came forth, and overcame, and quite destroyed and
killed death, and became glorious, and was made king both of the Jews and
Gentiles, and reigns for ever, throwyng down his enemies with everlasting
shame.

First therefore in these words is contained the death of Christ, for the
prophet says, his rest. And afterward is noted his glorious and victorious
resurrection. For ye prophet says, that his rest shall be glorious: but his rest
or death could not have been glory, or glorious, or honorable, if he had abiden
still in death, and wrought and done nothing by it.

Exo. 14.15.
In Exodus it is written, that the lord stretched out his hand, and by his
great miracles declared his power, that he might deliver his captive afflicted,
and oppressed people out of Egypt, and bring them unto the promised land of
Canaan.

And here the Prophet does again promise such a deliverance: but a much more
glorious and marvelous deliverance then that was, when he drowned Pharao
with all his host in the red sea, and brought his people out of all danger
into the land of promise, without hurt and harm. The deliverance out of Egypt,
was but only a figure of this deliverance, of which the prophet speaks
here. For God will deliver the remnant of the Jews and Gentiles out of the
eternal captivity of Satan by Jesus Christ, and gather them all together into
the kingdom of heaven, where they shall never suffer either damage, detriment,
or loss.

And he calls all nations throughout all ye whole world. For salvation has
extended it self to all the world, that the dispersed and wandering children of
god might be gathered together out of all quarters of the earth, as Christ
himself says in John:

And I, if I were lift up from the earth, Ioh. 12.32 Ioh. 11.51.
will draw all men unto me. And again: Christ should dye for the nations, not
for the nations only, but that he should gather together in one the children
of God which were scattred abroad.

The prophet Esaias sings a notable Psalm of this great and inexplicable
benefit of the true and spiritual redemption in Christ, whereby we be
delivered from everlasting damnation. And in that Psalm he meruailously
sets forth the goodness of god in Christ saying: Behold, God is my salvation,
Esa. 12.
I will trust and will not fear: for the lord God is my strength and song, he
also is become my salvation.

If Cleophas and his companion had known him to be the savior and deliverer of
Israel, as well as Esaias did, they had never been in heart so heavy as they were.

It follows in the prophet Esaias: Esaias. 12.53
Therefore with joy shall ye draw waters out of the wells of salvation And
ye shall say in that day, praise the Lord, call upon his name, declare his
works among the people, make mention of them. For his name is exalted. Sing
unto the Lord, for he has done excellent things.

This is known in all the world: Cry out and shoute, O inhabitant of Sion, for
great is the holy one of Israel, in the midst of thee. Note here how greatly
and abundantly the prophet reioiceth in spirit, or the bountiful grace of god
offered in Christ our only savior and deliverer. When ye gospel of God is
taught unto us, then is ye holy ghost with all his graces given unto us (to
wit) remission of sins, peace of conscience, and true joy. He is the true
fountain and spring of the living water, of which Christ speaks in John
saying: Ioh. 4.14.
The water that I shall give him, shall be in him a well of water springing up
into everlasting life. John. 7.37
And again Christ says: If any man thirst, let him come to me and drink: he
that believes in me (as says the scripture) out of his belly shall flow rivers
of water of life. He spoke this of the spirit, which they that believe in him,
should receive. For he obtained this holy ghost by his death for us, and he
mightily showed forth to us, how that by his death and the victory of his
resurrection, he overcame sin, death, and Satan. The true Sion, that is, the
catholic church of the faithful does in deed, and not without good occasion
rejoice and shout for joy, yea, she may well and worthily glory. For she has
gotten forgiveness of sins, righteousness, the holy ghost, peace of conscience,
and everlasting salvation. For Paul says to the Corinthia^s. 1. Cor. 15.57.
That God has given us a glorious victory and triumph over the law, sin,
death, and hell, through our lord Jesus Christ. Esaias prophesies in like manner
in his 25. chapter of the victory of Christ, Esa. 25.8
saying: God (Messiah) will destroy death for ever, and the Lord God will wipe
away the tears from all faces, and the rebuke of his people will he take away
out of all the earth. For the lord has spoken it.

Now then, if Christ has swallowed up death, then are we surely delivered from
it. For death neither has nor ever had power over Christ, because he was pure
and free from al sin. All mankind in deed is subject to it. But Christ paid
the price of all our sins, and in his own person overcame death, and so
destroyed it, that henceforth it cannot utterly undo us, and devour us. Because
all we which believe in Christ shall rise again, by the virtue of Christ's
resurrection. This also might have comforted Cleophas and his companion, and
have certified them that Christ was a spiritual king, which should not restore
that corporal kingdom of Israel, but redeem the true Israelites, to wit, the
children of promise through the whole world, from the kingdom of Satan, and
bring them into the heavenly and spiritual kingdom of everlasting life, and
immortality.

Esaias in his 26. chapter, has a notable song of ye kingdom of Christ, of the
church of the faithful, and of the fortitude, and security thereof, where he
says: Christ, victorious walls.
We have a strong city, salvation shall God set for walls, and bulwarks. That
is to say, the walls, and armor of it, are the saving health and victory of
Christ, which are sure and invincible fortresses. Open ye the gates, that the
righteous nation, which keep the truth, may enter in. Here are the citizens of
this city described, to wit, the righteous, which believe in Jesus Christ.

It follows: By assured purpose will thou preserve perfect peace, because
they trusted in thee. Perfect peace.
This is spoken of the king which rules this heavenly city, because he does
always, and in all places, give, and maintain, true, pleasant, and perpetual
peace against Satan, the world, and the flesh. This peace is in conscience
through faith in Jesus Christ. A little after, Esaias does prophecy of the
resurrection of those dead, which shall have believed in Messiah, and are
citizens of that heavenly Jerusalem, saying: Thy dead men shall live, Esa. 26.19
even with my body shall they rise. Awake and sing, ye that dwell in dust. For
thy dew is as the dew of herbs, and the earth shall cast out the dead. Come my
people, enter thou into my chambers, and shut thy doors after thee. Hide thy
self for a very little while, until the indignation pass over: for lo the
Lord comes out of his place to visit the iniquity of the inhabitauntes of
the earth upon them, and the earth shall disclose her blood, and shall no more
hide her slain.

Now if the righteous which yet lie in the earth, shall rise in their own
bodies, then must it needs be, that Christ should rise before, who is the head
and king, Our resurrection.
by whom they are justified and delivered from their sins, and by whom they
shall rise again.

The prophet therefore undoubtedly speaks here of the resurrection of Christ
and christians, and calls the faithful of Christ, the lords dead (that is)
pertaining unto the lord, or which are the lords, of whom God will take an
account, and whom he will preserve, and not leave them in death, but bring
them to everlasting life. For if God be theyrs, and they Gods, then out of all
doubt can not they continue in death, neither has death totally swallowed them
up, Where the dead be until the last day. Mat. 22.32
and consumed them, but it has for a short time separated their body and
soul: For God is not the God of the dead, but of the living. The soul is with
Christ, and the body in the ground. But at the last day the lord will purge,
and purify their bodies, and adorn them with infinite, and unspeakable glory.

Esaias teaches us, what manner of life we shall have after our death, Our state
in ye world to come.
when he says: Awake and sing. If the godly must sing, (and undoubtedly they
shall sing that everlasting Alleluya, that is, a thankesgiuyng, because death
is swalowed up in the victory of Christ) then out of doubt shall our life
(after this temporal life) be a most happy and blessed life: and we shall have
continual joys without any taste of pain, or sorrows, perpetual health
without sickness, eternal, and true pleasures, delights, and comfortes
without any wearisomnesse or molestations. After that day sicknesses shall
trouble our bodies no more, neither shall old age wither our bodies, or
decrease our strength, but we shall always have a continual spring, everlasting
pleasure, and perpetual beauty. Therefore says the prophet:

Thy dew shall be as the dew of a green medowe. That is, after your
resurrection, you shall not fade or decay, but flourish always and for ever,
and be as a fair meadow, and green garden, which by her sweet dew,
comfortable buddes, and pleasant delectation, feeds the eyes of all men. But
before this most joyful day of the resurrection of the faithful, we must
suffer much affliction and heaviness, (as Christ warns us in John, Ioh.
16.33.
saying: In the world ye shall have affliction,) and be made conformable unto
his death. This must be suffered patiently, and moderately, that be suffering
we may be made like unto Christ, and so according to our portion be partakers
of glory. And so Paul says to the Philippians. Phil. 3.7.


The things which were vauntage to me, the same I counted loss for Christ's
sake, that I might win Christ, and that I might know him, and the virtue of
his resurrection, and the fellowship of his affliction, and be made
conformable unto his death, if by any means I might attain unto the
resurrection of the dead.

In the mean while we sit, as it were shut up, unknown to the world, in our
parlor or closset of the holy church, believing the doctrine of the sacred
Gospel, and confirmyng our faith and hearts, with the sweet promise of GOD in
his word, even unto the last judgment, that the wrath of GOD may pass over,
and that which ought to be judged, receive judgment.

Our afflictions here are not continual, but for a short time, which compared
unto eternity, is not the twinkling of an eye. And this time once finished,
the Lord will come to judgment, and give unto every one according to his
works. Then shall the godly and guiltless Abel rise from the dust of the
earth, and then shall not the earth any longer cover the body of the
righteous, but it shall give them up, that together with their souls they may
be glorified.

And the Prophet in his 27. chapter prophesieng of Christ's kingdom, Esa.
27.2^.
and the catholic church calls it a vineyarde, saying: In that day sing of
the vineyarde (to wit, the church) of red wine. I the Lord do keep it, and
will water it every moment, least any assail it. I will keep it day and
night. Hereafter Jacob shall take root, Israel shall flourish and grow, and
the world shall be filled with fruit. And in that day also shall the great
trumpet be blown, and they shall come which perished in the land of Ashur, and
they which were chased into the land of Egypt, and they shall worship the lord
in the holy mount at Jerusalem.

This vineyarde, is the church of the faithful, The church gods vineyard.
which is enclosed and hedged about with the word of God, adourned with the
holy spirit, and moystened, and watered with the precious blood of Christ.
Although many hurtful beasts inuirone it, and go about by craft to burst
into it, and utterly to destroy it: yet shall it grow and be fruitful,
because the lord him self keeps it, and is a watchman, and keeper thereof,
which keeps it with all care and diligence. And the new testament in Matthew
speaks of the church after the same sort. Mat. 20.21


Although this vineyard abide great tempests, violent assaults, and grievous
storms: yet is it not torn in pieces, broken down, lesned, or cut shorter,
and made straighter, but every day becomes more flourishing, greater, and
greener. For the church increases and is dilated, and spread into the four
quarters of the whole world.

The Apostles which were to spring of the seed of Jacob and Israel, according
to the flesh, propagated, and spread the Gospel abroad through all the world.
And the Lord by their planting and wateryng, gave such increase, that
throughout the whole world there sprung up of the Gentiles, spiritual Iacobites
and Israelites, which have the faith of their heavenly father Jacob, and by
their life profess, and witness, that they are endued with the faith of the
Patriarchs, and are their children by faith.

And thus the true Jacob or Israel, yt is, the true church spreads it self
through the whole world, which before was only in Judea. Math. 8.11
For many shall come from the East, and West, and shall sit down with
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the kingdom of heaven.

The great trumpe the Gospel.
And it was convenient that the trumpe of the gospel should at the same time of
grace be blown through the whole world, that the grace of Christ might appear
and be opened, and offered to all men. And that both the Jews and Gentiles
might be gathered out of the whole earth, into one church, and worship the lord
Jesus Christ, in his holy hill Jerusalem, to wit, the catholic church, which
is the hill of the Lord, and the heavenly Jerusalem. For the earthly Jerusalem
has now his end, and lies wasted and destroyed, and was but only a type of
the heavenly Jerusalem. And now that the truth it self, and the thing figured
is come, and is present, there needs not any more figures. In vain therefore,
and frustrate is the expectation and hope of the Jews, which understand these
prophesies of the earthly Jerusalem, which shall never be restored to his former
state and dignity, as Daniel prophesies in his 9. chapter.


Anna. If this vineyard or catholic church, that is, The true deliverance of
Israel.
christian religion, should flourish thorough the whole world, If also the
Gentiles should worship Christ, and if they should become true Israelites, and
by the help and aid of Christ, flourish, and wax green: then surely was it
convenient that Christ should rise from the dead, to plant, and keep the great
and ample vineyarde, and so save, and deliver, not only Israel, according to
the flesh, but even us Gentiles, which be the spiritual Israelites. But these
two disciples considered not this.


Vrb. If these prophesies be well and diligently waied and considered, we may
plainly see and gather out of every one of them, the resurrection of Christ,
and true christians. This is the true deliverance of Israel, not only from the
king of Assiria or Babylon, but from that great and horrible tirant of hell,
Satan, and everlasting death. Esaias prophesies in other places also of that
gracious time of the new testament, wherein Christ came, and the holy ghost was
sent into the Apostles, by who^ the chief and true quietness, and peace of
conscience was given in the kingdom of Christ. And thus he prophesies in the
32. The palace shall be forsaken, etc. until the spirit be powered upon us from
above, Esa. 13.14.
and the wilderness become a fruitful field, and the plenteous field be
counted as a forest. And judgment shall dwell in the desert, and justice shall
remain in the fruitful fields. And the work of justice shall be peace, even
the work of justice and quietness, and assurance for ever. And my people shall
dwell in the tabernacle of peace, and in sure dwellings, and in safe resting
places. Esaias had told the Jews, that both their city and kingdom should be
destroyed, as it came to pass afterward by the Chaldes. And so it ought to
be before the coming of Messiah (who should end all calamities) and before
the holy spirit of Christ should be poured upon the^ from heaven, which was
fulfilled in Jerusalem on Whitsonday, when Christ sent his spirit visibly unto
his Apostles. Acts. 8.4.
Then at the last was the true Jerusalem builded by the Apostles on Christ the
head corner stone.

Then the desert, (that is) the remnant of the Jews and Gentiles, shall be as
a field well tilled, and they shall bring forth abundance of fruit in the
faith of Christ. And the field which before flourished (to wit, the Sinagoge)
shall be made a forest and wilderness. Then shall true righteousness dwell in
this kingdom of Christ, to wit, faith in Christ, which brings forth most
pleasant and delectable fruits, namely, peace, even true peace in the lord,
Romans 5.1
peace of conscience with true, and everlasting security.

He calls the church of Christ also, the habitation of peace, the tabernacle
of trust, or most sure habitation: Peace only in ye church.
because we can find peace and safety from the tyranny of the wicked spirit,
from sin, and from death, in no other place, but only in the church of
Christ. For he which keeps and defends the church, is the Lord of hosts
himself, which has overcome Satan, and established Sion (that is, the
church) on a strong and sure foundation, and in all places strongly defends
it from all evils that hang over it. He only deserved and made our
reconciliation. The church is his heavenly body, the church is his temple, the
church is his kingdom wherein he dwells. And therefore there can be no true
peace at all any where, but only in the church in which we have true peace
with GOD thorough our mediator and reconciler Jesus Christ.

Without this dwelling place of God, is very whote indignation, wrath, and
wretchedness. For in him which believes not in Christ, dwells the wrath of
God, therefore he must needs perish. But the true peace and security which we
have here (but in faith) by the holy ghost, the earnest penny of our
inheritance, shall then in deed at the last in the life to come have his
beginning, when our last enemy death, shall be utterly abolished.

There is also in the 35. of Esaias a comfortable prophecy of Christ, and of the
kingdom of his church, of the doctrine of his Gospel, of the miracles and
signs of Christ, and of our true deliverance through Christ, and of the
eternal joy of faithful Christians. The words are these:

The deserte, and the wilderness shall rejoice, Esa. 35.1
and the waste ground shall be glad, and flourish as the rose, it shall
flourish abundantly, and shall greatly rejoice also, and joy. The glory of
Libanus shall be given unto it. the beauty of Carmel, and of Sharon. They shall
see the glory of the Lord, and the excellency of our God. Strengthen the weak
hands, and comfort the feeble knees. Say unto them that are fearful, be you
strong, fear not. Behold, your GOD comes with vengeance, even God with a
recompense, he will come and save you. Then shall the eyes of the blind be
lightened, and the ears of the deaf be opened. Then shall the lame man leap
as an heart, and the dumb man's tongue shall sing. For in the wilderness shall
waters break out, and rivers in the desert. And the dry ground shall be as a
poole, and the thirsty, as springes of water, (in the habitation of dragons
where they lie) shall be a place for reeds, and rushes. And there shall be a
path, and a way, and the way shall be called holy. The polluted shall not pass
by it, for he shall be with them, and walk in the way, and the fowls shall
not err. There shall be no Lion nor doysome beasts shall ascend by it,
neither shall they be found there, that the redeemed may walk. Therefore the
redeemed of the Lord shall return, and come to Sion with praise, and
everlasting joy shall be upon their heads. They shall obtain joy and
gladness, and sorrow and mourning shall fly away.

Both the Jews and christians understand this chapter of the time of Messiah,
when the new Testament through the whole world is preached. The prophet uses
figurative speeches, under which are hidden many mysteries. Libanus, Carmell,
and Sharon are places in the land of Canaan, and by them the inhabitance of
the land are to be understood. And this flourishing and reioicing, is a
spiritual reioicing, and is wroght in men's hearts, when they hear the gospel
of Jesus Christ. And this is the meaning of ye prophet. Though the rebellious
and disobedient Sinagog, with ye princes of Judah, and the greatest part of the
Jews, together with their kingdom be abolished and destroyed: yet shall some
remain and continue still, and the people of the lord shall flourish, and be
increased. This was fulfilled in the land of Judah, even in ye Jews in Christ's
time, when he lived here on this earth. For Christ and his disciples went and
coasted thorough over all that country. Christ was in the desert, and the
Gospel was preached in the cities, streets, villages, fields, waters, and
mountains, with great, and strange wonders. And although these things were done
in ye skorsaunt and fruitful, in as much as welsprings of Gods grace streamed,
and flowed therein with great abundance: and in as much as the holy ghost by
the gospel caused notable and pleasant fruit to grow where before had been,
through the slender knowledge of God, great drought, thirst, and barennes.

But be not these (I pray you) to wit, faith in Christ, knowledge of our
sins, and graces of God, remission of sins, with a pacified and quiet
conscience in the lord, and good works coming of true charity and unfeigned
faith, excellent fair fruits, and beautiful and fragrant flowers? But this
grace did not remain and abide the remnaunt of the Sinagoge alone, but was by
the Jews (to wit) ye apostles conveyed also unto the dry, great, and wild
wilderness of the Gentiles, which also became very fresh and fruiteful by the
welspring of the Gospel.

And thus those notable and inestimable gifts of God, to wit, that we have the
words of God, the law and the prophets, and the Evangelists, with the true
exposition and understanding of them (which before time was only in the Jewish
Synagoge) be now given to the church, which consists of the remnant of the
Jews and Gentiles. And the unbelieving Jews have not now one of them. Is it
not (I pray you) a great and singular grace, glory, and gift to see the lord,
to wit, to know Jesus Christ: Esaias. 52.11.
the knowledge and understanding of whom does in deed justify and deliver us
from our sins, from death, and from all those things, of which Satan did
accuse us.


Anna. What preaching and joyful gospel is that, by which such great things are
wrought?


Vrb. The preachers and teachers of Christ shall with sound and plentiful
comfort, direct and strengthen all humble and broken hearts, which do
acknowledge and confess their sins, and desire the grace of Christ. For God
has ordained and promised them, help, aid, and comfort in Christ, that they
may be safe and out of all ye dangers of death and Satan.


Anna. What comfort and help is that?


Vrb. Verily, a most sure and strong comfort, Great comfort.
and help, even God himself present in his own person to deliver us. For he
says, hu iabo, he himself will come. Where then shall there be any place left
for sin, death, and Satan? seeing that the Lord himself will come to to
deliver us from them. They must of force fly, and vanish away at the presence
and sight of our God, eue^ as smoke.

This prophecy was fulfilled in Nazareth and Bethelem, when the true and
natural son of God, the everlasting word of the father in his own person,
took on him man's nature in the unity of his eternal person, in the womb of
the virgin Mary for our sakes, and became man, that in that his eternal,
innocent, inculpable and most righteous person he might deliver mankind from
misery, and restore him that was fallen and gone astray to his old honor. Which
thing he performed in deed, both by his passion and resurrection.

Cleophas and his companion waighed not this prophecy of Messiah diligently
enough, neither did they thoroughly understand it. For if they had, they would
have lept for joy, and said: Let our Scribes and Pharisees, disdain, fret,
sin, and rage. And what the^? Our Messiah will well enough overcome their
cruelty and tyranny, though it be never so bloody. Neither can they for all
their cruel rage, utterly take him from us. And where as he died once, it was
his pleasure: for he willingly suffered death for us. For if he had not offered
himself freely unto the hands and cruelty of the Jews, they could never
have touched him or hurt him a hair. But he tarieth not in death, because he
is God, who promised also unto us miserable sinners, power, help, comfort,
consolation, and everlasting joy. And whatsoever he has promised, he both can
and will perform. And in that he is God, he rose by his own power from the
dead, and took all power from death. First in his own person, then also in
ours, which believe in him. And we verily have seen such, and so many
wonderful miracles of his, that they do plainly enough testify unto us that
he is the true Messiah. For he gave sight to the blind, he made the deaf
hear, he healed the weak and lame, and made the dumb speak.

Whereupon the prophet says: Esaias. 35.5
Then shall the eyes of the blind be lightened. By this word then, you must
understand that most acceptable and joyful time of grace of the new
Testament, that time of Christ, when the welsprings of living water shall flow
from place to place in the desert, where God before was not known, nor heard
of, because that out of one church or congregation of the godly, the gospel
shall flow and spread abroad into other places, that there they may learn to
know Christ.

And where the serpents before spewed out their poison of false doctrine,
superstition, and idolatry, thither shall the sound doctrine of the truth now
be brought, and there shall it bring forth most plentiful fruits.


Anna. What way and holy pathe is that which is here spoken of in this
prophecy by which he says no sinner goes?


Vrbanus. What that holy way is
He speaks in this prophecy of the Gospel of Christ and of his Church. The
holy way therefore, whereof he speaks here, is faith in Jesus Christ, true
God and perfect man, borne here of the seed of Abraham, and David.

No way to God but faith.
In this way walked Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, David, Mary, and the Apostles:
neither is there any other way but this unto the living God, as Christ says:

I am the way and the truth, and the life, John. 14.6.
no man comes unto the father but by me. There is no other true faith, but
the christian and catholic faith. Faith the holy way to God, and way but it to
God.
All other sects though they seem never so holy, are nothing else but errors
and Satanicall superstitions. No man was ever saved, unless he believed in
Christ. And therefore this Christian faith is called the true, right, only, and
holy way unto everlasting salvation. Even the greatest sinner that is, shall be
safe if he go this way.
He that walks this way, whosoever he be, though he be a very fool in
worldly matters, yea, a most simple idiot, or vilest sinner, he can not but
must needs be pertaker of everlasting life. But whosoever goes any other way,
although he seem to the world, learned, holy, wise, and of great experience,
yet he wandereth all wide, and goes astray, nay, he hastes hedlong unto hell.
Furthermore, this way only is most sure, and safe. In this way, Lions and
wild beasts can not hurt us. For neither tirantes nor false teachers can hurt
them, whosoever they be that abide in this way and go not out thereof. For
though they take from them both their goods and lives, yet shall they have no
loss, but gain thereby. For all things happen unto their health, so long as
they are kept of Christ, who has such care over them, and so preserves them,
that he suffers not the least hair of their head to perish.


Anna. But who are these redeemed of the Lord?


Urban. Even both Jews and Gentiles, Who be the redeemed.
which believe in Jesus Christ, namely, all true Christians. These were once
seduced by Satan, and brought into the horrible captivity of sin and death,
Our state without Christ.
and therein had remained for ever, if ye lord had not himself come, and by his
precious blood delivered the^. But the Lord himself came and vanquished and
spoiled Satan. And so these redeemed, turned to Sion, yt is, into the holy
catholic church by faith, and the sacraments, and they come with praise, joy,
and exultation. For ye more vile and horrible the captivity was, so much
greater is the joy of the prisoners which are redeemed.

But this was a most vile and horrible continual captivity, wherein we should
have been for ever most miserably tormented both in body and soul, with all
kind of calamities: tortors, I say, which are such, that they pass all our
senses and capacity. And therefore this our joy in the Lord in Sion is, and that
by right, infinite, and incomprehensble, and more then heart can conceive.

The world also has his joy, but the joy thereof is momentany and very short,
for it has his end and continues not. The joy of christians is the true joy.
But the joy of the faithful christians is eternal. It begins here in
faith, but afterward when our last enemy death shall be swalowed up, and Satan
with the wicked and deceitful world cast down into the pit of hell, there to
be tormented for ever: then at the last it shall burst forth and show it
self. And all they that believed in Christ, to wit, his whole kingdom, shall
from that time forth be no more afflicted with enemies. Then shall the true and
everlasting joy of the faithful christians begin, heaviness, sorrow, and grief,
shall then have an end. For that kingdom (when the glory thereof shall be made
manifest) shall then at the last have no more sin, nor feel death, sickness,
persecution, calamity, troubles or adversity, for all causes of sorrows, and
sadness, are then through Christ taken away. As Christ witnesses in John: Ioh.
16.22
I will see you again, and your hearts shall rejoice, and your joy shall no man
take from you. Apoc. 21.4
And in the Apocalips the voice says: That GOD shall wipe away all tears from
their eyes, and there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, neither crying,
neither shall there be any more pain.


Anna. Seeing that we through our Messiah should have such full and perfect
redemption from all our sins, death, and damnation, and enjoy everlasting
life and felicity, out of doubt he neither could nor should remain in death.
And would to God we could believe this, and always rejoice in the Lord.


Urban. Even the godly are often sad, and as it were without faith.
Truly so we should in deed always believe and rejoice. But that evil spirit
through his wicked temptations oftentimes does so with thick clouds darcken
this clear son of joy and faith in us, that sometimes we cannot see it. Yea,
he makes us sometimes so heavy, that we, either altogether forget this great,
and iuestimable promise of everlasting life, or else weigh it not so diligently,
nor print it so deeply in our hearts as we ought. But let us always keep in our
hands the sword of the spirit, that is the gospel, and therewithal defend
our selves from the fiery darts of our enemies. We must stir up, and exercise
our faith, by diligent using, reading, hearing, and handling the scripture,
least we sleep in carnal security. Yea, we must say every foot with the holy
prophet David: Behold, Psalm. 13.3.
and hear me, O Lord my God, lighten mine eyes, that I sleep not in death,
lest mine enemy say, I have prevailed against him, and they that afflict me,
rejoice when I slide.

Esaias prophesyeth again of Christ: Esaias. 40.9
O Syon that bring good tidings, get thee up into the high mountains: O
Jerusalem, that bring good tidings, lift up thy voice with strength, lift it
up, be not afraid, say to the Cities of Judah: Behold your God, behold, the Lord
God will come with power, and his arm shall rule for him. Behold his wages is
with him, and his work before him.

Here Syon, and Jerusalem are warned, that they preach the coming, grace, and
power of God, in Christ. As if he should say to other cities in Judah: ye have
looked long for Messiah, which was promised in the law, and prophets: now look
up, now lift up your ears, and hearts, behold, here is your God, Messiah, the
most mighty Lord, who has showed his power, in that he has redeemed you from
those mighty, and cruel enemies, to wit, sin, death, and hell. What so ever
thing he but even thinks to do, he can finish, and perform the same, so as
no man is able to hinder it. For he is very God himself, in, and under the
shape and form of man.

Esaias also tells, how he does govern his people, Esa. 40.11
or kingdom: to wit, with great diligence, faith, and carefulnes, saying: He
shall feed his flock like a Shepherd, he shall gather the Lambs with his
arm, and carry them in his bosom, and shall guide them with young. Iho. 10.11.
We are Lambs, and Christ the Shepherd: he feeds us with his wholesome
word, which is our meat. And, although as yet we be weak, and imperfect, as
concerning the flesh, yet does he not cast us away, and thrust us from him: but
he bears us on his shoulders, and cherishes us, even in his bosom, and lap.
For the kingdom of Christ, is the kingdom of grace. And so in deed carried he
these two weak sheep, Cleophas, and his companyon: Wekelings.
because they were very ignorant, heavy, and weak in faith. But he fed them by
the word of God, and put such things in their minds, as refreshed them, and
made them very joyful, so that they were able to comfort others. In the 34. of
Esaias, Christ says unto his people: Esaias 43.20
But thou have made me to serve with thy sins, and wearyed me with thine
iniquities. I, even I am he, that puts away thine iniquities, for mine own
sake, and will not remember thy sins.

Here we see what it was that caused Christ to suffer, What caused Christ to
dye.
and dye: even our sins. And Christ alone, and no other, could, and was to
satisfy God for them. Our works, sufferings, and merits, were never able to have
done it. Our righteousness, therefore, or salvation, lies not in our hands, nor
in our works, or sufferings: but in the actions, and passions of Christ Jesus
our Lord. It is he that purges, pardons, and wypeth away our sins, not for
the worthynes of our deserts, but even for his own sake. Good works are not
to be trusted in.


Here we have the cause, and fruit of Christ's passion, and therefore these two
disciples should have thought thus: He has suffered, and yet not by
constraint, but of his own free will. It was his fathers will, and it was also
his will to suffer. And by this only way, and mean, he would redeem true
Israel, and so begin his kingdom. And a little after, Esaias in his 4 4.
chapter, shows what fruits came of these tribulations, vexations, and
afflictions, which Christ suffered for our sins: verily, even this, that we
have the holy ghost, with all his gifts given us, by which the church, the
kingdom of Christ, does grow, and flourish, as a field that is well watered,
and moystned with fruitful showers, The regenerated, and faithful are true
Iacobites.
in the month of May. When God iustifyeth the wicked, then forgeueth he him,
not only all his sins, but he gives him also the holy Ghost, with all his
benefits: to wit, faith, charity, hope, joy, and peace of conscience. And
hereupon grows, and comes true Jacob, and Israel. Thus therefore, says he
unto Israel: I will pour water upon the thirsty, and floods upon the dry
ground. I will pour my spirit upon thy seed, Esaias. 44.3.
and my blessing upon thy buds, and they shall grow as among the gras, and as
the willowes by the rivers of waters. One shall say, I am the Lords, another
shall be called by the name of Jacob, and another shall subscribe with his hand
unto the Lord, and name him self by the name of Israel.

Here you have the calling of the Gentiles: so that even they also shall be
Jacob, and Israel in spirit, and faith: and they shall both in word, and
deed, profess Christ to be their Lord, and God. This therefore, is the true
deliverance of Israel, that Christ does deliver both the Jews, and Gentiles
from their sins, from al errors, and from everlasting death: and gives them
his holy spirit, that they may acknowledge, confess, praise, and glorify
God: and at the last rise again from death, and live for ever. This is the
sacred seed of Abraham, of which the kingdom of Christ grows to greter, and
greter strength.

The disciples, perchance, were of this opinion, that Messiah should deliver
the Jews by force of arms, and edge of sword, and enrich them in the land of
Canaan with continual peace, plenty, and abundance of all kind of
commodities. But this was a light, and miserable kind of deliverance, in
comparyson of our deliverance, from that eternal captivity, and tyranny of
Satan, with which we all were oppressed. And when the prophet has now
reproved, and accused Israel for their Idolatry, because they honored not the
true God aright, He says thus: Esa. 44 12.
Remember these things O Jacob, and Israel, for thou art my servant. I have
formed thee, thou art my servant, O Israel, forget me not. I have put away thy
transgressions like a cloud, and thy sins as a mist. Turn unto me, for I have
redeemed thee. Rejoice ye heathens, for the Lord has done it. Shoute ye lower
parts of the earth, burst forth into praises, ye mountains, O forest, and
every tree therein, for the Lord has redeemed Jacob, and will be glorified in
Israel.

The church understands this of Christ, our redeemer, and true savior. For
there is no other redeemer of mankind, but Jesus Christ: neither is there any
other God, which can purge, and pardon sin, but Christ alone. Every creature
may well, and worthily rejoice, and praise God, for this glorious, incomparable,
and inestimable deliverance.

This benefit, to wit, that our only, and eternal priest Christ Jesus, the king
of Israel, has blotted out our sin, destroyed hell, overcome death, and
reconciled us to God: is so great, glorious, incomparable, and inestimable a
benefit, that it passes all benefits that could happen to us: nay, there is
none any whit like it.

Esaias prophesyeth again in the 49. chapter plainly, and manifestly of Christ,
saying: Thus says the Lord, the redeemer of Israel, Esa. 49.7
and his holy one, to him that is despised in soul, to a nation that is
abhorred, to a servant of rulers: kings shall see, and arise, and princes
shall worship, because of the Lord that is faithful: and the holy one of
Israel, which has chosen thee. Thus says the Lord. In an acceptable time
have I heard thee, and in the day of salvation have I helped thee, and I will
preserve thee, and will give thee for a covenant of the people, that thou may
raise up the earth, and obtayn the inheritance of the desolate heritages, that
thou may say unto the prisoners, go forth: and to them that are in darcknes
show your selves. They shall feed in the ways, and their pastors shall be in
all the tops of the hills: they shall not be hungry, neither shall they be
thirsty: neither shall the heat smite them, nor the sun. For he that has
compassion on them, shall lead them, even to the springs of waters shall he
drive them. And I will make all my mountains as a way, and my paths shall be
exalted.

Behold, these shall come from far. And lo, these from the North, and from the
West: And these from the Lord of Sinim. Rejoice O Heavens, and be joyful, O
Earth: burst forth unto praise, O Mountains: for God has comforted his
people, and will have mercy upon his afflicted. But Sion, says the Lord, has
forsaken me, and my Lord has forgotten me. Can a woman forget her child? and
not have compassion on the son of her womb? Though they should forget, yet
will I not forget thee.

Behold, I have graven thee upon the palms of my hands. Thy walls are ever in
my sight, thy builders make have: thy destroyers, and they that made thee wast,
are departed from thee. Lift up thine eyes round about, and behold, all these
gather them selves together, and come to thee.

As I live, says the Lord, thou shall surely put them all upon thee as a
garment, and gird thy self with them like a bride: For thy desolation, and thy
wast places, and thy land destroyed, shall surely be more narrow for them that
shall dwell in it. And they that did devour thee, shall be far away. The
children of thy Barons shall say again in thine ears: The place is strait
for me, give place to me, that I may dwell.

Then shall thou say in thine heart: who has begotten me these, seeing I am
barrain, and desolate, a captive, and a wanderer to, and fro? and who has
nourished them? Behold, I was left alone. Whence are these? Thus says the Lord
God. Behold, I will lift up my hands to the Gentiles, and set up my standard to
the people, and they shall bring thy sons in their arms, and thy daughters
shall be carried upon their shoulders. And kings shall be thy nursing fathers,
and Queens shall be thy nurses. They shall worship thee with their faces
toward the earth, and lick up the dust of thy feet. And thou shall know that I
am the Lord, for they shall not be ashamed that wayt for me. Shall the pray be
taken from the mighty? Or the just captivity delivered? But thus says the
Lord. Even the captivity of the mighty shall be taken away, and the pray of the
tirant shall be delivered. For I will contend with him, that contendeth with
thee: and I will save thy children, and will feed them that spoil thee, with
their own flesh: and they shall be dronken with their own blood, as with sweet
wine. And all flesh shall know that I the Lord, am thy Savior, and Redeemer,
the mighty one of Jacob.

This prophecy comfort true Israel: to wit, the church, the spiritual
kingdom of Christ, congregated of the Jews, and Gentiles: and it teaches us
what is the state of Christ's kingdom in this world: to wit, that nothing in
this world is more contemptible, and vile, then the true Israelites, or the
right believers in Christ Jesus.

For, the king him self in this earth showed all humility, and submission, and
was so far from al pride, cruelty, ostentation, and worldly pomp, that the
world utterly despised, and contemned him, even as if all that ever he had
done, had been nothing. For when he had continued almost 34. years, in very
humble, and low state, even as a pilgrim, or stranger here on earth, at last
they put him to a most shameful, and ignominious death. 1 Cor. 4.17 The godly
in this life must be persecuted.
And those (as S. Paul witnesses) that believe in Christ, must be like unto
their head Christ: that is, in this world they must be contemned, persecuted,
afflicted, and subject to all calamities.

Tertullian, in his Apology against the Gentiles, says, that in his time,
Christians, of all other, were counted unprofitable persons, and men good for
nothing. And Ciprian, against Demetrian, says, that in his days what evil so
ever happened in the earth, either dearth of victual, or other evil, or
misfortune, it was always imputed to the Christians.

And Paul to the Romans says out of the 44. psalm, that Christians in this
world, are accounted as sheep for the slaughter. Romans 8.36.
For, who so ever they be that be enemies to Christ, the same also go about to
kill, or destroy those that truly believe in Christ, and they that kill them,
think they do God service. Wherefore it is specially to be required, John.
16.2.
that the godly here arm them selves, and strengthen their hearts with true
consolations against all assaults, least they be discouraged, and faint under
the cross.


Anna. What comfort, then, does the holy Ghost give them in these great
calamities?


Vrb. First, he calls the remnant of his people: that is, the faithful
Christians, poor, and contemptible souls, which the world abhors: and
which are constrained to be sheep ordained for the tirants slaughter. But on
the other side, he promises that there shall be in those enemies great change,
to wit, that they shall be so clean altered, and have their disposition, manners,
and nature so changed, and become such, that they will embrace, and honor the
godly for Gods sake: whom they shall, by the preaching of the gospel, know,
and profess. And this was fulfilled, when the Roman Emperors (who before
time had bitterly vexed, and persecuted the kingdom of Christ, continually
destroying his faithful christians) at last were content in their own persons,
to profess the name of Christ, and did highly honor the christians, and
decrely, and heartily, embrace, and reverence them, as the only beloved people
of God. Of this sort was Constantine the great, Theodosius, and Charles the
great, and many other Emperors: whereby they which believe in Christ, have even
in this world, much pleasure, and joy. But the true comfort, contained in the
words following, shall at last appear. The prophet says: I have heard them in
an acceptable time etc.

This acceptable time, or time of mercy, is that time of grace of the new
testament, in which the Lord (the most plentiful welspring of mercy) opened ye
treasure, and (...) the most precious gifts of his grace: and commanded the
everlasting covenant of his mercy, to be published abroad, and preached
throughout all the world, as Paul expounds this prophecy to the Cor. For the
Lord sent Christ: and Christ performed al things, 2. Co. 6.17
which made for man's deliverance: for with his sacrifice he pacified God for
sin, blotted out sin, and swallowed up death, and fulfilled the law, and
conquered Satan. All which great benefits, and rich treasures, together with
his royal victory, and life, God commanded should be offered, and given to the
world, by his gospel. Indeed, this day of the Lord, is a most acceptable,
joyful, and comfortable day. This is the day of perfect health, and help. The
Lord also has given his servants (to wit) the true believers in Christ, for a
league of his people: even as Christ is a league betwixt God, and man. For the
word of God, and the holy sacraments, by which, ye church does bring other also
into ye league of grace, that they likewise may be partakers of Gods promises,
are found, and remain, in, and with the church. Whereas men which are without
knowledge of God, being in heresies, superstition, and idolatry, exercised, and
blinded, are by that evil, destroying, and disturbing spirit, dispersed, and
the heritage divided. Co^trarily, Christ's faithful are by the gospel, Luke
11.24
and doctrine of the church, gathered together into the unity of faith, which
iustifyeth.


Anna. But what says the church to them, which yet believe not?


Vrb. Esaias. 44.
It says that which Esaias speaks of here, saying: Go forth, and show your
selves: as if he should have said, ye sit in Satan's prison, and in darkness of
unbelief: but if you abide in that prison, and darkness, you shall die for ever.
And therefore arise, and come out, and fly speedely out of satan's kingdom:
repent, and amend your selves, and believe the gospel: and then shall your hearts
be lighted with knowledge, then shall you both learn to know your selves, The
word, the sacraments, and the holy Ghost, the welsprings by which our thirst is
quenshed
and you shall also receive true holiness, and be saved. In the kingdom, and
dungeon of satan, is nothing else but everlasting hunger, and penury of al
things: but in the church, which is the kingdom of Christ, are most
delectable, and pleasant pastures. For the gospel is a most joyful messenger,
and comfortable word of life, which flows with all delites, comforts, and
joys: in which we find, and have plenty, and full store of al pleasure, and
goodness: to wit, forgeuenes of sins, true holiness, peace with God, joy of
spirit, and peace of conscience, and life: yea true, and perfect consolation.
And this is the meaning of these strange words of the prophet, where he says.
They shall feed in the ways, and their pastures shall be in the plains, or in all
the tops of hills, they shall neither be hungry, nor thirsty, and the heat of the
day shall not touch them. But whence have they such delights, and pleasures? The
prophet answers, because their deliverer will rule, and govern the^. They are
(as you here) in the kingdom of mercy, Christ conducteth the^ by his word, and
spirit. These three: to wit, the word, the sacraments, and the holy spirit, are
the welsprings, and floods, by which only this spiritual thirst, may in all
places, and for ever be quenched. And least this spiritual thirst should not be
quenched: or these pastures of life be hid, and not easily found, the Lord will
make all the mountains (into) a way: that is, there shall be in all
congregations, or companies of Christians place, that eue^ easily, and with no
troble, me^ may come unto him. There shall be a very broad, and frequented way,
ready, and easy to be found, so that no man shall have need to ask which is the
way, lest thereby the free acces to Christ, might be hindered. For in what kind,
and state of life so ever any man shall be, so yt it be not quite contrary to
gods word, if he believe in Christ, doubtless he shall both have forgeuenes of
sins, and be inheritor of everlasting life, whether he be Jew, or Gentil,
master, or servant, mistres, or maid, maiestrate, or subject: and they shall
come from far. Before, the people of god was in the little land of Chanaan: and
the church of God was straightly laced, and he^med in: but now it shall be let lose
through ye wholl world: and as Christ says in Luke, they shall come from the
East, and from the West, and from the North, Lust. 13.24
and from the South, and shall sit in the kingdom of God. Then the prophet
bids all creatures rejoice, and be glad, for all creatures which are, are in
two places: to wit, in heaven, and earth: now the occasion and cause why they
ought to triumph, and rejoice, is this. First, because God the father has sent
his son into this earth, and given us his gospel from heaven, which is a
message of reconciliation betwixt God, and man: and the word of grace, and
remission of sins. Secondly, because that now the people of God, faithful
christians are out of al danger, and in a happy ease: for death is subdued. The
godly are terrified with Gods judgment, and fere hell.
But he calls the good christians poor, or afflicted: because, while they
live in this earth, they are heavy, and troubled inwardly with fear, and
terror of death, and gods judgment: and outwardly they are shaken with
persecutions, and all kinds of calamities. But this is our consolation, that
god calls us his people: for if we be his people, and he our comforter, and
protector: the^ may we in deed rejoice. For if God be with us, who can be
against us? what hurt can the creature do us? how ca^ it dismay us, seeing the
creator himself does comfort, and help us, the flesh is very weak, and when the
tempest, Eue^ the elected doubt sometime that God has forsaken them and will
distroy them.
and thick mistes of adversity, and tribulations come upon us: when we are
overwhelmed with vehement crosses: and when we are something sharply assaulted
with sorrows, fears, and temptations: then do these comfortable promises of
gods grace and help, vanish away, and fly out of our sight, in so much, that we
think God has forsaken us, and that he is angry, and so plagueth us, because
he intends to destroy us. For thus says Sion, to wit, ye miserable afflicted
godly in their infirmities, and grievous temtations: The Lord has forsaken me,
the Lord has forgotten me, my sins O Lord, are heinous, great, and grievous,
and to heavy for me to bear. What shall become of me, O wretch that I am? what
shall I do? how shall I escape everlasting death, and the wrath of God?


An. The temptations of the best and godliest.
Truly husband, it is oftentimes so with me, for I am many times so afflicted,
and am in such heaviness, fears, and temtations, that I think God cares not
for me, and that he will eue^ in these trobles, fears, afflictions, and
temtations, leave, and destroy me most miserable woman.


Vrb. Our weak and fearful flesh cannot always expel such fears, and
cogitations. For though the promises of God be never so plentiful, and
manifold, and though god every foot help us, yea, and that so manifestly, and
redely, that we may even grope, and feel him: yet when troble, and greef come
again, we are so unmindful of all the former helps which we have had, and we are
so trobled, and soroful, as if the lord could forget, or forsake us, which in
deed he can never do. For he has promised both to help, and comfort us, and
surely he will perform his promise, for he is true, and therefore he will do
it, he is of such might, yt whatsoever he says he can perform it. Wherefore
Esaias adds to this complaint of the godly which mourn under the cross, a most
joyful, and comfortable consolation, by which we may help this our dastardly
weakness, A comfort for us in our temptations.
and desperation, and comfort our heavy hearts thus wrestling under ye cross, and
pressed down with adversity, and desperatio^. And to do it the liuelier he
boroweth a similitude of nature, which is commonly known amongst all men, to
wit, the loving, and motherly affection of women, which of all other, are most
natural to their children. We know yt God has planted in the mother such
favor toward the fruit of her womb, that she will rather dye, then suffer her
children to take wrong or injury. But if any mother could so forget her self,
as not to be touched with the feeling of her childrens harms: yet ought al
christians to believe that god neither will, nor can forget his love, and mercy
toward us. His faith, and love surpasses the love of all creatures, as Christ
himself sufficiently shows in matthew, by the example of the father, which
gives not a stone to his son in stead of bread which he required. Math. 7.9
If we therefore, which are evil, ca^ give our children good things, and daily
protect them, and that with all care, and diligence? how much more carefully,
firmly, and constantly, shall god love us, and faithfully defend us his poor
children? This is a notable, and worthy saying, but only here apprehended by
faith, otherwise we understand it not.

Furthermore, the prophet declares how the lord loves his church, where he
says, that he has graven it on the palm of his hand, or, he holds it in
his hand. By which he gives us to understand, that he diligently cares, and
provides for ye church: God watches over us to save us.
that he ca^ no more forget it, the^ I ca^ forget yt which I have always
before mine eyes, and in my hand. And seeing the Lord always beholds the
walls of this spiritual city, to wit, us, and that upon purpose to preserve
us, care for us, watch over us, and look to us: surely none can so assault us,
or besiege us, and our city, but the lord will see it, and although for a time
he suffer us to be tempted, or afflicted, yet will he not see us overwhelmed, or
devoured.

This city has also skillful builders, or carpentars, to wit, sincere, and
godly teachers, which daily enlarge, and fortefy it. And though tirants, and
heretics assail it, and go about to overthrow it, yet have they no succes in
their doings, but by their attempt reap perpetual shame: for it is builded
upon a sure, and strong rock, against which the gates of hell shall not preuail.
The prophet in the words following, says: that a great, and infinite number of
people shall come together out of all places, and shall believe the gospel, and
be gathered into the church. God also swereth by his holiness, that many, even
of those which in the beginning stood against the church, shall afterward come
into it, and be such ornaments to it, that it may glory in them: which came to
pas in Paul, and many others. And it shall be daily more, and more enlarged by
the great multitude of people, which daily run thus unto it. At the beginning,
it was but little, and had but a small company, and was like a barrayn woman,
which is solitary in her house: but these faithful christians, whereof the
number was at the first so small, shall wonder to see themselves made so great
a multitude, and to be so increased. And they shall marvel whence such a
great people can come. Unto this the holy Ghost makes answer, and says: I
will bring them, behold, I will open, or lift up my hand, and I will hold up the
sign, that is, the cross of Christ, whereunto I will make thy disparsed
children assemble, and that shall be done by a singular, and notable way of
mildnes, and lenity.

For, the Gospel is a sweet, gentle, fair, and fatherlye kind of speech,
which draws such as be children, by most comfortable, and sweet promyses of
help, and comfort.

And by this Gospel, the most mighty potentates, and puissaunt kings of this
world, are drawn, and allured into the Church, that they may believe the
gospel, and be a help, and protection unto the Church. Yea, they shall
reverence, honor, and highly esteem the church, for they shall worship it
with their faces toward the earth. That is, they shall fall prostrate before ye
church. This is the promise of the lord, and it must needs be fulfilled: though
oftentimes in the eyes of the world it seemed impossible to be brought to pas,
and clean contrary to reason. But we must expect the Lords leisure, He that
stands in patience shall not fayie of help.
and live in hope. For the Lord will perform what so ever he has promised.
Which when he shall do, then are we delivered, and most happy. For, whosoever
believes in the Lord, and patiently watches for his help, and believes his
word, shall not be confounded, but have, and see his hope fulfilled.

But now if the church in her weakness, and infirmity say: O god, how shall
this be that thou say, I shall have so many children, which shall come unto
the Gospel, seeing they are so subject unto cruel tirants, that they cannot
get from them, and come unto me. For sin is a cruel tirant, and by it they
are sore blinded: yea, death, and hell also keeps them close prisoners: and
by good right, for their hearts are hardened. which thing these words following
import, Sin a tyra^t over us
where the Prophet says: Shall the pray be taken from the mighty? to which God
makes answer, saying: the church shall be great, ample, and famous: and those
which are now in bondage, shall have their freedom, whether those tirantes
will or not: for God will destroy those tirants: and will bring forth his
people, and deliver the church: and the very tirants themselves, shall be their
own destruction. And where he says, Shall that which is in bondage by the just
man be brought to freedom? this is the meaning. The law, sin, 2. Pet. 1.
and death had duly brought us into bondage for in that we were bond, and
captives to sin, we were servants, and bondslaues to the law, sin, and
death.

But there is a stronger Lord, whose name is Jesus, he by good right has made
us free, and that by his most precious, and inestimable (...) redemption, to
wit, he by him self has redeemed us, so that we are not only by might, but
also by right freed from the power of Satan. Esaias has excellently described
the state, and condition of Christ's kingdom. Least, Afterward any man should
look for an earthly kingdom of Christ as the Anabaptists and Jews do.

Esaias in his 50. Esa. 50.6.
chap. does plainly prophecy of the passion of Christ: and he speaks thus in
his person, I gave my back unto the smiters, and my cheeks unto the nippers. I
hid not my face from shame, and spitting, for the Lord god will help me,
therefore shall I not be confounded: therefore have I set my face like a flint,
and I know that I shall not be ashamed. These two disciples thought yt Christ
had bin clean confounded, and extinguished: but the third day they saw it
happened far otherwise, to wit, Christ's enemies were subdued, and Christ himself
exalted. The comfort of the Church by the examples of Abraham and


And Esaias in his 51. chapter does comfort the church congregated of the Jews,
and Gentiles. The church in this world has affliction, and tribulation, and
therefore he comfort it with the example of Abraham, and Sara. Abraham, and
Sara were, by reason of their old age, past all hope of children, neither could
it be thought that of them should come such a famous people. Notwithstanding it
came so to pas, that this seed was so multiplied, that it was like the sand of
the sea, according to the promise of the Lord. And so though the little flock of
Gods people in this world, be as a desolate, barrain, and only widow, in
comparison of the great number of the ungodly, yet shall it come to pas that
thou shall increase, grow, and be exceeding famous. For, although thou have in
this world many enemies, which do all they can, and employ themselves totally
to subvert thee, to root thee out, and to overthrow thee, yet can they not hurt
thee.

Their councels, and devises shall all be frustrate: yea, they them selves, how
great soever they be, are nothing: nay, much les then nothing. For the moth
shall eat them as a garment, and the worm shall consume them like a vesture:
but my righteousness remains, and abides for ever, from generation, to
generation. Yea, and he adds a saying that is full of comfort. The Lord shall
comfort Syon, he shall comfort all her desolations, Esaias. 51.3.
and he shall make her desert like Eden, and her wilderness like the garden of
the Lord. Joy, and gladness shall be found therein: praise, and the voice of
singing. Which is to say, although the church be like unto Abraham, solitary,
and forsaken: yet shall she be blesssed, and flourish like as a most pleasant
garden. And therefore we ought in no wise to be offended at the base estate of
Christ, and his former coming: or at ye homely state of the church, while she
walks in this crooked world like to a pilgrim.

And a little after in the same chap. the Lord speaks to his people: A great
comfort.
I, even I am he that comfort you. This is a great, and worthy mystery, for
we understand here Christ's humanitye, as if he should say: my servants the
prophets have much, and diversely hitherto comforted you, but yet came not that
true comfort of Israel. Now therefore, will I far otherwise comfort you, and
that much more lively, and in greater abundance then before. For now, even I
my self will come in mine own person, and comfort Sion. This came to pas when
Christ was made man, and lived among men. For he sent not a Prophet, or an
Angel, but he himself at the fulness of time, came in ye flesh, that he might
comfort us in the flesh. Those two discyples plainly felt that comfort on
Easter day, when God him self in man's nature glorified, and revived them, and
cheered up their heavy hearts by the scriptures. And Esaias says further: Arise,
put on thy strength, O Syon, etc. Esaias. 52.1.


And here again does the prophet comfort gods people, making them promise of
Christ their redeemer, as if he should say, go to Sion, thou which art so
often afflicted, and troubled, thou which art now prisoner unto thy enemies,
and now again set free, and yet afterward captive, and laid wast, so that thou
may truly be called most miserable, and wretched.

Now rejoice. Now be glad, and leap for joy, for thy miseries shall once have
end. For I promise thee a better, and more blessed state in time to come.
Hethertowards thou have been for a time redeemed from thy enemies, and for a
time thou had tranquillity, and wast afterward afflicted again: But now thou
shall enjoy at last sound consolation, which shall never decay, after which, no
captivity, or destruction shall follow. Wherefore put all heaviness from thy heart,
be of good courage, and awake, for the time will once come wherein thou shall
truly be set at fredome. And thus the prophet speaks of that everlasting
deliverance which we have in Christ, who has vanquished our enemies by whom
we were afflicted, and vexed in captivity: and has delivered us from them, and
restored us to our old fredome: and all this he did of his own mere grace,
clean without our desert, though it cost him even the best, chiefest, and most
precious humain thing he had. For he offered up his body for a sacrifice, and
shed his most precious blood for our redemption, that thereby he might put away
our sins, overcome death, and vanquish, and destroy hell. And by these works
of his everlasting, and infinite person, he obtained for us everlasting
redemption

Sion the spiritual city is vexed, and troubled, because it is constrained to
harborow, and bear the ungodly. It can in no wise patiently suffer such
grief, and blasphemies against god, and his name. Therefore God by the prophet
promises that the uncircumcised, and unclean, that is, the unbelievers, whose
hearts in Christ Jesus are not purified, nor cleansed, but hate the church of
God, None members of Sion but beleuers.
shall not have their habitation there. But this thing in this world is done
spiritually. For, whosoever believes not in Christ, yea though he sit in
Peter's chair, or were head of the church, as Annas, and Caiphas were in the
Sinagogue, and other many wicked Jews, which would be counted righteous, yet
is he no member of true Syon, that is, of the Church, for he has not the
spirit of Christ: and how then can Christ be his head, or he his member, for
such a one is without the communion of saints. But at the day of redemption,
when Christ shall come to give sentence, then at the last shall all the wicked
infidels, and false Christians, be even corporally separated from the
faithful. Then shall Sion be most beautiful, and delectable, when all which
shall dwell in her, shall put on their wedding garments: then shall the Church
be clean without blot or wrinkle: and then he which has not on his wedding
garment, shall with his hands, and feet fast bound, Math. 22.12.
be cast into utter darcknes. In the mean time Sion in outward appearance, has
a heavy countenance, because we wander yet in this flesh, and because the old
man is not yet mortifyed, and because satan, and the world do injury us,
persecute us, and torment us, and because tirants vex, and trouble us with the
doctrine, and traditions of men. But we must not sleep in security, we must
rise, and lift up our selves and shake of slouthfulnes. And although with our
body we cannot come unto that wished mark, and full perfection, yet in heart we
must aspire, and fly up to Christ our redeemer, as Paul teaches to the
Philip. saying, (...). Phi. 3.20.
Our conversation is in heaven. Moreover we must still stand in our freedom,
which Christ by his precious, and inestimable price wrought for us. And we must
by pure, and unspotted faith, cleave closely in all we can to Christ, and cast
the bonds of humain traditions quite, Men's traditions and laws must not
trouble us. Esa. 52.4.
and clean out of our consciences, that so Christ may rule in our hearts,
otherwise we shall never be able to stand.

And then the prophet speaks of a twofold captivity, and transmigration. The
first is corporal, when as they were most miserable captives in Egypt, and
afterward amongst the Assirians, and Caldeans, who at that time, were more
cruel, and deadly enemies to god, then the Jews were, and therefore unworthy to
trouble, and vex the children of God at their pleasure. But now for the second.
The Lord by his prophet says, you are yet miserably afflicted, and trobled.
The pharisees and papists in this be alike.
For they which rule over my people, to wit, the pharisees, and saduces, and
such like, make them (by tormenting, and excruciating their consciences) so to
houle, lament, and mourn, that the corporal captivity was much more easy, then
this spiritual bondage of their souls. And therefore I will make an end of this
butcherly tirannye which they exercised in their conscience, and I will call,
Esaias. 52.5.
and congregate my people to my self, that they may know my name, because that
I only am their iustifier, and redeemer. But when shall this be? he answers,
in that day, that is, at the former coming of Christ. He goes on therefore,
saying: Lo I my self will speak. Verse 6.
Here God promyseth again his humanity. For, when the son of god was made
man, and lived here on this earth, it was in a strange manner, and such as
before was not heard of: to wit, he was here as true man, and did speak
himself, and he, who before had spoken, and talked with man by his angels, and
prophets, is now even in his own person present a true teacher, who alone is to
be heard of us, even as the father has commanded in Matthew, saying: hear
him. Mat. 17.5.
And what this teacher speaks he perfourmeth in deed.


Anna. What be his words? What speaks he? He is a notable personage, or
messe^ger, and therefore out of doubt his words must needs be notable, and
excellent.


Vrb. He came to preach (as Paul faith to ye Ephesians) peace unto us, Ephe.
2.17.
and to tell us that God for his sake does forgive us our sins, and will never
herafter be angry with us, but still continue our merciful father: and this
eternal peace which he speaks of, is surely that joyful, gladsome, and
desired message, Verse. 7.
and most true gospel it self. And therefore he says, O how beautiful, and
amiable are the feet of those that preach the gospel, or that bring that good,
and joyful message of eternal peace from heaven. Christ him self, as the
minister of circumcision, preached to ye Jews his fathers mercy, which is
freely given us And he commanded his Apostles to preach this joyful message
or Gospel of eternal peace, and salvation: yea he preaches it yet by his
ministers which he endueth with ye holy ghost, yt so they may understand the
scriptures, and instruct others in the^. Here you see, that the spiritual
kingdom is not erected, and stablished by corporal armor, but by the Gospel:
for the preachers do nothing else in the pulpet, but declare the grace of God,
and eternal salvation in Christ Jesus, saying: in times past, Satan came
mightily reigning in this world, but now (O Sion) comes a stronger, eue^ thy
God which is a king, Christ Jesus, who has overcome both Satan, and the
world. He is the mightiest of al, he rules over all, and therefore no creatures
can hurt thee: If you will bide, and be Christ's, none shall hurt you. Verse 8.
to wit, us ye church, so long as we abide under the protection and defense of
this omnipotent prince, for this king is God him self. The Apostles were
Watchmen or seers, which so exalted their voice, that the whole world was
filled with their words. They also received great comfort, and reioysed that
Christ our savior himself was come to save us, and deliver us: and it was
also visibly seen and known that this king did convert Sion, and yet he used
no violence or tyranny in his government in Syon. For sometime he went up to
Jerusalem, and sometime he came down from Jerusalem, and all as a pilgrim, or
stranger. But he so converted Sion, to wit, his people by the Gospel, so that
they cast away all their errors, and left their sins, and led righteous and
godly lives: yea the spirit, and word of Christ wrought all miracles, and that
so mightily that he achieved and did that with a word that the whole world
could not do with all their strength, and riches. His kingdom is amiable, and
wonderful: he bids Jerusalem, that is, his people, rejoice: and with one
consent gloriously set forth and boast of that so great and wonderful mercies
of their God. And he calls Jerusalem a desert, Verse 9.
or desolate place, because the people of God was then small and of no
countenance. But now the chiefest cause of their joy is this, yt their comfort
is now present with them, for yt Lord himself comforts his people and redemeth
them out of extreme, horrible, and everlasting calamities. He has sent his
only begotten son, Christ the arm of God.
whom he calls the arm of God, that is, his power, strength, and fortitude.
And it was his pleasure to make him perfectly known to all nations by the
Gospel, that all nations of the earth might see the salvation of our God, that
is, Jesus Christ, who was nothing known before, amongst the Gentiles. For the
Jews only, were the people that looked for him, and none else.


Anna. What says Esaias of Christ in the 53. Chapter? which you always, call the
golden chapter, and commend so greatly, that you would have all men, to have
it at their fingers ends, and in their memories.


Vrba. Hitherto you have heard, of the spiritual kingdom of Christ, under the
cross, and therwithall, the notable, and worthy comfort, which the Church
receives, to wit, that all beleuers in Christ shall in him have full
deliverance, and after the end of these troubles receive everlasting joy. But
Esaias in this Chapter, tells us by what means, our king Christ has obtained
for us, and given us such wonderful things to wit, full deliverance from all
evil, an everlasting kingdom, continual peace, heavenly joy, and eternal
salvation, and he prophesies very plainly of the passion, resurrection, and
glory of Christ, whereunto he should enter through his passion: the words of
the prophecy are these.

Behold my servant shall prosper, he shall be exalted, Esa. 52.13. and 53.1.
and extolled, and be very high. As many were astonished at thee (his visage was
so deformed of men, and his form of the sons of men,) so shall he sprinckle
many nations. The kings shall shut their mouths at him, for that which had
not been told them shall they see, and that which they had not heard shall they
understand. Esa. 53.1.
Who will believe our report? and to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed? but
he shall grow up before him as a branch, and as a root out of a dry ground,
he has neither form, nor beautye, when we shall see him there shall be no
form, that we should desire him, he is despised, and rejected of men, he is a
man full of sorrows, and has experience of infirmities, we hid as it were our
faces from him, he was despised, and we esteemed him not. Surely he has borne
our infirmities, and carried our sorrows, yet we did judge him as plaged, and
smitten of God, and humbled. But he was wounded for our transgressions, he was
broken for our iniquityes, the chastisment of our peace was upon him, and with
his stripes are we healed, all we like sheep have gone astray, we have turned
every one to his own way, and the Lord has laid upon him the iniquities of us
all.

He was oppressed, and he was afflicted, yet did he not open his mouth, he is
brought as a sheep to the slaughter, and as a sheep before her sherer is
dumme, so he opens not his mouth, he was taken out of prison, and from
judgment. And who shall declare his age? for he was cut out of the land of the
living, for the transgressions of my people was he plagued, and he made his
grave, with the wicked, and with the rich in his death, though he had done no
wickedness, neither was any deceit in his his mouth. Yet the Lord would break
him, and make him subject to infirmities, when he shall make his soul an
offering for sin, he shall see his seed, and shall prolong his days, and
the will of the Lord shall prosper in his hands.

He shall see of the travail of his soul, and shall be satisfied, by his
knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many: for he shall bear their
iniquities. Therefore will I give him a portion with the great, and he shall
divide the spoil with the strong, because he has powered out his soul unto
death, and he was counted with the transgressors, and he bare the sin of
many, and prayed for the trespassors.


Anna. Every one may see (if they way thease words well,) that this prophecy
speaks of none but of Jesus of Nazareth, so plainly, and manifestly does it
set forth the passion of Christ, not differing at al from the historye of the
Evangelists.


Vrb. You say true, the Jews see it, but being bewitched of satan, they see
not that which they do see: and now they seek absurd, and diverse and
marvelous strange and coacted expositions, and starting holes to creep out
at, least they be forced to grant yt this text speaks only of Christ, and so
be found giltye of manslaughter which they committed in their Messiah. 1576.
years ago. They complain in deed, and think that their sins are more
heinous, and grievous then the sins of their forefathers, because they have
been captives now more then.1500. years. For their fathers were but.70. years
captives in Babylon, for committing Idolatry. But when they see that this
their captivity continues now so long, they can conceive no comfort by the
law, and prophets, neither have they any certain hope, that ever their bondage
shall end, that they may return again into the land of Canaan, as at other
times they did, when they were restored, and delivered out of captiuitye. And
this does Rabbye Sammuell himself confess. Yea they are so obstinate, and so
clean without repentance, that when they eue^ see, and perceive by the
prophets, that Jesus of Nazareth by all men's accounts is the true Messiah, yet
they pass it over with silence, and conceal it, and will speak nothing of it
in ye sinagogue before the youth, and simple people, and so hold them still in
their blindness, and error.

Koheleth of Prage in the disputations at Ausburge, which Doctor Phillip
Melancto^, Doctor Brentius and I had with him, would gladly have expounded this
chapter of those Jews, which at this day are disparsed, afflicted, and
contemned in all the world, but he brought in so ill favored, vain, folishe,
and unsavory stuff: and reasoned so baldly, that he shamed him self, and
blushed before us all. The Jews before they fell into this blindenes, and
reprobate sense for killing of Christ, (that is before the natiuitye of Christ
while as yet they had the prophets,) understood this text of Messiah as
appears by Ionathas his Thargum which begins to expound this chapter
thus. Haizlach Abdi Meschiho that is, behold my servant Messiah shall be (made)
fortunate. The old Hebrews also, expounded this chapter thus: Messiah shall be
more exalted then Abraham, and set above Moses, and none shall be like him in
greatness, and glory, he shall excel all the angels of god in honor, and
dignitye.


Anna. This is a horible blindness of ye Jews of our time, that reding these
things in their books, they will not se the truth. For as S. Paul says eue^
unto this day, the vale of Moses covers their hearts, that even when they
read of Messiah, yet they understand not what they read. But when they shall be
converted unto the Lord, then the vale shall be taken away: and as soon as they
shall believe the gospel, they shall plainly understand all the prophesies
concerning Christ, so that they may very easily know them, although now they
understand no title thereof? is not this a dark, and deep blindenes, that they
dream Messiah should in this earth have an earthly, and corporal kingdom?
but yt he should purge all men's sins, and deliver all mankind from death.

Of this they are utterly ignorant, and of this they cannot abide to hear,
because they understand noe prophesies, but every day are more and more wrapped
in blindness, until it shall please God to take mercy upon the^. A yet no
blindness seems to me more gross, then the blindness of that evil, and doting
man Rabbi in hannapher, Romans 11.32
who in the Sinagoge, eue^ before your face did not let to say, that he never
sought nor looked for forgiveness of his sins, or righteousness by Messiah. O
horrible, execrable, and lamentable blindenes.


Vrba. Yt was my hap to hear the same filthy, and abominable error of ye
Jews at Bru^suige in their Sinagog. Paul to the These, pronounces, a very
heavy, and fearful saying, and sentence against them, to wit, These. 2.16.
that the wrath of God is come on them to the utmost: verily they neither know,
nor understand the person or ministerye of Christ. But let us leave these
blinded bussardes, and come again to the words of the prophet. It is
sufficient for us which believe in Christ that the Evangelists, and Apostles do
every where plainly, and undoubtedly expound this 53 chapter of Esai, to be
me^t of Jesus Christ as appears in Math. 8. What kind of kingdom Christ is.
Mar. 15. Lu. 22 Ioh. 12. Acts. 8. Romans 10.4. and 15.1. Peter. 2.

But first we must note, that this Chap. almost in every verse witnesses, yt
the kingdom of christ is not of this world, but heavenly: because he neither
has nor braggeth of any of this worldly beuty, glory, or magnificensy: nay he
which is ye king, and head of this kingdom, is mocked, scoffed, scorned,
contemned, and killed of this world, and therefore it was a great and blind
ignorance, and doltishnes, that sum even of the believing Jews did dream that
he should erect, and restore again the earthly kingdom of Israel, or that he
should be an earthly, or worldly king of the Jews in the land of Canaan, and
deliver them from the tyranny of the Gentiles. He came for greater, yea I say
for far greater causes, then all the kingdoms, empires, powers, honors,
wealths, Wherefore christ came.
and riches of this world, to wit, to destroy the works of Satan, with the
kingdom of sin, and death, and to establish his kingdom of righteousness,
and everlasting life. But carnal men do carnally expound the promises of the
Lord, until they receive the holy ghost, the true Doctor, and teacher of the
truth. It is the spirit of God, which at the last, does truly open the eyes
of the heart, that the truth of God may be seen, perceived, and understood.

The Evangelists use so to speak of the person of Christ's, as though we may
take the^ some time to speak of the Godhead, and glory of Christ, and sometime
of his humilitye, submission, affliction, miserye, and contemptible state in
the eyes of the world, even as occasion, and place serve. You have heard before
how Esaias prophesied, that the only begotten son of God Jesus Christ, who was
spoken of before by the prophets, should come into this world even in his own
person. But Esaias now in this 35. chap. tells what he should do, and
perform, at his coming in the flesh, to wit, that he should be our servant.
And the Father calls him his servant in respect of his office, because he is
to help us, obedient to his Father even unto the death the death of the
cross: and because he humbles himself beneath all men, and is a very abject,
and lowlye, servant to all men, that thereby he may exalt all men. The Prophet
also shows that Christ, after this his humilitye, should be exalted unto the
most highest state of honor, and glory.


Anna. I pray you then tell me, how shall Christ obey? and how shall he rule?


Vrba. Very wisely. For he will so rule, How christ rules.
and govern the misterye which his Father committed unto him, that no man can
ever sufficiently commend him.

For though it may seem absurd, and foolish unto reason, that Christ should
promise to deliver other me^ from death, when he himself dyed: and to bring
all that believe, into eternal glory, when he himself came to eternal
shame, and ignominye, yet this was the best, and fastest way, to work such a
notable work. For how can the everlasting wisdom of the Father do any
thing, that should not in every respect be most excellently done. And Iaskaet
may be thus translated. He will give wisdom, and understanding, or, he will
make men wise, and skillful. For Christian beleuers teach true, and perfect
wisdom in the school of Christ, which wisdom no worldling can understand.
The children of this world, by the wisdom of the flesh, can search after, and
get nothing, but the frail, and transitory goods of this world.

A note of worldlings, and good christians.
But faithful Christians are much wiser, they use this world, and the treasures
thereof, as the stranger uses his inery, and they after the true, and eternal
treasures of their heavenly cuntrye. But we must note, that this service of
Christ was not of long continuance, and that after it, should follow true, and
perfect glory, with everlasting honor. And therefore says Esaias, he shall be
exalted, extolled, and hiely esteemed. And this thing shall be so, that many may
wonder, and be offended at his great, and extreme humility, which thing
happened in the Jews, who abhor, and think it detestable, and great wickedness
to say, that Messiah, which is promised in the prophets, should be constrained,
to suffer a most vile, and ignominious death, whereupon they call Christ
Thalui, Why the Jews call christ Thalui.
that is hanged up, blaspheming him most horribly, wickdly, and detestably. The
cause, why they are offended at the cross of Christ, is because they seek in
Messiah the corporal goods, and temporal honors, and dignities of this world.

They think it wickedly, and impiously spoken, to say, that so great a king of
Israel should hang among thieves, as though he himself had been a most heinous
and wicked offender. But if so be that the sight of him should be so miserable,
so uncomely, so vile, and so foul, that he should not seem in the eyes of the
world, to be the man that could deliver others, and bring them unto honor, and
glory, (and this is the cause that he is ye stone of offense,) how could his
kingdom be worldly? Worldly princes must so set forth their brauerye,
dignitye, and majesty, that men may even be amassed to look on them. A worldly
kingdom cannot stand, unless there be in it both power, and reverence: where
the prince is poor, and despised, and oppressed by the violence, or tyranny
of the enemies, and does neither in power nor riches excel his adversaries,
there must needs the kingdom come to ruin.

But this our king will do more by his humility, then all the princes, and
kings in this earth can do with all their pomp, power, and riches. What will
he then do? The prophet says: He will sprinkle many nations. This is an Hebrew
phrase. This word Iaseh, does properly signify to disparce abroad hither, and
thither, even as drops of water are sprinkled here, and there. What the
sprinkling of the gentiles is.
This sprinkling therefore of the Gentiles, betokens nothing else in this place,
but to teach, and preach gods word amongst them, and this was fulfilled when
the Apostles, by the holy ghost instructed the gentiles, through the holy word,
and opened unto them this welspring of Gods grace in christ Jesus, and
dispersed the same, even as the fertile rayn which falls in May, that thereby
the fruit of Gods knowledge might grow, and increase in all places: and they
prevailed so much, through the preaching of Gods word, that even mighty
Emperors, and Princes did worship, adore, and fear Christ Jesus, and held
their tongues, and were astonyed. And among the gentiles, and other places,
where before the scriptures were not known, and the gospel not heard of, there
did they so teach the great mysteries of the gospel, that they were understood.

Seeing then in Christ such great maruels, and wonders are wrought, to wit,
that God becomes man, humbles him self very lowly, and in his blessed, and
most innocent humanity (I call his humanity, that humain nature which he took
upon him) suffers so great shame, greef, and calamity, and that of his own
people, whom he had blessed with so great, and infinite benefits both of body,
and soul: and seeing he must by this his ignominious death be exalted unto
honor, and so begin his spiritual kingdom, but must first as the king thereof,
labor under his cross, and suffer all kind of calamity, and shame, and yet by
the self same cross, be in deed exalted to honor, and crowned with eternal
glory: seeing, I say, these wonderful things, which are contrary to man's
reason, are done in Christ, and his kingdom, the world will not believe them,
when it shall hear them. And this thing the prophet saw in spirit, when he
said: who will believe our saying? that is, our preching, or doctrine. They are
so great, and incredible, The strange working of god
that reason cannot be persuaded, that such wonders either are, or could be
done.

How did the Jews, I pray you, in the beginning receive the gospel? how
absurd, and incredible seemed it to them? Did not Christ's own kindred
(according to the flesh) at the first, refuse to believe him? had not John
Baptist much to do, to draw his discyples from himself, and to bring them to
Christ? And, when they had seen all those great miracles, and wonders, yet
would they scarcely in the end, give credit unto Christ: so offended were they
at his base habit, and lowly conversation. And this ran always in their heads,
if he had bin our true Christ, or Messiah, he would have come after a more
regal, magnificent, and imperial sort, then thus. But how fell it out with
Cleophas, and his companyon? was not this prophecy verefyed, and fulfilled
even in them? Even the Apostles staggered, and douted whether Christ were
Messiah or no.
they had heard before of Christ, and they had seen his works, and great
wonders. Whereupon they supposed, and judged, that he was the true deliverer of
Israel: But when they saw so much humility, and weakness in him on good Friday,
that he suffered himself to be slain, and buried, it offended, and trobled them
very much, so that they then began to stagger, and waver, and doubt, whether he
was the true Messiah, or no. It would not sink into their heads, that Jesus,
whom they had seen crucified, could help other, and deliver Israel, seeing
that was now the third day since he himself suffered death upon the cross. And
these cogitations ran in their heads: How shall he deliver Israel from al his
calamities, which suffered himself to be taken, and nailed to the cross? we
believed that he had been the redeemer of Israel, but our hope is frustrate.

Behold how hardly the disciples believed the mysteries of the gospel,
concerning the death, resurrection, and kingdom of Christ. But when the women
said, that they had seen Angels at the grave: and when the discyples heard them
say, that Christ was risen to life again, O, how strange was that to them? how
hardly did they believe it? Christ in Luke, Luke. 13 33.
told his disciples before, what things should happen unto him at Jerusalem,
that is to wit, how he should suffer, and rise again the third day. But Luke
says, that they understood not those things. So utterly ignorant were they of
all these things. And in the last of Luke, when Christ was risen, the discyples
hardly believed that he was risen, and when Christ appeared unto them, they
thought they had seen some spirit, or vision, until they had seen, and handled
his true body, and eaten meat with him, and therefore it is said in Esaias, to
whom shall the Lords arm be reveled? This arm is Christ the virtue, and power
of God, who is eternal, infinite, and almighty. Reason cannot perceive, or
understand it, and therefore was it needful that it should be reveled unto our
hearts by the holy spirit, by which spirit only, we are able to understand,
perceive, and believe these great, and wonderful treasures which Christ has
given us.

Paul to the Corinthians says: The natural man neither perceives, nor
understands these things. 1. Cor. 2.14
Therefore Christ himself opened his disciples hearts, and by his holy spirit
lightened them, that they might both understand, and believe the scriptures. Lu.
24.45. Christ a branch.



Anna. Why does the prophet call Christ a branch, or root springing out of a
dry, and barrain ground?


Vrb. This may be understood two ways. First of his wonderful nativity. For,
al mankind was a dry, and barraine ground, destitute of the lively water of
grace. And yet of this dry, we by nature barren ground, and unfruitful.
and cursed ground of mankind was Christ borne, a most beutyful, and blessed
branch, and was made man in deed, without all spot of sin. Surely, surely,
this is a very strange branch, which grows out of such a dry ground, and yet
brings neither blot, nor blemish of that cursed ground with it. He has the
nature of Adam truly, but clean without sin.

Secondly, it may be understood thus. It is wonderful that Christ, after he
had put of that base habit, and humiliation, is made Lord of all things. No man
would ever have thought, that such a glorious glory should come of so vile a
cross. For there was no beuty then in his flesh, all was dry, vaded, feeble,
flagge, withered, and weak. And therefore the prophet says very well, and to
good purpose, he shall grow up, or, he ascended up before him, that is, before
God, because he was before him a most beutifull branch. He was before God in
the most splendent, and highest glory, although contemned of the world, and
without beuty in his passion. The prophet says, he was not beutiful: alas,
what beuty could there be in him? his most blessed face was all to be torn,
and defiled with blood, and spittle, and so deformed, and rent with thorns,
that even Pilate the Gentile wondered at their cruel dealing, and had more
compassion on him, then those enuyous, and blind Jews.

In the words following, Esaias does more at large set forth the ignominious
passion of Christ, telling us, how he was miserably, and cruelly tormented. He
was (says the prophet) most despised, and least regarded of all men. There was
no account made of him, and out of doubt, in deed, the Jews regarded him
nothing, but had him in great despite: for they made him (being the king of
glory) their mocking stock, and sent him to Herod for a may game. But seeing
that Esaias had foretold thus much of Christ, the Jews ought in no wise to have
bin offended at the contumelious, and shameful passion of Christ, especyally,
seeing these things happened by the ordinance, will, and providence of God. And
seeing that Christ yealded himself into the Jews hands, Ioh. 18.8.
of his own will, not of compulsion.

But now harken what good he wrought by this his passion, and debasing of him
self. He bare not his own infirmities, but ours. We had perished in
everlasting shame, if he of his mere mercy, had not taken compassion upon us,
and born that most heavy burden which came by our sins, and was laid upon
all mankind, to wit, if he had not taken upon him self our calamities, which
was due to al mankind for their sins, and born them himself, and quite
discharged us of that burden, we had dyed eternally.

And now first of all, learn here, that man's nature, Our nature is foully
corrupted
through sin, is most da^gerously diseased, and should by eternal death have
dyed for ever, if Christ had not helped us, and not borne our deadly disease,
and great weakness.

Secondly, it appears that our sins, and those infirmities, which proceed
of sin was so great, The greeuousnes of sin.
so heavy, and so importable a burden, that al mankind could not bear it, but
had fainted under the burden, and so must needs have been drowned in hell.
And therefore natural, and simply man, which being no more but man, could not
make satisfaction for sins. But Messiah, who was not only true man, but also
true God, only both had ability, and ought to do it.

Thirdly it must needs be, both mere, and horrible blasphemy, to teach that
sins can be done away by works, and penance, and therefore monasteries,
Horrible blasphemy to say good works purge sin
and other buildings, and else whatsoever, was founded of that intent, end, and
purpose, that thereby they might put away sins, deserve forgeuenes, and obtayn
ever lasting life. What thing soever (I say) was, or are done for this intent,
they are most foul, and filthy sects, and horible errors, and thereby the state
of our salvation is greatly hasarded. And look you mark this third note well. 2.
Pet. 2.1. A true comfort.


Fourthly, learn here a true comfort. If Christ bear our sins, and offenses,
then the passion of Christ is ours, and only proper unto us, and all his
deserts are ours, wherefore our sins (if the prophet be to be believed) can
never condemn us. For, this was the cause why he took them upon him, that he
might quite blot them all out for ever, so that afterward, they should not at
any time hurt us. And thus, the passion of Christ is become our satisfaction
for sins, and so we are delivered from al our sins by the death of Christ,
to who^ be honor, and glory for ever, Amen.


Anna. Our munks, and nuns believe not this, for they boast, and brag that
they deserve forgeuenes of our sins, and that they bear our offenses.


Vrb. Monasteries to be abhored.
If monasteryes, or munkes believe not this prophecy, but by other works and
means, then by Christ's merits and passion, seek salvation, and promise it
to other, their monasteries are very theeuish dens, and butcheries of souls,
and are filled full of horrible blasphemies, even from the foundation up to the
roof, and are as much to be detested, and abhorred, as the gates of hell.


Anna. Esaias. 53.4
What means Esaias where he says: we judged him as plagued, and smitten of God?


Vrb. Read the history of Christ his passion, set down by the Evangelists, and
then shall thou easily see the meaning of it. The Jews falsely accused Christ,
saying that he was a seducer of men, a deceauer of the people, an author of
sedition, and an enemy to the law, and a blasphemer of God. For, in John, they
said unto Pilat: Ioh. 18.30
If he were not an evil doer, we would not have delivered him unto thee. And
therefore he was thought to have sinned, and so to have been punished, and
smitten of God for his sins, and offenses committed against God. It is
against all reason that there should be such a law, that he which has not
offended, should be punished, and suffer for another offender. Man's reason
says, Man's reason.
let the offender suffer for his offense.

But here, by the good grace, and bountiful mercy of our God, it is otherwise:
We had offended, and therefore by good desert, we ought to have bin eternally
punished: But christ was without fault, gilty in no point, and defiled with no
spot, and yet, even of his great mercy, and ardent good will, he put himself in
our stead, and for our sakes, suffered that punishment which he never deserved.
And here again, you have the true manhood of Christ, because you see in very
deed, he suffered for us, and took our sins upon him on the cross.

Therefore Esaias says, God punyshed him not for his own sins, but for our
sins, and iniquities. It was convenient that he should be that true pascall
Lamb, which is innocent it self, and without blot, but bears the offenses of
others of the world, and by this prophecy, Paul takes occasion to say to the
Romans, Romans 4.25.
that Christ was delivered to death for our sins. And so that punishment
which we had deserved, was laid on Christ, by the mere mercy, and goodness of
God, that we might have peace. If he had not taken the punishment of our sins
upon him, we had never bin at one with God, nor the wrath of God had never bin
appeased toward us. We were deadly wounded, even to everlasting death, neither
could any other heal us, but the wounds of Christ, which gushed forth of his
most precious blood.

No man is here excepted. For, all mankind, yea, the whole stock of mankind,
was by the deadly poison of sin, miserably wounded, and infected in every
part. There is none that does good, no not one, Psalm. 14.3.
as the Psalm witnesses. We had all gone from thy right way of truth, and
innocence, into the troblesome, rough, rugged, and erroneous ways of falsehood,
and wickedness, like wandering, and straying sheep. We all lay, even as the half
dead wounded man, which fell into the thieves hands, as he went between
Jerusalem, and Jericho. We had all of us need of the physician, delyuerer, and
pastor, to seek for us sheep gone astray, to bring us into the way, and to help
us, and deliver us. But there was none other that either could, or should do
this for us, but Jesus Christ, by the mercyful, and free promise, which God
made to us of his son in the law, and the prophets. For he was ordained as
Peter says, 1. Pet. 1.20 Our gospel.
for this end, to deliver us. And therefore says Esaias: The Lord has laid upon
him the iniquity of us al. This is our gospel, and what more joyful, and
comfortable, or better news, can the wounded, and sorrowful sinner hear, then
that his sins are laid on Christ? If they be laid on him, he will bear them,
wipe them away, and blot them out. For, it is certain that he dyed, and rose
again, to save us sinners. And this obedience of Christ (in that it pleased
him, even as a Lamb, to be sacrifised for our sins, and in that he suffered
that bitter death for us, and all even of his own good will, freely, with great
patience) is so thankful, and acceptable a sacrifice to God, yea, a sacrifice
of such infinite merit, and worthynes before the face of God, God cannot
condemn us, if we believe.
that he neither can, nor will in any wise condemn us, so we believe, and trust
in Christ. And therefore God the father laid al our sins upon his only begotten
Son Christ, least they should condemn us.

This love of God is so great toward us, that no heart is able to consider it:
and this offering, or sacrifice for our sins is so excellent, and precious,
that there can be no sin where this sacrifice is offered. But how behaved
Christ himself when he suffered? he was as meek as a sheep brought to the
slaughter, for the Prophet says: He shall be brought even as a sheep to be
slain. He calls Christ a sheep, because he was sent of his father, that he
might bear our offenses, and be offered up for our sakes, and sins, as sheep
were offered in the law of Moses, which offering was only a figure of Christ.


Anna. How was he taken out of prison, and from judgment?


Vrb. Here Esaias does prophecy of that glory, into which, by his passion he
entered. For, Christ did not dye, How christ was in judgment.
that he should remayn in death, but that he might swallow up death, and rise
again from death. He was for three days space in judgment, and tribulation,
or prison, when he suffered himself by Pilate, to be iudgeed, and condemned to
the death of the cross: but that heavy, and unspeakable pain, (that the Lord of
all things, and judge both of the living, and dead) suffered himself to be
judged, and condemned by sinful men, was not to continue longer then three
days. After which torments he should at the last (being risen again) reign
with great glory over Israel. He dyed once, and dies no more. Romans 6.9.
Death henceforth has no more power over him, but he is ruler over it for
ever. Whereupon (says the prophet) who shall declare his age, or generation? or
tell of the time of his reign? When the Jews supposed he had bin dead, and
quite destroyed, then at the last he passed from time which perysheth, into
eternity which never shall have end, and he rose from death into the glory of
the everlasting joy, and immortality.

This is that infinite merit of Christ's passion, by which he deserved for us
forgeuenes of all our sins, and everlasting life. He was cut of, and taken
away by his passion out of the land of the living, which live here in this
transitory life. Our life verily is miserable, and short, and always caryeth
death about with it, and is every moment in danger of death, and has death
following it, even as the shadow does follow the body. But Christ then in his
passion, passed from death to everlasting life, where he does now reign our
Lord, and king for ever and ever.


Anna. Why says Esaias, the Lord made his sepulcher with the wicked, or,
suffered him to be buried as the wicked?


Vrb. The prophet speaks of the outward, passion of Christ. Paul to the Gala.
calls him a (...) that is, cursed, or maledcition, and there he says, Gal.
3, 13. Christ became accursed for us.
that for our sakes he became accursed, as though he should say: although
Christ, as touching his own person, was innocent, and that blessed seed of
Abraham, against whom, neither sin, nor death had any power, yet of his own
free will he became in his outward man contemned, and (...) accursed, and
suffered himself to be slain upon the cross for us poor miserable sinners: this
kind of death is due only to those, who for their offenses, and wicked life are
condemned. He suffered this most shameful death, and became for our cause the
curse, that we, through him, might obtayn blessedness.

Thus then, suffered he on the cross for great offenses, wherewithal the
blinded Jews did most unjustly charg him. They accused him of blasphemy, and
sedition, saying: that he trespassed against God, and Caesar, and so rightly
deserved that cruel death: whereas in deed he suffered willingly for our sakes
that vile ignominye, and false accusation, which they falsely forged against
him. For he him self never sinned, neither could offend: but so was the will of
our heavenly father. He spared not his dearly beloved Son, that we (poor
sinners) might by that his most shameful, and contemptuous death, (but unto us
sure salvation) be delivered from all our sins.

Esaias teaches in the words following, what commodity we have by this
miserable, and ignominious death of Christ, and he says: The figures or types
of the sacrifices in Moses law, are fulfilled by this only Sacrifice of
Christ. These be his words, when he shall spend his life for our sin, when he
shall make his soul an offering for sin, or, when he shall give his life a
sacrifice for sin, then shall he have seed, his age shall be prolonged: that
is, when he shall have offered himself up in Sacrifice upon the cross to his
heavenly father, for our sins, then shall he have seed, or children, that is,
faithful believers in him. And his years shall be so long, that the life of
him, and all faithful christians, shall be without end. It is otherwise with
erthly kings for they when they dye, depart from their kingdoms, and their
Successors possesses the^. But this our king of glory, Christ, dyed another
wholesome, and lively kind of death, by which he enters into true life, and
most mightily begins the administration of his eternal kingdom.

And here again is the resurrection of Christ, and faithful Christians,
foretold. For this is the right, and true ruling, governing, erection, and
establishing of a kingdom, when the king erecteth such a kingdom as will never
decay, in which the subjects always have continual, and perfect safety,
protection, peace, surety, felicity, and all good things abundantly: and this
can no earthly king do. For all earthly kings dye, and their kingdoms perish,
and decay with them, as we see all dominions, princely power, and kingdoms
continue in this world but a while, and not for ever, but within a few ages, to
come utterly to ruin. Whereupon Esaias says, that the will of the Lord is in his
own hand, or his determination, or purpose by the hand of Messiah shall have
prosperous succes. For, what thing soever the father commanded Christ to do
for us, all that has he fully finished with perfection, yea with faithfulness,
and to our great commodity: and he plainly declares that this was done by
Christ's merit, where he says, his soul was in pain: that is, he suffered
much vexatio^, greef, sorrow, and misery for our sake, but shall have a great
reward, or worthy hire. For, after so many tribulatio^s he shall see those
things which will make him joyful, that is, the catholic church, or the true
godly, who through sincere faith do openly honor Christ, glorify Christ,
preach Christ, and confess ye Lord Christ, and so highly esteem these his
labors, miseryes, and greefes, that they doubt nothing, but that by the same,
they shall attain everlasting salvation, peace, rest, and consolation. And
therefore they will not be afraid to suffer temporal death for the glory of
Christ. For they know that true righteousness, everlasting life, eternal
salvation, and abundant treasures of all goodness, and felicity are to be found
in Christ Jesus.

Now have you heard how Christ bare our sins, and satisfied for them. In the
words following, Esaias teaches us, how we may be justified, and made partakers
of that most wholesome passion, and merits of christ. And he says, his
knowledge, or the understanding of Christ, is ye mean whereby we receive, The
knowledge and understanding of Christ the righteousness of all Christians.
and attain yt great treasure. Wherefore (wife) if you believe this prophecye, to
wit, yt Jesus Christ the true son of God, God, and man, took away from you
your sins, satisfied for them, and offered him self (...) a sacrifice for
you, and that he became your savior, and has by his miserable, and innocent
death reconcyled you to God: These (I say) if you believe, by this faith shall
you receue forgeuenes of your sins, and be reputed before God both just, and
holy, as the Evangelists, and Apostles, and especially S. Peter, Paul, and
John, in every place witness. This is the righteousness of Christians, to
acknoledge, and believe that Christ is our only Mediator, Savior, and
Redeemer, whom God sent to take our sins upon him, and satisfy for them. The
righteousness of faith and how we are saved.
Paul calls this righteousness, the righteousness of faith, which stands not
on our merits, but on the merits of christ. He therefore that knows Christ,
and believes that he is the true purger of sins, and the destroyer of death,
and apprehends him in his heart by true faith, and takes him for his only
treasure of life, that man is iustyfyed, and saved. But he which does not
believe, is already condemned, for the Lord has decreed this thing, and told
it us by his law, prophets, and evangelists, that he will have mercy on us, for
nothing, neither in heaven nor earth, but by Christ, and for Christ, for whose
cause he will pardon our sins, and give us everlasting life, if we will
believe in him. Act. 4.13. Romans 3. Gal. 23.

And therefore not without a cause says the prophet, he shall bear their
sins, seeing that there is no other neither in heaven, nor earth, who can
bear or purg our sins, but even that Messiah: It follows therefore
undoubtedly, that no man can be justified, saved, and delivered from his
sins, unless he believe in this only savior Jesus Christ.

Now then you hear, that Christ is the servant of God in the work of our
redemption, and that he is therefore worthily called righteous, because he
only is just, and justifies others, as S. Steven calls him. He justifies
us in his own knowledge, and understanding, Acts. 7.52
that is, he justifies us, when we hear in the gospel, that he only, and
none other has borne our sins: and when by sure faith we retain it, and put
all our trust in him both in our life, and death: and say both with heart, and
mouth, Christ only has borne our wickedness, and died for our sins, and
only is our righteousness before God: and this righteousness, (which we get thus
by faith,) because it is founded, and built on Christ, stands fast, and firm
against the gats of hell,


Anna. As far then as I can hear, if I should be asked, how it comes to
pass, that I being a sinner, am become righteous, thus I ought to annswere: I
am not righteous because I have not sinned, or because I have done many good
deeds, or for yt I have satisfied for my sins, but I am righteous, because
Christ has borne my sins, in whom I believe, and in whom I repose all my
trust.


Vrba. You answer well, and soundly: and so have all the patriarks, prophets,
apostles, and true Christians, from the beginning of the world, to this day,
believed: neither is there any other belief auailable before God. He that
believes not, as you have said, isda^ned, neither can there be any way found
to save him, though he were covered with all the cowles of all the monks in the
world, and had all the good works, Merits of munks, and friars help not in
the work of justification.
merits, crosses, sufferinges, and penants in himself alone, that is in the
whole world. For they all cannot avail him, or healpe him, but he must needs
be a firebrande of hell, there to burn for ever, if he do not believe as you
say. Well let us hold one. The prophet furthermore speaks here of the fruit,
and reward of Christ's passion. And he says it is an eternal triumph, or
victory over sin, death, the world, and the devil.

For Christ has overcome these cruel, and bloody enemies, and has delivered
his elected from them, and so has received through the whole world generally
for his inheritance a great, and glorious people, or a most beutifull church,
which is his spiritual kingdom. And this has that the ignominious death of
Christ don, because he bore our sins, and suffered himself to be hanged
between ij. thieves, and prayed for transgressors, and sinners, as Paul says
to the Hebrews. Hebr. 5.7.
Christ in the days of his flesh did offer up prayers, and supplications, with
strong crying, and tears, unto him that was able to save him from death, and
was also heard in that which he feared: and though he were the son, yet
learned he obedience, by the things which he suffered: and being consecrate,
was made the author of eternal salvation unto all them that obey him, and is
called of god an high priest, after the order of Melchisidech.


Anna. What says Esaias of Christ in the 54. chap?


Vrb. In that chapter he describes the kingdom of Christ in faith, that is to
say, the catholic Church which in this word is under the cross, poor,
miserable, helpless, and base to behold. But he comfort it, promising to
help it, and enrich it, so that it shall become most populous with men of all
sorts, from each side presing into it, in so much that it shall bring forth an
infinite multitude of Children of grace, and have many more sons, then the
malipert synagoge, though she seemed never so fruitful, (and in deed she
seemed fruitful, for she had the law, and many good works, and work mongers,
or worketeachers, with all kind of merits,) these be the prophets words.
Rejoice thou barren that bear not, burst out, and sing, thou that trauailest
not, because the desolate has more Children then the married says the Lord.
This comfort must also be well observed, least taking offense at the small
number of Christians, we be dismayed, and fall from the faith. For the days
will come, when the number of the faithful shall be great, and populus Thus was
Sara barren, but our God so blessed her, that she became the mother of many
Children, and a great people. To be short Abraham must needs, according to
Gods promise in Genesis, and according to the Etimologie, Gene. 17.16
and signification of his name, be made a father of many people, and heir of
the earth. For his blessed seed, with all his blessings was also promised to
the gentiles. The prophet moreover uses certain similies taken of tents,
which are set up, and spread in the fields so largely, that many may dwell in
them. Whereby he gives us to understand, that the church should be spread all
abroad, through the whole world: and that the day should come, that the Gospel
should be preached in all lands, and that they should receive Christ. These be
his words. Enlarge the place of thy tents, and stretch out thy cords, and make
fast thy stakes for thou shall increase on the right hand, and on the left.

He promises moreover to the church. Gentiles for inheritance. But not so
that the Church should inherit the Gentiles, after a worldly manner of
inheriting, as kings of the earth inherit, and have their people in
subjection. For Christ's kingdom is not of this world. It is a spiritual
inheritance which the Church by the Gospel gets: and it shall dwell there
where before (through ignorance, and incredulitye) was a deserte, and wild
wilderness, as it was at Athe^s, where, before the Gospel came, they understood
nothing of God aright But S. Paul converted many at that place, and tought
them which came, and believed ye Gospel ye right faith. And therefore says
the prophet, thy seed shall possess the Gentiles, and dwell in the desolate
cities.

The prophet also confirms that comfortable promise of Christ, signifying,
that although to the carnal eye, the Church seems very small, and little, and
as though God had forsaken it, and that it were as a forlorn, and perished
thing, yet it should be great. For god shall be her spouse. Fear not for thou
shall not be ashamed neither shall thou be co^fou^ded, for thou shall not be
put to shame: yea thou shall forget the shame of thy youth, and shall not
remember the reproach of thy widdowhead any more: for he that made thee is thine
husband whose name is the Lord of hosts: and thy redeemer, the holy one of
Israel, shall be called the God of the whole world, this is a spiritual
marriage, and we may have great comfort in it.

S. Paul does famously paint out, and amplify this comfort in the epistle to
the Ephesians. And he calls it a great mystery, that God him self would in
man's nature bespouse us to him self, and join us with him in the bond of
marriage, whereby now we learn, that whatsoever is Gods, is ours, and what is
ours, O noble and comfortable exchange.
the same does God take away, and lay them all upon him self, as they were his
own. We have sins, and death, with the everlasting curse, and damnation.
Christ has righteousness, life, and salvation. So then, those evil, hurtful,
and deadly things of ours does he overcome, destroy, and take from us, and in
stead thereof, he freely gives us, all these other good treasures of his.

Is not this (I pray you) an amiable, and sweet marriage? So then as an honest
wife does promise her self all happiness of her husbands head, whom she has
ever found faithful, and loyal: and as of the other side the good husband
entirely loves, cherishes, and delights in such a wife: so stands the
case between God, and us.

We may therefore be of good courage, and rejoice always in the Lord, and not
be dismaide in any extremity, either when sin troubles our consciences, or
when death terrifieth us. For we shall not be confounded, we shall not be
ashamed. For he that defends us, both can, and will redeem us from all evils.

And note in this place, that he says our redeemer, (to wit Christ) shall be
called the God of the whole world, or God in all the earth. Hear we see the
divinity of Christ, and that men should acknowledge, and worship Christ
through the whole world, as true and only God.

And note this also, that the Church looks like a forsaken, and mourning
woman, whereupon we gather, that her exceeding great joy is here in hope, but
after this life her glory shall be made manifest. Romans 8.18.
If then she must be sorrowful hear in the earth, Christ's kingdom is not a
corporal or earthly kingdom, for he says: But for all this the Lord has
called thee, being as a woman, forsaken and afflicted in spirit, and as a young
wife when thou wast refused, says thy God.

But for all this, there is no danger, she shall not be utterly forsaken. The
world counts the church a forsaken, and miserable people: but God says, in
mine anger I hid my face from thee for a little season, but with everlasting
mercy, have I had compassion on thee, says the Lord thy redeemer. Note how
friendly, and fair the Lord speaks to the Church, comforting her, and
promising that her cross, and sorrow should not continue always, Romans 8. 2.
Cor. 4,
but her joy, and fame shall never have end. And so does Paul comfort us to
the Romans, and Corinthians. Esaias adds also a similitude, wherein he says
that God would show his mercy upon us, and how he would do it. As he promised
grace unto Noe, saying that he would never after drown the world with water,
and he gave him the rainebow for a sign: So also will he firmly, and
constantly perform to us his promised grace: these be ye prophets words. For
it is unto me as the waters of Noe, for as I have sworn that the waters of Noe
should no more go over the earth so have I sworn, A great and notable comfort.
that I would not be angry with thee, nor rebuke thee: for the mountains shall
remove, and the hills shall fall down, but my mercy shall not depart from
thee, neither shall the covenant of my peace, fall away says the Lord, that
has compassion on thee.

Which is thus much to say. Although thy adversaries be strong, yet shall they
not be able to hurt or destroy thee. They shall fear, fall, and vanish away,
but my grace, and health shall not be removed, but remain for ever. For I have
made a covenant of grace with thee. O this is a comfortable word, that the
Lord says he will not be our Judge, but our merciful Father. And yet the
afflictions of the church, shall not only be short, but they shall serve to
this end, to increase, and multiply the faithful. The more the church is
afflicted, the more fruitfully it increases. The cause why we be tempted and
troubled.
For the Lord does with it as the quarriers, or rough masons do with the rough
stones of brick, which they chop, and hew with their mallet now on this side,
the^ of that, striking of the knobbs, that they may make them square, and fit
for the building: so does the cross hew, and cut the old man with his lusts
and concupiscence: and this is the cause, that god suffers his Church to be
afflicted, crossed, and persecuted, to make it by crossing it a goodly fair
kingdom, all of precious stones, to wit, Christians, which are taught of God.

For the Christian man's art, The Christians art.
and science is the gospel, which reason has not found, nay, it cannot
conceive it. For the Gospel is not naturally ingrafted in our reason, it is not
borne with us as the law is, but the holy ghost, by whom it is sent from
heaven unto the earth, must teach us by the preaching, or ministry of ye word.
In this kingdom shall be true peace with God, through faith in Christ, that
the Church in all kinds of afflictions, may have wherein to comfort her
self, and to pacify her conscience, seeing God him self is her forgeuer. And
true godly works of righteousness, in deed follow this peace, as the words
following do import.

O thou afflicted, tossed with tempests, that have no comfort, behold, I will
lay thy stones with the carbunckle, and lay thy foundations with Safires, The
beuty of the Church.
I will make thy windows of Emerauds, and thy gates shining stones, and all thy
borders of pleasant stones, and all thy Children shall be tought of the Lord,
and much peace shall be to thy Children. In righteousness shall thou be
established, and be far from oppression, For thou shall not fear it and from
fear, for it shall not come near thee. Behold the enemy shall gather him
self, but without me whosoever shall gather him self in thee, against thee
shall fall.

All these things are spiritually wrought in ye hearts and consciences of the
godly, and shall at last be fulfilled in the day of redemption. The Jews look
for a Jerusalem, that should be builded of perles, Iemms, and precious stones,
and they expound this promise carnally, of an earthly building, but Esaias
speaks in this place of a spiritual building, and spiritual stones.

When we hear, and believe the Gospel, then are we by the word, and faith
builded upon that our precious corner stone, and rock Christ, yt we may be the
holy City of God, which he him self does build, and in in which he does
dwell. He that is a stone, and Citizen of this City, he is in safety: sin,
death, and Satan can not hurt him: for God himself is there the ouerseer, and
master mason.

Esaias in many chapiters has plainly set down what Christ is, and what his
ministry is, and says, that Christ's Church, or kingdom is not an earthlye
kingdom, but a congregation of the faithful in spirit, which believe the
Gospel, and hold, and depend in this life, of the word of God, and not of the
visible things of this world. 2. Pet. 3.13. Apoc. 21.1.
For there is an other world, and an other earth prepared for the Children of
God wherein nothing dwells but righteousness it self. They seek a city to
come because in this world they have no place of co^tinuau^ce. Heb. 13.14.
And least they should be offended at the crose, or faint in so great
affliction, and least in the heat of persecution, and in the tossing tempests
of temtation, they should say with them selves, we shall perish and be undone:
he comfort them with most sweet and fatherly promises, saying that he will
be with them in all their dangers, and readely help them in all their
miseries.

Seeing then the kingdom of Christ is a hidden kingdom of faith under the
cross, it is needful that we lay good handfast hold of the word of God,
Needful to know the word and promises.
and with And therefore Esaias. does counsel, and exhort the Church of
Christ, that it should diligently hear, and in heart lay up, the word of God:
in which great and infinite treasures, (to wit,) everlasting righteousness,
peace, joy, health, and life are offered, and freely given us, without our
desert. And these be his words O every one that thirsts come ye to the
waters, Esa. 55.1.
and ye that have no silver, come bye and eat: come I say bye wine, A sweet
exhortation
and milk without monye, and silver, wherefore do you lay out silver, and not
for bread, and yet labor without being satisfied. Lo hear how sweetly God
allureth, and draws us to his word, and heavenly treasures. He calls his
word water, even water of that everlasting and lively fountain of which John
speaking says, John. 4.1.
yt it quenches eternal thirst, and yt it refreshes, and recreateth us in
all our drought, and heat of persecution, and affliction, which is the true
water of comfort, and life, wherewith we repare, and refresh our selves in all
distress both of body and soul.

He calls it wine, and also milk, for that it gives comfort, and
consolation as well to the old as to the young, to the weak, as to the strong:
and because it quickneth, and refreshes the troubled conscience: and because
it nourishes us to everlasting life, and feeds us with lively food. Here he
excludes no man, he says:

Whosoever hungreth, and thirsts for true righteousness, only let him come,
as for money, and money worth he has no need, only let him come. This water,
this wine, and this milk, are most pleasant to all the poor in spirit, as
Christ says in Matthew.

The pharisees, and Iusticiaries sell righteousness, Math. 11.
works, and spiritual comfort very dear. But here in the word of God, they
are all given gratis. Whosoever seeks peace of conscience, and righteousness,
other were then in the gospel, they lay out their monye, Who lay out their
money for naught.
where there is no bread because gods promise is the bread, by which we live
before god. It follows in the prophet.

Harken diligently unto me, and eat that which is good and let your soul
delight in fatnes. Incline your ears, and come unto me. Here, and your soul
shall live, and I will make an everlasting covenant with you, even the sure
mercies of David. Behold I gave him for a witness to the people, for a prince,
and a Master unto the people. Behold thou shall call a nation that thou
know not, and a nation that knew not thee, shall run unto thee, because of
the Lord thy God, and the holy one of Israel. For he has glorified thee. In
these words Esayas does teach what great, and infinite fruit we reap of the
word of God to wit, even life it self.

In the word of God is contained the pleasant, consolation, meat, and drink
of the soul: he that believes it has life, John. 8.52.
and does not taste of the eternal death. It is the word of grace, and truth,
whatsoever it promises is firm, certain, and sure, and must needs come to
pas. And that he may better stir up our minds, and strengthen us with
greater comfort, he calls it the promise of grace in Christ, and covenant
with David, whereof you have heard in the Psalms.

This is that new testament, the covenant of grace between God, Psalm. 87.4.
and all the faithful, which in true faith apprehend, and take hold of Christ
the true David, from which God shall never turn his face, Even the godliest of
all sometimes weak and offend. Romans 8.1.
and mercy. And although yea even the true godly them selves be hear weak,
and not altogether perfect, yet for Christ's sake into whom they are ingrafted
in faith, there is no damnation to them. If this covenant depended upon our
good works, so that only we should think God to be atone with us, so long
as we are just, and without sin before him, then in deed, the whole state of
our salvation were uncertain. For no man at all in this flesh does live
without sin. But our salvation has a more sound, and firm foundation even
the grace, and truth of God. Hear he promises forgeuenes of sins of his
mere grace, and what of his grace he promises in faythfulnes he performs.
Romans 4.16
Wherefore Paul has a noble saying. Righteousness is by faith, that it might
come by grace, and the promise might be sure to all the seed, not to that only
which is of the law, but also to that which is of the faith of Abraham, who is
the Father of us all. It follows in the prophet, that he has given the true
David, even Christ the son of David for a witness. For he teaches and
preaches the Gospel.

The prophet also says that God gave him to be a Captain, Master, and
Emperor, or law geuer to the gentiles, which is is as much to say, as Christ
should be the Doctor, and king of the gentiles, which gentiles as the Gospel
witnesses, shall see how obstinate, rebellious, and unbelieving a kind of
people the Jews be, which obstinatly refused their own flesh, and blood,
Jesus Christ the true Messiah, and utterly, and contemptiously rejected him,
whom above all men they ought to have received, and honored. Paul says to
the blinded Jews, Acts. 13.46
It was necessary that the word of god should first have been spoken unto you,
but seeing ye put it from you, and judge your selves unworthy of everlasting
life, lo we turn to the Gentiles, for so has the Lord commanded us. etc.

And again he said to the Jews at Rome, Act. 28.28.
that would not believe the Gospel. Be it known therefore unto you that this
salvation of God is sent to the Gentiles and they shall hear it.

Esaias also does plainly promise, that Christ should be the redeemer of Sion,
(that is to say, Esa. 59.20.
of such of the Jews as be elect:) so that all shall not be condemned,
although thy be fallen into most grievous, horrible, and long blindenes, and
God also promises, that he will not take his word, and holy spirit from the
Church. Math 28.20.
For as Matthew says, Christ shall tarry always with us. So also says Esaias. And
the redemer shall come to Sion, and unto them that turn from iniquity in
Jacob, says the Lord. And I will make this my covenant with them says the
Lord. My spirit, which is upon thee, and my words, which I have put in thy
mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of thy mouth of thy seed,
nor out of the mouth of the seed of thy seed, says the Lord from henceforth,
and even for ever.


Anna. Is this the prophecye, which Paul recites in the 11. of the Romans,
where he comforts ye Jews saying, that many of them shall be converted
before ye last day? The Jews shall be come Christians before the last day. Romans
11.25.



Vrb. It is the same, and he speaks mistically to the Gentiles, that they
should not utterly contemn the remnaunt of the Jews, or despair of their
salvation, saying. Partly obstinacy is come to Israel, until the fulness of
the Gentiles be come in, and so all Israel shall be saved. As it is written. The
deliverer shall come out of Sio^, and shall turn away the ungodliness from
Jacob. And this is my covenant to them, when I shall take away their sins. As
concerning the gospel, they are enemies for your sakes. But as touching the
election, they are beloved for the Fathers sake. Out of all these prophecies,
might Cleophas and his fellow have drawn some comfort, and known that Christ's
kingdom, was spiritual.

But to go on, mark how sweetly, pleasau^tly, and graciously Esayas
prophecieth of the kingdom of Christ saying, that it should by preaching be
enlarged, and spread all abroad, and that there is no life but only in ye
Church, and that he which refuses to be of this spiritual kingdom is damned.
The prophets use very much figurative, and borrowed speches. We must therefore
be acquainted with their phrase of speaking. These then be his words in the
60. Chapter.

Esa. 60.1.
Arise O Jerusalem: Be bright, for thy light is come, and the glory of the Lord
is risen upon thee. This light is the gospel, the glory of God, and the gifts
of the eternal treasures, as wisdom, security, health, and life. It
follows. For behold, darkness shall cover the earth, and gros darkness the
people. But the Lord shall arise upon thee, and his glory shall be seen upon
thee. And the Gentiles shall walk in thy light. And kings at the brightness of
thy rising up. Lift up thine eyes round about, and behold, all these are
gathered, and come to thee. Thy sons, that is to say, the faithful in Christ,
shall come from far. That is to say, in all the parts of the wide world shall ye
gospel be taught, and the people shall believe on Christ. And thy daughters shall
be nourished at thy side. Then thou shall see, and shine, A prophecy of
Ingla^ds calling to the Gospel.
thine heart shall be astonyed, and enlarged, because the multitude of the seas
shall be converted unto thee. That is to say, the Gentiles that inhabit the
Islands, and all the sea coasts. And the riches of the Gentiles shall come unto
thee. This prophecy was then fulfilled, when ye gentiles in Spain, France,
Italy, Greece, Asia, Cilicia, Africa, Egypt, Cyprus, Creet, Rodes, Liuonia,
Borus, or Pruse, Pomeriane, lower Germany about the West sea, Scotland,
England, Ireland, Island, and in other countries, and places, were converted by
the preaching of the gospel. The multitude of Camels shall cover thee. That is,
the people of the East which abound in Cammels, shall also come to the heavenly
Jerusalem. Esa. 60.6.
The Dromedaries of Midian, and Ephah. That is, the people about the red Sea,
and they of Arabia shall believe in Christ. All they of Sheba shel come, they
shall bring gold, and incense, and show forth the praises of the Lord. Esa. 60.6.
All the sheep of Kedar shall be gathered unto thee The Rams of Nebayoth shall
serve thee. By Seba is meant the people on the right hand of the East. By Kedar,
and Nebayoth, those that be on the left hand. He says that these should serve
the Church, and gather them selves together to it, and should preach, and
glorify Christ as our only Savior. Esa. 60.7.
They shall come up to be accepted upon mine Altar. This is fulfilled when the
preachers of the word of God convert the people, so that they mortify the old
man, and willingly submit them selves to the cross, and so offer up, Esa. 60.7.
and sacrifice them selves to God, through Christ our Altar. And I will
beutefie the house of my glory. That is, I will enrich, and beutefy my church,
my spiritual Temple, Esa. 60.8.
with all kind of gifts of ye holy ghost. It follows who are these that fly
like a cloud? and as the doves to their windows? These words be figuratively
spoken. The clouds be ye Apostles, who are very fruitful For they bring ye
sweet shoures of the word of God. And they were swift as ye clouds, and as
doves, for they did fly to all people in all parts of the world, that they
might preach to them the gospel. Esa. 60.9.
It follows. Surely the Isles shall wayt for me, and the ships of Tarshishe,
as at the beginning, that they may bring thy sons from far, and their
silver, and their gold with them, unto the name of the Lord thy God, and to the
holy one of Israel, because he has gloryfied thee. And the sons of strangers
shall build up thy walls, and their kings shall minister unto thee. That is, men
shall greedely, and earnestly desire the gospel, as the only comfort of their
sad, and troubled conscyences. And they shall frankely lay out their substance,
and goods, to help to set out, and publish abroad the name of the Lord: and to
preserve, and deliver the miserable, and afflicted men. These children of
strangers (or strangers) be the doctors of the gentiles in the church, such as
Athanasius, Nazianzenus, Cyrillus, Chrysostomus, Augustine, Hillary, and others
which builded the church by their writing, and preaching.

It follows, In my wrath I smote thee, but in my mercy I had compassion on
thee. Esa. 6.10.
That is, thou have now some sins, and it is necessary thou should in this
life be beaten, and chastened with a fatherly rod, and suffer affliction. But
this yet is a fatherly anger. For all thy affliction shall be for thy profit, A
fatherly correction
and health, that thou be not damned with this wicked world. Under the copy of
this feigned angry countenance, lies hid a fatherly grace, and great good will:
as if he should say, I will not kill thee, but I will smite thee, and chastise
thee, Esaias 60.11 The church cannot be overthrown.
that thou may live. It follows, Therefore thy gates shall be open
continually, neither day nor night shall they be shut, that men may bring unto
thee the riches of the gentiles, and that their kings may be brought. For the
nation, and kingdom that will not serve thee shall perish, and those nations
shall be utterly destroyed. That is, although thou be enuyroned with many
enemies, which all seek thy life, and threaten thy death: yet shall thou be
safe, and without danger, even as a fortifyed and well defenced city, which
shuts not her gates, and fears not her enemy. This is our security, that
we have in the spirit. Neither can all the enemies of christ (though they
join hands, and lay their heads together) subvert, or destroy the church of
the godly, though they never so sore afflict their bodies, and take away their
goods. The church is as a city that lies always open. For, it ever and at all
times receives, and wayteth for all that repent, and give their names to
Christ, and come into this city: for it has this promise, that it shall
increase even unto the last day. The word, and the Sacraments be and are ever
to be found in the church, by which if we convert, we have remission of sins:
neither be these truly found in any place, but in the church. He that is not a
christian, or a citizen of this city, is flatly condemned.

Esa. 60.13.
It follows in the text. The glory of Lybanus shall come to thee; the Fur
tree, the Elm, and the Box tree together, to beutefie the place of my
Sanctuary. For I will glorify the place of my seat. That is, in whatsoever
excellent, and famous thing the Sinagoge of the Jews has before time excelled
other nations, as in the sacred Scripture, the knowledge of god, the promise of
grace, Christ, righteousness, and true hope of salvation: With all those will I
now bles Christ's church. It follows The sons also of them that afflicted
thee, shall come, and bow unto thee: and all they that despise thee: Esaias 60.14
shall fall down at the souls of thy feet: and they shall call thee, the City
of the Lord, Syon of the holy one of Israel. Whereas thou have been forsaken,
and hated, so that no man went by thee, I will make thee an eternal glory, and
a joy from generation to generation. Thou shall also suck the milk of the
gentiles, and shall suck the breasts of kings: and thou shall know that I the
Lord am thy Savior, and thy Redeemer, the mighty one of Jacob. That is: Harken
my church. Those which now persecute thee, and so bitterly revile thee,, shall
once be converted to the catholic faith, and shall well know that thou, even
thou art the city of god, and the true Syon. And look how desolate thou wast
(as forsaken for a little time) so shall thou now be highly exalted to great
glory.

And where he figuratively speaks of milk, thereby he gives us to
understand, that even as mothers do wish well to their deerly beloved babes,
cherish them, softer them, and nourish them: even so shall the Gentiles show
exceeding great curtesy, and kindness to the church, and by all means study to
profit, and further it.

Here now must you note, that though the church outwardly appear despised, and
foully deformed, yet will God preserve it, and defend it, that he may highly
magnify, exalt it, and glorify it. But this is chiefly done in spirit, and
this Spiritual glory of the church does very far excel all the beuty of the
world.

Furthermore, those shall be highly honored, which in this world were despised,
and persecuted. Were not the Apostles, and Martirs (I pray you) utterly
contemned? and yet the remembrance of them is now yearly celebrated with all
solemnity and joy. And they are called (as in deed they are) the deer friends of
God, and most holy, and happy souls. And whence have we this estimation?
verily because God himself, is our savior, and yt strong and almighty one, our
redeemer. How now ca^ we miscary, Esa. 60.17.
having this savior, and redeemer always with us, and on our side? It
follows, For bras will I bring gold, and for Iron, will I bring silver, and for
wood, bras, and for stones Iron. I will also make thy government peace, and
thine exactors, righteousness. Violence shall no more be heard of in thy land,
neither desolation, nor destruction within thy borders, but thou shall call
salvation thy wales, and praise thy gates. Thou shall have no more son to shine
by day, neither shall the brightness of the Moon shine unto thee. For the Lord
shall be thine everlasting light, and thy god, thy glory. Thy son shall never
go down, neither shall thy moon be hid. For the Lord shall be thy everlasting
light, and the days of thy sorrow shall be ended. Thy people also, shall be all
righteous. They shall posses the land for ever. The graffe of my planting shall
be the work of my hands, that I may be glorified. A little one shall become as
a thousand, and a small one as a strong nation, I the Lord will hasten it in
due time.

That is to say. Give ear (my church,) if for my sake thou lose any thing, or
be despised, it shall be manifoldely, and abundantly restored thee, and thou
shall be recompensed with heavenly treasures. Thou shall become mighty, and
glorious, thou shall have faithful bishops, and doctors, which shall godly, and
diligently teach, both spiritual and temporal peace, so that the godly may
live, and be at rest, and peace, both inwardly in their hearts with God; and
outwardly with their neighbors. The Lord shall so marvelously defend thee,
that thy Inhabitants, and Citizens, may for ever sit secure, and safe. But this
must be understood in this life, of the spiritual security, and peace.

Thou shall call thy walls salvation, Seeing thou have within thee this so
sure, and certain an aid, and defense against all assaults of the enemies, a
defense, I say, much surer, then the world either has, or can give. And thou
shall call thy gates praise, because the true, and marvelous great riches of
gods graces, shall be so plainly taught, and understood in thee, that by them,
al christian men may be moved to laud, and praise the Lord, without ceasing,
for all his gifts, both temporal, and spiritual, which this wicked, and
ungodly world does not so much as acknowledge, so far is it from giving God
thanks, and praise for them. A property of the godly
Only the faithful in Christ be they that do this, and they sing both in
spirit, and mouth, and desire always so to sing, Psalm. 84.4
as witnesses the Psalmist, saying: Blessed are they that dwell in thine house
(O Lord,) for they will ever praise thee. Selah.

And least we should look for a corporal City, and an earthly kingdom at
Christ's hands, as do the blinded Jews, and foolish Cheliasts, the prophet
says in the words following, that this corporal, and visible sun shall not
make the gates, and walls of this City visibly to be seen with bodily eyes,
in the brightness, and light of the son. There must be a much cleerer light
for the beholding of this City. God himself shall shine in this city, as the
visible sun, and shall lighten our hearts with the gospel. And by this light may
we see all those great things, and excellent benefits, which God has promised
to his church.

Hereby also know we, that the catholic church, and the kingdom of Christ is
not a visible kingdom. For these worldly kingdoms, dominions, or politik
powers, may be beholden in all their regal pomp, with corporal eyes: But the
church, and the beuty thereof cannot be seen, but with spiritual eyes for an
other kind of sun must shine in it, then does in this world.

But now mark what excellent, and comfortable promyses we have in Christ. The
sun of Christ's kingdom shall not go down. This visible sun on the day time
having run his course, does every day go down, and bydes himself til the
next morning. But our sun, and our moon tarry with us for ever. For Christ the
sun of righteousness ryseth, and shines to us by his gospel, and shall never
go down from his elected. For though never so great a cloud of temtation
darken this sun, yet shall it not utterly go from us, Christ forsakes not his
utterly.
but at the last day of redemption, it shall apeare, and shine unto us most
clear, where neither cloud of affliction, ignorance, or incredulity can cover,
hinder, or blemish his brightness. Then at the last shall be seen the fulfulling
of the great promises of the peace, health, and joy of the church. Our state in
heaven.
When Christ our everlasting light, shall be made many fest, then shall we see
him face to face, then shall our afflictions end, and then shall the day of
eternal glory appear to the children of God.

Note also here, that in the church, or kingdom of Christ, there shall be none
but just men. Here in the world, godly, and ungodly dwell, and are mixed
together, but in the true church, the congregation of Christians in the spirit
is such, that there is not one ungodly person. For in the last day, the ungodly
faithles, shall be even corporally separated for ever from the godly.

The fantastical, and mad rabble of Anabaptists, suppose that they can gather
together all the godly into some one erthly city, and that they should so
corporally fulfill this promise. But their conate shall be frustrate, they shall
labor in vain, it cannot be so in this earth, while this life lasts.

At the last day the Tares shall be separated from the Wheat. But here in this
church, the ungodly (as thieves, and robbers in a kingdom, which abuse all
Creatures, and with violence, and iniurye, possess, and cease all things into
their hands,) are mixed with the godly until the last day. But the godly shall
reign with Christ, Romans 8
in heaven, and earth. God shall excellently, and bravely burnish the earth,
and visible creature, and shall give it a new shape, and marueilously beutefy
it, that ye children of God may enjoy it. And thus shall the godly inherit,
and posses a new heaven, and a new earth, 2. Pet. 2, 13.
in which righteousness shall dwell, as Peter says.

But how shall they come to so great, a glory? And why shall they have it? Why,
and how we shall be glorified.
Even therefore shall they have it, as Esaias says, because they are the bud, or
bows, or young plant, which the lord himself has planted with his own hand,
because he has renewed in us the Image of God by his word, and his spirit, and
has made us new men, and a new creature in Christ. In the end of this chap.
Esaias promyseth it shall come to pass, that though the church be small, and
rare, yet shall it so increase, that an innumerable, and infinite number of
people shall receive the faith of Christ. And least (when we see the true godly
persecuted, and slain on heaps, and the world swarm with a great multitude of
ungodly, and worldlings, and the church, in comparyson of the world, but little,
and straight) we should something doubt how this should come to pas. In his
conclusion he says, that it is not man's deed, thus gloryously to exalt the
kingdom of Christ, but God himself shall do it in his due time. For to see the
gospel taught, men believe such hidden mysteries, and believers of Gods
promyses, to relinquish, and contemn this world, and valyantly by death to
confess Christ, passes al man's reason, wisdom, and worldly power. These must
needs be the works of the mighty God, which by his power, and spirit does work
them, preserve them, and increase them in us.

Again, you may gather out of this prophecy, that the kingdom of Christ is
spiritual, and eternal, and that it behooved him to rise again from death, if
he should be the son, and everlasting light of the godly, and that we also
shall rise again, that we may in the life to come receue, and for ever enjoy al
these great promises made in the prophets. Whosoever believes this, sorroweth
not as did Cleophas, and his companion. For he knows that Christ shall come to
deliver Israel, and advance it to glory. But this glory is not seen in this
frail life, it is here but in hope, but after this life we shall see, and have
it in eternal, and perfect possession.

Now shall you hear what Esaias prophesyeth, of the church, of us christians,
and of Christ the Savior of the church, how that he shall come in Syon, and
justify the gentiles: How even the very gentiles shall receive Messiah how he
shall give this church: faithful bishops and pastors, and how he shall
gloriously beutefy it, and diligently co^serue it, as his only beloved spouse.
Whereby all men may plainly see, that though the church be here crossed, to the
end it may be made like her Lord, Esaias 92.1^
and king, yet is she not forsaken of God.

And thus he says in the 62. chapter. For Sions sake, I will not hold my
tongue, and for Hierusalems sake, I will not rest, until the righteousness
thereof break forth as the light, and the salvation thereof as a burning lamp.
And the gentiles shall see thy righteousness, and all kings thy glory, and thou
shall be called by a new name, which the mouth of the Lord shall name. Thou shall
also be a croun of glory, in the hand of the Lord, and a royal diade^ in the
hand of thy God. It shall no more be said unto thee, forsaken, neither shall it
be said any more to thy land, desolat, But thou shall be called Hephzibah, That
is to say my delight in her, and thy land Beulah. That is to say: inhabited.
For the Lord delights in thee, and thy land shall have a husband. For as a
young man marieth a virgin, so shall thy sons mary thee: and as a bridgrome is
glad of the bride, so shall thy God rejoice over thee.

Here the prophet says, a great part of men regard neither God, nor Christ,
and yet shall the elect, seek for the spiritual, and true Sion, and weight
for Christ their only Savior. But seeing the Church lies open to Satan's
persecutions, and of him is afflicted, and wasted, it has great need to be
comforted.

Therefore he says, I will not keep silence, but I will teach Christ
continually, until he come. For Christ as Paul witnesses, is the only
righteousness of Sion, or of the spiritual Jerusalem. 1. Cor. 1.30
And he is the only salvation of the Church, Psalm. 37, 39.
as the Evangelists, and Apostls teach in every place. Esaias therefore teaches
of none but Christ Jesus, whom God sent us to be our Savior, that both Jews,
and Gentiles might enjoy, and be partakers of this his benefit: as it has been
fulfilled in all places, The new name.
ever since thapostles time. And this new name here spoken of, is nothing else,
but that Gos people is now called the Church of the son of God, and the true,
and heavenly Jerusalem, which is the mother of all the elected saints.

And hear behold how precious, and dear a darling, the Church is to God, our
good and faithful father. For the prophet calls it a crown of glory, the
world counted the godly, as ungodly, as fools, as doultes, as outcasts, and
as of scouringes of all things, and every man, did scoff, mock, scorn, and
injury the^ at their pleasure. But the Church has here an other manner of
name, for it is called a beloved, precious, Comfort under the cross.
and glorious crown, my delight is in her, and a people that has a god, that
will not forget them. These be most comfortable promises, when we be under the
cross: But they must be steadfastly believed, or else they little auailed. For it
is most certain (although in this world we be contemned, and afflicted) that
God yet loves us so derely, and well, that all the creatures of the world are
compelled to serve, and help us, even then, when the world supposes they must
torment us. Yea the Angels in heaven care for, cherish, and defend us, and God
himself bears us in his arms, as does the loving Father his only beloved
child.

But now consider this great work of the love of God, I mean the passion of
Christ, and that God became man for us. All these things he did for ye Church
to the end, that having delivered them by this means from all evils he might
bring them to health, and life everlasting. How could he declare, and show a
more fatherly love, and good will to his Church, the^ he has done in
delivering, his only begotten son up unto death for it, that he might
deliver it, when as yet it was his enemy.

Though this infirmity, sore temptation, and cross of ours in this world,
appear outwardly, horrible, Romans 5.10,
and detestable, yet in deed thy are nothing else, but a Fatherly rod,
wherewith he corrects, amendeth, and reformeth his derely beloved children.
As for the glory, which in the day of redemption shall be revealed unto us, I
will now say nothing of it, but the^ it shall appear, how dearly God loves his
church. And then shall it be seen, that this temporal trouble, which we
Christians have hear, is a certain sign of Gods great good will, and true
fatherly love toward us. Esaias his words seem to sound, as though he spak of
that earthly Jerusalem in the land of Canaa^. Troble and vexation a sign that
we be gods children.
And the prophet beholding the Church with spiritual eyes, is compelled to
speak as if he spoke of these earthly things because they were figures of the
true, and heavenly Jerusalem, and land of righteousness

As Peter, and Paul, do sufficiently witness, prescribing us a sure rule, how
to understand the prophets aright, when they speak of Christ, and his kingdom
the church. Note also that Esaias calls the church such a crown, as is in the
hand of the Lord, or which is carried in the Lords hand. Which is as much to
say, as the Church is a spiritual kingdom, which God himself does govern,
and rule. It is also a crown of glory, or a glorious crown in the hand of the
Lord, because it does not appear glorious in the eyes of the world. And whereas
the prophet takes his similitude of a marriage, and of faith given between man,
and wife, that is very comfortable.

For hereby we learn how dearly, tenderly, and inwardly God loves us, and
what infinite treasures we shall receive of him. For we know that ye bridgrome
makes his bride partaker of all he has: It follows. I have set watch men
upon thy walls O Jerusalem, Esa. 62.6.
which all the day, and all the night continually shall not cease. Ye that are
mindful of the Lord keep ye silence, and give him no rest, till he repare, and
set up Jerusalem, the praise of the world.

The watchmen are the faithful preachers of Gods word, which watch and take
pains in the Church, in prayer, and doctrine, least Satan that deadly enemy
by his false prophets should deceive, and overcome the^. And these prechers
always preach true repentance, and the grace of God in Christ: and they
diligently by their exhortations, and sermons teach us the knowledge of god,
and our selves, and to give God thanks for all his unspeakable benefits.

Esa. 62.8.
It follows. The Lord has sworn by his right hand, and by his strong arm,
surely I will no more give thy corn to be meat to thine enemies: and surely
the sons of the strangers shall not drink thy wine, for the which thou have
labored: But they that have gathered it shall eat it, and praise the Lord, and
the gatherers thereof shall drink it in the courts of my sanctuary. This is
spoken and meant of the spiritual corn, and wine. And this is the meaning
thereof. It cannot be but the word, which these preachers teach, should take
place, and after it shall follow and rise the fruit of faith, which appears
not at all in the ungodly

These courts that he speaks of is the congregation or Church of Christians,
or the godly, amongst whom the gospel is purely taught, where men's
consciences were pacified, quieted, merry, and pleasant in the Lord when the
inward man feels peace, tranquillity, The ungodly men have no part of gods
peace.
quietness, securitye, felicity: and perfect pleasure in the word of God. None
of the ungodly either feel or have taste of this pleasure. And least we should
any thing doubt of this promise, he binds it with an oath that we shall have
those things, which he promises. It follows in the text. Go through, go
through the gates, prepare you the way for the people. Cast up, cast up the
way, and gather out the stones, and set up a standerd for the people. Esa.
62.10.
Behold the Lord has proclaimed unto the ends of the world.

Tell the daughter Sion, Behold thy Savior comes. Behold his wagis is with
him, and his work is before him and they shall call them the holy people, the
redeemer of the Lord: And thou shall be named a City sought out, and no^t
forsaken. In these words the prophet commands, that the word of the Gospel
should be diligently, painefully, and continually tought in all places, where
men be to hear it. The gates of ye Church do stand always open, all things
are now ready, there lacks nothing, but that you diligently urge, and believe
the doctrine of the word: and that ye remove, take up, and sweep away all
things whatsoever hinder the cross, and increase of the Gospel, that it may
have better success. Preach you Christ crucified, and he shall by his spirit
gather, and draw all men unto him. To be short, the Gospel ought to be
published, and preached through all the world. Tell the daughter Sion. that is,
you must declare to all the elect both Jews, and Gentiles, that their Savior
Christ Jesus is at hand, and whatsoever he promises or enterpriseth for the
saving of his people (that is to say) the spiritual Sion, the same he mightily
performs.

For the captiuitye wherein he was, and the passion which he suffered is our
redemption, and salvation, and his death is our life. And though Sion that is
the Church be counted but base, and vile in the eyes of the world, yet shall it
be glorious, famous, and of great dignity before God, and it shall have this
worthy name, and title, to be called the holy people of God, whom God himself
in man's nature, which he took upon him, has redeemed.

And although the world supposes that God has rejected, The catholic church.
and forsaken the church, and that God himself is sore displeased with it,
because they see it in misery, calamity, and under the cross, yet nevertheless,
shall it both be called, and in deed be found that perfect city of God, which
God in no case can forsake. And here you see the articles of the creed I
believe the holy Catholic church, the communyon of saints. For, he that
believes in Christ, is a citizen in this City, and a saint in Christ, which
forgeueth our sins, and sanctyfieth the church by his word, and holy spirit.

Now then, if you will not have this work of Christ our Savior to be fruitles,
it is necessary, that the gospel should be preached in all the world, and that
there should be in all places faithful believers in Christ, and that the same
believers be delivered from death, to the end the church may be made this
beutifull city, and fair dwelling, or house of god, which he cannot forsake.
Here also, it is euydent, that it behooved Christ to rise again from death, to
the end this city might be builded in all the world, and that the faithful in
Christ may be delivered from all their calamities, sin, death, and damnation.
This did not Cleophas, and his companion, while they were on their way to
Emaus, understand, and that was the cause that they were so sad.

But let us now go to the 63. chapter of Esaias, in which the magnificall, and
glorious triumph of Christ is descrybed, to wit, how by his cross, and
bloudsheding, he marueilously overcame his, and the churches enemies, namely,
sin, death, Satan, and the sinagogue of the unbelieving Jews, and valiantly
vanquished them by his own strength, and virtue. Esaias in this chapter also
uses (after his manner) a figurative speech, saying: Who is this that comes
from Edom with red garments from Bosrah? He is glorious in his apparel, and
walks in his great strength.

Here the prophet wondering at the passion of christ, uses an interrogatiue
speech. Edom signifies red, Edom.
ruddy, or redly colored. Bosrah signifies a vine branch from whence the
clusters of grapes be gathered, which are troaden, and pressed in the wine pres.
He calls the Sinagogue of the Jews Edom, or red, because they all bestayned,
and defiled them selves with the blood of the prophets, and Christ, when they
said, his blood be upon us, and our children. The prophet therefore, Christ's
blood upon the Jews.
saw in the spirit, how that bloody Sinagogue tormented, and afflicted Christ,
and all be slubbered, and berayd him in blod, as we see the grape treders are
besprinkled, and bestaind with the wine in the vintage. He saw also, in the
same place, by ye spirit, what Christ by his blodsheding has wrought, and
done: to wit, how he has by his own strength, and virtue, without the help and
aid of any other, overcome, and vanquyshed his enemies, and admirably
tryumphed, as a most fortunat, and worthy warryar, in his triumphs, conquest,
and signs of victory, worthy to be beholden of all men. For when ye Jews
thought verily he had been dispatched, and deead in deed, then rose he again
from death, and began his kingdom, and declared him self to be a valiant
vanquisher of sin, death, and all the kingdom of darcknes, and punished
(with the horrible plague of captivity, hardness of heart, and apostasy) the
Jews in all the world whersoeuer they be, for this horrible, and cruel fact of
sheding of innocent blood.

Unto this interrogatio^ of the prophet, does ye Messiah answer: saying: I
speak in righteousness, and am mighty to save. That is to say, why marueilest
thou what I am? I am he whom God has sent to teach righteousness, nay even to
help, that is to say, iustifye, and save of mine own hability. But by and by
the prophet adds another interrogation.

If thou be the true Savior, which shall help, and give life in deed,
wherefore then is thy apparel red, and thy garments like his that treads in
the wine pres? How does this agree, and stand with thy promyses, wherein thou
take upon thee to help, and save us? To this Christ answers. I have troaden
the wine pres alone, and of all people there was none with me, for I will tread
them in mine anger, and tread them under foot in my wrath, and their blood
shall be sprinkled upon my garments, and I will stayn all my raiment. For the day
of vengeance is in my heart, and the year of my redeemed is come, and I looked,
and there was none to help, and I wondered that there was none to uphold.
Therefore mine own harm helped me, and my wrath it self sustained me. Therefore
I will tread down the people in my wrath, and make them dronken in mine
indignation, and will bring down their strength to the earth.

In this answer of Christ, we see how he would by his passion enter into his
glory, and thoroughly deliver us for ever. He says, thou shall not maruail to
see my raiment red. For this is the true, and redyest way, and means to save
the world, and God has so ordained it. I have troade^ the wine pres alone,
Christ alone trod the wine pres.
that is to say: I alone have born the sins of the world upon the cross. No
man else was able to satisfy God for the sins of the world, but I alone. It
was my blood only, that both could, and ought to do it, and nothing else. There
was no other means, nor way to save you from your sins. And in that my
infirmity I showed great strength, and I have troaden down the hugest, and most
deadly enemies of man, I have overcome them, and destroyed them, and I have
vanquyshed Satan, with all his (...) his false deceate, malice, and trouble,
which he has brought into the world, for the destroying of man. And whereas
the unbelieving sinagogue rejected me, and could not abide to acknowledge me
for their Lord, I have overcome Satan which blinded the Jews. And I am placed
in heaven, Lord of all creatures in heaven, and in earth, to take just
vengeance upon those that will not believe. And now have I won unto me the
Gentiles to be mine own peculiar people. This have I done only by mine own
strength, and power, as Paul witnesses to the Colossyans. And in mine anger
have I duly punished mine enemies, Collos. 2.
because I have with zeal taken upon me, and fulfilled the ministry, which my
father has committed unto me, and have so confounded the Jews, that they have
lost all the dignity, privilege, and prerogative, that before they had. This
day of revenge, and deliverance, is the time when Christ suffered the Jews to
be blinded, and dispersed: and receued the gentiles to favor in their place, by
the doctrine of the gospel, whereby he brake the head of the old serpent, Mat.
12.21.
and bestowed the victory that he had gotten upon the gentiles, and took away
from the sinagogue, all the knowledge, and understanding of the scriptures.

Now he holds on to speak of his passion, and agony which he suffered for
our sakes, saying: I looked about me, to wit, in the time of his passion, and
weakness, and there was none to help me, there was not one that either would,
or could help me. I had none on my side, no man helped me, yet I helped my
self. No man's strength could do me good but mine own. I held me by mine own
arm. In mine own zeal did I preserve, deliver, and raise up my self, and now
I am king, and now do I punish them that despised me, and I take from them
their strength, and ability, and else whatsoever I had given them, as the
scriptures, and every other excellent, and great gift, wherein they excelled
other nations.

This prophecy is now manifestly fulfilled in our sight. Behold, the Jews in
these our days, how ignorant they are of the scriptures, and how far from the
vndrstanding of the law, and promises in Christ. They understand the law
carnally, and they presume (but in vayn) that they are able without the help of
Christ to fulfill the law, not knowing, like blind men as they be, that they
cannot do it without the help of Christ's spirit. They see not that the
promises of Christ speak of the spiritual kingdom, and that the Law is but a
scholemaster unto Christ, in whom we are only blessed, justified, and the law
fulfilled.

Thus these two discyples, Cleophas, and his companion, should in this case
have thought with them selves. It pleased Messiah once willingly to die, and to
suffer the sinagogue to kill him, for so is Gods ordynance, and Christ's will, and
the prophets fortold it, and Christ also to his discyples long before his
death, how he determined to deliver his children from death, by this kind of
death, and he also told them, that he would rise again the third day from death.

But now let us see what shall become of the pharysees, The punishment of those
christ-killers.
and proud prelates, and let us see how this their detestable deed shall in
them be punished. Their joy shall not continue long, no not three days. For,
after three days Christ shall rise again to life, and shake of death, and in
his fury tread down, overthrow, and destroy these bloudsuccors, and spoil them
of their victory, which they thought (but falsely) they had gotten of him. And
when they count themselves sure, and think themselves conquerors, then without
any hope of recovery, shall they utterly lose all they have, both law,
prophets, lands, city, and temple, and they shall be punished with continall
calamity, horible destruction, and utter subuertion of all their Iudaisme, and
so pay for the bloody coat of Christ. The pharisees, and Christ's killers have
good cause to sorrow, seeing they have brought upon their own heads such
horrible punishment, and grievous wrath, and yet have done Christ no harm. But
we, in so much as he is risen again, may well rejoice, be glad, sing, and
comfort our selves in his resurrection. For, Christ has by his death destroyed
death, and redeemed Israel. But the natural man does not understand these
supernatural things. The spirit of Christ must in these matters be our
Master, and Instructor.

Esaias 65.11.
Esaias also in his 65. chapter prophesyeth of the receiving of the Gentiles, and
of the backslyding, and refusing of the Jews. The same prophecy does S. Paul
recyte in the tenth to the Romans And thus does Christ speak in that prophecy.
Esaias 65.1
I have bin sought of them which asked not, I was found of them which sought me
not. I said, Behold me, behold me, unto a nation that calls not upon my name.
I have spread out my hands all the day, unto a rebellious people, which walked
in away that was not good, even after their own imaginations.

But least any should think now, when he had thretened unto the Jews their
destruction, and punishment, which should come upon them, that Christ had
utterly cast them of, so that not one of them should ever obtain mercy. He
promised that he would be gracious unto some of that huge multitude, Esaias. 65.8.
which he would take again to mercy, for thus he says. As the wine is found in
the cluster, and one says destroy it not, for a blessing is in it: so will I
do for my servants sake, that I may not destroy them wholl. But I will bring a
seed out of Jacob, and a root of Judah, that shall inherit my mountayn, and
mine elect shall inherit it, and my servants shall dwell there. This was fulfilled
in the Apostles, and in them of ye Jews which believed the Apostles. These are
the kirnell of Judah, the elected seed, and the children of promise which the
father drew, that they might come to Christ, and these be they that posses the
mountains, to wit, the spiritual Syon of the church.


Anna. Cleophas, and his companyon, might in this prophecy also have seen, that
at Christ's coming, the Jews religion should come to an end, and the gentiles
should believe, and that the Jews through their incredulity should perish, and
fall away from their Messyas, though yet some of them should be saved, and
delivered. Undoubtedly this is the spiritual delyuerance of Israel. And here
must we mark, that not all Israel, according to the flesh, should embrace
Christ, and that this promised deliverance of Israel by messyas, which the
prophet spoke of, should not so come to pas, that all ye twelve trybes of
Israel should be delivered bodily from the violence, and iniuryes of the
gentiles, and so have (under Messyas, in the land of Canaan) an earthly
kingdom, in which, according to the flesh, they should live at lyberty, peace,
pleasure, plenty, and security: But it is to be understood, that their
delyueraunce should be spiritual, so that many of them should (nevertheless) by
the gospel in Christ be justified, and saved, though a great part of them, were
to fall away from Christ, and to repugne, and set the^ sclues against Christ,
and his church, as at this day we see, they do.


Vrb. It is in deed as you say. For they did not understand the prophets, nay,
when Christ came unto the Sinagoge, it was so stufft, and overwhelmed with man's
traditions, that their very doctors them selves understood not the scriptures,
as they were with us in the time of popery. Now if the doctors were so
ignorant, alas, what could the rude people know? The prophets out of doubt are
plain, and manifest enough and they evidently declare, that at the coming of
Messiah, Goim, that is to say the Gentiles shall in deed be leave, receive, and
acknowledge Messiah to be their Lord, and that the most part of the Jews,
should rebelliously reuoult from him, and but only a remnaunt of them be
converted to him, to whom the Gentiles should be gathered, and joined: and of
the^ both should be made one spiritual Israel: And to this end, were those
comfortable promises of the kingdom of Christ, made both to the Gentiles, and
the remnaunt of the Jews. As Esaias says in the words that follow.

Esaias 65, 13
Therefore thus says the Lord. Behold, my servants shall eat, and ye shall be
hungrye. Behold my servants shall rejoice, and ye shall be ashamed. Behold my
servants shall sing for joy of heart, and ye shall cry for sorrow of heart, and
shall houle for vexation of mind, and ye shall leave your name as a curse
unto my chosen, for the Lord God shall slay you, and call his servant by an
other name. He that shall bless in the earth, shall bless himself in the true
God: and he that swears in the earth shall swear by the true God. For the
former troubles are forgotten, and shall surely hide them selves from mine eyes.


Anna. Does the prophet here speak of corporal meat, and drink as that
miserable, and blinded rabble of the circumsised Jews do Judge?


Vrb. 1. Tim. 4.8
Paul says in the first of Timo. that those that believe in Christ have the
promise made them both of this life, and of the life to come: And therefore is
it most true, yt those christians which believe in Christ shall enjoy even such
things as are necessary for this life. But without all doubt the prophet saw
here a greater and more excellent thing, and he means rather a spiritual
sustinaunce then a corporal. As for the meat and drink, which nourishes the
body, the prophets greatly regard it not: about such things they greatly
trouble not the^ selves: it is the health of the soul that they chiefly
regard, that is their chief care that especially did they think themselves
bound to teach, that so they might search out, and promise everlasting health,
with joyful life, and immortality, to the believers in Christ

For their promises contain the very true Gospel of Christ Jesus. And the
Gospel is the promise of true righteousness, life it self, eternal salvation,
and the spiritual, and everlasting kingdom of Christ. And this is the cause
that the prophets use by temporal blessings (as their words import) to
prophecye of true and heavenly happiness.

And to this end does all the doctrine of ye gospel tend, and to this it draws
us: Ioh. 6.27. The true bread, and food. Luke 22.24
as witnesses Christ in ye sixth of Ioh. saying. labor not for the meat that
perishes, but for meat that e^dureth unto everlasting life. I am the living
the bread, which came down from heaven, if any man eat of this bread he shall
live for ever. And in Luke he says, Therefore I appoint unto you a kingdom,
as my Father has appointed unto me, that you may eat, and drink, at my
table, in my kingdom: Such promises made he to his disciples which continued
with him in his afflictions, at what time he had neither kingdom, countenace,
glory, nor estimation in this world. And Paul to the Romans says. Romans 14.17
The kingdom of God is not meat, nor drink, but righteousness, and peace, and
joy in the holy ghost. This true joy, and continual gladness shall the
faithful in Christ enjoy: Romans 2.8.
but the heritage of the ungodly shall be wrath, indignation, punishment,
vexation, and anguish of soul.

The Joy of the Christian beleuers, in the midst of their afflictions begins
here in earth, in faith, and hope, when God the holy Ghost does witness within
us, that we are the children, and heirs of God, and already saved: but as yet
only in hope. But in the great day of the Lord we shall then at the last
beginn to enjoy for ever that great gladness, pleasures, and delights of life
everlasting.


Anna. What name is it by which Gods children fweare?


Vrb. Esaias says, it shall come to pass that the name of a Jew (by reason of
their apostacye, and for that they denied Christ) shall be odious, and
contemptible in all lands. The name of a Jew odious.
So that when men will wish ill to one or curse one, they shall wish the same
to fall upon him which fell upon the Jews. But gods servants (that is to
say, the true Jews) spiritual Israelites, which believe in Christ shall be
called by an other name to wit Christians of Christ the Lord their God.

Acts 11, 25.
And we see it is so come now to pas in deed, and all those blessings in which
the Jews before did excel be now at this day translated to us gentiles, the
faithful christians. For we only now have the true, and sound understanding
of the scriptures, the true Messiah, and true faith which gives life: we have
the true righteousness, true works, true sacrifice, and true oblation, and the
right high priest, the right alter, and the right propitiatory, temple, and
service of God.

And this name Christian shall be so honorable, and famous, that the valiant,
and godlyest Martirs of Christ shall not be ashamed for the professing of
Christ, to suffer most grievous punishment. Who as Eusebius witnesses,
constantly, and corragiously professing their Lord, have said even to the most
bloody tyrants teeth, I am a Christian: yea though they certainelye knew they
should presently, both be terribly tormented, and hazard their lives for it.

There is no God but Christ Jesus our savior and he for our salvation died,
fear not therefore comdemnation.
We also bless our selves in the name of Jesus christ, ye true God, neither is
there any other God but Christ Jesus. There is but one God only, and he being
true god in ye person of the son, was made true man of the seed of David.
This is fulfilled: For seeing christian beleuers know that all Gods graces,
help, health, comfort, life, and liberty, are only in Christ, and through
Christ they fly in all peril, and trouble, to this name Jesus for help, and
as soon as they do it, and once name it, straightway it ministers strength,
comfort, and consolation to the heavy heart.


Anna. Why does the prophet say, that their former troubles are forgott, and
put out of sight, and hide from them? seeing that in the kingdom of Christ,
that as in the Church there is nevertheless outwardly nothing but affliction,
vexation, and tribulation in this life: insomuch that even the most holy men
many times fall into such trouble of mind, that they need the comfort of other
men.


Vrb. You must acquaint your self with the prophets phrase of speech. How our
foremer troubles are forgot.
The prophets speak of ye kingdom of Christ, as if we were now already
delivered out of these troubles: and as if the glory of his kingdom, which is
yet to come, had now already apeared: nay, as if ye everlasting life, which is
yet to come were already begun, where as yet it is but only in faith. And so it
behooved the^ to speak of it. For if they should paint forth the kingdom of
Christ in his proper colors, and set it forth aright as it ought to be, they
must not look upon that base, and homely outward appearaunce, in which here
upon earth it lies covertly hid under the cross: but they must behold the
glory also in which it shall flourish in the day of our perfect regeneration,
when all kinds of evils, incommodities and stombling blocks shall be removed
out of the kingdom of Christ, and when we shall be free from all kind of
crosses, and calamities.

In as much as we being justified be faith in Christ, are freed, and delivered
from our sins, and in as much as we bear Christ by faith in our hearts, and
are now made the sons of God, and have our life hid and preserved with Christ
in God, and have the holy spirit the earnest penye of our inheritance, and so
spiritually are risen again from the death of sin, and have nothing else to
look for, but that this mortal body should dye, and rise again: the
prophets I say, because of these so excellent things, and because we are saved
in hope, Our comfort and blessing and first fruits of the spirit.
used sometimes (in that they knew what faith in Christ could do, and should
do) to speak of the kingdom of Christ, as if now already we were translated
out of this frail and corruptible life, and out of these troubles, cares,
calamities, and afflictious into that life that continues for ever.

And this certainly is our sure, and plentiful comfort, and consolation, nay,
it is our spiritual blessing, wherewith we now are already blessed. And these
first fruits of the spirit are such heavenly treasures, that no tongue can
utter the excellency, and dignity thereof. And this is the cause that when we
be endued with these heavenly treasures, we bear the heavy cross of
persecution, and trouble more patie^tly. Before this we were in ye kingdom of
the devil, the kingdom of ye everlasting curse but now we are in the kingdom
of eternal blessing, in which only, and else not at all, we find, and enjoy
the grace of God, righteousness, health, and everlasting life. Esaias 65.17
It follows in the prophet: For lo I will create new heavens, and a new
earth, and the former shall not be remembered, nor come into mind. But, the
Lord says, be you glad, and rejoice for ever in the thing that I shall
create. For behold, I will create Jerusalem, as a rejoicing, and her people as
a joy. And I will rejoice in Jerusalem, and joy in my people, and the voice of
weeping shall be no more heard in her, nor the voice of crying. Behold here how
exceeding glorious the kingdom of Christ shall be after this life. God for his
childrens sake, his faithful, which be heirs of all things in Christ, will
wake a new heaven, and a new earth. And then all things shall rejoice with the
Children of God: all affliction, and trouble, which we suffered here in this
earth shall then be forgot. For heaviness has then his end, and eternal Joy
begins. Now it is called the earth, The earth a vale of misery.
and so it is in deed even a vale of misery, and a sea of sorrow.

For which way soever a man turns his eye, there is nothing here to be seen,
but danger, and affliction. The water drowneth us, the fire burns us, and
the air with tempest, storms, thunder, lightning, and hail, molesteth us. In
the earth we see our graves, and the burying places of the dead, and dens of
thieves, and here the tortor, and there the rack to torment us. To be short,
there is no place, but that of misery, and mischief it is a place. For as yet
Satan with this his world swells, rages, turns, and tosseth every thing
vpside down, and brings in all kind of calamity, and mischief upon us: but
when he with his incredulous and wicked world, shall be hurled hedlong down to
hell, when our God shall renew the earth, and when ye true Christians shall
only appear in all places, and nothing but true justice inhabit the land:
then shall the memory of that former earth, the vale of misery (in which was
nothing but present peril, sickness, sorrow, affliction, and death,) be utterly
extinguished, and forgot: then at the last shall the true heavenly Jerusalem be
builded, where shall be nothing but sure, pure, and unspeakable joy, and there
we shall rejoice in the Lord for ever and ever, and God shall be to us all in
all.

And whereas the Jews, and Chelieasts draw, and wrast this text to the land of
Judah, they are foolishly, and doultishly deceived. For all Iudaisme with their
tempell, Jerusalem, priesthood, and principalitye had their limits, and time
appointed, and ought to continue but only till Jesus Christ should come, and
fulfill the scriptures, who together with his Church was by the law, priest,
sacrifice, temple, and Jerusalem prefigured, and signified. For Esaias a little
after in the 66. chapter, prophesyeth of the Jews ceremonies that they shall
have an end, and that after for ever in ye Church of the faithful in Christ,
there shall be month after month, and Saboth after Saboth, that is to say, in
this church shall be a perpetual, and continual Saboth, Saboth after Saboth,
still one upon one, whereas the Saboths of the Jews were numbered, and known.

In this last of Esaias also we have a notable, and worthy prophesy of the
kingdom of Christ, or of the church of the faithful. The words of it be
these. 1 Cor. 15.28
Rejoice ye with Jerusalem, and be glad with her all ye that love her: rejoice
for joy with her, all ye that morn for her, that you may suck, and be
satisfied with the breasts of her consolation, and that ye may milk out, and
be delighted with the brightness of her glory. For thus says the Lord, Behold I
will extend peace over her like a flood, and the glory of the Gentiles like a
flowing stream: then shall ye suck, ye shall be born upon her sides, and be
joyful upon her knees. As one whom his mother comfort, so will I comfort
you, and ye shall be comforted in Jerusalem. And when ye see this, your hearts
shall rejoice, and your bones shall florishe like an herb, and the hand of the
Lord shall be known among his servants and his indignation against his
enemies.

You hear in this prophesy that Jerusalem groans under her cross, because she
is so miserably, and hotly persecuted, and troubled here in the earth. But God
promises that there shall be such plentiful comfort in the heavenly
Jerusalem, that the faithful believers shall not remember their former
griefs. He uses a figurative speech, saying, like as a hungry sucking infant
greedely draws his mothers breasts with pleasure, and thinks nothing
sweeter then his mothers milk: so shall there be breasts of all comfort in ye
church by which the faithful shall take most pleasant repast, and pleasure.
For the Church in this life, has the most pleasant, and honey sweet milk of
Gods promises which the children of God suck, and with which they are
nourished, and battned in faith, and by which they are unspeakably, and
vncredibly comforted in the spirit, which does inwardly illuminate, and teach
them the mysteries of the gospel. And though the Church here upon earth, be
afflicted, tormented, and tossed with troubles, and has no resting place, yet
does god promise it great, plenteous, and eternal peace, which as a flowing
river, whose course is never stayed, shall never be dried. For the kingdom of
Christ is a kingdom of eternal peace, which we have with God through
Christ. And as the tender mothers nourishe and bear their young infantes in
their laps and arms: so do the pastors in the kingdom of Christ bear the
faithful Christians, and they faithfully minister, and truly break to them
the pure, and sound food of the word of God, and give to every one, as well
weak as strong according to their need. Neither was there ever yet upon this
earth any parents (though they were most pampering, and fond of their children)
that could so sweetly entreat, so delicatly nursse, or so derely love, and so
faithfully, carefully, and watchfully look to their children as God does to
us. And therefore though ye Church of the faithful lie open to every cross,
and calamity after her christ's example: yet is ye force of these heavenly
promises such in ye midst of these troubles, that doubtedly all the joys,
pleasures, and co^solatio^s of this world are nothing in respect of them. For,
2. Cor. 1.5.
(as Paul witnesses to the Cor.) As the sufferinges of Christ abound in us,
so our consolation abou^deth through Christ.

In the psalms also it is written: in the multitude of my thoughts in my
heart, Psalm 94.19
thy comforts have reioysed my soul, and Christ told his desciples, and us
before hand, Ioh. 16.20.
that they should weep and morn in this world: but ye world should laugh, and
rejoice. But immediately after, he greatly comfort them, and us with a
comfortable promise of eternal joy, saying your sorrow shall be turned into
joy which no man shall be able to take from you for ever. Has not a godly man
passing surmounting joy here upon earth, when he remembers this heavenly
Jerusalem, and beholds with spiritual eyes this glorious city of God? and
when he remembers that all Gods dear children in all the wide world which are
innumerable shall have one father, one king, one teacher, one faith, one mind,
one hope, and one everlasting inheritance together with them that are already
departed in the Lord, and which we shall see at the last day in a gloryfied
body with these eyes? O what an exceeding joy will it be to behold yt Christ
the head of all Saints, and holy Mary the blessed mother of God with all the
Patriarchs, prophets, Christians joys.
Apostles, virgins, martyrs, infa^ts, and angels in heaven? Verily man's heart in
this mortal flesh can not think or with sense conceive any part or parcel of
this so great excessive, and everlasting treasures, and joys. For it far, and
very far passes our capacity as Paul witnesses out of Esaias saying: Eye has
not seen, 1. Cor. 2.9. Esa. 64.4.
neither ear has hard, neither came into man's heart the things which god has
prepared (in his heavenly Jerusalem) for them that love him.

Besides this, our bones shall flourish and bud: This is not to be understood,
only of the recreation, refection, and joy that we have here by the word of
God, Our resurrection and state after this life.
but (as the Church has hitherto ever expounded it,) of that glorious
resurrection of our bodies in the last day, when our dry bones (be they never
so ill favored broken, and parched, wheresoever they be, either by water or by
land) shall bud, and flourish (that is) shall be restored, and repared, at the
sound of the archangell and the body it self shall be indewed with eternal
health, and prosperitye: by this means our bones may bud for ever, seeing our
bodies though now they be weak, feeble, and frail shall (contrary to
Porpherye) live also for ever. For the Lord has said it. Thus then in that
heavenly Jerusalem after domes day shall be no sickness, no old age, no death:
but continual health of body, and always a fresh, merry, flowrishing, and
lively youth. To be short, as Saint Augustine says, There shall be an
everlasting perpetuity of a most happy, De ciuitate Dei. 2. ca. 12.
blessed, merye, and joyful life. The children of God here in their life time,
be but weak, feeble, despised, and subject to the mockes, and persecutions, of
the ungodly, who kill them, and butcher them even as Sheep prepared for the
shambles. Contrarylye, the world florisheth in power, honor, pleasure, and
prosperity, and florisheth so in all dayntye delicates, that there seems to be
no such calamities, and miserable man as the true godly beleuer in Christ, but
at the last day when this heavenly Jerusalem shall be builded for altogether:
then shall Gods hand or power be known, with which he will deliver his
servants, the true godly, those that believe in Christ. Then shall they not be
either weak, feeble, miserable, or contemptuous: but they shall be strong, and
bewtifull, and sit on christ's right hand. in gloryfied bodies like to Christ
and being in hye, and infinite glory, and adorned with inestimable ornaments,
and delivered from death, and all misery. They shall for joy sing and triumph,
and the^ shall they sit in their majesty, and mock, and point with the finger at
death, and Satan, saying, death where is now thy sting? hell where is now thy
victory? death is for ever swallowed up in the victory of Christ. And though
the children of this world, which would not believe the gospel, for a time
here upon earth have had some wealth, and wallowed in pleasure, as if god had
most favored, and loved them: yet at the last day they shall well find, that
they were Gods enemies, and the^ shall they to their smart feel how hot,
heavy, and horrible the wrath of God is against them, that be now against
Christ. For then shall God without mercy, and pitye throw them with Satan, and
all his ministers hedlong down to hell, there to be damned for ever.

Esaias in the end of his prophecy foretells of the calling of the Gentiles to
the gospel, through all the world, how the Apostles should gather together, by
the preaching of the gospel, all such of the gentiles as be elect, and should
bring them into heavenly Jerusalem the catholic church, as a sacrifice, and
oblation unto the Lord. These be his words: For it shall come that I will gather
all nations, and tongues, and they shall come, Esaias 66.18
and see my glory, and I will set a sign among them, and will send those that
escape of the^, unto the nations of Tarshish, Pull, and Lud, and to them that
draw the bow. To Tuball, and Iauan, Isles a far of, that have not heard my fame,
netther have seen my glory: and they shall declare my glory among the gentiles,
and they shall bring all your brethren for an offering unto the Lord out of
all nations, upon horses, and in charyots, and in horselitters, and upon mules,
and swift beasts to Jerusalem my holy mountain, says the Lord, as the
children of Israel offer in a clean vessel in the house of the Lord.

Do you hear? God by the preaching of the gospel, will judge all the works,
both of the Jews, and the gentiles, and will gather them together, that they
may see the glory of God, how that all our hability, and strength is nothing,
but yt only his grace obtained by Christ is al in all. This Christ only
forgeueth our sins, iustifyeth us, and saves us: and he only destroys, and
overcomes death, and the devil, and delyuereth all his out of all misery, and
calamity. And this deliverance does he declare by the preaching of the gospel
in all parts of the world: and he calls certain parts of the earth which lie
East, and West, North, and South, and which lie to the four parts of the
world. And that re^nant of Jews which he speaks of here, which escape and
are delivered out of blindness, are the Apostles, Mar. 16, 15.
and them does he send to all the world. Wherefore you may well see, that there
he does not speak of a worldely kingdom.

Jesus Christ crucyfied is the sign, he is preached to be the only savior of
the world, and the true glory of God, Christ our sign or ba^ner.
which glory, that is to say, truth, mercy, and power, which God has given us
in Christ, shall be preached, and showed to the Gentiles, and by that preaching
shall the Gentiles be brought to God, as it were a gift, or oblation purifyed,
and made acceptable by the gospel, as Paul witnesses to the Romans saying: I
put you in remembrance through the grace that is given me of God, Romans 15.15.
that I should be the minister of Jesus Christ, toward the Gentiles (...), yt
is, ministering the gospel of god, that the offering up of the gentiles might be
(...) an oblation acceptable being sanctified by the holy ghost. You see then
that the Jews sacrifice should have an end, and that lively men, not bruit
beasts, must be offered unto the Lord in all lands. The true delyueranee of
Israel by Messiah, is this, that he saves all his that be in the world, The
heavenly Jerusalem.
as well Jews as Gentiles, which are converted, and illuminated by the word, and
his holy spirit, and makes the^ partakers of eternal life. And these, thus
delivered, and saved by Christ, are that heavenly Jerusalem, the holy
mountain, and the congregation of the faithful in Christ, into the which
there is every day some brought out of all places, and offered unto the Lord,
as a pure oblation.

By these horses, chariots, horslitters, and such other that the prophet here
speaks of, must be understood, that sweet, fair, gentle, mild, and
pleasant preaching of the gospel, De ciuita Dei. ca. 12.
in which the consciences of men be carried very easily. And by these things, as
S. Augustine says may be understood all the help we have either by God
himself, or by his angels, or men, whereby the brethren of the elected
Israelits be drawn into the church, as brethren into the catholic faith.

And thus do you hear, how that the spiritual kingdom of Christ, the church
consists both of ye Jews and gentiles: and how that in all parts of the world
she is governed by the preaching of the gospel, and is subject in this life to
the cross, that she may be made like to Christ her king: and yet
notwithstanding, she has passing fair, great, and comfortable promises, in
which she reposeth her hope, and has her comfort, and consolation, til such
time as Christ the king of glory appear from heaven in his majesty, with the
angels of his power, that he may be glorified in his saints, and praised in all
his faithful. The^ at that day shall it well appear, how great, excellent, and
infinite, the glory of the eternal king, and of his kingdom, and the holy
church is, whereof the prophets have spoken even from the beginning.


Anna. What prophesyeth Jeremy of Christ, and his church?


Vrb. Jeremy in his 11. chap. prophesyeth of the willing redynes of Christ in
suffering his passion, Iere. 11.18.
he says thus. The Lord has taught me, and I know it, even then thou shewedst
me their practices, but I was like a lamb, or a bullock that is brought to the
slaughter, and I knew not that they had devised this against me, saying, let us
destroy the tree with the fruit thereof, and cut him out of the land of the
living, that his name may be no more in memory. But O Lord of hosts, that
iudgest righteously, and tryest the raynes, and the heart, let me see thy
vengeance on them, for unto thee have I opened my cause.

Here, in this prophecy Jeremy is a figure of Christ, and the church has 1000.
years, and more so expounded this text, to wit, that God the father does here
reuele to his son Christ the wicked counsels, hatred, despite, and bitterness
of the Jews, and how that they would kill him as a sheep, and lamb. By the
which name Esaias also calls Christ. For it was very requisite that he should
be that lamb without spot, which by his only sacrifice should purge the sins
of the wholl world, even as the figures in Moses law fore showed.


Anna. Why does Christ here say, that he perceived not, or knew not their
wicked, and malicious pretenses seeing he him self told his disciples long
before his passion, that he must suffer at Jerusalem, and knew every thing the
Jews meant, and devised against him?


Vrb. S. Hiero^ takes the meaning of this text thus, that Christ saw in him
self no sin, or knew him self to be gilty of no sin, as Esaias says. Esaias. 53.6.
But although this may be so read, and understood, yet do I take it to be meant
of Jeremy him self, against whom the Jews at Anathoth took such devilish,
deadly, and privy counsel, as he had not understood of, if God had not
revealed it to him. It is sufficient that Jeremy be a figure of Christ in the
chief point, that is to say, in his passion: for it is not needful that he
should in every word bear the figure of Christ, and his sayings.

The Jews pretense was, that they might utterly extinguish Christ, and put him
out of remembrauce. As for example, when we abhor any kind of fruit, we
grub up, and destroy the tree, root, bole, branches, fruit and all, so that it
never bud, or blossom again. S. Jerome has it thus. Let us throw wood upon
his bread. Which words in the church, were ever yet to this day, thus
expounded, let us lay a cross upon his body, and crucifye him. And Christ
calls his flesh meat, and bread of life. Ioh. 16.55.
And afterward, Christ speaks after the property, and condition of man's
nature, which for us he took upon him, and says: thou Lord art just, thou
know they do me wrong, to thee I commit my cause. And so he prayed in the
garden at the mount Olyuet, thy will be done, O Father. And his prayer was
heard, and he was obedient unto his father, and redeemed us. For though they
crucified him in his infirmity, 2. Cor. 13.4
which willingly in the time of his stuardship, he took upon him for our
sakes, yet by the power of his Godhead, he does live, and sit at the right hand
of God, being Lord both of Jews, and Gentiles: and he beholds the dispersed,
and straying Jews (which know not how to repent) wandering now above 1570
years, as confounded, distracted, and blinded vagaboundes, so that they be
more odious, and vile then dogs.

Jeremy in the 16. chapter, prophesyeth of the calling of the gentiles, Ier.
16.19.
how they should believe in Christ. These be his words. O Lord thou art my sort,
and my strength, and my refuge in the day of affliction, the Gentiles shall
come unto thee from the ends of the world, and shall say: surely our fathers
have inheryted lies, and vanities, wherein there was no profit. Before, he said
that Christ should call the Gentiles, and should make them his spiritual
kingdom: these were his words: Behold, I will send many Fishers (says the Lord)
and they shall fish them. This was fulfilled in the Apostles, amongst whom, Ier.
16.16.
the most part were fishers of fishes, but afterward were made fishers of men,
as we read in Matthew, where Christ calls them, saying: Follow me, and I will
make you fishers of men. Mat. 4.19.
Here it appears that he went not about to erect a worldly kingdom, for that
requires other manner of men then fishers.

In the 32. of Ier. there is an excellent comfortable prophecy of Christ,
foretelling what kind of king, and kingdom, he, and his should be, and how he
should rule it. In that place he chiefly threateneth to punish the salse
prophets, which did not preach the word of God purely, and faithfully to the
people, saying: Ier. 20.1.
Woe be unto the pastors that destroy, and scatter the sheep of my pasture,
says the Lord: therefore thus says the Lord God of Israel, unto the pastors
that feed my people: you have scattered my flock, and thrust them out, and have
not visited them, behold, I will visit you for the wickedness of your work,
says the Lord: and I will gather the remnant of my sheep out of all countries,
whether I had driven them, and will bring them again to their folds, and they
shall grow, and increase, and I will set up shepherds over them, which shall
feed them, and they shall dread no more, nor be afraid, neither shall any of
them be lacking, says the Lord.


Anna. What pastors be these, that the prophet here threateneth?


Vrb. Ungodly kings, that deal not well with his people, and false prophets, and
wicked teachers, such as the scrybes, and pharysees. Here you see what
negligent, and unfaithful stewardes were in the house of the Lord, and how
miserably, and dangerously they neglected, and seduced the poor people. And
yet nevertheless, God calls even that people (though they were few,
scattered, thrust out, and not looked to) the flock of his pasture. So in the
time of papistry God had a little flock, over which though the wicked
shauelings had little regard, and care, yet nevertheless, God preserved his
flock, and his sheep, and has given the^ good pastors. But as for the wicked
hirelinges, he has so visited the^ with his rod, that they are now confounded
openly before the face of the world, whereas before they were taken to be good,
and holy shepherds. And so did God the Jews confound the pharisees, and in
their places amongst substitute the Apostles, which he stirred up to feed the
people with the wholesome food of ye word of God, and they gathered from all
quarters, the remnant of Gods flock, into the unity of the christian faith.


Anna. When was this prophecy to be fulfilled?


Vrb. In the time of the new testament, when the true Messiah should come of
the stock of David, then did the end of the pharisaical tyranny draw on, and
the true preachers, Iere. 23.5.
to wit, the Apostles drew near, as it is specifyed in the words of Jeremy. It
follows, behold the days come, says the Lord, that I will raise unto David
a righteous branch, and a king shall reign, and prosper, and shall execute
judgment, and justice in the earth. In his days Judah shall be saved, and
Israel shall dwell safely, and this is the name whereby they shall call him, the
Lord our righteousness.

Gal. 4.4.
That time, or these days, wherein so great things are promised, is the fulness
of the time, whereof Paul speaks to the Gal. When Christ himself shall come,
who was promised before in the law, and the prophets. Jeremy in this place,
calls Christ the blossom of David, Christ the blossom of David. Reg. 6.12.
meaning that he is true, and natural man, of the stock, and blood of David,
like as the Lord had promised to David. This prophecy speaks of Messiah, even
as the Jews themselves do testify. For Ionathas says in his Thargum. Kemle
David Meschiah Deradikia, that is, I will raise up unto David that righteous
Messiah: if therefore, he be true man of the stock of David, what marvel is it
if first he dyed, and yet nevertheless he had power, and ought to deliver, and
justify Israel, and to redeem the^m from all their miseries? The greatest, and
extreemest calamity, is to lie captive in sin, and death, and therefore was it
meet, that this king, the son of David, should deliver Judah, and Israel,
that is, the twelve trybes of the Jews, with all true Israelites, that is to
say, right believers from sin, and death, or else had they never been
delivered. And here also it follows, that he should rise again from death,
which thing was unto him easy. For he was not only right natural man, of the
stock of David, but true, and natural God: and therefore says Jeremy, his name
shall be called Jehovah or Adonai: that is, God him self. For the Jews
themselves teach, and the scripture affirms, that this word Jehovah can be
rightly given to no creature, but only to God him self, of whom al creatures
have their beginning, as you have heard. Wherefore it was meet that he should be
a king, far differing from those which had been before him, and reigned in the
seat of David. For Jeremy says, that he shall execute justice, and judgment
in the earth through the whole world, and condemn, and destroy the wicked, and
make them which were unjust and sinful, very pure, and righteous. For his
kingdom is a kingdom of true justice, and innocence. And Judah, and Israel,
that is, both those people shall have help of him: not yt the x. tribes should
return out of Assiria, into Samaria, and there have a king of their own, and
set up a corporal kingdom, as Judah had before time in Jerusalem, when they
lived under David, and Solomon, with peace, and quyetnes: but that they should
have a spiritual help through Christ, who should deliver them from sin, and
death, that so they might dwell boldly, and safely, that is, that they might
have their consciences quyeted, appeased, and merry, as men which now by faith
in Christ, have their sins forgeuen, and are at peace with God through
Christ. So that they need not dread, nor fear death, or any other evil,
because that this wise king, the most pure, and flourishing blossom of
righteousness, is made the righteousness of all Christians, that all faithful
believers, the spiritual Israel, consisting both of the Jews, and Gentiles,
may through faith, receive the holy Ghost, which testifyeth in their hearts that
they are the children of God, heirs of God, and coheires with Jesus Christ,
and so with bouldnes of siprite, Romans 8.38.
say with Paul: We are persuaded that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor
principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height,
nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love
of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

John. 3.14.
Is not this a famous help? and a strong, and firm fortress for the godly?
that they can say, we know that we are translated from death unto life? That
is, the holy spirit has taught us by the word, and heavenly unction, that
Christ has freed us both from sin, and death, and that we (by him) after
death, shall rise from death, and live for ever. This is that hope of Israel
which neither Gentil, nor Infidel has. Now mark what noble, and miraculous
works of divinity (which none could do but very God him self) the prophet
ascrybeth to this son of David. He says: He shall execute, and set up
justice, and judgment in the earth. And he shall justify others. Ergo he must
not only outwardly, but also inwardly purge the heart, and forgive sin, And
this is only the work of God. For it is he only that can change a wicked, and
malicious heart, and it is he which can illuminate, and regenerate us, and none
but he. And again, if he can forgive sins, he can also abolish death, 1. Cor.
15.56
which is the reward, or stipend of sin, and the sting of death. If then he
could ouercom death, and make us righteous, and give us everlasting life, he is
true God, which can only in deed deliver us from our sins, and eternal
death, and give, and preserve true tranquillity, and peace.

If then Judah, and Israel, that is, the hole church of the godly, shall be
delivered from their sin, and death: then must it needs follow, that they
shall live with Christ for ever. Here then in this prophecy (if we mark it
well) we may see that Christ should dye as the natural son of David: but not
abide in death, but that he should justify, and save Judah, and Israel, that is
to say, his people, the godly, and faithful. And for this cause should he first
rise again from death, that he might raise his Israelites, that is, his
faithful from death, and that he might purchase for them, and give them eternal
life, and security for ever. For if he should have given them peace but for a
time, he should not truly, and in deed, have delivered them: neither were it
a true tranquillity and peace. Wherefore it was necessary, that that peace and
salvation, which he should give his elect, should continue for ever, and ever.

Thus then in this short prophecy have we this eternal king, together with his
death, resurrection, and everlasting kingdom, expressly, and soundly descrybed.
And so does Jeremy again teach us, in the 33. chapter, calling the gospel the
voice of joy, Ier. 33.11.
which God speaks to Israel, and Judah. For the law only shows Gods wrath,
and punishment: but the gospel, that new covenant, promyseth mere grace, and
redemption.

And then he prophesies how the help, and redemption, which this king
brings, shall extend it self to all people far, and nere. The people of God
in time past soong, and spoke of the great benefits of god, how he brought them
forth out of the land of Egypt, and delivered them by many marvelous miracles:
Egypt a figure of hell, and Pharao of the devil.
but when Christ that son of David shall come, then shall they gloriously
triumph, and tell of far greater good gifts of God, to wit, how Christ has
brought, and delivered us out of the hellish black Egypt, and kingdom of sin,
death, and everlasting damnation, and gathered not only the Israelites after
the flesh, but all his elected children in all the world out of all nations
into this Church of the godly, which thing has been done ever since the
Apostles time even to this day. For we which believe in Christ, have a more
excellent, and notable captain, then Moses and Joshua. We have Jesus Christ
for our captayn, who has delivered us out of the bondage, and house of the
spiritual Pharao, to wit from the captivity of Satan. This eternal
redemption does every day renew in us the remembrance of our god: so that we
say the Lord lives, who has delivered us from sin, death, and Satan, and
has brought us from all errors to the true knowledge of the Gospel.

This is a spiritual deliverance, and bringing out of Egypt, and a spiritual
kingdom where in we see Iudaisme should once cease, and Christianisme by
Christ our king be set up through all the world: and therefore it was
convenient that he should rise again that he might erect this kingdom upon
earth, and conserve it for ever. To which sense the prophet speaks saying,
Therefore behold, Ier. 23.7.
the day is come, says the Lord, that they shall no more say, the Lord lives
which brought up the children of Israel, out of the land of Egypt, but the
Lord lives, which brought up, and led the seed of the house of Israel, out of
the north country, and from all countries where I had scattered them, and they
shall dwell in their own land.

Here we must note that all temporal deliverances, which the Jews had here
upon earth from the hands of earthly tyrants, and the gentiles, were but figurs
of ye true and everlasting deliverance, which we have by our Messiah Christ: of
which in this place to speak is not to our purpose. The prophets for most part
set down such circumstances in their writings that we may well gather, they
had a farther respect then only to the deliverance, out of the captiuitye of
Babylon, and such like as appears in the 30. of Iere. Where God says, Iere.
30.2.
write thee all the words that I have spoken to thee in a book. For lo, the
day is come, says the Lord. That I will bring again the captivity of my
people Israel, and Judah says the Lord. For I will restore them into the land
that I gave to their Fathers, they shall possess it.

This prophesy can not be understood of the land of Canaan or of any earthly
deliverance. For Osias says that his wife bore him a daughter whose name was
(Loruhamah) that is with out pity. Osia. 1.6.
Whereby is meant, that God would not any more have mercy upon the x. tribes as
he had mercy upon Judah, and Be^iamin, which two tribs he brought home out of
the captivity of Babylon: but he left the x. tribes in Assiria amongste the
gentiles. Wherefore without doubt Jeremy prophesies of ye spiritual bondage
of ye remna^t of ye 12. tribes of Judah. God will turn away this spiritual
bondage, wherein they were holden captives all abroad, in error, and unbelief,
under Satan, and bring the^ forth into the land of truth, Iere. 30. chap. 5.
and righteousness: as it may be gathered by Ieremies words, which here follow.
For in that day says the Lord of hosts, I will break his yoke from of thy
neck, and break thy bonds, and strangers shall no more serve them selves of
him, but they shall serve the Lord their God, and David their king whom I will
raise up unto them. Therefore fear not O my servant Jacob, says the Lord.
Neither be affrayd O Israel, for lo I will deliver thee from a far
country, and thy seed from the land of their captivity, and Jacob shall turn
again and shall be in rest, and prosperity, and none shall make him afraid:
For I am with thee says the Lord to save thee.

In deed the Jews were under a figure corporally delivered from the bondage,
in the which Nabucadonezer held them captives: but this deliverance was but a
trifell, in respect of the spiritual deliverance wherewith Christ delivered
us from Satan. Here the prophet speaks manifestly of Christ, as the Jews
them selves confess with us. And he calls Christ David, the king of the
Jews. Christ is called Christ. Psalm. 89.20
For David which was Salomo^s father had in the Lord departed this world long
before this prophesy. But Christ many times in the scriptures is called David
because he was to come of ye house, and stock of David after the flesh, and to
this does the Chaldes translation agree. For Jonathan has this text thus,
Veijschthameum limschicha bar David malcehom. that is, they shall obey their
king Messiah the son of David. And so did the Jews understand this prophesy
of Messiah in the time of the captivity of Babylon, when they had the prophets
and understood the Scriptures.

Zachary sings a notable song of this deliverance under Christ the true
David, where he does plainly and notably expound this prophesy of Jeremy, and
other such like as be meant of the kingdom of Christ. For when he understood
by the gift of the holy ghost that his son John was (...) the fore runner of
Christ, after whom Christ immediately should follow, and when he saw that
plentiful time of grace, and salvation in which all the promises of God,
concerning the redemption of Israel, should be fulfilled he soung this most
sweet, and pleasant song. Luke 1.68.
Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, for he has visited, and redeemed his
people, and has raised the horn of salvation unto us, (to wit a most
certain, and sure kingdom in which, there is true health, and happiness,) in
the house of his servant David. For many which bore this true David Jesus
Christ, (as God before had promise to David, was of the house of David. It
follows: as he spoke by the mouth of his holy prophets which were since the
world began, saying that he would send us deliverance from our enemies, and
from the hands of all that hate us that he would show mercy toward our
Fathers, and rememeber his holy covenant, and the oath which he swear to our
Father Abraham. Which was, that he would grant unto us that we being
delivered, out of the hands of our enemies, should serve him with out fear,
all the days of our life in holiness, and righteousness before him. And thou
babe shall be called the prophet of the most hiest, for thou shall go before
the face of the Lord, to prepare his ways, and to give knowledge of salvation,
unto his people, for the remission of their sins, through the tender mercy of
our God, whereby the day spring from on hye has visited us, to give light to
them that sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death, and to guide our feet
into the way of peace.

Here we see Christ Jesus is our king, under whom the faithful in Christ do
sit sure, and safe, without fear, in fulness of heavenly gifts in the
spiritual kingdom when Christ has made them, at one with his father, and
when he shall be their king, and God. Who the^ should they fear, and tremble?
seeing the horn of salvation is in the house of David, that is, the kingdom of
Christ, the kingdom of blessedness, in which neither sin, death, nor Satan,
can hurt the faithful beleuers with whom Christ is always present, and whom
he does ever support. And this is the true redemption, and that true help,
which all the true, godly, and elect, have gredely looked for from the beginning.

Jeremy prophesies of Messiah at large in the 31. saying, Ier. 31.1.
at the same time says the Lord, will I be the God of all the famelies of
Israel, and they shall be my people. The fulfilling of this prophecy begun in
the appostles time when many of the kingdoms, and generations of Israel
believed in Christ, and became the people of god and it shall be fulfilled or
finished when the fulness of the gentiles shall be come in, whereas those x.
tribes were before this, utterly rooted out of the earth, from the face of the
Lord, for your Idolatrye.

Ieremye prophesyeth of the hope of the Gentiles, saying that it should so fall
forth, that Israel (that is to say the remnant which the Lord had chosen)
should be delivered from their captivity: and that they should come into
Sion, that is, into the Catholic Church with spiritual songs: and that the
gentills should hear it, and speak of it, and rejoice at the conversation of
the Jews. If this must thus come to pass, then out of doubt must they needs
come to Sion, that is, ye church of Christ, which is the spiritual kingdom of
Christ wherein shall be great abundance, and plentiousnes of all good, and
precious things. We must understand by the corn, wine, and oil, and such
like heavenly gifts, which Christ by his spirit bestows on the Church,
that it may be glad and rejoice in spirit. Romans 14.17
For the kingdom of God is not earthly meat, and drink, but righteousness,
and peace, and joy in the holy ghost. The words of this prophesy be these,
hear the word of the Lord, ye gentiles, and declare in the Isles a far of,
Ier. 31.10.
and say he that scatters Israel, will gather him, and will keep him, as a
sheppard does his flock: for the Lord has redeemed Jacob, and rau^somed him,
from the hand of him that was stronger the^ he. Therefore they shall come, and
rejoice in the light of Sion, and shall run to the bountifulnes of the Lord
even for the wheat, and for the wine, and for the oil, and for the increase
of sheep, and Bullocks, and her souls shall be as a watered garden, and they
shall have no more sorrow.

The Jews understand not this, but suppose that it shall be carnally
fulfilled. But I have often said that ye prophets use to speak figuratively of
Christ's kingdom, and of the great, and unspeakable goodness thereof, to wit,
of the word of god, and ye holy ghost with all his gifts, faith, forgeuenes of
sins, peace of conscience, joy in the spirit, understanding of the
scriptures, and comfort, and hope out of Gods holy promises of all which, both
Jews, and Gentills, that believe, shall be partakers. And these are the gifts
of god by which, he adorneth, and makes his kingdom, that is the faithful
Christians, fruitful, even as a fertile garden, or a green orchard.

In this chapter Ieremye does comfort the weak in Israel that they should
not dowt of the promised Messiah but steadfastly believe, ye like as he had
promised a spiritual drliuerance to wit forgeuenes of sins for Messiah his
sake: so it should come to pas yt he should take some piece of Israel for his
people, and that so the kingdom of Christ should continue and abide for ever.
And the new testament tells us that there is an everlasting covenant of Gods
grace confirmed unto al faith full Christians, saying, yt our sines are pardoned
for christ's sake, and ye god will be our merciful father for ever. He
promises also that he will send the holy ghost into our heart to lighten us
with the knowledge of God and to purify our hearts, by faith in Christ that so
we may have the law of God not only written in papers but even engraven in our
hearts.

The law requires faith, and fear of God, with hope and love toward God,
and our neighbors: but the heart of man is wicked, To have a will to keep Gods
law and to love it is not of the flesh ergo of God and a sign of election.
even from his youth up, and sustained with original sin, that he has no
understanding, no joy, no desire, no good will to walk in the law of god. But
the spirit of Messiah, the finger of God, will take away, and clens all these
things, and will write that within our hearts, with lively letters which the
law requires, to wit, faith in Christ by which we have forgeuenes of our
snnes, and love which is the fulfilling of the law. Then shall all things
happen well, and we shall be in happy, and blessed state. For there be none in
the kingdom of Christ but men instructed, and blessed by the holy ghost which
both know them selves, and God, and are bent, and ready to serve God, from a
clean, and a pure heart, of a good conscience, and an unfeigned faith: although
they be very weak, and compassed about with sin, and often times stumble, and
therefore with all the Saints they make their prayer saying: O Lord forgive us
our trspasses. these are the words of the prophet: Behold the day is come,
Iere. 31.31
says the Lord that I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel,
and with the house of Judah: not according to the covenant which I made with
their fathers when I took them by the hand to bring them out of the land of
Egypt, the which my covenant they brak, although I was a husband unto them,
says the Lord: but this shall be the covenant, that I will make with the
house of Israel. After those days says the Lord I will put my law into their
inward parts, and write it in their hearts, and I will be their God, and they
shall be my people. And they shall teach no more every man his neighbor, and
every man his brother, saying know the Lord, for they shall all know me, from
the least of them, unto the greatest of them, says the Lord: for I will
forgive their iniquity, and will remember there sins no more. Thus says the
Lord, which gives the sun for a light to the day, and the courses of the
moon, and of the stars for a light to the night, which breaks the sea when
the waves thereof rore: his name is the Lord of hosts. If these ordinances
depart out of my sight, says the Lord, then shall the seed of Israel cease
from being a nation before me for ever. Thus says the Lord, If the heavens can
be measured, or the foundations of the earth be searched out beneth, the^ will
I cast of all the seed of Israel, for all that they have done, says the Lord.

The apostle expounds this prophesye unto us in the Hebrew, telling us that
it was fulfilled at the former coming of Christ into this world, Heb. 8.6.
when Christ the mediator of the new testament, executed his priestly office,
offering up sacrifice for us, and was placed at the right hand of the trone of
majesty in heaven, being the minister of the holy things, and of the true
tabernacle, wrought by God, and not by man. The old testament had then
continued unto the time appointed, that is, unto Messiah, who was by the
priesthood, sacrifices, and ceremonies prefigured. But when the light, or
candle came, it was meet that the shadow should give place.

In the old testament, The law.
the law was written in tables of stone, and by it the false double dealing,
and curse of the people, was manifested, and reproved: but not taken away. For
it was a killing letter, which told the^ what was just, and what was to be
done, but it could not inwardly change, and renew the heart of the old carnal
man, to make them gladly, and feruenly do those things which were of God: but
it led men to Messiah, who should circumcise their hearts, with his spirit,
take away their sins, and write the law in their hearts.

Outward circumcision and cerimones.
Outward circumcision, sacrifices, the blood of beasts, the leuiticall
priesthood, the law of Moses, and other ceremonies had no such strength, nor
force, yt they could help or deliver sinners. And the faithful Christians
before the coming of Christ, had experience of this in them selves. They saw
in deed that their deliverance from sin consisted not in ceremonies, and that
those ceremonies should not always continue. For no sinner, had ever by such
ceremonies obtained redemption, or help, but they knew very well, that God had
promised a new testament, and forgeuenes of sins, by the blood, and sacrifice
of Messiah, and that the spirit of Messiah should imprint, and fulfill the law
in us: so that through our faith, we might both receive a clear conscience,
and acknowledge God our Father by Jesus Christ, Ioh. 8.56.
the mediator of the new testament. And therefore did they so earnestly look
for him, as Christ says. Abraham in spirit saw this day of the new testament,
in which Christ should, by the Gospel, and the holy ghost, be manifested, and
declared unto the world, and he was glad. The old testament was a preparatiue
of ye new testament into Christ, in which ye outward letter does not only
sownd into ye ears, but the spirit also does inwardly quicken, and illuminate
the heart: but these things were hid, and few did know it. But in the the new
testament these are plain, and manifest: 2. Cor. 3.3.
whereupon Paul calls the Corrinthians, his Epistle written not with ink,
but by the spirit of the living God, not in tables of stone, but even in the
fleshly tables of the heart.

The Jews received ye law from God, who promised them temporal goods, and
blessings, and they on the other side again, promised unto the Lord that they
would keep it, The new leage of grace is firm and ure.
but they performed not their promise neither fulfilled they those things,
which ye Lord in his law required at their hands. For they assayd and endeavored
to keep it of them selves, without the help of Messiah, but it was impossible.
And then the Lord made a better testament, or a new covenant with his people,
which depends not of our works or worthiness, which are uncertain, wavering,
weak, vnco^stant, and unstable: but even of his own promise of Christ, which
is most sure, and vnfaileable, and without our desert. This covenant was a
covenant of grace, a sure covenant, a continual, and firm covenant, for it
is grounded on Gods mercy in our Messiah. For the truth, and mercy of God
abides for ever, and the gifts, and calling of God are without repentance,
To. 11.29.
(...). Therefore first he sends Moses to teach them the law, and to show
the world their sins, and the curse dew for their sins, that so he might
make them come and confess their faults, and humble them selves before god,
and ask his pardon. The Lord had promised from the beginning his grace, and
blessing in Messiah, the seed of Abraham, and David. This promise is the
gospel or new testament, instituted, and confirmed at the fulness of time, by
the blood of Jesus Christ: and therefore was it needful, that Christ should
come, unto whom the law sends, and turns all men, that they may have
grace, and truth granted by Jesus Christ.


Anna. Cleophas, Ioh. 1.17.
and his companion understood not this. For if they had, they would never have
been so heavy, but have thought this with them selves. The time is now come,
wherein our Iudaisme, with our ceremonies shall have an end, and Jesus of
Nazareth by his wonders has declared him self to be the true Messiah. Surely
Jeremy prophesyeth, that the old Testament (when the fulness of time should
come) should be abrogated, and the new covenant of grace should take place. And
this must be confirmed by blood, but not by the blood of sheep, and calves, but
by the death of Messiah, as Esaias, and Danyel witness. And this covenant which
God made with the people of God, shall continue for ever. This is that true
delyuerance of Israel. And now at the last shall the kingdom of Israel in
deed be rightly restored, erected, and establisted for ever. God will not recant
this, and therefore must it needs be done, because God has spoken it. And as
he has not hitherto altered the course of the day, and night: even so will he
not change this his promise. To be short, the hope of Israel shall not be
frustered, but as we trust, so (according to the promise of God) shall it come
to pas. For God cannot lie, neither did he make this promise upon any such
condition, that our salvation should consist upon our works, and therefore it is
sound, perfect, and sure. And therefore must Israel, and Judah needs be saved,
and Christ arise again from the dead, that he might preach, and publish the new
covenant.


Vrb. You say well. And seeing that the circumcision, and other rites were to be
abrogated, they might easily have coniectured, that the kingdom of Israel
could no more stand, or tarry, then the external priesthood with his outward,
and figurative ceremonies. Whereupon it may well follow, that the Gentiles also,
should have access unto Messiah, and be received into his spiritual kingdom.
For, seeing the external circumcision, with the priesthood, sacrifices, and
genealogies, which were drawn from Abraham, did cease, and were no more
esteemed, and neither ought, nor could do any thing to the justifying of
sinners, but the hearts were to be circumcised, and the law of God by the holy
Ghost to be written in men's minds, what differences, I pray you, is there now
between the justification of the Jews, No difference betwe^ the salvation of
the Jews and Gentiles.
and Gentiles?


Anna. None in deed at all, but as Peter says, God ordained from the
beginninning, that the gospel should be preached even to the gentiles, and that
they should become as faithful christians, as Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and the
Patriarchs, and Apostles were. For, God promised that he would receive them
into his kingdom, for he bestowed on them the holy Ghost, as well as on the
Jews. Neither did he after make any difference between the Jews, and Gentiles.
The stop of the partision wall is broken down, and the Lord has cleansed the
hearts of the gentiles through faith: so that now Christians, or the church of
the faithful, are only the people of God, without any further difference, and
they are (as Christ says) faithful only saved. Neither can any man be saved
any other way, but only by the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ.


Vrb. This is the foundation of our faith. And whereas Jeremy promised
afterward, that al from the least unto the greatest, should know the Lord in
his new testament: you must understand it of all the Isralites, which are the
children of promise. For to them the Lord gives the catholic faith, and the
holy spirit by his gospel: and he draws them, that they may come unto
Christ, and that his spirit may teach them, and they know the voice of their
shepherd, and follow not any strange teacher.

Now harken how Ezechiel prophesies of the time of the office, and of the
kingdom of Messiah, in his 11. chapter, where he has these words: Eze. 11.17.
Thus says the lord God, I will gather you again from the people, and assemble
you out of the countries where you have been scattered, and I will give you the
land of Israel, and they shall come thither, and they shall take away all the
Idols thereof, and all the abominations thereof from thence. And I will give
them one heart, and will put a new spirit within their bowels, and I will take
the stony heart out of their bodies, and will give them a heart of flesh, that
they may walk in my statutes, and keep my judgments, and execute them, and
they shall be my people, and I will be their God.

Ezechiel, when the Lord had raised him up to prophesy of these things, does
comfort the Jews being prisoners in Babilo^ by this prophesy. And he promised
the^ that the Lord would deliver the^ out of the bondage that they were in, and
bring them safely into their own country to Jerusalem: which things came so
to pas in deed in the days of Zerubabel, Iehoschua, Esdras and Neemias when
they should no more commit Idolatry with Babell and other Idols, as before they
had done. But this deliverance out of the captivity in Babylon was but only a
sign of our true deliverance by Christ, whereby all prisoners, and such as
remain captains are at the last truly delivered, and saved, Captivity of
Babylon.
as soon as they cast away their ungodliness and Idolatry, and embrace the true
Christian faith.

This prophesy has respect unto yt time of Messiah, when he gave his spirit
unto his people and circumcised their hearts and purified their own blind and
(...) vnpenytent hearts, and put in place thereof a new heart which fervently,
If the heart desire to observe and keep Gods law, it is a merry heart, and it is a
sign ye thou art regenerated.
and ardently desires to observe and keep the commandments of God. For
Christ is the only alone Physician of our heavy, sick, and deadly wounded
nature. He alone regenerateth us with his spirit, he heals us, and he
restores us again, and he only is our intercessor, who puts away and
remoueth from us the wrath of God, and reconcileth us unto the Father: so that
with a fatherly heart and affection he embraces us and makes us his children,
because Christ has both purified our heart, pardoned our sins, and brought us
into favor with the father again. Moses by his law could do none of these
for us. Moises law
He can only show us the curse of the Lord and prophesy of the blessed seed of
Abraham: and this was all that he could do. But to take away sins, and to work
our justification, was a work which none could do but only Messiah.

This is the way and mean by which Christ planteth and preserves his
spiritual kingdom, when of sinners he makes godly and righteous persons,
and gives them new hearts, and lightneth the^ by his word and holy spirit, and
renews them, that they may be in the inward man inclined with a ready delight
and alacrity to do the will and pleasure of God. Deu. 10.16.
This is the meaning of Moses in Deutrinomy when he comma^deth that they
should circumcise the fore skin of their heart, that is, their evil thoughts
co^cupisences, and fleshly desires. Deu. 50.6.
And he promises unto his people a spiritual circumcision, saying the Lord
thy God will circumcise thine heart and the heart of thy seed, that thou may
love the Lord thy God with all thy heart and with all thy soul that thou may
live.

Earthly Kings maintain external justice, and restrain vices and wickedness
by the sword, but they have no power to restrain and bridle the heart. For the
heart for all that they can do, will abound in concupiscens of al kind of evils,
yea it would brust forth into deeds (if it were lawful to do them) and satisfy
his own appetite and wallowe in all filthy flagitiousnes. And this is che cause
that earthly kings defend and maintayn their dominions by the galouses,
torments, wheels, swords, halters, and other punishments: and yet
notwithstanding all such executions, and torments, the wickedness, and rash
bouldnes of louse livers can scarcely be brideled. For so soon as the heart
perceives that it has got license, and time, A description of the godly.
by and by it turns to the old habit, and commits what lewdnes it
lists. But Christ goes to work after another, and better sort. For he
changes, and cleanses the heart from evil to good, which when he has once
puryfied, and changed, there follows by and by, honesty, holiness, and
integrity of life in outward conversation. And thus does he renew those which
are endued with true innocence, and through faith are drawn cheerfully by a
hearty desire, to work all kind of virtue.

And thus does this our king reign spiritually, and by his word, and spirit,
preuayleth more then al kings, and Caesers in this world can do by compulsion,
and all kind of torments, though they be never so cruel,

Ezechiel also has a prophecy, and promise of this day of salvation, and new
league of grace, Ezec. 36.25.
in his thirty six chapter, in plain words saying. Then will I power clean
water upon you, and ye shall be clean, (yea) from all your filthynes, and from
all your Idols will I cleanse you. Here the prophet promises the sacrament of
baptism, The sacrament of baptism.
which is most pure and clean water, because of ye word of God, of which it
depends, and has his excellency. And therefore it is caled in Titus, Titus. 3.
The lauer of regeneration, and the holy Ghost, which God, in baptism, by
Christ our Savior, pours plentifully upon us, that we by his grace (being
justified) may through hope, be made heirs of everlasting salvation.

This was then fulfilled, when the discyples baptized the people, and forgave
sins in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ and when the cleansed, and godly
congregation of the faithful Christians was first erected, who first rightly
found forth the Lord God, and were daily more, and more increased? as we read
in the Acts, that the spiritual kingdom of Christ by his word, did daily
more, and more increase, though in their bodies they suffered great
persecutions, and dangers, And this was the way, and manner, by which Christ
would govern his kingdom. But the blinded Jews thought that all these things
should carnally be fulfilled, and that Messiah would rule his kingdom in
worldly pomp, and power.

God in the 34. chapter of Eze. promyseth his people a true shepherd, which
has good and wholesome pastures, and which will keep his sheep faithfully, and
defend the^ carefully. Which things the pharysies, and faithles shepherds in
Judah did not, Ese. 34.23.
but fed and fatted themselves. The prophets words be these. And I will set up a
shepherd over them, and he shall feed them, even my servant David, he shall
feed them, and he shall be their shepherd, and I the Lord will be their God,
and my servant David shall be the prince among them. I the Lord have spoken it.
And I will make with them a covenant of peace, and will cause the evil beasts to
cease out of the land, and they shall dwell safely in the wilderness, and sleep in
the woods. And I will raise up for them a plant of renown, and they shall be no
more consumed with hunger in the land, neither bear the reproach of the heathen
any more. Thus shall they understand, that I the Lord their God am with them,
and that they, even the house of Israel, are my people, says the Lord God.
Christ our shepherd.
And ye my sheep, the sheep of my pasture, or men, and I am your God, says the
Lord God.

This shepherd is that Messiah, whom Ezechiell calls David, because he
should be borne of Dauides stock. And the Jews themselves agree with us in
this point. For David the son of Iesse, was dead long be fore ye time.
Ezechiel spoke this prophecy in the time of the captivity of Babylon, unto
which from David the son of Iesse his time, were 14, generations, as S.
Augustine says in the 11. chapter de ouibus, where he expounds this
prophecye.

Now you hear that this prince, or king shall not rule corporally, or after
the manner of this world, but that he shall feed his people, that is, he shall
govern, feed, and preserve them by his word, as Christ himself plainly
expounds this prophecy in John. This league shall be a league of peace, 1. Ioh.
20.
and security, that the Israelites may live bouldly in peace, and safety. God
will never be angry with them, any more to destroy them: but they shall enjoy
quietness in their consciences, neither can any man harm them under this
shepherd David. For the true faithful christian is so safe in his faith, that
none can hurt him. All creatures are forced to help him. And they shall know
(says he) or they shall see, that I the Lord their God am with them, and
admonish them.

Was not this plainly, and truly fulfilled, when Christ the true David, true
God, and true man, fed his people him self, and pardoned them their sins,
pacifyed the troblesome sea, healed their sickness, and raised the dead to life
again? But Cleophas, and his companyon could not understand all these things,
until they heard the Lord himself, and till their eyes were opened.

Ezechiel also prophesyeth of Christ, and his kingdom, and of the general
resurrection, which shall be in the last day, in his 37 chapter. And how the
Jews should be truly delivered by Jesus Christ: saying. Iere. 31.31. Eze.
37.1. The general resurrection.
The hand of the Lord was upon me, and carried me out in the spirit of the Lord,
and set me down in the midst of the field which was full of bones. And he led me
round about by them, and behold, they were very many in the open field, and
lo, they were very dry. And he said unto me. Son of man, can these bones
live? And I answered, O Lord God thou know.

Again he said unto me, prophecy upon these bones, and say unto the^. O ye dry
bones, hear the word of the Lord. Thus says the Lord God unto these bones.
Behold, I will cause breath to enter into you, and ye shall live. And I will
lay sinews upon you, and make flesh grow upon you, and cover you with skin,
and put breath in you, that you may live, and you shall know that I am the
Lord.

So I prophesied as I was commanded, and as I prophesied, there was a noyce,
and behold, there was a shaking, and the bones came together bone to his bone.
When I beheld the sinwes, and the flesh grow upon them, and above the skin
covered them, but there was no breath in them, Then said he unto me: prophecy
unto the wind, prophecy thou son of man, and say to the wind. Thus says
the Lord God. Come from the four winds, O breath, and breathe upon these same
that they may live. So I prophesied as he had commanded me, and the breath
came into them, and they lived, and stood up upon their feet, an exceeding
great army.

Then he said unto me, Son of man, these bones are the hole house of Israel,
behold, they say our bones are dry, and our hope is gone, and we are clean cut
of. Therefore prophecy, and say to them: thus says the Lord God. Behold my
people, I will open your graves, and cause you to come out of your sepulchers,
and bring you into the land of Israel. And ye shall know that I am the
Lord. When I have opened your graves O my people, and brought you out of your
sepulchers: And shall put my spirit in you, and you shall live. And I shall
place you in your own land. And then ye shall know that I the Lord have spoaken
it, and performed it, says the Lord.


Anna Does the prophet here speak unto ye Jews, that they should not, in the
captiuitye of Babylon, be discouraged, as though God were forgetful of his
promise, and would not deliver them out of that bondage, or would hold back the
kingdom promised to David's son? Verily they were heavy, and much trobled, and
they doubted, so as if they should have said with Cleophas, and his companyon,
our hope is quite frustrate.


Vrb. Yea forsooth. For he comfort here the captive Jews, that they should
not despair, or doubt of their return into the land of Canaan, though they
were vexed with heavy, and great calamities. For, it seemed as impossible unto
the captive Jews that they should return to Jerusalem, and reedify the temple
and set up the service of God, and be restored to their former state again, as
that those dry, and broaken bones should be reuyued, and live again.

But here Ezechiel sees a comfortable vision, in that God rayseth the dry
bones to life again, and gives them as great beuty, and strength, as ever they
had, that so the people of the Jews might thereby learn the omnipotent power of
God, and nothing doubt, but that he both would, and could perform those
things which he had promised of Messiah the son of David, and of his
glorious, and everlasting kingdom, and deliver them, that all things might be
accomplished, and fulfilled in the land of Canaan, which he had promised them
before by his prophets. And that, that captivity of 70. years should not
hinder their return, and the promise concerning Messiah. For God would show, and
declare his power in his people, that so his deed might answer to his word.

It follows in the prophesy. And say unto them, thus says the Lord God
behold I will take the children of Israel from among the heathen whether they be
gone, Eze. 37.21.
and will gather them on every side, and bring them into their own lands: and I
will make them over people in the land, upon the mountains of Israel, and one
king, shall be king to them all, and they shall be no more to the people,
neither be divided any more henceforth into two kingdoms, neither shall they
be polluted any more with these Idols, nor with their abominations, nor with
any of these transgressions, but I will save them out of all their dwelling
places, wherein thy have sinned, and will cleanse them: so shall they be my
people, and I will be their God. And David my servant shall be king over them,
and all they shall have one shepherd, they shall also walk in my judgments,
and observe my statutes, and do the^ and they shall dwell in the land that I
have given unto Jacob my servant, where your Fathers have dwelt, and these
shall dwell therein, (even) they, and their sons, and their sons sons for
ever, and my servant David shall be their prince for ever.

Moreover I will make a covenant of peace with them: it shall be an
everlasting covenant with them, and I will place them, and multiply them, and
I will set my sanctuary among them for ever more. Thy tabernacle also shall be
with them, yea I will be their God, and they shall be my people. Thus the
heathen shall know that I the lord do sanctify Israel, when my sanctuary
shall be among them for evermore. This prophecy was corporally fulfilled after
they had been captives 70. years, when the Jews returned into their country,
and assembled themselves together, and multiplied, until the coming of Christ
which was to come.490. years after that captiuitye: then in deed had they one
king. But this prophesye was truly fulfilled, in the last week spoken of by
Daniell, at the former coming of Christ, when both he and his disciples
converted the^ in the land of Chanaan, and else where, where they were
dispersed: and gathered them by the gospel, into that only spiritual
shepfold the Church of Christ before times. Judah and Benjamin had a king of
their own, and the ten tribes which fell from the house of David under Roboham
had another king of their own: but when Christ the true David came, all the
Jews were made one people, under one true king Christ. In this kingdom, shall
not the question be curiously asked, whether you are of the tribe of Ruben,
Leuy, Isachar, Zebulon, Dan, Gad, or Ashur etc: but it shall be asked, art thou
a Christian? do thou acknowledge, and confess Jesus of Nazareth to be the
true Messiah, whom the patriarchs, prophets, and all the tribes of Israel did
look for? They even unto this time, carefully looked for Christ. But when
Christ himself came the true sheppard, and king of Israel, then was that
everlasting covenant of grace, betwixt God and man ratified, and then that
true throne of grace, wherein all fulness of the Godhed corporally dwells,
that is Jesus Christ, true God, and true man was conversant here himself in
earth amongst men. That old Caporeth, and their material temple, Christians
the temple of God.
and Leuiticall priesthood was then no more to be regarded: for all tipes, and
figures then ceased, and the truth it self appeared. Christly fidelians, 1.
Cor. 3.16.
who laid hold of Christ in their hearts by true faith, were then made the
lively temple, and sanctuary of God.

As Paul well, and learnedly expounds such figures, saying, 1. Cor. 1.30.
Know ye not: (says he) that you are the temple of God, and that the spirit
of God dwells in you for the temple of God is holy which ye are. And to the
Corrinthians, Eze. 37.26.
he teaches what is true holiness and the fulfilling of al figures, to wit,
Christ himself, Who (says he) was given us of the Father to be our wisdom,
holiness, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption. And as the Lord himself
says a little after, in Ezech. My righteousness, that is, my sanctuarye or
habitation shall be for ever among them. Eze. 37.26


This is the circumstaunce, and prophets drift in the prophesye before said, to
persuade, and prove this congregation of the Israelites, to be an everlasting,
and spiritual kingdom, under their own king christ. For the land of Canaan,
Jerusalem, and the temple were brittle, and but for a time even as this visible
world is. Therefore that habitation could not continue for ever: wherefore the
prophet speaks here of spiritual, and eternal things which cannot by
continuance of time decay, and die, but must stand for ever. These things which
are earthly, and of this world, vanish, and decay: but the king Messiah, and
his habitation, the house of Jacob, and his kingdom abides for ever.
Wherefore, they are not earthly, nor carnal, but everlasting, and spiritual.


Anna. If according to this prophesye, the house of Jacob, or the kingdom of
Messiah should be the sanctuary of God for ever: and this spiritual David be
the king of the faithful Christians, or Israelites for ever, then must it
needs follow that he should rise again, and gather the disparsed Israelites,
or children of god together, yt he might erect an everlasting kingdom, and
raise his people from death, and give them life, and salvation in everlasting
peace. This is that true holiness, and full deliverance of Israel from all all
euilles, temporal, and eternal.

If Cleophas, and his companion had understood and believed this prophesy they
would never have said: We thought that it had been he that should have
redeemed Israel: but they would have said, we hope, and believe, that it is he
that has, and shall redeem Israel, although he has now suffered death. For
the promise of the Lord is sure, and certain, and can never deceive us.
Farthermore in as much, as Messiah is called David, because he was born of
David's stock: and in as much as he is true man, what marvel is it, if he be
subject to death, and dyed? But in that he should keep, and govern Israel
for ever he could not abide in death, but must needs rise again, thereby to
fulfill this, and other prophesies concerning his everlasting kingdom. But
there is one thing in this prophesye, which moves a doubt: you said yesterday,
that Ezechiell in this chap. did prophesye of that general, and universal
resurrection which should be at the last day. The house of Israel which is a
figure of the house of Israel.
Wherefore then does the prophet say that these dry bones were the house of
Israel, which was in captivity at Babylon? how can you here by prove the
universal resurrection of the dead?


Vrba. I confess in deed that Ezechiel in this chap. does speak of the
deliverance, and restitution of Israel, and that he prophesies also of their
return, and as it were by law, recover their land lost in their absence. But
judge you, seeing God by this similitude would comfort his people, that they
should not doubt of their deliverance, whether our resurrection, may not hear
be gathered of this place, as a certain, and undoubted truth, or no. For if
our resurrection were uncertain, and doubtful, he could not by it have
proved, or ministered unto them any sownd, and sure comfort. For then they would
have said, look how slender and small hope there is that these bones should
live again, even so small hope is there, that we should be redeemed, out of
the captivity of Babylon.

But here the prophet brings in, and alleges the resurrection of their
bones, as a thing most sure, of which no good nor godly man may doubt: even as
if he had said, look how certain, and sure it is, that these bodies shall
rise, and live again, by the power of God, even so sure also it is that you
shall be delivered out of the captivity of Babylon, and restored to your own
country again.

Moreover we know, that the catholic Church both in the east, and west, has
hitherto without all controversy, by the instinct and light of thy holy ghost
expounded this prophesy of the resurrection of the flesh.

Of which thing the holy Bishops, and Doctors are plentiful witnesses, as
Ireneus, Turtulian, Ciprian Hillary, Ambrose, Gregory, Nazianzenus, and Gregory
the great, in his book against Valent. Turtulian in his treatise of the
resurrection of the flesh. Cyprian in his third book to Quirinus. Hilary upon
the 52. Psalm. Ambros in his book of faith and resurrection, and in his third
book of the holy ghost. Gregory Nazianzene in his funeral sermon of Basil.
Gregory the great in his xx. homely upon Ezechell.

And the Prophet Ezechel chapter. 40. discribeth a wonderful and merueilous
city and temple of Jerusalem. But all these things are to be understood
spiritually of the heavenly Jerusalem the eternal City of God.

But let us see now what Daniell says of Christ: And as for those things
which I opened a little while a go out of the 2. and 9. thap. it shall not be
needful now to repeat them again. But in his 7, chapter, he prophesies most
sweetly of the kingdom of Christ and of his saints, to wit, how his kingdom
should be everlasting, propagated, and spread abroad throughout all the world:
and he says, Dan. 7.13.
As I beheld in visions by night behold one like the son of man, came in the
clouds of heaven, and approached unto the au^cie^t of days, and they brought,
him before him. And he gave him dominion, and honor, and a kingdom, that all
people, nations and language should serve him: His dominion is an everlasting
dominion which shall never be taken away, and his kingdom shall never be
destroyed. And a little after he adds: and they shall take the kingdom of the
Saints of the most high and possess the kingdom for ever, even for ever, and
ever.

You know this to be a general rule, A good rule.
and necessary for the understanding of the prophets whereas any thing is spoken
in the Prophets of the eternal kingdom of Christ, of Christifidelians, and of
everlasting life, that there we both may, and ought to ground the resurrection
of Christ, and faithful Christians. For if they shall live and reign for
ever, then must they needs rise again which thing Daniell prophecieth in his
12. chapter as plainly, and evidently as if some of the Evangelists had
written it. This prophecy is to be referred unto the last day wherein this
world shall have an end. And these be the words of the prophet. And at that
time thy people shall be delivered, every one shall be found written in the
book. And many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth, shall awake, some
to everlasting life, Dan. 12.1.
and some to shame, and perpetual contempt: and they that be wise, shall shine
as the brightness of the firmament: and they that turn many to righteousness,
shall shine as the stares for ever and ever. Do you not here see the indowted
resurrection of all men, as well good, as evil. But you may see also here, that
there shall be great difference amongst them which shall rise.

For they which are the people of God, to wit, christifidelians, which are
written in the book of life, shall be delivered from the wrath of God which
shall come upon the unbelieving, and wicked world, that is, they shall be
delivered from the everlasting punishment of hell, and be brought into
everlasting life. But the wicked, which have not in their life time believed the
gospel, shall not be saved, but the wrath of God shall abide on the^ for ever:
for they have denied to receue ye true life Christ Jesus, and therefore shall they
be confounded, and perish for ever. Dani. also here describes the glory which
Gods children shall have after the resurrection, saying, The state of the elect
in the world to come.
yt they shall be as bright as the sun, and stars of the firmament for ever
world without end. And this out of doubt, is the true, and last deliverance of
Israel, that is of the children of god, which we do with firm faith and hope
look for. For as verily as all other things, which in the prophets are
promised, are perfitly finished: as the birth of Christ, with his passion,
resurrection, and asce^tion, and calling of the gentills: so also at the last
day shall this be fulfilled, to wit, the resurrection of dead with the true
deliverance of all faithful Christians. These and such like promises are our
gospel, and the ground work, and foundation of our faith.


Anna. What says Hose concerning Christ?


Vrb. Hose is one of the small prophets, but yet he has many noble prophesies
of the mysteries of the gospel, The small prophets.
as of the calling of the gentiles unto the gospel. And though the Jews should
have a grievous fall, yet he promyseth unto them the grace of God, The contents
of the prophet Hosea.
and that at the length, they shall believe, and reeeaue Christ, and acknowledge
him to be their Lord, and king, who^ before they had rejected.

He prophesyeth also, of the great, and glorious kingdom of Christ, that is,
of the catholic church of faithful christians, and of that spiritual marriage
between Christ, and all Christifidelians, and of the victory of Christ, how he
should overcome, and abolish sin, and death, and of the resurrection of Christ,
and of our rising again.

He reproves also, the ten trybes of Israel for their Idolatry, threatening
them everlasting captivity under the Assirians: but he promyseth grace, and
help to Judah, that is, to those two trybes Judah, and Benjamin, which fell not
away from the house of David.

In the first chapter he threatens Samaria with the captivity of Asiria,
saying: Ose. 1.6.
I will no more have pity upon the house of Israel, but I will utterly take
them away. Yet I will have mercy upon the house of Judah, and will save the^ by
the Lord their God. And will not save the^ by the bow, nor sword, nor by
battle, by horses, nor by horsemen

Cleophas, and his companyon might here have learned, that the kingdom of
Christ is not an earthly kingdom, seeing that Hoseas threatened unto the
gretest part of the Jews such captivity, that they should never return to
their wonted state, or dignity of kingdom, as when they had a king of their own
in Samaria, or Israel. If therefore, the 12. tribes of Israel should under
Messiah have had such a kingdom, wherein they might corporally have ruled over
the gentiles, and have abounded in all pleasures, and worldly felicity (which
carnal opinion all the Jews had of Messiah) then consequently had it been
necessary, that they should all have been delivered, and redeemed out of
Assiria.

But here you hear how it should come to pas, that the very remembrance of
Israel should be blotted out. Which thing is signified by Lorichamoh the
prophets daughter. Which name, by interpretation, signifies without mercy. But
seeing the delyuerance of Israel was nevertheless promised by all the prophets,
it must needs of necessity be true. For the word of God cannot lie, or deceive
us.

Seeing therefore, their delyueraunce by which they should be delivered from the
Assirian king, and be restored into that land, whence they were removed, should
not be corporal, nor earthly: it must needs follow, that it should be
spiritual. For there is no mean, nor other way, by which they could be
delivered. Which thing the words following prove, where he promised such help
unto ye trybe of Judah, as cold not be wrought by corporal, and earthly armor,
as bows, swords, and such like, but even by the Lord their God. What other
thing is this, but that God would after another way, and mean, bles, and help
Judah, that is, David's kingdom, and all other Israelites, and confessors of
God, then worldly princes use to help their subjects?

Hose 1.7.
The Lord will have mercy on them. That is, will pardon them, justify them, and
save them: and so bring and deliver them out of Satan's kingdom, of which the
Psalmist speaks thus. The Lord will redeem Israel from all his iniquities.
Psa. 130.8.
This is the sole hope, and redemption of Israel from his iniquity, and
consequently from all his evils, which cursed sin had brought upon man, and all
mankind, that is, from that horrible death, Ephesians. 1.7.
and captivity, wherein the faithles, reuolting, murdering, and (...) frauduler
spirit did hold us as Paul briefly expounds this prophecye to the Ephesians.
saying: we have in Jesus Christ the son of God, redemption through his blood,
even the forgeuenes of sins, according to his rich grace.

And although we understand that temporal help, by which God delivered Judah
from Senachari^, and brought the Jews from Babylon to Jerusalem: yet was that
temporal deliverance angore of the true, and everlasting salvation, by which
Christ has delivered all true Jews, that is, his elect from sin, death, and
the tyranny of hell, by his cross, without all external force. But now see how
the lord will at the last, forsake, and abolish Iudaisme, all their earthly, and
figurative priesthood. The priests wife brought out a son, who^ the Lord
called Loam, that is, not my people, and he adds the cause. Because, said he,
you are not my children, neither will I be your God:

Hereby might the Jews have seen, that there was a notable change to come. And
they ought thus seriously to have reasoned the matter with them selves. How
shall we, I pray you, understand the word of God? He promises unto Israel, and
Judah, great, and infinite treasures, in all the prophets, he says he will be
their king, and they shall be his people, and that he will have mercy on them,
and give them on everlasting kingdom, and he made an eternal covenant of
grace with them. How then agree these things with this prophecye? wherein it is
prophesyed that Israel shall be captive, and God will forget them, and never
after have compassion upon them. Are we the true Israelites or no? truly it is
like, and must needs be meant of us. And in the 6. chapter the Lord says. For I
desired mercy, Hose. ^6.6.
and not sacrifice, and the knowledge in God, more then burnt offerings.

By these words of Hose, they might easily have understood, that the foundation
of true religion consisted not of ceremonies, but that God required faith that
works by love, and is ready to do good, for which Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
were commended, and called the servants of God, rather then for their corporal
circumsition. Here might the Jews have seen, what was the matter, and cause,
that the Lord denied them to be his people.


Anna. I would hear the cause, and see this question answered. For I doubt
not, but as all things are come upon the unbelieving Jews, which God
thretned: so all things shall be performed which he promised. I pray you confer
these places, and reconcile them.


Vrb. God says in deed, in the psalms, Psa. 94.24. Romans 11.2. Psalm. 98.3
that he will not reject, or cast of his people, and forsake his inherytance.
And Paul says: That God has not cast away his people. And the Psalmist says:
The Lord has remembered his mercy, and his truth toward the house of Israel.
Like as also Mary the blessed mother of Christ says in her psalm of
thankesgeuing. And Zacharye says, that God will not forget his mercy, which he
promised to his people Israel. Know you therefore, that God is true, and
constant in all his promyses, and that he performed unto the Jews all things
which he promised them.

But the manner of Gods promyses must be marked, for they are of two sorts. Some
of them are temporal, or corporal, The manner of gods promises must be marked.
and are of 2. sorts.
and are made upon condition. As when God promised that the land of Canaan, and
the material temple should continue, and such like.

These promises pertain to Iudaisme, and have this condition annexed. If the
Jews would keep the law of God, as it was to be kept, then that promise should
be fulfilled: 1. kind of promises.
but they kept not the law, and yet notwithstanding being blindly bewitched,
they looked for the fulfilling of those promises. The Lord in deed performed
those promises rightly, as they were to be performed. But figures ought of
right to give place, when the truth comes.

God sent also his son, the Messiah, unto the^, that he might be born a Jew,
of the Jewish family of Abraham, and David. And for this his sons sake, he
brought them out of the land of Egypt, and gave them the land of Cannan for
their inheritance: and he separated them from all the people of the world by an
earthly kingdom, by an outward priesthood, by an holy worship, and by a
propper form in religion, to be a people unto himself: and he preserved, and
defended the^ afterward, by great, and wonderful miracles: yea, he brought
them out of the captivity of Babylon.

To be breef, he preserved their law, religion, temple, city, and political
government, by a singular care, and marvelous zeal, even until the promised
Messiah, the true, and eternal king of Israel was come of them. Whereby in deed
they received a great glory, and prerogative above all the world, and many of
them, by Messiah, were delivered from sin, death, and damnation, and so at
the last, were brought into that true Jerusalem, and Syon. And these are called
in the prophet, the remnant of his people, the remnant of Jacob, and Israel:
whom God, amongst others, had chosen to himself, and predestined to
salvation in Christ, of which sort there be many. But if they be compared to
the great number of the unbelievers, 2. kind are free promises.
they are but a few.

There are other free promises of the mere grace, and mercy of God, without
all man's desert, and worthynes. These do appertayn to the new testament, and
consist in the merits, and worthynes of Messiah. These have a firm, sound, and
unshaken foundation, to wit, the great, and wonderful mercy of God, and his
fatherly goodness, and truth: and they depend not of our worthynes at all.
Wherefore they are firm, and certain, and cannot be called back again. And they
are promises of the spiritual, and everlasting treasures, to wit, of the
victory, by which sin, death, and Satan, were extinguished, of the
forgeuenes of sins, of the true, and everlasting righteousness, and of life,
and salvation in Christ.

These kind of promyses do not only appertayn to Israelites, Iudaisme, and the
Jews according to the flesh, but (all respect set aside, without difference,
not regarding whether they be Jews or Gentiles) to the true Jews, and
Israelites, according to the spirit, which are the elect in Christ, the
children of promise, the children of the new testament, without respect. For
here the carnal nativity, ganealogie, kindred, or seed, and offspring of
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, is not regarded at all: but the spiritual nativity,
and inward circumcision of the heart. Luke 3.8.


Of such Jews, and true Israelites, John Baptist speaks in Luke, saying: Say
not with your selves, we have Abraham to our father, for God is able of these
stones to raise up children unto Abraham. Romans 9.6.
And Paul to the Romans says well, and bouldly: All they are not Israelites,
which are of Israel, neither are they all children because they are the seed
of Abraham, but in Isaac shall the seed be called, says the Lord. That is,
they which are ye children of the flesh, are not the children of God, but ye
children of the promise accounted for the seed.

Do you not hear see that God at the first chose his ministers, and children
out of Iudaisme, when the gentiles were without Christ, and were alienate from
the common wealth of Israel, and were strangers from the covenants of promise,
and had no hope, and were without God in the world. But God always reueiled in
the prophets, the mystery of our communion in Christ, Ephe. 2.12.
to wit, how the Gentiles also should be coheires with Israel of the heavenly
kingdom to come, and be partakers of one body, and promise in Christ Jesus.

But mark I pray you, wherefore the scripture sets forth the chief
patriarchs, as Abraham, and Jacob, so gloriously. It does not commend, and set
forth unto us Abraham only born of flesh, and blood: but Abraham believing in
Christ Jesus, regenerated by faith, and born a new, and made a new man, as Paul
plainly teaches, Gal. 3.7
saying: They which are of faith, the same are children of Abraham. For the
Scripture foreseeing that God, by faith, would justify the Gentiles, preached,
before, the gospel unto Abraham, saying: In thee shall all the gentiles be
blessed. So then they which be of faith, are blessed with faithful Abraham,
who is the father unto all them which believe in Christ, whether they be Jews,
or Gentiles.

And in like sort does the scripture set forth unto us Jacob, not simple Jacob,
but that Jacob which wrastled with the Lord, and ouercommed by faith in Christ,
and thereupon obtained he the glorious name to be called Israel, (that is) a
man of great might with God, who by the Christian faith in God is with God, and
through god ye Lord of all things. And these are ye patriarchs unto whom, as
unto good Christifidelians the spiritual promises were made, and not for their
corporal circumsition, or for the law: for the law of Moses was given long
after that promise.

Note here what the true Israel is: what is the true Judah: and who be the
right children of the patriarchs: and then the promises that were made unto
Israel, shall be more plain, and easy to be understood, and you shall better
perceive who they are, which shall enjoy the kingdom of heaven, For Esaias
says. For though thy people, Esaias. 10.22
O Israel be as the sand of the Sea, yet shall the remnant of them return.

Here you see that the promises are not understood of all the Jews, or
Israelites in Israel, according to the flesh, but that a certain only in the
house of Jacob shall be delivered by Messiah from death, to wit, (those which
have believed ye promises which Abraham, and Jacob did believe, and so are become
the true children of Abraham, and Israel through faith.

But least any, for this great defect, and incredulitye of the most part in
Iudaisme, should think that the eternal covenant of grace, made with Israel
is broken: the prophets do wonderfully against this doubt comfort the people.
And they look (as Hosye does here) with spiritual eyes, into this great wide
world, the spiritual Jerusalem, which consists of the Jews, and gentiles:
for by and by after those words, that I recited, he says, Hose 1.1^
Yet the number of the Children of Israel shall be as the sand of the Sea
which can not be measured nor told: and in the place where it was said unto
the^ you are not my people, it shall be said unto them, ye are the sons of
the living god: then shall the children of Judah and the children of Israel be
gathered together and appoint them selves one head.

Thou must understand the prophet thus. God in deed made a covenant with
Abraham, and his seed, wherein he promises that he will be their god, and
multiply them as the sa^d of the sea, and not reject them. And he did well, and
magnifically perform this in the beginning amongst the Jews, whom the Lord
by wonderful miracles multiplied, and preserved, never utterly leaving them
until Jesus Christ the true seed of Abraham came into this earth, in whom all
nations were blessed. For when Christ came, and was preached by the gospel
through the hole world, then was the covenant of Gods grace, which he had made
with Abraham, and his seed, first published, and it began truly to be
fulfilled, when an innumerable multitude of Abrams children not only of the
Jews but even of the Gentiles through out all the world sprung up by the
gospel, by which Abraham also himself was made the child of God.

This therefore is the prophets meaning. Although the Lord cast of the outward
Israel, never minding to bring him again into the land of Canaan: yet
nevertheless, the great worthy promises of the Lord made unto Israel shall be
fulfilled, and the children of Israel shall never the later be in number as
the sand of the sea, and Messiah shall build, and erect, a great famous, and
princely kingdom: but this shall so be performed, that he will not raise up
children to Abraham of the Jews only, but even of the Gentiles through out
the whole world: and they shall be the true children of Abraham, and Israel,
which through faith receive that blessed seed of Abraham, Jesus Christ the
true, and everlasting king of Israel. This is the notable, and worthy
multiplying of Abraham's seed, and the children of Israel, which thing is
wrought by the gospel in faith through the whole world, and shall be in
working till the last day, until all be come into the kingdom of Christ,
which shall come, and are elected thereunto.

This also is to be marked, that the kingdom of Israel, before the natiuitye
of Christ, was divided, and 2. tribes only, Judah, and Benjamin, tarried with
the house of David, the other tribes chose for themselves a king, and the
greatest part of the^ became Idolaters: but it shall not be so says Hoseas, in
the days of Jesus Christ the true king of Israel. For Judah, and Israel,
(that is) the children of promise, shall be gathered together in one faith, and
spirit, both out of all these tribes, and out of all nations, under the true
king Jesus Christ. And there shall daily more, and more christians spring out
of all nations: for the kingdom of Christ must from hence forth increase, Esa.
9.7.
and grow greater, and greater until the worlds end, whereas all earthly
empires shall decrease, fall, and be destroyed.

And Hose prophesies again in the end of the 2. chapter of the everlasting
covenant of grace between God, Hose. 2.18.
and us, in a pleasant, sweet, and comfortable similitude saying: And in that
day will I make covenants for them, with the wild beasts, and with the foul
of heaven, and with that that creeps upon the earth. And I will break the
bow, and the sword, and the battle out of the earth, and will make them to
sleep safely. And I will mary thee unto me, for ever, yea I will marry thee
unto me, in righteousness, and in judgment, and in mercy. And in compassion, I
will even marry thee unto me in faythfullnes, and thou shall know the Lord.

He speaks not here of earthly things, but of the heavenly peace of
conscience with God, through faith in Christ, which neither tyrants in the
earth, nor wicked spirits in the air can overthrow or take away. How can any
thing hurt the faithful christians, seeing they be by faith dedicated, and as
it were married unto Christ the Lord of zeboth? and are by this spiritual
marriages, made one flesh: by which union, and conjunction we receive al these
excellent promises, which by the commandment of god, the prophets, and
Evangelists make unto the Church.


Anna. How I pray you comes this to pass?


Vrba. Those things which are the husbands, The marriage of God with Israel
his people
are the wives: and so one the other side, those that are the wives, are the
husbands. Those that be married together, have all things common between them.
We upon our part, have sin, death, and damnation: but Jesus Christ, our
husband, is full of grace, life, and health. If therefore we trust in Christ,
and acknowledge him for our only husband, redeemer, and Savior, then does
that faith unite, and knit us so to Christ, that he becomes our husband, and
head, and we his members. Thus Christ takes upon him our evils, and
calamities, and gives us his graces, and felicity: thus are we made
righteous, and thus are we quickened, and saved, where before we were sinners,
dead, and damned.

These are the unsearchable riches of Gods grace given us in Jesus Christ,
Ephe. 3.10
of which Paul to the Ephesians does so gloriously bost, saying, that they
exceed all human senses, and pass the capacity of al creatures. Consider
then what he is able to do, and what kind of parson Christ is, to wit, an
infinite parson, God and man, which can not sin, die, or be dampened, because
his righteousness, life, and salvation, are invincible, everlasting, and
almighty. Seeing therefore that his innocence, life, and salvation, wrastled,
Christ righteousness, wrastled on the cross with our unrighteousness.
and fought upon the cross with our sins, death, and dampnation, which were
not able to overcome him, it must needs follow, that in him our sins, death,
and damnation are swallowed up, and taken away.

Seeing then, that we are ingrafted in christ by faith, in him, we are also, by
his mere grace, and love both delivered from all our sins, and freed from
Satan's tyranny, and have the everlasting righteousness, life, and health, of
our husband Christ given us. Thus does Christ adorn, and deck his well-beloved
spouse the Church, that she may be glorious without spot, or wrinkell, and yet
purified by the lauer of water in the word of life, (that is) by the faith of
the word of life, righteousness, and salvation. Now ye see how the Lord joins
true Israel in marriage to him self as his wife in faith, in righteousness, and
judgment.

The marriage of the elect with Christ eternal.
Here also must be marked, that this marriage shall continue for ever, as the
prophet says. Whereby it follows, that Christ must needs rise again from
death and raise his bride to life, that she might live with him for ever. This
is that everlasting kingdom of Christ, the kingdom of grace, out of which all
sin, death, and wickedness is cast, and banished: and in which mere grace,
righteousness, innocence, life, and salvation do fully dwell for ever, (as the
prophet says,) Thou shall know the Lord. But to know him is eternal life.

John. 17.3.
And in that day I will hear says the Lord, I will even hear the heavens,
Oseas. 2.21
and they shall hear the earth, and the earth shall hear thee come, and the
wine, and the oil, and they shall hear Israel; and I will sow her unto me in
the earth, and I will have mercy upon her that was not pitied, and I will say
to them which were not my people thou art my people, and they shall say, thou
art my God.

He speaks here of that most wished, and joyful time of the new testament.
For when the gospel is taught and Christ by faith receued: then will not God
suffer his Church to want, but will provide for her, and cherish her: and
though in the mean time she gloriously wrestle, and groan under the cross,
yet shall she be so provided for, that she shall not want things needful for
her. For the true Israel shall by Messiah be increased, and multiplied. The
Church shall become true Israel, that is, the seed of the Lord, that it may
increase, and continue for ever: so merciful is the Lord unto the rest of the
Jews, and Gentills. The Jews or Israelites were before without mercy. But in
the time of Christ, the Lord took compassion upon them. The Gentills were not
the people of God, but in the time of Messiah, being called through the gospel,
they are made his people which acknowledge, call upon, and honor God in true
faith by our only savior, and mediator Christ.


Anna. Have not the Jews or the Israelites according unto the flesh, son,
hope, in the scriptures, that they shall be delivered from that obstinacy, and
hardness of heart, wherein they now are? Shall no Jews but only the Gentills
hereafter be partakers of the spiritual kingdom?


Vrba. Yes, they have some hope that they shall be delivered. And I would to
God they could understand the scriptures, and would learn thereby what grace
yet ye Lord has left in store for them. For Hose says: The children of
Israel shall remayn many days without a king, Hosee. 3.4. The Jews shall
become Christians.
and without a prince, and without an offering, and without an Image, and
without an Ephod, and without Teraphim. Afterward, shall the children of
Israel convert, and seek the Lord their God, and David their king, and shall
fear the Lord, and his goodness in the latter days.

You have heard before, that Paul would not have the Jews despised. Romans 11.
For they have a promise of their conversion before the last day, when they
shall become christians, that is, when the Israelites, according to the spirit,
to wit, the elect number of the children of God among the gentiles shall be
accomplished. The^ shall the Jews have their eyes opened, and be gathered unto
the true Messiah, Jesus Christ, and embrace the gospel. Paul understood this
well out of Hose, who makes here a comfortable promise unto the Jews, that at
the length, the Lord will take compassion upon them, and call, and convert so
many amongst them, by the gospel, as appartayn to the kingdom of Christ, which
knows who be his sheep, and his sheep shall know their shepherd.

This prophecy is so plain, that it needs no long exposition. The Jews have
now these 1560. John. 10.14
years since the coming of Jesus of Nazareth (which time is those many days
which the prophet speaks of) bin dispersed abroad throughout the whole world,
and have neither king, nor prince of their own: neither yet until this day,
know they Christ, the true Messiah or king. And they are constrained, as
afflicted, and abiects, and miserable men, to live here, and there, under
strange kings, throughout the whole world. Their temple, and altar, with their
place of sacrifice are destroyed, and so continue. And they have neither
priest, nor true divine service. God grant that they may shortly be
plentifully converted. Amen.

The word of God can not lie, or deceive us. They shall seek the true God of
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, by Jesus of
Nazareth the true Messiah. And after their long error, at the last they shall
be converted, and brought into the way, and shall seek after Jesus Christ the
true king, promised in Moses, and the prophets, who was sent at the fulness of
time, born of the house of David, and is placed at the right hand of the
father, and equal with him in power. They shall also preach, and set forth with
us, his bounteous grace, and liberality, which he offers, and gives us in
the gospel.


Anna. Hoseas says, that they shall come unto David in the last day. Shall
David then rise again before the last day to be king?


Vrb. Ps. 39.3.20
No forsooth. You have heard before in Ezechiel, and in the psalm, that Christ
is called David, because he was born of David's stock, according to the flesh.
David strong of hand.
And he is in deed true David, as in this place S. Hierome notes, that is,
strong of hand. For he only by his own power, virtue, and strength, delivered
his people from the captivity of the devil: and so the Jews themselves
understood this prophecy, to be meant of Christ the seed of David, of which
thing their Thargum is witness, in which, this text is read thus. After this
shall the children of Israel be converted, and seek the glory of their God,
and be obedient to Messiah, the son of David, that is, to Christ their king.


Anna. If the matter stand so, then truly are not the Jews quite to be
condemned, and rejected, seeing God has promised that he will be so gracious
unto them, and convert so great a number of them.


Vrb. I often speak, and give warning of this, that christians do not with
such despite upbraid, despice, or spite so proudlye, and contemptuouslye at
the Jews: but let them call to mind, and wey well the warning which S. Paul
gives to the Romans

Hose does prophecy more of our resurrection by messiah, saying: To. 11.4. etc.
17.18. Hosee. 5.15. Hosee. 6.1.
In their affliction they will seek me diligently, saying: Come, and let us
return to the Lord, for he has spoiled, and he will heal us. He has wounded
us, and he will bind us up. After two days will he revive us, and in the
third day he will raise us up, and we shall live in his sight. Then shall we
have knowledge, and endeavor our selves to know the Lord. His going forth is
prepared as the morning: and he shall come unto us as the rayn, and as the
latter rayn unto the earth, which makes it fruitful.

S. Ambrose, and other holy doctor of the church, do understand this prophecy
to be meant of the resurrection of Christ, and of our rising again. For
Messyas rose again from death the third day. And when we have borne our cross in
this frayl, and mortal life, and are fully mortefyed unto the world, then will
he raise us up again in the day of redemption, and we shall ever be, and live
with him, as Paul says to the Thessalonians. For he is risen again, 1. The.
4.17.
and has appeared with the bright morning star, as the true son of
righteousness, which does illuminate us, and make us fruitful, with the ferrill
rayn of his grace, that we may bring forth the fruit of true repentance.

And Hoseas in his 13. chap, prophesyeth very plainly of Christ his victory,
how that for our sakes, and profit he has overcome sin, death, and hell,
saying: Hosee. 13.14.
I will redeem the^ from the power of the grave. I will deliver the^ from
death. O death, I will be thy death. O grave, or hell, I will be thy
destruction.

This thing Christ fulfilled, when for our sakes he died upon the cross, and
gloriously rose again the 3. day, by which he satisfied for our sins, and
overcame death, which had overthrown us, and redeemed us from the damnation of
hell. The sin with which man's nature was infected, even unto everlasting death
was deadly or present poyso^: but now Christ by his death destroys sin, and
kills death, in which of right we should have tarried for ever. Hose also in
his 14. chapter does very co^fortably prophesy of Christ, Hosee. 14.1
and his kingdom, and tells us that in him is grace, and forgeuenes of
sins, in him is mere love and faith, in him are true good works and
securitye, and in him is great good will toward us, and the bud of God in us.
For Jesus Christ is God in deed, and our defender, saying: O Israel return
unto the Lord thy God, for thou have fallen by thy iniquity. Take unto you
words, and turn to the Lord and say unto him, take away all iniquity, and
receive us graciously, so will we render the calves of our lips. Asshur shall
not save us, neither will we ride upon horses, neither will we say any more to
the work of our hands, ye are our Gods: for in thee the fatherles finds
mercy. I will hear their rebellion: I will love them freely: for my anger is
turned away from him. I will be as the dew unto Israel: he shall grow as the
lily, and fasten the roots as the trees of Libanon. His branches shall
spread, and his beuty shall be as the olyue tree, and his smell as Libanon.
They that dwell under his shadow shall return: they shall revive as the corn,
and flourish as the vine, the sent thereof shall be as the wine of Libanon.
Ephraim shall say, what have I to do any more with Idols? I have heard him,
and looked upon him, I am like a green fir tree, upon me is thy fruit found.

In the beginning of the 14. chapter, Hoseas month the Israelites to
repentance. But seeing, that true repentance is the work of the holy ghost in
us, and not of the natural man, the holy ghost, at the end, adds these
notable promises, that Israel by them might be stirred up, to believe the grace
which god promised, and so receive the power of the holy ghost, that he might
obey the commandments, and word of God.

Is not this promise full of comfort, where he says: I will heal Israells
backsliding, (that is) he will pardon all their offenses, and never be angry
with them any more for their sins? In which promise Christ, the throne of
grace, is included, and comprehended. For these determinations of God is, that
he will forgive sin to no man, yt he will love no man, and that he will receive
none unto grace by any other means, but by his dearly beloved son: who is
become our only redeemer, mediator, reco^ciler, bishop, priest, propiciatory,
or throne of grace, as Paul affirms saying, Ephe. 1.6.
We are accepted in his beloved, by whom we have redemption, through his
blood, even the forgeuenes of sins, according to his rich grace. It is
manifest therefore by ye firm foundation of the apostles doctrine, that Hoseas
here speaks of Christ, although he name him not: seeing that there is no other
reconciler, which can turn the wrath of God from us, but only Jesus Christ.
Wherefore I have often said, that where the Lord promises his grace,
redemption, forgeuenes of sins, righteousness, life, and health, that there is
Jesus Christ promised: by whose death, and precious blood, we are reconciled to
God the father, and receive forgeuenes, remission of our sins, true
righteousness, and life everlasting.

There follows in the text more promises, but expressed in figurative words.
For he takes a similitude of the dew of roses of Libano^, and of the olive
tree: which words import nothing else but the great felicity of Israel, or
christifidelians, after that they believe, and are received in the grace of God,
and obtain forgeuenes of their sins.

Is it not an exceeding great felicity, to obtain forgeuenes of our sins, to
be counted righteous, before God, and to receive the holy ghost, with all his
gifts, and by the same to be healed up in faith: Which is the receiving of that
great, precious, and heavenly earnest penny (that is) the spirit of God the
father, and the son, which does assure us, that we be the children of God, and
so his heirs, and coheyres with Jesus Christ? what I pray you, can he want
which has the Lord for his inheritance? This prophesy chefely takes place in
the time of Christ, when the gospel brought forth fruit throughout the whole
world, and christ's heavenly kingdom was builded in every place, that Christ
the king of glory, be imbrased for our God, and savior through faith, by which
we are made the children of God, and shall praise him for ever, together with
his holy angels, to whom we shall be like in ye world to come, in the
resurrection of the dead, ye glory whereof exceeds all that the hearts of
earthly creatures can conceive: but it is now hid. For we are as yet but
blessed in hope, but when our king, the prince of glory, shall come in his
majesty to judgment, then shall our felicity be made manifest. Romans 8.24.


To be short, the Lord shall be the defense, bulwark, comfort, help, solace,
and sound felicitye of Israel. But the Prophet speaks of a greater defense,
comfort, help, and benefit, the^ this world has, or can understand. The
kingdom therefore of Christ, is a kingdom of blessing, wherein we enjoy
abou^dance of all goodness. The prophets prophesied, that this deliverance,
help comfort, and kingdom should be a continual, and spiritual, and not a
te^porall kingdom, which abounds in frail, vain, and transitory wealth of
this world, as the carnal Jews dream, and imagine.


Anna. What I pray you, does Iohell the prophet prophecy of Christ?


Vrba. Ioell in his 2. chapter prophesies that the kingdom of Christ, shall
be illuminated, and beutified with the rich knowledge of God: and that it shall
receive the holy ghost, with all his gifts: and that espetially in the mount
Sion, (to wit) in the catholic church, where shall be true deliverance,
help, and redemption from sin, and death: and that afterward, there shall be
no more respect of persons, between the Jews, and Gentiles: but whosoever
shall call, upon the name of the Lord Messiah, shall be freely delivered from
all his sins. These are the words of the prophesye: Ioell. 2.27
Ye shall also know. that I am in the midst of Israel, and that I am the
Lord, your God, and none other, and my people, shall never be ashamed. And
afterward, as Peter cited this prophecy on whitsonday in his sermon at
Jerusalem, In those days, that is, in the time of Messiah. I will power out my
spirit upon all flesh. And your sons, and daughters shall prophesy, your old
men shall dream dreams, and your young men shall see visio^s: and also upon
the servants, and upon the maidens in those days will I power my spirit: and
I will show wonders, in the heavens, and in the earth, blood, and fire, and
pillars of smoke. The sun shall be turned into darkness, and the moon into blood,
before the great and terrible day of the Lord come. But who so ever shall call
upon the name of the Lord shall be saved. For in mount Sion, and in Jerusalem
shall be deliverance, as the Lord has said, and in the remnant whom the Lord
shall call.

This prophesy took place in Christ's time: for Israel had then experience in
deed, that god was with the^ in man's flesh. And the holy ghost was then much
more gloriously, royally, and abounda^tly given them, the^ before the
nativity, passion, and resurrection of Messiah. For before they were but few,
which had the spirit of prophesying: but when Jesus Christ, was ascended unto
the right hand of his father, then the holy ghost withal his gifts was
wonderfully, and richly given unto many, as the hebrew word Eschpoch declares,
which signifies to pour out. The holy ghost, was visibly poured upon
faithful Christians, when they were baptized, and the Church in all places had
his teachers who had the spirit of prophesying. And the knowledge of Christ,
is now spread abroad, and dispersed throughout the whole world.

But where the prophet speaks of Sion, and Jerusalem it must be understood,
of the church of faithful Christians, wherein Christ has his habitation, as
in his own kingdom. Who so ever will be saved from sin, death, and tyranny
of Satan, he must believe in Christ, call upon Christ, and be brought into the
church of christ: for without that Church, is neither health nor forgeuenes of
sins. Neither is there any cause, why any sinner, should respect this or ye
city, above other as ye Jews did earthly Sion, and Jerusalem, seeing Ioell
says yt, the Lord would pour out his spirit upon all flesh, not only upon
the Jews in Jerusalem, or in ye land of Canaan, but every where through the
whole world where the Gospel is believed. It follows therefore that whosoever
shall call upon the name of god shall be safe, and not the Jews only, which
served, and called upon God at Jerusalem, for then, was that time come: John.
4.23
of which Christ says in John, that the heavenly father requires true
worshippers, which worship, and call upon him in spirit, and truth. Behold, the
kingdom of Christ has not any bond, or limits prescribed to it. The gates of
heavenly Jerusalem are so broad, that every one that will may easily enter in.

There is no need now, that any should be circu^sised, that is, yt any should
come to Jerusalem, to offer up the blood of beasts. Nether is it necessary,
that he should be of the stock of Abraham, after the flesh: only let him
believe the gospel of the power, and grace of Christ, and let him call upon
Christ, in all places, and so may he have enteraunce unto the true Sion. This
is the most ready, compendious, and only way, and door unto Sion: where the
true health, and salvation, of Gods grace is found. This is the notable, and
large way of deliverance, not only of the Israelits, according to the flesh,
but of al men believing, and calling upon Christ wheresoever they be. Thus you
read in the acts when the keeper of the prison in Philippa, Acts. 16.30
asked Paul, and Silas what he should do to obtain salvation, then Paul
answered: believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved, thou, and
thine household: They command him not, to go to the Temple in Jerusalem, or
Sion. For, the Spiritual Jerusalem, was then begun to be spread abroad among
the Gentiles, throughout the whole world. And wheresoever any believe the
gospel, and call upon Christ, the same are saved, and are in the spiritual
Jerusalem (that is) in the Church of the faithful, and have one true God, one
savior, one teacher, one spirit, one faith, and one hope, with all the
saints, in the world. Ioell in his 3. chapter also amongst other things,
prophesies of the true, and spiritual Jerusalem, (to wit,) of the Church of
the faithful, saying thus. Ier. 3.16.
The Lord will be the hope of his people, and the strength of the Children of
Israel. So shall ye know that I am the Lord, your God, dwelling in Sion, my
holy mountain, then shall Jerusalem be holy, and there shall no strangers go
through her any more. And straight way follows, But Judah shall dwell for
ever, and Jerusalem from generation to generation. For I will cleanse their
blood, that I have not cleansed, and the Lord will dwell in Sion. Here we see,
that though the Church of Christ, be persecuted with many, and bloody enemies,
yet shall that continue for ever, and that those which hurt the christians, but
even lightly, shall not escape scotfree, but Christ will punish them, and him
self abide in Sion. This prophecy, to wit, that God himself will always dwell
in Sion, (that is,) the Church of Christ, is often times repeated of the
prophets, and it has more comfort, and consolation in it, then heart can
think. Saint Paul, alleged this promise as an invincible fortress, for a
comfort for himself, and for the church in all afflictions, saying. If God be
on our side, who can be against us. Romans 8.31.
As if he should say, the kingdom of Christ, the spiritual Jerusalem is
strong enough, and sufficiently well fensed it need not fear any foe, for the
Lord himself dwells in it, and who then can overcome it? What is this whole
world? what are all the devils in hell? what are all the tyrants in the earth?
what are all creatures in the world in respect of God? surely nothing but
weak worms, flies, and gnats.


Anna. Now follows Amos. What does he prophecy of Christ, and his kingdom?


Vrb. He prophesyeth of Christ in his 9. chapter, and he calls him the
Tabernacle of David. Because Christ was born of the stock of David: and he
calls him a fallen tabernacle: for he speaks according to the opinion of
the Jews. For while the Jews were now, and then captives, and dispersed, and
afflicted: and while the promise of Messiah, which was that he should come of
the stock of David, was in their opinion, protracted, and long delayed, they
greatly regarded it not, but for the most part, despised it, as though God would
not perform it. Yea, after the captivity of Babylon, when Christ his coming
drew near, and those seue^ty weeks of years, which Danyell speaks of, drew
toward their end: the famely of David fell in decay, and was clean without
power, and honor. So that the^ it was neither esteemed, nor regarded, and al
men thought that Messiah, that great king of Israel, could not rise of that
stock. For the parents of Christ, dwelled not in Bethelem in Judah, in the city
of David, or at Jerusalem in Sion: but in Nazareth, a city of Galiley: David's
rumous tabernacle restored by Christ.
so that the house of David, and Messiah, who was promised to come of David,
seemed unto the Jews a ruinous tabernacle quite fallen down.

When therefore it came to pas, that Christ was born in Bethelem, the city of
David, the tabernacle of David was restored: and that kingdom which was
promised should rise of his seed, was then perfectly erected: and that which
before seemed fallen, ruinous, and destroyed, was then at the last repaired,
and amended: and that promise which was made to David, to wit, that his seed
should reign, and rule in his throne, was then mightily fulfilled.

And the Thargum says, that Christ, and his kingdom is promised by this
tabernacle of David: and doubt ye not, but that this exposition of Ionathas is
good and true. These are his words, Akin Iath malcuta debeth David, (that is,)
I will raise up the kingdom of David's house, that is the kingdom of Christ.
But mark this, although David's kingdom before was mighty, so that he ruled
not only over the 12. tribes of Israel, but also over the Idumites, Sirians,
Moabites, Philistines, and other nations more: yet was all that his government,
but a ripe of the true David Christ Jesus, and his everlasting kingdom: nay
being compared unto Christ's kingdom, all his kingdom was but as decayed,
broken, and shaken, ruinous, and torn tabernacle. But when Christ came, then
was the horn or kingdom of Salvation erected in the house of David, and that
kingly throne of David was then given to the true king. For Christ by the
gospel, calls all the tribes of Israel, into his spiritual kingdom, and
he called the gentiles through the whole world, by his Appostles, that both the
Jews, and Gentiles might receive this sone of David, and acknowledge him for
their king, and that he be king over all men, from sea to sea,

Psalm. 72.8.
The most mighty Lord in all the world, even the Lord of all creatures. And
this is the stopping up, and repairing of the fallen, Amos. 9.11
and rent tabernacle: and this is the restoring, and strengthening of ye
things, which were decayed therein. Now hear ye words of the prophecy.

In that day will I raise up the tabernacle of David, that is fallen down, and
close up the breaches thereof, and I will raise up his ruins, and I will build
it as in the days of old that they may possess the remnant of Edom, and of
all the heathen, because my name is called upon them, says the Lord that does
this. Behold the day is come, says the Lord, that the plowman shall touch the
mower, and the treader of grapes, him that sows seed, and the mountains
shall drop sweet wine, and all the hills shall melt. And I will bring again
the captivity of my people of Israel, and they shall build the wast Cities,
and inhabit the^, and they shall plant vineyardes, and drink the wine thereof
they shall also make gardens, and eat the fruits of them. And I will plant
them, upon their land, and they shall no more be pulled up again out of their
land, which I have given them, says the Lord thy God.

Saint James alleged this prophecy, in the first counsel of the Apostles
holden at Jerusalem, to establish, and prove the Christian liberty, and the
calling of the Gentiles, how they were not to be laden with Moses law, but
that to preach the name of Christ, and believe therein both amongst the
Jews, and Gentiles is sufficient salvation, and that both Jews, and Gentiles,
as are now saved, Christian liberty.
not by the works of the law, but by the grace of our god in Christ: and that
circumsicio^, with other works of the law, are not needful unto
Justification. This is the Christian liberty, which we have through Messiah
the true David, which in the new testament, is openly preached through the
whole world: and this is that time of grace, that most acceptable time, of
which Amos prophesies. This is the day of Salvation. Afterward he prophesies
in figures, that the kingdom of Christ shall be a blessed kingdom: and he
uses such words, as if he should speak of some corporal, or earthly blessing
wherein abounds wine, fruits, corn, and stately, and costly building,
pleasant gardens, with all other things necessary for a pleasant life. A
general rule.
But you know my general, and common rule of these, and such like prophesies,
to wit, that they must be understood of Christ, and his spiritual kingdom,
that we set not our will of corporal things, as do the blinded Jews. For the
kingdom of Christ, has an other, and far greater kind of riches, pleasures,
meats, drinks, and treasures, to wit, spiritual, and eternal in Christ
Jesus, the spiritual, and eternal king of glory. But we must speak, and
think of Christ's kingdom, as Christ himself, and the Apostles, describe it
in the Gospel.

You must therefore understand by these corporal treasures, and blessings, Ephesians.
1.3.
the spiritual blessings, of which Paul speaks to the Ephesians, saying:
That God the father of our Lord Jesus Christ has blessed us with all
perpetual blessings in heavenly things in Christ. And he calls this blessing
promised in Christ, the unsearchable riches of Christ, which for the greatness,
and excellency thereof, Ephe. 3.8
cannot be searched out. But the holy Ghost in ye scriptures, uses to speak
unto us of spiritual things by outward similitudes, and things which are
manifest unto our eyes, as fathers use to form their tongues and talk, to the
capacity, and understanding of their children. For so long as we are in this
flesh, we are too too blind, and nothing capable of heavenly things. And it may
appear by the circumstances, that the prophet prophesyeth not here of earthly
things: for the Lord promyseth, that he will turn the captivity of his
people, that is, that he will deliver his people from al their enemies.

This is that glorious, and famous deliverance which the people of God, that
is, the faithful christians, have in Christ Jesus. He promises to preserve them
in their land. They had before the land of Canaan, but God will give them, and
their heirs, a far better land, wherein shall be abundance of all blessings,
and all felicity. This out of doubt, is that new land wherein dwells
righteousness, 2. Pet. 3.13 Heb. 11.
and that true country, which the patriarchs, and true godly beleuers in
Christ Jesus, sought with all diligence to inherit: to wit, the heavenly
Country.

All these things, the Lord himself promised, who in no wise, can deceive us.
It was therefore needful, that Christ should be born of the house of David,
that he should dye, that he should rise again, and that he should erect, and for
ever establish, and preserve his blessed kingdom, in which is no malediction,
but true blessedness, and plentiful abundance of all felicitye. For all
promises are established, and performed in Christ, and in him they are all
yea, and Amen. 2. Cor. 1.20.



Anna. Abdias is a very short Prophet. Does he prophecy any thing of Christ? I
think he may well be called Obaydiath, which signifies the servant of the
Lord?


Vrb. In the end of his prophecy he speaks of the kingdom of Christ, and of
the catholic church, under the name of Sion, and the house of Jacob. And he
says that it should be spread abroad throughout all the world: His words be
these. Abdy. 1.17.
But upon mount Sion shall be deliverance, and it shall be holy, and the house
of Jacob shall posses their possessions. And the house of Jacob shall be a fire,
and the house of Joseph a flame, and the house of Esau a stubble, and they
shall kindle in them, and devour them, and there shall be no remnant of the
house of Esau, for the Lord has spoken it. And they shall posses the south fide
of the mount of Esau, and the plain of the Philistians, and they shall posses
the fields of Ephraim, and the fields of Samaria. And Benjamin shall have
Gilead, And the captivity of this host of the children of Israel, which were
among the Cananites, shall posses unto Zarephath, and the captivity of
Jerusalem, which is in Sepharad, shall posses the Cities of the South. And they
that shall save, shall come up to mount Sion, to judge the mount of Esau, and
the kingdom shall be the Lords.


Anna. This prophecy is somewhat darck. What means the house of Jacob, the
house of Joseph, the house of Esau, the plain fields, the country of Ephraim,
and of Samaria, and the mountain Gilead, Zarphad, and Seraphad? Of what
possession does Abdias here speak? means he of these earthly places? as that
the Jews should conquer all these countries, and be Lords over them? what is
the true, and natural sense, and understanding of these words?


Vrb. The unbelieving Jews understand this text, and others like it, to be
meant of earthly things: in deed, and they feed her vain hope, and look for
a day, (but in vain) that all those nations, whose captives they had been, to
wit, the Assirians, Caldeans, Persians, Macedonians, Romans, Sirians,
Philistians, Egiptians, and other more, should be in subjection unto the^: and
that the people of Israel should dwell safely, and never afterward come in
captivity.

This exposition is erroneous, and false: for the lord made no such promise
with them as they dream. But he promyseth, that it should come to pass, that
Judah should be redeemed out of Babylon, that they might build up their city,
and Temple again: and that Messiah, the true prince, and captain of Israel
should come after the captivity of Babylon, as we have said before out of the
9. chap. of Danyel. And that your Iudaisme should then have an end: and that,
that earthly kingdom of Judah, should be an eternal, and heavenly kingdom:
Goim, that is, the Gentiles, should also come out of all the parts of the earth,
and be partakers with true Israel of all Gods blessings promised in Messiah.

Wherefore Abdias must be understood here, to speak of this spiritual
possession, which is that Messiah. And the Apostles, and true believers, shall
(through the gospel) bring all nations under the sweet yoke, and obedience of
the christen faith, that they may acknowledge Christ for their only, and
everlasting king, and confess the Apostles of Christ, with all faithful
Christians, converted by the Apostles, to be the Church their spiritual mother,
and glorious City of God, to whom they do readely, Amos. 9.
and willingly, yield them selves, and obey, as you have heard out of Amos.

Mount Sion the Church of God.
Now I will expound the prophesy, and then shall you more easily understand it.
Mount Sio^ you know, is the Church of Christ, it is also a holy hill, because
the Lord dwells in it: and Christ the holiest of all holy, consecrateth, and
sanctifies it by his word, and spirit to be his holy habitatio^ for ever: as
Esaias, says, when you read this hebrew word Kodesch, it signifies the
holiness. For true holiness, and righteousness, is no where but in this holy mount
the Church of Christ. Many do read Kodosch, and then it signifies holy, as we
have spoke before.

The house of Jacob, is called the scripture, the house of David the tribe of
Judah, which always tarried with the house of David. And when it is called
Judah, The house of Jacob the house of David.
and the house of Jacob, and Jerusalem, and the house of David, it is for the
most part all one. And this was a figure of the great kingdom of Christ Jesus.
And therefore, the Archangell Gabryell in Luke calls Christ's kingdom the
house of Jacob, Luke. 1.33.
and the trone of David, in which Christ shall rule for ever. For the
spiritual kingdom of Christ begun in Sion, the earthly kingdom of David, and
from thence spread it self through out the whole world, when the Apostles
according to Gods commandment, Luke. 24.47.
begun to preach the gospel of christ to all creatures, and in the name of
Christ preached repentance, and remission of sins amongst all nations,
beginning at Jerusalem, as Luke witnesses. Note also how God promised the
Patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, seed of their own flesh, and blood,
Genesis 22.18.26.4.28.14
in which, all the earth should be blessed, that is, should be freed, and
delivered, from the everlasting curse of sin and from death, and from the
bonds o Satan: and be made the children of God, who should reign together
with the same seed Christ, in the kingdom of innocency, life, and salvation,
for ever, and ever. This was a great promise, and therefore does the scripture
in every place make mention of these patriarchs. For when this seed was
promised them and when, god promised that their children should be in number as
the sand of ye sea, then was Christ the eternal king, and his eternal
kingdom promised them, and us. And therefore is this kingdom of Christ's also
called the house of Jacob, the seat or trone of David, (that is) the Church of
Christ.

The house of Joseph, in the scriptures is the very same, that the other 10.
tribes of Israel be, which fell away from the house of David, and chose unto
themselves a king of their own. This kingdom separated by it self, is called
Samaria of that head and Metrapolitaine city. It is called also Ephraim,
because of Ieroboham, which was of the tribe of Ephraim: and it is also called
Joseph, or the house of Joseph, because Joseph was the father of Ephraim.

The house of Esau, is the kingdom of the Edomits which took their beginning
of Esau, and had their dwelling in mount Seiar, The house of Joseph Samaria
Ephraim. Iosu. 4.4. The house of Esau.
ny to the great desert which lies from Jerusalem Southwardes.

The Southre^ menare they, which dwelt in the tribe of Judah. Those which dwelt
in the champion countries are Lidda, and Emaus, as Saint Heirome says. Those
v. Cities, Gaza, Ascalon, Azotus, Accaron, and Geth, which lie westward, be
the Phelistians. Ephraim, is a country of Samaria, wherein dwelt the tribe of
Ephraim, who was the son of Joseph. Benjamin is a peculier, and propper tribe
of the Jews: but it is counted in the kingdom of Judah. Saint Herome says,
that Gallaad is Arabia. The city Zarphad was between Tier, Joseph. 8. Lib.
and Sidon, whereof Josephus speaks. Siphrad was a city in the land of
Babylon.

This therefore is the meaning of the prophets, he prophesied of the captivity
of his people, and how Edome should be laid wast: but now he comfort the
Jews, least they should have been discouraged, as if therehad bin no hope for
Sio^, in the captivity of Babylon: and as if Messiah should not have come. And
he promises also unto the Jews deliverance, that they should come again
into Sion, though they yet laid wasted by the Babilonians, and Edomits. For he
says the Lord will bring deliverance, help, and redemption unto Sion, The
true deliverance of Sion.
which came so to pas in deed. For hard after that the Jews came from Babylon,
and that the city of Jerusalem, with the temple, and divine service was
restored, came Messiah our true Savior, and deliverer into Sion. The Lord had
often times before helped the mount Sion, and the City Jerusalem: but they
were not the true help, or sure salvation, which Messiah in his own person
should bring.

But when the king of Israel, borne of the tribe of David, was come into Sion,
the^ came there also with him all felicitye, salvation, and abundance of all
good things. For he began by his word, and spirit to call back, and redeem
his people, from that spiritual captivity which they suffered under Satan,
and other false teachers. He fulfilled the prophets, and obtained a true, and
everlasting deliverance unto his people by his blessed death, and glorious
resurrection. Pletho.
This was that true Pletho, that is redemption: all other deliuera^ces were but
only figures of this deliverance. Read the acts of the Apostles, and note how
salvation by the gospel begun in Sion, and thus spread forth it self
through the whole world. Peter redeemed, and converted 3000. men at on sermon:
and from that time forth, the Lord mightily increased the kingdom of Christ,
as luke witnesses, saying, Acts. 2.47.
the Lord added daily to the congregation, such as should be saved. This
salvation was showed forth, with such power of the holy spirit, that the
remnant of Israel, the Apostles, and their fellow laborers, being the true
house of Jacob, and Joseph, were a flame of fire which (like straw) burnt, and
consumed the house of Esau, (that is) the Edomits, who before were mortal
enemies to the house of Jacob, and Joseph: so that many of the Edomits were in
deed won to the gospel, and the wickedness, and hatred of their Father Esau was
by the fiery heat of charity, so consumed in them, that as concerning the
inward man, they were no more Esaits: but came unto the house of Jacob, and
Joseph, and were made of one faith, and mind with them, (to wit) spiritual
Israelites. And thus the gospel went forth into the four quarters of the
world, that Judah believing might bring many countries, and people unto the true
faith of Christ: which must be understood by the people a fore named, whom he
joins together, thereby to declare that the salvation, and kingdom of Messiah
should not only be in Sion, and earthly Jerusalem, but in all parts of the
whole world, from East to the west, and from the north, to the south. For the
people before spoken of, dwelt in all the 4. quarters of the earth, as Christ
prophecieth in Luke, of the calling of the Gentiles saying, They shall come
from the East, and from the West, and from the North, and from the South, Luke.
13.29.
and shall sit at table in the kingdom of God.


Anna. We may here also gather by this prophecye, that Christ the king of Sion,
could not abide death, seeing he was to bring such ple^teous, and so great a
ree^dption as should be spread through the whole world, and that he, which
should thus be redeemed by him, should live with him for ever in his kingdom.


Vrba. You say well.


Anna. But who are those Moschim which should come out of Sion? truly there is
but one only Moschia, or Savior Jesus Christ.


Vrba. Who be these Moschim, Cor, 15.57 Romans 12. all the chap.
The Apostles are so called for the Gospels sake which they preached, which in
deed is the word of life, and health, by which they converted many in Sion and
won them to Jesus Christ. For Paul says, that he provoked the Jews to
emulation, that he might save, or deliver some of the^ and, that he might bring
them unto Jesus Christ, their only Savior. These Moschim or redeemers, judge
the mount Esau, because the holy ghost by their preaching, and doctrine, does
before the last day reprehend all sin, and these 2. shall in the last day, sit
upon 12. thrones, and judge the 12. tribes of Israel.


Anna. What shall follow when the gospel has bin preached in all the whole
world? Mat. 19.28



Vrba. All the kingdoms of the earth together with the earth it self, shall
then fall, and all principalities shall have an end. But the Lord of Sio^, has
raised up such a help, and salvation in Sion, as should stand fast for ever:
whereas the world, withal her pomp, and royalty, with all her kingdoms, and
Monarchs shall fall, and all earthly pomp shall have an end. But the kingdom
of our king Christ Jesus shall stand for ever, and he shall be king alone, and
his kingdom shall have no end. Other kingdoms have their terms, and years
of contine vance appointed, which being expired they fall. The kingdom of
Assyria, and Babylon continued certain years, and then the Monarchy came to
the Medes, and Persians, whom king Alexander conquered, and subdued, and the
Romans subdued him, and now hold the last Monarchye, which shall be holde^ in
this world. And yet this also shall have an end. For it begins all ready
mightily to decrease, and decay, and yet was there not of all these mighty
Monarchs, any one so great, that ruled all the world: but the kingdom of our
king, which is the king of glory, shall stand for ever, and royally rule over
all: which thing Thargum witnesses in this place. For this is the Caldeans
text. And the kingdom of the Lord, shall be declared, or exalted, over the
inhabitance of the whole earth. So splende^t and glorious shall the house of
Jacob be.

But what needs many words? The Angel Gabriell shows the natural sense of
this prophesye, where he brieflly describes this our king, and his kingdom to
the blessed virgin Mary, saying. He shall be great, Luke. 1.32.
and shall be called the son of the most hie, and the Lord shall give unto him
the throne of his Father David, and he shall reign over the house of Jacob for
ever, and of his kingdom shall be none end. Here you see what Abdias meant in
the end of his prophecy, to wit, that many kings shall rule in this earth, and
their kingdom shall pass, from man to man, and that one shall destroy, and
kill another. But when the true Salvation, and redemption shall begin in Sion,
after the captivity of Babylon: then shall a perpetual, and constant kingdom
be builded with which no man shall even meddle. That kingdom is the house of
Jacob, the congregation, the true Israelites, consisting of Jews, and
Gentiles, and that house, or kingdom shall be, and remain to Messiah alone
for ever.


Anna. What says the prophet Jonas of Christ? Jonas preached the gospel to
the Niniuits.



Vrba. First he declares in his prophecy, that the gretnes of Christ's
kingdom shall be glorious, and ye both Jews, and gentills shall have
salvation in Christ and that Christ shall be the king, and Savior of the whole
world. For the Lord se^deth Jonas to Niniue, a City of the Gentills, the
chief City of Assiria, where he preached unto them repentance, and not
circumsition, or other Jewish ceremonies. We be justified without the works of
law.
Here you may gather that he which confesses his sins, and is penitent, and
flies unto Gods grace promised in Jesus Christ, is justified, and saved
without the works of the law: and you se also yt god is the God both of the
Jews and Gentiles, and that he will make the gentiles Israelits, who shall be
partakers of all his promises, with his people in Christ Jesus. Romans 3.29.
Secondly Jonas is a sign of ye death and resurrection of Christ. For ye in
first of Jonas, you may see, how God ordained a great fish to swallow up
Jonas, Jonas a figure of Christ.
and he was 3. days, and 3. nights in the belly of the fish in the Sea. This
was a sign or signification, that Christ should dye, and be 3. days in the
sepulcher: and that the 3. day he should rise again, as this figure is truly
expounded by Christ, the truth it self, in Matthew, where he says. This evil,
and adulterous generation seeks a sign, Mat. 12.39
but no sign shall be given unto it, saving the singe of Jonas the prophet.
For as Jonas was 3. days, and 3. nights, in the whales belly, so shall the
son of man be 3. days, and 3. nights in the heart of the earth.


Anna. Does Micheas prophecy any more, the^ that, which you have already
expounded out of yt 5. chapter?


Vrba. He prophecieth much more: but it would be long to expound all. Mic. 5.3.
After that Micheas, had uttered that excellent prophecy, of the Lord God of
Israel, Christ Jesus, where he says, that he should go out of Bethelem, he
straight way prophesies thus, saying. Therefore will he give them up, until
the time that she which shall bear, shall travel: then the remnant of their
brethren, shall return unto the children of Israel. And he shall stand, and
feed, in the strength of the Lord, and in the majesty, of the name of the
Lord his god, and these shall dwell still: for now shall he be magnified, unto
the ends of the world.

That is to say, the captain, and guide of Israel shall not yet come: but the
Jews for their Idolatrye, shall first be grievously punished and afflicted. For
they shall abide 70. years in their captivity of Babilo^, and afterward they
shall come into their country, and loking for that gracious time of the God of
Israel.

And although their plague, captivity, and affliction, be great, yet will the
Lord keep his promise, and will send the promised Messiah Moschell unto Israel
at the time appointed, and then at the last shall true felicity come: then
shall all things fall forth well, and prosperously: then shall the true
Israelites come together, eue^ as it came to pass, in the time of Jesus
Christ, who is the true shepherd, and cast out all false ministers, pharisees,
scribes, and Jews, and feed his sheep himself, by the great power of God.
For he taught the^ by the spirit of grace, and converted and lightened their
hearts, and cast out the evil spirits, and raised the dead to life again, and
wrought strange miracles, and wonders, in the name of his heavenly Father. So
that the sheep, can now no more be demanded, and destroyed of the Volues, but
may sit safe in his pastures, and under his protections. And this Moschel, or
Lord, and prince of Israel shall be magnified, and glorified through the
whole world, in the time of the new testament, which was fulfilled, when Christ
by his passion entered into his glory, and rose again from the dead the 3.
day, Mat. 28.6. Mat. 28.18
and sits at the right hand of God, that all power, both in heaven, and
earth, might be given him: and when the holy ghost preached him by the Gospel
in all the world: Psa. 89.24
and when his horn, (that is) his spiritual kingdom, (as you have heard in
the psalms) was in the name of god exalted, multiplied, and daily increased,
both by the Jews, and Gentiles as it is yet, manger Satha^-and the world his
wife. The world the devils wife.


And a little after Miche. prophecieth how Christians or the kingdom of Christ
should reign, and remain eue^ under the cross, in ye midst of their
enemies. By which we see that it is a spiritual kingdom, seeing it is in the
wicked world, amonest many nations, What a people the Christians are.
even as ye dew of the Lord, or as a drope of water in the grass. For the
people of the faithful, is a marvelous people. They are in the earth, but not
an earthly kingdom of the earth. Their doctrine is the holy ghost, which
comes from heaven, from God the holy ghost. They the^ sealues also are from
heaven regenerated by water, and the holy ghost, their life consists in
faith, they live in Christ, and they are wonderfully preserved under the
cross. And although in the eyes of the world, they may seem weak, yet are
they invincible, and through faith in Christ have always ye victory: yea they
break through the world, sin, death, and the bonds, and snares of Satan, and
govern their inheritance: but all these things are done spiritually, and by a
marvelous means, altogether hidden from the world. For this is wrought by the
word, and spirit, but much more worthily, and gloriously, then man can
imagine. These are the words of the prophecy. And the remnant of Jacob, shall
be amongst many people, as a dew from the Lord and as the showers upon the
grass, Mic. 5.7.
that waits not for man nor hops in the sons of Adame. And the remnant of
Jacob, shall be among the Gentiles, in the midst of many people, as the Lion
among the beasts of the forest, and as the Lions whelpe, among the flock of
sheep, who when he goes through, treads down, and teareth in pieces, and
none can deliver. Thy hand shall be lift up, upon thy adversaries, and all
their enemies, shall be cut of. Here you may see the power of the gospel, and
faithful christians. Those which believed in Christ, and tarried loking for him,
were the true remnant of Jacob. They trusted not in man, but in God: and
certainly believed, that according to his promise he would deliver them out of
all calamity, although at that time they were captives, and afflicted in the
midst of their heavy, and deadly enemies. But the Lord dwells with his
servants: he has promised in Exodus unto all faithful christian men, that he
will be an enemy unto their enemies, Exo. 23.22.
and afflict them, which afflict the faithful Christians. Wherefore there is a
certain hope, and sure victory promised here unto the remnant of Jacob, and
the kingdom of Christ, that is, to the whole Church, which in this world
dwells here among her enemies. And thus be the faithful Christians
encouraged, fortified, and embouldened, by ye promise of God, and faith in
Christ Jesus, to walk even as the Lion in the wood, which fears no other
beast, and passes them all in strength.

And this prophet magnifically describes Christ's kingdom, in his 4. chap.
much like to ye 2. of Esaias: his words be these. And the same day says the
Lord, will I gather her that halted, Mic. 4.6.
and I will gather her that is cast out, and her that I have afflicted. And I
will make her that halted a remnant, and her that was cast far of, a mighty
nation, and the Lord shall reign over them in mount Sion, from thence forth,
even for ever.

This is the time of the new testament: faithful christians are here signified
by the halt, cast out, and afflicted men: like as they are also understood in
61. of Esaias, and in every place of this prophecy, because of that cross which
they bear in this world, that so they may be made like unto Christ their king.
You must then understand by the halte, cast out, and afflicted, those which are
poor in spirit, which are troubled in conscience, which outwardly in this
world, suffer persecution, Who be the pore in spirit.
and inwardly in their conscience are terrified, and tormented with the feeling
of their sins, the fear of death, and the wrath of God. These are the poor
unto whom this good tidinges are brought, that they have a good favorable,
and most gentile king, who will not cast them of for their weakness, and
infirmity, but helps them, and salueth their sores. And although in this
world, they be weak, forsaken, banished, abiects, and most contemptible: yet
will the Lord make of them, a famous people, who shall live safely under him in
perpetual glory, in the kingdom of heaven.

Here again you hear that the kingdom of Christ is spiritual, The elect are
brought to the kingdom of heaven by fears, temptations and crosses for flesh
and blud which cannot inherit the kingdom of heaven must-by these curses be
eaten a way.
for the faithful Christians in this world, are weak, and contemptible: but
by the cross, they are brought to eternal glory. For when the whole world,
with all his pomp, and glory shall decay, then shall they be crowned with
great honor, and glory, in the everlasting kingdom of Christ. And thus the
prophets have respect unto the eternitye, and salvation ordained for us in the
kingdom of Christ.

In the end of the 7. chapter he does wonderfully, and above measure land, and
extol the great, and inestimable riches of Gods mercies, which were promised
unto us in Christ, and which were promised unto Abraham Isaac, and Jacob, of
whose stock Christ the king of glory should come, according to his humanitye.
These are the words of the prophecy. Who is a god like unto thee, that takes
away iniquity, and passes by the transgression of the remnant of his
heritage? Mic. 7.18.
He retains not his wrath for ever, because mercy pleases him, he will turn
again, and have compassion upon us, he will subdue our iniquities, and cast al
their sins in the bottom of the sea. Thou will perform thy truth to Jacob, and
mercy to Abraham, as thou have sworn unto our Fathers in old time.

This was a very necessary comfort, in the captivity of Babylon, unto the
Jews, least they should have fallen into despair, and doubt of the mercy of
God: as if the Lord would altogether have forsaken his people, and revoke his
promises of grace in Messiah, for the sins of the people. For it is as if he
should have said, go to, we shall be led into captivity: but it is the
judgment of the Lord, and his will. We have in deed, abundantly deserved all
kind of calamities, yet must we not therefore doubt of the mercy of God. For
his grace in Christ Jesus is very great, deep, and a bottomless sea, Gods
mercy is a bottomless sea.
wherein all our sins may be drowned, and swallowed up. The Lord has made a
covenant of grace with our fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, that in their
seed Messiah, all nations of the earth should be blessed, yt is, receive
forgeuenes of their sins, be delivered from death, and be saved from
everlasting damnation, and receive the free gift of innocensie, and everlasting
life.

This promise will never deceive us. For the Lord swear unto us, by a holy, and
faithful oath, that so the rather he might confirm us in faith, and make us
the less doubt, that all those things should come to pass, which he had
promised: and that for Messiah his sake, he would help us, be gracious unto
us, and deliver us from all our calamities. This grace and truth can not be
called back: but as sure as god is good, so sure is it, that we shall be
partakers of his grace, if we believe his promises.

Wherefore let us be of good chere. Our sins shall not nor cannot hinder, nor
make frustrate those things which God promised to our forefathers. He has
promised Christ, therefore out of doubt, he will send Christ for our
deliverance. And this was the hope of Israel, to wit of all faithful
Christians from the beginning of the world, even unto this day. And this in
deed is the true Gospel, which Messiah by his death, and bloudshedding
confirmed: namely, that the son of God should be made man, and borne of
Abraham's seed, yt he might give us the heavenly benediction (that is)
righteousness, life, and health, that we might by him be freed from our sins,
and delivered from death, and be raised unto everlasting life, and reign with
him for ever in everlasting glory.

And this is ye chief sum of all the prophets, The sum of ye prophets.
touching Christ, and his kingdom, according as God after the captivity of
Babylon, fulfilled them, and sent Jesus Christ, our true king, and deliverer
unto the world.


Anna. What says that comforter Nahum of Christ? For he may well be called
Nahum, (that is,) co^forter.


Vrba. He agrees with the 52. of Esaias upon the gospel, saying, Behold upon
the mountain, the feet of him that declares, and publishes peace. O Judah,
keep thy solemn feasts, perform thy vows, for the wicked shall no more pass
through thee, he is utterly cut of. That you may more easly understand, what
Nahu^ prophecieth, note first, he prophesies against ye Monarchy, or kingdom
of Assiria, especially against Niniue, the great city of Assiria, which the
prophet Jonas converted before yt. These things therefore was their comfort:
namely, ye the enemies of Judah, to wit, Sanherib, and his kingdom (who before
had proudly, and cruelly triumphed over Israel, and conceived an opinion of
them selves, that they could devour) Judah should be wasted, and destroyed as
Esaias in 36.37. comfort Jerusalem, and the king Hischia, by the commandment
of God, in his 36. Esa. 37.31.
and 37. chapter, saying. And he will cast unto it that, which shall be
escaped of the house of Judah, and that which shall remain to plant, and he
will make it to take root downward, and bear fruit upward. For out of
Jerusalem shall a remnaunt go, and they that escape out of mount Sion: the
zeal of the Lord of hosts shall do this. Therefore thus says the Lord,
concerning the king of Ashur, He shall not enter into this city, nor shoot an
arrow there, nor come before it with shield, nor cast a mount against it. By
the same way that he came, he shall return, and not come into this city,
says the Lord. For I will defend this City to save it, Hear the angel is a
figure of christ and sanherib of satan and Jerusalem of ye elected sons of god.
for mine own sake, and for my servant David's sake. Then the Angel of the
Lord went out, and smote in the camp of Asshur an hundredth, four score, and
five thousand. So when they arose early in the morning, behold, they were all
dead corpses. So Sanherib king of Asshur departed, and went away, and returned
and dwelt at Nineveh. And as he was in the temple worshipping of Nisroch his
god, Adramelech and Sharezer his sons slew him with the sword, and they
escaped into the land of Ararat: and Esarhaddon his son reigned in his stead.

You have heard the history, note therefore this also, that Nahum comfort
Gods people in this his prophesy, bydding them be of good cheer, and despair
not. For although the king Asshur will besiege, and afflict Jerusalem yet shall
there be no danger. For God will help them, they shall hear joyful tidings
to wit, that the enemy shall not hurt their city, but dye miserably, that they
may yet again celebrate their feasts, and merely rejoice in quiet peace.

Esa. 9.6.
And this was fulfilled, as you heard of late out of Esaias. But you must know,
that this temporal deliverance, in which earthly Jerusalem was delivered, was
only a figure of the true, and everlasting deliverance which we have in
Christ. The Angel of the great counsel which was sent to prostrate, 1. Coll. 2.
and destroy the enemies of the spiritual Jerusalem, that is, of the catholic
church, and to overthrow, and abolish that wicked spirit, or Sanherib, that
very Belliall with all his hellish host, and to deliver us from him: which
thing he performed, and by his own power overcame those enemies. The
evangelists, and the preachers of the new testament bring unto us this
joyful, and gracious tidings, to wit, that Satan is conquered, and we
beleuers truly delivered. These preach in all congregations perpetual, O
happy church and pore in spirit.
and everlasting peace, and salvation by Christ Jesus.

And this is the meaning of this prophecye, and of Christ, and his church, to
wit, that she should rejoice in the Lord for her deliverance, because she is
freed from Satan's assaults, from his tyranny, from sin, from death, and from
hell. O happy Judah, O happy church, O happy congregation of the faithful,
which do acknowledge, confess, and believe in thy God. Thy Sanherib, Satan
with all his host, and members, as the foolish world etc, The victory of the
church in christ.
who has so hardly handled, pinched, and oppressed thee, that thou could in
no wise rejoice, is now by Christ overcome.

Be therefore of good cheer. Thou shall hear joyful tidinges, to wit, that
thou shall not be in danger, neither that any evil shall happen to thee. The
Lord himself, shall defend, and deliver thee, and thou shall have true joy,
and peace. Wherefore yet again keep holy thy feasts, and days of joy,
celebrat thy passover in unleavened bread, (that is) in truth, and holiness, be
merry, and rejoice always in the Lord. For Beliall Satan is conquered by the
cross of Christ. Thou need not therefore hereafter fear him: he can not now
hurt thee. For he lies now prostrate in the dust, that valiant conqueror
Christ Jesus thy head, Luke. 11.22.
and husband, has entered into his palace, and overcome him and taken his
armor from him, and has triumphed over him, and has given his victory to
thee. Wherefore thou may well, and rightly celebrate these feasts of joy, in
sacrifices of praise, and thanks giving, for these benifits given unto thee by
Christ Jesus. This out of doubt is a most plentiful, and joyful consolation,
that the gospel of our eternal deliverance together with peace joy, and
security, by faith in Christ, shall remain for ever in Judah, that is in the
Church. For Satan is conquered, and overcome, (that is) all his power against
the congregation of the faithful, is taken from him, sin by yt blood of Christ
is washed away, and death is destroyed, and so all the accusations, that this
Bellial can lay against us. For sin is cleansed and taken away, and therefore it
follows, that we shall be justified, and saved in Christ Jesus for ever. And
this truly is a great and chief principal cause, why we for such our
deliverance, should celebrate our spiritual feasts of gladness in praise, and
thanks giving to God our good father incessantly for ever.


Anna. The prophets are brief in their writings, but they contain very
weighty, and worthy matters, in few words: let me hear now, what Habacuk
prophecieth. Habacuc an imbraser.



Vrba. Habacuk signifies an imbraser, who in imbrasing takes one by the
middle in his arms: even as a mother imbraseth, and kisseth her crying
children. For he comforted the heavy wreatched people at the heart that they
should not despair, because of the captivity of Babylon, as if God had quite
forsaken his people, and as if the promise of sending of Christ of the house of
David to be ye true deliverer, had been utterly frustrat. And he lovingly
imbraseth ye people, he sparing no pains that might make ye Jews steadfastly
believe that their comfort Messiah should come. And he signifies unto them that
though the Jews for their sins were banished and Jerusalem destroyed: yet all
the promises of God in the prophets made concerning our Savior, should never
thelesse be fulfilled, and that Babilonicall tirant punished. Habacuc chap 5.1.
These are his words in the 2. chapter. I will stand upon my watch, and set
me upon the tower, and will look and see, what he will say unto me, and what I
shall answer him, that rebukes me. And the Lord answered me, and said: write
the vision and make it plain upon tables that he may run that reads it. For
the vision is yet for an appointed time, but at the last it shall speak, and
notly: though it tarry, wait for it shall surely come, and shall not stay.
Behold, he that lifts up himself, his mind is not upright in him, but the
just shall live by his faith.

Abacuk was commanded to wright these words in a table, and so set them up in
public places, as in the Church or market place, that all men might read
the^, and understand them, and that every one passing by, might esely spy, and
understand it. You shall understand this prophecy thus.

King 9.9.
The vision signifies a prophecy: the prophets are called seers, because they
see the mysteries of the gospel, concerning Christ, The prophets caled seers.
a far of with their spiritual eyes. This therefore is the sense of his words.
Wright this vision in a table, that is, wright up the confirmation of all the
prophets in christ, that the faint hearted Jews when they begin to despair,
may see what they ought to ground in their hearts, think with their self of
the fulfilling of all these prophecies, which have been foretold of Christ, and
his kingdom.

Let the words be written in the table, to signify thus, though ye be now
captives, and your land destroyed yet all the prophecies, which are spoken of
Messiah, of his everlasting kingdom, and of your salvation wrought by Messiah,
and what thing else soever the prophets have written of Christ, of his
miracles, and of his ministry are sure, and must be fulfilled. What ye lord
promises in word, that he performs in deed, neither can any tirant, or
Satan himself hinder it. But that is fulfilled at the time, in which the Lord
appointed it should be fulfilled. This is ye case and state of the regenerate in
their new birth christ hides him self long from them but at last he commith
when the flesh is well tamed.
The prophet then says thus in effect. Ye shall be wearied by the tediousnes
of time, and many heavy cogitations shall rise in your hearts: so that ye shall
almost despair of his coming, being so long driven of, from day to day, even
unto the end of your captivity, and yet must ye not therefore doubt of the
word of God, but patiently weight for the Lords coming. For what the Lord
has promised, that is certain, and sure: verily it is not lawful to doubt of
the Lords words.

But if any man upon contention, will not believe this prophecye of Christ, he
destroys his own soul. But gods promise, shall be nevertheless fulfilled,
whether the contentious caitiue, believe it or no. Marry he for his
incredulity shall have no part thereof, faith is all in all. He which believes
the promise enjoys it: It is an honor to God to believe his promises and
contrarily dishonor to destroy them believe them and thou shall both honor God
and be saved thy self.
he yt does thus honor god, yt he believes, and judges him to be a true sayer,
and a merciful God, him lykwise does God honor, and accou^teth, and calls
him righteous, and pardons his offenses, and makes him partaker of all his
goodness in Christ Jesus.

For the righteous lives by faith: that is, if any man will live, and be
righteous before God, it is required of necessity, that he believe the Lords
promises. Here you see the way to come to righteousness, and salvation: to wit,
if you desire to be justified, and saved, then must you believe the gospel of
Christ: for by that must we receive righteousness, life, and salvation. There is
no other mean nor other way, by which we can be justified, and saved.

S. Paul in his epistles to the Romans Galla. and the Hebre alleges this
notable, and worthy sentence of the gospel of Christ, as a forceable, and
weighty testimony of the righteousness of faith: saying that it is not any
otherwise to be gotten, and retained but by faith.

And therefore Christ reproves Cleophas, and his co^panyon, for that they
believed not the prophets, speaking of Messiah, and so became pensive, and
doutfull. In like manner does Abacuk also. He bouldly, and vehemently
threatens the Jews captivity, and yet nevertheless, he says, that the
coming of the promised Messiah should not thereby be hindered at all, but he
should in deed deliver them according unto the prophets. And he says that
they which will be partakers of this deliverance, must lay sure hold by faith
upon the holy promises of Christ, of his passion, of his resurrection, and of
his ascension. But they which will not believe, shall not be partakers of Christ's
merits, but remain captives in their sins, and dye for ever.


Anna. What, and when did Zephane prophecy of Christ, Zephane.
and his kingdom?


Vrba. He prophesied in the 19. year of that virtuous prince Josias king of
Judah, and he says thus, in his 3. chapter. Therefore weight ye upon me says
the Lord, Zep. 3.8.
until the day that I rise up to the pray. For I am determined to gather the
nations, and I will assemble the kingdoms, to pour upon them my indignation,
even all my fearce wrath: for all the earth shall be devoured with the fire of
my ielosy.

Suerly then will I turn to the people pure language, that they may all call
upon the name of the Lord, to serve him with one consent, from beyond the
rivers of Ethiopia, the daughter of my disparsed, praying unto me, shall bring
me an offering. In that day shall not thou be ashamed, for all thy works,
wherein thou have transgressed against me. For then I will take away, out of
the midst of thee, them that rejoice of thy pride, and thou shall no more be
proud of mine holy mountain. Then I will leave in the midst of thee an
humble and poor people, and they shall trust in the name of the Lord. The
remnant of Israel shall do no iniquity, nor speak lies, neither shall a
deceitful tongue be found in their mouth. For they shall be fed, and ly down,
and none shall make them affrayd. Rejoice O daughter Sion, be ye joyful O
Israel, be glad, and rejoice withal thine heart, O daughter Jerusalem. The
Lord has taken away thy judgments, he has cast out their enemies, the king
of Israel, even the Lord is in the midst of thee, thou shall see no more
evil.

In that day shall be said to Jerusalem, fear thou not O Sion, let not thine
hands be faint. The Lord thy God in the midst of thee is mighty, he will
save: he will rejoice over thee with joy: he will quiet him self in his love
he will rejoice over thee with joy. After a certain time will I gather the
afflicted that were of thee, and them that bare the reproach for it.

Behold at that time I will bruise all that afflict thee, and I will save her
that halteth, and gather her that was cast out, and I will get them praise and
fame in all the lands of their shame. At that time will I bring you again,
and then will I gather you, for I will give you a name, and a praise, among all
people of the earth, when I turn back your captivity before your eyes, says
the Lord.

Zephany prophecieth unto the people, what punishment should come upon them,
for their sin: as Jerusalem, and Judah should be destroyed, and the people, be
lead captives out of their country. But seeing the prophets were the ministers
of Jesus Christ, For whose sake the Prophets were sent.
sent for ye true Isreal's sake, their manner is always after threatening, and
denuntiations to the people of their deserved punishment, to comfort the elect
by sweet, and plentiful promises of their true deliverer Christ, The elect
must be comforted, ergo they are sometime weak and fearful.
and of his kingdom to the end ye godly should not despair in their captivity
as though ye Lord would for ever be angry, and revoke his word of the promised
help in Messiah: Seeing I say the chief end of the prophets be ye promises of
Christ which are the true and very Gospel it self, they always preach Christ.
And so does Zachary here in the end comfort the Jews, least in the captivity
of Babylon, they should faint: and doubt of Gods word. The promises of Christ
the chief thing in all the prophets
And he prophecieth, that the Lord will gather them together, again in a
mighty hand, and that he will send Christ and spread his kingdom through the
whole world, and exalt his people unto the highest stage of honor.

This is the meaning of this prophesye. Ye must needs be captives, whether ye
will or no, but ye must not therefore despair: weight only for the Lords
leisure. For when time shall be, I will not fail you, but help you. I will
rise up, and declare my power to the whole world, says the Lord.

First of all, he stirred up the king of Babylon, to seize upon the country,
and miserably to destroy all things that were in it. But the Babilonian king
was well fauordly, and deuly punished, plunged, and destroyed again himself
of the Meades, and Persians. Thus the Jews, the people of god, were spread all
abroad, throughout ye whole world: and by those words, ye great praise honor,
and glory of gods name, was better known to all men: so that every one might
even with his hands feel, (and much rather know,) the God of the Hebrews, to
be the true, and only God, even until the time of grace it self came, when
the father by his son Jesus Christ, was every where truly known and glorified
in his Gospel.

Sweet lips.
This pure language, or those pleasant, and sweet lips, be the preachers of the
Gospel, which preach unto us mere grace in Christ, and offer us, and give us
true deliverance in Messiah. For by these, the faith of Christ, enters into
men's hearts, that they may receive the holy ghost: Gal. 3.14.
and so together with one heart publicly, and openly pray unto Christ, and
confess him to be their only Savior, and deliverer. For they all have one
doctrine, one spirit, one faith, and one hope, and they believe in their
hearts, that God has raised Christ from death, and they confess with their
mouths that God has made this Jesus, Lord of all things, and anointed him
to be his Christ, and by this faith are they saved, and Justified.

Acts. 8.27.
He prophecieth also of the greatness, and widenes of Christ his: kingdom and he
speaks of that mighty kingdom of Ethiopia, lying beyond that great, and
famous flood Nilus, to wit, that it also shall be brought to the faith of
Christ, and shall have true worshippers, who shall call upon God through
Christ, their only mediator, and shall by the Gospel be brought, as a present
to our God, into Sion his holy temple: as we read in the Acts of the Ethiopian
chamberlin of the Queen of Cande who came to Jerusalem, to worship the true
god.

Then Jerusalem, at that time, (to wit, in the time of Christ, when the gospel
shall be preached through the whole world,) thou shall not be confounded, or
ashamed any more. For thy sins through the Gospel, shall then be wiped away,
and thou shall plentifully receive the holy spirit of Messiah, that thou
may not be defiled again, with so great Idolatrye, as thou wast before.

The proud, hauty, and swelling pharisees with their acco^plises, and other of
such like stamp which are puffed up with a perswatio^ of their own holiness,
and trust to their own righteousness, fastings, sacrifice, The false churches
here described, and who be Pharisees.
circumsitio^, alms deeds, and the works of the law, and the temple: and
upon this presumption have erected a humain holiness of their own, and rejected
the divine grace of god in Christ: these pharisaicall fellows I say, can not
abide to acknowledge, the true righteousness of God, to wit Jesus Christ, as
sufficient to salvation, whom God himself has given us for our righteousness,
and who alone, and no other, is the fulfilling, and end of the Law, for
righteousness, Romans 10.4.
unto every one that believes in him. But the Lord has taken away from the
true Jerusalem, these proud puffed up Iusticiaries, which will be saved by their
own works, and look not for salvation, by the mere, and free grace of God,
that the true Christians may know the^ to be seducers, and take heed of them.

Now note that the kingdom of Christ, The Christifidelians or Christifaythfull.
is not an earthly, but a spiritual kingdom, and that the true
christifidelians, are not proudly pricked up in the pomp of worldly vanity,
neither does the world greatly regard them, and yet are they in great price,
and highly glorified with God.

He calls faithful Christians a miserable, and pore people. They are not in
deed, in multitude so many as the wicked be, and for the most part, the world
despises and rejects them in this earth, but with God they are in great
honor, and highly esteemed For by faith in Christ, they are the children, and
heirs of god, whose names are written in the heavens. The time is not yet
come, wherein their glory does appear: now is the time of trouble with them,
even until the last day, that they may by afflictions, crosses, and
persecutions be made like their Master Christ. But at the last day, Christ's
kingdom shall be manifested in glory. In the mean time, they hold them selves
contented with Gods word, they trust him, who has promised them true, and
everlasting life, with sure, parfite, and eternal treasures. He calls
faithful Christians, as other prophets do, relics, or remnantes: for the
smalest company of people come unto Christ, even as the Lord says, Mat. 22.14
many are called, but few are chosen. He calls the^ in Luke, his little
flock, in whom the Lord is so well pleased, that he will give them his
kingdom.

And where he says, that the chosen remnant, will work no wickedness, it is
spoken of the Godliness, innocence, integrity, and simplicity of the
faithful: because they are honest, and simple dealers. For they have that true
faith, which works by love.

And although, they are not altogether perfect, neither can in all points
fulfill the law, Though the faithful offend yet their offenses are pardoned.
but have many infirmities, so that they must daily pray: our Father which art
in heaven, forgive us our trespasses: and so have their sins also by faith,
daily forgeuen them: yet by faith, they are in the gracious kingdom of Christ
wherein is perpetual remission of sins, and a perpetual exercise unto
repentance, and Godliness, and the remnant of their sins, which lurk in
their flesh, are not imputed unto them to condemnation, for Christ the king of
glory his sake, on whom they believe, and continually call.

It follows therefore, that the remnant of Israel, the faithful Christians,
shall live safely, and without danger. For the kingdom of Christ is a
kingdom of true peace, and security, in which they are so loving as by faith
in their hearts, they lay hands on Christ their Lord, who has overcome the
world, and Satan: and both can, and will daily help all that be his, in all
their calamities, and dangers.

What then need they fear? have they not I pray you in him, (and of him,) a
true shepherd, comforter, savior, deliverer, and a full horn of all happiness.

Now he exhorts Sion, to wit, the faithful Christians, to be heartily merry.
And he prophecieth very co^fortably, of the salvation, which Christians have in
Christ, the Lord of Sion: to wit, that Christ saves christians from
punishment, and turns their enemies from them, but whereas he delivers the
earthly Jerusalem, and drives away their enemies, it is a figure: but where as
he delivers the spiritual Jerusalem, to wit, the faithful, and takes away
the punishment, which their sins had deserved, and satisfies for their
transgretion, and overcomes the world, death, and the devil, and turns away
those enemies from us, this is that true deliverance, and help, which
Sophonias, and other Prophets spiritually had respect unto.

What can be spoken more comfortably, A great comfort.
then that God himself is the king of Israel, and is ready with us to help
us. For God himself, is made man, and dwells with us. We are his tabernacle,
his possession, his darling, and his people, and he him self will always
continue with us: there is therefore no cause, why we should fear any evil or
danger. Who can hurt them which have God the Father: and which have God the son
with them, as their king, reconciler, deliverer, and the life it self, and
which have God the holy ghost, as their comforter, and earnest penny of their
everlasting inheritance, and salvation? For the prophet uses that great name
Iehoua, that is God himself: ( 3. persons, and one God.)

Is not this kingdom of Christ, a glorious, and princely kingdom? are not
these treasures (which our faithful God promises by his Prophets in Christ)
great, unspeakable, and infinite treasures? He which has the Lord God, the
Father, the son, Our summum bonum.
and the holy Ghost, that summum bonum, that only alone, and ye chief goodness
to be his defender, what can he desire more?

Wherefore, Sophoni says furthermore, at that time that is in the day of
salvation, when Christ shall come, then shall a joyful Message be brought unto
Jerusalem the church, as the Angel said unto the sheapherds, Luke 2.10.
be not afraid, let not thy handfast hold go, that is despair not, believe
still that God will help thee: all things shall hap well, your case shall be
better, the^ you can either desire, or wish: seeing that thy only God, and
mighty Savior is in the midst of thee. And that thou may the better look
for help, and all happiness of him, be assured of this, that thou art so derely
beloved unto him that he does rejoice in thee, even as the tender father does
in his dearly beloved son, when he loves, and cherishes him.

The prophet cannot sufficiently declare ye joy which god takes in the
congregation of the faithful Christians, saying: he will save thee: and he will
rejoice over thee in great gladness, that is, he will pour forth all his
faythfulnes upon thee, and his fatherly good will toward thee, that at the
last the world may be compelled to see and palpably feel (but especially the
children of God shall know) that ye Lord loves thee abundantly as Paul
writes to Titus.

Titus. 3 6.
And he promises Christian liberty, because he will take away these toys, to
wit the life, and tradition of men: we know the pharasies taught the law
naughtely, and went a horing with the doctrine of men teaching, that men should
do the works of the law, to the end that they should be justified, and have
remission of sins, by the works of the law, and not by the mere grace of
God, and Christ alone.

And he promises the Church such a help, as by which, her enemies should be
destroyed, but she continue still. Wherefore, though heretics, lie, and deceive
never so much, though tyrants murder, and kill never so many, though false
Christians berwaye, and betray all they can, and though Satan rage, and rore
never so much: Yet in the end, shall the Church, the kingdom of Christ,
overcome, and the enemies of christ yea, death the last enemy of Christ, and
Christians, shall be destroyed. The Church as Sophony says, has a mighty
Savior, Mat. 16.18
which can mightily save, and deliver her. And as Math. says a rock, whereon
it is builded, against, which even the gates of hell can not prevail. And
although gods children are a miserable, afflicted, and calamitous poor people,
though they be crippells, and outcasts, and though they be outwardly in body
persecuted, and inwardly in the soul shaken, and tormented with the terrors of
death, and with fear of damnation: yet will Messiah help them, and aid them,
and bring them, to honor, and gather them into his kingdom: as Luke says in
the 11. chapter, where Christ calls the halt, and lame to his supper.

Is it not a marvelous great honor, and glory, that he pronounces of the
Jews, that salvation shall come of them: and of the Church, that it is the
City of God, which the Lord himself has founded, and builded, and that there
is no other true joy, peace, safety, righteousness, fortitude, riches, honor,
life, or salvation, but only that, which is in the catholic Church, in the
time of grace, and Messiah?

I will bring you, that is, I will by the Gospel call you on all sides, from
amongst ye wicked, unto Christ's kingdom, and I will gather the disparsed
children of the Lord, and I will exault them to honor, when I shall have turned
away their captivity. Man speaks not these things, but God himself, whose
will or purpose, no man can let, or hinder. He says that he will gather his
servant, into the kingdom of Christ and therein make them honorable in
deed. The vildest shame that can be.
For as it is the vildest shame, and greatest ignominy, that can be, to be a
sinner, and bondslaue of Satan: so on the other side, it is the greatest
glory, laud, and honor, that can be, to be delivered from sin, and Satan, and
to be made the child of God by the gospel.

To conclude, in that we be made by grace, children by adoption, so that now we
may live, and reign with Christ for ever: who can either speak, or think of
this glorious glory, gloriously enough?


Anna. Has Aggeus any promises of Christ?


Vrba. Yea forsooth. For he prophesied after the captivity of Babylon, and he
moves the people, earnestly to build up the temple agayine, that the worship
of God might be restored. For, this second temple should become very honorable,
because the true God of Israel himself should personally come into it as
Mallachy prophecieth. And afterward he promises Christ, and says that the
time of his coming draws nigh: his words be these. Thus says the Lord of
hosts, Agge. 2.7.
yet a little while, and I will shake the heaven, and the earth, and the sea,
and the dry land, and I will move all nations, and the desire of all nations
shall come, and I will fill this house with glory, says the Lord of hosts.
The glory of this last house, shall be greater then the first, says the Lord
of hosts, and in this place, will I give peace, says the Lord of hosts.

This prophecy forespeaketh of the former coming of Messiah into the world,
how he should come to Jerusalem into the temple, and how there should be a
great change, both in heaven, and earth. For the Lord has sent the Angel of
the great counsel, even his son in the flesh: that by Christ, he might
summarily restore all things, in heaven and earth: wherefore it was of
necessity to follow, that Iudaisme should be abrogated, and that the Jews
should revolt, and that the gentiles, should be made the people of God: and
that great wonders should be don, at which even ye Angels should marvel for
ever.

And he says that Christ is the hope of all nations. For all men are borne
sinners, and sin daily, but he which sins, We are by nature sinners.
does the work of the devil, and is the servant of Satan, and child of
death. From the which kingdom of sin, death, and damnation, no man can
otherwise be delivered, Our state without Christ.
but by Messiah, who only was sent of God, to take away the works of the
devil, and destroy the kingdom of Satan, to wit, sin, and death, and to give
us true life. And therefore he is the hope of the whole world: neither is there
any comfort, help, forgeuenes of sins, righteousness, peace, safety, joy,
life, or health, any where else to be found, but only in Christ.

Therefore all the elect, even from the beginning, have very carefully, and
earnestly desired Christ, because no man either could, or ought, to help the
wretched world or deliver it, from everlasting misery, and calamity, and bring
it to everlasting joy, but only Jesus Christ. When Christ, in the last week of
Daniel, came into this world then came our true preacher, our only reconciler,
and mediator, who made, and confirmed the everlasting covenant, of peace,
between God, and us. And the prophet repeateth this word, The Lord named five
times.
the Lord of Zebooth. 5. times, that the faint hearted Jews, ready to fall to
desperation, should in no wise be discouraged, but finish the work which they
had begun, and steadfastly weight for the coming of Messiah: seeing the
almighty God, who is the truth it self, had so often, and so earnestly, made
promise of him. And so we have Christ, the comfort of all nations, of all
sinners, and the true peace of the whole world, and that in the temple, (that
is,) in the Church of Christ, who him self, is our peace, as Paul says.
Ephe. 2.24.
And seeing Christ is the comfort of all nations, it follows, that both they
ought to believe, and trust in him, and that his kingdom also should be among
all nations, both Jews, and gentiles through the whole world.

And therefore shall they hope to have, and also surely receive of him
forgeuenes of their sins, righteousness, reconciliation with God, true peace,
securitye, everlasting joy, true life, and eternal salvation. For if the sin
of the Gentiles should not be taken away, then in deed should neither death,
nor Satan's tyranny, and kingdom be taken away, neither could they have any
comfort or hope.

But seeing that Christ, is their hope and comfort, These gentiles are we for
the Jews called all the world gentiles, except themselves.
and that no vain comfort, (for God himself speaks it) then surely must all
heuines, calamities, and misery be taken away from the gentiles also, which is
nothing else but sin, evil conscience, death, and everlasting damnation. And
therefore, must they also of necessity rise from death, and live for ever with
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of heaven. You see, by the Epistle
of S. Peter, that the prophets have respect unto the health of the souls, and
therefore their whole endeavor is to preach true comfort: seeing the prophecy of
Christ, who brought us from sin to righteousness, and innocencye, and from death
to life everlasting, as we find he does in deed. Moreover, he has deserved
for us the comforter, the holy Ghost, by whom he helps, and comfort us
under the cross, until we be called out of this frail, and miserable life,
and receive ye promised crown of glory, which in deed we posses in this
earth, though it be but yet in faith, and hope.


Anna. You always have said, that Zachary is a prophet, full of notable
comforts. Let us therefore here what comfort he gives us, by his promises.


Vrba. He is in deed, a comfortable prophet, Zachary.
and the days wherein he lived, required the same. For he prophesied, when the
Jews were even at the point of returning out of the captivity of Babylon, and
when the City with the temple, should be builded again. The people at that
time, were yet faint hearted, fearful, and doubted that they should not be
safe from their enemies: and therefore he comfort them, and sets Christ
before their eyes, as a loving Savior, that so they might be of good cheer,
saying: that Christ should spedely come and help his servants, and spread his
kingdom through the whole world: and therefore was it needful, that Judah, and
Jerusalem should be builded again, to the end, they might receive their own
king. And the prophet speaks, as follows. Jerusalem shall be inhabited
without the walls: for the multitude of men, Zach. 3.4.
and cattle therein. For I (says the Lord) will be unto her, a wall of fire
round about, and will be the glory in the midest of her. Here he prophesies of
the spiritual Jerusalem, to wit, the church of Christ for the earthly
Jerusalem had her bounds, and walls, but the heavenly Jerusalem, shall be so
wide, and large, that it can not be compassed with any walls, yea it shall be
as wide as ye world. For it is the kingdom of Christ, which by little, and
little, without ceasing, shall be increased, unto the last day: and the true
children of Abraham are (as the God of Abraham promised,) even as the sand of
the sea, and the star in the firmament: and the promised blessing shall come
upon all nations through the whole world, that Christ may be known and
worshipped, every where, for the true Lord and god.

By the cattle, understand weakelinges, and such as are ignorant in the
knowledge of the scriptures, and faith: these are led, and fed, in the pastures
of Christ, by those which are more strong, and firm in faith.

A fire wall.
But he is a merueilous wall, which is all fiery: truly the Church of Christ in
this place, has so great, and comfortable a promise of Gods help, as you
shall scarsely find in any other place of the scriptures

For I will be says the Lord, a wall of fire round about her, the Church of
Christ.

You see that he speaks here, of the heavenly City wherein God himself,
will be the watchman, keeper, wall, and defe^der, if their God be thus present
with us, we have just cause to rejoice in the Lord: seeing, that wheresoever
God himself watches, defends, and fights for us, there are we safe, out
of danger of this world, and Satan, and need not fear them. To be brief,
the great humilititie of Christ Jesus, in that he vouchsafed to become man,
being the true son of God: and the sending of the holy ghost, the true teacher
of wholesome doctrine, in the Church of God, whereby the church is still houlden,
and preserved in truth, that it may steadfastly cleave to God: where as
otherwise, the whole world is blinded with errors, carried away with lies, and
miserably deceaueth it self: these I say do sufficiently declare, how
gloriously the Lord has shewted himself in this spiritual Jerusalem. Satan,
the world, and heretics, do not cease, nor sleep: but bend themselves, in
all they may, yea, they strive with hand, and foot, to destroy Christ his
church. But although, according to the flesh, it be weak, yet nevertheless it
stands, and gets the victory over all her enemies. So plentifully, does
the Lord declare his glory, in his spiritual city the Church.

In the words following, he sets forth the help, and comfort, which we
shall have in Christ his kingdom saying: He which touches you, Zach. 2.8.
touches the apple of mine eye.

How I pray you could a most loving, and tender father speak more lovingly, or
sweetly, even to his darling, and derely beloved son? if the Lord look
carefully to us, Where is the apple of Gods eye.
as men use to look to the apple of their eyes, then surely can no hurt happen
unto us, in the kingdom of Christ, neither need we to fear any danger. A
comfort for the weak which are tempted Zach. 2.10.


A little after, Zachary comfort such Christians as are under the cross,
and by reason of the weakness of the flesh, are in fear, and trouble, even as
the Jews were at that time saying: Rejoice, and be glad, O daughter Sion: for
I come, and will dwell in the midst of thee says the Lord: and many nations,
shall be joined to the Lord, in that day, and shall be my people, and I will
dwell in the midst of thee, and thou shall know the Lord of hosts has sent
me unto the. And the Lord shall inherit Judah, his portion in the holy land, and
shall choose Jerusalem again. Let all flesh be still before the Lord, for he is
raised up out of his holy place.

That is to say, O Sion, although thou be afflicted here in the earth, yet be
of good chere, because thou shall co^tinew. For I my self do come, and abide
with thee. Was not this fulfilled, when god became man? and at this day,
wheresoever Gods word is received, there does God dwell, and that is the true
Sion, as Christ says in John: He that loves me, keeps my commandments,
John. 14.23
and my Father will love him, and we will come unto him, and will dwell with
him.

Surely this is the spiritual kingdom, wherein god dwells with us by the
gospel, and by faith which the holy ghost works in us: as S. Paul says to
the Ephe. Christ dwells in our hearts by faith. And Esaias tells us where God
dwells, to wit, in faithful and humble hearts, Esaias. 66.2
indewed with the fear of God, and not in earthly temples mad with hands.

Zachary also tells us, that the kingdom of Christ shall be large, and wide,
and that the gentiles, shall become Christifidelians: and so by faith in Christ
shall also become the people of God.

All these things are daily fulfilled, that we by experience may know these
things to be most true, which they have prophesied: and thy are sure, by great
miracles, but no man does earnestly, and diligently consider them, as in deed
they ought to do, if they will be accounted true Christians.

But how shall Judah be the inheritance of God? and Jerusalem chose^ again?
Eue^ then when the Lord shall cast down the partitio^ wall betwixt the Jews,
and Gentiles, and by the Gospel make of two peoples one holy nation, then I
say, shall the true Judah, that is, the congregation of such as confess the
Lord, be made Gods inheritance, one Jerusalem, and one elected city: but this
shall not be only in Canaan, but through all the whole world. Afterward
follows an exhortation unto the whole world, where he says, let all flesh be
still, or silent. Here we may learn, Let all flesh be still.
that he speaks in this place of spiritual Judah, and Jerusalem which
appertains to the whole world: otherwise he would have commanded only the
Jews alone to have bin still, and silent, if the Jews alone, and none else,
should have bin his kingdom.

This therefore is the sense: God will dwell both with the Jews, and Gentiles, in
all places through the whole world. Wherefore let all the earth be silent, let
every man suffer the Lord to work, raygn, and have power in him: he will do
all things well, and wisely: let no man be wise in his own conceit, let no
man brag of his own holiness, let no man attribute any thing unto himfelfe, but
let all men humble, and submit themselves. For here is now wrought a strange
thing: when the Lord comes, and rules men, when God comes, let all flesh
be silent, and acknowledge themselves condemned sinners, and then will the Lord
deliver them: for how shall sin, or miserye have any abiding there where the
Lord is king, and gouerner.

In the 3. Chapter, he says. Zacha. 3.8.
Here now O Iehosua, the hye priest, thou and thy fellows, that sit before
thee: for they are monsterous persons. But behold, I will bring forth the
branche, my servant: for lo the stone that I have laid before Iehosua, upon
one stone shall be 7. eyes, behold I will cut out the grauing thereof says the
Lord of hosts, and I will take away the iniquity of this land, in one day: in
that day, says the Lord of hosts, shall ye call every man his neighbor,
under the vine, and under the fig tree.

The prophet speaks plainly here of Christ, of his passion, and of his
kingdom. First the Lord talks with the hye priest Iehosua, who was a figure
of christ and therefore has the same name, and is called Iehosua, or Jesus, as
the 70. interpretors call him here in their translation. And whereas he speaks
only to the hye priest, and his friends, he teaches us that the promises of
Christ, and his kingdom shall not profit all men, and that every man shall not
be partaker thereof. And the cause is only, for that all do not believe in
Christ: for that promise belongs only to the faithful Christians, who
together with Iehosua, has all one faith, and spirit, and he calls them,
monsterous persons, A great marvel.
or great marueils. For there is no more marvelous thing in the world, then a
godly man, who will leave all things in this earth, and follow Christ looking
for forgeuenes of sins, and everlasting life, only by him, and by nothing
else.

The world wondereth, that faithful Christians can so despise (even in this
life) this world with all the plesures thereof, for Christ's sake: who himself
despised all the honor of this world, and utterly rejected ye pomp and vain
glory thereof. And for this cause, Christians in this world, are counted fools.
Behold, I pray you how, even Cleophas, and his companion at the first were
offended at Christ, although they were his disciples. 1. Cor. 1.32
Therefore says Paul very well. Christ is unto the Jews a stumbling block,
and unto the Gretians, or Getiles foolishnes.

Furthermore God does promise his servant Christ. Christ in the scriptures, is
often called the servant of god, for his service, which here he has don in
the earth (to wit,) because he taught his flock, because he suffered for
sinners, and because he was obedient unto his Father, in fulfilling his
commandment, even to death, the death of the cross: of which his work, and
service wrought for us, all these other servants of god have prophesied, but
none of them all either ought, or could do, and execute that office.

But he calls Christ Zemah, that is, a branch, because he does daily
flourish, and grow hier, and hier, as a young spire, or young branch. Christ
is also adorned in their places, by the same name, as in the 13. of Hieri. the
4. of Esaias, etc. For like as the bud grows until it comes unto the
natural length, and greatness: even so does Christ increase, and grow by the
gospel, in the hearts of men. And look how much longer and further he is
known, and preached, so much more plainly is he known, and preached: The
kingdom of Christ waxes daily greater, and greater, and grows, even unto
the last day, yt all the elect may be borne, called, and justified.


Anna. Can the Jews be persuaded, that this text does prophecye of Christ?


Vrba. Ionatha^ in the Caldy bible, does so expound this prophecy, and by this
servant Zemath, he understands Christ. For thus is his translation in this
place. Lo, I bring my servant Messiah, and he shall be made manifest.


Anna. But what are those 7. eyes in one stone?


Vrba. The prophet had spoken many things before of that earthly temple, and
building: but because they were all but figures of Christ, and his kingdom,
the propheteth immediatlye mix in the prophecies of that spiritual prophecy,
of the lively temple of the Church.

The stone is Christ, as Esaias, and Peter calls it, 1. Pet. 2.6. Math. 21.
Psalm. 117.
saying, behold I put in Sion, a chief corner stone, elect, and precious. But
the 7. eyes does betoken the knowledge of Christ, because he is seen, and
known by the eyes of faith, to be the only iustifier, and savior of all
beleuers. The kingdom of Christ, does stand in the faith, and knowledge of
Christ, as the prophets, and Apostles with one consent do teach. Whose eyes be
clear.
He which knows Christ has bright eyes, for he is illuminated to see the
secrets of God, which are hidden unto the world, and over which the Angels in
heaven rejoice. Many do hear the gospel only with their ears, but they
neither know, nor see Christ with the eyes of their heart. They only
acknowledge him, which do believe in him. And therefore there are not ears in
the stone: but eyes only are graven therein.

They therefore which embrace the gospel by the holy ghost, that they may
believe in Christ, and know the unsearchable riches of his grace, and bring
others to ye knowledge thereof, they are the 7. eyes. The Apostles truly were
sharp, and quick eyes, and also the godly which do yet to this day, learn to
know Christ.

Wherefore, where Christ, by the Gospel, is not yet known, there is black, and
thick darkness, and never one eye at all. And the eyes are only in the stone.
The faithful Christians be only they which see, and know all things, as
namely what God is, what Christ is, what the spirit is, and what life,
righteousness, sin, hell, and Angels be: and what the devil, the world, the life
present, and the life to come be. Of all which the wise of the world can not so
well judge, as the blind man does of colors.

And where he says, that he will cut out the grauing of that stone, that is
meant, of the passion of Christ: because that by his cross, and passion, he
was as it were pollished, and graven, that he might be the corner stone of the
church: he was also formed, and pollished to his glory, even as a stone is cut,
and pollished for the building, as he himself also says unto these. 2. his
disciples. Was it not meet, that Christ should suffer, and so enter into his
glory? Luke 24.46 Hebre. 2.10
And Paul says: That he by afflictions, should confecrate the prince of their
salvation.

The instruments for this ingrauing, were they which martired Christ, as ye
soldier which perced the holy side of Christ, and other tormenters. John. 19.

And this stone with his afflictions, is the foundation of this new, and
heavenly temple, upon whom, all the other building does safely stand. All
faithful Christians, are builded upon this stone, and have all their
righteousness, strength, and life by Christ's passion. And he himself now
plainly declares, what profit the grauing, or pollishing of this stone, or
the passion of Christ, Zaca. 3.9.
brings unto mankind: Saying, I will take away the iniquity of this land,
in one day.

As if he should say, in the leuiticall priesthood were diverse sacrifices for
sin, but those sacrifices could not in deed take away any sin, by their blood,
they wear only figures betokening Messiah to come, he only alone both can, and
must by his ingrauing, and death in one day, (that is to say,) on good friday,
offer up such a sacrifice, and make such a reconciliation for sin, as may be
sufficient for all the sins, which have been committed from the beginning of the
world, and shall be unto the end thereof.

Hereby also you may gather his resurrection. For if he must be cut of, (that
is) put to death, and so take away all sin, and consequently abolish death it
self, it must needs, that he must rise again, and raise us up also at the
last day. And seeing that the truth it self, (yt is) Messiah should not long
after the captivity of Babylon, come to beutify, and set up, a true, and
omnisufficient priesthood, and kingdom: therefore that tipicall priesthood of
the Jews, and the earthly kingdom, had their end, as soon as that true, and
perpetual kingdom of Christ came, in which in one day, because of the
sacrifice that then was offered, is perpetual remission of sins, and
reconciliation with God. But seeing sin is purged, for which there was
perpetual enmity betwixt god, and man, seeing the wrath of God is pacified, and
seeing we are reconciled unto our God, by the death of Messiah: we have true
peace, and tranquillity in Christ his kingdom, and need not fear our enemies,
sin, death, and satan. For Christ has vanquished them al for us which thing
the prophet means by the words following. In that day, Zac. 3.10.
(that is in the day of Messiah) shall ye call every man his neighbor, under
the vine, and under the figg tree. In these similitudes, and figurative words
he speaks of the spiritual peace of God, which is in the Church. And in his
6. chap. he says. Behold, Zac. 9.12.
the man, whose name is Zemath, (that is the branch) he shall grow up out of
his place, and he shall build the temple of the Lord, and he shall bear the
glory, and shall sit and rule upon his throne, and he shall be a priest upon
his throne, and the counsel of peace shall be between them both.

In this prophecy is Christ, with his double kingdom promised, to wit, his
kingdom, and priesthode: 2. Crowns set upon the priests head
for ye prophet was made to set 2. crowns upon the head of the hye priest.
Whereby it was signified, that Messiah should be the true king, and priest in
Israel. And it is meet that these two kingdoms, the priesthood, and princely
power, should both be found in one person Christ. For he puts the crown
only upon the head of him, that was then the hye priest, but he did not put it
upon the leuitical magistrate Zerubabell. And again he calls Messiah Zemath,
and he shows the cause, why he calls him so. For this king, and priest,
shall have so great felicity, and prosperity in his kingdom, Esa. 53.10.
that all things shall have prosperous success, and shall fall forth happily,
and according to his mind, and desire. And Esaias says. The will of the Lord,
shall prosper in the hand of Messiah. As a fine bow, or branch, at the first
is small, and tender, but after grows hyer, and hyer, and does shute forth,
until at the last, it become a fair, pleasant, and hye tree, full of fair,
and bewtifull branches, so that it delights the eyes of all men, and is also
very pleasant, by reason of the shadow thereof: even so Christ although he was
in the beginning but small and unknown, (when his name was yet but only
known in Judea, in the land of Israel, and was despised of ye most part of
men,) yet did he grow so mightily, and shute up so hy, and spread so broad yt
he fills the whole world, with his bows, and branches, as Esaias says, Esaias.
9.3.
that he may confirm, and strengthen it etc.

And Daniell says, that the stone which is taken out of the mountain without
hands, becomes a great mountain, and fills the whole earth. This Zemah,
is not tied unto a certain place, where he should be king as David was unto
Jerusalem: but he is king in all the world, and raygneth in all places, by the
gospel and ye holy ghost. Satan with this his world goes about to hinder,
destroy, cut down, and pluck up blossoms, while it be young, that it grow
not: but the more they hinder it, the better it prospers, and grows, and
builds Gods temple, 1. Pet. 2.5.
(that is,) the church of Christ, with precious, and lively stones, of which
Peter speaks. But this is a far greater temple, then that which. Iehoschua,
and Zerubabell builded at Jerusalem. It is a temple which no Nebucadnezer, no
Antiochus, nor Tytus can burn, and destroy. This temple is the spiritual
temple of the Lord, builded by the gospel through the whole world, and
consecrated by the holy spirit. This temple shall stand for ever, against the
gates of hell. The priest of this temple is an everlasting priest, and
therefore the temple must needs be everlasting. This priest has those true
ornaments, praises, and honor, which were signified by Arons ornaments. And
this priest reigns still in his throne, and has both the functions, to wit,
the everlasting priesthood, and the eternal kingdom. But note that he says
upon his seat, by which words, he signifies yt this priest, is the true
priest, and king: and that all other tipicall priests, and kings were but
servants, or ministers to this priest, and that they in there ministry, did
but only service unto this true king, and priest. But Christ the true blossom
of David, is the true king, and priest, and the true, and natural Lord of the
throne, and eternal kingdom. He only shall bear rule in this throne. This
eternal throne is only his seat, and shall so continue for ever. Neither
shall there ever hereafter be any contention, or dissentio^, between these two
kingdoms (to wit) the spiritual priesthood, and kingdom: as before times
there has been between the external priesthood, and terrestrial kingdom.
For these two functions are both now turned to one person, which both can make
intercession for us, in heaven, before the father, as our priest, and defend,
and govern us here in earth, as an omnipotent king. Jonathan the Caldean
confirms this exposition, who has translated this text of Zach. thus in the
caldean tongue. Behold for here is the man, whose name is Moschiah, which shall
come to be made manifest, famous, and glorious. And he himself shall build the
temple of the Lord. But you may not hear understand an earthly temple. For
like as the priest is spiriturall, so does he build unto ye Lord a spiritual
temple, wherein he himself alone does execute the function, both of the
priest, and king.

Zach in his 8. chap. prophecieth, that the kingdom of Christ shall be very
ample, and glorious in all the world. And that not the Jews alone should reap
profit by Messiah, but that the Gentiles also shall be joined unto the Jews,
and acknowledge, Zach. 8.20.
and call upon Christ their Lord: his words be these. Thus says the Lord of
hosts, that there shall yet come people, and inhabitants of great cities, and
they that dwell in one city, shall go unto an other, saying: up let us go, and
pray before the Lord, and seek the Lord of hosts. I will go also, yea great
people, and mighty nations shall come to seek the Lord of hosts in Jerusalem,
and to pray before the Lord. Thus says the Lord of hosts: in those days
shall ten men take hold out of all languages of the nations, even take hold
of the skirt of him that is a Jew, and say, we will go with you: for we have
heard, that God is with you.

Although this prophecy was also fulfilled in earthly Jerusalem, after the
captivity of Babylon, in so much that the city became famous, and the name of
the temple (which was more gloriously, and princely builded then the other
hefore) became so notable in all places, that many famous men came thither to
worship, and many of the Jews which had been disparsed, drew by this occasion
many nations to their religion, and brought them with them to worship God at
Jerusalem: Yet this was more gloriously fulfilled in ye Apostles days, at what
time many gentiles followed one Apostle, that they might know the Lord Christ,
and believe in him, and so come unto the spiritual Jerusalem, the church of
God, the true, and lively temple, to honor the living God.

Zac. 11.12.
And in his 11. chap. Zache. prophesyeth how Christ should be sold for 30.
pence, saying: And I said unto the^, if you think it good, give me my wages,
and if no, leave of: so they wayed for my wages, 30. pieces of silver. And the
Lord said unto me, cast it unto the potter, a goodly price that I was valued at
of them. And I took the 30. pieces of silver, and cast them to the potter in
the house of the Lord.

This prophecy was fulfilled, when the traitor Judas sold Christ for 30. Mat.
26.15 Mat. 27.7.
pence, with which the Jews bought the potters field. This was the potter to
whom 30. pence were given: for Judas Iscarioth cast them down in the temple,
and then they carried them to the potter. For the high priest said, it is not
lawful to put them into the treasury, because it is the price of blood. And so,
when they had cast their heads together, they bought with them the potters
field, to be a burying place for strangers.

The prophet prophesyeth in his 12. chap. how true Israel, Zac. 12.1
the kingdom of Christ, should be under the cross here in this earth for the
profession of the gospel, saying: The burden of the word of the Lord upon
Israel says the Lord, which spread the heavens, and laid the foundation of
the earth, and formed the spirit of man within him. Behold, I will make
Jerusalem a cup of poison unto all the people round about, and also with Judah,
I will be in the seege against Jerusalem. And in that day will I make Jerusalem
an heavy stone for all people: all that lift it up shall be torn, though all
the people of the earth be gathered together against it.

In that day, says the Lord, I will smite every horse with stonishment, and
his ryder with madness, and I will open my eyes upon the house of Judah, and will
smite every horse of the people with blindness. And the princes of Judah shall
say in their hearts, the inhabitants of Jerusalem shall be my strength in the
Lord of hosts their God. In that day will I make the princes of Judah like
coals of fire among the wood, and like a firebra^d in the sheaf, and they
shall devour all the people round about, on the right hand, and on the left:
and Jerusalem shall be inhabited again in her own place even in Jerusalem. The
Lord also, shall preserve the tents of Judah, as aforetime. Therefore the glory
of the house of David shall not boast, nor the glory of the inhabitants of
Jerusalem against Judah.

In that day shall the Lord defend the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and he that is
feeble among them, in that day shall be as David, and the house of David shall
be as Gods house, and as the angel of the Lord before them. And in that day
will I seek to destroy all the nations that come against Jerusalem. And I will
pour upon the house of David, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the
spirit of grace, and of compassion. And they shall look upon me whom they
have pierced, and they shall lament for him, as one that mourns for his only
son, and be sorry for him, as one is sorry for his first borne.

This prophecy is a consolation for the apostles, and christians, that they
despair not, and fly, and fall away in persecution. He reproved the corporal
Israel, the Jews, before in the 11. chap. somewhat sharply, where he said: I
will not feed you. But unto some, that is, Zach. 11.9.
unto the remnant, he made promise to keep them, saying: The poor of the sheep
that waited upon me, Zach. 11.11.
knew that it was the word of the Lord.

These remnantes and afflicted sheep, are now that true Israel, unto whom the
Lords promises of comfort are available. These are they, which in this world
are tossed with many, and strange afflictions, and yet are not overcome, or
overwhelmed of evil: but are delivered from all their misery, and are made even
stronger in persecution under the cross. That burden, does signify a
prophecy, which prophecieth of some grievous, burdenous, What the burden does
signify.
and heavy thing, as is the cross, and persecution coming upon the godly:
which to the weak flesh, is burdensome, and heavy. And the prophet to the end
he may better, and liuelyer comfort them, sendes his auditors unto the first
article of faith, to wit, creation, giving unto the Lord, a notable and worthy
title, to the end, the godly may in their trouble be strengthened in faith, and
think thus, truly the Lord, in whose hands the hole world is, who is most
mighty in all necessity, and a deliverer out of all dangers, is with us.

He has created all things, and he feeds, and cherishes all things.
Wherefore no creature, can do any more unto us, then that omnipote^t Lord, and
creator of all things, gives them leave.

Zach. 12.2.
He calls Jerusalem, the cup of poison. Meaning the Apostles, and primative
church, gathered together by the Apostles. These were of no account, so yt the
Jews, and Gentiles, which were their enemies, thought that they might easily
destroy such a pore company, and thought that they were scarce, What the cup
of poison is.
an evening draught.

But what does the Lord? he puts that small company into a cup, which makes
these their persecutors stumble: and when they think, that they can drink
the^ up at one draught, they are made so mad, and foolish, that they stumble,
and fall like drunken men. This thing was fulfilled, when the Jews, and
gentiles set themselves so ragingly against the Apostles, and their scollers,
that at the last they perished, and fell: whereof some, were converted by the
gospel, and of enemies became friends, fell to their salvation: but some fell
utterly to their everlasting destruction, for their hatred, and malice,
conceived against the godly.

Zacha. 12.3
By and by after, He calls Jerusalem, the heavy stone unto all people. For
Jerusalem, that is, the Apostles, and faithful Christians, That stone is the
gospellers.
shall not be suppressed: but their persecutors, shall fall, from me in grace,
that they also may become faithful Christians, and some in indignation, that
they may remain obdurat, and work their own destruction. For how soever they
afflict, or destroy the Church of God, casting it wittingly and willingly aside
as an unprofitable stone out of this world, yet can they not take that clean
away: but kill, and destroy themselves, while they go about to remove that
stone.

And these words following, do witness that he speaks of affliction. All the
people of the earth, Zacha. 12.3
shall be gathered together against it. Christ himself told this to his
disciples before, in John saying: The world hates you, John. 15.19
if they have persecuted me, they will persecute you also. John. 16.2. John.
16.20


And again. Whosoever kills you, will think that he does God service: You
shall weep, and lament, and the world shall rejoice, and in the world, ye
shall have affliction. But the Lord has promised your deliverance saying. Be
of good cheer, I have overcome the world. In me ye shall have peace, and yoer
sorrow shall be turned into joy. And in John it is said. Ioh. 10.28.
My sheep shall never perish, neither shall any pluck them out of my hand, my
Father which gave the^ me, is greater then all, and none is able to take them
out of my fathers hands. I and my Father are one.

The same thing also does Zach. here promise. Zacha. 12.4
In that day says the Lord, I will smite every horse with stunishme^t that is,
all strength, and power, which rises against the Church of Christ, shall be
able to do nothing, but they shall be confounded. The world is still in armor
against the Church, and they do all they can against it, and they have bent all
their force against it, but all in vain. For where are now Nero, and Domitian,
those mighty, and outrageous enemies of the Church, and those gentiles, which
have persecuted so many of ye godly, you see, that, which Zac. says here, is,
and shall be daly fulfilled. And note, that the prophet here describes the
kingdom of Christ, to be a kingdom, which lies in this world under the
cross. It is not therefore a worldly kingdom: for then should it in the world
be magnified, and have great wealth, pomp, power, and majesty, and defend it
self with strength of arm, and armor, as others do, but the lord only is her
fortitude, Zach. 12.4.
tower, fortress, and bulwarks, as it follows. I will open (or set) my eyes
upon Jerusalem: (that is) I will keep the Apostles, and faithful Christians,
which shall be after them: even as a father, still in my sight will I keep
them, and I will be with them in all necessities. I will blind, and fatuate
their persecutors, so that all their counsels against ye godly shall be quite
frustrate. The world shall show all her suttilty, and power against the poor
church of Christ: but faithful Christians, shall not take up to the^ corporal
armor against their enemies: but the Apostles, and doctors, shall comfort
themselves, and others under the cross, with the word of God, and sweet
promises of Christ Jesus our Lord. For Christ sake, they shall both willingly,
and cherefully bear the cross, and they shall be content with it. For the
comforter, Zacha. 12. all the chap.
the holy ghost, does conserve, and comfort them by his word. And this
consolation of the Princes of Judah, (that is) of the doctors, and teachers,
shall be of such effect, that even like unto fire, they shall with the wood
burn, and devour many, which be about them, and they shall convert many
persecutors, and gentiles, and bring them to the kingdom of Christ. And
although all nations set themselves against Jerusalem: yet shall that heavenly
Jerusalem the Church still abide where it is, and become most populous: but he
says in his place, to signify thereby, yt he speaks, not of ye corporal
Jerusalem, but of the Church, which shall abide there where it is, or
wheresoever else it shall be in the whole world.


Anna. Wherefore does Zach. make a difference, in the words following, betwixt
Judah, and the house of David, and Jerusalem, seeing they are the only people
of God, (to wit,) faithful Christians?


Vrba. He will there by teach us, that there is no difference, nor respect of
persons, in the church: but that all the faithful Christians, Gala. 3.28.
are all one in Christ Jesus as Paul teaches to the Gala. In former times, the
house of David, had a great prerogative, for it was more famous, and noble,
then the city of Sion. For it was the kings stock, and tribe, and the
citizens of Jerusalem were then more noble, then the rest of the Jews: but it
shall now be otherwise. For all shall be alike. For there shall be one
spiritual freedom, or redemption, wherein, none shall more arrogantly, or
gloriously vaunt him self, then an other, but all shall rejoice in the Lord.
In the words following, where he speaks of David, God promises that the
faithful Christians shall be strong in the Lord: of which strength, Paul
speaks to the Phil. I am able to do all things, Phil. 4.13.
through the help of Christ, which strengthens me. All the godly receive the
spirit of Christ by faith, and have Christ in their hearts by faith. Wherefore,
whosoever travail under the cross, and are weak in yt appertains to the
flesh: yet in the Lord are they very strong. They have all one faith, one
spirit, and one Lord: and therefore shall they all overcome sin, death, and
the world. Which thing otherwise, the whole world, with all his might, power,
and pollecye, could not ever bring to pass. Nevertheless, this their force,
or fortitude is not of themselves, but of God. Therefore says Zach. Zac. 12.8.
In that day, (to wit, the day of this tribulation,) shall the Lord defend the
inhabitants of Jerusalem. that is, all the godly, or those that faithfully
trust in the Lord. Wherefore though some of them fall, and offend, yet shall
they be as David. Who according to his outward parson, Who be David's.
was not of any great, or portly stature: but the strength of God, was
wonderfully seen in him, so that he could, and did overcome, that huge,
monsterous, and dreadful Goliath.

It is a common thing even for the righteous, and most godly in this life to
sin, stumble, offend, and fall. But they have in this place the promise of the
lord, that he will not by and by reject them for their fall, and sin. For though
they be weak yet shall they always be most victorious David's. A worthy stout
deed.
Surely it is to be required that there be greatstrength, and power in him, who
being but one man alone, fights against the whole world, satan, sin, and
death, and so that he gets the victory. And surely thus to do, is a
Dauidlike deed.

Moreover, these strong men, and house of David, Zac. 12.8.
shall be as the house of God, and as the angel of the Lord before, or amongst
them. That is, all these invincible christians, such as David was, who do
obtayn victory even in this weakness of flesh, they shall be in the church the
true house of the Lord, and like unto the angels of the Lord, that is, in whom
the Lord dwells. And they which do instruct others to true godliness, shall
be so glorified, that they shall be most famous amongst christians, even like
the angels, and messengers of Christ. Now he promises moreover, that it shall
come to pas, that the enemies of Christ, and the church, shall be quite
destroyed. For he which hurts the godly, hurts the apple of Gods eye. Zac.
2.8.


Here you hear again, what kind of kingdom Christ's kingdom is: to wit, a
kingdom which is forced to stand upon watch, and be ready in armure. For, it
has against it most mighty enemies: it must therefore be of some power, and
strength, nay of very great strength if it shall conquer so great enemies. But
that can not be by any corporal, or worldly means, but spiritually by faith,
as the prophets words do plainly import, and signify. But such, and so great
is the obstinate blindness of the Jews, that they dream that the prophets
speak of an earthly kingdom of Christ here in this world, which shall use
corporal armor, and strength, and have worldly pomp, and glory.

Although therefore the godly be sore troubled with very many enemies, yet for
all that, shall they be, and remain without danger, the patience of the godly.
but through patience, so that they suffer, and take al things well, and
patiently, which come upon them.

The prophet also describes the spiritual weapons wherewithal Christ armeth,
and defends the godly in his kingdom, saying, I will pour, says he, my
spirit of grace, Zach. 10.10
and prayer, or compassion, upon the house of David. That is, I will give my
holy spirit unto my servants, that it may lighten them with ye true knowledge
of the gospel, that they may know that I am merciful unto them for Christ his
sake, the armure of the godly.
and that I do pardon their offenses, whereupon they may have quiet, and
appeased consciences.

Besides this, when the storms of afflictions do come upon them, and sore,
and vehemently vex their flesh, then shall the holy ghost teach them rightly to
pray in the name of Jesus Christ, who himself does pray for the godly with
sighs which are not able to be expressed. And these are the weapons
wherewithal the congregation of the godly do overcome when the cross is at
hand, and tribulation hangs over their heads. The godly straight way fly to
the name of the Lord, and call upon it, and receive help in due time: but our
Jews, and Anabaptists (when persecution comes) resist their enemies with
force, and arms, and yet notwithstanding, will they boast themselves to be the
people of God, which is the cause that they are always so miserably confounded.

Now the prophet tells what it was that purchased the holy ghost for the
godly: to wit, the passion, and death of Christ, They shall see, Zac. 12.10.
and look upon me (says the Lord) whom they have pierced.

Here God speaks in his own person, who before spoke in the prophets person,
and confesses that he is pierced, that is, nailed upon the cross, and wounded.
And it is here proved by this text, that Christ is true God, and man, who
should suffer, and die for us. And it follows also, that Christ, with all
Christifidelians, shall rise again. For he had promised before, that he would
give his holy spirit unto the godly, that he would destroy the enemies of the
godly, and that he would preserve, and defend the godly. If, therefore, he must
keep, and preserve his elect for ever, and duly punish all the gentiles, and
their enemies, it must needs follow that he must rise from death, and raise up
his servants, God and man one person.
and govern the^ for ever. And here observe this, yt God, and man, Christ, is
one person: for he says, they shall look upon me whom they have pierced. Christ
was pierced according to his manhood, and not according to his Godhed alone. He
speaks plainly of one person alone. He says me, and deuideth not his Godhead
from his manhood. For he him self, the everlasting son of God, was pierced,
but according to his humanity, not according to his great, and infinite deity,
as Paul says to Cor. The Jews crucified the Lord of glory. That is, 1. Cor.
2.8.
the God of Zeboth. Psalm. 25.

And thus, Christ by the gospel is preached, and seen how he was crucified. But
at the last day shall his true humain nature, wherein he was crucified, and
wounded, in deed be seen. He kept the print of his wounds in his body after his
resurrection. Moreover, Christ's friends, and Christifidelians, mourned, and
lamented for Christ. But especially, and properly the godly mourn when by faith
they apprehend, and deeply ponder the passion, and death of Christ, when they
imitate Christ in suffering, and when every one bears his own cross, and
suffers with Christ, How Christ is lamented for.
to the mortification of the old man.

And Zachery in chap. 13. prophesyeth of the fruits, of Christ's passion, of
the forgeuenes of sins, of the holy ghost, of baptism in the house of David,
and of the church which should be: saying, in that day there shall be a
fountayn opened to the house of David: and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem,
Zac. 13.1
for sin, and for uncleanness.

Messiah shall make this fountain to flow in his kingdom, Ioh. 7.37
of which John speaks, If any man thirst, let him come to me and drink. He
that believes in me, as the scripture says, out of his belly shall flow
rivers of water of life. He spoke this of the spirit which true believers in
him should receive. This holy ghost is plentifully poured upon us in baptism,
by the washing of the new birth. Tit. 3.5
And this holy fountain stands always open in the house of David, that all men
may come, and drink. For the church receaueth both Jews, and gentiles into the
kingdom of Christ, by baptism, which purges away the uncleanness, and filth
of original sin, by which the holy nature of man in his first nativity, is
stained, and spotted, even as with poison.

It takes away also that sin, which we our selves commit, that is to say, al
sins are by baptism pardoned in the house of David, the new Jerusalem, the
kingdom of Christ. There were in the old testament many washings, and
cleansings, but none could be delivered by them from, sin: but this spring of
the new testament, hallowed by the precious blood of Jesus Christ, flows
always full of mere grace: and this welspring cleanses, and drowneth all the
filthynes, and vncleanlynes of all sins. And all these things rise, and come
to us upon this, that Christ was crucified, and pierced: blod and water flowed
out of his side, John. 19.34
and out of doubt it was for the washing away of all our sins.

And Zachary prophesyeth again a little after, of the passion of Jesus Christ
our true shepherd saying: Arise O sword upon my shepherd, and the man, that
is, my felsaith the Lord of hosts, smite the shepherd, Zach. 13.7
and the sheep shall be scattered, and I will turn my hand upon the little ones.
And in all the land, says the Lord, two parts therein shall be cut of, and
dye, but the third part shall be left therein. And I will bring that third part
through the fire, and will fine them, as the silver is fined, and will try them
as gold is tried. They shall call on my name, and I will hear them. I will say
it is my people, and they shall say, the Lord is my God.

This sword at that time, was the power of darcknes. For, Pilate, and the hard
hearted Jews, bare the sword, and authority at that time in the earth, but
notwithstanding, they could not have hurt Christ, unless God had suffered
them, and ordained the same before, as Christ says, Pilat had his power from
above. This shepherd is Christ, the sheep are the Apostles, which fled when
Christ was taken, and suffered. Christ himself alleges this prophecy in
Mat. 26. Mat. 26.56


Furthermore, the Lord calls Christ the man, that is, his fellow. For Christ
is the true, and only shepherd in the church, and is also with the father for
ever, Ioh. 1.18
as John says, The son is in the bosom of his father. Mark also, how the
kingdom of this world has no beauty, but appears oftentimes miserable, and
therefore can it in no wise be earthly, and of this world. The shepherd him
self was smitten by the earthly magistrates, and his sheep were terrified, and
disparsed: and the disciples them selves were offended in Christ, as you have
heard in Cleophas, and his companion. They supposed that he would have smitten
others, and that he would have delivered the Jews from all tyranny of the
gentiles, neither did they yet see, how that they should in Messiah have a
spiritual deliverance from their sins, and death. But those little ones, unto
who^ Christ turned him self, are the afflicted, and poor christians, which
are dispysed in this world, but dearly beloved children before God.


Anna. What are these three parts, of which ye third part only remains?


Vrb. Two parts is that great multitude of the ungodly in the earth, which are
offended in Christ, of which, one part cannot abide the cross, and tribulation,
but turns back unto the world, and stiffly cleaves unto it. Another part
suffers them selves to be seduced from the way of truth by false teachers, to
perish in their errors. Ye that be tempted and terrified fear not for you are
this third part which is brought through the fire. Your temptations are the
fire that fineth away the dros of the fleshly affections.
But the third part are the true godly, which steadfastly stand to the gospel,
and become like unto gold finely tried, and purifyed in the fire of temptation,
and persecution.

These are those true Christians, who only do obtain salvation, because they
abide in the true faith even unto the end, and suffer not them selves by any
means to be called or drawn from Christ. Their faith is tried in tribulation,
by which they call upon the name of god, in spirit, and truth without hipocrisy,
and always glorify God, and are hard of God. God acknowledges them for his
dearly beloved sons, and they also confess god to be their most loving father.
Seeing then that the Prophets have so often in time past prophesied that
Christ, and his people should be persecuted, and afflicted, but yet that all
crosses, and tribulation, should not either let, or hinder Christ nor his
church to attain unto the joy promised: those two disciples ought not to have
been so offended at the death of Christ.

And he prophesyeth again of Christ's kingdom: saying, The Lord shall be king
over all the earth. And here again, Zac., 14.9
Christ is called true God. In that day shall there be one God, and his name
shall be one. This is spoken of the unity of the Christian faith. Before that
time there were many feigned Gods, but in the day of Messiah, shall the only
true God alone be called upon in Christ. And who so will not come up of all the
families of the earth, Zac. 14.17.
unto Jerusalem, to worship the king, the Lord of hosts, even upon them shall
come no rain: That is, those which come not into the church of Christ, and do
not with one consent, together with all the faithful, adore Christ, and
acknowledge him to be the king of glory, they shall be a cursed people, upon
whom no rain of the spiritual benediction shall fall. For they which are not
in ye church of Christ, have neither the word of god, nor faith, nor mercy, nor
the holy ghost, nor forgeuenes of sins: but shall die in their sins.
Because without this spiritual Jerusalem, there is no forgeuenes of sins.

And least any man should think, that the kingdom of Christ, should be an
earthly kingdom throughout all the world, Zach. says, that in the heavenly
Jerusalem, of the Church of Christ, the feast of tabernacle shall always be
celebrated. This is the pilgrimage of the godly, that in this world, they shall
be as pilgrims, and strangers, which look for their true, eternal, and heavenly
country: for the Jews dwelt not always in their tabernacles, but only
tarried there 8. days, and then returned home.

Seeing that I have now troubled you long enough, and you have taken very great
pains, in explicating the prophets, I pray you tell me but even briefly, what
Malachy prophecieth of Christ, and his kingdom?


Vrba. He prophecieth in his first chap. of the holy and sacred kingdom of
Christ, through the world, saying, that it should come to pass, that christ
should be acknowledged, to be the true Lord and God of the whole earth: and
that he should be honored openly as God, and that all men should confess him
to be God: by which he signifies, that at the last, the kingdom of grace,
should not only be amongst the Jews, but even through the whole world, among
the gentiles also. Whereby it is understood, that the earthly king of the
Jews, and their figurative priesthood, should cease in the time of Messiah:
and that another kingdom, and priesthood, which is spirtuall, should begin.
And therefore Cleophas and his companion, looked in vain for an earthly
deliverance, at the hands of Messiah. For Mala. prophecieth of the spiritual
kingdom, and pristhood, Mal. 1.10.
saying. I will not accept an offering at your hand: for from the rising of the
sun, unto the going down of the same, my name is great among the Gentiles,
and in every place, incense shall be offered unto my name, and a pure offering:
for my name is great among the heathen, says the Lord of hosts.

This last prophet Mala. (whom Ionathas the Caldean, and Rabiaben suppose to
be, Esra.) prophecieth, that ye name of God shall be great: to wit, that the
name of God, should be glorified, preached, and praised through the whole
world. This was fulfilled, when the gospel was published, and waxed famous,
and brought forth fruit, through ye whole world. For by the gospel Messiah
was made known unto the world, and the grace of God which he promised, and
gave us in Christ, was openly published unto all creatures.

The Lord in times past, was known in Judah by his word, and his name was great
in Israel: but when the apostles, and their successors, had spread abroad the
Gospel of Gods grace through the whole world: Psa. 113.3
then was song a new song, as it is in the Psalm. The Lords name is praised,
from the rising of the son, unto the going down of the same.

What the preaching of the gospel is
For where so ever the gospel is apostolically, and sincerely taught, that is,
where so ever repentance, and forgeuenes of sins is preached, in the name of
Jesus Christ: there men become humble, and contrite of heart, and confess their
sins, and acknowledge, and praise the rich mercy of god in Christ. And straight
way after, they seek to mortify their old man, The fruit of the Apostolical
doctrine Romans 12.1.
and by faith give their bodies up unto God, a lively sacrifice, holy, and
acceptable unto god: which is their reasonable serving of god. And they bear
tribulation patiently for Gods sake, and give thanks to God for all his
blessings in Christ: they pray, and call upon the Lord, in all necessity,
and they live a pure, and innocent life. All these, to wit, a true faith in
Christ, a denying of our selves, a consecrating of us totally to the will of
God, the preaching of the gospel, the incomprehensible riches of Christ, which
he gives us, a professing, and praising of Jesus Christ, a prayer proceeding
of faith, and a thanks giving for the great treasure of the gospel, and for
the precious death, and victorious resurrection of Christ Jesus, and for all
the other benefits of the Lord, which we have through Christ Jesus: these I
say, are the true sacrifices by which the name of Christ, is made glorious, and
famous amongst the gentiles, and thus does Thargu^, also understand this
prophecye saying: My name is sanctified through you, and your prayer, is as a
pure sacrifice before me.

If therefore it was convenient, and must needs be, that Christ should be made
glorious among the gentiles, through the whole world, and that he shall be the
true Lord of all nations, whom they should worship, and acknowledge, to be the
true, and only Lord, who should deliver them from all trouble, (and so his
kingdom be in every place:) it was needful, that he should rise again from
the dead, and that he should provide for all nations, and that he should
illuminate them by his gospel, that he should receive them into his kingdom
and that he should defend, cherish, and preserve them for ever. Mala. in his 3.
chap. joins the Master, and his servant together, to wit, christian John
Baptist, and christ: saying, that John should come before Christ and make ready
the way, and that Christ should straightway follow after John his forerunner:
these be his words. Behold I will send my messenger, Mat. 3.1.
and he shall prepare the way before me, and the Lord whom ye seek shall
speedely come to his temple, even the messenger of the covenant whom ye
desire. Behold, he shall come says the Lord of hosts, but who may abide the
day of his coming: and who shall endure when he appears. For he is like a
purging fire, and like fullers soap: and he shall sit down to try, and fine
the silver: he shall even fine the sons of Leui, and purify them, as gould,
and silver, that they may bring offerings unto the Lord, in righteousness, then
shall the offering of Judah, and Jerusalem be acceptable unto the Lord as in
old time, and in the years a fore. Mat. 11.10.


This prophecy does Christ himself expound in Matthew: where he calls John
Baptist, the Messenger, and he wonderfully sets him out, and makes him more
worthy then all the prophets. Why John Baptist was so hyly praised,
For he showed not Christ a far of, but pointed at him with his finger
saying: Behold the lamb of God, which takes away the sins of the world.
John baptized with the baptism of repentance in the desert, and preached unto
the people, him which should come after, to wit, Christ Jesus, that they might
believe in him. John's words be these: Repent for the kingdom of God or heaven
is at hand. Mat. 3.2.
I baptize you with water to amendeme^t of life, but he that comes after me
is greater the^ I, whose shows I am not worthy to bear. He will baptize you
with the holy ghost, and with fire: which has his fan in his hand, and will
make clean his flower, and gather his wheat into his garner, but will burn
up the chafe, with unquenchable fire.

Note that Malla. says, that the Lord (that is) Christ shall come to his
temple Pithom, that is, by and by unlooked for. For when the people came on
heaps, and flocked unto John where he preached, suddenly Christ came, and
commanded John to baptize him, and began to teach, and went in to the temple
at Jerusalem. And Mala. Mal. 3.1.
says whom seek you? for Christ was in the law, and prophets promised, as
the true deliverer of Israel. And therefore all the godly, gredely, and
earnestly looked for him. And Malla. calls Christ the Angel of the new
testament, or covenant. For he was sent from the father, as the messenger of
the great message, that he might be the mediator of the new testament, or of
the eternal covenant of grace, which was made, and confirmed by the precious
blood, and death of Christ. If this messenger had not ben sent, and stricken
this covenant of grace, betwixt God the Father and us, and if he had not
reconciled us, and in his own person wiped away our sins, we had tarried, and
perished, in our sins, in death, and in the wrath of God for ever.

But seeing that Christ is come, and has made and confirmed this testament, or
league, by so great a price, we which believe in Christ, have in Christ the
messenger of the new testament, remission of our sins, everlasting
righteousness, reconciliation with God, and life, and salvation. He which first
promised this testament, is god the truth it self he which confirmed, and
approved it, is the natural son of god, our savior, in whom the father is
well pleased: and he which teaches us to understand this covenant, and to
believe it, (who also witnesses unto us, that the covenant is firm, and
stable, and that we are the children of God,) is the holy Ghost. Lo these are
the unsearchable riches of Christ, which Paul every where did magnifically
preach. And therefore very well says the prophet Escher athem hephezim, that
is, whom do you so carefully, greedely, and heartily desires. You know that
Hopheptz in ye holy tongue does signify, to be ravished with a singular, and
hearty desire of any thing, as when we covet to have any thing, with a hearty
desire, with a good will, and with a great and arde^t appetite. And thus did
the true Israelites, with all their hearts, earnestly look for the coming of
Christ, because they knew, that we through Christ's merits only, should
obtain all true felicitye with God, that is, full deliverance from all evils.
They did know that, which the new testament every where now witnesses, to wit,
ye man of himself without the spirit, power, and hope of Messiah could not
perform ye law, and that none could obtain righteousness, and salvation, but
by Christ. And therefore did they look for him, as the only reconciler, and
Savior, and as that true, and only fulfiller of all things, or as Paul
calls him, the fulfilling of the law, in whom they put all their confidence.
For wheresoever they desire, and preach the mercy, and deliverance of God,
there also do they desire, and glorify Christ, who only, and no other in the
whole world, has obtained, and deserved the mercy of God, and has brought us
true, and everlasting rede^tion. Wherefore Augustine that worthy Doctor of the
Church, says well, and godly after this sort: For his sake the testament is in
him, the testament is decided, he is the mediator of the testament, he sealed
the testament, he is surety for the testament, he is witness of the testament,
he is the inheritance of the testament, and he is fellow heir of the testament.


Anna. Whether of Christ's coming is it that Mala. says shall be so heavy,
and intolerable?


Vrba. He speaks of his former coming, which although unto the true
Israelites, and children of promise, it was a singular comfort, and great joy,
and a thing especially desired, (as appears in Simeon, and Anna, the
prophets, and such like,) yet was it a horrible, and fearful coming, to the
rest of the unbelieving Jews, Pharisees, Saduces, and other deceauers, of which
they did reap no joy, or profit, but were offended in Christ, and could not
stand in his sight. Their doctrine had daiseled the eyes of the common sort,
with a great show of holiness: whereas it was nothing else in deed, but horrible
errors, hipocrisye, and deceit. When Christ Jesus came, (the true light of the
world, and the truth it self, by whom came grace, and truth) then all the
errors, simulations, and deceites, crafts, and hypocrisy of those deceivers,
were manifested, and they themselves destroyed. For he did openly reprove, and
accuse their life and doctrine, and he so confounded them, which before were
accounted most godly, and learned in Iudaisme, that it might easily appear
unto all men, that they were blind guids of the blind, and mere deceivers.

For when the gospel was mightily, and truly taught then could no error, or
hypocrisy, lurk, and be unknown: so forceable was the truth. Nay the word is
so pure, and perfect, that even the most holy are accused by it: because no man
in this flesh, is free from sin. To be short, for this cause was Christ borne,
and for this cause came he into ye world, John 18.31
that he should bear witness unto the truth, and he that is of truth hears his
voice.

Satan had sown, and spread marvelous hipocrisies, and lies in the world,
but Christ came, that he might confound the lies, and teach the truth. And
therefore his first coming of Christ (because his doctrine was vnpleasa^t, and
sharp unto the world, and because he accused them of sin) was as a fire, which
purifieth, and cleanses all filth, and dross from gould, and makes a strange
seperatio^ of the evil from the good. When he teaches, he does separate
gould, and silver, that is, good men from copper, and dross, to wit, from the
hard hearted hipocrites. For he which was of God, heard the word of Christ, and
left all his errors, and cast all his hypocrisy a side, and became a
faithful, or true Israelite in whom was no deceit. By the cross also they
were purged, and tried, as gould in the fire. This tribulation, and cross,
always waits upon the word, and always comes with the word.

And Christ, at his first coming, has true Levites, and spiritual priests,
Pe. 2.9.10.
which are consecrated, and cleansed. These are, as Peter says, all that truly
believe in christ, but especially, Romans 3.28. Gala. 3.11.
they which faithfully teach the word, by which ye righteousness of faith, does
enter into the heart. These offer true acceptable sacrifices in righteousness, yt
is, in the faith of Christ, which before God is true righteousness. They offer
themselves in faith, they offer an humble, and penitent heart, and they offer
praises, and thankesgeuing, for their redemption in Christ. The holy doctors,
as often as they do convert the people by the gospel, from darcknes of
unbelief, unto the light: and from the power of Satan, unto God, so often do
they offer an acceptable sacrifice unto the Lord. Paul when he converted the
gentiles, unto the faith of Christ, calls that his labor, the oblation of the
Gentiles, Romans 15.16
made acceptable, and sanctified by the holy ghost.

Here we plainly see, that the kingdom of Christ, is a spiritual kingdom,
and that it is had under the cross. For all they which are in that kingdom, are
priests, and offer up sacrifice, and therefore it is a priestly kingdom,
which is here in the world proved by affliction. You have not here any word, or
mention, of an earthly dominion, majesty, or pomp: but you hear mention made
of a kingdom, which consists in spirit, and faith.

Judah, and Jerusalem, to wit, the Church of Christ offer up in the time of
Messiah, an excellent sacrifice unto the Lord, such as were the sacrifices of
Abell, Abraham, Isaak, and Jacob, which were offered up long before that
Messiah had received the law, and ceremonies, and brought to the Jews.


Anna. What made the sacrifices in times past acceptable unto the Lord? How
sacrifices in time past were acceptable to God.



Vrba. Faith in Christ made them acceptable: for the patriarks by faith looked
steadfastly for the promised blessings, and grace of God in Messiah. And they
offered up yearly sacrifice, and honored God, and gave him thanks, with lowly,
and Christian hearts for his grace promised by this faith, as Paul witnesses to
the Hebr. Because it is impossible to please God without faith. And Paul in
that chapter reckneth up also those holy Patriarch, and fathers, Hebr. 11.6.
and says that their works pleased the Lord by faith. And he speaks of the
faith in Christ, which is a certain, and undoubted persuasion, and trust of
gods grace toward us in Christ. The Lord vouchsafes not to receive any to
grace, but for Christ, and in Christ. Wherefore there is no other faith that is
true faith, but the faith that is in Christ. And ye elect which were before the
nativity of Christ had this faith, None saved but Christ faithful.
as well as we have it now: and they were as good Christians as the Apostles,
and we are. For there is but one gospel, and one faith which saves. There is
none saved unless he be a Christifidelian, that is unless be believe in Christ.
Mala. prophesies in his 4. chap. of ye ltater coming of christ unto judgment,
and what should be the state of things in the last day, Mala. 4.1.
and what shall be the portion, and end both of the godly, and ungodly, saying:
For behold, the day comes that shall burn as an oven: and all the proud,
yea, and all that do wickedly shall be stouble: and the day that comes shall
burn them up says the Lord of hosts, and shall leave the^ neither root, nor
branch: but unto you that hear my name, shall the son of righteousness arise,
and health shall be under his wings, and ye shall go forth, and grow as fat
calves, and ye shall tread down the wicked, for they shall be dust under the
soole of your feet, in that day that I shall do this, says the Lord of hosts.
Remember the law of Moses, my servant, which I commanded unto him in Horeb,
for all Israel, with the statute, and judgments. Behold, I will send you Eliah
the prophet before the coming of the great, and fearful day of the Lord, and
he shall turn the hearts of the fathers, unto the children, and the hearts of
children to their fathers, least I come, and smite the earth with cursinges.

The day whereof Mala. speaks here, is that great day of our Lord Jesus
Christ, as Paul calls it, at which day, These. 5.2. Phi. 2.16. 2. Cor. 1.14 2.
Pe. 3.7.
Christ shall come in his majesty, with all ye celestial army, to judge the
quick, and the dead, as Peter says. He shall come with fire and judge the
world. Then the ungodly, which have not believed the gospel, but still continued
in their sins, shall be like straw: and the fire after the judgment of
condemnation, shall compass the wicked about, and carry then away with it,
from the face of the earth, out of Gods sight, into hell, into everlasting fire,
which is ordained for Satan, and his angels, and the unbelievers, as the psalm
says. Fire shall go before the Lord, Psalm. 97.3.
and Christ shall burn his enemies round about. And this shall as surely come
to pass, as those things have done, which are written of Christ (to wit,)
that is borne, dead, risen again, and sits at right hand of God, and has
gathered together the Jews, and Gentiles unto his sheepfould. Mat. 4.1.


And then he says: The Lord of hosts, the God omnipotent, has said it, he
surely can not deceive or lie. And although the wicked in this earth, despise
ye Lord, and his people, and are so puffed up with pride, and disdain, that
they think the godly, not only not worthy to be spoken to, but also vex, and
greatly injury the^ and so standing on their pantophles, as if all the world
were their own, The great destruction of the ungodly
live as they would for ever enjoy these worldly pleasures, and hear always
make merry: yet shall they in the day of the Lord, be confounded, and so they,
and all theirs vanish away, that they shall have nothing at all left them.

All their temporal wealth, pleasures, joy, and even their lives also shall be
taken from them. And they shall never see those eternal treasures, which they
neglected, and despised here upon earth. To be short they shall be rooted out
from of this earth, Mala. 4.1.
and cast into everlasting torment. And this does Mala. signify unto us, where
he says the Lord God will leave the^ neither root nor bra^ch. That is, he will
condemn them both body, and soul, and cast them for ever into everlasting
darcknes: so that they shall never enjoy, nor look for either temporal, or
eternal life at the Lords hands: for they shall be dealt with as Trees, when
we will utterly destroy, and root them out: for then we do not only pull away a
few bows, and lop it unto the bole, but we dig him up by the root, that it
never spring any more. But the state of the godly, which shall have feared the
name of the Lord, and believed that after this temporal life, they shall have a
better life, and that Christ will at the last day surely judge, and give unto
every one, according to that he has done, shall be much better. And therefore
do they in this life fear God, as a just judge, who will take account of
every idle word, in the last day of judgment: and they love him as a good
father, of whom they hope, and assure them selves to receive all good things,
even as natural Children, seeing they have here by patience, in well doing,
sought yt everlasting life, which the Lord has promised them in Christ. And
therefore shall they receive glory, honor, and immortality. Which thing Mala.
means when he says: Romans 2.7.
unto them that fear the Lord, shall the son of righteousness arise. That son is
Jesus Christ, Mala. 4.2.
he lightneth us with true knowledge, both of God, and of our selves, he only
by the beams of of faith justifies us: for he is the most splendent and
bright son of all innocence, and righteousness, in whom is neither blott, cloud,
nor spot of sin. He only kindles, and makes warm our cold hearts with the
beams of his spirit: he fructifieth our dry, and parched ground, that we may
bring forth unto him the fruits of righteousness, for without him we can do
nothing that is good.

John. 5.5.
When this sun shall rise in his perfect brightness, the^ shall it bring to us
that bright, and wished day of lively eternity: and it shall shine unto us for
ever: and shall never go from us. Under the wings of this son, is life, and
health: the Hebrew word in this place, is marvel, coming of this word Ropho,
which signifies to heal, or medesine. Note therefore that we are da^gerously,
and deadly sick. For sin has destroyed, and infected both our body, and
soul, with deadly poison. The soul is full of sin, the body also is all
sinful and mortal, so that of necessity, we had died for ever, if the Lord
had entered into Judgment with us: but he gave us Christ, the Physician of our
wounded, and deadly sick nature, to deliver man's nature, from all sickness, and
to restore us both body and soul, to perfect health. He which calls upon
this Physician, and believes in him, shall be lightened, and clearly delivered,
both in body and soul, from all sin, and evil, which sin brought with it
into the world: the soul shall be cleansed from the stains of sin, and from
evil thoughts naughty lusts, and ungodly desiers, and the body shall be
delivered from mortality, and corruption. For this physician is the Lord
himself, who for this cause only took upon him our nature, that he might in
us make it altogether clean, innocent, immortal, and pure, and save it.
Whereupon the prophet says. Health is under his wings. For he which flies to
be under the wings of this son, Mala. 4.20
and seeks health, and salvation at his hands, is saved. In deed these words
are figurative: but they mean nothing else, but that which the Evangelists,
and Apostles speak in plain words, to wit, that he which believes in Christ,
shall be saved, and have everlasting life. But if he which believes in Christ
has everlasting life: surely he has also true, and everlasting health. For he
which abides in his sins, abides in a most dangerous disease, and dies an
everlasting death. For the wrath of God abides on him. John. 3.36
But he which lays hold on Christ, as one the true physician by faith he
obtains everlasting health, both of body and soul. Christ verily co^pareth
himself to a physician in Math. saying, that he came unto the sick men, Mat.
9. all the chapter.
as the physician to the sick: and he mightily showed, and exercised, this art,
in this earth, all the time of his pilgrimage when he healed, and restored, not
only the souls from sin, and the bodies from all kind of sickness, and
diseases: but raised them up, even from the dead.


Anna. What means Malachy in that he says, you shall go forth, and grow up
as fat calves: or, you shall go forth, and dance, or leap, and come in like
a fatted calfe?


Vrb. This is a figurative kind of speech, spoken of the godly, to whom the
word of God is a most pleasant pasture: for it shall go well with them in the
last day. For then shall they be free, and safe from all evil, sin, lust,
fear, heaviness, and persecution. Whereupon Paul calls the last day, the day
of redemption. And Christ in Luke, exhorts the godly to lift up their heads
when the day of the Lord draws nigh, Luke 21.28
because then their redemption also is at hand. Then shall that last enemy of
the godly, to wit, death be destroyed, and mortality shall be swallowed up in
the life of Christ. Then shall they all have lyberty, and ability to be always
with Christ, without any impediment of the body. Now the body is slothful,
loytering, and weak: but at the last day, it shall be as clear as the sun,
immortal, elegant, strong, puissant, lively, subtle, neat, pure, spiritual,
and nimble, and have eternal health. For they are saved both in body, and
soul, as our creed does teach us. I believe the rising again of the flesh,
which with the soul must be glorified, and have everlasting life. The ungodly
here in this earth do miserably kick, tread upon, afflict, injury, and mock
the godly, and count the^ as ofscourings of the earth: nay, they judge them to
be most wicked men of all, and even sacrifices for sins. For the elect shall
have tribulation, even unto the last day: but when Christ the son of
righteousness, shall come down from heaven, to separate chafe from wheat to
wit, his servants from the wicked: then shall there be an alteration of all
things, then shall the pomp, bravery, and glory of this world, with all the
foolish confidence thereof, fail, and fall. Then shall the wicked be tumbled
down from their honor, and be for ever utterly shamed, and be made our
footstole. Then shall they be broaken, and troaden down, and be contemned for
ever, and be more filthy, and vile then the dirt in the streets. For he which
here suffers with Christ, shall in the world to come, be glorified, and reign
with Christ for ever: But he which here believes not the gospel in this life,
and is not like to Christ our head in the cross, he at the last judgment
shall be condemned unto horrible, and everlasting death, lamentations,
calamities, and miseries, with all the devils in hell. And this shall the Lord
of Zebooth, or the Lord of hosts do. He shall bring that day upon the world,
when it shall live most securely: and unto his, that is, unto the
Christifidelians, he shall give that kingdom of glory, which by the prophets,
and evangelists, he has promised them.

In the words following, he exhorts the people that they call to mind the
law of Moses: as if he had said, the time of Messiah is not far of, it is even
now at hand. Beware, and watch, that ye despice not the day of your visitation,
that when the Lord comes, you be not offended at him.

Moses has foretold you in Deuter. that the Lord will raise up unto you, Deuteronomy.
18.18
a prophet of your brethren, like unto him, to Moses, that is, one which is
true man as Moses was, he shall teach by the commandments of God, and the
Lord will punish him which will not hear him. For Moses says, that God will
require it of them: that is, they which will not believe the gospel of Messiah,
shall at the last day give account unto the lord: and for their unbelief, they
shall be judged in ye Lords anger. If the Jews had obayed this admonition, and
more diligently sought Christ in Moses, if they had learned better to know his
person, and office, (seeing Moses speaks so plainly of Christ) then had they
not so wickedly, and cursedly despised that day of their visitation: but would
have embraced Christ, and have esteemed him above Moses. But when Christ was
come, they would be Moses discyples, although the term of his time was ended.
For Moses was but only a servant in the house of the Lord. And when the Lord
Christ himself came, then ought the servant to give place, and all men ought
to hear the word which Christ did speak by the word of his father.

The righteousness of faith had also her testimonies in the law, in Moses, and
in the prophets. But when Christ, and the Apostles taught it, saying, Repent,
and believe the gospel, the Jews refused their doctrine, Mar. 1.15.
and would be justified by Moses, and his law, and used not the true mediator,
and savior Christ, Jews and Papists in this agree.
in the work of their justification: but refused that most precious corner
stone, and could not abide to use, and admit it in their building of
justification. And therefore they became abominable, and perished, they, and
their building.

And least the day of Christ's former coming, should be unknown unto them: he
gives the^ a notable sign, whereby they might have learned, that the day of
Messiah was now at hand: for he promises that he would send them that former
John ye Baptist before that great day, Mat. 11.14.
and he calls him Elias, because he should go before Christ, and prepare the
way for him, in the spirit, and strength of Elias, as the Angel of the Lord
expounds this prophesy of Elias to be meant of John ye Baptist. And Christ
himself applies this prophesy in Matthew unto John Baptist saying: yt John is
that Elias, Luke 1.24.
which was to come that is of whom Mala. the last prophet did prophesy, Let him
which has ears to hear, hear. But their hearts was blinded, and their ears
stopped up yt they could not understand. He calls that day of Christ's former
coming fearful or horrible beams of the falling away, and blindness of the
Jews. For before they were the well-beloved children of God, and the inheritance
of ye Lord. But when they killed the true Messas, the son of god, and preferred
that wicked offender Barabas before him, and wished that his innocent blood
might be upon them, and their children: then they were rejected, and blinded,
and the kingdom of God was taken from them, and they lost both the City, and
the temple, and the whole land, and they are afflicted as well with spiritual,
as corporal captivity unto this day, and the Gentiles are received, and
adopted as children.

This is that Heren, or curse wherewith the earth was smitten. But they which
at the beginning believed John, and took Christ to be their savior, and forsaked
Moses: they escaped the curse. And such as were the apostles, and those of
the Jews which believed christ and his apostles. And these in the prophets are
called the remnant of Jacob Malachy, therefore, (which concludes the old
testament) does tell us that Moses, with the law, and the prophets, do all
with one consent bear witness of Christ, that he is the true deliverer of
Israel. As if he had said, Moses served in the house of the Lord, unto his
appointed term of time was expired, prophesying in all his figures, external
sacrifices, oblations, and plain promises of Christ, and he referred all his
doctrine unto Christ. And this is that seed of Abraham, by which all nations
are blessed. This is that true high priest, propiciation, and sacrifice, which
reconcileth us unto God.

This is that true Melchisedech, and that serpent in the wilderness, and that
great prophet whom Moses commands all them to hear, which will not incur
the wrath of the Lord. And this is the son of David, to whom the Lord had
promised an eternal kingdom. Beware therefore, that when he comes, you take
not the servant for the master: and a figure, and shadow, for the light, and
truth. For it is he in deed, of whom the law, and all the prophets with one
consent do prophecye. If you refuse him, the^ give you not credit to moses,
and the prophets, and the Lord will smite you with a curse. Beware therefore, for
I have now given you warning before.

All laud, and honor be unto our good, and most faithful God, for ever, and
ever, for the gift of all prophesies through our Lord Jesus Christ of Nazareth,
the true, and only Messiah, promised in the law, and the prophets, whom God
sent into the world at the fulness of time: To wit, 1576. years ago. And who
perfectly, and thoroughly, fulfilled all things which were necessary for the
repayring, and absolute redemption of mankind. And now sits at the right
hand of God our Bishop, and King omnipotent, for ever.

And here now (good wife) you have almost all the chief prophesies of Jesus
Christ, expounded, and gathered out of all ye prophets as diligently as I could
by which you now know, what Christ preached unto his disciples on the way from
Jerusalem to Emaus.


Anna. Seeing that Emaus is but only 60. furlongs from Jerusalem, it seems
to me that Christ did not recite all these prophecies which you have been this
2. or 3. weeks in expounding to me.


Vrb. Verily S. Luke says, that Christ begone at Moses, and expounded unto
them all the prophesies in the scripture which were spoken of him whereby it may
be gathered that it was a famous, and good loving sermon, in which he proved,
and confirmed unto them, that he must by the cross enter into his glory.

But it is like, that Christ expounded unto his disciples, the most chief
prophecies, which speak of his passion, resurrection, and everlasting
kingdom, that thereby they might learn, that it was the good will of God the
father, that his well beloved son Jesus Christ should redeem the true Israel,
not with gould or silver, nor by any worldly pomp, or power: but in the
weakness of his cross, by his most precious blood which he shed to deliver us,
from all our enemies, from the wicked world, from poysenfull sin, from
horrible death, and from our perpetual, and cruel enemy Satan, with whom,
and all his members, we have bellum (...), a continual war. I have been
loving in citing the scriptures, that I might the better set down, and more
plainly expound the whole sermon of Christ as far, as appertained to the
witnesses of the prophets, as I have said before.

But how say you? is it not a great joy, and a very paradise, to a godly heart,
by faith to search, and learn the comfortable mysteries of Christ, contained
in the prophets, as the These. the valiant sowldiers of Christ, often times did,
because this kind of exercise, avails much to the confirmation, and
establishing of our Christian faith? For which, our Lord God has laid a
perfect sure foundation, even from the beginning of the world, by his holy
prophets, his servants, which are the most ancient doctors in the earth: and
also by the gospel of Jesus Christ, which is a doctrine of great antiquity in
the world, and has always bin most vehemently assailed by Satan, and his
heritical members, and yet has always escaped, and in the end obtained
victory, and triumphed over them all. For the word of the Lord abides for ever.


Anna. This Easter Sermon, is more plenteous, and of greater authority with
me, then all the pomp, and wealth of the whole world. Nay what are a hundred
thousand worlds, with the vanity of all their wealth, power, and pomp, in
comparion of such great promises of God, as we have in Jesus Christ? Even
nothing at all. I heartily thank God our heavenly father, that he has
vouchsafed me to live unto yt happy day, that I might hear such an
apostolical Sermon. And I hope, that I shall ever hereafter, be better for it
while I live. And I trust I have received such comfort here by that, yt I shall
ever hereafter, celebrate that joyful feast of Easter, with spiritual comfort
in Christ.

For this gospel which was promised in the prophets so many ages ago, and is
now preached openly throughout this world, in these latter days, does not
exclude me. For every one which believes in Christ, and calls upon his name,
shall be safe.

Here is no merit of mine spoken of, as necessary to life, and salvation: but
only the infinite merit of Jesus Christ, which is preached of all the prophets
and Evangelists. The merciful, and everlasting God, the father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and our Father be praised for ever, and ever: for the wholesome
mysteries of the holy Gospel of Christ Jesus, which he has so mercifully
opened, and so richly given unto us unworthy sinners.


Vrba. Now you know what S. Paul means, where he says, that Jesus Christ is
our wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption, given us of God:
and you see what is the true hope, help, and comfort of Israel.


Anna. I see it, and I believe it. The Lord increase my faith. And I beseech
thee, O most merciful Father, for Jesus Christ's sake, our only reconciler,
that thou will also vouchsafe, to reveal the comfortable gospel of thy
unspeakable grace, (promised and given in thy only begotten son Jesus Christ)
by thy holy spirit, unto our beloved children, (which thou have given us, to
the enlarging of the kingdom of Christ, and to the glory of thy most blessed
name) that they, by the inward instruction of thy spirit, may understand, and
believe this Sermon of thy son, and through thy holy spirit, continue unto the
end, in that faith of Christ, and hope of the Gospel, and true Israel.

All the riches of this world, are nothing to this christian faith. I wish unto
my dear children, no other felicitye, no other dowries, no other riches, nor
no other inheritance, but yt they may truly, and constantly bebeleue this
sermon: which if they do, then are they rich enough in this world, and in the
world to come, though they should never so poorly, here beg their bread all
the days of their life. For by faith in Christ, we have God the father, God
the son, and God the holy ghost, one true God by the inestimable benefits, and
merit of Christ, who for our sakes became man, that we might be made the
children of God, and that God might be our loving Father. And now what can we
want, seeing we have thee O Lord, the only true, and loving god to be our
Father, through Jesus Christ our Lord, who is our own proper righteousness,
life, and and salvation.


Vrba. God keep you, and me, and our Children, in this faith, and then are we
fafe, then shall we be passing well, then shall we have perfect joy of spirit,
and then shall we daily, and hourly with joy, celebrate the joyful feast of
Easter, till we with our beloved children pass out of this frail, and
tra^sitory life, into the heavenly kingdom of Jesus Christ, our Lord, and true
God, which has been prepared for us, from the beginning of the world: of which
thing I am assured. The Lord confirm our faith and hope, unto the eternal
glory of his holy name.


Anna. Amen.


Vrba. But you must every day (wife,) when you have given God thanks, and made
your prayers thorowely ponder with your self these things of the gospel of
Christ, which I have been, now a good long time in speaking, and you must keep
them in your heart as a most rich treasure, and precious iuell.


Anna I will do it by Gods grace, and God bless me, and all good Christians.


Vrba. Amen.


Anna. Amen.


FINIS.
The Lords name be praised. And O Lord I beseech thee, give plentiful fruit
of these my Labors Amen. Amen. *
A Table of such particular notes as are worthy the marking in the course of
this book.
A.
AAron and his priesthood. 23 Abdias why so called. 190 Abhominatio^ of
desolatio^ what it means. 67 Abraham his hope in the promised seed. 10 Adam
his fale. 7. the Gospel given him* 10. how mortified. 117. 120 Affliction why
it is. 120. why it ought patiently to be suffered. 16. how comforted. 133. 136.
how forgotten. 161. a sign of election. 151 Afflicted none refused of Christ.
50 Anabaptists. 56. what church they seek in this world. 104. why they cursed
Christ. 118 Angels why they could not help Christ in his passion. 98. they
never adored any but God alone. 75 Angel Gabriell sent to Mary. 33. to
Daniell. 63 Anointing of Christ what it is. 38. 55 Apparel filthy, sin. 46
Apostles how they understood the Scriptures. 45. doubted whether Christ were
Messiah. 140 Article of our Creed what principally impugned of Satan. 83
Athanasius his creed. 70
B
Babylon the captivity thereof. 173 Baptism. 174 Begging Judas, papists,
false gospellers. 56 Belief necessary in hearing, and reading the Scriptures.
6. of what difference in heavenly, and worldly things. 73. of what force it
is. 39. of what comfort, to a sinful conscience. 58 Beleuers only members of
Sion. 136 Bethleem what City it was. 29 Blasphemye. 142 Blood of both
Testaments. 44 Bread, and true food. 160 Bibles in Latin, some falsify the
rext. 8 Bibles of the Caldeans. 9
C
Caporeth a figure of Christ. 22 Carpenters of the Church. 134 Cattle who be.
203 Christ, how, when, and why promised. 7. 10 11. 16. 63. prophesied of in
scripture two ways. 8. why promised before the law. 15. his nativity. 3. 7.
16. 31, 84. 96. his acceptable year. 60. his manhood. 18. 20. 31. 33. 41. 49.
50. 71. the son of Abraham and David. 27. 28. how David's son, and Lord. 112
the son of the pure virgin Mary. 28. 33. a stone cut of a mountain, without
hand. 35. 63. why the seed of the woman, and not of man. 7. the necessity,
and benefit of his nativity. 24. 64. 84. the time of his nativity. 16. 63.
of the City where he was borne. 29. his flight into Egypt. 90. his parents why
removed from the kingdom of Israel. 18. 20. to whom he was sent. 14. 57. why
sent 64. his names 29. 36. 39. 81. why called Siloh. 20. 18. why called Christ.
38. an Angel. 8. an Angel of the great counsel. 87. Messiah. 39. Israel.
54. a stone. 61. the Lord. of Zeboth. 76. Amon. 71. Moschell. 30. Melchisedech.
21. 112. his person discribed. 49. 50. his Image painted. 85 How he is known,
and how necessary to be known. 2. 4. his conversation on earth described. 47.
Why he eat with publicans. 50. his humility and poverty. 18. 43 44. 47. 50
59. no cause of our fall. 118. our Jewel. 11. the end of the Jews kingdom.
18. 44. 66. his tears for Jerusalem. 43. his service toward us. 4. 6. how he
handles his friends, and enemies. 87. his comfort against our ingratitude. 54
his comfort for an heavy conscience. 85. he has followers according to his
humanity. 74. at enmity with the the serpent. 8. 9. afflicted 47. why painted
with a cross on his shoulders. 62. how long he lived. 69. Christ his kingdom,
what a one it is. 17. 20. 41. 44. 53. 64. 85. 105 110. 119. what manner of king
he is. 19. 57. 63. 91. how he rules his kingdom. 20. 99. by what armor it is
sustained. 44. how far it reaches. 45. his scepter 17. 61. 74. 120 his poor
royaltye. 49. his power. 44. 88. how he is a Giant. 87. his peace. 49. 89
Christ his priesthood, and ministrye. 21. 47. 51. 91. 53. 6. how anointed 55.
74. 38. aparaled with filthye garments. 46. the true Melchisebech. 112. 21.
the high priest. 93. our shepherd. 92. 94. 85. Gods servant. 92. signified by
the brazen serpent. 21. by Aarons priesthood ibidem. by the mercy seat. 20.
22. by the pascall lamb. 114. 22. he and Moses compared. 45. 59. the seal of
the Prophets. 12. 43. his doctrine, and gospel. 4. 6. 44. 53. the wisdom of
his word. 34. his manner of teaching. 57. 91. his mouth called a sword. 53. his
Sermon going to Emaus. 27. 35. 97. called a prophet 91. a preacher. 57. his
preaching to what end 91. sanctified of God to be our teacher. 55. he
counsayleth contrary to the world. 86. his care over his Church 4. our
mediator. 93. the only way to God. 29. 128. our only savior. 37. 93. 9. 16.
39. 60 43. 99. 100. 63. 2. 3. our righteousness. 43. 108. 79. 87. 89 our
rede^tion. 46. 107. 9. 11. 94. 59. 78. the only forgeuenes of sins. 46. 99.
100. our reconciliation. 23. 39. 100. 45. our propitiation. 79. 93. a gage that
God is with us. 52. his exceeding grace, love, and mercy, to man. 35. 42. 50.
16. 88. 58. 35. his merciful nature described. 50. 57. how he calls, and
justifies us. 43. the fulfilling of the law. 43. 12. richer in grace, then we
in sin. 9 Christ his Godhead proved. 84. 72. 76. 31. 35. 77. 81. 74. a
necessary point of religion. 83. he is God and not the Father. 71. no God but
him. 21. the bud of the Lord and fruit of the earth. 119. his union of both
natures. 18. 82. 48. 49. 3. his name Iehoua. 76. how he sits on Gods right
hand. 112. how he is with us. 36. his miracles. 78. 85. 97. his omnipotencye.
51 Christ his death and passion. 7. 16. 25 32. 10. 85. 107. 98. of what force
it was. 99. he suffered wholly. 82. why he required help upon the cross. 98.
his burial and resurrection. 121 10. 7. 102. it is made ours. 102. the
commodity of his death and resurrection. 99. 103. his victory over sin, death,
and Satan. 9. 10. 52. 59. 88. 94. 99. 122. our banner in battle 12. his
judgment. 49. 95. 96. Christ killers their punishment. 158 Christianity, or
Christians life. 5. 116 170. their cognizance. 120. why so named. 16. 160. what
people they are. 186. their joy. 1. 6. 128. 27. 42. 58. 133. 136. 163. 153.
122. 161. their state in the world to come. 123. 103 163. 178. 153. why
afflicted. 120. their comfort in affliction. 52. how they ought to judge. 50.
the temple of God. 176. their food and bread. 160. their thirst, and hunger,
how restored. 132. without money. 149. their wisdom. 139. why and how they shall
be glorified. 153. their prayer for the Church. 112. their art. 148. they
only saved. 93 builded upon the corner stone. 148 false Christians described.
55 Christmas caroll at Geneua. 84 Church Gods vineyard. 124. no peace without
it. 125. afflicted but not vanquished. 91. 112. 105. 103. 151 156. how
nourished, and comforted. 162. 152. 155. how Christ purges it. 117. why called
a crown. 155. dear to God. 154. called a sect of the Jews, and heresy of
papists. 118. the largenes of it. 147. defended by Christ. 204. 153. 155. her
weakness how comforted. 133. 130 136. 147. her marriage. 147. the beuty of it
148. her victory. 196. her builders. 134. the gates thereof are always open.
156. False Church described. 199 Circumsition, and ceremonies of no force. 171
City of the world most honorable, which. 30 Cleophas sad in his journey to
Emaus. 1. 27. comforted again. 3. 5. 27. the Sermon he hard. 4. 5. Comforts in
persecution. 131. in temptation. 132. 134. 135. 136. against sin. 58
Confession of sins only, has the benefit of the Gospel. 58. it is such as
the faith is. 61 Conscience laden with sin only pacified by faith in Christ.
107. 58. 78. true council, whence it is fetched. 87 Creation of man how pure
it was. 13. Creed the principal article of it. 83 Cross why to be suffered
patiently. 16.
D
Daniell his prophecye, and prayer in captivity. 62. his dream of the four
Monarchies. 63. his prayer for the coming of Messiah. 65 David a figure of
Christ. 91. strong of hand. 184. his ruinous tabernacle restored by Christ. 188
Daughter of Hose the prophet what it means. 179 Dead where they be till the
last day. 123 Death comforts against it. 87. it is but a sleep to the Godly.
79 Devil vanquished by his own hissing 10. his wife. 186. he is figured by
Pharao. 168 Deliverance of ours how strong it is. 85 Disciples how they
understood the Scriptures. 4
E
Earth a vale of misery. 161 Easter day. 1 Eating spiritually. 107 Edome what
it signifies 157 Egypt a figure of hell. 168 Elect their state afteer the
resurrection. 103. 123. 178. 163. 153. where they be till the last day. 123.
doubt some time that God has forsaken them. 133. 149. 199. their marriage with
Christ. 183. the true elected who be. 48. how they are brought to heaven. 195.
figured by Jerusalem. 196 Election tokens thereof. 170. 58 Elohim what it
signifies. 74 Emanuell what it signifies. 35 Emaus how far from Jerusalem
27 Epicure Gospellers. 56 Eyes clear whose be. 216. Seven in one stone what it
means. 206 Faith increased by prayer. 3. which is the true faith. 16. the
righteousness of God. 4. seems sometimes to be wanting in the godly. 128. the
fruits and operation of it 126. 61. is our righteousness. 120. 145. the
righteousness available before god. 64. wherein it is. 52. ye chief point of
it. 83. the foundation of it. 73. how it purges sin. 58. a work of the
first commandment, due only to God. 80. it makes us priests. 93 how it is
to be exercised. 129 Fear of perdition, a sign of election 58. Smell feasts.
56 Feudatory what it means. 31. Feeling of sin, of what effect. 15 Figures
of Christ. 20. 23 Figures of the law, and things figured. 24 Flesh, the
frailetie thereof. 13. fretteth inwardly. 60
G
Gentiles called. 120. 49. 51. 54. 150. 157. 108. 166. the Jews salvation and
theirs all one. 172. how they are sprinckeled. 140. the milk of the church.
152. Germans Christmas caroll. 84 God what he is. 72. his names 75. his
essential name. 77. where to be sought. 48. his covenant to Abraham. 182. 4.
7. his marriage with Israel. 183. his finger what it is. 170. his care for his
Church. 4. his fatherly correction. 151. he gave the promise before the law.
15. he swereth. 112. 16. what it is to sit at his right hand. 112. not to be
sought without Christ. 83. can not co^demn us if we believe. 143. his honor
what it is. 81. 198. 177. his sanctuary what it is. 177. his strange works
140. binds his mercy to us with an oath. 16. his promises are of two sorts.
180 Godly described. 174. sometimes sad as without faith. 128. how they be said
to be hurt by the wicked. 9. 112 sometimes tempted. 149. 133. their propertye.
153. always persecuted. 131 Gospel, the doctrine, benefits, ministers thereof.
4. 6. 7. 45. 49. 143. the operation of it. 49. 120. 58. the promise made to
Adam. 4. 7. the tidings thereof 45. the trumpe thereof. 124. the holy Ghost
given us when it is taught. 121. given without money. 149. ought to be pondered
necessaryly. 156. the end of the prophets. 11. only given to the poor in
spirit. 58. the scepter of Christ. 74. the sword of the spirit. 129. False
Gospellers who be. 65 Grace of god, upon what first promised. 4. 7. why
promised before the law. 15. is greater the^ sin. 9. pledged unto us. 52
Ground good what it is. 58
H
Hearing of scripture, requires prayer, and belief. 6 Heaven our state
therein. 123. 103. 178 163. 153 Hell has no rest. 46. figured by Egypt. 168
Herod king of the Jews. 17 Holy ghost his grace, and gifts. 119 87. why he
was sent. 91. his sword 129. given us by hearing the gospel. 122. what he
teaches. 4 Hope due only to God. 122 Hose, the contents of his prophecy 178.
his daughter. 179 Hunger how refreshed by christ. 132 160. without money. 149.
nothing else in Satan's kingdom. 132 Hypocrisye. 105
I
Jacob his house, in scripture what it signifies. 191. true Iacobites who be
130. he wrastled with the Lord. 181 Jehovah what it signifies. 76. 37
Jerusalem destroyed. 66. a figure of the Catholic church, 42. the heavenly
Jerusalem. 164 Iesse the tribe thereof, when, and why, condemned. 18. 20 Jesus
a name of Comfort. 36. 37 Jews, what it signifies. 67. their error of Christ
his coming, and kingdom. 41. 55. 68. 41. their blindness in scripture. 138.
77. 158. 68. shall become Christians. 68. 150. 184. understand no histories 68.
their name is odious. 160. they have ye same salvation that christians have.
172. their objection against the Christians. 68. 43. 35. burned with fire out
of the ground, for repairing Jerusalem. 67. their contraction in Marriage. 28.
their government. 17. when, and why it ceased. 17. 66. 18. 44. make a Jest at
Gods promise, made to Jacob. 17. 19. their sinagoue called Edom. 157. apply the
prophecies of Christ to Hesechia 35. offended at Christ's death. 21. 140. their
opinion of Christ. 32. they spitt at Images. 67. their captivity in Babylon.
63. their pretense to extinguish Christ. 165. Islands called to the gospel. 51
Images abhorred by the Jews. 67 Immanuell what it signifies. 35. Ingratitude
punished. 66 Jonas the sum of his prophesy. 193. a figure of Christ. 185
Ionathas his saying of what comfort the scriptures were. 86 Joshua why so
called. 36 Iuvile the year of it. 60 Judas, and his bag is, where christ is.
56 Judges of the world. 96. 61 Judge how we ought. 50 Israel the kingdom of
it divided. 182.
K.
Knowledge of Christ, what it is, and how necessary. 2. 3. 148. it is our
righteousness. 145. it is like to eyes. 7. 206 Knowledge hangs upon belief in
divine matters. 73
L
Law what it is. 11. what it requires of us. 13. 170. why it is urged upon us.
14. why it is was given after the promise, 15. the figures thereof 24. a prison
59. the operation of it. 49. the sacrifices of it. 24. it must be spiritually
fulfilled. 60 Liberty of Christians. 189 Lord named five times. 203
M
Machabies their government. 19 Man his fall from his pure creation. 12. 13.
his state without Christ. 200 his heart how new. 173. cursed if he trust in
man. 80. Merchants of righteousness who be 149 Mary a pure virgin. 28. 33.
denied so to be of the Jews. 34. her petegree why not drawn in scripture. 28.
falsely said to have trodden the serpents head. 8 Marriages how co^tracted among
the Jews. 28 Maidens their bringing up among the Jews. 34 Melchisidech his
priesthood. 21 Merits none in man. 13. of no force. 146. have no fruit of the
Gospel. 58 Messiah what it signifies. 39 Ministers hipocriticall who be. 56.
57 Merit of the world. 205 Mysteries in ye first promise of grace. 8 Monarchs
of the world. 62 Monastaries to be abhorred. 142 Mortificatio^ comes by the
cross. 120 Money who they be that lay it out upon naught. 149 Moses and
Christ compared. 45. 49 Milk sold without money. 149
N
Names of God in Scriptures. 45 of Christ. 85. how full of comfort. 37. 38 New
name what it is. 154 Name of Christians. 160 Natural man what he is. 13. 142.
how blind 42. 64. Nezacon what it is. 68
O
Offended many be but not through Christ. 118 Original sin. 7. 12. 143
Ornaments of Christ how they differ from princes ornaments. 61
P
Patience never fails of help. 134 Perseqution follows the Church. 131
Pharao a figure of the Devil. 168 Pharisees, and papists alike. 136.
described. 199 Poor in spirit who be. 195 Preaching the end thereof. 120. it
ought to be used continually. 156 like to horselitters, and Chariots. 164. high
priest crowned with 2. crowns. 207 Prophets called seers. 197. for whose sake
they were sent. 199. a rule to understand them. 177. 189. their end. 11. 12.
their hope. 93. the sum of their doctrine. 196. they speak straungely of
Christ's kingdom. 114 Prophets false who be. 166 Promises of god nedful to be
known 148. they are of 2. sorts. 180
R
Reading of scripture requires prayer, and belief. 6 Reason to be aba^doned
in scriptures 73 Redemption wherein it consists. 46 how it is wrought. 16.
redeemed who be. 128 Reeds bruised who be. 50 Regenerate their condition. 198.
they are the true Iacobites. 129. signs of their regeneration. 173 Remission
of sins how purchased. 5 Repentance the effect thereof. 5. the first stepe to
grace. 12. it only has the fruits of the Gospel. 58 Resurrection of man
twofould. 101 it is in Christ. 123. 102. our state after it. 103. 123. the
condition of it. 178. 175. 163.
S
Sacrifices of the Jews why, and when abrogated, 67. 108. how many of them, in
the old law. 24 Sadness of 2. sorts. 1. 58. sometimes in the godly 128
Salvation the causes thereof. 100. 83 in Christ only. 93 Satan his head
bruised, what it means. 8. he tempts but overcomes not. 91. 112. his
kingdom and rule in this world. 104. his army. 53. vanquished by his own
malice. 9. how he slaundereth the Gospel. 56 principally impugneth Christ
Godhead. 83. his kingdom. 152 Scholars for the Gospel who be. 58 Scriptures
their comfort. 45. 32. 86 how full of knowledge. 32. where they be had. 41.
called an Apothecaryes shop. 86. their end 15. why it urges the law upon us.
14. may not be hard, or read without prayer or belief. 6. 77 Seed of the
woman promised. 8. to whom sent. 14. Serpent stingeth the hele of Christ. 8
Sin how not to be feared. 21. 58. how redeemed. 46. 79. 58. 128. the force of
it inwardly. 60. it is our filthy apparel, and has no rest. 46. what dishonor
it brings. 103. only forgeuen by Christ. 100. 8. a tyrant over us. 135. has
no dominion over us. 10 Sinners none refused of Christ, not the greatest. 50.
120 Sion a figure of the spiritual Sion. 115. a figure of the Church. 91. 190
Spirit of Messiah the finger of god cleanses us. 170. the fruits of him 161.
his sword what it is. 129 Sprinckeling of the Jews, what it is. 140 Sweet
lips who so called. 199
T
Temple of God who be. 176 Temple of the Jews when and how destroyed. 66
Temptations of the Godly. 133. 149. the cause of them. 148. remedy against
them. 78 Testament old, and new how they differ. 11. the blood of them differ.
44. the new is the kernel of the old. 114 Threats why denounced in
preaching. 11 Thyrst of men how refreshed. 132 without money. 149 Traditions of
men must not trouble us. 136 Troubles how they are forgot. 161 Try our selves
how we ought. 50 Tidinges joyful. 58 Time acceptable when it was. 60. 132.
fulness thereof when. 69 Tytles given to Christ. 9. 37. 39
V
Virgins how trained up among the Jews. 34 Unction of Christ. 38. 52 Vineyard
of God the Church. 124
W
Water of life bought without money 149 Way to God what it is. 127 Weakelinges
in faith called cattle. 203 Wedding garment. 136 Weeks of years in Daniell.
62. 65. 69 Wolves dwell with lambs. 120 Word of God of what force. 53. 87.
contemners thereof punished. 26. 61 66. 96. it is no creature. 72. necessary to
be known. 148 Works of a Christian. 5. 117. of no force to salvation. 9. 14.
129. 142. 146. of the flesh can not be good. 60 World, and unpleasant prison to
the penitent. 14. how it does judge 56. Wisdom thereof differs from
christ's wisdom. 134. 139. the devils wife. 186 Wounds how they are truly
bound up. 59 Will to keep Gods law, a sign of election. 170 Wine press
trode^ only by Christ. 157
Y
Year of the Lord acceptable. 60. 132 Year of Christ's first coming
accounted. 65
FINIS.
Faults escaped in this book.
Page 9. b. the note. fish. read. hiss. 28. b. 27. his. her. 30. b. 27. sorth
us as a prince. forth us a prince. 64. a. 34. consists. consist. 73. 3.
matters we. matters: in worldly matters we. 79. 2. righteousness, but of
righteousness of. 79. 27. so proper. so pure. 114. b. 4. false prophesye* Esaias
his prophesye. 115. 18. speak of some, speak of it as if they speak of. 119.
b. 20. an such inue^tio^. can such munition. 120. b. 25. which gdo. which god.
121. 12. Esha. Ishai. 126.27. doysome. noisome. 133. in the note. lust. Luke.
133.14. sit in the. sit at table in the. 131. 11. Barons. Barre^nes. 154. b.
31. Gos. Gods. 155. 10. must. most. 160. 16. living the bread living bread.
166. b. 4. God the Jews. God amongst the Jews. 166. b. 5. places amongst
substitute. places substitute. 169. in the note called Christ. called David.
170.40. many. Mary. 156. 28. cross. course. 159. b. 2. as they were. as it
was. 172. 21. in the Hebrews. In the Epistle to the Hebrews. 175, b. 29. or
men. are men. 176. b. 6. Christ before times. Judah. Christ. Before times
Judah. 185. b. 17. hear. heal. Math. 19.28.193. in the note. Math
28.19.191.27. bonds O Satan. bonds of Satan. 192. 40. abide death. abide in
death. 184. 5. demand. devour. 198. to destroy the^ believe them, and. in the
note. to destrust them. Believe them, and 299. 27. Zachary. Zephany. 200. b. 29.
loving. long. 201. 36. thee all. thee and all. 201. b. 14. life. lies. 201. b.
29. Christ yea Christ shall be overthrown. yea. 204. 2. defender, if their
God. defender. If therefore God. 204. 16. shewted. showed. 204. b. 21. mad.
made. 210. b. 17. wood. word. 213. a. 2. fell. fellow. 214. a. 27. king.
kingdom. 215. 13. christian. Christ and. 216. b. 21. b. 21. his. this. 217. a
12. had. hid. 217. a. 24. Messiah. Moses. 220. a. 30. former. forerunner. 220.
a. 39. was. were. 220. a. 41. beams. because. 220. b. 3. Messas. Messiah. 220.
b. 18. Jacob Malachy, therefore. Jacob, Malachy. therefore. 221. a. 23. loving.
long. 221. a. 23. (...). 221. a. 37. loving. long. 221. b. 11. great. greatest.
221. b. 28. hereby, that that. hereby, that. 221. b. 40. ever: for. ever fot.
222. a. 36. life and and salvation. life and salvation. 198. 17. marry. But.
fol. 173. b. for merry read new in the not.

FINIS.
AT LONDON. Printed by John Day dwelling over Aldersgate, and are to be sold
at his shop under the gate. An. 1578.


