A TRVE RELATION WITHOUT ALL EXCEPTION, OF Strange and Admirable Accidents,
which lately happened in the Kingdom of the great MAGOR, or MAGVLL, who is the
greatest Monarch of the East Indies.

AS ALSO With a true Report of the Manners of the Country; of the Commodities
there found, With the like of sundry other Countries and Islands, in the EAST
INDIES.

Written and certified by persons of good import, who were eyewitnesses of
what is here reported.

LONDON Printed by I. D. for Thomas Archer, and are to be sold at his Shop in
Pope's Head Palace. 1622.

Late and admirable News, from the East Indies, and the Country of the great
Magor, testified by persons of great import, as shall appear.
IN the year of our Lord 1618. and in the month of June, we arrived at the
Cape of Good hope, where we found the people of the Country, albeit Heathen
and Idolaters, yet very kind and friendly unto us, for some small quantity of
Iron and old Copper, we had of them upon exchange Beeues and Mutton. This Cape
(otherwise called the Cape of Bona Speransa) is very temperate, and agrees
well with the constitution of our people. Four or five hundred persons, sick
of the scurvie, and other diseases of the Sea, they all recovered their health
perfectly within a very few days.

They have a very pleasant drink, which they call Toddye, like in taste to
white Wine, which distelleth from the Pahneto trees. At our departure from this
Cape we sailed two or three days in a Sea like in color to whey, whose
bottom could not sound.

We came afterward to the Country of the great Magor, or as some call him
Magull, his Lascar, which is his Train, which follows and always goes with
him in his progresses, consists usually of 200000. people of all sorts. These
lodge all in fair Tents, richly hanged, which being pitched according to the
order of that Country, they make a very gorgeous and glorious show, as of a
most beautiful and large City.

This Magor, has a place called the Maoll, in which he keeps a thousand
women to serve his lustful desires.

When he makes his progress, his Concubines go with him in all sumptuous
manner, carried upon Elephants in Castles, richly covered, or upon men's
shoulders, in a frame made like the upper part of a Coach, but not so close
covered. He has under him 37. Provinces, and very many goodly Cities: the
length of his Country is 2800 miles: the breadth 1900 miles.

When he admits to his presence the Persian Ambassador, or the Ambassador of
any other mighty King, when he gives them either loving or kind speeches, or
looks, then the Ambassadors in token of thankfulness, kiss the earth. But
Sir Thomas Roe the King of Great Brittaynes Ambassador would not so much
derogate from his place, to abase himself so demissiuely. Notwithstanding, he
was always entertained with more and greater respects then any other
Ambassador.

This Magor, does every year weigh himself in a Balance made for the
purpose; first, he weighs himself with waights of Silver, next he weighs
himself with waights of Gold, and lastly, with Jewels, and precious stones:
his weight of silver, and gold, he gives away liberally at his pleasure, after
he is weighed, he mounteth into his Throne, and then he throws amongst the
standers by, a great quantity of Silver and Gold, made hollow, like to the
form of Nutmeggs, and such other Spices, which his Country does afford. These
ceremonies being ended, then he begins to Carowse and largely to drink with
his Nobles, till they be all drunk. The Scales with which he is weighed, are
all of massy Gold, richly beset with precious stones.

No man has any Land in this Magors Country but himself, he gives pentions
and takes away pentions at his pleasure. No child inherits any thing which his
Father had in possession, but at the pleasure of Magor: all Honor and
Gentilitie dies with the person who had any, and returns back to the Magor.

He shows himself in public and open manner to the people, at the least,
three times in a day; first, at the Sunne-rising, to which he makes low
Reverence. Secondly, at noone, at which time he sees Elephants fight, or some
other pastimes provided for him. Thirdly, before the Sun set, but when the
Sun is setting he descends from his Throne, and shows as low obeisance as
he did at the rising.

At all these times, whosoever comes unto him as a Suitor, uses no other
means for his dispatch, but to hold up a paper in his hand, and he is heard
immediately, and encountreth the best fortune which Suitors can desire, for
either he presently obtains his Suit, or has a present denial; there are no
masters of Requests, nor any delatory references upon any petition.

Magors people are governed by no other laws but what lie in his breast, and
the breasts of his counselors, yet there is no place where businesses are
sooner dispatched, or where Justice is more uprightly and impartially ministered.

Cursero, the eldest Son of Magor, being of an haughty and aspiring Spirit,
practiced to take from his Father both Crown and kingdom, but Magor not only
took his son prisoner, but with him some 2000. of his chiefest followers,
having taken his son, he placed him to see the execution of those two
thousand he had taken. The manner of the execution being terrible, for they
were put into the ground upon sharp stakes, and so left to dye. After this
execution, Magor shut up and sealed his sons eyes, so that for three years
he saw no light of Sun or Moon at all: seven years he kept him in close
Prison, but at this time he has a little more liberty. This Prince is of a
different disposition from his Father, for he keeps but one wife, and is a
great favorer and protector of Christians; he is generally beloved of all men.
Magor will not undertake, nor do any business of import, but as he shall be
directed and counseled by his Astrologers, and Magitians, when they tell him
the day and hour are fortunate then he adventureth upon any thing, he cannot
endure to hear any talk or mention made of Death which is the most desperate
and greatest folly which our age can or does afford, nay what madness is it?
not to hear talk, nor make provision for that which cannot be avoided. God
has pointed nothing more certain then Death, because we should ever consider
of it; and nothing more uncertain, then the hour of Death; because every
hour we should be provided for it. Magor being much delighted, with
Astrologers, Magitians, and Witches, of which his Country is replenished, there
came upon a time one of that Crew unto him, and presented unto him an Ape;
telling Magor, that the Ape could do strange and admirable Tricks: well quoth
Magor we will make trial of your Apes skill, and cunning, and thereupon
commanded the Ape and her Master to be carried out of that room, into another
that they might not see what was done, in their absence Magor took a Ring from
his finger, and having always about him a great number of Boys, some 200. or
thereabouts, which he keeps for unnatural and beastly uses, he gave the
Ring to one of the Boys and bad him hide it, then these Boys flocking
together, the Ape and his Master were called for: now quoth Magor let your Ape
try her skill, I have lost my Ring, let us see if she can find it; the Apes
Master commanded the Ape to fetch the Ring, the Ape went immedidately to the
Boy which had the Ring and took it out of his bosom and brought it to Magor.

Who wondering much at it, he caused the second time the Ape and her master to
retire out of sight, and in their absence, he caused his Secretary to write in
several papers, the Names of some twelve or fourteen, of the greatest Gods,
and Prophets which either were heard or known to be worshipped, either in his
Country or in any place of the World, which being written, they were mingled
on an heap and laid upon a table, Then the Ape was called for, and commanded
to take the Name of the greatest God and truest Prophet from amongst those
papers, the Ape went presently to the Papers, and turning them up, from amongst
them all, only took out the Name of Jesus and delivered it to Magor, whereupon
Magor and the rest of his Nobles, were much amazed: but upon secret conference
amongst themselves, they resolved to make further trial: whereupon the Master
and the Ape were commanded to go to a further room, and some persons
commanded to watch them, that the suspicion, of all deceivable courses might
be taken away, and cleared: the papers were written again with the same Names,
and more were added, which being done; the Ape was called for the second time,
and to make choice as formerly she had bin directed, she presently went to
the papers and made the same choice, which before she had done: which stroke
Magor and his Nobles in a greater amaze then at the first: notwithstanding a
third trial was made, but with the like and same success, whereupon a great
Noble man humbly besought Magor that he might make the fourth trial, which
was granted him, this great man was called Mattolet Chan, which in their
Language signifies (the beloved Lord) He caused the Names to be written the
fourth time, and mingled together, and cast in a heap upon the Table, the Ape
was called as formerly she had been, and commanded to make choice of the
greatest God or Prophet, whose name was contained in those papers. The Ape went
presently to the heap, and slightly and scornefully turned them over, but
took up no paper but returned to her master. Magor and his Nobles wondered more
at this then of what passed before, and asked the Apes master, what might be
the cause why the Ape would not bring any paper as before she had done, but
turned them up in so scornful a manner, perhaps quoth the master, the name
which the Ape looks for, is not there amongst them; then the papers being
examined, the name of Jesus was missing, now quoth Magor, let the Ape show
cunning to fetch that paper, wherein that name is written. The Ape receiving
her command, made present have to Mattolet Chan, and leapt upon him, and
withal thrust her hand into his bosom, and drew out the name of Jesus, which
she brought hastily to Magor. This being so strange an accident, was wondered
at of all the standers by, whereof some were Jews, some Mahometans, some
Christians, with others. This has been averred to be true, by master Edward
Terry, Preacher to Sir Thomas Roe, who heard it credibly reported, as
aforesaid. And Sir Thomas Roe has reported the same for truth to sundry right
honorable parsonages. Master Terry the Preacher has often seen the Ape.

The great Magor, and generally all the Indians of his Country are given over
to fleshly pleasures: they may, and do keep as many wives and concubines as
they will, or are able to maintain. What misery do these Indians endure, to
have so many women about them, when as there be many English men are grievously
vexed to have the company but of one. But perhaps the Indian women are of a
far milder temper then the English, as hereafter shall be showed. The Indians
are more jealous of their women and wives, then either Spaniards, or Italians.
The Father will not trust his son, after he comes to twelve years of Age,
except he be gelded. The Indian women in their houses are commonly covered, and
if any woman go abroad uncovered, she is reputed a Whore.

Magors subjects are tall, and of comely personage, but of a tawnie coullor,
but they are faint hearted; Magor will usually say, that one Portingall will
beat three of his subjects, and one English man will beat three Portingalls.
In this Country there are many several Sects, some called Banians, who will
kill nothing that has life, no not so much as snakes. They have Hospitalls to
keep and cure lame Horses, lame Dogs, lame Birds, or any lame Creature, and
when they be cured, they are set at liberty. The manner of that Country is to
burn the bodies of the dead, and the wives willingly burn with their
husbands. But of late the women begin to break that custom.

The Indians under Magor, worship evil favored ugly Idols, which they call,
Pagods: their Priests are called Ioggis, or Bramines; their Church they call
Muskitts; they go on Pilgrimage to several places; Some to Mecha in Arabia;
Some to the Head of the River Ianges, wherein they throw silver and gold,
according to their abilities, and after wash themselves in the River, and then
they think they are pure and clean from all sin.

These people have many feasts, and many fasts, which they keep with sundry
idle Ceremonies, some of them mourn in blew, others as Iapaners, mourn in
white. They are skillful in Physic, especially, in Simples.

The learning which they have, which is but small, is in the Mathematics, and
in Natural Philosophy; they have small store of Books, because there is no
Printing amongst them; all their Books are Manuscripts.

Their vulgar speech is called Industan. The speech at Magors Court, is usually
the Persian Language. Their learned tongue is the Arabian; the common people
are very apt to immitate any thing which they see to be done by Strangers.

I cannot let pass a strange and wonderful report which fell out in Magors
Court, and has been by Sir Thomas Roe reported confidently for Truth. There
was a Rasa, (so great Princes are called,) who was an absolute Atheist, who
would always scornefully, and disdainefully speak and dispute against the
Deity, not enduring either himself, or any other, where he might oppose to
acknowledge any Godhead. This great Prince sporting himself among his
Concubines, one of them who was most favored of the Prince, and might be most
bold with him, when he was flouting, and jesting against the Deity, plucked
from his breast an hair, and withal a drop of blood followed, which was not
regarded at all at the first; This very place within very few days began to
fester, and by degrees grew to that extremity, that the pain was
intolle-rable, and withal proving to be a Gangrene; having used all the
means, which Physic, or Surgery might afford him, it proved irrecoverable.
This Rasa seeing his estate, and that he had no hope of life, but a dreadful
expectation of imminent death, sent to Magor to take his leave of him, Magor
sent diverse of his Nobles unto him, to comfort him, with all the best offers
and speeches which any subject might desire from so mighty a Monarch. Which
when the Nobles had delivered unto him, he made answer in this manner; My Lord
Magor, is a great Monarch to command upon earth, but there is a more omnipotent
Monarch, which has absolute command and power in Heaven and Earth. You all
know, I was an opposer, an enemy, a contemner of all Deity, and against that
omnipotent Majesty of Heaven. He has now showed and manifested his power and
Justice upon me, who now lie in torment, every minute of an hour expecting to
die. What I would not acknowledge in my life, I am constrained to acknowledge
and confess upon my death, for we which live at random, and speak at large
in our lives, when death works natures dissolution, we are then compelled to
change our former opinions, and to acknowledge our former errors. I was an
Atheist, by my own experience I dare and can assure you, what is one of the
greatest causes of Atheism; wicked lives do wish, there were no God to punish
their offenses after this life, and therefore do flatter themselves in their
life; they frame to themselves all the reasons they can devise, to persuade
themselves there is no God. But my Lords, there is no Atheist which dare at the
hour of his death maintain and defend that Doctrine of Atheism, which he did
in life, for nature it self does constrain them to a terrible recantatio^ at
the hour of death, as you may now behold a grievous example in me: what would
not I give? what would not I do? my Lords if I might have longer time of life
to acknowledge and confess freely and plainly that God head, which formerly I
have with scorn and malice so wickedly denied: who would have imagined that I
being a Soldier should not rather have died upon some honorable wound, given
by sword or lance; then so shamefully to die upon the plucking of one hair
from my breast, this kind of death, as it is most shameful to me, so it does
more manifest, and illustrate the Divine power to be most Omnipotent and
miraculous. My Lords, my vital powers do fail me, I can speak no more,
only this for a farewell, which I pray you deliver also to my great Sovereign
Magor, do you all fly and take heed of Atheism, seek out with all the care
and diligence you can, thou knowledge of the only true and Omnipotent God,
dare not live those wicked lives, nor maintain those horrible opinions whilst
you are in health, which as you see most manifestly in me are so terrible and
horrible at this hour of my death; having ended these words, this mighty
Prince dyed.

From Magors Country we sailed toward other Islands, and arrived at an Island
called Zeloon, which Island yields Cinnamon, and other spices in great
abundance, it yields also Pearls, Rubies, Saphires, Garnets, and sundry
other precious stones.

From Zeloon we arrived at an Island called Sammatra, which yields Pepper,
Gold, Benjamin, Camphire, with sundry other Rich Commodities, afterward we
sailed to Patanie, an Island governed by a Maiden Queen.

From this we arrived at Iapan, which is one of the greatest and goodliest
Islands of the World, having great store of Gold Mines, and of Silver, they have
Silver, of three sorts all vnstamped, they have small plate, which goes in the
market for buying of victuales: they have other pieces of plate vnstamped, more
finer Silver, and that goes in the Country, to buy all other commodities; they
have a third sort of plate, finer silver then any Spanish money, and this is
carried away by Strangers.

This Country is Governed by an Emperor, who has under him 62. Kings, the
Revenews of this Emperor are infinite, a great part raised by Rice, the People
of this Country are proud and haughty, very warlike, yet exceeding obedient to
their Emperor, and the Kings, to whom they are Subjects. They are very kind
to Strangers: Justice, in this country is severe without partiality; Thieves
are not imprisoned but presently executed, If a murder be committed, and the
murderer escape, he who apprehends him, has 300. pounds given him upon the
deliverie of the murderer; so that few or none of the murderers escape
present execution: In this Country a man may walk without danger all hours
of the night, so he do not missebehaue himself. If any controversy arise
betwixt party and party, it is forthwith decided, their Laws are Leges
talionis, Eye for Eye, Tooth for Tooth, Hand for Hand, and Life for life, they
worshipp and pray all to a Saint, called Ameda, whom they esteem to be a
Mediator betwixt God and them; when a Soldier dies, they are persuaded he
goes presently to Ottango Fatechman the God of War.

FINIS.

