A report of Master Doctor Redmans answers, to questions propounded him
before his death, concerning certain points of religion, now being with many
in controuersye. Whereunto diverse artycles be added, lately subscribed by
Master Chedsey.

Try all things, and take that which is good.

1551.

The Printer to the Reader.
BEcause I had hard sundry and dysagreynge reports of Master Doctor Redmans
judgment, in certain points of religion at the time of his death, and
perceived one day in Master Secreatary Cecilles Chamber at the Court, a paper
briefly conteynyng the sayings of Master Redman, with the hands of diverse
learned men, subscribed to testifye the truth thereof. I besought him to have
the coppye for the satisfaction of many men, and to show me the truth of the
testimony written, the paper it self he lent me wyllyngly, which (as he told
me) he had in the counsel, of the Duke of Northumberla^de to who^ the Kings
Majesty delivered it. And for the proof of the matter written, they whose
names be subscribed had affirmed the same partly to him self, partly to others
beside the testimony of their own hands, thus having the thing in my hands
and perceiving daily talk to increase here upon, I thought it convenient to
imprint it for the satysfactyon of the more number. And making Master Cecil
pryuye of mine intent with the reasons that moved me, he gave to me two other
wrytinges, the one written by Master Doctor Wilkes and belongyng to Master
Redmans matter, the other of certain artycles subscribed by Master D. Chedsey of
Oxford, a man of much learning, and as it seems yeldyng his affection to
learning, which thing I thought not amiss to knytte together in one printe,
reseruyng the judgment of the whole to be measured by charity, which as
Saint Paul says: thinks not evil, ioyeth not on wickedness, but ioyeth
on truth and suffers al things. etc. In the stock whereof, god grant all the
professors of thy word, to plant, and grifte, the growyng of their knowledge,
that it may in the spreadyng of the bows bring forth good fruit in, worckes
like the stock.

At London the.xii. day of December. M.D.L.I.
A Communication between Doctor Redman, lyinge in his death bed, and Master
Nowell, scholemayster in Westminster, and certain other, touching certain
points of christ's religion.
IN Primis the said Doctor Redman sent for M. Nowel of his own mind, and
said, he was willing to common with him of soche matters as he had moved the
said D. Redman of a day or two before. And he being desired of ye said M.
Nowel to declare his mind concerning certain points of our relygyon, first
said, ask me what ye will, and I will answer you before god truly as I
think without any affection to the world or any worldly person.

Witnesses, Alex. Nowel, Rych. Burton, Ellis Lomas. John Wryght.

2. Ite^ the said D. Redman said that the sea of Rome in these latter days is
sentina malorum, that is, a sink of all evil.

Witnesses.
John young. Alexander Nowell: Rychard Burton, Ry. Elithorne, Edward Cratford,
Ellis Lomas John Wright.

3. Item that purgatory as the schole men caught it and used it, was ungodly,
and that there was no soch kind of purgatory, as they phantasyed.

Witnesses.
John young, Rychard Elithorn, John Wryght. Alex. Nowel, Ed. Cratford, Rychard
Burton, Ellis Lomas.

4. Item that the offering up of the Sacrament in Masses and Trentalles for the
sins of the dead is ungodly.

Witnesses.
John young, A. Nowel, E. Cratforde, Richard Burton, Ellis Lomas.

5. Item that the wicked are not partakers of the body of Christ, but receive
the vtwarde sacrament only.

Witnesses.
John young. Alexander Nowel Rychard Elithorn, Edward Cratforde, Ellis Lomas,
Richard, Burton, John Wright.

6. Item that the Sacrament ought not to be carried about in procession, for
it is taught what is the use of it in these words, Accipite manducate and
bibite, and hoc facite in mei memoriam. Take, eat, and drink, and do this
in the remembrance of me.

John young, Alex. Nowel, Rych. Burton, Ioh. Wryght. El. Cratforde, Ellis Lomas.

7. Item that nothing which is seen in the sacrament, or perceived with any
outward stuff is to be worshypped.

John young, Alex. Nowel, E. Lomas, Ry. Burton.

8. Ite^ that we receive not christ's body corporaliter, id est crasse,
corporally, that is to say grossly, like other meats, and like as the
Caphernites did understand it.

John young, A. Nowel, R. Burto^ El. Cratford, Ellis Lomas. John Wright.

9. Item that we receive christ's body sic spiritualiter vt tamen vere, so
spirituallye, that nevertheless truly.

John young, A. Nowel, R. Burto^ El. Cratford, Ellis Lomas. John Wright.

10. Item as touching transubstantiacion, that there is not in any of the old
Doctoures any good ground or sure proof thereof, or any mention of it, as far
as ever he could perceive, nether that he seith what can be answered to the
objections made against it.

John young. Ry. Burton. Ellis Lomas.

11. Ite^ being asked of Master Wilkes, what that was, that was lyfted up
between the priests hands. he answered: he thought that Christ could nether
be lift up nor down.

John young, Ry. Burton. E. Lomas.

12. Ite^ that Priests may by the law of God marry wyuez.

Alexander Nowell. Ellis Lomas.

13. That this proposition Sola fides iustificat, so that fides signifye veram
viua^ and acquiescente^ in Christo fidem id est amplexum Christi. that is to
say: Only faith does iustifye, so that faith do signifye a true lively, and
a faith restinge in christ, and embrasing Christ, is a true godly sweet and
comfortable doctrine so that it be so taught, that the people take none
occasion of carnal liberty thereof.

John young, A. Nowel, R. Burto^ John Wright. Ed. Cratford, Ry. Elithorn, Ellis
Lomas.

14. Item that our works cannot deserve the kingdom of god and lyf^
everlasting.

John young, Alexander Nowell, Rychard Burton, Ellis Lomas, Edward Cratford,
Rychard Elithorn, John Wright.

Item that the said Doctor Redman at soche times as we the foresaid persons
which have subscrybed heard his communication, concerning the foresaid points
of religion, was of quiet mind and of perfyte remembrance, as far as we
were able to judge.

John young. Alexander Nowel. Rychard Burton. Ellis Lomas. Edward Cratford,
Rychard Elithorn, John Wright.

Also Master young of himself does declare further, touching the former
Articles on this wise.

To the.v. Article.
IN Primis that Doctor Redma^ said more, where as S. Augustine said: Quod Judas
idem accepi^t quod Petrus, that Judas received the same that Peter did, he
said: that he understood that of the sacrament, and that after thee same
phrase a man might say: Quod Simon magus idem Baptisma recepit quod
Apostoli, That Simon Magus received the same baptism that the Apostles did,
when he did receive only the outward sacrament to his conde^pnacio^, for he
said that he thought: christ would not vouchsafe to give his holy flesh to an
ungodly man, and this he said was always his mind, though he knew that other
men did otherwise think.

To the.vi. Article.
Item he said: he never lyked the carriage about of the sacrament, and preached
against it, about a.xvi. years since in Cambridge.

To the.x. Article.
Item when he was demanded of transubstantiacion, he said: that he had
trauayled about it, and thinckinge that the doubts which he perceived did rise
thereon, should be made plain by the schole men, did read their books, and
that after that he had read them that the opinion of transubstantiacio^ was
every day magis and magis languida that is, weaker and weaker, and that there
was no soch transubstantiacion as they made, addinge thereto that ye whole
schole did not know what was meant by consecration, which he said was the whole
action of the holy Communion.

To the.xiii. Article.
Item he said that he did repent him that he had so much striued against
justification by only faith.

To the.xiiii. Article.
Item that worckes had their crown and reward, but that they did not deserve
eternal life and the Kingdom of God, no not the works of grace, Nam domini
dei vita eterna. For everlasting life is the gift of God.

A Note of the Communication that I Rychard Wilkes had with M. D. Redman, being
sick at Westmynster, but of good memory the second day of Noue^ber. 1551.
in the presence of Master Young, and an other whom I did not know, and two of M.
D. Redmans servants, the one called Ellise and the other unknown.
I Wyshed him health in soul and body, and doubted not but more he did
practice the godly counsayl in him self, the which he was wont to give to
other, being in his case, and thanckes be to god, who had given him stuff of
knowledge to comfort him self withal. Says he, God of all comfort give me
grace to have comfort in him, and to have my mind wholye fyxed in him. Master
young and I said Amen. Then I communed with him of his sickness, and the
weakness of his body, and though he were brought never so low, yet he, if it
were his pleasure that raised up Lazarus, could restore him too health
again, No no, says he: that is paste, and I desire it not, but thee will of
God be fulfilled. After this a little other like communicatyon, I asked if I
might be so bold not troublynge him, too know his mind for my learning in
some matters and poynctes of Relygyon, he said: yea, and that he was as glad
to common with me in soche matters as with any manne, and then I said to his
seruaunces: I trust I shall not trouble him, no said Else his servant, my
Lord of London M. Nowell, and other have comuned with him, and he was glad of
it. Then said Master Redman no you shall not trouble me, I pray god ever give
me grace to speak the truth, and his truth, and that which shall redounde to
his glory, and se^d us unity in his church, and we said. Amen. I said he should
do much good in declaringe his faith, and I would be glad to know his mind, as
touching thee Sacrament of thee body and blood of Christ, he said as man is
made of two parts, of the body, and the soul, so christ would feed thee whole
man, but what says he be the words of the text, let us take the words of the
scripture, and he rehearsed the text him self thus, Accepit Jesus panem,
christ took bread, wherein his will was to instytute a Sacrament, Accipite
commedite, take, eat, here he told thee use of it, what did he give the^?
Hoc est corpus meum, He calls it his body. Then I asked him of the presence
of Christ, he said: Christ was present with his sacrament, and in those that
received it as they ought. And there was mira vnitio, a wonderful union (for
that word was named) betwixt Christ and us, as s. Paul says Vos estis, os ex
ossibus eius, et caro ex carne eius, ye be bone of his bones, and flesh of his
flesh, the which union was ineffable. Then I asked him what he thought of the
opinion that Christ was there corporally, naturally, and really, he answered
if you mean by corporally, naturally, and really, yt he is there present, Vere,
I grant. The^ I asked him how he thought of that which was wont commenly to
be spoken, that christ was there flesh blood, and bone, as I have heard the
stewardes in their leetes give charge, when the six Articles stood in effect,
and did give charge too thinquest to inquire, that if there were any that
would deny that Christ was present in the Sacrament of the altar, in flesh,
blood, and bone, they should present them. He said: that was to to gross, and
could not well be excused from the opinion of the Caphernites. The^ I asked him
in asmoch, as christ was there, Vere, how do we receive him in our minds
and spiritual parts, or with our mouths and into our bodies, or both? he
said: we receive him in our minds and souls by faith. Then in asmoche as he
was much in this point, that there was Mira vnitio, a merueylous union, betwixt
us and Christ, in that we were Caro ex carne eius, et os ex ossibus, bone of
his bones and flesh of his flesh, I desired to know his opinion, whether we
received the very body of Christ with our mouths, and into our bodies, or no.
Here he paused and did hold his peace a little space, and shortly after he
spoke, saying: I will not say so, I can not tell, it is a hard question, but
surely says he: we receive Christ in our soul by faith, when you speak of it
other ways, it sounds grossly, and sauoureth of thee Caphernites. Then I
asked him what he thought of that which the Priest was wont to lift up and show
the people betwixt his hands, he said: it is the sacrament, then said I they
were wont to worship that which was lifted up, yea says he: but we must
worship christ in heaven, Christ is nether lifted up nor down, I am glad said I
Master D. to hear you say so much, I would not speak of the holy sacrament
otherwise then reuerentlye, but I fear lest that sacrament and little white
piece of bread so lyfted up, has robbed Christ of a great part of his
honor. The^ said he loking up and prayinge, god grant us grace that we may
have the true understanding of his word, whereby we may come to the true use of
his Sacraments, and said he would never allow the carrying about of the
sacrament and other fond abuses about the same. Then after a little while
pawsyng said I, Master Doctoure if I should not trouble you, I would pray you
to know your mind in transubstantiacion, Jesus Master Wilkes says he will
you ask me that? Sir said I, not if I should trouble you, no no, I will tell
you says he, because I found thopinion of transubsta^ciation received in the
church, when I hard it spoken against, I serched the ancient Doctors
diligently, and went about to stablishe it by them, because it was received,
and when I read many of them, I found little for it, and could not be
satisfied, then I went to the scole doctors, and namely to Gabriel, and wayed
his reasons, the which when I had done, and perceived they were no pithier,
Languescebat opinio mea, de transubstantiatione, my opinion of
transubstantiacion waxed feeble, and then says he: I returned again to
Tertullian and Ireneus, and when I had observed their sayings, mine opinion
that there should be transubstantiacion, Prorsus erat abolita, was quyte
dasshed. Then said I, you know that the scole Doctors did hold that Panis
no^ remanebat post consecrationem, that bread remained not after consecration,
as they called it. The scole Doctors says he: did not know what consecratio
does mean, and here he paused a while, I pray you said I, what say you yt
consecratio does mean, says he: it is Tota actio in ministering the Sacrament
as Christ did institute it. All the whole thing done in the ministry as
Christ ordained it, that is consecratio, and what, says he: need we to doubt
that bread remains. Scripture calls it bread and certain good Auctours
that be of latter time, be of that opinion.

After that I had communed with Master D. Redman, and taken my leave of him,
Master Young came forth into the next chamber with me, to whom I said: that
I was glad to se Master D. Redma^ so well minded, then says Master Young to me,
I am sure he will not deny it, I ensure you says he: Master D. has so moved
me that where as I was of that opinion before in certain things, that I would
have burned and lost my life for them, now says Master young, I doubt of
them, but I see says he: a man shall know more and more by process of time,
and readinge and hearing of others, and Master D. Redmans saying shall cause
me too look more dylygently for them.

Item that Ellis Master Doctor Redmans servant showed me, that he did
know that his Master had declared too King Henrye the.viii. his Majesty,
that faith only justifies, but that doctrine as he thought was not to be
taught the people, least they should be negligent to do good works.

The said M. young has reported, the which also I heard that Master Doctor
Redman should say, that consensus Ecclesie the consent of the Church was but a
weak staff to cleave to, but did exhort him to read the scriptures, for
there was that which should comfort him, when he should be in soche case as he
was then.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London by Thomas Raynalde in Paul's church yeald for Wylliam
Seres, dwelling at the west side of Paul's toward Ludgate, at the sign of the
hedgehog.

Cum Priuilegio ad Imprimendum Solum.


