The REDEMPTION of lost Time.

Ephesians. 5.16. Redeem the Time, for the days are evil.

LONDON, Printed by N.O. for Richard Sergier. 1608.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE SIR EDWARD COKE KNIGHT, LORD chief Justice of the
Kings Majesty's Court of Common Plees.
VOuchsafe my good Lord, to patronage this small Treatise of the Redemption of
lost Time, which here I present unto your Honor (as an undoubted token of my
dutiful affection toward you) not presuming thereby to instruct your Lo. in
any thing you learned not before, being a Person well known to have deep
insight in the due value and worth of TIME, and wisely to understand how to
estimate, employ and divide the same, rendering to every action his due Time,
and to every Time, his right function: But that under the shadow of your wings
and protection, I may be freed from that Tax, whereof the best Books now
adays imprinted cannot escape censure. And verily, if they be commended who
bring us any commodities, drugges or delights, fashions or fruits from foreign
Countries, how can I be justly reproved, if after long pursuit in a strange
land, J bring home a dish of rare dainties, profitable and necessary, a
precious Jewel richer then the gold of Ophir, the Redemption of lost Time.
Thus ceasing to interrupte your Honors waightier businesses, I commend this
unto your Lordsh. favor, and your Lordsh. to the Almighty his protection.

London the 10. of May. 1608. Your Lordsh. humbly to command, Daniel Powel.

To the Reader.
IT is true which is spoken in the Castilian Proverb, El bien no es conocido,
hasta que es perdido, The good is not known until it be lost; as I have at
last found by experience in my self, who have, but since my late Travels,
neither apprehended what TIME is, nor understood the power and value thereof:
which verily does not a little griue and vex me, in that all this while I lost
so much good. Wherefore I could heartily desire with the Poet,

O si praeteritos referat mihi Jupiter annos! That, if it wre possible, I might
once again enjoy the years that are already past, whereby I might employ them
as I ought, and redeem them from the captivity wherein they have been
detained. But he who once so little regarded to know and estimate the Time as
appertained, is now well worthy to wish and want that which sometimes he had
in abundance and vainly misspent. Yet notwithstanding I hold it for a special
gift and grace given me of GOD, that now at length he has vouchsafed me this
knowledge, that henceforth I may better employ the time which the Lord in mercy
shall hereafter grant unto me; and that now I thoroughly understand what it is
to come out of Babylon, to know God in Christ, to worship him only; to read the
Scriptures, to hear Gods word, to be partaker of the Sacraments, and to pray
in a known tongue; which I speak not as if I had been at any time affected,
otherwise then now I am, but because I never heretofore esteemed either TIME,
or any of these benefits according to their just value and worth, as now I do.

And in this respect I could wish all men to constitute me their Proctor and
Advocate as well to sue for their ransom; as also to teach and instruct such
negligent Sinners as detain Time captiuated, how they ought to Redeem the
same, and how much it concerns and imports them; to admonish secure and
careless Christians rightly to weigh the Benefits which in great abundance
GOD has mercifully bestowed upon this Church and Common wealth; and to beseech
all others that they loose neither hour nor moment of any Time or Season.

For accomplishment whereof I desire all men to peruse this small Manual,
wherein they may plainly understand and learn, both how and from what TIME is
to be redeemed, and afterward in what sort they ought to employ the same. And
though happily some men may think that in discoursing of TIME much Time may be
spent (which though otherwise I acknowledge may be true,) yet hold I not the
Time imployde in this Treatise, either lost or ill spent.

I heartily pray and beseech our Lord GOD, even for his most precious blood sake
(which was the price of our Redemption) that even as I wish and desire, so this
Redemption of Time lost, may be beneficial and profitable to the Reader.

D. P.

The Contents of the Chapters which are contained in this Treatise.
CHAP. 1. What a precious Jewel TIME is. Fol. 1. CHAP. 2. That we are Lords of
Time, and to what end GOD did bestow it upon us, and wherein we are to employ
the same. Fol. 17. CHAP. 3. How GOD in his just Judgment cutteth off sinners
from inioying the benefit of Time, who before made no reckoning thereof to
profit themselves thereby, as they ought and might have done. Fol. 29. CHAP. 4.
He that now inioyeth the Benefit of TIME, must with great feruencie and zeal
labor to imploye it altogether well. Fol. 41. CHAP. 5. How worthy of reproof
idle Persons are, and who they be. Fol. 57. CHAP. 6. How the BODY detaineth in
captivity the Time which is properly the SOVLES, and how it exalts it self
and rebelleth against the SOVLE. Fol. 72. CHAP. 7. That lay persons may
lawfully enjoy some recreations, and intertaynements of mirth, solace and
pleasure. Fol. 84. CHAP. 8. That likewise it is lawful, yea very necessary for
religious and ecclesiastical persons to use some honest exercise, which may
serve for intermission, recreation and rest. Fol. 96. CHAP. 9. How TIME is to
be redeemed; and who they be that detain the same in captivity. Fol. 108.
CHAP. 10. How it is to be understood that the days are evil, and how that
therefore TIME is to be redeemed. Fol. 119.
EPIGRAMMA.
PRimus vt ante liber docuit sperare salutem,
Tarda tui quamuis fuerit moestitia cordis,
Dum syncera tamen: promit sic docta secundus
Dogmata, queis discas a primo flore iuuentae
Subdere colla Deo: rocteque impendere Tempus.
Tempus, and obrizo long praestantius auro,
Cui magnae cedat famae Carbunculus, atque
Arcana quaecunque iacent tellure reclusa.
Non si sort tibi non applaudente, reperta
Diuitia pereant, spes est reuocare, volantis
At non est horae fas instaurare ruinam.
Obseruat natura vices, rapidusque polorum
Tempore transigitur cursus, fit circulus, atque
Vertitur in gyrum rursus, rursusque recursat,
Nec tamen vna redit transacti temporis hora.
Resnullareuocanda prece, precioue, beatum
Quae faciat, stygios aut certe mergat in amnes.
Si tibi currenti fructus cum tempore cedit,
Otia declinas, remanent te praemia, verum
Si teris incaute Tempus, quando vltima tande^
Hora aduentarit, fueritque occasio cassa
Virtutis, lugens inferni claustra subibis.
Ergo age quando datu^ est, virtuti insistere cura:
Vt tutus Christum valeas audire vocantem.
G. B. THE Past, the Present, and the Time to be
Could a man tell, or were there mortal wight
So far above earth, raised to that hight
That heavens dimensions he could clearly see;
Better that man were to report from thee
The Benefits, mortallity might raise
From thy just labors, then th'vncertaine praise
Attending books, which not their worth can free
From the Taxation which foul Envy lays
On Virtues faire-selfe, and with hellish spite
Is ever blasting the deserved Bays,
That should adorn her: But receive this right
From TIME it self that must thy fortress be,
Whose perfect use is only taught by thee.
M. Drayton. The Authors (besides sacred Scriptures) who are cited in this
present Treatise.
A
Alphonsus de Castro. S. Ambrose. Andreas Bishop of Caesarea. Aristotle. S.
Augustine.
B
S. Basil. Bid the venerable. Bernardinus de Sena. S. Bernard. Bonauenture.
C
Cassianus. Cesarius Helisterbacchensis. S. Chrysostom.
D
Dion Cassius. Dionysius Carthusianus.
E
Elianus. Euthymius.
G
Gregory Nissen. Gregory the Pope.
H
Haymo. Horace.
I
S. Jerome. John Chrysostom. John Damascen. John Orozeus. John Stobeus.
L
Laertius. Laurence Justinian. Ludouicus Blosius.
M
Maldonatus.
N
Nicholas Diukespu.
O
Origin. Ovid.
P
Plutarch.
S
Salmeron. Seneca. Simon de Cassia. Suarez.
T
Thaulerus. Theodoret. Thomas Aquinas. Thomas Kempis.
V
Viegas. Virgil.
Z
Zedrenus.
CHAP. I. What a precious Jewel TIME is.
IT is the manner and style of the sacred Scripture, that when any notable cause
of importancie is showed and noted unto us, some wonderful vision or
miraculous type ever goes before, which does awake and stir up our spirits
and senses for attention, leaving them in suspense and admiration, as very
ordinarily may be seen in the book of the Prophets, and specially in the
Revelation of the blessed Evangelist Saint John, where amongst many other
admirable visions and strange figures, chiefly that is to be noted, which he
has written in the tenth Chapter (which together with those words of the
Apostle, in his Epistle to them of Ephesus, Ephesians. 5, 16.
Redeem the Time, because the days are evil; shall be the very Theme or
ground of this our Treatise and exhortation) saying, Reave. 10.1.
that then he saw a mighty Angel come down from heaven, clothed with a
cloud, and that he wore upon his head, in steed of a Dyademe, the rainebow,
and his face shined as the Sun in midday, His feet were as pillars of fire,
And he had in his hand a little Book open, Ver. 2.
and he put his right foot upon the Sea, and his left upon the earth, 3.
And cried with a loud voice, after the manner of a Lion when he roareth, 5.
and lifting up his finger toward heaven, 6.
swear by him that lives for evermore, which created heaven, and the earth,
and the Sea, and all things in them contained, That from the days of the
seventh Angel, there should never be any more TIME.

And briefly to manifest the mysteries which here are comprised, Refert illos
Viegas in Apoc. cap. 10 Andreas Episc. Cesareae in c. 5. Apoc. Act. 1.2.
This Angel according to the exposition of many Authors, is Christ our Lord;
the Angel of the great Council, or else is one of the blessed Angels which
represents his person, and executes the office of Legat-ship, as his
Imbassadour. He came down from Heaven, because visibly he is to descend from
thence in a cloud shining with great power and majesty, to judge the whole
world: Howbeit, his coming clothed with a cloud, does signify the confusion
and turmoile which shall happen as well in those last days, as also in that
space and time, in which the persecution of Antichrist shall endure: when
specially they shall behold those hideous signs and terrible tokens, which are
to happen before the day of the universal Judgment, and are every moment to
expect that fearful presence of the Judge. The Rainbow signifies peace; and
the Fire, wrath, furiousness and punishment: and in those two extremities of
man's body, which are, the feet, and the head* both the end and beginning
thereof (viz.) both top and toe, are pourtrayed both the commings of our
Savior CHRIST into the world. The first was, of mere mercy, to make peace
and atonement between God and men; and because of that, for his Escutchion
and special difference, he bare upon his head the Rainbow of heaven, in
token that the Deluge of his former anger, displeasure and passed punishment,
were now ceased. And in the latter coming, he shall come as Judge, and
therefore he shall carry feet of fire, which betokens inflexible rigor, and
terrible wrath: Ignis ante ipsum praecedet, Psalm. 50.3.
says David, There shall go before him a consuming fire. The Form and shape
of the Pillars signifies, the mighty strength and force he shall have, for the
execution of his final sentence and last Judgment. The Book open in his hand,
in respect of his Godhead, represents the eternal wisdom he has, for the
which he appropriateth to himself the office of Judge; and in respect of his
Manhood, it signifies the absolute knowledge he apprehends to understand the
worth and worthiness of the causes, process and actions of all the sons of
Adam, and the scroll or proclamation of the divine law, wherevpo^ they are to
be judged. The putting of one foot upon the Sea, and the other upon the Land,
is as much to say, as that he imbraceth, co^passeth and comprehends all
things, sea and land, earth and water; and that nothing can escape his hands,
free it self from his power, Psalm. 139. ver. 3. and 8.
nor be hid from his presence. The roaring, as of a Lion, signifies the wrath
and vengeance, wherewith he shall pronounce sentence against the condemned
ones. And the solemn oath, signifies the infallible certainty and
assuredness he shall have, in the accomplishment and execution of those things
before prophesied, and preached to the people, which in the days of the
seventh Angel, when they shall hear that fearful Trumpet sounding and
summoning all the sons of Adam to Judgment, shall end and finish the Time
for ever afterward; and they who made no profit thereof, when they had it,
but have deferred their good works until the uttermost day, and last hour of
their lives, shall eternally remain without it. And that public sounding and
proclamation of the Angel, with such and so many circumstances, That on some
day Time should end and cease, and when that should be, is, to give us
intelligence that we may understand of what price, value and estimation, and
what a great benefit of God bestowed upon us it is, that he has made us
Lords of the same all the days of our lives. And on the contrary, what a great
cross and punishment is it, for othersome to be absolutely bereaved thereof
and to have it quite taken away from the^, as a thing by them misspent, and ill
employed.

To manifest what a precious thing Time shall be, it suffices only to know,
that in one instance of time, one may gain infinite eternity of glory. And
therefore the Holy Ghost counsaileth us, Eccli. 4.20.
to preserve and keep Time, as we do gold, so shall we depart from evil;
which is, as if he had told us, that we should use and employ it in good works,
and not loose the least moment thereof. Again, he wills us to be advised by
the same Ecclesiasticus, Eccli. 14.14.
saying: Defraud not thy self of the good day, and let not the portion of the
good desires ouerpas thee. One translation has Particula bonae diei: and
others (as likewise in the vulgar editio^) Boni doni. One while he says, let
no part of the good day ouerpas thee for naught; another while he says of the
good gift, or desires. The meaning is, to admonish us, that we spend well the
Time, and the Day, yea all days: for he that can well order and redres one day
may by the same amend and reform al his life, and in the same, man ought to do
all the good he can for him self, and for his neighbors, exercising himself in
works of Piety and mercy. King David so much feared to loose the least
particle of Time, and so far endeavored wholly to employ the same well, that he
striued and conte^ded with the sun, for early vprising to praise God, which at
length the king prevented, according to those words, Psalm. 11^. ver. 147.148
Praeueneru^t oculi mei ad te diluculo. Early in the morning do I cry unto
thee: Mine eyes prevent the morning watch, that I might meditate in thy words:
for before the Sun was up, I was occupied in the same. Which according to the
exposition of S. Ambrose, is as much as if more clearly he had spoken, Rise
earlier thou Christian, before the Sun be up, for I hold it great negligence
and carelessness most culpable in thee, that the beams of the Sun when it
rises, should find thee idle and sleeping in thy bed. Thou art ignorant
perhaps, that thou ought every day to render unto God almighty the first
fruits of thy tongue and heart? See thou have a daily harvest, and daily fruit
in like manner. And in another Psalm, the Prophet says, Psalm. 77.4.
Anticipauerunt vigilias oculi mei. My eyes prevented, and awaked before the
watchmen, and guard of the city: that is to say, (as S. Jerome declares)
before that any body went to watch, or did awake, I awaked and watched at
midnight and in the morning, at midday and in the evening; and finally seven
times a day do I laud my Lord, yea, always and at all hours have I his
praises in my mouth. He well knew how to observe Time, he duly acknowledged
what it was, and what stood him available; and as of a thing so precious, he
knew how to make profit thereof, without loosing one jot either of the Good
day, or of the good gift. Time says Theophrastus is a most costly Theophrast.
expense. Seneca. Epist. 1.
And Seneca in his first Epistle (which he wrote to his friend Lucilius) says
thus; What man is he, that will suffer me to set price on his Time? How much
thinks he, is the day worth, admitting that every day he were to die?
wherefore we do much deceive our selves herein, because we fix not our eyes upon
death, a great part whereof is already past; all that of our age and life which
yet remains behind, death holds in possession. Wherefore my dear friend
Lucilius, persist still in doing of that which thou thy self in thy Letters,
did write unto me thou do, being a person that so well know the due
estimation of Time: embrace all the hours, so shall thou depend less upon the
morrow, pointing (as it were) this day with thy finger, not permitting the
same to ouerpasse thee idly, for the life (putting it self off with
prolonging) flies away and passes at random; And all things else being
estrainged and alienated from us, only Time is ours; and very natural reason
has infourmed us, that we obtain the possession of a very swift thing, which
runs away so fast, and slideth amain, yea flies apace from between our
hands. The knowledge and discretion of mortal men is so little and weak, that
they impute it a great loss incase they leave undone the least vilest thing,
or smallest trifle, being indeed reuocable and amendable though pretermitted,
none thinks that he owes or is indebted any thing for having received Time,
considering that Time is but one sole thing, which yet the grateful man can
make no due satisfaction for that which he received as he ought, in regard of
the high price, and for that the debt is great in undertaking the day upon
himself. And in his book of the shortness of life, Idem lib. de breuit vitae.
he says: There is no man that will forgo or part with his patrimony or
substance, nor disinherite himself, but rather will keep it, and augment it:
as for Time, and his course of life, he will with great facility impart and
bestow them many times on diverse vain things. They are very niggard of their
wealth, but for Time they are most prodigal and lavish, when as indeed their
honest and laudable covetousness, should be only of Time; because most truly
(as in the same Book, then presently after he says: Time is the most
precious thing that is, and yet for all that, they dispraise it and hold it of
no esteem, for naught, and of no worth; as though it were right naught indeed,
bearing no price at all. Not one makes reckoning of it when they have it, but
if any be sick, then shall you see bowing of knees and crouching before the
Physician, and if he fear the sentence of death, that man will weigh him with
gold for to ransom his life,

That blessed holy man, Laurentius Iustinianus, Laur. Just. de vitae solit.
6.10.
treating of Time and the value thereof, says thus: Who has that power to
comprehend or conceive in his heart, what a precious thing Time is? O what
grace, eloquence or sweet flowing speech of man is able to declare it? None
knows it, but such as now want and miss the same. Then all the goods of the
world, honors, dignities, and prelacies, the pomp of this age, corporal
delights and bodily pleasures yea and all manner recreations, sports and
pastimes, joys and intertainements whatsoever they be, which are under the
cope of heaven, would be given in boot and exchanged for one hour of Time,
if it were possible to be obtained; because in this most short space, they
would appease the divine Justice, they would make glad and rejoice the Angels,
they would eschew from that fearful sentence of eternal damnation, and
gain (yea without al doubt they would procure) life everlasting. And they are
most unhappy, upon whom the Sun of mercy is already set, who most
irreuocably shall descend into that lake of misery, where there is neither
order nor good course, Job. 10.15. and 22,
but fright and horror perpetual, and with good reason shall be denied of
their pardon, because of their contempt and disdaining of Time when it was
offered them, who respected neither consideration nor the experience of the
validity and worthiness of the same, nor yet the great necessity and lack
thereof, which one day they should feel, living after the taste of their
pallats and proof of their appetites, as though they should never dye. Oh I
would to God, that they who employ the time wickedly, and live most idly and
securely, did know how to estimat that, which they ouerpasse, and look without
consideration and due regard. For what thing is it that is more valuable then
Time? what thing more excellent? what thing more seemly and cheerful? what
thing of more fruit and better profit? or what thing more lovely, amiable and
beautiful? But out alas! great dolor, woe and grief! There is not any thing
more vilipended, nor at least worse respected, nor more basely reputed, nor
more indignely, and opprobriously used then Time is, whereas indeed men are
able to gain and obtain heaps of eternal reward, in whatsoever small portion
of Time. Wherefore they who well know the due value of Time, will not ouerslip
any space or quantity thereof, be it never so little without some profit, and
for which they are to yield to God, a most strait account. And the famous S.
Bernard says: Ber. ser. ad Schol.
That he reckoned nothing more precious then Time; but in these days nothing
more base nor more contemptible. They let go the days of health, and none
considers of them, as though by right and equity, a man should not be grieved
to loose that day which is never to return again. But let men note, and be
assured, that as one hair of the head shall not perish, Luc. 21.18.
much less shall any one moment of Time, without rendering good reason and
account for the same. Let none of you (my Brethren,) esteem that Time for
naught, which you consume away, and spend in idle talk, Words fly away
irreuocable, Time runs on irremediable, and the ignorant does not understand
what he loses. It is lawful (say some) to chat a little, and to hold
conference till one hour be past, O! but how long will that hour endure? That
very hour, which our Lord has granted thee to repent, to sue and prosecute
for thy pardon, to purchase grace, and to procure glory. O! but how long will
that Time continue? That very time, wherein thou art to procure favor and
mercy of the divine Piety, and to make all possible speed to accompany the
Angels, to sigh and desire fervently for that euerduring Inheritance; to waken
that slow and lukewarm will, and to bewail all wicked fellowship and impious
iniquity. Thus far the Divine Bernard. I would to God (says Bernardine de
Sena) if that traffic and merchandise of Time, Bernardin. tom. vlt. ser. 13.
art. 3. and 4. Et tom. vlt. ser. 18. p. 1. princip.
might be carried into Hell to be sold; where for one only half hour, would
be given a thousand worlds, if they had them. But Time surpasses all things,
that are in the world, it is so gainefull, that men enjoying the same, may
reap and obtain such grace, as that they may come to possess and enjoy even
God himself, goods and treasure infinite. And if the Devil might obtain to
himself but a small space of Time, wherein he might repent him, then would
he save himself, and recover that good, which now without remedy he has
lost. That thing is most precious (says the same man) whereof a small parcel,
valueth so much as a great quantity of another thing: And therefore that is
the gold, because that with a little thereof one may buy many and large waights
of any other thing or metal; Considering all which, mark well, what a thing
Time is, and how available, in respect that in one instance of the same, if
thou know how to traffic well, thou may win heaven and life everlasting
in such sort as the good Thief has done.

That holy Arsenius well knew the estimation of Time, Dion. Carth. in Opusc.
who after he had retired himself from his ordinary deuotio^s, was so greedy
in spending the time, that he was wont to say, That a few hours of sleep was
sufficient for a religious mind. And whereas on a time perceiving himself to
be stung and conquered of Time he called it unto him, saying; Come, now come
my violent enemy, then setting himself down, did sleep a little.

And if it be lawful to speak of Gentiles and Heathen men for the confounding
of ill livers and bad Christians, Plutarch.
Plutarch writes of Marcus Cato censorius, that three things he greatly
abhorred. The first was, to repose secrets in women, The second, To go by
water, when one might travail by land. And the third was, that he should
ouerpasse any day, wherein some good were not done. Pliny the great, seeing one
day a Nephew of his, walking for pleasure, sore chid and reprehended him,
saying, well thou may do, not to loose them hours. Sertorius the
Proconsull and Captain general of the Roman Forces, Plutarch in Sertorio.
at such time as he was forced to redeem and buy his Passage for money of
certain barbarous people, some of his company murmured, and took that action
in very ill part, for that it appeared unto them, as Tribute given by the
Romans, he made them this answer, I have neither redeemed nor bought any other
thing save only Time, which is a Treasure most precious of all the best and
richest things that are in the eyes of the most greediest, and most covetous
persons that be: To conclude then, if the Heathen have so reputed and thought
of Time, how much more ought a Christian man to estimate thereof, considering
that in and by Time, he may gain eternal wealth and endless glory.

CHAP. 2. That we are Lords of Time, and to what end GOD did bestow it upon
us, and wherein we are to employ the same.
THE learned and devout Laurentius Iustinianus reports the same which Seneca
said before, Laur. Just. de vita solitar.
that all other things are strange unto us, but Time is properly termed OURS,
and that we are Lords of the same, because it is in our hands, and lies in
our power, to employ it as we please: which is no small favor and benefit
that GOD does for us, in bestowing as our own, one sole thing so precious, and
specially by granting it so bountifully, and so long, though the longest be
but very short; Hereupon says Seneca, Seneca.
the Time we enjoy is no small matter, and without reason it is, that men do
complain of the shortness of their lives, but rather should esteem that
loss to be very great, when they loose Time. The life is long enough, for
performance of special and commendable actions, incase the whole be well
employed. In the Angels, God proceeded so determinatelie, and with such
limitation, that for instances, he gave them set terms, and prefixed times
for their trial, whether they would stand or fall; very short spaces and
moments, as some say, they were but two or three mome^ts, and othersome extendes
them more largely to four, which in truth to them sufficed, because of their
quick apprehensions, and perfection of their natural inclinations; but to
slow, unconstant, and changeable man, God has granted many years and ages:
Howbeit, not to live idle and secure, nor to waste and consume it in play,
delights, iestes, pleasures, meriments, pastimes, and carnal sports, much
less in sin and the hurt of himself, but that it be employed in good
works, in lawful exercises and honest recreations, and should labor in the
vineyard, Math. 20.2.4.6. etc.
and painefully in the sweat of his brows gain his daily food and stipend,
which is the workemans wages, and the reward of his good adventure. Whereupon
the Apostle says, Gal. 6.9.10
Doing of good works, and using the Time in such things for which it is lent
us. Let us therefore, neither deceive our selves, nor be dismayed, nor be
weary to reap and mow Time, and we shall gather our harvest and fruit in due
season. For which, in all that time we enjoy, let us perform what good we
may. And Seneca, Seneca.
though an heathen man, says, that Time was not so liberally and so
bountifully bestowed upon us, that we should loose any part of the same,
which by the Apostle is called the acceptable time, 2. Cor. 6.2.
and the day of salvation. Wherefore (my good brethren) employ the same for
your souls health, to do works acceptable and grateful unto God. And
therefore also, the time of this life, is called the Fair time, or Market
time. For as in the same, wares are sold and bought most cheap and at a small
rate: So in this life, great marchandizes and jewels of infinite value, may be
bought at a small rate, 2. Cor. 4.17
and for one momentanie and light tribulation or affliction may be caused an
eternal weight of glory (as the same Apostle S. Paul says) which in Heaven
is to be possessed and enjoyed.

And by the way let us here note, how by that holy and blessed Apostle, it is
termed a weight, because that with the weight and greatness thereof, it
makes light and easy all the difficulties and troubles of this life, and that
which we suffer and abide here in the same, makes us to weigh: all which in
comparison is as easy and as light to bear, as one straw or chafe. Even as a
great heavy weight in one end of a pair of scales, does highly lift up and
out-waigh the other end, wherein there is but one single straw or chafe: So
the weight of our reward being put in the one end of the balance, does lift up
the other end wherein our labors and worldly businesses are weyed. Whereunto
agrees that, which the same Apostle in another place has written, namely,
That the passions and tribulations of this life, Romans 8.18.
are neither comparable nor equal to the glory to come, which hereafter
shall be revealed and manifested in us: till such time by all comparison, they
are very small, light, and of no weight. And upon that similitude of the Fayors
(for application sake to our present purpose) it seems our Savior CHRIST has
meant and used it, Luc. 19.13.
when he compared the kingdom of Heaven to a man trafficking and merchandising
in this world; Math. 13.45.
considering when he spoke to all the faithful (as to men full encombered with
many businesses) Occupy till I come, for hereafter there will be no place.

Furthermore, the time of this life is called, Time of vacation (from all other
businesses) whereby man may solly and wholly addict and employ himself in the
service of our Lord. It is called Time of employment, according to those words
of our Redeemer, spoken by the mouth of his Evangelist S. John, Now is the time
to work, Io. 9.4.
while it is day; the night comes, when no man can work. It is likewise
called the time of sowing, and the time of mowing and gathering of the Harvest,
because it is the time of grace and faith, whereby the reward of heaven is to be
won and obtained. And therefore by the example of the heedefull, diligent,
and careful Emmet, the Holy Ghost sends to reprove and confound the idle and
sloathfull person, Prou. 6.6.
Go and behold the Emmet (says he in the Proverbs of Solomon) She prepares
her meat in the Summer, Verse 8.
and gathers her food in harvest: which she lays up and keeps in her
storehouse or granarie for her provision against Winter, which season is
counted no time to get, but to eat and spend that which before was gathered
and laid up.

Time was bestowed on us by the Lord (says Laurence Justinian) for to lament
and bewail us of our sins, Lau. Justin.
to be very penitent, to purchase virtues, to increase in grace, to atchiue
faith, to discharge us from hellish torments, and to obtain heavenly glory.
And it is so true, that Time was given us to be employed in good works, as
only that which we spend about the same, and in virtuous and necessary
exercises is most properly OURS, and only enters within the reckoning of our
lives and account of our days: For all the rest, there is neither respect nor
memory thereof in Heaven, nor in the book of life; albeit the world makes
reckoning of them, records and inrolls them for long continuance; but our Lord
knows no such, at least he says, that he acknowledges no such, as a thing
which neither pleases, delights, nor yet contenteth him, but rather much
vex and sore offend him. So Origin, Orig. in Psalm. 37.18.
expounding the words of David, The Lord knows the days of the undefiled,
which are the Just, says thus; In the sacred Scripture, it is said, That God
knows but only good things, and that he is ignorant of the evil, and them
he forgets; not in that his knowledge cannot comprehend all things both good
and bad, but in regard the evil are unworthy of his sight and notice, I
know you not, Math. 25.12.
said he, to the foolish Virgins, and as much again to the workers of
iniquity. The Lord knows the ways of the just (said that kingly Prophet
David. Prou. 4.18.
) And Solomon says, that the Lord knows the way of the right hand. And so
says David, that the Lord knows the hours, and the days, and the Time of
them that live without spot of sin, but is ignorant of the days of Sinners.
The holy Scripture makes no reckoning of the time of Saul's reign, save only
of two years, 1. Sam. 13.1
though he reigned 40. years, because only two years he lived well, and
without blemish of sin, and the residue, were days stained and tainted
therewith. So of S. Paul. Act. 20. verse 31.

Dion Cassius writes, Dion Cassius.
that in a City of Italy was sound an ancient Sepulcher, wherein upon the
Tomb or upper stone thereof, were written or ingraued these words, Here lies
Simil, the Roman Captain, whose life, though it were long, yet for all that
is reputed to live, but only seven years, because in them he retired
himself from the Court, and being freed of the cares and charge in Office,
which formerly was imposed upon him, he addicted himself to the study of
virtue, to his own meditations and godly exercises. Damascen in his history
of Barlaam and Iosaphat reports, Damasc. histor. Barla. cap. 18.
that when Iosaphat demanded of Barlaam, of what age he was of; he made him
this answer, (if I be not deceived) I am forty and five years of age, and
so many years there are, since I was borne. What do thou answer me
(replied Iosaphat) for thou seem to me, that thou art past seauentie? I
mary (said Barlaam) if thou reckonest my years ever since I was borne into
this world, thou say right, and art not deceived, for that I am past
seauentie; But those years do by no means seem unto me, years of life, nor
can such be reckoned in the Account, which were spent and consumed in the
vanities of this world; because then (as servant to my sins) I lived after
the taste of my sensuality, and appetite of my flesh and outward man, being
then without all doubt dead according to the inward man, and so I may not call
them years of life, which rather were years of death; But after that (by the
grace of God) I was crucified and dead to the world, and the world to me, and
have put off the old man, then lived I no more after my sensuality, nor after
the flesh, being enemy to the Spirit, but only to Jesus Christ, and those
years I call years of life and salvation. And I believe that all those who
remain in sin, and obey the devil, and consume their lives in delights and
vain concupiscences, are departed this life and dead, because that Sin is the
death of the soul, Romans 6.19.21.
as affirms the blessed Apostle S. Paul, Romans 6.21. Godly S. Jerome
expounding the first Chapter of the Prophet Haggai, says: Hieron. in Agg. cap.
1.
All that Time wherein we give place to Sin, and serve our own vices,
perishes and will be lost, and as though it had never been, shall be reputed
for naught.

It is reported of Titus Vespasian, that being one day at supper, and calling
to mind, that in that day he had showed no courtesy nor rewarded any body,
nor had performed any good turn, or done any good deed to any person, he
spoke with great feeling and sorrow of heart, to all them that were then
present; Oh my friends! how grievously sorry am I, to have lost this day; Then
let a Christian man hold for lost, that day which by him is ill employed, and
make that reckoning that he shall have nothing for it.

For manifestatio^ of this truth, that the years spent and consumed in vices
and wickedness, are not properly OURS, Seneca says, Seneca.
That there are many who first must leave to live, before they ca^ begin to
live. Time (says that famous Doctor Thomas de Kempis) was bestowed upon us,
Tho. de Kemp. 1. page Sermon. ad Nouit. cap. 7.
to perform good works, not for idleness, nor to hear or rehearse old
tales, fables, vanities, nor things of no value. Wherefore my good Sons
(speaking to the Nouices in Religion) let neither hour nor any time ouerpasse
you without some fruit and profit. And when you are freely licensed to speak,
you are not permitted to talk or confer about any other thing, but what
shall be commodious, necessary, and profitable. For as you are to give
reckoning to God almighty for every idle word: Mat. 12.36.
so are you bound to yield a strait account for all the Time which you have
lost and ill employed. Ludouicus Blosius amongst other his exhortations which
he gives to such as Lud. Blos.
purpose to lead a spiritual life, advises and says, That he should regard
and weigh the estimation and value of Time, and esteem the least part thereof
(if ill spent) how little soever it be, for a very great loss. And that
mystical Thaulerus, Io. Thauler.
amongst other documents and admonitions he gives to religious persons, says;
Take heed and beware (as from the most pestiferous poison that is) of the
least loss of Time; And so one of the Offenses, whereof the Remembrancers or
Chequer-officers; and our Accusers at the day of Judgment, shall accuse and
tax us withal, will be loss of Time, according to that, which the Prophet
Jeremy in his Lamentations does give us to understand, Lame. 1.21
Vocauit aduersum me Tempus. The Lord called Time to be witness against me.
The which place Thomas of Aquine expounds of the day of judgment, Tho. de
Aquin. Sap. 5.
because amongst other things, whereof we are there to be charged and burdened,
one will be Time; Where all the whole orb of the earth (in defense of Gods
honor, will commence hard suite against all sottish and senseless sinners,
accusing the^, and requiring Justice against them for the wrong and hurt they
did, against both their Creator and the creatures, by abusing and misimploying
them, and halling them by the hair, against their wills, to serve their own
lusts and wicked appetites.

CHAP. 3. How GOD in his just Judgment cutteth off sinners from enjoying the
benefit of Time, who before made no reckoning thereof to profit themselves
thereby, as they ought and might have done.
NOTwithstanding that solemn Oath of the Angel, (whereof we spoke in the
first chapter) that on some day, Time should finish, and make an end of all in
general at the day of universal Judgment, after which there should be no
more Time to deserve either well or ill, or to make any saving repentance: And
that every man in particular, in the last day of his life is to expect his own
peculiar Judgment: yet for all that it is greatly to be feared and considered.
That God accustometh for the punishment of the heedlesse and negligent sinner,
to cut off Time from him, and to shorten his life, least he should profit
himself thereby as he ought and might have done, considering that he has ill
employed and misspent the same. So teaches that famous Bernardine de Sena, S.
Bern. art. 3. cap. 4.
and for proof thereof cites that place of the Apocalipse, Apoc. 3.3.
Si non vigilaueris, veniam ad te tanquam fur. If thou watch not, I will come on
thee as a thief; and thou shall not know what hour I will come upon thee.

Whereupon God threatens the careless sinner, who from day to day deferreth
and prolongeth his conversion and amendment (dreaming and imagining that he
shall have Time enough, yea, to spare) says thus; Be not negligent and
careless, neither jest nor dally thou with Time, neither esteem the same so
certain, so sure, so long, nor so at thy command as thou imaginest; watch and
sleep not, be ever wary and well advised; If otherwise, he will come unto
thee as accustometh the thief to come, to rob and spoil, and will on a
sudden, at unawares, catch and apprehend thee; before thou can know or
perceive on what hour he is to come The thief comes to steal, and to carry
away the treasure, which he shall find heedlesly laid up, and which is not
kept with that due regard and carfulness as behooved; and such is Time in the
house of the sinner: And therefore with good and just reasons, will the Lord
cut it off, because it was not regarded and employed to that end, whereby good
gain and profitable exchange, yea great riches, blessings, and eternal
happiness might have bin had and obtained.

Conformable to this, says our Savior, by his Evangelist S. Matthew; Mat.
25.29
He that has shall have more, and from him that has not, shall be taken away
that which he has, or seems to have. The just man apprehends Time as his
own, and is Lord thereof, for that he well knows how to use it, and to him
that has time at the end of his life, more time and space shall be given him,
to examine himself and to purify his conscience, and shall have abundance,
because he shall obtain full remission and complete pardon of all his sins,
plentiful grace, and glory infinite. And he possesses no Time, who (while
he lives) does not well employ the same, but being seduced and deceived by
the Devil with prolonging of amendment, thinks that he shall enjoy
sufficient, by the just Judgment of God shall be bereaved of his vain
expectation, and shall want space to repent, either by some sudden death, or by
some other disgraceful and unfortunate accident; Thus far Bernardin
Senensis. And for that cause does our Lord and Savior, admonish us so often,
Mat. 25.13.
that we watch, because we know not the day nor the hour wherein Time will
make an end of us.

And the holy Church semblably, like a loving and co^passionate Mother, does
advise us the very same, saying; Let us reform and amend that which hitherto
we have most ignorantly or wilfully transgressed, considering that no Time of
repentance will be hereafter left us, which though we seek for, yet shall not
we obtain the same. And to this purpose, as God cuts the third of life before
the time from him, who profited not with Time in his service. Bern. de Sena.
Bernardinus de Sena reports a most terrible and fearful accident which in
his time happened in a certain village of Catalunna, near to the kingdom of
Valencia. A young man of the age of eighteen years, having been most
rebellious and disobedient toward his Parents, did many times loose and forget
the regard and respect due unto them. In punishment whereof, God leaving him to
himself, came to be a most notorious Thief, and for robberies being
apprehended and condemned to die, was brought to be hanged to the market place
of his own Town: And the young man being dead, and hanging upon the gallows,
and all the whole Town present, they saw and perceived his beard to sprout
out, and much hair to grow, and to remain with a wrinkled brow and a writhen
face, full of gray hairs, and with the aspect and semblance of a man of ninety
years, a thing whereat all were astonished and wonderfully amazed, which
accident being brought to the knowledge of the Bishop, who then resided in that
Village, commanded that all should prepare themselves to prayer, himself
performing the same, most humbly beseeched Almighty God, that he would be
pleased, to reveal unto them the mystery of so rare an accident, and after a
pretty while entreated silence, and speaking with a loud voice, said thus; You
see (my Sons) that this young man died of the age of eighteen years, who
afterward appeared and seemed with the visage and countenance of a man of
ninety years; whereupon you are to note what God would have us to be
instructed of, namely, that after the course of nature he was undoubtedly to
live ninety years, and so would have done, had he been obedient to his
Parents, but in regard of his sins and disobedience, the Lord has permitted
him to die a violent death, cutting off from his life so many years, as are
from eighteen to ninety. And because this might be manifest and apparent to al
men, he has wrought this miracle.

S. Jerome says, Hieron. Epist. 21.
that the shortness of life, is a punishment and judgment against sinners,
and therefore because of sin the Lord from the beginning of the world, has
shortened and cut off the life, and years of men. Once God withdrew from
Hezehiah fifteen years of his life, Isaiae: 38.1.
which according to the course of nature, he was to live, but afterward by
means of his Tears and hearty repentance, Ver. 3.
they were restored and granted unto him again. And so Haymo upon those words
of the Prophet Isaiah, Haymo in Isaian, 38.5.
The Lord hard thy Prayer, and has seen thy tears, and will add unto thy
days fifteen years, says thus; even as he spoke to Adam, that he should be
immortal, conditionally so as he continued obedient to the divine precept: so
by God his eternal Decree those years were granted to King Hezechias
conditionally, if he lived faultlesse and blameless, and would not suffer
himself to be puffed up with pride: For those years which for his pride should
have been taken from him, now because of his humility and lowliness, were
restored again. Psa. 55.23.
Viri sanguinum and dolosi, non dimidiabunt dies suos, says David, The bloody
and deceitful men shall not live half their days, That is, as if more
plainly he had said, They shall not live the one half of the days they
should have lived, in case they had been godly. Sinners are not the men whom
they think and imagine they are; For as our Savior said to the Jews,
Auferetur a vobis regnum Dei, etc. Mat. 21.43.
The kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and shall be given to a Nation
which shall bring forth good fruit, and shall better know how to acknowledge
and estimate thereof: So will God bereave sinners of Time, because they yield
no fruit of good works in the same, and will bestow it on such as will yield
good fruit and likewise know how to employ the same well. Those words of
David in his 102. Psalm, Nereuoces me in dimidio dierum meorum, Psalm. 102.24.
wherein he beseeched the Lord, that he would not take him away out of this
life in the midst of his days; albeit according to some interpreters, are as
much to say, as Oh my God I heartily beseech thee not to take me away in the
midst of my days, because that time and age is the very gulf and wrack of
life, the nest of cares and pretensions, and more dangerous to die in, then in
old and decrepit age; and is not so secure, nor of such confidence and
assurance: Yet others expound them to the purpose we now treat of, that is to
say, in other terms, O Lord, I fear and tremble that for my demerits and
sins, and for having so ill employed my Time, my life be cut off or
shortened, which is a punishment thou art wont to inflict upon some, who run
on in their wickedness, not regarding the exceeding infinite finite worth of
Time. And therefore do I earnestly entreat thee, that I be not unseasonably
cut off and taken away in the midst of my days, but that thou suffer and
permit me to enjoy and fully to accomplish the residue of my years, which thou
in thy determination have appointed I should live, if I persisted obedient in
thy service, as I ought.

That holy and blessed man Job (the mirror and pattern of all patience) also
says speaking of the sinful man, Job. 15.32.
Antequam dies eius impleantur, peribit, etc. Before that he accomplish his
days, he shall die, and his hand shall be cut off, as the vine in the bud,
that is to say, God will take him away, and shall cut him off in the blade,
being young and tender, and shall fade and wither away before his time, and in
the midst of his days shall be bereaved of his life, as being an unworthy
and unjust possessour thereof. Over and besides THIS, being a great punishment
in this life, in the other, the remembrance of Time which they enjoyed and
suffered to pass away without any profit, shall be a great pain and grievous
torment to the condemned ones, and therefore shall then though all to late,
behold and bewail the lack and want of so precious a jewel.

Holy S. Bernard, Bern. ser. de fall^^. praesentis vitae. Sap. 2.
in a Sermon entitled of the fallacy and deceit of this present life, very
elegantly declares how it bewitcheth and deceives Sinners, sometimes
protracting and making their lives long and large, whereby they might so defer
and prolong their conversion and amendment in such sort, as they never
afterward amend indeed or are reclaimed, and othertimes abridging it and
making it short, whereby they may truly say, That life is short, and is but a
blast, and therefore let us make have to glut our selves with all manner of
delights and pleasures of the world.

Whereupon he says, that God amongst other things cutteth off such persons in
the midst of their greedy appetites and licentiousnes for their impudency
in offending, and bereaueth the^ both of Time and of their lives, because such
who of their own accord have no regard to leave their wicked ways, GOD
cutteth off before their time, and charge them with death, and by force
constrains them to forbear to sin any further. And for that respect many
sinners die very improuidently and unwillingly which the world judges to
happen unto them by some accident, or hidden indisposition, or for some
manifest casuastie; pretending besides, that those days wherein they lived not
in sin, were not true days, nor the life that they lead, true life, but
painted and appearing: Whereupon they are called in the holy Scripture, Dead
sinners. 1. Tim. 5.6. Apoc. 3.1.
The Widdowe (says the Apostle) who lives in pleasure, is dead while she
lives. And our Savior says in the Revelation unto a certain Bishop, who
lived not as he ought, Thou have a name that thou live, and the world thinks
no less, but thou art not living but dead, and for such I repute thee to be,
considering that thy soul remains dead within that living body of thine; So
as the sinner has no life in deed, but only a name that he lives.

To conclude therefore, if that Time which the wicked vainly misspend and
abuse, cannot properly be termed a Time of life, and that God oftentimes
shorteneth the life and days of the wicked; then do they not, nor shall LIVE
as the world imagines, but shall be very poor and sparing of days, that is,
They shall die very timeously and speedily; Contrariwise, upright and just men
shall be full of days, and shall live far longer then the world supposes;
for the Lord will not gather them into his barn, until it be due season.

CHAP. 4. He that now inioyeth the benefit of TIME must with great feruencie
and zeal labor to employ it altogether well.
IF Time be such a precious jewel, bestowed upon us to do good works, and to
labor in the vineyard of our Savior all the day long until Sun set; And if
we profit not our selves therewith, we may fear and tremble, that it will be
taken away from us, and that we shall want the same, when we most desire and
have need thereof: It is good reason therefore, that we employ it well, and
that in the mean time with great earnestnes and zeal we labor in our
vocation. So Ecclesiastes advises us, saying, Eccles. 9.10
Let thy hand labor ALL that it may, and that with earnestness, diligence,
feruencie and have; he says All, as if he had said, Let no good thought or
imagination ouerslippe thee, which thou may obtain; nor any good word which
thou may hear, Omit not any thing thou ought to utter, nor any good
work thou may perform, forgoing neither occasion, opportunity nor time to
do good. And further he says, That which THY hand, and not that which a
stranger or another man's hand does, because thou must not rely or repose thy
salvation upon the hands, power or strength of any other, neither ought thou
imagine that thy servant, or thy friend, or any other worldly person, ought to
gain Heaven for thee, thy self playing the Trewant, and continuing lazy. Thy
hand and thy arm are to perform it, and are to labor with greediness,
earnestness, carfulness and zeal, because life flits away, and when thou
least suspectest, Thy Sun will set. Rejoice that thou have labored much,
because thy rest and reward shall be so much the greater. And the reason which
the Preacher yields for all above said, is, because that after this life no
work either of reason, or of understanding, or any act of will, or of any
other power shall be of worth nor of profit to gain thereby grace or glory.

The seven fertile years (prefigured by the seven fat kine, Genesis 41.2.
which king Pharao saw in his dream) do signify the time of this life, which
by weeks (whereof every week comprehends seven days) goes on with an
alternatiue continuation and succession, wheeling about and prosequuting his
path; but afterward will come other seven years (which will be all that which
shall remain in the other life, which is without end) prefigured by the seven
lean and hunger-starued kine, Verse. 3.
barren and without fruit of desert. For which cause in imitation of that
discreet and wise man Joseph, Exodus 16.16
Now (Brother) fill thy granarie and storehouse, and make provision against the
time of want and famine, because if thou wait to gather Manna for the Sabbath
day of the other life, it will profit thee no whit, but rather will be
converted into worms; For thereby will remain in thy Soul (whereof we now
speak) a perpetual worm and sting of conscience, Rachel was most fair, Genesis
30.1.
and beautiful above measure, but barren withal, and though Leah was not so
well favored, yet was she fruitful. The other life is most beautiful and
excellent, but is said to be barren, because there is no place for repentance
and good works, proper unto this present life, the which though in comparison
it be brown, duskish, foul and laborious, yet notwithstanding is fruitful
and fertile, and apprehends that sovereignty, which causes and produces
works both good and acceptable unto God, with the increase of grace and assured
hope of glory; and he who at first does not respect these things, and with
alacrity and patience under go his labor and suffer grief and tribulation,
and daily busy himself about good exercises, cannot hope hereafter to enjoy
the exceeding and excellent beauty of Rachel the other life. Matt. 20.7


Then be careful (thou Christian) to labor and work here All that thou
can, because hereafter thou can not possibly do it. We are mercenarie
workmen and hirelings, and therefore there is no reason we should pass away
our lives idly, nor in delights, pleasures and dainties, as though we were
great Magnificoes or Gentlemen of high reputation. Before Adam had sinned GOD
placed him in the Paradise of pleasure, Genesis 2.15.
the which he ordained for him, that he should labor in that gardeine; that in
that lodge or palace of pleasure, he should be entertained, spend his time and
solace himself. But after he had sinned, he was banished out of Paradise, and
was made a labourer and a workman of the terrestrial vineyard. Considering
therefore the case stands thus, labor and make speed (my friend) if thou
be desirous to live without stain or spot of sin, and to end thy days in
all joy and spiritual happiness.

Because this is not rightly understood, or rather because few endeavor or
care to understand and consider the same as they ought, men now a days
convert this vineyard into gardens and places of mirth and pleasure, and pass
away their lives in all kind of sensuality and delight: Who are rightly
compared unto king Ahaz, of who^ it is written, 2. Reg. 16.
that as he beheld the Altar of Damascus, he sent from that City the true
pattern and platform thereof unto Vriah the priest, that thereby he might
frame, and make an Altar according to the kings order and direction; but the
Altar of brass and of metal, Ver. 8.
which stood till that day before the Lord, he took away out of the Temple,
and from before his presence, That (I say) many Christians now adays do
practice, who embrace Religion, and worship God, but upon the Altar of the
Gentiles, living as though they were Gentiles or heathen men, enjoying so much
and so many dainties, pleasant tastes, and delicates they can procure and
attain unto, they fall straightwayes to all such things, as their appetites
can wish and demand, and without making of any manner resistance they labor
to fulfill and perform what their sensualities shall long and lust after.

Correct and chastise (thou Christian man) that body of thine, tame and subdue
it, busy thy self in the works of a Christian labourer, work in thy
vineyard, dress and prune it, dig and delue it, plough it, till and manure
the inheritance of thy soul, and thou shall see how thy sensuality will forgo
and forget her heady wilfulness, her gallant bravery and wantonness, and
there shall not be found in the same such store of bryer-bushes, nor so many
thornie brambles, and sharp pricking thistles of Sins as otherwise there
should. So, because the children of Israel should not be multiplied, Exodus 1.1^.
nor recover any head or strength, but that they should be kept under and
sold, Pharao made them work and labor, and appointed them ordinary tasks
which were not small. Know and acknowledge (thou Christian) the good time and
the good day, hourd them up in store, and reserve them in thy storehouse,
whereby that may not be said of thee, which was spoken of the Hebrews. The
Kite, the Storke, Isaix. 10.
and the Swallow do know their times and seasons, and well understand the due
value thereof and profit thereby; But Israel neither knows nor regards the
time of his visitation, nor understands how to profit by the occasion
thereof, and therefore shall some day weep and lament most bitterly, and shall
much long for, and wish even that which now he neither esteems nor regards.

The people of Israel perceiving the river of Jordan to be dry, were therefore
secure in the passage, and least they should loose so good an opportunity,
they made have to pass over, Iosuae. 4.10
and indeed passed over most safely: But if they had deferred their journey
till another day, peradventure they should have come short and found the
passage shut up. We cannot secure to our selves the morrow, and if this day
thou may, defer it not, let it not ouerpasse thee, but convert thy self
to God, for it may be that to morrow thou shall not be able or can not.
Psalm. 95 7.
To day (says David) if you will hear the voice of the Lord, who inuiteth and
calls you to repentance, and to amendment of life, poast it not over so
hardening your hearts, Verse 8.
and defer not till another day. Consider thou miserable wretch, thou blind
and ignorant Sinner, that the Devil to deceive and delude thee, says, Bestow
upon me this day, and the morrow thou shall give to God, and to morrow he
will reiterate and say unto thee the very same, and so he will cosen and undo
thee.

S. Basil says, Basil. hom. 13 exhort. ad Bapt.
That he noted a most marvelous subtle shift of a certain little Bird (which
according to Elianus is the Partridge) which perceiving the Fowler to draw
near toward her nest where her young (...) lay, fearing that if he had come
any nearer, he would have made a pray of them all: wherefore in respect they
could not well fly, she skipt out of her neast and lighted hard by him,
putting him in hope, that he might speedily catch her (having her young ones,
as he now imagined sure in his hands,) of purpose to make him to follow her
into by-pathes, and whereby he might forget to find again her little young
ones. When the Fowler drew near toward the Partridge, and thought himself
sure of her, she suddenly flurted up, and alighted some short distance before
him, and after that manner, always flying and staying, or rather limping and
hopping still near abouts him, she deceived the Fowler by intertaining and
withdrawing him aloof so far, till at length her young ones by little and
little with short leapes and easy flight, had provided for themselves, and
dug small holes in the ground, and had hid them all in safety. And
afterward, the wily and cunning dam soared aloft, and quite flew her ways,
leaving the Fowler deceived and ashamed, considering he could lay hold neither
of her self, nor upon any of her young ones. In the same manner goes the Devil
about to delude and entrappe thee (thou blind and foolish Sinner) and so
detayneth, entertaineth, and draws thee on, with vain pleasures and
deceivable delights from one day to another, and from one year to another,
yea many years together, with one false hope, that hereafter thou shall have
Time sufficient to repent thee, that if thou neglect it this day, thou may
perform it to morrow, or some other day, (as though the days and times were
in thine own hands, Act. 10.
which the eternal Father has reserved for himself) whereby thus always
loosing Time, and the occasion present, thou might hereafter come to want
and lack all good opportunity or seasons, then shall thou have cause to
bewail and moan for ever.

If it be good to convert our selves to God almighty (says S. Augustine) let
us do it quickly, let it be done instantly; Aug. ad fraet. in Eremo.
will thou say, I will convert and turn me to morrow? yea too morrow. And
wherefore not this day? Considering the morrow is neither sure, nor certain,
Happens there not oftentimes many sudden deaths? Die there not an innumerable
multitude without acknowledging their sins and repentance? The^ say thou,
God help me, what harm have I spoken, by saying, that to morrow I will convert
me and begin a new reckoning, when of necessity it should be done this day?
Then God help me likewise Brother mine (answered S. Augustine) what hurt have
I spoken by saying, it should be done this day? That being much more safe and
better; and so I speak better then thou do, considering thou have not for
thine own, but only this day, and yet not all this day, save only the
present moments or minutes. How much better were it if it might be, that all
thy life were good, for thou wishest and desire that it were amended and
reformed, then that some part thereof be good, though as little as may be? Thou will have, or at least indeuorest to obtain, thy meat, thy wife, thy house,
thy apparel, thy hose and shoes, all thoroughly neat and of the best; Esteem
and respect therefore thy Soul in much more account then thy shoes? Thus far
Saint Augustine.

The life (says Seneca) is divided into three seasons or times, namely, Seneca.
in that that is past, present, and to come, and of them the Time present is
the shortest, and that to come is most doubtful, but Time past is most sure
and certain, and thereof now Nature it self has lost the dominion and
Ruledome, neither is it possible, that it can be recalled by any humane
faculty. Then if we suffer the Time present to ouerpasse, we endanger our
selves to be bereft for evermore without it, but to continue in eternal
condemnation. How much more thou sottish Sinner, (Open thine ears and listen
to me) I say, how much more better were it, that in all the Time of this life,
yea from the very first moment, that thou have the use of Reason, thou yield
forth good fruit, and prepare thy self, and be in a readiness against such
Time, as when the Master and Lord thereof does come to demand it, for there
is neither moment nor hour, wherein he cannot come and call us to particular
Judgment, wherein he rewards the laborers and workmen of his vineyard,
according to every ones labor and industry. All which out of S. Jerome.

In confirmation whereof, that Parable of the Fig Tree comes near this
purpose, Mat. 21.19.
which our Savior Christ had planted, and as our Lord drew near the same
being hungry and desirous to eat some figs, and finding no figs thereon, did
curse the same. Mar. 13.28.
And the holy Evangelist well notes, that as then it was no time of fruit
bearing, And therefore did not inflict that punishment properly upon the Fig
tree, but upon fruitless and barren men void of good works, signified by the
same tree. Because that man at all times is bound to yield and render fruit,
for which cause our Lord, when he comes to seek and finds none, he will
inflict upon him the pain of his eternal malediction and everlasting curse.

All things) says Solomon) have their determined and precise times, Eccles.
3.1.
and after that sort and manner, That all Time, is neither opportune nor
seasonable for all things, for that which is peculiar and natural for one
thing, is not fit for other business, but very prejudicial and hurtful. As
if one should sow, when he should reap, fall and grub up trees, when time
were to plant, To speak, when one should keep silence, To laugh, when he
ought to weep; Furthermore, for man to do good works, and to labor in the
vineyard of our Lord, there is no precise nor limited Time: it is always
fit Time, It will be ever seasonable, in what hour so ever, and in what age
so ever, admitting that at no time, it be lawful to sin and offend, and that
no Time was given and bestowed on man to do evil or to execute wickedness.
According to those words of Ecclesiasticus, Ecclus 15.20*
God commanded no man to do ungodly, neither has he given any man license
to sin: but rather advises and admonishes all men to preserve and keep
Time, Ecclus 4.20.
and that they depart from evil, because it was lent and given them for no
other end, but to do good, and to employ the same well.

The being of a man idle and careless, Matthew. 20 7
as well the workman as the hireling, is reproved by the goodman of the
family, yet such an idle standing and careless living of him that is most in
years, and most aged deserves and is worthy of most blame. And so compares
that royal Prophet David in the beginning of his Psalms, the Just man, Psalm.
1.3.
with the Tree that was planted near the running waters, which yielded fruit
in due time. By which he meant not to say, that as the tree renders no fruit,
save only in one month, or at one special time of the year, and not in
others: so the just man is to yield his fruit upon certain days or months, or
in some precise and determined years, and not in others; But rather says
thus, even as the tree yields his fruit in his due time and season, and if it
did not, the^ would the owner cut it down to the very ground: So man ought to
render fruit according to his estate and profession in his time, And his time
is, all the time of his life, And he advises and warns him on Gods behalf,
that it behooves him always to pray, Luc. 18.1.
and never to cease, and to be always watching as it were with a candle in his
hand, because he knows not at what hour his Lord and Master will come, Luc.
12.40.46.
and that he be always provided in a readiness with the accounting Book of
Receipts and Defrayments of Charges and Allowances against the Time he shall
come to demand an account of the Talents, Mat. 25.19.
which were upon trust committed unto his charge and delivered to be kept,
that now they should be restored, and of the increase and profit of the
Vineyard which was rented and farmed unto him, and of his traffic and
employment. All which is a manifest argument or sign, that at all times the
Lord expects that man bear fruit, and be prepared as a faithful and wise
Servant. And he calls his Time, all the time of his life, because that after
the same, (as the Angel most solemnly has sworn it) There should be no more
Time. Apoc. 10.6.
The tree which the Evangelist S. John in his Revelation did see, which always
continued with fruit, and every month yielded his own* Apoc. 22.2
all which was wholesome and profitable, yea the very leaves thereof, represent
the just man, who always bears fruit at all times and in all the months of
the year, and throughout his whole age, and all that is in him, is good and
profitable, as well thoughts, words, as deeds.

CHAP. 5. How worthy of reproof idle persons are, and who they be.
Seneca de breuitate vitae.
Amongst all men, (says Seneca) they only are deemed idle, who employ and
addict themselves to the study and exercise of wisdom and knowledge, albeit
indeed they only do live; seeing they do not only preserve and live out
their own years and ages, but also add unto their days, the fore-passed
times of former ages, because they have the fruition of that which in those
days was registered for the behoof of ensuing posterity, whereof they reap
great commodity and profit. Which Idleness (having bin so well employed) is
laudable and prayseworthy, but (excepting this) al other idleness which properly
is idleness indeed, is most worthily to be reprehended: For as the Bird was
created to fly, Job. 15.
so was Man borne to labor. And touching that Idleness, the same Seneca says,
that it is the living man's sepulcher, and that the healthful idle person, and
loyterer that follows nothing but idleness, being as it were interred and
buried therein, is in great danger of falling into many offenses against God:
Wherefore Ecclesiasticus says, Eccle. 33.26.
That Idleness has taught much malice and envy. A certain Schooleman
terms Idleness, Fr. Francis. in sua regula.
the Enemy of the Soul. Aug ad fra. tres in Eremo ser. 19.
And S. Augustine writes, that no friend of idleness shall or can be any
Citizen in the kingdom of Heaven. Chrysostom. hom.: 8. in cap. 4. ad Ephesians.
S. Chrysostom affirms, that Idleness is a part of vice, or rather no part
at all, but a most wicked perverse root, yea the very cause and occasion of all
vices, whereof Idleness is the Ringleader and Mistress.

That great Anthony with loud shrikes and sorrowful lamentation to God
almighty, cried out in the wilderness, saying, O my God and my Lord, thou true
Samaritane and right keeper and protector of Souls and of bodies, raise in me
thy grace, afford me such favor, and bestow upon thy Servant so much mercy,
as that thou permit me not to be idle one jot in this Desert; whereunto in
like manner (as the story reports) a voice from heaven made him this answer,
Anthony, thou have rightly desired to please God. Then pray? and when thou
can not pray, labor and do some handiwork? and always employ thy self in
some one thing or other, performing such things, which on thy part are to be
performed and done, and then shall thou never fail or miss the divine favor?
It was the opinion of the Fathers who lived in Egypt, Cassian lib. 10. collat.
c. 3.
That one only Devil tempted a laboring Monk, but many, the idle. Howbeit,
because many things are written concerning and against that kind of
idleness, my principal intent and chief purpose is, not to entreat thereof
so much as of spiritual Idleness; Against which I will proceed, freeing many
of error in that point (who in their own conceit and imagination are much
occupied) manifesting and proving with sufficient reasons, how they are idle,
and how they with-holde Time captiuated and imprisoned.

For which purpose I say, he is idle who uses not Time conformable to that
end, whereto by our Lord it was granted unto us, but rather imployeth it in
things unlawful and unjust, which neither tends nor can be directed to his
service, nor to the benefit or profit of his Neighbor, or about some other
businesses which cannot be perfected or brought to pass for any honest or
laudable end: And so all Officers, Laborers, Merchants, Tradesmen, Workmen,
and Hirelings, Kings, Princes, Counsailors, Advocates, Ministers and Servants,
and all manner of persons that are such, do as it were cover heaven with their
Mantles, and with-holde Time captiuated, when they occupy and busy themselves
in and about works, actions, exercises, and services which are unlawful and
prohibited by the Laws, Decrees and Constitutions divine, or not to that end
and intent they ought, or else do live so secure and retchlesse, that they do
no work that is good or acceptable unto God; And therefore (as before we have
spoken) Time was bestowed on man, not to do evil, nor to be idle, and he that
is ill occupied, is reckoned and accounted as idle before God.

In vain has he received a Soul, Psalm. 15.
who always offends GOD with the same. In vain has every Sinner had all
that Time, wherein he lived in sin; and in vain have all those now the same,
who continue therein, and for all the time their souls have remained idle
within them, notwithstanding that they have profited as touching the world, and
reaped benefit thereby, and enjoy the use of their strengthes and powers for
other works, actions, exercises and services; but as for the principal end
whereto GOD granted the same, which was, that they should serve him (as
acknowledged Seneca at length) when he said: Seneca.
That God created all other things of the world for the use of humane body,
and the body for the five senses, and the Senses for the Soul, and the soul
to contemplate and love the divine Beauty. All the Time they spend and wast
sinfully, or do not employ themselves in things about the service of God, is
idle and vain, And yet for all that you will say, that the King is busy, or a
Counsailour, or some Officer or Minister, etc. But I will term such a one an
idle Christian, a loyterer or idle workman in the house of God, and millions of
persons do remain in hell for their idle loytering in that kind of Idleness,
who in their own imagination think themselves greatly occupied in this world.

All hours spent and consumed in unlawful plays, murmuration, detraction, in
writing and reading of lascivious letters and profane books, which usually make
chaste minds dishonest, And those times likewise which are spent in registring,
sentencing, and judging of other men's lives and actions, without delivering to
the party grieved any Copy of his own cause, and without any mature or full
hearing thereof, nor yet well knowing it, and before the Judges have thoroughly
understood the truth thereof, nor as yet have received the Informations they
ought, and yet proceed to Judgment, or acquit by proclamation: Who can leave
such persons uncondemned for idle ones, who wickedly employ and imprison all
good Time. And all those hours which either thy self, or bad, vain and
naughty women have wasted (which are not a few in number) in decking, trimming,
and adorning themselves, for to ensnare and entangle men's hearts, to captiuate
Souls and bring them in subjection, to make free, and set at liberty them that
are bound. May such (tell me?) be ouer-past, without the same censure and
sentence? And the time and hours which the ambitious sort (wherein they are
puffed up, as another Ephraim) do spend and consume in erecting and building
of their lofty Towers and windy Turrets, and in purtraying in the air the
dreams and inventions of their fickle fantasies, speaking to themselves, like
unto that proud King Cyrus (the type and figure of that proud Lucifer) saying,
I will sit in the mountain of my testament northward; I will place my seat
and my throne so high, that my feet may be above the stars. What wise or
discreet man will say, That such Time is not lost, misspent, and bound (as it
were) in fetters and imprisoned? The time and hours which the covetous person
spends in plodding of his Accounts and Reckonings, imagining and compassing
how and by what means, and with what intelligence, he may hourd and receive
still greater gain, use, and interest, by way of trucke, or barterie, by
changing and exchanging, by usury, or without usury, adding and extracting
with himself, watching, wallowing, and cumbring himself therein, and wholly
reposing all his care, endeavor, and industry in his own resolute appetite,
to procure and get all that he may come to, by lawful or unlawful ways and
means, either by hook or by crook: requiring good and sufficient Security to
be answerable for sure undoubted payment and satisfaction as well of the
principal Sum, as of the interest thereof and use of Time, at the day
limited and prefixed; But what man is he that can secure himself, that that
day, wherein he shall demand or expect an Account with consideration for
Time, shall pass for current and good? I need not discourse any further
hereof, nor manifestly express any more estates or conditions of people, for
by so doing, my memory might fail me, and I should put my self to excessive
pain and trouble. Wherefore, Is the world so ignorant or so sottish (being so
wide and so spacious) but that hence any understanding Christian may collect
and gather all the rest, which here may be specified and condemned if he
please, as well by the Sermons which he has heard, the books that he has
read, and by the holy inspirations and inward enlightening which the Lord has
given him, as by that which his own conscience (being his own loyal witness
and faithfullest friend, except he be an Atheist) has many times admonished
and inwardly accused himself of?

And that more credit may be given to that I say, it will not be amiss for
confirmation thereof to avouch the authority of the sacred Scripture, David in
one of his Psalms says of the good and just, Psalm. 73.
Dies pleni inuenientur in eis, That in them will be found full days and not
empty. It is a very usual speech in the old Testament, that they died full of
days, as it is said of Abraham, Isaak, and of other Saints and friends of God,
Genesis 25.8. and 35.29. Job. vlt. ver. 17.
Thou shall go to thy grave in a full age, as a ricke of corn comes in due
season into the barn, Job. 5.26. Whereupon if that be spoken of the just, then
contrariwise may we say, that neither the days nor years of Sinners are full,
but empty and void, yea for number few, lessened, diminished and vain, and
their hours, diminished hours, and by consequence will not dye full but empty
of days. Dion. Carth. in Job 5.
And Dionysius Carthusianus expounding those words of Job. Menses vacuos
enumeraui mihi, Empty months and days have I reckoned to my self, says.
That the penitent sinner may well say so, namely, that he has wasted, spent,
and consumed without fruit or profit his time and days, and so for good works
they were void and empty, idle, and full of vanity and all vice, which is as
good as right naught. And thereupon S. Ambrose says, S. Ambr.
that the life of the just is full, and the days of the wicked are void and
vain, and naught they apprehend, save only an appearance and show, much like
unto a green Reed without either marrow, substance, or pith. Of the same
opinion is Gregory in his Moralls, Greg in moral. sup. c. vlt. Job.
treating upon the last Chapter of Job.

Now, that all persons who have so lived, and presently do so live, are most
worthy of reprehension, does already appear most manifestly out of the former
chapters. Then, considering Time to be a most precious Jewel, as may well be
understood out of the first Chapter, and that it was bestowed upon us, whereby
we might win and gain heaven, by a lively faith working by love, as is proved
in the second; and that God suddenly accustometh to abridge and cut it off from
such who do not well and worthily employ the same as they ought, as may be
seen written in the third Chapter, and notwithstanding regard not to accept
the advice and counsel which by the illumination of the holy Spirit we have
showed and directed them in the fourth Chapter, but being altogether
forgetful, and all fear and care being set aside, do by their unsavory
morsels and bitter tastes (though outwardly guilt and canded) wickedly employ
Time, the which they dispraise and commit outrage against, and in steed of good
dealing or well handling thereof, or profiting themselves thereby, they grieve
and vex it, and do withhold the same in prison and captivity, without any
manner of consideration of what they loose, or might thereby obtain, nor of
what they owe to God, who at his own cost so redeemed them, and whom, for such
and so many innumerable respects, obligations and rewards they ought to serve
both day and night, and to love and reverence withal their heart and withal
their soul.

Such may be compared to Merchantmen, who on Markets and Fayor days, not
respecting the present gain they might there obtain, do occupy themselves
about childish toies, and embrace fopperies of ieasts and deceit, and by
hearing of Ballad singers, or blind folks rehearsing of old tales and fables,
or by seeing of stage-plaies or Comedies, or other vain pastimes at Bear or
Bullgarden; and afterward do find their purses empty, and the occasions to
merchandise, traffic and to get, to be ouerpast. Likewise they are like those
mariners who coming a shore out of their Ship or Galley to provide them of
things necessary for the accomplishment of their voyage and arriual to their
wished port and desired haven, do linger and busy themselves in beholding the
curiosities which are about the streets and in shops, or by walking in curious
gardens, whereby Time ouerpasseth them without perceiuance, and forget
themselves of that they principally came for, and that their Ship, Galley or
vessel, was ready at hand upon a set determined time to launch forth and to
strike sail, and so remain destitute of necessaries, poor, comfortless and
miserable in a strange land, because they came too late and unprovided.

It may seem to those, who so without remorse or feeling do loose time, that
they possess so much, that they shall have sufficient and enough for all
things, yea Time to spare, to repent and amend their lives: Whereas indeed it
appears plainly that their understanding and knowledge do fail them,
considering Zeno Cliticus, being an heathen man (as Laertius reports) did
say, Laert. in vita Philosopho.
That men had no such lack or want, nor such penury of any thing, as they had
of Time: and truly with good reason and sound probability, because we
apprehend not that which is past nor that to come, and Time present is so
fleeting, successively following on, and so short, that in one moment it is
past.

A certain devout holy man maruailing with himself and bewailing the estate
of those idle persons, who so fruitlesly without grief and compunction of
heart, permitted Time to ouerpasse them, did say, The slothful loses both
this, and the other life, blessed is he that spends his life and his powers
in the service of God. I pray thee tell me? If a well of wine or a fountain of
oil, were freely given thee, which for the space of one whole day should
continually run in thy house, would thou (being poor) consume that one
day in play, or rather in looking out Barrels and vessels wherein to save and
preserve the same, where by to become rich? Without doubt (if thou were not
mad) thou would do the latter: So did that wise and discreet Widow (of
whom mention is made in the second Book of the Kings) by gathering up and
saving of the oil which the Prophet Elisha most miraculously procured for her
to pay the debts of her late husband, 2. Reg. 4,5
least the Creditors would take away her two sons for slaves, till she had
discharged that she owed; But out alas! (says that holy man) our blockishnes
and madness is such, and our discretion so little, that whereas God gives us
Time, and the life present, whereby in the same through his divine grace,
manifold blessings and exceeding favors, we might with that maine and principal
stock he bestows upon us, make our selves rich, and satisfy that we owe,
least hereafter we be made slaves to the Devil, without remedy, and without
end; yet we lauishly spend and consume the same in vanities and trifles.
Agreeable to which, be these words of most pariend Job, saying, Job. 24.
Dedit ei locum poenitentiae, God gave man place of repentance and time for the
same, but he has converted the good use to an abuse, and in sins of Pride.

CHAP. 6. How the BODY detaineth in captivity the Time which is properly the
SOVLES, and how it exalts it self and rebels against the SOVLE.
THE Body after the fall, so lifted up it self, withstood and rebelled so much
against the Soul, as the flesh (like another bondslaue Hagar toward her
Mistress) has lost all awful respect, Genesis 16.4.5.
and would seem to be Lady and Mistress, and that the Soul is but a slave or
servant, suggesting that all the Time of this life is only for the Body, for
his own gallantnesse and recreation, and for the accomplishment of his sinful
lusts and greedy appetites; and further, that the Body shows great favor,
yea does a very good turn unto the poor Soul by yielding it so much time as
himself pleases; who by reason of her deiection for sin, was brought unto
this miserable thraldom: Whereupon she may say unto God, counting her troubles
and anguishes, that which Jerusalem in her great griefs and sorrows has
uttered, Lam. 1.11.
Vide Domine and co^sidera, etc. Behold Lord and consider how I am become vile,
considering that my bondslaue esteems so little of me, and offers violence
unto me. And therein does the Flesh greatly injury the Soul, and with a
Stranger exalts it self against all reason and justice, and is therefore
bound to restore unto the Soul that which properly is hers, upon pain least
when he shall have need of the Soul and Body, both of them do fail to
attain their final Salvation.

For prosecution of this point, there can be no better doctrine written, then
that of S. Bernard in his Sermon of the Aduent, Ber ser. 6. de Aduentu Domini.
a great part whereof I will here rehearse. The time of this life (says he)
is not for the Body, but for the Soul, and for her only was it assigned and
appointed: because the Soul is far more worthy then the Body, and that which
first fell and transgressed is first to be repaired and remedied, and therefore
because the Soul was first in the transgression, came the Body to incur in
the punishment, and to participate thereof: But incase we desire to be made
living and true members of our head, who is JESUS CHRIST, we are to manifest
the same, and to conform our selves unto him, wherein our first thought and
chiefest care should be concerning our Souls, for whose behoof most
principally HE came into this world, and has suffered the pains and torments
of the Cross; and therefore let us reserve and keep the care of the Body,
against that day and time when our Lord shall come to reform it, as the
Apostle says, Philip. 3.20.
Saluatorem expectamus Dominum nostrum etc. We look and expect for a Savior
(who is Jesus (...) safeguard and preservation depends upon hers. Be therefore
somewhat courteous, civil and discreet, to give place and prefer so honorable
a guest. Thou art in thy house and upon thy ground, for thou have been earthly,
and of earth thou art, but the Soul is lodged in thy house and home, as a
stranger, a pilgrim banished as an exile from her own dwelling. Tell me (thou
Body) what rude, rusticall Clown or countriman, though never so gross or
doltish block-headed fellow, If a Prince or an Earl should come to lodge in
his house, would not he with heart and goodwill, retire and withdraw himself
to the worse part thereof, whereby to suffer that Nobleman to enjoy the best
room or chamber? yea, if it were necessary, would go and sleep upon hay or
straw, or near the cinders and ashes upon the very hearth, or in the chimney
corner. Then likewise do thou the same, and if it be expedient, leave off to
eat and sleep for the good of thy Soul, and for the love thereof loose thy
delights and pleasures, forgo thy pastimes and sports, Fast and keep Diet,
whereby she may be safe and whole, chasten and discipline thy self, let thy
self blood to tame and mortify thy flesh, if need shall so require, that thy
Soul may live; For this Time is no time of mirth and solace, but of lamentation
and tears, no time of rest and quietness, but of labor and pain; no time of
worldly recreations and loose-liuing, but of prayer and repentance, nor time of
any contentments, but of tribulations and sorrow. Time may hereafter come of
laughter, when thou may rejoice and be merry together with her, so as now
thou bewail and weep with her; For if thou sow no tears, thou shall neither
reap nor gather any alacrity or joy: Despise not thy guest, esteem her not
of any small worth or reckning, though she seems unto thee a Pilgrim and
stranger, but rather admire to behold the manifold goodness and unspeakable
blessings that redound unto thee, as well because of her society and presence,
as also by reason of her participation and communicating with thy self in all
things. That guest, and that Soul is she, who gives sight to thy eyes,
hearing to thy ears, words to thy tongue, taste to thy palate, and to all thy
other parts their sense and several motions, yea all their grace, comeliness
and beauty.

But if more clearly thou desire to understand this point, then consider what
thou should be in case she were lacking (I mean) departed or fled out of
thy house? At that very instant, thy tongue would be mute and dumb, thy eyes
blind, thy ears deaf; thy nose would wax pale, all thy beauty and
comeliness would fade and perish, and then should thou remain dreadful
and terrible, foul, filthy, ugly, frozen, stark and stiff, loathsome,
irksome and horrible, and would be a most stinking corrupted rotten
carcass, and a dunghill of worms. These things being well considered, Wherefore
do thou for one momentanie and temporal delight and pleasure grieve and
offend so noble and profitable a member, so principal a guest, and bereauest
her of her Time? yea, stealest and robbest her thereof, and consumest the same
so ill, and so like a wicked scape-thrift. The which false deceiuable delights
notwithstanding, thou could not enjoy, incase thy soul were absent from
thee? Albeit nevertheless if such and so great glory and treasures happen and
befall thee by reason of her presence and fellowship, though being a Soiourner
in a foreign country, by reason of Sin and Transgression, banished out of the
sovereign Court, and from the sight of her Lord; Yet what shall come and
redound to thee, when of all sides both (Body and Soul be reconciled unto the
Almighty, and so shall absolutely remain in his grace and favor, in his
friendship and inward familiarity? It is reason therefore that thou in all
patience and meekness, do dispose and prepare thee to offer thy self to
all things which may in any wise profit and serve for the obtaining and
purchasing of that reconciliation and amity, Tell thy guest, thy Soul, that
which Joseph said to King Pharao his gentleman Butler or Cupbearer, I am sure
and certain that ere it be long the King will remember himself of thee, Genesis
40.13
and will restore thee to thy former estate, and therefore, I prithee, have me
in remembrance at that time. So without doubt, she will specially stretch her
self for thy good and regard thee, if now thou serve and use her well, and
imployest the time about that which belongs and appertains to the Soul,
and not about thine own only commodities and peculiar behouffes, on her cost
and charges. And when she shall obtain the grace and favor of her Lord, and
enjoy his presence, she will intercede and entreat for thee, and will be thy
most faithful friend, and advocate, and will say:

Most merciful and omnipotent Lord, when for punishment of my offenses, I was
exiled in the world, and as a Pilgrim and stranger walked therein, a certain
poor, pitiful, and godly boast received me into his house, and dealt with
me most lovingly, For whom, so effectually and so sincerely as I may, I most
humbly beseech thy most infinite Clemency and goodness, that thou requite him,
who for the love of me gave away all his Substance, utterly undoing himself
for my sake, and offered himself to perform whatsoever I thought behouefull
and good, forgoing his own appetites, fancies, dainties, and pleasures,
laboring and sweating, wearying and vexing himself for me, and enduring
thirst, hunger and faintness, watching, sorrow and tribulation; and for his
own proper necessities and peculiar affairs took the least part of Time,
eue^ as little as might be, whereby the more might remain for me.

Hereupon no doubt will be fulfilled, that portion of Scripture which says, Our
Lord executes his will upon them that fear him, Psalm. 145.18.19.
and will hear their prayers and supplications; For when that King of infinite
Majesty shall come, compassed with shining brightness and glory, accompanied
with thousand millions of Angels to raise up and restore our bodies, and to
reduce them like unto his own, awakening the^ out of that sleep, in which now
they rest, by that terrible and dreadful noise of the Trumpet (thou having
ever demeaned thy self toward thy Soul in all thy steps and carriage as thou
ought and appertained, Then will our Lord well reward thee with his glory,
who will glorify and cloathe thee, with those most precious indowments of
immortality, mortality, agility, impassibility and brightness, the which in
the company of thy Soul thou shall for ever enjoy. Desire not therefore (I
beseech thee) to loose and ouerpasse a Glory so glorious, such delicates, such
wealth, and such honor, for any short, fading, and perishing pleasure, or for
any seeming good tastes or carnal likings, being indeed full of distastes and
dislikes. For which moreover the wicked are to suffer and abide grievous
dolours and everlasting torments. All which above rehearsed out of famous S.
Bernard.

Such therefore who for their carnal bodies in this life do challenge and
assume the Time that belongs to the Soul, which they vainly misspend
according to their own lusts; neglecting and contemning, yea and as it were
trampling their soul under their feet; the Lord threatens with great
punishment, in those words of holy Job, in the 24 chapter, saying* Job. 24.20.
Their mirth and pleasures shall most speedily end and finish, and all their
sweetness shall be turned into worms and stings of conscience, and all mercy
and pity will forget them for evermore, and at last shall be buried in the
perpetual pit of oblivion, they shall pass from hard frozen snowie waters,
into intolerable excessive heat, whereby their pains and torments might be
the greater, and their punishments prolonged. The cause whereof will be Pauit
enim sterilem, Verse 21.
etc. Because they fed and pampered the Barren, and they righted not the
widow. That Barren signifies the Body, for the more it is cockered, and
pampered, the less fruit of Godliness does it yield. It is all one, as if
they pampered and cherished a dry wooden block: The widdowe signifies the
Soul, because there is no widow so mured up in a corner, nor so solie left,
as her self is in the house of the Sinner.

To conclude therefore, I heartily pray and entreat all Sinners, for the love
of Jesus Christ, yea all such as bereave the Soul of Time, and assume it for
the lusts and appetites of their own bodies, diligently to consider of all
here before spoken, and then to reform themselves, and heartily to repent them
for the enormities and wickedness they have committed; and that they employ
for the good of their Souls all the time they may; considering that on her
health and happiness, depends all that of their Bodies, and by the welfare
of the Soul must they come to abound and be replenished of that glory which
for evermore they hope to enjoy.

CHAP. 7. That lay persons may lawfully enjoy some recreations, and
intertainments of mirth, solace and pleasure.
BEcause (as holy Job says) our Flesh is neither of brass, Job. 6.12.
nor of steel, nor the power and strength thereof of hard and strong flint, but
brittle, sensible, soft, feeble, tender, and such as will be tired and wearied,
yea dulled with labor and pain, with manifold businesses and affairs: and
likewise for that the Soul being united, and as it were incorporated with the
gross Body; it is to be granted that at sometimes she must enjoy her desires
and solace, as also the old married man though never so wise and discreet,
yields and uses some youthful behavior toward his wife, specially if she
be a young woman. Wherefore some interposition of mirth is very requisite and
necessary amongst many businesses of care and respect for the refreshing of the
continual travel and wearisomnesse of the body: For if man should always
without intermission work and labor, he would not only make dull and weary
his understanding and memory, continually wast the vigor and strength of his
health, but also should most speedily spend and consume his life withal.

And so whereby generally both men and brute beasts might interchangeably
enjoy travel and ease, labor and rest; Also the natural disposition and
condition of sleep and of the variety of Time, it was ordained that the night
should succeed and follow the day, wherein (as Wisdom speaks, Wisd. 18.14
) All things do keep silence, and according to Virgil, Virgilius.
All the field as well birds as beasts are quietly at rest; And because that
the ordinary rest was thought too little, the Feriae which we call Feasts were
ordained, which throughout all Nations, Countries, and people at several
seasons are used and observed: It is convenient and expedient therefore, that
after labor there should be rest, whereby men might repair their strength,
recover and obtain a longing desire and will to return unto their labor and
businesses again; without which, every work, labor, occupation and exercise
would be so heavy and toylesome, that our weakness and feebleness could not
be able to bear and sustain, For as Ovid says,

Quod caret alterna requie durabile non est. Ouidius.
Nothing can endure or long continue, which wants interchangeable rest, which
according to Plutarch, is the very health and preservation of labor.

It is written of King Amasis, that when his public affairs were finished,
he was wont for a while to recreate himself with his familiar friends. And of
Sceuola, that upon vacant hours he played a while at tennis. Howbeit, of our
Savior Christ (setting aside the heathens and pagans) it is not written that
at any time he laughed, but that he oftentimes wept as at the raising up of
Lazarus, and over that ungrateful city of Jerusalem, Io. 11.35. Luc. 19.41.
Heb. 5.7.
and upon the Cross: Nevertheless for recreatio^ sake, when he thought it
necessary and expedient, he sometimes lead his Disciples with him to the
fields, and said unto them, Rest and pause ye a while (you that are weak and
mortal men) eat your selves and refresh ye, Take breath and recover strength
and spirit, whereby you may with more ardent fervor and alacrity of spirit,
return to your several offices, ministeries, and functions. So that by all
which has been said in the precedent Chapters, we are not condemned for all
the time that is spent in play, recreations, sports, solaces, spectacles and
sights which apprehend the same ends and causes, but rather let us note and
diligently observe, that if it be necessary to keep order, temperance, and
moderation in causes of weight and moment, much more is it in trifles and
frivolous matters, the which though most cunningly handled and framed, yet at
times are wont to be disordered and reduced to somewhat; for the peril and
danger, which remains and arises out of the excess and vnmeasurablenes
thereof. Wherefore according to the Apostle, A Christian man ought to perform
and do all things orderly, 1. Cor. 14. 40.
much more it behooves him to prescribe and limit taskes and measure in his
recreations, 3. Tho. 22. qu. 168.
and upon the time which therein he shall wast. And for that respect there is a
virtue, which is called (...) or Comitas, Gentenesse or good behavior,
conformable to which GOD would, that men should recreate and sport themselves
in such sort, S. Ambr.
that (as says S. Ambrose) it behooves not to loose our gravity or sobriety
in pleasure, least the harmony of good life should be dissolved.

Aristotle says, Aristot.
that as a little salt will serve to season one mess of meat: So a little
recreation suffices life, which recreation is to be used in the same manner
as salt is. And so their play, sports and entertainements ought to be lawful,
short, seldom, honest and not prejudicial or offensive to any, accomodate and
fitting to the time, place and persons, and with such moderation and
soberness, as that which he takes and assumeth for help and ease, be no let
or hinderance unto him, nor any impediment of his virtuous exercises and other
just offices or duties.

That which is to be recovered and obtained is ability and strength, whereby
things may be the better compassed and brought to pass and effected without
default or difficulty: For when the faintness of our natural disposition is
well refreshed, it incourageth and animateth us to proceed and persevere
therein; As on the other side, it is such an enemy unto labor and amendment of
life, as that our appetite does covet and long for pleasures without rule or
order, unless great care and diligent respect be had, and that Mediocritie be
kept wherein all virtue consists: Otherwise one may fall with great facility
into Idleness and vice, and so fly from labor, whereupon it falls out that
the inward man comes to be disordered, and for ordinary businesses and
requisite occupations to remain a person most slothful, idle and lazy, most
slack and loose, and least apt and disposed to do good. For which cause the
Philosophers and the civil Laws have ordained some documents and set down
limitations: Albeit the recreations of a Christian, by all good reason ought to
be much more moderat, more honest, and more lawful, then those which the
Philosophers, Or the civil Laws do permit or grant.

The Lacedaemonians took a most heedfull strait reckning, Aolian, de varia
hist. lib. 2.
that no person should loose and Time, nor live idely, nor enter into any
matter of jest or scoff, save only in laudable works, honest labors and
virtuous exercises; whereas upon a day it came to the notice and knowledge of
the common Magistrates, that the Inhabitants of Decelia, were gone forth to
walk at noone time: they sent after them a letter to this effect, Walk ye not
abroad so much for mirth and recreation sake, as for the exercising of your
bodies, because it is very firting and behoouefull for the Lacedaemonians to
seek out help and remedy for the preservation of their healths, not by walking
and loytering, but with bodily exercises, about things lawful and profitable.

Some sports there be which are good and lawful, and occasion may be offered,
and opportunity serve, wherein pastime may be a virtue, as then chiefly when
it is necessary for man for the administration and performance of his office
and function, S. Tho. 22. Qu. 168.
specially being virtuous, and about the service of our Lord, for the obtaining
of greater ability and strength for fulfilling thereof, That thereby he may make
due satisfaction for the same, least otherwise he should fail, or be dismayed
in the high common pathway, and as the Spanish Proverb says, Porno dar con
lacarga en el suelo, A Spanish Proverb.
least our burden and charge fall in the mire, and so we might loose our
labor. Which by little and little with great moderation and sobriety are to be
used, and with such discretion and heedfulnes (as concerning the end and
intention) they were first invented, and specially after their greedy
appetites for lucre and profit have crossed them in some plays, which I hold
more then hurtful and damnable; which not only are no help or aid for the
furthering of our offices and special duties, which on Gods behalf and our
own consciences we are bound to effect, but rather and impediment and let, yea
an occasion whereby we commit therein no small defects; but oftentimes many
offenses against God, as lying, swearing, false oaths, frettings, contentions,
standing most stiffly and stoutly in bad quarrels, outfacing and earnest
laboring in strifes, which are wont to cause dislikings, evil words,
enmities, and rancour, wherefore I hold and am of opinion that the Time which
is spent in such plays and sports, for ill employed and lost, for captiuated
and impr soned Time.

It is very necessary that persons go visit and communicate with Charity,
which is a recreation most lawful for the continuation and preservation of
amity and friendship.

Conformable to which, a certain Philosopher said, That Taciturnitie or
Silence, has undone many friendships, or broken many a loving knot: But the
imparting to their friends of their contentments in their actions, labors, and
chances for the greater joy of the one, and the hartease and comfort of the
other, is a thing most lawful and laudable, and the Time needful and expedient
about the same, is well employed; Howbeit, many of the visirings and
gossippings which now adays are used, are either so prolix and tedious, so
without fruit or profit: Or so hurtful and prejudicial to themselves and to
their Neighbors, or all that they treat of it but vanity, and sauoureth of
the world and her fashion; so as I hold such for perilous and dangerous, and
the time therein spent, for ill employed and captiuated.

And I believe it is the Tongue which consumes and unthriftily spends the
most Time, because that kind of Tattle or prittle prattle will never cease and
have end, or be wearied and tired, and the fire thereof is it, which most
prolongeth and longest puts off and deferreth repentance, and her spots and
blemishes are they that most spread abroad and furthest creep, and she is that
moath which deuoureth and destroys the most clothes, yea that which with her
fine cunning and queint subtilty, will neither remit nor forgo.

The feasts and banquets which are made for conservation of peace, love,
concord, amity and unity, or for any other just causes are lawful, being used
and observed with that temperance and moderation as appertains and with their
due circumstances, as becomes Christians. Nevertheless for the most part as
they are now used with such disorders, riot and excess, for so many hours
and for so long time together, I may not be bold nor dare presume to make them
good and perfect, nor to undertake their justification upon my conscience,
because the most part of Time which therein they wast and consume, I rather
hold as ill employed and imprisoned.

Concerning meriments, leapings and dauncings, I have nothing to say, saving
that I think many of them to be most lascivious and wanton, and that many
times they wake and stir up them that sleep, and do change and alter the
spirits and affections of chaste souls and honest hearts, and do disquiet men,
raise an hurly burly, cause and provoke unlawful and immodest thoughts and
disordered desires and lust, wherefore I hold much of that time, which therein
also is consumed and spent, for ill employed and captiuated.

And whereby it may be seen, with what moderation and stint men ought to use
their recreations and sports. It will not be out of purpose or in vain for the
shortning and abridging of the superfluity of worldly contentments; to write
that which divine Chrysostom rehearses in reproof of those words which they
call Donayres, Chrysoft. in expos. Epist. ad Ephesians. ser. 17.
etc. Merry jests, witty sayings, gibings, foolish tales, or taunts to make
people laugh, counterfeiting of other men's gestures, scoffings, making of
mowes, dancing the Antique, or any ridiculous toy to move fond delight,
legerdemaine, iuggling, performing of apish complements, to use terms
specially proceeding from sharp biting and taunting toungs, and which are
mingled with malice; for the inconveniences which thereupon do ensue, says:
Brethren, this life and the time thereof, is the Time of war, of watching,
and always to go ready with armor on our shoulders, and our eyes staring
against the plots and ambushments of the enemies, and by good reason, Time has
here no place of laughter, which is carnal and of the Sons of the world, who
profess and observe the laws, customs and abuses of the same. Hear (thou
Christian) our Savior Christ, speaking to al His, The world shall sport it
self, Io. 16.20.
shall laugh and be merry, but you shall weep and walk sadly and pensiuely:
Christ was crucified and buffetted for thy Sins, and thou desire to pass
this life in Donayres, etc. Merry Jests, fond delights, mirth, laughter and
vain pastimes.

CHAP. 8. That likewise it is lawful, yea very necessary for religious and
Ecclesiastical persons to use some honest exercise, which may serve for
intermission, recreation and rest.
THERE were certain Heretics, Alph. de Castro aduers. haeres. lib. 11. verb
Oration.
who misinterpreting these words of the Evangelist S. Luke, where it is said
that men ought always to pray, Luc. 18.1.
and never to wax faint; brought into the Church that false and new coined
doctrine, teaching that no other thing was to be done and performed neither
night nor day, but only to pray, and that without any manner of intermission,
interruption or ceasing howsoever: For man ought only to be occupied and
employed therein: But these Heretics were sithence not without great reason
condemned and banished out of the Church, because it was not possible that our
weakness and feebleness should endure and be able always to pray, in such
sort as they have affirmed; Neither are the words of the Evangelist so to be
understood and expounded, neither has the infallible Verity spoken them in
that sense.

That which by these words, 1. These. 5.17.
It is expedient always to pray, and by those of the Apostle, Salmeron.
Pray continually without ceasing, is meant, is this; when as necessity
compels us to ask any thing of God, or when we are driven to any
straitness, tribulation or adversity, or do fear any such thing, then are
we to entreat and beseech with earnestness and perseverance, once, twice,
and thrice, till he show mercy upon us, reward, assist, and favor us without
fail or fraud, not ceasing nor being dismayed, though presently he do not
sensibly bestow or grant that which we demand, but that we knock and call at
the gate of his bountiful mercy, until it be opened for us, and that if he
please, he bestow upon us our desires, because of our importunacie, even as the
Lord in the Parable of the widdowe and wicked Judge does teach us the same
(which then to that purpose he propounded after he had said, Luc. 18.2. and
seqq.
Men ought always to pray, who with mere importunacie and perseverance, came
to weary the Judge for the grace and favor she desired. And this is confirmed
by the example of the Church who prayed without intermission, for the Apostle
S. Peter while he was detained in prison, Act. 12.5.
until he was delivered thence, and that she saw him safe.

Moreover, that saying, Pray continually, is as much to say, as Pray at hours
and time convenient, wherefore Dionysius Carthusianus says, Dionys. Carthus.
Let him that prays, pray without intermission in due times; and he prays
always, who prays when he may, and has occasion and fit opportunity
thereunto.

Simon de Cassia declares it thus; Simon de Cass. in Job. 7
All the life of man is a continual trial and warfare, and all the time he
continues and abides here, our enemies wage battle against us both night and
day without ceasing or intermissio^: And of our selves or by our own proper
strength and might we are not able to overcome or co^quer them, nor to
withstand their force, and therefore it behooves us to pray continually, and to
entreat for aid and succor of that LORD, who only is able to grant our
requests, for which cause the Spaniard says, En todas manner as es oportuna la
oracion importuna: that is, By all means an importunate prayer is always
opportune and fitting: And therefore it is not to be so intended, that there
must be no ceasing nor intermission of any Time in prayer, considering that our
sleep, our eating and drinking do often constrain us, as also our
apparrelling, and sometimes we must rest and ease our selves, and men must have
time to prepare them selves to their several offices and ministeries, and
sometimes to recreate and repair themselves for performance of corporal and
spiritual works of mercy: but that which is sought and expected of us is,
that our intention be wholly settled toward God, and that all our works be
only directed and intended to his glory, and that at times and hours
convenient, our hearts and thoughts be lifted up unto him, to pray and beg
that which we lack and have need of, So as all our life time, it behooves to
pray continually, because throughout the whole course thereof, there is neither
day nor hour, wherein man may say, that there is no need, or can leave undone
so necessary, and so important an exercise. But ever and always to continue
in prayer and meditation: there is no head can bear it, nor body endure it,
nor any Law of God that commands any such thing, nor obliges or binds us
to any such task, (because his yoke is easy and pleasant, and his burden
light) and there are other things wherein we ought to be employed, which
charity and necessity demand and require at our hands.

And for the accomplishment of all things, how spiritual or holy soever a man
be, it is very needful and requisite that he have and exercise some lawful
occupation and honest exercise, or some other function which may serve him for
recreation and ease to lighten the heart, because that variety (as says
Theodoretus) takes away the irkesomnesse and loathing, Theodor. li. de prouid.
and causes fresh desires and new appetite to spring and grow in us, and so
afterward man will return with better liking and greater ability, and with a
more fervent desire and earnestness to his spiritual exercises. Wherefore, 3.
Reg. 3.
even as the Wiseman in that his discreet Solomon,
judgment and sentence, 1. King 3.25.
which he gave for satisfaction of the two women who sued for the child, each
of them affirming that it was hers, where he commanded that it should be
divided and parted in the midst, and so distributed betwixt them both: So the
wise, prudent, spiritual man, is to part and divide his Time between the Soul
and Body, yielding and rendering to either of them the part due to the same: And
as true husband Jacob with his two wives Rachel and Leah, Genes 29.23. ver. 30.
was wont by turns to exercise himself in both lives; namely, active and
contemplative, giving the most he could, to the most perfect and most excellent.

And because that in this miserable and wretched life, the soul is not able to
attend always on spiritual things, therefore all authors that write of
spiritual life, say, that some interposition of Time is very necessary,
whereby the spiritual man might exercise himself in some honest and lawful
trade or occupation, which should neither withdraw nor auert the soul, nor
restrain the spirit, but such as should strengthen and comfort them, and serve
for aid and courage. For which cause those Fathers who in time of persecution
lived in the Desert and solitary places, enjoyed and used their corporal
occupations, or bodily travels, and set times thereto limited and dedicated,
whereby the Devil might always find them occupied either in corporal or
spiritual exercises, which corporal exercises served in steed of recreation
and repast, and for the obtaining of more valor and courage, to perform the
spiritual.

So says S. Jerome in his Rule, D. Hiero. in reg. cap. 8.
Give no place nor entertainment to idle and wandering thoughts, for if they
begin to be Lords over thee, and to master thee, thou shall perceive and feel
in thy soul a most heavy loss and great damage. And least the Devil do
find thee lazy and idle, procure (when thou do not contemplate) to do and
execute some handieworke, as by making some baskets of rushes, or by framing
and composing some small fruit dish or platter of slender, fine, delicate
twigs or osyars: Dig a while in some garden, and the ground being seasoned
and prepared, dress and make even the same, frame it in order, measure it with
a line, and divide it into squares and make beds, sow and set therein diverse
sorts of pulse, plants, seeds and flowers. Visit them often, succor and
prune them, and in due time water them, and as the seeds are growing and
sprouting, rake and pluck up the wild herbs and noxious weeds; and if it
please thee, thou may graffe some trees, whereof thou may in time come to
gather their sauorie and wished fruit. Make hiues, whereinto the industrious
Bees may retire themselves and abide, and work their sweet honey combs: we aue
and make nets to fish and catch the busy rouing fishes; Write and compound
books; pourtray and draw pictures, Paint or limme them with colors, because
the idle is an ocean of thoughts, and therefore the religious men of Egypt do
accustom to receive none that is ignorant of some office or science, not so
much for the earning of his victuals, as for that which imports the souls
health, and for the avoiding of idleness, and whereby with the variety and
change of exercises, he might return with more earnestness and desire to the
spiritual exercise of prayer and co^templation, the which in this present life
none can possibly endure continually. And moreover, writing to Demetrias, he
says: Idem epist. ad Demetr.
It is of great importa^cie that thou loose no time, but remainest always
occupied, the^ chiefly at the hours of Pryme, the third, sixth, and ninth
hour, at Euensong, Completorie, and Morning prayer, wherein every day thou art
to exercise thy self in prayer, assign to thy self appointed hours for
study, to learn and understand the sacred Scriptures, and after thou have
spent some time there-abouts, and perceiuest the thoughts, and care of thy
Soul, to have awakened, stirred, and moved thee, to fall down upon thy knees,
and oftentimes to kneel upon the bare ground, have due respect to the
ouer-plus of time, having always some business and work at hand, and do thou
spinne the wool, bumbast, or cotton, flax, hemp or towe which remains on
thy Distaffe, or reele and wind up bottomes of yarne, stitch and sow a while,
labor and perform some such like work, for if thou be busied, the days will
never see me long or tedious, but easy and short.

D. Berm, tract. de vita solitar.
And divine S. Bernard in his Treatise of solitary life counsels the same,
saying: After thy daily sacrifice of prayers, after thou have studied thy
lesson, and after the examination of thy conscience, use and embrace some
occupation or bodily exercise, whereby the soul and spirit may for some short
time rest and refresh it self, yea pause and breath, least thou be dismayed,
auerted, or withdrawn from thy purpose of godly exercise, from the which when
thou please or see convenient, thou may depart and leave of, or be freely
dispatched without any manner of offense or displeasure. For as man was not
created for the woman, Genesis 2.18.
but the woman for the man: So, the bodily exercise ought to be for the
spiritual, and to help and further it, but not to hinder or disturb the same
by no means. In like manner, as the Companion, which God gave to Adam, Verse 23.
was in all resembla^ce most like unto him, made and formed of his rib, bone,
and flesh; So likewise the help, assistance and exercise, which ought to
accompany and bear fellowship with the life spiritual, must resemble and
hold proportion with things spiritual, and by reason of their affinity,
either of them should be the badge and token of the other, as to meditate
somewhat that has been spoken or written, or to write ought that was read or
heard; for if they were laborious works of great pains and wearines, amazing
and as it were distracting the senses, and tyring the body, the spirit and
courage of well doing would be altogether assuaged and abated, and the
devotion lessened and diminished, yea made lukewarm. Therefore the religious
and spiritual person must take heed of, and look diligently, that the Time
be not overmuch which he shall spend in bodily exercises, but so as with great
ease and facility, he may return again to his spiritual devotion; howbeit
the while and space that the corporal endures, he ought not to be alone and
his exercise carelessly performed, but accompanied with others, and refreshed
with the spiritual. Corporal exercises, are those which are termed
handycrafts or works of the body; for otherwise watchings, fastings, and such
exercises of mortification, do not only not perturbe or hinder, nor cause any
hurt or damage to the spirit, and are not contrary unto the same, but rather
they are most favorable and profitable, if they be done and seasoned with
discretion and wisdom as is requisite. And the same Saint Bernard writing of
a religious Sister of his, Idem tract. forma been viuendi ad soror. ca. 51.
says thus; Thou (servant of God) must always read, pray, and labor, that
the spirit of dishonestie beguile not thy idle spirit, and carnal delights,
and fleshly lusts have the upper hand of labor and paines-taking. Divide the
day (Sister) into three parts, in the first, pray? in the second, read? and in
the third, labor? and perform some handie work: Prayer, does purify and
make us clean, reading, does teach and instruct us, and labor makes us
blessed and happy, according to that of David; Thou shall be happy and
fortunate, Psalm. 128.2.
and all things shall happen well unto thee, because thou eatest the fruit of
thy handiworke and labors. And who so well and so wisely parts and spends
the Time in this manner, shall have no recconing to yield unto God Almighty of
Time ill employed, neither shall Time have whereof to complain him.

CHAP. 9. How TIME is to be redeemed; and who they be that detain the same in
captivity.
THE Apostle S. Paul, amongst other documents, exhortations and counsels that
he gave to the Citizens of Ephesus, and to all Christian people, after he
had admonished them, that they should beware from ryotousnes and covetousness,
and from all other works of darkness, and that they should not communicate
with Heretics being enemies of the light, says thus; Ephesians. 5.15
Videte quomodo caute ambuletis etc.

Now you see how many daingers there be, occasions, impediments, lets, and
ambushments in the way to heaven, and how many thieves and robbers, pirates,
rouers and other enemies hinder the passage; therefore Look about you and be
advised how you walk, and how you travel that way, make your journey warily,
with special care and heedfulnes, with much vigilancie and fear, least you
fall into their snares. Walk not as fools, but as wise, discreet, prudent,
circumspect and wary, least by following and prosecuting the enemies plots and
practices you be quite overthrown. Remember that it is said, Ephe. 5.16.
Redimentus tempus etc. Redeem the time because the days are evil. The first
exposition or explanation of which words (because the second part thereof is
treated in the Chapter subsequent) is of Saint Jerome where he says, Viegas in
Apoc. cap. 10. citat Hieronym.
that God bestowed Time upon men whereby he might be served in it, and they
occupied in good works, (the which more at large may be understood in the
second chapter precedent) which notwithstanding they detain as captiuated and
imprisoned, employing the same in bad works and wiced affairs (which is a
captivity most culpable and blameable, and most worthy to be lamented) But
Time is to be redeemed and ra^somed, by doing of good works; for then does man
redeem and buy it, and make that properly his own, which malice had detained
as overcome and alienated.

The second Exposition is this, God cutteth short and diminishes many times
from Sinners their days and time, the which by the course of nature (had they
been good) should have lived longer, (as in the third chapter before we are
instructed) Wherefore the good, just, and virtuous man, and he that imployeth
his time well, does redeem and ransom it. Then he that rescueth and
ransometh that part of time and space of life, wherein he lived sinfully, for
which God by his just Judgment would have cut him off, shall now enjoy all the
time that Nature had assigned and appointed him to live in, and shall die a
good usurer or great gayner of time, and full of days.

The third Exposition is, That he redeemeth Time who takes part thereof from
the affairs and traffic of the world to bestow it in the service of God,
for the enjoying of the inward peace and quietness of his Soul, for the
idleness of Marie Magdalen is not to be accounted Idleness, Luke 10.39
but holy and religious employment.

Furthermore, he that uses Time with such circu^spect limitation and heedfull
respect in his transitory commodities and temporal businesses, as that he
does not employ the whole day therein, but now and then borrowes a little from
his worldly employments, and saues and reserues it for the Soul, for her best
advantage and greater benefit; he is truly said to redeem and purchase Time,
and to bestow for the same even that which he saved and spared from his worldly
affairs for his Souls health. And albeit this redemption and ransom (because
of the delight and good liking otherwise of the which he is deprived)
aggrieueth him in such fort, as it should grieve one to be beguiled of his
dinner, who had a good appetite thereunto, yet notwithstanding man ought very
earnestly and eagerly to strive and procure by all means to redeem and
recover again the pawn or pledge of a thing so precious as Time is,
considering that pastimes and sports, unlawful and excessive entertainments
and recreations, were the money and price by the which it was sold to the
Devil, who beguiled us most notably in the sale thereof, with his great
subtilty and forcible enticements as well of the Time it self* as of the
precious worth and value thereof.

Agreeable to which, that most famous Doctor of the Church S. Augustine says,
August. ser. 24. de verb. Apostol.
To redeem Time is, as when any body impleadeth or sueth thee for thy goods,
to loose somewhat thereof for the gayning of Time to serve and please God, and
to abstract thereout so much as by suits of law thou should spend; and that
which thou seem to loose, thou gainest, which is the price wherewith thou
have bought Time; and something must be lost to get, and to purchase; for if
thou go to the market place to buy bread, wine, or oil, or other
merchandice; thou give and receiuest, thou leauest and receiuest, thou
leauest behind one thing, and bring home another, thou leauest money behind
thee which thou loosest, and cariest home thy ware or merchandise, and that is
to buy: for if thou had not given something, thou should not have now
wanted what thou had, but thou should have possessed much more then
before, if happily thou had found it, or did inherit it, or else that
others in courtesy had bestowed the same upon thee; but when thou give and
loosest, or take out of thy house one thing to bring home another, then do
thou buy and purchase: and that which thou inioyest, is that which thou
boughtest, and that which thou bestowest and have not, is the price wherewith
thou have bought.

The Divine Chrysostom expounds it after this manner; Chrysostom. in Epist. ad.
Ephesians. Ser. 17.
Redeem the time (Brethren) that is, Redeem the opportunity and the occasion
to do good. Time is not yours to be despised, and wherein without sinning you
may play and spend it away wickedly, or consume it unthriftily (as is said of
one, who affirmed that he could play away his money, and throw it into the
river if he listed, because he was Master thereof) for though it be yours, by
being in your hands and power to employ it well or ill; Yet are you but
Pilgrims and Passingers, and therefore ought to desire no worldly honor, nor
vain glory, nor riches, dignities, puissance or authority, revenge, nor any
point or particle of renown or worship. Suffer and bear meekly all things
which offer themselves unto you against the hair as it were, and disagreeable
to your good liking; have patience therein, and so you shall redeem and ransom
Time, and do good to your enemies, and give them of that you have if they ask
it and be in necessity. Imagine that a man had a house most rich and most
sumptuous, very costly furnished and well orderly provided and prepared, and
that by the fame and report thereof certain thieves or burglarors did enter
into the same, who sought and endeavored to kill the owner, that afterward
they might spoil and rob him, whereupon he should say unto them, Oh my good
friends, for the love of God, do not murder me, and I will yield and render
you all that I have in my house, and thereupon delivers the^ all things they
ask and demand; of such a one we may truly say, that himself ransomed his
own life: So after the same manner, thou (my Brother) enioyest a large fair
house, great store of wealth, jewels, pearls, and precious stones; thou
possessest a Soul which is the lively Temple of the living God, yea his own
house and dwelling place, thou art endued with faith, hope and charity,
besides other virtues and gifts from his hands and bountiful liberality; Give
and bestow all that shall be demanded of thee, and loose the remainder when
it shall be expedient and needful, in exchange least thou loose the life of
thy Soul, and so thou may ransom and redeem Time, which in case thou do
not, thy enemies will lead thee away captive.

Again, Sinners may redeem and ransom the time they withheld captiuated, if
they will embrace and follow the Counsel of the Prophet Baruch, where he
says; Baruch. 4 28.
Sicut fuit sensus vester, etc. Convert and turn you to God, and after your
conversion to him by repentance, you shall serve and obey him ten times more
careful with more ardent heat, fervor and diligence then before when you
departed from him and misimployed your time.

They will likewise rescue and repurchase the same again, if they will perform
the admonition which the Apostle S. Paul gives, declaring upon the consequence
of these words, Sicut exhibuistis membra vestra, Romans 6.19.
etc. Even as hitherto you have employed and yielded your bodies, senses, and
members in the service of uncleanness and iniquity, to sin, now wheel about
and look back, turn over the leaf, and employ all things to serve equity,
virtue, and holiness of life.

The Apostle having spoken before, Romans 6.19.
Humanum dico propter infirmitate^ vestram, etc. I speak as a man for your
infirmities sake, and because you are weak, heartily beseeching you, that you
wholly employ and busy your selves in the service of God by keeping his
commandments, and redeeming the Time (of which holy exercise the fruit is
your sanctification, for by such works man does sanctify and dedicate
himself wholly to God) and that you perform this with as great affection and
alacrity, as ever hereto fore you devoted your selves to impiety, yielding
your members as bondslaues to sin, whose fruit is nothing else but iniquity,
and whereof a Sinner can make no other profit, but that he remain a Sinner, a
miserable wretched man, and be so accounted.

And notwithstanding it be true that Sanctification does far exceed iniquity,
yet rest I well satisfied with such unfeigned endeavor and resolution of doing
good works, which some have performed after their conversion, with such
earnestness as before they were set and bent to sin by displeasing and
offending of God; We see how violent and courageous many are to sin, and
after they have glutted their appetites how slothful and lukewarm, how slack
and faint they are to repent and to exercise themselves in actions of virtue?
The sinner rusheth through thick and thin to accomplish his desire, and to
satisfy his lustful appetite: and as it were to run away with that he longed
for; nothing seems difficult or hard unto him; and if thou ask him, how
can thou suffer this, or that? though he be never so grave and ancient, to
all things he will frame an answer, and say, yes.

Time seems most short to sinners for inioying of their lusts and pleasures,
but to occupy themselves in good works it seems most large and wearisome:
The Service long, the Sermon large, his prayers, meditations, pains and
fasting, laborious and tedious: Cold weather makes them heartlesse and cowards,
heat slacketh and releaseth them, and all things seems painful and heavy.
So as (to conclude) that is a most singular remedy and help for to redeem
Time, to employ it well, and to use it with such alacrity, heedfulnesse,
earnestness and liveliness to devotion, as he has done when he was
altogether bent and resolved to loose and captiuate to same.

CHAP. 10. How it is to be understood that the days are evil, and how that
therefore TIME is to be redeemed.
AL things that God has created are good being considered in themselves, and
according to their own nature and kind, because that from his most blessed
hands, there could proceed no work or thing which were not good; And so
himself after the work of Creation said, that all were good and perfect, Genesis
1.31,
that he had made and created.

And to speak to our purpose, the days and years considered in themselves
cannot be evil, neither can there be any moral malice found in them, which
justly may be termed a fault, because they are not capable thereof: nor yet
any feeling of punishment, for they cannot apprehend it, nor any other misery
which men suffer for their sins: But the days are said to be evil, in
respect of men, who live in them by occasion of their transgressions and sins
they commit, or by reason of those punishments they suffer, caused by the
former, according to S. Chrysostom and S. Ieromes exposition. Chrysostom. and Hier.
sup. Psalm. 27.
And so are persons that be weak, sick, sad, sorrowful or afflicted, wont to
say, O what an evil day this has been unto me! oh how terrible, and how
bitter!

Two things there are (says that excellent S. Augustine) that make the days
to be evil, Aug. ser. 24. de verbis Apost.
and are the cause wherefore they are termed evil, being indeed in themselves
good, namely the Malice and the Misery of men: The misery or wretchedness is
common, but the malice ought not so to be. From the time that Adam sinned, and
was banished out of Paradise, the days have ever continued evil: and the
crying of infants at the time of their birth is a presage of their misery and
troubles, and a sure sign and infallible token that upon that day they enter
into this vale of tears, and that at the least (though they be so happy as to
become good) they shall not fail but be encombred with sundry dangerous
temptations and trials, albeit the cause thereof cannot be expressly declared.

Euthymius expounding Euthym. in Psalm. 34.
those words of the Psalmist, Who is that man that wishes life and desires
to see good days? says, that those good days, are they of the other life,
for that those of this, are evil, according to that which Jacob spoke to
Pharao, Genesis 47.8.9.
and the Apostle S. Paul also when he wrote to them of Ephesus, Redeem the
time, Ephesians. 5.15.
because the days are evil. And S. Basil faith the same: The whole time of my
Pisgrimage (says Jacob answering Pharao, Basil, ibid.
who had asked him, Genesis 47.9.
how old he was) is an hundred and thirty years few and evil have the days
of my life been. The king demanded him, how many are the years of thy life?
and he answered, The days of my pilgrimage, etc. and though it seems that he
answered not to the purpose, yet did he answer most admirably, like a most
holy, wise and discreet Saint, amending and secretly correcting the demand and
question propounded unto him, even as the Master is accustomed to do with his
Disciple, when he demands not aright: who gave Pharao to understand, that
the years of man's life, are not years, but days, and the days be not days
but hours, and the hours, not hours, but moments; and that the life of the
Servants of God, is no steedfast or permanent life, but only a peregrination
and pilgrimage toward the heavenly Jerusalem; They are passengers and
strangers, and thereafter they use the goods of this world; and said further,
that the days he lived were few, being a hundred and thirty years, because
these and many more, are indeed but few, Genesis 29. and 31. Job. 7.
likes as the longest life, is but short.

And finally he calls his days evil, because of the manifold perils wherein he
remembered himself oftentimes plunged, and of the corporal and spiritual
travels which usually he suffered: For the life of man is a temptation and
trial even all the time that he lives upon the earth. And because of the
misery and troubles, the mischances and disgraces which befall and happen unto
men in their days, happen and befall men in their time, the days are called
evil, as likewise in the sacred scripture they are so termed.

Therefore also is the day of Judgment called the evil and the bitter day,
Psalm. 50.
in respect of the wicked; and from hence we may understand the sense and
meaning of those words of our Savior written by S. Matthew, Matthew. 6.34.
Be not over careful for the morrow, for the morrow shall care for it self;
the day has enough with his own grief: That is, Simon de Cassia.
as if more plainly he had said, Too day ye have sufficient to do, namely to
carke and care for this present day, and for all the labors, turmoyles,
occupations, necessities and businesses thereof, without doubling the weight or
ouer-charging your selves, in taking upon you too day, the anguish, vexation
and burden of the morrow, imagining that then you may do it, or that then
such a thing may happen unto you: for I assure you that to morrow will be very
careful of it self.

And therefore the meaning of that, which the Apostle wrote to them of Ephesus,
when he said, Redeem the time because the days are evil, Ephe, 5.16.
was this, Behold, that the days are troublesome, full of misery,
difficulties and lets, occupations, temptations and impediments of your
salvation and health; For the which, and for many other things and affairs,
whereinto the necessities of this body and life, and our own ill inclined
natural disposition after the fall have lead us, much part of time is often
lost without fruit, and is sold, morgaged, impawned, pledged and captiuated.
And therefore I heartily beseech and exhort you, and do highly commit to your
charge, that you take special care and regard that it be not ill employed any
longer, nor withheld imprisoned, but that you cause and procure to your
uttermost power and endeavor, that thereby you may reap profit, that it be
redeemed, repurchased and ransomed, and that you will duly esteem thereof, and
negotiate therewith; So as when our Savior shall come to demand an Account,
thou may be able to make it good. And so are all of us to do and perform,
considering besides that the days are most short, uncertain and irreuocable,
we should be covetous of Time, endeavoring and procuring to recover that which
is lost, and to pacify them unto whom we have done any harm by making of
great have to recover and save that which is to come to serve God in, and to
repair our former negligences and passed heedlessnes with present diligence
and care, renewing and augmenting our repentance, mortifications and charitable
deeds: Even as accustometh the Trauellor to do when he has any long journey
to make, and perceiving the time to be short, and that by his own negligence,
rechlesnes and carelesnes, he is much behind, he indeauoreth afterward to
run in such sort that he goes in two hours so much way as that otherwise
he would not have gone in six, and for that purpose looks for nearer ways
and shorter cuts, he sweats and toils, and runs on headlong a thousand rugged
ways, without resting or pawsing, though necessity much require it, and if he
hap to eat, it will be but a bit, and that with much celerity and quick speed.

So did the same Apostle for the redeeming of the Time which he had lost, and
withheld captiuated. Sequor si quomodo comprehendam. Phil. 3.12. 1. Cor. 9.24
As if he had said, Now in respect I captiuated and lost so much time, and
erred so far, and continued so backwards in the right path of Gods service,
and was so negligent in gaining and procuring the glory of the life to come, I
will now give double diligence and bestir my self apace, and run without any
looking back, because I make no reckoning of all that I have already iourneyed
and traced, but rather will commit all that to oblivion, as if I had not
traveled it at all, crowding and thrusting my self forward, as it were
through the midst of all that stand before me, having always an eye to that
which I have to go, and not to that, which I have already traveled.

King David did the same, after that God had amplified and enlarged his heart
with his love and fear, and took away those gifes or fetters which he had on
his feet, as himself confesses, saying; Psalm. 119.
Viam mandatorum tuorum cucurri, etc. When as by thy great mercy (O my Lord
God) thou thoughtest good to draw me out of my sin and misery, wherein I
detained and spent so much time, and have been pleased to burst the chains
where with I was tied and bound, refreshing and comforting my heart with the
water of thy superabundant grace, more then of Angels; I begun (for the
redeeming of Time captiuated) to run, and have runned (as far forth as I
could) with all diligence, without reaching, as it were, one breath or other,
the way of thy precepts.

The devout and mystical Thaulerus (with whom we will conclude this Treatise)
did ask, Thauler.
how lost and passed Time might be redeemed and raunsomed, considering we have
no moment of time which we owe not to God, and (as Gregory Nissenus says)
when all the life is employed in Prayer, Greg. Niss. in orat. Dominie.
and in giving thanks to God, with much ado, do we accomplish as we ought, what
at the present ouerrunnes us, how much less that of the Time past, and to
come: makes answer thus; Let every one depart and retire himself withal
possible power and strength, from all and every place and time, and betake
himself wholly unto that present Nuno (which properly cannot be said in the
vulgar language) of eternity, where God is essentially, and always continues
in one Being, and in one firm stability, without respect of any thing that is
Past, or To come, but all Present and in one perperualestate, vniforine,
perdurable, fixed, permanent, constant, unchangeable and immovable, having no
time to ouerpasse him, In whom remains and is al present, past and future,
and all beginning and end of time, without beginning and without end. And there
in God are found all the treasures which by the wicked are vilified, despifed
and conte^ned, yea infinite more. And they who accustom many times to lift them
above themselves, and above all things created, and to hide themselves and make
their nests and dwelling with God, who abides in the Souls of all present,
such without doubt do make themselves rich, and shall find in him much more of
that which otherwise they might have lost. And in this introuersion or
conversion to God, ought every one of us, wholly, entirely and perfectly to
transform himself into him, and from the very bowels of his heart say unto
him after this manner.

Oh my everlasting God, If all the TIME which has been from the beginning of
the world, and which shall be till the end, were granted unto me, I would live
wholly for thee and in thy service, and from henceforth I would God I might live
and continue so loyal, faithful and obedient in all kind of virtue, as all as
many men as have been borne and lived, though it be in all manner affliction,
trial, misery and tribulation. I would to God that all the waters of the Sea
might be distilled through my eyes to remedy al them that are poor and in
necessity, and to comfort them that are sad and heavy, and to love thee (my
God) to praise thee, to extol thee, to magnify thee, and to glorify thee so
much as all thy Saints and Angels of thy sovereign Court: For without all
doubt I would do and perform all those things very willingly and with all my
heart.

And certainly he that retains and feels in his heart that will and lively
affection, shall be so assured that he shall be accepted of that most just and
rightful Judge, as if he had put it in effect, because the seeking with an
unfeigned will to accomplish and perform any thing, Chrysostom. homil. 19. in
Matthew. S. Tho. 1.2. qu 20. art 4 2. Cor. 8.12
and the real doing and fulfilling thereof, is all one and the very same with
God. For as S. Paul says, if there be first a willing mind, it is accepted
according to that a man has, and not according to that he has not.

FINIS.

