MOSES AND IETHRO: Or the Good Magistrate:

Containing sundry necessary admonitions to all Majors, Governors, and Freemen
of Towns Corporate, as they were delivered in a Sermon at S. Mary's in Dover
on the Election Day.

By IO: READING.

2 CHRONICLES. 19.6, etc. Take heed what ye do: for ye execute not the
judgments of man, but of the Lord, and he will be with you in the cause and
judgments. LONDON, Printed by John Legatt for Robert Allott, and are to be
sold in Pauls-Church-yard at the sign of the Gray-hound. 1626.

To the Right Worshipful the Mayor and Iurats of Dover: To the Majors, Barons,
and Freemen of the Cinqueports: Grace and peace be multiplied in Jesus Christ.
RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL,
I Have tendered these Meditations to your so general Patronage, because you
all have one interest in them; In as much as you all make one body. I am not
ignorant, that they are neither accommodated to the excellency of these times,
nor the curiosity of such as will not abide wholesome Doctrine; I do know,
that (to guilty consciences, and carnal minds of men not so much proposing
to themselves reformation, as formalitie in hearing) all plain and home-put
reproves are like acrimonie of medicines to green wounds: I remember that
truth, by reason of our corrupt will and perverse affections, is fruitful in
begetting enemies; neither am I to learn this out of mine own particulars; it
was ever so with the Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs* yea and Christ himself: yet
have I (without care, what the vnreformable shall think, or say of my plain
dealing) addressed these exhortations to those few of many amongst you, who
(duly considering how heavily it imports us to admonish sinners, Ezekiel. 3.20.
lest their blood be required at our hands, to cry aloud and spare not, to show
the people their transgressions, I^^^ 8.1.
and the house of Jacob their sins) will not therefore think we are become
their enemies, because we tell them the truth, but remember how necessary the
greatest instancie, and roundest warnings now are in these dangerous times,
wherein the dreadful hand of God, has in our late visitations, po^nted out
the neglect, conniuence, and impunitie, begetting that cursed liberty of
sinning, for which the wrath of God comes on the children of disobedience:
and, that (since we must all indifferently appear before the tribunal of
Christ) they are not friends, ^ Cor. 5.10.
who pass by our unregarded faults, as the Priest and Leuite by the wounded
man, but they who like the good Samaritan, power in Wine and Oil, to cleanse
and heal, and consequently to prepare us against the strict examination of the
most holy Judge: Consider therefore what I say, and the Lord God give you
understanding in all things, that upon a present reformation, the Lord may make
fast the bars of our gates, turn his indignation from us, and set the cloudy
pillar, day and night, betwixt us and our insolent enemies: in which hope I rest

Yours to love, and serve you. IO: READING.

Moses and Jethro.
Exodus 18.24. And Moses harkened unto the voice of his father in law, and did
all that he had said.
MOses does here pass to the history of a new policy which thenceforth he
observed: there are two parts of it; the first declares the advice and
counsel of Iethro, gluing being and life to this political course: From the
17. verse, to the 23. the second relates the execution of the same counsel
from the 24. verse.

In the first is found an (...), an euersion, reiection* or reproouing their
former custom, the thing which thou do is not well: as if one should tell
you, you have some inconveniences in your custom, Verse. 17.
which are neither right, nor good: so found Iethro some subsect or reformation
in the customs of Moses and the republicke of Israel.

In the second is a (...), or proposition of an order from that time to be
instituted.

Concerning the persons eligible to the magistracy, these particulars are set
down.

1. Quis praefecturus esset. Moses, consulta sacie Domini, Be thou for the
people to Godward, Verse. 19.
and report thou the causes unto God, and admonish them of the ordinance and of
the laws, etc. that is, Verse. 22.
judge thou in difficult causes, which cannot be decided, but by consulting
with God.

2, Quos eligeret: provide among all the people men of courage, fearing God,
men dealing truly, hating covetousness.

3, Quibus, Appoint such over them to be rulers over thousands, rulers over
hundreds, rulers over fifties, and rulers over tens: Let them judge the people
at all seasons -- that is for the manner of judicature which is set down,
verse. 22. the event is promised, verse. 23. if thou do this thing (and God so
command thee) both thou shall be able to endure, and all this people shall
also go quietly to their place. Immediately after the advice, comes the
narration of the fact the fruit and issue thereof. Moses obtemperated, And
Moses harkened unto the voice of his father in law.

The words co^taine Moses his 1. Regularitie, and disposition in taking
counsel, And Moses harkened unto, etc. 2. Conformity, in the execution
thereof, and he did all, etc.


And Moses harkened unto the voice of his father in law: 1. His regulatitie.
Genesis 3.17.
Hearing is the sense of discipline: error first entered into the soul through
that door, the woman harkened to the serpent and was seduced, and because the
man hearkened to the voice of his wife, in that which God forbad, he was
cursed, and the cure must follow the evil, the same was into the soul, we
must be healed through the care: there the word enters to beget saving faith,
faith is by hearing: there counsel enters into the mind, Romans 10.17. Pro
2.2.10, 11, 12.
to make men wise; cause thine cares to hearken unto wisdom, incline thine
heart to understanding: when wisdom enters into thine heart, and knowledge
delights thy soul, then shall counsel preserve thee; and understanding
shall keep thee, and deliver thee from the evil way --.

Moses was here ruled by his father in laws counsel: what that was, the
precedent story has, and I shall speak summarily of it in the conclusion
hereof.

For the present I have to observe the regularitie and disposition of
considering him in relation to his counselor: Moses had heard God speak: had
received commission, and instruction from God himself; God had by his hands
done wonderful things in the land of Egypt, wonders in the sea, Number. 14.14.
wonders in the desert; the Lord was among that people, he went before them by
day time in a pillar of a cloud, and in a pillar of fire by night, to give them
light; Exodus 13.2^. Deuteronomy. 1.31.33.
and to search them out a place to pitch their tents in: this was the dreadful
standard of the Lord of hosts, where God set it down, they pitched their
tents, when he removed it, they were to march again. The Lord did bear them
in the wilderness, at a man does bear his son: The Lord had promised Moses
his assistance, Deuteronomy. 1.31. Exodus 3.12.
certainly I will be with thee, to dictate what he should speak in his
service, Exodus 1.12 15
I will be with thy mouthy, and will teach thee what thou shall say, and to
direct in all cases of deliberation, I will teach you what ye ought to do:
and lest Moses should still distrust his own ability* God confirms his
promises by miracles peculiar to Moses sense. Thus was Moses enabled by the
spirit of counsel: but as for Iethro, whether he were Prince, Exodus 4.
or Priest of Midian, or both. I dispute not: it was an ancient manner among
the nations, for Kings to be sacrificers; Aristot. Polis. 3.10
and though David's sons are called Cohens, 2. Sam. 8.18.
which is interpreted,. Chron. 18.17. Primi ad manum regis, Psalm 1 ^0 4. (...).
3. P^^l. 1^2.9. ^^r 32.32.
chief about the king: yet the word (...) does usually import, the same which
is in Greek, (...) (which the Apostle uses Hebr. 7.) so called of sacrificing,
and doing of sacred works: admit he were a Prince, yet in this new form of a
traveling commonwealth, (which could borrow neither model, nor rules, from
any other state then in being, but was immediately dependent, for laws,
policies, and government, on the word and commandment of God) he could not be
acquainted with any such mysteries of state, as might serve to declare him a
fit counselor for an unknown government: yet Moses hearkened unto his voice.
How abundance of knowledge (especially attained by immediate revelation)
puffs up, the messenger of Satan buffeting Paul, 2. Cor. 12.
to prevent that mischief, does sufficiently declare: how authority greatneth
the mind, Paul's prescription to Timothy may serve to intimate, a bishop (says
he) may not be a young scholar, 1. Tim. 3.6.
lest be being puffed up, fall into the condemnation of the devil: he
prohibited not his youth, as unapt for that office: 1. Tim. 4.
let no man contemn thy youth, but the inexperience of such a man as was
nouiter instructus, and as it were nouella plantatio. Chrys^^^o* 10
The devil does mainely labor to bring men down the same way by which
himself fell; therefore he tempts the ignorant to presumption, till such a
mind, like the rising smoke, Omnia vitia in male faclis timend a sunt, superbia
in benefactis, etc. Aug. in Ps. 58 2 Cor. 12.10. Chrysostom. ib. hom. 26.
by greatning it self, vanish and come to nothing. He tempts the learned,
and good, to pride, and contempt of others, therefore when all vices else are to
be feared in evil works, pride only is to be feared in good. When I am weak
then am I strong (said the Apostle) Vbi afflictio, ibi and consolatio, where
affliction is, there is consolation, and that grace which fortifieth with
humility, by subduing, and lessening the mind, which in the natural man has
for the most part, such dependence on things external, that the mind of man
and his condition, like the beasts and the wheels in Ezekiels vision, are
degressed, Ezekiel. 1.10.
or lifted up together, for that mind is on the outward estate which bears
it, as the spirit of the beasts was in the wheels. What so great a command as
Moses had might work, they know, who becoming acquainted with such titles of
honor, suddenly forget themselves, and their ears prove nice and impatient
of counsel. Saul did once think humbly of himself, was little in his own
sight; 1. Sam. 15.17.
then he would hearken to the advice of Samuel, but being promoted to a
kingdom, he neglected the voice of God: no doubt but there was a time when
Rehoboam would have heard the counsel of the ancient men, but feeling the
authority of a king in his hand, he rejected them for the advice of the young
men: why go I so high, or far? has no man known, that a white staff has
in a year or two so inspired an officer over a thousand, that he could abide
no advise? Moses in their language would have said: has not God himself put
mine authority into my hand? has he not committed to my charge six hundred
thousand men? Number. 11.21.
have I not talked with God in the mount? have I not by the power of God
confirmed my authority by sundry miracles? or in the language of the wilful
Sodomites, some would have replied, he is come alone as a stranger, and shall
he judge and rule? Genesis 19.9.
or as the insolent Pharisees to the young man whose eyes Christ had opened, thou
art altogether borne in sins, Ioh. 9.34.
and do thou teach us? thou art not acquainted with the affairs of this new
state: content thy self with thy charge at Madian: But this meekest servant of
God for all those glorious dignities conferred on him, hearkened to his
counsel, who was far inferior to himself: leaving us in his example this
instruction.

The best and most excellent men will hearken to the advice of others, yea,
sometimes of their inferiors: for,

1. The wisest men are subject to ouer-sights and errors: never to err is
peculiar to God alone who only is omniscient, who therefore has been his
counselor? but he gives not all knowledge to the wisest, to humble them who
being subject to a thousand errors, are yet apt to be proud with a false
opinion of wisdom.

2. God does sometimes reveal wisdom and counsel to men whose aspects are
not promising, whose condition is mean, and obscure, (there was found in the
little City a poor wise man, who delivered the city by his wisdom, Eccl.
9.14.15
though he were so little respected, that no man remembered him) and hide it
from the learned and prudent, as to ascertaine men, that himself is the
author and fountain of every perfection so to teach them, that they ought not
to be arrogant of that they have received, since the simple may eft-soone
control their proiections, neither to contemn others to whom God will
sometimes make them beholding for advice.

Hence it comes to pass that wise men love counsel, and fools their own
ways: they know in the greatest atchieuements counsel is better then strength:
(...) M^^^^d.
they know it is a great misery to want the advice of private friends, much
greater is the want of counsel in matters public; they know advice is a
sacred thing, they know that counsellesse force falls with it own weight:
Vis co^si^ij expers mole ruit sud. Cassi^d^r. Ber^, de consid. l. 4. c 4. Ibid.
every provident man therefore consilium quaerit: if it be not given him he
will purchase it. Bernard says well, by counsel, tracta ante factum, quia
post factum sera retractatio est: advise, before thou execute, repentance and
counsel come too late, when things are done. Do nothing without advice, and
post factum non poenitebis: the reason why wisemen love others advice, is
because seeing their own wants, they suspect, and are jealous of themselves:
the fool, because he knows not so much as his own defects, has an high
opinion of his own worth, therefore he is precipitate, and often unlucky to
himself, or that unhappy commonwealth committed to his managing: and like the
Polypus (a true emblem of unadvised men) taken in a snare, Whose motto is
(...) Ambros.
for want of taking heed. I conclude this point then. Counsel is for wise men,
and correction for fools, for these hate advise: the wisest of men has the
sum of all, Prou. 12.15.
The way of a fool is right in his own eyes: but he that hears counsel is
wise.

I know not yet to whom this address belongs, but in the phrase of Tamar I
may say to him, Discern I pray thee, cuius sunt ista, sigillum, Genesis 38.25.
sudarium and scipio iste. -- I mean the seal and staff of office, to him I
say, as this concerns him, when the staff and authority shall be put into
his hand by your suffrages, to assure him that he cannot be a good patriot who
despises, and therefore will not hearken to counsel: so to you all I say, it
first and for present concerns you, who though many, are but one body, and in
place of one Moses now to make choice, (one Moses made choice of many
Magistrates, you being many are to choose one) therefore your first part is in
imitation of this man of God, to hear advice what choice you ought to make:
you must be auscultantes: first to the Prophet, who by a laudable custom, is
to you as some Iethro, aduising you concerning your election: secondly, to
those grauest, and most experienced members of your state, whose age,
employment and observation have enabled them to judge what man in respect of
the particulars, fittest to be elected.

The word is our cloudy pillar to direct our courses, when that remooueth we
must follow it, when that stands, Greg Math. 13. Mat. 13.16.
we must rest: this is that cibus mentis, in whose strength we are to walk:
this is that which makes us blessed in harkening to it, and wise in doing it,
Math. 7. 24. S^ultus vero haec audita dis^imulans, tanqua^ super arenam opus a
dif^eationis impenderi^, infideliter flat, etc. Hilar. Canon. 6. Exodus 29.20.
I will like him to a wise man, which has builded his house on a rock: he
and his work shall stand. With this the good Magistrate must be initiated and
consecrated, (as the high Priests were wont to be, with the blood of the
sacrifice: thou shall take of the blood and put it upon the tip of their right
ear -- and upon the thumb of their right hand, and upon the great toe of the
right foot) their ear must first be touched with the word, that it may be
sanctified and opened to counsel, next the hand, that their work and
administration may be holy, and that their conversation may be blameless.

If this part be neglected, I easily believe the rest will prove unhappy, and
evil to you, what choice soever you make: for how shall God give you a blessing
in a good Magistrate, how shall he prosper his best counsels, or endeauours
to you, when to initiate him, you begin so euilly, as to contemn God? For he
that despises these things, despises not man but God. And himself faith
again, Ezekiel. 3.7*
The house of Israel will not hear thee, for they will not hear me:

It must needs be evil likewise, where the advice of men experienced, and
authorized to assist, is contemned.

I say therefore, there are some men (I say not where, if it now concern you,
look to it, if nor, lay it up till it may) there are some men, for this cause
most unfit to be elected, because they cannot abide the word of God, if it
touch them, nor the counsel of good men, if it cross them. Some worldly men
are like those inhabitants by the falls of Nilus, the noise of other businesses
has so filled their ears, that they cannot hearken: the Roman Peter has cut
off the right ear of some, and such a Malcus hear nothing save only what the
state of Rome says, there are no men to sit at our helmes. Others are, Aug. ^^
Psalm. 57.
for other causes, deaf adders, who laying one ear to the earth, and covering
the other with the tail, (I mean, either for carnal advice, or perverse
affections luting up their ears) cannot be drawn out of their holds: who
loving their own ignorance, cannot be brought out into the light with the most
divine and sweet enchantments of wisdom: ib. Aug.
these are not only non audientes, men not hearkening, but omnino vt non
valiant audire facientes. So composing themselves, that they may not hear
these like the enraged Jews when they hear their faults touched, stop their
ears, and fly upon the speaker. Non erant surdi, sed fecerunt se surdos: Act.
7. Aug. qu^s.
they are thus affected also to the counsel of men, if it be not a Miner^a of
their own brain, pride and self-love will neither suffer then to execute, nor
apprehend it: there is nothing more intolerable then this outsides of a
magistrate, who thinks nothing can be right but what himself does, or
proiecteth: look nearer him, he admireth his own head, talks of the
excellent services done to the state, disparageth his predecessors, finds
inconveniences in other governments, in fine, as if he were possessed with a
spirit of contradiction, and his ears metamorphosed into tongues, he who
should be a^scultans with Moses in my text is loquax, and nothing else, as for
advice he fears it might import some weakness in the receiver to carry any but
an independent brain. I have showed you the Idea and character of a Magistrate,
whose example if any so evil be to be found, must be avoided: as Cyprian said
of Doctors, I must conclude of governors, Neminem bonum esse, etc. qui non
idem sit docilis: he cannot be good who will not be taught: Moses thought not
himself too good to be advised by a man, who never went dry-foot through the
red sea, who never talked familiarly with God: to shut up this point then; in
your elections, it is safer, (I dare say it confidently) if you had any so
unhappy choice, to take a fool, who would perform this first part, and
hearken to good counsel, then a wise man in his own conceit; there is more
hope of a fool then of him: a simple man with ears is better then a deaf
Ahithephel with his most curious oracles: he then that has an ear let him
hear: Tutius auditur veritas quam pradicatur. Aug, de doct. Christ.
there is no fear in hearing good counsel, there is often danger in giving it:
Moses hearkened unto the voice of his father in law, this is the first part,
the next is --

2. His conformity in execution.
He did all that he had said. We are now arrived at the maine point, practice.
It was the only good disposition position where we found him auscultantem:
hearing is the sense of discipline, without this what ever is done were better
undone: without the eyes of counsel what is the strongest will, but like some
blind Sampson pulling down the pillars of a corporation. Yet we must not be
Athenians given only to hear, Act. 17.
or tell: now comes the fruit, in this same (fecit) without this, what ever
is heard, were as good unheard: you see these are the gemelli, which, (as in
every happy state they are borne together) cannot be divided from the word of
God, to the most godly counsel of man, there is a most necessary conjunction,
of hearing, and doing: without the last we cannot be justified in the first,
without the first, not instructed in the last: many come to, and go from this
place, without fruit; because they come, vt audiant, non vt discant, not to
learn, but to hear, either for fashion, or for their pleasures, as to a
theater: so this place becomes to them, for an hour, diuersorium otii, and a
conuenience of seeing and being seen. But except we he arken to the voice of
God, we cannot believe, faith is by hearing: Romans 10.
and except we do what we hear, we cannot be saved: not the hearers, but the
doers of the law shall be justified: so is it in moral affairs: the deaf man
cannot be wise, but all counsel, to a man, who will at last follow his own
fancy, is but lost breath: such aduisers are but as Salomons grave Senators to
his wilful son, heard, but not followed.

The sum of all is, if you will be well advised, you must do all that is well
said to you; so did Moses here, fecit quicquid dixerat. All, not some things
only, I never heard of any man either so perverse in his resolution, or
singular in his opinion, but that he would hear and do some things to which
he was advised: but good counsel must be more universally followed, Moses did
all. There is a way to pervert the best counsel, by seeming to follow it, as
when we leave out that, in which is the life and efficacy of the whole: as if
the clyent should follow the prescriptions of his learned counsel in all,
except the maine point, as if, of sundry dieticall rules of Physic the
patient should dispense with the principal: so Herod heard John, and did many
things, but not the maine: so Saul took Samuels counsel, for the Amaleck
voyage, yet you see what became of it, 1. Sam. 15.
for sparing Agag, and the best of the spoil: so some petty statists use our
ministry: sometimes they will hear a sermon before their elections, or
assizes, and therein will hear, and follow, as far as may make them seem
religious to a heedlesse vulgar, as far as the word complieth and agrees
with their desires, but for this (all) it will never go down: for fear
ignorance, or prophanes should do them the wrong to count them Puritans, who
never loved so much as a show of true holiness: and because they suppose (that
which can never be) that wisdom may be severed from religion, therefore they
follow religious counsel, but as Peter followed Christ to the high Priests
hall, a far off, and had rather forswear any acquaintance with it, Luke
22.24.
then be outwardly disaduantaged by it: if ye will follow God as Moses did
Iethro's counsel, you must do all that he says:

Some may say, he that will hearken to every body, shall be like the chafe
tossed to an fro with every breath of wind: it is an endless confusion, a
perplexed torture to be troubled with the unmannerly buzzings of a many-headed
vulgar, which oftentimes like those troublesome euening-flies Blind Beetles.
cast themselves into our ears, with a great noise to no purpose. How
irresolute must he be, who will hearken to that variable master, sounding of
nothing more then contrarieties? when shall he end his task who undertakes to
please every body? where is that advise, that design, that undertaking, which
finds no disallowance? Add to this, among many voices the serpent also
hisseth; there are, who give pernicious counsel. Shall I then hearken to all?
I say not, take counsel of the evil, they who so do, are like those who ask
counsel of the dead, in which advice commonly the devil personateth the
Prophet, 1. Sam. 28.7. etc.
or of familiar spirits answering in idols, as Ahaziah did; what necessity does
thus straiten any man? Is it because then is no God in Israel? 2. Kin. 1.2.
has he no servants of whom thou may take advice? I say not, follow all that
which seems counsel; the devil said, Command, or speak, that these stones
be made bread: it seemed charitable counsel, (...) etc.
but was a tentation. The young men said to Rehoboam, Math. 4.3. 1. King. 12.10.
Thus shall thou say unto this people -- my least part shall be bigger then my
fathers loins. It was seducement, it was not counsel, both giver and receiver
of such advice, are deceived so often as they take all that which is spoken
concerning counsel and deliberation to be good, Give not thine heart to all
the words that men speak -- thou must know thou art sometimes amongst the
Sirens, Eccl 7.23.
and must stop thine ears, for fear thou be drawn to death by them. But how
shall I discern which is counsel, and which seducement? Reduce all to these
touch-stones, the word and will of God, and the commodity and good of them or
him for whom such counsel is intended: is it not agreeing with the holy will
of God? be it the oracles of Ahithophel, seem it never so good for the state,
it is not to be followed: there is no wisdom, nor counsel against God: be it
preiudicious to the state, though for thine own private gain, seem it never
so good or pleasing, it is a suggestion of treachery, it is no counsel which
is taken for any subordinate respect against the state, or the public good
which therein must be saved: is it against thy souls health, is it hurtful to
thy body, fame, estate, friends, directly or consequently (wherein neither Gods
honor, thy Prince, country, religion, or thy soul are otherwise interessed)
it is seducement, it is not counsel: you see the means to discern, and you
must ever begin to weigh by this balance of the sanctuary which stands before
my text -- if God so command thee -- Some may say, Verse 33.
you have your failings too, who deliver the word: it is true we have, and
often preach the word in much weakness, would God we were made perfect. I say
not that the heathen sages were more beneuolous hearers, then many Christians,
they wont to set the Graces by the statue of Mercury, to import that some
slips of the speakers of good things, are to be borne withal; but I say those
infirmities are not always our proper faults, you also have your shares in
them, it is because you want holy appetites to this word, Nonnunquam vero
propter auditoris culpam subtrahitur sermo doctori: Greg. in pastor.
that God sometimes and for your sakes shortneth us: when zealous and obedient
hearers do hunger for the word, they do not only help the Preacher with their
attention, but obtain, that God, who fed multitudes with few loaves, enlarges
our hearts and opens a door of utterance, yea sometimes for holy hearers
sakes, the word is given plentifully even to a Judas, an evil teacher. To
conclude this matter then, I must say in Christ his words, Take heed how you
bear, and when you hear holy advice, if God so command you, imitate this man
of God in my text, who did all that Iethro had said.

What was that all? read the 21. verse. you shall quickly see the pattern of
good Magistrates: 1. they must be men of courage, viros roboris, according to
the Hebrew: what should he do with the sword of justice in his hand, who is of
young Iethers mettle, Judge. 8.20.
and dares not draw it to cut off maiefactors? acoward cannot be either an
honest man, or able Magistrate: for what counsel can rectify that mind which
dares not be just: fear is one of the deaf affections, no reasons can master
it. But because all daring without the fear of God, is but temeritie and
desperate resolution, this is annexed, they must be such as fear God: this is
the only antidote against all base and servile fear: he that truly fears
God, will not fear man, or be daunted, or discouraged from executing justice.
This fear of God, is the ground of all ability, it is the beginning of
wisdom; and all good order, and government, for those who are truly holy
cannot but labor to make others so: happy is that government, where the
Magistrate executes his charge for conscience sake, doing his duty, not like
those nigardly and dissembling votaries who will not offer without a witness,
but because he knows that the eye of God is upon him, (...) etc. Isocr. orat.
ad. Nic.
who indifferently hates that man who justifies the wicked, and him who
condemns the just. Think not then that it is the duty proper and peculiar to
inferiors to live well, and that the Magistrates may live disorderly: -- (...)
ib.
all the people look on them, and from their actions, derive either honesty
or liberty of sinning: command thy self therefore thou that command
others, and think it more honorable for thee, in the fear of God, to subdue
and govern thine own inordinate affections then to exercise authority over
thousands of citizens: as much as thou art dignified above others, so much
excel them in goodness. This thou shall do, if thou fear God, and so conform
thy self to the examples of religious Governors, that thou may be
indifferently a pattern to thy inferiors and an emulator and imitator of thy
superiors.

Thus must Magistrates be able men; they must also be men of power, virtue and
actiuitie of body and mind, so the word is used. Genesis 47.6. and men of spirit
and courage, so it is used. 1 Chronicles. 26.6. that they may stand up for the
oppressed, as is said of Moses. Exo. 2.17.

2. Men dealing truly: or men of truth. The Greek calls them just men: and
Zach. 7.9. is mentioned judgment of truth, so sometimes justice goes for
truth, because these virtues, are so nearly allied: it is an admirable
connection of these things, first of truth with courage and strength of mind:
Veritas odio est. Tertul. apo. a^o. geat. c. 14. Veritas odium parit.
for truth cannot be without enemies, it begets them: he had need to be a
resolved man who will be a man of truth: secondly, of truth and the fear of
God: for (says Tertullian) truth knows she is a stranger on earth, and that
she shall easily find enemies amongst aliants: Ib. Apol. c. 1.
yet that she has, her allies, mansion, hope, favor, and dignity in heaven.
The Magistrate then must be a veritable, sincere, and solid man, being what he
seems, and seeming such an honorable pattern for others imitation, as the
God of truth (whose vicegerents princes are) will approve: he mustloue and
search out the truth of causes, (without which justice cannot determine) not as
Tertullian says, of certain Philosophers, mimice affectant veritatem, and
affectando corrumpunt: nor, Ib. c. 46.
as he says of the same, may he be furator eius and custos, both a thief and
keeper of truth. He must regard the truth and equity of the cause, not
friends, not kindred, or other relations, as if they might alter the case, or
lawfully pervert the course of justice. The Thebans wont to make the statues
of Magistrates without hands, importing that they might be no takers; and the
images of judges without eyes, or with eyes shut, intimating that they ought
truly and without respect of fear or favor of any, impartially to give
sentence; as it is said of Seleucus, who would not against law, spare his sons
eyes, though out of his tender love, to spare one of them, he put out one of
his own: so then you see they must be viriveritatis, not hypocrites in matter
of justice, making a show of doing it, but doing nothing less. Some fail
herein for fear, some for favor, some for custom sake, others in their place
wont to do so, Veritatem se non consuetudinem cognominauit. Tertul. de Virg.
veland. Consuetudo sine veritate, vetuflas erroris est. Cypr. ad Pomp. 1. King.
21.8.
but it is a dangerous practice, for truth cannot be prescribed: Christ called
himself the truth, he named not himself custom: custom without truth or
equity is but the antiquity of error and iniquity: some make their authority
serve their own ends, as when they execute law to satisfy private malice, or
oppress the innocent under some pretenses of justice or prerogative; so
Iezabel used Ahabs seal: this is a frequent and unhappy perverting of
equity, the most hateful hypocrisy in judicature; when malice personateth
justice, when the devil plays the judge.

3. Lastly, they must be men hating covetousness* as Paul says of Deacons to
be elected, I must of Magistrates, it behooves them to be men of good report,
(as it is Deuteronomy. 1.13. known men:) (...), not desirous of filthy lucre: 1 Timothy
3.8. Deuteronomy. 16.19. 1 Samuel 8.3. Prou. 1.19. Ezekiel. 22.27. Isa. 56.11. Non sit manu^
tua porrecta ad accipiendum, and collecta ad dandum De modo been vivend. ser.
44.
the love of gain is the corruption of justice, and a reward puts out the
eye. I may say then to you, who are to be elected, as Bernard to one, let not
thine hand be stretched out to take, and shut when it should give; and to you
who are to make choice, as the same Bernard in another place, elect such, as
look not into the hands, but necessities of the afflicted. It is a miserable
case when the Magistrate in a corporatio^ is so necessitous, that he has too
many temptious to be unjust: and it were to be wished that in every such place,
provision might be made, that the elected Magistrate might be, for his estate,
indepe^dent on the vulgar: for without this, rarely can justice find a due and
smoth course. The complaint is made, the nocent conuented, but the conclusion
is too often (what ever shows are made) the malefactor must be spared, because
he is, or may be a customer; then Eli says only, 1 Samuel 2.23.
Why do ye such things? for of all this people I hear evil reports of you,
do no more my sons: and so it comes to pass that when the Magistrate will
not execute justice, nor punish sin, to remove evil from the land, God
enters for default of justice, and severely punishes the whole commonwealth.
How hateful a gain is this before the Lord: how filthy a lucre before good
men? is it not the price of blood, which is the gain of him who betrayeth the
state? the like mischief sometimes befalls, when the Magistrate is indulgent
at the instance of friends, or kindred; such pleas are so common, that it is
something rare to observe that malefactor, who has not some uncle, brother,
cosen, or friend to stand up an earnest advocate for his allies or customers
impunity. What justice, what fear of God is this? Or if justice be impartially
done, the unjust delinquents will do their worst spights, that the rare man,
who without fear, favor, or respect of filthy gain, executes justice shall
be undone, for they will withdraw their customs, because the good man would
not conniue and sell them justice, which they wickedly suppose as merchantable
as any wares, and a kind of vailes and due, upon occasions belonging to
customers.

It is time to conclude: Brethren, I am not ignorant of the censures the last
election passed upon me, because I did not after this manner, and according to
the custom of this place and time advise you, but preached on another more
general subject: I could have answered then, how much it grieved me, to hear
some (too great a sum) crying like those Israelites to Jeremy, Pray for us
unto the Lord -- that the Lord thy God may show us the way wherein we are to
walk, and the thing that we may do: Ier. 42.2.3. Verba quidem pi^tatis plena:
sed verbis non conso nant oopera. Theod. inter, in Ier. 42*
yet intended not, what ever was preached, to follow (I will not say one word,
but not) all. Words full of piety, but works not consonant to those words:
they did well to desire to hear, but it is not well when that was all, and no
practice followed. But now I say I have better hope of you: and therefore
advise you again, take heed that you now do all, that you be not worthily
retaxed, in that you only call for that word, which you will not follow: be
not like those wicked Levites, who coming to their consecration made show of
sanctifying hands, f^et, and cares, but contrary to the sanctity of their
order never cared more for the substance: honor your authority as you are
honored by it, eclipse

(...)
