THE MAIDEN QVEENE Entitled The Britain shepheardes tears for the death of
Astrabomica.

Augmented the worlds vanity. Both in sententiall verse, necessary and
profitable to be read of all Men. 1607.

Sola Virtus expers Sepulchri. portrait of Queen Elizabeth I

Imprinted at London by I.W. for John Brown and are to be sold at his shop in
Saint Dunstons Churchyard in Fleetstreet:

To the right worshipful and virtuous Lady Katherine wife unto the worthy sir
George Morton Knight.
RAre Chrisolite of virtues treasury,
Within whose looks rarieties do dance,
In living Corrall and pure Yourie,
Enamelling your modest countenance,
Whose holy life like Angels attomies,
Make strangers give you tributarie praise,
Adamaske blush which by no dieing dies
But springs when death Life's prentiship decays.
In steed of silver Vallance let me draw
Your favors heavenly in Diapor
On these complaints of Astrabonica,
Ambrosian Lady if you grant it her
My Muse shall make your worship longer known,
Then Nymphs or Charactries on marble stone
Your worships to command Henry Raymonde.

In Zoilum.
When Pan with great Apollo did contend,
For glory of sweet touch, and accent pure,
The Phrigian King as Judge the strife to end,
To rural Pan the Laurel did assure
Phoebus offended with his unjust doom,
Gave Asses ears to such as claimed his room.
Then judge on Zoilus boldly, for to you
The Asses ears, his head and all are due.
Pascitur in viuis liuor, post fata quiescit. The Britain Shepheardes tears
for the death of Astrabonica in sententiall Verse.
Canto I.
When Rubie spring in primrose weed,
Bespang'd fresh lovers season,
The Virgin Queen, of heavenly seed,
By virtue soul and reason.
Mox cetam ad superos moritu ra Astraa reces sit Iuuen.
Audacious fate declined, suppressed,
And Englands joy deprived,
This Orient Corrall, Natures best,
Whom death again revived.
In heaven, fame, and Cinders, she
Igne suo Vitam dum raspit, igne capit phoenica, etc. preper
Suruiuing, absent, flies,
And dead, sequestered lives in three,
And, as the Phoenix dies.
Envy, I laugh thy worst to scorn,
Thy smiles, with murders under:
The glories which by her were borne,
Shall kill with double wonder.
Her spirit rich in saints designs,
Eagle-eide wisdom teaching,
Higher then Hiperion shines,
Her contemplations reaching.
Ruling with meekness and reward,
Goddess of virtues gardaine,
Most God-like she was here prepared,
To conquer vice with pardon.
And when pale death did her convince,
King James in virtue shining
Succeedes, and now that noble Prince,
Supports us from declining.
Which sacred states by fate disioinde,
The living raigns for ever.
The dead is unto fame combinde,
And either times outliuer.
Cant. II.
Aurora weep thou pearly mhirre
Distill each incensorie grove
True shepheardes tears to shed on her
That was the azure heavens love,
Thou Juniper and Sicomere,
Deplore you Astraes fatal fall,
Weep Laurel to Apollo dear
And Violets which the prime do call.
For Astra fair with hairs adorned,
Like Tinsil diaperd on pearl,
The jealous stars have death suborned
To steal her hence, more lucent girl.
Astranubes condidit lunam nec clarius fulgentsydera: her
For heavens fair Lamps, that glister so,
From her perfection hid their face,
Or else they had with scornful woe,
Been Sunburned by more lucent grace.
Her breath was like the verdure worn
On Summers forehead: Maias birth
Cannot, with such perfume adorn
The closet of green mantled earth.
Of nightingales a consort sweet
Recorded, whilst the Nymphs with Palm
Shrouded fair Astraes winding sheet,
Of Cassia and spiced Balm.
Quidsibene notum porticus Agrippate conspexerit: ire tamen superest Numa quo
denenit and Ancus. hora.
Thus all between the Sun and Earth
Converse with men but like the snow:
For what promotion, health, or wealth
Is there, but time does overthrow?
Thus life presents the new sprung May,
That morning blewes, and heat of noone,
Blights, that it flourish'th not a day,
Declining in it self more soon.
Cant. III.
The Cinocure, whose glistring light,
Was clearer of my pleasures morn,
Has locked me in cares Ebon night,
Bound in the chair of fortunes scorn.
The Cinthia of my thought is lost,
(So vain it is to flourish here)
But after her my love shall post,
To meet again my native dear.
So on the sweet Pastane fair,
Of her rich foreheads, Edin plain,
Where all the love of hearts repair,
My flock of joys may feed again.
That walking with thee, in the grove,
Elisus campit ^datur ora tue^^ tua. Virg
Where blessed souls delights are shut,
My wretched eyes may once more roue,
Upon thy looks that life did cut.
From me, but if unwasted art,
Yet sporting by the Elizian shore,
I will come serve thee with the part,
Of duty, not performed before.
Post quam te partem anima mea rapuit maturior Vi^* nec Charus noc supersles
ipse su^ mihi. Hor.
For thee I waste, as wood on flames,
Or as dissolved wax on coals,
And pine much like, the gnat that games
Him in the lamp, till death controles.
Nunc ager Vm brens sub nomie no nuper Osellii dictus, erit nulle propriut Hor.
Thus earthly things are not our own,
Their blossoms every blast decays:
Those, that on earth are longest shown,
Do spring and fall within few days.
Qui Letheum transiit flumen nulla illum posent reducere Carina: Seen.
The tree in morn, that proudly grew,
Ere glade is often blown away,
And then no showers can it renew,
To flourish after first decay.
Canto IIII.
When Prime, fancies weeping mother,
Corral buds, as joys fore-commer,
Brought from radiant Sol, her brother,
To ennamell Lady Summer.
Astra, the rose-bud of our spring,
Dying, Et longum formose vale, vale inquit Iola Virg
with second life was crowned
And every Muse, and every thing,
Her chest in weeping fare wells drowned.
The Hyrachies in Tempe green.
With silver girdled Thames decreede,
Cui parem alma fides non inueniet Hor.
For to enterre this maiden Queen,
Whose better never should succeed.
Her soul fled to the Edin door,
In dulcent gardaines taking ease,
Nepenthe does her joys restore,
Without the cup of Menales.
There Ceres gives her Atis flower
Venus her lovers stammell bud,
Hermophrodite erects her bower
By Atis in the myrtle wood.
There sport with them by quiet Leathe,
A while, my joy and I will come,
And kiss thy footesteps after death,
As now I do adorn thy tomb.
Fortuna vt me dicus ignarus multos coecat Eras.
Thus when worlds chiefest things arise,
Chance bends our minds to fancy those,
With which most swift away she flies,
When on them once our liking grows
Canto V.
Ergo Quintilium perpetuus soper vrget Hora.
DId then the flower of maidens fall,
Into deaths slumber? no not so,
But saints did her to heaven call,
With them in Paradise to go,
Micat inter omnes Iulium sidus velut inter ignes Luna minores.
Saying thou Phoenix of all stars,
Come to the crowned Virgins here,
A door thy Savior and the scarres,
By which he ransomed thee so dear.
Humanum est humanis easibus ingemisce^e Herodi.
But I, since mortal, must lament,
For thee, sweet Queen, for thee for ever,
Railing on death's ungentle dent,
O death, O Joy, O sorrow giver.
O who can ward the stroke of thee?
Nullum saeua caput fugit Proserpina.
Or for himself or friend compound?
Or to preserve mortality,
What Onamell can there be found,
And since she was Theano wise,
A Samarite unto the poor,
Dei pater seeds alcidi inter Astra Sen.
And Tuca chaste within the skies,
You Gods to her a star restore.
Thura dabe atque omnes violae tactabo colores luuena. Partae tibi a^ria sunt
palum bei Virgil.
And ever whilst I tarry here,
I will burn incensory wood,
To thee, and send young Turtles dear
For tokens to the Elizian flood.
Princess and Queen I will thee call,
My Swanes, for thy decease, shall weep,
For ever, by Thamesis fall,
Cursing deaths private public sleep.
Cant. VI.
THe Thrush shall descant of thy same,
In silver warbles to the spring,
Her young shall do the very same:
In other ages as they sing.
Virtutes tuas nobilis exprimer iufans luuena.
The Virgins yet unborn shall walk,
Unto Dianas silent woods,
Thy chastity shall be their talk,
As they do crop the maiden buds.
The Captain of more high desire,
Thy wealth, thy bounty, and thy men,
Thy peace and conquest shall admire,
Such late perchance declined then,
But I forget my self to mourn,
That joy to mourn, and mourn to joy,
Since I beheld the blessed Vrne,
Whose bosom holds my joys annoy,
You adamantine ruthlesse Bears,
Lay rage aside and weep with me,
Thou wolf, if thou for her shed tears,
The shepheardes swain shall pardon thee.
The Cattoblepos
Thou beast that do the Moon delight,
Thy God desse wail no more but die.
Cinthia the comfort of the night,
Is placed in heaven, out of the sky.
Nunquam Stygias fertur ad Vmbras inclita Virtus. Seen.
But die not loving, hating creature,
Live not, fool in such distress,
Her virtues spite of such defeature,
A double view do still express.
Cant VII.
YEt comfortles we all decay:
So did her delian essence please,
So best respects slide first away,
And grief concludes the greatest ease.
Diuitia sedent in vsum nunc mihi nunc alii. Hor.
A Crown possessed of him this day,
Ere long some other does possess,
And those which for estate assay,
Then least, by falling, are made less.
The chiefest store of worldly things, Lubrica fortunasunt dona: Hor.

Are flying in a sky of glass,
Which fortune gives waxen wings,
To melt, before they come to pass.
Then care of mind, and bodies grief,
Still vexes life, and death does come,
In our securenes, like a thief,
Mishaps warn none, but biteth dombe,
Quod nollimus accipimus quod vellimus perdimus, Terent:
And naught is sooner lost, save things,
Which to enjoy we must request,
But those, we would not, fortune bringes
To life, the mother of unrest.
A thousand cares chance does present,
With one good thing unto our eyes,
Which when to take our minds consent,
The more abide, the lesser dies.
Since freshest things so soon decay, Carpe diem quam minimu^ credulus postero
Hor.

And rest as they had never been,
Once gone, he therefore that will may,
Must gather time when it is green.
Canto VIII.
IS any Muse weeper for death,
Whose tears can give a Phoenix life.
Yes, Clio mourns, when kings yield breath
And falues the wound of sorrows knife.
Then Aconite, Cypress and Yewe,
Yield sable shadow unto graves,
The Virgin Laurel is her due,
And virtues bud her tomb imbraues:
You Thespian Imps of memory,
Sing but of her magnificence,
And your heroic harmony,
Like Mermaides tunes, shall ravish sense.
Time stroke this marigoldes fair crown,
So Queene-apples consume to clay,
Paunces and Hiacinths fall down,
In earthly things there is no stay,
Wherefore awhile I mean to cease,
My tears that after shall abound,
Though few moan him, that will increase,
A spark that will himself confound,
Iam Elisias domus, iam beatu^ littus tenes Sen
Yet will I not relinquish plaintes,
For Astra sweet my song shall lead,
Who lost for ever, with the saints,
Remains in the Elizian meade.
Nulla te terris rapiet vetustas Sen.
Now dwelleth-dead here, and living there,
And yet alive in every place:
For Atropos, nor time can bear,
From earth, the virtues of her grace.
And you poor swains, that sigh and cry,
For her, yet never saw her face,
Take here a shepheardes Virelay,
That shall recite you what she was.
An Ode Canto IX.
AS Philomela does condole, Qualis populea moerens Philomela sub Vmbra, amissos
queritur foetus quos durus arator detraxit. Virg.

When Plowme^ hard of heart have stole
Out of Dianaes chamber,
Her little ones, so we lament,
Railing on death's ungentle dent,
That closed thy breath's sweet Amber
O death her face was wonders book,
Charactred with an angels look,
Where in a little heaven,
Ten thousand dimpled smiles did dwell,
Sporting in virtues Onamell,
But now she is bereauen.
Her radient forehead was the sky,
The shining Onix fixed thereby,
Her eyes the Beams of Phoebe
Her cheek pure Salamander down,
Ennameld with an orient crown,
More lucent then fair Hebe
Like wiery gold her locks did shine,
Her breath more sweet then Eglantine,
Her speech all Musicks wonder:
And every part so passing fair,
That destenies did rent their hair,
Such dulcent life to sunder.
If that a goddess should assume,
Life made for nature to consume.
She could not better govern,
She left no fame of sin behind,
But boundles ornaments of mind.
And was her bodies Sovereign.
Melpomen, Pracipe lugus bres cantus Melpomen. Hor.
by the Castale flow,
Tune thy sweet treble to our woe,
For iron fortune closes,
Her breast exceeding summers milk,
Or Lillies spread on damask silk,
Or times admired roses.
Come gentle Flora to our Queen, Tibi Lilia plenis ecce ferunt Nympha
calathis. Vir.

Bring Dill and Ladie-lases green,
To deck our rural glory,
Here gladent lies the splendent Sun,
Whose influence our day begun,
That all the meades are sorry.
The little Goats do learn to weep, Tuum poeni etiam ingemuere leones
interitum Virg.

So do the Wolves, so do the Sheep
The Signets as in dying
Warble upon Meanders shore,
Hic Vultur illic luctifer bubo gemit: Sen:
The Vultures for her loss deplore,
In their unlucky crying.
But thus the Iem of earthly things,
One moment unto nothing brings,
Thus flesh has no assurance.
What most thereof we precious call,
Like to the leaf does spring and fall:
But now she has indurance.
Where happy souls contained are,
To be our climate, Venus star
Why Muse then stay thy mourning,
And also we have part of her,
Spiced with penitential mirre,
Until her souls returning.
Her Obiet. Canto X.
A Straea, let thy shephearde come,
Ornamus tumulos and lauro terra Vire^ts spargitur. Iuue,
And keep this obiet at that tomb,
Which was our joys bereauer,
Times silver daughter, purest maid,
I will adorn where thou art laid,
That wast, and art for ever.
A Phoenix thy dead cinders gave, Gentis humana pater and custos tibi cura
magni Casaris data. Hor.

From thee a royal king we have,
Good angels be his guider,
And Monarchs his posterity,
Till time the day of doom descry,
He is our cares deuider.
Dearling to the graces three,
Whilst Alchamists ordain for thee,
A tomb of Gold and Amber,
The marigold, Mollia luteola pinget vacinia caltha Virg.
the suns delight,
Green Basil and the Primrose white,
Shall deck thy bridal chamber.
Husbandles, fair wedded maid,
To Christ, Gloria virtuie^ tanquam Vmbra sequitur Cicero.
true virtues have defraide,
In steed of deaths short slumber,
Such praises to thy Virgin name,
Such lucent attomies of fame,
No Linceus eye can number.
Yet will I tell although a Swain,
The golden age was in thy reign.
It was an April season.
Thy bounty seemed the verdant showers,
Thy virtues rare a wreath of flowers,
As sunbeams bright thy reason.
It was a sight of worth to view
What majesty did thee endew.
Thy wisdoms true decerning,
How other realms did deifie
Would ask Minerua to descry,
Which is the Queen of learning
Though insolence does now repine,
At times extinct, those days of thine,
Derided fond supposers,
Thy counsailers were famous far, Championi.

Thy champions terror in all war,
Thy fleet new worlds disclosers,
Thy realm was like an Indian mine,
The purest metal was thy coin,
The arts that then were used,
Ensuing times may imitate,
But not exceed in any rate,
Impartially perused.
Thy fleetes resembled Zerxes power,
Each leader in them was a tower.
Thy soldiers rocks of honor,
The companies which those did yield,
Could beat great Caesar from the field.
And wound their foes with horror,
The illustrious bands were infinite,
Which she kept disciplined to fight,
And ready at an hour,
Her Cannon, Musket and her pike,
Her troops of horse so thunder-like,
Scornd Alexanders power. Pallam siguis auroque rigentem: colloque monile
baccatum. and duplicem gemmis auroque coronam Virg. Purpuret Christis iuuenes
auroque corusc^ Virg.

Her captains marched in suites of gold.
And silver cloth of price untold,
In chains and indian pearl,
For silk and velvet was but mean,
Such happy plenty flourished then,
To bless this heavenly girl.
Her men most fierce to sight at hand,
Could use the utmost of a band,
For high exploites resolved,
Well set they were and fitly made,
Famous to charge and to invade,
They sternest foes dissolved.
To lead those valors lived then,
Young Essex that brave Mars of men,
Who in Galizia raised,
His Spear, and dared at single sight,
T'in counter proudest spanish knight,
He was like Hector praised.
There were no Idols in her days,
One God with vnprophaned praise,
She most devoutly served,
Her Clergy were a noble sort,
Of learning rare, and good report,
And were by faith preserved.
Her lawyers were profound and wise,
No private fee could right surprise
Vice had such sickles ready, Troiaues opibusque egenos Dido. Virg.

It neuar had a time to grow
Great pentions she did still bestow
Upon the sick and needy.
The damask rose her ensign bore,
Her cheek that badge in beauty wore,
The Lion was her banner.
Her mind heroicke fixed to this,
Made her the milke-white Lioness,
Of pity, mixed with honor.
Thus was the land-like to the cost,
Of Edin which old Adam lost, Insula dives opu^ Priams dum regna mane bant,
Virg. Nempe Alcides mortalis obiit Seen.

Whilst that white rose remained,
But for she lived below the sun,
Where all things unto ending run.
She could not be retained.
Our lives are at so frail a rate,
Death is our sur'st associate,
Our joys resign to sorrow, Nemo tam diuos habet fauentes crastinum vt sibi
possit polliceri Seneca.

And lost, or gotten things but grieve,
Less happy time, then bad we live,
Uncertain of the morrow.
Thus life enioyes no residence,
Short minutes do our time dispense,
And sixty times an hour
Time changes as the moments run,
Things seeming permanent begun:
Time does, like gnats devour,
But lo the Lapidaries come,
With orient Iems to raise thy tomb,
In form of heavens fair motion,
Of Jasper clear shall be the sky,
The Sun of gilded Yuorie,
Diana in her stacion.
With silver stars shall make a night,
Her self a blasing Chrisolite,
And interposed under,
Green myrtle groves of Emerauld,
For earth center shall be impald,
In this applausiue wonder.
Reuested in a Sapphire blew,
Shall lie a maid of snowie hew,
Upon a tomb of pearl.
The Muses nine in corrall drawn,
Clouded in Tinsill and pure lawne,
Shall mourn about this girl.
White turtles also pensil'd theare,
Of diamond shall tapers bear,
Which stars shall tip in burning,
In violet gowns nimphs manifold,
Shall sit and pray in books of gold,
And make harmonious mourning.
Poor shepherd, then I will away,
Sweet nightingale, and lark go play,
Her obiet thus was ended:
And she suruiues in heaven above,
And joys of paradise does prove,
And is with saints attended.
Cant. XI.
LIke as the Swan, which never sings before, Piscospue amne padusae Dat sonitum
raues per stagua loquac iacycni. Virg.

Time, naturs steward, bids him life restore
Then with such tunes receives his final sleep
That all Meanders continent do weep.
So do I sing though not so sweet a lay,
Yet it presageth of my dying day,
And speaking Astrabonica of thee,
The turtle doves resort to visit me.
The Nymphs, as witnesses, about me come,
How I died speaking, though I lived dombe.
Some to deride me, Bubosape queriet longas inslet umducero voces: Virg.
but none prove more bad
Then such as seem so wise, so good so sad.
The lasie Owl, that harbendger of death,
Besoundes a dirge for thy expired breath.
Canto XII.
THe bird that makes his song-booke of a thorn,
By the enclosure of thy grave does mourn
The glo-worme kind, thy obsequies to hold
In steed of tapers, shines like Phoebus gold.
The glistering yeikle, when winters come,
With silver labels beautifie's thy tomb.
Despise not then that by the Elizian coast,
In shepheardes music I salute thy ghost,
For fear the sun should languish in desire,
And by descending set the world on fire. Nitor tui splendentis pario marmore
purius Hora.

Nature and death decreed that thou sholdst die
Viewing the starry casement of thine eye.
Whose brows of beauty still enclosed such sight
As dimmed the carbuncle the Chrisolite.
Canto XIII.
WHen flowring Floras vesture does begin,
To show the cowslip with his balmy chin
Her verdure rare, infusd into some flower,
Might, with Adonis, dill up Maies bower,
Within her face, that features Hellicon,
Latona had her chaste Pauilion.
And to the waters does lament her loss,
Who with an orient, stellifi'd the cost.
The little Nimphs their yuorie lutes do frame
For her the Stygian Mariner to blame,
Melpomene to whom Apollo gave
The doleful voice does mourn besides her grave
Pleasant Euterpes eyes for anguish weeps,
To see her gladed in eternal sleep.
Canto XIIII
O When will Time her equal find again
For to inhabit in this mortal reign,
She has been often bewaild of each degree,
Multi ille bonis flebilis occidit nulla flebilior quam tibi Virgili. Hor.
Quicquid corrigi non potest levi us ^it pattentia Catullus
But of none more (sweet virtue) then of thee
No Orpheus songs can her recall again,
Unto the image of her flouring reign,
For Mercury, with his hard wand has led,
Her hence, unto the black flock of the dead
But when such helps fortune loades the sight,
Patience and fortitude must make it light,
Old wintry age, in grisly furrows now,
Callends of death indents upon my brow.
Yet ere I fade and ere my pen shall pass.
I Will show the world how good a Q. she was,
Canto XV.
I, In the ruins of my withered lust,
That should but meditate on sable dust.
Thy blandishments, as loue-sicke must unfold,
For the succeeding ages to behold.
Charactring it, upon some mirtles bark,
In verses fit to greet the mornings lark.
You little heard-grooms bound to shepherds law,
See then what wight was Astrahonica.
Purpuriat ded^ ratque comas diffunder^ Ventis: Virg.
The damask roses incensorie bud,
For pure vermilio^ could not match her blood
Her voice with wonder hearing charmed still
Like to an Orpherion touched with skill.
Her hairs that with the warbling wind does twine
Did seem, then Tagus richer, more divine.
Cant. XVI.
These sonets importe the accomplishments of her youth.
HEr eyes presented with her forehead eue^,
Stars dancing in the silver hall of heaven
Phoebe reflected not more brighter on,
Her tender lover young Endimion.
Her words from wits circumference did fall,
Comprising method most angelical.
To such, as modesty did not reveal,
She was obdurate with a flintie zeal.
Ovid himself could not her fair impart,
And yet her beauty was her poorest part.
When she did trip upon an April green,
You would have took her for Adonis Queen
Her dainty lips she moved being merry.
Described a corrall kissing of a cherrie,
Canto XVII.
THis Shephardesse, that death from us bereaues
Her little goats, upon the twining leaves
Was wont to feed, Pormosus oues ad flumina pavit Adonis: Virg
to her our looks did go,
To gather indissoluble pure snow.
For white and red so flourisht in her cheek,
That Edins white and orient seemed to speak.
Natures decree in polished yuorie,
That with her glade, true beauties day should die
A hook of Crystal were her hairs, her eine.
Ensnared with sun beams in a silken line.
Where virtues did a world of hearts behold
Surpised by blushes in a net of gold.
In wonders Simpathie, from earth exiled,
Her virtue lived to beauty reconciled.
Canto XVIII.
SEeking her face at midnight for the day.
I did behold night, heaven, moon and may.
For stars and virtues Suns and flowers did trip,
From cheek to forehead, and from eye to lip.
Her cou^tena^ce moved with a thousand graces
As pretty dimples quauer in loves faces.
Whose lusters had they bin by cignet shown
They would have turned Achilles to a stone.
Have been an incensorie flame to make,
The Phoenix rare an other shape to take.
A year of may-months on her brow did oast
Marshalling features to defend the coast.
Under whose ensign modesty did fight,
Against all false exacters of delight.
Canto XIX.
HEr hairs that on her brow the air did blow
Bended I ke daffadillis kissing snow.
Where beauty drawn with many an azure line,
Showed to the world she was a wight divine.
And in her looks were living angels drawn,
Weauing hart-wo^ders in her cheeks soft lawn
The little stars shot from their fixed places,
Under her eie-lids to behold their faces.
Which sat in Canopies to all discloses,
Two silver loade-starres in a sky of roses.
Pallas disciphred not a fairer dame,
Of silk and tincy in gold arras frame.
She was a virgin to be praised of kings,
And was the diamond of earhtly things,
Canto XX.
But now yon honied flowers with balmy sap,
That sunny bloomes awake on Tellus lap.
Shall decorate no more her bosom sweet,
For she is gladed in her winding sheet.
The twining worms within the dead ma^s hal
For love knots, in het silken locks do craule.
With mourning silence, by some secret tree,
Winding. Nec gemere aeria cessabit turtur ab Vlmo Vir.
Like to the turtle I will grieve for thee.
And if I talk, my speech but sorrow tells,
My hearing deaf, but only hearing knels.
The rotten toade-stoole shall content my taste
My sight and feeling after death shall have.
That worn with, Morphew lean and withered,
I may resemble my companions dead.
Britans Ode S. XXI.
When as that cunning Artizan,
Fair Philomel, her song began.
The time Aurora in her tent,
Displayed her rubie ornament.
This time the term of shepherds law,
Came lovely Astrabonica.
To teach her corrall lip to plead,
Of love, in the green girdled meade.
Looks that since, and siths that look,
Instantly my arrant took,
Heart did love to eyes deliver,
To present the fairest liver.
Hartles souls, we both did woe,
VVanting hearts yet both had two.
Like Ganimed her face did shine,
That youth which draws the Gods their wine.
Her feature seemed of flesh and bone,
Like Venus in white marble stone.
The yuorie girl was not so white,
In which Pigmalion took delight.
Her skin as sleeke as Affricke silk,
Aurea mala decemn isi, cras altera mittam Virg.
Her vainslike violet strains in milk.
Her hairs revealed the golden fleece,
Or passing tindaris of Greece:
Queene-apples for her did I get,
With yellow sides like amber wheat.
With turtle-doues from myrtle nest,
While she made bracelets for my wrest.
But were the son of Telaphus,
Or youthful chaste Hippolitus.
That had with grizly death agreed,
To fetch her to the Elizian meade.
To be the flower of virgins there,
I know not but their did appear.
From violet buds a serpent blew,
Whose sting infix'd, Astraea slew.
There as me a sleep she sung,
Death, to death, her sorrows stung.
Medea wanted to apply,
Nec semper viola, nec semper lilia florent; ^^riget amissa spina relect^ rosa.
Ouidius. Forma breuis flos est.
Nepenthe buds and dittany.
And whilst heavens took her soul,
Theeuish death her beauty stole.
So the rose-bud of our spring,
Died like every pleasant thing.
So the Lilly of our field,
Presently her life did yield.
Presently, for finest leaves,
First from green, the frost bereaues.
Thus desteny our life but lends,
And care begin's where pleasure ends.
So death's lure must be obaid,
And good things soonest are betrayed.
So that which men most precious call,
Springs but to feed mischance withal.
Phatusa never more did mourn,
When sobs did her to Amber turn.
Nor Progne, which on turrets steep,
For men's false periuries does weep.
Then I, when fatal palenes there,
I had espied to clould my dear.
O Astrabonica I cried,
And echo half the name replied.
Bonica is gone to keep,
A flock of heavens golden sheep,
Then viewed I her in such sad sort,
As sorrow none can now report.
Cursing planets of life's might,
Stars of birth that did this spite
And all that unto death belongs,
Tears of grave, and herses songs,
Breathing out her final groan,
She desird to pass alone.
This is my last request quoth she,
Stay here till I do come for thee:
So here I stay amidst this vale,
Till my Elizian Nightingale,
Inuit me to the mi^le spring,
If my cares thorn her bosom sting.
So here I stay against my breast,
As Philomele when I should rest.
The thorn of fortune which spares none,
To make me mindful to be gone.
Nema foelix est dut fuit aut vx^^ quam erit. Zen.
From hence where man is made the slave,
Of all mishaps until his grave.
This apparent to the woods,
The Nymphs selected verdant buds,
And time the daffadilly gave,
So she was wedded to her grave,
In maiden years who was destroid,
For good things seldom are enioi'd.
HEre is no sage Astidamus to please,
Envy that honest actions does displease.
No liquide incke of Hellicon to write,
Rural my songs, and I arurall wight.
In Western Valleys by the Sycomers,
Elizian sorrows, shed in April tears.
Relent not reed, though fawning Gnatho spite,
Asses more often use to bray then bite.
Yet as thou art submissiue to the wise,
Malignant curs deride and sotts despise.
Of Zeuxes pensill, let Apelles tell,
Nature ordained thee to an oaten Quill.
Depart and live for Hiltons old content,
Eternizd by Thamesis continent.
FINIS.
THE WORLDS VANITY. Very profitable for allsorts to consider.
Est Vita aegra salus, Vexata quies, pius error,
Bellica pax, Vullnus duceque, suaue malum.
WHen Zephirus, the primrose love was come,
To raize the sleeping pawnce from winters spite,
And April seasons nutrimentall blome.
The sable earth in daffadillies dight.
Whilst unto Flora, birds on every tree,
Their homage paid in Tubals harmony.
Then on a promontory by the west,
I spent my time in meditation,
To sing unto my reed esteeming best,
Some song thot might remain when I am gone,
Where full of care for Astrabonica,
This languishment of life my voice did draw.
In method which perchance it self may save,
From the invasion of dissoluing days
And keep from deaths subversion and the grave,
My thoughts enclosed in suruiuing lays
Which spurnd by envy shall affirm with schools
No praise so great as the contempt of fools.
Frondeum infelix Philomela nidum ponit argutum medidit anicanoro. Cutture
carme^ Toren.
O who will learn me grief? come Philomele,
That to the virgin Muses Lutes do sing,
And wilt thy woeful desteny reveal.
To shepheardes in the tender lipped spring,
Cimbale a silver strain, then sob among,
And with sweet discords melody my song.
This fickle worlds delight, is but distress,
Which wise men title false felicity.
Fools sweet, whose substance is but bitterness.
Asilly toy to mock our fantasy
For none inherits joy upon the ground,
Until their bodies on the bear be bound.
First strangers here we greet the world with cries
Cares eat our life, and we feed worms at last,
Nothing have we secure but miseries,
Our goods are trifles for mishap to wast,
And he that seems too rich, too strong to fade
Lies soonest level by the deluers spade.
Here, if in virtuous parts we spend our days,
The evil minded mock and hate us sore,
And if we sin and follow vicious ways,
The good and virtuous will detest us more
Thus envy combats life, but happy those,
That force the scum, their envy to disclose.
Life linked to the corse appears in view,
Like feathers on the arrows that are sold,
Which are but fastened with a little glue,
And fall away by heat arwatry cold.
So falls our life with every little grief,
Into the dust, so falls the greenest leaf.
How can life be of any valor when,
A soldier but for eight pence does it sell?
How can it be that men should not be men,
But so like brutes in base affections dwell?
When counting at their end their season spent
Their life shall seem a short imprisonment.
Here men repose securenes in their hope,
In which their lot most fatal does appear,
For often their purpose aims beyond the scope.
Of the short time, they have to soiourne here:
Admit they live, life but augments their thrall
Their wishes to some others lot do fall.
Man seems to be most happy in his youth,
Florida aetas multos mortis casus habet. Cicer.
And in the joy, to that frail flame assigned,
But youth is frailest if we note the truth,
And soonest spent, for youth with foolish mind
Falls unawares on care, or timeles end,
His joys deride him, and to cares descend.
In wealth some other would be counted blessed:
But vain presumption or unthrifty pride,
With servants falsehood empties often his chest,
Or his insatiate spirit does hoorde and hide,
That having store, he plains of poverty,
Or prodigal, is eat of usury.
Thus mortal happiness (if any be)
Does iointely yield us most unhappiness,
For loss or gain prove both alike to thee,
For loss or gain prove both alike distress,
Frail earthly things corrupt both root and seed
For to their loss, or gain great cares proceed
All earthly pleasures, that content the eye,
One blast their being, and their worth subdues,
Fortune with death mischife with misery,
And momentarie end, our mirth pursues,
Then if thou will thy heart on pleasures lay,
Choose God to be thy confidence and stay.
This life is but a may game, mixed with woe,
An aierie stage, where we like poppits play:
Quis sit an aditciant hodierna crastina vita temporadis supri. Horat.
The greatest joy does pass as minutes do,
And look what time has brought, time takes away,
With Sisiphus, we role a restles stone.
The best to day a man to morrow none.
Joy is the image of inconstancy,
Day but a lamp for men to view their pains,
Time, purseuant of imbecilitie,
Rest, an unrest, where sin in thoughts remain,
All things vnpermanant save misery,
Mishap, our wealth, and death, our desteny.
To know this world make but anotomie,
Of the dissembling hippocrites that live,
Search him that yields thee formal courtesy,
And he will be thine, no longer then thou give:
Making himself a Ianus with two faces,
Fallit vitium specie virtutis, Innenal,
Now yielding honor, and anon disgraces,
So does the world, like to a parasite,
Or flatterer unto some fat-purst fool,
Entice us on with pleasure and delight,
But when her blandishments atach our soul,
We find her painted craft was to beguile,
And Siren like to kill although she smile.
Here is that radiant Jewel, virtue spurned,
Naked conceit bare witted bravery
Does sit her chariot she being quite oreturnd:
Here short liud gnats hate perpetuity,
Whose wit with Midas maks the^ wear long ears
Though for their wealth wise men with flatterers
O nunimi vobis hunc prastat honorem. June.
The ocean of oblivion must not drown,
Those Guls, which to produse a benefit,
In all offenses will a man renown,
Th'ile say that madness is a manly heat,
And if insatiately we swallow food,
These will comme^d our stomachs to be good
Our humors these will sound with subtle slight,
And where we estimate our selves most dear,
Either for form of body, wit or might,
In that they will protest we have no peer:
But mock us gone, to such no counsel tell,
But seldom speak and always listen well
Donec eris foelix multos numera bis amicos. Tempora si fuerint nubila solus
eris. Ouids.
Here whilst a man has wealth to spend and give,
These threed-bare echoes of inconstancy,
That like to droanes on others honey live,
Will counterfeit with men to live and die.:
But if their patron once they needy see,
They seek a new and then say farewell he.
If they perceive thy tables spring is dry,
These fawning Gnathoes from thy need will turn
To other bordes, and to thine enemy,
Percha^ce will go to to do thee some shrewd turn
Some will be friends their aimed stroke to strike
Of which prevented, they will thee dislike.
They call him fool in these deceitful days
That is to seek with both his hands to play,
Wherefore that wight is thrale to great dismaies
On frindships trust which does his councels lay
Then with thy friend, as still your friendship grow,
Remember he may live to be thy foe.
As when Sybell, the trojan duke did lead,
Unto the myrtle woods and realm of ghosts,
Virtutis comes inu^dia.
The helhound snarled with the triple head,
And hegs and furies, serpents at him tossed:
So here with slimie mouths at virtue fights,
Lusts fat-braind fragme^ts cropstuft parasites.
Thus in this world the laborinth of woes,
With false resemblances we are suppressed,
Learning and virtue have ten thousand foes,
In no degree content, or fortune rest,
Health, beuty, strength and life, but spring to fall,
And envy springs with either to wrong all.
Inuidus alterius rebus macrescit opimis. Hor. Effundet mala lingua Virus
atrum. Virg.
A wight with neighbors happiness and joy,
Perplexed ever with contagious pain,
Is envy ever laughing at annoy,
But stings her heart with snakes at others gain,
At books and learning she will poison fling
As thick as Bacchus wives at orphy sling
Thus we with sundry woes are martired,
Being poor in wealth, and strangers to our own
Here in the vale of mourning banished,
Living but deputies and must begone:
And the more perfect all our virtues are,
The fouler enuies do against us war.
Then that which we call death, is not to die,
But rather to exchange a death for life,
Dico tunc vitam beatam fata cum peracta sint: Solon.
And escape the cloister of all misery,
And earthly ambages and hellish strife,
If by contemplating our state we see,
We bo^dslaues live, and death shall make us free.
The glutton thinks his belly is too small,
The covetous still wants dross and slime,
The flatterer protests he is at thy call.
While for themselves these cunning mates but clime
Here with such counterfets we always dwell,
That seek our goods but wish our souls in hell
Here being borne, we rather die then live,
For all our life is as a seeming death,
Few hours we sport, but many days we grieve
Whilst death with secret hand does stop ourbreth
So though we joy or grieve, while we be here,
We only seem as shadows to appear.
Both wealth, and friends, both ioys and sports also
Will flit away if danger come in place:
And sure they prove untrue to make us know,
That this frail mansion is no dwelling place,
To teach us love those things that still endure,
And seek a haven wherein to live secure.
Man's mortal life is like a speedy post,
That from all places swiftly cuts a way,
Until he has attaind his aimed cost,
Both youth and age haste on and make no stay,
In the beginning, middle end of either,
Cum sapido capimus supe Vanena. Cibo.
Both seek such things, and will abide with neither
A wretched soul, that fortune down has flu^g.
Finds no assistance in his shipwracks flaw,
In seeking flowers, with nettles we are stung,
Thus bound we are in worldly yokes to draw.
And we resemble till in dust we lie
The flowet that in a day, does spring and die.
Let not my words supply a wonders place,
For truth does witness that I do not feign,
He that is mortal knows a mortals case,
And that each mortal lives in mortal pain.
For we were borne to die and die we must,
To day alive to morrow turned to dust.
What wight can well behold a dead man's skull
And sighing will not say the same with me?
That were thy corpse as Salamander wool,
A vault of slime thou art, and once shall be,
Closed in a charmell house as could as stone,
And meat to worms that now thou treadst upon
This world is like unto a common Inn
Where Adoms child does live as passenger,
Here some one day, some many days have been,
Yet in their being they are naught the near.
For tim's so swift, Dum loquimur fugit inuida atas. Hor.
that none can time retain,
And Time once gone, Time never turns again.
Man's life is very fitly termed a span,
And we are but earths worst, and that is clay.
Worms are the garland of vain glorious man,
O be not proud since thou must die to day.
Then if thou trust, trust death for he is sure,
For all on earth will perish as impure.
Life may be likened to a violet flower,
Beg nawne with Caterpillars or the glue,
That wise Medea gave her paramour,
Which choking balls the bulls of Colchos slew:
Life may be like to nothing, since man sees,
Nothing more like to nothing then life is,
Mandeeme thy self no better then thou art,
A sorry iourniman from birth to grave:
All worldly goods which we encroach by art,
Are momentarie trash, and what we have
Is of the world and must be left behind,
And on the earth is no content of mind.
Wealth comes not in by hap or is increast,
By fathers toil, the sons good to prepare,
Promotion comes not from the East nor West,
Such fortuns dwell neither in moon nor star
But he does all increase, and blessings hold,
That first composed man of earthly mould.
As he in danger lives who has a thief
Hid closely in the night, behind his door,
So all that live have even of thieves the chief,
Death lodged within their boso^: Thebes therefore,
Wisely ordaind, that license none should have
To build his house, that made not first his grave
Triphon and Agamendo having made,
Apolloes temple, and for leu of this,
Desired the happiest thing that could be had,
They were repaid with death as chiefest bliss.
This common peril, salve of vanity,
Is good, because it ends misery.
The power of flesh is but a rotten reed,
And truth to say, Breuis est magnifortuna fauoris. Sen.
what is prosperity?
A slave to alteration, care and dread,
A slipperie step that ill men magnify:
And life is but a warfare against sin,
And flesh a bridewell to torment it in.
All worldly lovers die not worthily,
But twice the pains of fleshly death they bear,
Whereas the stout, and valiant men but die,
These Cowards feel a double death for fear.
But fate which none can flatter, or suborne,
Nor tongue entreat, ought stoutly to be born.
I know the property of pleasure is,
To leave more sorrow, when it goes away,
Then when it came it brought deluding bliss,
And well I know, that death will have his day:
(...) The which defrauding lusts when we have took,
In their best stay do vanish all like smoke.
And done we circumuent our selves thereby,
The time thereof departs and there we stand,
Detected factors of a villainy,
Mocked by the deed, and of the hellish band,
The judge, our conscience does co^demn the evil
Which we commit and leaves us to the devil
To some good art if Tutors do not bind,
Us, Otium omnia mala docet, a dolescentes. Cicer.
in our youth, the cares of life to try,
We, being free, our idle vexed mind,
To pleasures damned faculties apply,
That worse then pre^tiship, our fancy wounds
Our selves to death, and prove Acteons hounds
Here such as gifts do spare, and those made poor,
By giving no respect can have, for all,
Pleasure excludes who can give no more,
Then poverty her Siren voice does call,
If once enriched she rich and poor does weed,
Then turn's them out unto small friended need
To harbor in all weathers, poor and bare,
On the cold ground, of such as friends had been
Some will deride them, none relieve their care,
But say wherefore had he not kept it then?
Thus when our wealth will not keep company
None will redress our states in misery.
And can we any earthly thing attain,
Without displeasure, labor, misery?
Which of them are not slippery in the gain,
And very may games of uncertainty?
Their vanity no author can discuss,
They are as common unto beasts as us.
The grave delivers all men from their care,
And life once gone, sins, time seems finished
Praemia quanta bonos maneant. Inuen.
In spite of all the snarling curs that are,
Which gnaw the living and torment the dead,
Both rich and poor, even all that suffer grief
If good, shall after death find full relief.
When Thian from the worlds great voyage came
Some asked him what a world he then had seen
I have beheld virtue oppressed with blame,
(Quoth he) and poor men's suits confounded clean
By the usurping proud, and fools express,
And beat the wise, and great thieves ha^g the les
And how for money Argus will not see,
How rich men's falts were sport, but poor men's crime
How best deserts with thanks scarce guerdo^'d be
How the oppressed bought pity in his time:
And how most seeming holy men in gowns,
Under that sanctimony fished for crowns.
This was the worlds rude revolution then,
Which ever was but vain and ever shall
Remain man's hurt, sins shop a demons den,
Or like a dream, or tossed tennise ball.
Man's life is fitly termed a nothing got,
The gainers loose the hauers have it not.
Care eat's man's entralls, Envy gnaws his back,
Fortune with slipperie chances trip his foot,
Greedines tells him somewhat still does lack
When he has took his deepest shallow root
His name, and fame, time does dissolve to noght
And one as vain into his room is brought.
The triumph days which Rome to Caesar gave,
Carthage to Hanniball, the spartan host
Unto Leonides that Athens grave
Imposed on Pericles and Persia coast
Allotted Syrus, after victory
Had no repose, no perpetuity,
For this the heathen Emperors ordained,
(So much this worlds vain frailenes did they know
That when they had their diade^s attaind,
Masons and Caruers should unto them go
Enquiring of what form that tomb should be
Sowell the Pagans knew their vanity.
For this the Romans made a wise decree,
That when a Consul did in triumph ride
In Coach, with him a slave should placed be
Which slave should say my friend for all this pride
Take heed thou know thy self chance does butle^d
This which in shame without great heedwil end seasons and years
Through howrs through days, weeks, months,
Through labor, hunger, cold, care, pain tears,
watchings,
Through false delights, fools, unjust friends, loss,
From birth life fades, unto the grave again:
And death, the sweet release of sorrow great,
The flouring bud of youth does first defeat.
To Ciperissus youth he was extreme,
And unto Hilas, who his locks did dight,
Making his noone day mirror of a stream,
And Adlington whose surname Welsteed hight,
In belgicke wars, his lance did overcome,
Circling that young Apollo with a tomb.
Si quid mea carmina possint Nulla dies vn^ quam memori te eximet ano Virg.
But, most obliged friend, thou shall not lie,
In lowest dust, as though thou never were,
Although alas we all are borne to die,
My love shall one day greet thy warlike bear:
Mean time repose thee in the Elizian field,
Fame has thy name, and honors tent thy shield.
Raptam euridice^ atque irrita l^itisdona querens. Virg.
Yet will I moure for thee with such sad lays,
As Orpheus once resounded for a ghost,
When in the prime of all her flouring days,
His young wife whom he dearly loud he lost.
The woods shall be my house, my bed so^e stone
There will I live, for thee and die alone.
Here, as they would, who can their hopes receive?
Here, as they would, who can esteemed be:
Here, Fates, and friends perfidiously deceive:
Here, as they would (Time) who can feed on thee
None: for on earth, where al things are unsure
Things seldom be, or being not endure.
My youth declined, and felt no kind of joy,
The wanton days wherein I took delight,
Were but a dream, a shadow, and a toy,
And were but lent to breed me more despite
But why vnpittied should I murmur so?
I naked came, and naked hence must go,
Respect the universal lives of men,
And see what toil in living dust remains,
This man is fleshly crimes detested den,
That seeks out Anaxarchus worlds for gains,
Diseases, need, and wrong an other knows,
Like leaves in storms so are we tossed with woes
And living here with whom does man frequent:
But with old lechers envious parasites,
Murderers belly-slaues what snares are bent,
Noua terris incumbit febriu^ cohors. Hora.
To take his soul, against his body fight,
Intolerable stones and stranguries,
With fevers, postumes, swelling maladies.
Man in this world is laid as sure in hold,
Till he be put to execution,
For what gaile has more labor, hunger, cold,
Or more diseases then this world has shown:
To greatest men O vale of languishing,
No muse can tell the troubls thou do bring
And whereas one adorned with the crown
Of silver locked age, salutes his grave,
Infinite in their chief are beaten down,
Pallida mors aquo pulsat pede pauperum takernas regu^que turres. Hor.
Death neither spares the wretched nor the brave
For death of custom as a cold in May,
By toil, or sorrow first gives youth decay.
O foolish sorrow, vexed happiness,
Self flattering mock, proud nothing, painted clay,
Chaos of trouble, mischief, and distress,
Incurable Ulcer, Sirens lay,
Times Icarus, Post, Bubble, Froth, false name,
O life no slander can express thy blame.
Mishaps tragedion, residence of pain,
Cipher of earth, sins slave, true reasons gale, Cipher.

Thoghts pray, ioies mock, youths fool, natures disdain,
Prids ass, into the ditch of death to fall
Is man, his youth, and age both fickle breath'
Are but as Gaylors keeping him for death.
Thus all our days are parents of sure cares,
Willand Wit.
Our health the nurse of wars, tween will and wit,
Our impious youth a mist for age prepares,
A crimefull pack of sin, too great for it,
Our selves unto our selves a wretchedness,
With vain co^ceits our lusting minds oppres,
Our age presents, but feeblenes disguised
Perplexed in thought with sin, in flesh with pain
His company, and counsels are despised
His death expected by his friends for gain,
Who much rejoice if we in riches vade,
If poor to rid us hence they will be glad.
For all their palaces and shining pride,
Rich men are slaves to many tirannies,
And sleeps foe sorrow, durst in them abide
Foul lusts, and mocked hopes do them surprise,
And though their greatness keep the mean in fear
Yet most with them their own co^ma^ders bear.
If earth were animated with a soul
As Plato did suppose, the very ground,
Whereon he treads, would call a monarch fool,
And say thou wretch thou think thy self renownd,
When I, that am the earth retain in me
A thousand thousand better men then thee.
And if earths compass be a point in all,
Of which an Empire seems a little spark,
What may we then a private Lordship call.
Not half a wormehole if we rightly mark,
Then why should any think themselves so great
Since they are bounded in so small a seat.
And when thou leauest this life, thou bearst nothing
Of these with thee, thy realms, and pleasurs send
Thee hence alone although thou were a king,
Thy flesh also that seemed thy dearest friend,
A naked soul, does let thee pass away.
Thus but in heaven, thou have no perfect stay.
Therefore we always should have death in mind
How to another country we must go,
How life is but a leaf blown up with wind,
A cobweb light, a false familiar foe,
Sin's nurse, a sickness long, a dying day,
A friend of vice, that seeks the souls decay.
And al our pride is but mortality,
Where in an earthen frame, the plannets boil,
Humors corrupt, as Cinthea does the sea
Which do inuest the soul and make her toil,
In cogitations base, and all earths best,
Is seldom had or gotten but unrest,
Our home above the circle of the stars
Is set, leaving the clouds behind her back,
To the last heaven the soul her slight prepares,
By death released from this valley black,
Whether when endeed desteny thee brings,
That thou behold the snining judge of things
Then will thou say this is the wished place,
My country true of which I had no mind,
Here was I borne and bowing down thy face,
To earth, thou will co^demn thy friends so kind,
That there lament thy death because they cast,
Their love on lusts, and ioies that will not last.
This earth is but a Cell of punishment,
Yet peoples insolency will not know it,
Until they fall in matter of complaint,
Though time their youth and chance their friends defeat,
Whilst that themselves are well they think such lie,
As say this world is but mere vanity.
The minutes, hours, days, weeks, months and years
On whose swift transmigration life depends,
Senister chance excruciates with tears,
If one day please, a month with care offends,
The liked time declines, the wished lot
Com's sild, and soon departs being got.
Count but the time, ere thou thy wish obtain,
Then next, how long thou after that may live.
And thou shall see it prove so short and vain,
That having it, it shall thy mind but grieve,
And prove in usage, less and worse to thee,
Then in thy fancy first it seemd to be.
As the vniointed limb no ease can have,
But by uniting with his native place:
So from his birth until he has his grave,
Man lives in grief, and does but thorns embrace
In joy and time, he hopes but for his pain,
And hating death, he hates his greatest gain.
Now since the world can give but painted bubbls
For fools and epicures to dote upon,
Tell it, it can impart nor ioies nor troubles,
For all is but a dream below the sun,
And flesh is dust, pride, vain, and life a span.
Then bid the world afflict thee how it can,
Foes, fortune, world and hate, your worst is death
Greatness, delight, and pomp, your best is end,
Here hopes and friends the fates sequestreth,
And many tears for both in vain we spend.
The living and the great are fortunes slaves,
More then the wretch, or those that lodge in graves.
Thus is our life but careful meditation,
Qua atas lo^g^ est aut quidom ^ino homini longum. Salust.
Of vain discordant thoughts, a liking shade,
Of momentarie things a mist soon gone,
A frothy dew which to it self has made,
The promise of long time, when that each hour
It is unto it self unknown unsure.
And of this life, the trust and confidence,
Whose short abode does make us bold to sin,
By this thou see and by experience,
That since the hour in which it did begin,
It runs unto naught and ever shall,
Till it expire as it had never been,
Like to a dream or shadow on a wall.
What fool will then repine to pass from hence,
Where nothing is sincere faith, peace, nor love,
Where many most oppress the least offense,
Whereas the great are not so sure above,
But they shall naked pass to natures Inn,
And soon become, as they had never been.
That they may enter heavens eternal gate, Math. xi.

To Christ, who calls oppressed souls to joy,
And with the blessed sainted infants mate,
Which Herod from sweet Iewrie did destroy,
Wherewith all wronged innocents appears,
Math. 2.
Their weeping mothers bathed in blood and tears
No eye has euerseene nor heart has thought,
The solaces which God has laid in store
Corinth. xi.
For their content, who set this world at naught
The kingly prophet wished to keep the door
Of that place, Psalm. 84.
rather then he would possess
All earthly Princes glorious wretchedness,
Here soldiers and courageous noble men,
Who for their countries honor were suppressed,
Released from their bodies painful den,
With everlasting quietness are blessed
In union of the Godheads trinity,
They that were mortal living angels be.
Which Lord I pray, that when our life shall end
This life which day by day in vanity,
And night by night to none effect we spend,
Of all offenses pardoned let us be
Committed here by mist of mind oppressed,
That in thy promised glory we may rest.
The glory bright of that immortal reign,
Where souls and bodies shall be wedded new,
After domes day, and never die again,
Paul wished to be dissolud this same to view,
And praises of his highest God to sing,
In Paradise by heavens eternal spring.
That therefore we may trust none earthly thing
Sweet Jesus, for thy tender love to all,
With the lost sheep unto thy fold us bring,
Math 18.
That we may know thy voice when thou do call
Make saved souls of these our sinful forms
And think on me Lord, when I am in thrall,
And lie in grave a deaths head full of worms.
Grant Christ whose blessed blood in crimson streams,
With bitter rods and cruel nails was shed,
Whose sacred limbs were racked on wooden beams
Whose holy heart was pierced being dead,
Grant to protect us from all deadly sin,
And when we from this dying life are fled,
Let sorrows end and heavenly joys begin.
Amen.
An Ode. Nulla dies caret maerore.
With providence reflect thy look,
Into thy lives accounting book.
And thou shall see how Time destroys
Thy youth, thy friends, thy foolish joys.
Which pleasures mocking all desires,
Show them but servants unto liers,
And look on this with eyes of mind,
With which men see when they are blind.
None ever had such joy a day,
That from them did not slide away.
For that soon turns into was,
Which sprung of late as tender grass.
With Joy let none himself deceive,
For every lust will take his leave.
Rich misery is great men's share,
Pompous distress and glittring care,
With which they toil as troubles lent,
Till death exact of them their rent.
Still in thy pleasure bear in mind,
That sorrow is not far behind.
Fiuers present our image plain,
Which passing never turn again.
Such is this world when it is best,
That each degree finds little rest.
He that is highest in his pride,
His fortune changes as the tide.
All signifies a fading flower,
Rust, Time, and worms will all devour.
Life, Joy, and every pleasant meede,
Scarce hangs by a slender threede.
To all, this period fate does doom,
That all must unto nothing come.
As child in nurses arms, by death
Included here we draw our breath.
Where all our solace is unstable,
Out death unknown inevitable
Which none by strength alternate may,
Riches, or birth, or other way.
And earth is promiser of rest,
Which is not as it seemed possessed.
None have contentment at their call,
And smalest sweet abounds in gall.
When we think surest for to stand,
Then greatest slidings are at hand.
One danger sildome comes alone,
But more proceed ere that be gone.
The Castles, which repulse a foe,
Cannot defend a man from woe.
Wherefore old Solon did commend,
To call none happy till their end.
And Dyon gave this sentence rare,
The shorter life the lesser care.
From birth that prison we ascend,
On earth, as stage to take our end.
And here a life enui'd we have,
And no true rest until our grave.
Wherefore fools heaven, but wise men's hell,
Vain Earth, I bid thy joys farewell.
FINIS.
Ad suos libros.
AS Time and the cold grave,
Concludes every thing:
So you I ended have
Poor books, amidst the spring
Even as the Lark saluted day
And silver drops bedewd each way.
Go now and pardon crave
Of that heroic knight,
Which wisdom does embraue,
Whom if you know not right,
His bounty, stature, complete form,
And valor great shall you inform.
His hair like wreaths of gold
Do shade his manly face,
So warlike to behold
As Mars the God of Thrace.
Nature and Art did both consent
So to contriue him excellent.
His Lady fresh also,
And daughters virtues flowers,
Adorn you, as you go
Until your latest hours.
Which goodly creatures to be seen
Seem Lillies on their stalks so green.
So pass away and if that envy stir,
It Is but a stingles drone, a barking cur.

