THE CHVRCHES HAZARD Delivered in a Sermon in the Cathedral Church in
NORWICH, upon the fifth of November. 1629.

By THO. REEVE, Minister of Gods Word at COLEBY in NORFOLK.

LONDON, Printed by AUGUSTINE MATTHEW'S, for JOHN GRISMOND, and are to be sold
at his shop in Iuy-lane at the sign of the Gunne. 1632.

TO ALL THE ADHERENTS of the Romish Church amongst us.
HOw comes it to pass, that Rome is become the Seminary of mischief? an^
that where Martyrs once abounded, now Conspirators? the faith of that Church
being once famous through the world but now her Bloodshed; all Christian
Countries having (...) her tumults, and many her Treacheries. Can we judge her
that delights in cruelty, the tender Mother? no, the Rev. 17.4.
scarl^t Wh r^? Are these her gentle warnings? her spiritual stripes? what to
strike Nations to death? Did Christ ever prescribe, that a Church should be
advanced by such direful designs, dismal stratagems? Let his Records be
searched, and the Grant of this charter shown. No, this practice nature
disclaimes, how much more Scripture detests? Traitors are the worst men in the
bad age, Luke 21. 2 Timothy 3.4.
yea the Monsters of the perilous times. Out of the Manuscript of Judas,
Treason may be proved but out of the Gospel of Christ never: Oh then that it
should b^e held the perfection of Religion, the mould of merit! I wonder those
practiced disciples blush not to call themselves Jesuits, and that the Pope
the Crafts-master of the science does not hang down his head in the sight of
the whole world, to style himself the Vicar of Christ. Oh blessed Savior,
thou which did suffer thy own blood to be shed, and had rather loose thy
life then thy meekness, which neu r struckest enemy to death, though thou
had Math. 28.
all power, which did Luk 9.55.
cool the breaths of them which would have had fire fetched from heaven, and
did teach the Math. 26 52.
Discipline of patience to that military Apostle which did cut off Malchus his
ear, which thy self were an innoc nt 1 Pet. 1.10.
Lamb, and did send forth thy Messengers as Math. 10 1^.
Lambs, which would have kingdoms subdued unto thee by revealing of
mysteries, and not by depriving of life, how will thou acknowledge such
followers to be of thy retinue? No here Antichrist is discovered, in that he
is so ^pposite to Christ. Cum sitis inhumani, impij, crudeles, homicidae, non
ampl u^c^itis Ch istia^i. Lucifer, Caralitan^^r^ Athan l ^p 65
Seeing y^are inhumane, impiou^, cruel, homicides, y^e are no longer
Christians. Their ab sing of the Scriptures, the mingling of their own works
with Christ's precious satisfactions, the steame of their Brothell-houses, their
shop of Imagery their new built Chaldron of Purgatory, the grounding of the
principles of their Religion out of Apocryphal, allegorical, parab licall
places or out of most dark^ and intricate places of Scripture, from which no
conuincing arguments are to be fetched, the voluntary confession of their own
Writers that neither Transubstanstiation The utter rejecting of Hoc est c ^pus
m^u^ for a clea^e place, and oncluding N n potest per vllam scripturam probati
Fisher cont. capt. Babylon. n. 8. Bellarm nes conf ssing Sco^us his opinion
(that there is not extant any place so express, that without the Churches
d^claration, can evidently constr^^ne us to admit it) not to be improbable de
Euch l. 3 c. 23. Non dissimili.
Transubstantiation, Ha^^e Communion custom. G e^ de Val de vsu. Euch c. 10.
lade of the peoples devotion H^^.
Communion in one kind, Indulgences. Roff Assert luth conf. art. 18. Cajet
opusc. tom. 1. tract. 15 de Ind cap 1.
Indulgences, Sacrifice for quick and dead. C^ster in co^p. o^th fid. them ^rep
5. c. 2 p 1. 2.
sacrifice for quick and dead, Prayers unto Saints and Images Bat^n in 2^ q 1
art. ^0.
prayers unto Saints, worshipping of Images, Christ^ descension into Limbus
Patrum, no where expressed, that Christ w^nt thithe^ to deliver the souls ^f
the Fathers, M^^c (...) Can^ l ^l. c. Theol. c 4
Christ's descension into Limbus patrum, Conf^ssion Gl^ss in G^at. de poen.
did. 5 c 1 in poenit.
Confession, nor many other points are clearly to be proved out of Scripture
their reviving of the ancient heresies of the Valent ut ^^an^ Hera^eonites for
extreme v ction. Irenae. l 1 c 11. Aug l (...) hae^ c 16
Valentinians, and Heracleonites, Angelic^^s for woe shipping of Angels, A^g ^e
haer. c 39.
Angelickes, Ca^p^^a^ians for wo^shippin^ of Images. Epiph haer. 27. Aug. de
^ar cap 7.
Ca^pocrati^ns, Collyridia^ f^ worsh pping of the vi^gin Mary, Ep^h. haer ^8.
Coll^ridians, Sam^saeans for relics, Epiph ^aer. ^3.
Sampsaean, M^^ichees for Priests single l fe, Aug Epi^t 74 Id. de morib. Ecc
and Mani^^. l. 2. c. 13.
Manichees, Mestaleans that Baptism does ^^e^y (...) e sins going before,
Theod. divine. Decr^e de Baptismo
Messalians, N^di^edales ^or their ^a^e f^oted Fransiscanes and Seculars, Aug
de har c 58
Nodipedal, Catha ^st^ for merits, Isio^ 1 Etym. lib. 8 c. 4.
Catharists, Armezians for wo^sh pping of the Cross, N^. ^ph l. 1^. c 45
Armenians, A^sto^ick^ for voluntary poverty, Epiph haer 61.
Apostolickes, Mar ^us the (...) for having blo^ in the Chalice. Epiph haer. 34.
Marcus, Nouatians for doubting of remission of sins, A^b i. ^. de Poen. c.
^. and l. 2. c. 5.
Novatians and others, their Boy-fathers alleged in solemn controversies,
the digladiations of their own Divines against them, and the maine points of
our profession proved substantially out of their own Writers, make m^e to
renounce them; but their conspiracies make m^e to abhor them, defy them, look
aghast upon them; but specially when treason comes to be dogmatised by their
Schoolmen, every Romish Theologue almost now adays not being able to compose
a Body of divinity without this sanguinary Maxim ins rted, justifying the
lawfulness of Treason, and (as if it were a professed (...)) describing; and
prescribing the means of it; making no conscience of it after Suarez defens.
fid Cath. adv Aug. sect. exc. lib. 6. c 4. n. 18.
condemnatory sentence, yea if the Popes Bann 2. (...). p. 5^^.
in erpretatiue sentence can but be conceived it is enough; to do but deny
their Religion, is to Sand. de clau. Dan. p 25.
run upon the sword of the Church, Suarez def. fid. ^at adv. Aug. sect. er.
lib. 6 c. 4 n. ^8.
any person then appointed by the Pope may take away the life of his
Sovereign, if none be appointed the Successor may do it, if there be no
Successor the Kingdom may do it; yea Mariana. instit. reg. p ^^.
Mariana is so impud^nt that he says, that it is a wholesome meditation for
Princes to persuade themselves that they may be then killed, and the party not
only to do it lawfully but with glory and commendati n. Bellarmine I confess
was a modest Papist; his tenets not steeped in the au^atiousnesse of many; yet
Micah 7.4.
the best of them is but a brier, and the most righteous sharper then a
thorne-hedge, for when I consider his Bell de pontif. l 5. c. 6.7.8. Bell de
pot. ^um. Pont. ad Guliel Barcl. p. 97.
treasonable conclusions, and his damnable Letter to Blackwell, what do I hold
him but a Cardinal Engine of sedition? The Pope is held by many a Holy Father,
as if the Sanctuary of peace, truth, and piety were in his breast, yet when I
call to mind how Vrban^ 2. held killing of Kings no murder but a zeal to the
Catholic mother, and how many Consider the miseries of these Emperors Kings,
and Princes. Leo Is^u^us. Sigon. de rag. ^^al. p. 10^. ^u^ovicus pius papi^
mass. annal. p. 04. Childerick. ^^m in. gest. Fran^. p. ^03. O^ho the gr a^
^ui^ p. 6. c. 6 Henry the 1. Ben Ca^d. vit. Hild. p. 2 H^ r^ the 4. N^ucl. p
7^7. Hen^. 5 vr^p p 2^2. Lot^ar us Otho Fris l 7 c 18. Fri^. Barba^ossa Nauct p
856. ^enry 6 Hoved p 63^. Philip his brother, Nau^^. p 898. Otho 4. Wa sing
Yp^d N^ust p. 4^. ^r^d. 7. P^ndul^. col. hist. N^ap. p 245. Henry 7. Avent. p
5^7. 5 8 W^nc^^l us ^he^d. Ni m p ^8. so n^ Q. o^ Naples Nauct. p. ^024.
Man^ed. K. of Nap. and (...). Nauct. p. 9^6. C^dinu^ Parai. v^s. p 11. I^lian
and Lawrence the Du^es of Florence, Vol p. 51.
Emperors have been troubled by Popes with the loss of their peace,
kingdoms, or lives, and other Kings and Princes in the like manner molested,
how Man. Paris. p. 223.
King John amongst our selves, and Cu^. Neub^g. p. 1^^.
Henry the second were put to baseness, how Q. Elizabeth after the B^ll of
Pius Quintus was never at rest, how Or^. Sixth. 5. ha^. in Conf^. (...). 15^9
Sixtus the f^^t justified by a panegyricall Oration the murhering of Henry the
third in France by a Dominican Friar, I can count the Pope no o^^er then a
murdering Father, ye^ the Cut throat of Christendom Be^^de, when I recount
the massacres of Merindoll and ^ie^s, V^s^, Paris, and ^f that here intend in
England at this Gun p^wder Treason, I can speak to R^me in no mil^er terms
then God did once to Niniveh, Nah. ^ 1.
Oh thou bloody City.

Oh ye then which are the admirers of that Church, which think it the Paradise
where the tree of life does grow, and hold no ground holy but that which that
Church sanctifies, see at last the A^mnable impostures ye have b^e^e misled
with renounce that Apo^. 1^.5.
Woman of forn^cati ns, and 2 Thessalonians. 2.3.
Man of sin be it for no other reason then the e principles of blood;
Treason can never be an appendant of the true Faith. And oh ye Priests and
Jesuits, the spirit of conspiracy, and nerves of treason, who with wit (...)
the whole world, and have raised up nothing a great while but a learned
v^l^^ny, by whom all the Commotions, the turbulencies is the Christian world
have b^ene either acted, or animated, consider at last what it is y^e practice,
Treason; Treason, the attempt of rash^^sse, the v^ ^f ^a^red; the scandal of
humanity, the (...) of Religion; wi^^ men should not do it, good men will not.
What therefore will ye ^or this still streine your wits, and your neck s? and
make your selves fearful to your own people, odi^us to us? no, if reverence
to God and man have not q^ite f^rs^ken you if ye have not forgotten the honor
and safety o the men in y ur own corpses, desist from such hideous, horrible,
graceles d^signes. And the rather because (saving the reputation of your own
judgments) ye are circumuented, being but made slaves to the subtilty, and
insolency of your Pope; for what J beseech you (by all the pri^les of
conscience that are left in your bosoms) has been these many years the
maine incentiue of all your disloyalties; has it not been to make your Pope
not only c^i^^e Priest but chief Potentate in the Christian world? where his
temporal jurisdiction has not been acknowledged, there ye have labored to
thrust it in by this spiritual feat. But (if ye have but one drop of
spiritual ointment left upon your eyes) consider if the opinion be not as
vain, as the attempt is desperate; who knows not the forgery, as well as the
ambition of this Title? But Luke 22.26.
it shall not be so amongst you, damps the Popes affected Primacie over all
Bishops; but Io. 18.36.
my Kingdom is not of this would, throttles over all his Supremacy Kings and
Emperors; Christ never assumed it, Peter never challenged it, the ancient
Bishops of the Romish Church never pretended title to it, how then should it
now come to be a right unquestionable? Search antiquities; Theo. l. 1. c. 7.
Constantine the great was so far from suffering Julius the Bishop of Rome
for being his Head that he gave not, his Legates (but Eustathius Patriarch of
Antioch) precedence in the Council of Nice. Leo ad Cler. and plebem Constant.
ep. 23.
Leo commanded not Martian the Emperor to summon a Council, but made humble
request for it by the Clergy and people of Constantinople, Cum lachrymis and
gemitibus Leo ep. 14. ad Theodosium.
and with tears and sobs he begged of Theodosius to have had a Council in
Italy but could not obtain it; the words of Pope Agatho of old were not
imperious to Heraclius, and Tiberius the Emperors, but Pro obedientia quam
debuimus. Council. Constant. Act. 4.
For the obedience we owe you, Gregory the Great acknowledged himself the
servant of Mauritius, for Christus dominari Imperatorem militibus sed etiam
sacerdotibus concessit. Greg. lib. 2. ep. 103.
Christ granted the Emperor not only to rule over soldiers but Priests; in
Justinians days it is evident that the Emperor was held so far superior to
the Pope, that the said Emperor Pontifical. Cont. tom. ^. in vita Vigilii.
deposed two Popes, Silverius and Vigilius, and he himself as well as Theodora
the Empress thanked Belizarius their Agent for it; Eutropius says, that in
former times such wa^ the obedience of Popes to Emperors that if the Emperor
sent for the Pope, Omni neglecta occasine. Eutropius.
all business set aside, he went though he knew it were to go into
banishment. The boundless power and immoderate Tyranny of Popes over Princes
in those ages, then were not known; are ye not persuaded in your c^nsciences,
that the first raise of Popes, was by the Grace of Princes, and the next by
their own masterlesse Ambition? your own writers will testify as much. Your
Ceremoni^ry says that Hoc affi^mamus ante Carolum magnum nem^nem Imperii
Romani coronam ex manu Pontificis Romani s^^cepisse. Cer. lib. 1. sect. 5. c. 7.
before Charles the great, no man ever took the Crown of the Empire of the
Pope, Boniface the eighth, was the first that ever invested himself in this
supremacy, and yet ( Major says) Bonifacius 8. multum apparenter definivit
qu^d Romans Ponti ex est supra ^^ges in temporali^us quod tamen o^ulatissin. ^
Theologi dicunt esse f^lsum. Io. mayor a^sent. distinc. 20. q. 2.
the Judicious Divines of those times held it but a corrupt i^ ^e. Mea potestas
non p nd^t a Papa (...) a Deo immediate, and va^um est quod di^i solet Papam
habere superiore^ Part. vrsp. i^ Ludou. 4.
Ludovicus the fourth, was wont to say, that it was a mere vanity, to hold
that the Pope had a Superior to him upon earth. Potest^s saecu ar^ mayor est
spi^ituali, nec quod illa e^ est subiecta in aliquo Ioh. de Paris. de par. Reg.
and papi^^. c 5.
Johannes de Parisijs concludes absolutely that the secular power is supreme.
Non Apostolico iure, N^c enim illud tibi da^e, quod non habuit, Petrus potuit.
Bern. de Consid. ad Eng. lib. 2. Fides temporum non Evangeliorum. Hilar.
Bernard himself avoucheth to the Pope, that his power is not by Apolicall
right Why then fight ye thus for a new invention? which if it be come to be a
point of faith, yet it is not the faith of the Gospel, but of the times, and
that not of the purer Primitive times: will ye be the defenders of an
usurpation? and venture your lives and souls for a fancy of power? Oh that ever
men of your acuteness, and acrimony, should be thus infatuated to be
instruments of such fl^gitous, execrable practices for an arrogant person? who
sees not that since the Pope came to this power, he ha h given himself to
nothing but to haugten^sse, and slothfulness, he is too great now to open his
mouth in a pulpit, or to busy his pen to discuss Controversies of Divinity,
the zealous and laborious Bishops of Rome are vanished, they prea^h only by
your lips, and write only by your hands their chi^ f study is now to invent
mischief, and to in ite you to attempt them; Oh therefore go open your closed
eyelids, and rub upon your consciences to take notice of the palbable grafts
of the Popes, and to beware them; fight not for Tyranny, dye not for Pride,
show not less mercy to Christians, then you do to Jews and Tu^kes, embrew
not your hands in the blood of Princes, with shame blush over that which is
past, with horror prevent all such future practices; get your Pope to give
satisfaction to all the World, for all former Treasons, to burn all sed^tious
books, or else assure your selves whatsoever ye can colourably pretend to the
world* an infamy sticks upon your Church, and your religion will be held as
dangerous as corrupt. Thus out of ardent desire to procure safety to my Country
and to get such black deformities wiped from the brows of all them that
profess Christianity, do I offer these wholesome aduertisements to your
duest and deepest considerations, beseeching God that your pistols, poisons,
powders, may now be laid aside, and that ye may fall to works answerable to
true prof ssion.

Yours so fa^re as ^^ue Christian Reli^^on will s^ffer. THO: REEVE.

THE CHVRCHES HAZARD.
NEHEM. 4.11. And our adversaries said, they shall neither know, nor see till
we come into the midst of them, and slay them, and cause the work to cease.


THe Church is a Particle of Heaven, a quint-esse^ce I am sure from this earth
Hortus inclusus a Garden enclosed, Cant. 4.12.
severed like Paradise from all the world; Gods Suburbs below; the Royal City
above, the Suburbs below; that Seeds Beatorum this Renatorum; that the Seat of
the Glorified, this of the Sanctified. Constitu^^ sibi locum vnum aus condidis
vniuersum.
He which made the whole world, reserved this one place to himself. Whether
God dwell not here, let the shaking of his Scepter manifest; Iudicia indicia,
His judge menti are testimonies. I can read God present amongst his people
as well in the patent of his works, as in the charter of his Scriptures; for
Pagina authorem suum nunquam tacentes, Amb. ep lib. 10. ep. 84.
These are volumes that never conceal their author. How comes it that the
Church has stood all this while against the formidable rage of the world, but
that it is a fenced City? It had long since been made a ruinous heap, but
that it is the Palace of the great King. Extingere voluit, sed Deo gratias non
valuit. Bern. ep. 2.
The enemy of Sion would have extinguished it, but God be praised he could
not. Ramos confregit, radici non nocuit, Chrysostom hom. 10. de diuite and paupere.
He brake of some of the branches but he could not hurt the root. From the
mouths of our adversaries let us be resolved, whether this be not the Great
Gods Station; for the devises, designs have been many mischievous against it,
yea Innumerae pestes Ereb^.
infinite Fiends of Hell, have been busy, boisterous, for the demolishing of
it, why prevailed they not? why were they defeated? Oh they fought stoutly, but
God had the upper ground of them, their swords were too short, and blunt to
fight with the Almighty; they felt here Digitum, a Finger more weighty and
mighty then man's to oppose them; Every succor then to the Church is a
Charactar, and every deliverance an Oracle to evidence Gods presence amongst
his people. How wonderfully did God here preserve Judah, when danger was
imminent? God I say, and not Relliquia Danaum, atque immitis Achildes.
the Relics of Ba^ylons oppression, the strength of the captivity returned;
no, God to show the pre-eminence of his power, the perogatiue of his Church.
Let Judah go on to build the wall, to repair the breaches of Jerusalem, their
zeal is commendable, their pains acceptable; all awful and laudable; yea the
Deed is Gods, and the Defense shall be Gods; Judah is Gods Promoter, and he
will be her Protector. Jupiter al^itonans.
That great God, that can make the battlements of heaven to crack, and the
Axel-tree of the world to fall in pieces with his thunderbolts, takes upon him
the Patronage of Judah. Let Sanballat v. 1.2.
scorn^ and Tobiah v. 3.
deride yea a Senate of wits meet together even v. 7.8.
Arabians, Ammonites, Asbdodites to consult, conspire about a work of ruth and
ruin, yet God will be a tutelar, safegarding power. For that is the purport of
this sentence, it is rehearsed as a point of bliss when Judah lay at the
bleeding point, if God had not helped they had been helpless; helpless? yea
liuelesse, for they had been slain, and their work ceased before they had
either known or seen. For our adversaries said, They shall neither know nor
see, till we come into the midst of them, and slay them, and cause the work
to cease.

Our, stand here like a people severed from all the Babylonians, they peculiar
to God and he to them, for he is a friend though there be Adversaries; he
has concluded no harm unto them though they said it; he had eyes ten
thousand times brighter then the Sun to discern their secretest practices,
though they had thought to come upon them before they should either know or
see, they shall not touch the hemme of Gods garment, nor raze the skin of his
body, not come to the out-skirts of his people, though they think to come into
the midst of them; Gods people are secured though they conjecture they should
be slaughtered, slain; the conspiracy shall cease, though they suppose the
work shall cease. For our Adversaries, etc.

Our, show a company, and a company they had need to be, and well knit
together, for they are a genus inuisum.
hated stock, they have Adversaries; and no commune Adversaries but such as
were full-b^nt upon a wretched purpose, they had vared as it were upon it, they
had said; yea and close dangerous Adversaries, which would come upon them in no
manly sort, give no warning of their wrath, send no open defiance of their
displeasure, for then Judah might have brought forth pares ^^ullas, and pila
minantia pili^*
col^urs alike and forces alike, but come upon them before they shall either
know, or see; neither will the refuse people satisfy them, no they would be
for the flower of the garland, for the most insigne, and illustrious, for the
Midst and not ther^o show an angry brow any, or to pa l^y the reason o^ their
distaste, but to make havoc; to express their minds at the swords point, a
sharp discovery of men's intentions; confodere, configere to wound to stab, to
slay; and not only so, but a greater spite is yet behind, to overthrow the
means of Gods service, ^o get a conquest upon religion, or these people are
strengthening them^elues, say they in this holy City, they are reedifying the
wal^s of Jerusalem, that their God might again be worshipped, well this holy
attempt they would hinder; the Work is the eyesore, and the W^rke shall cease
Our Adversaries said, etc.

In the Text consider.

A holy Congregation -- Our. A hellish opposition -- Adversaries. A firm
resolution -- Said. A cunning proiecting -- They shall neither know, nor see. A
high attempt, -- till we come into the midst of them. A merciless design --
and slay them. A rancour against religion -- And cause the work to cease.
Our.
First, for the Holy Congregation, Our. This word belongs not to a single
soul, but to men united, they were scattered, but now they are reducted into
one; in Babylon they lived apart, mourning in their secret, several corners,
to Judah, they are now returned, and there they now speak with a voice, like
the voice of many waters, Our. Though before My adversaries here, Thine there,
This man's in another place, yet now, Our. The scattered stones of Sion are
gathered together, the Saints are met, there is a Holy Congregation. Vas^li
Eccles 4.10.
Woe to the church when she is alone, Joy to the Church in her troops, the
Church is then clad in her rich attire, yea decked like a Bride in her Nuptial
Ornaments, then the Monilia circa collum.
jewels are about her neck. The Church in persecution is said to be in the 2.
Cant. 1.
clefts of the rocks, in the secret places of the stayres, desirous to look
ovt, and yet ashamed to be seen, her profession being in oppression, she
hides head, and shunnes company; not in the open streets, nor in the market
place does she take her turns, but in the clefts of the rocks, in the secret
places of the stayres; not but that she then is, but not conspicuous; she
wants not interna^l entity, but external felicity: But a Church flourishing,
is the Saints eye-pleasure, the worlds amazement, 6. Cant. 4.
terrible, like an army with Banners. For an army with Banners d sp ayed, not
more goodly to be beheld, then the ^urch with her ranckes filled. Genesis 30.1.
Give me children, or else I dye says B^ch ^, so give me my multitudes says
the Church, or (...) ^nguish; she is then like a Es. 17.6.
Vine shaken with a berry here and there, in the out-most boughs. The luster
of a Church is gone, when Gods Courts are not filled, and Jerusalem, the mother
of us all, seems to be in her Widdow-hood, when many of her children are not
at her knees, professing their faith, praising their God. See the luctuous,
dolorous state of the Saints, when the Church is in this distresseful plight.
1. Lam. 4.
The ways of Sion do lament, because none come to the solemn feasts, all
her gates are desolate, her Priests sigh, her virgins are afflicted, and she
in bitterness. Solemn feasts, but no solemn appearance, the gates open, but
desolate for want of company; Oh what a brow of anguish is there then every
where discerned? the Priests sighing, the Virgins afflicted, and she in
bitterness. But change this state, and what a change of carriage is there then
to be seen? all glee, and triumph, recreement, and rauishment to beh^ d the
Church in her excellency, eminency, glory. David describing this state, does it
with most passionate, aff t onate terms of exultation; Psalm. 68.24, 15.
It is well seen Oh God, how thou go, how thou my God and King go in the
Sanctuary, The singers go before, the Minstrels follow after, and in the midst
are the damsels playing with their timbrels. Then the Church is compassed
about with her noise of musicians; not waylers, there lamenters, here deplorers
in the midst, but singers before, minstrels following after, and in the midst
damsels playing with their timbrels. This is Sanctuary jubilation, Gods going
in Majesty upon earth. It is well seen how thou go, how thou my God and
King go in the Sanctuary, How! that is, how Magnifically, like a Prince in
Trisne. There is not a more delectable spectacle upon earth, then the face of a
Church visible; then the Church, Pacem praefert Iren.
Carrys a torch before her, not creepes up and down in the dark, but carries
torch-light in her hand; yea, though before no man knew where she was, but held
her for lost, yet then they come forth, and out of joy of heart, and jucundity
of spirit, point at her, as at the Moon in the firmament. Ecce Luna ecce vbi
est. Aug tract. in 1 ep Joan.
Behold the Moon, Behold where she is; the eclipse is gone, the wayne is
past, Behold the Moon, Behold where she is. The Church with her Congregations
about her, make Gods family to be in it is splendour, then Apparet Deus and l^qui
turcum sanctis Amb. lib. 2. c. 7. de Jacob.
God yields an appearance of himself, and vouchsafes to have familiar parley
with his Saints. O joyous thing to have but a sight as it were of Gods bright
brow in his house, and to hear but the sound of his lips going in his
family, where there is an unity, as they termed it of collection, not a
Logical, but a kind of transcendentall Unity, an Unity no other then an
Universality, Our. Sions prosperity, with groans in their breasts, tears in
their eyes; they wished for it, and Exe^tatus dies omnium v^^is venit Cyp. lib
de lapsis.
The day longed for of all is come; We their children enjoy it, enjoy it, but
joy not in it, bless not G^d for the happy fruition of it. Our religion is not
in bondage, but whether the gratitude of most be not, I leave it to judgment.
God has unlocked his gates unto us, set open his Courts, but we come not into
his gates with thanksgiving, nor into his Courts with praise. I see many
professors, but few confessors, that confess the pretiousnesse of Gods favors
unto us. Are these the flourishing times of Religion? it appears not by our
devotion. Where are they that are as if they dreamed, in a holy trance, to see
our Captivity returned like the Rivers in the South; to behold the bliss of
the times? no we see the Spouse with her threescore Queens, and fourscore
Concubines, and the damsels without number about her, but we do not count her
Blessed. Oh how deserve they to have persecution again that know not what it
is to have freedom, and to have the Altars of God broken down amongst them,
that do not bind the sacrifices with corde^ ^o the horns of the Altar. Oh
therefore Vbi beneficium ibi sit officium. Amb.
where the happy blessing is manifest, there let the dutiful acceptance of it
be apparent; Let your eyes be dazeled with the bright beams of the light of
the Gospel, and your ears glow with the sweet charms of salvation. If it be
comfortable to you to enter into Gods Tabernacles; into Gods Tabernacles above
your seeled parlours, into Gods Tabernacles, above the palaces of Princes, then
cry out Psalm. ^4.1.
O how amiable are thy Tabernacles thou Lord of hosts! Know the difference
between Babilons thraldom, and Judahs liberty, ye have not now single souls,
or a few private persons, but a Congregation; Yea, Ad est militum cohors
candida. Cyp. de lapsis.
There is a white band of Christian Soldiers to magnify God, to maintain
profession. We are in our multitudes, Our.

Adversaries.
Hellish opposition, Adversaries, Our, had a company, and Adversaries has a
company; company against company. From whence observe, that the Church must
resolve upon Opposites. Io. 15.19.
The world loves her own, and God forbid we should be her Own to be loved of
her; no, Nigros corrodit lividu^ vngues Martial.
The envious bites his black nails against us, we may see his malice at his
fingers ends. Inter Babilonem, and Jerusalem nulla pax sed guerra continua. Ber
ser 2. de pugn. spirit.
Between Babylon and Jerusalem there is no peace, but continual variance,
Yea, Quanta ab exteris passa est Id ser. 29. in Ca^^
How many things does the Church suffer of them that are without? They are
without, and so in battle array against them that are within they are Without,
and so let them which are within stand upon their guard. How should the Church
be Militant, if she had no standards set up against her? The devil would cease
to be an enemy if he should raise up no oppugners; when can the seed of the
woman be in a sure league with the seed of the Serpent? when can Christ be
dearly affected of Antichrist? no he is (...).
Against, his malice is written in his brows, took for no benevolent
affections from him. Superstition is the professed opposite of truth, whosoever
carries in his mouth the name of a false God, proclaims deadly feaud to all
Gods true followers, as Lucius told Vrbicius for condemning of good Ptolomeus,
Quod Christians nomine gaudet and gloriatur ad puntendum commotus es. Niceph.
Call Ecc. hist. lib. 3. c. 33. Use.
Because he rejoices, and glories in the name of a Christian, ^fore thou
set thy self to punish him. We must expect no sincere affection from
infidels, or Misbeleeuers, no they are Ban-dogges to the Church; no friends to
God, and so our Adversaries. This serves to stir us up to heedinesse;
Adversaries they are, and oh that we should count them friends! Will the Lamb
sit down, to rest quietly, when the Wolfs jaws are open? Will the Keepers of
the Vineyard be recklesse in their charges, when the Foxes are round about the
hedge? Have they once maliced us, and will they be no longer mischievous? Yes,
Sero recusat iugum far quod subij^ (...). Sen.
hardly can any man desist from those courses he has been inured to. We have
been once in peril by these Adversaries, then how ought we still to be in
dread? They are still Adversaries, and so still infesters, molesters; the flame
may be put out, but the aymers are still remaining; though like the unclean
spirit in the Gospel, they have been once dispossessed, yet if they should
find the room swept and garnished for them, they would return with seven
spirits worse then themselves; shall we not think them fully to be
Adversaries, till we have tasted of r^ine by them? If we should dream of
tranquillity, I am sure there is no security, they that have once bent their
swords against our throats, we should do ill to sleep quietly by their sides.
^ug 16. (...).
Up Sampson, the Philistines are upon thee. m Let us be prepared for buffets
and blows. Look in envies jaw-bones, and see if there be any white teeth in
her mouth, stand at the threshold of malice, and listen if there be any parley
of peace in the house; no as the Priest told G^lba, n Look to thy self for
the Blood-suckers are not far. Our Adversaries pretenses may be fair, but
their purposes are dismal; their blandishments may be sweet, but let not too
much affiance be put in them. Sint e^cu^iae. ne sint ^xuviae.
Let not our eyebrows be closed, for fear the skin be plucked over our
ears; their nails may be payred, but they will grow again; for rancorous,
spleenatiue they are, full of amarulency, malevolency, heart-brent, hand-bent,
no State- Adorners, no Church-advancers, no God help Adversaries, Our, and ^r
Adversaries.

Said:
Now let us come to the firm resolution, Said; And if about a good business,
well said, but be the business never so bad, yet not toung-tied in it, though
it were a thing not fit to be thought, yet said. Adversaries, and so
spightfull, Said, and so wilful, for that is the meaning of the word, they
were inflexibly, irrevocably bent upon it. Ahab, Hos. 9.9.
they are deeply set. Pusillanimity they hold a base defect, but baseness
they hold no excess, there is in them a fiduciary fortitude (as the Moralists
term it) to things unseemly. Is it courage to attempt evil? yet Psalm. 6^.5.
they encourage themselves in an evil purpose; for be the action never so
evil, yet they are as full of animosity about it, as if it were about the
saving the lives of their parents Sueton (...)
Caligula was wont to commend one word Vnmooueablenesse, that were the action
never so odious, cruel, yet he would never change color nor countenance at
it, so these are daunted, deterred at nothing; they say upon that, that all the
world shall say against the horriblenesse of which fact, shall make the ears
of all to tingle, and the eyes of Infidels to gaze; they say, that is gage
themselves to ungodliness, as if all the powers of heaven should not be able to
cross them, they are (...) Aristot.
firmed in their opinions; they firmed, and look that others might be
confirmed. Prou. 27.17.
Iron sharpneth Iron, that their confederates might not start back, they bind
them to it by a solemn covenant of their lips, it is said, and so not
afterward to be gainsaid, no man must speak against it, desist from it, for
his promise is out to the contrary; that it might be settled, it is said, Our
adversaries said. C^h^bet vires ingeniumque pudor. Ovid.
shamefastness remains in man, it restraynes both power and wit in evil
things; but if the cheeks have once lost modesty, and the conscience remorse,
the black face, and deformed visage of the most nefarious, horrid intendment
will not terrify them, no not so much as make them blush; be it a piacle, and
most execrable offense, yet they retract not from it, but devou^r themselves
unto it, Say, Our Adversaries said.

They shall neither know nor see. From hence observe, that there is no
mischief like to the secret. Gravis est illis fortuna quibus est repentina:
the Posie of Germanicus.
Those accidents are grievous which are sudden, unexpected, unsuspected
dangers, how difficult are they to be avoided? a close villainy is an
ambushment, a latitant foe, a pitfall, the hand of mischief has given the
blow before it was known to be lift up, the snare is on the heel before it
was discerned to be laid, the poison is in the throat before it be seen what
manner of liquor it be, yet these are the privy practices of the wicked, their
attemps clandestine, they serve under the Prince of darkness, and therefore
they love to do all in darkness: knowledge they think would make their
actions abhorrid, and therefore their actions are covert; Cum vincere aperte,
Non datur, insidias armaque tecta parant. Calamitatis abstrusa illecebresa
fallacia. Cyp lib. 1. ep 2.
when they cannot openly destroy, they prepare treacheries and engines of
craft, y there is a flattering face of a hidden calamity. A thief they say
comes of a word that signifies Fur of Furvus.
dark, because he takes the opportunity of darkness, to accomplish his ends,
so these by st^alt^iue, surr^p^itions courses, put in practice their designs.
Dalilah will sh^^e off Sampsons seven locks, before she tell him of any
Philistines, so these take away all strength before the forehead of an adversary
be discerned; look for no Worthies here, for they shun light, nor for any
signal of battle to be given, for they trust more to their projects then
their prowes^, Ps 11 2.
They would shoot secretly at the upright in heart, Psa. 10.^.
They lurk like Lions in their dens. So that Archers, and Lions they are;
Archers, but no noonday, but midnight Archers, or Archers that would shoot
in a cloud; and Lions they are, but lurking ones, not roaring in the fields,
but watching in their dens. Cain does not challenge the field of Abel, no Gen 4
8.
walk into the field with Abel, like a brother, not like a butcher, yea, Abels
blood is shed, before Cains malice seen. Ioab embraced Amasa; though embruing
be his purpose, yet embracing is his practice; he embraces till Amasa falls dead
out of his arms; he cries not Estne pugna? come shall we try our valor? but 2.
Sam. 20.9.
Estne pax? Is it Peace? and thus with a sword hid in the scabberd of peace,
does he strike him into the fifth rib that he died; is this captaine-like? no
caitiffe-like. Go fetch the child that I may Mat. 2.8,
Worship him, says Herod. Herod it seems would become very devout, but let
not the Wisemen trust him, for then he will make them loose the title of
Wisemen, yea, make Babes of the Wisemen, for Herod's purpose is not Non seruire
sed saeuire, Raulins, ser 3. in Innocent.
to Worship, but to worry. And thus the Churches Adversaries love to do all in
obscurity, their chief prop is subtilty; Egregiam vero laudem, etc.
Noble praise, high honor, no doubt: All men may see they are given to
jgnominious courses, which would do such things, as till they be effected, men
should neither know nor see; they are all for surprisals, to take men on the
sudden, that men might be wrecked before warned, and they might be felt as
Adversaries before they be either known, or seen. From hence I might cast
shame upon the faces of our Adversaries, for how may all the world take notice
of them to be but base-spiritted, whose chief engine is craft? it seems they
are ashamed of their God, which cannot be helped but by such privy practices.
should be so many, and the prouocations of the Nation so rife, that we seek
not by reverence, and obedience, to keep Gods eye upon us, to search out the
purposes, and to discern the practices of the wicked against us. Heb. 4 13.
All things are naked before him, but many things are hid from us. Therefore
seeing we cannot watch sufficiently for our selves, let us get God to keep
vigils for us; we had need to keep him sure, or else we are not sure of
safety. Our Adversaries have secret projects in hand, not bruited in our
streets, nor hung up upon our City gates, but privily contrived, they would be
upon us before we should either know or see. Our Adversaries said, they shall
neither know nor see.

Till we come into the midst of them.
Midst. Till we come into the Midst of them. From hence observe that the
ambition of the Adversaries is at the Grandies, that not a few poor abiects
might endure the smart of their power but the chiefest livers, that as Sueton.
Caligula would have men so to be slain that they might know themselves to
dye, so these would be Authors of such a misery, as it might be felt to be a
misery, they would be in the midst to be in the midst of mischief, Vniuerse^
praem^nult vt non pe^tus, n^n ^orum latera, sed faciem ocul^ s^ue gla^iis, ac
tell* impeterent. In his Phars^lian war against Pompey, Plut.
that as Julius Caesar commanded his soldiers to fight at the eyes of his
enemies, so these would fight at the Eyes of the Country, that these being
struck out, the rest of the body might not know how to guide it self; the
cropping of ordinary herbs in the Garden will not serve their turns, no they
are for striking off the heads of the tallest poppies in the Garden, as Plut.
Tarquinius the proud was; Let Nehemiah here and his chief followers be laid
hand on, and the spirits of the rest will soon fail; command the Midst, and
Master of all. Church. For Rich men, Neuters? Great men, Atheists? Am I in the
bosoms of none? The Country complains her ancient Gentry is decayed, the
Church complains her religious Gentry is decayed; their Forefathers bowed
their knees to God, and they to their Paramours; that means which the one spent
in almsdeeds, and the maintenance of the Gospel, the other spend in pride, and
riot. Are there none that in steed of being Great Ornaments to their Country
are Great Botches, or Great Burth^ns to their Country? their Greatness
serving them to no other end, but either to be a shelter for licentiousness,
or a club to dash out the brains of poverty with? Some there are I know, that
stand upon their true terms of honor; that as their Christian names are set
before their sir-names, so they prefer piety before gentry: And oh let all be
thus addicted, and that even for the very peril greatness stand in. For
Adversaries there are, and at wh^m are their aims? the Infimates? no, the
Potentates; the loftier the pedigree, the greater foment of their malice; at
their high blood, are their high aims; whatsoever these simple souls may
endure, yet the gentle sp^rk is he whom they would quench, Cui ger^^a proauis
ingena.
which has the race of famous Beau-pieres to illuster his stock. The
Adversaries love to ruffle the purples, to give a Rent in scarlet, to twitch at
the golden chains, to enter in at the painted portals. Greatness is their
eye-marke, they would be in the Midst. Our Adversaries said, they shall
neither know, nor see till we come into the Midst of them.

And slay them.
And slay them. From whence observe that nothing, but Bloodshed can truly
satisfy the Adversaries of the Church; they come not to make sport, but
spoil, not to fray, but to Slay; not to mark out enemies, but to massacre
them; not to plead the right of a quarrel, but to subdue, subvert; they bring
Iacula mortifera, Ps. 7.
Weapons of death along with them, they are men thoroughly armed. Did ye never
see the mouth of envy open? Hear what dreadful menaces she sends forth;
Diglutiamus eos, ps 124.
Let us swallow them up quick; Disperdamus eos de gente, Ps 83.
Let us scatter them from being a Nation, Exinanite, exinanite, Ps.
Down with them, Down with them even to the ground. Have not the Adversaries,
think ye, wide throats that can swallow up men quick? Do they not carry a
whirle wind in their lips, that can scatter men from being a Nation? are they
not pernicious Artisans, yea some of Satan's dismantlers (who is called the
(...) Rev 9.11.
Destroyer) that never cease till they come to the groundwork? yet this is
the merciless rage of the Churches Adversaries, Desolation, Destruction is
that they aim (...); their swords they think never shine bright, till they
g^^^r with the blood of the Saints; they are not worthy they suppose to be
counted Adversaries, unless they can sacrifice to their Dagon a fat burnt
offering of Professors corpses. Howling is their melody, firing of Cities,
breaking of Scepters, casting down Thrones, dying the stones of the streets in
crimson is their pleasurable object; that as Sylla filled a po^le of blood, and
then set his hands by his sides, Ob quam (...). Plut.
and cried out, Oh what a noble act have I done; and as Claudiu^ killed men
only that he might see how fine a thing it was for men Vt exper^ntium fac^es
videret. Suet.
to breath out the last gasp; So these exercise all sort of barbarous
savageness, and count it but their recreation the perfection of their
Religion; they meditate upon Slaying. Adversaries, what but bloodshed? I know
not whether thy life be dear unto thee, but sure I am this is that they
dearly thirst for. Netu^ feritate Lyc^on.
The enemy of profession is known well enough in his cruelty. Christendom
has his doleful pictures hanging up in every corner. There are some happily
that care not if the Adversaries were now in the Midst of us, for begin they
not to palliate their dealings, to collaud their courses? yea even to censure
them, that think hardly of them? Oh what are such but Sicophants, assentatory
spirits? they extol Crocodiles, magnify Vipers; Deus dicit Homicida est, and
tu ad illum tanquam ad medicum curris? Chry. orat. 5. in Iudaeos.
Does God tell us they are murderers, and shall we hold them as Physicians?
has God marked them out as Adversaries, and shall we esteem them men of
mercy? no I say God keep us out of their furies, or else sure I am we have
seen our best days, so soon as they prevail our Kingdom even gives up the
Ghost; a truculent, sanguinary people are they, given to slaughter; as here,
Our Adversaries said, they shall neither know nor see, till we come into the
Midst of them, and slay them.

And cause the Work to cease.
Now let us come to the rancour against Religion. And cause the Work to cease.
As if they should say this City they count the holy City, this they are now
fortifying that they might sacrifice, worship; well this we will hinder, this
frustrate, And cause the Work to cease. Adversaries. For let that be
suppressed, and then they are quiet, but let that have any liberty, and then
their hearts gnaw them, their galls flow over, and they are ready to fall out
into any outrages; Mat. 10 22.
Ye shall be hated of all men for my names sake. Christ^ sol^^ causa omnis
odit and persecutionis. Musculus
Christ alone is the cause of all hatred, and persecution. As they are men they
can be at peace with them, but as they are Christians they detest them. Caius
Sceius (said the Heathens once) is a good man, evil only because a Christian:
So that if men wear the open cognizance of Christianity, Bon^s vir C. Se^us
malus tantum quod Christianus, Tertul. Apol. adv. Gent.
i^ there be a clear brow of profession seen, it is enough to set all the
world in a tumult against them; as sore eyes cannot endure the brightness of
the Sun, so superstiti^n cannot endure the light of the truth. If the Woman
be clothed with the Sun, and have the Moon under her feet, Rev 12.1.
and a crown of twelve stars upon her head, let her look to her self, it
will not be long before the great red Dragon will lift up his seven heads, and
ten horns, and persecute her into the wilderness, Plin.
as the noise of timbrels make Tigers run mad, so the melodious sound of
profession make the maligners of the Church to rage; they cannot cease, till
the work cease. This teaches us how highly we ought to esteem of religion; Non
est res parua quam sic infectantur hosts. Bern. ser. 31.
that is most precious that is most maliced, c It cannot be no small matter,
that the enemies are so offended with. Our adversaries spleen may teach us the
excellency of our Religion; they most envy it, therefore we ought most to
prize it; Religion above birth, above goods, above life. Oh that thou should
value any thing, and vilify Religion! no, Mat. 6.11.
Where the treasure is, there let the heart be also: be not recklesse, or
remiss whereby the devotions of it be slacked, or the purity of it corrupted;
contemn all things about thee, rather then Religion. That ought most to
rejoice thee, because it most teenes the Adversaries; it is the grand incentiue
of their distaste, the vpshot of their malice; the hindering of the Work they
aim at more, then at the slaughter of the persons. For our Adversaries said,
they shall neither know, nor see, till we come into the midst of them, and
slay them, and cause the Work to cease.

Thus have I told you a story out of Judah, and is it not the vine Image of our
own Country? were they in danger, and were not we at an exigent? What was
this but the most fatal, exitiall day that ever was appointed for our Nation?
It should have been Englands autumn, Romes springtide; Englands Vespers,
Romes Mattens; Englands Exequies, Romes Festival: They began to cry out with
them in the Tragedy, Thebis laeta dies adest, Ara^ tangite supplices, pingues
ca^ite victimas. Senec.
Rome thy joyful day is at hand, once let us sing high Mass, and make a fat
sacrifice of the Protestants. They had a long time cursed us at Rome, and they
saw we waxed never the leaner; they told the world in their Councels, and
Controversies that we were Heretics, and they saw their word would not be
taken, for we showed Christendom the true Heretick^ in the Conclave; these
courses they saw would take no place, therefore they would fall to other
practices; the pen they saw could do no good, therefore they would try what
policy could do; ay, Hoc, hoc ministro noster vt ^tur dolor. Senec.
This, this is the only medicine for our grieved minds. Conspiracy is the
Popes only weapon, treason the last refuge of Rome: They had often tried what
their Gun-pouder would do above ground, and they ever found it flashed back
in their faces; the blisters were still to be seen in Spaines cheeks,
therefore they will try what their Gunpowder will do under ground; their
Saint Peter falls to Salt-peeter, a Crack with that they think should make
the heart strings of the Land to break, and of the world to tremble; they had
spent so much Gunpowder upon us before that their Indies were almost wasted,
well they will now be at less charge, 36 barrels shall work the feate; what,
England that was held before even impregnable, now to be conquered with 36
barrels of Gunpowder? Yes, if a place convenient can be but found out; and may
we not let these men alone to choose their advantages? Well, what shall the
project be, to win Dover Castle? no, that had too tough walls for such scant
provision; what then, to be Masters of the Tower? no, there were too many
roaring Watchmen upon the walls to drive them from that attempt; what then, to
destroy the Universities? no, that they knew would have stood them in small
stead, learning now so abounding, that they should have found an University all
over the Kingdom; what then, to blow up Tiburne? that indeed they spighted
much, because it had quartered many of their Traitors; yet they considered,
that that plucked down, there was more Timber to have been gotten in England;
what then, to batter down the Princes Palace? that indeed had been
something, yet there they should have wanted some of their Adversaries: the
project therefore in conclusion was for the Parliament; if we know not where
the strength of our Land lay, our Adversaries can show us; where but in the
Parliament? and not in this openly to assault, but secretly to blow up; a
Parliament was gathered together, and Rome would have dismissed it with a
stratagem; an abrupt manner of breaking up, they would have dissolved it with
Gunpowder; broken up, blown up; England gave the summons, and Rome would have
given the writ of departure. Could this plot have been so laid, that it might
have come from above, a man would have thought it had been Heavens-blow, the
stroke of God; but the Papists have no power above, all their strength lies
beneath, it had come but from H^ll, it had been but the very of the Devil.
The Papists say they would feign bring us to Heaven, but then the force of
their courtesy lies in pulling of us up thither with Gunpowder; as for all
their E^gines of Doctrines, they do but push ^owne, strike to hell. I have
read that in Rome there was once via sacra a Holy way, shall I think that
sti^l remaining? no, I rather believe there is Via sanguinea, a bloody way.
They say their Images have sweat blood, and that they have found blood in the
Sacrament, let them talk of those miracles as long as they will, so long as
they work not this miracle to make a Kingdom sweat blood. But this they would
do, yea this they had done, if God had not wrought a Miracle, to make Tiburne
sweat blood in stead of the Parliament; we lay at the point of death, and the
Papists were coming with this plot as extreme unction to send us out of the
world with; For, for the State to have received the stab, and Religion the
stifle, was as this day determined, decreed. Our Adversaries had said they
shall neither know nor see till we come into the midst of them, and slay them,
and cause the work to cease. Give me leave to run short descant upon my
Text, and to fit every parcel according to the present occasion.

Our.
Were we not at this time gathered together into companies? was there not the
face of a Holy Congregation, a Church visible amongst us? Ye^, Babylons yoke
not long before had been upon our necks, since the days of Queen Mary the
grass was scarce grown, where their flames had been; they needed then no
barrels of Gunpowder, their pitch-barrels and faggots served the turn; yet I
say at this time our captivity was ended, and our Church come to a most fulged
estate; for by the coming of that famous Queen Elizabeth to her Throne;
Elizabeth indeed, the oath of God, or the fullness of God, sworn to his
cause, replenished with his heavenly endowments; she, who was as a polished
corner in Gods Temple, as a golden pot of Mannah in his Sanctuary, the Orient
pearl of the Christian world, yea the Bright star of the Earth in her days.
Oh whom should I recount thee to be, Oh quam (...) memorem*
as incomparable, as invincible; not greater in the conquest of her enemies,
then the peerelesnesse of her virtues; the Queen of England by her title, of
the world by her desert; Heb. 11.
Who being dead yet speaks; who^e memory is written in the hearts of her
subjects, the best Chronicle; a virgin, and yet the Gandame of Honor; a Woman,
and yet a Terror Achivis.
Terror of Ter^magaunts; which paid her soul ^^rs with the gold of India, and
m^de Cadiz the tiring room of her Captains; which turned an invincible Armado
into a Sea-bonfire, and made 88 like a Clim^ct ricall year to the state of
Spain; which in her days for her Princely deportment, seemed the Master piece
of Royal perfections, and for her manifold preservations, the Miracle of Gods
providence; whose government was throughout glorious, not like the Reigns o^
some Princes that we read of in other Histories, whose governments h^ve pr^ved
to their su^jects, like the seasons of the year, a cheerful spring at first,
comfor^able Summer afterward, but at last ^^ar^full ^^^f^-^^ll, and a nipping
Winter; or (...) Dan. 3.
N^buc^^dnezz^^s Image, the hea^ of gold, the breast of silv r, b^t (...) w^rds
nothing but brass, iron, and c^ay; as Ne^o wi^ f^r Ad quinque nu^m. Su^t.
five years was n^table in his government and Caligula ^f whom Suetonius thus
r^port, H^nus qu^si de Principe, reliqua vt de m^ni^ro n^rra^ (...)
Hitherto have written as ^f a Prince, but afterward I must write as of a
M^^ster; But as for her, the s^epter fell out of her (...) with honor, h^ last
years be^n^ as famous as h r first, her people blessing their selv s that they
dyed before (...), ^cause the (...) a Prince behind them, a^ it was said of the
Subjects in the days of Augustine; wh ch lived with more M^j^stie, and dyed
with more ^eare^ then any of her Predec^ss u^s in a thousand years before h r;
which deserved a tomb of gold at her death, as Constantine the Great h^d; and
to have had Statues set upon her honor in every house, as Marcus Aurelius had
after his departure; whose Sepulcher, (and ah that I should speak off her
Sepulcher) is the monument of everlasting renown, more to be regarded with
all due respect, then any of the Paynims vrnes, or the Popish shrines; whose
name is the joy of our hearts, the Triumph of our tongues; which can scarce to
this day be pronounced without panting breasts, and dropping eyes; whose body
is gone to sleep in a bed of safe repose, whose soul is in the Chauntry of
Heaven, for Gaudet vnus ^uis^ue Angel (...) tantum (...) tangere. Chry. hom 15.
de diuit. and paupere.
Every one of the Angels desired to catch, to carry such a burden to God. She
I say, for Faemineo generi tribuuntur. All these blessings of the Church are to
be attributed to her, as the happy restorer of them; Illa Ecclesiae scintilla,
she, the bright Spark of the Church warmed us, when we were almost frozen to
death in that brumall season of Popery, and like a good Surgeon st^nched our
dropping veins, when they were almost l^ft empty of blood; she brake the yoke
of Egyptian bondage, led us through the red Sea of prepared dangers, seated us
in the land of promise, fed us with the honey and milk of Evangelicall truth,
brought home the Ark of God with Triumph, and set our Church like a City upon
a hill; as Ani^lasinutha, that renowned Queen, who followed Theodoricus that
vessel of blood, Vas sanguinis decreta mala emendavit. Platina
mended all the cruel decrees; So this renowned Princess removed all the
sharp statutes, and the shadow of her Throne proved a shadow of refreshing to
the Professors of Religion. Judge. 5.7.
Surrexi ego Deborah, Surrexi ego matter in Israele; I Deborah arose, I arose a
mother in Israel. A stepmother we seemed to have before, a natural mother
now; forty four years nourcing up her subjects with the breasts of sincere
profession: And her successor proving a successor of her faith, as well as
her Throne: King James memorable for his wisdom, and graces, confirmed this
happiness unto us; in so much that Paradise seemed not fuller of pleasant
fruits, then we of faithful Protestants: not a scattered flock were we at
this time, but a fold well filled, we were in our multitudes. Our

Adversaries.
Next Adversaries. And who are Adversaries to us, if not Romes squi^t-eyed
brood; they are Papists, we Protestants, and as the saying was of old,
expectas vt Quintilianus ametur.
Do look that Quintilian should be loved? Quintilian that was the Orator
against the vices of the times; so do look that any Protestant, that has
laid open the nakedness of the whore of Babylon should be tendered by her
Followers? no as Fabritius envied all that Marcus Aurelius did: so we must
look for nothing but the spirit of contradiction, and contention in all our
passages. Ganius Arianus quod os suum obturaverat Chrysostomus, coepit
tyrannidem exercere. Erasm in vita Chrysostom.
Ganius the Arrian because S. Chrysostom had stopped his mouth, burst out into
tyranny: So because we have gagged the obstreperous throat of Romanists, that
they cannot so rifly, or succesfully belch out their Doctrine of Devils amongst
us, they swell with malice against us; yea they have sacrificed in hatred
against our cause, as it is reported of Caligula, that he sacrificed to Envy:
Mark Rome, and see if it be an auspicious planet to our Church, no it looks
with malignant aspects; I will look for honey in the nests of Dragons, as
soon as for affection in the followers of Antichrist; their Vatican is the
Councell-chamber of mischief to us, the Popes keys are but picklockes to our
state; It was never well with Christian states, since Popes came to wear
Triple Crowns; what has he to do with Crowns? Plat.
the Phrygian Miter that Syluester 1. wore upon the cold Mountain of Soracte,
would become him well enough; when Popes come to wear Triple Crowns, then oh
ye Christian Princes your Crowns shake on your heads; but why a Triple
Crown? a Triple jest; that his Followers might think they could want no
means under such a Diadem'd head? or wherefore else? where is he King? of
Pasquius post, the Lady Ioanes porphiry Chair? and the Curtisans stews,
where like a Prince he takes tribute? Constantines donation proved to be
ridiculous.
I know no other Kingdoms he has, unless I would credit some Jesuits, who
say he is King of Heaven, Earth, and Purgatory; as for Heaven indeed (though
Rome boast of many miracles) yet I never read, nor heard, that God sent him
down a Crown from heaven; for Earth strange it is that Christ (whose Vicar
the Pope pretends to be) never woare crown but that which was put upon him in
scorn, a Crown of Thorns, and yet that the Pope must have his brows
filleted: as for Purgatory indeed, that is a Newfoundland, and if the world
were well rid of Popes, it were no matter if there he woare a Crown. But in
the mean time till this doubt be resolved, by what right the Pope c mes by
his Triple Crown, I am sure of the ruth that has followed upon it: triple woe
is threatened to all them, that will not yield obedience to the T^iple Crown:
we like not of his pride, then the proud man waxes ^e^uish, and t^trical to
all them that will not approve of him: ^^e Church of Rome is the Genius
Euange^^i, Calv^n. ad Regem Ga^l^ae.
Fi^nd, and ^ury to haunt the Gospel; the Protestants Little-ease: I know not
whether all amongst us will count these Adversaries, but sure I am that they
are they that once chayned us up in the botome of their l thsome prisons, and
burnt our bodies t ashes, they left us no other visibility of our Church but
Martyrdom, nor no other monuments of our Religion, but such as were fetched
from their flaming st^kes, they suppress^d our writings, deprived us of our
lives, and suffer^d none but their own sworn Scribes to be penmen of h
st^ries, and then, asked us where was our Church before Luther: Are th^se
friends courtesies? I know not, let brainsicke lymphaticke, bewitched, besotted
persons led away with an as^^ntatory, or an abderitious spirit conceit them to
be Friends, but sure I am when time was they were such dear Friends as made
use of their time, and use of our blood: therefore for my part I see the
enemies eye in their heads, the gall of Aspes in their bosoms, Adversaries
they are: Our, and Our Adversaries.

Said.
Next, Said. And oh that it should be said, that Rome should not say, to any
thing! what the intrepid men of the earth, and not hardy to any enterprise?
They scotch at a mischief? and be faint-hearted in any pestilent pernicious
devise? Let them serve no longer under Antichrist, who is said, to be (...)
^deus facie Dan. 7 20.
a man of an impudent countenance, as if he could blush for nothing; their
Master can infuse courage into them, they shall merit by it; and when he that
sits in the chair, will thus authorize, countenance sin, and lay down hire
aforehand, even to put them into his Rubricke, to record them in his Calendar
for Saints (the highest preferment these men look for) what villainy will not
our Adversaries undertake. Plutarch.
Scipio said, that if he bade his soldiers throw down themselves from the
top of a rock, they would not refuse it: So these men will throw down
themselves into the bottom of hell at the Popes command. Here was an action
odious, horrible enough, yet was it not Said? Yes, they had bound themselves
unto it by oath; and taken Sacrament upon it; Romes oaths! Romes Sacraments!
oaths, the spring-heads of conspiracy; Sacraments, the broad seals of
treason: Now then being thus mortised in mischief, what can ye look for, but
pertinacy in the work. Excordes? no, Effrontes; heartlesse? no browlesse in
it; fervid and vigorous, that it might have been dispatched, two years space
could not rebate their edge, nor make their hearts relent from this horrid
enterprise, with joint consent, and unchangeable purpose, do they settle
themselves to it: when Faux was apprehended, and examined, whether it touched
not his conscience to be the Actor of such a wretched intendment, he answered
like a man steeped in Rooms Lees, that it repented him of nothing, but that it
was not executed; so that this was not some floating conceit, or swimmering
resolution, but as solemnly concluded and obstinately vowed unto, as ever was
any thing; it was decreed, it was Said, Our Adversaries said.

They shall neither know nor see.
Next, They shall neither know nor see. This is the point of cunning, and doubt
not of that to be there, when Rome is the Schoole-mistrisse of subtilty, the
very Accademy of hellish policy; where Jesuits are lutors, the Pupils cannot
but be subdolous; If ye would have a snare to be laid, send for these
crafts-masters; they are the ex^ cunning Artizans of the world, versed,
exercised in all versute, fraudulent courses. Would ye have a taste of their
subtilty? there needs no more to relish your palates, then the remembrance of
this days intention. I have read of many crafty plots, as of Genesis 34.
Simeon and Leui, that set upon the Sichemites, whilst they were sore of their
circumcising, of 2 Kings 19
Adramalech, and Sharezer that slew Senacherib when he was worshipping in the
Temple of Nisroch, of Knolles.
Chasis Ilbeg, who s ying unto Hadrianople, like a discontented fugitive and
having gotten some authority in the City, on the sudden set upon the warders
at the gates, and having slain them, let in his ambushment not far off, and
so betrayed it into the hands of the Turks, of Knolles.
Terhates Bassa, who feyning himself to be at the point of death, sent for
Ales-Beg, and his four sons, with pretense, that if he should die, he would
commend his government into his hands, till Solomon his Master should
otherwise dispose of it, and so with this wily devise, having drawn them to
him presently put them all to death, of The watchword being Nir^, in which
were thirty thousand slain at Constantinople. Procop^et Euagr.
those desperate wretches in the days of Justinian, that went with sharp
weapons secretly under their garments, and stabbed men to death, no men knew
which way. But of all subtle devises, this carries the superiority. For
consider the passages in it: To the Priest it is disclosed under seal of
confussion, so that he must not r^ueale it. Next, the Actors had sworn, that
neither directly, nor indirectly, by word, nor circumstance they would discover
it, so that they had made sure work at home, Confessors, and accomplices are
bound to secrecy, like Angerona the goddess of silence, that the Poets speak
of, which holds her finger upon her lips, with a tablet upon her breast, and
this inscription upon it, Hear, see, and say nothing, Papirius was not more
ready to cut his tongue out of his mouth, because he should have been forced
to confess his treason, then these would have been ready to have been
discerpted, eviscerated, to have had limb torn from limb, rather then they
would have had any thing brought to light. Consider further.



Nocte ^atent mendae vittoque ignoscitur omni. Ovid.
Faults have then gotten their couerts, and men may sin by a kind of
privilege. This was the opportunity they took, when honest men were at their
rest, then they were watching, and sweating, to convey in their engines of
horror.

Contra terra motum nulla latebra, nulla fuga. Petr. 91. Dial.
Against an earthquake (says Petrarch) there is no hiding, nor shifting; so
say I for Gunpowder. The blast is inevitable, for all them within the
compass, it is a quick dispatcher; In a plague, a man may escape, in a
battle a man may come forth alive, against poisons, a man may have Antidotes,
but from Gunpowder what muniment, or preservative? no, it is the strongest
arrow in deaths quiver.

Faux, to lay up in store for him? but the Master should never have made use of
this provision for himself, never have warmed himself with the billet, nor
have had so much as a draught out of the 36. barrels, the Master herein me
thinks was a strange kind of prodigal; oh but it was for friends, it was for
a Parliamentary breakfast, and Papists care not to bestow much upon such a
courtesy for us; there were Laws to be made, and they would have them to be
proclaimed, Cum sonitu, with noise: indeed it had been the lowdest trumpet
that ever the earth heard, or shall hear, except the trumpet upon moun^ Sinah,
and the last trumpe; Here are Popish proc^amations of Laws, Mugitu lam^nta
^li, omnia com^lerent Greg. Naz in Mon.
they would fill all the sky with a lamentable roaring.

Well, the devise was so great, that they began to send forth their Prophesies
t^ their friends, That the memory of novelties should perish with a crack, and
in a moment should their bones be crushed; yea, they thought a man might have
seen any thing in the Egyptian darkness, as soon as have had any thing in
this enterprise discovered; in so much that when it was revealed, Faux (that
Cerberi Faux, if it may be lawful to use the word, that jawe of Cerberus)
uttered this blasphemous censure, that not God but the Devil had ^icovered it.
Now lay all these things together, and consider with your selves whether man's
ear ever heard, or man's heart can conceive a more secret plot; no, our
Adversaries were close enough, like Basilisks, they would have killed before
they had been seen. Our Adversaries said, they shall neither know, nor see.

Till we come into the midst of them.
Next, Till we come into the midst of them. And were not our Adversaries aims
as haughty? were they not for the Midst? the height of authority? the heart of
command? Yes, Rome would be felt in her stroke. They care not for some eminent
man, or some chief family, but for the Nation; a National Stratagem, Ra^^
al^o (...).
our Ki^g^ome must have perished from her highest top. Twelve men were ab^ut
to br^ng into bondage, a whole Kingdom with one stroke, yea, with one blow to
make a g^nerall thrall; the Papists strike home. They would put out all the
lights of the Land at a blast, what a dark house had there been? Rome has a
strange kind of extinguisher. They would batter down all the bulwarks of the
Kingdom at one Cannon-shot: Mahomet the Great, Solomon the Magnificent, nor
any of the mighty martial spirits in the World, ever had such artillery. The
King in his Throne should have been blown up, the Queen his consort in
wedlock, should have been his consort in woe, the Prince at their knees,
should have been heir apparent to nothing but their misery, not a Nobleman
should have been left, not a Prelate to govern the Church, not a Judge to
defend the Laws, an^ many in hundred o^ Knights, and Burgesses, should have
be^e fetched away with the jmpetuous gust of that whirlwind. How near soever
the Papists might have been unto us at other times, I think these had been
in our bosoms, In the Midst. Our Adversaries s^yd, they shall neither know nor
see, till we come into the midst of them.

And slay them.
Next, And slay them. And what but Slaughter can be expected from Rome, when
the bloody bourr^^sses of the World, have there their settled mansions? For
there to kill men, to destroy states, Peritia est, ar^ est, vsus est. Cyp ep 2.
it is a skill, an art, a custom. Tanquaem Leonin^s catulo^ in perniciem
Romani Imperis. Plut.
Amilcar said, he bred up his four sons, like Lions whelps, to the
destruction of the Roman Empire: So these like the wild beast^s breed, are
br^d up to t^are in pieces the bowels of Christian states. Orcus vo is ducit
pedes. Sueton.
Hell rule over you, was it said in the days of Nero. So hell is not greedier
to devour souls, then Rome bodies, Commonwealths. Caligula after a
slaughter, licked off the blood of the edge of his sword, as i^ it had been a
Cordial, and indeed to Caligula it might be; So these murder, an^ delight in
murdering. The Chu ch of Rom^ was wont to be built up by preaching, and
disputations, yea, Mart^rd m^, but now to exalt their Hierarch, they have found
out a more ready, and feate course, by poisons, pistols, ponyards, m^ssacres;
Romes conver^ors, the Jesuits lively doctrine, or deadly; their operative
sermons, or rather occisory; they are waxen peremptory indeed, (ye know the
signification of the wor^, or if ye do not, there needs no Comment to
explain it, but their practice) they fetch blood at pleasure, by their new
kind of preaching, they are the only Pulpit-men in the World, that strike to
the heart; they can equivocate a State to death, a lethall devise. Well,
whether this work had bin a pastime, yea or no, judge ye; Gunpowder makes mad
pastime, a pastime it might have been to them, but a perishming it had been
to us. What one living soul had there remained of that Honorable Assembly
gathered together? it had been the great Funeral of the meeting; in a day, in
an hour, a minute, never so many Worthies of our Land (since the Land had a
name) had breathed out together their last gasp. -- animus me^inisse horret.
And for the miseries intended to the Land in general, the heart may tremble,
and the cheeks look pale at the thought of them, they are incredible, they
had been insufferable; Me thinks I see how this whole Land had been turned
into a Charnel-house, where there should have been nothing but dead men's
corpses, and bones to be found; a shambles in every City, a slaughterhouse in
every Country, that as Asia was called once the Grave of Rome, for their many
Nobles that had been there slain, and buried in the time of those wars, so
England had bin but the Churchyard of the Protestants, yea, and that which any
sober Papist that is not drunken with the Jesuits giddy wine, may tremble at,
they had bin merciless to men of their own profession; Lam 4.
The Dragons will draw out their breasts to their young ones; but these cared
not for the crushing of them. For it was the gracious resolution of Father
Garnet (who was their provincial then in England) that it was no sin to
destroy the innocent with the nocent, the devil himself never uttered such a
doctrine, he would not destroy them of his own Kingdom; Beelzebub therefore
may loose his place, and Garnet become hells superintendent. The simple Lay-
Papists from hence may see how the Jesuits uphold a Religion only to suck
means out of their c^f^ers, or as for their lives they care not; no, as it was
said of Caligula that he slew Senatores and cognatos. Suet.
Senators, and his own kinsmen, so they which were of the blood of their own
profession had smarted with the rest. Yea had they by this plot brought in some
foreign power here to rule, I wonder what respect English Papists should have
found at their hands; As it was in vain for Galba to cry out Quid agitis
commilitones? ego vester sum, and vos mea, Sueton.
what ayle ye oh my Fellow- Soldiers? I am yours, and ye are mine; So in
vain had it been for them to say, what mean ye our Fellow-professours? we
are limbs of the Church of Rome, and so are ye; no they would have put no
distinction betwixt one and other, as Hist. of the Neth.
Duke D' Alua said once, his sword knew no difference betwixt the throat of a
Papist, and a Protestant. A slaughter indeed not to be paraleld; I read of
many, of Herod that slew his own son, of Dioclesian that killed Aper his
father in law, of Selymus that wretch that slew his own Father; of Periander
that killed his wife, of Bessus that slew his own Master Darius, of Pyrrhus,
that slew his trusty servant and Secretary. But here, Father, son, husband,
wife, master, servant, secretary, the state had gone to it; Romes-slaughter, a
State-slaughter; yea and not only us whom they counted Heretics, but the
Darlings of their own bosom brought to perdition; So that of their slaying
we need not doubt. No, Our Adversaries said, they shall neither know nor see
till we come into the midst of them, and slay them.

And cause the work to cease.
Next, And cause the work to cease. And had not this gone with it? had not
Religion been driven into banishment? had not our golden Candlestick been
thrown down? had not our pillar of truth been raised? had not the wide door
of the Gospel amongst us been locked up? had not the songs of the Temple
ceased? yes, your feet must have trod no more upon the pavements of these
Sanctuaries, nor your ears heard any longer the sweet charms of salvation,
this work ha^ ceased; And a goodly work no doubt had come in the ^^ead; we
should have had Masses again, the Masses of ignorance and in devotion, for
what manner of supplications are those that are in an unknown tongue? the
Priest man conjure then if he will, for if ^e do but conclude Per Iesum
Christum Dominum nostrum, he shall have the peoples Amen; Masses, therefore
mockeries, Masses, Ma^king, yea fitter for a M^s^e then f^r Church service: And
we should have had Traditions, the third Testament of Christ Ie^us, the
Lip-oracle that Go^ would never suffer to come to writing, ^n inspiration
forsooth, and yet not to have an inspection; And we should have had the
Breaden-God, Transubstantiation, translation; for Christ d^li^ered Bread and
Wine, and now it is translated into a God: Romes tra slated Sacrament, a God
they have made it, though God know but a breaden God: For strange it is, that
Christ Jesus would leave his supernall mansion now to dwell in boxes, and
pixes, and wafer-cakes; and that he which has incorruptible glory would now
come, and roost under elements, that are apt to foist, and m^u d, and be
poisoned, and eaten of vermi^^; a Breaden god indeed, that suffer such
deperitions; And we should have had Invocation of Saints; Invocation of
Saints? what is it but indignity to Saints? For do the Saints in h^auen think
God so mere less now, that he must be mediated to by them to show mercy? do
these men think Christ not a sufficient Medi^^ou, for why ^lse do they fly to
others? or do they think these as sufficient as Christ, for else how dare
they call upon them? Romans 10.
How shall they call upon them in whom they have not believed? Besid^s it would
do a man good to think of their Invocation of Saints, when Longesse that
thrust the spear into the sides of Christ, and St. Chappelet a notorious
usurer and cheater, and many others that were monsters both in life and death,
are put into the n^mber of Saints. B sides we sh^^ d have had Holy water, fa^^e
water I should have said; ^o^ why Holy water? because it can driu^ away Devils?
strange it is, that those Devils, that can scarce be driven away by all kind
of watchfulness, prayers, tears, vows, that they should be driven away with
the sprinkling of a ^ew drops of Holy water; Rome has an excellent fountain:
what should I speak of their Indulgences, Purgatory, Cruci^^xes, and the like?
yet this was the Dagon they fought for, to advance superstition again, to
bring in their Work, and to cause our work to cease. Our Adversaries said,
they shall neith r know nor see till we come into the midst of them, and slay
them, and cause the work ^o cease.

Thus beloved at last have I shown you the swart face of this detestable
treason, the Monster of all cunning inventions, and cruel conspiracies: yea
Quae inferna tantum scelus vomuerunt, Amb.
what mouth of hell ever vomited ^ut such a mischief? What now remains? but
that we should first.

(...). Homer. Odyss. 1. Eurymachus ad Telemacham.
in the knees of God, as the Poets phrase is. In the knees of God, and not in
the brains of men; In the knees of God, and not in the arms of men. For it
was neither our foresight, nor force that could have delivered us; 1. not our
foresight, for all the state policy in the world could not have helped us. 2.
Not our force, for all our bands of armed soldiers could not have rescued us,
K James in his speech to the Parliament.
as that King prudently and piously confessed; if the Lord had not put into the
heart of that noble Lord Mount-eagle to communicate the Letter, and into the
heart of the King to interpret the abstruse intricate meaning of the Letter,
contrary to all Grammatical sense, it had been impossible for us to have
been delivered; therefore Psalm. 64.9.
All men shall see, and say, this is the Lords doing, for they shall perceive
that it is his work; therefore Non nobis Domine, non nobis, Not unto us (oh
Lord) not unto us; not unto our wisdom, or valor; Sed nomini tuo, Unto thy
name, thy might and mercy let all the praise be given. And praise let it be.

Quisquis non videt coe^us est, quisquis videt and non laudat. ingratus est.
Aug lib. 1. de civit Dei c. 1.
Whosoever does not see this to be Gods work, is blind, whosoever sees it, and
does not magnify him for it, is unthankful. Oh that there should be faint
echoes of our praises in Gods Courts as this day, that the roofes of Gods
Temples should not shake with our gratulatory sounds; Oh bring forth the Lute,
and the Harp, the well-tuned Cymballs, and the loude-sounding Cymballs, praise
God in the highest for this highest favor, which is the most matchless
temporal deliverance, that ever the finger of God wrought upon earth: the
people of Rome had so good hopes of Caligula at the first, that that day
wherein he beg^n his Reign^ (by decree of Senate) was called Palilia. Su^t.
The Day wherein Rome was new built: So we may c^ll this day as the day wherein
England was newborn. And shall we not honor our Birthday? they day wherein
God has granted breath, and ^ife to state, and Church? yes, consider the
streams of that River, that still make glad the City of the Lord amongst us,
and honor the Fountain from whence they fl^w, for, for what will we magnify
God if not for this blessing?

Church of Rome; for how damnable is that Religion, that has been the
fosterer and producer of such a devilish design? Oh let us abhor that
Church where Murderers and Traitors are tolerated, yea Canonized, these are
^lores non pl^ne fructuum se^ pinarum. Aug.
fruits not of figge-trees, but of brambles; Oh that ever Treason should be so
deeply rooted in the Popes heart, that he should not be ashamed in the sight
of the whole world, to mingle the blood of Garne^ with the blood of Christ. Oh
Holy Father! Oh pure Religion! Well, let these practices ex^crab^e, horrid,
make us tremble at their religion, and with constancy cleave to our own
religion; Yea, seeing God so miraculously, as this day defended our c^use, let
us neither he doubtful to embrace this faith, nor bashful to profess it.

has opened his bosom, spread out his wings, revealed his arm! that his
mercies should be fresh before our eyes, and our sins stink upon earth, cry
to heaven? Oh sacrifice your sins before God, that this day did not deliver
you over as a sacrifice to the rage of your Adversaries; vow your selves to
his service, that kept you from them that had vowed your slaughter; let not
your devotions cease, seeing the work does not cease; seek Gods face, that
he may ever seek your bliss, keep you from outward invasion, inward
conspiracy; protect your bodies, preserve your souls, deliver you from the
malice of men, and the fury of Devils, give you the happiness of a Church
visible upon earth, and the glory of a Church triumphant in heaven. Which that
he may do, God grant for his mercies sake. Amen.


