A mostpleasant Dialogue:
OR

A merry greeting between two lovers,
How Will and Nan did fall at strife,
And at the last made man and wife.
To the tune of Lufina.


GOod morrow fair Nansie, whither so fast,
I pray sweet, whither are you walking?
Stand back, Iack-sauce, I like not your cast,
I scorn with Coxcombs to be talking.
No rustic Clown within the Town,
shall disturb me, stop, stay, or hinder,
To talk with such a fool as thee:
no man shall think my wits so slender.
Thou know I am a Gentleman borne,
and come of no small reputation:
My fame will never be out worn,
whilst English men enjoy this Nation.
In foreign Lands I have been proved
to be the ^ader of the battle,
Of Captains Knights and Lords beloved,
when thundering Drums and Cannons rattle.
I heard indeed thou have been pressed,
and know the cause of it, believe me:
Only to get a man releast,
for which he 20. shillings gave thee:
But being come into the place,
whilst others bravely showed their cunning,
Thou like a Coward did hide thy face,
and glad were thou for to be cunning.
I have 3. hundred pounds a year,
which shall be thine, if thou can fancy,
And love thy friend as may appear,
all shall redound to my sweet Nansie.
My birth also thou do wellknow,
my Parentage does grace our meeting:
Grant me thy love, and thou shall be
the Mistress of my wealth, my sweeting.
As for thy wealth, keep to thy self,
for fear heere-after thou should want it:
I knew a fool bestowed his pelf,
and in small time he did recant it.
But for thy birth, I think on earth
the like was not by one nor other,
Long 7. years together, through wind and weather,
thou wast borne at the back of thy mother.
When I lived with my friends at home,
I went in silk and rich arayment,
With Gallants I in Tauernes board,
ten pound at once in ready payment
I did disburse out of my purse,
unto the Uintner for good licker,
And so my Father allowd me to do,
to make my wits and spirits quicker.
The second part, to the same tune.


MUch like unto a ruffian, rude,
thou did amongst Puncks and Panders wander,
And commpany keptst with Strumpets lude,
as flocks of Geese keep with the Gander.
To Tom of Bedlam would thou skip,
all this is truth which I do tell yet,
And eat the meat out of his scrip,
so glad were thou to fill thy belly.
Why Nan, me thinks thou should not chide,
nor put thy will to these disgraces:
Many fair Lasses I have denied,
which sought to win me with embraces.
Winny the witty and Parnell the pretty,
and Sis of the City have sought unto me.
Besse, Ioane, and Isabell: Sue, Alce and bonny Nell,
thought of me passing well, and Kate did woo me.
Since thou so many loves have had,
and every one of them do forsake thee,
I Will show thee how thou may soon be a Dad,
if thou with speed away be take thee.
Go to Pickt-hatch, there is bouncsing Kate,
that for a good husband is like to miscarry,
If thou go unto her, and soundly do woo her,
she would make thee a Dad the first day thou do marry.
Wilt please you to the Tavern go,
and take a pint of Sack or Clarret:
Fine Sugar cakes we will have also,
what-euer it cost I will pay for it.
The good Sack-bowle shall merrily trowle.
in Nectar shall your health go roundly,
Then well-come luck; my dainty duck,
may sit and see her self pledged soundly.
Thou boystrous Clown, give over thy suit,
and leave thy fabling complication:
Speak wiser words, or else be mute,
twill be more for thy commendation,
Thy jolly red nose does well disclose,
and show thee to be a man of mettle:
Thou Wilt sit in a house, to drink and carouse,
till thy nose look like a Copper-kettle.
All these strange speeches which here are past,
shall never make me misdo^^ my Nancy:
I trust to enjoy thy favor at last,
the words in derision thou have given me many
I for thy sake will under take,
to swim the Ocean like Leander.
Be thou to me like Penelope,
which in affection did never wander.
Then heeres my hand, sweet, Will at command
my heart also shall still procure,
Like faithful Hero to thee I Will stand,
like dame Venus will I endure,
To keep my Joy from direful annoy,
I Will leave my life to do thee pleasure.
Take all thy self, my only sweet boy,
my Jewels, Rings, my gold and treasure.
Thanks gentle mistress of my heart,
my breast has now given over panting:
To Church let us go act the part,
which yet betwixt us (...)
In Nuptial bands give (...)
which never can be separated.
Great Cresus gold twice ouertold,
could never be so highly rated.
Finis.
C. R.

Printed at London for H. G.


