THE OLD MAN'S STAFF, Two Sermons, SHOWING THE ONLY WAY TO A COMFORTABLE old
Age, Preached in Saint Mary's in Dover by JOHN READING.

Psalm 71. 9. Cast me not off in the time of age, forsake me not when my
strength fails. LONDON, Printed by Bernard Alsop for John H^dgets. 1621.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE EDWARD Lord Zouch, Sr. Maurc and Cantelup, Constable
of Dover Castle, Lord Warden, Chancellor and Admiral of the Cinque Ports, etc.
Of his Majesty's most Honorable Pri^te Counsel through Great Britain, my
singular good Lord, increase of true blessedness.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
THese Sermons which I tender your Lordship, I preached to a zealous
Congregation, with assurance, that GOD who vouchsafed to speak out of the
bush, Exodus 3.
was also powerful in my weakness: and for that I am resolved, that what some
profitably hear, Qui est locutus (...) sen^bus, nee rubum est dedignatus,
Ambr, l. 1 de Virg.
they and others may also profitably read, with like confidence I venture them
into the jaws of a censuring age; not caring how they displease curious ears,
so they may benefit the good: I shall judge them happily borne, what ever they
suffer, if of many Readers some lay them to heart. I confess they are an
unworthy interest of that I am indebted to your Honor, therefore am contented
if they go but for two mites, so that they may be laid up in the treasury
which weighs all offerings by the Giuers mind: Be pleased to accept them,
and I will daily beseech the Lord all-sufficient, to add many comfortable
years to your Honorable age, that it may be crowned with immortal glory in
his kingdom: In whom I am

Your Honors most humble Servant, JOHN READING.

THE OLD MAN'S STAFF.
PROVE. 16. 31. The hoarie head is a Crown of glory, if that it be found in
the way of righteousness.
Man's life is but a journey to the grave, Via vita dicitur per quam quiliber
natus properat ad finem, Basil. in Psalm. 1. Exodus 12. 8. 11.
a way, a short way to death: Infancy the way to childhood, childhood to youth,
youth to the strongest age, that to old age, and old age the Thule, and ne
plus vltra of Nature, Baculus sustentatio est senectutis Chrysostom. in Psalm. ^3.
Hos. 4. ^2. Ezekiel. 19. 7. Isai 36. 6.
is the confines of Death. The old man stands like the Israelite departing
from Egypt, eating the Passover with sour herbs, and his Staff in his hand.
Some lean on superstitious vanities, their Staff teaches them, but to err;
others to that Staff of Reed, the World: which confidence is an Egypt to
Israel, Baculus intelligitur ae que ipsa lex, quae^ oste^dere no^^r pec^a^a,
non aufer^e Chrysostom quo s.
breaking in their hand, and wounding them which trust to it. The blessed man
makes righteousness his Staff, not that of the Law, that is a Rod of Iron to
break the ungodly, that can discover, but not take away sin; but the
righteousness of Faith in Christ, (Arod of the stock of Ish^i) and the
complete armor of God, (...)
which furnished the Patriarchs and Prophets: which being fully revealed in the
old age of the World, to comfort her e^ill days, are like David's Staff and
Scrip, furnished with stones taken out of the brook, a sure defense against the
enemy: Blessed is the man planted by these waters, he shall bring forth fruit
in due season, his leaf shall not fade, his old age shall be blessed. The
hoarie head is a Crown of glory. These words contain this proposition, the
old age of a righteous man is honorable and blessed: yet in a second view I see
them, Genesis 2.
like the river of Paradise, dividing themselves into four heads.

Old Age.

A Crown of dignity.

it is found.

in the way of righteousness.

The hoarie head or old age is a Crown^ of glory, My discourse must begin at
the end, like the motion of the inferior Spheres ab occasu, from the evening
and setting of life: The last Scene to be acted on Natures Stage, is the
Prologue, the exordium of my Text. The Argument and sum which all our numbered
days shall teach us, Cur^s est certus aetatis and via na^urae v^ea, omnes vnu^
c^rrious c^rriculum, ad propr^am metan^ tendentes. Basil (...) P^^l. 1. ho. 1.
is our present lesson, We must be old. There is a certain course, and one
only path of Nature, an headlong way of time, wherein is no stay, but such
easy passage, that the Infant and lame old man run with equal pace to a
more distant or nearer end. Man's state was by creation immortal, but the day
that sin was borne, man began to die: had he not sinned, there should have
been a comfortable maturitie in age; and if our lives like some long kindled
lamps should have consumed, it must have been without all pain, sickness,
want of strength, sense or fear of death; for without sin there could have
been no punishment: so that if we define old age, a c^rtaine ripeness of
life, and length of time to a blessed translation, then age is natural; Ipsa
senectus est morbus. Membra torpent, praemoritur visus, auditus, incestus.
Plin. l. 7. c. 50. Eccles. 12. De fide resur. c. 9.
but if we describe it according to our present being, it is a continual
disease, the grounds and lees of life, in which the body languisheth, one part
forerunning the rest toward the grave; in which the keepers of the house
tremble, and the strong men bow themselves, the gri^ders cease, and they wax
dark which look out of the windows: therefore I may say of it as Ambrose of
death; God gave it not a principio, sed pro remedio -- non naturaest sed
malitiae: (...) is no Child of Nature but Disobedience, and now our lives decay
is a remedy against the life of sin, that therefore in this senio mundi,
do^age of the world, our lives like winter Suns hasten to their s^tting,
shortning from hundreds to tennes. It is the mercy of God, that our sins so
quickly mature, should not live too long, to greaten his judgments. For whose
sake ^ime and age now pull us by the hands, (...). 1^. 16.
as the Angels did Lot, and part of his family, lingering in the condemned
Sodom; and we must soon be old.

God said it in the first si^ners doom: and again he calls ^an earth,
earth, earth, Gen 3. 19.
remembering him what he was, is, and shall be.

Experience tells us, one day tells another, one night certifieth another,
(...)
our life is but of few days; and we like those which sail, arrive insensibly
at our Port.

O^r griefs tell it us, growing in our decreasing, waxing strong in our
feebleness. Genesis 47. 9.


All the Creatures tell it us, (...) (...)
which have (...) senium: (...)
as of all things there is a maturitie, so of life which is old age: the long
lived trees have their age of decaying, nay, the glorious piles of building,
(^^ately Sepulchers of Charity) grow old, the graves are buried in their dust,
and monuments by some esteemed the only suruiuers of their families, Vita
sens^m absum^tur. Bas^l. in Psalm 1.
are entombed in oblivion: I have not yet said all; Death himself that meagre
Sarcophagus, greedy st^^ueling, having deuo^red all like Time, shall ea^e
himsel^e and die of Famine: The last enemy that shall be destroyed is Death.
1. Cor. 15. 26 Use.


No lesson in the World more taught, less learned: though God, experience,
pains, Death, nay though the earth every day opening her mouth to recei^e
others, tell us our turn is near: yet we live as if we belee^ed it not. (...)
The first use cries to the Old man, Whilst it is called to day, if ye hear
his voice ^arden not your hearts. Sleep not without Oil in your lamps, the
Bridegroom is at the door. The second comes from the unhappy old men,
crying to the young as Diu^s from hell, Luke 16. 28.
lest they also come into this place: the young say of this lesson as the high
P^iests to Judas, What is it to us? Math. 27. 4.
at least as the jews in Hagge 1. 2. concerning the repairing the Temple, The
time is not yet come: or with him in the Comedian, How unjust is it that our
fathers would have us, iam iam, Ecel^s 11. 9. Matui^ sias senex.
a pueris ilico nasci senes: rejoice O young man in thy youth, and let thine
heart cheer thee, walk in the ways of thine heart. But the foundation of a
comfortable old age is laid in youth: in fair weather we fit our houses
against rain: Ad viaticum senectu^s. Eccles. 12.
mode^^tion must be learned berimes, the best provision for age; therefore God
says, Sera and contumeliosa est senectu^s.
Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth: He knew the danger of the
evil days, how unapt they are for reformation, and how deceitful old age is*
(...).
it steals on with a sly foot, makes no noise, gives no warning, thou
shall perceive it come before than spy it comm^ng; youth flies as it seems
to approach: age creep^th like Gideon through the dark to the Madi^nites,
mantled with night and steep, clouded with pleasures and business, and when
it seems far off, it lays hand on us: ^os. 7. 9.
so (as God said to Ephraim) gray hairs are upon us, and we know not. This is
the reason why we have so many youthful old men, C^ildren of age, before we
have put off our youthful mind^; comm^th Time and casts her hoarie rob^ over
our deca^ed b^dies. Some think the time will make it own provision, but our
years pass by us like swift stream^s, as the swee^e streams by Tan^alus, of
which we taste no more then our foresight takes up; therefore esteem no time
well spent, which will nothing benefit thine age.

Some think it a soon learned lesson, but their time will enforce them to
know, it is no easy step from the broad paths of sensuality, to the ways of
righteousness: we cannot presently be made good old men, we must not hope to
sleep young, like Epimenides in the fable, Plut. part. 2. moral.
and to rise up old. It is a wonder to find a fruitful age following a
vicious youth: we have little hope of the Autumn, An sen^ s^t gerend. re^p.
where the Spring promised not so much as Blossoms: I deny not, but that God
(to whom all things are possible which he will) can fill the valleys of Moab,
when no rain is seen; can change a leprous soul, 2 King. 3. 17. Exodus 4. 7.
as Moses hand by putting again into his bosom; but it is a fearful
practice to tempt God with expectation of miracles, whilst we neglect the
ordinary means. Improve thy youth therefore, for age steals on, or if
futures move thee not, look upon thy present danger: youth is near error,
Vicina lapsibus adol^^^^^^ Chrysostom.
it is the age of error, (and happy man whose errors die with his youth:) there
are a thousand false tongued Hienaes call upon it, millions of Sirens to
distract it: Sin fitteth like Salomons Curtizan, ready at every corner of
the street to fall upon the young man's neck; ^elling of peace offerings,
opportunity and fill of pleasures with which she allureth. There are many
enemies to grace, but none more to be feared then they which fight within us
against us: how dangerous is then the estate of youth? Besides all other
enemies, it has it self the greatest enemy to it self, it self being a
contemner of others counsel, Iuuen^^s contemptrix (...).
and de^titute o^ it own (without which they are like helmlesse Ships in the
waves of that age) they love no unbought wisdom; Dixit Marc^s de filio suo
Commodo, and est in salo and fluctu vitae. Herodi I 1.
therefore they are like the inferior orbs, how ever they are every day
carried about by the primum mobile, yet they will go their own courses.
Therefore I may say as Zenophon, of the youth which watched about the Pre^orie,
(...).
his age seems to need most care; S^^han is ambitious of the hearts of young
men, (...). Hippocrat.
and though every age be fruitful of evil, yet none more then youth. The
young man had need to have continual counsel, others good a^uice in their
hearts, is like fire in green wood, it must be followed with continual
breaths, or it will go out again; and their own good motions are commonly
like sick men's hunger, often a false appetite, seldom continuing. To
conclude, age is coming, and the day shall have enough with his own grief:
if thou load it with sin, that leaden talent, with excesses, lu^ts, wicked
habits of youth, (...)
(which deliver an out-worne strengthlesse body to old age) it must needs (as
Jacob said of his (...)) couch down between two burdens, sin and
infirmity. Pre^ent the evil betimes: be an happy old man in thy yo^th, as
some are unhappy young in their age. Thou will say, I am not sure to be old:
admit that old age may be prevented with Death, Death has a royal
prerogative, and is prevented with nothing; if thou will not provide for
uncertain old age, provide ^or certain death. There was no Manna found (...)
the Sabbath, but on the other six days there was found pro^ision for the
seventh day. After death comes the eternal Sabbath, then will be no time for
provision: thou art yet in the flower of thy youth; gather such store that thou
may crown thine hoarie hairs, for the hoarie head is a Crown of glory when
it is found in the way of righteousness.

I am at the ways end, A (...) of glory.
the reward, the Crown of glory comes next to hand, whether we understand
our Crown importing a reward, Per Catachresin, Pro omnipraemio
as it is used, for that the Conquerers were crowned, as a reward of their
victorious labor, as 2. Tim. 2. 5. or if we take it for an ornament, as Prou.
4. 9. or for abounding fullness, such as even compasse^h every part, Et Psalm.
103. 4.
as Psalm. 64. 11. it will reach us this lesson:

The old age of a good man is full of comfort and honor, it renews as it
^adeth, as it loses the blossoms of youth, it finds a Crown of dignity,
abundance of dignity, which even like a crown compasses every part.

This point well learned, Use.
would first, better nurture those despisers of the aged, who have learned of
the wicked children of Bethel, (...)
to mock the aged; or (as if they had taken up the inhumane custom of the
Massage^es, and Berbuces) with vnreuerent usage, to ear up their aged Parents,
whom God commands them to honor.

Secondly, it would comfort the aged, if they knew the dignity of their age,
and that it is a Crown of glory, which consists in the benefits and
blessings which God gives them by their age, for their age, and at the end of
their age: of which I will speak in order, if you will first consider with me
these six things which seem to make old age unhappy. Some are troubled, Exodus
20. 12. Leuit 9. 32. Turpe est sapienu, came habe^t anim^ captar^ lauds ex
corpore.
for their beauties decay in age; they may learn a worthy saying of a most
unworthy Julian: It is a shame for the wise to be ambitious of his bodies
praise, since he has a soul: beauty is fading, a frail good, unworthy a
wise man's care in possessing, or sorrow in losing.

Secondly, for that it is full of infirmities: but they which so object, do
more properly blame the disease, then age. To these I only say, if thou art
good, thine infirmities cannot make thee unhappy.

Thirdly, for that age like Delilah, cutteth off our strength as we sleep in
her lap; Plut.
leaving old men like Mercuries, which they painted without hands and feet,
unapt for employment: but it is neither strength of old men, nor counsel of
young which is expected: happy state where young men's arms, and old men's
counsel prevail. When Soph^cles sons before their time, enquired into their
fathers years, he repeated to the Judges the verses he was making, for which he
was judged able still to manage his affairs: greatest a^chiuements are not
managed so much by strength as wisdom. But who so weak that c^nnot serve
God? Remember that thou art subordinately borne for thy Country, thy friends,
thy self, but primarily for Gods service.

Fourthly, because it (...) pleasures: but since we want to our opinion, only
what we desire; that fault is not in age, but evil appe^^^e of things at least
not seasonable; and to reason, nothing is properly wanting which is not
numerable among things necessarily good. Want of abundan^ riches, or youil full
pleasure, are improper, and abusiue speeches; for one we should say, want of a
mind not coueto^s; for ^he other, want of temperance, though with some
diff^rence: abundance may be more happily enjoyed then desired, (all may
possess, none may be co^^^ous) but pleasures are for the most part more
happily desired then enjoyed. For they like one Zoroastres, laugh at their
birth, (...)
but like all others borne and dying, end with sorrow: pleasure is counsels
foe, reasons snare, and the wits tyrannical master; it is the devils
grand-factor, the bait to cover the hooks of sin; the sweet mortal poison
which dries the veins, and enfeebleth the sinews of virtue: no wonder if
Marcus Curious wished his enemies given to pleasure, he knew suchidefendants
unhappy, next them against whom death fights with his double armor, the
Sword, and Famine. Happy age then which takes (...) which would make us more
unhappy, (...)
which makes us less desirous of that which we should not desire: so many
are the mischiefs which this bewitching Siren conueieth to the heart through
the senses, that many may auow that which Appius Clau^ius said (when he heard
the overthrow which Pyrrh^s gave the Romans) Before I grieved that I was blind,
but now I wish me deaf also: not to speak of the miseries of these evil
times, which seem to pron^u^ce the deaf happier the^ their hearers, I dare
conclude, that the damned have experience hereof, it had bin better for them to
have bin blind and deaf, (...)
then to have their pleasures in this (...), changed for eternal torments in
hell.

Fifthly, that which some object, the aged are froward, petish, hasty,
malicious, dispraising the present, praising the ages past, selfe-opinioned,
forgetful, and the like, is not our ages fault but ours: that it is talkatiue,
he well confessed and excused who said, I thank mine age which made me less
intemperate though more talkatiue: young men blame the aged for speaking much
when their own ears itch to be running out into their tongues, or when they
hear their just reproves: the speaker makes discourses long or short. I
never heard a wiseman speak too much, or a fool too little.

Lastly, some therefore esteem old age unhappy, because it is near death:
these may as justly think all the life wretched, of which no part is far from
death: and if this life be but a shadow of true life, then he that has most
to spend of an uncertain life, is nearer (...) evil to be feared, then the
aged, who as he is in probability nearer death, so in truth is he nearer the
beginning of a true and eternal life.

Opposite to these seeming evils, are six real benefits, whereof God gives
the first four by our age; the fifth, for our age that is with man, the last at
the end of our age: and these are like six precious Jewels set in this crown
of glory, dignifying a righteous old man.

The first is wisdom, Gloria senum est canities, ^d est (...), Bed exp. in
Sam c. 2.
the beauty and vigor of the mind. The ancient heathen pourtrayed out our ages
with the same colors and pensill, which now opinion works with: making the^
like Nebuchadnezzars Image, an head of gold, breast of silver, the last part
mixed with Iron and clay. But the word of God does otherwise describe, youth an
age of error and folly, but old age the last golden part, a crown of dig^ity.
Some may truly say, it is more easy and common to be old then wise: Si sum
Sophocles non delito, id^l^o non sum Sophocles.
I must borrow his form of speaking; If Sophocles, no doter, if a doter, no
Sophocles: if any be this blessed old man, he is wise, if not wise, not this
righteous old man; as will appear in the last part. What the^ if these
wrincles are the monuments of thy beauties ruin and decay? yet in those
furrows experience has sowed wisdom. The spring is lovely for hopes, but the
autumn for fruits: the glory of young men is their strength, Prou. 20. 29.
and the beauty of old men is the gray head. There is beauty for beauty: but as
God has given the flower of our life to adorn our youth, otherwise full of
deformities of mind, so has he given the fruit of wisdom, the late
comeliness of mind to honor age, S^^a foecunditas. Ambr. l. 5.epist. 31.
else full of infirmities: (...) age is the flower of wisdom, or rather
wisdom is the fruit of age; as if God made this age amends with greatest
excellency of mind: not to tell of the aged necessity of aged experience, to
the happy being of a State, where like the contrary motions of the heavens,
Rehoboams young Statesmen are to be moderated by the aged: nor of the misery
of that Common weal, where Princes are children, where those young Phaetons
obtain power, to set the world on fire. I may easily say, it is the helm of
the mind, and age brings that maturitie which makes wisdom a skillful
Pilot, which in the young, at best is but in Theorie, in hope.

The second is, age makes us abandon many noisome affections which loaded our
youth, as the storm forced Ionahs Mariners to cast their wares ouerboard: when
once we have received the sentence of death in our selves, we do without much
difficulty, cast off the care of vain delights. Barzillai (who lived in a more
holy age) re^used the preferme^ts of Da^ids court: 2. Sam. 19. 34. 35
How long have I to live? I am this day eighty years old: can I hear any more
the voice of singing? Let thy servant turn again, that I may die in mine own
city. He remembered provision was then to be made which could floate aloft
upon a ship-wracked broken body. (...).
It is a world to see the vain opinions of some men, they would lay violent
hands on unconquered nature, and be young again, Antis^. apud Laert lib. 7.
so their age the only desired thing they hate: their desire of youth in age
is but a second childishness of the old; there being nothing more
unreasonable, then to loathe that state and age to which with wishes and fear
of failing we have attained: and why? forsooth they want those pleasures which
attended their youth. It is true, Satan gives the young man pleasures freely:
but as the reuengefull Selymus bestowed these farms on his Ianizaries, that he
might sequester the^ to the slaughter; which dangers the good man's age teaches
him to loathe: which falling upon the delights of giddy youth like Pythagoras
on the company of drunkards, Dorion (...). lib gent.
bids the Musicians change the harmony, and sing a sadder note; at which
becoming sober, they cast off their garlands, and are ashamed of their folly.
Do thou then blame thine age for disburdening thy mind of eui^s? Recount
thine age, number thine errors, and thou will be ashamed of that thou have
been: as the stars vanish at the fight of the Sun, so do our foolish
delights at the rising and approach of true wisdom showing us some light of
the joys of heaven. Age takes not away, but changes the delights, giving
true for false; real for seeming; blessed for dangerous, pleasures: I will
dismiss this age as Jacob his Asher, with this blessing, (...)
it shall give pleasures for a king: the greatest and most solid delights.

The third is a willingness to die; for we die not all at once, but part after
part decaying, gives us an easy passage. The old man departs as out of an
Inn the young is pulled out of his house: the young dies as fire quenched with
water violently, the old man like a lamp burnt out.

The fourth is a nearer view of the most blessed estate of heaven: doubtless God
reserueth the greatest comforts for this greatest trial: the nearer death the
more the righteous man is sensible of heaven: therefore how ever in his trials,
he be toffed betwixt fear and hope, like Jacob at the report of his dear
Joseph's life, (...)
yet when he sees the charets ready to carry him away, then his spirit
reuiueth: as he said of his Bethel, so may I of this last age, it is the gate
of heaven, it is our Nebo from whence we take a view of the holy la^d to which
like wearied pilgrims we are entering: these are four benefits which God gives
us by age: the 5. he gives for, (...)
or in respect of age, that is, honor among men. As the law makes a diadem the
sign of honor and majesty, so God by nature makes the hoary head a crown of
dignity. Therefore the Greeks do aptly express age and honor by the like word
they had their Presbytery, the Magistracy so named of the Roman Senate was so
called of age: (...)
the Jews Sanhed^im were elders of the people: so is the last part of a holy
crown of life dignity. Thou will say, thou have not thine honor. Wonder not,
thou live amongst men, Quosiudices (...).
of whom God receives not what they owe. When the old man at the Olympikes
could find no place to rest him, (...)(...)
but with some disrepect was p^ssed from one to another, coming to the
Lacedemo^ians men and children stood up and gave him place: which al
applauding, the old man wept, saying, Alas that al Greece knows goodness,
Honestissimu^ senectuus (...)* Nusquam sen^ctus honoratior. C^c.
but the Lacedemo^ians only practice it. All know how God commands to honor
the aged, but of the godly I may say as Lysander of Sparta, It is the most
honorable house for age: they give it the best entertainment.

The last is the dignity which God gives at the end of a righteous age, a
glorious and eternal life. They perish not which sleep with the Lord, Manet
eorum vita ouorum manet resurrectio. Amb. l. 5. orat. suneb. De Vi^ginio Ru^o.
inquit Ph. Mortalitas mag is fin^a qu^m vita est. l. 2. Ep. 1.
they are like Moses bush not consuming though they seem on fire (...) dying
in death, their life remains whose (...) remains: so that in their death
their (...) is rather ended then their life. Their corruptible state being
changed for a most honorable: I will say of the poor decayed temple the old
man's body, as Z^rubbabel Hag. 2. 4. 5. Who is left that saw this house in her
first glory? and how do ye see (...) now? is it not in your eyes in
comp^rison of it as nothing? yet now be of good courage -- yet a little while
-- and I will fill this house with glory, the glory of this shall be greater
then the first. The glory of youth is but hope of glory in age, and this shall
far excel it: but herein consis^eth the greatest glory of the aged, They are
near the crown of life in the kingdom of glory.

The end of the first Sermon
THE SECOND SERMON. If it be found in the way of righteousness.
WE have surueyed the last part of man's earthly pilgrimage, and viewed the
dignity belonging to the aged, if their age be found in the way of
righteousness: to find may signify either to attain, as Prou. 4. 22. or to
exist and be, as (...) 8. or to afflict and judge Psalm. 21. 8. Psalm. 89. 20.
So (...) follow this sense we shall discover the All-(...) of justice, finding
out all the ways of man: it is the Epilogue to Solomon's Ecclesiastes: Eccle.
12. 14.
God will bring ^^ery work to judgment, with every secret thing whether it be
good or evil. How ever our works seem to us, Prou. 16. 2. (...). 8.
God pondereth the spiri^^t he Ancients of Israel may be secret idolaters, but
he that searches Jerusalem with a light, (...)
even God, unto whose eyes all things are open, shall discover it. David well
knew that God spyed out all his paths, and that if he inclined to any evil,
the Lo^d would find it out, who saw the secrets of the heart. By three
discoueries God manifests himself a present beholder of all the ways of man.

First, more immediately smiting the conscience, with a dreadful apprehension
of his presence: which comes as Jesus to Magdale^ before present, but after
making his presence known; opening the eye of the soul, awakening the
conscience to behold the eye of God looking on us: which falling on the heart
like some dreadful light from heaven, siniteth down some like Paul bound for
Damascus, that he may raise them: opens others eyes and discovers the
judgment, Number. 22. 31.
standing like the Angel before Balaam in a narrow way with his sword drawn
in his hand: or like the fingers of an hand writing on Belshazzars wall, Dan.
5. 5. 27.
loosing his joints, and striking him with a cold shaking at the sight of this
sentence, thou art weighed in the balance, and FOUND too light. So God found
Judas conscience, though a little while he enjoyed the price of blood, yet
presently his conscience is found, Mar. 27.
and he confesses I have sinned in betraying innocent blood. Cain was sick of
the same disease, and whilst none pursued him, his conscience told him, who
ever found him would slay him. When Aristubolus had murdered his brother, and
starued his mother: his conscience was found, and he could never get those
bloody stains out of his mind, till with extremity of fear and griefe',
Joseph. lib. 1. de bell. Iud. c: 3. Sperandum certe non crat vt maximum
deilumen facta (...)
his bowels perishing he cast up blood, which casually thrown down where his
brothers was not yet washed out, to the amazement of the spectators drew out
this desperate confession of a wounded conscience: There was no hope, I should
conceal my wicked deeds, from the great light of God. Such is the violence o^
these E^nas, fires of hell, by the breath of God set on fire in the reprobates
conscience, that he that has concealed it all his life, has often been
compelled at his death to utter it to his shame. God hears the secret parley
of the heart; he heard Moses prayer unspoken. The tonglesse Creatures speak
in his ears, the voice of Abels blood cried to God, Genesis 4. 10.
the stones cry out of the wall in the oppressors house. Has blood a voice?
can senseless creatures speak? or does this intimate God a present Seer of
every action, in all more certainly informed then if the Creatures could tell.
Much more does he hear a thousand witnesses crying in a sinners conscience,
Origin. vocat signataspecatorum imagin^s.
in which all the world at the judgment shall read the crimes written with a
pen of Iron. Lucian wittily feigned in his Menippus, that certain shadows
attending our bodies in this life, accused us to the infernal powers. Our
conscience is that shadow which (when the light of God has found us) we
cannot outrunne. Every one has such a register, a witness a judge, a severe
revenger in his own bosom. Therefore (says Ambrose) if a man be alone, let him
be more ashamed for his own conscience, Si quis solus est, ^emetipsum prae
caeteris ^rubescat.l.7. Ep.^4.
and rather stand in awe of himself present then a thousand others: for all
the world may be deceived in thee, but thy conscience will speak the truth.

God finds out good men in their errors, but as the stranger young Joseph, to
direct him in his way to repentance: the sinner Luc. 7. long hid her works of
darkness, yet being found she watered Christ's feet with tears. Peter denied
and forswore his Master: but when Jesus looked back, and found his conscience,
he went out and wept bitterly.

The second discovery is by the word preached: some think the word finds not
the reprobate, but it is ever mighty in operation, Hebr. 4. 12.
sharper then a two edged sword, and enters through, even unto the dividing
asunder of the soul; it is powerful to harden and convict the conscience of
the rebellious.

David heard the parable, but till God by the ministry of Nathan comes to a
nearer application and finds him, 2. San^. 12.
he gives sentence as on another man: When the Jews heard Peter, their hearts
were pricked: God had discovered their ways to them, then they begin to
conceive a dreadful presence of God, and the miserable estate they were in. It
is no wonder though we have for a time Adams thickets to run into, strange
Labyrinths and excuses to hide us in, so that the word finds us not, but when
God will find us: he that being God and man did often find the hearts of his
hearers, Math. 8. Non ad verba sed ad animu^ respondet.
often answered as to their minds which spoke, will by the same spirit direct
the prophecy to our consciences: and howeuer opinion, security, or wandering
thoughts have bard up the doors of our hearts, when God will enter to find
us, they shall fly open like the Prison doors before the Angel.

The third discovery of man's ways is by judgment. Jonah fled from God, Act
12. 10. sonah. 1. 3.
and was embarked for Tarshish, and when God found him he confessed his sin.
Many years Joseph's brethren hid their mischievous practice against poor
Joseph, but at the sight and first appearance of affliction, they confess, We
have sinned against our brother, Genesis 42. 22. (...) 44. 16.
in that we saw the anguish of his soul when he besought us, and we would no^
hear him: and again to Joseph, God has ^ound out the wickedness of thy
servants.

Achan had buried his theft, (...)
but who can hide from God, who being in every place, leaves none secure for
the wicked? God finds him out by lot. Ahab changed his apparel when he
entered into the battle, but God singled him out, the arrow found him betwixt
the joints of his armor. How often does God find out the adul^erer with shame
and poverty? if perhaps he escape both these, yet rotrennesse sends, 'as
Ioab after Abner, and smites him under the fifth ribbe: how ever he hide,
(...)
God will find him. I need not added to your experience any relation of the
discovery of murders, 1. Sam. 15.
and oppressions, the injuries like Saules Amalekitish cattle, never ceasing
crying till the crime be found out. But how ever God let the sinner go in this
life, his judgments shall find him in that to come.

This were enough to teach the sober minded to keep a good conscience, Use.
and to lay the word to heart, and pull off the false visours of hypocrisy,
thou must not think to go a way which God sees not: it is true, neither
shall any thing be found which thou have not done, (there is no cup in
B^niamins sack) neither any thing hid which thou have done: If thou do
well, Genesis 4. 7.
shall thou not be accepted? Will he not crown thee? And if thou do not
well, sin lies at the door. Sin shall hunt the wicked person to
destruction: sins like Acteons dogs, pursue their Masters to the death. If
^hou were to deal with man, thou might call thy temporizing in Religion
policy, thy Oppression providence, thy Luxury mirth, thy M^lice austeri^ie,
thy Profaneness wit, thy lasciulous talk, sa^^tnesse; thy wantonness,
comitie; thy lying, equiuocating; thy symonie, gratitude; but none of these
shifts and disguises will avail thee: it is God which shall judge thee
according to thy ways. There is but one path to heaven, the way of
righteousness in which the blessed are found, Pars vl^. In the wa^ of
righteousness. Non de aetate sed de mente iudicium est, Origin. Non annorum
canities est laudanda sed morum. Ambr. Perfecta aetas est vbi perfecta virtus,
Ambr. orat. ^un.
which is my last part. The old man is honorable: but where shall I find the
man? there are many of years, but few honorably old; they are not gray hairs
and wrincles, which beget a reverent esteem with man, much less the Crown of
glory with God. There is a young old man, as there are some old young men: he
a child at an hundred years, these old with few. Honor is due to the aged,
not to all, but to the righteous: to all other their gray hairs are the
displayed banners of Gods judgment, a Crown, but a Crown of thorns; which
teaches us, (...)
that the only way to an honorable and comfortable old age, is an holy life:
the promises of a blessed age are to the righteous. And by the Prophet he
says; There shall be no more a child of days, nor an old man that has not
filled his days; for he that is an hundred years old shall die as a young man,
but the sinners being an hundred years old shall be accursed. And of Elies
family, he says; There should not be an old man for ever: and to the wicked
he threatens a trembling heart, and a sorrowful mind, ^ life hanging before
them, fear both night and day, without assurance of life. The ungodly shall
not live out half his days: therefore S. Peter says, If a man long after
li^e, and would feign see good days, let him refrain his tongue, eschew
evil* and do good. There is no means to obtain a comfortable old age, but
by this narrow way of righteousness.

There are two ways; (...)
the one rough, but strait; the other easy, but like the rock at Massada, a
snaky way full of turnings, and narrow in the end: in these are contrary
leaders; the Devil says, as Abner to Asahel, Turn thee either to the right
hand or to the left, God says, Make straight steps unto your feet: there is
but one short and strait line betwixt two limits: And they who carry the Arc
of Gods Covenant in their breasts, go like the Philistims kine to Bethshemesh,
in one path, turning neither to the right hand nor to the left: though
continually expressing frail affections, (...)
of returning and deuiation.

There are that blame their age as full of inconveniences; but the truth is, it
is only sin which makes them unhappy. As Esau said of his brother, Genesis
27. 36. 38.
so may we of sin, it took away our birthright, and it will also have our
blessing: was it not justly called a deceiuer? Esaus tears must be our tutors,
he sought the blessing, but too late.

There are many Arguments to persuade the old man to this way of righteousness.

First, let this have the first place: all other comforts in this winter of
life are stricken dumb: as Lamech said of his Noah, (...)
this shall comfort us concerning our work and labor of our hands. The wise
man co^pareth the joy of the wicked to a light which shall soon be put out,
but the rejoicing of the righteous is like the light which shines more and
more t^ a ^erfect day. Many are the dreams of foolish men: (...)
some trust their beauty shall last to comfort them; which flower withers in
the hand of the most charie possessor: the flowers are man's short-liued tutors,
Nee ouod fuimu^u^ sumusue, cras erimus
telling him all flesh is grass, and the beauty thereof as the fading flower:
the most lovely face is subject to wrincles, those loathed characters of age,
despised sepulchers of beauty: sole virtue can beautify old age, which only
waxes young and fresh with years. Some trust to strength, Ad mortem nati
sumus eamque fugere ne fortissimi possunt, Eleazer. apud. Joseph. de bell. Iud.
l. 7. c. 28.
therefore keep a careful diet, that it may serve them in their age, but it is
a slender fortress which will not hold out the assault of few days sickness:
perhaps some are so strong that they come to fourscore years; but then nature
comes like an instant Credi^rix, if we presently pay not the life we owe,
either she serves her execution on our senses, or takes pledges, our legs,
our hands, our eyes, part after part. Virtue only has an immunity and grows
not lame with age.

Some of the Cynicks opinion, Diog apud. Laert. l. 6.
that there is nothing more wretched, then a poor old man, lean only to the
deceitful staff of wealth: but righteousness is the Jacobs staff; G^^. 32.
10.
though it be all the wealth we carry in our journey, we shall return rich in
the Lord: but riches are but like Elishaes staff in Gehazies hand, 2. King. 4.
29. 32.
in vain sent before to reuiew age, our second childhood. Others hope to
improve their age to an happy state by humane reason, but with much industry
have only shot arrows at the stars, and sounded deep to touch Nept^ne; al
their precepts proving but desperate conclusions, As Soc^^tes, and^.
miserable co^forters: their opinions placing selfe-murderers in their supposed
happiness. I grant, (...)
their reasons like sleepy potions may an afflicted mind for a time, the best
of them being as merry company to bring us before the Judge, by which the way
may seem shortened, but the doom nothing lightened. In these or the like ways
there is a Crown: Plut.
but as Seleucus said of his, If any knew the miseries which belonged to it,
and how heavy it is, he would not take it up if he found it in the way. Of all
such I may say as Paul, They have all gone out of the way, Romans 3. 12. 16. 17.
destruction and unhappiness are in their way, and the way of peace have they
not known. Many years once told, can no ways comfort a foolish old age: but
the conscience of a well spent life, is an happy possession.

Secondly, there is no other means to be honorable before God and good men. It
is true, the godless Americans honor the Devil, wicked men will idol the
ungodly. For a time the rough garment may cover the wickedness of an old
Prophet: perhaps sin may be folded up in the large robes, and in the large
pleates of Magistracy: but then God will at the last, if he find any such,
brand them with final confusion: and howeuer they shined like glorious lights
(whilst fear and observance awed the vulgar) yet they shall at last go out,
with an ill-sauouring snuff, and Death shall freely confess what they are,
though life dissembled what they were. Time is a slow speaker of the Great, but
it will once tell all.

Dishonor not thou thy gray hairs, if thou would have others honor them: as
Epaminondas answered the Thebanes, when the Arcadians would have them winter in
their City: Now the Arcadians admire us wintering in the field, what honor
would they give us if they should see us ^itting by their fire? Young men
deservedly honor the aged for their temperance and moderation; but if they see
them sitting by their fire of luxury, drunkenness, and wantonness, how
should they ^euerence them? Would thou have thy gray hairs honored?
Tu^illos reuerere primus, vere confu^io ett and irrisio, vr camtiem ornamentum
extrinsecus, intrinsecus autem animum habeant puerilem, Chry^. in Heb. ho. 7.
Plut. De iuuen. and sen. inquit Ambr. Illi de aetate suppetit excusatio, mihi
iam nulla, illa enim debet disce^e, nos docere. de poen. l, 2. c. 8. Z^noph^^,
l. 1. Ioh. 7. 48. 1. Pet. 5. 3. Ezekiel. 8. 12.
do thou first honor them with the Crown of dignity. It is a mere mockery
for a boyish mind to be suited in the colors of age: old age is a Crown of
dignity, but if the old will (...) he shall be but a child of years, and God
will make his old age most despised.

Thirdly, old men's evil examples are double sins. As the Ephesians had three
degrees in their presbytery: the first were learners; the second, practisers;
the third, teachers; so are there in our ages; the last must be a teaching age:
to teach (...) continency it avails much, to see how old men live; example
is a powerful Rhetoric in any, but in old men, in Princes, it has an
hundred tongues: D^e any of the rulers or Pharisees believe in him? example of
the Honorable, and Elders speaks with authority: the more to blame they which
abuse it to make others fall, whereas they should be examples to the flock of
Christ: Have thou not seen what the a^cients of the house of Israel do in the
dark? Therefore Gods wrath was k^^dled, it aggrauated the fault that they were
Elders. Some think if they be rigid censurers of the young, it is enough; but
see thou give good example, remember thouart old, and many younger eyes derive
their liberty of sinning from thine intemperance.

Fourthly, there is nothing in the world more wretched then a vicious old man:
who in a diseased body has a more corrupted soul. The Heathen said well,
(...) in (...)
We must not burden old age, already over laden with miseries. Some men may
say, Peccatum reuixit, ego autem intery: the more they grow, the more youthful
their sin. 1. T^m. 6. ^o. Cum cur^cta vi^^a in seen senescant, sola auari^a
(...) nescit.
And among all, that dropsy of the soul, the disease of age, Covetousness
makes an old man unhappy, at even burieth him alive in the earth: Satan has
his variable Porters to watch at the doors of this world; De d^uitibus, inquit
Greg. Naz. otat. 28. (...) etc.
at our coming in, he fetteth his fair sweete-singing handmaids, those are
pleasures: at our going out, stands his eager long-fingered Groom,
Covetousness, to attend our age, which comes (like and envious Philisti^, to
Isaacs Well,) with his earth to fill up our hearts: you shall have many men,
how careless soever they have been in their youth, yet in their age their
thoughts are fixed on the world, as Archimedes on his Geometrical Tables; Plot.
when his servants pulled him up to eat, and had anointed him, he pourtraied
his works upon his oily body. Hear they, pray they, if you could open their
heart, you might see the picture of the world sitting like Silenus Image in the
broken stone: Plin l. 36. c. 5. De bell. ^ud. l 7. c^ ^5. (...)
therefore, though Covetousness be the root of all evil, yet it is like
Josephus Baaras, it is death to pull it up, it is rooted in the heart. All the
best riches are but a viaticum, enough is useful, too much a burden: good men
use the world as if they used it not; as Plinies Cranes about to fly over the
Seas, take up stones in their feet, and sand in their throat, to give them
weight against the wind, and as they came near the land, they by little and
little, cast them down, so lightning themselves, that the desired shore sees
the last stone, not taken away, but let fall; So the Children of God take up
the care of riches to serve them in their life, but as they come nearer their
desired rest, they more and more disburthen themselves. What old men's
Covetousness means, I know not; why they should be so careful for this
nothing, so nothing careful for the life to come, there is no reason. In the
reserved Manna of every day there was a Worm, save only that which was laid
up for the Sabbath: that which thou laiest up for the eternal rest, shall not
perish, what ever else thou storest up shall be lost, and thou can carry
nothing with thee. Saladin would therefore have his exequies thus solemnized: a
shirt fastened to the point of a lance, in fashion of a banner, and a Priest
going before, crying, Saladin Conquer our of the East, of all the greatness
and riches he had in this life, carries not with him after his death, any
thing more then this shirt. If there could be any excuse for the covetous, the
young man had most rightto it. Covetousness is vain in any, 2. King. 5. 26.
but in the old it is most unseasonable: as Elisha said to Gebaza, Is this a
time to take money, and to receive garments, and Olines, and vineyards, and
sheep and oxe^? What, will thou lay hold on the world with a dying hand? with
one leg in the grave? what more foolish then to take up more provision for the
journey, by how much less thou have to go? which brings me upon my next
Motive.

Thou have now but a little time to watch, and the Bridegroom will come:
Sleep not without Oil in thy Lamp. The Devil faith as one to the Cynicke,
Laert. l. 6.
Se^exes, quiesce, Master favor thy self: but he answered well, If I were
running in a race, should I slacken my pace toward the end, and not rather
hasten it? Be zealous, it is but a little while, and thou shall be crowned.

Sixthly, Senex quasi seminex, semimortuus.
thine age has placed thee like Aaron in the camp of Israel, betwixt the
living and the dead. There is nothing more to be admired, then a wicked old
man, who being placed at the door of the world, never looks out, albeit a
thousand forerunners continually cry, The Judge is at the door.

Seventhly, the old man has many remembrancers: when the sense of death with
varieties of infirmities, when thy dim eyes, thy (...) legs, thy trembling
ioynt^, thy staff in thine hand, thy gray hairs, all together preach unto
thee the Epilogue of dying Jacobs Sermon to his Sons ( I am ready to be
gathered to my Fathers,) it is impossible for thee to forger (except thou wi^^
not remember) thine end. Have thou forgotten the insuries done thee? Have thou
forgotten thy debtours? If thou have, thou may the better remember God: Death
has three Nancioes, 2. King. 1. 9. 10. Casus dub^a, infirmitas grauia,
senectus ^e^ta nuntiat.
chance, (...) it, and old age; these run like Ahazi^es Captains over
fifties, to Eliah on Carmel; if we escape the first, the last brings us
down. The first relleth us of Deaths ambushments: the second, of the Sable
flag displayed; the third of the battle joined. Infirmity seems to instruct
age the second childhood, bending him downward, as if it said, Man behold thy
mother, into whose bosom thou art returning for thy long rest. But old age
full of infirmity, being the last scene of our life, assures us we are near
death.

Eighthly, it is a mark of Gods children to be more fruitful in age: Pli. l.
16. c 27 Cursu opus e^t and curiu valido Chrysostom he 7. in ep. ad He. Ad vnum tan.
^um festinat currendo, hoc est, vt accipiat palmam. ^b.
they are like Plinies Amygdala, more abounding with fruit as more in years.
It is a way of righteousness, importing, we must not stand still in it: our
life is a course, and we must run, and that strenuously: like him which as he
passes, regards not railing, mocking, praises, disprayses, wife, children,
friends, any thing which may hinder him, only he hastneth for the crown. Some
say, I have been zealous in my youth, then I fasted, prayed, heard, read: Ne
^^hi veteres virtutes enumeres, nuc quoque iuvenis esto. Chry. ibid.
now mine eyes are bad, my hearing sayleth me. now I must spare my self; would
God thou would, which only may be, by living uprightly: Tell me not of the
old virtues of a former life, God requires not strength of body, but a zealous
heart: ^e loves not a man like the Indians, Plin lib 7. c. 2. Annos du^ enos
viuere, in iuventa candido capillo, qui in senectute nigres cat.
gray headed in their youth, waxing black in their age. No lover patiently
beats forsaking, if we forsake the good way we were in, we must not hope to
find God unjust.

Ninthly, the wicked old man shuts up the gate of mercy against himself.
How can thou say, forgive me the sins of my youth, which committest the
same in age?

Lastly, thou have less excuse for thy sin, for as much as the sins of
youth which carried thee like Lu^. 6.
the man possessed, have now left thee (at least thine age might have
dispossessed thee of them) if thou Cum seen (...) laborat ibid.
fall back, it shows a disposition extremely evil. He were a foolish
Mariner who having, with long wrestling, overcome the violence of a cursed Sea,
wh^ the storm cease, with a sound Bark and a little way to go, would put
into harbor. In youth our mind is sick of a thousand diseases, it is more
found in age: therefore when our youth like Jonah thrown out and swallowed up
of that vast bellied monster Age, which must render it again to a better life,
our masterlesse affections inclined, then to give over the combat against
sin, is, I say not like a foolish and lasie Poet in extreme actu deficere, to
^aile in his last act, but to depart before the day, before we have the
blessing. Give me leave to say, wherefore being freed (not from ceremonies, but
from those tyrannous masters intemperance and lusts) do ye return again to
those beggarly rudiments of youth those nastie vomits of sin cast out? Phil.
3:


Some man may say, Beatus qui no stent, hoc est, non dru ^mmoratus est in via
peccatoru (...) Psalm. Dat vires sequentibus se, ^taque quo (...) 8. 14.
none can be perfect here: it is true, we are now but in the way of
righteousness, tending to, not yet attaining perfection. I account not (says
Paul) that I have attained. Blessed is he that has not stood in the way of
sinners: that is, has not long lingered in the path of destruction. What if
thou go but slowly? If thou wrestle with Jacob, though thou come halting off,
let him not go before he bless thee, who gives strength to those who follow
him. Beginnings of goodness are hardest.

But yet as the Angel said to Gideon, Go on in this thy might, if thou have
well begun: if not, think not any age too late to learn, In isto adhuc
mundo (...)
it is no shame to amend; neither too late to repent in this life. Blessed is
that man whose errors die young; but if they are grown old, blessed is that
man, which even under the stroke of death conuerteth: this is the life of
repentance, Beatus qui sub ictu mor^^ animum conuertit a vit^s. Ambr. Basil^n
praecept. Iatius disp. Ad^ uc agon permanet, adhuc palma pendet, Chr) s. ad
Heb. 7.
that to come, of reward: this has labor, that wages: this suffering, that
consolation. Put not off thy repentance, thou know not whether thou shall
find her among the evil days: neither despair, then is a time of despair
when the gate is shut, yet the trial lasts, yet the crown hangs: remember
^hou art in the way, so run that thou may obtain this blessed crown of
glory, in, and at the end of a righteous old Age.

This Ibis, Exhalatis virosis and turbidis partibus odoratiorem hab^re and
virtutem aromaticam. Plut,
by reason she feeds on Serpents, has a poisonous breath in her youth, but
having wasted those foul and venomous parts, in her age she gives a sweet
and wholesome odor: thou have breathed thy souls poison in thine youth, words
proceeding from an infected heart, if thou art now this happy Old man, O show
the best part now, let thy speech be gracions seasoned with the spirit of God,
to the use of edyfying, these are the sweet breaths which God and good men
expect in thine Age. I will say all in a word, remember thou art old, Cu^us
vultum intrantes tristem, excunt^s exh^laratu^ putant. P^^. lib. 36. c. 5.
(...) 46. 6.
become thine Age. So shall thou find thine age like Dianaes Image at Chios,
though it seem sad at thine entrance, it will appear joyful at thy going
out: thy way shall be like the peoples into the Temple in Ezekiels Vision:
though thou go in at the cold Northern goae of infirtoities, (...)
(...) by the South. Thou (...) sick, none old; all shall be (...), never more
to be subject to the laws of Time and Age. Then shall our d^ie and withered
(...) ^od, flourish in the (...) to which bring (...) (...)

FINIS.

