Two very lamentable Relations:

The one, The grieuance for Religion, of those of Stiria, C^rinthia, and
Crayne, under FERD^^^ND then Duke of Gratz, now Emperor.

The other, The now present most humble S^^plication, of certain of the States
of lower Austria, unto the said Emperor.

Wherein is showed the most terrible, inhumane, and barbarian tyrannies,
committed by the Emperors Soldiers, specially the C^sockes and Wallons, in
the said Country.

Done out of the Dutch, and Printed.

1620.

The grieuances for Religion of those inhabiting in the Provinces of Stiria,
Carinthia, and Crag^^; not only in their Bodies outwardly, but also in their
Consciences inwardly, for the Testimony of the true Gospel; most cruelly
persecuted, by the enemies of the Truth, and their Commissaries: Under
FERDINAND, now Emperor, then Duke of Gratz etc.
TO declare to the World the hourly and minutely grief of Conscience and
grieuances for the Religion which we have had, were almost impossible and also
unnecessary, since it is, alas, too well known to this Land, to the Empire,
and to a great part of the World; yet nevertheless we will rehearse a few.

1. First, by privilege, and good will of the illustrious Archduke Charles of
Austria, of famous memory, our gracious Lord and Prince, was granted to the
professors of the Gospel, many special Ministers in principal Towns as in
Gratz, Indenburgk, Clagenfourt, and Labach.

2. Item, their Colleges and free Schools of learning, for instructing
Noblemens, and others Children, were admitted and granted them, in the foresaid
Towns of Gratz, Clagenfourt, and Labach, all which privileges are most
violently taken from them.

3. Item, in the Country of Stiria, were many Cathedral and other Parish
Churches also violently taken from them.

4. Also many privileged Churches, pulled down, and blown up with Gunpowder.

5. One hundred Preachers and Ministers commanded upon pain of death to depart
the province of Stiria.

6. A great many more Schoolmasters, and Teachers of the Youth, most
pitifully banished.

7. Item, many Churchyards, and resting places for the dead bodies of the
faithful, being walled and paled about, were most barbarously pulled down,
and made level with the ground.

8. The bodies of the faithful dug up, and given to be devoured by Dogs and
Hogs; as also the Coffins taken and set by the highway side, some burnt with
fire; a work both barbarous and inhumane.

9. Also upon the burial places of the faithful, were erected Gibets and
places for execution of malefactors. Also upon those places where Protestant
Churches stood, or where the Pulpit stood, or the Font-stone, were erected
always most filthy spectacles most ugly to behold.

10. Item, many thousand of godly and religious books, among which were many
hundred Bibles, the witnesses of Gods most holy Word, utterly burnt with fire.

11. Moreover, (a grief above all griefs) many thousands that professed the
Gospel, were most cruelly and shamefully tormented and tortured, and by the
same torments compelled shamefully, to deny and renounce the truth of Christ's
Euangell.

12. Compelling those of the Religion to swear upon their salvation never to
renounce that damnable Popish Idolatry, the which they were now forced to by
torments.

13. The poor distressed people, were also compelled to their extreme cost
and charges, to uphold and maintain a strong guard of Soldiers, for those
cruel Commissaries own obedient mancipia and euotoria.

14. The constant Confessors and Professors of Christ's most holy Word and
Gospel, together with their Wives, and innocent Babes, were most cruelly
compelled to leave their dwellings and habitations (whether it were in Cities,
Towns, or Villages) at the pleasure of those barbarous Co^missaries; and the
longest term of their abode was, six weeks and three days, sometimes but
eight days, and sometimes they must be gonne before Sunsetting, and sometimes
in the coldest time of Winter, in Frost and Snow: although it be manifest by
the peace of Religion, granted in the year of God 1555. (as appears by the
Formalia) that all Subjects or Tenants under Prince, or Nobleman, who were
persecuted for Religion, might freely choose the time of their departure out of
the Country.

15. They were not admitted time and leisure, to make sale of their Lands and
Goods, but (as may appear by that cruel Edict specialis) they were
constrained shamefully to sell them, to their unspeakable loss, yea, and
sometimes compelled to give them; notwithstanding, that it most manifestly
appears also, by the foresaid peace of Religion, that there should be no
compulsion, in selling or giving of Goods or Lands, excepting only, in amore
Christianae Religionis.

And if they did sell their Goods or Lands, they were compelled to give the
tenth Penny thereof, as by way of taxation; alleging that in Electorall
Princes and States Lands of the Empire they did the like. But, as it appears
plainly by the aforesaid peace of Religion, it is said, those Countries shall
pay the tenth Penny, who formerly did do the same; but these our Countries
have ever been free of those taxations. We omit to remember that those Jews
who were justly expelled not long since, were freely pardoned this taxation.

16. Notwithstanding, those Jews were bound by bond, to pay the tenth Penny,
at their departure out of the Land per modum Compensationis; but those poor
Christian Exiles must be banished and troubled, and forced not only to quit
their Country, Friends, alliance and acquaintance; not only debarred the
fruits of their labors, but also must be bereft of that little money appointed
for their maintenance, in this their woeful banishment.

17. And this was not a banishment with moderation to those devout and most
faithful Christians and our beloved Patriots, but they were exiled under pain
of death never to return. A banishment most infamous and most lamentable, that
a man must be constrained never to return to the place of his nativity,
there, where so many years he had dwelt with honor and respect; there where
are the sepulchers of his dead predecessors. Although it be expressly set down
in the often spoken of peace of Religion, that it shall not be prejudicial for
any man, freely to visit his Country, and friends, from whom he is banished
for Religion.

18. Also the Noblemen, and others of those Provinces being Protestants, were
not exempted this infamy, but were put by their hereditary offices of State,
only because they were of the Religion; and others were placed in their
offices, being men of no quality or merit, and only because they were of
Romish Religion. Our Protestant Noblemen, were also hindered from being
Administrators, or exequutors to their friends or their children, althoug they
deal never so faithfully: Which shows most plainly, that these wrongs done
unto them, was not for the insufficiency of their persons, births, or
qualities, but only because they were Protestants.

19. Also the Noblemen and Gentry of those Provinces being Protestants, were
most grievously taxed and caused to pay great and grievous sums of money,
over and above the tenth penny; notwithstanding that they had quitted their
Churches, Schools, Preachers, and Schoolmasters: yea, even those that
willingly would sometimes go out of the Country for devotion, to hear a
Sermon, or communicate, were constrained to pay the tenth penny, being out of
his Highness Countries; although it be manifest de iure, that nemo extra
territorium suum can punish any man. All these injuries are directly against
his Highness (now Emperor) own Edict, given to those of the Religion the
last of April, 1599.

20. These great and grievous troubles and tyrannical vexations, which we
have been and are plagued withal, were not so much to be pitied, if there
were any hope of our ease, or relief. But alas! the unmerciful answer and
resolution of his Highness (now Emperor) given to the Protestants the eighth
of December 1609. which was plainly told those of the religion, That he would
never yield to their demandes, and that he would continue in this his
resolution even till his grave; and that before he would yield for any of the
least of their demands, concerning their Religion, he would rather adventure
the loss of all that ever he had of God, and with a white Staff, go
barefooted out of all his Countries. Also his Highness (now Emperor) did
threaten mightily the Protestant Estates, vowing that he would be revenged on
them, for seeking any tolleration; alleging that it was against his princely
Authority.

21. To conclude, this last is the worst of all, that his Highness (now
Emperor) will not hear his Nobility and Gentry, nor one of those of the
Religion, but he oftentimes commanded them upon pain of their lives to keep
perpetual silence: as in Anno 1598. the thirtyeth of September; the fifth of
May 1599. the fifth of March 1601. and this last time, the eighth of December
1609. Also it is most manifest in that Edict, in the year 1599. he absolutely
forbids under the pain of death, that no man of what degree or quality
whatsoever, should entertain any Preacher or Minister of the Gospel; vowing
also that he will not hear any more of their grieuances: Which is, dura and
acerbavox regnantis, non velle audire and scripta accipere, contra quam Vetula
illa obijciebat Regi Macedonum Philippo audientiam recusanti: Si non vis
audire, noli ergo Regnare. The abuses in Religion is no new thing, especially
of the spiritual sort, but if the Spiritualitie did commit any excess, or
gave any evil example, it was to be seen into by their temporal Princes and
Lords, as we have a fine example in the History of Stiria (fol. 81,) in the
year of God 1518. When Doctor Luther had gotten the upper hand, he gave in a
long Catalogue of Complaints and abuses of the Clergy to the Emperor
Maximilian, complaining of the abuses of their Benefices, their neglect of Gods
Service, the insolences committed in their Diocese, the carelessness of their
salvation, of the evil governing of Church livings, and of the too many idle
persons, that were maintained to the heavy burden of the Country, as sundry
sorts of Abbots, Canonicats, Prebendes, Commendats, and many others: his
Imperial Majesty graciously did promise a redress, giving command to all
Dukes and Lords, to see a reformation. But at this time there is greater cause
of redress of abuses, since it is to be plainly seen, that wickedness has
gotten the upper hand, and alas! there is no hope of help, or redress.

If this Prince deals so hardly with his own, much more cruelty is to be
looked for at his hands, if he can have the upper hand of others.

The most humble Supplication of certain of the States of lower Austria made
unto the Emperor: Wherein is showed the most terrible, inhumane, and barbarian
tyrannyes, committed by the Emperors Soldiers, by the Casockes and Wallons in
the said Country.
MOst gracious Prince, the unspeakable spoiling, destruction, misery,
trouble, calamity, and subjection of these countries, wrought and effected by
the accursed Cosackes and others your Majesty's Soldiers brought into the
same, together with the robbings, murtherings, sackings, burnings, massacrings,
and other barbarian cruelties used and committed therein, moves and provoke
us in the name and behalf of our principal Lords and the whole Country, to
take and have our recourse, next unto God, to your Imperial Majesty, with
sighs and tears to renew our former complaints. In regard that the same (in
the least degree) are not yet redressed, neither has your Imperial Majesty,
nor you Generals granted any message, nor Mandate in writing for their safe
conducts; and to obtain some relief therein for your poor subjects. For
although your Majesty has heretofore oftentimes been certified and advised,
how and in what manner the Country in general is spoiled and destroyed, both
the Gentil-men and Commons robbed and ransackt, some of the Pesants killed, and
some of them driven from house and home into the Woods, and Mountains; Vines
and earable Lands spoiled and laid waste, humanity set aside; virtue,
modesty, honesty, policy, law and right hindered and neglected, and an
innumerable company of sins, and shameful and horrible actions are daily
committed, and cruelly exercised by the Soldiers. Your Majesty having most
graciously granted and promised, to take speedy order for the redressing and
prevention thereof; and to that end vouchsafed your Gracious Commission to the
General of your army, for the ceasing and stay of the same: being compelled
thereunto by mere necessity and force, your poor and humble Subjects are
again united to renew their said complaints, and to let your Majesty know,
that the said insolences are not by any means ceased, nor yet lessened, but
rather from day to day, and continually, are still committed, and more and more
increased and wax stronger, yea, and in such barbarian, unchristian, and
inhumane manner, that we are astonished and abashed to think thereon, and in a
manner have a detestation to name them to certify your Majesty thereof.
Therefore since the unruly Soldiers, specially the Cosackes, still persist in
such their strange, fearful, and detestable actions, and that there is no
forbearance nor distaste thereof in any sort, as also being certified, that the
same is to be continued and practiced by others of your Majesty's troops. We,
being upon more then a sure ground, for that we are certainly persuaded in our
consciences, that it cannot be answered before God, together with the States,
whose Officers are respectively to maintain the Country, moved with no small
grief and inward vexation of mind to behold the miserable state of the
country people, and being governors and fathers of the same, (as the duty of
every Gouuernor and Statesman binds him) most heartily and earnestly
desiring and wishing to see a remedy therein. Hoping that your Imperial
Majesty, will not in any wise be offended, nor take it in evil part, that in
some sort we make the same known unto your Majesty, only to the end, that your
said Majesty, as a Christian Potentate, and a most gracious Prince of the house
of Austria, may the rather with all speed seek to remedy, and take aid for
the diuerting of these great, most enorme, and mischievous proceedings.

So it is, and it pleased your Imperial Majesty, that for as much, as the
Wallons, and other strange Soldiers, brought into this Country, cease not
continually, to make a common practice to waste, spoil, burn, murder, and
massacre the Country and the Commons thereof, whereby there is not any
fearful, unspeakable, and inhumane action whatsoever, which they, and other
of your Majesty's soldiers with all cruelty, and bloud-thirstinesse, have not
effected, exercised, and committed; sparing not to burn whole Villages,
Hamlets, and Market-townes, and in them Storehouses for the provision of
Widows and Orphans, (among the which we also that are Ambassadors, and have a
special protection from your Majesty for our defense against all oppressions,
are not spared) seized upon, spoiled, and burnt their Castles, houses, and
their provision for their houses, being taken from them; the poor subjects
that are employed about necessary defenses, cannot get a bit of bread to
relieve themselves withal, but are constrained to starve and die for hunger.
Boys and Women being fearfully violated and ravished, are carried prisoners
away, both young and old men and women, most cruelly and terribly martired,
torterd, pressed, their flesh pinsht, and pulled from their bodies with burning
tongues, hanged up by the necks, hands, feet, and their priuy-members; women,
gentlewomen, and young wenches under years ravished till they die, women great
with child, laid so long upon the fire, until which time as that men may see
the fruit in their bodies, and so both mother and child die together, old and
young, high and low states, spiritual and temporal persons, without any
difference, oppressed, and many thousands of innocent people fearfully
murdered. Some in their castles (and yet such as have deserved well at your
Majesty's and the house of Austrias hands, as being old and good friends to the
same) notwithstanding their Letters Pattents of assurance and protection,
(because they profess the Lutheran Religion) pitifully murdered. Some of them
with their wives and children being brought forth in their shirts and smocks,
and wholly bereft of all relief, and such as fly out into the fields, not
suffered there to be free from their cruelties, but running after them, have
been most pitifully slain, and hewed to pieces. And many men of great account
have been glad to take Pasports from their own servants, with many other such
like unspeakable and inhumane insolences, and horrible, and cruel actions
that are practiced; which although, now (as loath to make them known unto your
Majesty) we forbear to write it as much as in conscience we can, and will
answer for the same before God, we will hereafter not spare to declare.

Therefore, since we know, that your Majesty takes no pleasure in these fearful
and horrible excesses, and intolerable abuses, and much more in respect of your
Christian charity and Princely mind, cannot but conceive a great disliking
thereof; and that it is to be feared, that your Majesty has not yet, or may
for a long time refrain from resolving upon an answer to be made, and order to
be taken touching these our obedient and humble supplications, and therefore
the same will have no end nor be restrained, whereby the whole Country will be
in danger to be laid waste, the Lords and subjects of the same brought and
reduced into extreme misery and affliction, to the great prejudice, not only
of your Majesty, but also of the whole famous and worthy house of Austria, and
an unrecoverable damage unto the Empire. We most humbly, once again beseech
your Majesty, in the name of our principal States, for the mercy of God, in
the bleeding wounds of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, that you would be
pleased, according to your natural commendable Austrian, and Imperial
clemency, to have compassion upon the necessity, misery, and pitiful
estates of your faithful States, Subjects, and inhabitants, whereby your
Majesty shall not only be a furtherance to your own desiring of peace,
quietness, and prosperity, and procure your most gracious satisfaction, but
also obtain immortal commendation of all posterity. Which your faithful and
bounden subjects will endeavor with all duty and obedience to deserve at your
Majesty's gracious hands, wherewith we refer our selves to your most Princely
pleasure and disposition.

The true nether Austrian Evangelical Committees and Ambassadors.


