VIVAT REX. A SERMON PREACHED AT PAVLS CROSS ON THE day of his Majesty's
happy inauguration, March 24o. 1614. And now newly published, by occasion of
His late (no less happy) recovery.

By JOHN RAWLINSON Dr of Divinity, and one of his Majesty's Chaplains in
Ordinary.

Vox populi, vox Dei.

AT OXFORD. Printed by JOHN LICHFIELD and JAMES SHORT, Printers to the famous
University. 1619.

TO THE MOST HIGH AND MIGHTY KING, JAMES by the grace of God, of Great
Britanny, France, and Ireland, King, Defendor of the Faith, etc.
Most dear, and dread Sovereign,
IT is not long, since there was but a step betwixt You and death, and that You
were even at the point of resigning this your earthly Kingdom for that
heavenly, whither your Queen of precious memory is lately gone before you to
take possession. The change though it had been happy for You, yet needs must
it have been bitter to us that must have lost you. But blessed be God, who
has frustrated our fear by exchanging it for joy. The wished and
thrice-welcome news of your joyful resurrection, and of the rolling away of
the stone from the sepulcher of Your body ((...) quasi (...)) has already
been published at the Cross by a Right Reverend Praelate (a faithful and
timely messenger thereof) in the audience of all the States of your Kingdom.
The Lord B. of London.
This VIVAT REX of mine (proclaimed at the same Cross now five years since
and upward, on the day of your Majesty's most auspicious and happy investiture
into this Kingdom) is but the AMEN to that VIVIT REX of his. The reviving of
Your Majesty is the reviving of this Sermon, and the reviuing of this Sermon
will (I doubt not) be the reviving of many a good prayer for your Majesty. I
am sure, it was no sooner uttered, but presently the tongues of many your
loyal Subjects bespake it for the Press, as desirous to have it also
imprinted in their hearts. Their hearts no less fixed to say VIVAT REX,
Macrob. Sat. l. 2. c. 4.
than was the tongue of the Cobblers Crow docil to AVE CAESAR. Your Majesty (I
dare say) will be far from saying either to them, or me, as there Augustus
says to the Crow; Satis domi salutatorum talium habeo; though if You should,
yet could neither of us fitly reply with the Crow; Opera and impensa periit.
For, whither such our salutations be accepted of You, or not, yet I have
learned of the Apostle, that they are accepted of God. 1 Timothy 2.3.
To You therefore (Gracious Sovereign) do we humbly offer this our
ioint-salutatio^, VIVAT REX: And for You do we likewise offer unto God this
our ioint-supplication, VIVAT REX Beseeching him again and again; long and
long to prorogue the Term of this your mortal life, to the utmost extent of
natures liueliehood; And when the date thereof shall expire, to immortalize
Your Life and Memory, Your Crown and Dignity in the golden line of life, the
line of Your Posterity. And, in the mean time, to grant, that as You are for
birth Eugenius, for glory Eudoxus, for aequity Eunomius, for integrity
Eutropius, for piety Eusebius, so for length of days you may be Macrobius.
Let him that is Amen it self say Amen! Apoc. 3.14.
Amen say I

Your Majesty's most faithful Subject, and dutiful Servant I. R.

VIVAT REX.
1 Samuel 10.24. VIVAT REX. Let the King live. Or, God save the King.


NO sooner have I read my Text (Right Honorable, PRAEFACE.
Right Worshipful, and beloved in the incarnate love of God Christ Jesus) but
there are two things (I know) will seem strange unto you. The one, An APOLOGY
that being to speak unto you two hours, I have chosen to speak but of two
words: The other, that being to recognize and celebrate the happy Inauguration
of King James, I have founded my discourse upon this acclamation of the
Israelites at the enthronizing of King Saul. 1 For the SHORTNESS of the TEXT.


But, as Adam and Eve, though but two persons, begat a world of men: So Vivat
Rex, though but two words, will beget a world of matter.

Well may Rex, the King, stand for Adam: for Adam was Rex mundi: the sole King
and Monarch of the whole world: and as well may Vivat go for Eve. For Eve was
Matter viventium, the Mother of the living: Genesis 3.20.
even as the Kings life is (as I may say) the Mother of all their liue^ that
live under him.

I have compared Rex and Vivat, the King and his Life, to Man and Wife: And
yet, in the prosecution, I shall be feign to divorce them in words: But cursed be
he, and let him perish from off the face of the earth, who shall but have the
least thought to divorce them in deed: to take the King from his life, or life
from the King. They are united and bound together in Heaven in the bundle of
life: Let no man then presume to vnty or separate them hee^e on earth. Vivat
Rex.

2 For the CHOICE.
Again: I grounded n^y choice, not upon any similitude or symbolization of our
Gracious Sovereign with that ungracious Saul: as minding to make Saul either a
precedent or a parallel to our King, who is as fair from Readiness vices, as was
Saul from his virtues: But upon the peoples cheerful, and joyful, and
dutiful omination to King Saul: thereby the rather to excite and kindle the
devotion of the people of Great Britanny to pray for the life of so good a King
as King James, by the example of the people of Israel so devoutly praying for
the life of so bad a King as King Saul. And yet not to slander Saul (no more
than I would the Devil himself, who was Readiness Familiar in the lik^ (...) ^f
Samuel, 1 Samuel 28.) when at his entrance and in (...) ^re into the Kingdom,
the people thus powered out their souls in devotion to God for him, he was then
Tanquam mustum, like wine which purges and purifieth it self best while it is
new: but soon after, he was turned In acetum, into vinegar, which is vinum
mortuum, dead wine: Insomuch, that though he lived King in Israel 20 years,
yet the Scripture says he res^n'd but 2 years, 1 Samuel 13: 1 Samuel 13.1. Stell.
l. 2. de cont. mund. c. 31.
(18 of the 20 stood but for a cipher) because (as Didacus Stella yields the
reason) Deus non numerat annos male expensos, sed solum been collocates: God in
his Arithmetike reckons not those years which we bestow ill, but those only
which we spend well.

But take him at his very best, and I hold him no fit mate or compiere for our
King, who as far ouer-toppes him in his virtues, as he did all the people in
his stature; -- toto stans vertice supra: being higher than any of them by the
head and shoulders: ver. 23: I will say more, Verse 23.
(and yet I will say no more than a truth) not only Saul, but Solomon himself
in all his royalty, was not to he compared to one of those Lilies that He
bears in His Arms by our Saviors testimony, Matt. 6.29.
Mat. 6. but much less to one of those Lilia virtutum (as St Bernard speak's)
those li^ies of his virtues that he bears in his breast. Bern. in Cant. Ser. 70.


Vivat Rex.

Divines distinguish Prayer into two sorts: (...), DIVISION.
and (...): Supplicatory, and Gratulatory. The one, Pro beneficijs impetrandis:
for benefits to be received: The other Pro impetratis: for benefits already
received.

This short ejaculation, Vivat Rex, is both. It is both supplicatory
salutation,wherein the people zeal usly pray unto God for the preservation and
permanencie of Readiness reign over them. And it is also gratulatory acclamation,
whereby the people testify both their gladsomnesse, and their thankfulness
unto God for their King.

Of both which while I shall speak as briefly as I may, let me crave the
continuance of your Honorable and Christian attention. For (as our Savior
Christ says, Ioh. 11.) Are there not twelve hours in the day? Ioh. 11.9.
or rather, are there not 8760 hours in the year? And will any then in this
assembly show himself so bad a Subject, as to refuse to render two of them
back to God, in a serious meditation and rememoration of this day's benefit?

A benefit, so great, that (doubtless) if our Savior Christ conversed again
upon earth, and should find but any one standing idle in the market place now
at the end of His Majesty's 11th year, as he found those in the Gospel at the
11th hour: he would say unto them, Matt. 20.6.
Go ye also into my vineyard, and there learn to bring forth the fruits of
thanksgiving for so rich a blessing.

And so far would he be from rebuking us, that say with them, Luke 19: Luke
19.38.
Benedictus quivenit Rex in nomine Domini* Blessed be the King that comes in
the name of the Lord: that he would say to those that should murmr, or be
offeded at Us, Verse. 40.
as ver. 40: I tell you, that if these should hold their peace, the very stones
would cry. In the Greek, there is but one letters difference between (...),
the people, and (...), a stone. And look how easy it is for a man to alter
that one letter: so, and much more easy is it for God, to change their whole
nature. For God is able even of stones to raise up sons unto Abraham Luke 3. If
therefore the people should so turn themselves into stones as not to cry: Luke
3.8.
then would God turn the stones into people, and they should cry: Vivat Rex.

God save the King.

Take we it first as a supplication, PART 1. SVPPLICATION. SVBDIVISION.
and it stand's upon two parts. The one, Personal: the other, Real.

1 The Personal, Quis? who it is that is prayed for? It is, Rex, the King. 2
The Real, Quid? what it is that is prayed for? It is, Vivat, that he may live.
In the first there is Agniti^ potentiae* an acknowledgement of his power and
Sovereignty, as he is a King.

In the second, there is Recognitio impotentiae: a remembrance or insinuation
of his weakness and frailty, as he is a Man.

But as our blessed Savior at his transfiguration took with him Peter, Matt.
17.1.
James, and John to mount T^abor, to give them a raste of his glory, before he
would speak unto them of mount Golgotha, Verse. 22.
the place of his mortality:

So let me first thew you the King in his glory, out of this word Rex: and
then in his frailty, out of this word, Vivat.

Physicians say, WHO (...) prayed f^r R^X. Ves^a^. (...) 15. Alexan. Ne^x.
(...).
there is great difference between

Vena arterialis, and

Arteria venalis.

And there is great difference (say the Naturalists) between

Iovis barba, and

Barba Iovis.

And great difference (say the Logicians) between these two propositions:

Iste vestitus est natui, and

Iste ^atui est vestitu^.

And surely, no less difference is there between

Rex Vivat, Let the King live, and

Vivat Rex* Let him live a King.

For, a King he may be, and yet not live; the life of the wicked being not
properly a life, but a death. And again, Live he may, and yet not live a King;
the duty of a King being the better half of a King. For a King is called Rex,
a regendo, of ruling: SVB^IVISION. THE VERY N^M^ (...) a King ^^phes (...). 1
D^ON^^Y; which stan^^
and ruling (ye know) includes as well a duty, as a dignity.

First therefore of the excellency of Kingly dignity, and then of the exigence
of Kingly duty. The one is Praeesse, to rule, not to be ruled by others:
There Is the honor of his place: The other is Prodesse, to rule for the good and
benefit of others: There Is the teno of his office.

Vivat Rex. Let him live a King.

And a King what is he, but that maine Ocean from whence all the lesser
streams of Nobility, of Gentry, of authority are derived? The excellency of
whose dignity shines first of all in the Author or ^reator of it, 1 In the
^^^HOR.
GOD himself: For St Peter calls it (...), the creature of God: 1 Pet. 2: as
St Paul calls it (...), the ordinance of God: Rom* 13. Per me Reges regnant: 1
Pet. (...) R^m* 13.^. Prove ^ 1^.
By me Kings reign; (says God in the person of wisdom, Pro. 8.) Per me, not
Perse: They reign by my appointment, not by any power or virtue of their own.
Their Super is but Desuper: Their being above other men, it is from God above,
to whose Supremacy all Superiority must subscribe. For Excelso excelsior alius
est, Eccl. 5.7.
as it is Ecclesiastes 5: God the most High who dwells in the highest
heavens, is higher than the highest Princes Highness here on earth. Prou.
21.1.
As Cor Regis, the heart of the King is in the hand of God: Prove. 21: So is
also Corona Regis, the Crown of the King: Dan. 4.14.
and (that all the world may know it so to be) it is fronted with a Noverint
vniversi Dan 4: that the most High has power over the kingdom of men, and
giue's it to whomsoever he will. Yea not only Confert, but Transfert too: he
not only collate's, but translate's kingdoms at his pleasure: For because of
unrighteous dealing, and wrongs, and riches gotten by decerte, the kingdom is
translated from one people to another: Ecclus: 10.8.
Eccl. 10.

God then being the Author of Imperial, or Princely dignity, 1 Pet. 2.17.
no merveile, if St Peter 1 Pet. 2: have as it were pared and coupled these two
together in one yoke: Fear God, Honor the King: because if ye do the one,
ye will do the other. If ye fear God, who is Proto-rex, the Supreme, or Prime
King, then ye will honor his Pro-rex, or vnder-king whom himself has honored.

2ly In the TRANSCENDENT POWER.
2ly: The excellency of Kingly dignity shines in the transcendent power and
praerogatiue of a King, which is such: that Plus potest rex, quam vnli bonus
rex: A king in his absolute and unlimited power is able to do more than a good
King will do.

It was therefore good advice which Agapetus gave the Emperor Instinian:
Aga^et (...).
(...). You shall do well (says he) to impose upon your self a necessity of
keeping the laws as having no superior here on earth, that may compel you to
keep them. You shall do the law great honor in keeping it: and shall strike
into your subjects a scare of transgressing it.

A King then though he be free from coaction to keep the law yet must he
voluntarily submit his will to the direction of the law: the difference
between a good King and a tyrant being but this; that a King makes the law his
will, because he will's, that which the law will's: But a tyrant makes his will
a law, because what he will's, he will have to be law.

Therefore Antigonus, King of Macedony, Cael Rhod. l. 23. c. 14.
when one of his Sycophants told him, that in a King all things are just and
honest: yea but (says he) none but barbarous Kings are of that opinion. (...).
For mine own part (says he) I think only those things honest that are
honest indeed, only those things just that are just indeed.

And it was but a mock that Anaxarchus gave to King Alexander, when seeing the
po^ture of Justice iet cheek by iowle on the right side of Jupiter's image:
Plutarch. ad punc. indoct.
he told him, that Jupiter was not thereby bound to do justice; but that the
people were thereby bound to conceive, that whatsoever Jupiter did* was (...),
lawful and just. For a good King will be so far from thinking it lawful for
him to break the law, that he will be (...), a keeper of the law: a keeper of
it in both significations of the word (...): He will not only Serv^re, but
Observare: not preserve it only, but observe it too: that is, he will neither
violate it himself, nor yet suffer it to suffer violence of others; and is
therefore called by N^za^^zer, (...), a living law: by Xenophon (...), a seeing
law: by the Roman Orator. Lex ^oquens* a speaking law.

But suppose him to be the very worst that may be, a tyrant: one that will make
the law an outlaw; yet shall it not be lawful for any mortal man
vindictiuely to meddle with him.

David though he were a King, and had therefore more right than any inferior
person to take vengeance of King Saul who contrary to all law ae^uity. and
religion, had causlesly slain the Priests of the Lord: 1. Sam. 24. yet it is
said, that his heart smote him, because he had but cut of the lap of Readiness
garment, 1. Sam. 24.6.
who was the anointed of the Lord.

Mark that, thou that boastest thy self to be Peter's Successor and herein
indeed exceedest him, that, as Peter cut off Malchus his care, Hieronym. epist.
l. 3. ep. 3.
which by St Ierom's interpretation is a King: So thou by thy devilish agents
and instruments cutt'st off not only an ear, or a lap of the garments of those
Kings that will not stoop to thy lure, but their crowns, and their heads too.

Surely, thou had never any such warrant from God, who was so far from giving
any commission either to David or any other, to put Saul (though a wicked King)
to the sword as that he suffered Saul to fall upon his own sword, 1. Sam. 31.4.
and so to be his own executioner: 1. Sam. 31. as i^ no earthly hand had been
fit to execute Saul (a King) but his own.

A fair example and warning-piece for Princes, to teach them Sibi imperare, to
be Kings over themselves, least God suffer them Sibi poeuas irrogare, to be
avenged of themselves.

It was the saying of that heathen Marcellus in Tacitus, Tacit. l. 4. paulo
post init.
that he would Bonos imperatores voto expetere, qualescunque, tole^are: pray
for Emperors, if they were good, but patiently endure them, though they were
never so bad.

It should seem by him, that heathen Rome was not then so heathenish as now it
is. For is it not now the doctrine of the Church of Rome, (and do they not
also countenance their doctrine by their practiced) that kings if they be bad
are not Tolerandi, to be tolerated with patience, but emedis to^lendi, to be
rid out of the way by violence? nay, be they otherwise never so good, (if not
good for their turn) that they are no voto expetends, to be desired of God by
prayer, but Glad^o impetends, to be dispatched of men by the sword?

But was this either the doctrine, or the practice of the Primitive Church?
Surely, no. Per. Martyr. in Sarn. 24.
For when those more than tyrannica^l tyrants to ba^ba^ously persecuted and
afflicted the Christians with most exquisite tortures and torments, yet neither
Peter, nor Paul, nor any of the Apostles did once offer to arm, or incense the
people against them Nay, they rather admonisht them, to make their
supplications unto God for them and namely for Nero that bloody persecutor,
whom therefore St Paul, by an (...), call's (...) the Lion, 2. Tim. 4. 2. Tim.
4.17. 3 In the FAC^. Gerson.


3ly The excellency of Princely dignity shines in the very face and countenance
of a King. For there is Character tremendus in vultibus Regu^: An impression or
character of dreadful Majesty stamp^ in the very visage of a King. The Lyon's
look is terrible to all the beasts of the Forest. And Nature hers^lfe (says
that Chief Secretary of Nature) has made the Physiognomy of Princes to be
such, Aris^ot.
as st^^ke'^ an lawful fear and reverence into as many as behold them; even
as it is said of Moses, Exodus 34: Exodus 34.30.
that after his conference with God* the skin of h^ face shone so bright, that
the people were afraid to come near him.

4ly And lastly the ex^elle^cy of Kingly dignity shines in the very
appellations of 1 King; that he is called a Head, 4. In the APP^^ATIONS.
a Shepherd, a Father, a God. I will but only salute them in a word.

1 First he is called a Head, Esaias 9: and 1 Samuel 15: 1 HEAD. Esa. 9.14 1. Sam.
15.17.
because as the Head is the Prince of the Natural body; so the Prince is the
Head of the Politic body; being to it as is the head to the rest of the
members, the fountain both of sense, and motion. And therefore as in the
natural body, so is it in the Body politic: If the body be without a head, it
presently falls to the ground, and perishes: or of the head be ill affected,
the whole body i^ by and by disabled. Whence it is, that Caput, as it
signifies a head, so it also signifies life because Salu^ capits: caput est
^alutis: the safety of the head is the head of the bodies safe^y.

2 A SHEPHERD. Arist. Eth. l. 8. c 11. ^sa. 44.28. ^^m ^lex. Philo. ^^d.
2ly, A King is called Pastor, the shepherd of his people. A man ^g^u^^ by God
himself to King Cyrus, 100 years ere he wa^ borne: Fso: 44. So do Cl^m^ns
Alexandrinus, and Philo Inau^ usually compare a King to a Shephea^d. and the
people to sheep: because as sheep will runn^ through a gai^ which the first
haht broken, though it be to the very endangering of then lives: so the rage
of the people stre^gthened by error and blindness of their nature, is such,
that unless they have a King to recall and guide them, it is a venture but they
run desperately to their own ruin.

3 FATHER Arist. l. 8. Eth. c. 10.
3ly A King is called Pater, a Father: be^a^se (says Arist) he must exercise
(...), the authority of a Father, not of a Master, over his Subject. This did
Augustus Caesar (an heathen Emperor) see by the dim and glimmering light of
Nature: of whom Macrobius write's, that he carried such an entire and fatherly
affection to the Commonwealth, Macrob. Sat. l. 2. c. 5.
that he called it Filiam suam* his own daughter: and therefore refused to be
called Dominus* the Lord or Master of his country, and would only be called
Pater Patria, the father of his country: because he governed it Non per
timorem, sed per amorem: not by fear, but by love. A title which the Pope's
Paternity for these many successions has much affected, though little deserved.
For the Pope by his very name (Papa) would have us to understand, that he is
Pa: pa: that is to say* Pater Patriae: the Father of his Country, which (by
his interpretation) is all the w^rld.

But let him be what he is; I am sure, that (as Cyrus says in Xenophon) there
is no odds at all, Xe ph. (...). l. 8. su^^^ ^^it. (...) ^^o. 12.
between (...), a good King, and (...), a good father. And therefore has God
joined a King and a father as it were in the same patent of honor: nor is there
any other co^mandem^t that directly enioyn's us to honor the King, save only
that which binde's us to honor our parents, which is the fifth commandment: and
it is therefore placed In meditullio in the very midst between the first and
second table, to show, that the King ought to be ( ^ustos vtriusque tabulae the
preserver of both tables of the Law: that he must have i^ his right hand the
first table, which is of Piety and Religious duties toward God: and in his
left hand the second table, which is of Policy and Civil duties toward men;
that so there may be as well Ex^erna professio doctrinae, an outward profession
of doctrine; a^ Gubernatio externa disciplinae, the government of outward
discipline. For we are not to imagine that a King is but Armentarius, a
heardsman only, that he should have care but of the bodies of his people. No:
a King is Mixta persona cum Sacerdote, a mixed person with a Priest, having also
the procuration and care of Gods Worship, and so consequently of the Souls of
men. And therefore does God promise it as a special blessing to his Church,
Esaias 49. that Kings shall be Nutriti^, Esa 49.23. P. 82.6.
her nursing Fathers, and Queens, Nutrices, her nursing Mothers.

4. GOD.
Fourthly and lastly: a King is called Deus, a God, Psalm. 82: Yet Non per
naturam, sed participative: a God (says Aquinas) not by nature, Aq^in. in Po
e^. (...). phil.
but by participation o^ his power from God, as the powers that are, are
ordein'd of God, Romans 13: and Assimilative, ^om 13.1. O^n. Apoll. hi^^^gl
a God by similitude* or likeness: As having like God himself (...), power
both of life and death. For he can Vivificare and occidere, quicken, and kill
men at pleasure: He can breath into the face of man (his civil creature) the
breath both of life and death: He can raise men out of the dust, and set them
even with the Pieres and Princes of his people. Yea, what God does of himself,
that does the King by others. God of himself knows all things: So does a King
by his Intelligencers. God of himself can do all things: So can a King by his
Officers. God is in all places at once by himself: So is a King by his
Deputies.

Now, 2 DVTY. Marc. 15.26.
because all these excellent titles of dignity will be no better to a King than
was Christ's title of Rex Iudaeorum, the King of the Jews, to him; that is, but
titles of his further condemnation, unless he be as studiously jealous of his
duty, as of his dignity (for not the having, but the deserving of honor, is it
that makes a King truly honorable, Xenoph. (...) l. 1.
as being (says Xenophon) (...), a superexcellent work:) It must therefore be
the prime care of a King, not so much to study how he may compass the title
of (...), the Great King; (which (says Suidas) was the title proper to the
Persian King: Suid. in voc. (...).
other Kings having only the addition of their peoples names given unto them,
as King of the Macedonians, or the like:) as how he may descrue the title of
Optimus, which Pliny gives to the Emperor Traian: Plin. Panepyr. Traian. p. 81.
the title of the Best, which indeed is the best title: That, as he is best by
virtue of his place, so he may be likewise best by place of his virtue; that
is, that he join his duty with his dignity: which is the second thing I noted
in this word Rex, or King.

Of which a word, and away; because the duty is so unseparably united to the
titles of dignity, that forget the one he cannot, but he must also necessarily
make shipwrecke of the other.

For as there is a duty which Subjects owe to their King: so is there also a
duty which the King owes to his Subjects. The duty which Subjects owe to their
King is obedience; and that is Summum dominationis bonum: Gerson.
the chief happiness of a King. The duty which the King owes to his Subjects
is love; and that is summum subiectionis bonum: the chief happiness of the
Subjects.

As St Paul bids, (...): 1 Timothy 5.3
Honor widows that are widows indeed: 1 Timothy 5. So are those Kings indeed to be
honored that are Kings indeed. And that which makes them Kings indeed, is not
their bare and empty names of dignity, unless they be also accompanied with a
faithful discharge of their duty. A thing not unknown of old to their very
children playing in the streets, who in their sport which Julius Pollux call's
(...), Alciat in castigat. Co^n. Tacit. Iul. Pollux. (...). l. 9. c. 7. Horat.
ep. l. 1. ep. 1.
of (...), a King, because in it they were wont to choose a -- King. Rex eris,
aiunt, Sirecte facias --, Do well (say they) and you shall be a King: whereas a
King, if he have naught but the name of a King to commend him, he shall be no
better than Rex larvatus, a King on a theater; or Rex ludicer, a King at
chesse, a wooden King. Let the King fail but in his duty, and the people will
not fail to fail in theirs. The Poets feign that Venus had a little son,
which she called (...), Love, Niph. l. de Amor.
which could never come to any growth or stature, till she had brought forth
another son, which was called (...); as if you would say, Love for love. Like
her son (...), is the love of the subjects to their King. Like her son
(...), the love of the King to his subjects. The Moral is; there must be an
enter course of love and duty between the King and his Subjects. For if the
King reguard not his Subjects, as Subjects; no more will the Subjects reguard
the King, as a King: which made that good Emperor Traian profess; Se velle
esse talem subditis suis, qualem vellet dominum, suum sibi fore, si
subijceretur: that he would be none otherwise affected to his Subjects, than
he would wish the Emperor should be to him, if himself were a Subject. TO
KEEP his people.


Now a King shall best express his love and duty to his Subjects, if he keep
them in tranquillity, in sufficiency in security.

F^st in tranquillity. 1 In ^^anquillit.
For as affliction and oppression is the scope of tyranny: so is peace the end
and vpsho^ of al good government. For a King (says Solomon) that sits in
the throne of judgment, P^ov. 20.^.
chaseth away all evil with his eyes. All evil? what is tha^ S. Austin says
that Pax est omne bonum: Austin. in Psalm. 127.
Peace is all good: and therefore A contrary, dissension and division is all
evil.

If then there shall be dissensions and heart-burnings among the people, it is the
brain and wisdom of the King that must compose them; like as Aristotel notes,
that the cold moistness of the brain is it that makes (...), Arist. de part.
mund. 2. c. 7.
that cooles and qualifies the overboyling heat of the heart: and that
therefore needful it is, that whatsoever creature has a heart, should also
have a head.

So does the great king Artaxerxes, otherwise called Assuerus, in his epistle
which he wrote to the Princes of 127 Provinces, profess, that he would not
abuse his power, but with aequity and gentleness would he govern his people,
and set them in a peaceable life, Ester. 13.2.
Ester, 13.

And because there is not a more Princely, or royal virtue than Peace,
therefore is Christ called Princeps pacis, the Prince of peace, Esa. 9.^.
Esa. 9.

And our manner is to give Kings as a special title, the title of
Serexiff^^is, or Pacisici: most Peaceable, or Peacema^^^s.

Secon^ly A King must keep his people in sufficiency. For, ^. In sufficien^y.
for a King to ^^^ome and cate up his subjects by exa^tion^ is a thing no lest
unnatural, than for a man to eat the flesh of his own aims. Should the head
in the natural b^^y draw all the blood, and marrow, and substance of the other
members to it self, it must needs turn to the destruction of the head it
self. For how should the head continue without a body? Or how should the body
but pine and perish without susteinance? What men? No Subsidies at all to be
levied^ yes: Reason good the people should yield Subsidi^^, aid or assistance
to the King who is Praesidium, the stay and safeguard of the people?

I only wish with Reverend Gerson that two Cautions may be carefully needed.
Gerson.


1 The One; Two Cautions. 1 Concerning the louy^g of Subsidies. Cic. O^^. l. 1.
That Subsidies be levied In bond aequitate and aequalitate, with good aequity
and aequality thorow-out the whole body of the kingdom. The Orator giue's the
reason out of Plato, because Particiuium consulere partem ne^ligere; To lay a
heavier load upon one part of the people than upon anot^er, is to bring into
the Common wealth a thing no less pernicious and capital, than is Sedition.
Let the bigger horse (says the Proverb) bear the greater burden. But let
neither less, nor bigger bear a greater, than they are able. O how blessed
are the people (and yet so blessed have we hitherto been) whose Kings are like
those holy and aquiate beasts, of whom it is said, that Manus ho^^nis sub
(...) eorum, Ezech. 1.8.
the hands of a man came out from under then wings! that is, under the
protection of whose wings poor Artificers and handiecrafts live in peace, not
oppressed or bu^den'd with exactions! And (that they may be the less burdened)
because it many times falls out, that it is not the Idol Bell bu^ his Priests
that eat up all, Dan. 14.13.
and that, in the night: that is not Kings themselves, but then Servants and
Officers that devour all in secret; (these by conveyances under hand, as those
by conveyances under ground:) therefore as God though he has mad^ Kings his
Deputies yet his eyes are always on them to see what they do: So m^st Kings
eyes be sometimes on their under-officers to observe what they do.

2 Concerning the giving of gifts.
2 His Other Caution is; That thousands are not to be impoverished, that some
few may be enriched; Ne liberalitas crudelis sit largitas: lest in such case
(says he) Princely liberality prove to be no better than bountiful cruelty.

This duty of mainteining the people in Sufficiency stand's Princes upon so much
the rather, because they are Villice, God's Stewards: Luke 16.2.
and being therefore one day to give an account of their Stewardship, that is,
of the goods of the Commonwealth, not as Lords, but as Tutors, they must see
that they so ceuen their reckonings, as that they may be found Villici
aquitatis, righteous Stewards.

Thirdly and lastly, 3 In Security.
A King must keep his people in Security. For, as to the people the Kings
safety must be the Supreme Law: Sal^s populi suprema lex esto. Esaias 14.14.
So to a King the peoples safety.

It was Lucifer's sin, that he would be similis Altissimo, like God himself:
which some Divines thus expound; that he would rule as Lord over all other
creatures, sine vlla obligatione ad earum custodiam seu servitium: without any
obligation, or ty of duty in their protection, or service: whereas
contrariwise, he ought to have known, that servitu^ eo mayor est, quo mayor
dominatio: the more sovereignty, the more service. And therefore Menander an old
Greek Poet said, Menand.
that (...). The only Servant in a family is the Master of the family. So
that, to be a King is but Nobile servitium, a noble kind of service; ^^th the
people can not be secure but by his care; and his own pillow must he stuff
with thistles that he may stuff the pillowes of his people with down. A thing
not obscurely signified by our blessed Savior, who was never so vexed and
tormented in all his lifetime, as when he ware the roabes and ensigns of a
King, Mark 15.17.
Mark. 15: when in a mockage they clad him with purple, and crowned him with
thorns, and put a scepter of reed into his hand.

Such then being the cares and vexations that are wont to attend upon Kings,
the less wonder is it, if in that aenigmatical parable propounded by Iotham,
Judge. 9: Judge 9.8.
where the trees went forth to anoint a King over them; the Olive would not
leave his fatness to macerate himself with the cares of a kingdom: nor the
Fig Tree his sweetness, to taste of the bitter-sweets of a kingdom: not the
Vine his fruitfulness, chearing both God and man, to afflict himself with the
barren cares of a kingdom: Only Rhamnus, the scratching and goaring and
barren bramble, good for nothing but to make fuel for the sire, he step's out,
and profer's his service. Verse 15.
It ye will indeed (says he) anoint me King over you, Sub v^nbra mea
requiescite: Come, and put your trust under my shadow. So that, he is worse
than a bramble-King, that will refuse to shade and shelter his people from the
scorching heat of violence and wrongs.

It was an honorable title which was given to good King David 1 Samuel 22: 1 Samuel
22.2.
(which is also even haereditary to our King, (...)
as descending unto him from his worthy Grandfather) that he was the Poor
man's King: For there gathered unto him (says the text) all men that were in
trouble, and all men that were in debt, and all those that were vexed in mind,
and he was their Prince.

Now, how should a King gain this Title to himself but by protecting and
securing his people? or how should he better secure them, than by returning for
Vivat Rex, Let the King live; Currat lex, Let the Law have his forth: that is,
for their prayer for his safety, a warrant for their safety: Not disarming and
taming his Laws, as Heliogabalus (in Lampridius) did his Lions and Leopards: I
amprid. Ant^^^. Helioga^al.
using the^ only Ad terrorem and delectamentum: to affright others, and
delight himself: but executing rigteous justice and judgment, the true end
why Princes are advanced to the throne: 2 Chronicles. 9: 2 Chronicles. 9.8.
as that blessed Queen Elisibeth protested of herself in a speech to her
Lords, that her verdict went ever with ^he truth of her knowledge. For Justice
(says that Great Moralist) (...) (...). (...) or perfection of the Law:
Plutarch. ad princ. indoct.
the Law is (...) the work of the Prince: the P^^ce is (...), the Image of GOD
digesting and ordering all things. As if he should say* that a Prince is then
indeed the Image of God, when (...) careful to make good Laws, and no less
careful to execute them, that his people living under him in security and
safety, may have just cause to pray for his safety; Vivat R^x.

And so from the Personal part of the Sup^lication, which is Rex, the King; 2
VIV^T.
I come now to the Real, which is Vivat Let him live.

Vivat Let him live, or, (as all our English translations read it) God save
him. Wherein (...) things.
And so in this one word Vivat there are two things implied. The one is Dator
the giver of life, ( God himself) to whom the Supplication is directed: The
other, Donum, the gift of life, for which the Supplication is commenced. 1
DATOR. ^^al. 75.6.


1 First then of the Giver: As David says of promotion, Psalm. 75: so may we of
Salvation; It comes neither from the East, nor from the West, nor from the
South: we may add; no, nor yet from the North; but from God alone who sett^s
up. and pull's down: who saue's, and destroy's at pleasure. Kings are wont
Occidere super ascensunt. to set in the East: that is, to fall when they are in
their ascendent, or else at the very top of their ascent: Psalm. 67.4. Act.
17.25. Theocoret. epit. dium. decret. l. 5.
But it is God only that does Ascendere super occ^sum: triumph over death it
self, Psalm 67: He it is that giue's (...). Life and breath, Act 17: and (as
Theodoret speak^s in ^^^om. d^^n, decret.) does not only (...) give life, but
(...) save life. And not the life o beasts only, Psalm. 36.6.
but of men too; Thou Lord do save both man and beast, Psalm. 36. And not of
inferior men only, but of Kings too: For Ipse est, it is He, (and only He)
that giue's deliverance unto Kings. Psalm. 144.10
Psalm. 144: As on the other side, it is He that does Vindemiare spiritus
principum: Psalm. 76.12.
Psalm. 76: discard Kings and Queens out of the stock when pleases him: or,
(as the Metaphor imports) tuck and take away the Spirits of Princes, as a man
would tuck grapes. And he is said to tuck them as grapes, because as grapes,
they exhilarate the hearts of the people.

Fallax equus ad salutem; A horse (says the Prophet David) is but a vain
thing to save a man: Psalm. 33.17.
Psalm. 33: And Vana salus hominis; as vain is the help of man, says the same
David: Psalm. 60. that is, Psalm. 60.11.
the people can no more save a King, than can a horse. All that they can do,
is but only salutare, to wish and pray for his health, (as here they do:) It Is
God only that can soluare, give him health, and help him in the time of
trouble. God only that has life for his own freehold, and can therefore say
Assertive, by way of oath, Vivo ego, dicit Dominus, As I live (says the Lord)
Ier. 22: Ier. 22.24.
Kings themselves hold their lives but In Capite* in chief, as from him; and
can therefore say but Optative, by way of wish, or of prayer, that which here
the people say; Vivat. Some Kings have by their Subjects been entitled (...),
Saviors: Isoc^at. Panegyr.
but God is (...), the Savior of these Saviors. That Is the first thing I
noted in this word Vivat, God save him; that God is Dator, the Author and giver
of life.

2 The second is Donum, the gift it self; or thing prayed for, which is Life.
Vivat, 2 DON^M. A foure-^old LIFE. 1 CORI O RAI. 2 POLI^^KE. 3 SPIRITVAL. 4
AETERNAL.
Let him live.

Take we the word Vivat in it is full latitude, and it is a prayer unto God that
he would bless the King not only with a corporal or temporal life. which
consists in the conjunction of soul and body, but also with other three
lives: A Politic, or Civil life, which consists in the unity of the King and
his Subjects in one Law. A Spiritual, or gracious life: and An Aeternal, or
glorious life; which two last lives consist in the mutuall^ty of amity between
God and the soul; though the former but Inchoate, imperfitly here in this
world: the later Complete* perfitly in the world to come.

The Poet ( Aencid, l. 8.) has a fiction of King Herilus, Virg. Aen. l. 8.
that he had three souls, and consequently three lives:

Nascenticui tres animas Feronia matter
(Horrendum dictu) dederat, terna arma movenda,
Ter letho steruendus erat.
But, I am sure, it is no fiction, but an undoubted truth, that every good and
Christian King has not only three lives in possession, but also a fourth in
reversion. The three in possession, are his Natural, his Civil, and his
Spiritual life: and the fourth in reversion, is Eternal life.

1 The life of Nature, that is Vita deficiens; a life that is frail and
defective, next door to death: and is therefore Vita sine vita, A life without
life.

2 The life of Policy, that is Vita efficiens; a life that is operative and
active: and is therefore Vita in vita, or, the life of life.

3 The life of Grace, that is Vita proficiens; a life that is still proceeding
in the works of piety, and godliness: and is therefore Vita supra vitam, or, a
life above life.

4 The life of Glory, that is vita perficiens; a life that is the accomplishment
and perfection of all happiness: and is therefore Vita post vitam, a life
after life.

By the first life, Vivit sibi, he lives to himself.

By the 2, Vivit reipublicae, he liue's to the commonwealth.

By the 3, Viuit ecclesiae, he liue's to the Church.

By the 4th, Vivit D^^, he liue's for ever unto God.

These 4 lives excel each other in degree of dignity. The later still the
better, and the last best of all. For, what is the life of nature in a King
without policy? Or what is the life of policy, without grace? or what is the life
of grace, without (if yet it could be without) the life of ensuing glory? For,
what shall it profit a King to be King of the whole world, and to lose the
kingdom of heaven? or to be called a God here on earth, if hereafter he
shall prove but a damned Devil?

His three first lives, under God, are maintein'd and preserved by the three
professions; Divinity, Law, and Physic.

His natural life by Physic; his politic life by Law; and his spiritual
life by Divinity. Upon which his aternal life (which is worth all the other
three) will infallibly follow.

Now, because these three professions of Divinity, Law, and Physic, are
Filiae Academiarum, the three eldest Daughters of the Universities; wisely
therefore, and worthily has his Majesty that now is (for continuance and
preservation of our Universities) not only established unto us those royal
Charters and Privileges which have formerly been granted us by his Royal
Predecessors in this kingdom: but further, now at this time, But since that,
there was a Mortmaine of 666 l 13 s 4 d: granted us by his Majesty, Septembers
14^. Anno re^ni Angl. 12^. Scot. 48.
of his Princely goodness he most graciously propendeth to the granting of a
Mortmaine to our University of Oxford for 500 l a year, more than we had
before. Which if we obtain, (as we hope, we shall.) then ye that are
abundantly able, cannot say, that ye would give more to our University, if it
were capable: for it is capable of more, if you would give it.

But to proceed; I doubt not, but the life here principally prayed for by the
people, was the natural, or corporal life of the King: THE KINGS CORPORAL LIFE
here principally intended. 2 MOTIVES to p^ay for the Kings life.
for that is commonly all that the people either mind or care for, either in
themselves, or in their King. And for it to pray, they are still put in mind,
on the one side by the frailty of the Kings life: and that, not only in
reguard of the stuff whereof he is made, but also of those many dangers where
with he is encompassed: On the other side, by the necessity thereof in respect
of themselves, whose state and life both depend's upon his life.

The first motive then to pray for the Kings life, 1 (...) LITAS, 1 Quo^d
materiam. Agapet. (...).
is the frailty of it. For a King (as Agapetus tell's the Emperor Justinian)
though he be like to God alone (...), in the power of his authority: yet is he
like other men (...), in the substance and constitution of his body. And though
(...), he be honored as in the Image of God: yet (...), he is compacted but of
the dust of the earth. His golden head has but feet of clay to support it.
Kings and subjects though there be an imparity in their birth, yet is there a
parity in their death. Ecclus. 10.11.
Hodie rex, cras moritur; as it is Eccl. 10. To day a King, and to morrow a
dead man. Yea, as sure as a King is a man, Platin. in vit. Pap. lo, 8.
so sure is it, that he must dye-like a man. Platina write's, that the Bishops
of Rome, who take themselves to be Kings of all the Kings of the earth, and
therefore play Rex in every kingdom, used at their installing to sit upon the
homeliest kind of stool ye can think of (he call's it sedem stercorariam)
which yet was Cathedra, a seat fit enough for them. The institution of which
ceremony was to remember them, that notwithstanding their Popedom, yet they
are still mortal, and subject to the necessities of nature as well as other men;
though it seeme's by their glorious, or rather blasphemous styles of Dominus
Deus Papa, the Lord God the Pope, and the like, that they have learned to make
another constructio^ of it; as if then they began to ease themselves of their
mortality. 2 Quoad Pe^^^la.


Again: The frailty of a Kings life, as it is seen in the mouldering matter
whereof he is made: so-likewise in the multiplicity of dangers wherewith he is
encou^tered. 1 SPIRITVAL enemies.


Dangers both of Spiritual, and of Corporal enemies. Spiritual enemies to the
natural life of a King are either his own sins, or the sins of the people.

1 HIS OWN SINS.
1 His own sins; when he is not as well a Personal King over himself, as a
Polisike King over others; when he has not as well Regnum rationis, a kingdom
of reason within him, to master his own passions, as Regnum nationis a
kingdom of people without him, to rule as his own subjects. 2 HIS PEOPLES
SINS.


2 And as the Kings sins, so are also the sins of the people spiritual
enemies to the natural life of a King. The wiseman tel^^s us, Prove. 5. that
sin is bitter as wormwood: Prove. 5.4.
I will add, that it has one quality of wormwood more. For, wormwood (says
Dioscorides) is (...), Dioscor. l. 3. c. 26.
offensive to stomach, and to head both, because the fumes thereof arising from
the stomach offend the head: and so often times the King, who is the head, is
chastised and punished for the sins of the people.

To what purpose then shall it be for you to cry, Vivat Rex, Let the King live,
if the outcry of your sins sound nothing but Moriatur Rex, Let the King die? In
vain do your tongues pray for his life, if your sins plot treason against his
life. The Greeks have one word that signifies Heaven and Hell both: and that's
(...): and they have another word that signifies God and the Devil both: and
that is (...): And tell me, I pray, are there not many that live, as if they
thought it all one, whither they go to heaven, or to hell and all one whither
to God, or to the Devil?

To say nothing of lying and extortion (the two beloved sins of your City) do
not the ruffians, I say not of, but about this City, account drabbing and
dicing, swearing and swilling, which indeed are four Carnal and Mortal vices,
to be their four Cardinal and Moral virtues?

But as John Baptist said of Christ: Ioh. 3. He must increase, and I must
decrease: So, Ioh. 3.30.
if ye will have the Kings life to increase, then must your sins decrease. Your
sins must be shortened, that his days may be lengthned. Moriantur peccata, us
vivat Rex; Let your sins die, that your King may live.

Seeing then the death of sin, is the life of the King; Let me add to Viuat
Rex, Vivat Pro-rex: Blessed be the godly and zealous care of him that is now
his Majesty's Viceroy for the government of this honorable City, who so
carefully and painefully labors to purge those more than Aug^^ in Stables
where these sins inhabit, which indeed will not be purged but with a stiff
sircame.

Yea, Let me also add one Vivat Rex more: Let that other King live, a King but
only in name, save that he is indeed a King of Preachers; I mean the R.
Reverend Bishop of this Dioecese, than whom, I dare say, though (God be
blessed) of late years, there have risen many, yet there never arose among you
a truer John Baptist, a man more zealous for the cause of the Lord of hosts,
and of his Sovereign. He as ready to cut down ^n Gladio oris, with the sword
of his mouth, as is his Majesty's Liefetenent Ore gladij, with the edge of his
sword. Both resolving with S. Ierom, Ierom. ep. 61.
that Ad tanta crimina patientem esse non oportet; Where such sins reign, as
reign in and about this City, there it is a sin for either Magistrate or
Minister to be patient; every sin being a sworne-enemy to the natural life of a
King.

2 CORPORAL enemies.
But besides these spiritual enemies, there are also corporal enemies to the
natural life of the King; sons of Belial, that cast off the yoke of obedience
to their Liege King, and serve another King, even the Prince of this world, Io.
12.31.
the Devil, who is also their father: and yet are they not so wise, as to
know their own father: like the Jews, Io. 8.33. V. 44.
saying. We are the seed of Abraham, when yet Christ tell's them, Ye are of
your father the Devil. These be they that have Vivat Rex, God save the King,
in their mouth: but Vivat Papa, God save the Pope, in their heart. They say,
God save the King, but it is but only dicis causa, for fashions sake: like as
roagues do, when they are burnt in the hand: they say it, because they must say
it. With them Vivat Rex is but a false cry; for even then when they say Vivat,
God save him; they rather wish, Moriatur, God have him. Aelius Spartian:
Antonin. Geta.
And as Bassianus Caracalla said of his own Brother, whom he had slain; Sit
Divus dum non sit Vivus, Let him (in God's name) be a Saint, so he be not a
Man: So, I wish we had not too-good cause to be persuaded, that they could be
content, to make out King St James, so they might unmake him King James; to put
him into their Calendar of Saints, so they might put him out of the Catalogue
of Kings.

The Frenchmen have a proverb; that Romam ad quaerendum sanctum Petrum eunt,
qui eum ante fores suas habent: There are that go to seek S. Peter at Rome,
when they have him before their doors. And may it not likewise be said of us,
that Antichristum Romae quaerimus, domialimus? we seek Antichrist at Rome, but
we cherish him here at home? Nay, I pray God we have not some of Solomon's
Spiders among us, that take hold with their hands, and are in Kings palaces, as
it is Prove. 30. Some in Court as well as in Country, that are of the poisoning,
Prove 30.28.
and of the stabbing, and of the fiering Religion; who it were good they were
soon swept down with the besome of discipline, Esa. 14.23.
lest in the end they sweep down all with the besome of destruction! They
have learned of the Seedesmen of the Romish doctrine forged in the shop of that
either Tricoronis, or Tricornis Episcopus, that three-crown'd, or three-horn'd
Bishop of Rome, that treason against a King not Catholic by their Copy, is no
sin against God. These, these (beloved) the worse Subjects they are to their
Prince, the sitter subjects are they for you that shall be Parliament Men to
work upon. Buisy not your heads in plotting and devising how to limit the
poor Clergy to a stint of competency. For, where there is Competency in the
tongue, there is covetousness at least, if not irreligion in the heart. Study
not, how ye may curb Christ in his Ministers, but rather, how ye may subdue
Antichrist in his members. Remember (nay, I know ye cannot but remember) the
children of Edom, Psalm. 137.7.
what they intended to have acted at your last Parliament. To quit their
en^^esy ye shall do well to enact some stricter order against them now at your
next Parliament.

It is observed by Eustathiu^, Eustath. in Dionyl. (...)
that the people Arimas^^ in Scythia are all borne (...) * only with one ^y^.
The ground of which accident ^e refer's to their winking with one ey when they
shoot. For with much winking (...) their aiming, that ey wexed less first in
the fathers then in the sons, and so in their sons sons for many generations,
till at last they had wi^kt it quite out, and so it continued. I will not take
upon me to divine; but I pray God, we wink not so long at Popery, till in the
end we wink out the very EY of this our land, which is our Gracious
Sovereign: and the Ey of our souls too* which is God's true Religion. And my
hearts desire unto God for this our Israel, is; that as his Majesty has in
this surpassed his Sister-Queene, whose (...) or after-fami shall never decay,
so long as religion has a tongue to speak, that he has in a manner
extinguished those Novatores, New Sectaries, or authors of innovation in Church
discipline: So in this he would also surpass himself, even in weeding out
those Veteratores, or crafty factors for the Old religion (as they call it) who
have a^ready trumpt dangers enough in his way, to arm him with expectation of
nothing but inlaelicity and mischief at their hands. Away with all
dispensation in matter of religion, which indeed i^ but nicknamed a
dispensation. A dispensation that is against right and reason (says the
Summist out of Panormitan) is not to be called Dispensatio, Angel: de Cas:
consc.
sed Dissipatie; a Dispensation, but a Dissipation. Religio, a religando,
Religion (says S. Austin) has it is name of tying: Austin. retrac. l. 1. c.
13. Lactant l. 4. c. 28. Histor. tripart. l. 1. c. 7.
because it is it that ties and knitt's the hearts of the people, not only to
God, but to their Prince too. And therefore Constantine the Emperor made
Religion which is the truth of Christ, to be the touchstone of the truth of
his subjects love to him. And because he would find who were indeed his
faithful friends, he caused proclamation to be made, that as many as would
reneag the Christian faith, they should be his friends, and his Counselors
of estate; all the rest must be packing. Whereupon many of them revolting from
the faith, in hope of preferment; others keeping the faith, but retiring
themselves; the Emperor changed his decree, keeping those only in office
which kept their says to God, but expelling and amouing those that denied the
faith, Ye (says he) that keep not your faith with God, what hope can I have,
that ever ye should prove faithful subjects unto me?

Such then being the condition, and frailty of Kings themselves, that
uncertain it is whither they shall die a dry, or a moist death; whither by the
hand of God, or by the hands of men; it is but needful that we make his
Majesty's Life our Samuel, or our (...), that is, 1. Sam. 1.20. Plato l.
quendam inscribit (...),
that is, that we ask it of God by prayer, that as his Majesty's reign began
with a preface of prayer (which indeed is the best preface to every business)
even a prayer of Vivat Rex, God save the King: So we should still continue our
prayers for it, as we do this day in public, and as (I hope) we do every day
in private; as being a thing which S. Paul would have to be prayed for with an
Inprimis, or first of all. 1. Tim. 2.

And, 1. Tim. 2.1.
that I may set the keener edge upon every one of you, for discharge of this so
necessary a duty; Let it not grieve you (Beloved) if as Christ's Sepulcher was
made in a Garden, Io. 19. So in the garden (as I may say) of this day's joy and
triumph, Ioh. 19.41.
I do here build also your Sepulchers: especially, seeing we are now In
Sepulchreto, in a Coemetery, or place of Sepulchers. Quod si magna ruat
quercus, trepidate myrica, Humfied. contr. monst. prodit.
If the ax of death hew down the great and mighty Oaks, ahlas what shall
become of us poor Shrubs? If death spare not the head it self, how should the
members hope to escape? Wherefore as Zipporah circumcised her son with a sharp
stone, Ex. 4. Ex. 4.25
So let all of us circumcise our hearts with remembrance of the grave stone,
from which none, no, not Princes themselves can plead exemption.

There are of you who either have, or may have your chambers as gorgeously and
as sumptuously bedeckt, as was that highest dining chamber (in Pliny) which
ran round about continually like the heavens; P^^^.
and in the roof of it were curiously wrought, the Sun, the Moon, and the
Stars. And yet when ye have made you such a Heaven here on earth, die ye must:
Earth must, and will to Earth. But ahlas (Beloved) this is it that deceiues us:
we are impatient either to hear, or think of death till it come. Whence it
is, that though we have Tot spectacula, tot specula, so many spectacles, and so
many looking-glasses of mortality before our eyes, yet are we like to those
that are bitten with mad dogs, Qui sespsos non noscunt in speculo, Gerson.
who know not themselves in a glass.

A second motive to the people to pray for the Kings life, 1 NECESSITAS.
is the Necessity of it in reguard of themselves. Vivat Rex, vt Vivat Regnum.
Let the King live, that his Kingdom may live; for the Kings life is the life
of the whole Kingdom. (...) (the very word in my text for a King) is so
called, because he is (...), the foundation of the people: Greg. Mor. 9. l. c.
10. Sap. 6.24.
according to which (...) the wise man says, Sap. 6. that a wise King is
Stabilimentum populi, the support, or stay, or staff of his people. And
because a King is Persona publica, not a private, but a public person; hence
is it, that his style, is, Mandamus and Volumus, in the plural, We will and
command. So that when the people pray for the King, they do indeed in effect
pray for them selves. Accidentia non sunt entia, nisi quia sunt entis, (says
the Philosopher. Met. l. 7. A^^^^. Met. l. ^.
) Accidents have no being of themselves, but only as they are inhaerent in a
substance which has a selfe-being. And surely, so may the people say to their
King, Quod vivo and valeo, si valeo, tuum est* that both their being, and their
well-being depend's upon him. As therefore one can wish a covetous man no
greater mischief than a long life, because he is the cause of his own ill: No
more can the people wish themselves any greater good than the life of the King,
because he is the cause of all their weal. A King then being Totum populi, the
total-summe (as I may say) of all the peoples welfare, good reason that Totus
populus, not some, but all the people should jointly pray for His welfare; that
both Vox and Votum, their voice, and their wish, Chordula and Cor, their
tongue-string, and their heart-string, Clamor and Amor, their loud shoute, and
their love should sound in an unison, to make up this sweet consort of Vivat
Rex, God save the King: that they should do, as the people do in my text,
Clamare, as it were rend and tear the very clouds with the cry and shoute of
their prayers, that they may pull down a blessing of long life upon the head
of the King: crying both vna voce, with one voice, that they have Vnum Regem,
but one King, and viva voce with a loud, on lively voice, that they may have
Vivum Regem, a huing King; Vivat Rex.

Thus far of Vivat Rex, as it is a supplication.

It Is now more than time I should speak of it, as it is an Acclamation, or a
voice of joy and thanksgiving unto God: and therefore now this second acception
shall only serve me for Application to the day. Vivat Rex.

PART 2. ACCLAMATION, fereuing for APPLICATION.
The ioints and passages of our joy and thanksgiving may be three.

1 That we have Regem, a King.

2ly That we have Talem, such a King, who for his matchless Graces and
virtues, may more truly be called a Nonesuch.

Ps. 118.24.
3ly. That this is the day, Quem fecit Dominus, which the Lord has made; nay
rather, In quo factus ast Dominus, Wherein King James was made our Lord. It is
the day of our rejoicing for his Crown, and ought therefore to be the Crown
of our rejoicing.

REJOICE, that we have 1 REGEM.
1 First then rejoice we that we have a King. Vixit Ragina, we had a Queen, who
had she lived, we should have thought, we had had no need of King James: But
now Vivit Rex, we have a King, and while He lives, we have cause to say, we
have no need of Queen Elsabeth. Both of them so incomparably excellent, that
it must be the commendation of both, that either of them was like the other.

Hieron. epist. l. 3. ep. ad Eustoch.
She was a Queen, of whom we might truly say as St Ierom said of that Roman
Paula; Vnius contempsit gloriam vrbis, totius orbis opinione celebratur, She
contemned the glory of one City, her name is precious throughout the whole
World. Eurip. Hecub.
Or rather, as Euripides said of Polyxena, (...), setting aside her mortality,
she was a Goddess here on earth. Insomuch that Grammarians did even blush at
their old rule of Masculinum dignius est Faminino. The masculine gender is more
worthy than the faeminine; till King James, as on this day, came as our
Dayes-man, to arbitrate the matter, and to vindicate the credit of His sex.

It was not without cause, that during the time of that short Inter-regnum, or
enter-space of reign between the death of that blessed Queen, and the
entering of our blessed King to this kingdom, Ios. 7.5.
our hearts did melt like water, as did the hearts of the Israelties. For, what
evils had we not then just cause to expect? But, when the wine of all our
comfort failed us, when the pitchers and vessels of our hearts ouerflowed with
the water of sorrow and compunction; then did God, even the God of Jacob, who is
a most praesent and extemporary help in the needful time of trouble, of his
own free bounty, and mercy, turn our water, (our salt water) into wine. Then
did our (...), or King grow up as it were in an instant, like the herb Basil,
called Basilica, or Regia berba, which by some is also called Ocymum, of (...),
because of the celerity and sodainnes of it is growth; His title (contrary to
the hope of our foes, and fear of our friends) taking firm and peaceable
footing in our land, before his person: and that, (...), without the effusion
or shedding of any one drop either of blood; or of sweat. So that, as Jacob
said to Laban, Genesis 30.30.
Genesis 30, Benedixit tibi Dominus ad introitum meum, The Lord has blessed thee
by my coming; So may our Jacob say to this land of ours. And in a better sense
may this Land of ours sing, SOL RE ME FA: that is, SOLus REx ME FAcit, It Is the
King only (under God) that mak'sane; than could one of the Popes, of whom the
same song was set up as a Pasquil in Rome; meaning, that only the King of
Spain had made him Pope, by giving a Spanish fig to some of his praedecessors
in that See.

And so (as St Austin speaks of the sorrows and joys of the righteous,)
Tristitia nostra habet Quasi; Aust. in Ps. 48.
sed Laetitia nostra non habet Quasi, Our sorrow for Queen Elisabeth was but as
it were sorrow; but our joy for King James is joy indeed.

1 NOT A PLVRALITY.
Joy indeed, and great joy; that we have not (...), a plurality of Kings. For
Kings (they say) are impatient of copartners; and kingdoms (I am sure) are as
impatient of them, as Kings themselves. The world at some times can hardly
endure the heat but of one Sun; but certes, if there were two Suns, they
would quite burn it up.

It Is an old, and for the most part a true rule in Economy, that he that has
but one servant, has a whole servant; he that has two, has but half a
servant; but he that has three, has never a servant. And no less true is it
in Policy, of Kings who are Servipublici, public Servants; (for (...), A
ruler, Max. Tyr. dissert. 20. ^ub fin.
or a King (says Max. Tyrius) is servant to many Masters.) One King, a whole
King; two Kings, half a King; three Kings, and never a King. In 1 Macch. 1: we
read, 1. Macch. 1.10.
that after the death of King Alexander, his servants shared his kingdom among
them, and so the Macedonians in steed of one King, had many Kings: But see what
follows in the very next words; Et multiplicata sunt mala in terra, and much
wickedness increased in the land.

O how happy then we, that have not Regem vnum in pluribus, a King that is but
one among many, but Plures in vno, many Kings in one! The King of England, the
King of Scotland, the King of France, the King of Ireland, all four Kings in
our one King. So that he is not only (...), Dionys. de divin. nom. l. 4.
but (...); Vnus. but vnitivus; one King, or a singular King, but a King that
makes one of many.

Yea the English and Scottish Nations, which before were divided no less in
heart, than in kingdom, has he now so concorporated, or rather coanimated
into one, that in the^ is fulfilled what was promised as a blessing to the
people of Israel, Ezech. 37.22.
Ezech. 37: I will make them one people in the land upon the mountains of
Israel, and one King shall be King to them all, and they shall be no more two
peoples, neither be divided any more henceforth into two kingdoms.

Here then is matter of great joy, that we have not a plurality of Kings, but
one sole, entire, and absolute Monarch.

2 NOT A NVLLITY.
And yet, behold matter of greater joy than this; That as we are freed from
(...), a plurality of Kings, which is bad, so likewise from (...), a Nullity,
which is worse. It was a great punishment to them, when they had no Smith in
Israel, 1 Samuel 13: but far greater, 1 Samuel 13.19. Judge. 17.6.
when they had no King in Israel, Judge. 17: for then (as it presently follows)
Every man did that which was good in his own eyes; that is, when there was no
King, then would every man be a King, to do what he lusted.

Such ataxy, or disorder, because it usually fallows upon anarchy, or lack of
a King, it is therefore noted of the Persians, that they were wont for five
days after their Kings death, to let their Laws sleep without execution, and
to let every man do what he pleased, that in those five days men seeing the
rage and tyranny of sin and injustice for lack of government, might more
willingly obey their King ever after.

2 THAT we have TALEM.
But, that which is indeed matter of our greatest joy, is, that we have not
only Regem, a King, but Talem, such a King; if yet I may call him Talem, who
has never a Qualem to aequal him.

Hieron, ad Pammachan prolog. l. 2. in Hose.
Of whom may be verified that which St Ierom testifies of Cato, out of Liuy;
that Eius gloriae neque profuit quisquam laudando, neque vituperando quisquam
nocuit, cum vtrumque summis praditi ingenijs fecerint, though M. Cicero, and C
Casar ( both of excellent parts) writ, the one in his praise, the other in his
dispraise, yet neither did the praise of the one add any thing to him, nor the
dispraise of the other detract any thing from him.

For, what can all those black-tongued Parrets, or foul-mouthed railers of
Rome, for their bitterness like those black styes (in Theophrastus) bred ex
absynthij semine, Theophrast. de cause. Plant. l. 4. c. 16.
of the seed o^ Worme-wood: I say, what can all of them with all their Caninae
facundia, or barking cloquence, detract from his Majesty? Or, what can the
very best Orat^rs among those that are his best subjects, add unto him?

It was the opinion of a great Orator, (how sound, I now dispute not) that
Kings would, Isocr^^.
for the most part, be better than private men, St Reges electio, non successio
faceres, if they were made by election, not by succession. But, say our King
had not come unto us by succession, as He did, but that our selves had been to
make the election, I would feign know, where we could have made such another
choice.

For, is not King James like the Adamant, Gemma Principum, and Princeps
Gemmarum, the Gemme of Princes, and the Prince of Gemmes; even the most
precious Gemme in the Ring of this round World? A Gemme, all whose brightness
and beauty is from within; A Gemme, which is so much the more resplendent,
because it is set in gold; and a Gemme, whose far and neare-shining virtues
shall hereafter be as so many precious Gemmes in his caelestial Diadem? Is he
not (as St Ambrose says of the Sun) Oculus mundi, Ambros. he xaemd, 3. c. 1.
the Ey of the whole world? nay, he on whom the eyes of the whole world are
cast? and Iucunditas diei, the Joy not of this day only, but of all the days
of our life? and Naturae Gratia, the very grace and ornament of Nature?

A King descended of so many noble and royal Progenitors, 1 NOBILITY.
that if he had but one drop of bloud-royal from every one of them, it were
almost blood enough for his whole body. And, as if he had been borne only to
be a King, he began both his Life, and his Reign at once; and therefore he
came into our Land with a Crown upon his head, Non tam factus, quam natus, we
rather found, than founded him a King.

And (which is not so much the fruit, 2 VIRTVES.
as the root of his Nobility) a King so virtuous, that he is like the
Philosophers Medium morale, or moral mean, in which they place only virtue,
and no vice.

And (which is the fruit of his virtue) a King so peaceable, that as Pliny
write's of the bird Halcyon, 3 PEACE. Plin. 1. 2. c. 47.
or the Kings-fisher, that while she makes her nest in the sea, the sea is
becalmed; so since He has nestled himself in this our kingdom, (which we
feared at the death of that Noble Queen, would have proved a Sea of troubles)
we have had none but Halcyontan days, days of calm, and of peace.

And (which is the fruit of peace) a King so learned, 4 IEARNING.
that whither he speak, he speak's so elegantly, that like another Palamedes,
he may well be called (...), the Nightingale of the Muses; or whither he
write, write's so inspiredly, so divinely, as if he wrote with a pen out of
the wing of that sacred Dove, the Holy Ghost.

I may say, for the universality of his knowledge, that we have a Head, not
inferior to that brasen-Head made by Albertus Magnus, and placed in his Study;
which (if we will believe Tostat) could readily answer Ad omnia quasita,
Tostat. in lib. Numer. c. 21. quast. 19.
to whatsoever quaestions were demanded of it. Since the beginning of the world
was it ever seen, that any King but He, turned Cathedram Regis, his Chair of
Estate, In Cathedram Regentis, into a Moderator's Chair, and publicly
moderated in our University Acts? and that, with such applause, as was able to
turn Envy it self into Admiration?

And (which is the fruit of his learning) a King so religious, 5 RELIGION.
Polychtonic
that as Constantine the Emperou^ bare clay upon his own shoulders to the
building of St Peter's Church; so has his Majesty in his own Person, and
with his own pen, manfully maintein'd the cause of Religion; so manfully that
as the Adversaries of Religion have just cause to be more afraid of his pen,
than of his lance; So has he just cause to be more afraid of then lance,
their stab, their gunpowder, than their pen. Never any King, in this respect,
so rightly termed Defendour of the Faith, as He.

And (which is the fruit of his Religion) a King no less dear unto God, than
is God to him; 6 DELIVERANCES.
so that he may well be called Amicus Dei, the friend of God, as was Abraham,
Iac. ^.23.
Iac. 2. As he has been God's Buckler to defend his Religion In salute
veritatis, in the safety of truth; so has God been to him what he was to
Abraham, Genesis Genesis 15.1.
15: his buckler to defend him In veritate salutis, in the truth of safety, as
the Prophet David speak's, Psalm. Psalm. 68.17.
68. And as the King has showed himself to be Iacobum Dei, James by the
grace of God in the one; so has God showed himself to be Deum Iacobi, the
gracious God of King James in the other; by his many (no less mighty, than
miraculous) deliverances of his Majesty, witnessing to all the world, that his
will concurr's with the peoples wish of Vivat Rex, God save the King; and that
if ever Vox populs, the voice of the people, were (according to the Proverb)
Vox Dei, the voice of God; then was it at the promulgation of King James.

And lastly (which is the fruit of Gods love and favor both to him, 7
FRVITFVLNES.
and us, and the pledge of our future happiness) a King so fruitful both in
Himself, and in his Issue, that though He be Optimus, the best that ever we
had, yet (blessed be God for it) we cannot say, as one said of Brutus, that He
is Vltimus, the last of worth that ever we are likely to have.

For, though our iniquities took from our bead a right hopeful Prince, whose
life was as sweet, as it was short, and (were it not that God has otherwise
so richly provided for us) to be deplored not with tears of water from our
eyes, but with streams of blood from our hearts: yet (thanks be to God) there
wants not as hopeful a succession; Virg. Aen. 6.
-- Prime avulso non deficit alter Aureus, -- as the Poe^t spoke of those
golden bought, No sooner is one shred off, but another shoot's out. For, of
those two precious Pearls which yet surviue, (as does also the Mother of them
our gracious Queen Anne, who is not yet so superannated, but that, by Gods
grace, she may be a joyful Mother of many more) is not one of them since
become a timely and teeming Mother? who (not long since) sent a more joyous and
welcome news to out King, than Bersabe did to David, 2 Samuel 11: saying, 2 Samuel
11.5.
not as she did, Concepi, I am with child, but Pepere, I have a child. I pray
God there may never come worse news to England! and because better cannot
come, that many such messages She may live to send!

And now, after all this, tell me, if ye might, would ye have chosen another
King? or if ye would, could ye have chosen such another? Does not our King as
much excel other Kings in goodness, as the Whale in the British Sea exceeds
the Dolphin in bigness?

Quantum Delphinis Balaena Britannica mayor? Beloved, if honor be due unto our
King, as he is a King, then much more, as he is such a King. And if thanks be
due unto God for giving us a King, then much more, for giving us such a King. I
have therefore so much honored and magnified the King unto you, that ye might
so much the more honor Him, whom GOD has so highly honored with all the most
glorious graces of a King; as also that ye might so much the more magnify God
for Him, who has so magnified his mercies toward you in Him.

3 THIS DAY.
And because (of all others) this is the day when this inaestimable blessing was
bestowed on us, therefore does this day above others, challenge a due and
thankful reguard of it at our hands; That, as on this day God blessed our King
with such a people, us his people with such a King; so on this day both Prince
and People, head and ta^le, as Esar cal^s them, chap. 9: Esa 9.14.
should offer up the sacrifice of thank ^o ^^ing unto God; even as it was
commanded in the Old Law, L^^^. 3.9.
C^put cum Cauda. that both head and ta^le should be sacrificed together; and
that both of us should render Pr^subilaeo, iubilum, the voice of joy and
iubilation for our Iubile or deliverance: Our del^^erance from those bloody and
dangerous vproares, which, a^ on this day* both of us so much feared, but
especially for our deliverance from the tyranny of Antichrist, which we (his
people) so much abhorted.

I may call it, Psalm. 64.12.
in Dav^a's phrase, Psalm. 64. ^oronam anni benignitatis Dei, the crown of the
year of the goodness of God. or the day wherein the Lord crowned our years
with his goodness. For, as according to our English computation it is the
Vig^l, or Eve to a second Newreares day, because from it our accounts and acts
reckon the new year: so was it the beginning of the acceptable year of the
Lord, even of a spiritual Iubile unto us. Dies vere Evangelicus, a day of glad
tidings indeed: For in it was brought unto us Evangelium Evangelij, the glad
tidings of the glad tidings of the Gospel: or (if ye will) D^uteronomium
Evangelij, the Deuteronomy, or republication of the Gospel. It Is the day of the
Annu^tiation of the conception of our blessed King, in the womb of this our
Land: and it is the Prodromus, or forerunner to the Annu^tiation of the
conception of our blessed Savior in the womb of the blessed Virgin. This the
beginning of our temporal redemption; That the beginning of our spiritual
redemption.

It is reported of the Duke of Venice, Grana^ens.
that he does Quotannts cum mars sponsalia solenniter contrahere, every year
solemnly contract, and espouse himself to the Sea; and in token of that
contract, he does Annulum porrigere, as it were wed himself to the Sea with a
Ring: signifying thereby, that his chief care and study shall be in pro^^^ing
Ships* w^^^ch are the ^^^ete mumtion and defense of his D mimons:

So let us (Beloved) in like manner year be year* so^ennize, and (what in us
is) ^^te^^^e the rem^^^b^a^ce of the ^ey: and toties quoties, even as often as it
shall^e^ turn, let us make ^s it were a New League, or Espoulais with it: and
in token of that league. let us s^ill other the Ring (as I may ca let) of this
anniversary, or ^^^ular revolution of our thanksgiving unto God, to remame as
a sure loue-token, or covenant betwixt us and our King, as immovable. as
inviolable, as is the covenant of day and night. And, as Moses to the
Israelites, Numb. 13. Number. 13.3.
So say I unto you, Remember this day: which while I am now remembering, I am
even in an Ecstasy, and cannot tell how to style it; whither the spring of our
joy; or the joy of our spring; or the day spring of our light; or the
wel-spring of our wealth; or the head-spring, o^ springhead of all our
happiness.

Nay, let me not streighten our thanksgiving to this day only, Psalm. 95.2.
but rath^^, as David will's us, Ps. 95. Annunti-te de die in diem salutare
eius, Let every day be the Feast of this blessed Annuntiation of our salvation.
Let us not only keep this day festival unto the King, but let us say with the
Prophet David, Ps. 75 Reliquiae cogitationis diem festum agent tibi, Psalm.
75.10.
The remainder of my thoughts st^^l keep holy day unto thee. And as we began
the first day; so let us both begin, and end all the days of His reign,
with Vivat Rex: Let that be both our Mattens, and our Evensong, every day. And
as I began my discourse, so will I end, with Vivat Rex; and let all the people
say, Vivat: and let God put to his Fiat, that so it may be. So be it.

VIVAT REX. LET THE KING LIVE.

Let Him live the life of Nature, maugre the beards and treacheries of all His
malicious and bloodthirsty enemies, who weep, because they see nothing worthy
the weeping at.

Let Him live the life of Policy, by a due execution of all Princely duties,
and so live in the hearts and love of his Subjects, which should he lose, He
should ^^ther breath, than live.

Let Him live the life of Grace, by a fervent love of thy truth, that thy mercy
and truth may embrace Him on every side; and that thou may make an
everlasting covenant with Him, Esa. 55.3.
even the sure mercies of David. Lastly, after these three lives ended here on
earth, let him for ever live and reign with thee in the life and kingdom of
glory; who live and reignest world without end. AMEN.

FINIS.

