The Ground of Arts: teaching the perfect work and practice of
Arithmetike, both in whole numbers and fractions, after a more easy and exact
sort, than hitherto has been set forth.

Made by M. ROBERT RECORD, D. in Physic, and afterward augmented by M. JOHN
DEE.

And now lately diligently corrected, and beautified with some new Rules and
necessary Additions: And further endowed with a third part, of Rules of
Practice, abridged into a briefer method than hitherto has been published:
with diverse such necessary Rules, as are incident to the trade of Merchandise.

Whereunto are also added diverse Tables and instructions that will bring great
profit and delight unto Merchants, Gentlemen, and others, as by the contents
of this treatise shall appear.

By John Mellis of Southwark, Scholemaster.

CERVA CHARISSIMA ET GRATISSIMVS PRO (...)

Imprinted by I. Harison, and H. Bynneman. ANNO DOM. 1582.

To the Reader.
THat which my friend has well begone
For very love to common weal,
Of good will has been over run
directing each part every deal.
And bewtified for thy behoof
With breifer ways for practice lore,
As by the trial and the proof
Was never yet in print before.
Of numbers use the endless might
No wit nor language can express,
Apply, and try, both day and night
And then this truth thou will confess.
The Books Verdicte.
To please or displease sure I am,
But not of one sort to every man.
To please the best sort would I feign,
The froward displease shall I certain.
Yet wish I will, though not with hope,
All ears and mouths to please or stop.
To the Right worshipful M. ROBERT FORTH Doctor of Law, and one of the
Masters of the Queens Majesty's high Court of Chauncerie.
BIAS the wise Philosopher of Greece, when his Country was spoiled, and the
people carried their goods away, being demanded why he did not the like?
answered, that he carried all that he had with him, meaning his virtue and
learning: So I (my Right worshipful and singular good Master) having nothing of
value in substance to bestow, do here present you with such treasure as the
Lord has vouchsafed upon me, which according to Bias opinion and mine own
likewise, is the greatest Jewel I have, not doubting but you will accept the
giuers mind more than the gift, which I confess is small. But being thoroughly
acquainted with the great favor your Worship bears to such as delight in any
good exercise, it has imboldned me to put forth this simple Addition under
your Worships defense. The entyre love and exercise of this excellent Art,
with drawing of proportions, Mappes, Cards, Buildings, Plattes, etc. were the
only studies whereunto I evermore have been inclined. Touching Drawing it was
only Dei beneficio, naturally given me from my youth, without instruction of
any man, more than Love thereof, delectation, desire, and practice. In this Art
also having great delight, I had no other instruction at my first beginning but
only this good Authors Book, but afterward I greatly increased the same
during the time I served your Worship in Cambridge, in going to the
Arithmeticke Lecture at the common School: And more furthered since the time
that I left your Worships service, which is about 18. years past, by
continual exercise therein (the mother and nurse of Science,) during which
time my only vocation has been (thinking it a meet exercise for a commonwealth) in training up of youth to write and draw, with teaching of them the
infallable principles and brief practices of this worthy Science, having (I
praise God for it) brought up a number to become faithful and serviceable to
their masters in great affairs, and many of them good members of a common
wealth, which is no small comfort to me in Christ. Amongst which number, a
countriman of mine has oftentimes been very inportunate with me, to do a
deed of Charity upon the ground of Arts, vz. to peruse and amend it of the
imperfections and faults, that have crept into it through negligence of often
printing. Which ernest request of his bred two strifes in me: The one was, I
was loath to do it, knowing my self inferior to a great number that might
better do it than I. And yet considering it is a Book has done many a
thousand good, which when a young beginner comes to a confused or mistaken
figure, it brings him into a wonderful discoragement and maze: which thing
considered, for mere love to a common wealth, and to the Book, being my first
Author, I willingly granted to do my goodwill. And passing under the file of
correction, I here and there encreast it with such necessary Additions as I
knew might encorage a young learner, and more would have done, but for fear
the Book would rise too thick or grow too dear. And being thus entered into
the vain thereof, and knowing that this Author was the only light and the
chiefest Lodestone unto the vulgar sort of English men in this worthy science,
that ever writ in our natural tongue, I have (according to my simple knowledge)
yielded again some part of my received talent with advantage: and endowed him
to the further increase of his memory, with Rules of brevity and practice,
abridged into a briefer method than hitherto has been published in our English
tongue, with other right necessary Additions, Rules and Tables, which I
trust will do my country good, and be right commodious to all sorts of men:
all which I commit to the favorable censure of your worship, and al such as
love knowledge, desiring their favorable correction herein if ought be amiss.
The which with greater affection than I am able to utter, I Dedicate to your
Worship, as a meet Patron, both for lerning godliness, and love of the same,
which coming from your worship into the hands of many (shall I doubt not) do
many good, as heretofore it has already done. So shall you (as the best
benefactor of these labors) be partaker of all their prayers that shall reap
profit or knowledge by this worthy Art, in Commendation whereof if I should
write, I should rather blemish tha^ adorn it. For the Authors Epistle unto
that famous Prince of worthy memory K. Edward the sixth, and his Preface to the
Reader, are sufficient.

Thus craving favorable acceptance of this my homely and dutiful present, I
humbly leave you to the conduction of the Almighty, whom I beseech long to
preserve you in continual health, with daily increase of worship, to the
glory of his name, and to the joy of all such as love you.

At my house in Southwarke this 12. of June, Your Worships most bounden to
command, JOHN MELLIS.

TO THE MOST mighty Prince Edward the sixth, by the grace of God King of
England, France, and Irelande. etc.
THe excellency of man's nature, being such, as it is by Gods divine favor
(most mighty Prince) not only created in highness of degree far above all
other corporal things, but by perfection of reason and search of wit, much
approaching toward the image of God, as not only the holy Scriptures do
testify, but also those natural Philosophers, which exactly did consider the
nature of man, and namely the far reach and infinite compass of the works
of the mind, were enforced to confess, that man scarcely was able to know
himself. And if he would duly ponder the nature of himself, he would find
it so strange, that it might seem unto him a very miracle. And thereof sprang
that saying: magnum miraculum est homo, maximum mariculum sapiens homo. For
undoubtedly as man is one of the greatest miracles that ever God wrought, so a
wise man is plainly the greatest.

And therefore was it that some did account the head of a man the greatest
miracle in the world, because not only of the strange workemanshippe that is
in it, but much more of the efficacy of reason, wit, memory, imagination,
and such other powers and works of the mind, which can more easily conceive any
thing in a manner, than understand it self. And amongst all the creatures of
God it finds none more difficult to be perceived than these same powers of it
self, whereby it does conceive and judge as it may be well coniectured by the
diversity of opinions, that the wisest Philosophers did utter touching the
spirit of man and the substance of it: whereof at this present I intend to
make no rehearsal, but who so sisteth to read thereof, may find it largely
set forth not only in Aristotle his books De anima; but also in Galene his
book called Historia philosophica, and again in Plutarch his work, De
philosophorum placitis, whose words are also repeared of Eusebius in the xv.
book, (...), unto whom I remi^ them that have desired to understand the
intricate difficulty of knowing our own selves, as touching our best part,
and that part whereby we deserve to bear the name of men.

This matter seemed so obscure and difficulte, in knowledge, that Galen, who
for his excellent wisdom and judgment in natural works, is called of many
men a Miracle in nature, yet in searching the nature and substance of the
spirit of man, he not only confesses himself ignorant, but counts it
plain temeritie to attempt to find it: so far above the hope of man's
knowledge is that part, whereby man does know and judge of things. And
although the ignorant sort (which hate all things that they know not) do
little esteem the profoundnesse of man's spirit and of reason, the chief power
and faculty of it, yet as there is a kind of fear and obedience of
unreasonable beasts unto man by the working power of God, so is there in those
small reasoned persons a certain kind of reverence toward wisdom and
reasons, which they do show oftentimes, and by power of persuasion are
enforced to obey reason, will they nil they.

And hereby came it to pass, that ye rudeness of the first age of man was
brought unto some more civil trade, as it is well declared by Cicero in the
beginning of his first book De inuentione Rethorica, where he says thus: Nam
suit quoddam tempus quum in agris homines passion bestiarum more vagahantur,
and sibi victu ferino vitam propagabant, nec ratione animi quicquam, sed
pleraque viribus corporis administrabant. N^ndum divine religionis, non humani
officij ratio colebatur: Nemo legitimas viderat nuptias, non cer^os quisquam
inspexerat liberos, n^n ius aequabile quid vnlitatis haberet, acceperat: ita
propter errorem atque inscitiam. caeca ac ^emeraria dominatrix animi cupiditas,
ad se exple^dam viribus corporis abutebatur, perniciosissimis satellitibus.

Quo tempore quidam, magnus videlicet vir and sapiens, cognouit quae ma^^ria
esset, and quanta ad maximas res oportunitas in animis iness^ th^ninum, si quis
eam posset elicere, and praecipiendo me^^^r^n reddere: Qui dispersos homines in
agris, and in tectis syluestribus abditos ratione quadam compulit in vnum
locum, and congregauit: and eos in vnamquamque rem inducens v^ile^ atque
honestam primo propter insolentiam reclamantes, deinde propter rationem atque
orationem studiosius audientes, ex feris and immanibus mites reddidit, and
mansuetos.



This long repetition of Tullies words will seem tedious to them which love
but little, and care much less for the knowledge of reason, but unto your
Majesty (I dare say) it is a delectable remembrance, and unto me it seemed so
pleasant, that I could scarce stay my pen from writing all that mine eyes
did so greedily read.

This sentence of Cicero am I loathe to translate into English, partly for that
unto your Majesty it needs no translation, but especially knowing how far
that grace of Tullies eloquence does excel any English man's tongue, and much
more exceeds the baseness of my barbarous style, yet for the fruit of the
sentence, I had rather unto my mere English Countrymen utter the rudeness of
my translation, than to defraud them of the benefit of so good a lesson,
trusting they will also gladly and greedily embrace all good sciences that may
help to the just furniture of the same, when they consider that informed
reason was the only Instrument, or ar least ye chief mean to bring men unto
Civil regiment, from barbarous manners and beastly conditions.

For the time was (says Tullie) that men wandered abroad in the fields up and
down like beasts, and used no better order in feeding than they, so that by
reasons rule they wrought nothing, but most of their doing did they atchiue by
force of strength. At this time there was no just regard of religion toward
God, nor of duty toward man. No man had seen right use of marriage, neither
did any man know their own children from other, nor no man had felt the
commodity of just laws: so that through error and ignorance, wilful lust,
like a blind and heady ruler, abused bodily strength as a most mortal
minister for the satisfying of his desire. At that time was there one, which
not only in power, but also in wisdom was great: and he considered, how
that in the minds of men was both apt instruments, and great occasion to
the due accomplishment of most weighty affairs, if a man could apply them
to use, and by teaching of rules frame them to better trade. This man with
persuasion of reason, gathered into one place the people that were wandering
about the fields, and lay lurking in wild cotages and woods: And bringing
them into one common society, did trade them to all such things, as either
were profitable or honest, although not without repyning at ye first, by reason
that they had not been so accustomed before. Yet at length through reason and
persuasion of words they obeyed him more diligently, and so of a wild and
cruel people, he made them courteous and gentle.

Thus has Tullie set forth the efficacy of reason and persuasion, how it was
able to convert wild people to a mildness, and to change their furious
cruelnesse into gen^le cur^^e. Were it not now a great reproach in this our
time (when knowledge reigns so large) that men should show themselves less
obsequious to reason? unless it may be thought, that now every man having
sufficient knowledge of himself, needs not to hearken to the persuasion of
others.

Indeed he that thinks himself wise, will not esteem the reason of any
other, be he never so wise, so that of such one it may well be said, He that
thinks himself wiser than he is, may justly be counted a double fool:
wherefore such men are not to be permitted in open audience to talk, but must
be put to silence, and made to give ear to reason, which reason consists not
in a multitude of words, heaped rashly together, and applied for one purpose,
but reason is the expressing of a just matter with witty persuasions,
furnished with learned knowledge. Such knowledge had Moses being expert in all
learning of the Egyptians, as the Scriptures declare, and therefore was able
to persuade the stubborn people of the Jews, although not without great
pain. Druis was son to K. Sarron, and succeeded him in his kingdom.
Such knowledge and such reasons did Druys show, which was the first law
maker of all the West parts of Europe. Like reason and wisdom did Xamolxis
use amongst the Goths: Lycurgus unto the Lacedaemonians, Zeleucus to the
Locrians, Solon to the Athenienses, and Donwallo Molmitius two thousand years
past, amongst the old Britanes of this realm. And thereby ti came to pass,
that their laws continued long, till more perfect reason altered many of them,
and wilful power oppressed most of them.

At the beginning when these wise men perceived how hard it was to bring the
rude people to understand reason, they judged the best means to attain this
honest purpose to depend of learning in every kind, for by learning, as Ovid
says: Pectora moiles^unt, asperitasque fugit: Stout stomachs do wax mild,
and sharp fierceness is exiled. Therefore as Berosus does testify, Sarron*
that was the third King over all this West part of Europe, for to bring the
people from beastly rage to manly reason, did erect Schools of liberal Arts
which took so good success, that his name continued in that sort famous above
two thousand years after: for Diodorus Siculus, which was in the time of
Julius Caesar makes mention of the learned men of the Goths, and named them
Sarronides, that is to say, Sarron his Scholars and fo^lowers.

Among these Arts that then were taught, some did in form the tongue, and
make men able both to utter aptly their mind, and also to persuade, as
Grammar, Logike, and Rhethorike, although not so couriously as in this time:
some other did appertain to the just order of partition of Lands, the true
using of waights, measures, and reckenings in all sorts of bargains, and for
order of building and sundry other uses, those were Arithmerike and Geometry.
Again, to encourage men to the honor of God, they taught Astronomy, whereby
the wonderful works of God were so manifestly set forth, that no man's tongue
nor pen can in like sort express his infinite power, his unspeakable wisdom,
and his exceeding goodness toward man, whereby he does bauntifully provide for
man all necessaries, not only to live, but also to live pleasantly. And so was
their confidence in Gods providence strongly stayed, knowing his goodness to
be such, that he would help man as he could, and his power to be so great,
that he could do what he would: and thirdly his wisdom to be so pure, that
he would do nothing, but that was best. Beside these Sciences they taught also
Music, which most commonly they did apply partly to religious Sciences, to
draw men to delight therein, and partly to songs made of the manners of men in
praise of Virtue, and discommendation of Vice, whereby it came to pass, that
no man would displease them, nor do any thing evil that might come to their
hearing: This Bardus Druidius the v. king of the Celtes, reigned 69. years, and
died 1832. years before Christ.
for their Songs did make evil men more abhorred in that time, than any
excommunication does in this time. The posteritle of these Musicians continue
yet both in Wales and Ireland called Bardes unto this day, by the ancient name
of Bardus, their first founder.

And as these Sciences did increase, so did virtue increase thereby. Again, as
these sciences did decay, so virtue lost her estimation, and consequently was
little in use: whereof to make a full declaration, were a thing meet for a
Prince to hear, but it would require a peculiar treatise. Wherefore at this
present I count it sufficient lightly to have touched this matter in general
words, and to say no more of the particularitie thereof, but only touching
one of those sciences, that is, Arithmetike, by which not only just partition
of lands was made, but also touching buying an selling, all assizes, weights,
and measures were devised, and all reckenings and accounts driven: yea by
proportion of it, were the true orders of Justice limited, as ( Aristotle in
his Ethikes does declare) and the degrees of estates in the common wealth
established. Although that proportion be called Geometrical, and not
Arithmeticall, yet does that proportion appertain to the Art of Arithmetike:
and in Arithmetike is taught the Progression of such proportions, and all
things thereto belonging. Wherefore I may well say, that seeing Arithmetike is
so many ways needful unto the first planting of a common wealth, it must
needs be as much required to the preservation of it also: for by the same
means is any common wealth continued, by which it was erected and established.
And if I shall in small matters in appearance, but in deed very weighty, put
one example or two, what shall we say for the statutes of this realm, which be
the only stay of good order in manner now? As touching the mesuring of ground
by length and breadth, there is a good and an ancient statute made by Art of
Arithmetike, and now it shall be to little use, if by the same Art it be not
practiced and tried. For the assyse of bread and drink, the two most common
and most necessary things for the sustentation of man, there was a goodly
ordinance in the Law made, which by ignorance has so grown out of knowledge
and use, that few men do understand it, and therefore the statute books
wonderfully corrupted, and the commons cruelly oppressed: notwithstanding some
me^ have written, that it is too doubtful a matter to execute those Assizes by
those statutes, by reason they depend of the standerd of the coin, which is
much changed from the state of that time when those statutes were made. Thus
shall every man read that lists in the Abridgement of Statutes in the title
of Waightes and Measures, in the seventh number of the English Book, where
he should have translated a good ordinance, which is set forth in the French
book: but no marvel if the Abridgement does omit it, seeing the great book
of Statutes does omit the same Statute, as it has done diverse other very
good laws. And this is the fruit of ignorance, to reject all that it
understands not, although they use some clokes for it: but such clokes, as
being allowed, might serve to repel all good laws, which God forbid.

Again there is an ancient order for assise of fire wood, and coals, which
was renewed not many years past, and now how Avarice and Ignorance does
canuas the statute, it is too pitiful to talk of, and more miserable to feel.

Furthermore, for the Statute of Coinage, and the standerd thereof, if the
people understood rightly the statute, they should not, nor would not (as
they often do) gather an excuse for their folly thereby, but as I said, these
statutes by wisdom and good knowledge of Arithmetike were made, and by the
same must they be continued. And let Ignorance no more meddle with the use of
them, than it did with the making of them. Oh in how miserable case is that
Realm, where the Ministers and interpreters of the Laws are destitute of all
good sciences, which be the keys of the laws? How can they either make good
Laws, or maintain them, that lack that true knowledge whereby to judge them?
And happy may that realm be accounted where the Prince himself is studious
of learning, and desires to understand equity in all laws. Therefore most
happy are we the loving subjects of your Majesty which may see in your
highness not only such towardness, but also such knowledge of diverse Arts
as seldom has been seen in any Prince of such years, whereby we are
enforced to conceive this hope: Certainly, that he which in those years
seeks knowledge when knowledge is least esteemed, and of such an age can
discern them, to be enimes both to his royal person, and to his realm, which
labor to withdraw him from knowledge to exeessiue pastime, and from
reasonable study to idle or noisome pleasures, he must needs, when he comes
to more mature years, be a most prudent Prince, a most just Governor, and a
right Judge, not only of his subjects commonly, but also of the ministers of
his laws, yea, and of the Laws themselves. And to be able to conceive the
true equity and exact understanding of al his Laws and Statutes, to the
comfort of his good subjects, and the confusion and reproach of them which
labor to obscure or peruerte the equity of the same laws and statutes. How
some of those statutes may be applied to use, as well in our time, as in any
other time, I have particularly declared in this Book, and some other I have
omitted for just considerations, till I may offer them first unto your
Majesty, to weigh them, as to your Highness shall seem good: for many things
in them are not to be published without your highness knowledge and
approbation, namely because in them is declared all the rates of alloyes for
all standerds from one ounce upward, with other mysteries of Mynte matters,
and also most part of the varieties of coins, that have been current in this
your Majesty's realm by the space of six hundred years last past, and many
of them that were current in the time that the Romans ruled here.

All which, with the ancient description of England and Irelande and my
simple censure of the same, I have almost completed to be exhibited to your
Highness.

In the mean season most humbly beseeching your Majesty, to accept this
simple treatise, not worthy to be presented to so high a Prince, but that my
lowly request to your majesty is, that this amongst other of my books may
pass under the protection of your highness, whom I beseech God most
earnestly and daily, according to my duty, to advance in all honor and
princely regalitie, and to increase in all knowledge, justice, and godly
policy. Amen.

Your Majesty's most obedient subject and servant, ROBERT RECORD.

TO THE LOVING Reader. The Preface of Master To: RECORD.
SORE oftetimes have I lamented with my self the unfortunate condition of
England, seeing so many great Clerks to arise in sundry other parts of the
world, and so few to appear in this our nation: whereas for pregnancie of
natural wit (I think) few nations do excel English men: But I cannot
impute the cause to any other thing than to the contempt or misseregard of
learning. For as Englishmen are inferior to no men in mother wit, so they
pass all men in vain pleasures, to which they may attain with great pain or
labor: and are as slack to any, never so great commodity, if there hang of
it any paineful study or trauelsome labor.

Howbeit, yet all men are not of that sort, though the most part be, the more
pity it is: but of them that are so glad, not only with paineful study and
studious pain to attain learning, but also with as great study and pain to
communicate their learning to others, and make all England, if it might be,
partakers of the same, the most part are such, that uneath they can support
their own necessary charges, so that they are not able to bear any charges
in doing of that good, that else they desire to do.

But a greater cause of lamentation is this: that when learned men have taken
pains to do things for the aid of the unlearned, scarce they shall be allowed
for their well doing, but derided and scorned, and so utterly discouraged to
take in hand any like enterprice again. So that if any be found (as there are
some) that do favor learning and learned wits, and can be content to
further knowledge, yea only with their word, such persons, though they be
rare, yet shall they encourage learned men to enterprise some things, at the
least, that England may rejoice of. And I have good hope that England will
(after she has taken some sure taste of learning) not only bring forth more
favorers of it, but also such learned men, that she shall be able to compare
with any realm in the world. But in the mean season, where so few regarders
of learning are, how greatly they are to be esteemed that do favor and
further it, my pen will not suffice at full to declare.

Therefore, gentle reader, where as I do upon most just occasion judge, yea
and know assuredly, that there be some men in this realm, which both love,
and also much desire to further good learning, and yet am not well able to
write their condign praise for the same, I think it better with silence to
ouerpasse it, then either to say too little of it, or to provoke against them
the malice of such other, which do nothing themselves that is praise worthy,
and therefore can not abide to hear the praise of any other man's good deed.

And considering their great favor unto learning, though I my self be not
worthy to be reckoned in the number of great learned men, yet am I bold to
put my self in preace with such ability, as God has lent me though not
with so great cunning as many men, yet with as great affection as any man, to
help my countrymen, and will not cease daily, (as much as my small ability will
suffer me) to endite some such thing, that shall be to the instruction, though
not of learned men. yet at the least of the vulgar sort, whose argument
always shall be such, that it shall delight al learned wits, though they do
not learn any great things out of it.

But to speak of this present Book of Arithmetic, I dare not nor will not set
it forth with any words, but remit it to the judgment of all gentle readers,
and namely such as love good learning, beseeching them so to esteem it, as it
does seem worthy. And so either to accept the thing for it self, either at
the least to allow my good endeavor. But I perceive I need not use any
persuasions unto them, whose gentle nature and favorable mind is ready to
receive thankefullye, and interpreate to the best, of al such enterprices
attempted for lo good an end, though the thing do not always satisfy men's
expectation.

This considered, did bolden me to publish abroad this little Book of the
Art of numbering, which if you shall receive favorably, you shall encourage me
to gratify you hereafter with some greater thing.

And as I judge some men of so loving a mind to their native country that
they would much rejoice to see it to prosper in good learning and witty
Arts, so I hope well of all the rest of Englishmen, that they will not be
vnmindeful of his due praise, by whose means they are helped and furthered in
any thing. Neither ought to esteem this thing of so little value, as many
men of little discretion oftentimes do: For who so sets small price by the
witty devise and knowledge of numbering, he little considers it to be the
chief point (in manner) whereby men differ from all brute beasts: for as in all other things, (almost) beasts are partakers with us, so in numbering we
differ clean from them, and in manner peculiarly, fith that in many things
they excel us again.

The Fox in crafty wit exceeds most men,
A dog in smelling has no man his peer,
To foresight of weather if you look then,
Many beasts excel man, this is clear.
The wittiness of Elephants does letters attain,
But what cunning does there in the Beeremaine?
The Emmet foreseeing the hardenesse of winter,
Provides vitailer in the time of Summer.
The Nightingale, the Lines, the Thrush, the Lark,
In Musical harmony pass many a Clarke.
The Hedgehog of Astronomy seems to know
And stops his cave, where the wind does blow
The Spider in weauing such are does show,
No man can him mende, nor follow I trow.
When a house will fall, the Mice right quick,
Flee thence before, can man do the like?
Many things else of the wittiness of beasts and birds might I here say,
save that another time I entende to write wherein they excel in manner all men,
as it is daily seen: but in number was there never beast found so cunning,
that could know or discern one thing from many, as by daily experience you
may well consider, when a Bitch has many whelps, or a Hen many Chickens: and
likewise of other whatsoever they be, take from them al their young, saving
only one, and you shall perceive plainly, that they miss none, though they
will resist you in taking them away, and will seek them again if they may know
where they be, but else they will never miss hem truly, but take away that
one that is left, and then will they cry and complain: and restore to them
that one, then are they pleased again: so that of number this may I justly
say, It is the only thing (almost) that separateth man from beasts. He
therefore that shall contemn number, he declares himself as brutish as a
beast, and unworthy to be counted in fellowship of men. But I trust there is no
man so foul ouerseene, though many right smallie do it regard.

Therefore will I now stay to write against such, and return again to this
book, which I have written in the form of a Dialogue, because I judge that
to be the easiest way of instruction, when the Scholar may ask every doubt
orderly, and the master may answer to his question plainly.

Howbeit I think not the contrary, but as it is easier to blame an other man's
work than to make the like, so there will be some that will find fault, because
I write in a Dialogue: but as I conjecture, those shall be such, as do not,
cannot, either will not perceive the reason of right teaching and therefore are
unmeet to be answered unto, for such men with no reason will be satisfied.

And if any man object that other books have been written of Arithmetike
already so sufficiently, that I needed not now to put pen to the book,
except I will condemn other men's writings: to them I answer. That as I
condemn no man's diligence, so I know that no one man can satisfy every man,
and therefore like as many do esteem greatly other Books, so I doubt not but
some will like this my Book above any other English Arithmetike hitherto
wrtiten, and namely such as shall lack instructers, for whose sake I have so
plainly set forth the examples, as no Book (that I have seen) has done
hitherto: which thing shall be great ease to the rude readers.

Therefore gentle reader, though this book can be small aid to the learned
sort, yet unto the simple ignorant (which needs most help) it may be a good
furtherance and mean unto knowledge. And though unto the King his Majesty
priuatelye I do it dedicate, yet I doubt not (such is his clemency) but that
he can be content, yea and much desirous, that all his loving subjects shall
take the use of it, and employ the same to their most profit: Which thing if I
perceive that they thankefullie do, and receive with as good will as it was
written, then will I shortly with no less kindness set forth such
introductions in to Geometry and Cosmography, as I have at other times
promised, and as hitherto in English has not been enterprised, wherewith I dare
say al honest hearts will be pleased, and all studious wits greatly
delighted.

I will say no more* but let every man judge as he shall see cause. And thus for
this time I will stay my pen, committing you all to that true fountain of
perfect number, which wrought the whole world by number and measure: he is
Trinity in Unity, and Unity in Trinity: To whom be all praise, honor and
glory. AMEN.

Here follows a Table of all the Contents of this Book.
The Contents of the first Dialogue contains the Declaration of the profit
of Arithmetike.
Numeration with an easy and large Table. Addition. Subtraction.
Multiplicatio^. Division.
with diverse Examples, and all their proofs, and some new forms of workings,
etc. Reduction, with diverse declarations of Coins Waights and Measures of
sundry forms newly added, with a new Table, containing most part of the
gold Coins throughout Christendom, with the true weight and valuation of
them in current money English, etc. Progression both Arithmeticall and
Geometrical, with diverse sundry questions touching the same. The Golden Rule
of three: and the Backer Rule of three: with diverse questions thereunto
belonging, newly added and augme^ted. The double Rule of Proportion. The Rule
of three composed of 5 numbers. The Rule of Fellowship, both with time, and
without time. Unto all these are added their proofs.
The second Dialogue contains
The first 5 kinds of Arithmetike wroughte by Counters. The common kinds of
casting of accomptes after the Merchants fashion, and Auditors also. Numbering
by the hand newly added.
The Contents of the second part, touching Fractions.
What a Fraction is. Numeration in Fractio^s. The order of working fractions.
with diverse familiar questions proponed for ye perfect understanding, and proof
of each of the^. Multiplication. Division. Reduction of diverse fractions into
one denomination in 3 varieties. Fractions of Fractions. Improper Fractions.
Fractions to the smallest denomination, with easy rules how to convert the^
thereunto. Fractions in other parts of things, with a Table demo^stratiue of
their proportio^s. Fraction, and how it may be turned into any other Fraction,
or into what Denomination you list.
Again of Multiplication Duplation Division Mediation Addition Subtraction.
The Golden Rule with diverse questions, and their proofs. The Backer Rule. A
question of Loan. The statute of Assise of Bread and Ale recognized and
applied to this time, with new tables thereunto annexed. The Statute of
Measuring of ground, with a table thereof faithfully calculated and corrected.
Questions of Society, with the reason of the Rules and proofs of their
works. To find three numbers in any proportion. The Rule of Alligation, with
diverse questions and the proofs of their works, with many varieties of such
solutions. The rule of Falshode, or false Position, with diverse questions, and
their proofs.
The Contents of the third Addition to this Book.
The first Chapter entreteth of Rules of Breuity and Practice, after a briefer
Method than ever yet was published in the English tongue. The second Chapter
treats of ye briefer Reduction of diverse Measures, as Else, Yeards, Braces,
etc. by Rules of Practice. The third Chapter entreats of the Rule of three in
Broken numbers after the trade of Merchaunts, something differing from Master
Records order, which is comprehended in 3 Rules. The fourth Chapter entreats
of Loss and Gain in the trade of Merchandise. The fifth Chapter entreats of
Loss and Gain in the trade of Merchandise upon time, etc. with necessary
questions therein wrought by the double Rule of three, or the Rule of 3
composed. The sixth Chapter entreats of Rules of payment, and of the
necessariest Rules that appertains to buying and selling, etc. The seventh
Chapter entreats of Buying and Selling in the Trade of Merchandise, wherein
is taken part ready money, and diverse days of payments given for the rest, and
what is won or lost in the 100 lb forbearance for 12 months, etc. The eight
Chapter entreats of Tares and alowances in the trade of Merchandise sold by
weight, and of their Losses and Gains therein, etc. The ninth Chapter
entreteth of Lengths and Breadths of Arras, and other Clothes, with diverse
questions incident thereunto. The tenth Chapter entreats of reducing of
Pawnes of Geanes into English yeards. The eleauenth Chapter entreats of Rules
of Loan and Interest with diverse questions incident thereunto. The twelfth
Chapter entreats of the making of Factors. The thirteenth Chapter
entreats of Rules of Barter or Exchange of Merchandise, wherein is taken
part ware, and part ready money with their proofs, and diverse other
necessary questions thereunto belonging. The fourteenth Chapter entreats of
exchanging of money from one place to an other, with diverse necessary questions
incident thereunto. The fifteeeth Chapter entreats of six sundry forms of
practice for the Reduction of English, Flemish, and French money, and how each
of them may easily be brought to others money sterling. The sixteenth Chapter
contains a brief note of the ordinary Coins of most places of Christendom
for traffic, and the manner of their exchaunging from one City or town to
an other, which known the Italians call Pary: whereby they find the gain or
loss upon the Exchange. The seventeenth Chapter contains also a
Declaration of ye diversity of the waights and measures of most places of
Christendom for traffic, at the end whereof are two Tables, the one for
weight, and the other for measure, proportionated to an equality unto our
English measure and weight, whereby the ingenious practitioner may easily
reduce the weight and measure of each Country into other. The eighteenth
Chapter entreats of diverse Sportes and Pastimes, done by Number.
FINIS.
A Collection of such Tables as are contained in this Treatise.
A large Table of Numeration. A Table of Multiplication. A Table of Division. A
Table of the money current in this Realm when the Author first published this
book. A Table of all the usual silver Coins now current in this Realm,
newly added. A Table of all the gold Coins in this realm with all the most
usual Gold Coins thoroughout Christendom, with their several waights of
Pence and Grains, and what they are worth in current money English. Certain
Tables or Notes of the contents of Ale, Beer, Wine, Butter, Soap, Salmo^,
Eeles, etc. both what such vessels ought to contain by the Statute, and what
those vessels empty ought to wey. A Table of the quantity of dry measures,
as Peckes, Bushels, Quarters, Weyes, etc. A Table of the proportion of measure,
touching Lengths or breadths: to wit, from the inche to the foot, and so to
the yeard, the Ell with their parts: the perch, the rod- the furlong, the
mile, etc. A Table made by Progression Arithmetical, which contains a double
table of Multiplication. A Table of the Art of Numbering by the hand. A Table
or demonstration of a figure or measure for the perfect understanding of
Fractions of Fractions. A Table of the contents of the Statute for the assise
of the weight of bread. From 1 s the quarter to 20 s faithfully corrected, and
amended. A necessary Table of the Statute of measuring of ground, upon the
breadth given, what length it ought to contain: faithfully corrected according
to the equity of the statute: wherein the Author declares how necessary this
worthy Art of Arithmetike is unto Gentlemen Students of the law, and such
other as are desirous of infallible truth. Brief Tables of the ready reducing
of English, French, and Flemish money, each into others common current
moneys. A brief Table or collection of the common and usual moneys of most
places of Christendom for traffic, the manner of their paymentes or
exchaunging from one City or town, to an other: right necessary for
Merchants, and other Occupiers, Traueluellers, etc. Tables of the Waightes,
Measures, and Customs of most places of Europe for traffic. 2 Tables, the
one for weight, the other for measure, reduced to an equality, unto our
Measures and weight here at London, with the help of which 2 Tables, and the
aid of the rule of 3, the ingenious may easilye reduce our measure to the
perfect valuation of other Countries measure or weight, and likewise theirs to
ours. Lastly, a Table demonstrating the true solution of three diverse things
hidden of 3 several persons in pastime.
A dialogue between THE MASTER and the Scholar, teaching the Art and use of
Arithmetike with pen.
THE SCHOLAR SPEAKS. SIR, SVCH is your authority in mine estimation, yt I am
content to consent to your saying, and to receive it as truth, though I see
none other reason that does lead me there unto: whereas else in mine own
conceit it appears but vain, to bestow any time privately in learning of
that thing, that every child may and does learn at all times and hours,
when he does any thing himself alone, and much more when he talks or
reasons with other.


Master. Lo this is the fashion and chance of all them that seek to defend
their blind ignorance: that when they think they have made strong reason for
themself, than have they proved quite contrary. For if nu^bring be so common
(as you grant it to be) that no man can do any thing alone, and much less
talk or bargayne with other, but he shall still have to do with Number: this
proves not Number to be contemptible and vile, but rather right excellent and
of high reputation, since it is the ground of all men's affairs, so that
without it no tale can be told, no communication without it can be long
continued, no bargayning without it can duly be ended, or no business that
man has, iustlye completed. These commodities (if there were none other) are
sufficient to approve the worthynesse of Number. But there are other
innumerable far passing all these, which declare Number to exceed al
praise. Wherefore, in all great works are Clerks so much desired? Wherefore
are Auditors so richely fed? What causes Geometrians so highlye to be
enhaunced? Why are Astronomers so greatly advanced? Because that by Number
such things they do find, which else should far excel man's mind.


Scholar. Verilye Sir if it be so, that these men, by numbering their cunning do
attain, at whose great works most men do wonder, then I see well I was much
deceived, and numbering is a more cunning thing then I took it to be.


Master. If Number were so vile a thing as you did esteem it, then need it
not to be used so much in men's communication. Exclude Number and aunsweare
to this question. How many years old are you?


Scholar. Mum.


Master. How many days in a week? how many weeks in a year? What lands
has your father? How many men does he keep? How long is it since you came
from him to me?


Scholar. Mum.


Master. So that if Number want, you answer all by Mummes: How many mile to
London?


Schole. A pooke full of Plummes.


Master. Why, thus you may see, what rule Number bears, and that if Number
be lacking, it makes men dumb, so that to most questions, they must
answer Mum.


Scholar. This is the cause sir, that I judged it so vile, because it is so
common in talking every while: For plenty is not deintie, as the common saying
is.


Master. No, nor Store is no sore: perceive you this? The more common that a
thing is, being needefully required, the better is the thing, and the more to
be desired. But in Numbering as some of it is light and plain, so the most part
is difficulte, and not easy to attain. The easyer part serves al men in
commune, and the other part requires some learning. Wherefore as without
Nu^bring a man can do almost nothing, so with the help of it, you may
attain to all things.


Sc. Yea sir? Why? then it were best to learn the Art of Numbering first of all
other learning, and then a man need learn no more, if all other come with it.


Master. Nay not so: but if it be first learned, then shall a man be able
(I mean) to learn, perceive, and attain to other sciences, which without
it, he should never get.


Scholar. I perceive by your former words, that Astronomy and Geometry
depend much of the help of Numbering, but that other Sciences, as Music,
Physic, Law, and Grammar and such like, have any help of Arithmetike, I
perceive not.


Master. I may perceive your great Clerkelinesse by the ordering of your
Sciences: but I will let that pass now, because it touches not the matter that
I entend, and I will show you how Arithmetike does profit in all these,
somewhat grossly, according to your small understanding, omitting other
reasons more substantial.

First (as you reckon them) Music has not only great healpe of
Arithmetike, but is made, and has his perfectness of it: for all Music
stands by Number and Proportion.

And in Physic, beside the calculation of Critical days, with other things
which I omit, how can any manne judge the Pulse rightlye, that is
ignoraunte of the proportion of Numbers?

And as for the Law, it is plain, that the man that is ignorant of
Arithmetike, is neither meet to be a Judge, neither an Advocate, nor yet a
Proctour. For how can he well understand another man's cause appertayning to
distribution of goods, or other dettes, or of sums of money, if he be
ignorante of Arithmetike? This oftentimes causes right to be hindered, when
the Judge either deliteth not to hear of a matter that he peceyueth not, or
cannot Judge it for lack of understanding: This comes by the ignorance of
Arithmeti^e.

Now as for Grammar, me thinks you should not doubt in what it needs
number, since you have learned that Nounes of al sorts, Pronouns, Verbs, and
Participles, are distinct diversely by Numbers: besides the variety of Nounes
of Number, and Aduerbs. And if you take away Number from Grammar, then is all
the quantity of Syllables lost. And many other ways does Number help
Grammar. Whereby were al kinds of meters found and made? Was it not by Number?

But how needful Arithmetike is to all parts of Philosophy, they may soon
see, that do read either Aristotle, Plato, or any other Philosophers
writing. For all their examples almost, and their probations, depend of
Arithmetike. It is the saying of Aristotle, that he that is ignorante of
Arithmetike is meet for no science. And Plato his Master wrote a like
sentence over his Schoolehouse door. Let none enter in hither (quoth he) that
is ignorant of Geometry. Seeing he would have al his Scholars expert in
Geometry, much rather he woulds the same in Arithmetike, without which
Geometry cannot stand.

And how needful Arithmeti^e is to Divinity, it appears, seeing so many
Doctors gather so great mysteries out of Number, and so much do write of it.
And if I should go about to write all the commodities of Arithmetike in civil
acts, as in governance of commonweals in time of peace, and in due
provision and order of armies in time of war: For numbering of the ho^^e,
summing of their wages, provisions of victualles, vewing of Artillery, with
other armoure: Beside the cunningest point of all, for casting of ground, for
encamping of men, with such other like. And how many ways also Arithmetike
is conducible for all private weals, of Lords and all possessioners, of
merchants, and all other occupyers, and generallye, for all estates of men,
besides Auditors, treasorers, receyuers, stewards, bayliffes, and such like,
whose offices without Arithmetike is nothing. If I should (I say)
particularlye repeat all such commodities of this noble Science of
Arithmetike, it were enough to make a very great book.


Scholar. No, no sir, you shall not need: For I doubt not, but this that you
have said, were enough to persuade any manne to think this Art to be right
excellent and good, and so necessary for man, that (as I think now) so much
as a man lacks of it, so much he lacks of his sense and wit.


Master. What? are you so far changed since, by hearing the few
commodities in general? By likelihode you would be far changed, if you knew
all the commodities particular.


Scholar. I beseech you sir, reserve those commodities that rest yet behynd,
unto their place more convenient. And if ye will be so good as to utter at this
time this excellent treasure, so that I may be somewhat enriched thereby,
and if ever I shall be able, I will requite your pain.


Master, I am very glad of your request, and I will do it speedely, since
that to learn it you be so ready.


Scholar. And I to your authority my wit do subdue, whatsoever you say, I
take it for true.


Master. That is too much, and meet for no man to be believed in all things,
without showing of reason. Though I might of my Scholar some credence
require, yet except I show reason, I do it not desire. But now since you are so
earnestly set this Art to attain, best it is to omit no time, least some
other passion, cool this great heat, and then you leave off before you see
the end.


Scholar. Though many there be so unconstant of mind, that flitter and turn
with every wind, which often begin, and never come to the end, I am none
of their sort, as I trust you partelye know. For by my good will what I ons
begin till I have it fully ended I would never blin


Master. So have I Found you hitherto in deed and I trust you will increase
rather than go back. For better it were never to assaye, than to shrink and
flee in the middle way. But I trust you will not so do, therefore tell me
briefly. What call you the science that you desiere so greatly?


Scholar Why sir? you know.


Master. That makes no matter. I would hear whether you know, and therefore
I ask you. For, great rebuke it were to have studied a Science, and yet
cannot tell how it is named,


Scholar. Some call it Arsmetrik, and some Augrime.


Master. And what does those names betoken?


Scholar. That if it please you, of you would I learn.


Master. Both names are coruptly written, Arsmetrike for Arithmetik, as the
Greeks call it, and Augrim for Algorisme, as the Arabians sound it, which
both betoken the science of Numbering. For Arithmos in Greek, is called
number: and of it comes Arithmetike, the Art of Numbering. So that Arithmetike
is a science or art teaching the manner and use of Numbering. This Art may be
wrought diversely, with Pen or with Counters. But I will first show you the
working with the Pen, and then the other in order.


Scholar. This I will remember. But how many things are to be learned, to
attain this Art fullye?


Master. There are reckened commonly seven parts or works of it.

Numeration, Addition, Subtraction, Multiplication Division, Progression, and
extraction of roots: to these some men add Duplation, Triplation, and
Mediation. But as for these last three, they are contained under the other
seven. For Duplation and Triplation, are contained under Multiplication, as it
shall appear in their place. And Mediation is contained under Division, as I
will declare in his place also.


Scholar. Yet then there remain the first seven kinds of Numbering.


Master. So there does: Howbeit, if I shall speak exactelye of parts of
Numbering I must make but five of them: For Progression is a compound operation
of Addition, Multiplication and Division. And so is the extraction of roots.
But it is no harm to name them as kinds several, seeing they appear to have
some several worki^g. For it forces not so much to conte^d for the number of
them, as for the due knowledge and practicing of them.


Scholar. Then you will, that I shall name them as seven kinds distinct. But
now I desire you to instruct me in the use of each of them.


Master. So will I, but it must be done in order: for you may not learn the
last as soon as the first, but you must learn them in that order, as I did
rehearse them, if you will learn them speedily and well.


Scholar, Even as you please. Then to begin, Numeration is the first in order:
what shall I do with it?


Master. First you must know what the thing is, and then after learn the
use of the same.


NVMERATION.
NVMERATION is that Arithmeticall skill, whereby we may duly value, express
and read any number or sum propounded: or else in apt figures and places,
set down any number known or named.

Scholar. Why? then me thinks you put a difference vetweene the value and the
Fygures?


Master. Yea so do I: For the valewe is one thing, and the figures are an
other thing: and that comes partly by the diversity of figures, but chieflye
of the places wherein they be set.


Scholar. Then I must know there three things: the Value, the Figure, and
the Place.


Master. Even so: but yet add Order to them as the fourth. And first mark,
that there are but ten figures, that are used in Arithmetike: and of those
ten, one does signify nothing, which is made like an 0, and is called
privately a Cyphre, though all the other sometime he likewise named. The other
nine are called Signifying figures, and be thus figured.

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 And this is their value. j.ij.iij.iiij.v.vj.vij.viij.ix.

But here must you mark, that every Figure has two values: One always
certain that it signifies properly, which it has of his form: and the other
uncertain, which he takes of his place.

A Place is called the seat or room that a Figure stands in. And look how
many Figures are written in one sum, so many places has that whole
number. And the first place must be called that that is next to the right
hand, and so reckoning by order toward the left hand, so that that place
is last, that is next to the left hand. As for example: If there stood
before you six men in a row, side by side, and you should tell them as they
stand in order, beginning with the man that were next to your right hand:
then he that were next him should be called the second, and so forth to
the farthest from your right hand, which is the sixth and the last.


Scholar. Sir, I perceive you well: so might I reckon letters or any other
thing. As if I should write eight letters after this order, a, b, c, d, e, f,
g, h, now must I say h, is the first g the ij, f the iij, e the iiij, d the v,
c the vj, b the vij, and a the viij.


Master. That is well done. And after the same sort use hereafter, that what I
declare by one example, do you express by an other, and so I shall perceive
whether you understand it or no. And so pass over nothing, till you perceive
it well, and be expert therein.


Scholar. Sir, I pray you how many of these places be there in all?


Master. There is no certain number of them, but they are sometimes more and
sometimes fewer, according to the sum that is expressed. For so many as the
figures are, so many are the places: and the last place is so called, not
because it is last of all other, but it is the last of that present sum,
and it may be the middle place in an other sum.


Scholar. Me seems I perceive this very well, as touching the order of
reckoning of the places: But as for the number of them, you say there is no
certainty. Now there rests to declare the value of the figures by diversity
of places, which you called, the Value uncertain.


Master. But first let me hear whether you know perfectly the certain
value.


Scholar. Yes sir, as you wrote them, so I marked them.


Master. How write you then five?


Scholar. By this figure 5.


Master. And how six?


Scholar. Thus, 6.


Master. Write these three numbers each by it self as I speak
them.vij.iiij.iij.


Scholar. 7.4.3.


Master. How write you these four other, ij, j, ix, viij?


Scholar. Thus (I trow,) 2, 1, 6, 8.


Master. Nay, there you miss: Look on mine example again.


Scholar. Sir, truth it is, I was too blame, I took 6 for 9, but I will be
warer hereafter.


Master. Now then take heed, these certain valewes every figure
represents, when it is alone written without other Fygures joined to him.
And also when it is in the first place, though many other do follow: as for
example: This figure 9 is ix. standing now alone.


Scholar. How? is he alone and stands in the middle of so many letters?


Master. The letters are none of his fellows. For if you were in France in
the middle of a M. French men, if there were no English man with you, you
would reckon your self to be alone.


Scholar, So it is. Then 9 without more figures of Arithmetike, betokens ix,
whatsoever other letters be about it.


Master. Even so, and so does it, if it be in the first place joined with
other, how many soever do follow, as in this example, 3679. you see 9 in the
first place, and does betoken nine, as if he were alone.


Scholar. I perceive that. And does not 7 that stands in the second place,
betoke vij? and 6 in the third place, betoken vj? And so 3 in the fourth place,
betoken three?


Master. Their places be as you have said, but their valewes are not so. For
as in the first place, every figure betokens his own value certain
only, so in the second place every figure betokens his own value certain
ten times: as in the example, 7 in the second place is seven times x, that is,
lxx. And in the third place, every figure betokens his own valewe a hundredth
times, so that 6 in that place betokneth vj.C. And in the fourth place, every
figure betokens his own value a M. times, as in the foresaid number 3. in
the fourth place, stands for^. M. And in the fi^th place, every figure
stands for his own valewe x.M. times. And in the vj place a C.M. times. And
in ye v^. place a M.M. times: And in ye viij. place x.M.M. so yt every place
exceeds the former x. times.


Scholar. As thus: if I make th^s Number at al adventures, 9^359^84, here are
eight places. In the first place is 4, and betokens but four: in the second
place is 8, and betokneth x. times 8, that is, 80: In the third place is 6, and
betokens six hundredth: In the 4. fourth place 9 is nine thousand. And ^ in
the fifth place is x.M. times 5, that is, fifty M. So ^ in the sixte place, is
a C.M. times ^, that is CCC.M. Them in the seventh place, a M.M. And 9 in the
eighte place ten thousand thousand times 9, that is xc.M.M. But now I can
not easily nor quicklye read it in order.


Master, That shall you practice by this means. First put a pric^e over the
fourth figure, and so over the seventh. And (if you have so many) over the
tenth, thirteenth, sixteenth, and so forth, still leaving two figures between
each two pricks. And those two rooms between ye pricks, are called ternaries.

Then begin at the last prick, and see how many figures are between him and
the end, which can not pass three, reconing himself for one: then pronounce
them as if they were written alone from the rest, and add at the end of their
valewe so many times thousand as your number has pricks.

After that come to the next three figures, and sound them as if they were
aparte from the rest, and add to their valewe so many tunes thousands, and
there are pricks beetwene them, and the first place of your whole number. And
so do by every other three Figures following, if you have more. As in example,
91359684. this was your number.

Put a prick over ^ in the fourth place, and over in the seventh place, and
then no more, (for your places come not to ten) as thus: 91359684.

Now go to the last prick over 1, and take it and the figure 9 that follows
it, and value them alone.


Scholar. 91 that is xcj.


Master. So is it: but then add for the number of your pricks twice M.


Scholar. That is xcj, thousand thousand.


Master. So is it. Then take the three other figures from one to the next
prick, and value them.


Scholar. 359. that is CCC.lix.


Master. Now add for the one prick* that is between them and the first
place, M.


Scholar. CCC.lix. thousand.


Master. Then come to the other three f^gures that remain.


Scholar. 684. that is, vj.C.lxxxiiii.


Master. Now have you valued all. And at the end of the last number you
shall add nothing, because there remains no prick nor number after it: yet
prove in an other number, as thus, 2 3 0 8 6 4 0 8 9 10 5 3 4 0.


Scholar. 2 3 0 8 6 4 0 8 9 1 0 5 3 4 0. I have pricked them as you taught me:
but I am in doubt, whether I have done well or no, because of the Cyphars: for
I remember, you told me that they do signify nothing, and therefore I doubt
whether I should reckon them for a figure in setting of the pricks: and
again, I know not wherefore they serve.


Master. That will I tell you now. Indeed they are of no value themselves, but
they serve to make up number of places, and so makes the figure following
them to be in a further place, and therefore to signify the more value: as in
this example 90, the Ciphre is of no value, but yet he occupies the first
place, and causes 9 to be in the second place, and so to signify ten times
9, that is, xc, so that two Ciphres thrusts the figure following them, into
the third place, and so forth.


Scholar. Then I perceive in the example above I have pricked well enough: for
tho gh that Ciphre that is pricked signify nothing, yet must he have the
prick, because he came in the xiij place. Then will I prove to number that
su^me. First there is 230 M.M.M.M. and then follows 864 M.M.M. And what shall
I now do? There is a Cyphre in the third place, and no figure after him, but
they that have reckened.


Master. He did serve for them that you have already reckened, to make them
in a place further than they should be if he were away: and therefore now you
shall let him go. And so do always when he occupies that place next before
any prick, which is the last of that Ternarie, and a Cyphre in the last
place does nothing.


Scholar. Then shall I say but 89 M.M.


Master. So, but go forth.


Scholar. 105 thousand. Now are all my pricks spent, and yet remain 340, so
that I must value them CCC.xl. only.


Master. Now can you reckon after this sort: and remember, that every such
room so parted, is called a Ternarie or Trinity.

Some do part such great numbers with letters, after this manner.

2 c 3 b 0 a 8 b 6 c 4 a 0 b 8 c 9 a 1 b 0 c 5 a 3 b 4 c 0 a. In which example
ye may see, that a supplyeth the room of your prick. And some do part the
numbers with lines after this form. ^. where you see as many lines as you made
pricks, and is one intent, save that the lines do more plainly part every
three figures, according as they should be valewed under one Denomination.


Scholar. Yea sir, but if you should show me a number so parted, I should
take it for many numbers, and not for one.


Master So might you do, not knowing my meaning. But what if I did set
forth the number without lines, and your self (for the ease of reckning) did
so part it with lines, would you forget wherefore ye did it, and then take
them for many numbers?


Scholar. No I trow not, but yet I doubt.


Master. Thou use that that you like best, for all the three ways are to one
intent, save (as I said) that the lines us more plainly distinct the
denominations.


Scholar. What call you Denominations?


Master. It is the last value or name added to any sum. As when I say:
CC.xxii. pounds: pounds is the Denomination. And likewise in saying: as men,
men is the Denomination, and so of other. But in this place (that I spoke of
before) the last number of every Ternarie, is the Denomination of it. As of
the first Ternarie, the denomination is unites, and of the second. Ternarie,
the Denomination is thousands: and of the third Ternarie, thousand
thousands, or millions: of the iiij. thousand thousand thousands, or
thousand Millions: and soforth.


Scholar. And what shall I call the value of the iij. figures that may be
pronounced before the Denominators? as in saying: 203 000000, that is CCiij.
millions. I perceive by your words, that millions is the Denomination: but
what shall I call the CCiij. joined before the Millions?


Master. That is called the Numerator or valewer, and the whole sum that
resulteth of them both, is called the Sum, value or number.


Scholar. Now is there any thing else to be learned in Numeration? or else
have I learned it sully?


Master. I might here show you who were the first inuentors of this Art, and
the reasons of all these things that I have taught you, but that will I reserve
till ye have learned over all the practice of this Art, least I should
trouble your wit, with over many things at the first.

But yet this must you mark, that there are three kinds of number: one
called Digits, an other articles, and the third mixte numbers.

A Digit is any number under 10, as this: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.

And 10 with all other that may be divided into ten parts just, and nothing
remain, are called Articles: such are 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, etc. 100, 200, etc.
1000. etc.

And that number is called mixed, that contains Articles, or at the least one
article, and a digit: as 12, 16, 19, 21, 38, 107, 1005. and so forth. And for
the more ease of understanding and remembrance mark this: The diget number is
never written with more than one figure, but the article and the mixed number
are ever written with more than one figure. And thus they differ, that the
article has evermore this Cyphre c, in the first place: and the mixte number
has ever there some Diget.


Scholar. By these last words, I perceive it much better than I did before,
and now (I think) I will never miss to know those three asunder.


Master. If you remember now all that I have said, you have learned
sufficientlye this first kind of Arithmetike, called Numeration, Howbeit, I
will yet exhort you now, to remember both this that I have said, and all
that I shall say, and to exercise your self in the practice of it: For Rules
without practice, are but a light knowledge: and practice it is, that makes
men perfect and prompt in all things.

And as you have learned to gather and express the value of a sum
propounded, and set down before you: so must you practice to mark note, or
write down, with apt figures, and in due places, any number, only named or
recited to you, or of your self imagined: as for a proof: How note you, or
write down this sum, five thousand, two hundredth, fifty and seven.


Scholar. This troubles me now, whether I should begin at the first
figure or at the last. For reason (me thinks) should cause me to beginnne at
the first: and yet if I write it as you speak it, I must begin at the
last.


Master. When you know your places perfectly, you may begin where you
list. But the more ease for your hand is to begin with the last, that is to
say, as I did speak them. Yet for the more surety, a while you may begin
with the first, repeating my words backewarde thus: Seven, Fifty, two
hundredth, five thousand: or else sounding them all by their diget or valewer,
as thus: seven, five, two, five: for that way is easiest. But then must you
look well, whether there be any Ciphre in your sum that he may be set in
his place. As if your last valewer of your sum (as you speak it) be above
9, then is there a Cyphre in the first place. And if it be a hundred or above,
then is there two Cyphres one in the first place, and an other in the second,
and so forth.

But because this thing is such that cannot be set forth without many words,
I think best here now at the end of Numeration to add a table easy and
ready for the first exercise of it.

Lo, this is the Table. The left side or hand. The names of the digits,
valewes certain, or valewers.
The denominatours of the place or valewe uncertain Nine. Eight. Seven. Six.
Five. Four. Three. Two. One. Ciphre. The order of the places. Unites. 9 8 7 6
5 4 3 2 1 0 First. Tennes. 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 Second. Hundreds. 9 8 7 6 5 4 3
2 1 0 Third. Thousands. 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 Fourth. x. Thousands. 9 8 7 6 5 4
3 2 1 0 Fifte. C. of thousa^des. 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 Sixte. Millions. 9 8 7 6 5
4 3 2 1 0 Seventh. x. of millions. 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 Eighth. C. of millions.
9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 Ninth. M. of millions. 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 Tenth x. M. of
milli^os. 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 Eleventh.

The (...)

This Table (as you may see) has eleven places, and in each of them are set
all the digites, whose certain value is written in the right hand of the
Table, and the value uncertain on the left hand. So that by this table you
may learn both how to express any number that you list, (if that it
exceed not eleauen places) that is to say, lxxxx. thousand Millions, and so
may you by the help of it, value all sums proposed under the said number.

For example: take the sum that I proposed before, which was five thousand,
two hundred, fifty and seven. And if you will express it, take the first
number (as I speak it) which is five M. whose valuer or certain value is v.
and his uncertain value or denomination is M. First you shall seek at the
right hand of the valuer v. Then seek along under the title of Denomination
toward the left hand, til you find thousands, and under it right at the soote
of the Table, is the number of the place, that is the fourth, wherein you
must write your diget or valuer five.

Afterward come to the second part of the number, two hundred, whose valuer
is 2, and his denomination C. Seek two at the right hand of the Table, and
go along under the denominations toward the left hand, til you come under
C: then look to the table, and there shall you see the number of the place,
that is to say, three, wherein you must set your diget 2.

Then do so by your other two numbers that remain, and you shall find five
in the second place for your fifty, and 7 in the first place for your seven.
And thus may you do with other numbers.


Scholar. Master I thank you hartilye. I perceive you seek to instruct me
most plainly and brieflye, and not to hide your knowledge with subtle words
as many do. For this rule is so plain, that I can desire it no plainer. And
though it seem somewhat long, yet I perceive it to be a sure way.


Master. So is it, and though it be long, yet it is neither too long, neither
too plain for young learners that lack practice: for this table is in stead
of a teacher, to them that lack one. But now I trust I have said enough of
Numeration: which after you have well practiced, then may you learn forth.


Scholar. Yet I pray you in one thing to tell me your judgment. Why do men
reckon the order of the places backewarde, from the right hand to the left?


Master. In that thing all men do agree, that the Chaldeyes,
which first invented this Art did set these figures as they set all their
letters: for they write backewarde as you term it, and so do they read. And
that may appear in all Hebrew, Chaldeye, and Arabike books, for they be not
only written from the right hand to the left, and so must be read, but also
the right end of the book is the beginning of it: whereas the Greeks Latins,
and all nations of Europe, do write and read from the left hand toward the
right: And all their books begin at the left side.


Scholar. That reason does satisfy me.


Master. It neither sact^fieth me, neither lyketh me well, because I see that
the Chaldeys and Hebrews do not so use their own numbers, as at another time
I will declare. But this plain reason may best satisfy you presently: That
seeing in pronouncing of numbers we keep the order of our own reading, from
the left hand to the right: And again, we do ever name the greater numbers
before ye smaller: it was reason, that the lesser places containing the lesser
numbers, should be set on the right hand, and the greater places containing the
greater numbers, to proceed toward the left hand.


Scholar. This reason is to me so plain, that it seems now against reason
to make a doubt of that order. So that now for Numeration I am satisfied: so
that only practice shall make me fully ready and expert in it. And in the
mean season, I desire to learn the other kinds of Arithmetike.


Master. That is well said: but what should you next learn can you tell?


Scholar. I remember you said that Addition was next.


Master. Even so, and what that is must you first know,


ADDITION.
Addition is the gathering together and bringing of two numbers or more into
one total sum: as if I have 160 Books in the Latyne tongue, and 136 in the
Greek tongue, and would know how many they be in all, I must write these two
numbers one over an other, writing the greatest number highest, so that the
first figure of the one, be under the first figure of the other. And the
second under the second, and so forth in order.

When you have so done, draw under them a right line, then will they stand thus.
^ Now begin at the first places, toward the right hand always, and put
together the two first figures of those two numbers, and look what comes of
them, write under them, right under ^ the line. As in saying, 6 and 0, is 6.
Write 6 under 6: as thus.

And then go to the second figures, ^ and do likewise: as in saying, 3 and 6
is 9: write 9 under 6 and 3, as here you see.

And like wise do you with the figures ^ that be in the third place, saying: 1
and 1 be 2: write ^ under the^, and then will your whole sum appear thus.

So that now you see, that 160, and 136 do make in all, 296.

Scholar. What? this is very easy to do, me thinks I can do it even since.

There came thorough Cheapeside two droues of cattle: in the first was 848
sheep, and in the second was 186 other beasts.

Those two sums I must ^ write as you taught me, thus.

Then if I put the two first figures ^ together, saying: 6 and 8 they make 14.
That must I write under 6 and 8, thus.


Master. Not so, and here are you twice deceived. First, in going about to
add together two sums of sundry things, which you ought not to do,
except you seek onelis the number of them, and care not for the things. For
the sum that should resulte of that addition, should be a sum neither of
sheep, nor other beasts, but a confused sum of both. Howbeit sometimes ye
shall have sums of diverse denominations to be added, of which I will tell you
anon: but first I will show you, where you were deceived in an other point,
and that was in writing 14, (which came of 6 and 8) under 6 and 8, which is
impossible. For, how can two figures of two places be written under one
figure, and one place?


Scholar. Truth it is: but yet I did so understand you.


Master. I said indeed, that you should write that under them, that did
resulte of the^ both together: which saying is always true, if that sum do
not exceed a Digit. But if it be a mixte number, then must you write the
Digit of it under your figures, as I have said before: but and if it be an
Article, then write 0 under them, and in both sorts you shall keep the article
in your mind. And therefore when you have added your second figures, which
occupy the place of tennes, you shall put that 1 thereto, which you kept in your
mind: for though it were ten indeed, yet in that place it is but as one,
because, that every 1 of that place, is ten, for it is the place of tens. And
in like manner: if you have in the second place so great a number, that it
amounts above 9, then write the digite, and reserve the article in your mind,
ever adding it to the next place following: and so of all other places, how
many so ever you have. And if you have a mixed number, when you have added your
last figures, then write the digit under the last figures, and the article in
the next place beyond them: so shall your number resulting of Addition, have
one place more than the numbers which you should add together.


Scholar. Now do I perceive you, and the reason of this is, (as I understand)
because that no one place can contain above 9, which is the greatest figure
that is, and then all tens or articles must be put to the next place following:
for every place (as I may see) exceeds the other place next before him, by
10.

Now (if it please you) I will return to my example of Cattle. But I remember
you said, I might not add sums of sundry things together, and that might I
see by reason.


Master. Truth it is, if you seek the due sum of any things, but if you
only seek a bare sum, and have no respect to the thing, then were it
better to name the sum only without any thing, as in saying 848, without
naming sheep, or any thing else. And likewise 186, naming nothing.

Now let me see: how can you add those two sums?


Scholar. I must first set them so, that the two first figures stand one over
an other, and the other each one over his fellow of the same place: then shall
I draw a line under them both. And so likewise of other figures, setting
always the greatest number highest, thus, as follows:

Then must I add 6 to 8, which ^ makes 14, that is mixte number: therefore
must I take the diget which is 4, and write it under 6 and 8 keeping ye
article 1 in my mind thus.

Next that do I come to the second figures, adding them together, saying, 8
and 4, make 12, to which I put the 1 reserved in my mind, and that makes 13,
of which number I write the diget 3 under 8, and 4, and keep the article in my
mind thus: ^ Then come I to the third figures, saying: 1 and 8, ^ make 9, and
1 in my mind makes 10. Sir, shall I write the cipher under 1 and 8?


Master Yea.


Scholar. Then of 10 I write the cipher under 1 and 8, and keep the article in
my mind.


Master. What needs that, seeing there follows no more figures?


Scholar. Sir, I had forgotten, but I will remember better hereafter. The^
seeing I am come to the last figures, I must write the cipher under them, and
the article ^ in a further place after the cipher, thus:


Master. So now ye see, that of 848, and ^86 added together, there amounts
1034.


Scholar. Now I think I am perfect in Addition.


May. That will I prove by this example.

There are two armies of soldiers: in the one are 106800, and in the other
9400: How many are there in both armies say you?


Scholar. First I set them one over an other, beginning with the first ^
numbers at the right hand, thus. But the nether number will not match the over
number.


Master. That forces not.


Scholar. Then do I add 0 ^ to 0, and there amounts 0, that must I write
under ye first place, thus.


Master. Well said.


Scholar. Then likewise in the second place I add 0 to 0, and there ^ arises
0, which I write under the second place, thus.

Then I come to the third place saying: 4 and 8 make 12, of which I write the
diget 2, and keep the ^ article 1 in my mind, thus.

Then add I 9 to 6, which ^ makes 15, to that I add the article 1 that was
in my mind, and it is 16. I write 6 under 6 and 9, and keep one in my mind,
thus.


Master. Why do you not write both figures, seeing you are come to the last
couple of numbers?


Scholar. Nay reason shows me,
that I must add that article that is in mind, unto the next figure of the
over sum, though there be no more in the nether sum.


Ma. That is well considered: then do so.


Scholar. Then say I, 0 in the over sum, and in my mind, makes 1, that I
write under 0: Then follows there yet one more in the over sum, which has
none to be added to it, for there is none in the nether sum, nor yet in my
mind, therefore I think I must write that even as it is.


Master. Yea.


Scholar. Then does my whole sum appear, ^ thus.


Master. If you mark this, you have learned perfectly the common addition of
all sums which are of one denomination: so that ye observe this also, that in
Addition you must have two numbers at the least, or else how ca^ you say that
you do add? And ever let the greatest number be written highest, for that is
the best way, though it be not necessary.

And forget not this, that if you have many numbers to add together, you shall
have oftentimes an article of a greater value tha^ 10: sometimes 20, sometimes
30, sometimes more, yea, peradventure 100. Therefore, as you did with the
article 10, so do with them, reserving them in your mind, and adding to the
number next following, so many as their valuer or value certain is: that is to
say, 2 for 20, 3 for 30, and so forth of other. But if the article be 100,
then must you not add the article to the next figures following, but to the
third figures from them, as I will show you anon by example. And if it
chance the number to be such, that it do comprehend two sundry articles,
(that is, one of tennes, and an other of hundreds) then must you reserve them
both in your mind, and add the article of tennes, to the figures that follow
next, and the article of hundreds, to the figure of the third place from thence.

Now take this example for ^ all. I would ad these xiij. su^mes in one, which
I set after this manner. Then do I begin and gather the sum of the first
figures, which comes to 107. For first I take 9. there x. times, and that is
90: then 9 and 8 is 17, that is in all 107. of which sum I write the 7 under
the first figures, and then have I an article of an hundred in my mind,
which either I must keep in my mind till I come to the third figures, which
are in the rooms of hundreds, or else I may for fear of forgetting, write
this one (being of the third place in your of come) under the third row of
figures, making two lines, as you see here done. And then must I write the
digites under the lowest line: and this is the surest way, when the sum is so
great, that the addition of one row passes 100.

When I have so done, I must then come to the second row of figures, and add
them together, which does make 115. of which sum I write the dygitte 5 ^
under the same second row, and then I have a mixed number remaining of two
figures, of which the 1 (that stands for 10) must be added to the second or
next place after them that I did last add. And the other yt stands for 100)
must be added to the third place from thence.


Scholar.
That is to say, the fourth place from ye first line or row of figures.


Master. Even so. And the^ will the sum appear thus. Then add the third row
of figures,
with the two unities between the line, and the sum amou^teth to 50: of
which I write the Cipher under the same third row, and the 5 under the next
figures toward the left hand. And with my pen I give a dashe to the two
unities between ye lines, whose value I have already added under the lowest
line.

Then I add the figures of the fourth row, with the 1 and 5 that are under
them between the two lines, and they make 29: ^ then dashe I the ^, and the 5,
with my pen, as I did before the two unities: and so write under ye lowest
line the 9 (yt is the digit) under the fourth place: and the 2, that is the
article, beyond it, toward the left hand. So those sums do make 29057.


Scholar. This seems somewhat hard, by the reason of so many numbers
together. Howbeit I think if I do often prove eue^ with this same example I
shall be able to do so shortly, wc any other sum.


Master. So shall you. For it is often practice that makes a man quick and
ripe in all things: But because of such great sums there may chance to be
some error. I will teach you how you shall prove whether you have done well or
no.


Scholar. That were a great help and ease.


Master. Begin first with the highest number, and then to all the other
orderly, and add them together, not having regard to their places, but as
though they were all unities: and still as your number increases above 9, cast
away 9. Then go forth, ever casting away 9 as often as it amounts thereto:
and so do till you have gone over all the numbers that you intended first to
add, and whatsoever remains after such addition and casting away of 9,
write it in some void place by the end of a line for the better remembrance:
and then put together the figures that result of the Addition, still casting
away 9 also. And then that that remains, write at the other end of that
line: and if those two figures be like, then have you well done by likelihoode:
but if they be unlike, then have you missed. As for example in this present
sum: The first figure of the over line is 9, let him go: then 8 and 8 is
16, take away 9, and there remains 7, add to it 4 that follows, and that
makes 11. from which if you take 9, there rests 2: then come to the next
row, whose first and second number are 9, thereore ouerpasse them both, and
take the 5 to ^che 2 which did remain in the first row, that makes 7, put
thereto the 4 following, that makes 11, thence take 9, and there remains 2^:
next that, go to the third line, whose two first numbers you may let
pass, because they are nines: then take the two which with the other two
that remained in the second row, make 6: then go to the fourth row, whose
two first numbers let go, and take the 6, to the ^ that remained, and that
makes ^^, take away 9, and there rests 3, which with the 3, that is next,
makes 6. And so go through all the other numbers, and you shall find that
there remains 5, after you have cast away 9 as often as you find it: therefore
write 5 at one end of a line in a void place thus. ^

Then gather all the figures of the total sum which is under the lowest
line, and cast away 9 as often as you find it, as thus: seven and 5 make 12,
take away 9, and there rests ^, to that if you add the 2 that is last (for
you may let go the 9) then does it make 5, which you must write at the other
end of the line that you made in the void place, and it will be thus. ^

And then you see that those two figures be like, whereby you may know that
you have done well, and so may you prove in any other.


Scholar. If it please you, I will prove in an other sum.


Master. With a good will.


Scholar. Then will I take one of your former examples, which was this.

First in the highest line, 8 and 6 make 14, then 9 taken away, there remain ^
5, to which I add the 1 that follows, and that makes 6. Then come I to the
second line, where I find first 4 which with 6, makes 10, from that I take 9,
and there rests 1, the next figure is 9, and therefore I let him alone, so
find I one remaining, which I set at the end of a line thus. ^ Then I come to
the total sum, and there I find that all the figures put together make 10,
from which I take 9 and there resseth 1 also, which I put at the other end of
the line thus, ^

And because they be like, I know that I have well added.


Master. So you know now both how to add two su^mes or more together: and
also how to prove whether you have done well or no: Addition of numbers of
diverse denominations.
which thing also you may do best by Subtraction. But because you cannot yet
skill of it, I will let that pass till anon, and will teach you now how to
add su^mes of diverse denominations: which thing can never be but when the one
denomination is such that it contains the other certain times. And yet you
shall add them to the other, not after this sort as you did them that were of
one denomination, but after such a sort as I will now show you, that is to say.

If you have a sum of diverse denominations, then look that ye set every
denomination by himself, with some note or figure of his denomination, as they
be wont to be written. Then write your other su^mes so under that first, that
every one be set under the other of the same denominations, as for example: if
your denominations be pounds, shillings, and pens, write pounds under pounds,
shillings under shillings, and pens under pens, and not shillings under pens,
nor pens under pounds.


Scholar. Now that you have spoken it, me thinks it needs not to warn me
of it, for it were against reason so to confound su^mes: but yet if you had not
spoken of it, peraduenure I should have been deceived in it.


Master. If you do say it is so plain, I will speak no more of it, but with
an example make the matter to appear evidently.

First, one man owes me 22 lb, 6 s, 8 d. An other owes me 5 lb, 16 s, 6 d.
And an other owes me 4 lb, 3 s, I would know what this is altogether. ^
Therefore must I first set down my greatest sum and the^ the other, every one
under his denomination greeing to the greatest sum, as here you see.

Then must I begin at smallest numbers, (which must always be set next
the right hand) and add them together, and if the sum of them will make one
of the next denomination, then must I keep it in my mind till I come to that
place, or else for more easiness write it under that place between the double
line, and under that place must I note the residue, if there remain any of
the same denomination, but if there remain none, then need I to write under
it nothing. And this is all that you must mark in this Addition: for all
other things are like to the other manner of Addition before mentioned.
Therefore the chiefest point of this Addition is, to know the valewes of
common coins and rated sums. As how many shillinges be in a pound: how many
pence in a shilling, of which and of other like things, I will instruct you
hereafter, in teaching of Reduction: But now I may not disturb your wit from
the thing that we are about.

Therefore let us return to ^ that former example, which I proposed of three
detters, which sums when I had set orderly they stood thus, with a double
line under them.

Then to add them unto one sum, I must begin at the right hand, where the
smallest denomination is, and add the^ together first, saying: 6 and 8 make
14. Now seeing these 14 are pennies, and that 1^ pence make one shilling,
which is the next ^ valewer, I take away 12 from 14, and there rests 2,
which I write under the pennies, and for the other 12, which makes 1 shilling
I write under the title of shillings, thus:

Then do I add all the shillings together, and find them 25, to which I add
that 1, between the two lines, ^ that makes 26, but because that 20
shillinges do make 1 pound, I take away 20 from 26, and for that 20 I write 1
under the pounds between the two lines, and the other 6 that remains, I
write under the shillings, as appears in the example before.

Then come I to the pounds, adding them all together, and find them to be 31:
thereto I add the 1 between the ^ two lines, and that makes 32, which su^me
I write down whole, because there rests no greater denomination, and then my
whole su^me appears thus.

So is my total sum, 32 lb. 6 s. 2 d. And this may you prove in an other
like sum.


Sc. Then will I cast the whole charge of one months commons at Oxforde with
batteling also.


Master. Go to, let me see how you can do.


Scholerr. One weeks commons was 11 d. ob. q and my batling that week was 2
d. q. q. The second weeks commons was 12 d. and my batling 3 d. The third
weeks commons 10 d. ob. and my batling 2 d. q. c. The fourth weeks commons 11
d, q. and my batling 1 d. ob. ^. ^ These eyghte sums would I add into one
whole sum, and therefore I will set them one over another, thus.

But I had forgotten, I should have set the greatest sum highest.


Master. So is it commonly best, howebeit, here it forces not: and in such
sums as this is, that go by order of weeks, days, or years, it is better
to keep that order, than to alter them, and to set the greatest number
highest, for that serves for such sums as go not by order.


Scholar. Then if I have set them well enough, I will begin to ad them thus.

First of the smallest ^ valewers at the right hand, which are called cees, I
find ^, and seeing that 2 cees, do make one q, I will write nothing under the
cees, but will write 1 q for 2 cees, under the kewes between the lines, as the
example shows.

Then come I to ye next valewers, where I find 2 q, and to ^ them I add the q
that is between the lines, and so are they 3 q: but because 2 q, makes one q,
I write one q under the farthynges between the lines, and the q that remains
must I write beneth the nethermoste line under the kewes, thus.

Then come I to the farthinges, where I find 3, and the other q that is
between the lines, makes 4 farthings. And because 4 q make just 1 penny, I
shall write nothing under the farthings, but must write 1 under the pens,
between the lines.

Next that must I add the half pence together, of which there are 3. but
seeing that 2. ob. make 1 d, I must write 1 under the pens between the lines:
but how shall I do it, for there is 1 already?


Master. Have you forgotten how I did in addition of the great sum before?
you must set it under the other, so shall they both stand for 2. For if you
should set it before or behind the other, they should make 11.


Scholar. I remember it now, and I perceive the reason. Then I will write 1 ob,
under the halfepence, and for the other two halfepens, which make 1 d, I write
1 under the pens: Then come I to the pens, and find, that there are of them
52. then put I to them the 2 between the lines, and that makes 54, which
amou^teth to 4. s. 6 d: the 6 d I must write under the pens, and the 4 s. I
must set (I suppose) farther toward the left hand by themselves.


Master. Even so.


Scholar. Then appears ^ all my addition thus. And the sum is 4 s 6 d. ob.
q.


M. Now have you done this well. But tell me, why did you writ kewe, cee, thus,
q, c. and not rather thus qc, as the fashion is?


Schol. Because I thought it was the best way for due gathering of every
denomination by himself.


Master. So was it in deed. Well now, can you tell how to prove this addition,
and such other like of diverse denominatio^s, and to try whether you have done
well or no?


Scholar. I would I could.


Master. That shall you do by this means. First as you did begin to ad so
reckon again every denomination by it self, and when you find so many small
that do make any other denomination, let them go, and keep in mind only the
residue that will make no greater denomination, and look whether there be any
such like value under the nether line, and if there be, you have well done,
and so go from one denomination to an other, unto the end.

But here must you note, that in gathering of the sums, ye must reckon those
figures that are written between the lines, with them that are written above
them: as for an example, I will examine the sum that I did last add, which
stood ^ thus.

First I find 6 and 8, which makes 14, from which I take 12, because it
makes one of the next denomination, and there remains 2, and under that
place I see a like figure, therefore I know that well to be done. Then come I
to the s, where I find 1, 3, 16, and 6, that makes 26, I cast away 20, for
they make another denomination, that is to say pounds: and the 6 which
remains, is like to the 6 that is written under them beneathe the lowest
line, therefore* that is well done also. And thence I go to pounds, where I
find 1, 4, 5, 22, that is 32, to which sum agrees another like under it.
Therefore I judge all well done.


Scholar. I perceive reason in this probation. Now will I attempt the same in
the sum that I did add, which when I had ended adding, stood as you may
see in the example following.

First amongst the cees I find but two, which make one q even, therefore there
must nothing be under the line for them: And amongste the kewes ^ I find 3,
of which two make 1 q, therefore I let them go, and the one q, that is left,
has an other like under his place, therefore that is well done.

Then the Farthinges are just 4, which make 1 d. and therefore I let them go.
Amongst the half pence there is one od (for 2. must I cast away, because they
made one penny) and unto it answers a like sum under it. The pens are 54.
from which I take away 48, that makes 4, s, and the 6 remaining agree to a like
figure set under the^. And last of all remains the 4 s, which the abiected
pens did make: so I perceive that I have well done. Now this will I not forget.
But will this examination serve in all addition?


Master. It serves for all addition of sundry denominations,
if the addition be made with two lines, (as were these) else it will not serve,
because that those sums which are here added between the lines, in Addition
by one line, are understood and not written: but I let that way pass,
because as it is common, so is it more deceivable than this way, namelye if a
man's memory be either dull or troubled.


Scholar. Yet it were good to know that way also.


Master. If you desire to know it, Another form of Addition.
this it is in few words. Do every thing as you did in this sort of
Addittion, save that where you made here two lines, you shall make there but
one: and those sums that you did here write between the lines, you must keep
in your memory, and use them (as you did here) each one when you come to his
place.


Scholar. Then they differ not, but in this, that this addition with two lines
leaves nothing to memory, but writes down all: and the other way commits
certain numbers to memory, as you taught me in the first examples of
addition of small sums of one denomination. But what if a man use it (as you
say men do commonly) how shall it be examined?


Master. Seeing you are so desirous of it, I will show both an example of the
addition, and also the manner to examine it.

I propose these three sums ^ to be added, and I gather first the pence, as
I did in the other sort, and I find of them 8, 3, 9, that is 20, of which
sum I bate away 12, which make 1 s, and keep that 1 in my mind, and the
rest, that is 8, I write under the pence.

Then do I add the shillings together, and find of them 6, 7, 8, that is 21,
whereof I bate 20, that make 1 lb, which I keep in mind, and to the other 1
that remains, I add that one that came of ye pens and was in my mind, which
make 2, and them I write under the shillings.

Then do I reckon the pounds together, 3, 6, 12, that is 21, and to them I
add the 1 in my mind that remains of ^ the shillings, which make 22, them
do I write under the pounds, and then my sum total appears to be 22 lb,
2 s, 8 d.

Now to examine this sum and all such like, you shall do thus. First begin
at the left hand with the pounds, Another form of proof.
and take from them that are above the line, 9, as often as you can: then that
that remains shall you double, and join it with the shillings, and take
away 9 from that as often as you can, and whatsoever remains, ye shall take
for it three times so much, and put to the pence: then take from all that
sum 9, as often as you can, and what so remains after you have wythdrawen 9
as often as you can, write that at the end of a line, as I taught you in the
other Addition.

And then come to the sum under the lire, beginning with the pounds, and do
even as you did with the sums above the line, till you come to your pennies:
and if the figure of the sum that remains after casting away 9, (as often
as you can) do agree with the other that remained before of the other sum,
which you did write at the end of the line, then have you done well, else
not: and for an example, I will examine that last sum which was thus:

First I shall begin at the ^ left hand with the pounds, putting them together,
which make 21, in which sum I find 9 twice, (for twice 9 is 18) that I
deducte, and there remains 3: that 3 must I double (as I said) because it is
the remayner of the pounds, and it will be 6. Then gather I the sum of the
shillings, which is 21, to the which I add the foresaid 6, and then it is
27, wherein I find 9 three times, and there remains nothing. This remayner
should I take three times, but three times nothing, is nothing: therefore in
this place is there nothing left to be added to the pennies. Wherefore I must
take the sum of penies alone, which is 20, from thence if I take 9 twice,
there remains but 2, which I put unto the end of a line thus. ^

Then I come to the pounds of the under number or total sum, and there I
finds 22, from which I take away 9 twice, and there remains 4: that 4 I
double, and it is 8, then do I add that 8 to the shillings, and it makes 10,
from which I withdraw 9, and there rests one: then do I take that 1 thrae
times, and it makes 3, which I add to the 8 d. and it makes 11, from which
if I bate 9, there rests 2, which is equal to the number noted at the end of
the line: and thereby I perceive that I have done well.


Scholar. But I do not see the reason of this.


Master. No? The reason of this proof.
no more do you of many things else, but hereafter will I show you the
reasons of all Arithmeticall operations: for this I judge to be the best trade
of teaching, first by some brief precepts to instruct a learner somewhat in
the use of the Art, The best trade of teaching.
before he learn the reasons of the Art, and then may you afterward more
sooner make him to perceive the reasons: for hard it is to occupy a young
learned wit with both the art and the reasons of it all at once: howbeit he
shall never be cunning in deed in an art, that knows not the reason of
every thing touching it. But for this work, because the reason is easy, I
will show it you now. You know that if one pound do remain, it being turned
into shillings, would make 20 s, in which number there is 9 contained twice,
and 2 s beside. And therefore for one pound you shall take 2 s, and so for
every one pound 2 s.


Scholar. I see it well, for if there remained 7 lb, after the nines were cast
away, I must take 14 s for that 7 lb. And so have I cast away 14 times 9 s,
and yet remains of every pound 2 s which makes 14 s.


Master. Like ways in shillings, which contain 12 d: for every shilling,
if you abate 9 pence there rests 3 pence.


Scholar. It is plain enough. And so if ^ shillings do remain, I must take
for it 15 d, that is three pence for every shilling, and yet in that so doing,
I have cast away five times nine pence.


Master. Other works have as good reason, but I will not stand about
yielding reasons now.


Scholar. Yet one thing more I pray you show me, why did you write your
number that remained (after you had withdrawn all the nines) at the end of
a line? for I saw no reason why that line did serve.


Master. Did you ever mark a Carpenter when he wrought?


Scholar. Yea many times.


Master. And have you not seen him when he has taken measure of a boarde,
that he has pricked it, and has with a twitch of his hand drawn a line
from the prick that he made?


Scholar. Yes I have marked that and have seen some mark 3 or 4 lines by the
prick, some also have I seen make a cross by it, but that I perceived was
for the easy finding of their prick.


Master. And even so is this line for the easy finding of your remainer, and
therefore some do make a cross, thus. And set the one remainer above the
cross, and the other under the nether part of the cross, as if I should set
my two remainers thus. ^

But there is another sort of proof of Addition; Another kind of proof most
usual and aptest of all.
to which the cross serves more meeter: and that is when the addition is of
diverse denominations: and I would examine every denomination by it self,
which way though it be not much unlike to the first proof that I brought of
such diverse sums, yet will I declare it, leasts you should think that I
would hide it from you.

You must make so many lines in your cross, as you have sundry
denominations: as if you have but two denominations, then you may make it thus,
that the over part and the nether part may serve for one denomination, and the
two sides for the other. And if you have three denominations, as pounds,
shillings, and pennies, then must you make three lines thus. The upright line
may serve for pounds, and the highest thwart line for shillings, and the
lowest for pens: as for example I will take a sum thus added.

^

For the proof of the which, because it contains three denominations, I must
make a cross of three lines, as in the page before. The^ I reckon first at the
right hand the pennies: 7, 1, 5, make 13, from which I take 12 for the next
denomination, that is to say, a shilling, and there rests 1, which I must
write at one end of the nether thwart line.

After that I gather the sum of the shyllings, 2, 8, 12, which makes 22. to
them I put one that I took of the pennies, and that makes 23: from those I
take ^0, the quantity of the next greater denomination, that is to say, a
pound, and there rests 3, which I write at the end of the highest thwart
line.

Thirdly, I add together the pounds, 9, 12, 16, which make 37, to them I
add the 1 that came of the shillings, and then there is 38, wherein I find 4
times 9, and 2 over, that 2 I write on the upright line.

That done, I come to the total sum, and examine it, beginning at the
pennies, where I find but one, and cannot take 9 from him, therefore I set him
at the other end of ye nether thwart line: Then I come to the shillings,
where I find only 3, which because it is less than 9, I set it at the other
end of the line of shillings, that is, the ouermoste thwart line.

Last of all, of the 38 lb, I take four times 9, which is 36, and there
remains 2, which I write under the upright line.

The^ I consider every number, comparing it to the number that is against it,
and because I find them to be every one like his match, I know that I have
well done.


Scholar. This cross I perceive does serve for those three denominations,
pounds, shillinges, pennies. But what if I had ob, q^, q, and c?


Master You think you be at Oxforde still, you bring forth so fast your q and
c. These lines, as I have said, do serve for three denominations, such as
they be: as here they do serve for pounds, shillings, and pennies: but if ye
have no pounds in your sum, then may they serve for shillings, pennies, and
half pennies: yea for q, q and c, if you have no greter denomination, so that
you remember that the upright line serves for the greatest denomination, and
the highest thwarte line, for the next, and the lowest for the least,

And so if you have four denominations you must make your cross with so many
lines. And if that your sum be of more denominations, make so many lines in
your cross. And thus will I make an end of Addition.

Examples of Addition. ^

The Proofs. ^

An other Example. ^


SVBTRACTION.
Scholar. THen have I learned the two first kinds of Arithmetike: now as I
remember, does follow Subtraction, whose name me thinks does sound
contrary to Addition.


Master. So is it in deed: for as Addition increases one gross sum by
bringing many into one, so contrary ways, Subtraction diminishes a gross
sum by withdrawing of other from it, so that Subtraction or Rebating is
nothing else, but an art to withdraw and abate one sum from an other, that
the Remainer may appear.


Scholar. What do you call the Remainer?


Master. That you may perceive by the name.


Scholar. So me thinks: but yet it is good to ask the troth of all such
things, least in trusting to mine own conjecture, I be deceived.


Master. So is it the surest way. And as I see cause, I will still declare
things unto you so plainly, that you shall not need to doubt. Howbeit, if I
do ouerpasse it sometimes (as the manner of men is to forget the small
knowledge of them to whom they speak) then do you put me in remembrance
your self, and that way is surest.

And as for this word that you last asked me, take you this description:
Remainer.
The Remainer is a sum left after due Subtraction made, which declares the
excess or difference of the two other numbers: as if I would abate or
subtract 14 out of 18, there should remain 4, which is called the remayner,
and is the difference between those two numbers 14 and 18.


Scholar. I perceive then what Subtraction is: Now rests to know the order
to work it,


Master. That shall you do by this means. First you must consider,
that if you should go about to rebate, you must have two sundry sums
proposed, the first which is your gross sum or sum total: (and it must
be set highest) and then the rebatement or sum to be withdrawn, which must
be set under the first (whether it be in one parcel or in many) and that in
such sort, that the first figures be one just over an other and so the
second and third, and all other following, as you did in Addition: then shall
you draw under them a line, and so are your sums duly set to begin your
working.

Then begin you at the right hand (as you did in Addition) and withdraw
the nether number out of the higher, and if there remain any thing, write
that right under them beneth the line: and if there remain nothing (by reason
that ye 2 figures were equal) then write under them a ciphar of naught. And so
do you with all the other figures, evermore abating the lower out of the
higher, and write under them the Remainer still, til you come to the end. And
so will there appear under the line what remains of your gross sum,
after you have deducted the other sum from it, as in this example.

I received of your father 48 s, of which I have laid out for you 36 s: now
would I know what does remain? and therefore I set my numbers thus in
order: First I write the greatest sum, and under him ^ the lesser, so that
the figures at the right side be even one under another, and so the other, thus.

Then do I rebate 6 out of 8, and ^ there rests two, which I write under them
right beneath the line, thus.

Then I go to the second figures, ^ and do rebate 3, out of 4, where there
remains 1, which I write under them right, and then the whole sum and
operation appears thus.

Whereby it appears, that if I withdraw 36, out of 48, there remains 2.


Scholar. Now will I prove in a greater sum: And I will Subtract 2367924 out
of 3468946. Those sums I set in order thus. ^

Then do I begin at the right side, and deducte 4 out of 6, and there
rests 2, which I write under them. Then go I to the second figures, and
withdraw 2 out of 4, and there remain two, which I set under the^ also: then
I take 9 out of 9, and there rests 0, which I write under them: for you say,
that if the figures be equal, so that nothing remain, I must write this ciphar
0 under them.


Master. It was well remembered, now go forth.


Scholar. Then I come to the fourth place and draw 7 out of 8, and there
remains 1, which I write under them also. Then in the fifte place I take 6
from 6, and there rests naught, for it I write under them a ciphar, 0: Then
in the sixth place 3 rebated from 4, there remains 1, which I write under
them: and likewise in the vij. and last place, 2 taken from 3, there is left
1, which I ^ write under them: so have I done my whole working, and my sums
appear thus. Whereby I see, that if I rebate 2367924, out of 3468946, there
remains 1101022.


Master. This is well done. And that you may be sure to perceive fullye the
Art of Subtractio^. let me see how can you subtract 52984732 out of 8250003456.


Scholar. First I set down the greatest sum, and after that I write under
if the lesser number, beginning ^ at the right side: and then my figures will
stand thus.

Then take I 2 from 6, and the rest is 4 which I write under them: then do I
withdraw 3 from 5, and there remain 2, which I write under them. Then take I
7 out of 4, but that I cannot, what shall I now do?


Master. Mark well what I shall tell you now, Note.
how you shall do in this case and in all other like. If any figure of the
nether sum be greater than the figure of the sum that is over him, so that
it cannot be taken out of the figure over him, then must you put 10 to the
over figure, and then consider how much it is, and out of that whole sum
withdraw the nether figure, and write the rest under them. Can you remember
this?


Scholar. Yes, that I trust I shall. Now then in mine example where I should
have taken 7 out of 4 and could not, I put 10 to that 4, which makes 14, from
it I take away, 7, and there rests 7 also, which I write under them.


Master. So have you done well, but now must you mark another thing also:
that whenever you do so put 10 to any figure of the over number, you must
add one still to the figure or place that follows next in the nether line, as
in this example there follows 4, to which you must put 1, and make him 5, and
then go on as I have taught you.


Schol. Then shall I say: 4 and 1 (which I must put to him for the 10 that I
added to 4 before) make ^, which I should take out of 3, but that cannot be,
therefore must I put to it also 10, and then it will be 13, from which I take
5, and there rests 8 to be written under them: and because of that 10 added
to the 3, I must ad 1 to 8 that follows in the nether line, and that makes
9, which I should take out of 0, and cannot, therefore I put thereto 10, and
that makes 10: from 10 I take 9, and there remains 1, which I write under
them.

Then do I add likewise to the next figure beneath, which is 9, and that
makes 10, that 10 should I take out of the figure above, but I cannot, for it
is 0, therefore I put 10 to it, and so take I 10 out of 10, and there rests 0
to be written under them. Then come I to the next figure which is 2, and to him
do I ad 1, which makes 3, that 3 I can not take out of naught, therefore of
yt naught I make 10, and thence do I take 3, so remains there 7 to be written
under them. Likewise do I put 1 to 5 that follows, and then is it 6, that
would I take out of 5, and cannot, therefore I add 10 to that 5, and make it
15, from which I rebate 6, and there remains 9, which I write under them. Now
have I spent all the nether figures, and what shall I do more?


Master. You should have added to the next figure following (if there had been
any) because you added 10 to the last figure before of the over line: but
seeing there is no figure following, you must add that to the place following,
and then deducte that from the number above.


Scholar. Then shall I say because I borrowed 10 to the over 5, I must put in
the next place beneath, that is under 2: then must I subtracte that ^ from ^,
and there rests 1, to be written under that, in the ninth place. Now I have
no more to subtracte, for there is never any figure remaining beneath, nether
yet any unite to be added, because I borrowed not 10 to the figure last
before,
and yet is there 8 remaining in the over line, which (I think by reason)
should be set at the end of the figures in the lowest row which is under the
line, for because there was nothing taken from it.


May. That is well considered, and reason teaches so in daede.


Scholar. But sir I beseech you, shall I always when any number so remains
alone (as this ^ did) write him under the line straight against his own place?


M. Yea, what else? Whether they be one or many: and this well remembered, you
have sufficiently learned Subtractio^. How be it, because of certain things
that might deceive you, if you did not take good heed to your working, I will
propose to you another example of many numbers to be subtracted, as thus,

I received of a friend of mine to keep ^869 Crounes, of which at one time I
delivered him again 500, at one time 368, and at another time 440, and an
other time 80, and an other time 64: now would I know how many does rest
behind. Therefore first I set down my ^ gross sum, and a line under it: and
underneath it I set all the parcels, thus: and under them a double line.

Then first I begin at the first place, and gather together the sum of al
those lines (save the ouermost) in their first figures, and so do I with all
the figures of the second place, and so forth as I did in Addition, save that I
leave out the highest row of numbers (as the line warns me) and that sum so
gathered between the double line, do I subtract out of the highest row of
numbers, and the remayner do I set under ye nethermost line: ^ as for
example.

I set the sums as before: than do I gather the first figures together,
where I find but 4 and 8, that make 12, (for three Ciphers increases no sum
in addition, as you learned before) of the 12 therefore do I write the digite
2, between the double line, and keep the article in my mind, til I come to
the second place, where I find 6, 8, 4, 6, that make 24, to them I put the
article in my mind, and it is 25, of which I write 5 under the second place,
and keep the digite 2 in my mind for the third place, where I find 4, 3, 5,
that make 12, to the which I add the 2 in my mind, and it makes 14, thereof
I write the 4 under the third place: and because there remains no more
figures to be added, I write the digit 1 in the fourth place, as you see in the
example.

Then come I to subtracting of this su^me between the lines, for by Addition
it is equal to the five parcels over it. Therefore I proceed to subtracte it
from the ouermoste sum, saying: 2 from 9, remain 7, to be written under
the^ beneath the lowest line. Then in the second place I take 5 from 6, and
there rests, to be written under the^. Then in the third place, 4 from 8,
rests 4. Last of all in the fourth place, 1 from 2, remains 1. And thus I
see that after those 5 sums are subtracted from 2869, the Remainer is 1417.


Scholar. This I perceive: but is there no shorter way and more speedier?


May. Yes, An abridgeme^t of the former manner of Subtraction.
when you are a while exercised in it: for you may as fast as you can gather
the numbers together, withdraw them out of the highest su^me if so be it, that
all the parcels which you do gather, do not exceed nine, but and if they
exceed nine, then must you subtract only the digit that is in it, and
reserve the article till the next place, where you shall add it with the
other figures and so subtract the whole out of the figure above them: but and
if in this place the sum of the parcels do exceed 9, then (as I said before)
subtract the digit only, and reserve the article to the next place, and so
still go forth, till you have ended your working.

As for example: In the last sum proposed, I gather first in the first
place 4 and 8, that makes 12, of which I deducte the digitte 2 out of 9, and
write under the remayner, which is 7, and the article 1 I keep in my mind.
Then in the second place I gather the parcels 6, 8, 4, 6, which amount to 24,
to that I add the article 1, which I have in my mind, and then is it 25, then
do I take 5 (that is the digitte in this number) from 6, that is in the second
place of the highest sum, and there remains but 1 to be written under
them, and now do I keep the article 2 in my mind still. Then in the third
place, 4, 3, 5, makes 12, and the article 2 in my mind makes 14: then take I
4 (which is the digitte) from 8, that is over them, and there rests 4, which
I write under them. Then have I the article 1 yet in my mind, which I should
add to the parcels next following, but seeing there is no number following, I
take that digit alone, and deduct him out of the next su^me above, which is 2,
and then is the remayner 1, which I write in the fourth place under 2. Lo, now
have you a shorter way.


Scholar. I like both ways well, and I perceive both well, yet as in the one
the working seems somewhat long, so in the other it leans very much (me
seems) to remembrance, and therefore may cause error quickly, except a man
have a quick and an exercised remembrance.


Master. What? would you then have such a way that should not be so long as
the one, nor so short as the other?


Scholar. Yea, if there were any such.


May. Than do thus: ^
still as you gather your parcels, when they exceed a digit, and makes him 10
or more, take the article, and write him between two lines (as in the first
example) under the next place toward the left hand: and then deducte the
digitte from the figure that is over him, and write the remayner. And then when
you gather the next parcels, you shall add to them the figure that is under
them, between the two lines. And if it exceed 9, do as I said before, write
the article under ye next place between ye lines, and subtracte the digitte
from the Figure that is over those parcelles: and if that all the parcelles
together and the number between the lines do make but a digit, then deduct it
wholly from the figure above: as in this example. I would subtracte out of
40308964, ^ these three parcelles

Therefore I set the^ first in order due: and then I gather the parcels of the
first place, which are 8, 2, 1, that is 11: of which I take away the article,
and set him under the second place between the lines: and the digit 1 that
remains, I deduct out of 4, and there rests 3 to be written under the first
place beneath the lowest line. Then come I to the second place, and gather the
parcels of it, 6, 4, 2, and the 1 between the lines, which make 13, of which
I take the article, and set him under the third place between the lines, and
the digit 3 I take from 6, and there remains 3, which I write under the
second place beneth the lowest line. Than in the third place I find 4, 3, 4.
which with the 1 between the lines, do make 12, therefore I write the article
again under the fourth place, and the digit 2 I take from 9, and there
remains 7 which I write under them beneath the lowest line.

And the^ come I to the fourth place, where I gather 1, 2, 3 and h^ 1 between
the lines, that makes 7, which because it is but a digitte I pluck from 8,
and the Remayner is 1. and must be written under them in the fourth place.
After that come I to the fifte place, where are only three cyphars, which make
nothing, the^ should I take that, that is to say nothing, from the figure over
them, which is also a cyphre, therefore I must say thus: if I take naught
from naught, there remains naught: so must I write a cyphre under them. The^
in ye sixth place I find but 1, which I take out of 3 over him, and the Remainer
is 2, that must be written beneth the lowest line in the sixth place. So I go to
the seventh, where I find only cyphres, and in the gross sum over them a
cyphre also, therefore must I write their remainer (which is nothing) with a
cyphre also. Then in the eighte and last place, I gather 1, 1, 2, that make 4,
which if I take out of that 4 that is over the^, there will nothing remain.
And that must be noted with a cyphre beneath the lowest line, as I have often
said, and so have I ended my work, and the figures ^ stand thus.


Scholar. Sir, I remember you taught me that ciphers should not come in the
last place, for because they serve only to increase the valewe of other
Figures which follow them, and serve not for those figures that go before
them: and now in your example you have set two ciphers in the two last places.


Master. I commend you for your remembrance. And truth it is, I should not
have set them here, but only because that I would make you plainly to perceive
the art of Subtraction. Therefore seeing that you do now perceive it, whenever
you should write down a cyphar, look whether any other figures be yet
behind. And if not than let go the cyphar also, for it needs notto write him
in any latter places, where no other figure does follow, except it be (as I
did) to teach the use of Subtraction the playner.

Therefore my figures ^ must stand thus when I have ended my work.


Scholar. So I would think by yt you taught me before. And now I believe I
could subtract any sums.


Master. So may you if you have marked what I have taught you. But because
this thing (as all other) must be learned surely by often practice, I will
propounde here two examples to you, wherein if you often exercise your self,
you shall be ripe and perfect to subtract any other sum lightly, for in them
is contained all the obseruaunces of whole number. And because you shall
perceive somewhat both how to do it, and also whether it be well done when you
have proved to do it, therefore have I written under them, both the
Remayners: And to one of them also adjoined his proof.

^


Scholar. Sir, I thank you. But I think I might the better do it, if you did
show me the working of it.


Master. Yea, but you must prove your self to do some things that you were
never taught, or else you shall not be able to do any more than you were
taught: And that were rather to learn by rote (as they call it) then by
reason. And again there is nothing in this example or any other of whole
number, but I have taught you the rules of them already.


Scholar. Then I trust by practice to attain the use of it. And is this all
that I shall learn of Subtraction?


Master, Yea, saving that (as you have seen in Addition) there are numbers of
diverse denominations, in which the working is not much unlike, yet without
some instructions be given of it, it might seem to a learner more difficulte,
then in deed it is. Therefore I will brieflye show you the use of it only,
by one example or two.

A certain man owed to me 14 lb, 12 s, 8 d, of which he paid me at one time 4
lb, 6 s, 8 d: at an other time 3 lb, and at an other 2 lb, 3 s, 4 d, and last
of all, 6 s, 8 d. Now would I know what remains unpaid yet, therefore I set
my ^ sums thus.


Scholar. Sir, I pray you why do you write 2 lb. for the common speech uses
rather to say 40 s.


Master. We must here use the denomination that is greatest in any sum, so
that we may not write according as we use to speak, saying: 16 d. 18 d: or
likewayes, 7 grotes, 8 grotes: 24 s. 40 s 48 s. and such other, but we must
write every denomination that is in any sum by it self, namely shillinges
and pounds. So must we write for these sums now named, 1 s, 4 d: 1 s, 6 d: 2
s. 4 d: 2 s, 8 d: 1 lb, 4. s: 2 lb, 8 s: and so forth of other like.


Scholar. So that we may not write in Arithmetike pennies, when the sum
amounts to shillings, nor shillinges when tho sum makes pounds. Now if it
please you, end your example.


May. When my sums are so set as I showed, then must I begin with the
smallest denomination, saying: 8, 4, 8, are 20. which sum because it is
pence, and 12 pence do make 1 s, I must take ^ from that 20 (which comes of
the parcels) 12. and for them write between ye lines under ye shillings, than
the 8 d, that remains I take out of ye highest sum, which is 8 also, and then
remains naught: wherefore under the pence I write nothing. Then come I to the
shillinges, and gather the parcels 6, 3, 6. which with the 1 between the
lines, make 16, that must I take out of the sum that is over it. But seeing
that sum is but 12, I cannot take 16 out of 12, I must borrow one of the 14
lb, and put to the 12, and that makes 32, for 1 lb is worth 20 s, then take I
16 out of 32 and there rests 16 to be written under the shillinges. Then come
I to the pounds, whose parcels are 2, 3, 4. that is in all 9, and one more
must I add thereto, because of the 1 that I borrowed before unto the 12 s, and
than is there 10, which I must take out of 14, so does there remain 4 to be
written under the pounds: so does my remainer appear to be 4 lb, 16 s.


Scholar. This do I perceive very well, and if there be none other thing to
be learned in Subtraction, then may I come to Multiplication, for that you
reckened to be in order next.


Master. We have done in deed with the art of Subtraction, as touching the
working. But yet before we go to multiplication, A proof of Subtraction in
numbers of one denomination.
I will instruct you how to examine your work whether it be well done or no, and
that is by casting away 9 as often as you can find it, as you did in Addition,
saving that you must here examine the highest number alone, and note the
residue of it at a lines end, as you did in Addition.

And when you have done with the highest number, then examine all the other
together, casting thence 9 as often as you can: and if the last remayner be
like the other, then have you done well.

But if you have diverse denominations in your sum, A proof in Subtraction
among diverse denominations.
yet for them all shall you make but one several line, as you did in Addition,
remembering to begin the examination at the greatest denomination, and to double
the remayner of pounds, and triple the remainer of shillings, as you did also
in Addition.

As for a proof, I will examine ^ this work where in the highest line I find
of pou^ds 14. from thence I bate 9, and there rests 5, which I do double,
because they are pounds, and the^ are they 10 thereto I ad the 12 and it makes
22 from which I take 9 twice, and there rests 4, which because they are
shillinges, I triple, and then are they 12, thereto I add the 8, and then are
they 20 thence take I twice 9, and yet rests 2, which I write at the one
end of a line thus, 2 --

Then I examine all the other parcelles and the remayner together, every
denominatio^ by it self. And first of pounds I find 4, 3, 2, 4 that is 13.
from which I take 9, and there rests 4. that do I double, and it makes 8,
to it do I put the shillinges, 6, 3, 6.16. that is 31 (for the one between the
lines must not be reckoned nor none in that space) and that makes in all 39.
Where hence I take 9, four times, and there remains 3. yt do I take three
times, and it is 9, wherefore I cast it away: then do I take the pennies 8, 4,
8. that makes 20, from which I take 9 twice, and there rests 2. which I
write at the other end of the proof line. And because I see that those two
numbers are equal, I say that I have well wrought.

And if you will you may make for every denomination a line, as you learned in
Addition: but then must you begin your examination at the smallest
denomination, as you did in Addition, for their proof is altogether like,
saving that in Addition you examine the nethermost sum alone, and all the
other together: and in Subtraction ye must examine the highest number alone,
and all the other together. And if you mark it well, it is even all one, for
that sum that in Addition is lowest, in Subtraction is highest: Gross or
total sum*
and that sum is called the Gross or Total sum.

Therefore if you mark what I said in Addition, you may easilye perceive what
is to be done for the proof of Subtractio^. And to the intent that you may
perceive it ye better, I will show you an other proof of Subtraction, and that
shall be by Addition, thus. Draw under ye lowest number (which is your
remayner) a line: then ad that number, An other proof of Subtractio^.
and all the other that you did subtract before, together, and write that that
amounts, under the lowest line: and if the sum that comes thereof, be
equal to the highest of the subtraction, than was the ^ subtraction well
wrought, or else not. As for example: in the last sums, which stood thus.

First I add 8, 4, 8, that makes 20. whereof I take 12 away, because they
make one shilling, and write for them under the shillings: and the 8 that is
left, I write beneath the lowest line, then add I the shillings 6.3.6.1.16.
that make 32: from which I take 20, and for it I write 1 under the pounds,
and the 12 that remains, I write under the shillings. Then come I to the
pounds, adding them together, which are 4.3 2.1.4. that makes 14: then do I
write 14 under the lb, and so have I ended the Addition. And I see that the
lowest line of number and the highest be like, wherefore I know that I have well
done. For my figures appear as you may plainly see in the page following.

And thus now have I ^ taught you the art of Subtraction, and the means to
prove whether it be well wroughte or not.

And this last proof of Subtraction is most aptest and best allowed of any
other proof: whether it be of lb s d. or any other gross some whatsoever.

Now and you remember, I omitted in teaching the proof of Addition one way
whi: che I said was by subtraction.


Scholar Truth it is, and then was it deferred, because that I had not the^
learned the feate of Subtraction, whereby I should have proved it, but now I
thank you, I have well learned the art of Subtraction, and the proves of it,
both by 9. and by addition. And now I would be glad to know, how I may prove
Addition by Subtraction.


Master. Then mark you this. The proof of Addition by Subtraction.
When you have ended your addition: take the numbers all that you did add, to
the highest sum, and deduct or subtract them from the gross sum that does
resulte, and if the remayner be like to the highest number, then have you done
well, else not.

As for example. I take one of the sums that I did add before, which ^ was
this that follows here.

Then do I come to the middle number (because here in this example are only
three numbers) and subtracte that from the nether number, beginning at the
right hand, and first I say, 0 out of 0, there remains 0: that write I
under an other line. Then again, 0 in the second place from 0, remains 0
under it I write 0 also. Next that in the third place, 4 out of 2 will not be,
therefore I ad to that 2, 10, and make it 12 from that I take 4 and there
rests 8. Then say I farther: 9 in the fourth place, and 1 (which I must
add for the 10, borrowed before) make 10, that must I take from 6: and because
I can not, I add to the 6.10, and then is it 16: from then I take 10, and
there rests 6. to be written under them. Again in the fifth place where I
find nothing written, I must set 1 for the 10 last borrowed, and that 1 do
I take from the 1 under him, and so remains naught, wherefore I write down
a cipher 0. Now have I done with the subtraction: and yet in the gross sum
remains 1, which I must set right in the same place, in the remayner, and
so the remayner appears to be like unto the highest sum of ^ the Addition,
as here appears. Wherefore I say that the Addition was well wroughte. And
note, that if you had subtracted the uppermost from the product or total
su^me, then the residue thereof would be equal to that middlemost number. But
if the parcelles which you added, be more then two: (as three four, five,
six, or more) than from your gross or total sum subtracte first one of the
percels: and note that new residue. Out of that new residue, subtract an other
of your percels, (which you will) and Note that second new residue. And if you
have no mo percels added, but three, than is that second new residue equal and
alike to the third parcel, which you have not (as yet) subtracted, if you
have wrought well: both in your first Addition, and now in your subtracting.
And so in this wise, (if you have four, five, or more parcels) may you
proceed to make your self sure of your total sum, first, by Addition of
the said parcels, produced and gathered. And thus may you do in any other
sum of one denomination or many: Saving that I will tell you by the way, the
last manner of proof that was showed you in Addition, is the best, and the
aptest proof for the Rule of Addition.


Scholar. Sir, I thank you most heartily,


Master. Therefore now will I make an end of Subtraction, and will instruct
you in Multiplication.



MVLTIPLICATION.
MVltiplication is such an operation, that by two sums produces the third:
which third sum so many times shall contain the first, as there are
unities in the second. And it serves in the stead of many Additions. As for
example. When I would know how many are 30 times 48: if I should ad 48, thirty
times, it would be a long work. Therefore was this work of Multiplication
devised, which shall do that at once, that Addition should do at many times.

Scholar. I perceive the commodity of it partly, but I shall not see the full
profit of it, till I know the whole use of it. Therefore sir I beseech you,
teach me the working of it.


Master. So I judge it best, but because that great sums can not be
multiplied, but by the multiplication of digits, therefore I think it best to
show you first the way of multiplying them: As when I say, 8 times 8, or 8
times 9. etc. And as for the small digits under 5, it were but folly to teach
any rule, seeing they are so easy, that every child can do it. But for the
multiplication of the greater digits, thus shall you do.

First set your digittes one over the other right, then from the uppermost
downward, and from the neathermost upward, draw straighte lines, so that they
make a cross, commonly called Saint Andrews cross, as you see here. Then
look how many each of them lacks of 10, and write that against each of them,
The difference.
at the end of the lines, and that is called the Differences, ^ as if I would
know how many are 7 times 8, I must write those digittes thus.

Then do I look how much 8 does differ from 10, and I ^ find it to be 2,
that 2 do I write at the right hand of 8, at the end of the line, thus.

After that, I take the difference of 7 likewise ^ from 10, that is 3, and I
write that at the right side of 7, as you see in this example.

Then do I draw a line under them, as in Addition, thus.

Last of all I multiply the two differences, saying: 2 times ^ make 6, that
must I ever set under the differences, beneth ye line: then must I take the
one of the differences (which I will, for all is like) from the other digit
(not from his own) as the lines of the cross warn me, and that ^ that is
left, must I write under the digits. As in this example. If I take 2 from 7, or
3 from 8, there remains 5: that 5 must I write under the digits: and then
there appears the multiplication of 7 times 8, to be 56. And so likewise of
any other digits, if they be above 5, for if they be under 5, then will their
differences be greater than themself, so that they cannot be taken out of
them. And again, such little sums every child can multiply, as to say: 2
times 3, or 4 times 5, and such like.


Scholar. Truth it is. And seeing me seems that I understand the multiplying
of the greater digits, I will prove by an example how I can do it. I would
know how many are 9 times 6.


Master. It is all one in value to say 9 times 6, or 6 times 9: but yet the
order is best to put the less sum first, saying: 6 times 9, and so of al
other sums.


Sch. Then would I know, how ^ many are 6 times 9: therefore I set ye digits
thus, and make the cross thus.

Then do I set their differences ^ at the right side: the difference of 9
which is against it, and the difference of 6, which is 4 against it also, as
in this example.

And under them I draw a line. Then do I multiply the ^ digites together,
saying: one time 4 makes 4, that 4 do I write under the differences thus.

Then take I one of the differences from the other digite, as one from 6, or
else 4 from 9, and each ways there rests 5, which ^ I do write under the
digits thus. And so appears the multiplication of 6 times 9, to be 54. Thus
I see the feate of this manner of multiplication of digittes.


Master. Now might you go straight to the multiplication of greater numbers,
save that both for your ease and suertie in working, I will draw you here a
table, whereby shall appear the multiplication of all digits, and this is it
that follows in the next page.

MVLTIPLICATION.
1 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 3 9 12 13 18 21 24 27 4 16 20 24 28
32 36 5 25 30 35 40 45 6 36 42 48 54 7 49 56 63 8 64 72 9 81

In which figure, when you would know the producte in any multiplication of
digits, seek your first or last digit in the greater figures, and from it go
right forth toward the right hand, til you come under the number of your
second digite, which is in the highest row: and then the number that is in the
meeting of the rows of little squares (which some directly from both your
propounded digits) is the multiplication that amounts of them. As if I would
know by this table the multiplication of 7 times 9, seek first 7 in the
greater figures, and then go right forth toward the right hand, till you come
under 9 of the highest row, in which place where y^^ so come under the other
digit (as here for example you come under 9) is always contained the of come
or product, which you seek and that place we term to be in the common angle,
in respect of the two numbers (...) taken on the outsides, as here in that
common angle, where ye rewes of little squares (directly proceeding from 7 and
9) do meet* you have 63, which 63 is the sum of the multiplication of 9 by 7.


Scholar. This is very good and ready^. And so may I find the multiplication of
any digits. But now how shall I do in greater sums?


Master. When you would multiply any sum by an other, you shall mark that
it is the meetest order to set the greatest number highest, which is the place
of the number yt must be multiplied: and likewise the lesser number under it,
for that is the place of the Multiplier or multiplicatour, that is to say, the
number by which multiplicatio^ is made: and is in English always put before
this word, Times: in such speaking when I say, 20 times 70. And the number
that follows this word, Times, is that which must be multiplied.

Therefore when I would multiply one number by another, I must write the
greatest highest, and the lesser under it, as in Addition. And under them must
I draw a line. As for example: If I would multiply 264 by 29, I must set them
thus. ^

Then must I multiply every figure of the higher row by every figure of the
nether row: and that that amounts, I must set under the line, as thus. First
I do multiply 4 by ^ 9, saying: 9 times 4 (or 4 times 9, which is all one)
and that makes 36, as the table before of digittes does declare, of that 36 I
must write the 6 that is the digitte, under the 9, and the 3 in the next place
toward the left hand.

Then come I to the second figure of the higher row, and say: 9 times 6 make
54, of which I write the 4 under the 3, and the 5 under the next place (as the
reason ^ wills me) thus.

After that come I to the next figure, which is 2, and do multiply it by 9, and
that makes 18: whereof I write 8 under the ^ third place, and the article 1
in the fourth place, thus.

And so have I ended the first figure of ye multiplier. Wherefore I give it now
a fine dash with my pen.

Then begin I with the ^ next figure, and multiply it into all the higher
figures, as thus,


First, 2 times 4 make 8, that do I write under the second place: for evermore
the digite or first figure of multiplication that amounts of the first figure
of the higher number, must be set under the multiplier of it, and the other in
their order, toward the left hand.


Scholar. I understand you thus: that the digit of the sum amounting of the
multiplication of the first figure of the higher row, by the first figure of
the lower row or multiplyer, must be set under the first place: and that that
amounts of the same first figure by the second multiplier, must be set
under the second place, and so of the other, if there be more multiplyers.


Master. So mean I indeed: and if there amount but a digit, then must it be
set under the multiplyer.

And now to go forth: I multiply by the same 2, the second figure of the
higher row, which is 6, saying: 2 times 6, ^ make 12: whereof I write the
digit 2 under the third place, and the artice 1, I write under the fourth
place.

Then do I multiplye the last figure of the higher sum, by that same 2, saying:
2 times 2 is 4: which I write under the ^ fourth place. And so have I ended
the whole multiplication: wherefore I also give the 2 a dashe with my pen,
thus: and so I do ever as soon as I have dispatched any digit by which I
multiply. And the sums stand thus.

Than must I draw a line ^ under all those sums that amount of the
multiplicatication, and must ad all them into one sum, as in this example you
may see.

Where in the first place I find but 6, and therefore write I it under the
line. Then in the second place 843, make 15, whereof I write 5, and keep one
in my mind, and so forth, as you learned in Addition. And so appears the
whole sum to be 7656, which amounts of the multiplication of 264 by 29.


Scholar. If there be no more to be observed in it, then can I do it, I
suppose, as by this example I shall prove. I would ^ multiply 1365, by 236,
wherefore I set them thus.

Then do I multiply 5 by 6, saying: 6 times 5 make 30: of which I write the
ciphre in the first place, ^ and the article 3 in the second place.

Then do I by the same 6. multiply ^ the second figure of the higher sum,
which is 6, saying: 6 times 6 make 36: of which I write the 6 under the
second place, and the 3 under the third place.

Then do I multiply the ^ third figure which is 3, by the same 6, and that
makes 18: of that I set the 8 under the third place, and the 1 in the
fourth place.

Then come I to the last ^ Figure of the higher sum, and multiply it by 6,
saying: 6 times 1 make 6: that do I write under the fourth place. And so have
I ended the first multiplier, and dash him slightly with my pen.

Then begin I with the second ^ multiplier, and say first 3 times 5, that
makes 15, of which I set the 5 under the second place, because that the
multiplier is there, and the 1 I set under the third place.

Then come I to the second ^ figure, that is 6, and multiply it by 3, which
makes 18, of which I set the 8 under the third place, and the article 1 in
the fourth place.

Than come I to the third ^ figure, which is 3, and multiply it by 3, saying: 3
times 3, make 9, which because it is but one digit, I set under the fourth
place.

And then coming to the last figure 1, I multiplye it by 3, and it makes 3.
which I set in the ^ fifth place, and then have I ^nded two of the multiplyers,
and the sums stand thus. And then I give 3 his dashe.

^ Then come I to the third multiplier, and multiplye it into every figure of
the higher sum, and first I say: 2 times 5 makes 10, of which I set the
cipher under the multiplyer in the third place, and the article 1 in the
fourth place.

And so multiplying the second figure 6, by that same 2, there amounts 12:
whereof I write the digitte 2, under ^ the fourth place, and the article 1,
under in the fifth place.

Now do I multiplye by the third figure of the higher sum, which is 3, and
that makes 6: which I set under the fifte place, as appears in the example
following.

^ Than come I to the last place, and multiplye that 1 by 2, and there
amounts 2, which I set in the sixte place, and then does the sum stand
thus.

And so have I ^ ended the whole multiplication.

But now (as you taught me) to know what this whole sum is, I must ad all
those parcelles together, and then under the line will appear as you may see
the gross or total sum, that is, 322140.


May. That is well done.


Sch. Then me thinks I would call it well done, when I knew whether I had
well done or no.


Master It may be tried by 9, as addition was, but the surest proof is by
Division, and therefore I will reserve that till you have learned the art of
Division.

And before we pass from Multiplication I will yet show you another way of
multiplication, which is counted of some men, and is in deed, both more
readyer, and more certain, which differs nothing from this that I have
taught you, save that it does understand always the articles, and join
them to the next sum, and therefore I will declare it only by an example.

If I would multiply 1542, by 365, I must set them as I said before, and
then do I multiply 2 by 5, and it makes 10, ^ of which I write the article
under the first place, and keep the digit 1 in my mind.

Then say I forth: 5 times 4 do make 20, and the 1 in my mind, are 21,
thereof I write the 1 under the ^ second place, and keep the 2 in my mind.

Then come I to the third figure ^ 5 saying: 5 times 5 make 25, and the 2 in my
mind make 27, whereof I write the 7 under the third place, and keep the
article 2 in my mind.

Then coming to the last figure, ^ I say: 5 times 1 make 5, and 2 in my mind
make 7: that do I write under the fourth place.

And then have I ended my first multiplier, and therefore I dashe it. Then do
I likewise with the second multiplier, saying: 6 times 2 make 12, ^ thereof I
write the digit 2 under the second place, and keep the article ^ in my mind.

Then say I forth: 6 times 4 makes ^ 24 and 1 in my mind make 25. so I set
that 5 under the third place, and keep the 2 in my mind.

Then multiply I forth, saying: 6 times 5, makes 30, and 2 in mind make 32,
whereof I write the 2 under the fourth place and, ^ keep the 5 in my mind.

Then do I multiply the last figure ^ 1 by 6, and it makes 6, to ye I add
the 3 in my mind, and it makes 9, which I write in the fifth place.

And so have I ended ij. figures of the multiplier.

Than with the third and ^ last multiplier, do I likewayes, and say first: 3
times 2 make 6: which I write in the third place under the multiplyer.

^ Than by that 3 do I multiplye likewaies the second figure 4, and it makes
12, whereof I write the digitte 2 under the fourth place, and the article 1 I
keep in mind.

Than come I to the third figure ^ 5 saying: 3 times 5 makes 15, and the 1 in
my mind make 16, thereof I write the 6 under the fifth place, and keep the
article 1 in my mind.

Then come I to the last figure, which is 1 and multiply it by 3, and it makes
^ 3, thereto I add the 1 in my mind, and it makes 4, which I write in the 6
place. And then have I ended ye multiplicatio^, and the figures stand in order
thus.

Which parcels if I add into one sum, it will be 562830, which is the gross
or total sum of all that multiplication


Scholar. Well, this manner of multiplicatio^ I perceive: but what other sorts
have you?


May. There is one way that is wrought by a checker Table, made thus.

Look how many places your su^me has that you would multiply so many
squares must you make in your table, from the right side to the left: Another
way of multiplication.
and so many from the higher part to the lower, as there be places in your
multiplier. Then set down your greatest sum first on the top of the table,
every figure in due order, in a square alone: I mean in those squares that be
open and vncrossed. And likewise in those like squares at the right hand, set
down your multiplicatour or multiplier, the last figure in the highest place,
and so downward, that the first figure may be in the lowest place.


Scholar. Sir if it please you, me thinks then I understand you best, when
you do not stand long in telling the rule before examples: But propose, some
example, and then in declaring it, bring in the rules withal.


May. In deed, that way is easiest for a young learner, therefore will I even
so do. Take this example: now I would multiply 2^36 by 2,

First I consider that my greatest number has four figures or places, and
therefore I make so many roumes between lines, thus. Than I see that of my
multipliers there are two, wherefore I draw so many lines a cross the other,
that there may be two roumes between them thus.

But you must not forget to let the ends of the lines run out, as if appears
in this Patron, for in those open squares must your two first numbers, and all the total sum be set. The^ draw a cross bar through every close square, so
that it may reach down to the lowest overthwart line, as in this form. And
than is your checker form prepared.

Then set down your first or greatest sum on the top, ^ and your
multiplyer on ye right side in ye open squares thus.

Then begin to multiply the first figure of the higher sum, by the highest of
the multiplier, saying: 2 times 6 make 12, that 12 must you write in the square
that is against the 2 ^ and the 6, but in such manner that the digit be set
in the nether corner of the square, and the article in the higher corner: as
you may see in this example.

And so of every other multiplicatio^, what ever amounts you must write in
the common square, which is against both those figures, by which you do
multiply. And if that sum do make but one digitte, than must it be set in
yt lower corner of ye square, but if it make an article, than write the article
in the higher corner, and let the cipher go (if you will) evermore, for here it
serves for nothing, seeing the lines do distinct the places: but if the sum
amounting of such multiplication do make a mixte number, then write the
article in the higher corner, and the digitte in the lower corner, as I did by
that 2.

Then when you have multiplied and ended the first figure, come to the next,
and multiply it in like manner, as in saying: 2 times 3, is 6: that 6, because
^ it is but a digitt, you shall set in the nether corner of the square, next
under 3, thus.

Then go forth, saying: 2 times 0 is 0: set ^ that under the bar (if you
list) in the third square.

Then forth and say: ^ times 2 make 4, that set in the last square under the
bar, so have you ended the first multiplyer: Dashe him.

Come now to the second multiplier, and say: 3 times 6, make 18, of which
sum, the article 1 must ^ be set above the bar, in the square that is next
to the 3 (as you see here) and the 8 under the bar.

Then say 3 times three make 9, set it in ye next suqare beneth the bar. Then 3
times 0 is 0. write it in the next square, or let it go, for all is one.


Scholar. I perceive it well ^ for here the lines distinct the places,
wherefore ciphers do only serve, and therefore here they need not to be.


Master. Then say farther: 3 times 2, make 6: write that in the ^ last
square, then will the whole figure stand thus.


Sch. Now could I (me seems) do like again. But how shall I do now to gather
the sum?


May. Mark first the order of the places in this figure, and so shall you
perceive the reason of gathering them into a sum.

The sloape bars do part the places; so yt the first place is the lowest
corner in all such figures (of the nethermost square next the right hand: and
all the half squares between that bar and the next, stands for the second
place, and so the room between that and the next bar, is the third place: and
so forth. Now if you perceive this, then must you ad all the figures of one
place together, as if you had an Addition of diverse sums.


Scholar. If I understand you right, then must I take here in this example 8 to
be in the first place: 9, 1 and 2, in the second: 0, 6, 1, in the third: 6, 0,
in the fourth: 4 in the fifth: and the sixth place has no figure.


May. You say well, and the reason is because the multiplication serving to ye
square, made but a digit.


Scholar Then it is all one, ^ as if they stood thus.


Master. Even so it is: and now add this sum, and there will appear the
total of the multiplication to be 46828.

A proof without squares.
And if you will see the agreement of this manner of multiplication, and the
other that you learned before, then multiply those two sums (that is 2036, by
23) ^ after the first manner without squares.


Scholar. You mean to set them thus in order.

And then multiply 3 into 6 ^ make 18: 3 times 3 make 9, 3 times 0 is 0 then 3
times 2 make 6: which must be set thus.

Then do I likewise with the second multiplier, saying: 2 times 6 make 12, 2
times 3 make 6 2 times 0 is 0, and 2 times 2 make 4, which when I add to the
other then will the whole multiplication stand ^ thus.


May. So that you may see in every place the same figures, as they were in the
multiplication by squares, though they differ in heighte and lowness of
places, but being added together, they make one sum.

And thus now ye have learned three sorts of multiplicatio^, which likes you
best, that may you use.

Yet are there other forms, but since they nothing differ from these three in
effect, but only in setting of the numbers, I will ouerpasse them till a more
meeter place and time. And now will I instruct you in Division, so that you
think your self sufficiently to perceive what I have taught you.


Sch Yes sir I thank you, but I do not perceive how to examine my work, to
try whether I have well done or no.


May. That is commonly used by ye proof of 9, as you learned before in
Addition and Subtraction, save that it has this ways diverse from them.

First you must make a cross after this manner.

Then must you examine your sum that should be multiplied, and look what
remains after casting away of 9, that set you at the one side of the
cross: then examine the multiplier, and whatsoever remains in it, after
casting away 9 as often as you can, write that at the other side of the cross:
then must you multiply those two numbers together, and look what amounts
thereof, if it be under 9, write it at ye higher part of ye cross: but if it
be above 9, then take thence 9 as often as you can, and write the rest at
the head of the cross. As in the last example of multiplication, the number
to be multiplied is 2036, wherein is once 9, and 2 remains, which I ^ write
at one side of a cross thus.

Then do I examine the multiplier, ^ which is 23, wherein there is no 9 but 5
in all, that 5 therefore I set at the other side of the cross, thus.

Then do I multiply by 2 and it makes 10, from which I withdraw 9 and there
rests 1 that 1 do I set at the head of the cross, then do I examine the
gross sum, amounting of the multiplication, which is 46828. wherein I find
9 three times and 1 remaining, that.1. I set at the foot of the cross and
then I see it to agree ^ with the other 1 at the top of the cross, and so
know I that I have done well: for if they two did differ, then were my work
vain, and the multiplication false.

This is the common proof, but the most certain proof is by Division, of
which I will anon instruct you.


Scholar Sir, what is the chief use of Multiplication?


Master. The use of it is greater then you can yet understand: howbeit, these
plain commodities it has, that if you would resolve any great and whole
valor into many small and less portions: as if you would change pounds
into shillings, pence or any other greater or smaller parcels, by
multiplication, ye shall do it speedely and easily. Also if you should need
to add one sum to it self, or to any other oftentimes, you shall do it by
Multiplication much more speedily, readily, easily and surely, then by often
and sundry Additions. Take you these commodities grossly showed for an
answer at this time, and hereafter I will more abundantlye make you to perceive
the use of it.


DIVISION.
Scholar. WEll sir, then in Division I pray you to instruct me. But me
thinks by the name of it, that it should be al one with Multiplication: for
I call that Division, when any thing is parted into diverse and many parts.


Master. You take it as it is taken commonly, howbeit, if you mark well, you
shall perceive that it is quite contrary to Multiplication, and does not part
one thing or few things into many, but contrary ways it brings many parcels
in to few, but yet so, that these few taken together, are equal in valor to
the other many: for by Division pence are turned into shillings, and shillings
into pounds: as for example of 1^0 shillings, it makes 6 pounds, so are 120
turned into 6, which is a smaller number: but then if you consider the
denominatours, you shall see that they are such, that one of the latter is equal
to 20 of the first, and so in value the sums are one, though in number they
do far differ, and the latter sum is the lesser, and so is it always in
division how be it, yet in the working, the sum is parted by an other, and
thereof does it take the name.


Scholar I think I shall better understand the reason of the name, when I know
the use of the work, therefore now would I gladlye learn that.


Master. Division what it is.
Division is a distributing of a greater sum by the unities of a lesser Or
Division is an Arithmetical producing of a third number, in respect of two
propounded numbers: which third number shall so often contain an unit, as the
greater of the two propounded numbers does contain the lesser. So that, even as
Multiplication did seem to serve in steed of many Additions, so Division
may seem to be in place of many Subtractions: Because that third number
briefly expresses, how many times the lesser of your two propounded numbers
may be Subtracted, from ye greater: As in practice will more plainly appear.
Therefore (as you may perceive) unto Division are required three numbers: the
first, which should be divided, and that must (generally) be the greater: and
the second, by which the other must be divided, and that is (generally) the
lesser, and is called ye Divisor. And the third which answers to the
question, How many times: and therefore is called the Quotient.

The first must be first written and the second so set under it that the last
figure of the lower number be right under the last of the higher, A general
rule for placing the figures.
contrary ways to the work of the other kinds of Arithmetike: for in them
the two first figures were set ever meet one under the other, but in Division
the last figures must be set meet, except it chance so, An exception.
yt the last figure of the Divisor be greater then ye last of the higher
number, for then you shall set the last of the Divisor, under the last (save
one) of the higher number, as for example.

If you should divide 365 (whithe are the sum of the days of a year) ^ by
2^ which are the days of a common month, then should you set them thus.

But if you would divide those ^ 365 days, by 52. which is the number of
weeks in one year, then should you set them thus.

Likewayes if I would divide ^ the same 365 by 4, which is the sum of the
quarters of a year, then must I set them thus.


Scholar. Sir, this do I understand, but how now should I do to divide the
one by the other?


Master. You must begin with the last figure next the left hand,
and see how many times the last figure of the divisor may be taken out of the
last figure of the over number, and that shall you note within a crooked line
toward your right hand. As for example.

I would divide 365 by 28, ^ then set I those two sums thus.

And I look how many times I may find 2 (which is the last figure of the
divisor) in 3, (which is the last of the number to be divided) and considering
that I can take 2 out of 3 but once, I make a crooked line at the right hand
of the numbers, and with in it I set 1, and that is called the Quotiente
number, as I told you. Quotient number.
Then because that when 2 is taken out of 3, there ^ remains 1, I must write
that 1 over 3, and deface or cancel the 3 and the 2, then will the figures
stand thus.

Then must I go to the next figure of the divisor, and take it likewayes so
many times out of the figures that be over it, and look what does remain,
that I must write over them, and cancel them, as in this example.

Therefore now I do take once 8 out of 16, and there remains 8, which I must
set over the 6, and cancel or cross ^ out the 15. and the 8 of the divisor:
And then will the figures stand thus.

And so have I once wrought.


Scholar. So I perceive that you take the nether figure not only out of the
other that is right over him, but out of that with the other also that
remains before, and are written toward the left hand.


Master. So must you do: for you must so take the divisor out of the over
number, that there remain not over it so great a sum as it self is, for then
were your work in vain.

But yet again here must you mark, that when you seek how many times the
last figure of the divisor may be found in the number over him, Note.
that you look also whether you may as often find all the figures following in
those that are above them, (considering all the remainders if there be any) if
not, take your Quotient less by one and then prove again, and so still, til
you find a moete Quotient: And by that moete quotie^t must you always
multiplye your divisor, and the product set under your divisor, so yt his first
figure stand under the first figure of your divisor, and the second under the
second, and so forth: and then subtract that product from the number to be
divided, that stands directly over it, as you have seen me do.


When you have thus wrought once, than must you begin again and write your
diuisour a new, nearer toward ^ the right hand by one place, as in this
example, you shall set 2 under 8, and 8 under 5, thus

Then (as before) seek how many times you may take your divisor out of the
number over him now.


Scholar. That may I do here 4 times.


Master. Truth it is that you may find 2, four times in 8: but then mark
whether you can find the figure following so many times in the other that is
over him: Can you find 8 four times in 5?


Scholar. No, neither yet once.


Master. Therefore take ^ out of ^, once less.


Scho. That is 3 times.


Ma. Well, then 3 times 2 make 6: Mark how to consider this kind of remainer.
if I take 6 out of 8, there remains 2: which 2 with the 5 following, make
25, in which sum I find 8 in times also, and therefore I take 3 as a true
quotient, and write ^ it within the crooked line of the quotient, before the
one thus.

Then say I: 3 times 2 ^ make 6, then 6 out of 8 rests 2, therefore I cancel
the 2 and the 8 and write over it the 2 yt does remain, thus.

Then do I take 8 as many times out of 2^, saying: 3 times 8 make 24, and if I
take 24 out of 25, there remains 1: ^ so then I cancel 25 and 8, and over
the 5 I set 1, thus. Or you might (after you found 3 to be a fit quotie^t)
straight way have multiplied the whole divisor 28, by that 3, at once: which
gives 84, which being set under 28, and duly subtracted from 85, ^ of the
number divided, gives 1, ye remainer of ye whole division: as before you
had. Work which way you list: here you see also the form.

And now have I done with dividing, for I can find my divisor 28 no more in
the over sum.


Scho. No, except you would part the 1 that remains, into 28 parts.


May That is well said, and so must we do in such cases, when there remains
any thing: but I will let that pass now, and will make you perfect in division
of whole numbers, and will hereafter teach you particularly of broken numbers,
called Fractions.

Now if you do perceive the order of division, then do you divide this sum,
136280 by 452.


Scho. First I set down the number that should be divided, then do I set the
diuisour under it, so that the last figure of it be right under the last
figure of the ^ over number. Then will it be thus.


Master. Can you take the last of your diuisour (which is 4) out of 1, which
is the last of the over number?


Sch. I had forgotten, because the last of the divisor cannot be taken out of
the last of the over number, in so much as it is the greater, therefore must I
set the divisor ^ one place more foreward, toward the right hand thus.

And then must I look how often I may find the last figure of the diuisour
(that is 4) in 13, which thing I may do 3 times, therefore do I say: 3 times 4
is 12, which I take out of 13, and there remains 1. Then do I make at the
right hand of my sums a crooked line, and write before it my quotient 3: and
I cancel 13 and 4, ^ and over the 3 I set ye 1 that remains, and the^ the
figures stand thus.

Then do I multiply the same quotient into every figure of the divisor, and
withdraw the sum that amounts out of ye numbers over them, as first I say:
^ times ^ make 15, which I take from 46, and there rests 1, I cancel
therefore 16 and 5, ^ and write over the 6 that 1 that remains, thus.

Then do I say lykewaies, 3 times 2 makes 6, which I take out of 12 and there
rests 6, therefore I cancel the 12 ^ and the 2. and over the 2 I write 6
that remains, thus.

Then should I set forward ^ the divisor, into the next place toward ye right
hand, thus.


Master. But you may see, that over the 4 is no figure, therefore must I set
the divisor yet forewarder by an other place.

And mark, when soever it chances so, yt you should set forward the divisor,
and that it can not stand there, because there is no number over the last
place, or if there be any, it is lesser then the last figure of the divisor,
then must you remove the divisor yet once again: and because that his first
place of removing served not to subtracte him so much as once, therefore shall
you write in the quotient a Cipher 0. And if you should by chance need to do
so oftentimes, for every time write a cipher in the quoitente. The reason of
this, will I show you hereafter.


Scholar. Then must I ^ set my sums thus.

And because I removed ^ the divisor, so yt I ouerskipped one place, A must
write a cipher in the quotient: and then must I seek a new quotient, as in
this example I must say, How many times 4 is there in 6? and since it can be but
once, therefore do I write 1 in the quotient, and then say I: 1 time 4; taken ^
out of 6, remains 2, I cancel the 6 and the 4, and write 2 over the^ thus.

Then say I again, once 5 out of 28, remains 23, I let the 2 stand as it
did, and over ye 8 I set 3, cancelling the 8 ^ and the 5 under it, thus.


May. You might as well have said, once 5 out of 8. and so remains 3 but
now go forth.


Scho. Then once 2 out of 0, can not be, what shall I now do?


Ma. Borow of the next number that is behind (for there is 230) and do as you
learned in Subtraction in a like case.


Scholar. Then must I borrowe 1 of the 3 coming behind next, and make that 0
to be 10: and then take I 2 out of 10, and there rests 8. And because I
borrowed one of the 3. I must cancel the 3, and ^ write 2 over it: then does
the figure stand thus.


Master. Now have you done, and yet remains 228, and your quotient show
you, that if you divide 136280 by 452 you shall find your diuisour in your
greter number 301. that is CCC times and once and 228 remaining.

And in the other example, where I divided 365 by ^^, the quotient was 13, and
1 remained: whereby I know that in a year (which contains 365 days) there
are 13 months reckening 28 days (or 4 weeks) just to a month, and 1 day
more.


Sch. Why then do we call a year but 12 months.


Ma. Of that at a more convenient time will I fully instruct you: but now it
is not convenient to entangle your mind with other things, than do directly
pertain to your matter. Therefore if you remember what you have heard, you
have learned a short mone^ of division, which I would have you often to
practice, so that you may be perfect in it, and hereafter I will show you
certain other proper points touching it,


Scholar. Then I pray you, yet tell me, how I shall examine and try my work,
whether I have done well or no, that though no man be by me to tell me, yet I
may perceive it my self.


Master. Some men (yea and commonly) do try it by the rule of 9, as in all
the other kinds, save that their order is this. First they cast away 9, as
often as they can, out of the divisor, and that remains, they set at one side
of a cross: As in our first example, the divisor was 28, from which you ^ may
take 9 three times and 1 remains which they set by a cross, thus.

Then do they likewise examine the quotient (which in our example is 13) and
from thence they cast away 9 as often as they can, and the remainer they set at
the other side of the cross, and then multiply they together those ij.
remainers: and to it that amounts they add the remainer of the division; if
there were any, from that whole sum they withdraw 9 as often as they ^an, and
the rest they set at the head of the cross: as in our example the quotient is
13, from which take 9, and there remains only 4 and therefore must you set 4
^ at the other side of the cross, thus.

Then multiply 4 by 1, and it yields but 4 thereto add the remainer of the
division (which was 1) and it will be 5, which sum does not amounte to 9,
and therefore must be set wholly at ^ the head of the cross, as you see here.

And this number on the head of the cross, is the first proof, to which if
you find an other like in the number that was divided, then have you done well.

Therefore now shall you likewise examine the whole sum that was divided, and
take away 9 as often as you can, and that that remains, set at the foot of
the cross: and if it be equal to that in the head of the cross, then have you
well done, else not.

As in our example the whole sum was 365, which makes 1^, from ^ that take
9, and there rests 5, which set at the foot of the cross, thus.

And you shall see that they agree: therefore have you well done.


Scholar. Now will I likewise examine our second example, where ye divisor was
452 which makes 11: from thence ^ I take 9, and the 2 that remains I set at
the right side of a cross, thus.

Then examine I the quotitient, which was 301, where I find but only 4. that
do I set at the other side ^ of the cross thus.

Then do I multiply 4 by 2, and it makes 8, to that do I ad the remayner of
the division (which was 228, and makes 12) and they two make 20, wherein I
find twice 9, and 2 remaining, that ^ 2 must I set at the head of the
cross, thus.

Then do I examine the whole number to be divided, which was 136280, where I
find twice 9, and 2 remaining, ^ which I set at the foot of the cross, thus.

And because that it does agree with the figure at the head of the cross, I
know that the division was well wrought.


May. This is the common proof, howbeit, the more certain working is by the
contrary kind, as to prove Division by multiplication, thus.

Multiply the quotient by the divisor, and if the sum that amounts be
equal to the sum that should be divided, then have you well divided, else not.

Howbeit, this must you mark, yt if there remained any thing after the
division, that must you add to the sum that amounts of the multiplication:
as in our first example the quotient was 13, and the divisor was 28: Now
multiply the one by the other, and the sum will be 364: to that if you add
the one that remained after the division, than will it be 363, which was the
sum that should be divided, and therefore I know that I have well done.


Scholar. Now will I prove the same in the second example, whose divisor was
452, and the quotient 301: these do I multiplye together, and there amounts
136052, to which if I add the 228 that remained, then will it be 136280, which
was the whole sum to be divided, and therefore I perceive that I have well
done.


May. This is the surest way to examine Division by Multiplication: and
contrary ways the surest proof of Multiplication, is Division.

And therefore now will I show how you may prove Multiplication by Division.

When you have ended multiplicatio^, A proof of Multiplication by Division.
and would know whether you have well done or not, set the gross sum that
amounts of the Multiplication ouermost, and divide it by the multiplier: and
if the quotient be the same number that should be multiplied, then have you
well wrought, else not: as in that example where we multiplied 264, by 29, the
gross sum was 7656.

Now if you will know whether that multiplication be true, you shall divide
that 7656 by the multiplier, 29: and you shall perceive that the quotient will
be 264, and that is a token that you have well wrought.


Scholar. By your patience I will prove that: and first I set down the gross
sum and the multiplier, not after the rule of multiplication, but after the
rule of division, for now that number is become the divisor, that was before
the multiplier, I shall ^ set them therefore thus.

Then shall I seek how many times 2 in 7, that may be 3 times, and 1
remains: but then may not 9 be found so often in 16, therefore must I take
a lesser quotient, that is to say, 2^ then say I twice 2 makes 4, which I take
out of 7, and there remains 3, then do I cancel 7 and 2, and over 7 I write
3 and in ^ the quotient I set 2, so the figures stand thus.

Then say I forth, 2 times 9 make 18 which I bate out of 36, and there rests
18 then cancel I 3 and over him set 1, and likewise I cancel 6 and 9, and
over them I set 8, so that thus stand ^ the figures.

Then do I set forward the divisor by one place, and seek a new quotient,
that is to say, how many times 2 are in 18, which I find to be 9 times, but
then can I not find 9 so many times in 5, therefore I take a lesser quotient,
as to say, 8: but yet is that to great, for if I take 8 times 2 out of 18,
there remains but 2 and I can not find 8 times 9 in 25, therefore yet I take
a lesser quotient, that is 7, which is also to great, for if I take 7 times 2
out of 18, there rests 4, but now I cannot take* 7 times 9 out of 45,
therefore yet I seek a lesser quotient, as to say, 6: then say I* 6 times 2,
make 2, that I ^ take out of 18, and there remains 6, so I cancel the 18 and
the 2 and write 6 over 8, thus

Then say I forth: 6 times 9 makes 54, that take I out of 65 and there
remains 11 ^ and the figures stand thus.

Then must I set forth the divisor again, and seek a new quotient, which
will be 4: for though I may find 2 in 11 five times, and 1 remain, ^ yet I
cannot find 9 so often in 16, therefore I set the figures thus.

And ye 4 in the quotie^t I multiply into the figures of the divisor, saying:
4 times 2 makes 8, which I take out of ^ 11, and there rests 3, therefore I
cancel the 11 and the 2 and set 3 over the first place of 11, thus.

And then do I say forth, 4 times 9 makes 36, which I take from 36, and there
remains nothing, so that ye quotient of this division, where 7656 is divided
by 29, is 264, which does declare that if 264 be multiplied by 29, the sum will
be 7656. And thus I perceive now how both Multiplication is proved by Division,
and division also by Multiplication.


Master. Now have I ended the five common kinds of Arithmetike: for as
toucing Mediation, Duplation, triplation, and such other, they are no several
kinds of Arithmetike, but are contained under the other: for Mediation is
contained under Division, and is nothing else but dividing by 2: and so are
duplation and Triplation contained under Multiplication: for Duplation is
nothing else but multiplying by 2, and triplation is multiplying by 3, of which
I will only propose an example, An example of Mediation.
for the rules you have heard already.

If you would mediate or divide into ^, this sum, 4531010, you shall set 2 for
the divisor, and work as you learned ^ before, as thus.

Then I find 2 in 4 two times, therefore my quotient must be 2: so I cancel 4
and 2, and remove the divisor ^ forward, thus.

Then again I find 2 in 5 twice, and 1 remaining, so I write 2 again for my
second number ^ of the quotiente, and cancel 5 and 2, and over 5 I set 1, thus.

Then remove I the divisor forward and seek a new quotient, which is 6: then
say I, 6 times 2 make 12, take that out of 13, and there rests 1, so I ^
cancel 2 and 13, and over 3 I set 1 thus. Then remove I the divisor forward;
and seek a new quotient which is 5. then take I twice ^ out of it; and there
rests 1, so I cancel the 2 and the ^ last figure of 1, and let the first
stand thus.

Then remove I the divisor forward, and seek a new quotient, which is 5: then
take I 2 five times out of 10, and there rests nothing.

Then remove ^ I again the divisor forward, thus.

But because I can not find the divisor in the number over it, I must set a
cipher in the quotiente, and remove the divisor to the ^ next place, as
appears in the figure before.

Then seek I a new quotient which I find to be 5, for so many times may I
have 2 in 10. Then have I fully ended this Mediation or Division by 2, and the
quotie^t is this, 2265505, which is the half of 4531010, as you may try by
Duplation: for double that quotie^t, Duplation.
or multiply it by 2, and the same number will amount.

I will no longer tarry about these, seeing they are but members of the other
kinds. Easy forms of multiplication.
But here now will I teach you certain easy forms both of Multiplication and
of division, and first of multiplication.

If you would therefore multiply any sum by 10, you shall need to do no more
but ad a cipher before his first place, as for example: 36 multiplied by 10,
make 360.

Likewise if you will multiply any sum by 100 put two ciphers at his
beginning.

So if you would multiply any sum by a thousand, ad three ciphers to the
beginning of it.


Scholar. This do I well perceive, and also the reason of it.


May. I will omit all reasons till our next meeting, when I shall tell you the
reason of all other parts of Arithmetike also: and as to our matter now, look
(as I have told you) that you both remember it, and also often practice it.

But if you would multiply any number by 5, mark first whether the number be
even or odd: and if it be even take the half of it, and write a cipher at the
beginning of it, as for example: I would multiply 2564 by 5, I take the half
of it, which is 1282 (as you may know by Mediation) and before it I set a
cipher, thus, 12820, and this is five times 2564.

And thus may you do with any other eue^ sum, that you would multiply by 5.

But if the sum be od, as for example 2563, the^ must you take the lesser
half of it, or (if you will) take away 1 from the first figure (as here take 1
from 3) and then take the half of the rest, and set before it 5: as of 2563,
the lesser half is 1281, for here I take but 1 for the half of 3: and if I put
5 before that lesser half, then have I multiplied it 5 times, as thus, 12815.


Scholar. What mean you by the lesser half.


May. There is no just half of any od number, therefore if we divide an od
number into 2 parts, as nigh equal as can be, yet will the one half exceed
the other half by one, as for example. The two nearest halfs of 9, are 5 and
4: and likewise of 15, are 7, and 8, where you see that ye one part still is
greater then ye other by 1. Now it is easy to know which is the greater
half, and which is the lesser half.


Scho. Then I perceive you, and can do likewise (I doubt not) with any sum.
For if it be not very easy to part into halfs, then will I do it by Mediation
easilye enough.


May. That is a sure way. And now have you learned how to multiply easily by
5, 10, 100, 1000: and of like manner may you do with any other of that sort.

But now if you will multiply by 20, 30, 40, and so forth: or by 200, 300, and
such like, where there is one cipher in the first place, or many orderly in
ye first places, you shall take away those ciphers, and multiply the sum only
by the other figure or figures, (if they be many) and then at the beginning of
the sum that amounts, shall you set so many ciphers as you took away.

Example of 2873, which I would multiply by 300. First I cast away the 2
ciphers from the multiplier, and I multiply the sum by only 3 that is left,
and it amounts to 8619: before which I put the two ciphers that I took away
before, and then is it 861900. And that is the sum that amou^teth, when 2873
is multiplied by 300.


Scholar. And if there were two or more figures beside the ciphers, I must only
take away the ciphers, and multiply by ye other figures, as I learned before:
as if I would multiply 93648 by 25000, I should take away the three ciphers,
and multiply the same by 25, and then at the beginning of that total sum,
should I add the three ciphers again.


May. Even so: but and if it chance the number that should be multiplied, or
both the sums as well the number that should be multiplied as the multiplier,
to have ciphers in their first places, evermore cast away the Ciphers, and
work by the rest. But remember to restore as many ciphers to ye amounting
su^me, as you bated before, as in this example: 30200 shall be multiplied by
206: I shall only take away the two ciphers from the greater number, and then
multiply 302 by 206, and afterward ad the two ciphers again. But if I would
multiply the same 30200 by 2060, I shall not only take away the two ciphers
from the number that should be multiplied, but also I may take away the one
cipher from the multiplier, and then must I add 3 Ciphers to the sum that
amounts: but take heed that you take away no cipher that comes after any
signifying figure, as in this last example, you may not take away that in the
fourth place of the higher number, neither that in the third place of ye
multiplier: how be it, yet this you may do: If one cipher or more come in the
midst of your sums, you may multiply by ye other figures, and ouerskippe ^
them, but so, that you give every figure his due place, as thus: I will
multiply 3026 by 2004, therefore I set them thus.

And thus do I multiply then: First 4 times 6 make 24: I set the 4 under
the first place, and keep the 2 still in my mind: Then say I again: 4 times
2 makes 8, and the 2 that is in my mind, makes 10, I set down the Cipher
0, and keep the article one in my mind. Then 3 times 4, is 12, and the 1 in
my mind makes 13, I set down the Figure 3, and keeping the 1 still in my
mind having no more places of ye upper number to multiply it withal: I put
it down next 2 in the fifth place.

But now when I come to the next place being a Cipher 0: I let it go, because
it multiplieth nothing: And likewise the second cipher.

But then when I do come to the 2, and multiply it into the 6 of the over
number, you must take heed (according as I taught you in multiplication) that
the first number amounting of the multiplication, ^ be set right under the
multiplier, and the other orderly toward the left hand, according as you may
see in this example. which being finished with the Addition thereof gathered
together, will stand as this example shows.

Which is indeed wrought ^ so much sooner and shorter by ouerskipping of the
two ciphers which else would have had two workinges more as by the same
example here also set down does appear.


Scholar. Sir, I thank you: for I see great ease in this way of
Multiplication, and if you can show me such like in Division, you shall
greatly further me.


Master. Yes, I will teach you some easy ways in division also, and first
this: If you would divide any sum by 10, you shall only with your pen make
a square line, Easy forme^ of Division.
between the first figure of your sum and the second, and than have you
done: for the whole number that follows the line, stands for the quotient
and the figure that is before the line, is the remainer: as for example, 3648
divided by 10, ^ will stand thus.

Where 364 is the quotient, and betokens that so many times are 10 in 3648:
and the 8 after the line, is the remainer, which cannot be divided into 10, but
by breaking it into fractions, wherewith I will not meddle yet.

And so likewise if you would divide any sum by 100, with your pen, you shall
cut away the two first figures, and if ye would divide by 1000, you must cut
away the 3 first figures, and so of any other divisor, whose last figure is 1,
and the other be ciphers, look how many ciphers the divisor has, and so many
figures at the beginning shall you cut away with the squire line, and they stand
always for the remainer because they are less than the divisor, and cannot be
divided by it, and the other figures that be behind ye line, stand for the
Quotient.

But now if your divisor have any other figure in his last place than 1, and in all his other places have ciphers, look how many ciphers there be, cut away
so many of ye first figures of the number that should be divided, and divide
the rest that follows the line, by that figure that is in the last place, as
if it were the whole divisor.

Example of 64284, which I would divide by 300, here must I cut away the two
first figures, (for so many ciphers my divisor has) and must divide the rest
by 3 which is the figure in the last place of the divisor. First therefore I
part away the two first ^ figures, and the sum stands thus.

Then do I divide 642, by 3, and the quotient is 214, for in 6 I find twice 3,
and in 4 once, and 1 remaining, which 1 with the 2 next before, does make 1^,
wherein I find 3 four times: and this is a ready way to turn shillings into
pounds: for since one pound does contain 20 shillings, I must divide the whole
number of shillings by 20 therefore easily to do it, I see that my divisor has
one ciphre, and therefore I cut away one figure from the beginning of the whole
sum of shillings, and then I do mediate or divide by 2 the other figures or
sum that follows.


Scho. I will put an example.

If you would divide 64287 shillings by 20, that is to say: If I would turn so
many shillings into pounds, I must cast away ye first figure, that is 7. and
divide the rest, that is 6428 by 2 so shall the Quotient be 3214, whereby I know
that 64287 shillings, make 3^14 pou^ds, and 7 shillings remaining.


May. Now prove by Multiplication whether you have well done or no.


Scho. The quotient is 3214. which I do multiply by the divisor 2, and it
does amou^t to 6428.


May. Hereby may you perceive not only that you have well done, but also how
by division you may turn shillings easily into pou^ds: And contrary ways, by
Multiplication you may turn pounds into shillings.

But here shall you see amongst diverse men, diverse forms of such division,
but if you mark what I have told you, you shall perceive easily al their
ways: for some men do not cut away so many of the first figures of the sum
yt they would divide, An other manner of the abridgment.
as there are ciphers in the first places of their divisor, but they set al
their ciphers orderly under the first places of the number that they would
divide, and then with the other figure (or figures if they be many) they
divide the rest of their sum. Example. If they ^ would divide 725931, by
3400, they set their sums thus.

And then do they divide orderly till they come to the ciphers: for there
they stay and end their work, as in this example: They seek how often 3 may
be found in 7, which is 2 times, and one remaining, therefore they set 2 in
the quotient, and cancel ^ 3 and 7, and over 7 they set ye 1 yt remained, thus.

Then do they go forth ^ saying: two times 4 makes 8, which they take out of
12, and there remains 4, thus.

Then renew they the divisor forward, and seek how often 3 may be found in
4, which is but once, and 1 remains, then set they 1 in the quotient, and
cancel ^ 3 and 4, and over them they set that 1, thus.

Then take they once 4 ^ out of 15, and there rests 11. Or else more easily:
Take once 4 out of 5, and there rests 1, so they cancel the 4 and 5, and set
1 over them, thus.

Then set they forth ye divisor again, and seek how many times 3 are in 11,
which they find 3 times, and 2 remaining: so they set 3 in the quotient, and
^ cancel 11 and 3, and over them sets 2, thus.

Then do they multiply ^ 4 by 3, which makes 12, that with draw they out of
29, and there rests 17. of which the 7 must be set over the 9, and the 1
over the 2, thus.

And now are the two ciphers next ensuing, so that the divisor can no more be
set forward, and therefore is the division ended, and the remainer is 1731.

Now the quotient, which is 213, does declare, that if you divide 725931, by
3400* you shall find it therein 213 times, and there remains 1731, so shall
you find it, if you work as I taught you, by cutting away the two first
figures,
because of the two ciphers. But this must you mark (as you may perceive by
this last example) that if there be left any other remainer in the sum that
was behind the squire line, that the remayner must be set to the latter end
of the first remayner, which was cut ^ away with the squire line: as if you
would divide 725931 by 3400, after the form that I taught you, then would
your sums appear thus.

So that 17, which remains after the line, must be set to the 31 (that was
cut away with the line) in higher places, as you see here: where that 17 with
the 31, do make 1731.

And here would I make an end of Division, saving that there comes to my
mind one late invention of easy Division which I will briefly set forth
to you, An other invention of easy Division.
so that if you find ease in it, you may use it. Because that the hardest
point in Division, is the ready and easy finding of the quotient number: and
again, if that be truly known, all the rest is but light to be done:
therefore this ways shall you quickelye and truly find the quotient.

Firsts write the nine figures of ^ number: I mean 123456789, not a long as I
have set them now, but up and down as in this form. And at the left side of
them draw a long line, as you see here: Then consider the divisor, by which
you intend to work, and set it on the left side of the long line, right
against 1, and for a distinction draw a line under it: then multiplye your
divisor orderly by each of those figures, beginning with 2, and so go
downewarde till you have ended all. And look what does amount of the
multiplicatio^ of each figure into the divisor, then write it against the
figure whereby you did multiply.


Sc. By example I may perceive it better.


Master. Take this example ^ 263845 to be divided by 64 the^ must I set the 9
figures as I said before, and the diuisour must I set against the 1, thus.

The^ must I multiply ye divisor byech figure orderly: first by 2 and it makes
128, which I must set against 2 at the left hand.

Then multiply 64 by 3, and it makes 192, which is set against 3. Then 4
times 64, make 256, ye set I by 4 Then say I, 5 times 64 make 320, that set I
against 5. Then 6 times 64, make 384, that set I against 6. Then 7 times 64
make 448, which I set against 7.

Further I say: 8 times 64, ^ make 512, which I set by 8. And last of all I
say: 9 times 64, make 576, which I set against 9. And then the will stand
thus.

And so is the table ended, by which you may easily find the Quotient, as you
shall see by example now.

Do you set down ye numbers (as you learned before) according to the order of
division.


Sch That is thus. ^


May Now look what number stands over the divisor, reckning thereto al them
that be behind it toward the left hand.


Scholar Then are there over the diuisour, 263.


Master. That is just: now seek in the table on the left side, whether you
can find 263.


Sch. It is not there.


Master. Then take the number that is next to it, beneath it: I mean a lesser
number than 263, but of all the lesser numbers that the table has, take you
that that goes nighest to 263.


Sch. That is 256.


Master. So is it: and mark this evermore, when you can not find justly in
the table that sum that is over your diuisour, then note that that is next
beneath it of any sum that is in the table,
and look at the right hand of the line what figure or digit that is against
that sum, and take that digit for your quotient, and then work on, as you
learned before: for now have I told you the whole use of this table.

Howbeit, yet that you may be sure to understand it, I will see you end this
example of Division by it.

Now therefore begin again.


Scholar. First I set down ^ the sums after the common manner, thus.

Then do I look over the divisor, and and there 263* Now to know how many
times 64 may be taken out of 263; I resort to the table aforesaid; and seek
for the number 263; but it is not there, therefore as you ^ad me, I take a
lesser number, the next to it that I can find in the table, and that is 256,
which number has against it on the right hand this digite 4 which I must
take for the first figure of my quotient.

Then do I (as I learned before) multiply that quotient into eneme figure of
the divisor orderly, withdrawing the sum thereof, amounting out of the over
sum: as here I say first: 4 times 6 make 24, so I take yt out of 26, saying: 4
out of 6 remains 2, which I write over ye 6: then 2 out of 2 remains
nothing, then cancel I 2 and 6, ^ and also 6 in the divisor, and the sum
stands thus.

Then do I likewise say forth: 4 times 4 make 16. which I take out of 23, and
there rests 7 to be set over 3, and that 3 with the 2 behind it and ^ the 4
under it, must be cancelled, as you see here.

Then have I done with the figure of the quotient.


Master. Now set forward your diuisour, and seek a new ^ quotiente, as
you sought this.


Scho^^^* Then thus stands the figures so that over the diuisour I see 78,
which I seek in the table, and cannot find it: therefore I take the next
lesser, and that is 64 the divisor it self.


May. So must you do when there is none other.


Sch. Then against ^ it I find this digit 1, which I must set in the
quotient before 4, thus.

Then multiply I 6 by 1, and it is but 6 still.


Master. Note.
You need not go about to multiply when the Quotient is 1, for 1 does neither
multiply nor divide, but in such case only subtract the divisor out of the
number that is over it,


Scholar. Then I take 4 out of 8, and there rests 4, and 6 out of 7 there
remains 1, so I cancel those numbres, and ^ write the remainers over their
places, thus.

Then set I forward the divisor again, thus.

^ Where I see over the diuisour 144, which I seek in the table, and find it
not: therefore I take the number in ye table yt is next thereto, beneathe it,
which I find to be 128, against which in the right side I find 2, which I
take for my quotient, and that do I multiply first into 6, and thereof
comes 12, which I take out of 14, and then remains 2, that 2 I set ^ over
4, and cancel the other figures, 1, 4 and 6, thus.

Then say I for the: 2 ^ times 4 are 8, which I take out of 24, and there
remains 16, of which I write the 6 over 4, and the 1 over 2 and cancel 2, 4
and 4, thus.

Now again I set forward ^ the divisor thus. And seeing over it 165 I seek
that in ye table, but find it not, therefore I take ye next lesser, which is
128, against which I find ^: that do I set into the quotie^t, and by it I ^
multiply first 6, and thereof comes, 12, which I take out of 16 and there
rests 4 the^ ca^cel I 1, 6, and 6, and over 6 I set 4 thus.

Then do I multiply ^ 4 by 2, and it makes 8, which I take out of 45, and
there remains 37, as in this example.

And now have I done.


May. Well, now I see that you can work by this kind of division, as far
forth as I taught you.


Scho Yea sir, I thank you, and I find in it much ease and certainenes.


M Yet one thing I doubt whether you perceive: what if you did find in the
table the number that stands over the divisor, what would you next do?


Scho. I think I should take the digitte against it on the left hand for the
quotient.


Ma. So is it: and as often as you seek in the table and find your number
just, Mark the diversity betvveene a true quotient and a just quotient.
the digit against it is your true and just quotiente. I call that a true
quotient also, if it be ye right quotient that you should take^^ though your
divisor multiplied by the same, do not clearly subtract the number over it,
but there does somewhat remain, as it chanced in all the examples that you did
work by. But if it should ch^nce (as it does often) that your divisor
multiplied by your quotient, do subtract clean the number over it, the^ call I
that quotient not only a true quotient, but also a just quotient, because it
does justly consume the number over the divisor: and that chances evermore
when the number over the divisor is justly found in the table.


Scho. This I shall remember.


Mr. But yet one easy point more I will tell you in this sort of division,
therefore mark it well.

When you have found in the table, other the same sum that is over the
divisor, other ye next beneath, (for lack of the other) the^ look what digit
stands against it, take that for your quotient. And because it is some pain
to multiply the divisor by the quotient, you shall not need to do it, but only
take the number that you found in the table, and subtract that from the over
number: for if you do multiply the divisor by the quotient, that will be the
number that shall amounte, therefore is this way more easier.


S. So is it, and also more cetainer for such as I am, yt might quickly err
in multiplying, especially being smallye practiced therein.


M. The^ prove in some brief example whether you can do it, and so will we make
an end.


Scholar. I would divide ^ 38468 by 24, therefore first I set ye table as here
follows: Then set I the two sums of Division thus.

And over the divisor I find 38, which I seek in the table and find it not,
therefore I take the next beneath it which the table has, and yt is 24, the
divisor it self: against which is set 1, which I take for the quotient, which I
set in his place. And now I need not to multiply the divisor by it, but only
^ to withdraw the divisor out of the 38, that is over it, and so remains 14,
as thus.

Then set I forward the ^ divisor, and find over it 144, as appears ^: then
seek I ye number in the table and find it, and against it is 6, therefore I
set 6 before 1 for my quotient, and I take that 144 for the just
multiplication of the divisor by that quotient, and therefore without any new
^ multiplication I do subtract the 144, from the other 144, and there rests
nothing, as you may see.

Therefore I set forward the divisor: but seeing it will not be in the next
place, (for then over 2 would be nothing) ^ I set it forward twice, as you
see here.

And for because that I could not set it in ye next place following, therefore
I set a cipher in the quotient, as you see.

Then look I over the divisor, and find 68, which I can not find in the table,
therefore take I the next beneth it; which I find in the table, and that is
48, and against it stands 2, which I take for the quotient* And then without
any multiplying of the quotient into the divisor, I do subtract ^ that 48 from
68, and there rests 20, as here appears.

And so have I ended the whole division.


Master. In very great sums to be divided by great diuisors; I think there
is no better way tha^ this for any man to use, though he be never so expert.
And that especially, if one great divisor be often to be occupied about
dividing many and diverse great sums. As commonly happens in Astronomical
workings, and Geometrical, about the signs, both straight and reuersed: as if
it be your fortune and desire to wade to the profoundnes of Geometrical and
Astronomicall calculations demonstratiue, you will soon confess. Whereof, an
other time shall better serve to speak. Now can you sufficiently skill in these
kinds of Arithmetike. And now for the farther use of these two last, that is
multiplication and division. I will briefly show you the feate of Reduction, by
the way.


REDVCTION.
REduction is, by which al sums of gross denomination may be turned into
sums of more subtle denomination. And contrary ways, all sums of subtle
denomination, may be bro^ught to sums of grosser denomination.

Scho What call you gross denomination, and subtle denomination?


Mai^ That I call a gross denomination, G^osse denominatio^.
which does contain under it many other subtiller or smaller: As a pound in
respect to shillinges, is a gross denomination: for it is greater than
shillings, and contains many of them. And shillings in comparison to pounds,
Subtle denominatio^.
or a subtle denomination, for because they are lesser then pounds, and many
of them are contained in one of the other: as so, likewise of other things,
whatsoever thing is compared to other, if it be greater and contains many of
them, it is a grosser denomination: but if it be lesser, so that many of them
are in the other, then are they called subtle denominations: whereby you may
perceive, that one denomination may be called a gross denomination, and also a
subtle (that is to say, a great and small) in diverse comparisons. For
shillinges compared to pounds are a Subtle or small denomination: but
compared to pennies, they are a gross or great denomination.


Scho. Now I understand the name, I pray you teach me the use.


May. The use is easily learned, if you remember what you have learned before.
For if you will reduce any sum of a gross denomination, To reduce gross
denominatio^s to subtle.
into a sum of a smaller or subtiller denomination, you must consider how
many of that subtiler denomination do make one of the grosser denomination,
and by that number or numerator do you multiply the other sum: as if you
would reduce 20 pounds into shillinges, you must consider that in a pound are
included 20 shillings, therefore multiply the one 20 by the other 20, and there
will amounte 400, whereby you may know, that in 20 pound are contained 400
shillinges. Likewise if you would reduce 30 shillinges into pennies,
considering that in 1. shilling, are 12 pennies, you must multiply 30 by 12,
and it will be 360: whereby you find, that in 30 shillings, are contained 360
pennies. And thus may you reduce any gross denomination into a more subtiller,
by multiplication, if you know how many of the lesser do make the greater: of
which thing I will anon give you a brief table for the most accustomed kinds
of money, weights, measures, and time, and such like, whereby you may know
how often each subtle denomination is contained in the Grosser, when you
shall need it for the foresaid kind of Reduction. And also the same shall
serve you, if you would reduce any sum of a subtiler denomination, To reduce
subtle denominatio^ to gross.
into a sum of a grosser denomination: For in such Reduction you must
consider (as in the other form) how many of the smaller do make the
greater, and by that number must you divide the other sum, and the quotient
will declare how many of the greater denomination, are comprehended in that
sum, as for example: If you would know how many shillinges are contained in
3240 pence, consider that 12 pennies do make 1 shilling: you must divide that
3240 by 12, and your quotient will be 270, whereby you know that so many
shillinges are in 3240 pennies. But and you would know farther, how many
pounds are in those 270 shillinges, seeing that every pound contains 20
shillinges, divide that 270 by 30, and it will be 13, and 10 remaining, whereby
you may, know that in 3240 pennies, or 270 shillings, are 13 pounds and 10
shillings. For evermore the remainer must be named by the name or denomination
of the sum that was divided, which in this place were shillinges.
And thus may you do with any other kinds of denominations.

Wherefore to the intent that you may have a light knowledge in the common
Coins, weights, measures, and such other, I have prepared here a brief table,
which shall suffice to you at this time, til hereafter at more conueniente
opportunity I may instruct you more exactlie in the same.


Note (gentle Reader) these valewes of English comes, as they were when this
Author first published his Book. But in our time (namely An. 1582)* they are
much diverse. Therefore something to pleasure thee in this purpose. I have for
thy benefit at the end of Reduction, set down and annexed a Table, not only
of our coins, but also of the most part of Christendom, with their just
waighte and values, current in this Realm of England, as by the same shall
plainly appear.

A Table for English coins. An, 1540.
A Sovereign. Half a Sovereign. A Royal. Half a Royal. A quarter Royal. An
old Noble. Half an old Noble. An Angel. Half an Angel. A George Noble. Half
a George Noble. A quarter Noble. English Coins.
A Croune. Half a Crown. A Croune. A Grote. A harp Grote. A pe^nie of 2
pence. A dandie pratte. A penny. An half penny. A Farthing.
The value of English Coins.
The value of English Coins.
A Sovereign is the greatest english coin, and contains 2 Roials, or 3 Angels,
either 9 half Crounes, or 4 Crounes and an half, that is to say, 22 s 6 d.

Half a Souerain is equal with a Royal.

A Royal contains an Angel and a half, that is to say: 11 s, ^ d.

Half a Royal contains 5 s, 7 d, ob.

A quarter of a Royal contains 2 s, 9 d, ob. q.

An old Noble, called an Henry, is worth 2 Crounes, or a Noble and half, that
is 10 s.

Half an old Noble is worth 5 s.

An Angel contains a Croune and half, or 3 half Crowns, that is 7 s 6 d.

Half an Angel is worth 3 s, 9 d.

A Noble called a George, is worth 6 s 8 d.

Half a Noble is worth 3 s, 4 d.

A quarter of a Noble (which in the old Statute is called a Farthing)
contains 20 d.

A Crown contains 5 s: and the half Croun 2 s 6 d. Howbeit there is an
other Croun of 4 s. 6 d which is known by the rose side, for the Rose has no
Crown over it, as in the other Crown, but it is environed on the 4 quarters
with 4 flower deluces, whereby you may best know it. But I will return to
speak of the value of the coins, for I intend not now to describe the forms
of them. Now of gold are there no more common coins.

In silver the greatest is a Grote, which contains 4 pennies. The^ is there
another Grote called an Harp, which goes for 3 d. Then next is a penny of 2
d. And then a Dandiprat, worth 3 half pence. Next it a penny, then half a
penny, and last and least of all a Farthing, whose coin is on the one side a
cross, and on the other side a purculles. This I tell you, because I see many
that cannot know a farthing from a small half penie.

Now have I told you all the English coins both of gold and silver, but yet
of the three most common valewers of money spoke I nothing, that is to say, of
pounds, Marks, and shillinges, which though they have no Coins, yet is there
no name more in use then they: of which the shilling contains 12 pennies or
3 grotes: and the pound 2 old Nobles, 3 George Nobles, or 4 Crowns, that is to
say, 20 s. A Mark, two George Nobles, that is 13 s. 4 d.

Here would I now express the valewes of sundry other coins of diverse
countries, but for three causes I now refrau^e. The first and chiefest is,
because they are not corrant by the Statutes of this Realm. An other cause is,
by reason they are so uncertain, that they be never long at one rate. And
again they are so different in so many places, that it were matter enough for
a great book, to speak sufficiently of them all. Howebeit, yet because you
shall not be altogether ignorant of them, I will show you the valewes of
some that are most in use, and first of France.

French coins.
The most common money are Deniers, Soulx and Franks, 12 Deniers make 1 s. 20
soulx make 1 Frank, so that as you see, these three kinds are like in the
rate: to penies, shillinges, and pounds with us, but that this is the
difference, that their Denier is but the 9 part of our penny, and so their
soulx (commonly called sowses) go 9 to our shilling, and 9 of their Frankes to
an English pound of money: So that 3 of their Franks make a noble. And by
those 3 may you practice how to reduce French money into English money. And as
for the rest of their coins I will omit till an other time, when I intend to
show you the rate of sundry other kinds of money.

But now as for the coins of Flaunders they be so chaungeable, Flaunde is
Coins.
that you must know the^ from time to time, else you cannot reduce them into our
money certainly. But yet that you may have an example of their money to
exercise you withal, you shall take those that be most common as Stiuers both
single and double, Grotes Flemmish, Carolus, and Gyldens: A Flemish Gross is a
little above 3 farthings English. A single stiuer is 1 d, ob, q. The double
Stiuer is ^ d q. The silver Carolus single, 2 d q. q. c. The double stiuer
Carolus is 4 d ob, q, q. Then is there also ye Carolus Gylde^ which is worth 20
Stiuers And the Flemish noble is worth 3 Carolus Gildens, and 12 Styuers.

Touching Danske money, they have their soulx whereof 20 is a Liver, which is 2 s
sterling. They have also their Grashe whereof 30 makes a Gylderne, which is
four s. sterling: They have also Dollors, and their common or old Dollor is
35 Grashe: new Dollors they have, which be diverse, some valued at 24 Grashe,
some at 26, and some at 30: and thus much I thought good to add to the Author
touching Danske money.

But I will let them pass now, exhorting you to practice to reduce those kinds
into English money, according as I have set forth here following: 2100
deniers, make 240 d: or 20 s: 3240 deniers, make 360 d, or 30 s 8352 deniers,
make 928 d, or 2 lb 17 s, 4 d: 2160 soulx, make 240 shillings: and so of other
the^ in ^ilie rate.

But if you will reduce Flemmish money justly, you must reduce it first into
the smallest part of English money that is in that come, as for example. If I
would reduce 368 double stiuers into English money, considering that a double
Stiuer contains 131 d q, you shall first look how many q be in the double
Stiuer, and you shall find them 12, therefore multiply the sum of the
stiuers by 13, and then have you their value in farthings, which is 4784. Now
if you divide that by 4, then will there appear the number of pence: but
better it were to divide it by 48 (for so many farthings are in 1 shilling)
and then will the quotient declare the sum of the shillings.

Likewise, if you would reduce any sum of single styuers into English money,
you must multiply the sum first by 13, and then have you a certain sum,
which sum if you divide by 8, then will amount the sum of pence: or if you
divide it by 96, the sum of shillings will appear.

But this mark in all division, when ye do reduce to bring one denomination
into an other,
if there be any remayner after the division, that must be named by the
denomination of the gross sum that was divided: as for example: I would
bring 254 q into pence, therefore I do divide that 254 by 4, for so many
farthings make 1 penny, and the quotient is 63, which is the sum of the
pence, and then remains yet 2, which are farthings still, as one may prove
by dividing. And this must be marked in all Division, namely when it is done
for Reduction.

Yet two words more added to the Author Concerning Spanish money, whereof the
most common money are Cornados, Marueides Ryalls and Ducats: 6 Cornados make a
Marueide, 34 Marueids makes one Ryall, and 11 Rialls makes one Duckate, so
the Ducket contains 374 Marueids, which to reduce into sterling money English,
34 Cornados makes our penny: or 5 Marueides and 4 Cornados etc.

Weights.
Thus much have I said of Money, now will I show you in like sort the
distinction of weyghts, after the statutes of England, where the least
portion of weight is commonly a grain, meaning a grain of Corn or wheat, A
Grain.
dry and gathered out of the middle of the ear. A Penny of Troy.
Of these graynes in time passed ^2 wayed just 1 penny of Troy, and then was but
10 pennies in an Ounce. An Ounce.
But now are there 46 pennies in an Ounce, so that there are not fully 14
graynes in one penny.

But now of Ounces after Troy rate (which is the standard of England) 12 do
make 1 pound.

Haberdepoise weights.
But commonly there is used another weight called Haberdepoise, in which 16
ounces make a pound. Therefore when you would reduce ounces into pounds, you
must consider whether your weyghts be troy weighte or Haberdepoise: and if it
be Troy weight you must divide your ounces by 12, to bring them to pounds: but
if it be Haberdepoise, you must divide them by 16. Now again, there be
greater weights which are called an hundred, half a hundred, A hundred vva^ght.
and a quarterne, and also a half quarterne etc.

Scholar. Why? so there may be reckened 20 pound, 40 pound, 200 pound and
such innumerable.


Master. All these are numbers of weight, but they have not common weights
made to their rate, as the other have. And again, these that I did name are
not just in number as they seem by their name, for an hundred is not just 100,
but is 112 pound. And so the half hundred is 56: the quarter 28, and the
half quarter 14. And these be the common weights used in most things that are
sold by weight.

Howbeit there are in some things other nams, as in wool, VVool^ weights.
Todde Stone^
28 pound is not called a quarterne but a Todde: and 14 pound is not named
half a quarterne but a Stone, and the 7 pound half a Stone. Other names
because they differ in many places, and agree in few, I let them pass.

Sack.
But a Sack of Wool by the Statutes, is limited to be 26 Stone.

Cheese vvaights.
Now in cheese, though it be sold by the hundredth, and by the Stone in some
places, yet the very waightes of it are Cloves and Weys. So that a Cloue
contains 8 pound: and a Wey 32 Cloves, which is 256 pound, that is 12 score
and 16 pound: And so much weighs the Wey of Suffolk cheese: And the like
weight is or should be the Barrel of Suffolk Butter.

The Wey of Essex Cheese contains 16 score, and 16 pound: And so much is also
the barrel of Essex Butter.

Measures for liquor.
Now of waights are made other measures, both for grain and liquor. For a
pound in weight makes a Pint in measure, A Pint. Gallon. Pottell. Quarte.
so that 8 pound (or 8 Pintes) do make a Gallon: half a Gallon is named a
Pottle: and half a Pottel is called a Quarte, which contains two pintes.
Fyrkin. Tertian. Kilderkin. Barrel.
Now above a Gallon the next measure is a Firken: then a Tertian, a Kilderkin
or half Barrel and a Barrel. And by those measures are sold commonly, Ale,
Beer, Wine, and Oil, Butter, and Soy^ Salmon, Herrings, and Eeles.

But as these be unlike things, Ale measures
so the measure of their vessels do differ: for the measures of Ale are as
follows: Of Ale. the Fyrken ye Kilderke^ the Barrel
contains 8 16 32
gallons Of Beer the Fyrken ye Kilderken the Barrel
contains 9 18 36
gallo^s

Soap measures, both Firken, Kilderken, Soap measures.
and Barrel, should be equal to al Ale measures. Moreover the Statutes do
limitte the weight of every of those three vessels being empty. A Barrel Half
Barrel A Firken
to weigh empty 26 13 6
pounds. Herrings also be sold by the same measures that Ale and Soap be sold
by. Herring.


Herrings also are sold by the tale, 120, to the hundred, ten thousand to the
last.

Salmon and Eeles have a greater measure. Salmon and Eeles.
Salmon and Eeles the butte ye barrel half bar. the firken
holds 84 42 21 10
Gallons.

Howbeit, some Statutes did limitte Eele vessels equal with Herring vessels.

Wine measures.
Now as for wine vessels seldom are smaller than Hogs heads, which are of
63 gallons: every Hogs head is two Barels: yet there are many other wine
vessels, but of them all, see this table, and mark the measures one to an
other.

Of wine and oil. the Rondlet the Barrel ye hogs head the Tertian the Pipe
the Tonne
holds ^8 ^^1 63 84 126 252
Gallons.

Tertians.
But you shall mark, that there be other kinds of Tertians: for there be
Tertians (that is to say) Thirdles of Pipes, of hogs heads, and of Barrels,
as well of other things as of wine.

B^tte.
Also of Malueseys, and S^cke, etc. the half Tonne is not called a Pipe, but
rather a Butte.

And thus much have I thought meet to tell you at this time.


Scholar. And is that always true?


Master. I have told you how it should be, but how it is I may not say:
how they do differ daily from their just measure, that Gagiers can tell you
better than I. But I will let this pass now, and speak briefly of the other
measures.

And as of waights there did spring the liquide measures, (whereof I spoke
last) so of the same springs dry measures: as Pecks, Dry measures.
Bushels, Quarters, and such like, whereby are measured corn and like grains:
also salt, lime, coals and other like. And this is the order and quantity of
them.


A Pecke is the measure of two Gallons. A Pecke*
A Bushel contains four Peckes. A Bushel.
A Quarter holds eight Bushels. Quarter.
A Wey contains six quarters.
These are the common names and measures, VVey.
but in diverse places there be diverse sorts.

The bushel in many places is 2 bushels: but then is the bushel there called a
Strike. Strike*
And in some places half a quarter is called a a Cornoke. But these diversities
are to many to tell you briefly them al. And again, since they are against the
law and Statutes, I count them unmeet to be used.

But now remains yet an other kind of Measures, Measure to meat length,
breaden, and thicknes.
whereby men met length and breadth, and thickness, and those are an Ynch, a
foot, and such other: whose names and quantities this table shows.

An ynch.
3 Grains of barley in length, make an inch. 12 Inches make a foot. Foot.
Yeard. Elle. Perch.
3 Foot make a yearde. 3 Foot and 9 inches make an Elle. 5 Yeards and a half,
make a Perch.
1 Perch in breadth and 40 in length, do make a Rod of land, which some call
a roode, some a yeard land and some a Farthendele. Acre.
2 Farthe^dels, make half an acre of ground. 4 Farthendels make an Acre.


More 40 Rods in length do make a furlo^g: 8, furlongs make a mile which
conteyneth 320 Perches.

So that an English mile grounded upon the Statute is in length 1760 yeardes,
5280 foot, and 63360 inches.

Somewhat greater then the Italian mile 1000 paces, and 5 foot to a pace.

Here might I tell you many things else touching measure, and also how to
reduce strange measures to our measures, but because it can not well be done
without the knowledge of Fractions, which as yet you have not learned, I will
let them pass til an other time, when I shall instruct you in Geometry,
wherein I should be enforced else to repeat the same often again.

Scholar. But yet sir of the parts of time I pray you tell me somewhat. The
parts of time. A Day. An hour. Week. Month. Year.



Master. You know that a natural day has 24 hours, and every hour has 60
minutes. It needs not to tell you, that 7 days make a week, and 4 weeks
make a common month, and 13 months make a year, lacking 1 day, and certain
hours, and minutes: But of that I shall instruct you hereafter.

Here will I make an end of Reduction for this time, which though it be
counted no kind several of Arithmetike, yet you see it is no less needful to
be known, or easier to be done, than of any of the other.


Scholar. Mary sir, it seems unto me much harder than any other sort, for it
requires the knowledge of so many things: but now sir when you see time, I am
ready to learn forth: for as much of Reductio^ as you have taught me, I
remember, but and if I do at any time forget, I shall have recourse to the
tables which you have set forth for me.


Master. So do you, for it will not be remembered without exercise.

And now according to promise here follows the Table which I have added to
this Author for thy utility, intending at the latter ends of my Addition to
this Book, to write of the ordinary money used in most parts of
Christendom: and their common values current for traffic in those places,
with the manner of their exchaunges, as also their usual waights and measures,
which I hope will be as gratefully taken of Gentlemen, merchants, and other my
Countrymen in general as I of good will set forth the same.


A Table of the names and valuatio^ of the most usual Gold coins throughout
Christendom, with their several weight of Pence and Grains: and what they are
worth of current money English.
The names and titles of the gold. The weight. Pe^ny. Grains. The valevve.
Shil. Pence. Royal 4 23 15 0 Half Royal 2 11 8 6 Old Noble 4 9 13 4 Half
old Noble 2 4 6 8 Angel 3 7 10 0 Half Angel 1 15 5 0 Salute 2 5 6 4 2. parts
of Salute 1 11 4 2 George Noble 3 0 9 0 half George noble 1 12 4 6 First crown
K. H. 2 9 6 4 Base crown K H. 2 0 5 0 Great Sovereign 10 0 30 0 Souera. K.H
best 0 0 10 8 Edward Souera 3 14 10 0 Souera. K.E. 3 14 10 0 Vnichorne of Scot
2 10 6 6 Elizab. Sovereign 3 14 10 0 Elizab. crown 1 19 5 0 Scottish crown 2
5 6 0 French Noble 4 16 13 4 All the sorts of French crowns 2 5 6 0 Old French
cro. 2 5 6 0 Flaunders Rider 2 6 6 6 Gelders Rider 2 2 3 6 Phillips Royal 3 10
10 0 Phillips crown 2 5 5 0 Collyn Gilden 2 2 4 8 New Andr Gyld: 2 3 5 0
Flanders noble 4 10 12 Flem. Angel best 3 6 9 Fland. real, or Key 3 10 10
Carolles, Gylden 1 21 3 6 Flanders Royal 2 6 5 Saxon, Gylden 2 2 4 8 Flanders
crown 2 5 6 Phillips Gylde. 2 3 4 2 Golden Lion 2 16 7 8 3. parts of gol. Ly.
21 2 5 2.3 parts gol. Ly. 1 19 4 11 David's Gylden 2 2 ^ Horn Gylden 1 12 4 11
Old Andre, Gyld. 2 4 4 10 Crusado long cross. 2 6 6 Crus. short cross 2 6 6 2 Myl
rays 4 20 13 4 Half Mill rays 2 10 6 8 Portigu. 1. ounce 2 16 3 lb. 8 s.
Portigu. 1. ounce 2 18 Golden Castilio 2 23 8 10 Ducket of Castile Ducket of
Arags 2 6 6 6 Hungary Ducket 2 7 6 4 Double Pistolate 4 8 11 8 Single
Pistolate 2 4 5 10 Ducket of Valens 2 6 Ducket of Floren. 2 5 6 4 Double Ducate
4 11 13 Single Ducket 2 6 6 6 Dou. duc. of Rome 4 13 12 8

Of silver coins current in this Realm
The Edward Crown of 5 s The Edward half crown of 2 s 6 d. The Edward
shilling, half shilling, and the 3 d. Philip and Mary's shilling and half
shilling. The Marie groat, and Marie 2 d. Queen Elizabeth's shillings 6 d. 4 d.
3 d. 2 d. 1 d. 3. ob. and 3 q.
It is to be understood (gentle Reader) that whereas the weight is called by
the name of a penny, Note.
it is not meant a penny of silver money, but a penny of Goldsmithes weight,
which is 24 Barley corns dry. And xx. of these pence make an ounce: and twelve
of these ounces make a pound Troy: So that if a man have not the weight where
with to wey any piece that may come to his hand, he may do it with the Barley
grains or corns being dry and taken out of the middle of the ear. Now to
Progression.

PROGRESSION.
Although until this day the most part of writers have defined Progression
as a co^pendious kind of Addition, yet truly it is not so: for progression
(as the very nature of the word does inform any man) is a going forward and
proceeding in numbers, and that regularlie and orderly, whose place is aptlye
chosen to be very ^eare, or rather next after the exposition of the four
principal parts of Arithmetike, for in it after a most easy manner, are all
the four former parts exercised and practiced: and not only Addition, as
customablie is done. Which custom has been the cause, why it has so
specially been named a kind of Addition* and defined to be a quick and
brief Addition of diverse sums, proceeding by some certain and reasonable
order.

You shall also understand, that there are infinite kinds of progressions, but
for you (as yet) two are sufficient to be exercised in: of which the one I call
Arithmeticall, and the other Geometrical.

Arithmetical progression.
Arithmetical progression is a rehearsing or placing down of many numbers,
number after number, in such sort, that between every two next numbers
rehearsed or placed down, the difference, diversity, or excess, be equal and
alike.

Scho. Sir, I thank you for that you have both opened unto me what Progression
is, truly, and also why it is here placed. But I pray you with an example make
plain your definition.


Ma. Examples can not want, seeing al reasonable creatures naturally use the
order of one kind of Arithmetical progression (which therefore is also named
Natural) when so ever they distinctlie do count or number any multitude one
by one, saying: 1.2.3.4.5.6. whereby the proceeding from number to number, and
every one surmounting and exceeding his fellow next before by a like quantity
(which here is 1) declares the same to be Arithmeticall progression. And for
the more plainness, I set it down in this manner.

^


Sc. This is most evident. And I think that I am able to tell you now of any
progression Arithmetical propounded, what is that common excess or difference
whereby it proceeds if this order be kept in it.


M. What say you of 3.6.9.12.15?


Sc. They exceed each other by 3. And that may I set down in such evident
order, as you did your example of Natural progression, in this wise.

^


Master. And do you not also now perceive, that the whole table of
Multiplication may be made by the order of progression Arithmetical? either if
you will begin at the first number of any of them on the left hand, and so
proceed right ouerthwarte: or at any of the first numbers of the upper row,
and go directly downward?


Sch. I pray you let me consider the thing a little, and I will answer you.

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 3 6 9 12 15 18 21 24 27 30 4 8
12 16 20 24 28 32 36 40 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 6 12 18 24 30 36 42 48 54
60 7 14 21 28 35 42 49 56 63 70 8 16 24 32 40 48 56 64 72 80 9 18 27 36 45 54
63 72 81 90 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100

By this trial I perceive it now very well: for the common excess or
difference between any two next, is continually as much as the first number
of every row, either from the left hand ouerthwarte taken, or from any of
the uppermost overthwart rows downward.


Ma. Now then if of any such progression you would speedily know the
total sum, much quicklier tha^ by common additions rules: To know the
total sum of an Arithmeticall progression.
first tell how many numbers there are (which numbers here we call places or
parcels) and if they be odd, write their sum down by it self, as in this
example, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, 14, where the numbers are 7, as you may see,
therefore set done 7 in a place alone: then add together the first number and
the last, as in this example: add 2 to 14, and that makes 16, take half of
it, and multiply by the 7, which you noted for the number of the places, and
the sum that amounts, is the sum of all those figures added together, as in
this example: 8 multiplied by 7 make 56: and that is the sum of all the
figures.


Scholar. That will I work by an other example. I would know how much this sum
is, 5, 8, 11, 14, 17, 20, 23, 26, 29. I tell the places and they are 9, that I
note. Then I put the first number 5 and the last 29, together, and they make
34. I take the half of it, that is, 17, and multiply by 9, and it makes 153.
That you say is the sum of all the numbers.


Ma. So shall you find it if you try it.


Sc. How shall I try it?


Master. By your common addition: for if you add all the parcels together,
you shall see the same sum amounte, if you did work well. And that manner
of Addition tries all kinds of summing any Progression.


Sc. Then can I sum a progression, if the numbers of the parcels be odd. But
what if they be even? as in this example, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8?


Ma. When the number of the parcels is even, then note that also as you did
before, and likewise add the first sum to the last, and by the half of the
number of the places do you multiply it: as in your example, the parcels are
8, that note I? then adding ye first sum to the last, there amounts 9,
that do I multiply by the half of parcels, that is by 4, and it makes 36,
which is the sum of the 8 parcels.


But if you will take one rule for these both, do thus. Multiply the half of
the one by the other whole, and the sum will amounte al one. For sometime it
chances that the number of the parcels be odd, so that their half can not be
taken: and sometime it chances the Addition of the first number and the
last, to bring forth an odd number, so that the half of it can not be taken:
but they will never be both odd.


Sc. The^ I perceive this, if there be no more longing to it.


Master. As accustomablie it has been taught, this has been the chief and
only exercise in Progression used. But that you may perceive how diverse
ways and to how great profitte so simple a thing (as this Arithmetical
Progression is) may be considered and used, I will here propounde you six
propositions, of which four of them were invented by a friend of mine, and
never before this published: and the first two, were never to my knowledge
written of, but by three men.


Sch. This does greatly encourage me to be attentife unto your words, seeing
I shall not only be instructed at your hands in the common known rules of
this excellent art, but besides that, so abundantly in other new rules
informed, as my very entrance shall seem to pass a great many men's farther
study, and longer continuance. Therefore sir, I beseech you, let me know your
six propositions.


Ma. These they are. 1 To know the last number without proceeding by continual
addition, til you come unto it, ^o that the common excess, the first number
and the number of the places be known. 2 The first number of the Progression
and the last being known, with the common excess, to find the number of the
places. 3 The excess being given, and the first or last, to know the
quantity of any middle number, whose place is given from the first or last. 4
The total sum being given, and the first and last, to find out the number
of the places. 5 The total sum of any Arithmetical progression being given, and
the first and last, to find out the common excess. 6 The total sum being
given, and the mutual excess, with the number of the places, to give the
first or last number of the same progression.


Many more considerations could I propou^d you in these Arithmeticall
progressions, but these are sufficient to give you occasion to think, that
rules of knowledge and arts are infinitely capable of enlargement.


Sen. Happy were I, if I did but well understand that which is already
invented and written. And yet in my simple fantasy. these things offer
themselves (in manner) to be studied for about Progression, therefore I pray
you to proceed to the rules answering to these propositions.


Master. I will orderlye for every of these six propositions give you rules,
and with every one an example, unless ye plainness and easiness need no
further exemplefying.

For the Solution of the first. Multiply the excess by a number less by 1
than the number of the places, and the offcome add to the first number, so
shall you have the last number, which is sought for.

As (for example) if there were seven places in a progression Arithmeticall,
whose continual increase, or mutual excess were 5 and the first number were
5, and I would know what the last and seventh number is, I multiply 6, which
is less then 7, (the number of the places by 4, thereof comes 24, which I
add to 5, that makes 29: and that is the last number, which I desired to
know. And this you may straighte way prove, by continual proceeding from 5
till the seventh place, increasing every one by 4, as thus.

5 9 13 17 21 25 29.

Lo here, the last, being also the seventh, is 29.


Sc. I perceive already one good property in this rule, which in all works is
to be desired: yt is, it will ease one from great labor, if a progression were
propounded of 100 or 200 places, or more, And also it is very easy to work,
and most necessary for the total sum finding, in a very long progression.


May. The second rule is this. From the

6 11 16 21 26 31.

If I know only 6 and 31, and that they increase by 5, than according to the
rule, from 31 I subtract 6, there remains 25, which 25 I divide by 5 (the
common excess) the quotient comes forth 5, to which I ad 1, that makes 6:
and so many are the places, as you see.


Schol. This rule is so easy, that I were much to blame, if I could not
remember it.


Ma. The third proposition may always

8 15 22 29 36 43 50 57.

And for the apt considering ye manner of this question, I will note over every
place his distance from the first and under every place his distance
inclusiuely from the last, thus.

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 8 15 22 29 36 43 50 57 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

Now, if that excess whereby this Progression stands, be known to be 7, and
the first number given, being 8, I would know what number stands under 4,
that is to say in the fourth place. I multiply 7 by 3 (which is less by 1,
than the number of the place propounded) that yields 21, to which I add 8
(the first number) so comes 29: which I say to belong to the fourth place, as
ye see in the example it also does: or if in the third place from the last,
you would know what number in this example should stand, the last number being
known to be 57, and the common excess 7, than by 2 (which is less by 1 than
the place propounded) I multiply 7, that gives 14: which I subtract from 57,
so remains 43: which appertains to the third place inclusiuely reckned
from the last, and so my example gives you.


Scholar. I perceive right good use of this rule: for if I had forgotten what
the first number were, and remember still but the last, the common excess,
and the number of the places, then might I come by the knowledge of my first
number again. And me thinks, that it differs not much from the first
proposition saving that which you make here a middle number, there was made the
last: and also in this point it differs, that in it the last was only sought,
and no consideration had in numbering the places from the last, as here I
mark in your numbers noted under your progression.


Master. And think you not the middle numbers of a Progression standing of a
hundred or three hundred places or more, may as much cumber a man to come to the
knowledge of them by continual increasing from the first (by the common
excess) or abating from the last continually (the common excess) as the very
final numbers in a shorter Progression would do?


Scholar. Yes sir, that I think right well, and therefore I am glad of this
new framed proposition, and the manner of the working of it.


Master. The rule of the fourth is this. the quotient, and that will be the
number of the places.


Scho. Then if in a Progression, whose sum were 207, and the first number 12,
and the last 57, if I add 57 and 12 together, that makes 69: and by it I
divide 207, the Quotient will be 3, which I double, and so I have 6, and so
many must be the number of the places, that this progression stands on.


May. Whether it be so or no, how will you try?


Scho. Half 6, which is 3, being multiplied by 69, must make 207, the total
sum, if 6 be the number of the places. For so the whole work of your rule in
summing any Arithmeticall progression did inform ^ me. I will than multiply
by 3, thus.

It comes forth iustlye.


May. I must much herein commend your promptnes, both in memory and in
well applying your rule: although in manifest words if did contain no such
matter.


Scho. Sir, I pray you hear me frame one example more.


May. I am well pleased, so that ye be short, for you make me more longer
here, then willingly I would have been: but I can not perceive how I could
have omitted any thing as yet, without your great lack thereof.


Sch. If I had received 85 pounds of certain men but of how many* I have
forgotten, yet I remember that the first gave me 7 lb, and the last 27 lb, and
every paymente after other did rise by a like sum. And the man for whom I
received this money, conditioned with me, that of every payment I should have
12 pence for my labor: now unless I can by art find the truth of this
case, I am like to lose the most part of my reward.


Master. I perceive you can hansomly frame an example, which should concern
your own gain: I pray you let me see how you would do Justice in this
point.


Scholar. I add the first ^ and the last together that makes 34: by which I
divide 85, thus.

Why how now? Sir, here is a remnant of 17, in which 34 cannot be had, so that
now I am in the briars for doubling of my quotient, and farewell then both my
Justice, and a good lump of my gains.


Ma. Ye are never the farther from the matter, though it fall into a fraction.
For you shall understand that the fractio^ which of any such work proceeds,
is ever half of one such,
as the units of the quotient before are. And that you may try, if you double
that which so remains, for then it will be equal to your divisor, as if ye
double 17 (the remna^t) it makes 34, and your divisor also was 34, this notes
the remainder to be half of one.


Sch. Now I am glad of this hard example. For with it I have a general rule
for the Fraction that may hap in this work. So that the quotient being two
and a half, I double that, and it makes 5, therefore should my gain be 5
shillinges. And to be sure (by your leave) I will try it for I ^ will
multiply half of 34, (which is the first and last number joined together)
by 5 thus. It is most true (I see) that I should leese nothing by the former
working.


May. The fifth proposition has this rule By the fourth rule find the number
of the places, that being done, from the last subtract the first, and the
residue divide by a number less by 1, than the number of the places, and the
quotient will show the excess which is sought for.

An example hereof shall be this: If ye had disbursed 685 lb. to a certain
number of men, you neither can tell how many they were or how much the ones
money exceeded his next before, but you are sure that ye excess was equal
between every two next: and also you remember that the first had 19, and the
last 118 pounds, how would you find both the number of the men and the
excess, continually observed in the succession of their reiments.


Scholar* Your rule does plainly bid, first to find the number of the places,
^ which I will do according to she fourth rule. I add 19 and 118 together,
thus.

By this 137, I divide 685, ^ thus.

Seeing there is no fraction, ^ but a whole number, being 5. I double that, and
than must the number of ye places be 10 Now from ye last I subtracte the
first, as 19 from 118, thus: And so remains 99.

This 99 I divide by a number less by 1 than the number of the places, and
seeing the places were 10, I divide 99 ^ by 9, thus.

The quotient is 11, and so was the excess, if I have followed your rule right.


May. You have wrought every part of this question both well in order and
truly in the practice of your rules.


Sch. I will than set it down also formablie, so that the number of the
places, the excess and the total sum may streighte appear, as your first
example stood.

The common excess. The Progression.
11 11 11 11 11 11 11 11 11 11 19 30 41 52 63 74 85 96 107 118

That the places be 10, and that from the first to the last the common excess
is 11, I perceive most evidently, but whether the total sum be 685, I have
not yet proved, which I will now do. I adds 19 and 118 together that makes
137: I multiply that by half the number of the places ^ thus.

All things agree most exactlye, so that I am perfect enough in these rules,
if I forget the^ not again.


May. Use makes all things perfect.

Your sixth rule is this. By the number of the places divide the total sum,
double the quotient, and that will be the first and the last joined in one sum.
Than by a number less by 1, than the number of the places multiply the
excess, that ofcome subtracte from the first doubled quotient, and the half of
the residue is the first number. The last number you may diversely find out,
as by the first of our six rules, or by subtracting this first number from the
sum which here contained both the first and the last ioyntlye (or thirdly) by
continual adding the excess.


Scho. I pray you make this somewhat more plain with an example.


May. If every month in the year (counting them now as thirteen) you gained
clearly 40 shillinges more than you did the month next going before, and at
the years end you find the whole gain 5720 shillinges, but ye remember not
how much either the gain of the first month, or the last was, by this rule
it may be tried out.


Sc. So that here ye seem to apply the 13 months to 13 places ye 40
shillings every one more then the other next before it, to be the common
excess, and 5700 s. to be the total sum.


May. It is true: by 13, ^ then I divide 5710, in this manner.

I double this quotient, so have I 880 for the first, and the last sin
joined together, by 12, which is less by one than the ^ number of the places,
I multiply 40, (the common excess) so comes 480.

This 480 I subtract from 880, so remains 400: half whereof is the first
number which we desired to know, that is 200.

And as for the last number, I can give you it 3 ways: As by the first of my
sire rules, I multiply the excess by a number less by 1 than the number of
the places: as 40 by 12, that gives 480, which I add to the first being 200,
so shall the last be 680.

The same sum comes forth, if ye subtract 200 from 880.

And thirdly, if I begin 200, and so proceed, increasing by 40, I shall at
the thirteenth place have 680, as thus.

200. 240. 280. 320. 360. 400. 440. 480. 520. 560. 600. 640. 680.


Sc I thank you most hartilye for these 6 rules. Now if it be your pleasure, I
would hear and learn somewhat of Progression Geometrical.


May. There are yet very many rules and propositions, which fall into this
Arithmeticall progression: but these shall suffice for this time.

And in Geometrical progression I will be more brief, both because I have
been so long in this part of Arithmeticall progression, and also for that it
would require the knowledge of Roots, and numbers surde, (whereof ye have yet
learned nothing) if I should frame the like propositions in them as I have
done in these. Therefore I will only teach you two practices, about it, and
so end the considerations and works of these progressions. Progression
Geometrical.
Progression Geometrical is when the numbers increase by a like proportion,
that is, if the second number contain the first, 2, 3, or 4 times, and so
forth: then the third contains the second so many times also: and so the
fourth the third, and the fifth the fourth: ^ wherefore I set these three
examples.

Here in the first example you see, that every number contains the other
(that goes next before him) 2 times: and in the second example 3 times in the
third example 5 times. Now if you will know how to find easilye the sum of
any such numbers, do thus. Consider by what number thoy be multiplied,
whether by 2, 3, 4, 5, or any other, and by the same number do you multiply
the last sum in the Progression.


Sc. I pray you work it by this example, 2, 8, 32, 128, 512, 2048, which I
have framed by proceeding from 2, and continually multiplying by 4.


May. Then must I multiply the last sum (which is 2048) by 4 also, and it will
be 8192. Now must I bate from this sum the first number of the progression,
which here is 2, then rests 8190, which sum I must divide by 1 less then
was the number that I multiplied by. Seeing then I multiplied by 4, I must
divide by 3, so dividing 8190 by 3, the quotient will be 2730, which is the
sum of all the Progression. And now to prove whether you can do the same, I
give you these numbers to add by this rule, 3, 15, 75, 375, 1875, 9375, 46875.


Sch. I cannot well tell by what number this Progression does increase.


Master. In any such doubt, do thus: Divide the second number by the first,
and the quotiente will show you the number that engenders the Progression.


Sc. Then is that number in this example 5, for so many times is 3 in 15.


Master. So is it. Now work as I taught you.


Scholar. The last number is 46875, which I multiply be 5, and it yields
234375, from which I abate the first number of the Progression, that is 3, and
there rests 234372, which I divide by 4, for yt is one less the^ 5, and the
quotient is 58593, which is the whole sum of the progression.


May. Now that you know the summing of Geometrical Progression, I will show
you a compendious manner either to proceed by, or to find out the quantitye
of a number whose distance from the first may be very great, An abridgement in
progression.
which to do by continual multiplication, would be very tedious, if the
numbers be great and the places many.


Sc. Nothing can pleasure me more then brevity, if it be plain.


Master. I think I am not yet in any point so dark or hard, that you need
to fear any obscurity now. The manner is this: set down of your progression
four or five of the first places, and under the first put a cipher, under the
second 1, under the third 2, etc. as if ye had a progression increasing by a
five fold quantity: as here, 2, 10, 50, 250, 1250: then under 2 I put a
cipher, and under 10 the figure of ^ 4: and so forth if ye will: but to a
wise and wary worker, a few places were sufficient to proceed by to any
number of places in this sort, if any two of your numbers progressional be
multiplied the one by the other, and the ofcome divided by the first of your
progression, the quotient is one of your numbers progressionall, and belonging
to ye place of your under numbers, that is equal to that sum, that is made of
Addition together of your two numbers which stood under these two of your
Progressionall numbers; that were multiplied the one by the other, ^ as in this
example.

If I multiply 10 by 50. thereof comes 300, which I divide by 2, (the
first number of the Progression,) and the quotient is 250: which 250, must
stand in the third place, because the number which stands under 10 is 1,
and that under 50. is 2: and 2 and 1 makes 3. Therefore I say, that 250
belongs to the third ^ place of this progression, as ye see also here it
does. Moreover If I multiply 50, into it self, thereof comes 2500: that
2500 I divide by 2, the Quotiente is 1500, which must be set in the fourth
place: because 2 added to himself again, makes 4, and in our example 1250
occupies the fourth place.


Sc. Then for that fifth place I multiply the Progressionall numbers over 2
and 3 one by the other: and for the sixth, I multiply that over 3 in it self.
etc.


M. Ye must well remember that these places that we now speak of, belong to
the under numbers, for the true places of the upper numbers is ever one place
more.


Scholar. That I see the reason of, because the under numbers begin one after,
and against the first place of my progression stands a cipher, so that the
250 which you said before did belong to the third place, I see belongs to
the number of 3 among your under numbers, but from the true progressions
beginning, it is the fourth.


Master You understand me as I mean. Therefore for your exercise of both the
rules here given for Geometrical progression, I will ask you a question,
much used among the common people, (as they have a great many the like) If I
would sell you a Horse, having 4 shoes, and in every shoe six nails, with
this condition, that you shall pay for the first nail 1 ob, for the second 2
ob, for ye third 4, and for the fourth 8, and so forth dubbling until the last
nail. Now I demand of you how much the price of the Horse would amount
unto?


Scholar. Seeing the Horse has 4 shoes, and in every shoe 6 nails, I
perceive here will be 24 places. If I could now have the last number, I
would quickly dispatch this question. I will therefore with as few
multiplicatio^s as I can devise, to come to the knowledge of the last number
of this progression. In double ^ I set forth than a few of my progression,
thus.

If I now multiply the numbers over 5 and 6, the one by the other, I shall
have the number of the eleventh place for the under numbers, but of the twelfth
for the upper numbers in which my progression stands, and then that of ye
eleventh place under, if I multiply in it self, I shall have for the 22 place
under, but for the 23 of that above, which I multiply by that over 1 of my
nether places, and I shall have the 23 of my nether places, and the 24 of the
upper, which is the number I seek for.


Master. Me thinks you have forgotten your rule for abridging your
multiplications: for in it, the ofcome over of any multiplication, is to be
divided by the first of the progression. And you now speak of no division.


Scholar. Sir I need not, as my progressio^ begins now: for if I should
divide by 1, it makes no other quotient, then the number is, it does divide.


Master. It is very well remembered ^ and noted of you, to your work then
according to your prescribed manner, which I like well.


S. I multiply 64 by 32 as here. And it makes 2048. which is the eleventh
place under, but the twelfth ^ above, and this, I multiply in it self, in this
manner. And this is the 22 place under but the 23 above. I multiply this then
by 2, as here.

And this of come ^ 8388608, is my four and twentieth place, which I have
found now by 3 multiplications.

Then do I resort to the rule of summing this Progression, where I consider
that the increase of this sum proceeds by multiplication of 2, and
therefore I do multiply the last sum by 2 also, and it yields 16777216.
from which 1 I abate the first number which is 1, and then rests 1677715,
which I should divide by 1 less then I did ^ multiply: but seeing that it
is 1, I need not to divide it, for 1 (as I have before said) does neither
multiply nor divide, therefore I take that sum 16777215 for the whole sum
of the pence, which by Reduction I find to be 699050 s, and 7 d, ob: that is
34952 lb, 10 s, 7 d, ob.


Master. That is well done, but I think you will buy no horse of the price.


Scholar. No sir if I be wise. Yet for my assurance will I take so much pain,
as to come to this last 8388608 by continual multiplication by 2, as in this
example you may behold my work till I have done.


Master. Well, are you not almost weary?


Scholar. Well fare my short rule, for in troth it has more cunning and more
ease.


Master. Well, then answer me to this question.

A Lord delivered to a Bricklayer a certain number of loades of brick,
whereof he willed him to make 12. walls, of such sort, that the first wall
should receive 2 thirdeles of the whole number: and the second 2 thirdles of
that that was left. And so every other 2 thirdles of that that remained: and
so did the bricklayer: And when the 12 walls, were made, there remains one
lode of Brick.

Now I ask you, how many load went to every wall, and how many load was
in the whole?


Scholar. Why sir, it is impossible for me to tell.


Master. Nay, it is very easy, if you mark it well. Mark well that I said,
that every wall should receive ^ thirdeles of the sum that was left. Now
take away 2 thirdels from any sum and you must needs grant that that
which remains is 1 thirdle of the sum last before: example of ^* from
which if you take 2 thirdels, there will remain 3, which is one thirdel of 9.
Likewaies from 3 bate 2 thirdels: and there will remain 1.


Scholar. This is true, and now I perceive, that the least wall had but two
load of brick.


Master. And by the same reason may you know how many load every wall
had, according as this figure following does show, and likewayes what the
whole sum of briekes was: for if you make 1^ sums, multiplying by 2, still
from the last remayner, as you may see here on the left side of the table,
there will appear all the remayners of every wall: and if you multiply the
last of those 12 sums by ^, also, then will that be the sum of the loades
which were delivered to the bricklayer.

Again, if you do double every remainer, as you may see at the right side of
this table, those numbers will show the sum of loades that went to each wall:
whereby you may perceive, that each wall was 3 times so great as the next
lesser.


Sc. Lo, now it appears easy enough. Now surely I see that Arithmetike is
a right excellent art.


Ma. You will say so when you know more of the use of it: For this is nothing
in comparison to other points that may be wrought by it.


Scholar. Then I beseech you sir, cease not to instruct me further in this
wonderful cunning.

The remainer after every wall. 1 12 2 Loades due to each wall. 3 11 6 9 10 18
27 9 54 81 8 162 243 7 486 729 6 1458 2187 5 4374 6561 4 13122 19683 3 39366
59049 2 118098 177147 1 354294 Some of the 531441 Loades delivered.


THE GOLDEN Rule.
Master. BY order of the science (as men have taught it) there should fellow
next the extraction of Roots of number, which because it is somewhat hard
for you, yet I will let it pass for a while, and will teach you the feate of
the rule of Proportions, which for his excellency is called the Golden rule.
Whose use is, by three numbers known, to find out an other unknown, which
you desire to know: as thus. If you pay for your boorde for three months 16
shillings, how much shall you pay for 8 months.

To know this and all such like questions, you shall consider which two of your
3 numbers be of one denominatio^, and set those two the one over the other, so
that the vndermoste be it that the question is asked of: as in my question 3
and 8 be both of one denomination, for they both be months, and because 8 is
the number that the question is asked of, I set them one over the other, ^ and
8 vndermoste, thus, with such a crooked draught of lines. Then do I set the
other number which is 16, against 3, at the right side of ^ the line, thus.

And now to know my question, this must I do: I must multiply the
lowermost on the left side, by that on the right side, and the sum that
amounts I must divide by the highest, on the left side. Or in playner words
thus: I shall multiply the number of which the question is asked (which is
called the Third number) by the number of an other denomination, The third
number.

The second number.

The first number.


(which is called the Second) and that sum that amou^teth must I divide by
the sum of like denomination, which is called the First. Then for the
knowledge of this question, I multiply 8 into 16, and there amou^teth 128,
which I divide by 3, and it yields 42 shillings, and 2 s remains, which I
turn into pennies, and they be 24 d, of which the third part is 8 d, so the
third part of 128 s is 42 s, 8 d: which sum I write at the right hand of the
figure against ^ 8, thus.

Hereby I know, that if thee months boording do come to 16 s, that 8
months bording will come to 42 s, 8 d: and likewise of any other like question.

But here must you mark, that the first number and the third be of one
denomination, and also the second and the fourth, the which you seek: or
else be of such denominations, that you in working may bring the^ into one. As
if a man should ask me this question.

*Twelve weeks iournying cost me fourteen French Crowns at 6 s. the piece,
how many pounds is that in one year. Here you see no two numbers of one
denomination, But yet in working, you may turn them into like denominations,
as thus: turn the one year into 52 weeks, and the fourth sum will be French
Crowns, by the order of the working: Then to know this question, multiply
the third sum 52 by the second 14: and the sum will be 728: that divide by
your first number 12: and the quotiente will be 60. Crowns: And 8 Crowns
remaining: which if you turn into shillings they will be 48 shillings which
if you do divide by your first number 12 the quotiente will be 4: which
signifies 4 s. put these 60. French Crowns (which make 18 pounds) with the 4
shillings: for ^ the sum that answers to the question: And it is the just
expe^ces of a year: And the sum will be thus.

And take this evermore for a general Rule touching this whole Art, That the
doubtful or unknown number, that you would be resolved of, shall always be
set in the third place, note also the first number and the third, must ever be
of one nature and denomination, or else must in working be brought to like
denomination and then of necessity must the other number be in the second
place.

Remember also, that the place of the first number is the highest on the left
side: and the place of the second right against it on ye right side: the place
of the third number is under the first, as by those examples you have seen.


Sc. This I trust I can do.


Master. But and if the question be asked thus: In 8 weeks I spend 40. s how
long will 105 shillings serve me? Here you see that 8 weeks aunsweres himself,
and says 40 shillings. But how long time 105 shillings will serve, you know
not. Therefore you shall set 105 in the third place, according as I told you
even now. And the first place must always be of the same nature or
Denomination, that the third is of, which here is 40. Then must 8 needs be that
other. Now multiply 105 by 8 and it will be 840 which if you divide by 40, it
will yield 21, which is the Fourth number, and shows how many weeks 105
s. will serve, if you spend 40 s. in eight weeks.

The figure of this question ^ is this: as if you should say: If 40 s. serve
for 8 weeks, 105 serve for 21 weeks.

Other diversities there be of working by this rule, but I had rather that
you would learn this one well, than at the beginning to trouble your mind
with many forms of working, since this way can do as much as all the other, and
hereafter you shall learn the other more conveniently.

And for your further aid and instruction to make you better acquainted with
this Goldon Rule, I have here proponed 6 questions, and their aunsweres, which
I think most conueniente and meet to prefer the desirous to perfect
understanding. The first four are all branches of one Question sproong out
of the best tree, (for a young learner to taste of) that grows in this
Ground of Arts, for that no manner of Question in the Rule of 3 what so ever
it be, can be proponed, but it must be comprehended, under the reason or
style of one of these four.


The Questions be these.
If 15 else of Cloth cost 7 lb. 10 s: what comes, 27 else too at that price:
Aunsweare. 13 lb. 10 s.

If 27 else cost 13 lb. 10 s: what are 15 else worth. Answer. 7 lb. 10 s.

If 27 else cost 13 lb. 10 s: how many else shall I have for 7 lb. 10 s.
Answer 15 else.

If I sell 15 else for 7 lb. 10 s how many else are to be delivered for 13
lb. 10 s. Answer. 27 else,

If 8 pound of any thing cost 16 s. 6 d. what money is to be received for 49
pound: Answer. 2 lb 4 s. 11 d.

If 4 lb. of any thing cost 17 d: what money will 8765 pound of that
commodity cost. Answer. 155 lb. 4 s. 3 d. farthing.

Of all which questions I omit the work of purpose, you should whet your wit
there by at convenient leisure, to climb each branch and gather the fruit of
them: And do mind now, before we make ad end of this Rule, to give you some
Instructions of the Backer Rule of 3. whose order is quite contrary to this
that you have learned. For in this Rule hitherto evermore look how much the
third number is greater than the first, so much the fourth number is
greater then the second. And contrary ways: look how much the first sum
is greater then the third, (if it do chance so) so much is the second sum
greater then the fourth. But in this Rule, there is a contrary order, as this:
That the greater the third sum is above the first, the lesser the fourth sum
is beneth the second: and this rule therefore you may call the Backer rule, The
backer rule.
as in example.

If I have boughte 20 yardes of cloth, Question of buying cloth.
of 2 yards breadth, and would buy canuas of 3 yards broad to line it withal,
how many yards should I need?

Sc. Why, there is none so broad.


May. I do not care for that, I do put this example only for your easy
understanding: For if I should put the example in other measures, it would be
harder to understand. But now to the matter: If you would know this question,
set your numbers as you did before: but you shall multiply now the first
number by the second, and that arises thereof, you shall divide by the third:
which thing if you do here, I mean if you multiply 30 by 2, it will be 60:
which sum if you divide by 3, there will appear 20: whereby I know, that if
30 yardes of cloth of two yardes broad, should be lined with canuas of three
yardes broad, 20 yards of canuas ^ would suffice, as this figure shows.

And now because ye found fault at my example, how say you, perceive you this?


Sc. Yes sir. I suppose.


May. Then answer me to this question: how many else of canuas of elle
breadth, will serve to line 20 yards of Say, of three quarters broad.


Sc. In good faith sir, I cannot tell, for I know not how to bring the sums
to like denominations.


Master. Then will I tell you: since there is mention here of quarters, and
again every one of the measures both else and yardes may be parted into
quarters, do you part them so both in the breadth and length, and then put
forth the question by quarters.


Scholar. Then I shall say thus. How many quarters of canuas of five quarters
broad, will line 80 quarters of 3 quarters broad.


Master. Now answer to the question.


Sc. First I will set them ^ down in their form thus, for 5 is joined with ye
question, and is therefore the third number: then is 3 the number of the same
denomination, I mean because they be both referred to breadth. Now I multiply
80 by 3, and it is 240, which I divide by 5, and it yields 48. Then say I,
that 48 quarters of 5 quarters broad, will suffice to line 80 quarters of 3
quarters broad.


Ma. Turn the quarters again into else and yardes.


Sch. Then I say, that 9 else and three quarters of a yard of elle ^ broad
will serve to line 20 yardes of three quarters broad, as this figure shows.


* M. Now what say you to this question: I lent my friend 400 lb for 7 months,
now how much money ought he to le^d me again for 12 months, to recompense my
courtesy showed him. Can you answer ^ to this.


Sc. Yes sir I suppose, for I will set down my numbers thus where I multiply 7
into 400, and it makes 2800, which I divide by 12, and it yields 233 lb and
there is 4 lb. remaining of my Division, what shall I do therewith.


May. Turn that same 4 lb into s and then divide it by 12 as you did before.


Sc. Well sir it shall be done, so have I 6 s. for my quotient, and yet
remains 8 s. upon my division.


Ma. You must also reduce 8 s. into pence, which makes 96, and divide that
also by your first divisor.


Sc. So have I done, and I find 8 pence for my quotient and nothing is left.


Ma. This must you always do, when any thing remains upon your division:
whether it be money, weight, measure, or any kind of thing whatsoever. This rule
is so profitable for all estates of men, that for this rule only (if there
were no more but it) all men were bound highly to esteem Arithmetike.

By this Rule may a Captain in war work many things, as Master Digges in
his Stratiaticos does notably declare: Only now in this my simple addition,
for a taste and incourageme^t I will enlarge ye Author with a question or ij.
more, wishing you, and every my cou^triemen or Gentlemen, whatsoever, that by
nature be any thing given to Millitarie affairs, to be familier and well
acquainted with this Exceliente Art, the which he shall find not only at
the Sea, but also in the Camp and Field services, abundantly to aid him,
either in fortificatio^, or in paying of Soldiers wages, how differente soever
their pay be: Charges of Ordinance powder, shot, Munition and instruments,
whatsoever, but now to the question.

If it should chance a Captain which has 40000 soldiers, Question of
provision touching a^a^^ate.
to be so enclosed with his enemy that he could have no fresh purueiance of
vittailes, and that the vittailes which he has, would serve that army but
only 3 months, how many men should he dimisse, to make the vittaile to
suffice ye residue, 8 months? ^


Sc. As you taught me, I set the numbers thus, saying: If 3 months suffice
40000, to how many will 8 months suffice?

To know this I multiply the first number 3 into second 40000, and it
yields 120000, which sum I divide by 8, and there will be in the quotie^t
15000, which if I do subtract from 40000, the ^ remainer will declare that he
must dismiss 15000 as this figure shows


* May. Now answer me to this question: If 136 Masons in a month be able
to build a Forte, to preserve the Soldiers from the enemy: And such
expedition requires that I would have the same finished in eighte days, how
many workmen say you is there to be appointed.


Sch. As you taught me I ^ set the numbers thus, saying: If 28 days require
136 Masons, what number of men by proportion will 8 days bring forth.

To know this I multiply the first number 28 into 236: And it yields me
2808: which I divide by 8. And my quotiente is 476, which is the just number
of Masons that shall supply this work. And now me think these questions are
very easy.


Ma. Truly if you take delectation herein you shall find this Art not only
easy, but wonderful pleasant and profitable: Now answer me this question,
and so will I make an end of this rule, in whole numbers hasting ye sooner to
broken numbers. For had you yt understanding of the^ perfectly, not only in
this Rule, but in all other: the question in sight might have been 10 times more
harder to absolve, and yet as easily and as soon wroughte as this.


Sc. Your words does greatly encorage me to be studious to attain whole
numbers, which me think are wonderful. But might I once attain to be a
practicioner in broken, I should think my self a happy lad.


M. Now what say you to this, If ^^ carpenters in 2 days can make ^00 Staves:
esteeming they work but 12 hours a day: And such need requires yt 384
carpenters are set to the finishing of these 200 staves, in what time say you
will they make the^ up


Scholar. I see here that I must turn my ^ days into hours, And ^ so doing
I set my numbers thus

Saying, if 48 men are 24 hours 384 men will make an end quickly. For it is
grounded upon an old Proverb, many hands make quick speed.

I multiply 48 into 24, and it amounts to 1152, which I divide by 384: and
my quotient is 3 hours which is my desire.

Note.
I take this for a note worthy the marking either in the Rule of three,
forward, or backwarde, when the two numbers art multiplied together, the
Producte is of the same nature, and denomination that the second number is of.


Master. Well, sith you perceive now the use of this Rule, The double Rule.
I will show other which ensue of the same, and first the double Rule, which
is so called, because there is in it double working, by which thing only it
differs from this.


Sch. Then by an example I shall understand it well enough.


Ma. Of carriage.
So shall you, and let this be the example: If the carriage of 100 pound weight
30 miles, do cost 12 d. how much will the carriage of 500 weight cost, being
carried 100 miles?


Scholar. I pray you show me the working of it.


M. You must make 2 workings of it: the first thus. If 100 pound weighte cost
12 d. how much will 500 lb. cost?

Set your figure thus. ^ And multiply 500 by 12 and thereof amou^teth 6000,
which if you divide by 100, the quotie^t will be 60, that is the price of 500
for 30 miles.

The^ begin the second work, saying: if 30 miles cost 60 d, how much will 100
miles cost? Set your figure thus. ^

Than multiply a 100 by 60, whereof amou^teth 6000 which being divided by 30,
will yield 200 d. Than you may say, that so many penies shall cost the carriage
of 500 pound waighte 100 miles, after the rate of 12 pence for the 100, carried
30 miles.


Scholar. Now I perceive it also.


May. These and such other like questions, are to be answered much quicker, at
one working by the Rule of 3 composed of five numbers, which here I will not
trouble you withal. But at the end of this Rule will show you the work
thereof: not only of this and the next question, but also I will there
deliver three or 4 other examples, wishing you then to make a comparison the
one with the other: And so to use which way you think good.


Sc. Sir I thank you much for your courtesy, and I long now til this rule be
ended, that I shall see how I may behave my self with that new Rule of 5
numbers, for that I have ever since you taught me hitherto, in the Golden
Rule both forward and backward wroughte but with 3 numbers only.


Ma. Question of sovving.
Till we have done with this, let us go on forward: and answer me to this
question: 30 bushels of wheat sowed, yielded in one year 360: how many will
80 bushels yield in 7 year.


Sc. First I say, that if 30 bushels will yield 360 in 1 year, then 80
bushels will yield 960 in 1 year. Then for the second work I say: If one
year yield 960, then 7 year will yielde 6720: as these two figures do show.

^

Question of Corn.
But now sir, if I set forth 30 bushels of corn to another man for 7 year,
agreeing so that he shall sow every year the whole increase of the corn, and
I at the end of those seven years to have the half of the whole increase: I
would know how many bushels will there amount to my part supposing the increase
to be after ye rate of the last question, for 30 bushels in one year, 360.


May. In such a question you must have so many several workinges, as there be
years, as for example: In the first year ^0 bushels yield 360: then to know
the yielding of the second year, I must say: If 30 yield 360, how many
yields 360? Work by your rule, and you shall find 4320. Then say for the third
year: if 30 yield 360, how many will 4320 yielde? you shall have 51840, and so
every year multiplying the whole increase by 360, and dividing it by 30, the
increase of the next year will amou^t, as these 7 figures (in ye next page) do
orderly declare: where I have set 7 letters for ye 7 years, of which the first
is set without art because that is the increase which you do presuppose: and
the last number of each other does show the increase of the year that it
stands for; which the letters do declare, so that the increase of the seven
year, is 1074954240 bushels: how many quarters that is, and also how many
ways, you may by Reduction soon find. ^ Now with one question more I will
prove you. If 6 Mowers do mow 45 acres in 5 days, how many mowers will mow
300 acres in 6 days?


Sch. If 45 acres do require 6 mowers, then 300 acres requires 40. Now again:
if 5 days require 40 mowers, then 6 days needs but 33 mowers.


May. Why do you not make mention of the 2 that remains in the last division?
for the last part of the question is wroughte by the Backer rule, where the
first number 5, is multiplied into the second that is 40, whereof amounts
200, which if you divide by the third number 6, the quotiente will be 33, as
you said, but then will there remain 2, which cannot well be divided into 6
parts: how be it, you may understand by the sixth part of 2, the third part of
one man's work, which you must put to the 33, or else you may say, that 33
workmen will end all the 300 acres in 6 days, save two men's work for one
day, or 2 days work for one man. But such broken numbers called Fractions,
you shall hereafter more better perceive, when I shall wholly instruct you of
them.


May. Yet one question more of field matters I will propone, and so I will make
an end of this double Rule of 3.


Sc. With all my heart sir I thank you, and I will dispatche it as soon as I
can, because would feign see the order of the next Rule of 5 numbers.


May. Then this is my question, If 300 Pioners in 8 hours, will cast a
trenche of 200 Rods: I demand how many Laborers will be able with a like
tre^che in three hours to entrench a Camp of 3500 Rods.


Sch. I think I am now in the Backe-house diche, for I know not well which
way to go about it: And besides that truly I think I shall never come to
prefermente that way my grouth is so small.


Ma. You know not how God may raise you hereafter by service, into the favor
of your Prince, for ye avail of your Country. Example, Sir Francis Drake, as
worthy a man as ever England bred, is not the tallest man, and yet has made
the greatest adventure for the honor of his Prince and Country, that ever
English man did.


Sc. Sir, I thank you for your good encouragement, my mind, though I be
little, is as desirous of knowledge, as any other: I have pondred now a little
^ of it, and thus I set forth the work.

Saying if 200 Rod require 3400 300 men what shall 3400 Rod require: I
multiply 3400 by 300: and it yields 1020000: which I divide by 200 and my
quotient is 5100 men.

Then must I say for my second work, if in 8 hours 5100 men be able to
discharge it, how many shall perform the same in 3 hours? now if I should
work by ye Golden Rule of proportion forward, I should find a less number of
men, because 3 hours is less then 8 hours: but because reason teaches me
that the lesser the time is, wherein ye french must be made, the more Laborers I
ought to have, whereupon I use now the backer Rule as in example. And I have in
my quotie^t 5000. So many Pioners must I have, to entrenche the camp in 3
hours.


Ma. You have answered the question very artificially: And truly I commend
you for your diligence and apt understanding: and now according to my promise,
I will (in whole numbers) give you a little taste of the Rule of 3 compounded of
5 numbers.


The Rule of 3 compound of 5 numbers.
THis Rule of 3 composed is distinct for most needful questions into two
several parts or workinges: And there belongs unto it always 5 numbers,
whereof in this rule being the first part: the second number and the fifth are
always of one nature and like denomination, which rule is to be wrought thus:
you must multiply the first number by the second: And that shall be your
divisor: Then again, multiply the other three numbers, the one by the other
and their product shall be your dividend.

And now according to my promise, we will first work the question of weighte
and carriage which I delivered you in ye double rule of 3: to be absolved by
this Rule, which was this.

If the carriage of 100 lb. weight 30 miles cost 12 d, what will the carriage of
500 lb. weighte stand me in being carried 100 miles.

Then mark ^ well how these numbers stand: multiply 100 by 30 as this figure
shows: And that number keep for your divisor:

Then multiply the other 3. numbers the one by the other, and they amount as
you see to 600000: which you shall divide by 3000: your quotie^t is 200 d: Now
you see it agrees with the conclusion of the double Rule.

S. Sir I thank you most heartily: it is even so.


Ma Yet note this for a generality in this Rule, Note.
look what nature or denominatio^ your middle number is: and of the like
denomination or nature is always your quotient.


Scholar. Well now and it please you by your patience, I will see how I can
end, the question then next following of 30 Bushels of Wheat sowed, yielded
in one year 360, how many then will 80 bushels yield in seven year: and
according to your reasons, I set my numbers thus: which 201600 ^ I divide by
30: and my quotiente is 6720: bushels my desire.


M Yet one question more I will propound unto you and so leave this rule, till
it please God hereafter, that I may make you work it in broken numbers.

What comes the interest of 258 lb for five months after the rate: of 8
pound taken in the 100 lb: for 12 months:


Sch Sir as this is a question of gains So will I warelie work this question
in hope one day to reap someting for my pains: and thus I propone it. But I
beseech you if it be not well set down to show me mine error.


Ma. Proceed you ^ have done very well


Sch. Then I doubt not by the grace of God but to end it: I multiply 100 by
12 it yields 1200: and the 3 other numbers multiplied together produces 10
20: which I divide by 1200: and my quotient is 8 pounds. The^ according as you
have taught me heretofore, I turn the 720 lb. that is left: into shillings:
and dividing it by my first number my quotient is 12 s. So I answer that the
lone of 258 lb for 5 months, after the rate of 8 lb. in the 100 lb for a year,
comes to 8 lb 12 s.


May. You say true, I commend your diligence, now behold the manner of the
second part of this rule.


M. In the second part of this rule of 3 composed: the third number is like
unto the first. And the rule is to be wrought as thus: you shall now contrary
to the last rule multiply the third number and the fourth together: and that
product shall be your deuisor: Then multiply the fifth by the second and the
producte thereof by the first: and that is ye number that shall be divided. For
example I propond this question: for a proof of my last question of interest.
A Merchant has received 8 lb 12 s. for interest for 5 months term, which he
received after the rate of 8 lb. in the 100 lb. for a year. The question is
now how much money was delivered to raise this interest: Behold therefore the
^ manner how the question is set forth.


Scholar. Sir I perceive it very well: and according to the doctrine which you
prescribed for the working thereof: if it please you now it is set down I
think I can follow the work.


M. Nay stay a while, and before you work mark well how I deliver a reason,
for the perfect understanding of this rule which is thus: Note.
if 8 lb. in 12 months do yield me 100 lb To take 8 lb -- 12 s. for 5
months, must needs yield a great deal more.

So upon the knowledge that I have in this Art, The first part of this rule is
aunswerable to the rule of 3 forward: And this latter part accords to the
rule 3 backward.


S. Sir I yield you most hearty thanks for these your last instructions, they
have given me great light into these two Rules, whereby I may the better by
deliberation conceive how to use them hereafter, when occasion shall require.


M. You say well, go too now if you will, and try your cunning in the question:
Note.
But this note take with you by the way, in as much as here is mention made of
shillings: turn all your money as you work, for your more ease in work.


S. If it please you to behold me a little, I will quickly end it: for I have
but my first: my second: and my last number to be multiplied together for my
diuidende: And my third into my fourth for my divisor: ^

Which I divide by 800. and my quotient is 5160 shillings, which in pounds
yields 258 my desire.


M. I will here for this time in whole numbers end this rule, and will
instruct you in the rules of Fellowship. You may at your convenient leisure,
for your exercise work the same, by the rule of 3. at twice: And for your aid
and encouragement therein, I set down here a profer how to apply it.

^


The Rule of Fellowship.
But now will I show you of the rule of fellowship or Company, which has
sundry operations, according to the diverse number of the company. This rule
is sometime without difference of time, and sometimes there is in it difference
of time. First I will speak of that without difference of time, of which let
this be an example.

Four Merchaunts of one company made a bank of money diversely, for the
first laid in 50 lb, the second 50 lb, the third 60 lb, and the fourth 100
lb, which stock they occupied so long, till it was increased to 30^0 lb. Now
I demand of you, what should each man receive at the parting of this money.

Sch. I perceive that this rule is like the other, but yet there is a
difference, which I perceive not


Ma Then will I show it to you. First by Addition you shall bring all the
particular sums of the Merchaunts into one sum, which shall be the first
sum in your working by the Golden rule, and the whole sum of the gains by
that stock shall be the second sum. Now for the third sum, you shall set the
portion of each man one after an other, and then work by the Golden rule, and
the fourth sum will show you each man's gains: as in example.

The parcels of those four Merchaunts make in one sum 240 lb: set that in the
first plare, the gains in the second, ^ and the first man's portion of stock
in the place thus.

Now multiply the second by the third, and it will be 90000, which you shall
divide by 240, and there will appear ^ 375 lb. thus.

And that the gains for the first man.

Now for the second man, set the 50 lb. that he brought, in the third place,
and work as before: and his part will ^ be 625 lb. as this figure shows.

Likewaies for the third man set his money ^ which was 60 lb, and his part of
gains will be 150 lb, as here appears.

And so for the fourth man, if you set his sum which is 1000 lb, ^ his
gains will be 1250 lb, as the proof will declare.


Scholar. This I perceive: but is there any way to examine whether I have well
done er no?


Master. That must you do by one common proof which serves to the Golden
rule and al other ensuing of the same: and that is this: Change the standings
of the numbers, and set the third in the first place, the 4 in the second
place, and the first in the third place, and they work by the Golden rule,
and if you have done well, the fourth number now will be the same that was the
second before. As for example, I will ^ take the last work which was this.

^ Which to examine I alter as I said, thus:

Now if I multiply the second number by the third, and divide that that
amounts by the first, then will the fourth number be 3000, ^ which was the
second before, as you see here, which is a token, that I have well done. But
as in a single rule one proof thus is sufficient, so in a rule where many
operations be, you must turn every of them as I have done with this one.


Scholar. Then for the ^ proof of the first work of this rule, I should turn
the numbers thus.

^ And the second thus. And for the third thus. ^ And in each of them if the
working were true, the fourth number will be still 3000.


Ma. Well, now an other example will I put to you, not of gains, but of loss:
for one reason serves for both.

If three Merchauntes in one ship and of one fellowship, had bought
merchandise, so that the first had laid out 200 lb, the second ^^00 lb, and
the third 500 lb, and it chanced by tempest that they did cast over board
into the sea merchandise of the value of 100 pound, how much should each
man boar in this loss?


Scholar. If I shall do in this as you did in the other question, then must I
join their three portions together, 200, 300, and 500, which makes ^000.
Then say I, if 1000 leefe 100, then shall 200 loose 20, and ^00 shall loose 30,
and 500, shall loose 50, as by these three figures it does appear plain.

^


Ma. Well since now you have done these I will propound a question of more
importance, which shall make you not only ye abler to understand this Rule, but
also it will greatly aid you in the next rule of fellowship with time, if such
need be that your money be of diverse denominations.

For this may not be forgotten in all such questions, if the number be of
diverse kinds: you must by Reductio^ bring it into one kind, that is to say to
the least value that is named in ye question. And likewaies shall you do, if
the time be of diverse kinds, as some years, some months, weeks and days,
you shall make al months, weeks or days according as ye least name of time in
ye question is: As for example.

First in diversity of money. Three co^panio^s bought 2000 sheep, and paid
for them 241 lb. 13 s, 4. d. of which sum one paid 101 lb, Question of Sheep.
10 s. The second paid 82 lb. 17 s, 10 d. And the third paid 57 lb, 5 s, 6 d:
How many sheep must each of them have? Answer: The first shall have 840. The
second 686. And the third 474. And that must you work thus. Solution.


First considering that your money is of diverse denominations, you shall (by
Reduction) bring it all into the smallest denomination which is in it, that is
to say, pence, and so will the total sum be 58000. pence.

Now, if you turn each man's money into pennies also, the first man's sum
will be 24360 pence: The second man's sum 19894. pence. And the third man's
money will be 13746. pence.

Now to know how many sheep every man shall have, let the whole sum of money
that is 58000. pence, in ye first place and in ye second place set the number
of sheep, and then orderly in the third place set each man's money, and then
multiplying the third and the second sums together, and dividing that that
amounts by the first, there will appear the number of sheep that each man
ought to have: as these three figures do show, ^


Scholar. Why do you set the money in the first place, seeing in the question
you say, 2000 sheep cost 58000 d? and not thus, 58000 d cost 2000 sheep.


Master. You remember, I taught you at the beginning of this Goulden rule,
that the first and third numbers must be of one name, and of like things:
and evermore the number that the question is asked of, must be set in the
third place. Now is the question plainly this: If four men bought 2000 sheep
for 58000 pence, how many sheep shall each man have?

But seeing in this question there ought more respect to be had to the sum of
money, than to the sum of the persons, (for in ye su^mes of money is there
proportion toward ye sheep, and not in the number of persons) therefore must
we turn the question thus.

If 18000 pence bought 2000 sheep, how many did 24360 s buy? Again, how many
did 19894 d buy? and how many bought 13746 pens.


Scholar. I perciue it reasonable, and so shall I do in all like questions.


Master. Even so, But for easiness of the work mark this: Note.
When soever the first and second numbers have ciphers in the first places, you
may both in the multiplication and in the division leave out those ciphers, so
that you leave out like many out of both sums, as in this question the
first number 58000 has three ciphers, and so has the second that is 2000:
therefore cast away their ciphers, and so will the first number be 58, and
the second 2: set them in their places, and work according to the rule, and
you shall perceive that it will be al one, saving that this is the shorter and
easier way, as these three figures do show.

^

And this you see is both easier, and also the more certain way to know the
answer to this question.


S. Truth it is as you say: but sir, me seems I might ask a further question
here, not only how many sheep each man should have, but also what every
sheep cost.


Master. That question does not only belong to this rule, but may also be
discussed by Division, especially if the questions number be one only: as
thus. Divide the total sum 58000 pence, by 2000 (or 58 by 2, omitting the
ciphers) and the quotient will be 29 pence, that is 2^ s, 5 d, howbeit, by this
rule you may do it, and best when the number of the question does exceed 1:
as if I should ask this question, 2000 sheep^ cost 58000 d,
how ^ much did 20 cost? Then shall I set my figure thus.

And doing after the rule, there will amou^te 580 pence, that is 2 lb 8 s 4 d:
the price of one score: But if you will use that easy way that I did teach
you, you may ^ change the first and second number thus.

Thus do you perceive the use of the rule without time. The rule of felovv^h^p
with time.
And that you may as wel^ perceive the same with diversity of time, I propose
this example.

Four Merchants made a common stock, Question of a bank.
which at the years end was increased to 35145 lb. Now to know what shall
be each man's portion of gains, you must know each man's stock and time of
continuance.

The first man of these four laid in 669. lb which he did take from the
stock again, at the end of 10. months. The second man laid in 810. lb. for 8.
months. The third laid in 900. lb. for 7. months. And the fourth laid in
1040. lb. for 12. months.

This question shall you examine as you did the other before, saving that where
as in the third place of the figure you did set each man's sum alone,
here you shall set the same being multiplied by the number of their time and
likewise in the first place of the figure, you shall set that number which
amou^teth of their whole sums so multiplied by their time, and added into one
whole sum as thus.

The first man's sum is 669 lb. which I multiplye by 10. (that was the number
of his time) and it makes 6690. The second man's sum 810. lb. multiplied by
8, (which was his time) make 6480. The third man's sum 900. lb. multiplied by 7
(for that was his time yeldeth 6300. The fourth man's sum was 1040 lb and his
time 12. multiply the one by the other, and and it will be 12480.

These four sums thus multiplied by their time, must be set orderly in ye
third place of the figure: and in the first place must be set the whole sum
of all four, which is 31950, and the gain must be in the second place, which
is ^5145. Now to end the question, I say first: If 31950 did get 35145, what
did 6690 get? ^ Answer, 7359 lb, as by this figure appears.

Likewise the second man had to his part 7128 lb, the third must have 6930 lb
And the fourth man shall have for his part 13728 lb as these figures do partly
declare.

^


Scholar. This I like very well: but what proof is there of this work?


May. The same that I taught you for the other. Howbeit, Another proof.
there is used both for this work and the other also this manner of proof, to
add all the portions together, and if they agree to the whole sum, then
seems it well done: but this is no sure rule.


Sch. Yet will I prove it in this example. The four parcels are these, ^
which if I add together, there will amount 35145, and that was the whole
sum: so is this rule true here.


Master. And so will it be still when the work is truly done.

Note the imperfection of this kind of proof.
But if you lift to see it proved false, take 10000 lb from the fourth man, and
put it to any of the other 3, and then be ye sure that you have not done well,
and yet will the proof allow it, for the Addition will still be all one.


Sc. It must needs be so: but what have I now to learn?


May. There are many other excellent parts behind, of which I will not, as
now, make mention because that without the knowledge of Fractions, they cannot
be duly taught, and much less understood. Therefore will I propose to you two
or three questions more, whereby you may practice the better the feate of the
rule of fellowship, (that thereby you may better perceive ye use of all other)
and so make an end for this time.

There is in a Cathedral Church ^0 Cannons, and 30 Vicars, Question of Canons.
those may spend by year 2600 lb, but every Ca^nnon must have to his part 5
times so much as every Vicar has: how much is every man's portion say you?


Sc. I pray you make the answer your self, so shall I perceive best the
means to answer to such other like.


May. In this question you must do as in those that have diversity of time,
for here is diversity of portions: Therefore shall you multiplye the number of
the persons by their difference of portion: (as you did in the other by time)
Then must you multiply the ^0. (which is the number of Cannons) by 5, (for
that is the number of their portion) so will it be 102: Then ^0, (that is the
number of Vicars) by 1, (that is the number of their portion) and it will be
30: put those two sums together, and they make 1^0: then say thus: If 130
spend 2600 lb, what may 100 spend? The rule shows 2000 lb.


Again for Vicars: If 130 spend 2600 pound, what may 30 spend? Answer 600 lb
as these figures show, ^

But if every Ca^non should have so often times 4 lb as the Vicar should have 3
lb the^ should I multiply 20 by 4, (that were 80) and 30 by 3 (that were 90)
and then both were 170. Then should the figures be set thus.

^

But this sort is to hard for you, by reason of the Fractions, therefore I will
let it rest to that place. And by this rule you see what the 20 Cannons may
spend, which sum if you divide by 20, you shall see each Cannons portion: and
so of the Vicars, if you divide their sum by 30, the quotient will declare
every Vicars portion.

The second Dialogue. The accompting by Counters.
Master. NOw that you have learned the common kinds of Arithmetike with ye
pen, you shall see the same art in Counters: which feate does not only serve
for them that cannot write and read, but also for them that can do both, but
have not at some times their pen or tables ready with them.

This sort is in two forms commonly: The one by lines, and the other without
lines. In that that has lines, the lines do stand for the order of places:
and in that that has no lines, there must be set in their stead so many
counters as shall need, for ^che line one, and they shall supply ye stead of
the lines.


Sc. By examples I should better perceive your meaning.


May. For example of ^ the Lines, lo here you see six lines, which stand
for six places, so that the nethermoste stands for the first place, and the
next above it for the second, and so upward, til you come to the highest,
which is the sixth line, and stands for the sixth place.

Now what is the value of every place or line you may perceive by the figures
which I have set on them, which is according as you learned before in
Numeration of Fi-figures by the pen: for, the first place is the place of
units or ones, and every Counter set in that line betokens but one: and the
second line is the place of 10, for every cou^ter there stands for 10. The
third line the place of hundreds, ye fourth of thousa^ds, and so forth.


Sc. Sir, I do perceive that the same order is here of lines, as was in the
other figures by places, so that you shall not need longer to stand about
Numeration, except there be any other difference.


M. If you do understand it, then ^ how will you set 1543?


Sc. Thus as I suppose.


Ma. You have set the places truly but your figures be not meet for this use:
for the meetest figure in this behalf, is the figure of a Counter round, as you
see here, where I have expressed that same sum.


Scholar. So that you have not one figure for 2 nor 3, nor 4 and so forth, but
as many digits as you have, so many Counters you set in the lowest line: and
for every 101 you set one in the second line: and so of other. But I know
not by what reason you set that one counter for 500 between two lines.


May. You shall remember this, that whenever you need to set down 5,
50, or 500 or 5000, or so forth any number whose Numerator is 5, you shall
set one counter for it in the next space above ye line that it has his
denomination of: as in this example of that 500, because the numerator is 5, it
must be set in a void space: and because ye denominator is hundred, I know
that his place is the void space next above hundreds, that is to say, above
the third line.

And farther you shall mark, that in all working by this sort, if you shall
set down any sum between 4 and 10, for the first part of that number you shall
set down 5, and then so many Counters more, as there rest numbers above 5. And
this is true both of digits and articles. And for example I will set down this
sum 287965, which sum if you mark well you need none other examples for
to learn the Nuration of this form,

But this shall you mark, that as you did in the other kinds of
Arithmetike, set a prick in the places of thousands, in this work you shall
set a Star, as you see before.


Scholar. Then I perceive Numeration: but I pray you how shall I do in this
art to add two sums or more together.


ADDITION.
Master. THe easiest way in this art, is to ad but two sums at once together:
howbeit, you may add more, as I will tell you anon. Therefore when you will add 2
sums you shall first set down one of the^, it forces not which, and then by it
draw a line cross the other lines. And afterward set down the other sum, so
that that line may be between them: Addition of 2 sums.
as if you would add 2659 to 8342, you must set your sums as you see here.

And then if you list, you may add the one to the other in the same place: or
else you may ad them both together in a new place: which way, because it is
most playnest, I will show you first.

Therefore will I begin at the units, which in the first sum is but 2, and
in the second sum 9, that makes 11. Those do I take up, and for them I set
11 in the new room, thus.



Then do I take up all the Articles under a hundred, which in the first sum
are 40, and in the second sum 50, that makes 90: or you may say better, that
in the first sum there are 4 articles of 10, and in the second sum 5,
which makes 9, but then take heed that you set the^ in their right lines as
you see here.



Where I have taken away 40 from the first sum, and 50 from the second, and
in their steed I have set 90 in the third room, which I have set plainelye
that you might well perceive it: how be it, seeing that 90 with the 10 that was
in the third room already, does make 100, I might better for those 6 Counters
set 1 in the third line, thus.

For it is all in one sum as you may see, but it is best never to set five
counters in any line, for that may be done with one Counter in a higher place.


Scholar. I judge that good reason, for many are vnneedefull where one will
serve.


Master. Well, then will I add forth of hundreds: I find 3 in the first
sum, and 6 in the second which makes 900, them do I take up, and set in the
third room, where is one hundred already, to which I put 900 and it will
be 1000, therefore I set one counter in the fourth line for them all, as you see
here.



Then add I the thousands together, which in the first sum are 8000, and in
the second 2000, that makes 10000: them do I take up from those two places,
and for them I set one counter in the fifte line, and then appears as you see
to be 11001, for so many does amount of the Addition of 8342 to 2659.


Scholar. Sir, To ad 8 sums together.
this I do perceive: but how shall I set one su^me to an other, not
changing them to a third place?


May. Mark well how I do it: I will add together 65436 and 3245, which
first I set down thus.



Then do I begin with the smallest, which in the first su^me is 5, that do I
take up, and would put to the other 5 in the second sum, saving that two
Counters cannot be set in a void place of 5 but for them both I must set 1 in
the second line, which is the place of 10: therefore I take up the five of the
first sum, and the 5 of the second, and for them I set 1 in the secounde
line, as you see here.



Then do I likewise take up the 4 counters of the first sum and second line
(which make 40) and ad them to the 4 counters of the same line, in the second
sum, and it makes 80, but as I said, I may not conuenientlye set above 4
counters in one line, therefore to those 4 that I took up in the first sum,
I take one also of the second sum, and then have I taken up 50, for which 5
Counters I set down one in the space over the second line, as here does
appear. And then is there 80, as well with those 4 counters, as if you had set
down the other 4 also.

Now do I take the 200 in the first sum, and add them to the 40 in the second
sum, and it makes 600, therefore I take up the 2 counters in the first sum,
and 3 of the^ in the second sum, and for them 5, I set 1 in the space above,
thus.



Then I take the 3000 in the first su^me, unto which there are none in the
second sum agreeing, therefore I do only remove those three Counters from
the first sum into the second, as here does appear.

And so you see the whole sum that amounts of the Addition of 65416 with
3245, to be 68681.

And if you have marked these two examples well, you need no further
instruction in Addition of 2 only sums: but if you have more than two sums
to add, you may ad them thus.

First add two of them, and then add the third and the fourth, or more if
there be so many: as if I would add 2679 with 4286 and 1391. First I add the
two first sums thus.



And then I add the third thereto thus.



And so of more, if you have them.


Scho. Now I think best that you pass forth to Subtraction, except there
be any ways to examine this manner of Addition, then I think that were good
to be known next.


Master. A prooef.
There is the same proof here that is in the other Addition by the pen, I
mean Subtraction, for that only is a sure way: but considering that
Subtraction must be first known, I will first teach you the art of
Subtraction, and that by this example.


SVBTRACTION.
I Would subtracte 2892 out of 8746. These sums must I set down as I did
in Addition: but here it is best to set the lesser number first thus.



Then shall I begin to subtract the greatest numbers first (contrary to the
use of the pen) that is the thousands in this example: therefore I find
amongst the thousands 2, for which I withdraw so many from the second sum
(where are 8) and so remains there 6, as this example shows.



Then do I likewayes with the hundreds, of which in the first sum I find
8, and in the second sum but 7, out of which I can not take 8, therefore
this must I do: I must look how much my sum differs from 10, which I
find here to be 2, then must I bate for my sum of 800, one thousand, and
set down the excess of hundreds, that is to say, 2, for so much 1000 is
more than I should take up. Therefore from the first sum I take that 800,
and from the second sum (where are 6000) I take up one thousand, and
leave 5000, but then set I down the 200, unto the 700 that are there already,
and make them 900, thus.



Then come I to the articles of tennes, where in the first sum I find 90,
and in the second sum but only 40. Now considering that 90 can be bated
from 40, I look how much that 90 does differ from the next sum above it,
that is 100, or else (which is all to one effect) I look how much 9 does
differ from 10, and I find it to be 1, then in the stead of that 90, I do
take from the second sum 100: but considering that is 10 too much, I set
down 1 in the next line beneth for it, as you see here.

Saving that here I have set one counter in the space, in stead of 5, in the
next line.

And thus have I subtract al, save two which I must bate from the 6 in the
second sum and there will remain 4, thus.

So that if I subtract 2892 from 8746, the remainer will be 5854

And that this is truly wrought you may prove by addition: for if you add to
this remainer the same sum that you did subtracte, then will the former sum
8746, amount again.

Scho. That will I prove: and first I set the sum that was Subtracted, which was
2892, and then the remainer 5854, thus.



Then do I add the first 2 to 4, which makes 6: so take I up 5 of those
counters, and in their stead I set 1 in the space, and 1 in the lowest line, as
here appears.



Then do I add the 90 next above to the 50, and it makes 140, therefore I
take up those 6 counters, and for them I set 1, to the hundreds in the third
line, and four in the second line thus.



Then do I come to the hundreds, of which I find 8 in the first sum, and 9 in
the second, yt makes 1700: therefore I take up those 9 counters, and in their
stead, I set 1 in ye fourth line, and 1 in the space next beneath, and 2 in
the third line as you see here.



Then is there left in the first sum but only 2000, which I shall take
up from thence, and set in the same line in the second sum, to the one
that is there already: and then will the whole sum appear as you may well
see, to be 8746, which was the first gross sum, and therefore I do
perceive that I had well subtracted before.

And thus you may see, how Subtraction may be tried by Addition.


Scho. I perceive the same order here with Counters, that I learned before in
figures.


Ma. Then let me see how you can try Addition by Subtraction.


Scholar. First I will set forth this example of Addition, where I have
added 2189, to 4988. And the whole sum appears to be 7177.



Now to try whether that sum be well added or no, I will subtract one of the
first two sums from the third, and if I have well done, ye remainer will be
like that other sum, as for example. I will subtracte the first sum from the
third, which I set thus in their order.



Then do I subtract 2000 of the first sum from the second sum, and then
remains there 5000, thus.

Then in the third line I subtracte the 100 of the first sum from the second
sum where is only 100 also: and the^ in the third line rests nothing, as you
may see in the example following.

Then the in second line with his space over him, I find 80, which I should
subtract from the other su^ then seeing there are but only 70, I must take it
out of some higher sum, which is here only 5000: therefore I take up 5000: and
seeing that is too much by 4920, I set down so many in the second room, which
with the 70 being there already, do make 4990, and then the sums do stand
thus.



Yet remains there in the first sum, 9 to be abated from the second sum,
wherein that place of units does appear only 7: then must I bate a higher
sum, that is to say 10, but seeing that 10 is more than 9 (which I should
abate) by 1, therefore shall I take up one counter from the second, and set
down the same in the first or lowest line, as you see here.

And so have I ended this work, and the sum appears to be the same which
was the second sum of mine Addition, and therefore I perceive I have well
done.


May To stand longer about this, it is but folly, another ^ay of ad^^tion.
except that this you may also understand, that many do begin to subtract with
counters not at the highest sum as I have taught you, but at the
neathermost, as they do use to adds: and when the sum to be abated in any
line appears greater than the other, the^ do they borrow one of the next
higher room, as for example.

If I should abate 1846 from 2378, they set the sums thus.

First they take 6, which is the lower line, and his space, from 8 in the same
rooms in the second sum, and yet there remains 2 counters in the lowest
line. Then in the second line must 4 be subtracted from 7, and so remains
there 3. Then 800 in the third line, and his space, from 300 of the second
sum can not be, therefore do they bate it from a higher room, that is from
1000: and because that 1000 is too much by ^0^, therefore must I set down 200
in the third line, after I have taken up 1000 from the fourth line. Then is
there yet 1000 in the fourth line of the first sum, which if I withdraw from
the second sum, then does all the figures stand in order, thus.

So that (as you see) it differs not greatly whether you begin subtraction
at the higher lines, or at the lower.

How be it, as some men like ye one way best, so some like the other:
therefore you now knowing both, may use which you list.


MVLTIPLICATION.
But now touching Multiplication: you shall set your numbers in two rooms
(as you did in those other kinds) but 2 so yt the multiplier be set in the
first room, then shall you begin with the highest numbers of the second
room, and multiply them first, after this sort. Take ye ouermost line in
your first working,
as if it were the lowest line, setting on it some moveable mark (as you list)
and look how many counters be in him, take them up, and for them set down
the whole multiplier so many times as you took up counters: reckning (I say)
that line for the Unites. And when you have done with the highest number, then
come to the next line beneath, and do even so with it, and so with the next,
till you have done all. And if there be any number in a space, then for it
shall you take the multiplier 5 times: and then must you reckon that line for
the Unites, which is next beneath that space. Or else after a shorter way,
you shall take only half the multiplier, but the^ shall you take the line
next above that space for the line of Unites. But in such working, if by
chance your multirlyer be an odd number, so that you can not take the half
of it iustlye, then must you take the greater half, and set down that, as if
that it were the just half: and further you shall set one Counter in the
space beneath that line, which you reckon for the line of Units, or else only
remove forward the same that is to be multiplied.

S. If you set forth an example hereto, I think I shall perceive you.


Maaster. Take this example: I would multiply 1 5 4 2 by 2 6 5, therefore I
set the numbers thus.

Then first I begin at the 1000 in the highest room, as if it were the
first place, and I take it up, setting down for it so often (that is once) the
multiplyer, which is 365, thus as you see here: where, for the one counter
taken up from the fourth line, I have set down other 6, which make ye sum of
the multiplier, reckening that fourth line as if it were the first, which thing
I have marked by the hand set at the beginning of the same.




Scholar. I perceive this well, for in deed this sum that you have set down is
265000: for so much does amounte of 1000, multiplied by 365.


Master. Well, then to go forth, in the next space I find one counter,
which I remove forward, but take it not up, but do (as in such case I must)
set down the greater half of my multiplier (seeing it is an od number) which is
182, and here I do still let that fourth place stand, as if it were the
first: as in these examples you shall see.
Where I have set this multiplication with other, but for the ease of your
understanding, I have set a little line between them. Now should they both in
one sum stand thus.


An other form of Multiplication.
Howbeit, an other form to multiplye such cou^ters in space, is this: First
to remove ye finger to the line next beneth that space, and the^ to take up
that Counter, and to set down the multiplier five times: as here you see.

Which sums if you do add together into one sum, you shall perceive that
it will be the same that appears of the other working before, so that both
sorts are to one intent: but as the other is shorter, so this is playner to
reason for such as have had small exercise in this art. Notwithstanding you may
add them in your mind before you set them down: as in this example you might
have said, 5 times 300 is 1500, and 5 times 60 is ^00 also 5 times 5 is 25,
which all put together, do make 1825, which you may at one time set down if
you list.

But now to go forth, I must remove the hand to the next counters which are
in the second line, and there must I take up those 4 counters setting down for
them my multiplier 4 times severally, or else I may gather that whole sum in
my mind first, and then set it down: as to say, 4 times 300 is 1200: 4 times
60 are 240: and 4 times 5 make 20, that is in all 1460, that shall I set down
also, as here you see.



Which if I join in one sum with the former numbers it will appear thus,

Then to end this Multiplication, I remove the finger to the lowest line,
where are only 2, them do I take up, and in their steed do I set down twice
365, that is 730, for which I set one in the space above the third line for
500, and 2 more in the third line with that one that is there already, and
the rest in their order, and so have I ended the whole sum, thus.



Whereby you see, that 1542 (which is the number of years since Christ his
incarnation) being multiplied by 365 (which is the number of days in one
year) does amounte unto 562830, The sum of the days since Christ's incarnation
which declares the number of days since Christ's incarnation unto the end of
1542 years, (beside 385 days and 12 hours for leap years.)


Sc. Now will I prove by an other example, as this: 40 laborers (after 6 d
the day for each man) have wroughte 28 days: I would know what their wages
does amou^t unto.

In this case must I work doublye: first I must multiply the number of the
laborers by the wages of a man for one day, so will the charge of one day
amount. Then seco^darily shall I multiply the charge of one day by the whole
number of days, and so will ye whole sum appear: first therefore I shall set the
su^mes thus:

Where in the first place is the Multiplier (that is 1 days wages for one
man) and in the second space is set the number of ye warkme^ to be multiplied.

Then say I: 6 times 4 (reckoning that second line of the line of Units)
makes 24, for which sum I should set 2 counters in the third line, and 4 in
the second therefore do I set 2 in the third line, and let the 4 stand still
in the second line thus.

So appears the whole days wages to be 240 d yt is 20 s.

Then do I multiplye again the same sum by the number of days, and first
I set the numbers thus, The^ because there are counters in diverse lines, I
shall begin with the highest, and take them up, setting for them the multiplier
so many times as I took up counters, that is twice, then will ye sum stand thus.

Then come I to the second line, and take up those 4 Counters, setting for the^
the multiplier four times, so will the whole sum appear thus.

So is the whole wages of 40 workmen for 28 days (after 6 d each day for a
man) 6720 d that is 560 s or 28 pound.


Ma. Now if you would prove Multiplication, the surest way is by Division:
therefore will I ouerpasse it, till I have taught you the art of Division,
which, you shall work thus.


DIVISION.
FIrst set down the divisor, for fear of forgetting, and the^ set the number
that shall be divided, at the right side, so far from the Divisor, that the
quotient may be set between them: as for example.

If 225 sheep cost 45 lb. what did every sheep cost? To know this, I should
divide the whole sum that is 45 lb, by 225, but that cannot be: therefore
must I first reduce that 45 lb into a lesser denomination, as into shillinges,
then I multiply 45 by 20, and it is 900: that sum shall I divide by the
number of sheep, which is 225, these two numbers therefore I set thus.



Then begin I at the highest line of the diuident, and seek how often I may
have the diuisour therein, and that may I do four times: then say I, four
times 2 are 8, whithe if I take from 9, there rests but 1, thus.



And because I found the divisor 4 times in the diuident, I have set as you
see, 4 in the middle room, which is the place of the quotient: but now must I
take the rest of ye diuisour as often out of the remayner, therefore come I to
the second line of the divisor, saying: 2 four times make 8, take 8 from 10,
and there rests 2, thus.



Then come I to the lowest number which is 5, and multiply it 4 times, so is
it 20, that take I from 20, and there remains nothing,
so that I see my quotient to be 4, which are in valewe shillings, for so was
the diuident: and thereby I know yt if 225 Sheep did cost 45 lb, every sheep
cost 4 s.

Sch. This can I do, Example of wages
as you shall perceive by this example. If 100 soldiers do spend every month
68 lb, what spends each man?

First because I cannot divide the 68, by 160, therefore I will turn the lb
into pennies by multiplicatio^, so shall there be 16320 d. Now must I divide
this sum by the number of soldiers, therefore I set them in order thus.



Then begin I at the highest place of the dividend, seeking my Divisor there,
which I find once, therefore set I 1 in the nether line.


Ma. Not in the nether line of the whole sum, but in the nether line of that
work which is the third line.


Sc. So stands it with reason.


Ma. Then thus do they stand.



Then seek I again the rest, how often I may find my diuisour: and I see
that in the 300 I might find 100 three times, but then the 60 will not be so
often found in ^0, therefore I take 2 for my quotient: the^ take I 100 twice
from 300, and there rests 100, out of which with the 20 (that makes 120) I
may take 60 also twice, and then stands the numbers thus.



Where I have set the quotient 2 in the lowest line: So is every Soldiers
portion 102 d that is 8 s, 6 d.


Ma. But yet because you shall iustlye perceive the reason of Division, it
shall be good that you do set your divisor still against those numbers from
which you do take it, as by this example I will declare.

If the purchase of 20 acres of ground did cost 290 pound, what did one acre
cost? Example of purchase.


First will I turn the pounds into pennies, so will there be 69600 pence.
Then in setting down these numbers, I shall do thus. First set the dividend on
the right hand as it ought, and then the divisor on the left hand against
those numbers from which I intend to take him first as here you see, where I
have set the divisor two lines higher than is his own place.




Scho. This is like the order of Division by the pen.


Ma. Truth you say, and now must I set the quotient of this work in the
third line, for that is the line of units in respect to the divisor in this
work.

Then I seek how often the divisor may be found in the diuident, and that I
find 3 times, then set I 3 in the third line for the quotient and take away
that 60000 from the dividend, and farther I do set the divisor one line lower,
as you see here.



And then seek I how often the divisor will be taken from the number against
it, which will be 4 times and 1 remaining.


Scho. But what if it chance that when the divisor is so removed, it cannot be
ones taken out of the diuident against it?


Ma. Then must the diuisour be set in an other line lower.


Sc. So was it in division by the pen, and therefore was there a cipher set in
the quotient: but how shall that be noted here?


Ma. Here needs no token, for the lines do represent the places: only look
that you set your quotient in that place which stands for units in respect
of ye divisor: but now to return to the example. I find the divisor 4 times
in the diuident, and 1 remaining, for 4 times 2 make 8, which I take from 9,
and there rests 1, as this figure following shows; and in the middle space
for the quotient I set 4 in the second line (...) he is in this work the place
of units.




Then remove I the diuisour to the next lower line, and seek how often I may
have it in the diuident, which I may do here 8 times just, and nothing remain,
as in this form.

Where you may see, that the whole quotient is 348 d, that is 29 s, whereby I
know that so much cost the purchase of one acre.


Sc. Now rests the proves of Multiplication, and also of Division.


Ma. Their best proves are each one by the other: for multiplication is proved
by Division, and Division by Multiplication, as in the work by the pen you
learned.


Sc. If that be all, you shall not need to repeat again that that was
sufficiently taught already: and except you will teach me any other feate,
here may you make an end of this art, I suppose.


Ma. So will I do as touching whole number: and as for broken number, I will
not trouble your wit with it, till you have practiced this so well, that you be
full perfect, so that you need not to doubt in any point that I have taught
you, and then may I boldlye instruct you in the art of Fractions or Broken
number: wherein I will also show you the reasons of all that you have now
learned. But yet before I make an end, I will show you the order of common
casting, wherein are both pennies, shillings, and pounds, proceeding by no
grounded reason, but only by a received form, and that diversely of diverse
men: for the Marchantes use one form, and Auditors an other.


Marchantes use.
But first for Marchantes form, mark this example here, in which I have
expressed this sum 198 lb 19 s 11 d. So that you may see that the lowest line
serves for pennies, the next above for shillings, the third for pounds, and
the fourth for scores of pounds.

And further you may see, that the space between d and s may receive but one
counter (as al other spaces likewise do) and that one stands in that place
for 6 d.

Likewise between the shillinges and the pounds, one counter stands for 10
s.

And between the pounds and 20 lb. one counter stands for 10 lb.

But beside those you may see at the left side of shillinges, that one
counter stands alone, and betokens 5 s.

So against the pounds, that one counter stands for 5 lb. And against the 20
pounds, the one counter stands for 5 score pounds, that is 100 pound, so
that every side cou^ter is 5 times so much as one of them against which he
stands.

Auditors Account.
Now for the account of Auditors, take this example.



Where I have expressed the same sum 198 lb 19 s 11 d. Auditors account.


But here you see the pence stand toward the right hand, and the other
increasing orderly toward the left hand.

Again you may see that Auditors will make 2 lines (yea and more) for pence,
shillings, and all other values, if their sums extend thereto. Also you see
that they set one counter at the right end of each row, which so set there,
stands for 5 of that room: and on the left corner of the row it stands
for 10 of the same row.

But now if you would add other subtract after any of both those sorts, if
you mark the order of the other feate which I taught you, you may easily do
ye same here without much teaching: for in Addition you must first set
down one sum, and to the same set the other orderly, and in like manner if
you have many: but in Subtraction you must set down first the greatest
sum, and from it must you abate the other, every denomination from his due
place.

Sc. I do not doubt but with a little practice I shall attain these both: but
how shall I multiply and divide after these forms?


M. You can not duly do any of both by these sorts, therefore in such case
you must resort to your other arts.


S. Sir, yet I see not by these sorts how to express hundreds, if they
exceed one hundred, neither yet thousands.


Master. They that use such accomptes that it exceed 200 in one sum, they
set not 5 at the left hand of the scores of pounds, but they set all the
hundreds in an other farther row, and 500 at the left hand thereof, and the
thousands they set in a farther row yet, and at the left side thereof they
set the 5000, and in the space over they set the 10000, and in a higher
row 20000, which all I have expressed in this example, which is 97869 lb, 12
s, 9 d, ob, q. Ninetye seven thousand, eighte hundred, three score and mine
pound, twelve shillings and nine pence halfpeny farthing, for I had not told
you before, where, neither how you should set down farthings, which (as you see
here) must be set^e in a void space sideling beneath the pens: for q one
counter, for ob,
2 counters: for ob, q, 3 counters: and more there cannot be: for 4 farthings
make 1 d, which must be set in his due place.

And if you desire the same sum after Auditors manner: Lo here it is.

But in this thing you shall take this for sufficient, and the rest you shall
observe as you may see by the working of each sort: for the diverse wits of men
have invented diverse and sundry ways, almost innumerable.


THE ART OF NVMbring on the hand.
But one feate I shall teach you, which not only for ye strangeness and
secretenesse is much pleasant, but also for the good commodity of it, right
worthy to be well marked.

This feate has bin used above 2000 years at the least, and yet was it never
commonly known, especially in English it was never taught yet. This is the
art of numbering on the hand, with diverse gestures of ye fingers, expressing
any sum conceived in the mind. And first to begin.

If you will express any sum under 100, you shall express it with your left
hand and from 100 unto 1000, you shall express it with your right hand, as here
orderly by this Table following you may perceive.

Here follows the Table of the Art of the hand.

hand gesture 1 hand gesture 2 hand gesture 3 hand gesture 4 hand gesture 5
hand gesture 6 hand gesture 7 hand gesture 8 hand gesture 9 hand gesture 10
hand gesture 20 hand gesture 30 hand gesture 40 hand gesture 50 hand gesture 60
hand gesture 70 hand gesture 80 hand gesture 90 hand gesture 100 hand gesture
200 hand gesture 300 hand gesture 400 hand gesture 500 hand gesture 600 hand
gesture 700 hand gesture 800 hand gesture 900 hand gesture 1000 hand gesture
2000 hand gesture 3000 hand gesture 4000 hand gesture 5000 hand gesture 6000
hand gesture 7000 hand gesture 8000 hand gesture 9000
















Sch. If you will give me leave to express it after my rude manner, thus I
understand your meaning: that one is expressed by crooking in the little
finger, like the head of a Bishops bagle: and 7 is declared by the same
finger bowed like a gibbet.


M So I perceive you understand it.

Then to express 8, you shall bow after

And if you bow likewise with them the

Now to express 10, you shall bow your

And for to express 20, you must set your

30 Is represented by the joining together

40 Is declared by setting of the thumb

50 Is signified by right stretching forth of

60 Is formed by bending of the thumb

70 Is expressed by the bowing of the foremost between the 2 foremost or
highest ioints of it.






Sc. In deed these be al he numbers from 1 to 10, and then all the tenthes
within 100, but


Ma. You can little understand, if you ca^ not do that without teaching. What
is 11? is it not 10 and 1? then express 10 as you were taught and 1 also, that
is 11: and for 12 express 10 and 2: for 23 set 20 and ^: and so for 68, you
must make 6, and thereto 8: and so of al other sorts.

But now if you would represent 100, either any number above it, you must do
that with the right hand, after this manner.



And as you expressed 2 in the left hand, the same fashion in the right hand
does declare 200.

The form of 3 in the right hand stands for 300.

The form of 4 for 400.

Likewise the form of 5, for 500.

The form of 6, for 600. And to be short:


Scholar. I understand you thus: that if I would represente 900, I must so
form the

And so the form of every tenth in the left hand, serves to express the
number of thousands, so the sum of 40 stands for 4000.

The sum of 80, for 8000.

And the form of 90 (which is the greatest) for 9000, and above that I can not
express


Master. No, not with one finger, how be it, with diverse fingers you may
express 9999. and al at one time, and that lacks but 1 of 10000. So that
under ten thousand you may by your fingers express any sum. And this
shall suffice for Numeration on the fingers. And as for Addition, Subtraction,
Multiplication, and Division (which yet were never taught by any man as far
as I do know) I will instruct you after the treatise of Fractions: and now
for this time fare well, and look that you cease not to practice that you
have learned.


Sc. Sir, with most hearty mind I thank you, both for your good learning and
also your good counsel, which (God willing) I trust to follow.


FINIS.
THE SECOND part of the Arithmetike touching Fractions, briefly set forth.
Scholar. ALbeit I perceive your manifold business does so occupy, or rather
oppress you, that you can not as yet co^pletelie end that treatise of
Fractions Arithmeticall, which you have prepared, wherein not only sundry
works of Geometry, Music, and Astronomy be largely set forth, but also
diverse conclusions and natural works, touching mixtures of metals, and
compositions of medicines, with other strange examples, yet in the mean
season. I can not stay my earnest desire, but importunelie crave of you some
brief preparation, toward the use of Fractions, whereby at the least I may
be able to understand the common works of them, and the vulgar use of those
rules, which without them can not well be wrought.


Master. If my leisure were as great as my will is good, you should not need
to use any importunate craving, for ye attaining of that thing, whereby I may
be persuaded that I shall any ways profit the common wealth, or help the
honest studies of any good members in the same: wherefore, while mine
attendaunce will permit me to walk and talk, I am well willing to help you
as I may.

What a Fraction is.
Therefore first to begin with explication of this name Fraction, what take
you if to be?


Scholar. Marie sir, I think a Fraction (as I have heard it often named) to be
a broken number, that is to say, to be no whole number, but a part of a number.


Master A Fraction in deed is a broken number, and so consequently, the part
of another number: but that must be understood of such an other number, as
can not be divided into any other parts tha^ Fractions: for although I may
take the third part of 60, or the fourth part of it, and so of other parts
diversely, yet these parts be not properly, nor ought not to be called
Fractions, because they may be expressed by whole numbers: for the third part
of it is 20: the fourth part is 15: the twelfth part is 5, and so forth of
other parts, which all be whole numbers.

Wherefore properly a Fraction expresses the parts or part only of an
unit, What a Fraction in properly.
that is to say, that the number which is the whole or entire sum of any
Fraction, may not be greater than one: and therefore it follows, that no one
Fraction alone can be so great, that it shall make 1, as by examples I will
declare as soon as I have taught you to know the form how a Fraction is
expressed or represented in writing.


NVMERATION.
But first to begin with the expressing of a Fraction, which is the numeration
of it, you must understand that a Fraction is represented by 2 numbers, set one
over the other, and a line drawn between them as thus,.^/4. 10/17 which four
Fractions you must pronounce thus: ^/3 one third part: * three quarters: two
fifte parts: 10/17. ten seauenteene parts.

Scho. I understand the form of their expression and pronunciation, but their
meaning or valuation seems more obscure: yet I think that by the two first
Fractions I understand the valuation of the two later Fractions, and so
consequently of other.


M. Value them then, that I may perceive your taking of them


Scholar. betokens two fifte parts, that is to say, if one be divided into 5
parts, that Fraction does express ij. of those fifthe parts: 10/17 does
signify, that if one be divided into xvij. parts, I must take ten of them.
And this I gather of the two first examples: for. that is one third part,
does easily declare, that if any one thing be divided into three parts, I
must take but one of them: so that is three quarters, does declare that one
being divided into four quarters, I must take (for this Fractio^) three of
those quarters.

If there be no more difficulty in their Numeration, the^ I pray you go
forward to their Addition and Subtraction,
and so to the other kinds of works for I understand that the same kinds of
works be in Fractions, that be in whole numbers.


Master. There are the same kynds of works in both, albeit the order of them
is diverse, as I will anon declare: but yet more in Numeration before we leave
it. You must understand, that those two numbers which express a Fraction,
have several names. Numerator, and Denominator.
The ouermost which is above the line, is called the Numerator, and the other
beneath the line, is called the Denominator.


Scholar. And what is the reason of their diverse names? For in mine opinion
both be Numerators, seeing both they do express the numeration of the
Fraction.


Master. You are deceived: for one only (which is the ouermoste) does
express the Numeration: and the denominatour does declare the number of
parts into which the unit is divided, as in this example, when I say: Divide
a pound weighte of Gold between four men, so that the first man shall have
2/15 the second 2/15 the third 4/15 and the fourth 6/15.

Now do you perceive ye by the denominator (which is one in all four
Fractions) it is intended, that the pound weight should be divided into so
many parts I mean 15, and by the four several numerators is limited the
diverse portion that each man should have, that is, that when the whole is
parted into 15, the first man shall have 2 of those 15 parts: the second man
three of them: the third man 4: and the fourth man 6. And so may you see ye
several offices (as it were) of those two numbers, I mean of the Numerator and
the denominator.

And hereby you perceive, that a man can have no more parts of any thing than
it was divided into, nether yet aptly so many: so that it were unaptly said:
You shall have 15/15. that is xv fifteen parts of any thing, seeing it were
better said: You shall have the whole thing.


Sc. So does it appear reasonablye: for the labor is vain, to divide any
thing, and than to apply the Division to no use. And much less reasonable
were it to say 16/15: for if the whole be divided into 15 parts only, it is not
possible to take 16 of them, that is to say, more than altogether.


Master. This is true touching the proper and apt use of the name of a
Fraction:
yet improperlye, and after a vulgar acceptance (for easiness in work) both
those forms be called Fractions, because they be written like fractions,
although they be none in deed for 15/15, and generally all such other: where
the Numerator and Denominator be equal, are not Fractions: but the whole thing
with all his parts. And so 16/12 is not to be called a fraction, but a mixed
number, of a whole number and a Fraction: for it is as much, as 1 4/12, that
is one whole one, and 4 twelve parts, as shall be declared in Reduction.
Therefore they do abuse the names, that call them Fractions, where the
Numerator is either equal or greater than the Denominator.


Sc. But is there any needful cause why they should so abuse the name?


May. There is cause why they shall sometimes, for easiness in work, write
some numbers after that sort, like fractions: but they needed not to call them
fractions, but as they be whole numbers or mixed numbers (that is whole numbers
with Fractions) expressed like fractions.

Now must you understand, that as no fraction properly can be greater than 1,
so in smalnesse under one the nature of Fractions does extend infinitelye: as
the nature of whole numbers is to increase above one infinitelye, so that not
only one, may be divided into infinite Fractions or parts, but also every
Fraction may be divided into infinite Fractions or parts, which commonly
be called Fractions of Fractions, and they be expressed diversely: As for
example, 3/^.., that is three quarters of two third parts, of one half part.
Whereby is signified, that if one be divided into two halfes, and the one half
into three parts, and two of those three parts, be divided idyntlye into
four quarters, this Fraction of Fractions does represente three of those
quarters.


Scholar. I pray you let me prove by an example in common money, whether I
do rightlye understand you or no. One Crown, which I take for an unit, does
contain 60 pennies, therefore the half of it is thirtye pence: of that half
is 20 pence, whereof 3/^ is fifteen pence, so then 15 pence is 3/^.2/^. of a
Crown. And so 3 pence is... of a shilling.


Master. You perceive this well enough, but how happened that you found no
doubt in the form of writing these Fractions, seeing the two latter Fractions
have no line between their numbers, as the first has?


Sc. Because I had forgotten (as Scholars often times do) that that was told me
before: but I pray you, express the reason thereof.


May. This form is but voluntarye, and therefore has none other reason than
the will of the diuiser, which form many do follow. Some other do make lines
between every Fraction, and add words of distinction, after this sort, of,
of, which form is good also.

Some other express them thus ^ in slope form, to distinct them from
several Fractions of one whole number, for if they were set in one right line
thus,
. then ought it to be pronounced, three quarters, and two third parts and an
half, which makes almost two whole units, lacking but one xij. part. And so
is it nothing agreeable with the other Fraction of Fractions, wherefore it is a
great oversight in certain learned men, which do express them so confusedly
with such several Fractions, that a man can not know the one from the other.

Therefore some men (as Stifelius) do express without a line numbers of
proportion, being applied to Addition or Subtraction: because they must be
taken as two, where the line in Fractions makes them to be taken for one: for
of the Numeratour and Denominatour is made one number.


Scholar. Three several varieties.
Then I perceive there be three several varieties in Fractions: First when one
only Fractio^ is set for one number, as 4/^, yt is four fifth parts. The
second, is when there be set two or more several Fractions of one number, as
2/5, that is iiij. ninth parts, and two fifth parts. The third sort is
Fractions of Fractions, as 4/9 2/5, that is 4 ninth parts of two fifth parts.


Ma. You have said well, if you understand well your own words.


Scho. If it shall please you, I will by an example in the parts of an old
English Angel express my meaning.


May. Let me hear you.


Scholar. The old English Angel did contain 7 shillings 6 d, that is 90 d.
Now of it, is 72 d. And of the same 90 pence, if I take and, that is four
ninth parts, and 2 fifth parts, 4/9 is 40, and is 36, which both make 76: but
if I take 4/9 of, that is four ninth parts of two fifth parts, seeing is but
36, then 4/9 of 36 will yield but 16: for 1/9 of 36, is but 4, and that taken
four times makes 16.


Master. This is plainly expressed, and truly and hereby (I doubt not) but
you do perceive, yt as great a difference as is between 16 and 76, so much
difference is between these two Fractions 4/9 and: and 4/9 of. And now that
you understand these varieties, I will proceed to the rest of the works:
first admonishing you, that there is an other order to be followed in Fractions
than there was in whole numbers, for in whole numbers this was the order:
Numeration, Addition, Subtraction, Multiplication, Division, and Reduction, but
in Fractions (to follow the same aptness in proceeding from the easiest
works to the harder) we must use this order of the works: Numeration,
Multiplication, Division, Reduction, Addition, and Subtraction.


Scho. That Multiplication and Division should go together, and Subtraction
to follow Addition, natural order does persuade: but why Multiplication
should be first in order here next to Numeration, and Reduction in the middle,
I desire to understand the reason


May. As in the Art of whole numbers order would reasonablye begin with the
easiest, and so go forward by degrees to the hardest, even so reason teaches
in Fractions the like order. And considering that Addition or Subtraction of
Fractions can very seldom be wrought without multiplication and Reduction: and
contrariwayes, Multiplication and Reductio^ may be wrought without this form
of Addition or Subtraction. Therefore was it orderly required, that
Multiplication and Reduction should go before Addition and Subtraction. And
the same reason serves for the placing of Multiplication before Reduction.


Sch. Then if Multiplication be the easiest, I pray you declare the form of it
first by rule, and then by example.


May. Your example is good.


MVLTIPLICATION.
THerefore when any two Fractions be proponed to be multiplied together, ye
Numerator of the one must be multiplied by the Numerator of the other: and the
sum that amounts thereof, must be set for a new numerator: likewise the
Denominatour of the one must be multiplied by the Denominator of the other, and
that that amounts, shall be set for the common Denominator: and this new third
Fraction expresses the Product of the multiplication of the two first
fractions proponed, whereof take this example, multiplied by 5/12, does make
15/6^.

Scholar. I perceive then, that 3 being the Numeratour of the first Fraction,
is multiplied by 5, being the Numeratour of the second Fraction, whereof
amounts 15, the Numeratour of the third Fraction. And so likewise, 5 being
Denominatour of the first Fraction, is multiplied by 12 the Denominator of the
second fraction, whereof amounts 60 the new Denominator: so that I perceive
how the work is done, but I do not perceive how 15/60 is greater than: For
if I shall use my former manner of examination by the parts of some Coin, I
see that of a Crown is 36 d, and 5/12 of a Crown, is 25 d, whereof the one
multiplied by the other, does make 900 d, which is 15 Crowns: but by your
multiplication there amounts ^^/60, which is but 15 d, and that is much less
then any of both the first Fractions.


May. That difference is between multiplication in whole numbers, and
multiplication in broken numbers that in whole numbers the sum that
amounts, is greater than both the other whereof it came: but in Fractions it
is contrarywaies: for the sum that amounts is lesser tha^ any of the other
two fractions, whereof it came.


Sc. I desire much to understand the reason thereof.


May. Although I purposed to reserve the reasons of works Arithmeticall for
the perfect Book of Arithmetike, yet I will show you this, because of the
strangeness of the work.

You see in whole numbers, that of two numbers being multiplied together, is
made the third number: which third number does bear the same proportion to the
number multiplied, that the multiplier does bear to an unit. And so in
Fractions, the third number which amounts of multiplication, bears the same
proportion to each of the two first fractions, that the other of those two
fractio^s does bear to an unit.


Scholar. Sir I understand your words thus: when 40 is multiplied by 12,
there does amount 480, which 480 does contain 40 so many times in it, as
twelve does contain units, that is to say: twelve times. And so it appears,
that 480 does contain twelve so many times also, as 40 does contain Unites,
that is 40 times. But now I see not how the third number in this example of
Fractions can contain any of the two former (as it happened in whole numbers)
seeing it is lesser than either of them.


May. No marvel if you cannot see that thing which is not possible to be
seen of any man, how the third number in multiplication of Fractions should
be greater than any of the two former Fractions, but yet this may you see
(which I said) that the third number in Fractions so multiplied, does bear
the same proportion to any of the two former fractions, that the other of those
2 fractions does bear to an unite, as in your example being multiplied by
5/12, does make 15/60. Now say I, that 15/60 does bear the same proportion
to, that 5/12 does bear to an unit, as you may in your own form of
examination by coin try it. For in an old Angel are 180 half pence, which
I set for the entire unit whose parts (according to the Fractions aforesaid)
are these, for 15/60 set 45 ob. for take 160 ob and for 5/12 put 75 ob Now
does 45 bear the same proportion to 108 that 75 does bear to 180: for 45 is
5/11 of 108, and so is 75 also 5/12 of 180. And for easier applying of each
comparison, consider this form of setting all these numbers before your eyes,
where the second demo^stration toward your right hand is answerable to the
first in every proponed part, where for (of 180) stands his value 108: for
^/^ stands 75: and for 15/60 is 45.

^

But these reasons may be better reserved till another time, when the knowledge
of proportions in due order shall be taught. Yet in the mean season I will
show you how it comes to pass that in Fractions the third sum must
needs be lesser then any of the other two.

Consider thus, that when a Fraction is proponed, as in the former example, if
it be multiplied by more tha^ 1, it will make more than one entire number. As
if I multiply by 5, that is to say if I take it 5 times, it will make three
entire units: example in a Crown, of it makes 3 s, which if I take five
times, it will amounte to 15 shillinges, that is three entire Crowns: so if I
take the same but twice, it will yielde 6 s, that is one entire Crown and. Now
if I take it but once it cannot be more tha^ it was before, that is,
3 s. And if I take it less then once, it cannot be so much as it was before.
Then seeing that a Fraction is less than one, if I multiply a Fraction by
another Fraction, it follows that I do take that first Fraction less than
once and therefore the sum that amounts, must needs be less than the first
fraction.


Sc. Sir, I thank you much for this reason, And I trust I do perceive the
thing, as by example of this same Fraction I will express If I take of a Crown
once, that is to say, if I multiply by 1, it will be as it was before, but 3
s: so if I do multiply it by, that is, if I take it but half one time, then
will it be but half so much: likewise if I multiply it by, that is, if I
take but the third part of once, it will yielde but 12 pence, that is the
third part of the first Fraction.

And so to make an end. If I take it but the twelfth part of once, that is, if
I do multiply it by ^/^^, it will yielde but the twelfth part of the first
Fraction, which is but three pence. And it follows that if 1/^2 make 3 pence,
then 5/12 must needs make five times so much, that is 15 pence, which was the
sum that has given the occasion of all this doubt.


Master. Then I perceive you have sufficient understanding in this sort of
multiplication for this time, wherefore I will omit that I might say more of
Multiplication, till we come to reduction, and will pass to the other works,
and first to Division, whose place follows Multiplication, both by natural
order, and also in ea^sinesse of work.


DIVISION.
WHen so ever two fractions be proponed, that the one should be divided by
the other, I must set down first the Fraction that shall be divided (which
is called the Dividend) and then after it the other, which is the Divisor.
Then shall I multiply the numerator of the dividend by the denominator of the
diuisour, and that which amositeth, I must put for a new numerator. Again, I
shall multiply the denominator of the dividend by the numerator of the
divisor, and the number that amounts thereof, I must put for the new
denominator. And this third fraction is the quotient of the said division.

Scholar. This seems easy in form, as by example, thus: If I would divide
by 2/6, first I must multiply 5 (being the numerator of the dividend) by 6,
which is the denominator of the Divisor, and thereof rises 30: then I
multiply 8 (being the denominator of the dividend) by 2, being Numerator in
the divisor, and so rises 16, the which I must make in a third Fraction,
thus 30/16.


Ma. Me seems you are quicker in understanding now, than you were when I
taught you the art of whole numbers: but that is no marvel, for the more
knowledge that any man gets, the readier shall he find his wit, and quicker
in understanding: but yet of 2 things I will admonish you, which you might
have observed here for ease of work and lightness of understanding the nature
of the Quotient.

Whensouer you divide one Fraction by an other, either they be both equal
together either else the one is greater than the other: if they be equal,
their quotient shall be such, that the numerator and the denominator of it shall
be equal also. And if ye 2 first fractions be unequal, their quotient shall
declare the same by the inequality of the numeratour and denominatour, as in
these examples following shall appear.

First of equal Fractions: 4/9 and 12/2^ be equal together: and if the one
be divided by the other, the quotient will be 108/108, as you may perceive by
that rule aforesaid.

Now in the unequal Fractions, as 4/9 and 3/10 the quotient will be 40/27: where
the Numerator is greater than the denominator.


Sch. I see it is so, but I see not the reason why it should be so.


Master. Note how (...) 2 numbers.
The reason is this, when any Fraction is divided by an other, the quotient
declares what proportion the dividend bears to the divisor. So divided by,
makes 2, which must be sounded, not two, but twice: declaring that is
contained twice in.

And note this, that the Numerator in the Quotient, represents the Dividend,
and the Denominator represents the divisor* And this is always true,
whether, the greater fraction be divided by the lesser, or the lesser by the
greater. But this proportion will not be exactly known, till you have learned
the art of proportions: notwithstanding somewhat of it will I declare in the
next rule of Reduction. But now for the easy remembrance of the Quotie^t in
division, as soon as you have set down your two Fractions, the one against
the other, then make a streighte line for the quotiente: and as soon as you
have multiplied the Numerator of the diuidende, by the Denominator of the
divisor set the number that amounts, over the said line, and then multiply
the other two numbers, and set their total under the same line.


Scholar. I perceive you would not have me trust to memory til I were better
expert, least oftentimes I happen by miss remembrance to be abused. This
example I take for that declaration.

If I would divide by I must set the numbers one against the other, ^ (as here
does appear) and then make an other line for the Quotient in some good
distaunce, where I may set the numbers of the Quotient, as soon as any of
them is multiplied: So then as soon as I have multiplied 2 by 4, which makes
8, ^ I shall set that over that line thus. And then multiplye ^ by ^, which
yields 9: and that 9 must I set under the same line, and then will the whole
quotient appear thus 8/9. Note.
Whereby appears (as I remember your words) that is in proportion to, as 8
is to 9: but how may I perceive that?


Master. Although you shall better perceive it by the rule of Reduction, yet
this example may be declared in common coin, as in a common shilling of xij.
pence, of which ^/2 makes 8 d, and does make 9 pence, and so you may easily
see that their proportions do agree. And if you had taken this example before,
when you took the example of* and ^/6, your Quotie^t would appear (as this
does) more easier to understand, whereas that Quotient being 10/16, is not an
easy proportion for you to perceive, being yet little acquainted with
proportions: whereof to give you some taste, I will enter to the rule of
Reduction: in which also I will declare other works, both of Multiplication and
also of Division, which now I must for a time omit, as things that do
need the help of Reduction.


REDVCTION.
THerefore will I now declare the diversities of Reduction of Fractions, Five
varieties of Reduction.
which commonly have five varieties.

1. First, when there be, sundry Fractions of one entire Unity, they must be
reduced to one denomination, and also into one Fraction.

2 Secondarily, when there be proponed fractions of fractions, they must be
reduced likewise into one Fraction, for other ways they can not be brought
into one Denomination.

3 Thirdly, when an Improper fraction is proponed, that is to say, a fraction
in form, which indeed is greater tha^ an unity, it must be reduced into apt
form expressing ye Unity or Unities of it, and the proper fraction distinctly.
And some times also it shall be needful to convert such a mixte number of
Unities, with Fractions into the form of a Fraction, that is into an Improper
Fraction, which 2 forms I esteem but as one, because they work on one kind
of number.

4 Fourthlie, there happens sometimes Fractions to be written in great
numbers, which might be written in lesser numbers, therefore is there a mean
to reduce such great numbers into their smallest terms.

5 Fiftelie, when any Fraction betokens the parts of a whole thing, which
has by common partition certain parts, but none of like Denomination with
that Fraction, then may you reduce the said Fraction into an other, whose
Denomination shall express the common parts of that whole thing.

Scholar. This distinction in doctrine delights me much, but more with hope
than present fruit, for as yet I do not understand scarcely the varieties,
and much loss the practice and use of their works.


Master. Reduction is an orderly alteration of numbers out of one form into
an other, which is never done orderlye but for some needful use, as in every
of the said 5 several varieties I will distinctly declare.

First therefore, when two or more several Fractions of any Unite be
proponed, The first sort of Reduction.
as for example, ^3/1 and 4/6: because it is hard to tell what proportion of
the entier number those two Fractions do express, therefore was Reduction
divised, to be a mean whereby these several Fractions might be brought
into one Denomination and Fraction.

And in these Fractions this is the art for bringing them to one denomination.

Multiply first the Denominators together, How to reduce fractions of
diverse denominations into one Denomination.
and the total thereof you shall set twice down under two several lines
for two new Denominators, or rather for one common Denominator: Then multiplye
the Numeratour of the first Fraction, by the Denominator of the second, and
set the total thereof for the Numeratour over the first line. Likewise
multiply the Numerator of the second Fraction by the Denominator of the
first, and set that total over the second line for the Numerator of that
Fraction, and so are those two first Fractions of several denominations,
brought to one Denomination.


Sch. If I understand you, as I think I do, my example shall declare the same.
The Fractions which you proponed were these, ^/16 and 4/6* whose Denominators
(being 16 and 6) I multiply together, and there amounts 96, which I set
under lines, thus. ^ Then I multiply the Numerator of the first Fraction by
the Denominator of the second, saying: 3 into 6 makes 18, that set I over the
first line for a new Numeratour, and it will be thus. ^

Likewaies I multiply the Numeratour of the second Fraction by the
Denominatour of the first: saying: 4 times 16 makes 64, that I set for ye
second Numeratour, and the Fraction will appear thus. ^ So that both Fractions
brought to one Denomination, must stand thus: ^


Ma. You have done well.


Scholar. I beseech you, let me examine it after my accustomed form, by common
parts of coin.


Ma. Go to.


Scholar. A new Angel accounted at eight shillings, contains 96 pence,
whereof ^* that is the xvj. part, is six pence, and 1/16 is 18 pence, that is
18/^6. Again of the same Angel, is 16 pence, so that 4/6 makes 64 d, that is
64/^^. And so I find the sums to agree with the other before.


Master. So have you now the Art to bring such two Fractions into one
Denomination. And if there be more than ij, Note the Reduction of three
Fractions or more to one.
then must you multiply all the Denominators together, and set the total
thereof so many times down as there be Fractions, and then to get for each one a
new Numerator. Multiply the Numerator of the first, by the Denominator of
the second, and the total thereof multiply by ye denominator of the third, and
so forth if there be more. Likewise multiply the Numerator of the second, by
the denominator of the first, and the total thereof by the Denominator of the
third. And in the same sort multiply the Numerator of the third into ye
Denominator of the first: and the total thereof into the Denominator of the
second, and so forth, if there were mo. So these 3 Fractions 2/5 ^/4 2/^
does make by Reduction these other 3. Fractions of one Denomination 24/6^
45/6^ 4^/6^. All which you may bring into one Fraction by adding the
Numeratours together, and putting that total for the common Numerator,
reserving still that same common Denominator, And those 3 Fractions make one
Improper Fraction thus. ^


Scho. All this I perceive, and also that this last Fraction is more than an
Unity, and therefore you did call it an Improper Fraction.


M There be certain other forms of working in this reduction, which I will
briefly touch also, to give you an occasion to exercise your wit therein.

The first variety of this Reduction.
The first variety is this. When you have made and written down your common
Denominator (as I have taught before) then to get a Numerator for the first, do
thus. Divide the common Denominator by the Denominator of the first Fraction,
and the quotiente multiplied by the Numerator of the same, yields a new
Numerator for the first new Fraction. So likewise do with the second and the
third, and with all the residue if there be more.


Scholar. That will I prove in your last example of these 3 Fractions ^. When
the Denominators be multiplied, they make 60 for 5 into 4 makes 20, and 20 by
3 yeldeth 60, that I set down 3 times, thus. ^: then to have a Numerator for
the first, I must divide 60 by 5, (the Denominator of the first) and the
quotient is 12, which I must multiplye by 2 (the Numerator of the first) and
that makes 24, and so have I for the first Fraction 24/60.

Likewise for the second fraction: The second variety.
I divide 60 by 4, and there comes 15, which I multiplye by 3, and so have I
45 and the second fraction 45/60. Then for the third in like sort will come
40/60.


Master. An other way is this. If it happen so that the lesser Denominator can
by any multiplication make the greater, the^ note the multiplier, and by it
multiply ye Numeratour over that lesser Denominatour, and for the lesser
Denominatour put the greater, as thus in these two Fractions, 2/^2 and three
being the lesser Denominatour multiplied by 4, will make 12, which is the
greater Denominatour: therefore by the same 4, I do multiply 2, which is the
Numeratour over 3, and that makes 8: under which I do put 12 being the
greater Denominatour, which is also made by Multiplication of 4 into ^, and so
have I these ij. Fractio^s 3/^2^, 8/^2: thus shortly reduced without altering
the one Fraction.


S This I understand.


Ma. The third ^arietie.
Then mark this third way: If the denominators do not happen so, that one by
Multiplication may make the other, the^ look whether they both may be parts
of any other one number, as in ^/1^ and ^/18, although the lesser taken but
twice be to great to make 18, yet they both may be parts unto 36: therefore look
how many times 12 is in 36, and that quotient being multiplied by the
numeratour over 12, the total shall be put in stead of the Numerator over
12, and for 12 put 36, thus, ^5/^6. So likewise look how often is 18 in ^6,
and because it is twice, therefore by 2 multiply 7. which is over 18, and it
will be 14, set that for the numerator, and in stead of 18 put 36, and then
shall your Fractions reduced, stand thus, 1^/36 14/36 in stead of 5/^2 and
7/1^.

Proof.
And if you will prove whether you have wrought well or no, that may be proved
by Reduction of them again to their former denominations, which art shall be
taught in the fourth kind of Reduction, where greater terms of Fractions be
reduced into smaller in number, but no smaller in proportion.
And if in such Reduction the same terms or numbers come again that were
before, then is the work good, else not.


S Sir, I hear your words, but I do not understand many of the^, which it
may please you to declare.


Ma. With a good will, when conueniente place serves, but that must be in the
said iiij. kind of Reduction. In the mean season I will declare the second
form of Reduction, which teaches how to reduce Fractions of Fractions into
one Fraction, and so to one Denomination.

When fractions of fractions be proponed, Reductio^ of fractions of fractions
into one fraction and denomination.
you shall multiply the Numeratours of each into other, and set the total for
the new Numerator, and then multiply all the Denominatours likewaies, and take
their total for the new denominator, and so are they speedily reduced.


Sc. If that be al then I understand it already, as by this example I will
declare. These be the Fractions, of of 6/7 of 7/9 which I would reduce to one
denomination.

Therefore begin I with the Numeratours, and multiple them all together, saying:
3 into 2 makes 6, and 6 by 6 makes 36, which multiplied by 7, yields 352,
that ^ I set over a line for the Numerator, thus:

Then I multiply the denominatours, 4 by 3 makes 12, and that by 7 brings
84, which multiplied by 9, yields 756, the new denominatour. And so the
whole ^ reduced fraction is this, which is to hard a Fraction for me to
understand yet.


May You think so, and no marvel, but anon you shall learn to judge it
easily, for this Fraction is no more in deed then although it be in greater
terms, and therefore more stranger and more obscure.

And this suffices for this Reduction, save that I will show you by a figure
of measure, the just rate and reason of this kind of Fractions, and also the
due understanding of the Reduction.

The entier measure parted into 9.

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 7/9.1..2..3. 6/7 1 2 3 4 1 2 3

Here you see the longest measure, (which stands for the whole and entier
quantity) first parted into 9 Divisions, whereof 7 are severed by the second
measure: and thereof again are parted out 6. And that 6 being distinct into 3
parts, 2 of them are parted by the fourth measure, of which fourth measure,
being divided into 4 parts, the lowest measure does contain, so that the same
must be named, not 3/4 of the whole measure, but in deed is of of 6/7 of 7/9
or as I would rather express it, 3/^ 1/^ 6/^ 7/^.


Scholar. This example is so sensible, that I can not choose but see it. And
furthermore, I see also, that the same fraction is equal to 3/9 of the entier
measure, as the lines which run up and down do expresselie set forth. Also
I see here, that.6/7, 7/9 is equal to 4/9 And further yet that 6/7.^/9 is
equal to 6/5.


Ma. I am glad that you see it so well, not doubting but you will gather
greater light of knowledge hereby.

The third form of Reduction.
But now it is time that we come to the third form of Reduction, which
teaches of Improper Fractions, that is to say, Mixed numbers of Unites and
Fractions, although they appear like Fractions, as this 2/^ 6/5, which does
include 5 Unites wholly, and over. Wherefore first you shall know them, by that
the Numeratour is greater than the Denominatour.


Scho. In deed sir that appears reasonable, that if the Numerator do
express more parts to be taken of any unity then the Denominator does
signify that unity to be divided into, it must needs follow that such a
fraction imports more than the whole, that is to say, the whole with
certain parts over. But what Reduction is there in it?


Ma. There be two several kinds of Reduction, concerning such Fractions.
Sometimes it shall be needful to convert those fractions into the Unites and
the proper fraction that will remain And sometimes contrary ways it shall be
mete to reduce mixed numbers, that is unities, written with fractions into the
form of one simple fraction, and so be there two ways.


Sch. What is the mean of the first way to turn improper fractions into
Unities with their proper Fractions?


M. That is thus. Reductio^ of improper frictions into units with their proper
Fractions.
Your Numerator being greater than the Denominator, must be divided by the
same denominator, and the quotie^t thereof expresses the unities, ye remainer
shall be put for the Numerator of the fraction that rests, and the denominator
must be ye same that was before.


Sc. For example, I take 17/5. And dividing 17 by 5, the quotient will be 2, and
there will remain 2.


Ma. That must you write thus, 3 where (you see) I have written, without any
line, as entier numbers ought to be written, and the 2 that remained, I have
set over the former denominator with a line, as a proper fractio^. And this
number does signify now 3 Units, and of one.


Scho Then if I would by Unites here understand crowns, so it were 3 crowns,
and, that is 2 s.


M. Even so, and therefore 17/5 did signify the same. But this happens
sometimes, that when the Reduction is so wrought, there remains nothing. And
then it is not a mixts number, but a simple entier number, represented like a
Fraction.


Scholar As ^^/^ will make 3 just, and 15/3 will make even 6. This I will
remember. But now, what is the second form of Reduction, that you spoke of
for these sorts of Fractions?


M. Reductio^ of whole numbers, either alone, or joined with fractio^s into
^ractions.
Whenever you have any of these two sorts of numbers, that is to say, whole
numbers without Fractions, or whole numbers with fractions, and you would turn
the^ into the form of a fraction you must multiply the whole number by that
denominatour, which you will have to remain still, and to the total thereof add
the numeratour which you have already, and all that shall you set for the new
numerator, keeping still the former denominatour: as if you have 6 which you
would convert into an Improper Fractio^ you must multiply 6 by 4, whereof
comes 24, and thereto add the numeratour which is 3, and so have you 27 for
the numerator, and 4 still for the Denominator.


Sc. Then is 27/4 equal to 6.


Ma. Even just, and so backward (as appears by the former Reductio^) 6 makes
27/4 And thus one of these Reductions may be the proof of the others work.


Sc. This I perceive, but now if you would turn whole numbers without fractions
into any fraction, I see not how that may be done, because there is no
denominatour to make the multiplication by.


Ma. That was well marked: but this you know, that no man intends to turn
any whole number into a Fraction, but he has in his mind that denominator by
which the Multiplication must be made:
for the proof whereof I set down 7, which is a whole number. And if you
will have this number converted into any certain fraction, will me to do it.


Scholar. I pray you reduce 7 into a Fraction.


Ma. Then you care not what the fraction be, so it be some fraction.


Sc. No, I pass not for the sort of the Fraction.


Ma. Then how can you think that you require me to do any thing certain,
when you leave me to do as I list? and seeing you stand at that stay,
whether think you that I must first intend in mind what fraction I will
make of it, before I can do it indeed?


Sc. Else you should do ignorauntly.


May. Then I will limit my self (seeing you will not) to turn it into
quarters. And therefore I multiply 7 by 4 (which is the denomination of
quarters) and there amou^teth 28 to be set for the Numeratour, and the 4 must
be set for the Denominator, and the fraction will be thus, 28/^.


Sch. Indeed I perceive this to be reasonable, for without much trial I
understand that 28/4 of any thing does make 7. And so then if I would turn 8
into fifth parts, it will make 40/5 which is all one with 8. for eyghte crowns
turned into fifth parts (that is, into shillinges) will make 40 shillinges,
that is 40/5 of a crown.


Ma. Seeing you understand now these three kinds of Reduction, I will declare
unto you the fourth kind, that is when Fractions be written in greater Terms
than they need, how they may be brought to lesser Terms.


Scholar To write any thing in greater Terms than needs, seems to be a
fault, The fourth kind of Reduction.
and so this Rule seems to amend that fault.


Na. It were a fault to do any thing without need which after must be
redressed: but in this case it is not so: neither did I say absolutely (as you
do) that it needs not to express those Fractions in so great terms, but
that the fractions do not need, I mean for their value to be understood:
but yet it may be needful for the ease of those works whereto they be
applied, as for example: In the first kind of Reduction this was your own
example: 3/16 and 4/^, which when you would reduce, you were feign to turn
them first into one Denomination, and so appeared they thus, 18/96, and 6^/96,
where the Fractions (for their own understanding) needed not to be turned out
of smaller terms into greater, but yet the easiness of working needed it.


Sch. Sir, I understand now, not only the difference of this need (for the
Fractions might better be understood as Fractions several, each in his
value, Terms of Fractions.
when they were in lesser terms, although they could not so well be reduced)
but also I understand what you mean by greater Terms and lesser Terms,
whereof before I was in doubt, for I see you call the Numeratour and
denominatour, the Terms of the Fraction.


Master. I am glad you understand it so well. Now then when you would value
any fractions (because that may best be done when the Terms are smallest) you
shall reduce them to the smallest that you can, which thing you may do thus:
Reduction of Fractions into their smallest terms.
Divide the greatest of any such two Terms by the lesser, and if any thing
remain by that remainer, divide the last Diuisour: and if any thing remain
now, by that divide the last diuisour (which was before the remainer of the
first Division) and so continue still, till nothing do remain in the Division:
and then mark your last Diuisour, for it is the number that will easilye
reduce your Fraction, if you divide both the Numeratour and the Denominatour by
the same number, and put for the Numeratour the quotient of his Division, and
for the Denominatour also his quotient, that rises by his Division.


Scho. I take for example 18/96, and because 96 is the greatest number, I
divide it by 18, and the quotient is 5, and there rests 6: what shall I do
with this quotient?


Master. Nothing in this work, but now seeing there remains somewhat, by
that remainer must you divide the last divisor.


Sc. If I shall divide 18 (which was the last diuisour by 6, that was the
remayner, so is the quotient ^, and nothing rests


Ma. As for the quotient I omit him yet: but because there does remain
nothing therefore is 6 (which was your last diuisour) that number by which you
may reduce the fraction proponed,


Sch. Then as you taught me. I must divide the Numerator 18 by 6 and the
quotient is 3, which I must put for ^ the numerator over a line, thus. and then
by the said 6, must I divide also the denominator 96, and the quotient will be
16, which I must take for the Denominator, and so is the fraction 3/16. And so
me thinks this Rule does prove ye work of the first Reduction.


May. That is true, if the first Reduction were made of Fractions in their
least terms, and else not, without some help, as the second number in that
place will declare.


Sc. The second number was ^/6, which was turned into 64/56, by that rule. Now
if I shall by this Rule reduce it again into the least terms, I must divide
96 by 64, and there rests 32, by which 32 I divide 64, and there remains
nothing, wherefore I must take that 32 for the Diuisour, to reduce the said
Fraction. Then do I divide 64 by 32, and the Quotient is 2, which I set for
my Numeratour. Again, I divide 96 by 32, and the Quotient will be 3, and so
have I but


Ma. Muse not at the matter, for you have done well enough: but you think you
have not the fraction that you looked for, that is 4/6, yet have you one equal
to it, as by the parts of a shilling you may prove.


Sc. Truth it is, for each of them will bring forth 8 pence, so that, 8/^^, and
4/6 and 2/7, be all three equal. And now I perceive that because 4/6 was not
written in the least Terms that it might be, therefore this Reduction
brought forth not it, but that other which is written in the least terms.
Now understand I this rule well. But is there any other way to work this
Reduction.


Master. Yes, but first note this, An other way for to work Reduction.
that if you find no such divisor, to reduce the Fraction till you come to 1,
because 1 does make no division, therefore that Fraction is already in his
least terms, as by 71/100 you may prove and so of 81/98 and many other like.
But now for your better aid to find the due proportion in least terms, with
more ease for a young learner, you shall mediate or take the half of the
Numerator, and also the denominator as long as you may upon a line always
parting them with a dashe of your pen as you work, which may easilye be
done, if the numbers be even: as 2, 4, 6, 8, or 10: But if they be odd (though
it be but in one of them) then must you abbreuiate them by ^, by 5, by 7, etc.

And because Examples do most instruct, I have in the Page following, set
down the manner of 2 or 3, whose last number at the end of the line, shows
the least term or valuation of that Fraction.

^

Abbreuiated first by 5, then by 293.

^


Sc. Sir I thank you much, this is very easy, and good for a young learner.


Ma. So it is, but yet notwithstanding, if you can without that division by
memory epsy the greatest number that may divide exactly both Terms of your
Fraction proponed, then need you not to use that division, as in this fraction
6^/96 I see that 12 is the greatest number that can divide them both: and
therefore without any work, by memory only, I turn that into, but this
ability in knowledge is gotten by exercise.

Yet one other way of easy Reduction in this kind there is, when your
Fraction has any Cipers in ye first places of both terms, then may you by
casting away the ciphers, make a brief Reduction, as thus 300/400, here take
away the Ciphers, and it will be, which is the same in value with 300/400.


Scholar. And so if I have 400/650 it will be 4/65.


Ma. You are deceived, for you take away more ciphers from the Numerator,
than you do take from the denominator, which you may not do.


Sc. I confess my fault, which came of too much haste, I was more gladder of
the rule than wise in using it: but now I understand it I trust.


Ma. Then may I go in hand with the fifth or last kind of Reduction^, The fifth
kind of Reduction
which teaches how to turn any fraction proponed into any other denomination
that you list: or into any parts of common coins, waightes, or measures, or
such like.

For declaration whereof, first you shall mark whether your fraction be a
simple fraction, either else a fraction of sundry parts, I mean of more
terms than 2. And if your fraction be a fraction of Fractions, or otherways
compounde, you must reduce it to one simple fraction. And then mark well the
denomination of that other fraction, into which you would turn this, for by
that denominatour you must multiply the Numeratour of your first fraction, and
the total Producte thereof shall you divide by the denominator of your first
fraction, and that quotient shall be the numeratour to the denominatour
proponed: as for example I have this fractio^, which I would turn into tenth
parts, therefore I multiply this 10 by 3, that is the Numeratour of my
fraction, and there rises 30, which I divide by 5, and the Quotient is 6,
which must be the Numerator to 10, and so will be 6/10.


Sc. This is easy enough to do.


Ma. Then shall you see an other example of the same fraction that is not so
easy: as if I would turn into viij. parts, prove you that work.


Sc. I must multiply 8 by 3, and there amounts 24, which I divide by 5, and
the quotient is 4, then is the new fraction 4/8.


Ma. And see you nothing doubtful in this work?


Sc. I see that when 24 was divided by 5, there remained 4, which I did not
pass of, because ye speak nothing of any remayner, but only of the quotient.


Ma. By likelihoode you remember what I said to you in division of whole
numbers, that you should not pass of the remayner there, but only note it as
a sum that could not be divided without knowledge of Fractions. Wherefore now
mark this, that in all Divisions of whole numbers, when there is any remainer,
you shall set it over a line as a Numeratour, and set the Diuisour for the
Denominatour, and that Fraction does make the Division complete, and is part
of the quotient: as if I would divide 48 by 5, the quotient will be 9: so in
your former work when 24 was divided by 5, the quotient should be 4, and so
the new ^ Fraction should be thus: that is 4/8 of the entire number, and of
4/8: which you may prove be example of some coin.


Sc. Then I take a Crown, whose is 3 s. Now if I would prove whether that 3 s
be 4 and of 4/8 I shall have a combrous work to do.


Master. In deed for whole pennies your example is troublesome: yet tourning
the Crown into half pennies, it is easy enough.


Sc. Now will I do it.


Ma. First let me tell you an easy way how to find any number that will
easily be divided into such parts as you desire, which way is this. Set down
the parts that you desire, and then by one of them multiply all the other, the
total whereof shall contain all the parts proponed, as if I would have a
number that may be divided into 4, 5, 6, and 7 parts, by 4 multiply 5, and
there rises 20: then multiply 20 by 6, and it will make 120: which multiplied
by 7, will yield 840: and so of any other numbers.


Sc. Then in our former example where is mention but of 5 parts and 8 parts,
I shall only multiply 5 by 8, which makes 40, and that number will serve.


Ma. So will it.


Sc. Then what is of 40?


May. Prove by the same rule which you confess easy enough: 3 times 40, is
120, which being divided by 5, makes ^ 24 and that is just.

Now to know whether it be equal to 24, first I see by the same rule, that
4/8 is 20, and 2/8 is 5, of which 5, I must take: ^ and that by the same Rule
is 4. So that I see now, that is equal to.


Ma. And by the way note this form of fraction how it is written, that is to
say, both the Numerator and his Fraction above the line, although I know it may
be written otherwise, as thus: 4/8 and of 4/8, but I accoumpte the other way
more apt a great deal.


* Scho. Now I pray you sir let me prove how this 4/8 and of 4/8 of a Crown be
equal to of a Crown our first proponed fractio^, that has brought forth these
hard fractions to my thinking yet.

First I see that of a crown is ^ s: which is 36 d, or 72 half pence. Now if
I can find that this fraction 4/8 and of 4/8 be equal unto 3 s: then am I
fully answered.

Because I cannot take 4/8 of a Crown, I turn the crown into half pence, as
you wild me, which makes 120, which I divide by 8, my quotie^t is 15, which
taken 4 times makes 60: now rests me to have ^/5; of the, whereof is 15, that
15 being parted into 5 parts, ye quotie^t is 3, which taken 4 times makes 12,
which with my 60 before, amounts to 72: which are then equal to my desire.


Ma. And so may you express by an other way then is before mentioned, all ^
Fractions of Fractions, as thus: That is of, and so of other, but I remit these
fourmes to the arbitrament of every wise arts man, to use as he thinks most
apt and ready.

But now one example more for this rule, and then shall we end it. If I have
^/15 of a Sovereign (accounting the Sovereign 20 shillinges) how many
shillinges is that 7/15?


Sc. I must multiply 7 by 20, and that makes 140, which I shall divide by 15,
and the Quotient will be 9 5/15: or else in lesser terms,.


Ma. That is 9 s, and one third part of a shilling, that is 4 d, as by this
same rule you may prove. And this for this time shall suffice for Reduction,
save that I must now repeat a little touching Multiplication and Division, and
so go forward.


MVLTIPLICATION.
IN Multiplication it happens sometime that there be whole numbers to be
multiplied with Fractio^s: And may be in two sorts, for either the whole
number is several from the Fraction, and is the Multiplyer, or else, the whole
number is joined with one, or both of the Fractions, Reduction of whole
numbers into Fractions.
and so makes a mixed number thereof. If it be in the first sort, then needs
there no Reduction, but only multiply the Numerator of the Fraction by that
whole number, and the total thereof set for the new Numerator.

Scho. I understand you thus. If I have 6/2^, to be multiplied by 16, then must
I multiply that 16 with 6, which is the Numerator, whereof comes 96, and
that must I set for the new Numerator, keeping still 23 for the Denominator,
and so the Fraction will be 96/2^ that is 4 4/23.


Ma. And in this sort of work you may abridge the labor, thus. If it
happen the denominator to be such a number, as may euenly be divided by the
said whole number proposed, then divide it thereby, and set the quotient of
that Division for the former denominator: but reserve still the Numerator, and
so is the Multiplication ended.


Scho. Then I feign this example, 7/20 to be multiplied by 5. And because 5
will justly divide 20, therefore I take the quotient of that division which is
4, and set in stead of 20, and so the Fraction will be 7/4, that is 1.


Master. Which is all one with 35/^0, that would have followed of the other
sort of work.


Sch. I perceive it very well.


Master. ^vv to mul^ie mixed ^he^s.
Now then for the other sort where the number is mixed, take this way: first
to reduce the said whole number, and fraction into one fraction Improper (as I
showed you in Reduction) and then multiply them together, as if they were
proper fractions.


Sc. 13 ^/5; being set to be multiplied by ^/9, first I must reduce the mixte
number, as appears in the margent, by multiplying 13 by 5, ^
and that makes 65, whereto I must add the Numerator 3, and so the fraction
will be 68/5, which now I shall multiply after the accustomed form, and it
will be 340/40.


Ma You have done well: and so may you see, that although most part of the
forms of Multiplication may be wroughte without Reduction, yet some can not,
as namelye mixed numbers.

And yet one note more will I tell you of Multiplication, before we leave it:
That is* when so ever you would multiplye any Fraction by 2, which commonly
is called Duplation, you may do it not only by doubling the Numeratour, but
also by parting the Denominator into half, if he be even.


Scholar. Then if I would double 5/^^, I may choose whether I will make it,
1^/1^, or else. And in deed I see that all is one, but that the dividing of
the Denominatour seems the better way to make smaller terms of the
Fraction, and so they shall need the less Reduction.


M. It is so: and now I shall not need to tell you that Multiplication is
proved by Division, and Division likewayes by multiplication, but the like
works that I showed you in Multiplication, will I show you in Division also.


DIVISION.
^ision to ^de a ^ole nu^^ by a ^ion.
WHen any whole number shall be divided by a Fraction, you must multiply ye
said whole number with the Denominator of the fraction, and set the total
thereof for the new Numerator, and for the Denominator, let the Numerator of
the Fraction.

Scholar. Then 20 divided by ^ will make 60/3, as here appears:


Master. ^iuide ^ction whole ^er.
Even so. But if you would divide the fraction by the whole number, the^
multiply the Denominatour by the same whole number, and set the total for
the Denominatour, without changing the Numerator.


Scholar. Then to divide 20/23 by 4, it will by 20/92. As here appears in
this ^ example.


M. You say well. And by the same example you give me occasion to remember an
other brief way to do the same: Another brief way
for if you had divided the said Numerator by 4, and set the quotient for
the Numerator, keeping still the old Denominator, it would have been not only
as well done, but also in a fraction of lesser terms.


Scholar. I guess it to be even so, by a like work that you taught me in
Multiplication. And for proof thereof 20/23 being the dividend, and 4 the
Deuisour, I divide the Numeratour 20 by 4, and the quotient is 5, which I
set for 20 over 23, thus 5/23. And I see that it is all one with 20/62, as by
dividing or abbreuing both these terms by 4, and so reducing them to their
least Denomination, I may easily ^ prove: as appears in this example:


M. You conceive it well. And if there be mixed numbers (either one or both) you
must first reduce that mixte number into an improper Fraction. And then work
as you have learned.


S. That was sufficiently taught in Multiplication. Therefore I pray you go
forward to some other thing.


Ma. Then take this note yet for division. If the Denominatours be like, then
divide the Numeratours as if it were in whole numbers, and the quotient whether
it be Fractio^, whole number, or mixed, is a good quotient for that Division.
And generally if one of the Numerators may justly divide the other, by that
quotient multiply the Denominator of the lesser Numerator, and set it that
does amounte in the room of ye same denominator, and then for a Numerator to
it, set the denominator of the other fraction.


Scho. Then if I would divide ^/4 by 12/1^ I see that 3 will divide 12, and
the quotient will be 4, by which I must multiply the other 4 that is the
Denominator under 3, and then it is 16, which I set for the Denominator 4, and
over it in stead of the ^, I must set 17, the other Denominator, and so is it
thus, 17/16.


Master. And so is 17/16 in stead of 11/48, which would have risen by the
common ^ work: as here appears:

And now for Mediation (which is to divide by 2) mark this: If the Numeratour
be even, set the half of it in his place without the Diuisour, and so have you
done: and if the Numeratour be not even, then double the denominator.


Sch. That is if I would mediate 6/11 I may make the quotient ^/11. And if I
would mediate ^/11 I must make it 7/22.


Master. Now trust I that you have sufficient knowledge in Reduction,
Multiplication, and Division: and therefore will I go in hand with Addition
and Subtraction, which now will appear easy enough.


ADDITION.
(...) add ^^ctions of ^e deno^^nation.
Whenever you have any fractions to be added, you must consider whether they
be of one Denomination or not* And if they be of one denomination, then add
the Numerators together, and set ye that amounts, for the Numerator over the
common Denominator, and so you have done. The reason is, because that such
differ little in Addition or Subtraction from the work of vulgar
denominations, where the Denominators be no numbers: as 3 pence and 5 pence,
make 8 pence, ^o ad fra^^^ons of d^rse deno^^nations.
where ye denomination is not altered. But and if the fractio^s be not of one
denomination, or any of them be mixed of whole numbers and fractions, then must
you first reduce them to one denomination, and after add them. And if they be
many, then add first two of them, and to the sum that does amount of the
Addition, add the third, and then the fourth, and so forth, if you have so many.

Sc. This seems easy enough, now that I have already learned to multiply
and to reduce, without which two, I could never have wrought this. And
therefore now I see good reason, why you did place Multiplication and Reduction
before Addition.


Master. It is well considered, but yet refuse not to express your
understanding of it, by an example.


Sch. Then would I add first 7/18 with 5/18, and because the Denominators are
like (and so needs no Reduction) I add 7 to 5, which makes 12, and then is
my sum 12/18, that is in smaller numbers.

And if I have many numbers to be added, as here 34/85 9/10, first I must
reduce them (because they have diverse denominatours) into one denomination,
and then will they be thus. ^ or in less terms 15/4^ 32/40 26/40, which by
Addition do make 83/^^ that is 2 3/^^.


M Now may we go to subtraction.


SVBTRACTION.
SVbtraction has the same precepts that addition had, for if the
Denominatours be like, then must you subtracte the one numeratour from the
other, and the rest is to be set over the common denominator, and so your
Subtraction is ended: but and if you have many Fractions to be subtracted out
of many, then must you reduce them to one denomination, and into two several
Fractions, that is, all that must be subtracted into one Fraction, and the
residue into an other Fraction, and then work as I said before.

Scholar For the first example I take 15/12 to be subtracted out of 17/12, and
the rest will be ^2/^^ or.

For an other example I take 2/4 to be subtracted out of 7/3 which I must
reduce, and it will be thus, 24/^2 and ^8/^2.

Then do I subtracte 24 out of 28, and there rests 4, which I set over the
common Denominator for a Remayner, thus, 4/32, that is.

Now for the third example, I take and to be subtracted from and 9/10. And
because their denominators be diverse, I do reduce the^ thus, 1^^^/1920*
16^^/1720, ^^80/1920 17^8/1920.

Then do I add the two first, and they make 3^^^/19^^. Also I add the two
last, and they yield ^^08/162^ Then do I subtract 3040 out of 3408, and there
rests 368, so is the remainer ^68/1920 that is in smaller Terms, 23/120.
And thus have I done with Subtraction, except you have any more to teach me.


May. Prove one example more of two Fractions of diverse denominations.


Scho I take these two Fractions, and 7/24, which being reduced, will stand
thus, 168/192. and 72/191 Now would I subtract 168 out of 72, but I can not.


Ma. Then may you perceive that you mistook the Fractions: for you ca^ never
subtract the greater out of the lesser, although you may add, multiply or
divide the greater with the lesser. And albeit that has both his terms
lesser than 9/24, yet is 9/2^ the lesser Fraction: for generally if you
multiply ye Numerators and denominators of two fractions cross ways, ^eatest
^ fra^
that Fraction is the greatest, of whose numerator comes the greatest sum,
as in this example: 7 multiplied by 24, makes 168: and 9 being multiplied by
8, yeldeth but 72 therefore is the first Fraction the greatest of these two, so
can you not subtract it out of a lesser Fraction.

But and you should subtract a fraction out of a whole number what would you do?


Sc Marry I would reduce the whole number into a Fraction of the same
Denomination that my Fraction is, and then work by Subtraction.


M. So may you do, but it is easier much, if your fraction be a proper
fraction, that is to say, less then an Unite, to take an Unite from the whole
number, and then turn it into an Improper Fraction* and so work your
subtraction. As if I would subtracte from 4, I may take one from 4, and turn
it into 5/5, from which if I bate 7/6, there will remain 3: And if the first
fraction be an Improper Fraction, then may I take so many Unites from the
whole number, that they may make an improper fraction greater then that first,
and then work by Subtraction: As if there be proponed 10/3 to be subtracted
from 6, because ^0/3 is more than 3, and not so much as 4. I must take 4 from
6, and turn them into thirdes thus. 12/3 then abate 10/3, and there rests so
the whole remainer is 2. Or, else you may at your pleasure take 3 which is
10/3 from 6 whole: Then set one under 6. as thus 6/1: And then to reduce those
2 fractions into one Denomination as ^ here appears:

Then 10/3 from 18/3 rests 8/3: which makes 2 your desire:

And thus will I make an end of the works of common Fractions for this time, not
doubting, but you can apply them both unto the rules of Progression, and also
unto the Golden rule, without any other teaching the^ you have learned before,
which might seem tedious to repeat, save that in some special diversities,
which be peculiar to Fractions, I can not ouerpasse, but instruct you somewhat
by the way.


THE GOLDEN Rule.
THerefore as touching the Golden rule for the placing of the 3 numbers
proponed in the question, whereby to find the third, and for the form of
their work, with other like notes, I refer you to that which you have already
learned.

But this easy form of working by fractions shall you note, yt if your three
numbers be fractions, for an apt work and certain, multiply the Numerator of
the first number in the question, by the Denominator of the second: And all
that again multiply by the denominator of the third number, and the total
thereof shall you keep for to be the Divisor. Then multiply the Denominator of
the first number by the Numeratour of the second, and the whole thereof by the
Numerator of the third, and the total thereof shall be your dividend. Now
divide this dividend by ye divisor which you found out before, and that number
shall be the fourth number of the question which you seek for: As in this
example. If of a yard of Velvet cost of a Sovereign (esteemed at 20 shillings)
what shall cost?

Scholar. If it please you to let me make the answer, A question of Yeluet.
I would first place ^ these three numbers, as I learned in whole numbers thus.

And then according to your new rule, I must multiply 3 being Numeratour in
the first number, by three the Denominatour of the second, and thereof comes
9, which I multiply again by 6, the Denominatour of the third number, and so
have I 54. which I keep for the Divisor, then multiply I 4, the Denominator
of the first, by 2, the Numeratour of the second, and there rises 8, which
again I multiply by 5, the Numeratour of the third, and it makes 40: then
must I divide 40, by 54, and it will be 40/^4 that is 20/27, in lesser terms,
and then the figure will stand thus.

But what that is in ^ money, I can not tell except I shall work it by
Reduction, as you taught me.


Master. It forces not now, you may reduce it when you list, but it were
disorderly done here to mingle diverse works together, where we do not seek
the value of the thing in common money, but in an apt number, which you have
well done. And therefore will I yet show you an other like way of easiness in
work, how you may change your 3 Fractions into 3 whole numbers, by which you
shall work as if the question were proponed in whole numbers. The first number
you shall find as I taught you: now to find the divisor of the second
number, take the Numerator for the second fraction: and for the third number
take that, that rises of Multiplication of the Denominatour of the first, by
the Numerator of the third, and then work your question.


Scho. A question of silver.
For example hereof, I put this question, If 11/12 of 1 lb waighte of silver, be
worth 11/4^ of a Sovereign what is of 1 lb. weighte worth? For the answer, ^
first I place the Fractions in order thus.

Then to turn these fractions into whole numbers, I multiply 11 which is the
Numerator of the first, by 4 (yt denominator of the second) and there comes
44, which I multiply by 2 the Denominator of the third, and so amounts 88,
which I set for the Divisor in the first place. Then in the second place I
set 12, which is Numerator in the second Fraction, and in the third place I
set the sum that amounts of 12, being the Denominator in the first number,
multiplied by 1, being numeratour in the third number, and so the figure ^ will
stand as here you see.

Then to work it forth, I multiply 12 by 12, and there amounts 144, which I
divide by 88, and the quotient will be 1 ^6/88, or in lesser terms, 1 7/11 and
then the ^ figure will stand thus.


Ma. These ij. forms now you understand well enough And as for any other, at
this time I will not repeat, only this shall you mark for ye proof of this
rule, whether your work be well wrought or no. Multiply the first number by
the fourth, and note what amounts: The proof of the Golden rule.
then multiply the second by the third, and mark what amounts also Now if
those two numbers so amounting be equal, then is your work well done, else you
have erred. And this shall suffice for the former rule, The Backer rule.
but in the barker rule, this shall you note for ease of work, that you
multiply the Numerator of the first by the Numerator of the second, and ye
whole thereof by the Denominator of the third, and that amounts thereof, shall
be the Dividend. Then multiply the Denominator of the first by the Denominator
of the second, and that whole by the Numerator of the third, and that rises
thereof shall be the divisor. Example of this: I did lend my friend of a
Porteguise vij. months, upon promise that he should do as much for me again:
A question of lone.
and when I should borow of him he could lend me but 5/12 of a Porteguise,
now I demand how long time must I keep his money in just recompense of my
lone, accompting 13 months in the year?


Scholar The first number must be the first money borrowed, that is ^/4 of the
Porteguise: the second number the 7 months, that is 7/^3 of a year: and the
third number the money that was lent in recompense, that is 5/12 of a
Porteguise: then I set the numbers ^ thus.

Then (as you taught me) I multiply three (being Numeratour in the firsts
number) by 7 the Numerator of the second number, and it makes 21, which I
multiply by 12, the denominator of the 3 and so have I 252 for the diuide^t:
the^ I multiply 4 ye denominator of the first, by 13 the denominator of the
second, and it yields 52. which I multiply again by 5, the Numeratour of
the third, and it will make 260, that is the Divisor. Then must I divide 252,
by 260, so it will be in ye smallest fractio^, 63/65 of a year.


Ma. And this do you see some ease in working, better than to multiply and
divide tediously so many Fractions. An other question yet will I propose, to
the intent you may see thereby the reason of the statute of assise of bread and
ale, which in all Statute books in French, Latin and English, Statute of
Assise of bread and ale.
is much corrupted for want of knowledge in this art: for the right
understanding whereof I propone this question.

When the price of a quarter of Wheat is 2 s the farthing white lofe shall wey
68 s. Question.
then I demand, what shall such a Loaf weye, when a quarter of Wheat is
sold for 3 s?


Scho. This Question must be wroughte as it is proponed in whole numbers and
not in Fractions.


May. You seem to say reasonably, how be it, in that Statute of Assise, the
rate is made by the proportion of parts in a pound weight Troie, else could it
not be a Statute of any long continuance, seeing the shillinges do change
often, as all other moneys do: but this Statute being well understood, is a
continual rule for ever, as I will anon declare by a new table of Assise,
converting the shillinges into ounces and parts of ounces. Therefore here by a
shilling you must understand 1/20 of a pound weight, and so by pence 1/2^ of an
ounce, wherefore although ye might work this question proponed by whole number
well enough, for ye time when the statute was made, yet to apply it to our
time, and to make it to serve for all times generallye it is best to work it
by fractio^s, setting for 2 shilling 2/20: and for 68 shillings, 68/20: and so
for three shillings 3/20, and then will the figure of the question stand thus.
^ In which question because all the denominators be like, you shall work only
with the numerators


Sc. Then I shall multiply 68 by 2, whereof comes 136, which if I divide by
3, the quotient will be 45: but how shall I make a Fraction of that to stand
with the other?


Ma. Have you so soon forgotten what was taught you so lately? This is his
form.


Sc. I remember it now and then ^ it signifies 45 twenty parts, and the third
deal of one twenty part.


Ma. So is it, and that makes in shillings, 45 s 4 d: whereby you may note one
great error in the Statute books, which have constantly 48 s in that Assise.
And by this rule, if you examine the Statute you shall find many sums false,
wherefore for the true understanding of that statute and such like as I have
made mention of it, and somewhat recognized it, so do I wish that al gentlemen
and other students of the laws, would not neglect this art of Arithmetike as
vnneedefull to their studies. Wherefore to encourage them thereto, and to
gratify both them and all other in general, I will exhibit a Table of that
part of ye statute in two columns, and in a third column I will ad the
correction of those errors which have crept into it.

Here follows the Table. The price of a quarter of wheat. The weight of a
farthing white lofe by the statute books. The correction by just Assise. s.
d. li. s. d. li s. d. 1 0 6 16 0 6 16 1 6 4 10 8 4 10 8 2 0 3 8 0 3 8 0 2 6 2
14 4 1/^ 2 14 4 3 0 2 8 0 2 5 4 3 6 2 2 0 1 18 10 2/^ 4 0 1 16 0 1 14 0 4 6 1
10 0 1 0 2 2/^ 5 0 1 8 2 1 7 2 2/^ 5 6 1 4 8 1 4 8 ^/^^ 6 0 1 2 8 1 2 8 6 6 0
19 11 1 0 11 1/13 7 0 0 19 1 0 29 5 1/^ 7 6 0 18 1 0 18 1 1/^ 8 0 0 17 0 0 17 0
8 6 0 16 0 0 16 0 9 0 0 15 0 0 15 1 9 6 0 14 4 0 14 3 15/19 10 0 0 13 7 0 13 7
1/^ 10 6 0 12 11 0 12 11 3/7 21 0 0 12 4 0 12 4 4/^^ 11 6 0 11 10 0 11 9 2^/2^
12 0 0 11 4 0 11 4 In the common books there is no farther rate of assise made,
than unto 1 2 s the quarter of wheat: but in an ancient copy of 200 years
old (which I have) there is added the rate of assise unto 20 s the quarter,
but yet was yt assise also either wrong cast at ye first pe^ning, or else
corrupt since that time, for lack of just knowledge in the rule of proportion,
which I will add here also, to gratifye such as be desirous to understand
truth exactlye.

The price of a quarter of wheat. The weight of the farthing white lofe by
the statute books. The corection of the errors. s. d. s. d. s. d. 12 6 11 0 10
10 14/25 13 0 15 0 10 5 7/1^ 13 6 10 1 10 0 8/^ 14 0 9 7 9 8 4/^ 14 6 9 2 9 4
16/20 15 0 9 1 0 0 15 6 9 1 1/^ 8 9 9/3^ 16 0 9 0 8 6 0 16 6 8 6 8 2 10/11 17 0
8 3 8 0 0 17 6 7 10 7 9 9/^5 18 0 7 6 7 6 18 6 7 3 7 4 8/^7 19 0 7 2 7 1 17/19
19 6 5 10 6 11 9/1^ 20 0 5 6 6 9 These 2 tables I have set several, because no
man should think that I would either ad or take away from any law those parts
which might of right seem either superfluous either diminute, but yet I may not
be so curious as to neglect manifest errors, which is not only my part, but
every good Subjects duty with sobriety to correct. And for avoiding of
offense I have rather don it in this private book rather than in any book of
ye statutes self, trusting that all men will take it in good part.


Sc. I would wish so, but I dare not hope so since never good man yt would
reform error, could escape ye venomous to^gs of envious detractors, which
because they either cannot or list not to do any good themselves, do delight to
bark at yt doings of other, but I beseeke you to stay nothing for their
perverse behavior.


Ma. I consider many things yt some may object, whereunto I am not unprovided
of just answers, but I will not seem so hasty to make ye answers before I hear
their obiectio^s, but as I trust that men are of a bettter nature, and more
grateful now tha^ some has bin in time passed, as I have don in ye statute of
Assise for bread in rate of s, so will I set forth the like table in pounds and
ounces, and the parts thereof, that it may be easily applied to all times: but
I mean not by this to alter any word of the statute (being so good an
ordinance, and of so great continuance) but only to make it as a kind of
exposition and declaration of ye said statut, trusting yt thereby ye statute may
be better understand, and consequently better put in execution. And here you
shall note, A pound weight.
yt I have accounted the shillings after the rate of lx s, to the pound weight,
because I esteem it ye most apt rate for our time. Wherefore if in ye first
column you find ye price of wheat, directly against it in ye second column, you
may find ye weight of the farthing white lofe, in this our time: and if you
double yt number (as I have done in ye third column) then have you the weight
of ye half pe^ny white lofe and so in ye fourth column is set ye weight of ye
pe^ny white lofe. It needs not to tell you that, yt the sight does testify,
how ye every colu^n is parted into 3 smaller pillars, whereof ye first colu^ne
has these 3 titles, pou^des, shillings, and pennies: ye other 3 columns have
each of the^ these 3 titles, pounds, ounces, and pe^nie weights. And as in the
first colu^ne xij d make a s, and 20 s make a pound, so in the other iii
columes xx pence weighte makes an ounce. and xij ounces do make a pound.

The price of a quarter of wheat.
lb s d. 0 3 0 0 4 6 0 6 0 0 7 6 0 9 0 0 10 6 0 12 0 0 13 6 0 15 0 0 16 6 0 18
0 0 19 6 1 1 0 1 2 6 1 4 0 1 5 6 1 7 0 1 8 6 1 10 0 1 11 6 1 13 0 1 14 6 1 16 0
1 17 6 1 1^ 0 The weight of the farthing white loaf.
lb. vnc. d w. 6 9 2 4 6 3 3 4 1 2 8 2 2 3 4 1 11 1 2/7 1 8 3 1 6 2 1 4 1 1 2 1
8/11 1 1 2 1 0 1 1/11 0 11 3 1/7 0 10 2 0 10 4 0 9 2 0 9 1 0 8 1 15/1^ 0 8 3 0
7 0 3 ^ 0 7 0 7 1 21/21 0 6 2/4 1 0 6 0 14/15 0 6 0 ^/^ The weight of the half
penny white loaf.
ll. vnc. d. w. 1 3 7 4 9 0 1 6 9 2 5 5 1/^ 0 4 6 3 3 10 2 4/7 3 4 1 3 0 1/^ 0
2 8 2 2 5 3 5/11 2 3 4 2 1 2 2/13; 1 11 1 2/7 1 9 0 1 8 3 1 7 4 1 6 2 1 5 3
11/19 1 4 1 1 3 0 6/7 1 2 1 ^/11 1 2 3 19/29 1 1 2 1 1 1 1/25 1 0 1 1/12 1 0 1
The weight of the penny white lofe.
li. vnc. d. w. 27 3 18 1 2 13 7 4 10 10 1 9 0 1 7 9 0 1/7 6 9 2 6 0 0 5 5 1/^
0 3/5 4 11 1 10/^1 4 6 3 4 2 4 4/13 3 10 2 4/7 3 7 0 3 4 ^/4 1 3 2 3 3 0 0 1/3
2 10 2 ^/19 2 8 2 2 7 1 ^/7 2 5 3 5/11 2 4 2 15/23 2 3 4 2 2 2 6/25 2 1 2 2/13
2 ^ ^


Sch. Sir, I do thank you most heartily for this, not only in mine own name
and in the name of all Students, but also in the name of the whole Commons, to
whom the restitution of this Assise (I trust) shall bring restitution of the
weight in bread, which long time has been abused. And if you know any like
things more, wherein you would vouchsafe to declare the errors and set forth
the truth, you cannot but obtain great thanks of all good hearted men that love
the common wealth.


May. I have sundry things to declare but I have reserved them for a private
book by it self, yet notwithstanding because the statute of the rate of
measuring of ground is so common that it touches all men, and yet no more
common than needful, but so much corrupt, that it is to far out of all
good rate, not only in the English books of Statutes commonly printed, but
also in the Latin books, and in the French also, for I have read of each
sort, and conferred them dilige^tlye, I will give you a Table for the
restitution of those errors, as may suffice for this present time. And first
will I propose one question to you touching the use of that Statute, whereby
you may perceive the order how to examine the whole Statute, A question of
measure o^ ground*
and every parcel thereof, and the question is this.

When the Acre of ground does contain four perches in breadth, then must it
contain 40 perches in length: then do I demand of you, how much shall the
length of an Acre be, when there is in the breadth of it 13 perches? but before
you shall answer to this question, I will declare unto you an other Statute,
which is the ground of the former Statute. And that Statute is this. It is
ordained that 3 Barlye Corns, dry and round, shall make up the measure of an
inche: 12 inches shall make a foot, A statute measures.
and 3 foot shall make a yard (the common English books have an elne) five
yardes and a half shall make a perch, and 40 perches in length, and 4 in
breadth, shall make an Acre. This is that statute: whereby you may perceive
that the intent of the Statute is, An Acre.
that one Acre should contain 160 square Perches. Now let me hear you
answer to the question.


Scholar. As I perceive by the words of that Statute, a perch to be 1/160 of
an Acre, so could I make those numbers all in Frations, and so work the
question: but seeing I may do it also in whole numbers I take that form for
the most easy, ^ therefore thus I set the question in form. Then do I
multiply 40 by 4, and it makes 160, which I divide by 13, and the quotient is
12 4/1^.


Ma. Now turn that 4/1^ into the common parts of a perch, as they be named
in the former Statute: how be it, it shall be best to take one of the least
parts in Denomination for avoiding of much labor, as feet, whereof the
perch contains 16 4/^.


Sc. Then to turn 4/13; into feet, I Multiplye 16 by 4, and it makes 66,
which I must divide by 13, and the Quotiente is 5 1/13.


May. So I find that if the acre hold in breadth xiij perches it shall
contain in length 12 perches, 5 foot, and 1/1^ of a foot, which is not fully
an ynche, for the ynche is 1/12 of a foot. Note this ^rour.
But here all the Statute Books in Latin and English (that I have seen) do
note it to be 13 perches, 5 foot and 1 inche: which makes above 13 perches to
many in the acre, so that I would have thought the error to have crept into
the printed books by the great negligence that Printers in our time do use,
save that in written Copies of great antiquity, I do find the same. Yet have
I one french Copy, which has 12 perches ^/^, and one foot, and that misseth
very little of the truth.


Sc. Then I see it is true that I have often heard say, that the truest copies
of ye statutes be the French copies.


Ma. That is often true, but not generally, as I have by conference tried
diversely: but in this statute the french book is most corrupt in all other
places lightlye.

But now to perform my promise I will set forth the Table for measuring of an
Acre of ground only by such parts as the Statute does mention, because at
this time I do of purpose write it for the better understanding of the
statute, and hereafter with other things I intend to set forth this same more
at large.

In this Table following, I have not done as in the other statute before
compared by restitution with the faults crept into the Statute, but only have
written that true measure, which the equity of the Statute does pretends. For
it were to vile to judge of so noble Princes and worthy Counselors, as have
authorized and set forth this statute, that they would make one acre in any
form greater than an other, but every one to be just and equal with each other,
which is the ground also of my work, and hereby may all men perceive how
needful Arithmetic is unto the Students of the law. But now I think best to
make an end of these matters for this present time, since the table has in it
none obscurity, that I should need to declare.

The breadth The length of the acre. perde. perde. feet. 10 16 0 11 14 9 12 13
5 13 12 5 1/13 14 11 7 1/14 15 10 11 16 10 0 17 9 6 27/34 18 8 14 19 8 16 18/19
20 8 0 21 7 10 3/14 22 7 4 23 6 19 18/23 24 6 11 25 6 6 5/^ 26 6 2 7/13 27 5 15
5/18 28 5 11 11/14 29 5 8 31/58 30 5 5 31 5 2 41/62 32 5 0 33 4 14 34 4 11
11/17 35 4 9 36 4 7 37 4 5 13/37 38 4 3 9/19 39 4 9/13 40 4 0 41 3 1 63/82 42 3
13 6/42 43 3 11 77/86 44 3 10 45 3 9 ^/^


Sc. In deed Sir, I understand the Table (as I think) by those other which
you set forth before. For in the first Column is set the perches of the
breadth of any Acre, and then in the 2 columns following appears how many
perches and how many foot the same Acre must have for his length


Ma. You take it well: how be it to speak exactly of breadth and length, the
first column does sometime betoken the breadth: and sometime the length,
for properly the longest side of any square does limit his length, and the
shorter side does betoke^ the breadth, yet it is no great abuse in such tables,
where a man cannot well change the title, to let the name remain, although the
proportions of the numbers do change: for still by the first column, is
expressed the measure of the one side, and by the two other pillars in one
Column, is set forth the measure of the other side. And this shall be
sufficient now for the use of the golden Rule.

Now somewhat will I touch certain other rules, which for their several
names may seem diverse rules and distinct from this, but in deed they are
but branches of it: yet because they have not only several workings in
appearance, but also pleasant in use, I will give you a taste of each of them.
As for the rule of Fellowship, both single and double, with time and without
time, I shall need to say little more than I have already said in teaching
the works of whole numbers, yet an example or.ij. will we have to refresh the
remembrance of the same, and to declare certain proper uses and applications
of it, as this for one.

Four men get a booty or prise in time of war, the prise is in value of
money 8190 lb, A question of unequal society.
and because ye men be not of like degree, therefore their shares may not be
equal, but the chiefest person will have of the booty the third part, and the
tenth part over: the second will have a quarter and the tenth part over: ye
third will have the sixth part: and so there is left for the fourth man a very
small portion but such is his lot, (whether he be pleased or wroth) he must be
content with one xx. part of the pray. Now I demand of you, what shall
every man have to his share?


Sch. You must be feign to answer to your own question, else is it not like
to be answered at this time.


Master. The form to understand the solution of this question, and all such
like, is this:
Reduce all the Denominators into one number by Multiplication, except that any
of them be parts of some other of them, for all such parts you may ouerpasse,
and take for them all those numbers, whose parts they be: as in this example
the shares be these 1/10 1/12 1/20 if I multiply all the Denominatours
together, beginning with 3, and so go on unto 20, it will make 144000: but
considering that 3 is a part of 6, I shall ommitte that 3, and likewayes 10,
which is a part of 20, I may ouerpasse also, and then is there but 3
denominatours to multiply, that is 4, 6, and 20, which make 480, which sum
I take for my work, because all the Denominatours will be found in it. Then I
take such parts of it as the question imports, that is for the first man,
1/10, the is 160 the 1/10 is 48: which I put in one sum for the first man's
share, and it makes 208. Then for the second man's share, I take, which is
120, and 1/10. which is 48, and that makes in the whole 168. Now for the
third man which must have I take 80 And for the fourth man there remains
but 24, which is 1/20 of the whole sum: so that if the whole pray had been
but 480 lb. then were the question answered: but because the sum was of
greater value, by this means now shall I know the partition of it. I must set
my numbers by the order of the Golden rule, putting in the first place the
number that I found by multiplying the Denominatours, and in the second place
the sum of the booty. The reason of this rule.
And look what proportion is between the first number and that second, the
same proportion shall be between the parts of that first number and the
parts of the second, comparing each to his like. Therefore I must put in
the third place, one of the parts or shares, and then work by the former
rule of proportion or Golden rule. And because I have 4 several parts of the
first number, by which I would find out 4 like parts of the second number,
therefore must I make 4 several figures.


Scholar. Now I trust I can answer to your question, as by your favor I
will prove.

^

And to try it, I set the 4 figures thus, marked with A, B, C, D, to show
their order. And then in each of them I multiply the second number by the
third, and divide their total by the first, and so amounts the fourth sum
which I seek for, for if I do multiply 8190 by 208, it makes 1703520, which
being divided by 480, makes in the quotient 3549 for the first man's portion:
And so workyng with the other three figures, I find for the second man 2866,
and for the third man 1365: and then for the fourth man 409. And so is every
man's share set forth in the figure here annexed.

^

And thus I think I have done well.


Ma. If you misdoubte your working and list to prove it, add all the shares
together: and if they make the total, the^ seems it well done.


Sc. I may set them thus: The proof by Addition
^ and then by Addition the just sum does amounte, that is 8190, and
therefore (as you say) it seems to be well wrought.

But I beseech you, is there any doubt in this trial, that you use that
word, The just proof.
Seems?


Master. You may easily conjecture, that if you did assign the first man's
share to the last, and so change all the rest, that one had an others share,
yet would the Addition appear al one, and therefore is not the proof exact.

But if you will make a just proof for the first man's part take ^^/^^ of the
whole sum, and if it agree with the number in the figure, then it is well done.
And so do for the second, third, and fourth sums, and this proof fails
not. Now will I propounde certain other questions which have been set
forth by certain learned men, albeit not without some ouersighte which
questions I protest heartily I do not repeat to deprave those good men,
whose labors and studies I much praise and greatly delighte in, but only
according to my profession, to seek out truth in all things, and to remove
all occasions of error, as much as in me lies: and for that cause I will
only name the questions without hurting the Authors name. The first
question is this.

A question of building
Four men did build a house, which cost them 3000 crowns, their shares were
such, that one man should pay 1/^ of the sum, and 6 crowns over: the second
should pay and 12 crowns over: the third man must lay out, abating 8 crowns
and the fourth man should pay, and 20 crowns more, ca^ you answer to this
question?


Sc No in good faith sir, and that you know best of any man, for I know no
more than you have taught me.


Master. Then I dare say you can not do it neither yet the best learned man
that ever did propose it, for the question is impossible: An impossible
question.
for declaration whereof I will be bold to use first the representation of the
numbers in their aptest form, (Although I have not yet taught you that manner
of work) because it may apppeare plainly that the question is not possible,
for here I have ^ set the parts, and added them, and they make the whole sum
and and 30 more. Now how is it possible to divide truly either gains either
charges so, that the particulars shall be more than the total.


Sc. It is against the form of proof by Addition of parts.


Master. You say truth. And because you shall perceive it the better, I ^ will
try it after the vulgar form, as in this figure you see where the with 6
over is 1506: for the total is as you heard before 3000: the and the 12 more,
is 1012: the would be ^0^0, but then abating 8, it is but 1992, and then last
of al, the is 750, and the 20 more makes 770: which al being added in one
sum, do make 5280, where the total sum should be but 3000, which sum if
you divide by 4/3, so shall you have of it, that is 2250, and thereto add 30
more, then will those 3 sums make ^ 5280: whereby you may see how this form as
well as the other, does declare that the particulars in that question would
make more than the whole sum by, and ^0 more: and therefore can that question
not be accepted as a possible thing, but yet do certain learned men propound
such questions, and answer to them. Therefore somewhat to say to their excuse
rather of their good meaning than for their doing, I will anon declare what
may be said for their defense: but in the mean season I will propounde the
question as it may be wrought by good possibility. As if four men build a
house together, and it cost them 3000 crowns, and then for the partition they
agree thus: that as often as the first man does pay 6 crowns, so often the
second shall pay four, the third man 8 and the fourth man three. Or else
thus: that the first man shall pay double so much as the fourth, and the
second man shall pay of the first man's charge: the third manne shall pay
double so much as the second: (And these two ways are to one end) but further
for their agreement it is appointed also, that the first man shall give 6
crowns overplus, and the second 12, and the fourth shall give 20, but the
third man shall give no overplus, but shall have 8 crowns abated of his charge.
Now is the question possible to be assoyled, and this is the way to do it.
Mark the proportion of the several charges,
and set out small numbers in that rate, by which you may reduce the work to
the Golden rule, as here in the first form, the numbers are alredie named, 6,
4, 8, 3: and in the second form, although they be not plainly named, yet they
may be the same numbers: for 6 is double to 3, and 4 is of 6: and again 8 is
double to 4. Now add these together and they make 21, which 21 must be set in
the first number in the Golden rule: for if it with the overplus of each man's
charge would make the total su^ of the charges, the^ were those several sums
the charges of each man, besides his overplus: but now it is not so.

The rule.
But yet this is true, that look what proportion each of these several sums
does bear to 21, the same proportion does the just charges of every man
(beside his overplus) bear to the total of the charges, the overplus being
deducted: wherefore this may you note, that before you do apply the total of
the charges to the Golden rule: you must deducte the overplus which is 6, 12,
and 20, that is in the whole 38 but then 8 must be restored for the abatement
of the third man, and then remains to be deducted 30, Take 30 therefore out
of 3000, and there will rest 2970, which I must set in the Golden rule for
the second sum: and for the third sum I must put each of the small numbers
before mentioned, which although they be not the several charges, yet they
represent them in proportion. And so making for every man's charge a several
question, the figures will be 4, which I mark with four letters, a. b. c. d.
thus.

^

Where I have set for briefnesse the sum of every man's charge in the fourth
place, presupposing that you can tell how to try out that fourth sum by so many
examples as ye have had.


Sch. As I trust that I understand this form, so I desire much to know
what may be said for the^ that mistook this question.


Master. You seem so desirous to know this error, that you have forgotten to
examine whether this work be without


Scholar. Me seems this work to be well done, because the Addition of the
4 several numbers does make the total sum of 2970, which was to be divided
into such four parts.


Master. But then have you forgotten that the first man must pay 6 crowns
more besides this share, and the second man twelve crowns more: the third man
8 crowns less: and the fourth man 20 crowns more, for without these, your
first total of 3000 crowns will not be made.


Scho. Then must I add to the first man's sum 6 more, and it will be 854 4/7:
and to the second sum I must add 12, and it will be 577 5/7: from the third
sum I must abate 8, and then will the sum be 1123 3/7: then adding unto the 4
sum 20, it will be 444 2/7: and these 4 sums will make 3000, which is the
whole charge, as in this example it may appear, where first I ^ gather the
14/7. that makes ^, and so proceed I in the Addition to the end.


Ma Now have you well done, and this work in the same sums is brought of other
learned men for the true solution of the question as it was first proponed,
which as (I said) was impossible: and now examine it by these several
sums, and see whether it do agree with the sums in the question proponed.

The first man must pay 1/^ and 6 over of the total sum: how think you, is 845
4/7 the half and 6 more of ^000:


Sc. No that it is not, for it would be 1506: and for the second man 101^: and
for ye third man 1992: and for the fourth man 770, whereof not one sum
agrees to this work. But I marvel that so wise me^ could be so much
ouerseene.


Ma. It is commonly seen, that when men will receive things from elder
writers, and will not examine the thing they seem rather willing to err with
their ancients for company, than to be bold to examine their works or
writings, which scrupulosity has ingendered infinite errors in all kinds of
knowledge, and in all civil administration, and in every kind of art: but
these learned men did not mean any other thing by this question, than to
find such numbers as should bear the same proportion together, as those
numbers in the question proponed did bear one to an other: which thing you
shall perceive more plainly by an other question of theirs, that is this.

A question of a testament.
A man lying upon his death bed, bequeatheth his goods (which were worth 3000
Crowns) in this sort. Because his wife was great with child, and he yet
uncertain whether the child were a male or female, he made his bequest
conditionally, that if his wife bare a daughter, then should the wife have
half his goods, and the daughter, but if she were delivered of a son, then
that son should have of the goods, and his wife but. Now it chanced her to
bring forth both a son and a daughter, the question is: How shall they part the
goods agreeable to the testatour his will.


Scholar. If some cunning Lawyers had this matter in scanning, they would
determine this Testamente to be quite void, and so the man to die intestate,
because the testament was made insufficient, since this condition was not
expressed in it, and also it might have chanced that she should have brought
forth neither son nor daughter, as often has been seen: so is the will
vnsufficiente in that point also.


Master. Such scanners should seem to cunning, and yet not so cunning as
cruel: for the mind of the Testatour is to be taken favorably, for the aid of
ye legatories when there rises such doubts. But let us try this work, not by
force of law, but by proportion Geometrical, seeing the testatour did mind
to provide for each sort of them.


Sc. If the son shall have by force of the Testament, so must the mother have.
Again because she has a daughter also, therefore ought she to have and the
daughter 1/^: that is both ways, and, which comes to the whole goods, and
more. Wherefore it seems also impossible.


Master. In this matter the mind of the Testatour is so to be understand,
that such proportion should be between the portion of the wife and the
son, as is between and that is, the son must have for 2/6 to his mother,
so shall he have ^ to 2, that is as much as his mother, and half as much more:
and the mother must have the like rate in comparison to her daughter. Then
must I find out 3 numbers in such proportion, that the first may be as
much as the second, and half as much more (that is) in proportion
sesquialtera, and the second to the third in the same proportion, such
numbers be 6, 9, 4.


Sc. I pray you sir, how shall I find out those numbers?


M. That will I gladly tell you.

To find three numbers in any proportion.
Whatsoever the proportion be of any three numbers, multiply the Terms of that
proportion together and the number that amou^teth, shall be the middle number
of the 3: the^ multiple that middle number by the lesser term, and divide
that total by the greater, and the least number of the 3 will amounte. So if
you multiply that middle number by the greater extreme, and divide that total
by the lesser extreme, then will the greatest number of that progression amount.


Scholar To find the proportion between 2. numbers.
Then in this example, to find the proportion of to, I must divide (as you
taught me in Division) by, and the quotient will be, that is 1, whereby I
perceive that the proportion in this question is, as 3 to 2. Therefore (as you
taught me even now) I multiply 3 by 2, and the sum is 6, which must be the
middle number: then I multiply the middle number 6 by 2, which is the least
term, and the sum is 12, that do I divide by 3, being the greater Term,
and the quotient is 4, so is 4 the least number of the 3. Then I multiply 6
by 3, whereof comes 18, and that I divide by 2 and so have I 9, which is the
greatest number of the 3.


Ma. An other way yet may you find the third number in any progression, if
you have 2 of them: for if the middle number be one of them which you have,
then multiply it by it self (as in this example 6 by 6 makes 36) and that
total divide by the other number which you have, and the third number will be
the quotient.


Sc. Then if I divide 36 (which comes of 6 multiplied by it self) by 4, the
quotient will be 9, and if I divide 36 by 9, the quotient will be 4. But what
if I know the first number and the third, and would have the middle number?


May. Multiply the two numbers together, and in their total you must seek
the root of that number, and it shall be the middle number: but because as yet
you have not learned how to extract roots, therefore use the first form which
I have taught you, till I teach you to extract roots. And now go forward
with the answer to the same question.


Scholar. I perceive then that the son must not have of the goods, neither the
mother, nor yet the daughter, but yet must the goods be divided in such
proportion, that the son shall have 9 crowns for 6 to his mother: and the
mother shall have 6 crowns for every 4 to the daughter. Then I apply it to
the Golden rule in three ^ examples thus: where the first number is the
Addition of those three numbers 9, 6, 4 and the third is one of them
severally: the second is the total of the goods in the testament: and then
by the work of the Golden rule I find out ye fourth number in every work
that is for the son 1705 1/11: for the mother ^ 1136 16/15: and for the
daughter 757, 17/15, which three sums added together do make the su^ of the
whole goods, as may be seen by this example.

And this (me thinks) I do perceive, that because in this case there is a
necessary remedy divised against an vrgente inconvenience, therefore those
learned me^ thought they might use the like liberty in that other question.


Master Your guess is good, but they had so good reason for them in the one,
as they have in the other: as in another example of theirs, it may better
appear, that is this:

A man left unto his iij. An other question of ^ Testament.
sons 7851 crowns, to be parted in this sort, that the first son should
have, the second son and the third son, which is not possible, for does
make 2/2 0/4: or 1/1 ^/2;, that is 1 ^/12, so is it more than the whole: but
reduce these fractions into one denominatio^, the least that they will come to,
and they will be 6/12, 4/12, 3/12, and so may you part the goods in such
proportion as these 3 Numeratours bear together: that is, the first to have 6
for every 4 to the second: and the second to have 4 as often as the third
has 3: and so their portions will be for the first, 2623 7/13: for the second
2415 0/13: and for the third 1811 1^/13, and those 3 shares added together, ^
will make the total sum of the whole goods, as you may easily see in this
example Another question is there proponed thus:

There is 450 Crowns to be divided beween 3 men, so that the first man must
have, the second man, the third man shall have.


Scholar. I marvel that any manne should be so ouerseene to propound that
question as a thing possible, since * 1/^ *, do make 1, that is almost double
the whole sum.

But I perceive it might be thus proponed, that as often as the first man did
receive 50 Crowns, so often the second man should receive 35, and the third
man 27, for, is equal to 50/60, and so is equal to 1/6 5/^, and is 2/6 7/^,
and so working the question, the 3 figures will appear in this form: whereby
the first man's ^ portion is found to be 200 50/56: the second man's
part is 140 15/56: the third man's share is 108 24/76: which in ye whole does
make 450 crounes yt was the whole sum to be divided between them.


Master. And thus you are (I think) sufficiently instructed in the rule of
Fellowship.


The Rule of Alligation.
NOw will I go in hand with the rule of Alligatio^, The rule of mixture.
which has his name, for that by it there are diverse parcels of sundry
prices, and sundry quantities alligate bound or mixed together, whereby also it
might be well called the rule of mixture, and it has great use in composition
of medicines, and also in mixtures of metals, and some use it has in medicines
of wines, but I wish it were less used therein than it is now a days. The
order of the rule is this: The reas^^ of this ru^
When any sums are proponed to be mixed, set them in order one over an other,
and the common number whereunto you will reduce them, set on the left hand,
then mark what sums be lesser than that common number, and which be
greater and with a draught of your perme, evermore link 2 numbers together, so
that one be lesser than the common number, and the other greater than he, for
two greater or two smaller can not well be linked together, and the reason is
this, that one greater and one smaller may be so mixed, that they will make the
mean or common number very well, but 2 lesser can never make so many as the
common number, being taken orderly: no more can two sums greater than the
mean, never make the mean in due order as it shall apeare better to you
hereafter. And as it is of necessity to lynke every smaller (once at the
least) with one greater, and every greater with one smaller: so it is at
liberty to link them oftener than once, and so may there be to one question
many solutions. When you have so linked them, then mark how much each of the
lesser numbers is smaller than the mean or common number, and that difference
set against the greter numbers which be linked with those smaller each with his
match still on the right hand, and likewise the excess of the greater numbers
above the mean, you shall set before the lesser numbers which be combined
with them.
Then shall you by Addition bring all these differences into one sum, which
shall be the first number in the Golden rule: and the second number shall be
the whole mass that you will have of al those particulers: the third sum
shall be each difference by it self and then by them shall be found the fourth
number, declaring the just portion of every particular in that mixture. As now
by these examples I will make it plain.

There is four sorts of wine of several prices, A question of mixing of wine.
one of 6 d a gallon, an other of 8 d the third of 11 d, and the fourth if 15
pens the galon, of al these wines would I have a mixture made to the sum of
fifty galons, and so that the price of each galon may be 9 pens. Now demand I
how much must be taken of every sort of wine?

Scholar. If it shall please you to work the first example, that I may mark
the applying of it to the rule, then I trust I shall be able not only to do
the like, but also to see reason in the order of the work.


Master. Mark then this form and the placing of every kind of number in it.

The common price.
^

Here (you see) I have set down the several prices which be 6, 8, 11, 15,
and have linked together 6 with 15, and 8 with 11. The common price 9, I have
set on the left side: And the difference between it, and every particular
price, I have set on the right hand not against the sum, whose difference it
is, but against the sum that it is linked withal: so the difference of 15
above 9, is 6, which I have set not against 15, but against 6, that is linked
with 15, and the difference between 6 and 9 (that is 3) I have set against 15.
So likewise ye difference between 8 and 9 is but 1, that have I set against 11,
and ye difference of 11 above 9 (which is 2) I have set against 8. Then add I
all those 4 difference, and they make 12, which I set for the first number in
the Golden rule: the second number I make 50, which is the sum of gallons
that I would have, and the third sum is every particular difference. Now
if you work by the Golden rule, you shall find the number of Gallons that
shall be taken of each sort of wine: For the better distinction whereof, I
have set these letters abcd both against the numbers for which the works do
serve, and over the works also, which seuerallye serve for each of them. And
now if you list to examine the truth of these works, add those four
sums together, The proo^e of (...).
and they will make fifty, that is the ^ total which I would have, as by this
example you may easily perceive. And for to prove how ye prices do agree, do
this. Multiply this total sum 50, by the common price 9, and it will make
450: then keep that sum by it self, and afterward Multiply every several
sum of Gallons, by the price belonging to the same Gallons, and if that sum
do agree with this, which you have kept first, then is your work well
done. As here, 25 is the number of gallons of 6 d price, multiply then 25 by
6, and it makes 150, which you shall set down: ^ then multiply 8 2/6 by 88
which is the price for ye number of Gallons, and it will make 66 4/6: so again
4 multiplied by 11 does make 45 5/6. And last of al 12 3/6 multiplied by 15,
makes 187. And these added together do make 450, as in the example annexed
you may see: wherefore seeing it does agree with the former sum of 50,
multiplied by 9, I may justly affirm this work to be good and well done.

The variation of this question.
And now to prove how you can do the like, I propounde the same question, only
willing you to use some other form of combining or linking the sums.


Scho. That shall I prove with your favor, and therefore I combine 8 with 15,
and 6 with 11, and then the form will be as follows: ^ whereby amounts the
same sum in total of the differences, as did before: and yet now the
differences be altered, as the combination is changed, whereof I understand
the reason by your former work. And therefore here appears no strange thing,
but that now I must have 8 2/6 gallons, of six pence and 25 gallons of 8 d
and 12 gallons and of 11 d, and so consequently ^ 4 gallons and of 15 d, so ye
multiplying 8 2/6 by 6, it makes 50, and the^ 25 multiplied by 8, makes 100:
likewise 12 3/6 multiplied by 11, yielded 137 3/6, and 4 multiplied by 15,
makes 62 3/6, which four sums added in one, will yield in the total 450,
which agrees with the Multiplication of 50 (being the total sum of gallons)
by 9 the common or mean price.


May. Seeing you conceive this work so well, I will propound an other example
unto you of more variety in the Alligations or co^binings: as thus.

A question ^f spices.
A Merchaunt being minded to make a bargain for spices in a mixte mass, that
is to say, of Cloves, Nutmegges, Saffron, Pepper, Ginger, and Almonds, the
Cloves being at 6 s apounde, the Nutmegges at 8 s. Saffron at 10 s. Pepper at 3
s. Ginger at 2 s. and Almonds at 1 s.

Now would he have of each sort some, to the value of 300 lb, in the whole,
and each pound one with an other to bear in price 5 s. how much shall he have
of each sort?


Sch. That will I try thus.

First I set down those six several prices, and at the left hand I set the
common price 5 s. Then I link the^ thus, 1. with 10, ^, with 6, and 3 with 8.
As in the example following.

^


Master. I had minded to have combined them in more variety, but I am
content to see your own work first, and then more varieties in combination
may follow anon.


Scholar. Then to continue as I began, I seek the difference between 1 and
5 (which is 4) and that I set against 10: then against 1 I set 5, which is
the excess of 10 above 5: so I gather the difference between 2 and 5, which
is 3, and that I set against 6, because it is combined with 2: and likewise the
difference of 6 above 5 (which is ^) I set against 2. Then take I the
difference of ^ from 5, which is 2, and that I set against 8, and before that
3 I set the difference of 8 above 5, which is 3. Then gather I al these
differences by Addition, and they make 18, which I set for my first number in
the Golden rule, and so appears by those works, yt of Almonds I must take 83
lb, of Ginger 16 lb, of pepper 50 lb, of Cloves 50 pound, of Nutmegges 33 pound
and of Saffron ^ 66 pound. Then for trial hereof, I multiply every parcel
by his several price, as 83 1/^ which is the sum of Almondes, I multiply
by 1, which is their price.

Also 16 the sum of Ginger I multiply by 2, which is the price of it. And so
each other in his kind, as this table annexed does represent: and then adding
them altogether, I find the total to be 1500, which also will amounte by the
multiplication of the gross mass of 300 by the common price 5, wherefore it
appears well wrought.


Ma. Now will I make the Alligation to prove your cunning somewhat better: but
because you shall not think your self pressed so much, I will also note the
differences, as in this example you may see. ^ where I have alligate 1 with 6
and 8: and therefore have I set against 1, both their differences: that is 1
and 3. Likewise because 2 is combined with 8 and 10, I set before him their
differences, 3 and 5. Against 3 I have set only 5, which is the difference
of 10, with whom 3 is combined only: likewise 6 is only Alligate to 1, and
therefore is the difference of 1 only set against it: 8 is lincked with 1 and
2 and therefore has he against him both their differences, 4 and 3: and 10
is joined with 2 and 3, therefore has be their differences 3 and 2. And
because of ease for you, in an other column I have set the differences reduced
into one number, for every several sort, and have also added the^ together,
whereby appears that they make 33, and so consequently you see the works of
the golden rule set forth for ye six several drugges: I have added letters a,
b, c, etc as before. But I would not wish you to clean still to these
eleme^tary aides, but accusiome memory to trust her self, so shall occasion of
negligence be best avoided. And as for the proof, try it at more leisure,
because yt time now is short, and you sufficiently instructed in that proof.
And there rests diverse things behind yet, of which I would gladly give
you some taste before our departure.


Scholar. But if it may please you to let me see all the variations of this
question, before you go from it, for me thinks I could vary it two or three
ways more yet.


Ma. I am content to see you make two or three variations, but I would be loath
to stay to see all the variations, for it may be varied above ^00 ways although
many of them would not well serve to this purpose.


Sc. I thought it impossible to make so many variations.


Ma. Marvel not thereat, for some questions of this rule may be varied above
1000 ways, but I would have you forget such fantasies, till a time of more
leisure. And now go forward with some variation of this question.


Scholar. For the first variation, I link the first number 1 with 8 and 10,
and 2 I combine with 6 and 10, then join I 3 with 6, 8, and 10, as in this
form.

^

And so does there appear the portion of weight for every kind of drugge in
this mixture. Now for the trial.


Master. Nay stay there, you shall not need to make trial in one example so
often, or if you list to do it by your self, I am content. But now set
forth (for declaration that you conceive the rule) two or three examples of
several combinations, and then will we and then will we pass to some other
example and so end this rule.


Scholar. As it pleases you so will I do. And these be the varieties in
which as the ^ combinations are several, so does it plainly appear, that
the differences by which the proportion of each several kind is taken, are
also several. And yet I see in the three first of these five varieties, and in
one other, before, the total sum of the differences to be one, that is to
say 18, whereby I perceive that the variety of their mixture does depend of
the variety of their differences several, and not of the variety of their
total sum.


Master. So is it. And seeing you conceive it so well, I will make an end of
this rule, only exhibiting to you one question or two of the mixture of
metalles, that by it you may devise other like, and exercise your self therein
also, because the use of it serves often in business of charge, not so much
for Goldsmithes, as for coynage in mintes. First I demand of you this
question. If a Mintemaister have gold of 22 karectes, and some of 23 karectes,
some of 24: Again, some of 15, some of 16, and some of 18 karectes, and would
mix them so, that he might have 100 ounces of 20 karects, how much shall he
take of every sort?


Scholar. To know that, I aunsweare in order thus.

^


Master. You have wrought the question well, but how chanced you made no
doubt of that new name, Karecte?


Scholar. Because I thought it out of time to demand such questions now,
seeing you make so much haste to end: and again in this case the proportion
of the numbers is sufficient for my purpose in this work, trusting, that an
other time you will instruct me as well of this, as of sundry other things,
which I have heard you talke^ of, so I have a great desire to know them.


Master. Your aunsweare is reasonable: and your request and trust with Gods
help I intend to satisfy. And to go forward with this matter, let me see
your examination of this last work.


Scholar. First for the one part I add together all the particular sums as ^
they appear in the work, and they make 100, as here by their Addition it does
appear.

And so it seems, that the sums are well gathered, but for the farther
trial of them, I multiplye first 20. which is the common or mean sum ^ of the
karectes by 100, which is the sum of the whole mass which I would have and
it makes 2000. Then I multiply every particular sum by the karects that it
does contain, as 10 by 15, and that makes 150.

Likewise I multiplye 15 by 16, and it yields 240: so 20 by 18 makes 360.
And 25 by 22 yields 550: likewise 20 by 23 brings forth 460: and last of al
10 multiplied by 24, yields 240: which sums all joined together make 2000,
that does agree with the like sum before: wherefore I may well say, that
the work is good. And now if it please you I would set forth some varieties
of this question, to prove my wit.


Master. Go to, let me see.


Scholar. Here be four varieties.

^

And more yet I could make, but not like is the number that you spoke of in
the variation of the other question.


Master. That will I teach you at more leisure, seeing it is a thing rather
of pleasure, than of any necessity.

But now for your exercise in this rule, one other question I will propose. A
minte master has 6 ingottes of silver of sundry finenesse, some of 4 ounces
fine, and some of 5 ounces, some of 6, and other of 8, some of 11, and other of
12: and his desire is to mix 500 pound weight, so that in the whole mass
every pound weight should bear 9 ounces of fine silver, how much shall he
take (say you) of every sort of silver?


Scholar. To find ^ out that I set the numbers thus in order.

And gathering the differences, it will appear, that of the first sort there
must be 43 of the second like much: of the third sort, 65 5/23: and of the
fourth sort as much: of the fifth sort 195 5/^: and of the sixth sort 86
2/2, which in the whole will make 300 lb weight: and in ounces after 9 ounces
fine 4500, that is of the first sort 173 2/2: and of the second sort 217
9/23: of the third sort 391 7/23: of the fourth sort 521 7/3: of the fifth
sort 2152 4/2 ^/3, and of the sixth sort 1043, which al together do make
4500 ounces, agreeable to the multiplication of 9 by 500.


Master. This is well done of you, therefore now make three or four
variaties, and so an end of this rule.


Sc. These 4 varieties I set for example.

^


Master. And by these it appears, that you can find out more, with which I
will not now meddle, save only for to show you an easy help in drawing the
lines of Combination, I will set forth two varieties here.

^

And this shall suffice now for the rule of Alligation or mixture, for by these
examples may you easily conjecture such other as do appertain to it, as well
for the due working, as for variety of drawing the lines of combination.


Scholar. Sir, albeit it pleased you ere while, to put me from my musing at the
manifold varieties, that may fall in these combinations, and termed them
fa^tasies, yet my fantasy gives me, that the consideration of this should in
many other examples and cases of importance be very needful, and the
knowledge of it most profitable. Therefore ye may well think, that at another
time convenient I will request you to aid me herein.


Master. Truth it is, that this consideration may fall in practice as well
Politic, as Philosophical, and sundry ways in them be applied, therefore
when time shall fall ^ for the discussing of this consideration, you shall not
want my helping hand.


The rule of Falsehode.
Now will I briefly also teach you somewhat of the rule of Falshod, which
bears his name, The occasion of the name.
not for that it teaches any fraud or Falshoode, but for that by false
numbers taken at all adventures, it teaches how to find those true numbers
that you seek for.

Scholar. So might any other rule be called the rule of Falshoode, for they
work by wrong numbers, and by them find out the right numbers, so does the
rule of Alligation, the rule of Fellowship, and the Golden rule partly.


Master. In the Golden rule, the rule of Fellowship, and the rule of
Alligation, although the numbers that you work by, be not the true numbers
that you seek for, yet are they numbers in just proportion, and are found by
orderly work: whereas in this rule, the numbers are not taken in any
proportion, nor found by orderly work, but taken at all adventures.

And therefore I sometimes being merry^ with my friends, and talking of such
questions, have caused them that proponed such questions to call unto them
such children or idiots, as happened to be in the place, and to take their
answer, declaring, that I would make them solue those questions, that seemed
so doubtful.

And indeed I did answer to the question and work the trial thereof also,
by those answeares which they happened at al adventures to make: which numbers
seeing they be taken as manifest false, therefore is this rule called the rule
of false positions, and for briefnesse, the rule of Falshode, which rule for
readiness of remembrance, I have comprised in these few Verses following, in
form of an obscure Riddle.

Guess at this work as hap does lead,
By chance to truth you may proceed.
And first work by the question,
Although no truth therein be done.
Such falsehoode is so good a ground,
That truth by it will soon be found.
From many bate to many mo,
From to few take to few also.
With too much join to few again.
To too few add to many plain.
In cross ways multiply contrary kind,
All truth by falsehoode for to find.
The sense of these Verses, and the sum of this rule, is this:

When any question is proponed appertaining to this rule, first imagine any
number that you list, which you shall name the first position, and put it in
steed of the true number, and then work with it as the question imports:
and if you have missed, then is the last number of that work, either too
great or too little: that shall you note as hereafter shall be taught you, and
you shall call it the first error.

Then begin again, and take an other number which shall be called the
Second position, and work by the question: if you have missed again, note the
excess or default as it is, and call that the second error. Then multiply
cross ways the first position by the second error, and again the second
position by the first error, and note their totalls severally by the names of
Totalles. Then mark whether the two errors were both like, that is to say,
both too much, or both too little: or whether they be unlike, that is, the one
too much, and the other too little, for if they be like, then shall you
subtract the one total from the other (I mean the lesser from the greater)
and the Remainer shall be your dividend, so must you abate the lesser error
out of the greater, and the residue shall be the diuisour. Now divide the
dividend by that diuisour, and the quotient will show you the true number that
you seek for: But and if the errors be unlike then must you add both those
totalles (which you noted) together and take that whole number for the
dividend, so shall you add both the errors together, and that whole number
shall be the diuisour, and the quotient of that Division shall give you the
true number that the question seeks for: and this is the whole rule.


Scholar. This rule seems so unlike any other, that without some example I
shall not easily understand it


Master. Therefore take this example: A Mason was bound to build a wall in 40
days, and it was couenaunted so with him, that every day that he wrought, he
should have for his wages 2 s, 1 penny, and every day that he wrought not, he
should be amerced 2 s, 6 d, so that when the wall was made, and the reckning
taken of the days that he wrought, and of the other that he wrought not, the
Mason had clearly but 5 s, 5 d, for his work. Now do I demand, how many
days did he work of those 40, and how many did he not work?


Scholar. I pray you express the order of the work, that I may partly by
imitation, and partly by comparing it with the rule, be able again to do the
like.


Master. This order shall you keep in the work of this rule: first take
some number (as you list) at adventure, as for example: I say he played 12
days, and wrought 28 days. Now cast you the wages of every day, and see
whether it will agree with the sum of 5 s, 5 d.


Scholar. The 28 days that he wrought after 25 pence the day, yields 700 d.
Then the 12 days that he wrought not, at 30 pence each day, does amount to
360 pence, which if I abate out of 700 pence, there rests 340: but you say
he had not so much.


Master. He had but 65 pence, and by this supposition he should have had
340: therefore is this sum too much by 275 which sum I must set down
after this sort, as you see here, where first I ^ have made a cross
(commonly called Saint Andrews cross) and at the over corner on the left
hand I have set the first position 12, and at the other corner under it, I
have set 275 which is the first error, with this figure 4, which betokens
too much, as this line, -- plain without a cross line, betokens too
little. On the right hand of the cross I have left two like rowmes for the
second position and his error. Therefore to prosecute the work, I suppose he
played 16 days, and wrought 24.


Scholar. I was a while in doubt why you named the days of his working,
seeing they be not set in the figure: and I doubted how you knew them, or
else whether that you did suppose them at all adventures, as you did the
days that he played: but now I gather, that seeing 40 days is the whole time
limited, then the days that he played being supposed the rest of 40 must
needs be the days that he wrought, and therefore 28 followed 12 of necessity
and 24 follows 16 also of necessity: but yet I scarce perceive why you set
not in the figure as well 28 as 12.


Master. It forces not which of them I take,
so that in the second position I take the numbers of the same nature that is
here both of working days, or both of idle: but now examine you this
second position.


Scholar. If he played 16 days, then abating 16 times 30 d the sum will be
480 d. And for 24 days that he wrought, every day yielding 25 d, the total is
600 d: so that abating 480 out of 600, there rests 120: and as you say it
should be but 65, therefore it is too much by 55, that must be set on the
right hand of the figure at the nether part, and over it on the same ^ side
16 which is the second position, thus. And as I gather by your words, it were
al one if I did set 28 in stead of 12, and 24 in stead of 16.


M. So were it. But this shall you mark,
Note:
that of what nature so ever the two positions be, of the same nature is the
quotient. Therefore when the positions in this question are 12 and 16, The
proof of this rule.
which both being numbers of the playing days, the quotiente shall declare the
true numbers of playing days, where as if the positions had been 28 and 24,
which are supposed to be the working days, then would the quotient declare
the true number of the working days, and not of playing days as it will do
now. And therefore to continue the work of this question, and to find the
true number of playing days, I must multiply cross ways the first
position 12 by 55, that is the second error, and the total will be 660,
then I multiply 275 by 16, and it yields 4400. Now because the errors are
like, that is to say, both too much, I must subtracte 660, out of 4400, and
so remains 3740, which is the dividend. Again I must subtract the lesser
error 55 out of 275 that is the greater error, and there will remain 220,
which shall be the divisor, then dividing 3740 by 220, the quotient will be 17.
Wherefore I say now constantly, that 17 is the true number of days that the
Mason played: and then it follows, that he wrought 23 days, and so is the
question answered.

Now for the order of trial of this work there needs none other proof but
only this, to work with this number according to the question, and if it
agree, then appears the number to be it that you would have. As here now
seeing he wrought 23 days, and must have for every day 25 pence, the whole
sum comes to 575. Then again seeing he played 17 days, and must abate 30
pence for eueriedaye, the whole sum of the abatement will be 510: therefore I
subtracte 510 out of 575, and there will remain 65, which makes 5 s, 5 d. the
clear wages of the Mason for his work, according to the question.


Scholar. Now I trust I understand the work and the rule so well (and the
better by this proof) that I can be able to do the like. And for a proof I
take the same question all save the last number, where I will suppose that he
had 10 s, for his wages clear. And now to guess at the number of ye days
that he wrought, I suppose first that he wrought: 20 days, then say I, if he
wrought 20 days his wages must be 500 d, then did he play other 20 days, for
which must be abated 600 d, and then he leeseth 100 d. And so am I at a stay,
for it is not like unto your former work.


Ma You should have required of me some question, and not have taken a
question of your own fantasying, until you were more expert in this art:
for so might you as well happen on an impossible question as on a possible:
but now to go forward, consider that this number is too little by 220, seeing
he should gain by your supposition 120 d, and in this positio^ he leeseth 100,
those both make 220, which you shall set down for the first error with this
sign --, betokening to little, as here in this form following does appear.

And now for the rest go forward ^ your self once again,


Scholar. As my error has uttered my folly, so it has procured me better
understanding. Now therefore considering this position not to solue the
question, I take an other, supposing that he wroughte 30 days, then for his
wages he must be allowed 750 d, and for the 10 days which he wrought not, he
must abate ^0^ d, and so remains clear 450 d: but it should be only 120 d,
therefore is it to much by 330, which I set down in the figure with the
former position, and his error and the figure appears thus.

Now must I multiply ^ in cross ways 220, by 30, and it will be 66000. Then
again I multiply 330 by 20, and it will be also 6600. Wherefore if I shall
subtract the one out of ye other, there will remain nothing to be the Dividend.


Ma. In this you forget your self again: for in as much as the signs in the
errors be unlike, therefore must you work by Addition, adding together those
two totals to make the dividend, and also adding the two errors to make the
divisor. And because you shall no more forgette this part of the rule, take
this brief remembrance: Unlike require Addition,
And like desire Subtraction.



Sch. You mean, that if the errors have like signs, then must the dividend
and the divisor be made by Subtraction, as is taught before: And if those
signs be unlike (as in this last example they be) then must I by Addition
gather the Dividend and the divisor. Therefore must I add 6600 to 6600, and it
will be 13200, which shall be the dividend. Then again I add 220 to 330, and
it will be 5^0, which must be the divisor: wherefore dividing 13200 by 550,
the quotient will be 24, whereby I know that the Mason wrought 24 days: and
then it follows that he played 16 days.


M. Examine your work whether it be agreeable to the question or no.


Sc* For 24 days work, the wages must be 600 d. and for 16 days which the
Mason wrought not, there must be abated 480, and then remains clear to the
Mason 220 pence, as the question imports, wherefore it is evident, that 24 is
the true number of the days that he wrought.


Master. Although you seem now to understand this work, yet to acquainte
your mind the better with the new trade of this rule, I think it good to
propone to you five or six examples more, before I make an end of it.


Sch. Sir I thank you, that you do so consider my commodity and profit in
knowledge, for undoubtedly it is practice and exercise that makes men prompt
and expert in every kind of knowledge.


Master. You say well so that they follow some certain precepts to govern
and rule their practice by, else may practice procure custom of error, and a
repugnance to exactness of knowledge, namely as long as the error is not
plainly known to the vulgar sort. But to return to our work. There is a
servant that has boughte of the velvet and damask for his master 40 yeardes,
the velvet at 20 s, a yeard, and the Damask at 12 s, and when he comes home,
A question of vvares.
his master demands of him how much he has boughte of each sort: I ca^ not
tell (says he) exactlie, but this I know, that I paid for damask 48 s. more
than I paid for velvet, now must you guess how many yeardes there is of each
sort.


Scho Although the guess seems difficulte, yet I will prove what I can do: for
I remember your saying, that it forces not how fond or false the guess be, so
it be somewhat to the question, and not an answer of a contrary matter.

Therefore first I imagine that he boughte 20 yeardes of Damask, for which he
should pay after the former price 240 shillings: then must he needs have of
velvet other 20 yeardes (to make up the 40 yeardes) and that would cost 400
s. So that the total of the price of the damask is less than the sum paid
for velvet 160 s, and should be more by 48. therefore the first error is 208
too little. Then begin I again, and suppose he boughte of Damask 30 yeardes
that cost 360 s, then had he but 10 yeardes of Velvet, which cost 200 s: and
now the price of Damask is greater than the price of the Velvet by 160
shillings, and should be but 48, therefore is the second error 112 too
much, which I set in form of a figure as here does appear. Then do I ^
multiply in cross ways. 280 by 30 and the sum will be 6240. Also I multiply
112 by 20, and there will amounte 2240. And in as much as the signs of the
errors be unlike, I know I must work by Addition, therefore add I those
two totals together, and they make 8480, which is the dividend: then add I
also the two errors together. 208 and 112, and they make 320, which is the
divisor. Wherefore dividing 8480, by 320, the quotient will be. 26, which is
the true sum of yeards of Damask that he boughte: and in Velvet 13 yeardes,
and that appeared by examination thus: 26 yeardes of Damask at 12 s. the yeard
makes 318 s, then in Velvet he had but 13 yeards and. that cost 270 s at 20
s. ye yeard. Now Subtracte 270 out of 318, and there will remain 48, which is
the number of shillings that the Damask did cost more than the Velvet.


M Now shall you have a question of an other kind. A question of debt.


There are three men that do owe money to me, and I have forgotten what the
total sum is, and what the particulars be.


Scho Why? then is it impossible to know the debt.


Master. Peace ye are to hasty: there is more help in it than you yet see: I
have three several notes, whereby it appears that I did confer their debts
together, and found the debt of the first and the second to amount to 47 lb,
the debt of the first man and the third did make 71 lb and the second man his
debte with the third, did rise to 88 lb. Now can you tell what every man did
owe, and what was the whole total?


Scholar. Nay in good faith: but as I perceive that it must be found by
conjecture, so will I guess at it, supposing that the first man did owe 20 lb,
and the second man 30, and the third.


M. Nay stay there for you are to far gone already,
you may not suppose a several sum for every man, for it is enough to suppose
one sum for the first man, and let the other rise as the question imports.
Therefore seeing you set the first man his debt to be 20 lb, the second man
can not owe 30 lb, for the declaration is that their debtes added together, did
make 47 lb. so must the second man his debte be but 27 lb. Now this second
debte with the third must make 88, therefore subtract 27 out of 88, and there
will remain 61, as the third man his debt. Then says the declaration, that the
first and third men's debts do make 71: but by this suppositio^ they make 8^
that is 10 too much: which I must set for the (...) error. Now work you the
second position.


Sc I suppose the first man's debt to be 24 lb, then must the second man's debt
(by your declaration) be but 2^ lb. seeing both they make but 47 lb. Also the
second man his debt with the third, do make 88 lb, and the second man owes
but 2^, therefore the third man must d^^e 65 lb. Now the third man's debt with
the first, should make by the declaration 71 lb, and they do make 89 lb: that
is 18 lb too much: and that is the second error, which I set down with
the first, and ^ their positio^ in this form and then do I multiply in cross
ways 20 by 18, and it is 360. Also 10 by 24 makes 240. And because the signs
of the errors be like, I must work by subtraction: therefore I subtract 240 out
of ^60 and there rests 120, which is the dividend: then do I subtract 10
out of 18 by the same reason, and so is the divisor 8, which is found 15 times
in 120, therefore I say that the first man did owe 15 lb, and then the second
man must owe 32 lb, for those 2 do make 47 lb, and the third man his debt is
56 for so much remains if I bate 15 out of 71, or if I take 32 out of 88.


M For the third example take this easy question for ye variety in work. The
third question.
Two me^ having several sums which I know not, do thus talk together: ye first
says to the 2, If you give me 2 s of your money, the^ shall I have 3 times so
much money as you: the 2 answers: It were more reason, that our sums were made
equal, and so will it be, if you give me ^ s of your money. Now guess what each
of them had.


Scholar. I imagine that the first had 9 s. Note:



Master. Consider evermore in your imaginations that you take a likelye sum,
as in this question take such a sum that having 2 added unto it, may be
divided into 3 parts even.


Scholar. Why? I remember you said before, it forced not how fondely so ever I
gessed.


M As for the possibility of the solution it is truth, but for easiness in
work, the aptest numbers are most convenient.


Scholar. I thought no less, and therefore I took 9 as an apt number to be
parted into: but I perceive I should have considered the aptness of that
partition after the addition of 2 unto it, and then 7 had been more meeter.


M That is truth, and then should the second man his sum be 5: for although
he have now but the third part of 9 that is 3, yet you must remember that he
lent the first man 2, and so had he 5.


Scholar Then to go forward: if the second man had 3 of the first man, then
should he have 8, and the first man but 4, so has he double to the first man:
yet he said in the question they should have equal: wherefore it appears that
he has 4 to much. Therefore I note that error with his supposition, and guess
again that he has 10 s: whereunto I add 2 shillings borrowed of the second
man and then has he 12 shillings, so the second man has remaining but four,
whereunto if I add the 2 that he lent to the first man, so had he but 6 s at
the beginning. The^ take 3 shillings from the first man, and give to the
second, then has the first man but 7, and the second has 9, which are not
equal, but there are 2 to many, ^ wherefore I set down both the positions
with their errors as here you see, and multiply a cross, so comes there 40
and 14: and because the signs be like. I take 14 out of 40, and so rests 26
to be the dividend, the^ likewise I take 2 out of 4, and there rests 2 by
which I divide 26, and the quotient will be 13, which is the sum that the
first man had. And so appears that two being added thereto, the sum will
be 15, so has the second man now but 5, and before he had 7: then take three
from the first, and put to his seven so have each of them 10, and that is
equal, as the question would.


Master. For the fourth example take this question. One man said to an other:
The fourth example.
I think you had this year two thousand lambs: so had I said the other: but
what with paying the tith of them, and then three several losses they are much
abated: for at one time I lost half as many as I have now left: and at an
other time the third time of so many: and the third time so many. Now guess
you how many are left.


Sch. Because here is mention made of certain parts, I must take a number that
may have all those parts: that is to say, ^/2, 1/^* and ^/^, which will be 24,
howbeit 12 has the same parts. Therefore first I take 12 to be the number
that does remain, so has he lost 6, 4, and 3, that is 13: and in the whole
25, but it should be 2000.


Master Ye are deceived yet still: you have forgotten the 10 part, which must
be de^alked, that is 200, so there remains but 1800 and now go on again.


Scho. Then to find the error, I take 25 out of 1800, and there remains 1775
to few, which I set for the first error. Then for the second position I
take 24, whose half is 12, the third part 8, and the quarter 6, where by
rises 50, which is too little by 1750, therefore I set down both the positions
^ with their errors thus.

And multiply in cross ways 1775-1750- 1775 by 24, whereof comes 42600.
Also I multiply 1750 by 12, and there arises 21000. And because the signs
are like, I do subtract the one from the other, and so remains the dividend,
21600: then do I subtracte 1750 out of 1775, and there rests 25: by which I
divide 21600, and the quotiente is 864, whereof the half is 432, and the third
part is 288, the quarter is 216, which ^ all being added together, will make
1800. And if you add thereto the tenth which was abated before, then will the
whole sum be 2000. And now does there come a question to my memory which was
demanded of me, but I was not able to answer to it, and now me thinks I
could solue it


M. Propone your question.


Sch. There is supposed a Law made that (for further tillage) every man that
does keep sheep, A question^ Of sheep and tillage.
shall for every ^0 sheep ear and sow one acre of ground: and for his
allowance in sheep pasture, there is appointes for every four sheep one acre
of pasture Now is there a rich sheepemaister (...) has 7000 acres of
ground, and would gladly keep as many sheep as he might by that Statute,
I demand how many sheep shall he keep.


M. Answer to the question your self.


Scho. First I suppose he may keep 500 sheep, and for them he shall have in
pasture after the rate of 4 sheep to an acre, 125 acres, and in arable ground
50 acres, that is 175 in all: but this error is to little by 6825. Therefore I
guess again, that he may keep 1000 sheep, that is in pasture 250 acres: and
in tillage 100 acres, which makes 350: that is too little by 6650.

^ These both errors with their positions I set down as you see, and
multiply in cross 6825 by 1000, and it makes 6825000. Then I multiply 6650
by 500, and it does amounte to 3325000, which sum I do subtract out of the
first and there remains 3500000 as the diuidende. Also I do subtracte the
lesser error out of the greater, and so remains 175, by which I divide the
said dividend, and the quotient will be 20000, so that I see, that by this rate
he yt has 7000 acres of ground, may keep 20000 sheep: and thereby I
conjecture, that many men may keep so many sheep, for many men (as the
common talk) have so many acres of ground.


Master. That talk is not likely, for so much ground is in compass above 48
miles, leave this talk and return to your questions, least your pointing be
scarce well taken.


Scholar. Indeed I do remember, that the Egiptians did grudge so much
against sheepeheardes till at length they smarted for it, and yet they were
but small sheepemaisters to some men that be now, and the sheep are waxen so
fierce now and so mighty, that none can withstand them but the Lion.


May. I perceive you talk as you hear some other: An other way of vvorking.
but to the work of your question: both this last question, and the next
before might be wrought without the second position, by the rule of
proportion, as this. When in this question ye found in the first error, that
for 500 sheep, there must be 175 acres, then might you reduce it to the
Golden rule, thus

If 175 acres will admit ^ in allowance 500 sheep than 7000 will have 20000.
And so by one position with the help of the Golden rule may you answer that
question. Likewise for the question of Lambs, when you ^ had found that 12
came of 25, you might have set the figure thus as ye see and have said: If 25
do leave but 12, what shall 180 leave? and it would appear to be 864.


Scholar. Sir, I thank you for this aid, for it does much shorten the work
of this rule.


Master. An other way yet.
Yet again I will show you an other way, to answer to this last question
without this rule of False position, and that by the rule of Fellowship, for
it appears in the proponing of the question, that 10 sheep must have in
pasture 2 acres and, and for them must there be eared but one acre: so it
follows, that for two acres eared, there must be five set to pasture. And if
you put them both into one sum, they will make 7. Therefore look what
proportion 7 being this total, does bear to 5 and to 2, such proportion shall
any total in this question bear to the pasture ground, and the eared ground.


Scholar. This serves wondrous aptly. Therefore to prove it, I demand this by
the former supposition: If a man have ^00 acres, how much shall he leave in
pasture, and how much shall he turn to tillage? You say that as 7 is to 5, so
shall 300 be to the acres of pasture: and as 7 is to ^, so is ^00 to the acres
of tillage, whereof for both I have set examples here following, ^ whereby
appears that of pasture there shall be 214 2/7 acres, and of tillage 85 ^/7
which both sums added together, do make 300.


Master. Now take an other example: A man has three silver cups with one
cover, the cover wayeth 18 ounces the second cup weyeth even half the weight
of the first and the third. Now if the cover be put to the first cup, they wey
just as much as all the three cups do wey: and if the cover be joined with
the second cup, they wey as much as the second twice, and the third: and if
the cover be put to the third cup, they will make twice as much as the first
and the second cup. Now try you what was the just weight of every cup.


Scholar. I do set the weight of the first cup to be 9 ounces: then in as
much as these two (that is to say, the cover and the first cup) do wey the
weight of the three cups, I see that the three cups must wey 27 ounces, for
so much is 18 and 9. Also because the first and the third do wey double so
much as the second, therefore is it the third part of that weight, that is 9,
and then would it follow, that the third cup also should wey 9 ounces, but
then the question says, that the cover being joined to the second cup, they
wey as much as the second twice, and the third once, that should be 27, and so
it does: then being joined with the third cup, they should wey twice as much as
the first and the second, that should be 36, and they wey but 27, so is that
error 9 too little. Then begin I again, and say, that the first cup does
wey 12 ounces, which I join with the cover, and they make 30 ounces: then
seeing the second is of that weight, it must needs wey 10 ounces, and the
third must wey 8 ounces, seeing the first and the third must wey 20 ounces.
Now put I the cover to the second cup, and they wey 28 ounces, which
should be even so: then join I the cover with the third Cup, and so should
it wey twice the first, and the second, that is 44 ounces, and they do wey
but 26, that is 18 too little: those ^ errors with their positions I set
down, and multiply in cross ways 9 by 12, whereof comes 108. Also 9 by 18,
and that yields 162: and in as much as the signs be like, I abate the lesser
out of the greater, and there does remain 54. Then do I also abate the lesser
error from the greater, and so remains 9, by which I divide 54, and the
quotient is 6: which I take for the true weight of the first cup: which being
joined with the cover must wey as much as the three cups, so do they wey but
24 ounces. Then seeing the second cup is the third part of that weight, for the
other two cups (you say) must wey double his weight, the weight of the
second cup is 8 ounces, and so the weight of the the third must be 10
ounces. Now put the cover to the second cup, and it will make 26 ounces:
that must be the weight of the second twice, and the third once, that is
twice s, and once 10, and so is it. Again, put the cover to the third cup
of 10 ounces, and they must wey twice as much as the first and the second,
that is 28: and so is all agreeable.


Master. Then aunsweare to this question.

A question of water.
There is a Cesterne with four cocks, containing 72 barrels of water: and if
the greatest cock be opened the water will avoid clean in six hours: at the
second cock it will ask eight hours: at the third cock it will avoid in
no less than nine hours: and at the smallest it will require twelve hours.
Now I demand, in what spaes will it avoid, all the cocks being set open?


Scholar. First I imagine that it will avoid in two hours.


Master. Then must there avoid by the first cock 1/^ of the water, that is
^4 barrels, and by the second cock, that is 18, and by the third cock 2/^
that is 16 barrelles, and by the smallest cock, that is 12 barrelles, all
which sums put together do make 70, as by their addition it does appear, but
it should be 72, therefore the error is 2 too few.


Scholar. Then I begin ^ again by your favor, because I think I understand
the work, and put three hours for the due time: so shall there run out at
the greatest cock, that is 36 barrels, and at the second hole ^/8, that is
27, and at the third cock ^/3 that is 34, and at the smallest hole, that is
18 barrels, which al together do make 105, and should be but 72, so is it too
much by ^3, therefore do I set the ^ errors in order of the figure with their
positions, and work by multiplication, in cross, saying: 2 times 3 is 6 and 2
times 33 makes 66: and because the signs are unlike, I must add those two
totalles together, which make 72: also I add the two errors, and they make
35, by which I divide 72, and the quotient rises 2 2/25, whereby I see that
all the cocks being set open, the water will avoid in 2 hours, and ^2/35 of
an hour.


Master. This exercise makes you to grow expert in the rule. Therefore I will
inure you somewhat more with a question or two.

There were two men that had been parteners, and had in account between them
300 ducats: whereof the one should have for his part 180, and the other 120:
but in the parting of them they fell at variannce, so that each of them catched
as many as he could: yet afterward being reconciled, they agreed that he
which had gotten most part of them, should lay down of them again, and he
that had gotten least, should lay down of those which he had taken, and then
parting them unto two equal parts, each man to have half thereof, and so
had they their just portions, as they ought: now I demand of you what each
of them had gotten by the scambling?


Scholar. I suppose he that had least, got 108 ducats, then the other had
192: wherefore in laying down again of the 192, there was put down that is,
144, and so had he left but 48. Also of the 108: there was laid down 36, that
is ^/^, and so he had left 72. Then I put together 144, and 36, and it makes
180 which I part into two parts even, and so comes 90 to be given to each
of them: which sum put to 72, makes 162, and joined to 148, it makes 238:
and now I doubt how I shall go forward.


Master. You need not to take but one of them which you list, the greater or
the smaller, for all comes to one purpose: and so may you compare it that you
take to any of the other sums, remembering that you make comparison to the
same in the second work: as for example of the first part, If you compare
138 with the lesser sum due, that is 120, so is it 18 too much: and if you
compare it with the greater sum, then is it 42 too little. Again, if you
compare 162 to the greater sum, the error will be 18 as it was in the other:
but it will have a contrary sign: and if you compare it with the lesser sum
it will be 42 too much: so that the error both ways is either 18 or 42: and
as for the signs it little forces, for in them is nothing considered here,
but likeness and unlikeness, which in this case, does neither further nor
hinder. But now go on with the work.


Scholar. If it be so, then am I out of my greatest doubt Then I join that 90
(which I found as the half of the latter partition) unto 48, which is left
with the one man, and so has he 138, which (I may say) is 18 too many for the
least should be but 120: that error do I note, and then make a new position,
supposing the one man to have 204, and the other to have 96, wherefore of the
204 there must be laid down 153, and so remains with him 51. Also of the 96
there must be laid down, that is 32, and so rests with that man. 64. Now
of the 153 and 32 I make one sum as 185, which I must divide into 2 equal
parts. and so each man shall have 92, whereunto if I add their former
portions reserved, then the one shall have 156 and the other has 145. Wherefore
I take the lesser sum now again, as I did before, that is 143, and find
that he has too many by 23, for he should have but 120, so have I for my two
positions two errors, which I set down, ^ as here may be seen, each error
under his position, and then by the rule I do multiplye in cross ways 108 by
23 and there rises 2538 which I note then again I multiplye 96 by 18, and
thereof amounts 1728. Now because the signs are both like, that is both too
many, I must work be Subtraction, and so abating 1728 out of 2538, there will
rest for the dividend 810: then for the divisor I subtract 18 out of 23 and
there remains 5, by which I divide 810, and the quotient will be 147 ^/33^,
which is the just portion of him that had the least sum. And if I do
subtracte it out of 300 being the total sum, then will there remain 152
9/1^, as the portion that the other did get.


Master. For the proof of this work, you may choose whether you will examine
those numbers according to the form of the question, or else work by other
two positions for to find the second number: and if those positions bring the
same numbers that did amount by the first two positions, then does each
work confirm other.


Scholar. By your patience, I will prove both ways, not only to see their
agreement, but also to accustom my mind to those works: for I perceive it is
exercise that must be the chief engrauer of these rules in my memory.


Master. You consider it well: then go to.


Scholar. First I will by two other positions try to find the portion of him
which had most.


Master. Although you may do it with any positions, yet to see the agreement
of your work the better, take the same positions that you did before, comparing
them now to the greater, as you did before unto the lesser.


Scholar. Then I suppose, that he that had most, had 192, so had the other
108. Now if I take of 192, that will be 144, and there will rest to that man
but 48. And from the second which had 108, if I take, that is 36, there will
remain to him 72: then joining 144 with 36, it will make 180, the half
whereof being 90. If I add to each of those two men's portions remaining with
them, the one shall have 138, and the other 162, of which two I take the greater
(that is 162) and see it to be 18 too few, for it should be 180, that error
I note under his position. Then for the second position I take (as I did
before) 204 for the one, and so rests 96 for the other: then take I of ^04
and it will be 153, and there rests to him 51. Also of the 96 I take that is
32, and there remains to him 64. Now put I that 32 to 15^, and it yields
105: which being parted in equal valewes, makes 92. to be added to each man's
remainder, and so the one has 143, and the other 156: wherefore I take the
greatest sum, and it is 23 too little, that do I note also, and set both
these errors under their positions, as in this example following does appear.

And then multiplying ^ 192 by 23, there does arise 4512.

Again, I multiply 204 by 18, and it makes 3672, which I do subtracte out of
4512, because the signs be like, and there rests 840 for the dividend: then
subtracting 18 out of 23, there will remain 5, which I must take for the
Divisor. And so dividing 840 by 5, the quotient will be 152 8/11, whereby I have
found an agreeable sum to that which I found by the former positions, for
him that had most, which if I do subtracte out of 300, that is the total,
there will rest 147 ^/11, which was the portion of him that had the least
part.


Master. So by diverse positions you see, that one does confirm the work of
the other. Now examine those two numbers by the form of the question, and so
shall you prove your work good also.


Scholar. If that he which gate most, had 152 3/11, then must he lay down
of his sum, that is 114 6/11* and so shall remain with him, but only 38
2/11 The other which had least, that is 147 3/11. must put down of his sum.
that is 49 1/11, and so does there remain with him yet 98 3/1^. Then do I
add together 114 6/11 and 49 1/11, and it will make 163 ^/1^, which I must
part into two equal parts, and that will be 81 9/11 to be given to each of
them: so putting 81 9/11 unto 38 2/11, there does amount 120 just, which is
the true portion of him that should have the lesser sum: and adding 81 9/11
to 98 2/11, the total will be 180. the true portion of the other. And so is
the work by this proof also tried to be good. And this I mark by the way,
that in their scambling, he gate most (as it chances often) that ought to
have had least by just partition.


Master. Let your study be to learn truth and just art of Proportion, and
to distribute and part according thereunto, as often as occasion shall be
ministered. And here would I make an end of this rule, save that I remember one
pleasant question which I can not ouerpasse, which I will declare somewhat
largely, because you shall as well understand some reason in the pleasant
invention, as apt proceeding in the witty working thereof.

Hiero King of the Syracusanes in Sicilia, An example of mixture of Gold and
Silver.
had caused to be made a Crown of Gold of a wonderful weight, to be
offered for his good success in wars: in making whereof, the Goldsmith
fraudulently took out a certain portion of Gold, and put in silver for it,
so that there was nothing abated of the full weight, although there was much of
the valewe diminished. Which thing at length being uttered, (as no evil can
always lie hid) the King was sore moved, and being desirous to try the
truth without breaking of the Crown, proponed the doubt to Archimides, unto
whose wit nothing seemed impossible, which although presentlye he could not
aunsweare unto, yet he had good hope to devise some policy for that
invention. And so musing thereon, as he chanced to enter into a baine full of
water to wash him, he observed that as his body entered into the baine, the
water did run over the tub: whereby his ready wit of such small effects
coniecturing greater works, conceived by and by a reason of solution to the
Kings question, and therefore reioicing exceedingly more than if he had gotten
the Crown it self, forgate that he was naked, and so ran home, crying as he
ran, (...), I have found, I have found. And there upon caused two massy
pieces, one of gold, and an other of silver to be prepared of the same weight
that the said Crown was of: and considering that gold is heavier of nature
than silver, and therefore gold of like weight with silver, must needs occupy
less room, by reason it is more compact and sound in substance, he was
assured, that putting the mass of gold into a vessel brimme full of water,
there would not so much water run over, as when he should put in the silver
mass of the like weight. Wherefore he tried both, and noted not only the
quantities of the water at each time, but also the difference or excess of the
one above the other, whereby he learned what proportion in quantity is between
gold and silver of equal weight. And then putting the crown it self into the
vessel of water brimme full (as before) marked how much water did run out
then, and comparing it with the water that ra^ out when the gold was put in,
noted how much it did exceed that: and likewise comparing it to the water
that ra^ out of the silver, marked how much it was less than that: and by
those proportions found out the just quantity of gold yt was taken out of the
crown, and how much silver was put in steed of it. But seeing Vitruuius which
writes this history, does not declare the particular work of this trial, it
shall be no inconvenience to suppose an example for declarations sake, wherein
although the true and just proportions be not expressed, yet the form of
trial shall be truly set forth And for an example, I suppose the weighte of
the Crown to be 8 lb, and so of each of the other two Masses. And when the
mass of Gold was put into the water, I imagine that there ran out 2 pound of
water: and when the mass of silver was put in, I suppose there ran out 3.
pound Again when the crown was put in, there ra^ out 2 pound Now to know what
quantity of silver was in the Crown, work by the rule of false position, and
imagine that there was 2 pound of silver: then must there be 6 pound of Gold*
Then say thus by the rule of Proportion: If 8 pound of gold do expel 2 lb of
water, what shall 6 lb. expel? and it will be 1 pound. Again for the silver: If
8 lb of silver expel ^ lb of water, what shall 2 lb of silver put out? it will
be. Now add those two weightes of water together, and they will make 2 lb 3/^
and it should be by the supposition 2 lb ^/^, so is it too much by


Sch* Now do I understand the work as I think, therefore I pray you let me
work the rest of the question. And because this first supposition did err, I
note that positio^, and his error, and take a new position, esteeming the
silver to be but one pound, so must there be in Gold 7 pound, Then say I: If
8 lb of Gold yield 2 lb of water, what shall 7 lb yield? and it will be 1 lb..
Again if 8 lb, of silver expel 3 lb. of water what shall 1 lb expel? and it
will be ^/2 7/6. Now must I add those two sums together, and they make 2 lb,
^/16 and they sh^ulde make 2 lb so is it too little by 2/16 Therefore I set ye
positio^s with their errors in order, as here ^ follows. And the^ I multiply
in crossewaies 2 by 6/11 and it makes: likewise 1 multiplied by: makes 2/8.
And because the signs be unlike, I must add those two sum, which make and
that is the dividend. Again I must add to 1/16, and it will be ^/^^* that is
the diuisour. Now I shall divide 1/^ by ^/^^ and the quotient will be ^^/^^ that
is, 1, whereby I know that there was put 1 lb and 1/^ of silver into the
Crown, and so much Gold taken out for it.


M Prove it now by examination according to the question.


Scho. If there were 1 pound ^/3 of Silver then was there of Gold 6 pound.
Now say I by the rule of proportion: ^ if eighte pound of Gold expel two
pound of water, what shall 6 pound expel?

^ It will be one pound. Again, if 8 lb of Silver expel 3 lb of water, what
shall 1 expel? It will be ^/1 7/2.

Now must I ad together 1 lb. and ^/1 7/2 and they will make 2 lb, 9/^6, that is
2 lb, according to the supposition of the question, whereby I perceive the
work to be well done. And as I can not but much rejoice of this excellent
invention, so my desire is kindled vehemently to be perfectlye instructed in
every part thereof, and namely in this point, whether the portion between
water and gold be such, that for 8 lb of gold into a vessel full of water,
there shall run out 2 lb of water: and for as much silver, whether 3 lb of
water would avoid?


Ma. I perceive your meaning, and conjecture your imagination to be thus: that
if you knew the exact proportion between Gold and Silver and Water both in
their weight and quantities, then could you easily find out the mixtures of
them, which thing I have reserved for an other work that entreats such
matters specially. And at this time you must consider, that you learn
Arithmetike, which entreats of the manner to solue doubtful questions touching
number, without regard what matter is signified by that number, else were it
necessary in Arithmetike to teach all arts, seeing in it may be moved
questions of al arts. But seeing you are so desirous to know this thing, I will
tell it you in such a sort, that you shall practice your art in finding it,
and propounde it in form of a question. Gold bears greater proportion to
water than silver does, and their two proportio^s be in proportion together as
4^/25. But to help you somewhat in this riddle, you shall note that the
proportion of quick silver unto water, is the just middle number proportional
in Progression Geometrical, between the proportions of Gold and silver unto
water. And his proportion is as 29^/^1. Now if you will know the just numbers of
these 3 proportions then must you find out 3 numbers in Progression
geometrical, whereof the middlemost must be 290/21, and the first must be unto
the last, as 25 to 48. And thus I will leave you to find those numbers when
you be at leisure.


Scholar. Yet sir I thank you heartily for this much, for now I see the
possibility to find them out. Howbeit, because this question seems
strange, if it might please you to instruct me somewhat in the order of
working for it, I should the more easily find the true working.


M. You desire too much ease if you will study for nothing: therefore to
occasion you to study ye better, I will leave this doubt wholly to your own
search. But as touching the generaltie of the rule, Archimedes needed not to
take two masses of gold and silver equal in weight with the crown, for the
proportion might as well be found in any other weight yea although the mass of
gold were of one weight and the mass of silver of another. As for example. If
the crown were of 8 pound waighte, as I did suppose, and I have not so much
other fine gold, but only 1 lb, and trying that by water, and finding that it
does expel but ^/4 of an ounce of water, yet then by it may I infer, that 8
pound of gold would expel 6 ounces of water And likewise of the silver: whereof
if I had but 2 pound, and find that it does expel three ounces of water, then
might I affirm that 8 pound would expel 12 ounces, that is 1 lb weight. And
so is it, as good as if the 3 masses were al of one weight. And thus for this
time I will make an end of this other part of Arithmetike.


Sc. Although I can not sufficiently thank you for this, yet your promise
made me to look for the art of extraction of roots, whereof hitherto I have
learned nothing.


Master. I will not break my promise, but intend (God willing) to perform it
within these three or four months, if I perceive this my pains to be well
taken in the mean season. And you shall not repent the tarrying for it: for it
shall be increased by the tarrying. And in the mean time, you shall take this
Addition, not for the second part of Arithmetike which I promised, but for an
augmentation of the first part, unto which I would have annexed the
extraction of Roots square and cubike, namely for examples of the Statute of
Assise of wood, but that in the second part I must write of diverse other
roots, and thought it best to reserve those rules also with their examples
unto the same second part.


Scholar. Sir, although I can not recompense your goodness, yet I shall
always do mine endeavor to occasion you not to repent your benefit on me thus
employed.


Master. That recompense is sufficient for your part.


FINIS.
The third part or Addition to this Book entreats of brief rules, called
rules of Practice of Rare, Pleasant and commodious effect, abridged into a
brieffer Method than hitherto has been published:

With diverse other necessary Rules, Tables, and Questions not only profitable
for Merchants, but also for Gentlemen, and all other occupiers whatsoever, as
by the Contents of this Book may appear.

Set forth by John Mellis Scholemaister.

The first Chapter of this Addition entreats of brief Rules, called Rules
of Practice, with diverse necessary questions profitable, not only for
Merchaunts, but also for all other occupiers whatsoever.
THe working of Multiplicatio^ in Practice, is no other thing, than a certain
manner of multiplying of one kind by another: whereupon is brougt forth the
product of the proponed number which is accomplished by the means of Division
in taking the half, the third, the fourth, the fifte, or such other parts of
the sum which is to be multiplied.

And for the better understanding of such conuersions: you shall understand
that in the manner and use of these Rules of Practice, you ought first to
know the even or aliquot parts of a shilling, which in this Table following
does appear.

Item d 6 is the of a s. 4 is the of a s. 3 is the of a s. 2 is the ^/^ of a s.
1 is the ^/12 of a s.


Wherein as you see according to the order of these rules of Practice at 6 d ye
yeard of any thing, you must take the ^/2 of your number which is to be
multiplied, and the product, that comes thereof shall be shillings, if any
unity do remain it is 6 d.

For 4 d take the of the number that is to be multiplied and the product also
produces shillings if any unities do remain, each one shall be worth in value
4 pence. The like is to be understood of the other 3 etc.

Example I.

At 6 d the yearde what 379 yeardes ^

II.

At 4 d the yearde: what are 104 yeardes worth ^

III.

At 3 pence the yearde ^:

IIII.

At 2 pence the yearde ^

V.

At 1 penny the yearde ^

Here you may see in the first example ye 379 yeards at 6 d the yeard, are
worth 189 s 6 d in taking the of 379. And in the second example the 104
yeardes at 4 d the yeard: are worth 34 shillings 8 d: in taking ye of 104.

Likewise in the third example 5014 yeards at three pence the yearde brings
forth 1253 s 6 d in taking the of 5014. Also in ye fourth example at 2 pence
the yearde, makes 88 shillings 8 d.

And lastly in the fifth example: 409 yeards at 1 d the yeard, amounts to 34
s and 1 d, in taking the 1/12 of 409: And so is to be done of all other
questions the like, when the number of the pence is any of the even or aliquot
parts of 12 d.

Item to bring the productes of these shillings and all other the like in
pounds is very easy in dividing of it into your mind by 20, for it is to be
understood that as often as 20 is found in that product: So many pounds does
it contain, which with facility to perform, always strike of the figure
toward your right hand, with a right down dashe of your pen for the 0 that
appertayto 20: And then begin at the left hand, in taking the of the rest.
And if at the last any unity do remain, the same shall be joined with the
figure that is cut of, which shall represent the odd shillings contained in
that work.

As for example in your third question at 3 d the yearde which amounts to
1253 s. 6 d: the producte whereof makes ^ 62 lb 13 s 6 d: as here you may see
is easily performed in the mergent.

Item also for the working of 1 penny the yearde, it is something harshe and
hard to take the 1/12; part of some products: Therefore to ease that hard
work you shall first bring your delivered sum into groats, by taking the
part of the product. And if any unites remain of that part, as sometimes there
may they are pence: and must be signified with a line from the groates with
their title of pence: And because that 60 groates makes a pound or twenty
shillings, strike of the first figure toward your right hand for the 0 that
apperteyneth to 60 (as you did even now for the 0 that belongs to 20:) then
in taking the of that product, if there do remain any unities the same shall
you join with the figure that you cut of, esteeming the^ as groates: which
keep in your mind. And by taking the part of them, you shall turn into
shillings: And so have you done as for example by a question or 2 hereafter
proponed shall more plainly by the work appear.

At 1 d the yearde ^

Here in taking the part of 1359: in coming to the last work the part of 39
being taken, the remainer is 3 which joined with the 2 that was cut off,
makes 32 groates: which converted into shillings by taking the part: makes as
appears 10 s 8 d: Many other ways there are, but none more apter for a young
learner to understand than this: wherefore this one way well impressed in
memory is better tha^ 20 ways doubtfully understood.

At 1 d the yeard, what 4533 yeards ^

At 1 d the yeard what 64768 yeardes ^

Now follows also to be understood yt if the number of pence be not an
aliquot part of 12, 2. Rule.
you must reduce them into some aliquot part of 12. And after the aforesaid
manner, you shall make of them 2 or 3 products as need shall require: And add
them together into one sum: And here for thy furtherance appears a note of
the order of their parts, as they are to be taken.

For pence 5. take. 3 and 2 or 4 and 1 7. take. 4 and 3 or 6 and 1 8. take. 4
and 4 or 6 and 2 9. take. 6 and 3 or 4.4 and 1 10 take. 6 and 4 or 4.4 and 2 11
take. 6* 4 and 1 or 4.4 and 3


Here in the first note of this table at 5 d, you shall first take for 3 d the
of the number that is to be multiplied: And likewise for 2 d: the of the same
number, adding together both the products. But if you will work by 4 and 1 you
must for 4 d first take the of the number that is to be multiplied: And for 1
d take the 1/12 of the whole sum or rather, which is more better for 1 d. you
may take the of the producte which did come of ye 4 d: Because ye 1 d is ye
of 4 d: The total sums of these two numbers shall be the solution to the
question. And in like manner is to be done of all others: As by these examples
following shall appear.

I.

At 5 pence the yearde What will -- 758 yeards amount to ^

Otherwise.

At 5 d ye yard what are 758 yeardes worth ^

II.

At 7 d the ell what 562 else ^

III.

At 8 d the lb what 112 pounds ^

Otherwise.

What coms -- 112 pound at 8 d the pound ^

IIII.

At 9 d the Ell What coms -- 356 else to ^

V.

At 10 d the piece What coms -- 795 pieces to ^

VI.

At 11 d the pound What -- 757^ pound ^ makes ^

Here in this first example where it is dema^maunded (at 5 d the yeard) what
will 758 cost: First for 3 d I take the of 758: And thereof comes 18^ s -- 6
d: Then for 2 d I take the of the same product which amounts to 126 s 4 d:
these two sums added together do make 315 s 10 d: And so much are the 758
yards worth at 5 d the yard.

Item also for the same again: First for 4 d I take the of 758: and thereof
comes 252 s -- 8 d: then for 1 penny I take the of the same product, that is
to say of 252 s -- 8 d, and it yields me 63 s 2 d: which both added together
make 315 s -- 10 d, as before.

Item, for 7 d there is take then and the 1/^ of the whole sum: which is to
be multiplied, and add them together, that is to say, first, for 4 d there is
taken the of 563: which coms to 187 s -8 d as appears by the work: and for
3 d there is taken the 1/^^ of the whole sum which amounts to 140 s -9 d.
Both which products added together makes 328 s -- 5 d: And so much coms 563
else to at 7 d the Ell.

Item, for the first 8 d there is taken for 4 d the of the whole sum: and an
other for the other 4 d, which added together as in the example does evidently
appear, amou^teth to 74 s -- 8 d.

Again, for the second work of 112 lb, there is taken first the of the whole
sum for 6 d, which coms to 56 s: then for the 2 d you have to take of the
whole sum, or if you will the part of the product that came of 6 d either
which makes 18 s 8 d. These two sommes being added together do make 74 s 8 d:
as in the third example appears.

Item, for 9 d there is taken for 6 d, the of the whole sum: and the of the
whole sum for 3 d, or otherwise for the 3 d you may take the ^/2 of ye
product that came of 6 d, because 3 d is the of 6 d: which added together as
plainly appears in the fourth example, amounts to 267 s -- 0 d.

Item, for 10 d, first there is taken for 6 d the of the whole sum, which
amounts to 397 s -- 6 d. Then for 4 d there is found 265 s: both which
added together makes 662 s -- 6 d as appears in the fifth example: it may
also be wrought, as appears by the second note in the table by 4 d twice
taken, and the of the product of 4 d: or else by the of the whole sum, etc.

Item, for 11 d, there is first taken the for 6 d: then the of the whole sum
for 4 d: lastly, the of the last producte for 1 d: All which 3 sums added
together makes in s 6947-5 d, and in pounds 347-7 s -- 5 d.

Item, likewise by the same reason, 3. Rule*
when you will multiply (by shillings) any number that is under 20 s you shall
have in the product pounds, if you know the even or aliquot parts of 20, which
are here in this little table set down to sight.

Item s 10 is the 1/^ of one lb 5 is the 1/^ of one lb 4 is the ^1/5 of one lb
2 is the 1/10 of one lb 1 is the ^/20 of one lb


So that for 10 s which is the of a pound you may take the of the number which
is to be multiplied: and you shall have in your product pounds: if a unity do
remain, it shall be worth 10 s.

Likewise for 5 s you must take the of the number which is to be multiplied:
And if there do remain any Unities, they shall be fourth parts of a pound,
every Unity being in valewe 5 s.

For 4 s take the of the number which is to be multiplied: And if there do
remain any Unities, they shall be fifte parts of a pound, each unity being
worth 4 s.

For 2 s you must take the 1/10 of the number to be multiplied: wherefore to
take the 1/10 of any number: you must cut off the last figure of the same
number (which is nearest your right hand) from all the other figures with a
small right down line or dash with a pen, and so have you done: for all the
other figures which do remain toward your left hand from the same figure that
you do separate shall be the said 1/10 of a pound: And that figure so
separated toward your right hand shall be so many pieces of 2 s the piece:
the which figure you must double to make thereof the true number of s, as by
the example shall appear.

Finally, for 1 s, needs small work, for it is so many shillings as be
proponed in the sum, which to bring into pounds has been already taught
in the first Rule.

Example.

At 10 s the piece ^

At 5 s the Ell ^

At 4 s the yard ^

At 2 s the pound weight ^

At 1 s the piece ^

4. Rule.
Nextly, now follows in order to be understood, that if the number of
shillings be not some even, or aliquot part of 20, you must then convert the
same number of shillings into the aliquot parts of 20: And thereof make two or
three products, as need shall require: which done, add them together, and
bring them into pounds. And here for thy furtherance I have set down a note of
the order of their parts, as they are to be taken.

s s 3 of 2 and 1 or 13 of 10.2 and 1 6 4 and 2 5. and 1 14 10. and 4 7 5 and 2
15 10. and 5 8 4 and 4 5.2.1 16 10.5.1 9 5 and 4 4.4.1 17 10.5.2 11 10 and 1 18
10.4.4 12 10 and 2 19 10.5.4

For 3 s according to the tenor that you see is expressed in the Table, you
must first take for 2 s the 1/1^ of the number that is to be multiplied: Then
for 1 s you must take the of the product which did come of the same 1/20
part, and add those two sums added there, produces the effect desired.

Item, for 6 s according to the note set forth in the table, first for 4 s I
take the of the number that is to be multiplied: Then for 2 s the of the
product that came of 4 s, and add them together.

Or else, as appears also in the table, for 5 s you may take the and the 2/^
part of the product that came of 5 s, and add them together.

Item, for 7 s, first take for 5 s the 1/^ of the producte, that is to be
multiplied, then for 2 s, take the 1/^ of the number that is to be multiplied,
and add them together, etc.

Item, for 8 s, according to reason, and the intent of the Table, for the
first 4 s take the of the product, and the same number again for the other 4
s: and add them together.

Item, for 9 s: first for 5 s take the 1/^: then for 4 s take the: and add
them together.

Otherwise as you see by the intent of the table, work twice for 4 s, as was
taught eue^ now for 8: and then take the of the last product for the 1 s: But 5
and 4 is the shorter.

Ite^, for 11 s: first dispatch 10 s: for which you must take the of the
product: then lastly for 1 s take the 1/10 part of the sum produced of the
of the product and add them together.

Item, for 12 s where I will end with the first part of my Table: First take
the for 10 s: And then for 2 s take the of the sum that came of 10 s, and add
them together: or else, if you please for 2 s you may take the of the whole
given number.

To write more of the manner of taking the true parts, I think superfluous. The
desirous practitioner will (no doubt) conceive it. Also the Table is some aid
to help the imperfect: whereupon by and by I will set down three or four of
these notes in examples: and the rest I will leave to thine own industry and
practice to labor upon.

This is the order most commonly used in Practice when the number of the s is
not an aliquot part of a pound. But loving Reader) after I have touched the
eue^ or aliquot parts of a lb that falls out in d and s, I will deliver 2 new
Rules that shall drown this common order quite and clean: wherein shall be
comprehended in one line, or working both even and odd part of s under ^0:
without regard whether it be an aliquot or not an aliquot part: which 2 Rules,
when they come in place, I commit to thy friendly judgment in working: Now
follows the examples upon the notes before said.

At 6 s the yard ^

Otherwise by multiplication of 6: ^

At 7 s the Ell ^

Otherwise by multiplication of 7: ^

At 8 s ye piece what 7563 pieces ^

Otherwise by Multiplication.

^

At 13 s yt piece what 401 pieces ^

Otherwise by Multiplication.

^

These and such like questions of Compound numbers, which I have here in this
fourth rule for orders sake set down, I count but as superfluous. For, in the
second part of my new promised Rules shall appear, that the given price of
any odd number of Shillings, either under or above 20: shall be wrought at
two wor-kings at the most how difficult so ever the question be.

Item, there rests yet a kind of Practice, how to bring pence into pounds
at the first working: whereupon you must understand, that 240 pence makes one
pound, or 20 s, I cut off the last figure or 0: and there remains but 24
(of which 24) 8 d is the part thereof: 6 d is the part, 4 d the part: and 2
d is the 1/12 part thereof.

Whereupon if it were demanded what 1486 yeardes or pounds of any thing
comes to: at 8 d the yeard, in pricking or cutting off the first figure
toward your right hand: for the 0 that appertains to 240: There is
remaining of the said sum 148: whereout I take the part: and it comes to
49 lb: and there rests one: which 1 I put to the 6: that I prick or cut
off, and it makes 16 pieces of 8 pence, which I double to make into groates
and they make 32. whereof the ^ part makes 10 s and there remains ^ s: which
is 8 pence, whereby it follows, that the 1486 yeardes at 8 pence the yeard,
makes 49 lb 10 s 8 d: as by the example shall appear.

Item for ^ pence, take the 1/^ part of the number from the pricked figure: And
if any unities do remain, they are so many sixepences, whereof taking the 1/^,
they are shillings, if there do remain yet one, it is in valewe 6 pence.

Item for 4 pence, take the part of the number from the prickte figure: If any
unities remain, they are so many groates, which to convert into shillings,
take the part: And if any thing yet remain, they are thirds of shillings,
echcone in valewe being worth 4 pence.

Item, for 3 pence, take the ^ part from the pricked figure, if any unities
remain, they are so many pieces of ^ pence whereof in taking the 1/^ part,
makes shillings: If any thing yet remain, they are fourth parts of
shillings, echone being in valewe 3 pence.

Item, for 3 pence, as appears also by the table, take the 1/12 part of the
number from the pricked figure: If any thing remain, they are so many pieces of
2 pence: which by taking the part, you shall turn into shillings: and if any
unities remain, they are so many sixte part of shillings, or pieces of 2
pence, whether you will.

If one pound cost -- 8 d ^

If one cost 6 d ^

If one yeard cost 4 d ^

At 3 d the yeard ^

At 2 d the ell what 7894 ^

6. Rule.
But if your number of pence be not an aliquot or even part of 24: then must you
bring them into the aliquot parts of 24, and make thereof diverse products,
which must be added together, as by the questions hereafter following shall
appear.

Item, for 5 d, first take for 3 d, then for 2 d: and add them together
according to the instruction of the second Rule: Or else first take for 4 d,
then for 1 d.

Item for 7 d, first take for 4 d: then for 3 d and add them together.

Item, for 9, first take for 6 d: then for 3 d, and add them together.

Item, for 10 d, first take for 6 d: then for 4 d, and add them together.

Item for 11 d first take for 8 d then for 3 d and add them together: as by
these examples following does appear.

Examples.

If one yearde cost 5 d what 7596 ^

Otherwise.

^

If one cost 7 pence what 987 ^

Otherwise.

^

If one cost 9 pence what 987 ^

Otherwise.

^

If one yearde cost 10 d what 987 ^

If one cost 11 pence what 987 ^

But if you have any shillings, and pence to be multiplied together: Then are
you to take for the shillings according to the enstruction of the third Rule:
And for the pe^ce according to the first Rule before mentioned: unless you can
spy the advantage thereof: and thereby help your self: as appears in this
second example, where first I work for 6 d: which is to be rebated out of the
given number, and I have 719 lb 11 s my desire.

At 10 s 6 d: the yearde What 738 yeardes ^

The like again is done by rebating as by these 2 examples appears:

Item, 418 else at 18 s ^

Item 517. at 16 s ^

7. Rules
And now I will touch a little the even parts of a pound that falls out in
pence and shillings, whereof for those parts you shall take such like part of
the given number that is to be multiplied, as the price of that given number
bears in proportion to a pound which also for thy better aid is here set
down.

1 s. 8 d is the 1/12 of the lb. 2. 6 is the of a lb. 3. 4 is the of a lb. 6. 8
is the of a lb.
Item first for 1 s 8 d take the 1/12 part of the given number and if any
thing do remain, they are twelve parts of a pound, each one being in value 1
s 8 d.

Item for 2 s 6 d take the part of the number that is to be multiplied. And if
any thing do remain they are eight parts of a pound each one being in value 2
s 6 d.

Item for 3 s 4 d as appears by the table, you must take the part of the
given number. And if any thing do remain they are 6 parts of a lb: each one
being in value 3 s 4 d.

Item for 6 s 8 pence take the part of the number that is to be multiplied: And
if any unities do remain, they are thirds of a pound every one being worth 6
s 8 pence.

Other infinite numbers there are, that may be reduced by abbreuiation into the
proportionate parts of a pound: as 16 s 8 pence makes: which 16 s 8 d is
easily reduced into groates by multiplying 16 by 3: and thereto add 2: which
makes 50 groates: Then set 60 the groates of a pound under 50, cutting of the
2 Ciphers, as is here ^ performed in the margent. And then have you brought 16
s 8 pence into the known parts of a lb which makes.

But yet gentle Reader, for thy further enstruction, I have hereunto annexed in
a table, how pence and shillings bears proportion to a lb: which I commit
to thy friendly benevolence, it will be some aid unto the ungrounded
practitioner: but I count him the best workman that can presently reduce his
given price unto the known and proportionate parts of a lb.

s d lb 0 2 1/120 0 3 1/80 0 4 1/60 0 6 1/40 0 8 1/^0 1 0 1/20 1 3 1/16 1 8
1/12 2 0 1/10 2 6 3 0 3/20 3 4 3 9 2/^6 4 0 5 6 1/10 6 3 20/16 6 8 7 7/20 7 6 8
8 4 5/12 8 9 7/16 9 9/20 10 11 11/2^ 11 3 7/16 11 8 7/12 12 13 1^/2^ 13 4 13 9
1/1 14 7/1 15 16 4/5 16 8 17 ^7/2^ 17 6 18 9/10 18 4 11/12 18 9 15/16 19 19
19/20

Here follows 4 examples upon the 4 notes delivered.

At 1 s 8 pence the yearde What 3884 yeardes ^

At 2 s 6 pence the yearde What 4562 yeardes ^

At 3 s 4 pence the yearde What 583^ yeardes ^

At 6 s 8 pence the yearde What 7562 yeardes ^

Now by custom you are able to work by all sorts of summmes, being
delivered in shillings and pence, as 1 s 1 penny: ^ s ^ pence 3 s 3 pence, and
so of all other: wishing you to have some considerations of your questions,
when they are set down, for there are many subtle abbreuiations, and great
adua^tages to be gotten, and easily to be perceived As ^ s. 8 d of 2 s and 1
lb 8 d. 4 s ^ d: of ^ s 4 d: and 10 d which 10: is ^/4 of 3 s 4 d 5 s 8 d. of
4 s: and 1 s. 8 d. 5 s. 10 d, of 5 s and 10 d: which 10 d is of 5 s^


And by this mean when you have taken one product, you may oftentimes upon
the same take an other more briefly then upon the sum which is to be
multiplied etc.

8. Rule.
Now gentle Reader that you have seen the virtue of the even or aliquot parts
of a lb: in shillings alone, And also in the aliquot parts of shillings and
pence: according to my promise hereafter follows a briefer and easier method
for any even number of shillings either under or above 20, then ever yet has
been published: Notwithstanding Master Humfrey Baker, whose travel is worthy
commendation, And whom for knowledge sake I reverence has in some part touched
this first part: though not in this method: The work of the Rule is both
pleasante, ready and brief. As by the variety of the examples delivered
thereupon shall appear. And first I will set forth a question: Thereby the
better to express or teach you the order thereof: which is this.

If one yearde cost 6 s what 8574 ^

To the understanding of this example, after you have set down your given
number in form of the rule of 3, with a line drawn under it: you shall
presently set a prick under your first figure 4, toward your right hand,
drawing from the prick as heretofore has been practiced, a little short line,
thereto set down the shillings anon, which done, multiply the first figure
4 by 6. the value of your price, (which here you see stands in sight above
the line.) it makes 24: which is 1 lb 4 s. The 1 lb keep to carry to the next
place, and the 4 s set down at the end of the prescribed line toward your
right hand: Thus have you done now with 6 above the line, and also with 4 in
the first place (for the prick under the 4. does represent that 4 has done
his office.) Then seco^darily for a general rule take but the of the given
price which here is ^, which 3, Note. A general rule.
is the number that shall now continue the rest of ye multiplication and end
the work, whereupon I multiply 3 into 7 standing in the second place it makes
21, and with the 1 lb I kept in mind 22, set down 2 and keep 3 in mind
working according to the rule of multiplication, delivering the tens in mind in
their due place, which done, the product from the prick to your left hand
represents the pounds and the other at the end of the line the shillings: as
appears by the examples.

If one yearde cost 2 s what 7536 ^

If one yearde cost 4 s what 8792 ^

If one piece cost 6 s what 9537 ^

If one cost 8 s what 7509 ^

If one cost 12 what 5794 ^

If one cost 14 s what 3705 ^

If one cost 18 s what 5703 ^

If one cost 22 s what 953 ^

Let these suffice gentle reader for an entreance into even numbers: And now I
will show the like rule for any od or uneven parts of a pound.

To help you to the understanding of these other questions yt hereafter
follows: where in my first example the given number is 6487. 9 Rule.
At 3 s the yeard: I multiply 3 above the line into 7. it makes 21: The 1
shilling I set down and the 1 lb I keep: Now am I to take the of 3: which
because it is an odd number I cannot. Therefore I shall keep and continue my
multiplication by 3 still: And work by the of the rest of the given figures or
numbers: To wit 648: And first the of 8 which is 4 multiplied into ^ makes 12
thereto join ye 1 lb in mind, it makes 1^: set down ^ keep one. Then again
multiply by 2 the of 4 it makes 6, and with 1 in mind it makes 7. Then
lastly take the of 6 which is 3, saying 3 times 3, is 9: which 9 set down and
so is the question answered as appears by the practice, and the examples
following.

At 3 s the yearde what 6487 ^

If one yearde cost 5 s what 4769 ^

At 7 s the elle what 6489 ^

If one elle cost 9 s what 2807 ^

At 11 s the pistolet what 8263 ^

If one piece cost 13 s what 4629 ^

But now note gentle Reader, when the given price falls upon any odd
number. As 3.5.7.9.11.13. etc: Then it is to be presupposed, that the given
sum to be multiplied must be a sum made of even numbers, as 2.4.6.8.0 etc.
else can not that question be wrought at one line or working.

Providing always that it may bear an odd figure in the first place
toward your right hand: as appears in these 6 Examples which last were
wrought, and such like etc. which may bear an odd number for the price, and
be done at one line or working very well.

But if the given price be an odd number, and the sum to be multiplied odd
numbers also: The^ can it not be done at one working, but requires the aid of
2 workings: for odd with odd will not agree, which notwithstanding to bring
to pass. Take this for a general rule: First work for the even number,
contained in that question, or given price, according as you have learned, And
the^ afterward for the one odd shilling, A general rule.
take the of the sum given to be multiplied, omitting the first pricked place,
As was taught for ye working of one shilling in my first rule of practice, And
add those two together. And you shall have your desire.

Example.

At 3 s the yearde what 7539 ^

At 7 s the ell what 7539 ^

At 13 s the yearde what 7534 ^

And thus have I abbridged into these two Rules how to bring any number of s:
whatsoever they be into pounds, with a brieffer method, then ever yet has been
published, which I commend unto thy friendlye censure and judgments in the
use of practice thereof.

If one cost 6 s 5 d what 1231 ^

At 14 s 2, d what 2825 ^

At 16 s 4 d what 2531 ^

At 3 s the Pistolet what 8325 ^

At 7 s the crown what 6529 ^

At 9 s the piece what 6567 ^

These three last questions may seem some thing hard, yet are they easy
enough, if you mark them well, if I should explain them, then are they too
easy: therefore I leave them to whet the minds of the desirous.

^0. Rule.
Item, when any one of the sums which is to be multiplied, is composed of
many Denominations: and the given number but of one figure alone: Then shall
you multiplye all the denominations of the other sum, by the same one figure,
beginning first with that sum which is least in value toward your right
hand, and bring the producte of those d into s, and the producte of the s into
lb* as by this example does appear.

^

11. Rule.
But if in any of the sums that are to be multiplied there be a broken number:
First work for the whole according to the instructions that you have learned:
and then take such part of the given price: as that broken number bears in
proportion to the price, as in the example: after you have wrought, for 3 s and
for 6 d: then are you to take the ^/^ of 36 d for the yeard: and add that to
the sum: So adding all 3 productes together which makes 43 lb -- 2 s -- 11 d
the just price of 246 Else: and thus must you do of all other.

At 3 s 6 d the Ell what 246 ^

At 16 s 4 d the piece What ^

If one piece cost ^ What ^

The Proof.

If 12 pieces cost 50 lb^ 2 s^ 6 d what one piece ^

12. Rule.
Item, touching the manner how to understand the order of this proof, and
others the like: first seek how many times 12 is contained in 50: makes 4:
rests 2 lb which converted into shillings, and joined with the other 2 s,
makes 42 s: wherein is found 12 three times: rests 6 s which turned into
pence, putting thereto the 6 d in the first place, it makes 76: wherein 12 is
found 6 times, rests 6 d, which contains 12 but a time, put that to the 6
d: And then the solution is 4 lb -- 3 s -- 6 as appears by the practice
thereof.

13. Rule.
Item, the like is to be done of any thing that is bought or sold after 5 score
to the hundredth, or the Quintall: As for example.

If 100 lb cost 27 lb -- 13 s -- 4 d What one pound.

^

I have wrought this at length for ye aid of ye yo^g learner, because he
should understand how al ye Multiplication is set down.

^

But to works it more neatly, it is by a little understanding ended thus.

Item to the understanding of this and such like questions, the right down
line is all the guide, which is pulled down close by 20, as you see in the
example, where 27 lb -- 13 s is reduced all into s: makes 552.

The 5 toward your left hand being sepated with the hanging or right down
line, is the just number of shillings: that aunsweareth to the question:
Nextly, 53 s is multiplied by 12 to reduce them to pence, putting to the 4 d:
it yields for the multiplication of the first figure two: 1 10: the one
beyond the line toward the left hand: is 1 penny toward the rest of the
price: then 53 also multiplied by 1 yields 53: but the 5 behind the line
toward the left hand, is also 5 d more, toward the price, which 1 and 5: I
add together under the line: it makes 6 d: So is there found now as
appears by the Titles of s and d: 5 s 6 d.

Finally, I come now on this side the line, toward the right hand: and under
12: I find first 10: and then 3: which added together makes 40: under which
40, you must put the 100: and it makes -- 40/1^0 which abbreuiated comes
to: So the just price of one pound after 5 score to the hundredth, makes -- 5
s -- 6 d.

One example more, and so will I leave this rule.

If 100 cost 10 d What ^

Also the like may be done of our usual waightes here in England (which is
112 lb for every hundredth weight) in case you know the Aliquot parts of a
hundredth weight, which are these, 56 lb, 28 lb, 14 lb, and 7 lb: For 56 lb is
the of 112 lb, 28 lb is the of 112 lb, 14 lb is the, and 7 lb is the 1/16.

Therefore for 56 lb, take the of the sum of money that 112 lb weight is worth.

For 28 lb take the of the sum of money that 112 lb weight is worth.

For 14 lb, take the of the sum that 112 lb is worth.

And for 7 lb, the 1/16 of the sum of money that C. is worth.

As for example: at 17 lb -- 19 s the hundredth pounds weight, that is to say,
the 112 lb, what shall three quarterus and 7 lb cost?

^

The second Chapter entreats of the Reduction of diverse measures to others
valewe by Rules of Practice.
13. Rule.
NOW will I show a few examples of Practice in reducing of measures: as Else
Yeardes, Braces, pawnes of Ieanes etc. Much more I would have touched but
that I fear the book will rise to too great a volume.

In 864 else of Antwerpe, how many yeardes of London?

^

Item, in these and such like questions of Flemmish measure to be brought into
yards English: first take the of the given number, as appears in the first
example toward your left hand: Then take the of that product: or the of the
given number: and add those 2 products together, they shall be yeards English,
as by the example you may perceive.

The second example toward your right hand is yet briefer than the first,
whose work is this: take the of the delivered number, and that product, subtray
out of the given number: and the rest shows your desire: of these two ways
use which you think best.

The Proof.

In 648 yeards of London, how many Else of Antwerpe ^

Item for the understanding of this work: first take the part of the yeards of
London, which found, add that part, and the y^ards together, as appears by
the practice: and the product shows the Else of Antwerpe.

In 320 yeards of London, how many Else of Antwerpe makes 426 2/^ Else.

^

Proof. ^

Other Reductions.

Item you shall understand, that for as much as 6 Braces of Millane make 5
Else of Antwerp, whereupon, according to the Rules of Practice, you may
reduce the one into the other by the like Reasons aforesaid in taking the
part, and then subtraye the same to make Else of Antwerp: And again by the
contrary in taking the part, with adding the given number, to turn the Else
to Braces, as for example.

In 876 Braces how many else of Antwerp

^

Thus appears, that 876 braces by practice, make 730 Else Flemmishe: which
Else Flemmish reduced into English yeardes by the Rules aforesaid, make 547 d
yeardes.

^. Rule.
So again upon the same first Question of Braces: I would know how many
yeardes English they make.

After the rate that 100 Braces are worth 62 yeardes.

^

Item, to the understanding of this work and such like, first take the of
the given Braces: And after take the of that half: or the of the given number,
and add them together: And the product are also yeards English.

18. Rule.
Item 3 Else of Rochell make 5 Else at Lisbone: So likewise 3 Else at Lions
make 5 Else at Antwerpe.

To work these and such like, double the Else of Lions, and the Else of
Rochel: and from their products Subtray the: And the rest shall be Else of
Antwerpe, or Else of Lisbone.

Example.

In 63. Else of Lions how many Else of Antw. ^

In 100. Else of Rochel how many Else of Lisb. ^

Touching the proof or return of these and such like questions for a general
Rule, you shall first take the of the given number: And add that and the given
number together. And the of that producte shall be your desire.

Example.

In 105. Else of Antw. how many Else of Lio^s ^

In 166. else of Lisbon how many else of Roch. ^

The third Chapter treats of the order and work of the Rule of three in
broken Numbers, after the trade of Merchants, digressing something from Master
Records, which is comprehended in 3 Rules.
NOw that I have somewhat entreated of the Rules of Practice, I will give a few
instructions after my simple order, for the working of the Rule of three in
broken numbers, wherein I shall need to say the less, because I hope the
studious Learner, that has traveled any thing in the Ground of Arts, is not
unfurnished of knowledge capable to understand me. But before I deliver any
instructions for broken numbers, I will propone a question, which shall be
wrought 3 sundry ways, thereby to show as it were 3 degrees of comparison:
how far the Rule of three, in broken, for more speed of work, differs from
whole, which I rather set down for a view, that the studious herein may be
more desirous to attain broken: leaving any more so discourse in Dialogue
form: but only to give instructions, where need is: and in the rest to put
forth the questions with their aunsweares.

My first question is this.

If one yeard cost 6 s -- 8 d What are -- 789 worth at that rate ^

Here the product of the sum are pence according to the nature of the middle
number.

^

I aunsweare 263 lb ^

Here the producte of the sum is s, according to the nature of the middle
number.

^

Here the producte is pounds according to the title of the second number.

^

Now that you have seen the 3 former virtues of the rule of three, whose
products has first brought forth d, next s, and lastly, pounds: I will
deliver 3 notes in order following: And with them a dosen questions: that shall
show the work of the Rule of three in broken numbers or Fractions.

1 The first four shall be sundry Questions of a Fraction coming in the
second place. 2 The second four shall be of 2 Fractions coming in the second
or third place. 3 The third four of Fractions in all three places.
My first question is this.

If one yeard cost^ me 3 s -- 4 d what are 756 worth at that price. 1. Rule.


In setting down the Question to perform the work I turn 4 d into the part
of ^ s.
TO the ready working of this question, and all such other like, my first note
is this: which take for a general rule, that when any one Fraction shall come
either in the second or third place: that the Denominator of that Fraction or
Fractions, must always be brought unto the number or Numerator of the first
place: and thereby multiplied the one into the other.

And this benefit is always gotten by the virtue of bringing the Denominator
of the second numbers fraction unto the first place. For the fraction in the
middle number is now released: and the producte that comes of the
Multiplication, is of the nature and like Denomination of the whole number in
the second place which here are shillings.

Whereupon now to work the question I bring 3 the Denominator of the Fraction
in the second place, unto my first number 1 with a line set under 1 thus: and
the 3 under it thus* saying, once 3 is my Divisor: That done, reduce 3 saying,
3 times 3 is 9, and the 1 over 3 make 10: my second number in the Rule of 3: by
which 10 I do multiply my last number 756 as appears by ye work thereof: And
it yields 7560 s my dividend.

Then dividing 7560 by 3 my divisor, it yields in Quotient 2520 s: which, as
appears by the work makes 126 pounds.

At 3 s 4 d the yeard what 756 yeards ^

^

If one yearde of cotton cost 8 d what 859. ^

This question was also wrought like the first and brings forth 29 lb -- 10 s
-- 6 d the price of 859 yeardes.

If 7 pound of any thing cost 3 lb 10 s What comes 987 lb to. ^

Item I will work upon my first question now again: but altered into the
proportion it bears to a lb: for that 3 s 4 d is of a pound.

^

As soon as I have carried 6 the denominator of my middle number unto my
first place, as before has been taught: I pull down one, the numerator of 6,
with a line under 6/1 thus: And that one of custom I pull down in sight being
the figure yt I shall multiply my last number by* According to the tenor of the
Rule of 3: And because one can neither multiply nor yet divide (though here
it is set down in form of multiplication,) the producte of the
multiplication, according unto the declaration of my first note, is converted
into the title of my second number which here are pounds: now follows the
division performed by my divisor 6, to make an end of the question.

^

Notes upon my second Rule for two Fractions coming in the second and third
place. 2. Rule.

My first question is this.

If one ell cost 13 s 4 d: what half a quarter or of an ell?

Answer. First bring 13 s 4 d into the parts of a lb: which is and then will
the question stand thus. 1 -- -- 1/^.

Item for the performance of this work do as before was taught in the first
Rule, first bring 3 the denominator of the second fraction unto your first
number 1: setting a line under 1 thus: Saying once 3 is 3: that done bring 8
the denominator of the third fraction setting it under 3: and multiplye them
together, saying 3 times 8 makes 24: which 24 is your divisor: (Now have you
done with the denominator 3. and also with the denominator 8.) Therefore you
shall put a line under 3 thus. And the like line also under 8: setting or
pulling down under them their own numerators, that is 2 under 3, and also 1
under 8, as appears in the example, which Numetors for a general rule are
evermore to be pulled down, of custom in sight, to multiply the one by the
other according to the tenor of the Rule of three. Then I multiply the one by
the other saying once 2 is 2: which signifies 2 lb: being of the Nature and
like denomination of the middle number, which 2 lb is to be reduced into
shillings, otherwise it can not be divided by my first number 24: Then
dividing 40 by 24: the quotient brings forth 1 s: So much is of an ell
worth after that rate. Otherwise although 2 pound could not be divided by 24:
yet it might have been abbreued to 1/12 of a pound: which is worth 1 s 8
pence, as before.

^

Second question.

If one pound of any waighte cost 13 shillings 4 pence: what are of the pound
worth after that rate: Answer. Reduce the 13 shillings 4 pence into the parts
of a pound: which is: and then will the question stand thus.

^

Item for the understanding of this, if you mark well the last example, this
and the rest lies open, and needs small instruction. For as you did last.
So now again bring the Denominator of the second and third fraction unto the
first figure, 1, multiplying the one into the other which makes also 24, as
before your Divisor.

Then making a line under 3 thus, and a line under 8 thus, And pulling down
their Numerators under each figure, that is, 2 under 3, and 7 under 8, which
as I said before for a general Rule I pull down of custom in sight: to be
the two numbers that of duty ought to be multiplied together, which done I
bring 2 being ye lesser figure under 7: multiplying them together, it makes
14: which are of the nature of the middle number. That is to wit pounds: which
14 cannot aptlye be divided among 24: Therefore are reduced into s, as is
plainly to be seen in the example. Then 280 s parted among 24: yields for
his quotient 11 s 8 d: your desire: and ye just price of of an ell. Otherwise,
14, though it could not be divided by 24: might by mediation or division in
broken numbers have bin divided or abbreuiated to 7/12 which in effect being
reduced to his known parts makes 11 s 8 d as before. But my good will and
meaning is to aid young beginners. Therefore have I reduced the 14 lb into s:
which is the easier way.

Now follows the Example. ^

The third example.

If one yearde cost me 2 s 6 d what 345 ^/4 yeardes.

Answer. First put 6 d into the parts of a s: and then the question stands
thus.

^

Ite^ to the ready understanding of this and all such like, according as
before has been declared: Bring the denominators of the second and third
fractions unto the first place, multiplying them the one into the other, al
which makes 8. your divisor common. The^ next reduce your second number,
saying 2 times 2 is 4: and 1, is 5: as appears in the example. Lastly, reduce
your third number 345 all into fourths, and they make 1381: which 1381 is to
be multiplied by 5, according to the tenor of the Rule of three: which done,
makes 6905 s: And divided by 8 your Divisor: yields in Quotient 863 s which
makes in pounds 43 lb -- 3 s -- 1 d: And so much are the 345 and yeardes
worth at that price.

The same question wrought again but 2 s 6 d: is now converted into the parts
of a lb, and stands thus: ^
Item, after I have brought here my second and third fraction unto my first
place, and found 32 to be my deuisor: having thus furnished my first place
with all things unto him belonging (which is meant of bringing and
multiplying the Denominators of the second and third Fractions into him) I then
go in hand to see what is to do in my second place, where presently of
custom I pull down my Numerator 1 under 8: being the figure in sight that
shall multiply my third number.

Then lastly I reduce 245 all into fourthes, as before was practiced, which
makes 1381, the which 1281 I am to multiply by one my second number: they
are nothing increased, but by the Methamorph of my work, they are now 1381
pound: being of the nature of the middle number, as I have often showed you,
which divided by 32 my Diuisour, yields 42 pound and 5/32: which 5/32 of a
lb reduced into known numbers, make 3 shillings 1 d as before.

Example. ^

Now follows 4 other questions which are in all: ^ Rule.
places, broken numbers or whole and broken together.

Item first for the finding out of your divisor: you shall take this for a most
certain and general rule. That you must multiply the numerator of the first
number in the question by the denominator of the second: And also all that
again by the denominator of the third: and the total thereof shall be your
divisor.

Secondarily for a general rule to find out your dividend, multiply the
denominator of the first number by the numerator of the second, and the whole
thereof by the denominator of the third. And the total thereof shall evermore be
your dividend.

Now for an example I propone this question thereby to make my meaning the
more plain, and to show you as I have done in the rest the manner and order of
the work.

If 3/2 of any weight or measure cost ^/8 of a lb or 20 s what are 2/8 of the
like weight or measure worth after that rate.

Example. ^

Item for the more plainer understanding hereof, and all other the like, in
broken numbers: First you shall pull down 2 the Numerator of the first number
or fraction, with a line under 3/2 thus: that done according as you have
learned before, bring 6 the denominator of the second fraction, and set it
under 2 multiplying the one into the other which makes 12. Then lastly bring
8 the denominator of the third fractio^: and set it under 12, multiplying that
12 by 8: which amounts to 96: (or else for more brief multiply 6 by 8:
saying 6 times 8 makes 48: which 48 set under 2, and multiply the one into
the other, makes 96 as before) And this 96 is the first number in the rule of
three. That shall always for a most general rule be your divisor.

Secondly to work for your dividend you shall as has bin sufficie^ttie
declared before, pull down 5 the numerator of your second fractio^. And set it
under 6 with a line under 6 thus. That done as you know, you are to pull down
3 the numerator of the third fraction and set it under 8. with a line under 8
thus multiplying the one into the other according to the tenor of ye rule of 3:
which makes 15: the^ according to my note, forget not to bring the Denominator
of the first fraction which is 3 under 15: And multiply them together, which
makes 45: which 45, is your diuide^d.

Which 45 are of the nature or denominatio^ of the middle number, as I have
often taught you before And therefore are 45 lb, which aptly cannot be divided
by 96: Therefore you shall reduce that 45 lb into s as you see is performed in
the example, which amounts to 900 s which divided by 96, your divisor it
yields 9 s and ^6/96 of a s which in lesser terms is 3/8 which 3/8 in money
makes 4 d: And so much will the aforesaid 3/8 cost, as by the work following
shall appear.

Example. ^

Otherwise though 45 could not be divided by 96: yet by division in broken
numbers it might have been abbreuiated to 15/32 of a lb, which redused into
known parts will make 9 s 4 d as before.

Now my second example shall be the proof of this question.
If yeards cost 15/32 of a lb: or 20 s what shall cost?

Answer. Work as was taught you before, and you shall have your desire.

^

Here as appears by the work, the multiplications being ended 240 is to be
divided by 288: which to some perchance may seem hard, yet notwithstanding is
the work good: Therefore abbreuiate 240 by 288: as you see here is practiced:
and the end of your abbreuiation shall come to your desire. ^

Otherwise. ^

Otherwise. ^

The third question.

If 2/4 else cost 13 s 4 d what 156 else?

Answer. To work this question the shortest way: reduce 13 s 4 d into the
parts of a lb which is.

Then as you did before after, you have set down the question, the numerator
of ye first Fraction 3, is pulled down under 4. and the denominators of ye
other 2 fractio^s multiplied into him which makes 18 your divisor.

Then the Numerator of the second fraction 2: is pulled down under 3 of custom
now in sight ready to multiply my third number by: which is performed as soon
as the last number 156 is reduced into halfes.

Then lastly I multiply that product by 4: the denominator of my first
fraction: if yields 2504: which I divide by 18: And my quotient is 129 lb and
1/^ of a lb remaining which is worth 2 s 2 d: And so much will 156 else cost as
by the work following does appear.

^

The fourth Example.

If 2 Else cost 1 lb what comes 29 else to?

Item to the workmanship of this question: first reduce your first number to
one direct Numerator: in saying, ^ times 2 is 4, and 1 is 5: Then bring the
Multiplication of the Denominators of the second and third Fractions, which
makes 12: and multiply that 12 by 5 your first Numerator, it makes 60, which
is your divisor.

Then the reduction of the second number, which is 5 multiplied by 117 the
product of ye last numbers reduction, make 585, which 585 yet rests to be
multiplied by 2, the denominator of the fraction in the first place yields
1170: which divided by your divisor 60: yields 19 lb -- 10 s as appears by
the work thereof.

Thus having now touched the 12 questions whereof I first pretended, which with
diligence and often practice I trust are sufficient to aid the desirous, unto
the working of any broken numbers, therefore I will propone a question or two
more, and so end this treatise of the Rule of three in broken numbers.

Example. ^

If of an ell cost 3 s 4 d what one ell. ^

Proof.

If one Ell cost 5 s what ^ If one piece of Kersy cost 2 lb -- 5 s, and one
yeard thereof sold for 2 s -- 4 d, how many yeards long was the whole piece.

^

A Grocer has bought a bag of Almonds wayghing 385 lb: tare 4 lb at 27 s --
6 d the C: The question is what they amou^t to in money.

^

^

The fourth Chapter treats of Lost and Gain, in the trade of Merchandise.
IF one yard cost 6 s -- 8 d: and the same is sold again for 8 s -- 6 d: the
Question is, what is gained in 100 lb laying out on such commodity.

Answer, the Rule of three direct, applies two manner of ways to do the
same: the one is to say: If 6 give 8, what gives 100? Multiply and divide, and
look what your quotient brings forth above your laying out, is the neat
gains, and the solution to your Question: If you follow the work, your
Quotient will bring forth 127 lb -- 10 s.

Item, to work it the other way, which I take the nearest, seek the
difference betwixt the just price, and the ouer-price, which is 1 s -- 10 d:
Then say by the Rule of three: If 6 s gain 1 s what shall 100 lb gain:
Multiply and divide, and you shall find -- 27 lb 10 s: and so much is gained
in 100 lb laying out.

Use which of these two ways you think good.

The Proof.

If a yeard of cloth be delivered for 8 s -- 6 d, whereupon was gained after
the rate of 27 lb -- 10 s in 100 lb laying out: The Question is what the yard
cost at the first hand?

Answer. Put your gains to 100 lb, al makes 127 lb -- 10 s: then say, if 127
lb -- 10 s give but 100 lb, what gives 8 s: work, and you shall find 6 s --
8 d, the true solution to your question.

Yet an other Branch or proof upon the same first Question.
If one yeard cost 6 s -- 8 d: the question is, what price the same is to be
sold again for, to gain 27 lb -- 10 s in 100 lb laying out.

Answer, say by the Rule of three, if 100 lb give 127 lb -- 10 s: what gives
6 s: multiply and divide, and you shall find 8 s -- 6 d, your true solution.

If one Ell cost 7 s -- 8 d, and sold again for 8 s -- 6 d Question: what is
gained in 20 lb laying out, in such commodities.

Answer, Seek the difference betwixt the just price and the ouer-price,
which is 10 d, and then apply the Rule of three, as before is taught: saying,
if 8 give s, what gives 20 lb: multiply and divide, and you shall find 2 lb --
3 11/22 s: And so much is gained in 20 lb laying out.

The Proof.

A Merchant has bought Holland cloth at 8 s -- 6 d the Ell, which proves not
to his expectation: whereupon he is content to lose 2 lb -- 3 s -- 11/23 s in
20 lb laying out: The question is what price ought to be made of the Ell
abating this loss.

Answer, do as before in gains has bin taught: putting 2 lb -- 3 11/2^ s
to your 20 lb, all together makes 22 -- 3 11/2^ s: Then say by the Rule of
three: If 22 -- 3 11/23 s give but 20 lb, what shall come of 8 s: work and you
shall find 7 s -- 6 d, the just price that the Ell ought to be sold for after
the rate of this loss.

Thus you see as in company the Rule is appliable as well to gains and loss.

If 20 yeards cost 36 lb -- 10 s how shall I sell the same again to gain of
the principal: or to make of 3.4: which is all one.

Answer, by the Rule of three: if 3 do do give 4: what will 36 1/^ give?
Multiply and divide, and you shall find 48 lb --: Then say again, if 20 1/^
yeards do give 48 pou^ds, as well principal as gain: what will one yeard be
worth at that price? Multiply and divide, and you shall find 2 lb -- 8 9/4 ^/3
^/3 s.

If one Ell of Cloth cost me 8 s -- 8 d: And afterward I sell, 10 Else
thereof for 5 lb -- 12 s -- 4 d: I would know whether I win or lose: and how
much upon the 100 lb of money.

Answer. See first, at 8 s -- 8 d the Ell, what 10 else commes to, and you
shall find 4 lb -- 11 s: and I sold the same for 5 lb -- 13 s -- 4 d: So that
I did gain upon the 10 yeardes 1 -- 2-4 d: Then if you would know how much is
gained in the 100 lb, say by the rule of three: If 4 lb -- 11 s did gain 22 s
what will 100 lb gain: Multiply and divide and you shall find -- 24 lb -- 10
s -- 10 1^/10 d: And so much is gained in the 100 lb of money.

If 12 yeards cost me 11 lb -- 5 s: And I sell the yeard again for 16 s: the
question is, whether I do win or lose, and how much in or upon the pound of
money.

Answer. Look what the 12 yeardes come to at 16 s the yeard, and you shall
find 10 lb: But they cost 11 lb -- 5 s: So there is lost upon the whole 1 lb
-- 5 s: Then to know how much is lost in the pound: Say by the rule of 3: if
11 lb do lose 1 lb, what will 1 lb lose: Multiply and divide, and you shall
find 6 d: and so much is lost in the lb of money.

If I sell the C. weight of any commodity, for 4 lb: whereupon I do lose after
10 lb in the 10^ lb: I demand how much I shall lose or gain in the 100 lb,
if in case I had sold the same for 4 lb -- 10 s.

Answer. Say if 90 lb yield 10^, how much will 4 give? Multiply and divide, and
you shall find 4 ^/9: Then say again, if 4 4/9 give me 4 what will 10 come to?
Multiply and divide, and you shall find 101 lb which is more tha^ 10^ lb by 1
lb -- 5 s: And so much is gained in the 100 lb.

A Merchant has sold Currants for the sum of 430 lb: and he has gained
therein after 10 lb in the 100 lb: The question is, to know how much he gained
in all?

Answer, Say by the Rule of three: If 110 lb do gain 10 lb, what will 430 lb
gain: Multiply and divide, and you shall find 39 lb - 1 -- 9 ^/11 d, And so
much has he gained in all.

If one yeard be worth 28 s, for how much shall 10 yeards be sold to gain
after 8 lb -- 6 s -- 8 d in the 100 lb.

Answer. First add 8 lb -- 6 s -- 8 d to 100: the^ say, if 100 lb do give 108
1/^ for principal and gain, what will 28 s principal yield? Multiply and
divide, and you shall find 30 s: Then say again by the Rule of three: If 1
yearde do give 30 s (which is as well the principal as the gain) what shall
10 yeardes give? Multiply and divide, and you shall find 15 lb -- 8 s -- 9 d:
And for the same price shall the 10 yeards be sold, for to gain after the
rate of 8 lb -- 6 s -- 8 d upon the 100 lb.

A Branch or Proof out of this Question.
A Merchant has sold Clothes for 15 lb -- 8 s -- 9 d, and he has gained in
the whole, the sum of 1 lb -- 3 s -- 9 d: The question is to know how much
he has gained in the 100 lb.

Answer, to know this, first rebate the gains from the price, and there
will remain 14 lb -- 5 s -- 0 d: Then say by the Rule of three direct, if 14
lb give me -- 1 lb -- 3 s -- d: what will 100 lb give? Multiply and divide,
and you shall find -- 8 lb -- 6 s -- 8 d the effect desired: the proof is
apparent in the question before.

Yet an other Branch or Proof of the first Question.
If -- 10 yeardes be delivered for -- 15 lb 8 -- 9 whereupon was gained after
ye rate of 8 lb -- 6 s -- 8 d upon the 100 lb: the question is, what the yeard
did cost at the first hand.

Answer, first say by the Rule of three, if 10 with principal and gain
yield 15 lb -- 8, what shall 1 yield? Multiply and divide, and you shall
find 30 s: Then say again by the Rule of three: If 108 principal and gain
give but 100: what shall 30 s of principal and gain yield: work, and you
shall find 28 s: And so much did the yeard cost at the first penny.

If one yeard cost 36 s how much shall 12 yeardes be sold for to gain after
the rate of 10 lb in the 100 lb.

Answer, First say, if 100 give 110 lb principal and gain, what will 26 s
give? Multiply and divide, and you shall find 39 s Then say again by the rule
of three: If 1 yeard of principal and gain yield 39 s, what shall 12 yeards
gain? Multiply, and divide, and you shall find 23 lb -- 15 s, which s is 2
d: And for the same price shall the 12 yeards be sold, to gain after the rate
of 10 in the 100.

The Proof.

If 12 yeards be sold for 23 lb -- 15 s -- 2 d whereupon is gained after 10 lb
in the 100 lb: The question is, what the yeard cost at the first penny?

Answer. First say, if 12 give 23 lb -- 15 s, what 1 yeard? Multiply and
divide, and you shall find 39 s: Then say again by the Rule of three: if 110
lb give but 100, what shall 39 give: work and you shall find 36 s, the just
price of the yeard at the first hand.

Ite^, when one Merchant sells wares to another, and he gives to the buyer 1
lb -- 6 s -- 8 d upon the score, or 20 lb: The question is, how much shall
the buyer gain upon the 100 lb after that rate.

Answer. First add 1 lb -- 6 s -- 8 d unto 20 lb, and they are 21: Then say,
if 20 lb give 21, what shall 100 give: multiply and divide, and you shall
find 106 ^/3: So the buyer gets after the rate of 6 lb upon the 100 lb.

Gentle Reader other necessary questions appertaining to Loss and Gain, you
shall have in the seventh Chapter of this Treatise.

The fifth Chapter entreats of Loss and Gain upon Time, wrought by the
double Rule of three: or by the Rule of three composed, which is contained in
four special selected branches or questions of diverse forms, each one of
them springing from the first question, and each one of them also being a
proof to other, etc.
IF one yeard cost me 2 s 8 d ready money: and after I sell the same again for
2 s 10 d to be paid for it at the end of 3 months: the question is, what I
gain upon the 100 lb in 12 months?

Answer. First say, if 2 gain 1/^ what shall 100 lb gain: Multiply, and
divide, and you shall find -- 6 lb: Then say again by the Rule of three: if 3
months gain 6 lb what shall 12 months gain: Work, and you shall find 25
lb: and so much shall I gain in 12 months after that rate.

Ite^ you may also work it at one working by ye first part of the Rule of 3
composed: saying, if 2 s in 3 months do gain of a s, which is 2 d, what will
100 lb gain in 12 months: which for thy further encouragement, the work of
this one Example I will here put down, to verify that I affyrmed when I
delivered in the first part of this Ground of Arts, that this Rule, and so
all others more reioiceth in Broken than in Whole.

^

If a yeard be delivered for 2 s -- 10 d: whereupon was gained after the rate
of 25 lb in the 100 for 12 months: The question is now, what the yeard cost
at the first hand.

Answer. first say, if 12 months gain 25 lb, what shall 3 months gain:
and you shall find 6 lb: Then say again the second time, if 106 lb give but
100, what shall 2 s give? work, and you shall find 2 s, which is the just
price that the yeard cost at the first hand.

If one yeard of cloth cost me 2 s -- 8 d ready money, for what term shall I sell
the same again for 2 s 10 d: So that I might gain after the rate of 25 lb upon
the 100 lb in 12 months.

Answer. First say, if 2 gain what shall 100 lb gain: Multiply and divide,
and you shall find 6 1/^ lb. Then say again for the second work, if 25 lb
become of 12 months, what shall come of 6 1/^ lb: Work, and you shall find 3
months: the just term of time that the cloth ought to be delivered at 2 s
10 d, to gain 25 lb, upon the 100 lb in 12 months.

If one yeard cost me 2 s 8 d ready money for what price shall I sell the same
again to be paid at the end of 3 months: So that I may gain after the rate
of 25 lb in the 100 lb for 12 months?

Answer. First say, if 12 gain 25 lb what shall 3 months gain? Multiply,
and divide, and you shall find 6 lb: then say for the second work: if 100 lb
gain 6 lb, what shall 2 s gain? work, and you shall find 2 d, which must
be added to 2 s -- 8 d: and then it makes 2 s -- 10 d: and for that price
must the yeard be sold to gain after the rate of 25 in the 100 for 12
months, you may also work it by the first part of the rule of three composed,
saying if 100 lb in 12 months do gain me ^5 lb? what shall 2 s gain in ^
months: work and you shall find ^/2^ of a lb, which in lesser terms is 1/1^,
and is in known money worth 2 d, as before.

Many other of these questions I might here have delivered, but for fear the
book would rise to too thick a volume, and so to make the price so much the
dearer, whereby it might not be so partable to my Countrymen as I wish it.
But these four, I have of purpose framed in this order, having relation one to
an other: Assuring you, that what questions soever may be proponed within the
compass of this rule, you shall find by one of these four to make a
solution: And moreover, diverse other are yet to be delivered: where the
Creditour gives diverse days of payment, which can never be well wrought, nor
yet understood, unless you can first find by Art, the just time that al
those payments, how different soever they be, ought to be paid at once:
whereupon first I think good here to give some instructions into such a Rule,
for it is the only aid for the finishing of such questions as hereafter
shall follow.

The sixth Chapter entreats of Rules of Payment, which is a right necessary
Rule, and one of the chiefest handmaids that attends upon buying and selling,
etc.
Example.

A Merchant does owe a sum of money, whereof the is to be paid at 6 months,
the at 8 months, and the rest at a year, If he would pay at one payment,
the question is, what time ought to be given him.

Answer I have omitted the quantity of the sum, for you shall understand,
the Rule is appliable, and yields a true solution to what sum soever shall be
proponed. But now for orders sake in teaching, I do imagine the sum to be 60
lb: whereupon the manner of this work is to multiply the proportionate part
of the money by the time, as in company: Then 20 being the first payment, and
the of 60, which multiplied in broken numbers by 6: his time of payment,
makes 6/^ which in whole numbers, as appears by the example ^ in the
marge^t, makes 2 months: next 30, which is the multiplied by his term 8,
yields 4 months, then ye rest which is 10 lb must needs be abbreuiated into
the proportion it bears to 60. which is: which multiplied by his time 12
months produces 12/6: makes 2 months. All which added together as
appears in the margente. makes 8 months: which is the just time that all
those payments ought to be paid at once.

A Mercha^t has 800 lb to pay, the thereof ready money the at two months,
the at four months, and the rest at a year. The question is, if he would
pay all at one payment, what time ought to be given him.

Answer* The ready money ^ is never multiplied: then multiplied by 2 months
as you did before, makes then by 4 produces 2 months, as appears here in
the margent: But now for the rest of the money you can not multiplye it until
you have sought what proportion it bears to 800 lb. Therefore you must
subtract the ready money: the and the 1/^ out of the principal: The rest will
be 66 lb: which you must look what part it bears to the principal, which
you shall find to be 1/12: The same you must also multiply by his time 12
months. And it yields 1 month: So all make 3 months as appears in the
margent.

A Merchant is to pay 1200 lb: in ^ terms, That is to wit, 400 lb. at 2
weeks And ^0^ lb at 4 months, lastly 200 lb. at 5 months. The question is in
what time, they ought to be paid at once.

Answer. Proportionate the parts, and you ^hal find for 400 and for 600. And
200 ^s the part: which multiplied by their times ^s before, and you shall have
weeks: more (...) weeks, and lastly 3 weeks, which together makes 12
weeks, or 3 months your ^esire.

A Merchaunt is to pay 600 lb in 6 terms, whereof 100 lb is paid present,
more 300 lb at 20 days: And the rest at 5 months, accompting 30 days to a
month. The question is, what time ought these payments to be paid at once.

I answer two months.

The seventh Chapter entreats of buying and selling in the trade of
Merchandise, wherein is taken part ready money, and diverse days of payments
given for the rest: and what is won or lost in the 100 lb* forbearance for 12
months more or less according to the quantity of money, or proportion of
time etc.
A Merchant has bought Sattins which cost 8 s the yearde ready money: And
he sells the same again to another man for 10 s the yearde: But he gives two
days for the payment: That is to say three months for the one half, and five
months for the other half: The question is to know how much the seller does
gain upon 100 lb in 12 months after that rate.

Answer. Seek first by the Rules of payment, at what time those two paymentes
ought to be paid at once, and you shall find 4 months, at which time the
second Merchant ought to have paid the whole entire payment: And therefore
say by the first part of the rule of three composed: If 8 s in 4 months do
gain two shillings, what will 100 pound gain in twelve months multiplye and
divide and ^ you shall find 75 lb as appears in the example, and so much
does the first Merchaunte gain upon 100 lb in 12 months.

A Merchaunt has sold 50 clothes at 9 lb the piece, to be paid the one at 4
months: the at 5 months, and the at 7 months: And ye sellers mind is to
take no more but after 8 lb in the 100 for 12 months. The question is now what
the first Merchaunt gains in the sale of these clothes after that rate.

Answer. First look what the 50 clothes come to at that price: and you shall
find 475 lb. Then secondly, according to your direction in the Rules of
paymente, seek at what time all the payments are to be performed at once. And
you shall find 4 months. Then thirdly say by the first part of the Rule of 3
composed: If 100 lb in 12 months gain 8 lb what will 475 lb gain in 4
months: work and you shall find 13 lb and 7/36 of a lb: which is the neat
gains that the first Merchaunt has after the rate aforesaid:

A Merchant has bought Holland at 7 s 3 d the ell ready money: And he sells
the same again, for 8 s 4 d the ell, to be paid part in ready money, more
parts at three months, and the rest at four months. The question is now to
know how much the first Merchant does gain^ upon the 100 lb in 12 months
after the same rate.

Answer. According to the direction deli^uered you in the rule of payment, the
ready money is not to be multiplied: Then wor^king for the other 2 paymentes,
to find ou^ the true proportion at what time they ough^ to be paid at once,
you shall find for at months, of a mo^th: And the rest of the mo^ney which is
5/12 multiplied by his term (...) months, yields 1 months: both which
added together make 2 and months: The^ just time, that both the payments ought
to be performed at once. And therefore say by the first part of the Rule of
three composed, if 7 in 2 months do gain 13/240 of a lb: what shall 100 lb
gain in 12 months after that rate, work and you shall find 76 172/20^
pounds. And so much does he gain upon 10 pounde^ in 12 months.

A Merchant has bought 30 clothes at 6 lb the piece for ready money:
Afterward he sells 10 of them for 7 lb the piece, for three months term.
And the other 20 he sells for 8 lb the piece for four months term: The
question is now, what he gains upon 100 lb in 12 months?

Answer. First find the value of the 30 Cloths, which amount to 180 lb:
Secondarily, seek what the ten pieces come to, at 7 lb: and what the 20 pieces
come to at 8 lb the one comes to 70, and the other to 160: both which together
make 230, which is 50 lb more than they cost: Thirdly, as I have taught you in
the Rule of payment, proportionate the first and.ij. prices, unto the
proportion they bear unto 230: the producte of their two prices ^ and you
shall find 7/2^ for the first, and 6/^ for the latter. Then fourthly,
multiply those parts, by their times: and you shall have 21/23 and 6^/2^: both
which together makes whole months, and 1^/23 of a month, which is the just
time that both those payments are to be paid at once.

The^ say by the first part of the Rule of 3 composed: If 180 lb in 3 ^6/2^
months do gain 50 lb, what shall 100 gain in 1 ^ months? multiply and divide
and you shall find 90 10/51 lb. And so much does he gain upon a 100 lb in 12
months.

A Mercha^t has bought Synamon which cost him 9 s the lb ready money: The
question is now at what price he ought to sell the C weight: To wit 112 lb: to
be paid the at 2 months, and the residue at the end of 3 months, so that he
may gain after the rate of 9 lb upon a 100 lb for 12 months.

Answer. Seek first by the Rules of payment what term both the payments
ought to be paid at once, where the multiplied by his term 2 months makes
months: Likewise the next paime^t which is multiplied by his term 3 months
makes 2 months: both which added together makes 2 ^/4 months: which is the
time, that both the payments ought to be paid at once. The^ say by the Rule of
3: if 12 months do give me 10 lb what will 2 ^/4 months give? Multiply and
divide and you shall find 2 lb. The^ say again by the rule of 3: If one pound
cost me 9 s what will 112 pound cost: multiplye and divide and you shall find 50
lb 8 s. Then say once again if 100 lb do give 102 what will 50 lb give?
multiply and divide and you shall find 20 lb -- 18 -- 8 13/25 d: And for that
price ought I to sell 112 lb of Synamon to be paid at two several payments
aforesaid: To gain thereby after the rate of 10 lb upon the 100 lb in 12 months.

Brief Rules for our hundredth weight here at London which is after 11^ lb for
the C.
Item who that multiplyeth the pence that one pound weight is worth by 7: and
divides the product by 15: shall find how many pou^ds in money the 112 pound
waighte is worth.

And contrariwise, he that multiplieth the pounds that 112 lb weight is worth
by 1^. And divides the product by 7: shall find how many pence the pound
waighte is worth.

Example.

At 10 d the pound weight, what is 112 lb weight worth?

Answer. Multiplye 10 by 7 and thereof comes 70: the which divide by 15: and
you shall find 4 lb. And thus the 112 lb is worth 4 lb -- 13 -- 4 d after the
rate of 10 d the lb aforesaid.

At 6 lb the 112 lb weight what is one lb worth?

Answer. Multiplye 6 lb by 15 and thereof comes 90: the which divide by 7:
And you shall find 12 d 6/7: So much is one pound worth when the 112 lb did
cost 6 pounds.

The eight Chapter entreats of tares and allowances of merchandise sold by
weight, and of losses and gains therein etc.
AT 16 lb the 100 subtle what shall 895 lb subtle be worth in giving 4 lb
weight upon every 100 for treat?

Answer. Add 4 unto 100, and you shall have 104. Then say by the Rule of
three if 104 be worth 10 lb what are 895 lb worth? Multiply and divide, and
you shall find 237 lb ^13-10 2/13 d. And so much shall the 895 lb weight be
worth.

Item at 3 s 4 d the pound weight what shall 754 be worth in giving 4 lb weight
upon every 100 for treat?

Answer. See first by the Rule of three, what the 100 pound is worth, saying,
if 1 cost 3 s what 100? multiply and divide and you shall find 16 lb 2/^: Then
add 4 unto 100 and they are 104: Then say again by the rule of three, if 104
be sold for 16: for how much shall 754 be sold for? Multiplye and divide
and you shall find 120 lb -- 18-3 1^/53 d: And for so much shall the 754 be sold
for, at 3 s 4 d the pound in giving 4 upon the 100.

Item if 100 lb be worth 36 s 8 d what shall 860 lb be worth in rebating 4
pound upon every 100: for tare and cloffe?

Answer Multiplye 860 by 4: and thereof comes 3440: the which divide by 100
and you shall have 34 2/^ lb: abate 34 from 800: and there will remain 825: Then
say by the rule of three. If 100 lb cost 36 s what will 825 cost after that
rate? Multiply and divide: and you shall find 13-15 s And so much shall the
800 cost in rebating 4 pound upon every 100: for tare and cloffe.

Item whether does he lose more that gives 4 lb upon the 100: or he that
rebateth 4 lb upon the 100?

Answer. First note that he yt gives 4 lb upon 100, gives 104 for 100: And he
which rebateth 4 lb upon the 100 gives the 100 for 96: Therefore say by the
Rule of three, if 104 be delivered for 100: for how much shall the 100 be
delivered? multiplye and divide and you shall find 96 2/12: and he which
rebateth 4 in ye 100, makes but 96 of 100, so yt he loses 4 in ye 100, And
ye other which gives 4 upon the 100, loses but 3 ^/1 1/^ upon the 100: Thus
you may see that he which rebateth 4 in the 100: loses more by 11/12 in the
100 lb. than the other which gave 4 upon the 100: for tare and cloffe.

If 100 lb of any thing cost me 22 s 4 d: The question is how I shall sell the
lb to gain after the rate of 10 lb upon the 100 pound.

Answer Say by ye rule of 3, if 100 lb give 110 lb. what shall 23 s give?
multiply and divide, and you shall find 1 lb 17/60: Then say again if 100 lb
be worth 1 17/60 lb: what is one pound worth? multiplye and divide, and you
shall find 3 d 6/75: And so much is the pound worth in gayning 10 pound
upon the 100 pound.

Item a Grocer has bought C waighte of a commodity for 6 lb 10 s: The
question is now to know how many pou^ds there of he shall sell for 33 s 4 d: to
gain 20 shillings in the C. weight.

Answer. Add 20 s unto 6 lb 10 s: and they make 7 lb 10 s Then say if 7 yield
me 112 lb, what shall 1 lb yield? multiply and divide and you shall find 24 lb
8/9. And so many pound ought he to sell to gain 20 shillings in his C. weight.

If one pound weight cost 3 s 4 d and I sell the same again for 4 s what is
gained in 100 pound?

Answer. You may say if 3 s give 4 s what will 100 lb give? But then when you
have sound you must subtract the product out of 100 lb, the rest is your neat
gain: Or else to produce the neat gain in your work at the first: Then
subtract the just price out of the over price, as I taught before in the first
beginning of loss and gain: And your conclusion shall be al one, multiply and
divide by which of the two ways you think good, and you shall find that he
gains 16 lb 13 s 4 d in the 100 pound.

Item if the pound weight which cost 4 s be sold again for 3 s 4 d: I demand
what is lost in the 100 lb of money?

Answer. Say if 4 s loose: what shall 100 lb loose? Multiply and divide and you
shall find 25 lb: and so much is lost upon the 100 lb of money.

Item if C weight of any commodity cost 45 lb: And the buyer repenting would
loose 5 lb in the 100 lb of money: I demand how the pound may be sold: his
loss to be neither more nor less than after the rate aforesaid of 5 by the
hundredth?

Answer. By the Rule of three, if 100 lb loose 5 lb what shall 45 lb leese? Work
and you shall find 2 lb: which rebated from the principal 45: rests 42 lb 15
s: Lastly say if 112 lb yield but 42-15 s: what 1 pound? multiply and divide,
and you shall find 7 s 7 d 17/28. And so much is the pound worth after that
loss.

A Grocer has bought 2 pieces of reasons: waying 175 lb 182 lb 191 lb: tare
for each frail 2 lb: at 25 s the C weight. The question is what they amounte
too in money?

I answer 6 lb 8 s ^/40.

A Grocer has bought 3 sacks of Almonds waying 267 lb tare 2 lb: 257 lb tare 2
lb 252 lb tare 3 lb at 2 s 10 the pound what amount they too in money?

I answer 110 lb -- 11-7 d.

The ninth Chapter treats of lengthes and breadthes of Arras, and other
clothes with other questions incident unto length and breadth.
IF a piece of Arras be 7 else and long: and 5 else and broad: how many else
square does the same piece contain?

Answer. Multiply the length by the breadth that is to say 7 by 5: And thereof
will come 4^ 11/12 else: so many else square does the same piece contain.

Item more a piece of Arras does contain 22 else square, And ye same being
in length 3 1/^ else I demand how many else in breadth the same piece does
co^taine?

Answer Divide 22 else by 2 1/^ and thereof comes 6 10/13: So many else does
ye same contain in breadth

Item more a Merchant has 3 else of Arras, at 1 else broad which he will
change with another man for a piece of Arras, that is 7/8 el square. The
question is how many else of that squarenesse ought the first Merchant is to
have.

Answer. Multiply the first Merchantes piece his length by his breadth, and
you shall find it contains 5 5/12 else, which 5 5/12 else you shall divide
by and you shall find 6 4/21 else: and so many else of that squarenesse,
ought the latter Merchant to give the first.

Item, a student has bought 3 ^/2 yards of broad Cloth, at 7 quarters broad,
to make a Gown: and should line the same throughout with Lamb, at a foot
square each skin: the question is now how many skins he ought to have?

Answer. Seek first the number of yards square that his cloth contains,
which to do, multiply 3 his length, by 1 his breadth, and you shall find 6
yeards square: then say by the rule of three: if 1 yeard square give 9 foot,
what shall 6? work, and you shall find 55 skins.

Item more, a Lawier has a rich piece of seeling come home which is 34 foot,
and three inches long: and 7 foot and 2 inches high: the Ioiner is to be paid
by the yard square: the question is, how many yeards this piece contains?

Answer. Multiply his length by his breadth, that is to wit, 24 foot by 7
5/24 foot and you shall find 174 77/96 foot square, which 174 you shall
divide by 9 (for so many foot make a yeard square) and you shall find 19
yeardes, 3 foot, and 77/96 of a foot: and so many yeards does this piece
hold.

Item, bought a piece of Hollande Cloth containing 36 else Flemmishe: The
question is, how many Else English it makes?

Answer. You must note, that 5 Else Flemmish do make but 3 Else English:
Therefore say by the Rule of three: if 5 else Fle^mish make but 3 else
english, how many Else English will 36 Else Fle^mish make? Multiply and
divide, and you shall find 21: and so many Else English does 36 Else
Flemmish contain. The like is to be done of all others.

Item more, I have bought 342 Else Flemmish, of Arras work at two Else
broad, Flemmish, and I would line the same with Ell broad Canuas of English
measure: The question is, how many^ Else English will serve my turn?

Answer. For as much, as 3 else English are worth 5 else Flemmish: therefore
put 3 else English into his square: in multiplying 3 by himself, which
makes 9: Likewise multiply the English ell which is 5 quarters every way into
himself squarely, and you shall find 25: Then multiply 342 which is the
length of the piece, by 2 which is the breadth, and thereof comes 684: then
say by the rule of 3, as before: if 25 else square of Flemmishe measure be
worth 9 else square of English measure, what are 684 of Flemmish measure?
multiply and divide, and you shall find 246 6/25 else English.

The same is also wrought by the backer Rule of 3, in seeking the squares
contained in the Flemmish ell of 2 else broad (which are 18): and also in
seeking the squares contained in the English ell (which are 25:) then say by
the Rule of 3 backward: if 18 quarters require 34 else, what shall 25 quarters
give? Multiply, and divide by ye Rule of 3: Reuerse, and you shall find as
before 246 6/25 else English.

Item more, at 3 s 4 d the Flemmishe Ell what is the English Ell worth after
the rate?

Answer. Say, if 5 Else Flemmish be worth 3 Else English, what is one Ell
Flemmish worth? Multiply, and divide, and you shall find of an English Ell:
Then say by the Rule of three, if of an Ell be worth 3 s, what is one ell
English worth? multiply and divide, and you shall find 5 s 6 4/9 d?

Item more, at 8 s 4 d the Flemmish El square, what is the English El worth
after that rate.

Answer. Say by the aforesaid reason: if 25 Else Flemmish square be worth 9
else square English, what is one Ell square Fle^mish worth? work, and you shall
find 9/25 of a an Ell square English: Then say, if 9/25 of an English Ell be
worth 8 s, what is 1 square Ell worth? Multiply and divide, and you shall
find 2^ s -- 1 7/9 d: and so much is the English Ell worth.

Ite^, more at 6 s 8 d ye Ell square, what shall a piece of cloth cost that is
7 Else long, and 3 Else broad?

Answer. Multiply the breadth by the length, and you shall find 24 else
square: The^ say by the Rule of three: if 1 Ell square costa 6 s what 24 ^/8?
Multiply and divide and you shall find: 8 lb -- 2 s6 d: and so much the same
piece of cloth shall cost.

Item more, a Mercer sold 2 pieces of silk. To wit, 24, 24, and 25 yeards at
9 s the yeard: and was glad to receive in part of payment again, a Cloth
containing 34 yeardes at 7 s the yeard: The question is now, what the Debtor
is in the Creditors debt: Work, and you shall find, he owes the Mercer 22 lb
-- 3 s -- 2 d.

The tenth Chapter entreats of the reducing of the Pawnes of Geanes into
English yeardes.
NOte, that 100 Pawnes do make 26 yeardes: whereupon ^ Pawnes 11/13 do make 1
yeard, and 1 Pawn after that rate and proportion is 13/5^ of a yeard.

In 4563 Pawns of Geanes, how many yeards English?

Answer. Say by the Rule of three, if 100 Pawnes do make 26 yeards, what will
4563 Pawnes make? Multiply, and divide, and you shall find 1186 yeards 19/5^:
so many yeardes do 4563 Pawnes make.

Otherwise, take some other number at your pleasure, as 10 Pawns, which is ye
1/1^ part of 100: then to find his proportion take ye 1/10 part of 26, which
is 2: and then say also by the Rule of three: if 10 Pawnes give 2 ^/5 yeardes,
what will 456 Pawnes give? work, and you shall find 1186 19/50 yeardes as
before.

More, at 2 s 6 d the Pawn of Geanes what will the English yeard be worth
after that rate?

Answer. Say by the Rule of three, if 1^/5^ of a yeard cost 2 s what one
yeard? Multiply, and divide, and you shall find 9 s -- 7 5/13 d.

More, if 346 Pawnes cost 30 lb -- 13 s -- 4 d sterling, what is that ye
English yearde after the rate?

Answer. Say by the Rule of three: if 346 Pawnes cost 30 lb, what are 3 11/13
Pawnes worth (for so many Pawnes make a yeard:) Multiply, and divide, and you
shall find 3804/27017 parts of a pound, which in known numbers is worth 2 s
-- 9 d -- 20439/^0^77.

The eleauenth Chapter entreats of Rules of Loan and Interest, with
certain necessary Questions and Proofs incident thereunto, etc.
ITe^, lent my friend 326 lb for 5 months simply without any Interest, upon
condition, to have the like courtesy again when I need: But when I came to
borrowe, he could spare me but 149 lb -- 8 s -- 4 d: the question is now how
long time, I ought to have the use thereof, to counteruaile my friendship
before time showed him?

Answer. Say by the Backer Rule of three: if 326 give 5 months, what time
will 149 lb 5/12 give? Multiply, and divide, and you shall stade 12 months:
and so long time ought I to use his money.

The Proof.

Item, lent my friend 149 lb -- 8 s -- 4 d, for 12 months: The question is
now, how much money he ought to lend me again for 5 months to recompense
my friendship showed him?

Answer. Say by the backer or reuerse Rule of 3: if 12 months give 149 5/12,
what shall 5 months give? work: and you shall find 326 lb: and so much ought
he to lend me to requite my gentleness or good turn.

Two other Branches yet more for Proof out of the same Questions.
Item, lent my friend 149 lb -- 8 s -- 4 d -- for 12 months, to have the like
friendship again when I need: And coming to borrowe of him he very
courteously took me 326 lb (for that he could well then spare the same:) The
question is now, how long I ought to occupy it, not usurping frienshippe, but
in his due time to restore it again.

Answer. Say by the Rule of three Reuerse, if 149 5/12 give 12 months, what
shall 326 lb give? Multiply, and divide, and you shall find, that at 5
months term, I ought to restore it again.

Proof.

Item lent my friend 326 lb for 5 months: The question is now, how many
pounds he ought to lend me for 12 months to recompense the pleasure again.

Answer. Work by the rule of three Reuerse, as you have done before, and you
shall find 149 lb -- 8 s -- 4 d.

Again, four other selected questions of Loan and Interest, all out of one
branch, and each one also a necessary Question, and a particular proof to
other.
ITem, lent my friend 430 lb at Interest for 3 months to receive after the
rate of 8 lb in the 100 for 12 months: The question is, what the Interest
comes it?

Answer. Say by the first part of the Rule of 5 numbers forward: if 100 lb
in 12 months gain 8 lb, what shall 430 gain in ^ months? Multiply the
first by the second for your Divisor: and the other three the one into the
other for your diuide^d: and you shall find 8 lb -- 12 s.

Proof.

Item a friend of mine received of me 8 lb -- 12 s for the Interest and Use of
430 lb for 3 months term: the question is now, what he took in the 100 lb
for 12 months after that rate.

Answer. Say by the first part, or rule of 5 numbers forward: if 430 lb in 3
months did pay 8 lb -- 12 s, what does 100 lb in 12 months, take after that
rate? work, and you shall find 8 lb: and so much he took upon the 100 lb for
12 months.

A third question and Proof also wrought by the backer rule of 5 Numbers.
Item, lent my friend 430 lb to receive for the Interest thereof: after the
rate of 8 lb in the 100 lb for 12 months: The question is now, how long time
my friend ought to have the use thereof, that it may be returned with 8 lb 12 s
gains.

Answer. Say by the Backer Rule of 5 numbers: if 100 lb in 12 months do
gain 8 lb: how long time shall 430 lb be a gaining of 8 lb -- 12 s? Multiply
the first and the second into the last for your dividend: and the third and
fourth multiply together for for your divisor: And then divide and you shall
find 3 months: the just time that my friend ought to use it, to return it
with 8 lb -- 12 s gain.

A fourth derived question out of this branch which is a Proof of this last,
and also of the other two going before.
ITem, how much money ought a Merchant to deliver after 8 lb in the 100 for 12
months that in 3 months I may gain 8 lb -- 12 s.

Answer. You may also if you please work it by the Golden Rule of three at
twice, first saying if 3. months gain 8. lb. what 12 months gain? you shall
find 34 lb: Then say again, if 8 lb -- become of 100 lb what shall come of 34
lb -- 8 s? work, and you shall find: the answer to the question, which is
430 lb: and so much ought the Merchant to deliver.

But most briefly it is answered by the Backer Rule of 5 numbers, where I
argue thus, saying: if 100 lb be 12 months a gaining of 8 lb: then but for 3
months term, only to take 8 lb -- 12 s must needs be a good round sum:
to work it, set your number thus, 100 -- 12 -- 8 -- 3 -- 8: multiplying the
first into the second: and also by 43 the product of the fifth for your
dividend: and the third and fourth together with 5 the Denominator of your
Fraction, for your Divisor: then divide, and you shall find as before 430 lb:
The true solution to your question.

The twelfth Chapter treats of the making of Factors which is taken in two
sorts.
THe first is when the estimation of the Factor, is taken upon the sending of
the Merchant: as if the estimation of his person be 1/^, it is understood,
that he shall have of the gain, and the Merchaunte the other.

The other sort is when the estimation of his making is out of the sending of
the Merchaunt: as if the order and agreement between them were such, that the
Merchant shall put in 800 lb: and the Factor for his making shall have:
nevertheless he shall have but of gain or profit: for the of 800 is 200 (for
the estimation of his making) which with the 800 lb make 1000 lb; whereof the
200 lb is.

A Merchaunt does put in 800 lb into the hands of his Factor: under such
condition, that the said Factor shall have: And after certain time, they
find in profit 124 lb -- 6 s -- 8 d I demand how much the Merchant shall
have hereof, and how much ought the Factor to have?

Answer. When the estimation of the Factor is out of the sending of the
Merchaunt, it makes ^ for the Merchant ^ for the Factor

But if that his estimation be at the sending of the Merchaunt, then it makes
but ^ for the Merchant ^ for the Factor.

For the Merchaunt is then to have and the Factor.

A Merchant does put into the hands of his Factor 800 lb, and the Factor 400
lb to have the of the profit: I demand now, for how much his person is
esteemed: when the same is counted upon the sending of the Merchant.

Answer. According to the tenor and order before prescribed in the first
Rule: That is, if his estimate be, he shall have the ^/4 of the gain.
Therefore say by the Rule of 3 direct: If taken put in 400 lb what is ye
estimate, or putting in of taking? Multiply, and divide, and you shall find 320
lb: and so much is the person of the Factor estimated.

Otherwise.

To find the estimation of the person of the Factor, you shall consider, that
seeing it was agreede between them, that the Factor should take the: then the
Merchaunt shall have the residue, which are: wherefore the gain of the
Merchant, unto that of the Factor is in such proportion as 5 unto 4: Then if
you will know the estimation of the person of the Factor: Say, if 5 give 4,
what will 400 give? multiply and divide, and you shall find 320 lb: And so much
is the person of the Factor esteemed to be worth.

Other conditions then these aforesaid, may also be between Merchauntes and
Factors without respect, either of sending or not sending of the Merchaunt:
where most commonly the estimation of the body of the Factor is in such
proportion to the stock which the Merchaunt lays in, as the gain of the
said Factor is unto the gain of the Merchaunte. As thus: if a Merchant do
deliver into ye hands of his Factor 400 lb and he to have half the profit: The
person of the said Factor shall be esteemed to be worth 400 lb And if the
Factor do take but of the gain: he should have but so much of the gain as
the Merchant takes: which must have: wherefore the person of the Factor is
esteemed but the of that which the Merchaunte lays in. That is to say 200 lb.

And if the Factor did take the of the gain, then the Merchant shall take the
residue which are: wherefore the gain of the Merchaunt unto the Factor is
then in such proportion as 3 unto 2: whereupon if you will then know the
estimation of the person of the Factor. Say if 3 give 2: what shall 400 give?
work and you shall find 266 pounds: And so much is the person of the Factor
esteemed to be worth.

And if the Merchaunte should deliver unto his Factor 400 pound and the
Factor would lay in 80: and his person to the end he might have the of the
gain I demand how much shall his person be esteemed?

Answer. Abate 80 from 400: and there will remain 320. And at so much shall
his person be esteemed.

A Merchaunt has delivered unto his Factor 900 lb to govern in the trade of
merchandise, upon condition that he shall have the 1/^ of the gain, if any
thing be gained: and also to bear the of the loss if any thing be lost: Now I
demand how much his person was esteemed at?

Answer. Seeing that the Factor takes the ^/3 of the gain, his person ought
to be esteemed as much as of the stock, which the Merchant lays in. That
is to say the of 900 pound which is 450: The reason is, because of the gain
that the Factor takes: is the of the 2/^ of the gain that the Merchant takes,
and so the Factor his person is esteemed to be worth 450 pound.

A Merchaunte has delivered unto his Factor 600 pound. And the Factor lays
in 250 pound and his person. Now because he lays in 250 pound, and his
person: it is agreed between them, that he shall take the of the gain. I
demand for how much his person was esteemed?

Answer. For as much as the Factor takes of the gain, he takes of that
which the Merchant takes: for are the of. And therefore the Factors laying in,
ought to be 400 pound, which is of 600 pound that the Merchant laid in: Then
Subtract 250, which the Factour did lay in from 400 pound which should
have been his whole stock: And there remains 150 pound: For the estimation
of his person.

More, a Merchaunt has delivered unto his Factour 840 lb upon condition that
the Factor shall have the gains of 160 lb as though he laid in so much ready
money: I demand what portion of the gain the said Factor shall take?

Answer See what part the 160 lb (which the Factor laid in) is of 950 which
is the whole stock of their company: And you shall find 3/19: And such part of
the gain shall the Factor take.

But in case, that in making their couenauntes, it were so agreede between
them: that the Factour should have the gain of 160 lb of the whole stock
which the Merchaunt lays in: That is to say of the 800 lb: then should the
Factor take of the gain: for 160 is of 800 pound.

The thirtenth Chapter entreats of Rules of Barter, and exchanging of
Merchandise, which is distinct into 7 Rules, with diverse other necessary
Questions incident thereunto.
1. Rule.
TWo Merchauntes willing to change their Merchaundise, the one with the other:
The one has 24 broad clothes at 10 lb 10 s the piece: The other has Mace, at
12 s the pound. The question is how many pound of Mace, he ought to give
him for his clothes, to save himself harmless and be no loser.

Answer. Seek first by the Rule of three, what ye 24 clothes cost at 10 lb 10
s the piece. And you shall find 252 lb, Then to find the quantity of Mace:
Say again by the rule of three, if 12 s buy one pound what shall 252 lb buy
me? Work and you shall find: 420 lb of Mace. And so many pound ought he to
give for his clothes.

The proof.

Two barter, the one has 420 lb of Mace at 12 s the pound, to barter or change
for broad clothes at 10 lb 10 s the piece, The question is how many broad
clothes he ought to give for all his mace.

Answer. First say if 1 cost 12 s what 400? you shall find 5040 s: then say
again if 10 lb give 1 cloth, what shall 5040 s give? work and you shall find
24 clothes: your desire.

2. Rule.
Two change merchaundise for merchandise the one has Pepper at 2 s 4 d the
pound: to sell for ready money: But in barter he will have no less then 3 s
the pound. And the other has Holland at 5 s 6. d the ell ready money. The
question is now at what price he ought to deliliuer the ell in barter to save
him self harmless.

Answer. Say by the Rule of three direct: if 2 s ready money give 3 s in
barter what shall 5 s give in barter? you shall find 7 1/14 s: and at that price
ought the second Merchaunte to sell his Hollande in barter.

The proof.

Two barter the one has Holland at 5 s 6 d in the ell to sell for ready
money: And in barter he will have 7 1/14 s: the other has Pepper at 2 s 4 d
the lb to sell for ready money. The question is now how he ought to sell it in
barter.

Answer. Say by the Rule of three direct if 5 ready money give 7 1/14 s in
barter, what ought 2 s to take in barter? multiply and divide and you shall
find 3 shillings your desire.

3. Rule.
Two barter, the one has cloth of Arras at 30 shillings the ell ready money:
but in barter he will have 35 shillings. And the other has white wines, which
he delivered in barter for 16 lb for a Tun. The question is now what his
wines cost the Tun in ready money.

Answer. Say by the rule of three direct, if 35 s in barter give but 30 ready
money: what did 16 lb in barter cost? Work and you shall find 13 lb -- 10 ^^/^^
s: and so much cost his wines for a Tun ready money.

The proof.

Two barter merchandise for merchandise. The one has wines white: at 13 lb 10
10/^1 s the Tun to sell for ready money: But in barter he delivered it for 16
lb. The other to make his match good and save himself harmless: delivers
Arras at 35 s the ell: The question is now what an ell of his Arras cost in
ready money.

Answer. Say by the Rule of three direct if 16 lb in barter give but 13 -- 10
30/71 s in ready money: what shall 35 s yield in barter? work and you shall
find: 30 shillings your desire.

4. Rule.
Two barter, the one has Carsies at 14 lb the piece, ready money: But in
barter he will have 18 lb. And yet he will have the part of his ouerprice in
ready money: And the other has Ginger at 8 groats the puund to sell for ready
money. The question is how he ought to deliver the Ginger by the lb in barter
to save himself harmless and make the barter equal.

Answer Item, for the working of this question and such other the like, you
must understand, if the party ouerselling his wares require to have also
some portion in ready money: as ^ etc. Then shall you rebate the same
demanded part whatsoever it be from the over price And also from the just
price. And those two numbers that shall remain after the subtraction is made,
shall be the two first numbers in the Rule of three. And the just price of the
same merchandise shall be the third number, which by the operation of the
Rule of three direct shall yield you a true solution: how and at what price,
you shall ouersel that your merchandise to save your self harmless, and make
the barter equal.

Example.

Take the (of eighteen) which is the ouerprice of his cloth: which of
eighteen: is six, which as appears here in the margent you must subtract ^
from 18: there rests 12. And also abate it from 14 which is the just price
of the cloth: and there remains 8: which 8 and 12, are the two first numbers
in the Rule of three. Then take 8 groates or 2 ^/1 shillings for the third
number. Then say by the Rule of three direct: if 8 s give 12 s what shall 2 s
give? Multiply and divide, and you shall find 4 s: And for so much shall the
second Mercha^t sell his Ginger, or his commodity in barter, to ballaunce the
same equal.

The proof.

Two barter, the one has Fine Carsies at 14 lb the piece ready money: But in
barter he will have 18 lb. And yet he will have the part of his ouerprice in
ready money: And the other has Ginger, which he having cunning enough to make
the barter equal, delivered for 4 s the pound. The question is now what his
Ginger cost him in ready money.

Answer. After you have made the subtraction, abating 6, the part of 18: both
from 18 and 14: as before was taught you, then will there remain 8: and 12 for
your two first numbers in the Rule of three. Then say, if twelve give but
eighte: what shall come of 4 the ouerprice of the pound of Ginger? Multiplye
and divide, and you shall find 2 s 8 d your desire.

Two Merchaunts barter Merchandise for merchaundise, the one has Denshire
whits at 7 lb -- 13 s 4 d the piece ready money: but in barter he does them
away for 8 lb -- 3 s -- 4 d. And yet he will have the part of his ouerprice in
ready money. And the other has Cottens at 3 lb the piece ready money. The
question is now at what price he ought to sell or exchange his Cottens in
barter to save him self harmless, and make the barter equal.

^

Answer. First seek part of 8 lb -- 3 s -- 4 d: which is 2 lb -- 14 -- 5 d
which rebated from 8 -- 3 -- 4 d, there rests as appears by the example
above said 5 -- 8 -- 10 2/2 d, which of 8 -- 3 -- 4 d also rebated from 7 --
13 -- 4 d there rests 4 18 -- 10 the two first numbers in the Rule of three.
And the 3 lb which is the neat price of the piece of Cotton is the third
number. Then say by the Rule of three derect: as was taught before: if 4 -- 18
-- 10 d give 5-8 -- 10 d what shall 3 lb give? multiple and divide and you
shall find 3 lb -- 6 s -- 1 91/292 d the just price that he ought to deliver
his Cottens in barter.

5. Rule.
Two Merchauntes will change Merchaundise for Merchandise, the one has Carsies
at 40 s the piece to sell for ready money: And in barter he will sell them for
56 s 8 d and he will gain after 10 lb upon the 100 lb: And yet he will have
the of his ouerprice in ready money: The other has Flax, at 2 d the pound
ready money: The question is now how he shall sell the pound of his Flax in
barter.

Answer. See first at 10 lb upon the 100 lb what the 56 s comes to, in
saying by the Rule of three direct, if 100 lb give 110 lb what 55? multiply
and divide and you shall find 3 lb -- 2 s -- 4 d of which the ^/2 that he
demands in ready money, is, 1 lb -- 11 s -- 2 d: the same 31 s 2 d abated
from 40 s, and also from 56 s 8 d: there will remain 8 shillings 10 pence: and
25 shillings 6 pence, for the two first numbers in the Rule of three: And 3
pence the price of the lb of flax for the third number. The^ Multiply and
divide, and you shall find, 9 ^8/5^ d. And for so much shall he sell the pound of
flax in barter.

6. Rule.
Two are willing to exchange merchaundise: the one has Norwiche Grograines
at 35 shillings the piece ready money: And in barter he will have 30 shillings,
and he will have the part of his over price in ready money: The other has
Norwich Stockings at 40 shillings the Doosen to sell for ready money: But in
as much as the first Merchaunts Grograins are no better, he would deliver them
so to balance the barter, that he may gain after 10 lb in the 100 lb, The
question is now how he shall sell his hose the doosen in barter.

Answer. Say, if 100 give 110, what shall 40 s give, which is the just price
of the dozen of stockings? multiply, and divide, and you shall find 44 s:
Then take the of 30 s which is 7 s -- 6 d: And subtracte it from 25 s, and
also from 30 s: And there will remain 17 s -- 6 -- and 22 s -- 6 d, for the
two first numbers in the Rule of three: and 44 s which is the just price (with
his gain in the dozen of stockings) for the third number: Then multiply and
divide, and you shall find 56 s -- 6 6/7: and for so much he is to sell his
dozen of stockings in barter.

7. Rule.
Two Merchantes will change their merchandise one with the other: the one has
720 Else of Cambricke at 5 s the Ell to sell for ready money: but in barter
he requires 6 s -- 8 d: And yet notwithstanding he loses by it after 10 lb
upon the 100 lb: whereupon he requires the of his over price in ready
money: And the other Merchant having skill enough to make the barter equal
delivers English Saffron at 30 s the lb: The question is now what his Saffron
cost the pound in ready money.

Answer. You must first seek what is lost upon ye 100 lb, which to do you
may say if you please, if 100 lb loose 10? what shall 6 s loose? work and you
shall find shillings (or eight pence) which must be rebated from 6 s 8 d: So
rests 6 shillings still: or you may say if 100 lb give me but 90 lb what shall
6 s 8 d give? Work this way either and you shall find also as before,
directly in your quotient 6 s: your desire. Then are you next to cast up what
the 720 else of Ca^brick comes to at 6 s 8 d the ell and you shall find 240
pound: the whereof the Cambricke Merchaunt will have in ready money (which is
120 pound) nextly you must cast what the Cambrick comes to after his loss
in the 100 lb which as you found is but 6 s an ell: and you shall find 216 lb:
now must you subtract (his ready money which is 120 lb) out of 240 lb: and
also of 216 lb. And there will remain 120 lb and 96 lb for your two first
numbers in the Rule of three, and 30 s the ouerprice of your Saffron for the
third number. Then multiply and divide, and you shall find 24 s: and so much
did his Saffron cost in ready money.

Two Merchants barter, the one has 50 Clothes, to put away for ready money at
11 lb the Cloth: and in barter puts them away for 12 lb: taking Hollande
Cloth at 20 d the Flemmish Ell, which was worth no more but 18 d: The question
is now, what Holland pays for the Cloth: and what he wins or loses by
the bargain?

Aunsweare. 50 Clothes at 11 lb the Cloth, comes to 550 lb: and put away at
12 the piece, makes 600 lb: Then to find what Holland pays for the Cloth:
Say by the Rule of three direct, if 20 d buy 1 Ell: what 600 lb? work, and you
shall find 7200 Else: Now to find the estate of his gain or loss, you
must seek what his 7200 Else comes to at 18 d the Ell: work by the Rule of
Proportion direct, and you shall find 540 lb, which is not so much as his
Clothes were worth in ready money, by 10 lb: and so much lost the first
Merchant by his exchange.

A Venetian has in London 100 pieces of Silk, to put away for ready money at 3
lb the piece. But in Barter he delyuereth the^ for 4 lb the piece, taking
woolles of a Felmonger at 7 lb 10 s the C. weight which was worth no more but 6
lb the C. in ready money: The question is now, what woolles pays for the
Silks, and which of them wins or loses by the barter.

Answer. 100 pieces of Silks at 3 lb, is 300 lb: and at 4 lb is 400 lb: Then
to find what woolles pays for the Silk: Say by the rule of three direct: If
7 d buy me 1 C. weight, what 400 lb? work, and find 53 C. weight of wool:
Now to find the estate of their gain or loss, cast up his wool at 6 lb
the C. (for so much they were worth ready money) and you shall find 320 lb,
which is 20 lb more than the Silks were to be sold for in ready money:
whereupon the Venetian gained 20 lb by the Barter.

A Merchant has 53 C. weight of wool at 6 lb the C. to sell for ready mony^
but in barter he will have 7 lb -- 10 s: and an other does barter with him for
Silks which are worth 3 pounds a piece ready money: The question is now, how
he ought to deliver his Silks the piece in barter? and how many pays for
the woolles.

Answer. Say by the Rule of Proportion, or the rule of three direct: If 6 lb
for a C. weight ready money yield me 7 lb -- 10 s what will 2 lb yield,
which is the just price of a piece of Silk in barter? To make the Trucke
equal: work, and find 3 lb -- 15 s the price of a piece of Silk in barter:
then say, if 3 lb -- 15 s require 1 piece of Silk, how many pieces of Silk
are bought with 400 lb, which is the valewe of the 53 C. weight of wool at 7
lb -- 10 s: work by the Rule of three direct, and you shall find 106 pieces
of Silk, and of a piece: and so many pieces of Silk pays for the woolles,
and neither party has advantage of other.

Two Merchants will change mercha^dize ye one with the other: The one of the^ has
beer, at 6 s 8 d the Barrel to sell for ready money: but in barter he will
sell the barrel for 8 s: and yet he will gain moreover after 10 lb upon the
100 lb: and the other has white Spanish wool at 20 s the Roue to sell for
ready money: the question is now, how he shall sell the Roue of wool in barter?

Answer. Say if 6 s which is the just price of the barrel of Beer be
sold in barter for 8 s, for how much shall 20 s (which is the just price of
the Roue of wool) be sold in barter? work by the Rule of three direct, and
you shall find 24 s: Then for because the first Merchant will gain after 10
lb upon the 100 lb, he makes of his 100 lb -- 110 lb: And therefore say by the
Rule of three, if the second Merchant of 110 lb do make but 100 lb, how much
shall he make of 24 s? Multiply, and divide, and you shall find 21 s -- 9 d
9/11 of a penny: And for so much shall he sell the Roue of wool in barter.

Two Merchants will change their commodities the one with the other: The one of
them has white Paper at 4 s the resme to sell for ready money: And in barter he
will do it away for 5 s: and yet he will gain moreover, after the rate of 10
lb upon the 100 lb: and the other has Mace at 14 s -- 6 d the pound weight, to
sell in barter: Now I demand what the pound did cost in ready money?

Answer. Say, if 5 s which is the over price of the paper in barter be come
of 4 s the just price, of how much shall come 14 s, which is the surprice of
the pound of Mace in barter? Multiply, and divide, and you shall find 11 s --
10 d: Then for because the first Merchant of Paper will gain after the rate of
10 upon the 100: Say, if 100 do give 110, what shall 11 s give? work, and you
shall find 13 s -- 0 d: and so much did the pound of Mace cost in ready
money.

The fourteenth Chapter entreats of Exchaunging of money from one place to an
other.
Exchange is no other thing then to take or receive money in one City, to
render or pay the valewe thereof in an other City, or else to give money in one
place, and receive the value thereof in an other, at term of certain days,
months, or fayres, according to the diversity of the place.

But this practice chiefly consists in the knowledge of the Money or Coins in
diverse places, of which for thy benefit, (after a few examples given to the
Introduction to this work) I will set down by certain notes of diversity of
the common and usual Coins in most places of Christendom for trafique.

And first I will begin at Antwerpe, where they use to make their Accomptes
by Deniers de gros: that is to say by pence Fle^mish, whereof 12 do make 1 s
Flemmish, and 20 s do make 1 lb de Gros.

Item, a Merchaunte delivered at Antwerpe 400 pounds Flemmishe, to receive in
London, 20 s sterling for every 23 s -- 4 d Flemmishe: The question is now,
how much sterling money is to be received at London for the said 400 pounds
Flemmish?

Answer. Say by the Rule of three, if 23 Flemmishe give 20 s sterling, what
400 pounds Flemmishe? work, and you shall find 342 lb -- 17 s -- 1 5/7 d:
and so much sterling shall I receive in London for the 400 lb Flemmishe.

Otherwise also wrought by Rules of Practice in taking the 1/7 of the Flemmish
money delivered: and abating the same from the principal, the rest is English
money sterling, as before.

^

A Merchant at London delivers 200 pound sterling for Antwerpe at 23 s 5 d
Flemmishe the pound sterling: The question is, how much he must receive at
Antwerpe.

Answer. Say by the Rule of three, if 1 lb sterling give 23 s -- 5 d Fle^mish,
what 200 lb sterling? work, and you shall find 234 lb -- 3 s 4 d: So many
pounds Fleshmish shall he receive at Antwerp for the said 200 lb sterling.

Otherwise also by Practice.

^

In London 200 lb sterling is delivered by exchange, for Antwerpe at 23 s -- 9
d Flemmishe the lb sterling: The question is, what rate the Flemmishe money
ought to be returned to gain 4 lb upon the 100 lb sterling at London?

Answer. First say by the rule of 3 direct: if 1 lb sterling give 23 2/4
Flemmishe, what 200 lb sterling? Multiply, and divide, and you shall find 237
lb -- 10 s: The which to return to gain 8 lb sterling in London. Say by the
Backer Rule, if 200 lb sterling require the excha^ge 23 s -- 9 d Flemmish, what
the exchange to make 208 lb styrling? work by the Rule, and find 22 s -- 10 d
1/26 d Flemmish, the effect in the question required.

If I take up money at Antwerpe after 19 s -- 4 d Flemmish, to pay for the
same at London 20 s sterling: and when the day of payment is come, I am forced
to return ye same money again in London to pay my Bill of Exchange: So that
for 20 s which I take up here at London, I must pay 19 s -- 6 d at
Antwerpe, I demand whether I do win or lose: and how much in or upon the
100 lb of money?

Answer. Say by the rule of three: If 19 give 19 what will 100 lb give?
Multiply, and divide, and you shall find 99 lb -- 2 s 106/117 which being
abated from 100 lb, there will remain 9 s 11/117: and so much do I lose upon
the 100 lb of money.

If I take up at London 20 s sterling to pay at Antwerpe 22 s 4 d: and when the
day of payment is come my Factor is constrained to take up money again at
Antwerpe, wherewith to pay the foresaid sum: and there he does receive 23 s
4 d Flemish, forthwith I must pay 20 s at London: the question is now, whether
I do win or loose, and how much upon the 100 lb of money after that rate.

Answer. Say by the rule of Proportion: if 22 s give 23 s, what will 100 lb
give? Multiply, and divide, and you shall find 104 lb -- 9 111/201 s: from the
which abate 100 lb, and there will remain 4 lb 9 5^1/201 s, and so much is
there gained upon the 100 lb of money.

In Antwerpe is delivered 200 lb Flemish by exchange for London, at 20 s
sterling for every 23 s 4 d Flemmishe: The question is, at what rate the same
is to be returned to gain 5 lb upon the 100 lb Flemish in Antwerp.

Answer. First say by the rule of three: if 23 Flemish give 20 s, what shall
200 lb give? work, and you shall find 171 lb 8 s 6 6/7 d: Then say again by
the Rule of three direct, if 171 lb -- 8 s -- 6 6/7 sterling give me 210 lb
Flemishe, what shall 20 s sterling give? work and you shall find 24 s -- 6 d
Flemish. And at the same rate ought the same to be returned at Antwerpe to
gain 10 lb upon the 100 Flemish.

A Merchaunt of Antwerpe delivers 234 lb -- 3 s -- 4 d Flemish, to receive at
London 200 lb sterling: the question is now, how the Exchange goes after this
rate.

Answer. Say by the Rule of 3 direct, if 200 give 20, what gives 234?
Multiply, and divide, and you shall find 23 s 5 d and for so much goes the
Exchange.

Item, the Exchange from London into France, is not like as it is in Flanders,
but is delivered by the French Crown, which is worth 50 soulx Turnois the
piece.

Whereupon also you must note, that in France they make their acco^pts by
Franckes, Soulx and Deniers Tournois, whereof 12 Deniers makes 1 Soulx
Tournois, and 20 soulx makes 1 lb Tournois, which they call a Liver or Franc.
But the Merchauntes to make their accounts do use French crowns, which is
current among them for 51 soulx Tournois: But by exchange it is otherwise, for
it is delivered but for 50 Soulx Tournois the Crown, or as the taker up of the
money can agree with the deliverer. And note that this {water} Caracter
represents the Crown by exchange, and is ever 50 soulx Tournois or French
money.

A Merchaunt delivers in London 240 lb sterling after 5 s -- 6 d sterling the
Crown, to receive at Paris 50 soulx Tournois for every Crown, I demand how
much Tournois or French money pays ye bills for the said 240 lb sterling.

Answer. Say by the Rule of three, if 5 s sterling give me 50 s Tournois,
what shall 240 lb sterling give? Reduce ye pounds into shillings: then
multiply and divide, and you shall find 2181 Livers -- 16 soulx, -- 4 Deniers,
and 4/11 Tournois, and so much paieth ye bills at Paris for ye said 240 lb
sterling.

A Merchant delivers in Roa^, or elsewhere in France, 1430 lb, or Francks:
the which Francke or lb is 20 soulx or pound Tournois, to receive in London 6
s 4 d sterling for every {water} of 50 soulxe Tournois: The question is how
much sterling money I ought to receive at London for my 1430 pound Turnois?

Answer. Say, if 2 lb give me 6 what will 1430 give me? work, and you shall
find 3622 s sterling, which makes 181 lb 2 s -- 8 d: and so much money is to
be received at London for the said 1430 Livers Tournois, after 6 s -- 4 d for
every crown of 50, soulxe.

In London is delivered 200 lb sterling by exchange for Paris, at 5 s -- 9 d
the {water} of 50 soulx Tou^nois: the question is at what price, the said
Crown is to be returned to gain 6 lb upon the 100 lb sterling at London.

Answer. First say by the Rule of three direct, if 5 sterling give 50 soulx
Turnois, what shall 200 lb sterling give? work, and you shall find 1739
Franckes, or Livers, 2 soulx 14/2^. Then the which to return and gain ^ lb
upon the 100 lb in London: Say by the Rule of three direct: if 17^9 Francks 2
soulx 14/23 yield 1 lb. what the {water} of 50 soulx? work, and find 6 s --
1 d 7/50 the effect required in the question.

A Merchant delivered in London 160 lb sterling, to receive in Biskaie for
every 5 s -- 6 d 1 Duckate of 374 Marueides, the question is, how many
Marueides I ought to receive at Biskate.

Answer. Say, if 5 s sterling give 374 Marueides, what shall 100 lb sterling
give? Multiply, and divide, and you shall find 217000 Marueides, and so many
I ought to receive at Biskie for my 160 lb sterling.

A Merchant delivers in Bayon, 20000 Marueides. to receive in London 5 s -- 8
d sterling, for every Duckate of 374 Marueides: the question is now how much
sterling money pays the Bills of Exchange for the said 20000 Marueides.

Answer. Say, if 374 Marueides make 1 Duckate, what 20000 Marueides?
Multiply, and divide, and find 106 Duckates 178/187.

Then say again, if 1 Duckate give 5 2/^ s: what gives 106 178/187 Duckates?
work, and find 30 lb -- 6 s and 34/56^ s which is worth ^^^/561 parts of a
penny.

Otherwise it is wrought more briefer at one working, as in the last question
before, in considering, that 5 s -- 8 d contains 1 Duckate, or 374 Marueides.
Therefore say by the rule of 3: if 374 Marueides give 5 s what 40000 Marueides:
work, and you shall also find in your quotients: 30 lb -- 6 s 34/561: and so
many pound sterling is to be received for the 40000. Ducats.

In London 200 lb delivered by Exchange for Vigo 374 Marueids the Duckate, of 5
s -- 10 d sterling, makes 256457 1/7 Marueides: the which io return and
gain 10 lb upon the 100 lb in London: Say by the rule of three direct, if
220 lb require 256457 1/^ Marueides, what 5 s -- 10 d? work, and find 340
Merueides, prises of every Duckate in return, which is the effect in the
question required.

These may seem sufficient for enstructions.

NOtwithstanding for thy further aid and benefit hereafter follows 6
special and most brief Rules of Practice for English, French, and Flemmish
money.

1 teaches how to turn Flemish to English sterling. 2 teaches how to turn
English sterling to Flemish. 3 teaches how to turn Flemmish to French. 4
teaches how to turn French into Flemmish. 5 teaches how to turn sterling
into French. 6 teaches and lastly, how to turn French into sterling.
The fifteenth Chapter entreats of the said 6 Rules of brevity, and of
valuation of English, Flemish, and French money, and how each of them may
easily be brought to others value.
How briefly to reduce lb, s, and d Flemish, into lb, s, and d English,
Sterling.
IT is to be noted, that 7 pound Flemish makes but 6 lb. sterling, 7 s
Flemishe, makes 6 s sterling. and 7 d flem. 6 d sterling. So that 7 yields but 6.
Wherein is evident, that there is lost 1/7, (if it may be so called) when it is
reduced into English money. Wherefore to know how much 233 lb. 13 s, 4 d,
flemish makes English, you must subtract from it 1/7, beginning with the
pounds, etc. and that which rests after this subtraction is the sum
required: so that 233 lb, 13 s, 3 d flem. makes 200 lb, 5 s, 8 4/7 d. sterling.

Example. ^

An other Example. ^

To reduce lb s. and d. ster. into lb s d flem.
Note that a lb sterling, makes 1 lb, 3 s, 4 d flem. that is 1 lb: 1 s ster.
makes 1 s flem. and 1 ster. makes 1 Flem. So that there is gained (if it may
so be called) of the sum being thus reduced to Flem. For of 6/6 is made 7/6*
which is 1 whole, and. Then to know how much 237 lb 7 s 6 d ster. makes Flem.
subtract from your ster. the of the whole sum. and add it to the same sum,
and it makes 276 lb 18 s 9 d, which is the sum required.

Example. ^

An other example. ^

Ye shall note, that the equality of Flemish and French money is this, that is
to say, the lb Flemish, makes 7 lb French or Turnois 1 s Flemish makes 7 s
French, and a great Flemish, makes 7 d French.

Wherefore to know how much 143 lb 4 s 9 d Flemish makes French. Ye must
multiply the whole number twice by 6, beginning at d, and so forward: and the
product of your second multiplication, divide by 5, so that work is finished.
Or multiply the said sum by 7, and take out of it adding it to the producte
of your multiplication by 7, and that is your number required. So that as well
by the one, as by the other, 143 lb 4 s 9 d Flemish, makes 1031 lb 6 s 2 d
French or Tournois.

Example. ^

An other Example. ^

Another example. ^ or thus. ^

A brief Reduction of lb s and d French, into lb s and d Flemish.
Multiply 233 lb, 8 s, 4 d, fr. by 5, and divide the product twice by 6, that
is the said number by 6, and the product again by 6: and the quotient of this
second division is the thing required. So that 233 lb, 8 s, 4 d, fren. makes
32 lb, 8 s, 4 d, 5/9 flemish.

Example. ^

Another. ^

To reduce lb, s and d Sterling, into lb s and d French or Tournois.
The lb ster. makes 8 lb, 8 s french, that is to say, 8 lb: the s makes 8 s,
and the penny 8 d french. Wherefore to know what 231 lb, 13 s, 4 d ster. makes
french, ye must multiply your whole sum by 42, that is by 7, and the product of
it by 6, and divide this second product by 5, and that is the sum required.

Otherwise multiply the sum ster. by 8, and add twice to the product, and it
shall produce the sum required. So that both ways, 231 lb, 13 s, 4 d ster.
makes 1946 lb french. As here under follows.

The same otherwise. ^

An other Example. ^

The same. ^

To reduce lb s and d fren. into lb s d ster.
To know how much 1256 lb 12 s 6 d fren. makes in sterling money, multiply
the sum by 5, and divide the producte by 7 and 6 at twice, and the last
quotient shall be the thing required that is to say, 1256 lb 12 s 6 d makes 149
lb 11 s 11 d 4/7 sterling.

Example. ^

An other Example. ^

Note, that when any money is given by exchange at London for Roan at 71 d: or
rather 71 1/7, for the crown of 50 s french, there is neither gain nor loss,
for it is one money for an other, accompting 8 lb 8 s French for 1 lb sterling
So the Gyuer loses the time of payment which is about 15 days, and he that
takes it, has gain of the same.

They of Rean that put sorth, or take money by exchange for London, ought to
have like consideration.

Item, when any man gives at London 64 d, or rather 64 d 2/7, to have at one
of the Faires of Lions a crown de Marc, he that so gives his money, loses the
time, and he that takes it, gains the same: for 62 d 2/7 is equal in value
to 45 s French. He that puts or takes money at Lions for London, ought to
consider the same.

Item, when any deliver in Antwerpe 75 d, to receive at Lions a crown of
Marcke, he that puts it forth, loses the time, and he that takes it,
gains the same: For 75 groates Flemish is equal in valewe to 45 s French.

Thus for this time I make an end of the practice of exchange and the
enstructions thereunto belonging, and according to my promise gratify such as
are desirous to know the common coins used for traffic among Merchauntes in
these Cities following: Here follows a brief declaration of their moneys and
ye recknings and accounts of them.

The sixteenth Chapter contains a declaration of the valuation and diversity
of coins of most places of Christendom for traffic: And the manner of
exchange in those places from one city or town to an other, which known is
right necessary for Merchauntes, by means whereof they do find the gain
or loss upon the exchange.
ITem for as much as the greatest diversity of money of exchange is at Lions
Therefore I will begin duly of the money of that place.

At Lions they use Franckes, Soulxes and Deniers Tournois: a Francke makes 20
Soulx, and one Soulx 12 Deniers: But the Merchants to keep their books of
accounts do use French Crowns of the mark at 45 Soulx the piece, and do
divide it into 20 s, 1 s and 12 d.

Item a Mark of gold 65 {water} of the Mark, which serves for exchange.
And divide it into 8 ounces. The ounce into 24 pe^ce or Deniers, the Denier
into 24 grains: And so the sum or whole by imagination or guess.

Also at Lions there are 4 fayres in a year, at the which they do commonly
exchange, which are from three months to three months.

At Geanes they use the Soulx: on Ducket makes lb. 3.

At Naples they use Ducats, Tarry, and Grains: The Ducket makes 5 Taris, and
one tarry 20 grains, but they take 6 Ducats (which makes thirty taries)
for the ounce.

A Ducket makes 10 Carlins, and a Carlin 10 grains, so that 2 Carlins make a
Tarry, and 100 grains make a Ducket.

At Rome they use Ducats of the Chamber, one Ducket is worth 12 Guylis, and a
Guili 10 Soulx.

At Venice they use Ducats Curraunts at 124 Soulx a piece or 24 Deniers, and
one Denier makes 32 picolis.

At Falerine and Messine they write, after ounce, tarry, and graynes, and 1
ounce is worth 6 Ducats, or 30 taris, and 1 tarry is twenty grains, and 1
grain 6 picolis, One Ducket is also worth 24 Carlins,

At Milan they use lb. s. d. of Duckettes imperials, and {water} of exchange
is worth 4 lb.

At Lucques, Florence and Aucone they use the {water} of gold: in gold the
French Crown is worth lb. 7: but at Buloigne, lb. 3.10 s

At Barselon they use the soulx, the Ducket of exchange is worth 22 soulx.

At Valence and Saragosse they use the Liver, Soulx and Denier, the French
crown of exchange is worth 20 soulx, and 1 soulx is 12 Deniers.

At the Fayres of Castill they use the Meruaidies, the Ducket is worth 375
Meruaidies.

At Lisbone they use the Rays, one Ducket of exchange is worth 400 rays.

At Noremburge, Franckford, and Auguste in Germany they use the Krentzers,
whereof 60 make a Floryn.

At Antwerpe they use lb. s and d de Gros, and they exchange into the Denier
de Gros. To wit our English penny.

At London they use the 1 lb sterling and 1 d sterling and they exchange in 1
d sterling.

The exchange of Lions at sundry places.
Item at Lions there is exchange in three sorts, at the cities and towns
following.

First they deliver at Lions one Mark to have or receive at Naples almost 41
Ducats: at Venice, 70 Ducats corrant, at Rome 63 Ducats of the Chamber,
Luques and Florence 65 {water} of Gold, at Milan 82 {water}.

And contrariwise at the said Cities aforesaid they do give so much of
money to have a mark at Lions.

Secondly they give at Lisbone one {water} of Mark of 45 soulx Turnois a
piece to have at Gennes, almost 68 Soulx. At Palerme and Messine almost 24
Carlins: at Barselone 22 soulx at Valence or Saragosse 20 soulx. At the fair
at Castili 350 Meruaides: at L^sbone 360 Rats: in Antwerpe 57 Deniers de Gros:
and at London 70 d sterling.

And contrariwise they do give in the said Cities almost as much of their
money to have a French Crown of the Mark at Lions.

Thirdlye they do give at Lions a {water} of the sun to have almost 93
Krentzers at Franckforde, Auguste, Norenberge, or other Cities in Almaine.

Also at Lions only they do pay the change the 2/^ in gold, and 1/^ in money,
or else al in money in giving 1 for the hundredth.

Chaunges at Naples and other Towns.
Item at Naples they give or deliver almost 112 Ducats to receive at Rome, 100
Ducats of the chamber at the old value.

Through Luques and Florence they deliver 100 Ducats Carlins to receive there
almost 86 {water} of gold.

Through Palerme and Messine one ducket of 5 Tarry to receive there almost 164
grains.

Through Milan one Ducket to receive there almost 90 Soulx.

Through Geanes one Ducket to receive there almost 65 soulx. The whole sum to
be paid within 10 days after the sight of the bil of exchange.

Also at Naples they deliver one Ducket to receive in Antwerpe almost 67 d or
Deniers de Gros. within 2 months: At London almost 60 d sterling, in ^ months:
At Barselone almost 20 Soulx within 2 months: At Valence almost 18 soulx wtin
2 months: At Lisbone 333 Rays, within 3 months: and at the fair at Castil,
almost 340 Merueydes at the same fair.

Change of Venice to other places.
At Venice they deliver 100 Ducats curraunte to receive in Almayne almost
140. Florenes at 60 Krentzers the piece.

At Lucques and Florence almost ^8 {water} of gold in 10 days.

Likewise at Venice they deliver a Ducket curraunt to receive at Palerme and
Messine, almost 21 Carlins, at Milan almost 93 Soulx. At Geanes almost 62
soulx, the whole at 10 days end.

Of the Pair or Pari.
As touching the exchange, it is necessary to understand or know the Pair
which the Italians call Pari which is no other thing than to make the money of
the change of one City or town to or with the money of an other, by means
whereof they do find the gains or loss upon the exchange.

Example.

Item having received letters of credit of one of Antwerpe that the {water} of
the sun is there worth 7 soulx. The question is what the same is worth at
London when the Pair or exchange goes for 23 s?

Answer. Say if 23 give but 20 what gives 7: work and find 6 s 1 1/23 d:
and so much is the {water} of the sun worth at London.

The seventeenth Chapter contains also a declaration of the diversity of the
waightes and measures of most places of Christendom for traffic. At the
end of which discourse are two tables, the one for waighte, and the other for
measure, proportionate and reduced to an equality of our English measure and
waighte, by the aid whereof the ingenious may easilye by the Rule of three,
convert the one into the other at their pleasure etc.
AT London and so all England through are used two kinds of waights and
measures, As the Troy waighte and the Haberdepoize: from the Troy waighte is
derived the proportion and quantity of all kind of dry and liquid measures,
as Peckes, Bushels quarters etc. wherewith is bought and sold all kind of grain
and other commodities met by the Bushel. And in liquid, Ale, Beer, Wine,
Oil, Butter, Honey, etc. upon these grounds and statutes, is Bread made and
sold by the Troy weight. And so is gold, silver, pearl, precious stones, and
Iewelles. The least quantity of this Troy weight is a grain, 24 of these
grains make a penny weight, 20 penny waights an ounce: and 12 ounces a pound:
2 lb or 2 pintes of this waighte makes a quarte. And so ascending into bigger
quantities, is produced the Measures, whereby are sold our other natural
sustenaunce, vz. Ale, or Beer, with also other necessary commodities, as
Butter, Honny, Herrings, Eeles, Soap, etc. Al which last before rehearsed,
though their Measures (wherein they are contained) be framed and derived from
the Troy weight: yet are they in traffic, with diverse commodities, as Lead,
Tin, Flare, Wax, with all other commodities both of this Realm, and of other
Foreign Countries whatsoever, bought and sold by the Haberdepoise weight,
after 16 ounces to the pound, and 112 lb to the C. weight. And unto every C.
is allowed 12 lb weight at the common beam. From hence is also derived the wey
of Suffolk Cheese which contains 32 Cloves, 8 lb to a Cloue, and weygheth
in all 256 lb: And also the barrel of Suffolk Butter is or should be of like
weight with the wey of cheese: vz. 256 lb. More 14 of these lb make a stone:
And 26 stone contains a sack of english Wool. Foreign Woolles, to wit,
French, Spanish, and Estrich, is also sold by the pound or C. waighte, but
most commonly by the Roue, 25 lb to a Roue: other commodities of tale are
bought and sold by the C. five score to the C. Except headed ware, to wit,
cattle, nails, and Fish, which are sold after six score to the C.

There is also two other sorts of Measures, to wit, the Ell, and the Yeard. By
the Ell is usually met linen Cloth, as Canuas, etc. And by the Yeard, Silks,
woollen Cloths, etc.

Antwerpe.
At Antwerpe are also 2 sorts of waights, their gold and silver weight, and
their common weight gold and silver is weighed by ye Mark, the Mark is 8
ounces, the ounce 20 Esterlings, and the Esterling 32, as our grains, The
Goldsmithes divide that into smaller, but not the Merchantes: the proof of
Gold is made by Caractes, whereof 24 makes a Mark of fine Gold: the Karact is
24 grains: the proof of the money is made by Deniers, 12 deniers is 1 s fine:
that is a Mark of fine silver, the Denier also is divided into 24 grains, and
the grain into 4 quarters.

Item, 100 Marks in Antwerp, Troy waighte, makes at Lions 103 Marks, 2
ounces, and 20 grains 23 p^ At Noremburg 103 Marks, 2 ounces, 2 quints, 3
Deniers: at Franckford 105 Marks: at Ausburge, 104 Marks, 3 ounces, 1 quint:
At Venice 103 Marks, 1 ounce, 7 deniers, 18 grains: At London 66 lb.

The Mark of Gold or Silver at Antwerp Troy weight, which is 8 ounces makes
7 ounces common weight with which all other merchandise is weighed: So that the
Troy weight is greater than the common weight by 6 in the C. By this waighte of
Troy they also wey Musk, Amber, Perle, etc.

All Silks are bought at Antwerpe, by the Bruges Ell, which is greater than
the common measure, by which they retaile by 2 in the C. Their common Ell is
^/4 of our yeard, and of our Ell.

Lions.
At Lions is used 3 sorts of waightes, whereof the first is the common Town
weight, with which they wey all kind of Spicerie, and diverse other
merchaundize. The second is called Geneua weight, which is 8 in the 100
greater than the common weight, with which they weigh Silks, etc. The third is
French weight, called commonly the Mark weight, and 100 lb thereof, makes 106
lb Geneua and 114 of their common weight, with which French weight is weyed al
things that pays custom or toll.

At Lions is also used two sorts of Else or Aulnes: The one wherewith they
measure gross Clothes, as Canuas, and such like. The other is called the
French El or Aulne, with which they measure all other kind of merchandise,
whereof 7 common Town Else makes 11 ordinary French Else.

Roan.
At Roan 6 Muydes of Salt, being the measure of ye place, make an hundredth at
Armuiden in Zeland, and the C. of Bronage, measure of Armuiden makes at Roan,
11 Muids, 30 Mines makes a Last of Corn, and 16 a last of Dates, 100 lb
weight there makes at London 114 and 109 2/8 at Antwerpe: And 100 Else make
at London 115 ^/8.

Noremburge.
A 100 lb weight of Noremburg, makes at London 111 at Antwerpe 107: And 100
Else of Nore^burg make at London 75 at Antwerp 95 etc.

Lisbone.
The C. weight at Lisbone makes 4 Roues, every Roue 32 lb: So that their C.
weight is 128 lb, and their pound contains 14 ounces, and 100 lb of their
weight makes at London 113.

Their Silk, cloth of Gold and Woollen is measured with a measure which they
call a Cubite, containing about 3/^ of a Varre of Castile: Howbeit, their
common Measure is called a Varre which makes 5 Palms and contains 1 1/^ of
a Varre of Castile: our ell of London is equal with the Varre of Lisbone.

All kind of Merchandise brought from Flaunders, Roane, or Britain, pays
at Lisbone, as a duty or custom to the King, 20 in the C. which they call
the tenth in Merchandise, and the other tenth in money.

Note also, that all kind of Merchandise coming to Lisbone by land, pays
less in custom than that that comes by water.

Civil.
The Roue of Civil is 30 lb, 4 Roues make their C. weight which is 120 lb: The
100 lb of Civil makes at London 102 lb: Their other common Measure is a
Varre, whereof 100 makes at London 74 Else: and at Rome 40 Canes, etc.

Venice.
At Venice be 2 sorts of Waightes, the one called La Gross, the other La
Subtle, with the Gross is weyed all kind of great wares: and with the small,
al kind of Spicerie, and such like: 96 lb of gross weight there makes at
London 100 lb: And 100 lb of Spicerie there without any tare, or alowaunce,
make at London 64, and with tare 56.

Their other common measure are Braces, whereof 100 make at London 55 Else, at
Antwerpe 92, etc.

Florence.
At Florence the 100 lb weight makes at Aquila, for Saffron 110: and 145 lb of
Florence make at Roan but 100 lb: the weight of Florence, and that of Luke is
all one.

Their other measures are Braces, whereof 100 makes at Antwerp Burges measure
81 Else, 100 Braces there make at London 49 Else, etc.

Lucque.
The Lucque Sattens are commonly sold at Lions by weight, and 133 lb, makes
at Lions 100 lb: So that 1 lb makes at Lions but 1 pound.

Their other measures are Braces, whereof 100 of them make at London 50 Else,
at Antwerpe 83 Else, etc.

Aquila.
At Aquila their 100 lb makes at London 71, their 136 lb of Saffron makes at
Geneua but 100: And 11 pound of Geneua makes 15 pound at Aquila.

Valentia.
At Valentia be 2 sorts of waights, a great and a small: The C. weight of great
weight contains 4 Roues: The Roue 36 lb: So the C. great weight is 144 lb:
and the C. weight small contains but 120 lb: and is also parted into 4 Roues
which is 30 lb to a Roue: By the small is sold the Scarlet grain, with all
other kind of Spicerie, and by the great is sold Wool with all such like
gross wares: The 1 lb of Silk at Valentia makes at Lions 1 lb Geneua weight:
The Charge of great Merchaundize at Valentia, contains 432 lb, and in small
wares 360 lb: The weight here, and at Barcellone is al one: Their 100 lb weight
makes at London 78 lb: and at Antwerpe 75.

Dansicke.
At Dansicke or Spruce land the Rule is, that whosoever buyeth any
Merchaundize there, buyeth it by the Shippound, which is 320 lb: 20 Lispoundes
make a Shippounde, and the Lispounde contains 16 pound: which Shippound of
Dansicke makes at Antwerp 266 lb: Their 100 lb weight makes at London 86, etc.

Their other common measures are Else, whereof 100 make at London 72: And at
Antwerp 120 Else.

Toulouse.
At Toulouse 6 Cabes of Woad, makes a Charge, 2 Cesterns of Corn, and all
kind of grain makes a Charge: the Cester weyeth 160 lb weight of that place.
Their 100 lb in weight makes at London but 91 lb.

Geanes.
At Genua or Geanes, a 100 lb of their weight makes at London, 71: And at
Antwerpe, 68 2/8: 100 lb weight at Genua makes at Venice, to wit, Subtle 106
lb.

Their other common Measures are Palms, whereof 100 make at London 20 Else:
and at Antwerpe 34.

The rest are supplied in 2 Tables which hereafter follows: whereby the
ingenious may gather his desire.

The agreement of the Waightes of diverse Countries, the one with the other,
being reduced to an Equality, and drawn into a Table, as follows.

112 pounds weight at London, make at Antwerp 107 Franckeford 099. Collen and
Ausburge 102 Noremburge 100 Roan 098 Paris 102 Lions 118 Diepe 100 Geneua 090
Towlouse 122 Rochel 124 7/8 Marcellis 124 Civil, etc. 109 Venice gross weight
105 Venice subtle weight 166 Aquila 157 Vienna 089 Preslaw 134 Leibzig 101
Dansicke 129 Lubecke 097 Barcellon 144 Lisbone 099 Geanes 157


The other Table of the agreement of Measures of diverse Countries reduced unto
an equality, by the aid whereof you may with the use of the rule of three
convert either more or less of any one measure unto other.

Else or ^eards ^ondon ^e at Antwerpe 100 Else Norenburg 104 Else Franckford
125 Else Leibsig 125 Else Preslaw 125 Else Dansicke 83 Else Vienne in Austi
87 Else Lions in France 60 ^0/41 Aulnes Paris in France 57 Aulnes Roan in
Normandy 52 Aulnes Lisbone 60 Aulnes Civil in Spain 81 Varres Castile in
Spain 81 Varres Methera Isles 62 Varres Venice 108 Braces Luques 120 Braces
Florence 122 Braces Millan 138 Braces Rome 90 Canes Geanes. 288 6/13 Palms


The eightenth Chapter treats of Sportes and pastimes, done by Number.
IF you would know the number that any man does think, or imagine in his
mind, as though you could divine. Bid him triple it, or put twice so much
more to it, as it is: which done, ask him whether it be even or odd: if he
say odd, bid him take 1 to it, to make it even: and for that 1 keep 1 in your
mind: now after he has taken 1 to it, to make it even, bid him give away
half, and keep the other half for himself, which when he has done, bid him
triple that half: and again after he has tripled it, ask him whether it be
even or odd: if he say odd: then bid him take 1 to make it even again: and
for that last 1 keep 2 in your mind, now after he has made his number even,
bid him cast away the one half, and keep the other still: From which half
that he keeps, cause him sutlely to put away or give you 9 out of his number,
and for each 9 that he gives you keep 4 in your mind, and thereunto join
the 3 which I bade you keep, and you shall have your desire.

Example.

Imagine he thought 7: the triple whereof to 21: and because it is odd, he is
to take 1 to make it even: which first 1 given is 1 for you to keep in mind:
Then the half of his 22 being cast away, he reserueth still 11: which after
you have bid him triple, it makes 33: then in giving of him 1 again to make
it even: upon that last 1 reserve 2 in your mind: then his half of 34 makes
17: From whence he can give you 9 but once: Therefore that yielding to you 4:
and the 3 that you keep make 7, your desire.

An other kind of Divination to tell your friend, how many pence, or single
pieces, reckoning them one with an other, he has in his purse, or should
think in his mind.
Which to do first bid him double the pieces he has in his purse, or the
number he thinks: if he participate his number or secreacie unto some one
friend that sets by him that can but multiply, and ad never so little: if
their number be great, then shall they work as you bid them so much the
surer.

Now after he has doubled his number, bid him add thereunto 5 more, which
done, bid him multiply that his number by 5 also, which done, bid him tell
you the just sum of his last Multiplication, which sum the giver
thinking it nothing available, because it is so great above his pretended
imagination: yet thereby shall you presently with the help of Subtraction tell
his proposed number.

The Rule is this.

Imagine he thought 17: double 17, and ^ it makes 34, whereunto if you add 5,
it makes 39: which multiplied by 5, as here is practiced in ye marge^t, it
yields 195: which 195 is the sum delivered you in the work: then for a
general rule, you shall evermore cut off the last figure toward your right
hand, with a dash of your pen, as here is performed, as a figure nothing
available unto your work: and then rebate 2 from your first figure, after 5
is cut off: and the rest shall evermore be your desire, as by this example
does appear.

If in any company, you are disposed to make them merry by manner of Divining,
in delivering a Ring unto any one of them, which after you have delivered it
unto them, that you will absent your self from them: and they to devise after
you are gone, which of them shall have the keeping thereof: And that you at
your return will tell them what person has it, upon what hand, upon what
finger, and what iointe. Which to do, cause ye persons to sit down al on a
row, and to keep likewise an order of their fingers: now, after you are gone
out from them to some other place, say unto one of the lookers on, that he
double the number of him that has the Ring, and unto the double bid him add
5: And then cause him to multiply that Addition by 5: And unto the product
bid him add the number of the finger, of the person that has the Ring. And
lastly, to end the work beyond that number toward his right hand, let him set
down a figure, signifying upon which of the ioints he has the Ring, as if it
be upon the second joint, let him put down 2: Then demand of him what
number he keeps. From the which you shall abate 250. And you shall have
three figures remaining at the least: the first toward your left hand shall
signify the number of the person which has the Ring: the second or middle
number shall declare the number of the finger, and the last figure toward
your right hand, shall betoken the number of the joint.

Example.

Imagine the seventh person is determined to keep the Ring upon the fifth
finger, and the third joint: first double 7, it makes 14, thereto add 5, it
makes 19, which multiplied by 5 yields 95: unto which 95, add the number
of the finger, and it makes 100: and beyond 100 toward the right hand, I set
down 3 the number of the joint, al makes 1003, which is the number that is to
be delivered you, from which abating 250, there rests 753, which prefigureth
unto you the seventh person, the fifth finger, and the third joint.

But note, that when you have made your subtraction, if there do remain a 0:
in the place of tens, that is to say, in the second place, you must then abate
1, from that figure which is in the place of Hundreds, that is to wit from the
figure which is next your left hand, and that shall be worth 10 tenths,
signifying the tenth finger: as if there should remain 803, you must say, that
the seventh person upon his tenth finger, and upon his third joint, has the
Ring.

And after the same manner, if a man do cast 3 Dice, you may know the points
of every one of them. For if you cause him to double the points of one Dye,
and to the double to add 5: and the same sum to multiply by 5: and unto the
product add the points of one of the other Dice. And behind the number
toward the right hand to put the figure which signifies the points of the
last Die: and then to ask what number he keeps, from which abate 250: and
there will remain 3 figures, which do note unto you the points of every Die.

Another.

If three diverse things are to be hidden of three diverse persons, and you to
divine which of the three persons has the three diverse things do thus:
imagine the three things to be represented by A.B.C The^ secondly keep well in
your mind which of the persons you mean to be the first, second and third:
Then take 24 counters or stones, and your three things, And give A. unto the
party whom you imagine to be your first man: and there withal give him one
of your 24 counters in his hand: And B. unto your second man: and there withal
2 counters: And C unto your third man, and there withal 3 counters. And leave
the rest which are 18 still among them, which done, separate your self from
them, and afterward bid them change the things among them as they shall think
good, which done after they are agreed, bid him that has such a thing, as
before you have represented by A for every counter that he has in his hand to
take up as many more, And for him that has B for every one in his hand to
take up two: And for him that has C. for every one in his hand to take up
4: And the rest of them to leave still upon the boorde. These three things and
the three persons being fullye printed in your mind, come to the table, and
you shall evermore find one of these six numbers 1.2.3.5.6 or 7 If therefore
one remain still upon the boorde, then have they made no exchange, but keep
them still as they were delivered unto them: So that the first man has A. the
second B and the third C. But if 2 remain, then the first man has B. your
second man A and your third man C: the rest of the work and the order thereof
are here apparent by the table following.

1 1 A 2 B 3 C 2 1 B 2 A 3 C 3 1 A 2 C 3 B 5 1 B 2 C 3 A 6 1 C 2 A 3 B 7 1 C 2
B 3 A

Another Divination of a number upon the casting of two Dice.
First let the caster cast both the Dice, and mark well the number: then let
him take up one of them it makes no matter which: and look what number it
has in the bottom, and add altogether: then cast the die again, and keep in
his mind what altogether makes: then let the Dice stand: bring 7 with you
and thereunto add the rest of the pits that you see upon the upper side of the
Dice, and so many did the caster cast in all.

FINIS.
I. D. To the earnest Arithmetician.
MY loving friend to Science bent,
Something thou have by this book woonne:
But if thou will be excellent,
Another race thou must yet run.
Supplies thereto but (few do) need,
And none but such as in our phrase,
(By Records pen) thou may well read:
Proceed therefore: Be not stunt dwase.
The ground most sure, whereon this race
With speedeful courage must be past,
Of late has turnde his Greekish face,
By English tilth, which aye will last.
The famous Greek of Platos lore,
EVCLIDE I mean Geometer:
So true, so plain, so fraught with store,
(As in our speech) is yet no where.
A treasure strange, that book will prove,
With numbers skill, matched in due sort,
This I thee warn of sincere love,
And to proceed do thee exhort.
Plus oultre.
THus gentle Reader I end this my treatise, with earnest request to accept it
in good part. And let my good will counteruaile the baseness of the style:
praying thee also to thy better furtherance of perfection, to amend in the
Margente of the book, these faults that have escaped in the Printing, which I
have here in this table of errata following collected.

Vale I.M. Norwicensis.

Faults escaped in the Printing, which I desire thee good Reader to correct
with thy pen, for thine own ease and benefit.
E. 16. page. line. 7 there lacks 4 lb 2 s.

S. 12. page. line. 26. read as you work into s.

Dd. 1. page line. 5. for 5/8 read.

Gg. 2. page. line. 8. for read 3/6.

Gg. 6. page. line. 11. there lacks. 666.

Ll. 10 page. line. 10. for read.

Mm. 1. page. line. 13. read for 2 s take the 1/10.

Mm. 2. page. line. 12. for read 1/10.

Mm. 6. page. line. 2. read whereof the.

Mm. 9. page. line. 23. Item for 3 d. take ^/8.

Mm. 15. page. line. 2. What 3884 yeardes.

Mm. 15. page. line. 26. read which 10 d is of 5 s.

Nn. 7. page. line. 4 read 23.

Nn. 9. page. line. 12. mende 48. to 4 s 4 d.

Nn. 13 page. line 7. under 2/4 put.

Oo. 8 page, line 13. read saying once 3 is 3.

Oo. 9 page. line. 6. in the example, say if 1 yeard cost 8. d.

Oo. 10. page. for 7/17 mende it to 7/14.

Oo. 11. page. line. 24. for make it.

Pp. 8. page. line. 3 for 18 s make 10 s.

Qq. 3. page. line. 5. for the seventh make it the eight.

Qq. 4 page. line. 13. read when I delivered it.

Qq. 5 page. line. 23. for 9 read 6.

Qq. 9. page. line. 5. for make it 8/2.

Qq. 11. page. line. 1. put a prick at 400. to sever him and asunder, the like
do at the end of 600: for to sever:

Qq. 16. page. line. 11. after the rate of 9 lb. read 10 lb.

Rr. 1. page. line. 5. for 20.18.8 13/25: read 51 lb. 14.5 13/25.

Tt. 14. page. line. 10 put out, by: read notes of the.

Xx. 1. page. line. 7. read of gold makes 65. {water}


