TWO MEMORABLE RELATIONS.

The Former, A Relation of some late Conflicts between the Portugals and the
English at SVRAT in the East Indies, Wherein the Portugals were vanquished,
many slain, and many taken Prisoners.

The Later, The Copy of a Letter written from Bergen-vp-Zoom by an English
hand; Wherein is contained, a full perfect and true Relation, of the late (great
and admirable) Defeat of the Spanish forces by Water, by the Prince of Orange
assisted with the English forces near Bergen, the 12. of September, 1631.

LONDON, Printed for NATH: BVTTER, and NICH: BOV^^^ 1631.

A Relation of some late conflicts between the Portugals and the English, at,
or near Surrat in the East Indies, by letters dated in Surrat the 29. of
September and ^7. of October 1630.
Upon the 22. of S^ptember 1630. arrived 5. English Ships in the road of
Swalley (which is the Port of Surat) namely the great James, the William, the
Blessing, the Discovery, and the Reformation, in the way of peaceable trade and
marchandizing, who there found thirty Portugal Frigots of war which had
waited for them, 20. days before the said Ships arrival to oppose their trade
there and in all other parts of the said East Indies, (as continually before,
the Portugals have done from the very beginning of the trade of the English
there) ^hi^h Frigots had a little before seized agreat Ship o^ (...) Portugals
no less cautelously had opened and spread them selves in good order, the full
length of all their Frigots, as they purposely had contrived themselves closer
along the shore, as well for the safety of their own people, as to terrify
the English from drawing any further for dread of the great Ordnance, which
with their harquebusses acrock (usually mounted on their Prigots sides) was the
refuge (it seems) they mainly depended on. But such was the undantednesse of
the English, being stirred up to a high measure of fury by the hourly vexation
and braving of the Enemy, as being now come within shot, with a general
resolution, reioyeing at the occasion, after a shot or two received first from
the Portugals, put on in the very face or mouth of all their Frigots: And
perceiving that but three of them could use the advantage of their Prowes
against them, and that some of the rest were brought a ground, and so could not
use their great Ordnance, but had only their harquebusses acrock to gall them,
advanced forward still plying their small shot with very good Discipline, and
the Portugals no less valiantly replying with their double forces, as well
from their Frigots on Sea as their squadron on shore, but not able (it
seems) to endure the violent rage of the English, they began to give
ground, and the English most fier^ely following, entered pell mell amongst them
even in the water, within less then pistol shot of their Frigots; In which
interim the Vice-Kings son was convayed aboard, but so narrowly escaped, that
the party who provided for his safety was himself taken prisoner in the
action, many of the English (not fearing to run up to the chinne in the
water, even to the very sides of their Frigots) pursuing the victory with great
flaughter, both on shore and at sea, and at length returned with 27. Portugals
prisoners taken alive, without the loss of any more then one ancient man (a
Corporal) not wounded, but suffocated with heat, and wounding 7. more of the
English. This they happily performed in the sight of Myrza Backhar and diverse
of the Country people to their great admiration and the English Nations great
honor. The next day to the Portugals great shame, they were constrained to
leave the Port: but the next day after (being Sunday the 24. of October) about
eight of the clock the Portugals put in execution their maine Stratagem (so
much depended on by them) and not without cause much feared by the English in
firing of their four prepared Vessels, chayned together for the intended
destruction of the English fleet, but the vigilance of the English, prevented
that great mischief intended by their Ships boats, well manned on the head of
their head. (...) amble thereunto. First, it is well known to us, that since
the enemy was repulsed, and forsook the siege of Bergen, in the dai^s of
Marquess Sp^nola, they have been practicing and plotting some dangerous
designs to make them^elues masters of some of the Isles of Zealand, that by
sloops, punts, and fl^t bottomed boat^, (which they have been a long time a
preparing and making) they might separate, and cut off our passage between
Holland and Zealand.

To this end, about two or three years ago, they began to fortify a village
in Brabant, called Sandf;le^te, which has a Creek that comes out of the River
called the Scheld, which runs up to Antwerpe; and made some Forts upon some
p^tches of dry ground in the drowned Land, called the Cr^ys-sconces, and
Hoogerweif, that they might bring their boats and sloopes on the back side of
Lillo, and so avoid the danger of shot in passing to Sanduliet upon the Scheld,
between two strong Forts of ours, Lill^ and Liefkeys book, which lies
opposite the one to the other. Now his Excellency perceiving the enemies
design, and that he began to fortify himself at Sandfleete, and in the other
places before mentioned; to prevent him from getting any more ground upon us,
built likewise Forts at a place called Blawe-garne, as Frederick Henry's Fort,
calling it after his own name, Hawtames and Carreys Forts, so that the Enemies
Forts may shoot at random at our shipping, which runs up to Lillo, and
Liefkeys book, and ours toward their sloopes, which comes through the drowned
land from Antwerpe to Sandsleete and their Forts. Now over against Sandsleete
and their Forts, there is an Island called the Doel, from which an old Dyke does
run from the Doel to the Scheld; which his Excellency hearing the Enemies
preparations, feared much that if the Enemy had possessed before us, and built
a Fort upon it, they might have cut off all relief and passage to Lillo,
Frederick Henry's Fort, and Lifkeys hook: And thus much to give you to
understand the situation of the place: which you may see more plainly in the
Card Brabant, which I send unto you.

The Enemy for the effecting of this great design by water, has been this
three or four years a making of Sloops, Punts, and great flat-bottom'd Boats,
especially since our last Flaunders voyage this year, to seek a revenge in
casting of new Ordnance for them, making a breast of Oaken plancks for their
Musketeers to play over Musket-proofe; and furnished them with Sails, Oars,
and all other necessary equipage, and in the fore part of their greatest Punts
and Sloopes planted three quarter and half Canon, with other Pieces to s^oote
level with the water. They drew not passing three or four foot water, and for
the hasting hereof, against the last full Moon and Spring tide, spared not to
work upon the Sabbath days. But before I go on, I will digr^sse a little,
and tell you of the frantic brain of a Pape or popish Priest, that would do
wonders. A Drum of ours being sent from our Army at Druynen to Antwerpe for
prisoners, some of the Enemy told him that there was a Pape, that would bring
their men into Bergin up Zoom, (which indeed he has done) and would carry
five thousand men under (...) for the morning tide; our men of war coming up
again, yet with their often shooting from their battery, and out of their
Punts with their great Ordnance, got clear off them again, and so with that
ebb fell down toward Bergen and beyond Rommerswall, in the view of our Army,
and passing by, three or four shot was made from the South sconce of Bergens
head to them, so that one of them shot off the Rudder of one of their Sloopes,
which was taken and brought in. But before I proceed any further, I will show
you the list of their preparations, and how strong they set forward from
Antwerpe, viz.

Fifty great Sloopes.

Ten great Punts, wherein their Canon was planted.

Eighteen Pleyts or great Lighters, which make in all seventy eight sail.

Four hundred small Pieces of Ordnance, as small Brass and Leather Pieces,
Chambers and Murderers.

Four thousand hand Grenades, and other fire works.

Ten half Canon.

Twenty French Canon, or three quarter Canon, carrying Bullets of 36. pound.

between six and seven thousand Soldiers and Sailors.

Eleven Barrells of money.

Great store of Ammunition, us Powder, Bullets, and Match.

Whose chief Commanders were the Prince of Barbanzon and Count John of Nassaw;
And victuals, wine and beer for fourteen days.

Being thus provided, as is aforesaid, and falling down before Bergen, at the
first fight his Excellency and we hearing such a shooting the night before,
and in this morning, being Friday the 12. of this month, knew no better but
that they had been our own men, which had been put to a retreat; not
thinking the Enemy had been so mad to undertake so high an attempt, as to
come under our noses, and to dare and brave our Army at noone day, our
Soldiers being on fire, and their fingers itching at them, and that only the
water parted us; his Excellency, from the hill which is by his quarter, calls
for his perspectiue glass, discouers the Burgunn^an Crosle, and their Sloopes
and Punts full of Soldiers, and being fallen down a little beneath
Rommerswall, drawing a gross together, and pointing as though they would land
upon the Dyke of Tertole; sends my Lord General Morgan away in all expedition
with the gards his own Regiment, and other Forces to secure that Town of
Tertole and the Island thereof. Proffering to land, they cried to the Peasants,
which stood upon the Dyke to desend it with their Arms, that they would wash
their hands in the Geufes blood; but seeing General Morgan and his Colors
making such haste to meet them, they bethought themselves, and fell back
again into the stream. But ere I conclude, there happened two wonderful
marks of the providence of God. Sailing one after another like a company of
wild geele, twelve or fourteen of their greatest Lighters wherein

(...) But the second mark of the admirable providence of God, was this; In the
morning toward four of the clock, the Lord sent a thick mist, which did so
blind fold them, as heretofore the enemies of Gods children were in the old
Testament, so that they could not see one another, and Count John in this mist
ran a ground, put forth a light, and the rest following, thinking he had been
in the stream, were all like wise stranded with him. When the mist dissolved,
they saw likewise our men of War which came from Holland and Zealand in the
head of them, which hindered them from recovering the Point* Count John, the
Prince of Barbanzon, the Duke of Borneuille, and two or three more Commanders,
being stricken with an amazement at this sudden work of God, got into a little
boat, and stole away from them, Count John calling to them, and saying,
Nessieurs a Dieu, Cest mon d^rniers, Every man shift for himself; which did
much discourage and astonish their men, as they themselves confessed: So when
that began to clear up, our men saw the gross of their punts and sloopes
lying upon the sands and mud, and they by hundreds forsaking their sloopes, and
casting away their arms, some swamme, others waded up to the neck to get to
the Land to save their lives, crying for quarter to the Pesants, which at the
first did repulse them: In the mean time Count John gave them the slip, and
got into Prince-land with those which he had in his little sloope, leaving his
Sword, his Leading-staffe, his Horses, and his Trumpetor and Laquyes behind
him. This morning being Saturday, the 13. of September New style, all the
Enemies sloops, punts, and lighters, all their Ordnance, and Ammunition,
Materials, Money and Victuals, thirty Commanders, as Governors, Lieuten^nts,
Coronels, Captains, and Abf^r^sses, Dullicum the Governor of Groll, which
heretofore had brought them into the Velowe (saving the Prince of Barbanzon,
the Duke of B^rn^v^lle, C^unt John of Nass^w, Barnesels son, and some others
that escap^d in the sloope with Count John) were taken; and the numb^r of above
4000. soldiers and sailors drove like flocks of Cattle through our quarters,
and has filled all our vacant places at Bergen up Zoom, Steen Bergen, and
Tertole with prisoners, having lost, as the Pesants in the Vosmare report, who
have buried them drowned and slain, above 800. of them, our soldiers and
sailers having made brave booties of arms, money, clothes, and victuals, and
fifty five thousand pound st^rling brought in by the Admiral of Zealand; which
the States, they say, will give as a reward to the Soldiers and Sailors for
their service. And this night, being the 15. of September, after thanks giving
to God, for this wonderful and powerful work of his Almighty and outstretched
arm, we have resounded the glory of God, from all our Towns and Forts, with
the report and thundering of a thousand Canon shot, toward the faces of our
Enemies; to make them understand in their Army, which lies but five English
miles from us, at Antwerpe, and along the coast of Flaunders, what God has
done for us: hoping shortly, as victors, after we have bin nineteen or twenty
weeks in the field, to return to Garrison. And thus, Sir, to conclude, I have
truly and briefly related unto you this victory, which God has given us
without the loss of blood, and not one man of our Nation, but a Seriant shot,
that you, and the reft of Gods people may rejoice with us, because his
deliverances and his mercies to his people, endure for ever and ever. Amen.
Resting

Your loving kinsman ever to command. H. H.
From our Army at Bergen up Zoom the sixteenth of September, 1631. new style.
Postscript.
This precedent Relation coming from a Noble and worthy gentleman to his
friend here in England, was obtained to the Press, with much importunity;
being the most exact and impartial discourse that has come to ourknowledge,
concerning this action. And which, if we durst manifest the Author, would give
sufficient credit to the matter. Such as it is, we promise shall be the last
we intend to publish of this matter.

Farewell.


FINIS.

