TRVE COPIES OF THE INSOLENT, CRVELL, BARBAROVS, and blasphemous Letter lately
written by the Great Turk, for denouncing of War against the King of POLAND:
AND Of the Magnanimous, and most Christian Answer made by the said King
thereunto.

With a short Preface, declaring the unjust Cause on which this Turkish Tyrant,
and faithless enemy of Christendom, now lays hold to invade it.

Published in Print by Authority, the 11. of June. 1621.

LONDON, Printed for William Lee: and are to be sold at his shop in
Fleerstreet, at the sign of the Golden Bucke, near Sargeants June. 1621.

THE PREFACE.
ABout the Year, 1608. Jeremy, Prince of Moldauia dying, left 3. Sons,
Constantine, Alexander, and Bougdan, the eldest of which being but 8. years
old, the Government, during his Minority, was by the deceased Father committed
to his Uncle Simeon, who dying within three or four years after, Constantine
the eldest son, according to his right, and supported by the Council of his
mother, undertook the government. At which time there lived at Constantinople,
one Tomsho or Stephen, who falsely pretending to be son unto Aron, who had
been Prince of Moldauia before Jeremy, had by money and other sinister
practices, framed to his ends, Mehemet Bassha, Lieutenant to the grand Vizier
(which is the highest Officer under the Turk) and by falsely suggesting that
Constantine refused to pay the yearly tribute of forty thousand Chequines to
the great Turk, obtained from him an Army of 20000. men under the conduct of a
Turkish General, to expel Prince Constantine, and establish himself in the
government. And notwithstanding Constantine endeavored to give all due
satisfaction to this Turkish General, and made evident the fraud and falsehood
of Tomsho, yet he being also corrupted by Tomsho's bribes and great promises,
would admit no reason. Whereupon Prince Constantine making head to defend
himself and Country, was in a Battle overcome, taken prisoner, and after,
seeking to escape, drowned in the River Niestre. Tomsho, after this victory,
being thrust into the Gouernnment, and indeuoring to keep by tyranny, what he
had gotten by injustice and usurpation, the Nobility attempted by arms to free
themselves and their Country from his unspeakable cruelties, but with success
unworthy their virtue; for, by an overthrow, both his malice, and the Countries
misery increased. In which disaster, the greatest part of them fly into Poland,
the refuge of the unfortunate Princess with her remaining children, and the
Tribunal from which their country was in justice to expect a Governor: the
Polonians having by ancient Articles, and capitulations between the Turk and
them, to the end their Kingdom might not be prejudiced by that neighbor
Province, which though Christian, was yet tributary to the Turk, reserved to
themselves the right and interest to name a Vaiuod, or Prince over that
Country. And to this purpose the King of Poland sent an Ambassador to
Constantinople, whom the Great Turk, contrary, to the Law of Nations,
Turkishly answered by detaining him prisoner, and ever since has threatened
that most Noble, and Christian Kingdom, with utter subversion, having (as it
is probably conceived) to that end drawn all his forces out of Asia, and made
a greater leuy in Europe, then has been known in that Empire, consisting (by
report) of four hundred thousand men; an Army sufficient to satisfy the most
covetous, or religious Christian Soldier with riches, or glory.

THE GREAT TVRKES LETTER.
Sultan Achmat Mahomet, Prior of the earthly Paradise, and keeper of the Grave
of thy God, Lord of the Tree of Life, and of the River Flisky, Conqueror of
the Macedonians, the seed of Great Alexander, Prince of the Kingdoms of
Tartary, Mesopotamia, Media, and of the Martial Georgians, Anatolia, Bythinia,
Asia, Armenia, Seruia, Thracia, Morea, Valachia, Moldauia, and of all warlike
Hungary, Sovereign Lord and Commander of all Greece, Persia, both the
Arabia's, the most Noble Kingdom of Egypt, Tremisen, and African Empire, of
Trabezond, and the most glorious Constantinople, Lord of all the white and
black Sea, and of the holy Cities Mecha, and Medina, shining with divine
glory, Commander of all things that are to be commanded, and the strongest and
mightiest Champion of the wide world, a warrior appointed by Heaven in the
edge of the sword, a great persecuter of his enemies, and of all their evil
vices, a most perfect Jewel of the blessed Tree, the chiefest keeper of the
Crucified God, a Prince and Lord in whom the Mahometans trust, and a great
persecuter of of all Christians;
To Sigismund King of Poland,
if thou do desire Our welfare, and art Friend to us and Our Officer
Lieutenant General of all our forces which we will send, Our Greeting. But
thou have long since broken Our friendship, and yet art neither ready nor fit
to wage War, or fight battle against us. But thou have some secret advice
and intelligence with other confederate petty Kings, and their Counselors, to
deliver thee out of Our hands, and our Vicegerents power, wherein thou have
done unadvisedly, and indiscreetly. If therefore thou thus persevere to oppose
thy self against us, then fear, for thy death, and the death of all thy
people is determined. We tell thee, We will overcome thee, from the rising of
the Sun, to the going down thereof, and we will show Our Majesty in our own
person and sight, unto the uttermost parts of the earth; Our very thoughts
shall be a terror unto thee, showing that We will perform all that which We
have herein denounced. And We will make known unto thee the powerfulness of
our Dominions. And thou, O King, which put thy trust in strong Forts and
Castles, shall have experience of Our resistlesse might. I will root thee out
altogether, and thou shall behold this with thine own eyes. Wherefore expect
now no more friendship at my hands; put not thy hope in the strength of thy
walls, with thy own forces and people. I will ruinate thee without any
resistance. I will destroy thy Cracouia, in sign of triumph, I will leave
there my bloody sword, that every one shall take notice thereof, and my belief
shall be spread throughout all thy Dominions, and I will utterly root out the
very remembrance of thy Crucified God. Let thy God be angry, I care not; He
may thou help thee. Thy anointed (the Priests) I will surely put to the
plague; Wolves and wild Beasts shall suck the breasts of thy Women; thou shall
leave and forsake thy Religion which thou now have; that which remains of all
things, shall be consumed with fire. Herewith rest thou satisfied; I do not
tell thee now what I will do; or mean to do with thee; understand if thou will, or can.

Given at Our most High Port of Constantinople most strongly guarded, etc.
THE KING OF POLAND HIS ANSWER.
SIGISMVND the third, by the grace of God King of Poland, Great Duke of
Lithuania, Russia, Prussia, Masouia, Samogitia, Liuonia, etc. and Hereditarie
King of the Suecians, Goths, and Vandales, one of the most humble servants of
the True God, and of his Son JESUS CHRIST Crucified,
to Achmat chief Prince of Turks, and Infidels, souls health.
We have received thy Letter, full fraught with threats, and swollen with
impieties against the Majesty of the most High God, whereunto we had not
vouchsafed answer, but that we were persuaded, our silence would have been a
means of causing thee to flatter thy self so much the more, else had We
neglected thee like an Arch-enemy of God, as thou art. We have therefore
thought fit in some sort to regard the Salvation of thy soul, giving thee to
know, that thou art no other then a mere man, in thy person more weak then
many of thy followers; which should cause thee to remember, that if it had not
pleased God to ingraue in the front of such as rule, a kind of awful
Majesty, whereby their subjects are kept in obedience; the good by reward, the
evil and perverse by rigorous Laws, and both the one and the other by
Authority; it were impossible they should continue eminent above others. Thou
then, who in thy self art but as other men, must know, that there is a Supreme
Power of more might then thine, which does uphold thy estate, causing thee to
be respected by thy followers. This power proceeds from God most Good, most
Just, most Mighty, who presrueth it so long as Princes humble themselves before
him; but if they suffer themselves to be transported with presumption, and
pride, he easily abateth, and corrects their fury. I will offer no other
example to thy consideration, then that of Bajazet the first, one of thy
Predecessors, who thinking to scale Heaven with his Army (which in the
judgment of Man was irresistable, but in Gods sight most contemptible) lived
to see himself vanquished, taken, and imprisoned, coopt up in an iron cage,
(wherein he was in triumph drawn after the victorious Conqueror, serving
him for no better then a footstool) and having no other food, then such as was
cast him (like a Dog) from his Table.

Think then with thy self, that he that was so great, so puissant, and so
terrible, may happily by right of Succession have left unto thee (as being
descended from him) the like, or worse fortune, if thou shall dare to continue
thy blasphemies against GOD, and his Beloved Son Jesus Christ Crucified. Thou
do mistake in thinking to lay an aspersion upon us, by reproaching unto us
the Cross. For We account it Our chiefest honor, and glory; by virtue
whereof, as the Emperor Constantine quelled his enemies, We hope, and
assured our selves to be defended against thy Fury. Thy proud, and thundering
words dismay us not, our courage is more Masculine and generous, then so to be
out-braued. For know, that we regard not thy threats, but with just scorn
tread upon thy pride, and laugh at thy idle terrors, and in stead of thanking
thee for aduertising us before thy coming, We bid thee come when thou will,
thou shall be received contrary to thy expectation. We have steep
Mountains, and impregnable Rocks that shall bar thee from entering into our
Lands. Thou shall find our Cities, and Castles well furnished with Munition,
our Canons mouths breathing furious fires, our courages invincible, our blades
eager and sharp, our bodies, as our minds, prepared to sustain the violence
of all seasons, our hearts promising nothing but victory. And to dazell thine
eyes, the glorious Standard of the blessed Cross shall go before us; but
above all, the Crucified Son of the most High God shall cause his Angels to
conduct us, and give us the victory; He it is shall be our Leader, under whose
protection we will not fear to brave thee at thy Gates. Thy miscreant troops
shall be trodden underfoot, and their bellies trampled on, and by a happy
victory (if thou chance to escape our conquering Arm) thou shall find thy
self pursued unto the most secret Dens of thy abominable Seralio; thou shall
see thy Mosques laid level with the ground, thy Muphty, and other the
execrable Priests of thy perfidious Mahomet made Gally-slaues; all those
traitorous run-a-gates whom thou do harbor, shall thou see put to exquisite
torments; of all which be most assured. And then shall be set free all those
poor and miserable Christians, who now lie groaning under the burden of thy
Tyrannous yoke, whose woeful cries being mounted to Heaven, have justly
excited the vengeance of God upon thee, who has permitted thee to rise to this
height of pride, that thy ruin and destruction may be the more exemplar unto
after-ages. To conclude, thou shall see the service of God re-established in
Greece and Asia, which thou do now unjustly usurp. But if it happen thee to
end thy miserable life in Battle, (which we hope God will grant) be confident,
that all the foresaid vengeance shall ensue upon thy death; And whiles thy
wretched Soul lies broiling in the quenchlesse flames of Hell, we will lift
up our cheerful voices, and, for the victory obtained over thee and thine,
sing praises unto our God: to whom be all glory for ever.

Know then, O Infidel, that we fear thee not at all, and if thou be not
wilfully bent to run headlong unto thy own destruction, be advised; content,
and contain thy self within those bounds thou do at this present usurp,
and if thou have any belief at all that thy thrice reverenced Prophet Mahomet
could tell a truth, or foretell future events, then call to mind, that of
those thousand years which he prescribed for the continuing of thy Sect,
there remain not above six or seven years. This then is the time that the
yet unsheathed Sword of the Christians affords for thy amendment, that thou
might come to the knowledge of the alone True GOD, to worship him in his
Son JESUS CHRIST, whereunto we once more exhort thee, omitting all other
salutation, and commendation.

Given at our Castle of Posnwich, etc. SIGISMVND.

Published June 11. 1621.


