REMEDIES Against Discontentme^t, drawn into several Discourses, from the
writings of ancient Philosophers.

By Anonymus.

Rebus aduersis constans.

LONDON Printed for Rafe Blower An. Do. 1596.

To the right Worshipful, Edward Cook Esquier, her Majesty's Attorney
general.
SJR, having received many kind favors from you, and there resting in me
small ability, though much will, to deserve them. I thought yet at the least
to do, as honest (though vnhahle debtors) are wont, who wanting means to make
full satisfaction, do strain the^ selves to pay interest until some better
fortune do befall them. And if you be pleased so to accept of these my labors,
I do promise and protest, that I will seek by all means possible to
discharge the whole, as my ability shall increase. Till when and ever, I will
wish you as happy, as J deem you worthy, and remain

Yours devoted in most dutiful affection. Anonymus.

Anonymus to his Friend.
YOu earnestly entreated me to send you those small discourses you took
view of in my study, not long since. You have so great authority over me
that I can not (without breaking the league of friendship) make that just
excuse unto you, which I might unto others. They were only framed for mine
own private use; and that is the reason I took no great pain, to set them
forth any better, thinking they should never see the light. Imagine not to
find in them, those subtle questions, and profound discourses which so
weighty a matter requires. It was not my purpose to enter so far, both in
regard of the weakness of mine own forces, as that I did likewise know well,
that the ancient Philosophers have left unto us many volumes of the same
subject, whose perfection I am in no wise able to imitate. But as they all with
one accord do acknowledge thus much, that we do naturallye desire to be
happy, and that there is no means in this world to attain thereunto, but to
bridell our affections, and to bring them unto a sound temper, which is the
only way to set our mind at rest: So did they judge it requisite, that we
should refer all our labor, watching, and meditation to this end. And in
deed it is the course which the best wits of those times, have taken: yea not
only they who have been guided by the obscure light of nature, but even those
who through faith have been enlightened, by the clear shining of the Son
beams. From these fair flowers, which their labors have afforded me, I
have as I passed by, gathered this small heap, and as my time and leisure
served me, distilled them, and kept them as precious. Deeming that the lesser
quantitye they did contain, so much greater should their virtue and power be.
For I was long since thus persuaded, that the receiptes which we seek, to
calm, and appease our mind with all, ought to be gathered into the fewest
words, and shortest precepts that may be, that we may always have them about
us. Forasmuch as disquietnes, which stops the passage offelicitie, and with
the which we are always to combat, does for the most part take us unawares,
and keep us at that bay, that if we have not still some short, and easy
weapons about us, which we may well handle, we should not be able to defend our
selves. I doubt not but your age, and experience, has long since provided you
those that are of better mettle, better forged, and tempered. But since that you
have a good opinion of mine, and desire to use hem (as you make me believe) I
do answerable to your desire send the you. If they please you, it shall be
according to my wish: If they displease, yet is it according to your
commandment. Fare you well.

Yours Anonimus.

A brief Table of all the Discourses contained in this Book.
1 How we ought to prepare our selves against passions. 2 Of the choice of
affairs. 3 Of foresight. 4 Of the vocation of every man. 5 How we ought to
rule our life 6 Of the diversity of men's actions. 7 Of the choice of friends.
8 Of dissembling. 9 Of vanity. 10 Of prosperity. 11 A comparion of our own
estate, with the fortune of other men. 12 Of adversity. 13 Of sorrow. 14 Of
the afflicton of good men. 15 Of other men's faults. 16 Of injuries, wrongs,
and disgraces. 17 Of poverty. 18 Of Death.
Anonymus, his Remedies against Coffeehouse.
1. Discourse. How we ought to prepare our selves against Passions.
SEEING that our felicity depends of our actions, and that our soul is (as it
were) the fountain and beginning thereof, the greatest care that we ought to
have (if we desire to live happily) is to quiet and appease it, and to take
order that it be not troubled with common and vulgar opinions, as things
contrary to the nature thereof. There are especially two seaso^s, the one of
prosperity, the other of adversity, wherein it is wont to be shaken with
passions, as it were with violent and mighty winds. We ought then before hand
(like unto the Mariners who before they put to Sea, do provide themselves of
all that may be necessary for them to resist a tempest) to furnish our selves
of discourses, which may like ancors settle our mind, that it be not carried
away with the waves of passion, when they shall happen to beat against it. For
as Zenophon did exhort his fellow citizens to sacrifice unto the Gods, whilst
they lived in prosperity, to the end they might before hand, be reconciled and
favorable unto them, when they should call upon them in adversity: So
likewise we ought when we find our selves at any leisure, to seek out the
knowledge and acquaintance of reason, to the intent that when we have need
thereof, it may come at our first call, as knowing our voice, and being already
willing to defend us. Discourses are the ouer-rulers of our passions: which
when we have thoroughly known and examined, and that we are well able to judge
what force they have over us, and what power we have over them, they are
nothing at al so enraged against us, but far more easily quieted. Like unto
dogs which never cease barking at them whose voices they know not, and are
soon appeased, when they hear them speak, whom they see daily. We are wont
to compare the commandment of the soul over this brutish and earthly part,
from the which our passions do arise, unto the office of a good Rider, who
mannageth his horse, for keeping still in the Saddle he turns and rules him
at his pleasure. But a Knight shall receive small honor, to bring a horse
vnbacked to the Turney, which had never champed the bytt, nor galloped the
round; we ought first to teach and tame a horse, before we serve our turn
with him at our need: So in like manner before we committ our selves to the
weilding of important affairs, and set our selves to show upon the Stage of
the world, we ought to tame this wild part of our soul, and cause it to bite
on the bridle, teaching it the laws and measures, wherewith it ought to govern
it self as occasions shall be offered, and setting before it the pleasure and
contentment which it is to receive, by the issue of worthy and constant
actions. Meditation is that which gives the soul a right temper, making it
hard, and not to be perced with any sharp passion, in resisting that for which
we have made long preparation before hand, we may well be wondered at, albeit it
be a matter most difficult: contrarily a very small thing troubles us, if it
happens on the sudden. How often do you think that Canius thought of
death, and how often did he discourse what it was, who being condemned by the
Tirant and sent to suffer, he was so smally moved therewith, that he said to
the Captain that came for him, that he should call to mind that he had the
advantage of a game of him, against whom he then went to play. And taking leave
of his friends, he gave them no other farewell but this, O my dear friends I
shall shortly know that which I have so long desired, to wit, whether the
soul be imortall, and whether by death we feel the separation that is made
between the soul and the body. We ought to believe, that this poor Pagan had
been long excercised in commanding his passions, and was well provided of
worthy resolutions, since that with such constancy and gravity he went to an
unjust and violent death. If then the desire, to know what the soul should be
after death, caused this man's torment to be pleasing unto him: What ought the
certain knowledge which we have of the immortality thereof, and the hope of
eternal life, eternally happy, work in those that shall daily meditate thereon?
Ought it not to cause both death and other afflictions which we endure, to be
delightefull unto us, seeing they are as it were the Waves which cast us, upon
this haven of happiness?

2. Discourse. Of the Choice of affairs.
MAn is not borne to live with his hands in his bosom, but contrarily as the
fairest member that sets out the world, he ought to bestow his pains for
the government and preservation of Civil society, wherein he is placed. But for
as much as the quietness of men, does principally depend of the election of their
vocation, and that there is nothing that furthereth them better to live
contentedly, then when they are well fitted with a meet calling, they ought
first of all to examine them selves, and consider to what end they take that
vocation upon them, yea and under whose authority. Because we ordinarily
presume too much of our selves, and attempt more then we have power to
perform. And this error, for the most part falls out in all our actions,
so that some spend more then their substance will bear, others labor more
then their strength will suffer them, others have no commaundment over anger,
others in their speech can spare no person, although it should cost them their
lives, others are unfit to manage matters of estate, because they are too sad
and pensive; others, are unmeet for the Court, because they are discourteous
and imagine ever their own opinion to be best. That which causes us to fail
herein, is that we know not our selves, and oftentimes without making any
proof of our sufficiency, we undertake such things as we must afterward
leave of with shame, or endure great pain and care, if we continue them.

Now, who so will weigh a matter before he take it in hand, let him remember
that always he that bears any burden, ought to have more force then the
burden it self. For if it were too great and heavy, without doubt he that
would take upon him to carry it, should be constrained either to leave it, or
to shrink under it. We ought likewise to consider, that there are many sorts
of callings, which of themselves are not so great, as in regard they are
intermingled, and entangled, with a rabble of other affairs, and such offices
are to be avoided in as much as they weary the mind. But we ought to make choice
of those, which we are able to execute, and bring to an end, or at the least of
such as we have good hope of the good effecting of them* And we ought always
to leave off those enterprises, that fall not out according to our purpose and
pretense. I say not this to fear you, nor in such sort to abate your courage,
that hereuppon you do avoid some necessary burdens, and as one daring to
undertake nothing, you remain without any calling, which should be a very
slothful, and unpleasing life.

For (as we say) It is the property of man still to be doing som-thing, which
should chiefly be, in that which is necessary and behouefull for the common
wealth. Seeing then the necessity of the life of man is naturally subject to
labor, and care, we ought to govern our selves in such sort, that if we be
called to undertake any virtuous, and laudable thing, we ought not to leave it
of for want of courage, nor yet to be so folish-hardy to enterprise that which
we know is above our strength.

3. Discourse. Of Foresight.
WE ought the^ to take order (if it be possible) that we be not surprised by
any worldly actions, being before hand thoroughly furnished with wisdom. Which
we shall easily do, if in all the affairs we undertake, we premeditate
th'inconueniences and crosses which may happen unto us, according to the nature
of them, and look unto that which falls out daily. And such Foresight does
wonderfullye lessen the force of evil, which cannot (if we take this course)
bring any alteration or change. Contrarily they bring great damage to those
who suffer them selves to be surprised, not considering that nature has set
men in a dangerous place, when she brought them forth into the world. They
weigh not how often they have seen women lament the untimely death of their
Husbands, and Husbands bewail the like burial of their Wives and Children,
even at their own doors. They consider not, that those who had speech and
conference with them but yesterday, are now dead. We are so deceived, and have
so small judgment, that we think it impossible, that the like should happen
unto us, which we see fall out every day. If we did acquaint our selves with
matters in such sort as reason requires, we should rather have cause to
wonder how the dangers and accidents which do pace so near after us, have not
in so long time overtaken us: And when they have met with us, how it is
possible that they should handle us so gently. O how do we deceive our
selves, when we will not forecast what may fall out, and mistrust the worst,
least we should be accounted timorous! It behooves him that sets sail to
know that he may meet with a storm. It is necessary for us to understand that
that which happens to an other may chance to us, and that which ha^geth over
every man's head, may fall upon ours. He which observes an other man's
adversity, as a thing that may be fall unto himself, is already armed. You
will say I never thought that should have happened unto me: And why not? what
riches is there, that is not atte^ded on with poverty? What honor, not waited
on with disgrace? what high aspiring, without danger of a down fall? There is
no estate but is subject to change, and that which happens to another, may
meet with thee. It should be a long discourse and contrary to our purpose if
we should reckon all those whom fortune, from the highest pitch of felicity
has brought to the lowest step of misery. In such an alteracion and variety
of matters, if you do not think that all accidents may touch you, you give
great power to adversity against your self, which is wonderfully appeased by
the wisdom of him that foreseeth it. Surely our minds should be settled in
far greater quietness, if our actions did tend to those things that had a
settled estate. For having once attained it, we should at the least content our
selves, and rejoice in peace. But for as much as all things in this world are
transitory and that there is nothing firm, the remedy of hurt by our
infirmity, is to foresee this, and not to afflict our selves with those things
the possession of which, is as disquiet, as their search. And therefore we
ought so to affect them, as things that may leave us, and have this foresighte
that they do not first forsake us. As it was once told to ANAXAGORAS, that his
son was dead, And he answered I knew well that he was a man and subject to
death. We ought in like sort, to be prepared against all chances. My friend
did not assist me in such a cause; I knew that he was a man, and so subject to
alteracion. I enjoyed a good wife: yet was she notwithstanding a woman. He
which in such sort preuenteth the worst, shall never be surprised at unawares,
nor say as foolish men do commonly. I had not thought it. To such the chances
of fortune bring great affliction, because they are not armed with wise
foresight to support them. A wise man in time of peace makes provision for
war. Ulysses passed many dangers and labors and yet was he never afflicted
with any thing but one trifle which surprised him on the sudden, which was the
death of a dog which he loved well. I may conclude with that which is commonly
and truly said. A man surprised is half conquered.

4. Discourse. Of the vocation of every man.
IT happens oftentimes that many men considering not what they do, do fall
into a kind of life painful to bear, and more troublesome to leave. Which
surely is a matter very intricate, which had need of great wisdom, and no
less patience, and wherein especially they are to call upon God for his
assistance; considering that in such a necessity, patience, and humility
toward God, is the only remedy to ease our grief.

Look into the estate of Prisoners, how painful it is unto them at the first
to endure yrons about their legs: but after they are a little accustomed unto
them, necessity instructs them, and use makes them carry them with ease.
There is no kind of life so restrained, that has not some comfort and
refreshing. And surely there is nothing wherein nature has so much favored
us, as that it has caused us to find the remedy, or lessening of our griefs
in the patient enduring of them: since man is borne subject to all kind of
calamities. We ought then to presuppose, that we are all Prisoners of fortune,
who houldeth all men fettered: and there is no other difference but this, that
some men's chains, are of gold, others of iron. We are all in one prison, and
they who hold others Captives, are prisoners themselves. If honor troubles
thee, riches vexes other men: and if baseness of birth afflicts thee,
Nobility and greatness tormenteth others a thousand fold more: If thou art
subject to an other man's will, thou shall see that he that commands thee is
Captive to his own, being bondslaue to thousands of disco^tentments, and cares
which thou perceiuest not. To conclude, if you look narrowly into the matter
you shall find, that the whole Life of man is nothing else but a kind of
bondag. wherein every one ought to frame himself in his calling, and endeavor
to content him self therein, dissembling the evil he meets with, and making
use of the good. For there is no estate of life so painful, wherein the
patient mind finds not some ease, and contentment. Albeit that art, and
dexterity, be more necessary, in adversity, then prosperity. Industry
raises up a family in a small time. And when crosses and encumbrances, do
offer themselves, we ought then to show our virtue, and diligence, putting
our chiefest trust in God. Jonas had good leisure in the whales belly, to make
his prayers unto God, which were not powered out in vain. In like manner, how
hard and heavy soever any thing is, it may be eased and helped. Limit always
your hope, by the term of your Life, and judge that many things, though in
their outward appearance they seem different, yet are they within, very like
in vanity. Envy not those who are advanced to a higher calling then your
self: For many times it falls out that that which we deem height, is a
downfall. And to say the troth, those who have lived contented, have not
always made the best Election: But they who have had the skill to carrye
themselves prudently in the Estate which they have chosen, taking that which
was evil pacientlie, and seeking to better that which fell out crosslie.
Whereupon Plato compared the life of man unto Dice play, wherein he which
casts, ought always endeavor to win, and yet content himself with his
chance. Seeing that good and evil is not in our power, and that we may
notwithstanding take our fortune patiently, and thank God that worse which
might have befell, did not happen unto us. Those men that are of a slender
capacity, if fortune once blow with a prosperous gale upon them, are so
transported with joy that they know not what they do, and no man is able to
converse with them, and in adversity, they are so astonished, and so sad, that
they are altogether beaten down. They are all like sick persons full of
anguish, who can neither endure, cold, nor heat. The Philosopher THEODORUS
was wont to say, that he gave words unto his hearers with the right hand, and
that he received them with the left. So do many often times who take that
Fortune with the left hand, which is given them with the right. It were far
better, wisely to immitate Bees, who out of Time (a sower and dry herb) do
draw sauorie and sweet Honny.

We ought in like manner out of this hard and painful life, to try out that
which is good, and cast away that which is evil, or at the least hide it. Yea
they who are exercised in virtuous actions, may after a sort make their profit
of that which is evil. DIOGENES being banished, took occasion by his exile;
to apply himself to the study of wisdom.

Nothing will be so hard as it seems, if by daily exercise you take a
habitude to live contented. Does it displease you to live in the Courts of
great Lords and Princes? Content you with your own dwelling house. Are you not
capable, to weild matters of Estate? Play the part of a good Citizen. By this
means you shall make that easy which is accounted painful in this life.

Moreover it will avail you much in your discontentments to set before you the
worthy and famous persons of times past, in what sort and with what wisdom
they have given remedy to the crosses, and encombrances, which have befell
them in their lives. Does it grieve you that you have no children? Consider how
many Kings have wanted issue of their body and dyed without heirs.

If poverty afflict you, weigh with your self how many exellent men have been
poor, who nevertheless have lived patie^tly without complaint. Upon a time one
brought word to STILOPHON the Philosopher that his daughter had played the
harlot, the fault (quoth he) is not to be attributed to me, but to her.

If the bad conditions of those that are yours do displease you, set before
your eyes, so many honorable and singular men, who have quietly endured the
corruptions of those belonged unto them: SOCRATES was troubled with the most
disquiet wife in the world, and said that in suffering her, he learned at ho me
to use patience abroad. Consider DAVID who was disquieted with his own
Children.

The world is full of such examples, And were it not, that we are too far in
love with our selves it is certain that even in the greatest afflictions we
should find sufficient contentment. For no prison is so obscure and straight,
that at the least, does not affoorde place, for a song, to lessen the pain of
the imprisoned.

To conclude, I say, that if you love God, and serve him, Charity alone will
give peace, and tranquillity to your mind, which the world cannot do,
though every one in word does offer it you.

5. Discourse. How we ought to rule our life.
IN mine opinion it is necessary to hold a certain firm and staid course of
life without changing upon every slight occasion, you shall see some who are
so infected with this vice, that they alter their manner of life daily, being
impossible to settle themselves to any thing, like unto those who never have
been at Sea, who when they first set sail, remove out of a great Ship into a
little, and from a little to a great, showing plainly that they mislike both:
being still Sea-sick and purging their stomach. It is even so with those who
bring their passions with them in those matters they undertake, seeking daily a
new form of life and never do effect any thing they begin. Every thing
makes themsick, all things torment them: to have much business, to be idle, to
serve, to command, to be married, to lead a single life, to have children, to
be without issue: to be short, nothing pleases them, nothing satiffieth
them, but that which they have not: And such kind of men live miserably and
discontentedly, like unto those who are restrained of their liberty, and
fettered, living in a daily torment.

There are another sort of men almost like unto these, who can never stand
still nor stay in one place, they never cease going and coming, they
intermedle themselves in every man's matter without any entreaty, they are
wonderfully troubled with business, and yet they have nothing at all to do. When
they come abroad, if you demand of them whither they go, they straight-waies
make answer I know not, I have some business like as others have. They run
about the streets, and market places, and return all weary and disquieted,
having dispatched nothing at all. For there is nothing that so much wearieth
any man, as to labor in vain: It is like little ants who climb unto the top
of a tree, and when they are at the highest have nothing else to do but to
come down again, without reaping any other profit. They go with such a
random that they carry all that they meet before them. The Exchange, Powles,
and the market places, are ordinarily full of such men. These forge and invent
news, are deceauers, talking still of other men's lives, and discoursyng
vainly what charges and offices other men have.

A wise man's actions tend always to a certain end, he never burdeneth
himself, with more business then he can well execute. And to say the troth.
He which takes much upon him, gives fortune much power over him.

6. Discourse. Of the diversity of men's actions.
IN my opinion we ought to have a care to fashion our selves to bear with the
time, and with matters, as they happen, and not to bind our selves in such sort
to one kind of life, that upon urgent occasions we may not leave of the same.
For like as a man being in health ought not to subject him self to keep a
kind of rule in his diet, but rather accustom himself sometimes to eat
more, sometimes to eat less, sometimes to dreak wine, otherwhiles water, to
sit in the Sun, and in the shade, sometimes to travail, and sometimes to take
rest: so ought we in like manner to fashion our selves to every thing, which if
we do, no strange accident that may befall (as there happens many daily) can
trouble or disquiet us, nay, though we should altogether change the form of
our life (as it is already said) we may do it with ease, so that it be not
upon any slight occasion, we being so well trained up, that it is no hard
matter for us, to yield to the present time. And surely the want of power in
us is one, and the same, not to know how to change, and not to be able to live
in a settled estate.

We ought to entermingle, and temper matters in such sort, that one may agree
with an other, somewhiles remaining alone, otherwhiles in company. In company
for our friends sake, alone for the love we bear our selves, It being unmeet
always to show our selves grave, for that would cause us to be hated. Neither
yet always merry, nor overmuch familier, for that would cause us, be
contemned. But we ought with great foresight to apply our selves to time, and
place, as occasion requires, it being necessary for us to recreate our
selves, that we may the better follow our business.

We read of SOCRATES (a most grave manne) that he thought it not amiss, to
sport with little Children. And of Marcus Cato (a severe man) that sometimes he
feasted merrily with his friends, to take pleasure, and refreshe his spirit,
being weary with public affairs. And of Scipio Affricanus we find written,
that sometimes he daunced.

All this we say, to show that the mind must have some refreshing, That manne
is not free, that has not the means sometimes to be at his own leisure. The
ground how fertile so ever it be, if it still remain untilled, be comes
barren in a small time. Continual labor, makes the mind weak and weary,
even as to do nothing, and to live altogether at ease, makes it dull and
heavy; Recreation ought to be unto us, as our sleep, which strengthens us
and gives us breath to return afterward more freely to our labor. But if
we did always sleep, it should be a kind of death, and not sleep.

They who in times past established laws ordained certain festival days in
the year, that men night be (as it were) constrained, to rest from their
business, and to sport themselves after their labors. Yea in former age, many
worthy persons, did appoint certain hours, for their recreation. Asinius
Pollio, a great Orator, never took so great business upon him, that he did
not allot unto himself the two last hours of the day to refresh himself,
during the which, he would not so much as read the letters he received from
his friends: least they might bring him some new thought and care. We read of
others, who labored till noone, and bestowed the rest of the day in matters of
no great moment. The candles that are given out to those that serve in court,
do seem to limit the time of rest and labor. There was a decree in the
Senate of Room, which forbad, that no new matter should be propounded the
two last hours of the day.

Moreover when a man is over wearied with important affairs, it is a great
strengthening and refreshing unto him, to sorace himself in some open and large
place, which seems to put, as it were, new life into him.

To conclude, we ought to delight in change, according to the time, and to
take heed that we nourish not our mind over soft, and daintily; For in as much
as of it self it has great forces, so that it be kept awake, and exercised:
It is not meet that we let it languish, and become weak. For if once we
come to be impatient, and tender, all things are displeasing unto us, meat
goes against our stomach, hunger gnaweth the belly, sleep displeases us,
watching tormenteth us, and like unto a sick person, we still seek after
new fangles.

Such daintiness has been the occasion that many have not been able to
endure, not so much as those things which of necessity they must use in this
life, (as sitting, sleeping, rising, waking, dyning, supping, apparelling
themselves, putting of their garments, and such like things which we must
daily do) but have rather let themselves pyne away, and dye: so grievous a
thing it was unto them to begin the same things again every day. Such
persons grow to such extreamities, that they know not how to govern and
nourishe their mind and keep it still in strength and courage, that it may be
acquainted with all things, taste all things, and digest all things. For in
this matter there is the like and the same reason and proportion between the
mind, and the body. And here hence it comes that you shall see some men so
tender, that the least noise in the world disquieteth them, And the ringing
even of a little bell does anger them. For like as unto a fainte and diseazed
body, so it happens unto a weak, languishing spirit, that whatsoever
touches it, payneth it.

7. Discourse. Of the choice of friends.
FOrasmuch as necessarily the life of man, has need of friends, and the
aid of company, (for it should be too ouerhard a matter, and too severe to have
the mind always bent unto business, and it should be a thing more grievous
to bear, to enjoy no person with whom we might take some recreation) I find
that we are over negligent in the choice of them. In my opinion we ought to
take great heed to make choice of such as are of a mild conversation, who of
themselves deserve to beloved: and accompanied.

There is nothing that brings so much contentme^t and recreation to man's
mind, as faithful friendship. For it is a singular pleasure to find one
framed with such a mild mind to whom thou may so bouldlye disclose thy
secret thoughts: whose council may give you advise, whose mirth may exempt
you from sadness, and whose presence may lessen your pain. Wherefore it
behooves to make election of such friends as are exempt of Covetousness, and
vice. For Vice (like unto fire) takes hold of that which approaches near
unto it. So that we ought to do as they are wont in time of plague, or
pestilelnce, separate those that are sound, from such as are sick, least
diseaze, and infection do grow, by putting them together.

Yet herein I would not have you to be ouer-scrupulous: for seeing that it is
impossible to find such as are absolutely perfect, we ought to hold those
in account as good: who have least imperfections in them.

You ought above all things, to shun such as are of a sad disposition, who
are still complaining, and still dispayring, yea albeit they did love you well
and were faithful unto you. For it is a thing that would greatly trouble us
to have such a friend who is always pensive and ready to sigh upon every
occasion.

Seeing that Friendship and company, is to ease us of our care: It were not fit
to use the familiarity of such a one, who in stead of rejoicing and lessening
your griefs, should put you into vain fears, and apprehensions.

8. Discourse. Of Dissembling.
IT is a great trouble, and disquiet of mind to many men, to seem others in
show, then they are in deed; and a great torment, still to have an eye unto
them selves, for fear least they should be discovered. As often as men look
upon the^, so often do they imagine to be espied, and in the end it happens
that they lay open themselves against their will. The care they have to hide
their natural disposition, is a hell unto the^: and to be discovered, a
confusion.

There is no such pleasure as to live according to a man's own nature. And a
beit there be some danger to be less esteamed, if it happen we be known.
Notwithstanding it were better to be somewhat less set by, and to live
openly, then to take such care to disguise our selves cunningly, albeit that
there ought to be me diocritie used in both. For there is a great difference
between living freely, and negligently.

Which that you may the better understand nature has endued us with two
qualities. The one general (which is that it made us reasonable creatures and
capable of discourse to utter our conceipte wherein we surpass brute beasts)
the other particular to every one (as to be inclined to gravity, to mirth, to
melancholynes, or to any other humor.) Herein we ought to follow our natural
inclination, so that it be not deformed or vicious, as if a man were subject
to laugh over much, it were convenient and necessary to strain himself to
correct this imperfection; But in those qualities which deserve no
reprehension, it were good not to double, or play the counterfeit. For it is a
very difficult matter, to use gravity always, (if nature inclines not
thereto) To change ones countenance, to speak highelie, and look big: which
things if by chance you forget, i^mediately you are laid open.

It were far better, to follow a pleasant conversation, and mild manner of
life: Notwithstanding if it happened that you were placed in some high estate,
which did require greater severity, herein it were not amiss somewhat to
force nature. Yet this ought to be done with great wisdom and moderation: yea
by little and little, so that this alteration might breed offense to no man.

This manner of dissembling cannot be blamed, for it greeueth none but those
who do use it, and change their natural disposition. But there are some, who
being in deed men of a light behavior, and ridiculous, desire yet to be held
for grave, wise, and worthy persons.

Others there are, who without any occasion, do seek to play the Counterfets,
who being borne to all meekenes and humanity, delight to show themselves rude
and crueil.

Others being very Cowards, make a show to be wonderful valiant, not regarding
in deed what they are. These kind of men cannot long hide themselves, that
being always true which is commonly said, No violent thing is durable.

9. Discourse. Of vanity.
IT is a very hard matter, yea I may say impossible for a man that is
vainelye given and over curious of honor, that he should ever taste the comfort
of the tranquillity of the mind, which is so much desired, and the which wise
men do seek to attain unto by all possible means. The reason hereof is,
because he cannot purchase all that which he longs after, neither the place,
nor the honor, nor the credit which he seeks for. He always promises
himself more then he is able to perform, being not able to set himself forth
in apparel, nor in othings according to his mind: because he desires to
pass the common sort in all things. So that he is troubled no less then they
who swim against the stream, hope against the hill, and in stead of aduauncing
himself, steppeth backward.

Contrarily the means to live most at ease, is to make less show, and
countenance the^ our power will suffer, or stretch unto, and leave of al pomp
and vanity, as well in apparel, as in the train of servants, and other things,
and to hold always as a mean, that which is necessary, and not that which is
grounded in the vain opinion of men.

Yea even in our diet, we ought to take heed, that we be not over sumptuous.

It were not amiss likewise to bridle our hopes, and not to enterprise and
undertake those matters that did pass our power to bring to effect.

As concerning riches, it were good that we took order that we rather made
provision of them our selves, then expected them of Fortune.

In all matters, it were best, to hold a mean as well in our actions, as in
our thoughts. For when any storm of fortune comes, it shall have less
means to overthrow us finding us to have stricken sails, then when they are
full hoisted.

Finally you ought to dispose of your self in such sort that albeit you
wanted wealth, yet should it not be any cross unto you.

If you delight in books, see that they serve you to other purpose then to set
forth your study, as some do use them, only for a vain show; like unto
brute beasts, who carry victuals on their back, but eat not thereof
themselves.

Too great a number of servants are but a trouble, who mar one another with
over much ease.

To conclude, if in any thing you make account to live after the common
opinion, you shall never live contented, if according to reason, and nature,
you shall never have want. O how quietly and peaceably does the humble man
live, who takes no great care for his provision. Surely even in those brute
beasts which we bring up, we hate such as are disdainful, and do seem to
be oppugnant, and not to rule themselves according to our mind.

To be short, remember that, Thunder and Lightning do commonly fall upon the
highest places.

10. Discourse. Of Prosperity.
WHen fortune smileth upon us, and that all things (as we say) fall out
according to our wish, then is the time when we ought most of all to look
unto our selves, to bridell our affections, and watch to frame our actions by
the rule of reason. For adversity does induce even our enemies to pity, and
prosperity does move our friends to envy.

If we should in this place recite all those who have ended their lives
miserably by a sudden and violent death, because they could not moderate
themselves in their prosperity, the discourse should be ouerr long: Our
purpose being to use brevity, we will forbear to entreat thereof, in regard
it is a matter, that every manne knows. And therefore when we have a time of
favor, we ought to avoid presumption, which does ordynarilye accompany it,
and diminish, and beat down as much as lies in us, this loftines which does
follow it.

True it is, that there are some, who in respect of the rank, and degree they
houlde, may not abase themselves without falling. It were very necessary, that
such persons did in such sort, ymploye their wits, to temper their gravity,
that men might impute their statelines to their Office, and not to their
nature: excusing themselves to their Frindes, and to such as are of less
calling, that they have not the leisure to entertain them, and make such
acompt of them as they would willinglye: using notwithstanding all the courtesy
their estate will suffer them, not entering into choler, if any one offers
importunatlie, or indiscreetelie to speak unto them, For it is all one vice,
not to be able to govern our selves in prosperity, and not to have the
patience to endure adversity.

We ought then to houlde an equality, in all the course of our life, and if it
be possible, to show allwaies a cheerful Countenance, full of meekenes and
courtesy.

ALEXANDER the great, far surpassed his Father, in worthy deeds of arms,
but his Father surmounted him in mildenes and humanity. The Father was always
virtuous and well-beloved, and the Son many times vicious and hated. So that
their Council is most good, and wholesome, who affirm, That by how much, we
are advanced to a high estate, by so much ought we to show our selves humble
and lowly.

Scipio Affricanus did commonly say, that like as we are wont, to put
unbroken horses, to some skillful Rider to manage, that we might use them at
our need: so is it needful to tame those persons who are grown most proud,
and insolent through their fortune, and to bring them to tread within the ring
or compass of reason, showing unto them the misery and weakness of the
affairs of this world, and the inconstancy of fortune.

This is the cause why we ought in our greatest prosperity, use the counsel
of our friends, and even then to give them more authority, over us, then at
any other time, to the end that they may boldly tell us our own, and stop our
ears against flatterers, who may easily deceive us. For in all seazons men
carry this estimation of themselves, that they are worthy praise, but most of
all in prosperity; in which time it is a hard and difficult matter, to find
any who does not willinglye attribute unto him self the cause of his own
felicity. And there is no seazon wherein men do sooner forget god, then when
they have attained to some high estate; So that misery is Physic, because it
brings men to know themselves.

To be well conceipted of ones self, and to believe liars and flatterers
causes men to fall into gross faults, and gives occasion to make them a
laughing stock to the world. And surely it is a great folly, rather to
credit others, then our selves.

This PHILLIP, (of whom I have made mention,) being puissant and triumphant,
and as a wise man, considering that the affairs of this world do not always
remain in one estate, caused his page every morning to salute him with these
words, Phillip remember thou art a man.

How much more ought a wise christian say unto himself. Remember thou art
dust, and into dust thou shall return.

11. Discourse. A Comparison of our own estate, with the Fortune of other men.
IT may serve greatly to attain the tranquillity of the mind, if we weigh in
our selves without passion, the means we have; and do afterward consider
others who have not so much: not doing as many men are went, who only look at
those that have more substance the^ themselves, wondering at the^, and reputing
them to be happy. Like unto prisoners who deem them fortunate that are at
liberty, those that are at liberty only such as are free, and rich; and
those that are rich, only such as bear office: those that have charge in
inferior offices, Kings: and Kings those that are Emperors, and mightier then
themselves.

And here hence it comes to pass, that being not able to match them who are
of greater power, they are male content with their own estates. Which is no
other thing then ungratefulness toward god, and a torment to themselves.

A wise man, albeit that others get the start of him in substance, is not for
that cause sad, nor discontented, but setting before him a great number, who
live miserably, and afflicted, rejoices in his own fortune.

And therefore when you shall lift up your eyes, and behold some ritchly
mounted upon their great horses; others that have well profited in learning,
and thou repinest thereat. Cast down thy sight, and thou shall find a greater
number, who walk on foot, and living poorly, do account thy estate happy.
For there is no reason, why the fortune of some few should rather move thee to
disquietnes, then the estate of many, persuade thee to contentment.

How many poor men are there who live of their labor, charged with
children, and want, and (which is worst of all) have no hope to escape out of
misery.

How many are there that would be well satisfied with that estate which you
bewail, and complain of?

We are in so miserable a season, that our life does rather depend of the
condition of other men, then of our own: and our neighbors substance
tormenteth us more, then our own wealth comfort us.

If it were possible for men openly to discern the estate of those whom they
deem happy, many times they should find their life more troublesome, then
their own.

Who is he that imagines not the condition of Kings to be most happy: And
yet note the speech of a King, who in Homer complayneth thus. Great Jupiter
has imprisoned me with great cares. O how happy are they who in their little
Cottages live exempt from these dangers.

And if it be so that Thowsands would content themselves with the estate wherein
god has placed thee, what reason have thou to complain, that thou have not
made exchange with some one, whose fortune thou do envy? what nedest thou to
torment thy self, to attain unto the estate of another, seeing it is certain,
that nothing does so much disquiet a man, as desire to aspire from one estate,
to another. Because that such men without any consideration, do follow any
hope that offers it self unto them: which failing to fall out according to
their desire, they blame Fortune, and curse their hap: never finding fault with
them selves, for their own lightness, and want of foresight: and considering
not, that it is a mere folly to impute their want of discretion to another, in
the fault they have made to follow that which is either uncertain, or
impossible. They are like unto those who storm and take on, because they
cannot fly, nor shute an arrowe with a Cart. The cause of this evil, is the
ouer-great love that men do bear them selves: And heerehence it proceadeth,
that they expect to be chiefest accounted of in all things. It is a small
matter for them to be rich, if they do not exceade others in substance.

Do but consider how this vice bears swaye, in all estates. DENISE the
first, thought not himself satisfied in being King of Sycilia, and esteemed
not his dignity thoroughly accomplished, because PHILOXENVS excelled him in
Poetry, and Plato in philosophy. But entered into such rage, that he condemned
PHILOXENVS to go to Plough, and bannished PLATO.

Of this self-love, likewise it comes often times to pass, that men do
undertake to discourse of all matters, to show their learning, and for the
most part, they become a laughing stock to the company. As it happened to
MEGABISES of PERSIA, otherwise a man of great worth and reputation, who on a
time, coming into the shop where Appelles the Painter followed his art, he
began to discourse thereof, and make known to Appelles, that he had skill
therein. Appelles, who was a pleasant and wise man, said unto him, Surely Lord
Megabises, before I hard you speak, I took you to be discreet, and
considerat, but sithence you have entreated of my art, even the boys in the
shop who grind coulors do laugh at you.

Hannthall the Carthagenian Captain, after that the Romans had driven him
out of Italy, and Afrique, flying to the King of Bithinia, was one day desired
to go to the schools to here a great Philosopher, who began to discourse of
the sleightes, and stratagems of war. Others who gave ear unto him wo^dering
at his eloquence, and the skill which he showed in matter of warfare, demanded
of Hanniball what he thought of his discourse, who smilyng said unto them,
that he had known many old fools, but that he never hard any that had
uttered so many follies as the Pholosopher. And no doubt Ha^niball had reason,
seeing he e^tred to entreat of that which is not learned within the walls of a
school, in presece of one of the most worthy, and experienced Captains then
living in the world.

Which plainly shows that every one, ought to content himself with his
calling, without intermedling with another man's profession, which the Poets
have given us to understand, fayning that even the Gods were contented, every
one with his own office: as Mars with war; Minerua with the liberal
Sciences; Mercury with Eloquence, Cupid with love, Neptune with the Sea, Pluto
with hell, Jupiter with Heaven, and so of the rest, every one contenting
himself with his propriety: and whenever any did enterprise to meddle with
an others office, he was either mocked, or chastised.

Heere-hence we ought to gather, that all things do not beseem all persons,
and that every man ought to consider what he is addicted unto, and content
himself therewith.

They who make profession of learning, had need of rest, and leisure.

They who serve Princes and great persons, are subject to great labor.

To be short, these things (and others which we might allege) are not fit
for all men: and every one is bound to profess that he is apt unto by nature.
The Horse is meet to run, the Ox to till the ground.

We should account him a fool, who would complain, that he were not able to
carry a Lion in his bosom, as he may a little dog.

There are some men who desire without leaving their vitiousnes, and idle life,
to become as great Philosophers as those who have attained thereunto with so
great watching and travel.

In times past good wrestlers were contented with their own prize, never
enuiyng the honor other champions did purchase in running. Contrarilye they
who contemning their own wealth, do gape after others men's substance, do
live in continual pain, and torment.

We read that there lived long since in Boetia very wise men, who complained
of their gods that their fig trees did not bear reasins, nor their vines
figs, we ought to imagyne that God has diversely framed men, to diverse
purposes, and that every one ought to quiet and content himself, with that
which God has bestowed upon him, without exceeding his bounds, To run after
that which is none of his. For such kind of People never make account, either
of that which they have had, or of that which they possess, but only of that
which they covet to have: and do always look a far of, never setting eye on
the place where they are.

In times past, there was a certain Image painted in a Temple, which did
represent those kind of men, who always expected the time to come, and did
still neglect the time present. The Picture was of a Rope-maker, who did labor
continually, and suffered his Ass to eat that which was behind him: Even so
do those who are ungrateful toward God, who contemning their own welfare,
do suffer forgetfulness to devour it, and are always longing for that which is
to come.

In worldly matters, all things are not after one sort, for as in Music
there are flat, sharp, and middle tunes, and the wise Musician, by the medlie
of the^, frames most sweet accords: Even so a wise man, of good and of evil
which happens in this life, he makes good harmony, taking not the good
alone, nor the evil likewise by it self, but interminglinge the one with the
other, as things which in this world cannot be separated. This worthy saying
of EVRIPIDES being true, Sorrow, and the life of man, are twins.

The 12. Discourse. Of Adversity.
Adversity is partly grievous, and heavy, unto us by nature; as sickness, the
loss of our children, and our friends, and such other like accidents: but
partly in like manner in the feeling of them we follow the common opinion, and
especially in matter of want, and necessity, in the receiving of injuries, and
reproaches, and when to our thinking men yield us not that honor, we do
deserve. Against which we ought to apply that which the Poet, MENANDER
speaks of. That which has happened unto thee is not grievous, but that thou
make a show that it is so.

And that this is true, thou have thy mind, and thy body, as much at
commandment as before any such thing did befall thee. Against which thou
ought to note, that thou endurest nothing against the law of man, seeing at
his birth these things were allotted and given unto him, ordinarily to
accompany him. And in deed, nature has not made us so weak, to endure
adversity, as we make our selves. Let us think that it is the least part of
man which is subject to Fortune, and that the chiefest portion is in our own
power, which belonging to virtue, cannot be overcome by any thing without our
consent.

Besides, we know that there needs no great force herein, having none to
fight withal but our selves. And seeing that the chiefest part of the
victory, consists in getting the maisterie of our selves.

Hereunto let us add: that God never casts those out of his favor, who
seek to get the victory in a righteous cause.

Fortune may bring thee to poverty, to a low estate, it may afflict thee,
but it can never force thee to become vicious, faint-harted, and cowardly. It
cannot take courage, and virtue from thee, in the which consists more force
to govern thy self then in the art of navigations: In as much as the PILOT
how wise and considerate soever he be, cannot by his art appease the raging
fury of the Sea, nor exempt others from fear: But virtue, and wisdom in a
heart, well framed and disposed, gives assurance to the body: preseruinge it
through temperance from diseases, and by continency, withdrawing it from other
vices.

And if so be, that any thing, should offer it self to our mind, wherein
there were any peril, we should as a dangerous gulf leave it and pass on
farther.

Or if the evil be inevitable, we ought te comfort our selves, immagening the
Port is not far of, and that we leave this body, as a crased ship,
houlding death as a haven of hapines and assurance. And knowing (considering
the nature of the soul) that the departure from this life, is to come to a
better. Which consideration, ought greatly to encourage Christians, not to
fear that which may breed terror to other men.

And if we had force, sufficient to defend our selves from the strokes of
fortune to meet with it, and stop the passage thereof, with a valiant
courage, and being prepared to withstand the assaults thereof, nothing
could tormente us. which we should effect, if we did not use to promise our
selves, any great and certain hope, nor any settled estate in this miserable
life. And that we did consider very narrowlye, if those things which we
repute as badde, are as evil as we judge them to be, or not. And if we did
sagelye weigh, and wiselye foresee before hand, what cross Fortune might fall
out, to assure our selves when it should happen, it would not terrify us
half so much: Nay contrarilye, the nearer it should approach unto us, the
more courageous, stout, and valiant should we be, and we ought not to be
dismaide, but most assured should we be to look her in the face, and to know
that she is not so hardy as they say she is. And albeit whilst we live
here, no man can vaunt and avouch that he has not tasted of her cup: at the
least, this he may say, well since I must needs drink thereof, yet will I not
shrink thereat, I will not complain, nor despair as other men do: I will
not reduce my self into that miserable estate, as some men do, when they are
crossed with adversity, albeit I am assailed with poverty more then they. I
will not deceive my neighbor, nor take that which belongs unto him: I will
not lie for any gain, nor forswear my self.

To be short, nothing shall so far forth seem intolerable, that to avoid
it, I will become vicious.

If by honest means I cannot ease my self, necessity (at the least) shall
cause my burden seem light, besides, the law common to all men which forbidto
accounte that heavy which so many do bear.

Make choice of any kind of affliction you please, you shall find more that
are burdened therewith, then exempt.

This ought to be a great comfort unto us, that where there is no sin there
is no evil: And that a virtuous man lives more quietly in adversity, then
the vicious does in prosperity.

Such pains righteous me^ have endured (who by the grace of god) were
thoroughlie accomplished with virtue, with patience, with humility, which how
grievous soever they were, yet did they not so much torment them, as their
conscience did comfort them.

Like as they who have the ague, do with greater pain feel, and endure their
fit, then others, that are in health, do the heat, and cold of the summer,
and winter: So they who are infected with vice, which burns their conscience,
are in a more grievous manner tormented with those accidents which do befall
them, then honest men are in their greatest adversities: who having their
inward parts sound, cannot be disquieted with the outward, especially when
they do oppose against it a valiant courage, and the force of an unspotted
conscience: a greater might surely then whatsoever we may purchase by any
other means.

Imagine not that Riches, how abundant soever they be, are able to give the
like contentment, as Virtue brings to an honest man, which of it self is
sufficient to make him happy. For whosoever possesses virtue it briugeth with
it self a reward in it self. And like as odoriferous and precious trees,
although they be lopte, or let dry, yet do they notwithstanding keep their
sweet and pleasant smell: and bad and barren trees, with their leaves and
blossoms, do bring no contentment: So virtuous men do receive more comfort
in adversity, then the vicious in the midst of their riches: being still
afflicted, and tormented, with the worm of their conscience. In what seazon,
in what place, in what estate soever you find an honest man, he is always
contented.

It is reported that DIOGENES the Philosopher, seeing a man that made
preparation against a Feastiuall day, said unto him: why labourest thou so
much to make thy self handsome, seeing that every day is a feastiuall unto a
virtuous man? Surely all the days of an honest man his life are, as solemn
days, and fit for pleasure, and recreacion.

For if we consider the matter a right, the world is nothing else but a fair
and holy temple, into the which man is received from the day of his birth:
within which Temple there are two great lights, the Sun and the Moon, with
many other stars. Wherein likewise there are many kind of creatures, by
means whereof, man atteyneth to the knowledge of others which he sees not.

And there is not the least of them but being rightly considered, do bring
contentment unto the mind. what pleasure is it to behold the fountaynes,
which still bring forth fresh waters, to see the trees, the plants, the
roots, the herbs, the diversity of living creatures, stones, hills,
valleys, plains? If men were wise, might they not serve them for their
recreation, and pastime. What greater pleasure is there in this life, then
those sports which god has left us to take in his creatures, if we knew
rightly how to use them? we take pleasure to see bulls and other beasts
fight, and yet there are other creatures in this fair Theater, that might give
us far greater delight, what sweeter music is there then the singing of
birds?

To be short we may take pleasure to behold, and observe, all the creatures
that god has made and created, each one in their kind.

We spend our life in so many practices, and deceiptes, that we have no
leisure to rejoice our selves neither would we let others take their
recreation.

If we knew how to set our mind at liberty, and give it time to rejoice,
and take pleasure in those things, and in the knowledge of god, nothing could
daunt it, or make it sad. But contrarily, being united to his maker, it should
live peaceably to it self, and rest in full joy for ever, knowing this that
albeit sometimes it has endured adversity, yet sometimes better has befallen
it, and by this means it should weigh the one with other, and say it has
more reason to rejoice in regard of good success, then to lament in respect
of evil hap.

As we are wont to withdraw our eyes from the sight of things which offend
us, and behold green colors (and such other pleasing to the sight) so ought
we in like manner turn aside the eyes of our understanding, and our thoughts
from ruefull things, and apply them to those which are delightful and
pleasant. Not playing the part of malicious men, who behold other men's
faults with kites eyes, and their own with Owls eyes.

We are oftentimes like Horseleeches, who drink the badde blood and leave the
good.

There was on a time a ritche man and miserable, who had in his house great
store of wine, and he was so covetous and blind, that he soulde the best,
and drunk the worste, a slave of his seeing the nigardlinesse of his Master,
fled from him, and being afterward demanded why he ran away, because
(said he) I cannot tarry with a man who having the good in his power, does
choose the bad.

The Philosopher ARISTIPPVS spoke better to the purpose: who of three Farms or
possessions that he had, having lost one, said unto his friends, that it
were simplicity to grieve for the loss of one of his Farms, and not to
rejoice for the other two which were left him.

We do as little children are wont, from whom if you take away one of their
puppittes, they cast away the rest in a rage. For if of many good things which
we have, some one be taken from us, or if by chance we loose it, we fall
straight into bitter lamentations, forgetting all other things that remain
safe in our possession.

But alas, will some one say, what is it that we have? To whom I will make
this answer, nay what is it that we enjoy not? Some man has great credit,
this other much wealth, some one an obedient wife, an other faithful friends.

ANTIPATER of Tharsis accounted this amongst other his good Fortunes, that he
had made a prosperous navigations from Sicilia to Athens: and we covet all,
having not the wit to thank God for that we possess, not making any
reckoning of the greatest riches because they seem to be common (to wit) to
live, to enjoy our health, to have our sight, to live in peace, to eat, to
drink, to behold the earth bring forth her increase, the Sea to be nauigable,
that we have power to speak, to be silent, to sit, to stand, to sleep, to
wake, If men did imagine what a coffeehouse it is to be deprived of such
benefits, we should live far more contented then we do.

What would not a sick man give for the recovery of his health? A blind man
to enjoy his sight, those who are basely accounted of, for credit and renown?

So wretched are we, that we never know what account to make of the
benefitts we enjoy, until we be deprived of them.

For a conclusion, let us learn this lesson, not to set our love upon the
things in this world, so much, that the fear of the loss of them do disquiet
us, or the loss it self cast us into despair.

The 13. Discourse. Of Sorrow.
AS adversity is either small or great, so does it cause us to grieve, wherein
likewise there is some Fault. For we see now that men have gotten an use to
bewail many things for no other cause, but that the custom is such.

Some man mourns by reason of some accidents happened to his neighbor, and
changes his countenance to show that he is very sorrowful therefore,
whereas indeed there is no such matter. This kindness is unprofitable, seeing
that in your own misery, you ought to grieve no more then reason requires,
and not as much as custom wills.

How many are there who shed tears when men behoulde them, and think it
should be out of fashion, if they did not weep, when others do.

Into how many encumbrances does it cause men to run into, to lean upon
Opinion?

It should be far better, in such matters, to invent some new way, and to
apprehende such accidents, as men of wisdom, and understanding.

What do their lamentacions avail either those that are dead, or such as are
alive, since that no other benefit arises or proceadeth thereof, then
wretchedlie, and without any profit, to bring a man into a consumption?
Albeit that for certain, sometimes there happens such crosses, and
mischaunces, that it is impossible for any man to forbear from sorrow, and yet
we ought herein to lament with reason. And seeing that time ought in the end,
to bring a remedy therefore, it were mere simplicytie, not with wisdom to
prevent it, and to do that which by tracte of time we should be constrained
unto, whether we will or not.

How many are there, who after the death of their children, or of their wives,
have eaten and been merry and taken their recreation, deeming the time lost
which they had vainly employed in sorrow and in mourning? For albeit it seems
that such persons are worthy to be called to remembrance, or (as I may better
say) that others folly may be revived by them, yet notwithstanding, you ought
to apply that remedy thereunto, which will come of it self, though you
should resist it.

14. Discourse. Of the affliction of good men.
IT is no small cause to such as are of a lively spirit, and to such as are
touched with any humanity, to be grieved when they see honest men receive
wrong: And surely it seems to be even a very hart-bursting, and more then our
nature will bear, to see wise men, that live quietly, to be afflicted,
troaden under foot, and ouerborne: and to consider how ill the world does
handell them.

This may seem somewhat to touch us: because in our opinion it restrains our
hope, seeing that the portion of honest men, is naught else commonly but
affliction.

Wherefore if any such matter does trouble you (as it does commonly) imagine
this, that if they are honest men, and patient, they are so much the more
happy: For so much as in steed of the pain, which they endure in this life
which is so short, they shall be rewarded eternally.

For amongst other infinite contentments, that they do enjoy, which remain in
the house of god, one especial comfort is that they are quit, and discharged
of the temptations, and torments of this world.

Besides this, set before you, the most holy persons, of the which some have
been beheaded, others hanged, others burned, some fleyed, others persecuted
with hunger, subject to misery and affliction, which the world surely was not
worthy of, and therefore hated them, as not belonging unto it. But God loved
them, and by his divine providence which cannot be deceived, intended that they
should pass by such tribulations, yea and that the pains which they suffer,
might further prick them forwards to forsake this miserable world. So that in
the end, they remove out of this prison, they escape this dungeon, and with a
short apprehension of death they enter into a way which leads into a better
life.

The 15. Discourse. Of other men's faults.
AFter you have settled your self, and appeased your own passions, the offenses
of other men, and such faults as are committed in public will torment your
mind, considering the disorder that is amongst us, which is such, that nothing
remains in the place, where it ought, neither does any man do his duty,
which he is borne to execute.

He which ought to be a good Judge, is a simple Citizen: and he which ought to
be a good Citizen, is a simple Judge, and we see that he which ought to obey,
does command.

It is a strange thing, to see how all things are corrupted, and sold, and
how all things are tossed topsy turuey: how the poor is chastised for a small
fault, how the law spares rich and mighty men, and now all the practice of
mankind, is nothing but to get money: and how few examples and occasions of
living well, those which bear charg and hold the chiefest places do show. A
virtuous man is held as a monster, hated, and abhorred.

What should a man say, to behold that which the people affects, that
which it desires, that which it rejects, and that which it contemns: what
an alteration is this in this world, what wretchedness, that we make no
account of that which we ought to hear, and disdain that we should not so
much as listen unto.

The great grief that diverse and sundry persons, have taken at such matters
has caused them for to sequester themselves from the world, and to live in
deserts, and solitary places: not being in any sort, able to behold that which
brings such sorrow unto them: but desiring rather to live amongst the rocks
with wild beasts, then amongst men fraught with such vices.

Notwithstanding both in this, and in all other things, which cannot be
amended, we ought to command our selves, in such sort, that they cause us not
to abhor the company of men: but rather give us occasion to look more
narrowly to our selves, to the end we be not of the number of those, who forget
the duty of a wise man: and that the faults thou do reprehend in other
men, cause not others likewise to note thee for them.

It were better to hold with Democritus, then with Heraclitus. Heraclitus
bewailed the faults of men, at the which DEMOCRITVS laughed. To the one it
seemed mere myserie, to the other mere folly. So likewise yt is better
forvs, when we cannot amend that which is amiss, by dissemblinge to appease
it. And surely yt is far much more humanytye to laugh at the common life of
men, then to weep thereat.

Yet shall you do best of all concerning the vices of other men, and the
faults which are publicly committed or done, if you keep a mediocritye, if
you neither make a jest of the^: nor grieve overmuch at them: it being a
miserable thing, so to afflict our selves for other men's faults, that we
do pine away with sorrow, and an inhumane pastime, to make a laughing stock,
or a scorn, of them.

Now there are some, that are not vexed nor troubled with these matters, yet
can they not bear with the imperfection of their friends, nay even their
enemies faults do grieve them. Honor, wrongs, tollerating of menns humors,
tormenteth them: The importunity of their friends, the bad disposition of
their servants, and most familliar acquaintance, afflicts them: as we most
commonly see it fall out daily. How much far better is it, to have patience in
those matters, since that a man reapeth such small profit, in seeking to amend
them. We ought to make this account, that such men as take pleasure to do
wrong, are like unto dogs, who are borne to bark. We ought to attribute
that to their ill nature, wherewith all they are daily sufficientlye
tormented, with continual care, which gnaweth their bad conscience.

But if you take occasion to stumble at all the evil, which may happily be in
those that are about you, you are utterly lost. For if either the vices of
other men, or of those that belong unto you, do once come to take houldt of
you, and to cast you down: you will wonder how all their importunities, and
griefs, will like an ouer-flowing water, with a full course run into your
bosom, as a mighty and deep Sea.

And without doubt, we should show our selves foolishly tender, always to
afflict our selves, if those with whom we live, do not look unto us so
carefully as we desire.

The excessive love, that we do bear unto our selves, does oftentimes
deceive us, and the dayntines of our own estate, is the cause that we cannot
bear with the negligence of our servants: Confidering not that many times
they cannot, nor know not how to do better.

We do expect that they should have all perfections in them; and we our
selves, commit a thousand faults: yea and many times we storm against our
servants, when our own bad conditions, or the buisines we are about does make
us froward, and do lay the fault on them who cannot remedy it.

Another matter often-tymes does disquiet us, and that is when we affecte any
thing over much, and so fall to quarrel with our friends about it. For there
was never perfect friendship between whom there is continually a certain
emulation, to obtain the upper hand.

If you do make trial, and by continual exercise, accustom to apply your
self to time, and to persons, you shall easily govern those with whom you
live, and purge those humors which you blame in them. And if some times it
seems impossible for you to bear with the^, think it proceeds through
your own fault, and weakness: Since the number of those are infinite, who
have conuersed, and borne with men of like disposition.

For as sick men are wont to say, that they are out of taste, and that all
meats are bitter, imagining the fault to be in the meat, or in the Cook: and
vet when they see those that are in health, eat thereof, and digest it well,
they know then that the imperfections proceeds from themselves: So in like
manner, as often as you call to mind, that there are many others, who
willingly do suffer those angry humors, you will then confess, that the fault
comes from your self.

If the froward conditions of a wife do displease you, seek if it be possible
to appease her by fair means, and by reason* which if you cannot, yet let
wisdom teach you to bear them patiently, and to dissemble that you cannot
amend: otherwise, of your house you will make a prison, of your ease, a
torment, and of your honor, a common song.

Expect not wisdom in your children, which is propper to old age, since that
they are borne young: which age brings many things with it, which if you will
on the sudden seek to make perfect, you do but bring disquietnes to your
self. And if in young trees you are contented that they only bring forth
leaves, why then do you look for fruit of your children before it be time: He
which expects that which cannot be, labors for that which he shall never
have. The best is to nourish and instruct them dilligently without overmuch
beating, or chiding, if they make a fault, which by you would be taught with
love, how they should amend.

16. Discourse. Of Injuries, Wrongs, and Disgraces.
There are some men, who can bear patientlye all manner of afflictions, but
they cannot endure an Injury, or disgrace: the which notwithstanding comes to
pass, rather because they are so persuaded of the matter, then that it is so
indeed.

Concerning this point, it will help you much, if you can take this resolucion
with your self, to exempt your self from the common opinion, and consider
those things without passion, which do disgrace a man. For by that means,
you shall see, if there be any reason to take the matter so hotlye, as you do.

There is a kind of disgrace, which we do call wrong, and that is when we
are greatly crossed in our buysines, against equity, there is likewise an
other sort, which is called a Disgrace, and that is when in our own person, we
are otherwise handled then is beseeming, whether it be by word, or deed.

Touching both the which, you are to understand, that an honest manne is not
subject to receive a wrong (I mean not hereby, that he shall have noe injury
at all offered him: For there is nothing so holy, but there are some boulde
sacriligious hands, that will enterprise to touch) Albeit there are many, whose
tounges and hands, are not otherwise employed, but to violate the honor of
God, and to pollute and rob his most holy and blessed Temples, though that
honest men are not any thing at all the less assured: and albeit that they
aim at them, yet can they not hitte them. For a thing inviolable, is not
simply, that which one cannot touch: but that which being hit, cannot be
prejudiced, nor hurt: Such a one is the virtuous man, who of himself does
never give occasion that any should wrong him. Howbeit if either in jest, or
maliciously he be set upon, he is as a brazen wall, which the arrows of the
wicked, cannot pearce. Besides, virtue is far greater in him, who having
fought, remains Conqueror, then in him, who never gave any stroke at all.
And therefore an honest manne, like unto good mettle, shows himself the more
when he is proved: Injuries do try him, but they do not enter. And yfby
chance in passing by, any manne does mock or scorn him, it does not move
him, neither does he make any reckoning thereof, assuring himself, it could
not light, or happen so far.

Besides, all men will hold the assaylant for a badde person, and him as an
honest man, deserving no such outrage. The force of his virtue, will appear
the more by this abuse, and his mildenes, will shine so much the more, by how
much the injury is undeserved.

To those who are of a weak courage, it is harder for them to bear a
disgrace. Do you desire to understand how injuries, are measured by opinion.
There is such vanity in worldly matters, that we are less grieved to receive
a great wound, then a small blow.

Others are more displeased with a word, then with death it self. We are
grown unto such childishnes, and blindness, that opinion affriteth us more then
the pain it self? as it falls out with little children, who are affeard of
a masque.

But a wise, and constant man, who judges of all things according to reason:
like as he esteameth all things as borrowed; So does the loss of the^ touch
him, as things not belonging unto him. And as he would have lived contented
though he had never possessed them (knowing that all things are in the
disposition of the giver, and not wealth only, but even life it self, and
honor) He takes the loss which of necessity he must make of some part of
them, as goods thrown ouer-boord, to save the rest.

Such a one has cousined you of so many crowns: It is a wrong that he has
done you: but yet, but of part of your substance, not of all. And he that has
the heart to give the whole if need require; shall he torment himself for the
loss of some portion.

If the manner of the taking of them move you to anger, think this, that as
you endure fortune and her thwartenings, so it is reason that you should
forbear insolent and saucy persons, who are but (as it were) the hands of
fortune.

Believe this, that our impatience does us more harm, then they of whom we
complain.

O such a one did not rise to give me place: he had not that regard of me in
talking with me, as I thought he would, he gave me not the wall: he took
place before me.

What speech is this, but complaints, growing from a soft, and tender spirit?

Many things do vex us, which would not a whit trouble us, if we did
interperet them aright, through our folly, and distruste of our selves we make
that a disgrace unto us which indeed is none, esteaming our selves worthy to
be used so.

And it is want of courage, although you feel it, that you cannot make light
account thereof, and tread it under your feet.

But if we would observe how the visions, and imaginations, of the dangers
which happen in our sleep, do pass away: which sometimes do move laughter,
when we remember them: we might do the like with injuries, as awaking out of
a sleep, wherein we were, whilst they were offered us.

An honest man will never wrong you, neither in your substance nor in your
person: and as touching the wicked, what remedy have you to grieve at them,
seeing that they have no more houlde of themselves, then mad men? And like as
you do bear with them always, and rather pittye them, then fall into anger
with them, for any thing they can say or doe^ unto you, so ought we to endure
and bear with a fool and a hairebraynd fellow that is half out of his
wits.

Whatsoever a iester, or a pleasant companion says unto you, you do take it
in good part, and do think you should abuse your self too much, if you
should quarrel or contend with him: Contrarily, if any merrye jest, come
from them, you straightwaies take delight therein, as a thing to make sport
at; Consider then how disproportionable it is, that a word spoken by one,
brings pleasure, and by an other debate, in as much as a colorick manne, has
noe more Judgment then a Iester.

What should I say of those, who are moved, even with little chilldren, and
silly women? who notwithstanding do rather offend thorough weakness, then of
any set purpose.

To conclude, your mind will never be in quiet, if you do take all things in
evil part.

But some will say; this injury may be borne withal, but that is not to be
suffered.

These men do pen up virtue too close, and do limit the power thereof,
with ouer-narow bounds, as if they should say, virtue may conquer this, but
not that. Surely if fortune be not wholly discomforted, and defeated, it
remains Conqueror.

Yea but if I have given the occasion of this disgrace offered me, how can I
bear it patiently without shame? If the wrong done you, do spring of your
own fault, it is no injury offered you, but a correction, which you ought to
receive as a wise man and take it for a chastisement, for your offense.

If any man jest at any imperfections in your person, as to have a great nose,
squint eyes, or crooked legs, you ought not to take that as an iniurye: For
it were mere folly to take thought for that which comes not from your
fault. Fidus Cornelius, did even weep for anger, before the Senate, because
that Conduba Strutio said unto him, that he was like unto a pield Camel.

What great simplicity is this, if any man do counterfeit us, we straight
ways take snuff thereat. Is it not a miserable blindness to grieve that
another walks as we do? seeing that we go, as he does.

The means to avoid this, were rather, if nature had deformed your body by
any imperfection, to speak first thereof your self, as one well acquaynted
therewith, and so by that means you should take occasion from others to jest
thereat.

VATINIVS did himself scoff at his deformed feet and neck, and by that
means none of his enemies did jest at him.

It is no small matter in houlding your peace, or leaving him alone, to take
away the delight from them, who thinks to do you injury.

Never answer an insolent or rash fellow. In keeping silence, you leave his
vice, his folly, and his rashness in his mouth, and in answering him, you
compare your discretion with him. For there is nothing that does so much equal
men together, as the participaco^ of one and the same vice: and there is no
such punishment for a fool as to let his words pass without making any
reckoning of them, which thorough your silence remain condemned as
impertinent, and he loses the pleasure, thinking to anger you.

Likewise you ought to be advised in your jesting. For you see that men eschew
the company of those, who make profession to scoff at others and there can be
no certain friendship with him who spares no man.

Caius Ceaser the Emperor, was by nature a great scoffer, he had in his army a
Tribune named Cheria, who spoke somewhat small, much like unto a woman by reason
whereof there was no great account made of him. When he demanded the
watchword, he lightly gave him some foul word to mock him, with which
disgrace he was so highly offended, that afterward amongst those who murdered
him he stroke of half his head at a blow, so that he whom he deemed less
the^ a man, showed most ma^hood to take him from amongst men. To use such
jesting shows great want of discretion, and not to be able to endure them,
want of courage.

SOCRATES hearing men scoff at him before his face, smiled thereat, not
showing any kind of anger. It is reported of him, and of Lelius, that they had
such quietness of mind, that they were never seen to change countenance.

Moreover you ought allwaies to avoid iarres, and brawlings, for it
distempereth a man very much, and changes his conditions.

Be temperate in your speech, and let your words be such, that they do carye
weight and authority with them, and accustom your self to pass many things
in scilence.

Be not deceived with the common sort, who call them free, that can endure
nothing.

True liberty in a man, is to live as he ought, which he cannot do, who has
his mind framed to set light by these vanities, and daintines, wherewith some
are moved and shaken.

Do you rather get the upper hand, in contemning them. For it is not a sign,
that a man is in health, when as he cries out, so often as he is touched.

The 17. Discourse. Of Poverty.
Whosoever does make that account of life and death, which he ought, need not
fear that poverty should afflicte him, nor take away his rest: For it were
far unfit for him that contemns death, to let him self be overcome by
poverty, which the common sort feels above other miseries: and whereof it
most complains and in most bitter manner, being not able to attain to that
sufficiency of wealth, to entertain them gaiely, nor to content themselves
with necessary means, for the maintenance of their life, esteeming abundance
of riches, the sovereign good of man, and poverty the chiefest misery of man.
Howbeit notwithstanding is it not better to enjoy any thing at all, then to
loose it when we have gotten it. Now it is impossible in this life, but we
should loose, since that one cannot abound in wealth, but many others must live
in want: and no man be an inheritour, without the death of another.

As poverty is not subject to receive great losses, so is it not accompanied
with such great cares.

If any think that they that are rich, have a stouter courage to bear their
loss then others, they deceive themselves. For the grief of a wound is as
painful to a great body, as to a little. Nay we commonly see, that men of
greatest stature are more tender then others.

The Philosopher BION was wont to say, that you put him to as much pain that
has store of hair, if you pluck one from him, as you do another that has
almost none on his head: the only difference is this, that he that is boulde
has less cause to complain.

This is the reason that for the most part you see poor men Ioconde, and
merry, because they have not such cares, and do less fear a storm then
rich men.

Poverty is a kingdom, and a great Lordshippe, which is in suertie against
all the world, stands in fear of nothing; And of it self is able to defend
it self against all her enemies.

Tell me I pray thee, thou that seek so much after this worldly substance,
if since the possession thereof, thou have enjoyed more quiet rest, or gotten
greater wisdom, or lived more at hearts ease.

The very heathens have taught us, how much poverty is to be esteemed, when
they imagined the Gods were naked atributing all things unto them, they thought
they stood in need of.

As for me I will never count him poor, who is out of the power of fortune.

This is only suffitient to teach us what pouerite is, that no man speaks of
it, that does not commend it, and do affirm that the wisest men have borne it
with greatest contentment.

It is a great weakness, and tenderness in us, not to be able to suffer that,
which others have endured, and a great fear we have to leave this world. For
if we desire to be accounted men, we would love that in our selves, which
we do allow in others. And therefore, albeit that our imbecillitie, and
faintnes, cannot wholly bear it, or at the least, we ought to limit our
affections, and guard our selves in such sort, that fortune may have less
advantage to offend us. For a little body well covered under a buckler, is
more assured, then one of great stature, who lies discovered, and subject to
many blows.

If it were not that my purpose is to spare time, and paper, I could enlarge my
discourse, by the recital of many examples as well of Pagans, as of Christians,
who have sought felicity in a poor kind of life. But the consideration of
one for all shall suffice, and that is, that Jesus Christ being Lord over all
the world, was poor, his disciples, who possessed all, were poor: the
Saints who might have enjoyed great wealth were poor.

If you were not borne to dye, I would counsel you to love riches: but I see,
That they to whom all things do fall out most prosperously, do sooner bring
their life to an end, then their covetousness.

Wherefore do you labor so much, for a thing that you must leave; And why do
not you rather quietly content your self with that which is necessary and
sufficient, knowing that the best sort of riches, is, neither to be too poor,
nor too far from poverty.

18. Discourse. Of death.
IT seems that all crosses may be borne, either by use, or by sound
discourse: but death and the apprenension thereof, is that which is most
terrible.

The remedy and true salve thereof, is that you this account, that nothing in
this world is your own; neither wealth, nor lands, no nor your life: which you
hold as borrowed and are as tennant at will: being that of force you must
leave it, whenever the Landeslord shall demand it of you, Notwithstanding
you ought not to neglect it, as a thing you have no charge of, but rather with
so much the more care have regard unto it (because you were) put in trust
therewith, and restore it without murmuring and with a cheerful countenance,
yiedling thanks to god for the time that he has lent it you, saying.

O Lord; I render my soul unto thee, with a free heart, yea and with a better
will then I received it. For when you gave me life you bestowed it one a silly
creature, who was altogether ignorant of the good he received: and now you
take it from one, who knows what he puts into your hands, which he
yeildeth up with a free will.

And surely every one ought to think that it is no hard matter to return
from the place from whence we come. And he has not learned to live well, who
knows not how to die.

We ought to bear the like affection to our selves as we do to those that
fight a set combatt. For we hate him that plays the cowarde, and do favor
him who with a stout courage hadd rather dye, then be conquered. Oftentimes
the fear of death, is cause of his end that flies away.

Moreover you know, that you received your life upon this co^ditio^, that ye
must die.

Be not then so unjust to seek to enjoy that for ever, which was given you
but for a certain time, Clayming title to that, which only you were put in
trust withal.

Besides, we say that the fear and apprehension of death, is a wonderful
thing and the extremity of all terror; Assure you, this fault does not
proceed of death, but of our imbecillitie, who are taken and stayed in the
pleasures, and desire of this life, and do love this miserable body of ours
above measure.

And if you do thoroughlie consider the matter, it is not death that is
terrible unto us, but the conceit we have thereof. For every one fears it,
according to the opinion he has thereof, and according to his conscience. Now
if this only be the cause that you fear it, charge your self with the
fault, and not death, like unto bad husbands, who are loath to come to a
reckoning for the distrust of their own doings.

To say that you fear it, imagyning that it is the last end of man; you have
no reason. For our soul remains always, which lives and cannot dye, The
Grecians called death, End, giving us to understand thereby, that it is the
last remainder of a miserable life.

The holy Scripture terms it steep, to assure us of our certain
resurrection that we may not lament as the Gentiles, who have noe hope.

Consider how many holy persons, have desiered it, as a remedy against
misery. SOLOMON, JOB, the holy scriptures, the histories of Saints, are full
of the praises and desire of death, what vanity is it, for to long after this
wretched life, this gaile, this prison, seeing that the longer we live, the
more we sin, and purchase to our selves new pain. That we may not fear
death, as the world does, we ought to do two things: live well (because of a
good and christian life, makes even the remembrance of death comfortable) And
to believe that, that which it pleased God to give us as a remedy, and ease of
our labor, is not so badd, nor so much to be feared as we imagyn: and we
ought to remember, that holy men have abhorred life, and loved Death.

THus have I effected what you entreated, with so much contentment to my
self: that I know not whether of the two, wear sharper spurs, to set me
forward in this Course: Reason, moving the duty of friendship, and desire,
the pleasure I took therein. As I was not long in bringing them forth, so do
I with some haste send them to you, and so leave them that I would not
hereafter have them acknowledge me for their father: But wish that you might
nurse them, apparel them, and bring them up, for from me they have scarce
taken their essence and first being, and to say the troth, I want milk, to
nourish them. And surely bearing that show, and Councenance they do, and
those signs of a good mind: though they be but little, in my opinion they
cannot be better then with you, who may in short time with your good
endeavors, and ercelent spirit, bring them up to more greatenes and perfection,
and add to their greater Nobillitie: Dignity, Fortune and Favor.

FINIS.

