NEVVES FROM SPAIN

catastrophic flood in Span

LONDON: Printed for WILLIAM BLACKVVALL, and are to be sold his shop over
against Guild Hall gate. 1618.

A TRVE RELATION OF THE LAMENTABLE Accidents, caused by the Inundation and
rising of Ebro, Lobregat, Cinca and Segre, Rivers of SPAIN.

Together with A Narration of a fearful Storm, which happened the third of
November, in the year 1617. in the Haven and Port of BARCELONA.

Written originally in Spanish by V. Rejaule the Kings Advocate.

Printed by Authority at Valentia, and now Translated into English.

LONDON: Printed for WILLIAM BLACKVVALL. 1618.

NEWS FROM SPAIN.
IF it be true (as it is infallible) that the Lord our God, before he
chastises us rigorously, only for his infinite mercies sake, uses to
admonish us, and give us many warnings, that so we might cease to offend and
provoke him: it is then a most certain sign, that when the warnings (which
God gives) are great and fearful, that then our sins are very great and
heinous, and consequently the chastisement which we deserve for them, must
needs be great and terrible. Among many other warnings in this latter age, one
of the greatest has been the strange inundations which of late have happened
in the Rivers of Ebro, Lobregat, Segre, Cinca, and other Streams issuing and
branching from them; the discourse whereof, though it be short, and would
affect more being seen then related, yet the rising and swelling of these
waters, being so strange and notable, the particulers so certain, and the
losses proceeding thence so lamentable, I have thought it not amiss to set
them down in writing.

In Tortosa the 22. October 1617. the heavens being ouer-cast with thick and
dark clouds, it began to rain, and so continued for the space of thirteen
days together, whereby on the first of November, the water rose so extremely,
that all men began greatly to fear, insomuch that every one thought that the
divine Majesty would now punish the world with a second Deluge: for this day
the waters rose so extremely, that the highways were covered; the lower
grounds remained, I know not how many days, as so many great rivers, or little
seas, without all means of passing them. Which fell out in such manner, that
in the hills and highways were afterward found the dead bodies of many men
which were drowned in these waters: catastrophic flood in Span and in the
ditches and lower grounds were found dead an infinite number of Cattle, as
well Sheep, as Horses, Mules, Asses, Oxen and Kine; Dogs, Partridges,
Conies, even unto Wolves and Foxes, and many other wild beasts.

But that which affrighted most, and caused the greatest terror to all men,
was, when the River of Ebro began to rise, in such sort, that the Inhabitants
of Tortosa began to fear that it would carry away their City. For now at
the beginning of its rising, (which was about the shutting in of the day) that
which the River had already set afloat, as chests, doors, beds, tables,
stools, and infinite other things, did evidently show the lamentable spoil it
had made upon the banks where the River had passed.

Which they of Tortosa seeing, after many Processions, Prayers, Letanies,
Rather should you have fixed the eye of your Faith and Hope upon Christ sitting
at the right hand of the Father.
at last they opened the most holy Sacrament in their Churches, crying all for
mercy to the divine Majesty, desiring that he would be pleased to pardon
them, and to deliver them from so evident and certain a danger. The rising of
this River continued two whole days, carrying away the Bridge of Tortosa, and
gushing into the City, cast down and carried away more then an hundred
houses. It is impossible to relate the particular damages and spoil of houses,
gardens, and other grounds which stood on the banks, besides the death of
Cattle innumerable.

Moreover, there was one Countryman which had his house and three hundred
Olive trees, together with many other trees of sundry other kinds carried away
with this violent and merciless stream: neither was there one tree left
standing on the Rivers side.

About some three leagues from the City of Tortosa was a small village called
Benifallet, whereafter that the flood had drowned many of the Country people,
which to save their goods did hazard their lives, at last it carried away the
whole Town, so that of two hundred houses there were left but only sixteen.

In another little village called Gerta, about two leagues from Tortosa, of two
hundred and fifty houses there remained but only seven.

At Ginestar also, which stands about five leagues from Tortosa, have happened
many notable and lamentable losses, both in the houses and in the fields. In
brief, so many and so great have been the overthrows all about the River,
that in all the places near adjoining unto it, not a stone has been left
upon a stone, but the poor Inhabitants and dwellers thereabout, are utterly
undone, being deprived of all their substance.

Praised be the divine Majesty for ever, and might he be pleased to appease
his anger, that so this punishment may serve for a warning to all sinners, and
so procure unto us the amendment of our lives.

catastrophic flood in Span

In the City of Barcelona the third day of the Month of November, in the sea,
and port of the City, happened such a storm and tempest, that the like has
not been seen in the memory of man. Scarce remained there a Vessel on the
water, which was not at least leaky and sorely beaten: the shrikes and cries of
the afflicted Mariners, made the most doleful noise in the world, and might
have softened and moved to compassion the most hardened flinty heart. For so
high and furious was the wind from the Leuante, that never was there seen so
terrible and dreadful a storm; the prayers and supplications of the
distressed Mariners and other deuont people (for now all Barcelona was come
together) caused a great terror to all. Some cried out and called for mercy
upon our Lord God Christ Jesus, and inuocated Why is not Christ sufficient, as
for the rest you rob him of his honor so that it may justly be demanded of
you, Who required these things at your hands?
his most pitiful Mother the holy Virgin of Montserrat, all prayed and called
upon Saint Telmo, and the glorious Saint Eulalia, and Saint Matrona, the
Patronesses of Barcelona. All the Clergy of the said City came out in
Procession, bringing forth the most holy Sacrament with them, which they held
two and twenty hours upon the Bulwark. All the Conuents also in the Town
came forth with very devout Processions, Lo here the refuge of superstitious
and Idolatrous people.
and carried many Relics of Saints, which caused a wonderful great devotion
in all the people. They brought also the most holy As you supersticiously do
believe.
true Cross to the Sea side, which they dipped three times in the water, until
it pleased the divine Majesty to be appeased, which was about midnight, this
fearful storm having now endured six and twenty hours, and that in such
extremity, that it cast a great fe^re upon all the people of Barcelona: for it
had now continually rained for the space of more then thirty days together
without intermission, whereupon there succeeded such a flood from the River
Lobregat, and that with such excess and fury, that it carried away the
greatest part of the houses and mansions, with two and twenty turrets or small
houses which stood on the Rivers side, and four thousand head of cattle were
drowned in this flood, which were found in the valleys and lower grounds, but
the greatest loss which this flood caused was in Sheep.

In Lerida also the fresh or land-floud which came from the River Segre, was as
violent as the rest, not to speak of the infinite harm which it wrought upon
the lands and houses of such as lived near the banks of this River, that
which is most Think upon it seriously, and you shall find that all this was
not without cause
remarkable was, how in the City of Lerida these waters swept quite away a
whole Convent of Trinitarian Friars, not leaving any the least sign of it
behind: they carried away also the greatest part of another Convent of
Augustine Friars, and almost all the houses of the Suburbs. To be short, so
many have been the harms also which these floods and extraordinary risings of
the water have done in the kingdom of Catalumna, that the understanding of man
cannot imagine them. Moreover, besides those many houses which these Rivers
have carried away, a great number more of houses have been overthrown and
cast to the ground by the violence and extremity of those thirty days
continual tempests, and incessant great rain.

The River of Cinca also has done mighty harm in the fields and towns
thereabout by its extraordinary swelling and flowing over the banks.

God grant that these chastisements and warnings which he gives us, may cause
us to cast from us all vices, that from henceforward we may serve him with
more truth and sincerity, that so his holy name may be praised for ever. Amen.

FINIS.
catastrophic flood in Span


