DAVID'S. SOLILOQVIE CONTAINING MANY COMFORTS FOR AFFLICTED MINDS. As they were
delivered in Sundry Sermons at St. MARY'S in Dover By JOHN READING

LONDON Printed for Robert Allot at the sign of the gray hound in Paul's church
yard. 1627.

David's Soliloquie. CONTAINING many comforts for afflicted minds. As they were
delivered in sundry Sermons at Saint Mary's in Dover. By Io: READING.

2 Cor. 1. 3. 4 Blessed be God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the
Father of mercies, and the God of all comfort:

Who comfort us in all our tribulation, that we may be able to comfort them
which are in any trouble, by the comfort, wherewith we our selves are comforted
of God.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Allot, and are to be sold at his Shop in Saint
Paul's Churchyeard at the Sign of the Greyhound. 1627.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, and most virtuous Lady, the Lady Sara Hastings.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
Lam. 3. 1. Deuteronomy. 32. 39 Deuteronomy. 28. 61. 65. Deuteronomy. 29. 24. 25. Psai. 40. 12 Lam.
3. 42.
THE rods of the almighty, wherewith he smites to heal, are so many and
diverse, and consequently the smarts and griefs which affect the mind so
variable, both by reason of our sins multiplicity causing, and our
apprehensions entertaining them, that I can neither reasonably hope this
spiritual electuarie, which I intend for the help of afflicted minds, can
serve for every malady, nor justly despair of it meeting with some Readers,
who shall by the assistance of the same Spirit which gave it being, find
comfort in it: and that in diverse kinds; the indispositions of the soul being
so complicate and mixed, that there need not (as the Egyptians were Hero^^tus
says, Among the^, Singulos morbos suos habu^sse m^d^co^.
wont to have) a Physician proper to every disease: he that has acquaintance
with one grief of mind, cannot but know many. But forasmuch as their causes
differ, Queritae^us ^alleth them, Fu ligniosos ^apores. Diaret Po^^hist. ^ap. 1.
some proceeding of gross melancholy, others of dark vapors dulling the
understanding, and disturbing the eluded pha^tasie, others of other causes, the
consideration where of is peculiar to the Physician, my present address is to
those only who are capable of the Ministers advice, and the comfort of Gods
Word. As Plato, Aristot. Zenophon. Plut arch. Seneca. and others.
Truly the ancient Sages seemd to writ many things learnedly to help the
perturbations of mind, some laboring Lib. 3. de Virginibus.
to ground it on a supposed constancy, not yielding to calamities, some to
bring it to a kind of stupidity, not feeling them, like those Artlesse
Physicians, killing by too much correcting some abounding humor, others
inuenting some pleasing lenitiues and diuersions; of all I may say in a word,
as Ambrose of Pythagoras, evening music which he used to refresh his heart
wearied with cares, in vain did they desire to remove secular griefs, with
secular remedies, for they more defiled and disordred the mind, by seeking
ease in pleasures: At quiuis Christ^inus etc. primo statim occursu adult^rina
and falsa ^llorum documenta ex Lydio Scrpturae sacrae lapide de^egit*
Quercitan. de perturbat: anim. ^n^t^^ cap. 1.
But every Christian, may, by the true touchstone, the holy Scripture,
presently discover them all to be adulterate and counterfeit; never any of the^
so much as mentioning the name of Christ, and through him coming to this
caelestiall Catholi^on of David, HOPE IN GOD, in which is the only A^ Augustine
says of Ciceros book entitled Hortensius which so much took him: Nec solum
me etc. re^^ ingebat, quod ^ome^ Christ's no^ erat ^b^. Couf. li. 3. c. 4.
sound cure of a troubled mind, and where in the most illiterate Christian
excels the most bookish Philosopher. Seeing therefore, by the good
providence of God, I have become acquainted with the usage and lineaments of a
troubled Plin lib, 3 5 cap. 10.
soul, not only by the view of others malady, but also by the sense of mine
own, as Protogenes the Painter, having his own countenance set by an
half-famishing diet, was thereby enabled to take the true aspect and poutrait
of meagre Lalysus to life. And seeing I have not only gotten some knowledge of
the Huius inuentionis princip^um, est ipsius morb^ cognitio. Lacu^. epitom
Galen. de meth medend. lib 2 fine. Initium medicae artis ded^t experientiae
^^urn in-stitut med lib. 1. ^. 1.
disease (the beginning of every cure) but experience (which begat the Art of
Physic) has made me so much an Empiric herein, that I may at least (as they
wont to do before the rules of healing, were improued to an Art) tell others
by what means the Lord has comforted me. I have therefore adventured this
Benoni, The sick wont to be carried out into the high ways that they might a
prateriun tibus remedia sciscit^ri Heurn. q. s.
the issue of mine experience into the public; that those Sermons which in
their delivery, were received with holy attention and good fruits of many
Auditors, might not like those Hebrew masculine Exodus 1.
books, live only the hour of their birthes, and presently be cast away,
but remain longer to Gods honor and the use of his: yet can I not probably
excuse my presuming to tender your Honor this homely piece, except I plead
your accustomed zeal to Religion, and favor to learning, and that you
vouchsafed to honor our congregation with your presence, while most of these
meditations were delivering. The God of all consolation make them effectually
profitable to the Reader, and your Honor completely happy with all temporal
and spiritual blessings in Christ Jesus, in whom Irest,

Your Honors humblest servant Jo. Reading.

DAVID'S SOLILOQVIE.
P^AL. 42. 11. Why art thou cast down, O my soul? and why art thou disquieted
within me? Hope in God, for I shall yet praise him who is the health of my
countinance and my God.
THE sum of Christianity, is that which Paul gives in charge to Timothy,
War a good 1 Timothy 18. 19.
warfare, holding says and a good conscience. The life of a Gal. 5 17.
Christian is (...), a trucelesse fight against the spiritual enemy: to him
that overcomes is appointed (...), Reu. 2. 10. Reu 3. 21.
an incorruptible crown. We must therefore take unto us 1 Cor. 9. 24, 25.
the whole armor of God: a principal part thereof, is Ephesians. 6. 13, ^7
the sword of the Spirit, the word of God: and whereas all that, being given by
inspiration 2 Timothy 3. 16
of God, is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, and for
instruction in righteousness, that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly
furnished unto all Basil. praefat in Psalm.
good works; and therefore is the wholesome physic for the soul, common to
all, a promptuarie; and storehouse of spiritual receipts, to cure all maladies
of the mind: a perfect directorie to all those holy duties required of man:
this one book of Psalms does especially, and most comfortably meet with the
per^urbations, and sicknesses of ^ distempered mind.

1. The Author.
It was penned by those holy men of God, who in ^undry conditions of the
Church, prosperous, and ^duerse, in several distresses of their own, did
either ^cco^modate those-hymnes ^o the public use, or pow^ed out their souls
to God, ^pening the priuaties of their own hearts to him.

2. The matte^.
The matter and subject ^c^reof is singular: For whereas the other Prophesies
were their Ambassies from God to the people, or at least the abstracts thereof,
these are, for the most part, their Colloquies and secret Conferences with God,
concerning the inward senses of their spirits; Soliloquies, expostulations,
demo^strations of the minds estate, the spiritual language of the soul to it
self and God, the searcher of hearts, concerning it own grief.

3. The necessary use of the Psalms.
So like are the things which are, to those which have been, that (as they
were not written for one time or age, but for the Churches use, to the end of
time) every man may apply something hereof to himself: this book is so
completely furnished with all varieties, that some part or other hereof draws
every man to a private and peculiar examination of himself. There is no
infirmity, among those multitudes to which the frail mind and life of man are
subject, which may not here be fitted with sure direction for that cure.

Besides, the many enemies which draw our hearts from God, our own affections
do not lightly hurt us: Satan making his advantage upon us through them:
diuerting some to a wrong object, as when we delight or trust in evil:
exasperating and sharpning some to a dangerous excess, as when we sorrow
immoderatly: retunding and abating others to an evil defect, as when we
cannot raise our hopes to fetch comfort from the promises of God: to omit the
rest, of which we shall not be occasioned to speak, of how many comforts are
we made insensible, and so enjoy not what we have i^ our hands and possessions*
with how many vselesse and insufferable burdens do^ we oppress our souls,
thereby making the life itself irksome and uncomfortable, for want of knowledge
to improve, or strength to moderate our sorrows* and vnrests of mind? what
fears, what cares, what impatience, what murmurings, what desperate
resolutions, what unhappy distractions, what infaust affrightments, what
hideous fantasies does not this sad Erinnys, worldly sorrow, present the mind
withal? when all this while we foolishly cause that affliction, which we
wickedly complain of: when we f^ede this bitter humor, with our painful
indulgence, this insatiable Vulture with our own livers: when possessed of
this melancholy devil, we wound, we tare, we cast our selves into this
fire, we plunge our selves into these Marahs of desperate sorrow.

There cannot be a good life without afflictions, nor these without sorrow, and
as rarely sorrow without excess, or defect: against all these here are
remedies: follow them you who are interessed, you shall find a certain clew,
to help you out of those intricate labyrinths of discontent, in which you
found no rest, out of which you discovered no way.

4. The form.
Neither can that be in vain, which the wisdom of God has done: he saw it
good, that this excellent matter should be cast and digested into such a form
of words, not let fall with the vulgar liberty of speaking, but taught to run
in smooth numbers, ordered feet of divine Poe^sie, composed and set to
musical tunes; there are many songs Origin. s. Iud. 50. 6.
left by the Prophets to the Churches use: there is besides this, one book of
Songs, the Canticles: there are many Songs intermixed in the other Scriptures:
some serving for sol^mnities, either on particular occasions, as their
victoriall Orig. ib.
Psalms, when they had passed the red Sea by a new, and unheard manner of
transportation: Then sang Moses and the children of Israe^this Exodus 15. 1.
Song unto the Lord: So when GOD broug^t down Iabin King of Canaan, Iud. 4.
2^. Iud. 5. ^.
Then sang Deborah and Barak the son of Abinoam, or a general song for
posterities, as God commanded Moses to record a Song Deuteronomy. 31. 19, 30.
of remembrance, Recite ye this song for you, and teach it the children of
Israel, a Psalm for the common and public Deuteronomy. 32. 1.
service of GOD, to which certain Levites were assigned: so David, and the
Captain of the Army, separated Ca^tores etc qui Psalm. mos dulci modulami^e
r^sonabant quod leuitas in templo dei, inter sacrificia quotidiana ^acere
solitos, etc. 2 C^ro 1^. etc. Beda capos^^n ^sram. l. 1 ^ 2
for the ministry, the sons of Asaph and Heman, and Ieduthun, to sing
Prophesies with Harpes and Psalteries, and with Cymbals. there were of these
cunning singers 288, who were divided into 24 courses, in which they served 12
in a course, to give thanks, and praise the Lord: some for private use and
application: the sweet singer of Israel endited 2 Samuel 23. 1
Psalms to be sung, not only in the public service of God, but in private
also, with singular profit. For as by other objects of external senses,
certain fantasies are begotten, which presenting themselves to the inward
faculties of the soul, do according ^o their several natures, and the
l^abili^ies of the receiver, make impressions, stir up the affections, and
move the reason, and will, to their operations; so especially those Species
(which enter the soul through, this serse of discipline, the hearing)
melodies, and sweet harmonies (which are a musical sound or consent of sundry
duly (...). Arist. de anim. l. 1. c. 4.
proportioned notes, varied according to diverse measures of time, with rising
and falling of tunes) for the (...). Ib.
Analogy they have with the soul it self, and sympathy with the affections,
which they do both outwardly express, or resemble, and inwardly move, like
some friendly guest, welcome to the Master of the house, find a free
cheerful and ready passage, both through cares and affections, which are as
diligent servants, to convey them to the inward presence of the soul: where
they have an admirable power to bring to a be^ter temper, whatsoever is there
troubled, to qualify and allay that which is too eager, to quicken and awaken
that which is too dull and heavy, to moderate that which some ill governed
thoughts had exasperated, to sweeten that which is too sharp: and all this,
with such facility, as if those querulous strings, and passionate notes,
excellent strains of descant which we hear, did familiarly speak to the
soul some spiritual language.

Doubtless isntrumental Music has an admirable power with the affections,
as may appear, in the use and experience of those serious Consorts, martial
musi^k^d which wise* Commanders have invented, to quicken and put life into
their Soldiers, knowing how those inanimate sounds do rowse and quicken the
dull, languishing and heavy spirits; as softer notes do find but the
thoughts in their most secret recesses, subduing them with so sweet a violence,
that the most fierce and savage among them are contented to be touched, and
cares most unquiet, to forget themselves. Antiquity was not so mad to think
there ever lived that Orpheus, who would go to rake hell for a wife, that
could inchant Bears, Lions, and other beasts, o^ charm their cares: that
Sisyphus forgot his labor, bloodlesse ghosts wept, moody Pluto became
passionate to hear him sing and touch his Harp, they Vera sunt ergo qua
loqu^ntur Poeta, sed obtentu aliquo specieque velata. Lactan. l. 1 c. 11.
had true morralls, which were to show, how deeply and mouingly music
enters into the soul.

But as humane, well governed, voices excel all other notes or sounds, so when
those become articu late, and we hear not only voices but words, and those
spiritual and heavenly, I know not how, the affections, reason, and deepest
senses of the soul are so moved, as that there appears the most excellent
use of Psalms and singing.

Et sicubi quis quamvis fero ac rab^dissim* furore captatur, si fortc fuerit
psalmi. and carminibus incantatus continuo omn is rabies ferocitatis eius
abscedit: Psalms tranqui^itas animarum est, and perturbationes vel yiuct^s
cogitationuin cohibens ira^undiam rep^^^ous, etc. Aug. ^^oem in Psalm.
1 To pacify and calm ungoverned affections, to quiet the fierceness of
raging thoughts, and like some gentle gust, from a contrary quarter, to smooth
and assuage the tumultuous surges of a troubled mind. Therefore David (whose
Harp gave Saul rest, from the unclean spirit which 1 Samuel 16 24.
vexed him, those mad fits ceasing, and he enjoying lucid internalls, whilst
he played) wont to tune his own complaints to swectest kayes, and teach his
sorrows to sing, endited this excellent ditty, to allay passions, and bring
them to such a temper, as might make him capable of comfort, which no mind is,
in violence of passion: wherein all counsel seems perverse and misspent
breath, as in troubled water the most beauteous face appears distort and
wreathed: Experience has showed the use of Psalms herein, by the silent
tears of mad men, and the deeply melancholy, suddenly falling at the hearing
some grave music, and it is not without good reason: because as the devil
marketh and makes use, to his advantage, of every temper and condition,
especially our immoderate fits of passion, and joins himself thereto,
hurting the distempred and lunatic, not more by their own hands, then by
adding violence to their affections, which misgouern them; so his power must
needs be more, or less to hurt them, by how much more, or less, their own
affections bear a part, and serve the evil spirit thereto these being
therefore tempered, by that harmonic which naturally gives refection to the
thoughts, an^ as it were gently handlet^ them, leading them away from the view,
and inwar^ apprehension of objects i^ksome, and such as first caused their
minds to faile^ and finds less aduantag^ to force them to outrages.

2 To stir^e up and awaken the affections, to carri^ up the mind to an high^
flight. The soul of man is not only clogged with an earthy prison, but with
many busy fantasies, cares, fears, distractions, with which, it cannot
easily ascend: it has therefore need of such means, as can greaten and give
more vigor to good passions, make the mind more actine and quick, to which
(what ever some, Stoically superstitious, do think, who like blind men
imagine no excellency in colors, or like deaf, in sounds) this spiritual
melody of Psalms is most apt.

What were our prayers better then the sacrifice of fools, without the fire of
zeal, wherein they must Iud. 13. 20.
ascend like the Angel in the flame of Manaohs Altar? What were our hearing
with drowzie, unmoved affections, better then formal and dissembled attention?
what fruit could we expect from devotion so cold? Therefore Beda speaking of
their frequent praying, and singing in Nehemiahs time, says, they used it
four times a day, that their prayer might ascend more purely and devoutly.
Whence he supposes grew the custom of singing in the Church before prayer:
because a Psalm sequestreth the mind from the earth, lifts up Chryso^t. in
Psalm. 146.
the thoughts, and makes them light and high flying. And Augustine confesses:
How much have I wept in thy Lib. 9. Conf. 6. 6.
Hymns and Songs, vehemently moved with the voice of thy sweet-sounding
Church, those voices flowed into mine ears, thy truth was distilled into mine
heart, thereupon the affection of piety was fervent, and my tears ran down.
Christ and his Disciples sang Psalms: the Church in her purest ages, used it,
yea when persecution hindered Hymn^s ante lueanos, etc. Pl^n Ep.
the more public service of GOD, they sung Psalms before day: the Church of
Christ to this day, before praying, prophesying, in divine Service, and use of
the holy Sacraments, does sing: It is not written in vain, that 2 King. 3. 15.
the Prophet commanded the Minstrell to play, and when he played, the hand of
the Lord came upon Elisha, and he prophesied: Humane frailties in things most
divine, have need of helps: among which, we may rightly number the Queeres,
of many Saints, singing, and making melody to God, with hearts, and voices:
they rap the mind into a kind of divine ecstasy, they carry it up from the
worlds gross and obstreperous clamours, set it out of, and above it self, and
on a sudden take a man up by the care, as it were into the third heaven, to
conceive the singing of glorious Queeres in the presence of God.

3 To convey things more deeply to the heart, which dilating it self to
that, which does delight, and please it, easily admit^eth them: and herein the
wisdom and goodness of God appears, he seeing mankind prone to pleasure,
Id enim quaerunt quod sens^ demulceat, persuadet autem quic quid sua^e est, et
animo penit^^ du^ delectat infidet. Lactant. Bas^^.
but virtue irksome, and difficult, for the pains in (...) to be taken,
inuiteth us to ^olinesse, with pleasing al^urements, musical pre^epts, folding
up that which should cure our souls, with that which delights our ^ares: and
as it were by ^ealth, conuaying it into our minds: after the man^er of a wise
Physician, who ^ining children medicine somewhat sharp, and unpleasant,
Amaresunt male viuentibus praecepta iustiti^. Lacta^.
to avoid nauseousnesse; and distaste, sweetneth the cup* all precepts of
ve^rtue, are bitter to the distempred palats of evil livers, therefore he
wrappeth up those Pills in delights, that he might heal, and profit us with
pleasure. O diuinam sapientiam quae no^ spo^te, ac cum animi alacritate
canentee docuit, quae diutius nostris essent animis duratura. Basil qu^. s.
This also helps an unfaithful and weak memory: we often think of that
which delights us, but that which by force, and difficulty is beaten into our
minds, we easily cast out again: those things which we receive and retain
with love and favor, firmly reside Aug. ^ro ^m in Ps.
and stick in the memory.

4 To unite the Saints of God, in heart, and voice to the service of God, who
so loves unanimity, that there he appointed the blessing Psalm. 133. 3.
and life for evermore: and promised that where two or three were gathered
together in his name, there he would, with his most Di^orsum populum vnius
chori per concordiam ^onsona modulatione co^socians totiu^ eccl^s^e vox vna.
Aug. quo. s.
gracious presence, be in the midst of them. Now in this exercise* ^here is but
one united voice of the Church.

5 To refresh us wearied with cares, oppressed with sorrows: how zealously
does a sorrowful heart sing, when the Psalm sui teth with his condition, when
it fitteth his sorrow. We do not so well understand these things, when we
formerly sing them, ^s when we impropriate the sense to our own condition,
when we are feelingly interessed in them. They are thought happy men who have
use for Psalms of Thanksgiving: but whereas it cannot be, but they must suffer
adversities who are humane, they also have a true taste of comfort, who in
afflictions, can with experience and deep sense, use these heavenly Songs,
which the spirit of GOD has endited for the same purpose: the prosperous man
may sing (why art thou cast down my soul?) and the afflicted his (venite
exultemus) an Hebrew Son, by the rivers of Babylon; but neither with that godly
passion, as if the mind were parallelled with the Song, the affection with the
Ditty: how moouingly do Si ergo, qu^ pri^^ forte c^nentes percur^imus, et
leuiter tantum et in superficie atting^mus, cum in necessitates et a^flictiones
inciderimus, tunc sci^^u^ et cognoscimus ips^re, qu^ est in nobis conueniens
medicamentum. Chrysostom. proem in Psalm. Act, 1^.
men sing their own grief, true sorrows? how passionately does the
disconsolate man sing in David's words, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken
me? Turn thy face from mine iniquity, or the like. And by such emptying the
heart, the afflicted man is comforted, when following the dearest Saints of God
in their conditions, and in their words, he thinks, and is resolved, no
tentation has overtaken him, but such as belongs to the beloved ^onnes of
GOD: with Psalms David comforted himself in afflictions, Paul and Silas in
prison: Psalms cheer the heart, revive the tired spirits: because this
exultation is begotten in Do spe futuri gaudii.
the hearts of zealous singers, out of an hope of future joy: Cantiois
satigationem itineris consolantur ac subleuant. Bed in Job.
they being like weary travelers, easing their longsome Pilgrimages with songs
and hope of arrival.

Chrysostom making a question, In Psalm. 42.
why this Scripture was written in Psalms; answers to this purpose: when God
saw men lazy, and unwillingly coming to read spiritual things, he
vouchsafed to sweeten that labor, and make the A ^niscuit pr^phet tam melodia.
pain move pleasing, he^ mingled Prophecy with melody, that it might delight
the mind, there being nothing which so cari^th it up, freeth it from earth and
bands of the body: our nature is so much delighted with music, has Vt vel
Infantes ab vberibus matris pendentes, si fleant et afflict antur ea ratione
sopiantur Chrysoft. qua. s.
^uch necessitude and agreement with it; that with this ^he careful Nurse
stilleth ^er weeping Infant hanging ^n her breast, with this she ^oppeth his
tears, with his she brings him a ^eepe: with this the hus^andman cheereth
up his ^eary Teames in Sum^ers heat: with this the ^ea man beguileth his
tedi^us Watches: with this ^red Palmers shorten their Viatores and itineris
molestiam illis canticis consolantes. Chrysostom. 1. s.
^ng ways: because ^en this kind of delight is ^erely allied, and familiar to
our minds, least the euil^ Valde cognatum et familiare. Ib.
one, making use of our natures, should pervert with lascivious and wanton
songs; GOD himself made us Songs, wherein we might both profit and delight.

Psalms are the Angel^ exercise, the daily practice of blessed Saints, the
spiritual Incense of the host o^ heaven: the sweet harbou in solitude: the
orname^ of celebrities, the medicin^ of sick minds, the mode ratour of
affections: an exercise becoming all degrees, all ages, all conditions, since
none are eith^ too grave, or too good t^ praise the Lord.

Use.
I have not made so larg^ a digression upon this poin^ only to praise these
spiritual Hymns, which beyond all commendations, praise themselves to every
Religious heart and care, but that I might fold up all this Proem, with that,
which I am resolved, is of most important use for these times.

mutes in GODS house, who have F^r^ in omnibus ^emplis vhi colebantur Isis et
Serapis, erat etia^ simulachru^, quod digito labii^ impresse admonere
videretur, vt silentium fieret. Aug. de ciu. dei. l. 18. ^. 5.
tongues and voices, but so strictly apprentized to the world, that they serve
for nothing else: at Church (as if they were votaries in the still Temples of
Isis and Serapis, and were warned by some Harpocrates finger on the lip, to a
sacred silence) they are not heard: doubtless there is not one pretenced
reason to all that are faulty herein, that they will neither join with the
congregation, nor sing privately: some condemn Music of leuity, and conclude
it vselesse: alas, poor man, can thy wisdom teach God? Is there any
knowledge but from God? who gave this skill? who made the voice to sing? did
God ever make any thing in vain? or, to leave the argument, is not his precept
sufficient? how often has Psalm. 47. 1* 6, 7.
he commanded it? All people Psalm. 66. 2.
clap your hands, sing aloud unto Psalm. ^1. 1. and 8^. 1. ^2. 1. and 95. 1. 2
and 96. 1. 98. 1. 8. 100. 1.
God with a joy full voice: Sing praises to God* sing praises, sing praises to
our King. Sing forth the glory of his Name. And for conclusion 105. 2. 134 2.
135. 3.
of these Psalms, he says, 147. 1. 149 1. 150. 6.
Let every thing that has breath praise the Lord. We read of no other mirth,
then this of singing, in our Savior Christ, with what spirit do thou
condemn or neglect that, which Christ did for thy imitation? Another excuses
himself, I have no voice, no skill: if thou have no voice, let Non dulcedo
^ocis s^d mentis affectise quaeritur. ler* l. ^2. ^p.
thine heart sing, bring well tuned affections, an understanding mind, a good
conscience, and a little skill will serve to a service, so holily pleasant, and
easy. I am melancholy says another: remember, this Psalmist used it, to
comfort his afflicted mind: I have not time, or place private enough, says
another, Paul found both in prison, is thy liberty more strait then his bands*
neither time, place, solitude, nor that importune tyranny of sleep, labors,
griefs, or fears enforced him to omit his singing to the Lord.

musicam deformantem, deforming music, under which name, wise Lawgiuers wont
to banish some kinds, from their republikes: and it greeueth me, that it
lies wholly upon us, to Preach against it, since it is most worthy with severe
punishment, to be banished all Christian commonwealths: it being no less
policy to prevent, then to punish sins, (for they are therefore punished in
some, that they might be prevented in others) since there is the self same
danger in cursed incentiues not hindered, as in those acts of sin, to which
they allure: I mean that ill-mannered petulancy of lascivious Songs and
Singers, base abuse of Music, which instead of bettering the mind, and
clearing the affections with Songs, conuayeth that impious obstenity into it,
that good manners are corrupted: and instead of spiritual restoratuie to a
sick mind, leaves a residence so poisonous in the mind, that it corrupts,
effeminateth and debanisheth it. These are Brokers for uncleanness,
incendiaries for lusts, brands of the first hell upon earth: who (as if Lact
an. l. 1. c. 21.
they were at those Herculean rites in the Rhodes, which they wont to
celebrate with wicked words, and execrations, that man only being held
polluted, who, though unawares, let fall any good word) have given the unclean
spirit possession of their tongues. I never read the devil sang, (I read
Christ sang, I read Luke 2.
of Angels, and Saints singing in heaven and earth) Re^. 5. 9. 11
but if ever the devil sing, or be at all musical, I dare boldly say, it is
he who sings in lascivious mouths, it is he who sings to thee in harlots
lips, it is he who sings in the warbling notes of wanton Catamites: these
are none other but the devils baits, set to catch thee by the care: he seems
studious of thy content, to please and make thee merry: but it is to bring
thee to eternal sorrow: so Fowlers call poor birds to the lymed bush^* and
then they soon, (but too late) know the unsuspected meaning of those beguiling
notes: it is but mirth, they say; it is a wretched mirth, for which thou must
give an account at the day of judgment, and which shall be ended with weeping
and gnashing of teeth. Know therefore, that albeit God seems severe, yet he
would not kill, but correct thine affections, he would not bar us of
pleasures, but change the dangerous and false, for safe and true. 1 These. 5. 16
Phil. 3. 1. Phil. 4. 4.
He would have us cheerful, he commands us to rejoice evermore; and, is
any merry, let him sing, but Iam. 5. 13.
one of the songs of Sion: only let no corrupt communication Ephesians. 4. 29
preceede out of your mouths; but that which Ephesians. 5. 19
is good to the use of edifying, that it may minister grace to the hearers.
Sing Psalms, Hymns, and spiritual Songs, Col. 3. 16.
singing with a grace in your Aduolet spiritus gratia. C^rys.
hearts to the Lord. To such songs the spirit of grace comes flying: the Bees
come to aromaticall, and sweet things, the Swine will to the mire: to obscene
and meritricious songs and discourses, the devils swarm, let them only use
and love them, who love their company.

Spirit, but I 1 Co. 14. 15
will sing with understanding also. There are formelesse singers, who imagine,
because the maine which God looks for, is the heart, therefore they may with
uncouth wild notes, and discordious, untuned zeal, vnkay an holy Queere, and
disturb the congregation; as if some new devotion had rapt them out of tune,
it being partly an affected ignorance, partly out of a desire, ratherto be
known for some singular disconuenience withal, then not at all to be noted of
any: as if because God regarded not Pharisaicall and superstitious washings,
therefore he required sordid worshippers, and unclean hands: because he is
not moved, with the most curious relishes of men or Angels, therefore he would
have men, discord, jar, and sing out of tune: nay, but he is the God of
order, not of confusion, and there is a decorum in the assemblies of men; to
whose presence thou owe a reverent conformity: there is a mean way; GOD
requires the unblemished Sacrifice, at least the best. I will neither sing for
tunes sake, nor without it: if I had Art and Nature serving me, as I would not
ostent; so not think it too good for Gods service: I would not care where I
were hoarse, so I could excel in the service of GOD, in his house I would
affect to go beyond my self, I would here do my best, and if I had any
Jewel, I would bring it toward the furnishing this Tabernacle: I will sing
with my heart, and inward feeling of my soul, but if I could sing the notes of
Angels, I would neither be ashamed of the excellency which God gave me, nor
be a niggard of it toward his service, I would not think that unsuitable to
his house of Saints on earth, which is, and for ever shall be familiar to them
in heaven.

the best grace in company: how well do they become the reioycer? how well do
they fit the mourner? how well does it beseem the good servant of God, to sing
praises? how does it beautify the streets? how are those ways strowed with
boughs and garments, as if our Savior were sensibly to be entertained, where
every Artificer has the praises of God in his mouth? how does it resemble our
City, to that Jerusalem above, where all are singers? how graceful is it for
private families to send out those sounds, like sweet odours, into the streets
(I applaud not them who do it only for applause) does not the devil stand
listening at the window, like the envious elder brother to the noise of his
Fathers inward music? is Luke 16.
he not vexed at it? would he enter if he were entreated? no, he knows that
is no music for his dancing. Let it be your practice to learn these Psalms,
teach them your children: happy house, happy state, where these have learned
their Hosanna, where these songs are heard, like Plato's Bees, settling about
their tender lips, an assured abodement of divine cloquence to come: even of
that which shall be heard among the Saints and Angels in heaven.

The occasion of these words was, David being exiled beyond Jordan, dwelling on
the hills of the Hermonites, and the little mount Nisar, betwixt the Reubenites
and Gadites, destitute of parents, brethren and allies, destitute of the
Tabernacle, and public service of God therein performed, thus complains him,
as appears in the fore going verses, then concludes, as before in the fifth
verse, Why art thou cast down.

His purpose is to show, that the most just grief and disquiet of mind, must
be moderated; for as much as God is ever able, and ready to (...) all them that
(...) in him.

(...). Vt quid tr^stis es? Aug. Lyra. etc.
Why art thou exreamely sad, some give it: Why art thousad* others. Why do
thou deiect thee? others, why Quid deiicis te? Iun. Cur te d^primis? Montan.
(...) Incuruatus est, etc.
do thou depresse thy self? The Hebrew has it from a word signifying a
crooking, bending down, or prostration: for sorrow does as it were bend him
down, according to which sense, it is Pro* 12. ^5.
said, Heaviness in the heart of man makes it si^ope.

(...). Homer. Vt quid ^o^ turb^^ me. Aug. ^ etc. Quid pers^re pis? Iun Cur
t^onultuaberis?Montan.
Why do thou trouble me, some read: as if it were, with such agitation as
moves the water from top to bottom, making it thick and muddy. Why do
thou trouble me? Why do thou make a noise? Why do thou tumult? Why art
thou disquiet? The (...)
word signifies tumulting, raging, or murmuring, such as deep waters make in
their fury: in which sense it is used in the 51. of Jeremy. When her (...)
waves do roar like great waters. So Ier. 31. 20. My bowels are troubled for
him, or sounded for him: the manner of speaking seems borrowed from the
disquiet of some disordered, mutinous, and counsels multitude, which, upon a
conceived injury, suddenly trauaileth with revenge, Saeuitque animis ignobile
vulgus: then firebrands and staves find wings, and fury weapons: such is a
troubled sea, where the madness of her people express the countenance of a
fluctuant tumult: such is an afflicted mind, where a thousand billows, open
so many vast graves, threaten so many deaths, vain hopes, and desperate
fears, alternating their momentarie courses, as it were from heaven into the
bottom of the great deepes.

Trust in God, or hope in (...) signific as anat^ se^ (...) expect are, (...)
(...) ^3. 15* (...)
God, it signifies an earnest and constant expectation.

Because I shall confess to him, some give it: yet I shall praise him, others:
the (...) (...) confi^eb^r Aug ad ^^c (...) s^m eum. Mont. (...) (...)
word is indifferently rendered, to confess, or praise, as Dan. 6. 10.

The health of my countenance, that is, giving me the joy of saving health, or
I shall praise him and his saying health, for Gods countenance is the
declaration of his favor in our deliverance and help.

Salutes facierum. Montanus.
As if he said, O my soul what is the cause thou art so much doiected? Why
do thou so yield to grief* as if there were no more help for thee in thy
God^? Why alt thou so impatient, vexing and fretting thy self? be contented,
cast cares and sorrows upon God* trusting him who never deceaneth trust: for I
am resolved he will deliver me, and I shall yet live to praise him for it: my
experience teaches me this confidence, because he is the lifter up of my
countenance, and my gracious God, which has ever yet provided for me.

The parts are two: 1, Expostulation reprehensorie, why art thou? 2, Counsel
consolatorie, hope in God.

It is the truest method of teaching others, or thy self, with reproof and
comfort: it is Gods own order: look into the Prophets, every where you shall
find threatenings and promises, correptions and consolations, like the rod and
Manna laid up together.

In the expostulation I shall observe some things belonging to the

1, Manner of speaking, or form of reprehension, it is interrogatory, Why?

2, Party speaking and spoken to, the Psalmist speaks as it were to another
(...) or as if he consisted of two parts. The flesh says grieve, and be
impatient, the regenerate part reproves that excess* it imports therefore a
Soliloquie. My soul, etc.

3, Matter of the reprehension which is twofold, 1, Deiection, why cast down?
2, Disquietnesse, Why art thou disquiet?


1 The first of these shows, it is no careless or strengthlesse reproof,
but full of vehemency: secretly retraicting to the pretended causes of
immoderate grief, or disquiet of mind, implying it is (...) causeless: for no
reason warranteth excess.

2 The second imports it is not formal, it is a Soliloquie and private
conference with himself; in his own soul, without which, how ever solemn,
public or private the exercise of Religion and devotion be, it is fruitless.

3 The third shows us two maine wants in an afflicted mind, that is, want of

1 Strength. Why art thou so weak, as that thou art overcome of sorrow?

2 Moderation. Why art thou so violent, that thou vexest thy self?

In the counsel I shall observe,

1. A remedy, in which are the, First, antidote against sorrow and distress of
mind, hope.

2. Subject, or ground of that trust, God. All other hopes are vain, and like
shifting Mountebankes ostent false cures, but help not: this only never
fails.

Secondly, reason or cause of that hope, which is either from the 1. Strong
persuasion which God then gave him for the future, I shall yet praise him.

2. Experience of Gods favors both present and past, He is the health of my
countenance.

3. Co^enant of GOD with him, he is my God.

1 So then the first place affords an inquiry after the occasion and
pretended causes of this cuill. Why?

my soul.



probatum est, Hope in God, for I shall yet, etc.

1. Why?
This quaere reproves, by exacting a cause: the Prophet wrastleth with his own
sorrows, and in this question both deriueth them from their fountains, and
implies, he ought so to moderate them, that he offend not GOD by impatience.
Luke 16. 21
Why art thou cast down? Why thou? For a poor Lazarus to be cast down, when
rich men's dogs enjoy the crummes he wants; for some distressed Genesis ^1. 19.
parent, some Hagar, whose helpless comfort is not to behold the end of her
staruing Infant: for some poor widow of Zarephath, 1 Reg. 17. 12.
protesting to the man of GOD, As the Lord thy God lives I have not a Cake,
but even an handful of meal in a barrel, and a little oil in a Cruse, and
behold I am gathering two sticks, that I may go in and dress it for me and
my son, that we may eat it and dye: For some afflicted Job, but now rich, and
presently stripped of al, lying sick, sore, and (which is a double disease) so
poor, that he is not worth one true frrend: for some indigent widow of a
Prophet, fallen into the arrests of Creditours so pitiless, that they will
take her sons to be slaves for the debt: for some necessitous attendant,
exhaust, and starued with long feeding on the heartlesse airs of dilatorie
promises, noble breathes, thin dewes of Court-holy-water, while he sees
worthless giuers receiving, godless receivers giving, Judas the Clerk of the
Market, with his Math. 26. 15.
what will ye give me? and all the seeming friends of desert, Thomas Scholars,
who can believe nothing without some feeling: for such men to be dejected, it
were no wonder: but why thou O rich man? Why thou O King, whose condition is
independent? What want thou David, loved in peace, feared in wars, to make
thee content? doubtless there is no external condition can allay the minds
disquiet: there is no Supersedeas in greatness against cares and sorrows:
whilst Genesis 28.
Jacob sleeps securely in the fields of Luz, that ugly empuse fear, with
swarms of cares and discontents cr^epeth like those Egyptian Frogs into
Kings Chambels, the impudent Hag dares look Majesty in the face, serve her
arrests upon greatness, and without respect of titles, lay rude hands upon
sacred robes.

For fools to cause, and then complain of the fruits of their own inventions,
or to be cast down it were no great matter, but why thou O man of GOD? Surely
there are remainds of folly in the most improued natures, and refined brains:
there is no more wisdom without some madness, then mortal perfection without
some blemishes, some Relics of the old man.

For some bloody Caine, conscious Herod, guilty Ahab, godless Belshazzar,
desperate Judas, to be cast down and disquiet, it is no marvel, the wonder
is they Isai. 57. 2^.
can be merry or quiet, there is no rest to the wicked: But why thou holy
Psalmist? is not the Kingdom of God Requiem in se non poterit haebere quoni.
am ^llum dereliquit in quo habitare et requies^ere debuit. Ber nard. de censes.
l. c. ^. Romans 14* 17.
in righteousness, and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost? Why art thou
disquieted? truly the most holy have their trials, their disquiet of mind:
because we are not yet wholly spiritual, that we might rest secure
C^nquerours; since then neither riches, honors, power, humane wisdom, or
perfection, can free from this sickness of the mind, there are none too
great, too wise, too good to follow our Psalmist to the cure, which by his
practice he teaches us, that is:

Doct.
In every disquiet of mind, first examine, and find out the cause: without
this, there is no hope of a s^und cure: for whereas Satan assaileth us diverse
ways, in our joy he says rejoice, and let thine heart cheer thee, that he
may add drunkenness to thirst. In prosperity, Math. 4.
all this will I give thee. But in our sorrows he Iud. 9.
says, Cast thy self down, we must not deal with him, who tempted Christ^,
and could deal with the Archangell, disputing about the body of Moses, he is
too Non ea^sas pro ^a^sis.
sharp a Sophister for us, and can obtrude fallacies, false causes: the best
way to overcome him, is to keep us to our close fights, not to be drawn out
of our entrenchments, and fortifications, Josh. 8. 22.
like the men of Ai to their destruction; we are incompetent assaylants, and
must content us, to defend: therefore we must make sure at home, we must deal
with these domestic enemies, our own inordinate affections, calling them to
account, not suffering them to get an hand over our reason, as Samson took an
oath of the 3000 men of Judah, Swear unto me that ye will Judge. 15. 12
not fall upon me your selves, and being secured of them, he feared not; so if
our own affections prove not false, no assaults can hurt us without.

How many thousands fret and grieve themselves to death, and never come so
far as this point of expostulation: why do I this? Why art thou cast down O
my soul? How many think they have just cause of sorrow, when indeed as it was
said of David's weeping, the salvation of that day is turned into 2 Samuel 19. 2
mourning, and they have more cause to rejoice then grieve? How many weeping
Magdalens see not how Christ offers himself to them, and speaks comfort,
in their afflictions, whilst they mistake Christ for a Gardner, they know not
the blessing that is near them? How many in bitterness of soul wish death
might end their sorrows, when they ought to see their happiness? they having
little other danger, then being made unhappy, by seeming so to themselves.

Me thinks, this interrogatorie particle stands before the disconsolate
mind (like the Angel by Peter in prison) with a touch, Act. 12. 7.
shakes off the chains, and leads him out: for truly, if we could once be
brought to learn this lesson rightly, and thoroughly to examine the cause of
our sorrows, we should be soon freed from them: for discovering them either
to be without good cause, or the cause to be some foul evil in which we yet
lie, we shall be ashamed of them, and turn our sorrow upon a right object,
and so be cured. Two things are therefore to be observed in this case.

1 We must examine, and sinde out the first cause of our sorrow: every man
knows the next and immediate cause of his grief, but we must not rest there:
it is not enough for Israel to sorrow, because the Lord Exodus 33. 3. 4, etc*
said, I will not go up in the midst of thee, except they consider, why God
said so, which was, because they were a stiff-necked people: Josh. 7. 6.
It is not enough for Ioshuah, and the Elders of Israel, to rent their
clothes, lament their danger, and loss of their brethren, except they look
to the cause of Gods displeasure: there is an Achans wedge, some neglect, some
sin if Israel be smitten: if the Lord give thee a trembling heart, failing
eyes, Deuteronomy 28. 65, 66, 67.
and sorrow of mind, so that thy life hang in doubt before thee, and thou
fear day and night, if thou have no assurance of thy life, so that thou say
in the morning, Would God it were evening, and at evening, would GOD it were
morning, for the fear of thine Ver. 58.
heart which thou shall fear: know, it is because thou do not observe to
do all the words of this law, neither do thou fear, this glorious and
fearful name, the Lord thy GOD. All sorrows are the undoubted effects of
sin: therefore the readiest way to the cure, is, not to rest, till we have
found out Causa m^r b^ primium excid^nda guam morbus. lo. Heurn institut. med.
l. 12. ^. 3.
the mischief which is hid, the excommunicate thing; to begin at the root,
and cause of the evil, which we suffer. The Prophet like a skillful Empericke
went roundly to work. Wherefore does a living man complain, a man for the
punishment I. am. 3. 39, 40.
of his sin. We have transgressed, and have rebelled, and thou have not
pard^ned: And the Psalmist says, Psalm. 107. 17.
Fools because of their transgr^ssion: and because of their iniquities are
afflicted. So Ier^m. 8. 14
Jeremy: The Lord our GOD has put us to silence, and given us waters of Gall
to drink, because we have sinned against the Lord.

Whence it appears, that sin in general is the true cause of grief and
impatience. More particularly, and especially these three, 1. Ignorance. 2.
Unbelief. 3. The distempers and indispositions of mind which follow them.

How shall they Romans 10. 14
belee^e in him, of whom they have not heard?) Though it be true, unbelief was
before ignorance, in time, and order of causing, in the first sinner, who did
know all things which he ought to believe, till believing the Serpent (which
was his unbelief) he transgressed, and so brought a native ignorance, and
spiritual blindness on all mankind. This ignorance is first, our ignorance
of God: When we know not, or consider not his power, and all-disposing
providence, governing all things, with a sweet, and irresistable omnipotency:
then we repine, and murmur, then we strive and wrestle, as if we could
prevail against him. Our ignorance of Gods goodness and mercy, working all
things for the best to them that love him, curing their souls with ass^ictions
temporal, healing with part of that Scorpion which did sting them; our
ignorance (I say) of the work of God herein, causes, that we look not
beyond our present condition, and therefore distrust the issue, whereupon we
are dejected, and so impatient, as if we were utterly lost for want of looking
to. Secondly, of our selves, and our own vnwor thinesse, which when we know
not, or remember not, we think we are too good, to be so sharply dealt
withal: that our sorrows are greater then our sins: that we have not
deserved all the miseries we suffer. This ignorance of our selves causes us
to build hopes far greater then our foundation, to undertake affairs abone
our strength, and in the whole course of our lives to carry a sail too great
for our bottom* so that when our disproportioned hopes and proiections fail,
and are ouerset, we grieve, we vex, as if GOD had done us injury, because he
gave us not so much, as our foolish hopes promised us.

unregenerate part, which because it is conscious of nothing but sin,
therefore can conceive nothing but justice in God, and fear in it self, which
suspicion so multiplieth, that upon every (the least) appearance of 1 Reg, 18.
44.
danger, be it but like the cloud arising out of the Sea, which Eliahs
servant saw on Carmel, as little as a man's hand, it presently resolves of
perpetual storms, hopeless and helpless conditions: therefore our Psalmist
says, Hope in God; by the cure showing the cause of the disease, that is,
distrust and want of faith, as we shall see hereafter.



1 Want of foresight, and fore expectation of calamities: it must needs be,
that affliction fall very heavily upon that man who never looked for it, who
made no other account to himsulfe, but to be carried to heaven upon downy
pillows, he that looks for trials, armeth his mind to entertain them when
they come.

2 Leuity of mind, and weakness, which cause that every breath (even common
accidents) overthrow a man, and move him to impatience.

3 Surfeiting on prosperity, (whence men grow effeminate, and, like formal
Soldiers, trained up only for a quiet pomp, are dead at the sight of an
enemy, every distress disordereth and confounds their thoughts.) He that
is not Aug. in Ioha^ Sermon. 42.
deceived with prosperity, shall not be broken with adversity: therefore GOD
says, it is good for a man, that he bear the yoke in his I. am. 3. 27.
youth, as we shall see in the following parts.

4 Envy, which has a long eye into other men's estates, not contented with
that it self has, except others might want that which they have. It is not
only afflicted with it own adversity, but with the prosperity of others also.

We may add to these and other causes of the minds disquiet, which are in our
selves, one external: that is the devil, who loves to be fishing in
troubled waters, especially those Marahs of man's sorrow and impatience, which
are his Nectar, and his music, because his desire is, to make man repine at
GOD, be at enemity with men, discontented with himself, impatient at his
estate; in fine, to make the whole life of man mis^rable, every occurrent
hurtful, the whole man less then a possessour of his own soul, and all this
out of a d^mned malice against God and man, whom he would fa^ne ^qua^l with
himself in a fear^full apos^^cie.

Use.
God does sometimes to the eye of man, strike wide, and shor^, yet he ever
does iastly (...) he seems (...) wid^, when he punishes Da^id on his
subjects 2 Samuel 24 1^.
backs: short, when Ioab and Shime^ in their age, 1 Reg. 2. 34. 45.
pay for the sins of their younger days, or the rich man sossereth the
torments of hell, after his days of pleasure: yet it is always just, and
oportune which God does: and often such, as the punishment shows it
derination from the offense: Pharaohs plagues were sitted to his offense, his
cruelty to the Infants, was rewarded him in the death of all the first borne
Exodus 1. 16.
in the land of Egypt: he that drowned was drowned: Exodus 12. 29
Exodus 14. 27. 28.
Adonibezcks imanity was retaliated in the same I^d. 1. 7.
kind, As I have done so God has requited me. Sodoms unnatural burning with
a Genesis 19. 24.
supernatutall shower of fire and brimstone. Ahabs bloodshedding with the blood
of himself and family. I need not speak of these: even for his own
children, GOD makes choice of the rod. Da^ids bloody sin is followed with a
sentence, which like a drea^full come^, hung pointing down upon his ^ouse Now
therefore the (...)
(...) shall never depart from (...) His ^^dulgence (...) with (...) the people
with a dimi^ution of the people: it is often so, that the punishment may lead
thee back to thine offense.

Thou art grieved for a debaushed child? see whether thou did not neglect to
breed him better, whether thou were not an Eli, and thy reproves gallesse,
when God was dishonored, and highly displeased? thou grieuest for some
dishonor? See whether some popular breath had not dangerously puffed thee up?
thou art rejected for thy sickness? See whether thy surfeiting were not so
only to be ended, whether thou did not abuse thy health and strength? thou
grieuest for thy poverty? it is an heavy trial, b^t consi^ r well whether thou
did not desperately cause it, whether thou went not an cuill, an expensiue
servant before GOD called his goods out of thine hands? whether thou did not
dishonor him with riches? See whether thy possessions be too little, or thy
mind to great? whether the misery, of which thou complai^est, be in the
estate, or mind of a foolish and unthankful possessour? whether if thou
would lessen thy desires, thy riches would not be great enough? thou
grieuest at thine imprisonment, exile, persecution, and absence from holy
assemblies? See if thou did not abuse thy liber^y, disregard the peace of the
Gospel, were not a negligent frequenter of the Church, or a profane and
careless hearer? search out thy sin, enquire out the cause: Why art thou
cast down, O my soul? How have I displeased God, and provoked him to strike
me? rest not till thou find the cause, deceine not thy self. Many a man is
miserably p^rplexed in mind, ^n^ by imputing his (...) ^rong ca^fe^ adds
som^thing to the evil, by laboring in vain for helpless remedies: as it
often befalls a man with some pain in his sleep, ^^ising from the ^neuen
position of his body, of which his fantasy presently frames some external
anoyance, which the troubled mind labo ^r^th to cast off, as if it were an
external evil: such are these supposed Ephialts of a disquiet heart, under
which we often groan, when the best way is to awake out of the sin in which
we sleep, so may we find cure with the discovery of our errors. Search
therefore into the bottom of the Ship for the (...), etc. ^atit^r quod no lit,
qui non peccat (...) bernard. (...).d^gr^^ and(...)
sleeping Jonah, which causes the storm, and i^ thou sinde the cause in thy
self: ^now that he suffers justly what he would not, who sins not except
he will.

2 Consider whether the pretended occasion or cause be a sufficient reason, why
thou should be so dejected, and disquiet: Why art thou cast down? It was
not for an Absalom, it was not for the sickness of a loved Insant: it was not
for that in his banishment he wanted the company of his dear friends; but
because he was depri^ed for that time of the use of the Tabernacle, and the
ontward exercise of Religion: this Psalm shows, first, with what grief he
was absent from holy assemblies: God was present with him in exile, but his
sorrow was, he could not come to the Sanctuary; for that he was sensible,
that external means and exercises of Religion, are like Jacobs l^dder,
whereby holy minds climb to heaven: the face of God was seen through those
types, the Tabernacle, sacrifices, altars, clensings, and other rites, as now
more clearly in the word and holy Sacram^nts: therefore good men love the
external worship of God, as his ordinances, and Churches as his amiable
Tabernacles, and the places where his honor dwells: so that how ever some,
with vain opinion of holiness, some for pleasures, some for profits are
withdrawn, it is the sharpest among the many sorrows of the children of God,
if either some cloud of fear fill the Temple, that they cannot enter, or any
prescription bar them from this house. Secondly, here appear the things
which aggrauate his sorrow, that is, an heavy remembrance of the happiness he
had, when he went with the multitude, and led them ouant and rejoicing into the
house of God, (a condition which cannot be wanted and remembered with patience)
and the opprobious taunts of his enemies, who measuring Religion by external
conditions, said: Where is thy God? Hence that sorrow: it is a bitter trial to
f^ele the insolency, and hear the blasphemy of the ad^ersary, if any thing in
the world would break a good heart, and disquiet a religious mind, doubtless
this would: yet he reprehendeth himself for it, by this question: intimating,
that there is no just cause of immoderate sorrow, no not in the most heavy
trials.

Use,
If so just a gr^efe (which only the Saints of GOD could conceive) cannot
iu^^ifie excess of sorrow: what must we think of theirs whose minds, like
some crazie body, or sore part, are hurt, and almost killed with every light
(...)
touch? or their bitterness of spirit, whose minds like disaffected pallats
relish every thing bitter? who are presently drowned with grief, for those
things, pere aliqui^ d^lce, sed o^nia videntur e^ am^ra. Aquin. 1. q. 7 ^. ^.
2. ^.
which are not worth a tear from a sound brain: nay, perhaps duly examined,
were a most just cause of rejoicing? How vni^stly do we deal with a gracious
Father, when we are murmuring and querulous; not only without cause, but when
we have great reason to praise him; for that of which we complain, at last to
put our mouths in the dust, and keep silence, since we caused that which
grieueth us.

If the spirit of GOD should search for this fauls, as Jerusalem with lights,
as the Idolatry of the Elders in Ezekiels vision, he should Ezekiel. 8.
find a good Baruck, crying, Ier. 45. 3.
Woc is me, for the Lord has added grief to my sorrow, I fainted in my
sighing, and I can find no rest. Because, when the Lord would destroy, he
looked for great things for himself. He should find the poor man in his
empty Cottage, grieuing so despairingly for a dearth, as if GOD could not open
the windows of heaven, and power out a blessing without measure, as if he
could not increase the oil and the meal: as if he, who does feed the
Ravens, and cloathe the Lillies without their spinning and sowing, could not
also bless honest labors, or would suffer a son to starve for want of
meat, whose providence d^scendeth to the smallest things. He should find the
impious Prodigal casting his Fathers Nativity, Esau-like, Genesis 27. 41
reckoning his gains, from the days of mourning, impatient, that a good
Father yet lives to keep a brainelesle Phaeton from precipitation and rui^e.
He should find the discarded Favorite, pining with envy, and with an evil
eye fretting, like the devil, to see any good conferred on others, because
himself is made incapable of it. He should find some worthless Haman,
though already unequal to his honors, yet inwardly swelling at the sight of
poor Mordecai. All this does nothing auatle 1 Samuel 28. 20.
me, as long as I see Mordecai sitting at the Kings gate: He should find some
desperate Saul's, as dejected in mind, as he prostrate in body, because his
Endor voyage pleased him not. 1 Reg. 21. 4
He should find an oppressing Abab, dejected and disquiet for poor Naboths
Vineyard: He should find ^2 Samuel 13. 2.
the wicked Amnon to, in a melancholy fit, so sore vexed, that he falls
sick forsooth, because he cannot satisfy his lusts: in which, as many other
particulars, a due examination would show those sorrows frivolous, wicked, and
unjust.

Thou have lost thy goods, and thine heart is cast down; thou say in ^hy
Iud. 6. 13.
several losses, as Ged^on to the Angel: O my Lord, if the Lord be with us,
why is all this befallen us? When God took away nothing but his own: when we
Totum licet seculum periat dum patientiam lucrifaciam Tertul. de patten. l. c.
7.
are loosers especially in the loss of patience, which is greater then the
loss of a world: let me have patience to overcome the evil, and all that the
devil, or wicked men can do, is, but by increasing and multiplying my
afflictions, to greaten the glory of my victories. Perhaps thou gave those
riches such place in thine heart, that when thou seruedst them, thou could
not serve God: if God freed thee from so unjust a tyranny, and made thee his
own servant; if God took that from thee, which took thy love, thine heart,
and thee from him, do thou well to complain?

Thou art dejected for some disgrace which is done thee: Have thou not cause to
praise God for afflicting thee so? the Son of God suffered the ignominy of
the Cross, and (...)Bt^s apud Laert. l. 1. Magna wa est quando pec^antibus non
^rra^c^. tur Deus. l. 1. ep. 3^.
do thou think them blessed, who enjoy the delights and pleasures of this
world? The Heathen said wisely, He is unhappy who bears not unhappiness: And
lerome says well. It is great anger, when God is not angry with sinners. O
Lord correct m^e (says the Prophet) but with judgment. It is a fearful
condition, Icr. 10. 24. Isai 1. 5.
when God says, Wherefore should you be stricken any more?

Thou art disquieted, because thou suffer the injury of gallfull tongues:
who hears all the evil he has done? Perhaps God stirred thee up enemies,
who might give thee a taste of that injury which thou have done to others: if
not, is it not enough for the Disciple to be like his Master? Some say I am
evil (says lerome) Titulum fidei servus agnosco, They termed my Lord,
Magitian, and his Disciples seducers. How negligently would thou have looked
unto Jesus, the Author and finisher of our faith; how seldom would thou have
considered what contradictions he has suffered for thy sake, except some such
like speaking against of sinners, humaneserpents-biting had necessitated thy
occasion of looking up to the brazen Serpent for help: only let God amend me,
I will not contend about the means: let him bid a thousand Shimeis curse me,
only let the Lord look upon mine affliction. I have neglected good words, his
milder warnings, if he will force me home by evil tongues, blessed be his
Name; let the wicked lips run over me; only let me be saved, Gratia^ ago deo
^eo quod um dign^^ quam mundas oderit. l 1 ep 45. Tertul. de ^ati. O dementiam
nescientem diligere homines humanitor, etc. A^g c^nfess.l. 4. c. 7.
and I will say as Jerome to As^lla, I thank my God that I am worthy to be
hated of the world.

Thou have lost a loved son, a dear friend: why do thou lament
immoderately, if thou beleeuest he is not perished, but shall rise again? O
madness, not knowing how to love men like men! O foolish man immoderately
bearing things humane. Perhaps thou were too fond, or confident in man, and
will thou be impatient for that which GOD saw, thou could neither wisely
possess, nor safely have.

Thou grieuest, because thou can not be quiet: Is not this unrest as the
winds, which keep the waters from corruption? Would not thy thoughts corrupt
with rest? would they not prove like Egyptian waters bloody, and thy designs,
as the Prophet says of the waters of Dimon, full of blood, as Danids rest
became deathfull to those he should have preserned: Will they not be as
Jericho streams, with some unwholesome veins falling into them* till the b^ing
salt be cast i^? Tho^ that art imp^ient (...) thy a^^li^tions, choose thy
condition. Let him take away his hand from me^, that I may be comforted, that
I (...) and be f^ee as others are; that I may dispose of my self as I would.
So said the Prodigal, Damihi Luc. 1 5. 12
portionem quae redit ad me. Well, go thine own courses, thou that do not
like of Gods gracious government, thou art given over to thy self; enjoy thy
self, and let thine heart cheer thee. Is there any thing in the world more
unhappy then this man? A man de liuered to afflictions is chastised to life
everlasting: a man delivered to Satan* for the destruction of the 1 Cor. 5. 5.
2 Cor.
sl^sh may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus. Nay, a man given as Job was
into the devils hand (^cce eum Job 2. 6.
in manutua) is safe, for this devouring Lion must no^ crush the prey betwixt
his teeth. We never read of a man finally given over to Ron. 1. 24. 28.
himself, to his own hearts lusts, to a reprobate mind, any less then truly
and finally wretched: if GOD will not suffer thee to perish; do thou well
Ezekiel. 18. 31.
to complain? Why will ye dye O house of Israel? Why art thou cast down?
What, because thou may not Pas^e popalum in virg: (...) Mich. 7. 14.
perish? Feed thy people with thy rod, the Flock of thine heritage, says the
Prophet, be compares Gods government of his Church, to a Pastoral feeding.
He leads them, he gives them pasture, but he has his staff, his crook in
his hand, to pull them in, when he pleases. It is a troublesome delight, to
be Pasci and pati simul, nonne molest a iucunditas est? Bernard. sup. cantserm
33. Tentatur etc. anima n^ prosperitate corrumpatur, et ad ^ersitate n^
f^angatur Aug in P^^l 64. Fe^^t de peremptore custodem * de c^r^ (...) sit ci^s
lib.
fed and a^flicted together; yet such are we, as that feeding without the rod
would make us lewd children: therefore God tries us, lest prosperity should
corrupt us, or adversity break us, he greeuerh us a little, that we may
rejoice eternally.

What ever thy afflictions be, as Augustine says of the old Prophets cark^sse,
the same Lion which killed it kept it* he made a keeper of a destroyer: Why art
thou then cast down? It is only the per ^ersenesse of man, to (...) salut^rie
things, and to take the hurtful willingly: to desire rather to perish
pleasantly, then to be cured with pain, to dye for fear of killing: to these
men medicine is mere cru^lty: the searing Iron, and Lancet, are instruments of
death: yet because they bring profitable grief, and necessarily make sad,
Horrorem operis fructus excusat, Tertul. ad^. Gnostic. c. 5. (...) vt
^onsuleb^t Solon. (...) in^ti t^med l. 12. c. 3.
they are used. The effect excuses the horror of the work, and that same
shrieker, sigher, and roarer under the Chirurgians, will after fill with rewards
those once esteemed cruel hands, he will commend them for excellent skill, he
will deny that they are cruel: So it is lawful for God, (who, as the rule
is, preseribeth, not the sweetest, but the wholesommest things) to heal us to
eternal life, by fire, sword, and what so ever is most bitter: or is it
lawful for Physicians, and not much more for God? Do we admire them, when
they so follow our disease that they cure by that which grieueth us, heates
with heates, the ouerflowings of the gall with bitter Portions, fluxes of blood
by opening of veins; and will thou blame a icalous God, if he strive with the
causes, and help, as it were by emulating the evil? if he dissolve death by
death, if he prevent killing by killing, torments by tormen s, punishments by
punishments, if be give life by taking it away? that which Na^seabit ad
antidetum qui hiau^t (...) nenum? Tertul q s.
thou think perverseness is reason, and grace which thou esteemest cruelty:
therefore shall he be queazie-stomacked to the antidote, who was greedy of the
poison?

To conclude, if we would not, like way ward children, cry because we will cry,
and like fools, pay with murmuring, where we owe thanks, but duly, and
wisely weigh, what cause we have of impatience, we should in every
correction, kiss the rod with David, and say it is good for me that I have
been in trouble, or at least in the words of my Text, Why art thou cast d^wne
my soul?

My soul.
IN the second place of the expostulation, we are to consider the party
speaking, and spoken to. The Psalmist speaks to himself, which manner of a
Treaty* is a Soliloquie, and parley of a solita^y man, whether the soole speak
within it self, in the spiritual language of thoughts, whereby it recedeth
from usual works and employments* receined from things external, and comes
home to it self, conside^eth, suruayeth, and examineth it own condition,
according to which, it either r^ioyceth, comforts, counsaileth, bemoneth, or
reproves it self, or expresses it self to it self, by words spoken, to
stir up the affections, and to leave a more firm impression in the mind,
then those slender and vnuttered thoughts could have done.

There is an inward speaking of the soul within it self: for whosoever
understands, in that he concciueth, something proceeds within him, which is
the conception of that which is understood, coming of of the intellectiue
virtue; which conception a word signifies, and it is called Aquin. 1. q. 27.
a. 1.
verbum cordis, the word of the heart, signified verbo vocis, by the word of
the voice. Primarily that inward conceit of the heart, is called a word:
secondarily the voice ^^rbum ^st ^^^dnon verbo pro^ertur, sed in cord
pronunciatur. Aquin. 1. q 34. a. 1.
expressing that inward thought, which was first pronounced in the heart. So
that thoughts are the Mentis verbum ipsaratio ^st, etc. v^rbum and quod ^st
nuntius mentis. Alex. Alens. part. 1. q. 43.
minds words, and words are the Messengers and Interpreters of the mind. In
the one the soul speaks inwardly either to it self, only conscious of it
own senses, which God alone knows with it, or to God, who because he
hears not like man, needs not audible sounds, he knows the unutterable
groans and Romans 8. 26.
sighs of the spirit, yea when we know not what to pray, as we ought, he
knows the meaning of his own spirit speaking in us, as a tender Nurse does
the wants of a c^ying Infant: in this, the soul, after a wonderful manner,
sends up votes to God, as it were by a private do^e, not known of men or
Angels themselves, or more properly to speak* talking with that Spirit, which
manifests to us, a secre^ and Fxod. 14. 15
awful presence in us. Moses why c^yest then to me? (said God* yet we hear
of no voice. In the other, the soul sends out that* which it has framed
within, through that p^slage which opens toward external (...) ^^s, making
the thoughts sensible* and by the Ministry of the (...) and vocal
instruments, framing such sounds as serve to conu^y them to the ears, and
souls of others: how else could a spirit (which is not heard, but through the
tongue) co^uay it inward sense and meaning, to the soul of another, but that
both these spirits (the one speaking, the other hearing, being now imprisoned
in their bodies, and shut up from each others interuiew) do speak and hear
through those doors of the body, which God has set open in man for such
intercourse?

These words of our Psalmist, do both discover the soul to be the part
affected, (by some dist^mper causing that immoderate gri^f whereof he
co^plaineth) and teach us a way to the cure in the like distresses: which is,
by such a ^^cesse from all evil, and worldly thoughts, as that the soul may
freely enjoy, examine, and search it self, and without hinderance, and
distraction, enter into, consider, and rectify it self.

The ground of all is, because the only way to help a sick and troubled mind,
is to raise it up to that soundness, and integrity, which it shall have in it
union with God, in whom alone consists all our blessedness: in whose favor
is life, in whose love happiness, in whose presence fullness of joy. Our union
therefore with him, his gracious presence in our souls and consciences, our
assurance of reconciliation with him in Christ, and a true sense and feeling of
the Kingdom of lesus established in us, is the foundation of all our comfort:
and this cannot stand with the Kingdom of Satan in the soul, for Christ will
have no union with Belial, he admits no partnership, and it is for sin,
for which the wrath of God coming on our disobedience, a^^^^cteth us, as has
been showed before: lest then, sin do by stealth possess the soul, and we
seek comfort in vain, we must seriously enter into our selves, and search and
try our ways.

For the clearing my way into this, and the following parts, I will here lay
down these five conclusions following.

1 There is a carnal security, an enjoying the pleasures of sin for a
season, amongst the unregenerate, whose sins never cost them tea^e, never
brake them an hours rest: therefore this point* I speak of, is a me^^e riddle
to such: when they hear these discourses, of comforting an afflicted soul, by
a fruitful Solil^quie, they think as the Act. 8. 34
Eunuch said to Philip concerning the Prophecy of our Saviors Passion, Of
whom speaks the Prophet this? of himself or of some other man? I speak not
now to these men: they Index ^^^us peccati cst men's quieta. Chrysostom.
have a spiritual lethargy upon them, a fearful apoplexy of the mind,
their souls are rather dead then quiet; Bernard observes Alia lona and iran
quilla, alia bonaet turb^ta, alia mala and tranquill^, alia mala and turtata de
conse. l. ^. 1.
that there is a conscience good and qui t, and another good and disquiet.
Again, there is a conscience, evil and quiet, and a conscience evil and
di^quiet. The first, is when the spirit of God testifies to a man's soul, that
he is the Son of GOD, in which Romans 8. 10. Romans 5. 1.
assurance it rest^th, and such a man has peace toward God. The second is,
when God does exercise a man with sundry fea^es, to cause him more zealously to
call upon him: the third is when a man sleeps in so deep a security, that
h^e has no sense of his own misery: The last is when affrighted at the sense
and memory of his sin, a man can res^lue of nothing, but to despair.

2 There are in the regenerate such remainds of the (...)Pyr^^^* ap^d
Illustrium.
old man, that their consciences do sometimes sleep like Jonas in the storm,
(so hard it is absolutely to put off the man, and cease to be what we were
borne) but that rest causes their further unrest, and disquiet of mind to
awaken them.

3 As we have in this life no absolute freedom from sin, so no absolute
immunity from disquiet of mind: which though it be the Caananite, left to
exercise us in a continual and careful watch against sin (and therefore the
Psalmist here speaks as it were to one within him, like a man consisting of
two opposite parts, one casting down, and the other raising up and comforting)
yet we have such assurance of the death of sin, faith in Jesus, and the
daily decaying of Satan's Kingdom, by the power of Gods holy Spirit dwelling
in us, such peace of conscience, and ^oy of the holy Ghost, as that we are not
utterly overcome of 2 Cor. 4. 8.
sorrows, (...), we are perplexed, doubting but not despairing.

4 The more the soul is freed from sin, the more it feels in it self, the
life of Jesus, the more assured quiet and peace it has, and therefore is the
less subject to those spiritual tyrants, which vex and torment the soul.

Sin is ever to be avoided, but the assaults and charges of sin are to be
received diversely, some by flying, some by resisting: by flying, when the
serpents presence is infectious when thinking increases the incentiue, as in
luxury and wantonness, and the like: therefore he comes with his He^ fuge
1 Cot. 6. 18 2 Timothy 2. 22.
nate Dei, Flee fornication. Flee from the lusts of youth: It is a serpent,
there is no surer way then flight, we must Parthian-like fight flying: So he
says of covetousness* ^ man of 1 Timothy 6. 11
GOD, she these things: because the more we look^ upon the world, the more we
are ^n^mou^^d. Sometimes we must res^t, when Sat^an comes upon us with his
scar^e crows, or where continual meditation disco^ereth the sin^e, and
breakreth the power of it: so in sorrow and impatience, we shall ou^^^ome* if
we wisely and valiantly resist the (...) by meditating on all the
circumstances, causes, and effects thereof, till by finding our error, we
find^ cure.

These things laid down, it appears farther, that to the attaining that
quiet, which is the health of a sound mind, we must deal with the part
affected, which is the soul: four things may persuade us to an especial care
hereof.

First: the worth and excellency of the soul: which besides it being eternal
and incorruptible, is so divine, that it was created to the most holy image of
God, in sanctity and righteousness, endued with that admirable light of
reason, that it is not only apprehensiue of the creatures, but of it self,
and some knowledge of the Creator of it self, by the book of Scripture, and
the book of grace; wherein he has revealed himself: Augustine upon this
Pfalme Quid agam ^t inueniam Deum meum, etc.
expostulateth after this manner, What shall I doc to find my God? I will
consider the earth, the earth was made: there is great beauty of the earth, but
it had a maker. Great are the wonders of seeds, and things which bring forth:
but all these have a Creator: I see the vastness of the broad sea, I am
amazed, I admire, I seek for the Author: I see the heavens, the beauty of the
stars, I wonder at the suns brightness, serving to our daily labor, the
Moon comforting the vnked shades of night: these things are wonderful, and to
be praised, these things I do admire and praise, but I long for him who made
all these: I came to my self, I search what I am who enquire after such
things? I find I have a bo^y, and a soul, one to be go^^^ned, one to
gou^^ne: my body to serve, my soul to rule: I ^iscerne my soul is something
better then my body: I perceive that which e^qui^eth after these things, is not
my body, but my soul: and v^t the things which I have behold on every side, I
know I see them through my body: I praised the earth, I know it by mine eyes, I
praised the sea, I knew it by mine eyes, the Heaven, the Sun, the Moon, I
knew them by mine eyes; these are windows of the Fenestra mentis.
mind; there is one with in who sees through them* when he by some other
thought is absent, they are open in vain: My GOD which made al these things,
which I see with mine eyes, is not to be found with these eyes: something the
mind ^pprehendeth of it self, whether it be that which it ^^rceiueth not
through the ei^s, as it does color and light, nor through the ca^e, as sounds,
there is something within, which is neither color, nor sound: Let any tell me
what color wisdom has, yet it is within, it is beautiful* i^ is commended:
and when these eyes are shut, or in darkness, the soul enjoyed the light
thereof: he con^l^deth Seipsum per seipsum videt.
therefore. It sees it self by it self: as it knows it self, it sees it
self: it requires not the help of the bodies eyes, to see it self;
Abstrahit se ^ se, v^ videat se in se.
yea rather, it withdraws it self from it self, that it might see it self
in it self: it recedeth from all the senses of the body, as it were
obs^^^perous and distractiue: but is Go^ any such thing as the soul? truly
we cannot see GOD but with the soul: yet he cannot be seen as the soul.
And a little after he says. Therefore seeking God in things visible and
bodily, and not finding him: seeking his substance in my self, I find he is
something above my soul: that I may therefore apprehend him by my
understanding, I meditated on these things, when should my soul come near
that which is above my soul, except my soul should ascend above it self?

What are these things which are seen with the eyes? how beautifnll are they?
These are not seen without the soul: how much more excellent is the soul
then these. Yet neither is the soul satisfied with the contemplation of these,
nor of it self: send it to the earth, sea, air, heavens, busy it upon the
reflexes of it self, it will not rest here, it must come to a glorious
Creator of all these, then (as those holy E^ck. 1. 2 5
beasts in Ezekiels vision when there was a voice, as the voice of the Almighty
in the firmament above V^^. Bern. de i^ter. Do^.
them) it stands still, and lets fall the wings.

Since then the life and felicity of man is in knowing God, and in him, and by
him, those infinite good things, which he has communicated to man, and these
only the eye of the soul can s^e, it imports us to care for this soul,
about all that which GOD has given us with it. The bodily eyes which perceive
only things mortal, corruptible, frail, or changeable, are of such excellent
use, that if we wanted them, we would give all we have for them: If Jesus
should now come by the blind man, would not his petition be that of Bartimeus.
Lord that I may receive Mark 10. 51.
my sight: How much more precious is the souls eye? Which of us had not rather
dye many deaths, then be metamorphozed into the shape of some beast, though
we might still retain an humane mind? how much Lac^am. ^. 5. c. 11.
more had we ^ather suffer, then be deprived of reason and understanding, and
have the soul of a beast in an humane shape?

Therefore, because God has made man of parts so different: of a soul, a
spiritual and heavenly substance: of a body, of earth, to serve all our
conditions and estates: neither all soul, because our first part is to deal
with earthly things; nor all body, because though we live, and are lashed, for
the present, about earthly affairs, yet we must live a life spiritual,
heavenly, and free from necessities, cares, and negotiations. Therefore we must
now care for our souls, and not be like those, who, (as if they were all body,
all earth, and no soul) live out of themselves: all their thoughts, words, and
actions, are for the body, and things temporal, as food, raiment, riches,
possessions, titles of honor, pleasures, and the like: but as if the soul
were some Idea, and dream of a Philosopher, nothing, or nothing worth, they
seldom, if ever think of it: the reason is, because for the most part, men
are either overcome and captiuated of their own affections, so that Andr.
Lacana epit. Galen. sect. 4. ep.
they only serve them: or are so lazy and stupid, that they know not whether
they have a soul or no: they cannot look up, for the most excellent light
most offends tender eyes: this makes those frequent confluences of people to
any idle spectacle: if it be but to see tripudiantem Simiam, a dancing Ape, or
the like, they forget themselves, run in, and admire it: but for so admirable
and excellent a part of themselves, as is the soul, they have neither time to
consider, nor delight to hear of it.

What madness is it to neglect that, for any possession, without which, we
cannot truly possess any thing? What should a man gain to get all the world,
with the loss of the soul, without which he possesses nothing? Thou fool,
this night thy Lu^. 12. 2^.
soul shall be required of thee: then whose shall those things be which thou
have provided? What exchange Cum amissa quaereretur. Hilar. Canon. 16.
shall he give for a soul, who would redeem it lost? Can these acquests for
which the whole world sweateth, cause or quiet the soul? There is nothing of
the world worth this little part of heaven, Unhappy therefore and desperate is
the neglect of it: if our estate be impayring, we consult with our friends:
if our possession be in hazard through some crack in our title, we solicit
the Lawyer: if our bodies, the Physician, if our souls, we will not so much as
advise with our selves: alas, if the soul be neglected, what is the external
man? The strong is like blind Samson, puissant to his own destruction: the
rich like the Isis-bearing Asle: the worldly-wise like the devil, subtle, but
not innocent: the honorable like those images carried in Precession, and after
their lives holiday, cast by into some mustie corner of a dark rood-loft: the
beautiful but pleasing mischiefs, like curious spring-flowers, of excellent
colors, but noisome smells. Strength, riches, wisdom, honor, and beauty,
are principally Psalm. 45. 13
in the soul, which like the Kings daughter, must be all glorious within: the
beauty of the soul is a divine and vndecaying beauty, not subject to time and
age, worms and corruption: and if God has expressed such excellency (which
is but a reflex of the beams of his incomprehensible glory on the creature) in
a corruptible body: what is that yet unseen excellency and beauty of the
soul? If Moses face (yet subject to corruption) was so glorious when he had
talked with God, that it must be vayled, what shall be the countenance of a
glorified body, Phil. 3. 21.
conformed to the image of Christ? and by that think what manner of creature
the soul shall be, when the face of God shall shine upon it, without these
clouds of mortality interposed, when Reuelat^ fac^e.
we shall be more then restored to that excellency of our first being.

If thou understand not this, know that the most excellent beauties of the
world are seen by light, without which they are not: and to see spiritual
excellency, holiness, and pureness of heart, is the light; without which
thou can neither see God, be sensible of goodness, nor know thy self; this
is like the Sunns brightness, which cannot be helped with any baser light,
therefore be holy, be pure, and thou shall see what excellency there is in
virtue, what virtue in the soul: Lord how curiously do men order their
gestures of body, how do they bring their words to the file, before they have
admittance to the tongue? how do they examine their countenance? the least
error of their garment is seen and rectified, but as if the soul were less
observed of the all-seeing God, then their lineaments of men, here they are
precisely curious, there negligent and stupid: love thy soul, and thou will be
jealous of it; thou will be looking what it wants, thou will confer with it,
and chee^e it up, as the Kingly Prophet here, Why art thou cast down?

2 The second reason to persuade us hereto, is because the cuill here to be
cured, is a sickn^sse of the soul: whether w^^ speak of the affection, under
which the Prophet groaned: true sorrow like a daring enemy, ma^cheth toward
the heart, the souls Corp^^ ren p^test dol^re nisi d^lente anima. Aq^sn. 12.
q. 35. 1. 1.
imperial seat: the body is not pained without the suffering of the soul:
Some indeed can faigne, and set off their g^iefes with words, as if they meant
their sale: like those counterset Vagrants, who lance and s^arifie sound parts,
and make them sores to gain compassion: Orbitates corporis ac vlcera mercatura
cuiusdam materiam and occasionem pretent. Basil. in Psalm. 14.
the talkatiue can tell you sad Tragedies, In exiguo Pergama tota mero, Of
martyrdom in his cups, sorrows in his wine: light cares are full of tongues:
but, as here, abyssus abyssum, depth of grief called for a depth of talk, a
Soliloquie: It is usual in great sorrows, their deepest sources run stilly,
and we talk inwardly, our soul to it self within it self: There is an
hypocritical repentance also, colored with fair complexion of religious
sorrow, which looks like Iezabel out of her 2 Reg. 9. 30.
windows, to make love to the vulgar: there are (...), but if it be not Math.
6. 16
in the soul, it is no penitent grief: there may be Ezekiel. 8. 14.
an elegiacall tongue where the heart is no more affected, then were those
hired Who celebrated Ad^nis feasts with show of great mourning.
mourners for Tamuz: but true sorrow affects the soul, and thither must be
followed to the cure. Or if we speak of sin, the cause of all sorrows;
except we pull it up by the root, it is nothing worth which we do: out of
the heart come adulteries, murders, and all other si^nes, for which God
smites: there is the fountain: if we could reach a bl^sphemous tongue not to
exceed his yea, and nay, if the min^e be full of blasphemy, we have but taught
him to sin more inwardly: if a lascivious speaker learn a better and more
graceful language, then that which wont to defile and embace an obscene
tongue, if yet, these nasty devils, lost, and uncleanness possess his heart,
if he whose eyes were full of adulteric, now show their whites to heaven in
prayers, yet has sworn all^agean^^, with opportunity, and darkness to s^rue
this ^in, his ca^^^ without a cast, is nothing worth before the sea^^h^r of
hearts: teach a man the laguage of Canaan, that his wor^s may administ^r grace
to the hearets, teach him to (...) m^r^ifull, to give all his goods to the
poor, teach him till his actions seen, to say for him, as Saul said for
himself, I have performed the 1 Samuel 15. 13.
word of the Lord, yet if he 1 Cor 13. 2, 3.
have not charity, he is nothing. I^ai. 13. 21.
If malice, pride, envy, or covetousness, cry in the soul like wild beasts
of the Desert, and doleful creatures, if unchaste thoughts revel there like
the Satyrs in the ruins of Babylon, I may say as the Prophet of the bleating
of those Amalckitish cattle, Quid ergo vox 1 Samuel 15. 14.
pecudum istarum? How ever a man learn to personate, how holy so ever he
seem, except he be such within, he is no better then a Pharise: How ever to
the world Religion may be like a picture, where that is most commended, which
most nearly resembles life, but is not living; yet God is not deceived with
disguises, shadows, colors, or representations: he condemns sin in the
heart, in the secrets of the soul. What ever reformation be in words or
outward actions, the soul not amended, it is but a false cure, a whole skin
ouer-hu^ts, inwardly festring, a palliatiue wound, healed without, before it is
sound within, which (except Hip. Coac. P^aenot.
it break out again, and admit of cure more sincere) is mortal. Sin and
grief begin at the heart, which first co^^i^^^h them, and there must find
help.

They are much deceined who think to ease the souls grief with secular
mirth: so often the poor* Dear shifteth from brake to brake before his living
passing-bells, whiles the messenger of death sticks in his side, and he
slyeth the danger which he carries with him: all temporal mirth, to a grieved
soul, is but as 1 Samuel 16. 2^.
David's Harp to a distressed Saul, the vexing spirit departing for a time,
presently returns again: it is not Music, merry company, change of place,
increase of riches, friends or the like, (though some of these may have a part)
ca^ cure a dejected soul: it must be something which can enter into the soul,
and powerfully work upon the cause of sorrow, that must certify and comfort it.

They are also deceived who think that any means, any words, any counsel can
redress that man, whose heart and inward powers of his soul, are not both
moved and reformed with that he hears: till the soul attend, and let in the
word, the lowdest sons of thunder cannot awaken.

of our own conscience, so if we find not the secrets of our soul, sin
will easily avoid our examination: some think it an easy matter to be
acquainted with our own minds: but God (who made I^r. 17. 9
it) says, The heart is deceitful above all things: How far does the
wisdom of man search? What corner of this great vninerse has it left
vn^^rnay^d? High are the starry o^bes yet Art has found out many of their
motions; secret are the unseen paths of the deepes, yet they are sounded;
dark and hidden are the deep veins of the earth, yet Art has found a way
into her bowels, to ransack her treasuries. But amongst all Arts, that Art of
Bernard. de interior. Dom. c. 2 5.
Arts is not invented, to hold the heart: it is easy to find thy words,
others can tell thee of them: it is easy to find thine actions, others observe
them: it is not much to know the secrets of thy family, though sometimes Solom
us ma^a do* (...) ac ^on^^gum ^it^a, ^icinis canenti^us ignorar^ Hie ^^nym. l.
2. ep. Sabin. diac.
we are the last that know those disorders, we are ignorant of those vices of
our wives and children, which are in our neighbors songs: but with what light
will thou search the inward house of thy seule? this is wrapped up in suel*
clouds and obscurity of spiritual blindness, that the hardest task is, to
find thy self in thy self, if there be any good thing in thine heart, how
readily does it often eat that? not like the City Shop-men, the worst first,
that the better may seem best, but all appearance of good first, and at once
is cast upon thine heart, like the ground 2 Samuel 17. 19.
Corn over the Well at Bahurim, that thou may not search deeper for the
spies.

The Pharise found what he seemed; he could not I uk. 18.
find what he was. Let us I* am. 3. 40.
search and try our ways: Our works do sometimes deceive us (when erring we
think we go right, or going once right, we think we do so always) our
hearts oftener (when he who knows he sins, thinks in his heart and
intention he is more sound, and means better things) but let us search and
try our ways, the usual passages of our thoughts and actions: their beaten
paths will best lead thee to thy self. Thou art not such as thou sometimes
seem: but as usually thou art. Saul had bin much deceived in taking himself
for an holy man, because he was once among the Prophets: Herod could not have
found himself among the obedient hearers, because sometimes he heard John
Mark 6. 20.
gladly, and did many things. The wicked man strayeth, and is not in his own
way, when he strayeth not from the Lords: good thoughts, words, or actions,
are no more proper to him, then truth to the devil, who speaks it not, but
for advantage, Ioh. 8. 44.
When he speaks a lie, he speaks of his own.

The tempter labors in nothing more, then to hide a man from himself, and
to keep from him the knowledge of his own corruptions, till it be too late,
and there be no more time for repentance: to which end, he that is the accuser
of the brethren, he that durst Job 1. Job 2.
calumniate holy Job before God, who justified him, will tell the wicked they
are holy: the devil is the greatest flat^erer, and all other Sycophants (what
ever they style themselves) are but his Pupils: he holds false glasses
before men, and they appear not to themselves, such as they are.

To this may be added, that the deceived heart helps to beguile it self:
do but search out thy soul, that thou may thoroughly examine it, and tell me
if it will not shift into a thousand forms: if it will not vanish as swiftly
as the lightning, lead thee importuning it stay, (yea too often from Church,
or the closet where thou art kneeling to pray) from heaven to earth, from east
to west in a moment, from business to business, and when thou have with
strong cries, tears, and sighs, forced it into the presence of God, and art
secure of thy hold upon it; tell me, if with the flight of a thought, it will
not plunge it self into the deepes of secular things, if like some dream thou
shall not loose it as thou find it, if (at the best, when it seems to
render it self to thine inquisition, behold I am here) it be not then as
Obadiah said to Eliah, When I am gone 1 Reg. 18. 12.
from thee, the Spirit shall carry thee into some place that l do not know.
Tell me if it will not put thee off to anothen day, with pretenses of present
importunity, affairs, and the like; that thou have no need of troubling thy
self now: tell me if it deceive thee not with shows of holiness: tell me if
when thou have sound it, it startle not as one impatient of being touched: tell
me if thou can with any violence hold it, but that it will be lost in a
thousand distractions: The reason of all this is, because sin can abide no
examination, lest the ugliness of it should make it hateful: therefore so
soon as it was borne, it ran with the sinner, like Genesis 3. 8. It a gra^is
culpa est conscientiae: vt six^ ^^dice ipsa se p^^iat, and velure se cupiat:
and t^n^e^ a (...) Deum ^uda fit. Ambros d^ pan. Job. 2 c. 11.
some night-louing monster to hide in the thickets: therefore it fills with
fear and shame, that we might hide it, if it were possible, from our own
consciences, and our own consciences from our selves: first there fore remove
those letts which stop the way to the examination of thy soul.

Secondly, duly and carefully consider thy souls estate; Psalm. 4. 4.
Examine your own 1 Cor. 11. 28.
heart upon you bed (...) Let a man therefore examine himself: 2 Cor. 13. 5
Prone your selves, examine your selves, know ye not your own selves? Return
unto thine heart, and diligently consider thy self: whence thou came,
whither thou go, how thou live: what thou do, what thou losest; how
much every day thou profitest, how much thou art defective: what thoughts make
mostfrequent incursions into thy mind, what affections move thee most: what
temptations and stratagems of the wicked spirit give the fiercest assaults:
when thou have, as much as is possible, gote^ knowledge of the state of the
inward and outward man, not only what thou art, but wharthou ought to be,
then may thou in thy thoghts be carried up to the conte^plation of God: for by
how much more thou profi test in the knowledge of thy self, by so much more
thou aspirest to higher things: if thou have already lifted up thy soul, and
set thy affection on things above, learn to dwell there, and with whatsoever
distractio^ thou art withdrawn ever haste^ to return thither: custom will make
it easy for thee todwel there by Pana potius tibi sit alibi quam ibi moram
facere, Ber. de inter. dom.
holy thoughts: nay, it will be a punishment to thee to remain elsewhere.
This cannot be without a frequent and severe examination of our souls: And on
the other part whilst we find not our sins, those ways will please us,
which provoke God to wrath: when disobedient Saul said 1 Samuel 15.
I have fulfilled the word of the Lord, then his judgment is denounced: so
Satan fights with his double weapons, killing some with their own sins,
but some also by their virtues, either by the knowledge of them, as the
presuming, or the opinion of them, as the erring. Such is our selfeloue, and
spiritual blindness, that when we feel the rod, we will not feel our
sins, when we languish under our afflictions, we dare pronounce our selves
just and innocent, so not finding our hearts corruption, for which God
strikes, we are smitten still. I hearkened and heard, but Ier. 8. 6. 10.
none spoke aright, no man repented him of his wickedness, saying, what have I
done? therefore the Lord threatened the judgment.

Thou groanest under some affliction? search to the bottom of thine heart,
there is some Jonah sleeping in hold, cast him out, and the storm will cease.
Otherwise, for a man Pharash-like, to grieve at his plagues, and not consider
the hardness of heart which causes them, is to cast on more and more wood,
and to Ier 3. 13. 14.
complain of the fire: Knew thine iniquities, for thou bast rebelled, and then
return thee again, says the Lord. Before we can turn we must know our
sins, and examine our selves before we can know them.

Neither is it casic by examination to find our sins, Lu^. 1^. ^.
we must (as the Woman for the piece of Silver) light and sweep: we must let
down the word of God into our hearts. The Jews could not find their sins:
Peter's Sermon found them, and Act. 2 37.
they were pricked in their hearts. David could not find his, till the Word of
God came to him by the 2 Samuel 1^.
Prophet Nathan, then he finds them: examine therefore, but by the word of
God, and take this rule with thee. So often thou have happily examined thy
soul and not bin deceived in thine inquest, as thou find by searching, more
cause to search further, rest not contented Isai. 6. Primus felicitatis gradus
est non delinquere, Secundus delicta cognoscere: il^ic currit innocentia
integra and illsbata qua seruet, ^ic succedit medela qua sanet. Cypr. ep. 3.
when thou think thou have no sin; it is the wrath of God, which causes
that for thy sins, thou should not understand thy sins, lest thou should
repent. The first degree of hapines, is, not to sin; the second is, to
acknowledge our sins. There ru^ neth that entire and vndeminished innocency
which may save. Here follows the remedy which may heal.

Thirdly, judge thy soul: if we would judge our selves, we should not be
judged: the only way to prevent afflictions, is to 1 Cor. 11. 31.
condeme thy self as most worthy to be afflicted: God like a gracious Father,
stands with his rod in his hand to prevent striking, he shows and
threatens his judgments, that he might not execute them upon us: he says,
Why will ye dye O house of Israel? He desires not the death of a sinner: and
mercy pleases him, therefore he expects our repentance that he Hos. 5. 15.
might forgive. I will go and return to my place, till they acknowledge their
offense. Take thee a roll of a book I^r. 36. 2. ^.
(says the Lord to Jeremy) Ne^it ^mnia Domi nu^: sed expectat vocem t^a, non
vt p^nict sed vt ignoscat. etc. Preveni accusatorem t^um, Si te ^pse
accusaueris, accusatorem nul^^m timebis. Ambros. de panit. l. 2. ^7.
and write therein all the words that I have spoken to thee against Israel, and
against Judah. It may be that the house of Judah will hear all the evil which
I purpose to do unto them, that they may return every man from his evil way,
that I may forgive their iniquity and their sin. He expects thy voice, that
he may not punish but pardon. Prevent thine accuser, if thou accuse thy self,
thou shall fear no accuser: sin can hope for none other sentence but
condemnatory, which if thou faithfully pronounce upon thy self, God will not.

Fourthly, thou must correct and reform the evil in thy soul. Phareah, Sa^l,
and Judas could say they had sinned, but could not amend: What avails
knowledge of our finn, without reformation? what profits the light without
sweeping this Beati qui gaudent quando intrant ad cor suam in Psalm. 33.
inward house? Blessed (says Augustine) are they who rejoice when they enter
into their own hearts, and find Hic est lectu^ an^ma, etc. B^rn. ser part.
no evil there: Bernard gives a reason. The soul is in pain or ease in the
Conscience; and presently after, Here is the souls bed, in this she takes
rest: What is thereason why men do so seldom, and so unwillingly come home to
themselves, to confer with their own souls? because there is an hell within:
and whatsoever fair show these paineted Sepulchers do make, there is nothing
but corruption and ga^tly fights, full of terror and aftrightment within: Do
but mark how unwilling they come home, whose houses are possessed with some
unquiet spirit, who have somevexing familiars ^ntraturi sunt, (...) ad tadia,
ad murm^^a, ad (...) Aug. ^. s.
there, they know they must go in to irksomnes, murmurings, and bitterness:
they are ever homesicke, and gasp after any other air: the Fields, Markets,
Tauernes, obstreperous Common Pleas, any prisons and stages of wars are
esteemed more quiet places: how much more wretched is it to have this
intestiue* shrew, a refractoric mind, a peacelesse conscience, which will go
with thee till thou leauest thy selle? whose shrill tongue no Bedlam can tame,
no sleep pacify, no wearines allay, no distance intercept, no indulgence
sweeten, no good words satisfy, give it it own will, it only will more
insolently grieve thee; curb it, it will be furious. Therefore that thou may
come willingly to thine own heart, cleanse it: (...) itl^d Aug. q. s.
among all the diseases of the mind, there is none so miserable as an evil
conscience, among all comforts, none greater then a good: if all be found
within, S^ tibi vulnus non sit and Aug. in Psalm. 45.
what ever or where-euer a man suffer, he will retraict to his conscience, for
there he shall find the comforter: but if there be no rest for the abounding
of sin: if Gods spirit be not there to comfort, what shall a man do?
whither shall he fly? from the field to the City, from the public to his
house* thence to his closet, his affliction follows him, they are not locks
and bars, they are not double guards can shut out these disquiets, no not
from the sacred bosoms of Kings, if they could, I might say as* David cried to
Abner, Wherefore then have thou not ^ Sam. 26. 15, 16.
kept the Lord thy King? ye are the Sons of death, because ye have not kept
your Master. Whither should he fly, but to his own soul, who can find no
sanctuary out of it? but if there be tumults, if there be the Aug. q. s.
smoke of iniquity, and the flame of wickedness, where shall he then rest?
while the men of Ai had a City to retire to, they valiantly repulsed Israel,
but when the ambush was discovered, when the enemy was before, and the smoke
and flame of the fire were seen in their own City, then their hearts failed,
then they perished: so long as we have a good conscience to retire unto, we
cannot be overcome of any af^lictions: for what has he to fear who is
conscious of no sin? but when fear of present death affrighteth on one part,
and the conscience within on the other part, cries (as Joseph's brethren in
their fear) We have verily sinned Genesis 42. 21.
against our brother, therefore is this trouble come upon us, which guilt of
conscience is as it were the smoke, and flame of hell fire, di^couering it
self in the sinners bosom, then he is cast down.

T^ ips^m qu^ sugies no^ne quoc^nque fugeris ^e sequeris? Aug in Psa. 74.
Whither then go thou? thou can not slye thy self: why do^st thou hide?
thy keeper follows thee, what aua^leth it a man Quid predest non habere
consciu^ habenti conscientiam? Lactant. l. 6. ^. 23. Non e^t quo fugias d De^
irat^ nisi ad Deum placatum. Aug. q. s.
to have no witness, who has a conscience? thou can not avoid thine own
conscience, much less God. There is no way to fly from God, but to God. from
God angry for sin, to God pacified by the obedience of (...) There is no way
to please God till we reform, because he is just, and cannot justify the
wicked: since then our life is a continual warfare, and fight against several
trials, we are to take that warning of sin, which the Princes of the
Philistims gave concerning 1 Samuel 2^. 4, 5.
their enemy, Let him not go down to the battle with us, lest he be in the
bat^el an adversary to us. Since we sail with sundry winds, we must with a
diligent watch free our Ship from dangerous places, lest it split among the
rocks: no Nemo diu tutus est p^ricul^ proximus. Cypr. l. 1. ep. 11.
man is long safe near danger. Neither can he escape the devil who will
entangle himself in the snares of the devil. If thou will be safe let not the
serpent lie in thy bosom, shut sin out of thy soul: if thou will have a
tr^stie refuge in affliction, keep a good conscience, Hic m^rus a^enius esto:
Let this be thy wall of brass.

Some can say why art thou so my soul? yet they are but Elies, so mild to
themselves, that in the examination of their ^aylings, they rather confirm,
then correct their errors: the drunkard often expostulating with himself (but
slenderly) why he is so overtaken, at last with frequent thinking, thinks
drunkenness but good-fellowship, himself naturally or habitually inclined to
that vicious thirst, and therefore of necessity a drunkard. Sins, like trees
in an hollow ground, if they Male enim natura te^tat quod no^ perficit I.
Heurn. inst. med. l ^1. ^. q.
be not overthrown with much shaking, take deeper root. Justice by
animaduersion, as Nature by her offices in a sickly body, does dangerously
assay that which it cannot perfect, and gives the disease new strength. This
ill justice in the soul (as in the state) whih examineth faults but Ex irrita
contentione nat^^ ae frustrague tantata excretione, mator fit infi^mitas et
morbus ^ires acquirit, inde era^iorsbus symptoma^tus naturae iam efsoeta
opprimitur ^b.
for fashion, not pursuing them to the due execution of laws, teaches men
more presumptuously to sin: better faults were passed by unseen then
discovered and not corrected: the same care which brings to this enquiry and
reprehension, (Why art thou so my soul?) must reform and amend the evil
reproved, that it may be no more so.

Fifthly, thou must hereby comfort thy soul; and raise it to a sound hope.
There are three common errors in this case: the one of them whose thoughts in
any distress, like Jacobs sons in the Genesis 42. 1.
dearth, stand gazing one upon the other, all expecting relief, but either
void of counsel or endeavor; these men tire themselves in those endless
Meanders of pensive thoughts, neither finding nor wisely looking for help: or
in the weakness of their resolutions, put it all upon time (the supposed
vulgar Physician for every malady) herein falling short of the wiser Heathens,
who (though without true reason) sought cure for their afflictions in reason:
such men are corrected in vain, they not only loosing the quiet fruits of
righteousness, which good men gather from those thorns, but provoke God to
strike more fearfully, because they contemn and neglect his judgments, who
make either none, or a wrong use of them.

The second, is of those sad malcontents, who in any great affliction, put on
the soul to some desperate resolutions: such men's thoughts are usually
astonished at first, and being recovered, furious: or like Iobes miserable
comforters, at first mute, at last vexingly talkatiue: To this second kind may
be referred Saules heaviness which carried him to Endor: and in this manner
did Judas and Ahitophel wrestle with their sorrows, and violently deal with
their grief, when they executed them by a fearful precipitation, and leaping
at once to hell. Whereas they ought to have submitted to the mercy, and good
pleasure of God, to have depended on him (who wills all things justly, and
happily to those who love him, and trust in his mercies) and with meekness
and patience to have dealt with their afflicted minds, whose distresses are
like wounds, and cannot be (...) Hip de art. l. Facilitate pot^^^ qui v^.
^^eur^. de method. med. li. 12. ^. 3.
healed by rough handling and tearing open, but must be helped as the diseases
of the body, by facility rather then force.

The last is of those who comfort themselves too soon: like unskillful
Chirurgians, using Cataplasmes before searching or cleansing; lenitiues, before
corsiues, have eat out the proud and unsound flesh of the heart, that is
comforting before a due examination, humbling and amendment of themselves.
These suffer a false Cure to their greater grief to come: These men ask of
peace, while their sins are in their greatest numbers: What peace, since
there is no atonement, no reconciliation to God? It is impossible either to
find true comfort out of God, or in him, while we, lying in our sins and
obstinacy, have him not for our God, whiles our souls, conscious of all the
evil which we have committed, fly the remembrance of him, as the greatest
torment to a guilty conscience, as we shall see more in the last part. To
heal the mind then, there must be oil to supple, but after the wine has
cleansed, there must be comfort, but in the order which you have heard: so that
whether we find, or fit our minds, examine, judge, correct, rectify, or
comfort them, it must be with deep sense, apprehension, meditation, and
application of the remedies to the soul: it is not any thing external can do
it, they are not all the quaint amulets of humane reason and discourse, (though
words have an admirable virtue and power to assuage a troubled mind) there
must be some divine alexipharmacum, and pres^ruatiue against that inward venom
of wordly sorrow.

to our souls, till our minds can be freed of all incumberances, so that they
may without interruptio^ confer with themselves, in all counsel, in all
consolation* in the diuinest influences of holy tongues, God* peaketh to us 1
Cor. 14. ^1.
at it were (...), let the most gracious lips say, (the Lord will comfort thee)
till thy soul says the same to it self within, it shall be, as words spoken
to the deaf, or vnattentiue: such are we, as that in our minds deuiation,
and distraction, hearing we do not hear; and multiplicitie of thoughts, the
mind loses it self, and being variably possessed of those deceitful
suggestions, and importunate fantasies which throng into it, it cannot enjoy
it self, or apprehend that which should cure it.

To avoid this evil then, it must necessarily enter into a settled and quiet
Soliloquie; which is a retiring of the soul into it self, a receding from all
noisome thoughts and distractions of the world, to intend and deal with it
self, concerning the cure and reformation of it self. Such is the violence of
some thoughts (especially Extorquent (...) a (...) ^^ndo in sere it atem*
s^^ctaru^ (...) resp^r^^us, Bern. ae triol g^^. b^n. Ser.
the pensive, which find advantage upon the weakness of a sick and dejected
mind) as that they wrest and forcibly carry us ^ way, so fast, as that they
suffer us not to take breath in the calm of holy Meditations. It behooves us
Pro. 4. 23.
therefore to keep the heart with all diligence, and to beat off these Birds
of prey, which fall upon our sacrifice, and would take us from our selves.

Discat ergo dispersiones cordis congregare, studeat cogitationes meant is
restringere, et exteriora (...) ass^^s^ at in intimis suis immorari, etc.
Bernard. d* inter. d^^.
Let a man therefore learn to recollect the dispersions of his heart, let him
study to restrain the thoughts of the mind, to forget things external, let
him accustom to dwell within himself, and to love internal goods; for as in
multiplicitie of sounds and varieties of voices, one so confounds another, as
that the ear can gather nothing certainly or distinctly: so is it in the
mind. As in a bodily cure, the light, the noise, frequency of friends, and
formal visitations, hinder the sick man's rest, so that he cannot comply with
the means of recovery. So is it in the mind, distractiue thoughts hinder that
health which must be obtained by a prudent composing thereof; but especially
those, which either as causes, or occasions more remote or near, do recrude
those wounds, and put back the cure; so that the mind must be withdrawn, as
Christ Mar. 7.
took the Deaf man from the multitude to help him: the obstreperous company
must be put out; as the Minstrills at Iair^s Seorsum ^ turbulentis
cogitationibus et actionib^s inordinatis etc. educit^r, qui s^nars meretur: Al.
Alexs*part. 4. ^, 17.
house: inordinate actions, incomposed speeches, businesses, and turbulent
thoughts divide the mind betwixt them, like those unmannerly Bethleemitish
guests leaving no room within doors for Christ, the life and comfort of our
souls: he that will be cured must be led out from these. I have bought a
Farm, I have bought Oxen, I have Married is (to many) a Supercedeas against
any warrant out of the Court of Conscience, because they cannot intend Religion
and the world, to serve them both. Therefore our Savior gives a necessary
causion Luc. 21. 34.
to his, Take heed to your selves, lest at any time, your hearts be
ouercharged with surfeiting, and drunkenness, and cares of this life. He
says not, take no care, drink no Wine, eat not: As the body is nourished by
a due proportion of the one, so the mind is exercised and bears a moderate
weight of the other, but in both, take heed you ouerloade not, and oppress
the mind, take heed you make it not heavy, incompetent, unable, unapt to it
(...), etc. A seruit^te Des diuellunt, inquit Chris. de d^^it^is. ho^^. 22 in
Matthew. 6.
offices: take heed of those cares which do (...), divide and pull from the
service of GOD: there is a spiritual drunkenness and surfeit, which
surchargeth the soul with sorrows also, under whose heavy ephialts the mind
lies groaning and cannot rouse it self, to shake off those imaginary burdens.
The reason is because the astonished mind plunged into these Marabs, at every
breath drinks in those fearful and despairing suggestions, with which
Satan plyeth it to destroy it, till filled with grief, it drowneth with it
own thoughts.

Who ever then will have a sound mind, must not only shut out that sin,
which is the Sheba for which afflictions besiege him, but must also sometimes
withdraw himself, and leave the world, and all the tumults thereof, as Abraham
left his servants at the hill foot. Let us ascend into the mountain of God: O
my intentions, will, Bernard. Soli^oq.
thoughts, affections, and all that is within me, let us ascend into the mount
where God sees and is seen. Cares, perplexities, anxieties, labors, expect
me here again. We must not only, not oppr^sse our hearts with cares, but
sometimes leave our selves, that we may enjoy our selves, we must leave the
outward man, to confer with the inward: and to this purpose, such places are
to be made choice of, as will best serve us to meditation. Jerome advises
after this manner. So have thou care of thine house, that yet thou Elig^tur
t^b^ oport^nus and aliquantum (...) ^amil^^ ^^repitu remotus loc^^ ^n gue^
velut in portu^ quas^ ex ^^lta te^pestate cu^^rum ^e recipias, etc. l. 2. ep^st
22.
afford* thy soul some vocation: choose some fit place, a little remote from
the noise of thy family, into which, as into an Haven, thou may go from the
great storms of cares, and in that private shelter may thou compose the
surges of thy mind, which were moved without.

Surely there is danger in secure solitariness: for the devil does most
assail those alone, against whom h^e can ^east prevail in comp^ny. Hence
took he courage, and when our Savior was led out into the wilderness, that
he might overcome for us. Then came to him the tempter. Marth 4. 3.
God who made man a sociable creature, said, It Genesis 2. 18*
is not good the man should be by himself alone; and such is man, as that
there is no pleasant possession, (no not of a Paradise) yet there is an
admirable use of wellgarded, and moderate solita^inesse to some minds: That
they may call themselves to account, that they may empty their hearts of those
cares which wea^ied them: thus cloyed with company, it is a sweet rest to be
alone. But much Math. 6. 1^
more is that, for which our Savior bad us to enter into our Chamber, and shut
the door, for which himself Mat. 14. 23.
left the multitudes, and went into the mountain in the evening, that Luke 9.
18.
was, that he might fit himself to prayer: for the Genesis 24. 63.
same purpose Isaac chose the still fields and silent euenings. Yet it is true
Ad Gregor. Naz de vit* solitar.
which Basil observes, the rolling and vnsteadie eye cannot see a thing at
hand: neither can a mind distorted with a thousand cares, perceive the truth
of Quid prod^st solitude corporis so solit^* do defuerst cord^ Greger. et 7 ^.
Aq^in 22. q 188. 8.
things: Idle and unsettled thoughts (even in solitude) are, like the straggling
beasts in the silent and quiet Groves, easily entoyled: therefore if our
secesse be not as well of mind, as body, what shall any solitariness avail
us? What profits it to shut thy Chamber door, if thou leave thine heart open?
It is good, no doubt, Debes p^ritati cordis studere, vt etc clausis se^sibus
carnalibus in temetipsum conuertaris, e^ cordis ostia ^ formis sensihilium,
etc. habe as diligenter serata, etc. Bern. octo. punct^.
sometimes to be alone, that we may have conuenience for holy Solilo*quies,
but we must know, they are not solitary Groves, silent walks, a desolate
Cell, or melancholy Hermitage, which can shut our selves from our selves: show
me that holy recluse, that mortified Anachorete, whose walls can keep out
cares, sinful and tumultuous thoughts: show me that little Zoar, those secure
mountains whither sin cannot follow an holy Lot. Show me that Eden into
with the Serpent cannot come. q s. Cum solitudinis mede^erta vallarent, lib 2.
ep* 15.
I left (said Basil) a thousand occasions of evil, my self I could not leave:
and Jerome confesses when he was environed with deserts, he yet had evil
thoughts, incentiues of vice Quasi mutasse sit hominem mutare regionem Cypr. l.
2. ep. 2.
following him: to change our place is not to change our mind: Moderate
solitudes are excellent helps to a retired mind: yet the solitary man, (as
the proverb goes) is either a Saint, or Devil: as a man may enjoy himself,
and be spiritually alone in the midst of multitudes, so he may be, never
less alone, then when alone: the mind is so active, that it cannot be idle:
it will be ever working upon something: when thou art withdrawn from company,
except thou art cautious, a thousand wicked thoughts, or at the best, headless
^antasies, barren streams of idle imaginations, will run through thy mind:
all such conceptions prove ^ither vipers, or embri^es mere abortiues of the
soul: thou must therefore as carefully avoid these inward, as those outward
tumults, and spend thy time to good purpose, when thou art alone: thou must
think and meditate of some d^finite thing, and that tending to Gods honor,
and thy souls health. Si solus ipse nunti^m bona^ in ore ci^s. 2 Samuel 18. 25.
An holy thought in meditation, (as David said upon discovery of the first
running messenger) If he be alone, there is good tidings in his mouth.
Multitudes of vain thoughts, are but the foolish Chimarae's of the mind.
Therefore suffer not thine heart to run the paces of those night-rouing
fires, whither every breath of wind leads them, nor Martha-like to be
cumbred about many frivolous things, with the neglect of the one necessary.
Fasten upon some course, for the relief of the mind, and give it not over,
till thou have brought it to some good perfection: as this happy sequestration
of thy soul to repentance, recesse from evil thoughts. evil men to the
inward Temple of Gods Spirit, where thou may with a Secreta liberate. etc.
Bid in ^oh. 5.
secret liberty call upon him: then shall thou not only ease thy mind, but
find an happy issue of thy sorrows: they shall be a Bethesda to heal thy
mind of some other languor, if thou can wisely descend into those troubled
waters. I know how willingly we think of our businesses, and things of the
world. Cares, pleasure, and desire, are like the teeth of the flesh-hooke,
which Satan thrusts into our hearts as importunately, as those ungodly
Impes, who 1 Samuel 2. 13. 15. 16.
wont to say to the Sacrificers in Elies time; No, but thou shall give it now,
and if thou will not, I will take it by force: How many hours do these take
from our sleep, and we consenting to the theft, are pleased that our soul
should entertain the robbers with long parleys: when alas all these
proiections are but as visions of the night, and as a dream when one awaketh.

Use
Sweet and excellent is the contemplation of things divine and heavenly, whereby
the mind is carried up on high, a man is ravished in Spirit, illuminated with
knowledge, enflamed with desire of goodness: all inordinate affections,
wandering thoughts, and fluctuation of the mind, e^agations of the spirit, and
distractions of the soul, are recollected into one, and the whole desire
fastened in that fountain of blessedness, when the Romans 1.
soul comes to a nearer view of GOD: we may see him in his creatures, Psalm.
19. 1
the heavens declare the glory of GOD, and the ^irmament shows the work of
his hands, as we see the power, actions public, and government of a King in
every poor Hamlet of his dominions: but by meditation, as by prayer, we are
let into his presence: but though we could see the heavens open, and Jesus
standing at the right hand of GOD, though the soul, and all it affections and
faculties were filled, with a sweet vision of caelestiall things, though we
should be rapt up into the third heaven, and hear the unutterable secrets of
that place, yet if we have not a Cherubs wing to cover the feet, as well as
to five, if, for all our highflying knowledge, our souls infirmity be
neglected, what were all that which we could know, better then glorious
objects to sore eyes, which help not, but greaten the pain, by the intensions
of the disaffected sensorie?

Let every one then improoue some hours to deal with his soul (pure and
sequestered from all distractions) that he may relieve and comfort it: neither
let any man think this practice concerns him not: he that has not sorrow,
should have, because he has sins to repent.

You humane Parrats, whose ears have run out into tongues, whose brains
labor with a dangerous flux: leave your much vselesse talk, and learn a
godly Soliloquie, it is more requisite you should inform your own souls,
then tire others ears: You profane and lasciuions speakers; learn to talk
chastely in your hearts, and your tongues shall not so offend God and good
ears. You punctual Orators, know that the sure rule, Recte et been loquendi,
is the word of God, which Psalm. 4
bids you Commune with your own hearts: You powerful Oracles (whose deep
senses testify a watchful conference with your sweet friends, your learned
Authors) who can eftsoone make (as Paul his Faelix) your happy Auditors
tremble, who can, with patheticall discourses, pull up the double sl^ces of
their souls for tears, sometimes of joy, sometimes of sorrow: give me leave
to remember you; if you speak not to your own souls what you speak to
others ears, if you have not let down into your bowels that roll of Gods
word, whose contents you deliver to the people* your curious lines shall
nothing profit you: your labor shall be to build an Arc for others, (...).
Cleanth. de per^pat. apud D. La^rt.
not your selves: you shall be (as that wise man said of the Philosophers
School) like a well sounding Harp which hears not it self. You external
men, who in your observance to others, live* so much out of your selves, as
that you must speak their thoughts, act their inventions, go with paces, and
as if their favor animated you, and you breathed their breath, as if you had
no soul, or that you have, a vassal to the world (where your desires have
placed your heaven) you never look home, come hither, see the excellency of
the soul, which can every moment bring you into the presence of the King of
Kings: you that are in love with your stately Piles, come see this living
Temple of the Lord: you that are enamoured of pleasures, seek them in your
souls; these only (as Iaakob said of his Asher) Genesis 49. 20.
shall give pleasures of a King. Laughter is a pleasure for a fool; delights
and sins are pleasures for Satan's slaves: riches are pleasant to unhappiest
vassals; but here only are those pleasures, which none but they enjoy, who
are admitted into the glorious freedom of the Sons of God; who are Kings,
and a royal Priesthood. You that would be rich, be assured, it is not laying
house to house, and land to land; it is not extending your Fathers bounds, by
the purchase of the next Tenements, (for how miserably poor is a covetous
man?) but here are true riches, here is that better part, which shall never
be taken away; here is the invaluable treasure of knowledge, virtue, faith;
here God manifests the riches of his grace and mercy, here he lays up the
assurance of our eternal inheritance, and the seals of our redemption. You
heartlesse worldlings, and outsides of men, consider and understand, that the
vain Idol which you adore, does ever finally torment and crucify those who
do most zealously worship it. Ambition Ambitio crux ambitiosorum.
is an Hamans Gibbet, how high soever; it is a torment to the proud: Avarice, a
Iaels tent-nayle, to fasten the rich man to the earth: Gluttony, and Ehud,
which under pretense of secret messages, strikes into the bowels: Wine, a
Serpent, which biteth Prove. 7. 23
as it pleases: Lust, an unclean and lightlesse fire, through whose
Moloch-flames, blind libertines (ambitious of their own destruction) are
sacrificed to the Devil: Surely her house Prove. 2. 18.
tends to death, and her paths unto the dead. All sins (to which so many
sacrifice their thoughts and times) are like Egyptian taske-masters, adding
stripes to heavy burdens, and their wages is death. I need not say more then
this, With how many cares, fears, griefs, vnrests, and perplexities, does the
world, or sin, rack the brains, press and wring the very heart of a man,
that he may serve them? All this while, how happily does that man liu^, who
enjoys, and conferreth daily with GOD in a contented soul? What madness is
it then, to seek that happiness abroad, which is only to be found at home? to
look for that in others, which is only to be found and enjoyed in our
selves? There is more sound content in one hours wise and holy enjoying a man's
own soul, then in an ages succesfull pursuit of the ambitious man's deluding
dreams. The world favors me not? only let GOD assure my soul of his
favor. This one thing have I desired of the Lord; only let him say to my
soul, I am thy sal^ation, it shall be a sanctuary to me against all sorrows.

Why art thou cast down, etc?
IN the third place we are to consider the disaffection, which is the matter
of this reprehension; and this is necessary to be handled, that the pensive
mind may N^^ enim possibile est alicui curare quosd^ mal^ habentes, qui ig^or
at passionem little qui mal^ valent. Irenae. proleg. lib. 4.
be helped: for how can we cure, except we acquaint us with the passions of the
sick? This malady is not simply one, but double, that is, dejection and
disquietnesse, the effects of immoderate sorrow and care: they seem extreme
and contrary fits: the first, a dull and heavy stupidity, a kind of hopeless
apoplexy of the mind, yielding it self to the requests of despair, as if
there were no hope, no help. The second is a restless selfe-vexing
impatience, as if the mind could help it self without God.

There is no estate without some complaint: discontent cannot be confined with
any limits, but the fruition of the chief good; therefore it reigns over all
that have lost their interest therein, till they do, either actually, or in
firm hope re-obtaine it. There has an universal distemper, for man's sake,
infected the world, and every creature groaneth with us also, and Romans 8. 22,
23.
trauaileth in pain together vnt^ this present: and not only the creature, but
we also, which have received the first fruits of the Spirit, even we do sigh
in our selves, waiting for the adoption, the redemption of our body. Mean
time the soul of man is exercised, like Israel in the way to the holy Land,
with continual disturbances, that we may know, that in this life is not Deur.
12. 9.
our rest: for (as Moses told them in the wilderness) we are not as yet come
to the rest, and to the inheritance which the Lord will give us; therefore the
mind can not be absolutely contented: it is satisfied with nothing, lest it
being satisfied with this nothing (which it loves) should rest and settle
here, and so not aspiring to better, be deprived of the best object of
desire, in which is happiness so complete and full, as that out of it, there
is nothing happy or good: whence it comes to pass, that all, that can desire
or wish, do naturally wish and desire some other estate then that they have,
all present desire being but a continued motion to that which is finally
desired: and therefore there can be in this life no absolute content, (which
is a true rest in the fruition of the chief good) till the mind rest in
obtaining that unmeasured goodness, which can not only satisfy or equal, but
exceed the mind, and give us above all that we desire or think.

Hence it is, that from the most loathed to the most emulated; from that
poorest and most wretched condition, which all men hate and dislike, to the
best that can be here enjoyed; from the lowest or highest, to which pity can
descend, or envy look, you shall find none who wishes not some change: the
poor man would feign be rich, the rich man honorable, the honorable
powerful, the mighty would reign; and he that commands many millions,
cannot command his own mind this one thing, to be content: the King of Kings
displayed (in his own Crown) those sovereign thorns, which prick the
sacred temples of Kings. There are two restles tormenters of the soul, fear
and grief; one waiting Quando tib^ be^^ est times, quando (...) doles* Aug. de
ve^b. Dom. ^e^m. 42.
on the prosperous, the other on the wretched, ready to give a sponge of
vinegar to their sufferings: when we are well, we fear; when ill, we grieve:
there is no condition secure from fear, or void of sorrow:

So that if the question were, Why art thou sad? the answer were at hand: look
on thy conception, birth, infancy, middle age, old age; look into thy body,
and the sundry distempers, faylings and decays thereof do answer for thee;
look into the whole course of thy life, how often has one day mingled thy
wine with gall? how often has one hour shut up a careless mirth with sorrow
and bitterness of spirit? look among thy friends, how many less do thou
now rec^on, then once thou did enjoy? how many depriuings seemed (not at
once, but in sundry funerals) to have buried a great part of thy life with
them? look into thy family, how many breake-hearts have thou outworne with
time, besides those which yet live to grieve thee? look round about, how many
evils are there in the world, to make thee fear or sorrow? not to speak of
depopulated Provinces, famine, murders, rapes, mangled carcases of
halfe-demolished Cities, and all that woeful equipage and effects of war,
which we have felt in others sufferings, (wherein the compassionate do vent
their mute impatience with tears and sighs,) nor of so many famous Churches
of Christ, (surprised, and filled with Babylons unclean birds) crying with one
voice: Woe is me for my destruction Icr. 10. 10, 20.
and my grievous plague, -- my Tabernacle is destroyed, and all my cords are
broken: my children are gone from me, and are not: there is none to spread out
my Tent any more, and to set up my curtains.

Lament. 1. 12.
Have ye no regard, all ye that pass by this way? behold, and see, if there
be any sorrow like unto my sorrow, which is done unto me, wherewith the Lord
has afflicted me in the day of his fierce wrath? Not to speak of those
warlike tumults, wars and rumors of wars, which threaten the world, as if
the Angel which came out from the Altar, now cried to him that has the sharp
sickle; Reucl. 14. 18.
Thrust in thy sharp sickle, and gather the clusters of the Vineyard of the
Earth; for their grapes are ripe. Look about thy self, on what side art thou
free? where has not death laid his ambush? where dwells that light heart,
which can promise it self one hours secure mirth? Consider thy soul, how
many are thy cares, (even for worthless trifles) griefs, perplexities; or, to
speak the most, the most unspeakable misery which sin brings with it; and
it may seem a more proper question, (Why art thou merry?) but he says, Why
art thou cast down? Why do thou disquiet thy self?

Great reason he should call his soul to account: for in the one, it lies
weltring in the bitter floods of grief; in the other, it possesses not it
self, (as we shall see in it place;) and both these excesses proceed of some
distrust.

It is true, that when all other passions in their means do help the
natural vigor and life of man, these are (of themselves) destructive, as being
(like all their allies) an appendix of death, the curse of sin: yet in
respect of man's present being, sanctified sorrow, is, among all passions, an
antidote, not only good, but necessary to the soul, as bitter Pills are to a
surfeited body. Satan, Maleuola bencuoletia.
in his mischievous benevolence, promises the soul an excellent estate in
delighting it; but he knows that pleasure ever vateth and softneth it,
leaving it ill affected: he knows it is Lactant. 1. 6. c. 20.
Virtues domesticke enemy; therefore when he would deprive men of all
holiness, (which he can no ways do, but by that which pleases) with these
allureme^ts he rauisheth the mind, being assured that these are the golden
Apples at which we will stoop; the only baits, the only stales, through
whose unsuspected disguisements, he may let fly his venomed arrows at the
beguiled soul. This is that, for which fools not only endure, but dotingly
love the dreadful approaches of sin. God leads to life through sorrows;
Satan to death through pleasures: so that -- Sicut ad verum bonum per fallacia
mala: sic ad ver^ malum per fallacia bona peruenitur. Lactant. l. 6. c. 22. 1.
Sam. 18. 21.
men come to true good through seeming evils, and to true evils through
fallacious good. So then, the tempter gives pleasures, as Saul gave Dauld his
Michal, that she might be a snare to him. Thus (as Cyprian said of the
Potentate) ^rridet vt -- blanditur vt fallat, illicit vt occidat, ext^llit vt
deprimat. Cyprian. l. 2. cp. 2.
saniat, he smileth that he may rage; he flattereth that he may deceine, he
enticeth that he might kill, he exalts that he might cast down. It is
virtue to be abstemious in lawful delights, and to use them cautiously. lest
they prove snares, lest their alluring charms bewitch us, and we perish.

No doubt there is a lawful and useful delight, Pro^. 17. 22.
which comfort the heart, causes good health to the body, and so sweetly
accommodateth the mind, that a man is more cheerfully enabled to the service
of God, who gave not so many several kinds of creatures and conueniences for
delight to ensnare men, but that in the wise use of them, we might admire and
praise the goodness of a bountiful God; the abuse and excess is evil and
dangerous: so is it in all passions of the mind; when they are moderate, and
their streams keep within their own channels* they are sweet and useful;
but when they ouerflow their banks, they become muddy and polluted: and so it
is in the kinds of good sorrow: fear and sorrow are, for the present,
necessary to good and evil men; to bridle the evil, to exercise and amend the
good. The three children Dan. 3.
were cast into the fire bound, but they were presently loosed, and walked
without danger: such are we; the world, sin, and many idle affections have
strong bands upon us, but so soon as we are put into the fire of affliction*
we are loosed, so that we walk more comfortably and safely, we come out like
refined gold. David confesses it of himself, Before I was afflicted Psalm.
119. 67.
I went astray; but now have I kept thy Word.

Such is sorrow, as the Senate judged of Seuerus, he seemed nimis crudelis,
and nimis vtilis; very cruel, but very profitable: without it, the mind is in
danger of taking by security, impenitency, and presumption, the Devils great
Generals, who 2. Sam. 12. 27.
say to him of such, as Ioab of Rabbah; I have taken the City of waters, come
now and smite it. How easily is that heart surprised, which can have no
remorse? therefore he says not (Why art thou sorrowful?) for God made that
affection to fortify the soul, that he that could not rejoice in doing
justly, might yet sorrow for that he did unjustly: but he says, Why art thou
cast down? There is a natural affection warranting some sorrow, even for
things temporal, neither unseasonable nor unlawful: Joseph mourned, David
mourned, Jesus wept; which proves, Ioh. 11.
that sorrow may be without sin. But Why art thou cast down? Sorrow may be
intense; Christ's soul was heavy to the death, he sorrowed -- quantitate
absoluta^. Aquin. 3. q. 46. 6. 2.
the greatest sorrow, yet not excessiuely, for he was not overcome of it; and
so it became him to sorrow, who was to bear all our sorrows at once. This
shows, that sorrow may prevail very far, without D.
sin: and therefore we may perceive, that these two things especially, a wrong
object, and excess, make sorrow dangerous and evil.

That this may the better appear, we must consider, Malum proprium. Aquin. 12.
q. 36. ^. 1.
that the proper object of sorrow, is evil, and that our own, and also
present; whence an extraneous object is sometimes derived: as when we sorrow
for some evil, which is not our own, but another, and only esteemed ours: so
the co^passionat sorrow: or when we sorrow for that which is neither evil, nor
ours, but is indeed another good, which we think is evil to us; so the
envious man pineth and is grieved. This being laid down, we shall perceive
that sundry kinds of sorrow are evil, in as much as they have a wrong and
unjustifiable object: as the envious man's grief is deuillish, when it is
conceived of that prosperity which hurts or endangereth him not: for if he
grieve at that prosperity of another man which hurts him, he is angry, not
envious: if he grieve for that prosperity which he fears may hurt him, it
is fear, not envy: if he grieve because the unworthy prosper, it is
indignation: if he grieve that another enjoys what he desired, it is
emulation: if emulation be of virtue, and we grieve that we cannot be is
holy or good as they, whose deportments we propose to our selves as patterns
for imitation, it is a commendable sorrow: but if it be because others obtain
that good opinion of the world, which we desire, but deserve not, or that
excellency and approbation with God, which we would have, but not endeavor
for; this is a Cain-like grief, 1. Ioh. 3. 12.
which was because his own works were evil, and his brothers good.

Also, that grief which the compassionate have, may have a wrong object, and
so prove dangerous and evil; as when Saul will save in pity, where God said
spare them not. All foolish 1. S5. 15. 3.
pity has evil sorrow: in that doleful Hag, which haunteth unhappy houses,
Jealousy, there may be illgrounded suspicions, bringing forth sorrows no
more reasonable then their cause. to these may be added those sorrows which
are conceived, because a man has not, or cannot obtain, or do that evil
which he desires: or which arise from some light and frivolous matter. All
these are to be avoided; for, as the people cried at Maximinus death, we must
-- ^ pessimo genere ne catulum quidem habindum.
not save a whelpe of so bad a race.

Secondly, excess denominateth sorrow evil: as acedia. Graecis. (...).
appears in that bitter grief, which so oppresses the mind, that it is
unfit for any good office; which is usually accompanied with a drawzie
laziness, dullness and heaviness of the spirits, a torpor of the soul, and
euagation of the mind; which being invested of the souls most excellent
faculties, draws them to a thousand headless resolutions, which, like mad
men's Roma Tibur amo etc.
inventions, are but framed and dashed again: at the evening, morning is
wished; in the morning, evening; summer in winter, winter in summer; in one
place, we think another better, and in that, another: no present condition is
liked; for that dedolent sorrow, which vexes and disquieteth the soul,
suffers it not to rest in any place or estate. The like is to be seen in
extreme anxiety, and sollicitous cares, and (as we shall see anon) in despair:
all which, and their like, whether they be effects, or concomitants of
excessive grief, are very evil and dangerous.

There are sorrows, with which God casts a man down, to exalt him more; in
which we must be contented to put our mouth in the dust, and bear quietly,
and with a holy silence, as Aaron did, when his sons Leuit. 10. 3.
were devoured with a fire from the Lord: But why do thou cast down thy
self? Eliah would dye, Jeremy and Job will have the day of their nativity
perish: Why this excess? this discovers a great frailetie in the Saints of
GOD, when they say in their haste, Psalm. 31. 22.
as our Psalmist, I am cut off from before thine eyes: when they will fall
down under the burden, tear open their own wounds, and add -- ad bona^
habitudine anin^ae pertinet. Aquin. 12. q. 39. 3. 3.
more weight then God laid upon them. Moderate sorrow belongs to the good
disposition of the mind, according to our present condition; but excessive
sorrow is a sickness of the soul: it is good to grieve for sin, the
contrary concludes want of sense or judgment, to know how hurtful they are:
this sorrow (as the Rainbow) is both a sign of evil and of good, judgment
and mercy: or, as they say, a Aquin. 1^. q. 39. 1.
good sign of a bad cause: evil, in respect of the evil affecting; good, in
regard of the part feeling, and laboring to abandon the evil felt; for this
supposes a knowledge, and hate of Adhuc est bonum quod dolet am^ssum bonum.
Aug.
the evil: that must be good, which lamenteth the loss of good. God
commands sympathy, and sense of others misery, (Weep with them that weep)
Romans 12. 15.
and sorrow for our own: Turn ye even unto me with Iocl. 2.
all your heart, and with fasting, and with mourning, and rent your hearts,
etc. not that God delights in our misery, but as Physicians prescribe bitter
Pills, cauterizing and cutting; he is the patients friend, who is his diseases
enemy: so God will have us sorrow, because he hates, and would have us hate
our sins, as the greatest object of grief.

Some think it an incomparable misery, to diet the Psalm* 42. 3.
soul, as David, who says, Psalm. 102. 9.
his tears were his meat day and night, and that he mingled his drink with
weeping: but the tears of the faithful for their sins, are excellent
signs, and Psalm. 56. 8. ^sa^. 38. 6. Luc. 6. 21. Math ^. 4.
GOD regards them, though they seem to perish. And Christ says, Blessed are
ye that weep now; for ye shall laugh. GOD will appoint unto them that mourn
in Sion, to gi^e unto Isai. 61. 3.
them beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, and the garment of
praise for the spirit of heaviness: so that I may say of such, as that
reverend man answered. Monacha, Augustines (...), Fieri no^ potest vt ^^liu^
istaru^ lac^^ymar^ p^rcat. Aug. Conf^^. ^. 3. c. v^e. Vsu^ d^l^^ is ablegat
^^xuriam cr^mini^ error is de^^ia^: ita cum dolemu^ admissa admittenda
excludi^^^: Amb. de poenit. l. 2. c. 10.
lamenting for her Son, who was then a Maniche; It cannot be, that the son
of these tea^es should perish. Ambrose has a reason s^ruing thereto: The ^se
of sorrow, remoueth the abounding of the crime, and delight of the error; so
that while we grieve for sins committed, we prevent the committing of them:
those tears which we shead for sin, are a kind of eyesalue to the soul,
and bar to sin: joys dilate the heart, and set open its passages to the
enemy; sorrow restrains and locketh up: where a thousand warnings are like so
many letters written in the dust, neglected, forgotten: we cannot easily forget
that for which we have heartily grieved: sorrow writes in -- quasi col^y^iu^
quoddam quo purgat^r (...) interior. Al. Alens. To. 4.
marble. Grief and love do mutually exclude each other, from the same subject
and respect: Who loves that which only grieueth him? We must then sorrow for
our sins, that we may not lone them; for they have no power to hurt, but
where they are loved.

There can be no sound cure (as you have heard) without searching, nor true
searching without smart: security tells us, we are surely good, because
prosperous: Because I am guiltless, Ier. 2. 35.
surely his wrath shall turn from me: therefore ^fflicta men's malum invenit.
Greg mor.
we look not after our sins: it is the afflicted mind which finds out the
evil: grief is quick-sighted; it looks into the earth, and finds the
theft; it spieth faults very remote and long Josh. 7. ^, 22.
past; it is a sure remembrancer; it ^xclud^th that le^ity, which choaketh
every Genesis 42. 21.
good intent, and, like a cruel Ammo^ite, rippeth Am^s 1* 1^.
up the souls womb, to make her best conceptions, her fairest purposes
abor^iue: it is an importunate soliciter for help; it thinks all hopes and
endeavors slow-paced and lame, till the remedy be come: it heals the heart
by breaking it, and so makes it an acceptable sacrifice to God: Psalm. 51. ^^.
A contrite and a broken heart, o God, thou will not despise. Where we may
observe, that not only a simple grief is required: for contrition imports
association, wherein the sinner grieueth much, and for many adjuncts of sin
together, which do not lightly affect, but break the heart: it is like some
close-mouthed vessel, filled with the venom of sin, it most be C^^ quasi
v^s fictile repletum ve^eno peccati, etc. Alens. par. 4. q* 17. qua in pecatis
moesti^i^ est, exi^ial^^ immod^rata fit. Chrysostom. de po^n. ser. 10.
broken, that every relish, or delight in sin may be let out; which can
only be by a sharp and intense sorrow: sin caused sorrow* sorrow must kill
sin: Goliahs sword must cut off his own head. Yet even in sorrow for sin,
there must be a moderation, lest being excessive, it prove dangerous. Paul
would not have the penitent Corinthian swallowed 2. Cor. 7.
up of sorrow. In true repentance, we sorrow for sin, -- Cum ^mmdationi^
proposito. A. Alens. par. 4 q. 12. m. 3.
with firm purpose to amend; which purpose necessarily presupposes an hope of
pardon; that hope cannot but raise the mind^ to much cheerfuln^ss^. Where then
there is a mind utterly and constantly dejected, there is despair, a worldly
and excessive sorrow, therefore no faithful repentance; which, though it 4.
sent. did. 14.
be very much, and with true grief, for that we cannot undo the evil which
we have done; yet, being it is a true hate of sin committed or to be
committed, with desire to satisfy, and to please GOD, it cannot be without
some comfort.

True it is, the penitent man may be without present sense of comfort, as
without present feeling of faith; yet, as that then hidden faith is not
extinct, but covered during the trial, so neither is our joy, which ever
accompanies it. Yea, in the very act of sorrow for sin, the faithful man
has comfort, *^x coniunctione disconueni^n^is. A. Alens. 9. s. q* 17. m. 1.
that grief being an union of things in themselves differing; a sorrow with
joy: neither does that joy diminish the grief, as it proceeds out of dislike
of sin, but as it is an abounding passion. As a true grief follows the
delight in sin, so a true joy that grief. Grief is conceived of things that
befall us unwilling; that is, which now (in our repentance) we would had never
been: as in sin there are two things, delight, in which sin is b^gunne;
consent, in which it is perfected by actions; so ar^ there opposite to these,
two things in repentance, grief for the act and complacence, which was in the
Doleas, and dolor gaudeas. Aug. de vera et falsa poen. l. c. 3.
conception of that sin; and a delight in that grief, wherein we rejoice
the more, the more we are sorry for the evil we have done; because thereby
we are more assured of pardon; knowing it is grace which makes us sensible of
finnes, and sense and smart make us desire and seek remedy, which is a great
part of the cure: and we doubt not, but he who has begun to heal us, in
giving a new will, will perfect his own work, so that we shall not will in
vain.

So then he says, Why art thou cast down? not Why art thou sorrowful? Godly
sorrow, not only eats up all other sorrow, (as Moses Serpent did the
Serpents of the Inchanters) but even it self, because it begins true joy,
and in that joy it ends. There must be sorrow, that there may be comfort, but
weighed with that same statera Sanctuarij, the golden mean: for though there
be with repentance an Contriti^ actionem dicit, etc. age^tis in seipsum. Alen.
q. s.
action of the mind against it self, to deject, judge, condemn, and correct
it self, (without which there is no rising to comfort, because, if we believe
not the truth, what-euer we think or believe, our comfort is false: if we do
believe the truth, then we believe that God is most just; and therefore,
although in his boundless Isa. 30. 18.
goodness, he will wait, that he may be gracious unto us, yet he cannot be
so remiss, at to approve our sins by an absolute discharging us, and
proclaiming forgiveness to our consciences, before we acknowledge and repent us
of them,) yet the soul must not cast it self down to despair of mercy:
for, as in Grace, that cannot be too little to save, which is gratum faciens,
which sets us in the favor of God; so neither is grief in contrition
little, if it be true; or true, if too much. There cannot be too great a
grief for sin, if it be with faithful repentance, which cannot subsist
with despair: because despair casts down the soul, but exalts sin,
Nihil ita offendit D^^, quam desperatione meliorum b^rere peioribus. Hier. l.
2. ep. 10.
(that very distrust of Gods mercy being a fearful sin, for that it
questioneth his goodness, and by despair of better, holds a man still in
evil) but repentant sorrow casts down sin, and lifts up and comfort
the mind, there being joy in and for that sorrow: as a man wounded with the
lancet, smarteth, and therefore is grieved, but yet rejoices to see that
corruption come away, which he knew must else have killed him. In respect then
of the true hate we owe to sin, sorrow cannot be too much: in respect of our
frailetie (we being as much subject to despair as presumption) it must be
moderated, lest we be swallowed up of it, and in avoiding one extreme,
foolishly perish in the other.

Use.
Unjust anger is an apparent mischief; envy is the hearts canker; malice is a
noonetide-Deuill; jealousy the souls wildfire; fear weakneth the hands, and
strangely tyra^nizeth over its subjects, beating them with shadows, making
them dye for fear of dying. Hopes have their strong delusions, and many times
greater despair: mirth opens the heart, like wine, leaving all unguarded and
exposed to slaughter, like Isbosheth to those crafty Merchants, ^ Sam. 4.
whose trade was in blood. Of all the passions Quod de spe dicit. Aug. de verb.
dom. in Luc. 11. sermon. 29.
and affections of the soul, sorrow seems an harmles silly one, not to be
blamed, but pitied: yet, -- o^o tuo scorpium time: crush it in the egg, left
it prove a Cockatrice. Worldly sorrow is a cunning Sinon, whose harmeles and
suspectlesse visage so beguileth many, that Satan's full-bowelled stratagems,
armed and most desperate resolutions, are by it conveyed into the soul: it is
a mischief which secretly biteth the heartroote; it eats up the life; it is
more general and greater (...) of (...), and (...) of (...).
then bodily sorrow; it dulleth and hinders the vigor and apprehension of
the mind, perpetually drawing the sight and intention thereof to that object,
which is dreadful, offensive, and unpleasing: it takes away the rest of the
mind, which should refresh it by diuersion to better hopes: it weakneth the
lively and cheerful flight of the thoughts, leading them to conceits, as
incongruous and irksome, as are the tedious complaints of ^ooles and madmen:
it hinders the vital motions of the heart, and operations of the body; it
dries up, consumes and weakneth i^; it is a miserable anguish, an hidden
wound, an insufferable mischief: such is extreme worldly sorrow, and yet more,
like the Croca^ile, Qua^diu vi^ i^ cresc^^.
it grows as long as ^t li^eth: if it be not killed ^etimes, it will prove an
insuperable Monster to de^oure t^ee, by making thee ^epine and murmur against
God* to thine utter confusion and ^obiection, which is a due (...) of the
unthankful.

Why art thou so disquieted within me?
WE are come to the second part of* the disaffection ^eere reprehended* as
Israel to the waters of strife, we must find some healing branch to cast i^to
it: we are come from a stupid, an excessive sorrow, to an inconstant
impatience: Quare (...) It seems not a stayed grief, capable of advice, nor
simply one, but manifold: like a tumult in some angry hiue, so swarm the
busy thoughts: like many people under some suspected roof, sundry iealousies
increasing the fear, all rise to run out at once; and where all would, none
readily can: so in some desperate grief, a thousand different and contrary
resolutions, do in that manner throng the doors of the soul, that it can
utter none. Like some violent spirits shut up in the vast hollowes of the
earth, enraged for lack of vent, causing a tumultuous shaking of the earths
foundations; such is impatient sorrow in a troubled heart. What evil past
comes not then to mind? How do we pull discontents out of their graves,
revive old calamities, which are like sundry infirmities in a crazed body, one
indisposition gives a new life to many out-worn griefs, and feeling to
forgotten bruises and old hurts? Lord, why Psalm. 88. 14, 15.
castest thou off my soul? Why hidest thou thy face from me? I am afflicted,
and ready to die from my youth up, while I suffer thy terrors, I am
distressed, says David.

Lom. 3. 17, 19.
Thou have removed my soul far off from peace, I forgate prosperity: and I
said, my strength and my hope is perished from the Lord; remembering mine
affliction, and my misery, the wormwood and the gall, says the Prophet.

The greater part of men may aptly change the question, and say, Why art thou
so quiet, o my soul? We may wonder what sleepie pillowes they rest upon, (as
it seemed Augustus did, at that bed whereon the desperate debtor slept) who
sleep in sin, as Jonah in the storm; as the sluggard, (that son of
confusion) in the harvest; as a man that lies down in the midst of the Sea;
or as he that lies upon the top of a Mast; as one with a Serpent in his
bosom; as one who has a thief broken into his house; to such I may say with
that Shipmaster, What meanest thou, O Jonah 1. 6.
thou sleeper? nunquam secura sides: such is our victory of Hilar. in Psalm.
138.
faith, as that we are never in this life secure conquerers: still the
spiritual thief breaks into our souls, and we have not to deal with flesh
and blood only, but with spiritual wickednesses, vigilant Ephesians. 6. 12
enemies, sleepelesse devils, the powers of Hell. Therefore I may say as
Demosthenes of Calcas; My Lords of Athens, how vigilant Alluding to the thieves
name.
ought we to be, seeing we have thieves of brass, and walls but of clay? o^
as the Proverb has it, He had need of a Dog to his servant, who has a Woolfe
to his companion. How often have we need of our Saviors Matthew. 26. 41.
words; Watch and pray? and where that will not serve, some thorns in our
sides to awaken us?

If a man lose a little of that he cannot long keep, Judge. 18. 23, 24.
like Micha, he pursues with open mouth, or without other instigation (as his
Judge. 17. 2.
mother) he blesses or curses, as it were with a breath, as he has sense of
loss or recovery; but when the best part is in hazard, he is contented to be
spoiled: it never disquieteth him, he knows not what this question means:
God will appoint some Moses to meet with these rocks, to make them flow, I may
say, O that their head were waters, and their eyes fountains of tears! O that
their hearts could be thoroughly touched, that they might be disquiet and
impatient! Good men are most disquieted for Gods dishonor, or their souls
danger, when secure men say, Surely the bitterness of death is past. It is a
fearful sign to be past grief, past unrest in sin, as it is for the body
to be past sense: such a mind is dead, not patient: sins rest is the souls
great hazard; or for their absence from holy assemblies, or want of the use of
Gods Word and Sacraments, though these do strangely please some godless men:
so for the same cause Heraclite weepeth, for which Democritus laugheth.

This disquietnesse and tumultuous sluctuatio^ of mind which is here reproved,
is an effect or concomitant of extreme sorrow: in the first, the soul was cast
down and oppressed, in this it lies fret^ing under the burden: sometimes
wrestling under the mighty hand of God, with indignation at that it suffe^eth,
as if it were indeed worthy of a better condition: it laboreth to cast off the
burden, it seeks a thousand ways for some tergiuersation and escape: all this
while God holds it fast in his hand, and it avails not to strive: hence
then a man is said to be impatient, not because he does not, but Exer^etur
(...) cum a (...) ^ustin^mus p^r^^cutio^es, damno, (...) is, ab aduersa^io
^^ntament^, a (...) flagella. Bonauent. in Luc.
because he would not suffer that, which he, by so much more, does suffer, by
how much less he would: the contrary to this is patience, whose object is
injury, or affliction.

A mind too qui^t settleth upon it lees, like Moab, at rest from his youth? it
is, like standing waters, fruitful o^ Serpents and venomous reptils: Ier. 48.
11.
an Asphaltit^e: Lake which feels no rec^p^ocation a pacificke Sea: on the
other part, too much disquier is an extreme as dangerous; in the one w^e are
becalmed, in the other wrackt. Now, as God, the most wise and just ^^^poser of
all things, permits not either air or water, to have dead and perpetual
calmes, neither to be incessantly hurried with violent storms, and furious
winds, but so moderateth both with sundry enterchanges, as that neither are
these familiar elements corrupted, for want of some agitation, neither the
creatures in them interessed, generally detrimented by their intemperate rage:
but so sweetly does that gracious Providence accommodate particulars with his
vni^ersall laws of Nature, that the foul commends and endeareth the fairer
season; the fair comfort and refreshes after the storm: so that there is
no tide ^runneth, no wind blows from the several points of the heaven, which
(though it crosses some) concurreth not with the desires and courses of others.

Semblably must the mind of man be tempered, it must not be too calm: if it
have no anger, it can have no zeal: if no impatience, it would too securely
reside, too indulgently suffer Gods dishonor, our souls danger, our own, or
our brothers injuries: if too impatient, it would be like a violent stresse
threatni^g a desperate wrack, and carrying away all hope of the quiet fruits
of righteousness: so that it is true, he is a fool who cannot be
passionatehe is wise who will not extremely: he is no good man who cannot be
impatient; but he is neither good no^ wise, who will be too much some then
being vnhappil happy (case flayeth the foolish) some happily vnhapp^^ (It is
good for me that I have been in trouble) it appearet^ that some man's
impatienc^ and disquiet of mind, is no^ so dangerous, as other men^ security;
our instance may be in Job and Dives. Ther^ is also an affected stupiditie* a
Stoicall sottishness, which has the face of patience: there is an impatience
which looks like zeal, and yet neither of these are good. There is also a
laudable disquiet of mind, an holy impatience, a zealous passion; as when we
cannot bear the dishonor of God: the meekest Moses threw down, Exodus 32.
and brake the Tables which God had written* he made the revenging sword fly
among the idolaters: Eliah was ^ealously impatient, 1. King. 19.
because they had broken down the Altars, and sl^ine the Prophets of the Lord:
Lots spirit was vexed at the 2. Pet. 2. 7, 8.
unclean conversation of the S^domites. And on the other part, the Lord
thretned Elt, that there should not be 1. Sam. 2. 32.
an old man of his house for ever, that the wickedness of 1. Sam. 3. 13.
his family should not be expiated and purged with sacrifice for ever. Why?
because his sons ran into a slander, and he ^^ayed them ^^t: which was,
because himself was too indulgently mild, patient in his reproouing them.
There being then an evil patience, and a good impatience: as also an evil
impatience, and a good patience or quietness of mind in bearing: we may
observe, D.
that these four things do especially name and demonstrate disquietnesse of
mind, or impatience, evil.

1. When the ground or occasion cannot justify any impatience.

2. When the cause of our impatience is some evil in our selves.

3. Want of a prudent moderation.

4. When there follow not a due end, and profitable effects.

causa procutartica, proegumena.
The first of these is that they call the occasion, or provocation.
The first is, when the external impulsive cause (which I call the ground or
occasion of our disquiet) is, through our prauitie, (the inward moving cause of
the same) so perverted, as that it produces not such an issue as it ought, but
contrariwise that, which being on such a ground, must needs be evil: there is
no question but impatience for the dishonor of God, if it be active, and
expressed upon others, is a masculine virtue, an effect of an holy zeal: it 2
Pet. 2. 7, 8. Exodus 3^. 19, 27. Numb. 25. 11, 13.
was commendable in Lot at Sodom: in Moses at Sina: in Phinebas at Shittim: or
if it be that silent agitation of the mind, whose secret addresses are only
to God, whose complaints are private: it is a pregnant virtue. Eliah pursued,
sat under the Juniper tree, and 1. King. 19. 4, 10, 14.
said, It is enough, Lord, take my soul. Why, holy man of God? I have been
very jealous for the Lord God of hosts, because the children of Israel have
forsaken thy covenant, cast down thine Altars, slain^ thy Prophets, etc. What
more just occasion to mo^^ a man to an holy impatience? When Hezekiah received
the sentence of death from Isai. 38. 1. 2.
the Lord, by Isaiah, he was troubled, he wept, and prayed, and God saw his
tears, and heard his prayer. Whether the ground were the fear of innovation
in the Church, or the judgments of God so quickly designing him to death, whom
he had lately delivered, either were a just occasion of some holy impatience,
the one being out of zeal, the other because his sins could not but come to
mind with the judgment of God, which are always to be considered with a
godly indignation against our selves who cause them.

But if the mind be vexed and unquiet for that which is to Gods honor, and
should contrariwise have occasioned our thanksgiving and rejoicing, or for
things frivolous and unworthy, how can it be good? Jonah was troubled that God
spared Nineue, wherein were an Ion. 4. 1, 3.
hundred and twenty thousand persons, that could not discern between their
right hand and their left, it displeased him exceedingly, and he was angry* he
expostulated with God: I pray thee, O Lord, was not this my saying when I was
yet in my Ion. 4. 11.
Country? Therefore now, O Lord, take, I beseech thee, my life from me, for it
is better for me to die then to line. So when the Gourd was smitten that it
dyed, when the East wind and the Sun beat upon his head, he fell into the
same impatience a gain: it was no sufficient ground, therefore the Lord said,
Do thou well to be angry? The Pharisees were vexed, because Christ healed on
the Sabbath, because he reproved their sins: the Israelites were troubled,
because Exodus 16. 3
they had not to satisfy their lusts, insomuch that they wished they had dyed
in Egypt. David himself was not clear from this eui^ sickness, hewas
disquieted for the prosperity of the wicked. Against this there are excellent
precepts, Psalm. 37. Fret not thy self because of wicked men, neither be thou
envious against the workers of iniquity, for they shall soon be cut down as
the grass. Fret not thy self because of him who prospers in his way. Cease
from anger, and for sake wrath. Fret not thy self in any wise to do evil.
For all such illgrounded disquier, whether conceived of envy, indignation,
fear, sorrow, or the like, whether expressed in anger, or revenge on others,
or obscure and inward repining at the providence of God, is evil, and by all
means possible to be declined, as having in it the venom of impatience.

Secondly, if it proceed of an evil in ward cause, it is e*uill. All the
Congregation lifted up their voice and Numb. 14. 1, 2, 3.
cried, and wept, they all murmured against Moses and Aaron. What is the cause
that so mighty an host of men should seem so effeminate? the occasion was
this; the Spies had reported the difficulries of the passage into Canaan; they
cry presently, Wherefore now has the Lord brought us into this land to fall
upon the sword? our wives and our children shall be a prey: were it not better
for us to return into Egypt? Why are your minds thus troubled? Has not the
Lord promised to cast out these Nations before you? Are ye not strong enough
to inuest the most puissant enemy? If not, is not God of power to do what
soever he has promised for you? Yes: but the thing which inwardly moves this
base disquiet of their minds, was their own distrust and unbelief; that is
the cause of their fear; that was also the cause of their murmuring for flesh:
they tempted Psalm. 79. 18, 19, 22. Psalm. 106. 13, 14. 1. Cor 10. 9 Mat. 6. 30.
God, and believed him not; therefore our Savior says to the solicitous and
careful men, Shall he not much more clothe you, O ye of little faith? Ioh.
14. 1.
And to his Disciples; Let not your hearts be troubled: ye believe in God,
believe in me also: intimating, as the only remedy against disquietnes of
mind: so the true cause thereof, a pusillanimous incredulity, and fearful
unbelief; and therefore our Psalmist also, after correction of his own
impatience, says; trust, or hope in God: showing in the remedy, the nature
and cause of the disease: which Note.
teaches us, that even that disquiet of mind, which is occasioned for Gods
cause, or zeal to the Church, if it be an effect of unbelief, or distrust,
(as if God either could not help, or would neglect and frustrate any
dependence on his promise) is evil.

How much more cautious must we be, that our impatience arise not of causes
merely evil, as of covetousness, pride, ambition, morositie and frowardnes,
vain and carnal hopes and desires, malice, envy, or revenge, or their like?
all which in their several defeatures, do marueiloufly wound and distress a
weak and ill-gouerned mind; and because therein are appetites of evil, by so
much more violently do they move the mind to impatience and discontent, by
how much more violently the natural affections of men are procliue to evil,
then to good. Some sins are borne (as I may say) of good parents, as pride of
deserving: which carrying in their pedegrees so foul a dash, bastardie and
degeneration, inherit not their progenitors commendations: such vices are like
that fruit which grows upon some mis^dopted branches, where a wild Sien is
granted upon a generous stock, and ^herfore conuerteth all those sweet and
wholesome humors which feed it, (into bitterness and distastfulnes: but
finnes greaten finnes, as one hea^e another* inordinate impatience is evil, on
whatsoever groundit spring How out of measure evil is it then, when occasions
and causes in a dangerous concurrence make it such? Look how some diseased man
fares with an outward distemper, or ill diet added to his indisposition. The
inward cause of his disenterie is some sharp choler abounding in his body; to
this comes an occasion from without him, as intemperate Summers heat, eating
o^ raw fruits, or the like, which being corrupted, do extremely stimulate that
choler, to a dangerous and painful malady in the bowels. So likewise is it
in the soul; where evil occasions meet with some obstinate humor of the
mind: the disquiet grows desperate: if Ahitophels insatiate ambition and
pride interpret the neglect of his oracles, an affront to his wisdom; what
impatience proceeding of holy zeal was ever so violent and precipitate? If the
wretched caitiue has oue^stood his markets at the end of a dearth, what other
impatience from good occasions is so impetuous? What could so easily arm a
desperate hand with halters, poison, knives? That rarest evil, impatience for
good occasions, in its extremes must be moderated, (as in the next place we
shall see:) but if the cause be some evil within us, no moderation can
justify it. Neither that which is conceived of triuiall causes, habits of
impatience, and evil custom of disquietnesse; all which, as familiar
mischiefs, domesticke devils, have unseen snares laid in every corner of
the house, to possess and surprise even those who hate and fear them.

The third thing which shows disquietnesse of mind evil, is when it wants
a discreet and prudent moderation: for in such cases, the emotions of the mind
(otherwise good) become dangerous: when all virtues consist in their mean,
that cannot but be evil, which being extreme, is separate and remote from
virtue: and when all extremes are dangerous, none are more then those excesses
in affections, which, like violent and sudden inundations, break in upon the
mind, ouerflowing and drowning, shaking down and carrying away ^l fruit of
temperance and meekness. All affections and passions of mind, are as servants,
and familiar necessaries of the inward house: we use not fire and water more
frequently, more profitably: but as manumissed slaves, promoted to place of
command, as the base and worthless (whose minds were never acquainted with any
noble thought) invested with titles of honor, such are affections usurping
over reason, which by right of creation is to hold a sovereignty over them; --
^sperius nihil est: -- Like fire and water, such are the base, such the souls
affections, good servants, but v^sufferable masters.

How excellent an affection is fear? but if it exceed that, which in it
mediocrity is the centinell of the soul, proves an impious distrust, and
evil cowardice. How sweet an affection is hope? but if it go beyond a
reasonable ground, it declineth to a foolish and dangerous presumption. How
useful an affection is sorrow? it makes men sensible of their own miseries,
else they would seek no help; and of others calamities, else they would not
pity* but if it exceed, it kills the heart, dries the bones; and is very
dangerous, as has been showed before* How pleasing an affection is mirth? the
refresher of drooping hearts, the antidote against heart-eating dedolencie and
pensiuenes, the cheerer of the sioke thoughts, the delight of the soul, the
minds serenity, the spirits sovereign restoratiue; yet there is a Serpent in
this Eden; extreme mirth is but a pleasant madness, a property discon^ring
much weakness and leui y of mind: on the other part, a mean and welgouerned
disquiet of mind, has much good in it, whilst it is contained in a due
proportion of zeal or godly sorrow; but if it prove ouergrowne and monstrous*
though it be conceived of the most lustistable occasions and causes, it must
suffer allayes and qualification. What more inst occasion of impatic^ice, then
that, of which the Pla^mist here speaks* What more holy cause, then his
zeal to the honor and seru^ce of God, Wherein he feared some eclypse by
alteration or m^ouarion? yet he corre^^eth his mind, Why art thou (...)
within thee? What more rust cause of the minds disquietnesse then sin? yet
if that be extreme, (as you heard of sorrow) it proves dangerous. Because
then excess in the effect, is a sign of excess, or some dangerous
concomitancie and union of causes, (as disquietnesse for sin imports, that
our sorrow is too great, or accompanied with a servile fear and distrust,
which jointly cause it;) therefore is (even that) disquiet, which may seem
derived from good occasions and causes, evil, if excessive. When once* this
Land being annoyed with Wolves, there was a Law made for the destroying of
them, that every convicted and condemned Fellon should be acquitted, if
(according to sufficient bayl^ given) he could, by a prefixed day, bring in
the heads of so many Wolves: the execution hereof, in short time, caused, that
the Forests and Woods had more Thieues then Wolves; a more dangerous beast
increasing upon the Commonwealth, in the destruction of the former: So it
often comes to pass, that while sorrow and disquiet of mind for sins,
do, at it were, hunt other sins to death, these Nymrods prove the greatest
Tyrants, the most fearful sins of the soul: extreme impatience has no
reason to justify it.

Lastly, if there follow not a due end; and profitable effects of our
affliction and disquietnes, i^ lis evil: the duo end and use of afflictions
are, if we are by them instructed, to give God honor in our patient bearing,
in our hope and experience of his graces sustaining us, if we doc enter into a
more deep and earnest consideration of our sins, whereby we are
necessitated to humble our selves before him in true and hearty sorrow,
because we have displeased him, call upon him more zealously, to reform our
Impatience, and amend our lives, whose prauitie secretly deriueth this fretting
humor into our hearts, the mercy of God so disposing, that we might not perish
by resting contented in sin, and, as it were, settling and feeding on our
lees for want racking. David expresses his disquietnesse by reason of his
sins: Thine arrows Psalm. 38. 2, 3.
stick fast in me, and thine hand presses me sore; there is no soundness in
my flesh, because of thine anger; neither is there any rest in my bones,
because of my sin* for mine iniquities are gone over mine head, as an heavy
burden, they are too heavy for me. -- I am troubled, I am v. 18.
bowed down greatly, I go mourning all the day long. -- I will declare mine
iniguity, and will be sorry for my sin. And presently after; Forsake me not,
o Lord; o my God, be not far from me, etc. It is an happy disquiet, an happy
impatience, which has such issue; I may say of it, as the woman of the most
blessed, Luke 11. 27.
Blessed is the womb that bare thee. Happy soul, happy impatience, which
brings forth fruit full prayers; happy man, who cannot be quiet with sin in
his conscience; happy is that best unrest, which will not suffer a man to
perish by sleeping in sin.

It was a great impatience Job. 3. Job. 6. 4, 9.
in Job, when he cursed the day of his birth, when he said, the arrows of
the Almighty were in him; when he desired that GOD would destroy him; when he
durst expostulate with Job. 7. 20.
God, and say, that he had set him as a mark, so that he was a burden to
himself; yet you see he came to sweet resolutions; 1. of confession; I have
sinned, what shall I do unto thee, a thou preserver of men? 2. of confidence,
Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him. Again; Job. 19. 25.
I know that my Redeemer lives. 3. of humility, I have spoken that I
understood not. Job. 42. 6.
I have heard of thee by the ear, but now mine eye sees thee; therefore I
abhor my self, and repeat in dust and ashes.

Mos^s was so disquieted, that he said to the Lord* Numb. 11* ^, etc.
Wherefore have thou afflicted thy ser^^ns? and wherefore have I not found
favor in thy* sight, that thou laydest the burden of all this people upon me^?
Wh^nce should I have flesh to gi^^^unto all this people? for they* weep unto
me, saying, Give us flesh, that we may eat: I am not able to bea^^ all this
people alone, because it is too heavy for meet* And if thou de^le thus with
me, kill me, I pray thee, ^^t of hand, if I have found fa^^ur in thy sight,
and let me not see my wretchedness. Thus they Psalm. 106. 33. Pertu^batus eni ^
^^urmure pop^li infidel^s, non ten^^t fid^ciam, qual^ debu^. Aug. ^d
pr^^oked his Spirit: so that he spoke vnad^isedly with his lips. And so great
was this impatience, that for it, God suffored him not to go into the Land of
Canaan. It is true; but giu^ me that ad^^s^^ (...) man, who could with
patience have borne the heartbreaking cries of one or a few famished infants
for bread: How much more grievous was it for one Moses to consider* so many
thousand bellies, (unacquainted with any rhe^oricke) so many important mo^thes
calling upon him for meat? yet he failed not to cry unto the Lord for help,
and, though with much testimony of humane frailty (showing what we are of our
selves) yet he prayed. ^^remie records his ^wne infirmity* when i^
bitterness of spirit, he said: Why is my pain perpetual, I^r. 15. 1^.
and my wound incurable which refuses to be healed? will thou be altogether
unto me as a liar, and as waters that fatle? And Ier. 20. 7. Augi^ur Propheta,
^^n quod calami^ate and ^e^b^^ibu^ affligit^r, sed quod ^loquia diui^a
sugillantur. Theod. interp. in lerem. 20.
again: O Lord, thou have deceived me and I was deceived: -- I am in derision
daily, every one mocketh me. -- The^ I said, I will not make mention of him, nor
speak any more in his Name. Albeit his impatience was more, for that the Word
of God became a reproach to the wicked, then for that they afflicted him in his
person, yet he she weth how infirm he was, and yet, in the same place, a
blessed issue, he resolves better, he was weary of forbearing.

But, if on the contrary, we grow worse and worse, the more we are afflicted,
then our impatience is evil. If (...) 10, 13.
we say in the rui^es of our families, The brickes are fallen down, but we
will build with hewn stones: the Sycomores are cut down, but we will change
them into Cedars. If we grow insolent, and turn not unto him that smites us,
neither with all our disquietnesse seek the Lord Ier. 5. 3.
of hosts: if when he consumes us, we receive not correction: if the more
we -- diuinit^s extitisse illam flammam, non quae terres^re illud domicilium
deleret, sed quae sublimius magnificenti^ q^e de^os^eret. Lactant. l. 3. c. 17.
are smitten, we fall away the more: if we think of our sins, as that
Orator of the burning of the Capitol at Rome, that that fire was by the
especial providence of God, not to abolish that terestriall Mansion of
Jupiter, but to require another more stately and magnificent: as if by how much
greater Gods judgments were, by -- c^ diligentius peccandum esset, etc. Ib.
Lact.
so much men ought to sin more diligently: if our impatience hatch any
monsters in the mind and resolutions; if it send out words tending to Gods
dishonor, expressing unbelief, malicious apostacy: the least hereof is
carefully to be avoided as a great failing in our duties, who ought patiently
to receive correction as sons, to whom God ^ffereth himself as a most
gracious Father; the greatest, as dangerous presumptions and prognostickes of a
reprobate Job 2. 9.
mind. Job's wife fell upon his hazard; Do thou still retain thine
integrity? Curse God and die. Such are often times the words and actions of
the afflicted wicked, that as Ieh^rams messengers, they 2. King. 6. 33.
express the apostacy of their master; Behold, this evil is of the Lord,
what should I wait for the Lord any longer? Such was Saul's resolution: when
God will not answer, he is for Endor, -- Athat ^nt^ mo^ebit: such Indaes
disquiet: such the end and fruits of impious men's impatience, vines of
Gomorah, grapes of gall, bitter clusters, such their wine, the poison of
Dragons, and the cruel gall of Aspes. It is a bittercup which the Lord has
mixed for his servants in their trials, but his mercy ever cuteth it with a
sweet issue, so that howeuer it ta^te at first, it has a good farewell. But
for ^ho wicked, judgments are laid up in store, sealed up amongst his
treasures, to whom vengeance and recompense belong: their foot shall slide in
due time, the day of their destruction is at hand, and the things that shall
come upon them make haste. Because they would not humble themselves under the
mighty hand of God, in patient bearing their crosses, that he might exalt
the^ in due time.

Use.
The mind of a natural man is as unconstant as the sea: sometimes smooth,
sometimes stormy, and so fierce, that in its madness it is ready As Nero,
(...). Sucton.
(in its own suffering) to imprecate confusion of all things: in any great
sorrow it is irresolute, (sometimes this is better, sometimes another best
comporteth with our unstable desires) it hops, it despaireth, it loves, it
hates what it loved, it rejoices, and presently grieueth for the same thing,
it never rests in any center of true wisdom: there is great cause then, that
man being so bad, so dotingly amorous of the World, so continually er^ing in
sundry passions, so immature and unadvised in his greatest deliberations,
should often change his mind, if all that inconstancy be but like the shaking
of the needle in a displaced compass, that it may by running over many points,
at last settle upon the right. But why any of Gods servants should be so
disquiet, as that he neither has present comfort, nor can admit of future,
there is no reason: there are fears and sorrows which will shake and disquiet
the most settled and best grounded mind, God coming, as to 1. King. 19 11, 12.
Eliah in Horeb, as it were with an earthquake, a strong wind breaking the
rocks of our hearts, and with a purging fire to try us, before he will speak
in the still voice of consolation: but why do we add to our own disquiet*
Why do we feed the gallfull humor? Like froward children, when we have been
deservedly beaten, we will cast down our selves, and cry for very pettishnesse
and fullennesse, as if we were in hope to compel our^correctours (at least
some witnesses) to favor and pity us suffering injuries: I do well to be
angry to the death (says Jonah.) If we might be our own Judges, how often
would we say and auow the same? we will be nothing, if we cannot be what we
would be: such a bitter distemper Augustine Confess. l. 4. c. 6.
fell into, for the loss of his friend: I was weary of living, and afraid to
die (says he:) And afterward; -- I boiled within, I sighed, I wept, I was
troubled* I had neither rest, nor advice: I carried a disseuered and bloody
soul, impatient of my bearing it* and where I should repose it, I found not;
not in the pleasant Woods, not in Sports and Sonnets: -- for whether should
mine heart ^lie from mine heart? This, (Why art thou disquiet) strongly
imports, thou oughtst not so to be, to dissuade from evil impatience, and
disquietnesse of mind, there are many express places of holy Writ. 1. Pet. 3.
14 Romans 12* 12 Phil. 4. 5.
Fear not their fear, nor be troubled. -- Be patient in tribulation. Let
your patient mind be known unto all men, I am. 4. ^.
the Lord is at hand. -- Be ye^ also patient, stablish your hearts, for the
coming of the Lord Heb. 10. 36
draws nigh. -- Ye have need of patience, that after ye ha^^ done the will
of God, ye might Prou. 3. 11, 12.
recei^e the promise. -- My s^nne, despise not the chastening of the Lord,
neither be wea^ie of his corrections: For whom the Lord loves, be corrects,
even as a father the son in whom he delights.

From reason there are many arguments also.

1. It is a sign of Gods love, that we are corrected, and not given over, as
appears by the last cited Heb. 12. 6.
Scripture* Gods counsel is to amend us by chastisement, * Patienti^ comes est
sapientia, non famula c^^cupisci^ntiae: patient is amica est b^*n^ conscientia,
etc. Aug. de patient. c. 6. lb. Aug.
whom his milder warnings (delivered us in his Word) could not amend.

2. It is a certain argument of true wisdom, greatness, goodness, and strength
of mind, to be patient in afflictions: none but the wise can be patient, as
none but the good, wise: therefort the cause shows patience, and where that
is good, this is true. The Philosophers, so much at ods concerning all, or most
points of wisdom and opinion, as that there wanted not an Anaxagoras, Cui
niues atramentum fu^runt. Lactant. l. 5. c. 3.
to affirm, that Snow is black, yet all met in this center of patience, which
they both commended, and affected: yet their wisdom (as their patience) was
supposititious and false: for how can he be either wise, patient, or good,
who known neither the wisdom nor patience of God? There is no outward mark
does more distinguish between the (...) and wicked, then meek and quiet
toleration of crosses *nec aliud magis (...) disce^ (...) ^^stos, etc. Cyp^. de
(...) patient. se. m. 3
This man complains and blasphemeth; the other in the very like affliction,
is proved and approved. Pu^ chafe into the furnace, it presently consumes;
pu^ gold into the same, it comes out more refined and precious: such is the
difference betwixt the wicked and righteous. Those* like the mighty men of
Nebuchadnezzars Dan. 3. 20. 21.
Army, which cast in the servants of God into the Babylonish furnace, are
slain; the other, like those three children, live in the fire: it is easy for
the formal hypocrite, in prosperity, to speak like a Saint: but because we
hear sometimes Jacobs voice, when the hands and actions are Esaus; God says
as Isaac, Genesis 27. 21
Accede nunc vt palpem ^e, fili mi* Come near, my soon, that I may feel
thee, whether thou be my very son or not: not that he knows not who are
his* but that he might make them known to men; for it is not professing, but
suffering, which shows the man: Gold is tried in the fire, good men in
affliction. Job suffered the malice of the devil, being rich and wealthy, and
more wealthy in -- ne^ pater nec domi^^^ est. Cypr. q. s.
many sweet children; presently he is neither a father, nor rich, nor master
of any thing: full of sores, full of anguish, his friends forsaking him, or
visiting, becommingmiserable comforters, so that he had in himself pains and
g^i^fes, in them, many vn^ind ^*e^rours to endure: the devil falls to his
old ward, arming the woman to suggest (...) as if he should find an^ other Adam
in Job, as if Illo antiquo nequitiae su^ vsus inge^^^* q^as^ om^es per ^ulicrem
decipere posset (...) ^ec^r in ^^iginc. Cypr. q. s.
he could deceive all by her, as at first he did the only man: but when she
instigated (...) ^ee answered* Thou sp^a^^ost (...) one of the foolish wom^n:
What* Shall o^ee receive good at the hand of G^d, and (...) we not receive
(...) did Job 2. 10.
not Job sinn^ with his lips. S^tan was deceived in his artifi^e, he hoped to
obscure his holy patienc^, bu^^made it more (...) was Cautior fuit istae in
doloribus, etc. Aug. de Adam and Job, I. de patient.
more cautious in his griefs, then Adam was in the pleasant Woods this was
ou^tcome in delights, the other overcame in pains; and that victory remains
to the Church, as a certain Troph^e of the devils ou^rthrow.

The wicked are presently Matthew. 13.
discovered in afflictions, they murmur, and like the Pati^mis vera (...) cum
quis amst quem portat, nam tolerasse and odisse nonest virtus, sed velamen
furoris. Bonauent. in Luc. 21. ^it. ex Greg.
rootlesse corn, are quickly wit hered. It is a special mark of
regeneration, if out of obedience we can patiently bear, and love God, as well
correcting, (...) (...) this is true patience, to love him of whom we (...) to
endure: and hate, is not virtue, but a disguise and veil of fury. Though he
slay me, yet will I trust in him: and because Abraham loved God, therefore
when God proved him with Grave preceptum. Tertul de patient.
that heavy precept, that which God pleased not to suffer, he would patiently
have suffered, had God pleased to permit it. It is a custom of Heathens, and
godless men to be impatient in temporallosses, because they Tertul. q. s.
prefer money before their soul; but it must not be so with Christians.
Once there were laws of retaliation, an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth.
The Lord of patience was not yet come; but when Mat. 5. 38 44.
he came, he said, Resist not evil, he expounded to a word, a Racha, to a
thought, to restrain the petulancy of hands, and to take away the poison of
tongues, he said, Love your enemies, bless th^^ that curse you. Wherein he
shows, with what Christian greatness and goodness of mind they must
overcome all evil.

3. Impatience is but a striving with God, an obscure and inward murmuring
against his prouidences Exodus 16. 8
What are we? (said Moses) your murmurings are not against us, but against the
Lord. He that vexes at second causes, does but bite Aug. q s. c. ^ 1.
the stone which is cast at him: it was not he that had will to hurt, who took
away Jobs goods, but he that gave that power: It is Gods alldisposing
providence (that cause of causes) which gives and takes away, which exalts
and casts down: the greatest endeavor of man cannot add one cubit to the
stature: therefore we^ show our vanity in nothing Matthew. 6.
more, then in being impatient, Isai. 45. 9.
for woe unto him who strives with his Maker. It skilleth little who
betrayeth, Ier. 50 24.
or who rages, when God suffers those, thus to Cypr. ep. 3
be entreated, whom he disposes to crown.

4. We pray; Thy will be done in earth, as it is in bea^en: wherein we not only
desire, that all the creatures should without resistance, quietly obtemperate,
and, as he has the holy Angels of heaven ready to atchiue, and do his
commands, so that all the wills of men on earth, may be framed into one
obsequious consent, that they may incline wholly to the will of God, that God
would be pleased to take away that innate contumacy of our minds, which cease
not to mutiny against his holy Spirit, that he would make us so docible and
tractable, that we may only will that which is pleasing to his will, that -- da
nobis spiritum c^nsil^ ^t faciamus voluntatem ^uam, etc. ^onauent. orat.
domini, exposit. ^oh. 6. 29, 39, 40.
he would give us new hearts, that we may not affect our own desires, but
subscribe to the absolute guidance of his Spirit, that we may believe in him,
that we may be holy, both in body and Spirit, that we may keep his Word and
commandments; but also, we pray that we may both in prosperity and 1. These.
4. 3.
adversity, give him the glory, pa^icntly and me^kely bearing his hand,
acknowledging his will and divine providence in all things which befall us: if
we pray, ^hy will be done, shall we resist that which we pray may be done*
there is great reason we should continually pray for this grace; for without it
we can neither pray nor hear profitably, being, through i^patience, possessed
of a du^l pensiveness, a painful it ^^omn^s, which is ^old of zeal to any
holy duty.

5. We ought to rely upon Gods goodness, who is faithful, ^o ca^ al^ our
cares upon him, to commit our selves and estates to him, who is both powerful
to keep us, and gracious to reward us, whose will also it Phil. 1. 27, 28, 19.
is, that we should glorify him in those sufferings, which he has appointed
us. It was Paul's comfort 2. Tim. 1. 12
under the Cross: F^^ the which cause I also suffer these things:
nevertheless, I am not ashamed, for I know whom I have believed, and I am
persuaded, that he is able to keep that thing I have committed to him against
that day* He Aded satis idoneus patientiae sequester Deus. Tertul. de patient.
c. 15.
is a sufficient sequestrator to the (...) if thou commit thy wrongs to him,
he is a revenger; if thy loss, he is a restorer; if thy grief he is a
Physician* if death, he is a quickner and reuiuer: how much should we suffer,
that he may be an accomptant to us?

6. There has no tentation overtaken us, but such as appertains unto man.
Paul comfort the Philippians herewith, when he bids them, in nothing to
be te^rified by their adversaries, they having the same Phil. 1. 28, 30.
^onflict which they saw in him, and then heard to be in him. He knows not
what this life is, who is ignorant of afflictions. It was said to be the
speech of Demonax, when he came to a friend impatiently lamenting the death of
his son, and ^^^ting mourning i^ dark^nes; Find me (laid he) three men in the
world, who have not lamented the death of some friend, and I will make thy
son alive again. When of all his acquaintance he could not reckon one; O
man (said he,) why do thou so much disquiet thy self, as if some new thing
had befallen thee! And it was a like wise practice which is imputed to the
Athenian Solon, when he saw one of his acquaintance disconsolately grieuing, he
led him up into an high Tower, whence having showed him those numberless
houses of a populous City; Now (says he) do but think with thy self, how
many sorrows have been, shall be, or now dwell under these roofes, and cease so
impropriate humane and common misery to thy self. We Vides^t quam sit vtile
b^mini scire se hominem vt proi^dt fit paratus ^d, etc and tolevantium
flagellorum. Bern. de obed. patient. etc. sermon.
must consider what man is, that we may learn to bear humane miseries with a
Christian resolution. Man begins with tears: the first language of man
streweth the condition in which, and to which he is borne: he that is
ignorant of all things else, knows how to cry in his nativity, as if in that
auspication, he did by a natural instinct, lament the anxieties and labors of
this life* the filly wretch res^iffeth a fore se me of the worlds storms, so
soon as he enters into this glassie sea. There was a time when man was
deputed to action only, Genesis 1. 28.
when God said, (...) the earth and subdue it. But for our sins, he pron oun
ced the irreuocable (...) (...) all mankind to a miserable serui ude under
labor (...) Genesis 3. 17, 19.
sorrows; Cursed is the earth for thy sake in (...) (...) thou ^ate of it all
the days of thy life in the sweat of thy (...) shall thou ^at bread, till th^^
return unto the ground. Besides we carry about bodi^^ subject to many injuries
open O dementiam ^escientem d^ligere homines humaniter! ^ stultum bominem
immoderate ^umana p^tientem! Aug. conf. I. 4. c. 7.
to many maladies what madness is it then impatiently to bear that in others
which we have in ourselves on in our selves, which we can no ways avoid or
lessen, but by patient bearing especially when we suffer no evil but that
which we have more then deserved.

(...) Without patience, (I say dot there is (...) comfortable enjoying any
thing without thee, but) there is no possessing thy self Passesse Luke 21. 19.
Illius rei dicitur qul^ possessor, cui^s habet plenum dominium. Bonav. in Luc.
21.
your souls with potic^re; says Christ: without (...) we have not (...) over
out sel^es: the impatient man is possessed of envy, malice, (...) in dignation,
griefe^ or the lil^o* ^but he is not master of him self: but the patient and
contented man, though he lose his fields, his merchandise, his pleasures ^hed
o^eth not himself. Patience is the keeper of virtue, and the ornament of the
ve^tuous: Patience is the (...) ^oble (...) ho^ that rules his ow^e mind,
Prou. 16. 22.
is better then he that winnes a City: the patient man possesses all things,
bo^^ prosperous and adverse* all things ferue him, yea those things, which
seem, and intend to hurt him, heat, cold, wa^m comm^nd him, and make (...)
more abound in that which is best* the stetility of his fields, give him a
bette^ harvest ^o lay up ^heeues, robbers* opp ressours, lay him up tr^asure in
the hands of God. Happy patience! which in^esteth, them with all things, who
^ra^e nothing else but patience.

8. As impatience has a wicked author, so has it Tert. q. s. c. 5.
^any cursed effects. I find^ faith Tertullian) the (...) and parentage of
impatience in the Devil: he impatitenly bearing, that GOD Cypr. de bono
patient. Et Tert. q. s.
made man to his own Image, and subjected the creatures to him, first perished
there by: Whether impatience were the Devils first sin, or that the first
occasion of such impatience, I dispute not now: sure it is, that impatience and
malice are co^tancous, that they indiuidually grow up together out of one
bosom: impatience is the womb which conceiueth cuery sin; the fountain
Defundens de suo font ^arias criminum venas. Ibid. Tert.
which conueyeth into the heart sundry veins of iniquity. Who steals, but
the impatient of want? Who murdereth, but the impationt of injuries? Whence is
that sale of chastity, and base prostitution? Whence standers, murmurings,
disobedience, covetousness, extortion, imposture, cursing, prophan^^ion, but
from impatience* When Israel are impatient of Moses stay in the Mount, then
they dare require an Idol: when they are impatient of want, then they Act. 7.
murmur: when they are impatient of hearing their due reproves, then they slay
the Prophets. Impatience is the Grand-dame of all sin: hence are heresies,
s^hisines, dissentions, renting the sacred unity of the Church: hence
rebellions, treasons, assascinations: in a word* every s^nne is no be ascribed
to impatience. The impatient and malecontent, are the Douils* An^ills, on whith
he can forge any thing necessary to his manufacture, and belonging to his shop.

9. Cypr. q. s.
By impatience we do more hurt our selves, than, Sit patientia in pecio^e, and
(...) illic locum h^bere non possant. Cypr. ib. Ephesians. 4. 27.
being, patient, the Devil himselle could hurt us: if he does not plough with
our heighfer, and worle upon our impatience, what can he do* How could he,
without our impatience, persuade us to anger, discord, ^^uenge, discontent,
murmuring o^ the like? The Apostle warns beer of when he says, B^ (...) but
sin not, -- neither gine place to the Devil: -- let all bitterness, and
wrath, and anger, and clamor, and euill*speaking be put away from you, with
all malice. And the Psalm. 37. 8.
Psalmist; Fret not thy self in any wise to do evil. Add to this, that by
impatience (like a man with indiscreet ^o^^ing and remoouing the burden, which
he cannot cast off) we greaten our load, as has been said: the impatient,
while they would not suffer, do not by that unwillingness procure their ease
from the evil they Qui mala malunt ^o^ co^mittendo far, quam non ferendo
co^mittere leuiora, etc. Aug. de pati. c. 2.
bear, but that they bear^ greater miseries* the patient, who ch^s^ rather to
bear evil, by not committing it, then to commit it, by not bearing it, do
both, by that patience, make those things less which they suffer, and avoid
worse things, into which the impatient do plunge themselves. Do thou know,
o impatient man, what shall be the end of thy discontent which now thou
feedest? Do thou know how great, how deadly that Serpent will prove, which
now thou fosterest in thy bosom? Do thou know how far God will let thee
run, who wilt not now be stayed, who now, either without cause or mean,
tormentest thy self with a fruitless impatience? Look upon the fearful ends
of many malcontents, and make a right use of their madness: the Devil has
prevailed over them; what are thou stronger or better, if he, against whose
providence thy disquietnesse makes thee repine* shall give thee over unto him?
How justly are they given over to Satan to their destruction, who will not
abide the sovereign hand of God to their salvation?

10. Patience proceeds Cypr. q. s.
from God, as from the Author and Fountain of it: from him it is derived, from
him it has excellency: how patient he is* those indignities and frequent
contumelies which he endures in expectation of the sinners conversion, do
testify: his creatures which the godless enemies enjoy, the sun rising, the
rain indifferently Matthew. 5.
falling upon the just and unjust, do manifest it: he has present revenge in
his power; yet he tempe^areth his indignation, in wonderful mercy waiting for
their repentance* to which his long suffering and goodness leads the vessels
of mercy* he does not ^nely command patience, but teaches i^ by incomparable*
1 Pet. 2. 21.
examples in himself* so that he is both Specul^m patie^di, e^ (...)
patientis* a mirror of patience, and reward of the patient* he, whose divine
nature is impatible, took upon him a passive, became man, was borne, suffered
hunger, thirst, weariness: he endured a domesticke enemy ^^bijs ^i^^ ^o^osis
no^ ^ega^it o^^ulum pa^i^. Aug. de patient. c. 9.
unto the last: he refused not a traitorous kiss: What contradictions, what
reproaches did he not suffer of a malicious Vulgar; spitting, scorning,
bu^^etting! The innocent permitted the guilty to condemn him to scourging,
crucifying: he that fed them with the sweetness and fatness of the earth,
endured their ^eeding him with vinegar and gall: when he was nailed to the
Cross, the Stars were confounded, the Elements troubled; the Earth trembled,
usurping night veiled the day, the Sun hid it beams, as if it would not see
the Jews impiety: all this time, he is like a I am be before the shearer: if
he, who came into the world without finne, lived without finne, went not out
without so much suffering, what cause have we to be impatient. We indeed
suffer justly, for, we receive the Luke 23. 41
du^ reward of our deeds; but he has (...) nothing ^mi^^e. In his agony he
hid his Majesty? and bare all constantly, that he might exhibit a perfect
example of quiet patience: and when they tortured him to the death, he ^lyed
out, ^ather, forgive them.

Again, he is the Fountain which gives patience and consolation; he is the
God of patience and consolation, Romans 15. 5.
because he only gives patience, and comfort the patient.

11. Sweet and* excelle^^ are the effects of patience: it allayeth anger,
sets ^ watch before the doors of the wise-mans lips* bridleth the tongue,
kee^eth peace, breaks the sin of malice, and the malice of ^i^ne, governs
the mind (...) (...) the violence* of b^^elling pride extinguishe^^ the fire*
of discord, ^^estraineth, the insolency of the rich, and comforte^h the (...)
the poor, it ^aseth (...) of subjection, and ^^uerneth, the* furious^^^^e of
dominion* O divine patience of the seru^^ts (...) Christ, ground of (...)
keeper of innocence, How shall I style thee? What shall I say in thy
commendation? What were this wretched life of man, what were we without thee?
Thou sweetnest the bitterness of sorrow, thou adornest prosperity, thou
lightnest adversity, thou pullest out the serpents teeth, and the sting of
afflictions, thou applyest the only antidote against the venomous effects of
sin; thou show the way to follow, the living way to blessedness, Christ
Jesus: patience is the only mean to overcome the evil we suffer: he that is
impatient, is overcome of that he suffers: he that returns evil for
evil, overcomes not, but is surprised of impatience. The most heroicke and
noble victory, is to suffer evil, and overcome it with goodness: every iniu
rye, where it finds patience, is so repulsed, as a bullet, contused by the
inpenetrable strength and hardness of a rock, and often hurts the Author with
a dangerous Tert. q* s. F^^cius ladentis in ^olore lasi est. Ib.
rebound if thou do not impatiently grieve, the enemy is defeated, because
the fruit of the hurter is in the grief or the hurt: when thou have prevented
that, he must needs be grieved, because Plus improbum illum cedu i^ inendo. Ib.
thou art not. Art thou injured? thou do beat that wicked man more by
suffering him. S^^me^ cursed, David was neither dejected nor reuengefull, he
endured those opprobries of the railer, and when he Potestatens regi^^^ in
aegis adhibuit prohibendo, quam exercendo vindictam. Aug. de patien.
could easily have rewarded him, he not only did it not himself, but
restrained another who was troubled at it; showing his Kingly power more by
forbidding, then exercising revenge: he acknowledged the will of God, for which
he patiently tasted the bitterness of those contumelies: Suffer him to 2 Samuel*
16. 11.
curse, for the Lord has bidden him. No evil shall hurt thee, if impatience
do not disarme thee. It is the Lord, (said Eli) let him do what 1 Samuel 3. 18.
seems him good. Naked came I out of my mothers womb, and naked shall I
return. -- The Lord has given, and the Lord has taken away: Blessed be the
Name Job. 1. 21.
of the Lord, says Job. Look Iam* ^. 10. 11.
upon the Martyrs, Take the Prophets, who have spoken in the Name of the Lord,
for an ensample of suffering affliction, and of patience: Behold, we count
them happy which endure. They have constantly endured all manner of See the
Epistle of the French, to the Churches of Asia and Ph^ygia. Eusebius. l. 5.
torments, yea sometimes till their tormentors were weary, and faint with
seeing and inflicting that, which they, who suffered cheerfully, felt.
Consider the effects of thy suffering: except it be thy fault, in not making a
right use of them, these trials have made thee humble, meek, and patient: What
then, though it be grievous for the present? remember the quiet fruits of
righteousness, ^ and say with comfort, as Joseph, naming his Ephrai^, -- GOD
Gen* 41. 52
has caused me to be fruitful in the Land of mine affliction. Mere with
afflictions by a resolute patience, and thou have half overcome them: the
re^olued Christian defeareth the enemy, by entertaining his charges before they
grow vnr^sistable. Temporal calamities are like nettles, if thou handle them
too tenderly, they will sting ^ Therefore CHRIST says, If any man will follow
m^^ let him deny himself, and take up his Cross, Mat. 16. 24
and f^ll^w me. For, first, if ^^are willing to bear, if we but submit ^o the
will of God, the bitterness of (...) i^ past, because God has w^ought that
good thing in us, for which he took up the rod* so that it will be but a
virga aurea, a golden S^^p^er* held out to us, (...) that we have access to
his favor. Again, our preparation is in arming against the violence of the
strokes: therefore he faith, tollat ^^ucem. Me thinks I see Moses rod cast
down, becoming a Sorpent, Moses flying from it, the Dord calling to him*
Exodus 4. 3, 4.
Put forth thine hand, and take it by the ^ayle. Good God! will it not kill* Is
it not a Serpent* You when he took it up, it is but a rod in his hand: such
are the rods of God, when we will not take them up willingly, when we look
fearfully at them a sarre off: but if we take them up, they are but rods.

Many also are the active effects of patience, that feminine virtue: Tertullian
calls it the Mother of mercy; for he will not grudge to give, who seareth
not to loose: it is that Cyprian.
which both commends and keeps us to God: without this, there is no crown
of martyrdom, no defense of virtue: without this, no way to follow our Savior
into glory: this is (says Bernard) that porta ferrea, the iron gate, leading
out of this earthly prison, to Act. 12.
the City, the heavenly Jerusalem.

Lastly, our trials cannot be long: and the more extreme and violent they are,
the shorter they must be: yet a little, and he that shall come, will come, and
will not tarry: it is but a season for which we are in 1 Pet. 1. 6. Reu. 22. 20
heaviness: Surely, I come quickly, says he: Athanasius comforted himself
and others, in Iulians time, with Nubecul^ est, cito transitura.
this argument: he is but a little cloud, which shall quickly pass over. O
that in every affliction we could but consider, how short our sufferings are,
and how our enjoying: shall be eternal! if we could but compare them, we
should easily conclude with the Apostle, -- The afflictions of this present
Romans 8. 18.
time, are not worthy of the glory which shall be showed unto us: because our
light 2 Cor. 4. 17.
and momentarie sufferings do cause unto us a far more excellent and
eternal w^ight of glory. What do worldly men endure for that they vicio^sly
love? riches, honors, pleasures? What do not the seditious Gatelines endure?
hunger, cold, watchings, fastings, labors, perils* in all which, their
hardines is admirable, their patience is nothing: for it Non qualia, sed qualis
pa^iatur i^ t^res^.
skilleth not what, but what a one suffers in the denomination of patience.
Now if thieves and murderers suffer these things, that they may possssse that
which may make them pe^ish* how much more should we, lest we peri^h* O that we
could but s^t our affections on things about* O that we could but love things
heavenly* O that we could but truly hope for them, and desire true goods! how
easily should we* ^^a^e s^eming ^olls (...) strength o^ Aug. de pat^. c. 4.
desire* c^^s^th ^ufferance of labors and grief* no man, but for t^^t which
delight^th, does ^o^untari^y tak^ upon him to endure that which tormen^^^^ him.
(...) ^erued s^uen years for his ^a^et, and they s^emed (...) him ^ut ^^^ew
days, Genesis 39. 2^.
(...) ^er.

Hope in God, etc.
THese words contain the counsel which the psalmist gives his own soul: in
which are the antidote against sorrow and disquiet of mind; hope, with its
ground and foundation, God. Here are two disaffections, deiection and
disq^ietnesse; and a remedy to cure them both, hope. These two do mutually
beget Chryso^t. (...) ^om. ^7.
each other; patience* hope, and hope patience. The Scripture often unites
them: -- rejoicing in hope; Romans 1^. 1^. (...)
patient in trib^l^tron. Love, says the Apostle, hops all all things*
end^reth all things. It is impossible for ho^^ ^o live without patience, or
patience to be sustained without hope.

Most pleasing is hopes persuasion, and very necessary for this life, amongst
so many miseries, calamities, things hard and intolerable. What were wretched
man without hope? This life were as a Ship without an helm, a body without an
eye, a Firmament without a Sun. Without hope, what relish could there be in
grief, what comfort in afflictions? Every adversity would seem, for the
present, a full period and end of comfort, which must as often dye, as we could
number sorrows betwixt the two limits of mortality, the Womb and the Grave.
There is nothing so bitter, which hope does ^ot sweeten. The A^cients w^sely
intimated Hope, the la^^ l^uing comforter of adversity, when they said, that
in Pandora's Table, the box emptied, all things powered out and lost, Hope only
remained in the bottom: and that when Faith, Justice, Piety, and Peace took
wing, and soared to heaven, Hope only was left to men on earth.

There is nothing so light, so little, so remote, so strange, to which the
mind, animated by hope, does not adhere: so light is hope, so obscure, so
blind, so ambiguous, incertaine, slender, vain. So pleasing is that sweet
liberty of hoping for our selves, as that it will feed upon conjecture and
opinion either probable or possible, because the like has been; sometimes it
happened to others, it has some reason, it is just, it should be so, it is
credible, it was promised, or the like; and where we have no ground, on which
hope can set the lightest foot, we frame some to our selves, imagining there
is, or may be something better then yet we see, or can imagine.

It may seem requisite, that hopes should be borne of the lightest causes,
that the mind, obuious to so many sorrows, might also every where find some
solace to refresh and sustain its often fainting: and that there is some use
even of those triuiall things it presents to the sorrowful; when the
imprisoned makes him roomo, with hope of enlargement; the meager feeds on
hopes of future saciety; the exiled sends his minds home, (...) tell his
friends (at least himself) that he is returning; the sic^e thinks of walking
into the fields, captives of liberty, the poor of plentie^ al^ this (...).
time, though it be but a dream, it shor^^e^h misery, and ^^ealeth some
hours from sorrow, by deluding the afflicted soul for that time t^ it is a
common solace, it makes him believe he is rich who has not: it is the (...)
troubled fool^, from whose altars it seemed^ an intolerable sacrilege to take
the mind.

But since there is nothing more deceitful then vain hopes, which howeuer,
like a draught of cold water they refresh the sick for a littletime, yet in
the end they do wonderfully exasperate our sorrows, by mocking our desires,
and give our souls the strappado; for we do the more dangerously despair: the
more we hoped in vain, the fall being greatned by the height of ou^ station
or exaltation, it remains, that the only way to comfort and quiet a
perplexed and troubled soul, is to cast all our care on God, to raise the mind
to a true hope and affiance in him.

For first, we must consider, that this hope is a virtue infused into our
hearts by the Spirit of God, who being 1. Pet. 1. 3.
the God of truth, cannot give a deceitful persuasion, by which we do
cheerfully and constantly expect his future benefits, in mitigation of our
present calamities, according to his good pleasure: in which assurance his
servants say; Though I should Psalm. 23. 1, 3, 4.
walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear none evil. He
must needs be safe, whom God assures of his protection; therefore this 1. These.
5. 8 Heb. 6. 19.
hope is the Helmet of salvation, and the Anchor of the soul.

T. Aquin. 22. q 4. 7.
Secondly, this hope is an adiunct of faith, and indiuidually follows it:
faith is Heb. 11. 1.
the substance of things hoped for: it is not a light and groundless opinion;
it is firm and continuing. We do hope for, and expect the fulfilling of Gods
promises, because we believe them to be true. Faith is a steadfast persuasion
of the truth of Gods Word and promise; hope looks for the fulfilling 1. Cor.
2. (...) ^ (...)
of it: Faith says, The things which eye has not seen, neither care has
heard, neither came into man's heart, are which God has prepared for them that
love him: Hope says* -- henceforth is laid 2. Tim. 4. 8
up for me the crown of righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge
shall give me at that day. Howeuer then, a^ faith looks upon the
p^^ishments, which are due to sinners, it is the cause of fear, yet as it
looks on tho reward which God has 22. q 7. 1. ^
promised, it is the cause of hope: this hope is fixed upon eternal
blessedness as its last end, and on the grace of God, as leading us thereto:
it makes us cleave to God, 12. q. 69. 2. 1.
the fountain of all blessedness, as Faith makes us adhere to him the
fountain of truth: it shows our reference to the help of God, in whom and
through whom we look for all felicity* O^^ Psalm. 124. 8
help stands in the Name of the Lord who has made heaven and earth.

Having then such a cause as apprehends and appropriateth to us all the
promises of God, it must (...) that though hope be only of things future and
joy of Spes pracedit gaudium and causat illud. 12. q. 25. 1. e.
the present; yet that hopes do both precede and cause that joy, which is a
sovereign remedy against all grief and disquiet of mind; as also, that
although hope be a mean betwixt presumption and despair, yet having no
participation of either extreme, it expels despair as its contrary: being
justified by Faith, we 12. q. 64. 4. 3.
have peace toward GOD through our Lord jesus Christ: and, -- We rei^yce in
tribulation; Romans 5. 1.
Knowing that tribulation brings forth patience, patience experience, and
experience hope, and hope makes not ashamed.

Thirdly, it does much stay a troubled mind, to consider that howeuer the
afflictions which it suffers, are common to good and bad, yet it neither
suffers upon the like* terms (for calamities are mercies to the Saints, out
judgments to the ungodly; to them the rods of Heb. 12. 6.
alouing father, to these the swords of an angry revenger) neither, are those
suffetings followed with one and the same, but contrary issues: the wicked
(like the Egyptians in the Red Sea) is overwhelmed, where the righteous is not
only preserved; but bettered. Admirable is the confidence of the faithful;
even in common Hab. 3. 16, 17, 18.
calamities: When I heard (says the Prophet,) my belly trembled, my lipp^
shook at the voice* for the fig tree shall not flourish, neither shall fruit
be in the vines* the labor of the Olive sha^^ fail and the fields shall (...)
no meat: the sheep shall (...) cut off from the fold, and there shall be no
bullock in the stalles: But I will rejoice (...) the Lord: I will rejoice in
the Lord of my salvation. The Lord is my strength. Cypria^ Contra Demel.
giving a reason why the heathens were impatient and querulous, where the
Christians were valiant and meekly expected the time of Gods promises, speaks
after this manner: We know (says he) there is no way to avoid the common
condition of all men, which is calamitous: we are now good and bad within one
Parisorte perpetimur. lb. Cypr.
house, whateuer how befalls, we share and suffer alike, till in the end of
this mortal life we be divided into several lodgings of life or death: Yet
(says he) we are not equal with you, though we suffer the same things; for
since in the sense of grief, consists all that which punishes, it is
manfest, that he partaketh not of thy punishmen, whom thou feast not grieuing
equally with thee. The mind of an holy man is erect and steadfast, even amongst
the ruins of a perishing world: patience is ever cheerful, and that mind
ever secure in God: he never deceives trust, in whom* we hope When the
Psalmist, out of a learned experience having discoursed of the estate of the
wicked and the holy, sends us to the issue of the Psalm. 37.
good man's trials, Marks the upright man, and behold the just: for the end of
that man is peace. The quiet fruits of righteousness are later, (liker the
blossom and fruits of Aarons dry rod) when it seems there is no hope, yet
they are sure and excellent.

Fourthly, because they that are begotten again to this lively hope, (being
kept 1. Pet* 1. 5.
by the power of GOD through faith to salvation) are ever assured of a better
life to come, an inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, and immarcessible,
reserved in heaven for them, a crown of glory. And (howreuer fierce he
seems) we shall (as David from the subdued King of Ammon) take our 1. Chron.
20. 2.
Crowns from the enemies head: for the mischief which he inuenteth against
us to make us suffer, shall add to our glory. In this confidence we stand,
as it were on Nebo, to view the holy Land, the promised rest. If in this life
only we 1. Cor. 15. 2
had hope, then were we of all men most miserable. Cypr. q. s.
That man indeed mourns and complains, if any adversity befall him here,
who can hope for nothing good in the life to come; who has reposed all his
hope and comfort here, and looks for nothing but torments so soon as he
goes hence. If a man did constantly believe he should come safely home, there
to find and enjoy an eternal quiet, the hoped fruits of his travail, could
any unevenness of the way deter 1. Sam. 14. 4, 13.
or divert him? Jonathan and his Armourbearer stood not upon the difficulty of
the passage, they climed up B^zez and Seneh upon their hands and upon their
feet, because they hoped for a glorious victory. The way to honor is through
danger; the way to life, through death; the way to heaven, through afflictions.
It is extreme childishness to be discouraged for the way, where the end has
assured comfort. Add to this, they live not to the World, but to God, and
already have their conversation in heaven, so that their souls being Phil. 3.
20.
as it were Gods domestics, and ever in his gracious presence, hearing him,
Eppes. 2. 19.
contemplating, or speaking to him, they are above the storms of humane
calamities, though they are sensible of them according to their outward man,
yet their better par^is so much above them so ready; in every appearance of
difficulties, to fly under the shadow of Gods wing, there to be sheltered,
thence to fetch comfort, that they not only have a blessed access through
faith unto his Grace, wherein they stand, and rejoice under the hope of the
glory Romans 5. 2, 3
of God, but they rejoice in tribulation; and therefore thus they reckon:
whatsoever affliction befalls us here, it finds us upon the 2. Cor. 5. 6.
way, (for whilst we remain in the body, we are absent from the Lord:) and
therefore like thieves and robbers, storms and dangerous passages, or whateuer
else makes a journey tedious and unpleasing, it makes us love home the better:
the worse the way is, the more we desire to be at the end of it. Thus they
overcome the infirmity of the body, by the strength of the mind: so confident
-- firmitate animi infirmitatcin corporis ^incimus. Cypr. q. s. Heb. 11. 35.
are they, that when they have been racked, they would not be delivered, that
they might receive a better resurrection.

If it be objected, that the most faithful have their trials, and do often
express great sorrow and disquiet of mind: we must know; that we are already
partakers of the promised rest in firm hope, we are there in desire; these we
have already cast out as the anchors of our soul; therefore as we say of a
ship riding at anchor, she has hold on the earth, though yet she ceele, heave
and set, and those anchors hold her from bestrauning Aug. in Psalm. 65.
and running aground, even against the winds, floods, Facit nos now abripi in
saxa. Ib.
and angry billows. So, against the temptations of this our pilgrimage, out
hope is grounded on that heavenly Jerusalem, which causes that we are not
split and bilged upon the rocks: like the needle in the Compass, so moves
our hope, it is ever shaking, yet it cease not, till by its unrest, it
return to the same point.

If it be urged, that we are yet frail, and full of evil, which may make our,
hopes decline, we say with Bernard; There are three things in In Psalm. 91 ser.
10.
which all our hope consists: First, his love which 1. Charitaes adoptionis.
adopted us: he, who for his own love, without any desert of ours, even when
we were enemies, reconciled us, and adopted us sons, will not now cast us
away, whom he has made better, though not yet perfect. Secondly, 2. Veritas
promissionis.
the truth of his promise: though all the world deceive us, and we deceive our
selves, God cannot but be veritable: in his Word we Hic sperandus adiutor est,
in quo dolus non est. Hilar. in Psalm. 145.
have general promises, and in our consciences, the particular testimony of
his holy Spirit, assuring us that we are the children of God, and Romans 8. 16
therefore neither life nor death can separate us from 3. Pot^slaes redditionis.
his love. Thirdly, his power to perform: if it were in man our hopes were
fixed, how unhappy were our condition? Man often fails, and when he has a
will, he 2. King. 5. 7
wants power, Am I God to kill and give life, said the King of Israel? God
only can do all he will, and will do all he has promised. Upon this ground
the Apostle 1. Pet. 1. 5.
comfort the Churches, when, having praised the Lord for that lively hope to
which they were begotten again, he says, they were kept by the power of God
through faith unto salvation.

Lastly, we must consider, that there is none other comfort in afflictions, but
hope of delivery out of them, or sure p^eseruatiues against them, neither true
hope or preservation but in God. Therefore the Scriptures do distinguish
betwixt true and false hopes, magnifying the one, and showing the true
unhappiness of the other: Cursed be the man Ier. 17. 5, 6, etc.
that trusts in man, and m^keth flesh his arm, and withdraws his heart
from the Lord: for he shall be like the heath in the wilderness, and shall not
see when any good comes. -- Blessed be the man that trusts in the Lord,
and whose hope the Lord is, for he shal^be like a tree that is planted by the
water, which spreads out his roots (...) the R^uer, and shall not feel when
the heat comes, but he^ lease shall be green, and shall not care for the
year of drought, neither shall cease from yielding fruit. Therefore Naum. 1.
7 Psalm. ^2. Psalm. 34. 8, 9. Lam. 3. 25, 26. Psalm. 40. 4, 17. Psalm. 107. 25,
etc. Ier. 14. 22. Hag. 1. 6, etc.
the Scripture addresseth us only to him for comfort, because he only is
good, he only is omnipotent, and in the ordinary course of his providence,
all things serve him, for the use and good of his; and when he pleases to
discover his holy Arm, and dispense with the laws of Nature, he does
wonderfully satisfy their hopes, and make good their confidence in E^^d. 14.
him. Then the waters must cease from their savage (...) 3. 27.
courses, the fire must not so much as leave any scent upon the garments of the
three children: the lions must not touch the Prophet: the Ravens must feed
Eliah: the oil and meal must increase, five loaves and two fishes feed
multitudes, and the fragments be greater then the feast. Therefore thou shall
in all distresses of Chry^o^t. in Psalm. 43.
mind find joy and quiet, if thou can ascend to that hope which is fixed on
God. In God we have all things which are good. Tu ^olu^ requies. Aug. confe^^.
^. 6. c. 16. Use. 12 q. 25.
Health, riches, honors, comfort: thou only, O Lord, art the rest of our souls.

All labor for hope, to comfort themselves against afflictions: for hope
adds to and above desire, an endeavor, and elevation of the mind, to obtain
a difficult good, which cheereth them: But there is much difference Aug. de
verb. dom. in Ioh. sermon. 59.
upon what ground a man hops or rejoices: for two things equally kill the
soul, despair and perverse and vain hopes. The joy of the faithful is
incomparably distant from the vanity of the hypocrites hope, which how far
soever it carry them confident against all dangers, yet is it but like
Pharaohs Chariot whe^l^s, which then fall off, when they are most engaged, and
like Jericho walls then falling down when they have most need of them.

According to men's several griefs, they apply several remedies: and it is
true, they may be useful in their kinds. Tears help vent some tongue-tied
sorrows, because every hurtful thing shut up within, does more vehemently
afflict. Friends Omne n^ciuum interi^s clausum, magis aff^igit. Aquin. 12. A. 2.
have a part, either dividing the burden by lamenting it, or by expressing sure
arguments of their love, and feeling of our griefs. Baths and Physic (if the
body either cause, or add to the distemper,) yea, Music and merry company may
have a part. Time, Reason and Sleep (that vulgar medicine for cares) have good
use; above all these, contemplation of the truth is excellent: for it has not,
as other delights, any grief properly contrary to it; by how much more we
know the truth, by so much less we grieve at seeming evils: but all these, and
whateuer other means the reason or experience of man can invent, without this
hope in God, fall short of any sound cure, some of them feeding, some
exasperating, the best but astonying the malady for a time, all being but as
draughts of cold water in some hecticke fits, by a little ease much enflaming
the disease.

Sound hope, like the Angel Genesis 21. 17
to Hagar in the D^sart, cries from heaven, Fear not: it opens our eyes,
that we may ^see our relie^e which is near us; it shows us our dwellings,
defended with a Mountain full of fiery 2. King. 6. 17.
Sentinels, like the beleaguered Dothan. Hope was clothes to Jacob against Genesis
31. 40.
the cold; shade against the heat: an armor of proof to David in his
combat; 1 Samuel 17. 37.
health and riches to Job; a native soil to Abraham; a Crown of
righteousness to Paul: it is all things Heb. 11. 8, 2 Timothy 4. 8.
which are desirable. But how wretched and unhappy are the hopes of worldly
men? Name me that Siren on earth, whose alluring notes can prevail against the
doleful cries of a repro^bate conscience. To say less, and yet all in a word,
Name me that estate in the world, which can give that dying man comfort, who
cannot hope in God. Trust in riches, honors, learning, fame, what thou can
else think of, can these keep thee alive? Why then do the rich or Noble dye?
Do thou hope thou shall dye at once, and never come to Judgment? Alas, thou
shall presently know that hell, which before thou could not believe; and
feel those torments, which thou esteemedst as dreams. Do thou comfort thee
in hope of Gods indulgence? Job. 8. 13, 14.
Bildad said right, The hope of hypocrites shall perish, his considence shall
be cut off, and his trust shall be as the house Prou. 10. 28.
of a spider. -- The patient abiding of the righteous shall be gladness, but
the hope of the wicked shall perish.

There are that trust in riches, yet surely are far from content or quiet of
mind. Augustine confesses what a bridle it was to his ambition, when, the same
day that he was preparing to make a flattering Oration in praise of the
Emperor; when his heart was troubled with that business, passing through a
street of Millan, he saw a poor beggar (perhaps with his belly full) iocund
and merry; wherefore he sighed; saying to his friends who accompanied Confess.
l. 6. c, 6.
him, what grief he conceived of such their madness, who with all their
unhappy cares and labors, intended to attain no more then that secure mirth,
which the beggar before them had gotten, and they (perhaps) should never get:
for, that (said he) which he has purchased with a little begged moneys, I was
ambitious of aspiring to, by such painful turnings and windings, that is, the
mirth of temporal felicity.

There are that trust in possessions, yet when these grand masters of earth
boast Luke 12. 19, 20.
of their store, and sing a requiem to their souls, their souls are taken
away.

There are that trust in popularity, that vainest and most inconstant breath of
a giddy multitude: and when they say, -- The voice of Act. 12. 22.
God, and not of man, then some desperate grief smites them, as the Angel
Herod, and they are eaten up.

There are a foolish kind of Idolaters, which worship the Idol of Horeb, the
shadow of supposed greatness: and when they have sacrificed much time,
observance, and expense, for a little hope of some subordinate favor, they are
deceived in their divination. Pharaoh trusted to his Charriots; Asa to
Physicians; Iona to his heels; he would run away from an omnipresent GOD:
Nebuchad-nezzar, Belshazzar, Sanerib, and their like, trusted in their power:
Israel hoped in Egypt: but when God will mere with them, how easily does he
send the sword after them? How easily does he speak concerning a mighty and
oppulent Nation, to root it up, and As the Wise man says of pride, riches, and
hope of the wicked: (...), etc. Wisd. 5.
cast it out? And the strong men shall be feeble-handed, the flight shall
perish from the swift, and their hope shall make them ashamed. All vain hope
is like a shadow, a Poast, a ship under sail, which makes no path in the
floods; the flight of a bird, or arrow through the air; the dust blown away
with the wind; a thin foam scattered abroad in the storm; smoke dispersed with
the wind, vanishing by being greatned; the memory of some one days guest.

There is no cause of the minds disquiet more familiar, then hope in things
deceitful, such as are the forenamed, riches, honors, pleasures, and favor
of great men; which, because they are inconstant, and often change, most needs
deject and torment that mind, which is only grounded on them* To this may be
added, that since our own hearts are apt to deceive us in our hopes, it
imports us, for the sound cure of a distressed mind, carefully to examine our
hopes* which we shall do, if we diligently observe the condition of them in
their proper

1. Cause, 2. Subject, 3. Object, 4. Effects and Adjuncts.
Ephesians. 2. 8. 1 Pet. 1. 3.
The efficient cause of sound hope, is the Spirit of God: if then our hope be
in or* of evil, it is not the persuasion of him that calls us to a lively
hope in Christ Jesus: for he never crosses his own revealed will. The Devil
has learned to imitate the inward and gracious working of Gods Spirit:
therefore he suggesteth an hope, but a false, that he may deprive Genesis 3.
men of the true. Ye shall not dye at all: Mark the inference and conclusion
of the persuasion: If it be, Ye shall not dye, therefore eat the forbidden
fruit, thou art redeemed, thou can not perish, thou art in CHRIST, there is
no condemnation to thee, therefore be bold to sin, that grace may abound; it
is a temptation of security, and not any testimony of the Spirit of God, which
bearing witness to the Elect, that they are the sons of God, infers to
their consciences, that therefore they must walk after the Spirit, that they
must be holy, that they must walk worthy of their calling; and because they
call on the Father, who without respect of persons, judges according to every
man's works; they must therefore pass 1 Pet. 1. 17.
the time of their soiourning here in fear. In a word, whatsoever hope moves
us to any resolution, against the express Will and Word of God, it is false
and unsound, and comes not of God, whose Spirit cannot persuade to
contraries, neither can cross that one truth, which is delivered in his Word.
Look to this, you that bless your selves in your wickedness; and persuade
your selves, you may go on in your sins, and yet God will conni^e; or that
he is not so severe and rigorous, as is preached unto you.

The isntrumental cause Romans 15. 4*
and ground of hope, is the promise and Word of God: if our hopes are groun^ed
on the Oracles of humane* wisdom, or po^^cie* if on the litigious plots of
opinion; if we say as ^haraoh, Come, let us work wisely, when we do wickedly:
if they stand on the fond arguments of Epicures, *Atheists, o^ Origenists*,
some hoping there is no God, some, that he regards nothing; others, that his
grace is universal; or any other (...) of man; they are vain and deceitful;
and, with whatsoever large promises they do for a time beguile men, they yield
no comfort at ^eed* but are a ^aets Tent to the weary, a dangerous repose.

The subject to which hope belongs* is only a Christian mind: for as faith,
so hope is proper to them. If the unbeliever and wicked man hope for pardon,
and life everlasting, his hope is in vain: I must say to him, as Peter to
Simon Magus, Act. 8. 21, 23.
Thou have neither part (...) fellowship in this businesies for thine heart is
not right in the sight of God; I see thou art in the gall of bitterness, and
in the bond of iniquity. If the Noble, great or rich man would be comforted
with it, he must know, all that he has in the world cannot purchase the least
dram of it. If any p^ophane Es^^ (who hates to be reformed) shall seek it
with tears, and cry in the bitterness of his soul, Bless me, even me
also, my Father; the best we can promise, is, the fatness of the earth shall
be thy dwelling place: but this hope appertains only to the sons of God.

12. q. 40. 1. c. 1. Bonum.
be good; and properly the chief Good. In a second place, goods subordinate:
as first, the honor of God; secondly, the souls health; thirdly, temporal
necessaries, daily bread, but bread of thy stature: thou hopest for abundance
of riches; I cannot warrant thy hope either good or sound: for how can thou
be assured, that that which thou hopest for, is good for thee? Do thou know
no man the worse for his wealth? How can thou call that good, which hurts
the possessour? To judge of the goodness the^, look upon the things which God
has promised his dear children: he has promised life everlasting: he has
promised, not to fail thee nor forsake Heb. 13.
he: he has promised, that all the things whereof Mat. 6. 32, 33.
thou have need, shall be ministered unto thee, if thou first seek his
Kingdom, and his righteousness: but for riches, or things temporal, whereof
he sees thou have no need, but rather of the contrary; how-euer displeasing
it be to thee, it is his wisdom that he has not promised them, and his
mercy that he does not give them. If God knew riches or honors absolutely
good, the good should never be poor, nor the wicked noble. If thou will hope
for that which God has promised, thine hopes are secured by his truth who has
promised. But if thou will make thy self great and glorious to the world in
thine hopes, if that fail thee, and thou art perplexed and grieved, because
thou art not such as thou hopedst to be, what remains more just and
necessary, then that thou lessen thine ouergrowne desires, and empty thine
heart of that ambition, so that it may be filled with better hopes; that thou
conform to the will and promise of God, and think not to incline his holy
will to satisfy thy unjust and wicked desires.

2. Arduum.
Secondly, it must be difficult: we do not hope for Exercitatio spei, dicit
respectum ad auxilium D^i. Aquin.
things easy, or in our power: Hope presupposes the help of another, that
is, of God: and herein it is distinguished from desire, which is of things
easy as well as difficult; and from presumption, which trusts in it self:
if thine hope be on the maine and greatest matter, the honor of God,
salvation of thy soul, and all things serving thereto, blessed is thine hope,
it shall bring thee comfort, though now it live among those difficulties, which
none but the power of God can facilitate and overcome. To be honorable, is not
the proper object of the Saints ^ope: they obtain that, who have not the least
acquaintance with this. Kings make honorable, but God only makes happy, in
the hope of life everlasting: Riches and possessions are not this object:
wicked and dishonest men know, how easy it is to be rich: but that which
neither honor, riches, nor humane wisdom, no not all the Kings of the earth
can give, is this ard^^m* which the Saint hops for. Thirdly, 3. Futurum.
it is not present, but future: hope that is seen, i not hope: herein it is
distinguished* from joy, which is of things present: and herein our patience
demonstrateth our hope; for if we hope for future blessed^^sse* Romans 8. 24, 25.
we do with patience abide for it. Those worldly men* whose faiths are
tender-eyed* and cannot look beyond things present; those impatient Esan's, who
for their present supplies* make so base an estimate* What profit Genesis 25. 32.
shall this birthright do^ to me* have not hope* whose proper object is future*

4. Possibile.
Lastly, it must be possible: it stands on the reueiled will of God* to whom
all things are possible* which he will do; by which, not by humane reason,
this possibility is to be valued. Abraham Romans 4. 18 21.
believed against hope, under hope: against hope, if we respect the reason of
man; wherein there appeared no argument, but all things contrary to that he
hoped: but under hope, in respect of Gods all sufficiency, because he was
fully assured, that he which had promised, was able to do it. Such is our
hope, that except it take wing, and mount above our senses, it shall ever be
carnal and frail. It is true, that which is impossible to man, may be, and is
sometimes an object of true hope, because it is possible with God: but that
which is impossible with God, can never be apprehended by any sound hope, how
possible soever it seem to a deceived man. Hence it appears, that the hope
which expects Gods conniuence in point of justice, his injustice in the
obstinate sinners impunitie, is wicked and desperate: when the wicked will
bless himself in his rebellion, and think by crying, Lord, Lord, howeuer he
will enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season, yet to find mercy: when the
adulterer, oppressor, drunkard, or malicious man, shall continue in their
sin, and yet pray in hope: when thieves or deceivers keep another man's goods
in their hands, L^ke 19.
and will not Zache*like restore, or at least, so much as they can: but if they
can give an holocaust of a rapine, and cover the Altar with tears; if with
undoing, and depopulating whole Lordships, they build a poor Almes-house, and
can but pray God to forgive them that sin, which they committed by fraud and
rapine, and in tend still to commit, by retaining those goods and possessions,
making the very bread, which they pulled out of Orphans mouths, serve their
pride and Iusts; do not these men, when they say, Lord be mereifull, in
effect, desire God to be vn^ust? Do they not pray him to wink at their sins?
Such men would feign be saved, but being wicked, feign go to heaven, but not
^^ore: they would drive God to impossibilities; but because he cannot be
unjust, therefore it is impossible for such men to have any comfort, or sound
hope. To shut up this point then, hope not unworthily, nor for things unworthy.
What are present honors to the future? What riches, fields, houses, to heaven
and heavenly things? Because we repose not our hopes on a right ground, God
often takes away that we trust in, and withholdeth that which would truly
comfort us. How injurious are we to our souls, when we set our hopes Egyp^ian
taskes, works of servitude? when (desiring it should ^^ie cheerfully into the
presence of God) we yet, either impe its wings with bastard feathers, trusting
in others, or our selves* or load its Angel quilles with dirt, hoping for
triples, or impious impossibilities. When God made this affection, to sustain
the drooping soul, to fetch tastes of the heavenly Paradise-fruites; by such
madness they come home, like Salomons* That shish merchants, 1. King. 10. 22.
with A pes and Peacockes among their precious lading. This man's hope is for
favor; another, for full barnes; another, for prosperous flocks, another*
for some maintenance for pride and lust; another, for food and raiment*
(Jacobs words without Jacobs meaning;) give him but that poor object of his
ambition, he cares for no more. Are these the hopes which can relieve a
distressed soul? Shall Cain's Henoch, Genesis 4. 17, 21.
or Iubals Organs comfort, where there is no hope of Heaven? Howeuer the
present world say, I will not purchase hope with a price: a grain of pleasure
is better then any spiritual Jewel; yet the wise Merchant sold all, to buy
that of which this hope gave him intelligence, because he found the worth of
it: there is no comfort without it, no misery with it.

Lastly, we must examine our hopes by its effects, and adjuncts, the effects
are many. It gives a man the true ground of Religion, by teaching him to
think more humbly of his own works, and not to depend upon himself. This is
the cause why God does sometimes give trials: We received the 2. Cor. x. 9.
sentence of death in our selves, because we should not trust in our selves,
but in God which raises the dead. It will be a perpetual comfort even in
afflictions, which he bears Romans 5.
not only patiently, but with joy and rejoicing, because he hops assuredly,
through the merits of Christ Jesus, that after he has glorified God in his
sufferings, he shall be glorified in the Kingdom of God* and that as 2. Cor.
1. 5.
his sufferings abound, so also his consolation shall abound by Christ.

The adjuncts of hope are many: 1. Preparation and alacrity of mind, lest any
thing should hinder us in that we hope for. Hope keeps 1. Pet. 1. 13 1. King.
18. 46. Heb. 12. 1.
us with our loins girt, like Eliah before the storm: therefore the Apostle
says; Let us also, seeing we are compassed with so great a cloud of witnesses,
cast away every thing that presses down: -- Let us run with patience the race
that is set before us. He that has a firm hope, shall so prepare for it,
that, if need require, he shall part with things pleasing and necessatie: Heb.
11.
so Abraham parted from his native soil: to the Disciples (as the necessities
of those times required) sold, and gave away, as Alexander, all his goods, and
household vtensils* because he was confident of supply, in the spoil of Darius.
If a man have this hope, he can forgo whatsoever hinders it* and if need
be* he can lessen his mind, pull in the ^ailes of that opinion of vain
reputation* which dangerously greatneth many minds* and, when ^ee is become
poor and indigent, think any estate good enough, in which he has a firm
hope of a better life.

2. An holy life is an ad^^nct, (...) 1. Pet. 1. 13*
as certain a Be sob^r and trust perfectly on the gr^^^ that is brought unto
(...) says Saint Peter: every man that has this hope in him, 1. John 3. 3.
pargeth himself as he is p^re. It is a dangerous hope which the wicked have:
either resolve to be holy, or be assured, whateuer hope thou conceiuest, it is
de^^ifull and damnable. True hope, like Aarons Miter bears this golden
inscription (fastened to it with that ^itta ^yacin^hina, the blood of Exodus 18.
36.
Jesus) ^ol^nesse, to the Lord.

3. Another adiunct of sound hope is constancy: for the Spirit of God will
still follow it with fresh vigor, and secretly dictate joyful I^^. 31. 12.
things to the soul, so that is shall be like a watered garden, trust, or hope
perfectly, or to 1. Pet. 1. 13 (...).
the end, for that is the perfection of hope: if hopes be fleeting and
wavering, they are weak, but if they once fail, they were never sound: they
must be therefore certain and permanent. We shall be holy and unblameable,
if we continue Phil. 1. 20. Colos. 1. 22 Heb. 3. 6. Heb. 10. 23
grounded and established in the faith, and be not moved away from the hope
of the Gospel. We are Christ's, if we hold fast the confidence, and the
rejoicing of the hope unto the end. It is not hard to conceive hope for a time,
the danger is in the delay. When we consider what we have hoped for, and
amongst many secular cares, and present trials, loose sight of our hope, and
cannot tell what is become of it; when it tarrieth Exodus 32.
long, like Moses in the Mount with God, then the danger is, the mutinous
thoughts will fall to some idolarrie. But if hope continue and endure the
fiery trial, it is pure. If when thou have received the sentence of death in
thy body, thou can hope in God, thy hope is sound.

4. A fourth adiunct of hope, is love of God, and of our brethren: Hope is, as
it were, the breath of love, which may gasp and retain the pangs of a dying
passion for a little time; it cannot live without it. We cannot be happy,
except we love God; nor love him, except we can truly hope, and trust in him;
and it is impossible (though some 1. John.
suppose they can do it) to love God, and hate thy brother: therefore Saint
Peter, having spoken of brotherly kindness and love, says, Give diligence to
make your 1. Pet. 3. 8. 2. Pet. 1. 7, 10.
calling and election sure, for if ye do these things, ye shall never fall.

5. To these may be added many more, as, boldness in professing the name of
Christ, meekness, temperance, Heb. 11. 35.
alacrity, and the like; and with these a good conscience, of which the
Apostle says; Sanctify the Lord 1. Pet. 3. 15.
God in your hearts, and be ready always to give an answer to every man that
asks you a reason of the hope that is i^ you, with meekness and re^erence,
having a good conscience.

By these and such like adjuncts, and effects of hope, examine and judge of thy
condition, and do not blindly trust to that which may deceive thee: all are not
good hopes, which promise much good: thou shall meet with many wrangling
Labans, often changing the covenant, which howsoever surely the wicked make
with the grave and hell, yet the Romans 6.
wages of sin is death. To trust in any but God, is to lean to a falling
wall.

To these rules of examination, and that which may be gathered from that which
has* been formerly said* concerning the examination, reformation of the
soul, and sequestration to an holy soliloquie, let a man also put these
following rules in practice, for the obraining and strengthening of a sound
hope.

1. In every affliction which shakes thy hope, consider the justice and mercy
of God: it much abateth the violence of grief to consider the equity of him*
that strikes, whose judgments, though they are often secret, yet they are
always just. The Emperor Maurici^s expressed the greatness of his afflicted
mind* when, to aggrauate his own death now imminent, at Phocas command, his
wife and children being butchered before his face, he only said* Just art
then, O Lord and right is thy indgement. It would easily stop out complaints,
(...) we could truly consider, what we have deserved; how much greater, and
more frequent out sins are, then our punishments. Herein if we learnt
patience, we must look for hope in the issue of our trials, considering that
God corrects us, to save us, and that all things must be good, Nec caret
^otestate qui iudex est, nec miserat^one qui Deus est. Hilari. in Psalm. 62.
which come from him, who, as God, is merci^ull as well as powerful, and cannot
but be good. This well understood, shall make thee know that estate, which thou
so much abhorrest, thinking thy self unhappy in it, is best for* thee. I but
thou vrgest thy* present enduring many things, not only inconvenient, but
intolerable. I answer in this one saying of my text, hope in God. Do thou
not hope in him* I can give thee no comfort. Do thou indeed hope in him? Why
art thou disconsolate? Thou say, Because my present estate is calamitous,
and evil. I say so too, if thy hope be in riches, pleasures, or any thing
which thou do now, or* can want hereafter: but if it be in God, how can it
be bu^ good, which he gives those that depend on him? Nam^ me that man who
trusted in the Lord, and perished. Say thou, It is evil for me which I
suffer? Whether can best judge, what is good for thee, the patient or the
Physician, God or thy self? Thou will say, God knows. I return to my
ground, if then thou do hope in him, do thou not hope he is a good and
gracious God, and will do the best forthee? Do thou not think him
omnipotent, and not to be prevented? Do thou not think him omniscient, and
not to be deceived? Do thou not think he loves thee most tenderly; and
therefore in his love and mercy, will make all things, even afflictions, work for
the best (...) thee? Learn therefore to ^^^cerne, and know the work of God in
thy correction, and thou shall have hope. They Psalm. 9. 10.
that know thy name will put their trust in thee, for then, Lord, have not
forsaken the^ that seek thee. 2. Learn to live within thy self, and set not
thy hopes on things external; for as they change, they ^^rment. He that makes
the testimony of Gods Spirit which is within him, his joy, his hope, his
delight, shall be cheerful and constantly resolved, when he shall hear the
ambitious crying out for the wheels inconstancy, in which he trusted, and
great Favorites, whilst they live, dead of the falling sickness. Call home
thy thoughts, thy desires, thy hopes, from the tumultuous world; and teach them
(...) ^iue within^ (...) (...) let them wait in that living temple, where the
glorious and blessed Spirit of God manifests his gracious presence, to the
secrets of thy soul; think there is no beauty, strength, health, (...)
pleasures or (...) not (...) and (...) consideri^, thou shall free thy? soul
from a thousand (...) and (...) which thou (...) not avoid; (...) thou will
depend upon any thing external, or of the world, whose in^essand changes will
never suffer thy (...).

3. Leave thy false, and seek confidence in God, that is, lean not to thy
f^lse, but to him; we must forsake our selves, to follow Christ, it is so in
hoping also* Would thou not have thine heart troubled (says In Psalm. 41
Augustine?) remain not in thy self. Hope in the soul, was like the ^ree of
life in Eden; but since we have sinned, we are, as it were, cast out from it,
and it is k^pt by fear, as with a fiery sword, whose blandishing b^rreth us
from an evil confidence in our selves, that we might seek a better, eud than
tree of life in the holy City, where shall be no more ourse, no more fear,
David cry^^h in his affliction, O that I had Psalm. 55. 6.
(...) then would (...) Whither would thou (...) awav, blessed man of God?
Where is that wilderness? From God? Thou can not: From the World? What is
the worst thereof, if thou hurt not thy self? from himself to God, is the
securest flight. So long as we depend upon our selves, we shall never have a
found hope, and therefore never be quiet within our selves; except a man leave
himself, he Bed. in Luc.
can never aspire to that which is above himself: in himself he has a
thousand arguments of despair, none of hope; and at the best, he is full of
inconstancy and change.

4. Learn meekenes and Lam. 3. 19, 20, 21.
humilities Remembering mine affliction and my misery, the wormwood and the
gall: my soul has them still in remembrance, and is humbled in me: this I call
to my mind, therefore I have hope. The rich man trusted in his increase, and
said, This will I do, I will Luke 12. 18, 19.
pull down my barnes, and build greater, -- and I will say to my soul, Thou
have much goods laid up for many years, take thine ease. -- But he was
deceived in that hope: the Matthew. 11. 29.
surest way is to learn meekness and lowlines of Christ: for so we shall
find rest for our souls, the rest we hope for, the hope we rest in.

5. Labor for the peace and testimony of a good conscience, by submitting thy
self to the government of his holy spirit, and a careful and constant
abandoning those fins, which by a strict examination thou find most reigning
in thee: for the kingdom Romans 14. 17.
of God is in rightcousnesse peace, and joy of the holy Ghost: the ground is
laid down, Romans 5. 1, 2. and S. 1. John 3. 21.
John says, If our beart condemn us not, then have we boldness toward God.
But there is no peace to the wicked, nor any true hope but in the death of
sin, by the Spirit of Jesus working newness of life, and giving witness to
our spirits, that we are his. In the multitude of my thoughts in mine be art
thy comforts have re^oyced my Quo^.odo mala conscientia tota in desperatione
est, sic bona conscientia tota est in spe. -- ille sperat, qui bonam
conscientiam gerit. Aug. in Psalm. 30. Amor non habit^ p^esuppo^it spe^s. 12.
q^o. 1. Cor. 13. 7. 1. John 4. 17, 18.
soul, says the Psalmist. But how should he be comforted, who has no hope,
or hope in God, whose conscience flies him, ^as^a seue^^ revenger? Be not
deceived, it is not an easy thing to hope in God: the cries of a guilty
conscien^o will easily prevail against thy vain hopes.

6. Love God, delight in him and his laws; learn to live to him that which
we love, and do not yet enjoy* we hope for. Lone suffers all things, it
beleeneth all things, it hops all things, it endures all things. Hereby is
love perfect in us, that we should have boldness in the day of judgment:
There is xo fear in love, but perfect love casts out fear. Faith must give
thee an ass^red interest in God, or thou can never delight in him. The best
things delight us not, except they be some ways ours: the evil man, who
delights in wickedness, cannot delight in God, nor his laws, but (like
aguish palats, all things, even the best, distaste them) so rellisheth he, as
his heart is affected: to those who love God, 1. Ioh. 5. 3.
his commandments are not grituous: Nay (says the Psalmist) Psalm. 119. 92.
unless thy laws had bin my delight, I should have perished in mine
affliction. Again he says, Delight thy self Psalm. 37.
in the Lord, and he shall give thee thine hearts desire. He says not, Love
nothing, delight in nothing. God forbid: if ye should love nothing, ye should
be dull, dead, loathsome, miserable. Pigri, mortus, detesiandi, miseri eritis.
Aug. in Psalm. 30.
Love and delight, but not in the world, not in sin (if any man love the world,
the love of God is not in him) but in him whose love shall make thee happy, and
give thee firm hope against all misery. Thou must love him Haec est illa
haer^ditas -- qu^ beatos suos faci^s haered^s. Bernard. de caen. dom ser. 7.
Sine medo^ te d^^exit: sine m^do e^m d^ligere deb^^. Ib. ser. 1.
without measure, because he has loved thee infinitely: this love of God is an
infallible argument, that God lo^eth thee (for no man can love him first) which
is the most blessed possession. It gives health to the sick, light to the
blind, pardon to sinners, life to the dead, joy to the sad, heaven to the
earthly, hope to the disconsolate, assurance to the fearful: it is the
fountain of blessedness; it is that sweet and unspeakable goodness of God,
which disuested Satan of his possession in us, and of enemies, made us the
sons of God: it is that sovereign and divine antidote, which turns the
poison of the old Dragon, the Devils malice, into cordials; and makes all that
he does against us in spite, turn to the best for us. There is but one sure
way to an invincible hope, to live to this good God, and to have our
conversation in heaven, to hear and seuerence him in his laws, and rejoice in
his works: the world smileth, we are not taken thereby, because our
indivisible love is to God: one, and to one. It frowneth? We depend not on her
brow, we serve her not, we live to God; it suffices us, that he loves us,
and his service is our maine care, his power our refuge, his mercy our hope.

7. Learn a Christian moderation in prosperity: moderate thy joys, allay thy
hopes, let neither be too great in things temporal, and thou have subdued thy
sorrows. Climb not too high, or to such place, as has neither security of
standing, nor safety of coming down. Keep thy mind low; hope not for things
greater then necessary use. Undertake not things too great for thy managing,
but deal in thine own calling, and according to thine own strength. Man's
hopes are like) the Moons borrowed light, the more they are toward heaven,
the less they show toward earth; the more toward the earth, the less
upward. The ^ouetous and ambitious can never be truly contented, or have a
sound hope* because their desires are either ouergrowne, or ever growing, and
aspiring to things above their reach.

8. Learn constancy in the practices of Religion: many men would feign find
help for their distresses of mind, and to this end they are contented to
hear, or read good advice, which they take, as drunkards physic, the
observation of whose strait rules, for a day or two, they follow with a months
ill diet, and so, not mending upon it, they blame that good medicine, which
could not enable them to be more evil. He that will learn patience to
sustain his hopes, must accustom himself to bear small crosses patiently,
that by them winning upon himself, and insensibly subduing his own natural
frowardness, he may gather strength to undergo the greatest. We must not
think, that good habits grow up, like Ionahs Gourd, in a night; or ripen, like
the G^^pes in the Butlers Genesis 40. 10.
dream: it is not so easy a thing, to learn that true* gouernment^ of thy
mind, in which a Christian hope can live: the Prophet Lam. 3. 24, 25, etc.
says; The Lord is my portion, says my soul, therefore will I hope in him:
the Lord is good unto them that hope i^ him, and to the soul that seek^^h him.
It is good both to trust, and to wait for the salvation of the Lord. I; but how
shall I gain this patience^ Use is a good teacher: It is good for a man to
bear the yoke in his youth: he sits alone, and keeps silence, because
^ee has borne it upon him: he p^iteth his mouth in dust, of there may be hope.

9. Pass by none of Gods benefits, without due regard and thankfulness. I shall
meet with this point again in the following parts.

10. Hear the Word of God diligently, and attentively: sit not at Church, Romans
10.
like those dease Adders which will not be charmed: for as faith, so hope is by
Romans 15. 4.
hearing: whatsoever things are written aforetime, are written for our
learning, that we, through patience and comfort of the Scriptures, Spes
fundata in diuinis eloquijs. Hyer^. s. Job. Ier, 17. 7. 8
might have hope. Hopes grounded hereon; are like trees planted by the water,
which spread out their roots by the River. O, did the profane and careless^ he
arer but know, what a sure hope in God were worth at the hour of death, he
would not, for all that wealth or pleasure, which he now idoleth, loose one
word or sentence, which falls from the mouth of the Prophet.

Lastly, Be frequent in prayer. These two excellent precepts are necessarily 1
The^. 5. 16, 17.
united; Rejoice evermore, and Pray continually. We cannot have any solid hope,
in which we can rejoice, except we come often into the presence of God by Romans
15. 13.
hearty prayer. The God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in believing,
that ye may abound in hope. It was Paul's prayer for the Romans, it must be
ours for our selves. Prayers must ascend, that grace may descend. Prayers, like
a thin vapor drawn up by the power of the sun, fall down in showers of
blessings: sweet issue of faithful prayers. Titus Vespasians Son was said
never to send any man sad out of his presence: surely, God never dismisseth the
humble and faithful petitioner comfortless away. Baal being called upon,
could not answer, for he was no God, but a senseless stock: but our GOD
hears his, even before they speak; he sees the desire in the heart, even
before it break out into the tongue: he helps our infirmities, when we know
not what to pray, and knows the meaning of the Spirit. Before Isai. 65. 24.
they call, I will answer (says he,) and while they speak, I will hear.
Divine efficacy of zealous prayers! David, Psalm. 116.
sang he de profundis, even at the gates of death; so did Ion. 2. 17.
Jonah in the belly of his living grave* In fear and danger* when my soul
sainted within me, I remembered the Lord, and my prayer came unto thee in thy
holy Temple: Tell me, you that forsake your own mercy, by waiting upon lying
vanities, what messenger could have fetched comfort so fur? Give me the use of
that word, -- Quis ascendit in (...) Send eloquence to plead at the gate of
Heaven* send wisdom to solicit; send reason to negotiate for thee; send
riches, which on earth Act. 12.
goes like the Angel through every ward of the prison, every door, (even the
gates of the Temple also;) send greatness, send honor to complement; nothing
could bring thee hope; only prayers find access to his favor, through our
Mediator Jesus Christ.

O blessed prayers! o blessed hope! How do thou carry men beyond reason,
beyond expectation* beyond i themselves (...) beyond thy self* and p^ac^st
them in that estate, which is not only above thee, but without thee? For,
enjoying entieth hope* as hope begins eternal happiness in our present
assurance.

For I will yet praise him, etc.
THe reason or cause of this hope, with which he comfort his soul, is
fetched, 1. From a strong persuasion for the future* which God the^ presently
gave him; for I shall yet praise him. Even in affliction he warranteth
himself deliverance* ^ as if he said, Hope, for now at the woost* I have
comfort; though it be ill with me now, I am resolved I shall be helped. 2.
From the experience of Gods favors past, whereby he has been the help of
his countenance. 3. That which implies past, present, and future: He is my
God, by his Covenant made with me.

There are three supporters of hope. 1. The promises of God, sealed to the
conscience by the Spirit of God* For what else could give assurance in
afflictions?

2. Experience of Gods favors.

3. The free covenant of God, assured us by his grace and holy Spirit of
adoption, whereby we claim an assured interest, and call him our God, our
Father.

This repetition of the same sense, imports, that David had not absolutely
vanquished his temptations at one encounter, but that he was compelled to
reinforce and strengthen his mind afresh.

(...)
This [yet] in my Text, is an enforcing particle, and of great weight* Grievous
are Confessione laudis in loco deputat^ suo cul^ui. Lyra.
my trials, yet shall I praise him in his holy Temple, yet I shall confess to
him. It is put aduersatiuely, importing a very difficult conquest over strong
and many oppositions: so Psalm 92. 15* he says, they shall still blossom,
and in their age shall be lusty and green; implying a strength, above and
against the many weaknesses of that age, which may seem to end that vigor: so
Psalm 141. 5. For, yet, my prayer shall be in their miseries: as if he had
said; Though their wilfulness be such, as that the greatest compassion can
hardly overcome it; yet, I shall pity them in their destruction. So does he
put the particle (...) which he uses six times in one Psalm, as it Psalm. 62.
1.
were, expressing a very hard victory over sundry kinds of trials. So he
expresses a notable conflict here, Flesh and blood casts down, faith
erecteth: faith has no sooner comforted the soul, with this inward parley,
but the wayward old man falls again to new complainings; yet faith
overcomes, and triumphs over despair: I shall yet Jonah. 2. 4.
praise him. So Jonah said. I am cast away out of thy sight, yet will I look
again toward thine holy Temple.

In that he says, he shall praise him, it shows he was confident of
deliverance: so that here are two things: 1. Confidence, 2. Resolution.
I shall yet praise him, I believe, and stand assured of help: and upon this
supposition, I resolve, I will praise him.

Romans 5. 2.
We rejoice in hope, (says the Apostle) it is their confidence: as I have
said, were it not for hope, I see not what comfort were in Dolores etiam inter
dolores nes^it* Greg. mo.
the world. He that loves an hopeless estate, knows not sorrow in a world
of sorrow: all (but for this) would be, either a sad visage of helpless
misery, or a foolish, of vain reioycers. And what were hope, without
assurance, but a painful hanging betwixt joy and sorrow? What were hope,
without ground, without reason, though with all confidence, but a blind
presumption, a selfe-deceiuing and obstinate opinion of help? Therefore he
armeth his hope with reason, assurance and resolution, which, like David's three
Worthies, break through the enemies Camp for waters of Bethleem, 2 Samuel 23. 16.
for a longing soul, and run through an Army of sorrows, to fetch comfort.

Hope and Fear, like the Spies sent into Canaan, both Numb. 13. 24.
r^nn^ before us, to discover for us: Fear t^ll^th of insuperable dangers,
ouergrowne difficulties, calamities immured to heaven: Hope brings from
Escol, a clust^r, 1. of Grapes, 2. Figs, 3. Pomegranats: that is, hope, 1. of
pardon, 2. of grace, 3. of glory. Oor pardon in the blood-sheddisg Ioh. 15. 1.
of jesus Christ, the true Vine, in whom we have reconciliation and atonement*
h^ere Sp^s veniae, gratiae, gloriae,

is the first. The next of those sweet benefits ^^ernall and ^xternall or
temporal* which God gives of his free grace, and makes them to be assured
pledges thereof by his holy Spirit, whereby he also rules, comfort; and
^r^serueth his, in his Kingdom of grace* ^he^^* are our present swe^tnesse and
good fruits. The third is the hope of glory, in which we expect the
resurrection of our bodies, life everlasting, and salvation, perfect happiness
in the sight and fruition of God* the sole and chief good, and fountain of
all communicated goodness and blessedness.

Of this estate, many excellent things are spoken in holy Writ: My flesh shall
Acts 2. 26, 28. Psalm. 16. 11.
rest in hope: -- tho^ have showed me the ways of life, and shall make me full
of joy with thy countenance: -- in thy presence is the fullness of joy, and at
thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore. Under this hope the Saints
rejoice, yea even in trib^lations; the^ presently conceiving, what shall be the
issue of those trials; because God loves them, and therefore Romans 8. 28
all things, by his good providence, shall work together for the best: neither
do they suffer as men half ascertained hereof, and therefore floting betwixt
hope and fear; but they stand assured of this love. Paul expresses Romans 8.
it; Who shall separate us from the love: of Christ? Shall tribulation, or
anguish, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? as it
is written, for thy sake are we killed all the day long, we^ are counted as
sheep for the slaughter: Nevertheless in all these things we are more then
conquerours through him that loved us: For I am persuaded, that neither death,
nor life, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor things present, nor things to
come, -- shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ
Jesus our Lord. The reason of this so great assurance, he set down before:
God does not hide his love, and bestow niggardly favors; his love is shed
abroad in our hearts, by the Holy* Ghost, Romans 5. 5.
which is given unto us; and this Spirit of adoption bears witness with our
spirit, that we are the children of GOD, coheires with Christ; and therefore
resolves us, if we suffer with him, we shall be glorified with him, and
that our glory shall abound hereafter, as do our present sufferings in
Christ: this Spirit does say to our hearts, as he did to Josh. 1. 5. 6.
Joshua, I will not leave thee nor forsake thee, be strong and of a good
courage. And out of the infallible truth of these promises written in his holy
Word, we gather the certainety of our deliverance. And forasmuch as all cannot
appropriate those general promises to themselves who hear them, it must needs
be, that the application thereof to our selves, is a peculiar work of the
Spirit of God, inwardly sustaining, in every assault, with fresh strength and
resolution: and therefore he is the paraclete, because he comfort.

To this inward assistance, God sometimes adds an outward evidence of his
power: as when he appeared to Joshua by Ierico, like a man, having his sword
drawn in his hand* thus answering Joshua* that he was come as a Captain of
Josh. 5. 13, 14.
the Lords Host. So at El^^hs prayer, he opened the servants eyes, and he saw
the mountain full of Horses and Charriots of fire* round about the Prophet. So
there was added a fourth* (whose Dan. 3. 25
form was like the Son of God) to the three servants of God, walking with
them in the midst of the fire, so that they had no hurt. It is a memorable
story of Theodorus the Martyr, who being grievously tortured, saw a young man
standing by him, with a soft and cool Towell, continually wiping off the
sweat, and encouraging him: all which time, and, till at the end of their
tormenting he vanished; he felt no pain. Both the inward and outward
assistance of the Spirit of God, is to comfort his, with assurance that he
will always make good his promises to them, that he will never leave them
comfortless* Whence we may learn, that the faithful have such assistance of
the Spirit of God, as that, how-euer they long wrestle with afflictions, yet
they are, not only in the issue, but in the very trial, superious by faith.
This is the victory that 1 Ioh. 5. 4.
overcomes the world, even our faith. And Paul says, In all these, we are
more then Romans 8. 37.
conquerours, through him that loved us.

There is no comfort to the afflicted mind, comparable to this assurance: I
shall yet praise him: David knew it, and therefore penned this Psalm, to
comfort his own soul: many of the faithful have known it, who upon their
deathbeds have sung this Psalm. The only way in present distresses to stay a
perplexed soul, is to send it to blessedness to come: therefore Christ, who
could do all things which he would, sometimes led away his petitioners for
things temporal, to the consideration of eternal. Martha comes to him, with
a zealous desire that her brother might live again: he tells her of a Ioh.
11. 25, 26.
better way to comfort, I am the resurrection and the life, whosoever believes
in me, though he were dead, yet shall be line: and whosoever lives and
believes in me, shall not Morte damnatioms aternaliter. Bonau. in Ioh. exp.
Luke 5.
dye eternally. So he dealt with the man sick of the Palsy, when he desired
corporal health, Jesus says, Man, thy sins are forgiven thee: Leading away
their thoughts, for the present, too carefully fixed on the evil they suffer,
to a sweet contemplation of those heavenly things which they shall enjoy. There
is no solid consolation in things present; therefore it must be sought for in
the future. Thus therefore reckon with thy self: How little is that which I
suffer, in comparison of that I shall enjoy? How long can I suffer here? If God
please, and see it best for me, he will deliver me now; if not, it must be
evil to obtain that which God sees not good for me: I am in the Lords
hands: be not cast down, O my soul, for, I shall yet praise him. If as often
as we were any ways disquieted, we would presently say with the Psalmist,
Return unto thy rest, o my Psalm. 116. 7
soul: if we would instantly look up to the LORD for comfort, the Devil
would be weary of his own assaults, and we should be the more comforted, the
more we are afflicted. O how blessed would our trials be to us, if out of a
true dislike to the world, they could compel our souls, our thoughts, to
dwell with God! happy miseries, which make men eternally happy, by forcing them
to heaven. To conclude, let us not give over for the frequencie of our trials,
but be confident, and, in the Name of God, warrant our selves better days:
otherwise, we shall not be sufficient witnesses to our brethren, of Gods
grace in us, if we do not first assure our own souls, that we conceive a
firm hope, and next express our confidence to others.

I shall yet praise him, implies, he will praise him, when he shall please to
deliver him. Good men, even in afflictions and wants, do resolve, not to bury
the mercies of God, but to praise him for them. Iaakob in his poverty vowed a
vow, saying; If God will be with me, Genesis 28. 20.
and keep me in this journey which I go, and will give me bread to eat,
and clothes to put on, so that I come again to my fathers house in safety,
Jonah. Psalm. 109. 22, 26. Psalm. 116. 14. Psalm. 66. 13, 14. Psalm. (...) 47.
then shall the Lord be my God. Jonah vowed, David vowed in his trouble; all
good men do so in their afflictions.

It is a sweet comfort, to vow, or resolve to pray se the Lord: such purposes
are like Ier. 38. 11. Veteramenta abiecta.
Ebedmeleks rags, though of themselves worthless; yet, by the grace of God,
they are let down, to draw us out of the dungeon: and are, often followed with
deliverance, ever with a blessing equivalent. When Jonah had resolved, the Lord
spoke unto the fish, and it Ion. 2. 10.
cast up Jonah upon the dry land. Where God will deliver his servant, he
gives this resolution. Howeuer God see best to do with a man, it is a blessed
prognosticke, to resolve to glorify him, who will never frustrate the faithful
desires of his, but either will satisfy, or exceed them, in giving better
then they desired.

These vows must they remember, whom God has heard, whether in public, or
private delinerances, lest God meet more severely with them, for their neglect
and ingratitude.

Lastly, we may hence perceive, how much the servants of God differ from
worldly men. David in his affliction, thinks and resolves to praise God:
these either think I shall live to be revenged, or to have my will, to enjoy
the pleasures of sin; either they do not resolve to be thankful, but forget
God who helped them, or resolve not to be thankful, but to serve sin. There
are but few David's, who resolve to praise God, or who praise him whateuer they
resolve. Are not ten cleansed? Where are the other nine? There are many
receivers, but few thanksgiuers: it becomes well the just to be thankful;
the Genesis 8.
ungrateful like the foul Raven, howeuer they go or come, return no more to
that hand which enlarged them: but the holy will come back with some
acknowledgement, if it be but like the poor Dove, with an Olive leaf in its
mouth, if it be but thanksgiving. God who has need of nothing, looks not
toward men (like the Court- Gehazies) after gratuities for unsold favors; he
measures our thankfulness, t^ot by the gift, but our mind: if we have not a
Sheep, a Turtle is accepted; and yet less, he looks for a thankful
tongue; and without all complement, an heart resolved to be thankful. What
can thou do less then resolve, I will praise him?

Who is the help of my countenance.
HE signifies, that God is his present helper, and does openly and evidently
relieve him: he ascribes his Psalm. 74. 12 Psalm. 44. 3, 6, 7, etc. Psalm. 11 ^.
1.
deliverances, and all his strength, and countenance to God. So do the
faithful always. Samson was of incomparable force and courage, against the
enemies of God: noble were his atchieuements, yet when he had slain a thousand
men with a iawbone, he acknowledges, Judge. 15. 18
Thou have given this great deliverance into the hand of thy servant. Our
Psalmist had many valiant men, and well ordered troops of disciplined soldiers
and, where most renoumed Generals fight with their heads, their wisdom and
policy, his enemies were well acquainted with the force of his own hands; yet
he acknowledges, 2. ^am. 22. 32.
as here, so elsewhere, that he must ascribe all unto God. It is but 1. Chron.
29. 10, 11, 12
stolen honor which is given from him to any other, and that sacrilege cannot
thrive in the receivers hands. Herod knew it: It is an evil Acts 12. 23
too common, men fix their thoughts and hopes on second causes, in taking them
to be their countenance, and so neglect God: therefore God often breaks such
confidence, makes frustrate their hopes, and leaves them without countenance,
that they may learn to trust in him.

The help of Gods countenance, is the declaration of his favor and
protection: of which he speaks in the fifth verse. Here he says, God is the
help of my countenance: because, God by his ready assistance, and frequent
declaration thereof, did assure him, and give him countenance. And he speaks,
as it were by way of a private appeal, even to his enemies, that he was not
daunted and appalled, but durst look the proudest of them in the face, when
God only assisted him. Fear ca^teth down the countenance, so that it is not
hard to read the thoughts of such an beart, in a suspectfull and
discountenanced face: but joy and assurance makes the countenance steadfast and
cheerful.

God is the health of his servants countenance, by giving them* 1. Confidence*
through a lively faith in Romans 10. 11.
him; and whosoever bele^^eth in him, shall not be ashamed.

2. Sense of their sins remission, and peace of conscience: sin in the
conscience deiecteth the soul, it is an inward wound, something at the heart:
till that be removed, there can be no good countenance, we dare not look
God in the face, we are afraid to think of him: Sin^e is the confusion of
faces. The Publican Luke 18.
durst not lift up his eyes to heaven; his dejected countenance argued a
grieved mind, whose sickness thus brake out, Lord, be m^rcifull to me a
sinner. The first man was not ashamed of his nakedness, till sin
discounte^anced him, and made him ashamed at the presence of God. There are two
reasons why the sinner must needs be confounded at the presence of God: 1.
Because he, who acting his sin, said in his heart* None shall see, finds now
by the checkes of his own conscience, he cannot hide from God, nor flee from
his indgements. 2. Because the very presence of the just is an intolerable
torment to the guilty* which makes the sinner tremble at 2. Sam. 2. 2^.
the thought of God. Abner said to Asahel, How then should I be able to hold
up my face to Ioab thy brother? He that has offended, and injured a man, will
be ashamed to look upon him. How much more is a man as^^med of his sin before
God? Ier. 38. 11.
As a thief is ashamed when he is found, so is the House of Israel. Joseph
urged many sound reasons, to have diuerted the importunity of any, but a
wicked woman: his Masters trust in him (it were baseness to deceive trust) his
favors to him (it were impiety to requite those with treachery;) but the
maine was, How can I do Genesis 39.
this great wickedness, and so sin against God? O blessed and happy fortress
of the mind, holy innocence, with what confidence do thou come into the
presence of the all*seeing God! how cheerful and v^daunted art thou against
all dangers? What has the innocent man to fear? But where this is lost, O
happy is that peace of conscience, which is found in the blood of Christ Jesus.
Eliph^z said excellently (though he did Job 22. 21, etc.
not well apply,) Acqu^i^^ thy self, I pray thee, with him, and make thy
peace; thereby thou shall have prosperity, (...) When others are cast down^,
then shall thou say, I am lifted up.

3. By giving sanctification and holiness: while we ^ye in sin, we can have
u^ peace of conscience, therefore no health of countenance. The wicked may have
confident faces, fo^eheads of brass, a whores forehead, impudent, and such as
cannot bl^^h: yet follow them to their ends, you shall know they have a
doloro^s wound in the conscience* When the world smileth, they are in their
hei^ht of countenance, at least, they can (...) v^ltu simulare: but their
hearts tell them what they are* i^ aduersinie and in^uitable death approach,
mark these daring spirits. H^m^n was of so proud a countenance, when he had
the Kings favor, that the least neglect of him* seemed a capital crime* when
^ b^t was clouded, he h^sted home mourning, and his head covered. Ahi^h^p^el
Hest. 6. 12.
was a great Statesman, when his oracles were h^d in honor, See 1. Samuel 28.
20. and Dan. 5. 6.
but look after the wretch, you shall s^e what was the help of his
countenance not God but popularity. David was not discountenanced, when Princes
did sit and speak against him: neither the Apostles, Acts 5.
when they were scorned, 2. Cor. 11. 23, 24, 25,
reviled, and threatened. Paul had discouragements enough of men, yet he was not
ashamed 2. Tim. 1. 12.
of his sufferings. The holy are bold as Lions: because they are led by the
Spirit of God, they say, Romans 1. 16. 1. Cor. 15.
Death, where is thy sting. Hell, where is thy victor^e* Job 11. 14.
Zophar advised well: If (...) be in thine hand, put it fa^^e away, and let no
wickedness dwell in thy (...) the^ shall thou ^^ft up thy face without spot,
and shall be stable, and shall not fear.

4. In giving victory against Romans 8.
all our enemies: in all these, we are more then conquerers, in giving us
defense against the insulting adversaries: therefore when he had said, Why go
I m^urning while the enemy oppre^^eth me? He infers presently; I shall yet
give him thanks.

5. In giving supplies, by his euer-present, and all-seeing Providence: The
Lord Psalm. 23. 1.
is my Shepherd, I shall not want. How-euer the Saints cry in their
distresses, as the Disciples in the storm; Master, Mark. 4. 38
carest thou not that ^e perish? yet they are assured of his assistance: he is
with Israel in the Desert, with Jacob in his journey, with Eliah at Chebar,
with the widow at Sarephat, with the Children in the furnace: it is easier to
say all in one word, then much less, in many: he is every where, ready to
supply his. Such experience does God give hereof to his, that he is their
countenance: experience is the cause of that hope, which makes them not
ashamed: To 5. 4, 5. 12. q. 40. 2. Tim. 4. 17, 18. 2. Tim. 1. 12. Genesis 48. 16.
Josh. 23. 14.
I was (says Paul)* delivered out of the mouth of the Lion; and, The Lord will
deliver me from every evil work; and will preserve me unto his heavenly
kingdom. And again, I am not ashamed; for I know whom I have believed* It is
an usual argument of comfort with the Saints of God.

Afflictions begin fiercely, 1. Sam. 17. 37. Psalm 77. 10, etc.
but they end mildely, and comfortably: they come upon us, like Samsons yelling
Lion at Timnah, with open mouth, but being overcome, Use.
they feede^ out hopes* with sweet experience of Gods mercies: the greater our
sufferings, the greater our experience of his goodness: therefore go^ back to
the carkas; look back to thy former deliverances, and thou shall have the
better hope for the future. Forget not all his benefits, and he will appear
to be the health of thy countenance: look back to thine infancy, how he
has fed thee, clothed thee, preserved thee* relieved thee, called thee to the
knowledge of Jesus Christ, taken thee out of the Kingdom of Satan, and made
thee his son, consider how he has given thee assurance of a glorious
inheritance with the Saints; and thou shall find good cause, to say in thy
particular, as the multitude Mark. 7.
of Jesus; he has done all things well. And thou shall be more and more
assured, he that saved sinners, will not condemn the just: he that spared his
enemies, will not cast away a son: none but the forgetful and ungrateful
want these arguments.

And my God.
MY God: by that free covenant, which he has 2. Sam. 7. 29.
made with me and my feed, that he will be our God; here is further
exptessed, the ground of his assurance: had his trust been in riches, they
could not have delivered him: had it been in Princes, though they are called
gods, they must dye like men: had it been in humane policy, that is subject to
error: had it been in strength and youth, that must yield to sickness; this
to age, both to death: but they that trust in this Lord, shall have hope in
death. They that trust in lying vanities, forsake their own mercy: The portion
of Ier. 51. 19.
Jacob is not like them, for he is maker of all things, the Lord of hosts is
his name. This is David's God.

Does any ask of his Power? it is infinite: of his Mercy? it is infinite: of
his Goodness? it is infinite: of his Love, Majesty, Glory, Dominion? all is
infinite, of which we can speak or think, and so much passing all
understanding, as that in speaking and thinking of him, we must veil our 1.
Tim. 6. 15, 16.
hearts: for he dwells in the inaccessible light: and though he appear most
glorious in his works, yet he is known perfectly to none but himself: though
he be Hilar. de Trin l. ^. L^ctant. l. (...) 8.
one, yet is he in all things: and being every where, omnipresent, he is in no
place included and limited: he is the Almighty Maker and Preserver of all
things; he governs over all the creatures: he only is eternal and
unchangeable; he only can do, whatsoever he will do; he does whatsoever he
pleases, without any let, labor, or difficulty.

Cio. de not deor. l. ^.
When Hier^ asked the prudent Heathen Simonides, what God is, he required a
days respit to answer: the second day, being asked what God is, he required
two days study more: and so, as often as his resolution was desired, he still
doubled the number of the days; till in the end he answered, The longer I
consider, the harder the matter seems unto me. Surely such is his glorious
Being, as that it is unspeakable. Moses saw but his back-parts, as Moses saw,
so he speaks of his seeing, to man's capacity: such is he, as that it is not
the least part of our knowledge, to know what he is not; which in a word is to
know, that he is nothing of all that which we -- perfecta scientia est, sic
deu^n scire vtlicet non ignorabilem, lam^n inenartabil^m scias. Hilar. l. 2. de
trin. De quo semper cogita^e debemus, de quo dign^ cogit^^e non possiomus. Aug.
de trin. l. 5. c. ^.
know. This is perfect knowledge, so to know God, as that thou know him to
be known, and yet ineffable: therefore we must always think of him, of whom
we cannot worthily think: for he is to be believed, to be known and to be
worshipped. It is life everlasting to know him, and whom he has sent, Jesus
Christ: and they only know what he has reueiled of himself, to whom, by his
Word and holy Spirit, he has reueiled himself: he has reueiled himself, One,
Eternal, Almighty, Al-wise God: this is David's GOD; three most glorious
Persons of infinite Majesty, an holy Trinity in Unity, neither confounded
nor divided, but one Godhead, one God Aug. de Genes. ad lit. l. 8. c. 19. --
Trinitatem ipsam, neque, conf^^^, neque separatam, etc.
most gracious, most just, most loving, most merciful, most holy, most wise,
the sole fountain of all Goodness, perfect goodness, perfection it self,
goodness it self: This is David's God.

But had he reueiled himself such to David, and not communicated something of
this goodness to him, what had it auailed him? The wicked mav know him to be
the God of the righteous, but a severe Judge to them. The devil knows more
of his power, and Maiestic, then we can speak, yet he trembles at his
presence: but here is that which only comfort the holy man, he is my God.
How is he thine? At he was David's, in respect of the Covenant 1. Cor. 6. 19,
20.
of Grace; he bought us with a price, when we ^. Cor. 5. 18.
were lost. He reconciled us unto himself by Jesus Christ, when we were
enemies and children of wrath: Romans 5. 10. Ephesians. 2.
he made us of aliants, and strangers from the couenants^ of promise,
domestickes Romans 4. 3. 6 Acts 4. 12. Heb. 11. 8, 13, 17, 32, 33.
to himself, sons and heirs of heaven. Neither was Abraham, David, or any
of the Saints reconciled by God, and made his by any other means, then 1 Cor.
10. 1, etc.
faith in the same Jesus, in whom we also believe: there is none other Name
given under Heaven, whereby we must be saved: the Fathers did all eat the same
spiritual meat, and did all drink the same spiritual drink: for they
drank of the spiritual rock that followed them, and the Rock was Icr. 30.
12* Hos. 2. 23. 1 Pet. 2. 10. Romans 9. 25, 26.
Christ. This is the Covenant which he makes with his, he will be their God.

No question but David comforted himself with this; and thereby shows us the
only ground of solid comfort, which is in and against every affliction, to
labor for a true sense of our interest in God, and that through his Covenant
of grace in Jesus Christ. The Lam. 3. 24.
Lord is my portion, says my soul, therefore will I hope in him.

For first, there can be no good and true consolation without this, as
appears by that which has been said: for there is no peace to the wicked;
neither is there any such heavy affliction, as that which assaileth a guilty
mind, an heart and conscience without God and goodness: where, at the sight of
danger, the memory tells the wretch within, of an innocent Joseph's blood, a
Naboths Vineyard, an Orphans goods in his house, or the like sin, for which,
God is his enemy; for which, the desperate and appalled conscience faints,
and persuades him, God is now come to take vengeance. Neither are the
prosperous wicked in any better case, all that comfort which they seem to
have, is but as a short beguiling dream of happiness to some wretched man:
these differing no more then two condemned men, one now under the tormentors
hand, the other in the Gaolers, and presently to take his turn.

To leave these, the servants of God know themselves, they had no true comfort
in any trial, until they were assured that God was their God, and they his
servants. Augustine confesses the reason why he could not be comforted in
Confess. l. 4. c. 7.
God, when, being a M^kiche, he lamented the death of his friend: In tears
(said he) I had a little rest: but when my mind was carried away from them,
agricuous load of misery surcharged me, which I knew (O Lord) was to be cased
and cured by thee; but neither would Sed nec volebam nec valebam, eo magis,
quia non mibi eras aliquid solidum and f^rmum, cum de te cogitaba^, etc. lb.
I, neither could I, because when I thought of thee, thou were not any thing
solid and firm to me; for, not thou, but a vain phanta^^e and error was my
god* wherein, if I striued to repose my soul, that it might rest, it found no
footing, but full on me again, and I remained to my self, that unhappy
place, where I could neither be, not yet recede: For whither should myheart
fly from my heart? Whither should I fly from my self? Whither should I not
follow my self?

Secondly, we must know, that they that are his, can want no manner of thing
which is good: whether our instance be in things temporal or spiritual: they
are always by him; they have their conversation in heaven; he takes their
parts; his especial providence watches over them, as has been said. It were
a task for an Angels tongue, to recount all their privileges; for eye has
not seen, not ear heard that, whereof their hopes assure 1 King. 10. 8.
them. The Queen of Saba accounted Salomons servants happy, who stood in his
presence: but I may safely say Psalm. 144. 15.
with the Psalmist, Blessed are the people, whose God is the Deuteronomy. 18.
Lord. God would assign the Levites no possession among their brethren,
because himself would be their portion. What need he more, who has the Lord
for his part? This only can make a man happy. What would it avail thee to
call this house, this field, this treasure, this kingdom^, this world thine, if
thou can not call God thine? O s^^six possessi^! ^ perfecta dei p^^tio! Hill.
(...) (...) 11^.
The more thou have, the more unhappy thou art. I had rather be a
doore-ke^per, any thing, in the house and favor of God, then to possess all
things else. Take away riches, honors, health, any thing, only be my God, and
let me never want assurance that I am thine. It was said of Mahomet the great,
that in his love was no assurance, and in his least displeasure death: but our
God is not changeable, and in his pleasure i^ life. Our God is not as the gods
of those Painyms, which must be fed with human blood: merry pleases him: nor
as the gods of the Grecians, which they were wont to serve and present (as
many poor attendants and reteiners now do their great Lords) not that they
should profit or do Gracia colcbat Deos: -- alios vt profint: alios ne noceant.
Lactant. l. 1. c. 20.
them good, but lest they should hurt them. But he^ is a gracious God and a
loving Father: he saved us, even when we could do nothing, but work our own
destruction.

Use 1.
Would thou have comfort. Be thou his* who is the God of all consolation* Let
him be thy portion thy God* every one says it* Hilar. in Psalm. 118.
but you shall rately fin^ (...) confidence* Thou must renounce the world,
sin, and thy self, if thou will have God thy God* the (...) god is pleasure,
the Phil. 3.
Epicures, his belly, the covetous man^ god is his riches: if thou, will have
God thy portion thou (...) be emirely his thou (...) not have any other God;
thou must live, as one of his. Every one claims an interest i^ God the very
hypocrites catch hold of him, as those women in the Prophet, Isai. 4. 5.
-- ^^ely let us be called by thy (...) and take away our (...). The wicked
heretics cry, our God, our God, who yet stick to the Church, like Bernacles
to the (...) side, are neither fish no^ ^^^sh, till opportunity wing^th their
desires, and then they are gone: Did Ier. 1. 4, 5.
(...) not still try unto me, Thou art my Father, and the guide of my youth: --
thus have, thou spoken but thou do evil even m^r^ and more. If thou
would have God own thee in offliction, comfort and relieve thee in (...)
and fear him alway^^ (...) therwi^^* though thou (...) lon^ prayers, and (...)
he will (...) thee.

(...) 2.
Have thou (...) thy (...) not too (...) rows, (...) the wic^^d, (...) now
(...) Where i^ now (...) Psalm. 1^. 1.
Where thy Religion (...) the Lord (...) the (...) (...) thine infirmity, who
(...) am infirm; but it is ^ne thing to grieve, or be ^isquieted, another to
be ^^st down, and comfort^^sse. If thou beleeuest God (...) thy God; be
confident; he will comfort thee in due ^ime.

Use 3.
Lastly, how vain are all (...) hopes of worldly men? How do they, like
unskillful swimmers, drown themselves with too much plun^ing, and want of
confi^^^^^? Here only is the in Christ. Pray, hear, labor for faith: that
will bring thee assurance, that God (...) thy God, and teach thee, Bernard.
with Thomas (that man* of desires), to put thy hand (...) his wounds, that
thou may^ say, My God and my Lord* Here is that elixer, (...) will change and
refine (...) before thou find this, (...) art nothing but droffe* (...) the
leaden talent of sin thy hopes are (...) thy fears, despair thy mirth*
security; thy (...) row, repining; thy (...) works, but shining (...) Romans 14.
^3.
for whatsoever is not (...) faith, is sin: whateuer (...) ^peri^i^s thou
(...) est, they (...) speciosa (...) fair punishments; but in Christ, those
actions and affections begin to change their nature, their veins turn more
pure and precious: thy works will express some fruits of the Spirit; thy
hopes shall be holy persuasions, Anchors of the soul: thy mirth, sound
rejoicing; thy fears sanctified; thy condition blessed; thy sorrows, happy
exercises of thy faith and patience; and afflictions themselves shall be
comfortable, because GOD is thy GOD.

FINIS.

