The Red-Crosse: OR, Englands Lord have mercy upon us. ^amentable Relation of
many Visitations by the Plague in times past, as well in other Countries as in
the City of London, and the certain causes thereof: With a true number of all
those that dyed in the last great Visitation: And also the number of all those
that have dyed in this present Visitation.
IT is no doubt, that the corrupti^^ of the Air, together with uncleanly and
unwholesome keeping of dwelling, where many are pestred together, as also the
not-observing to have fires private and publicly made as well within houses,
as without in the streets, at times when the Air is infected, are great
occasions to increase, corrupt, and produce pestilent Diseases. Neither can it
be denied, that the over-boldnesse of many preasing into infected places, and
the lewdness of others with Sores upon them, presuming into the open Air,
some of wilfulness, but truly many of necessity, contaminateth and corrupts
diverse: as the Leprosy, the Pox, and sundry such unclean diseases do: as by
drinking, lying in company, and other such means, where pure complexions and
clean bloods are defiled with such as are putrified: and therefore carefully
to be avoided. But all these are accidental, and rather effects than the
cause. For it plainly appears in the Book of Exodus that when it pleased the
Almighty God to smite the Egyptians, the Children of Israel were appointed ^o
dip Isop in the Blood of the Paschall Lamb* and smite off that blood on the
outward Posts of their doors, that when the slayer came to destroy in one
night all the first borne in Egypt, he might pass over the houses of Gods
children. So that it is plain, it was an Angel then sent to smite those
cruel people with the Pestilence.

Then first, this City of London, cannot be denied, to have had as great
blessings as ever had Jerusalem: for here God has long time been present by
his Word and Sacraments, yet they have abounded in all iniquity, when
Jerusalem long since had not a stone left upon a stone.

Secondly, London is situated as pleasantly as Sodom, and her sister Cities
before they sunk, even for the same sins that we have committed: for the
sin of Sodom (says the Prophet Ezechiel) was pride, fullness of bread, and
contempt of the poor. That these sins reign in London, who can deny? To
them, add fullness of drink; for therein we exceed the Nation, that within
these fifty years we hated for drunkenness: and I doubt, That un-nameable
sin of Sodom is used in too many places of the City. Yet London stands, and
so God grant with his mercy it long may.

Lastly, where in the change of Princes (especially after long peace, as London
most happily enjoyed all the time of our late Sovereign Queen Elizabeth, of
worthy memory) many Cities have come to miserable spoil, if not to ruin: yet
London, by our most potent Lord and King, has increased in tranquillity,
blessing pouring upon blessing: save only now for our negligence, God has with
his own hand smitten us, and sent many to mourn in death after our late
Sovereign deceased, whom we had almost ungratefully forgotten in a day.

In the City, called the great Caire, there is a Plague once every seven
years, which comes with such a fierceness, that the most part of the people
there do dye thereof: and diverse of them that remain alive, lose their
eyesight with the vapors and great heat which comes from the ground.

In the year of Christ, 81. and in the year 188. there continued a great time
a Plague in Rome, of which there daily dyed two thousand people.

In the year 254. fifteen Provinces of the Roman Empire, were in a manner
consumed with the Pestilence.

In the year 530. there dyed in Constantinople 5000. a day, and diverse times
1000. and at that time, in some other parts of Greece, there were not
sufficient living men left to bury their dead.

And in the year 1569. there fell such a Plague in Constantinople, that there
dyed in six months space, seven hundred thousand persons, and the year
following fell such a famine, that a penny loaf of Bread of English money, was
worth a crown of gold: by reason whereof, the people died as fast then of the
Famine, as they did before of the Plague.

In the year 540. there began an universal Plague all over the world, that
continued 50. years with great violence.

In the year 1348. in Paris in France, there dyed a hundred thousand people of
the Plague.

In the year 1359. so great a Pestilence there was in Italy, that there were
scarce ten left of a thousand.

In the year 1521. there dyed in Rome a hundred thousand of the Pestilence.

In the years 1576. and 77. in Millan, Padua and Venice, there fell a hundred
thousand in every City: and in Bohemia (being but a small Kingdom) there dyed
300000. the sam^ time.

Soon after the Conquest of King William, Duke of Normandy, when the people
were subdued to him, and the Knights fees rated which he had made, and himself
placed with Crown and Scepter* he took number of the Acres of land in all
the Realm, and of all the people, and of all the Cattle: after which fell so
sore a Plague, that the people dyed in such number, that Tillage decayed,
Famine ensued, with rot of Cattle, that men were feign to eat flesh of Dogs,
Cats and Mice. A fearful example for Princes.

In the Reign of King Edward the 3. there fell a very great Pestilence in the
East Indies, among the Tartariaens, Saracens and Turks, which lasted the space
of seven years: thro^gh the fear whereof, many of the Heathens willingly
offered themselves to become Christians. And shortly after, by reason of
Passengers from one Province to another, the same Pestilence was dispersed in
many Christian Kingdoms, and amongst other places brought into England; where
it was so forcible all over the Land that not only Men, but also Beasts, Birds
and Fishes were smitten therewith, and found dead with Botches upon them. Also
among men, the numbers that were alive, were scarcely sufficient to bury their
dead. At which time, with the rest that then dyed of the Plague, Henry Duke of
Lancaster, Blanch, Duchess of Lancaster, and the Earl of Warwick ended
their lives. So that in one year, in a little plot of ground of thirteen
Acres compass, then called Spittle-croft, and now the Charter House, was
buried 50000 persons, besides all them that were buried in the Churchyards and
diverse places in the Fields.

Our Visitations, though our sins exceed, have been more gentle: For in the
first great Plague in our memory, after the loss of New Haven from the first
of January 1562. to December 1563. there dyed of the Plague, twenty thousand,
one hundred, thirty six.

In the second great Visitation, from the 20. of December 1592. to the 23. of
the same month, in the year 1593. dyed in all 25886. of the Plague in and
about London, 15003. And in the year before, 2000.

In the third great Visitation which it pleased God to strike us with, at the
coming in of King James of happy memory, there dyed from the 17. of December
1602. to the 14. of July 1603. the whole number in London and the Liberties,
4^14. Whereof of the Plague, 3310.

From the 25. of August, to the 1. of September, there dyed in London and the
Liberties, 3385 whereof of the Plague 3035. being the greatest number that dyed
in one week.

From the 23. of December, 1602. unto the 22. of December 1603. there dyed of
all diseases, within London and the Liberties 38244. whereof of the Plague,
30578. and the next year following, London was clear of that infection, and
then were all the Shires in England grievously visited. Note the work of God.

And in the last great Plague, 1625. there dyed from the 6. of January, to the
27. of October, 53265. Whereof of the Plague, 34576.

Now those that dyed this present Visitation, 1636. are here set down weekly,
for better sa^isfaction to the Reader.

From the 31 of March to the 7. of April -- 209 -- whereof, of the Plague -- 2
From the 7 of April to the 14 -- 213 -- w^ereof, of the Plague -- 4 From the 14
of April to the 21 -- 244 -- whereof, of the Plague -- 14 From the 21 of April
to the 28 -- 259 -- whereof, of the Plague -- 17 From the 28 of April to the 5
of May -- 251 -- whereof, of the Plague -- 10 From the 5 of May to the 12 --
354 -- whereof, of the Plague -- 55 From the 12 of May to the 19 -- 334 --
whereof, of the Plague -- 35 From the 19 of May to the 26 -- 3^0 -- whereof, of
the Plague -- 62 This last week there dyed within the VValls of this City --
3 -- In the out Parishes -- 36 In Stepney -- 22 -- In Newington -- 1.
A Preservation by way of defense, to be used in common Assemblies, and in open
Air.
WHen you go abroad into the open air, and amongst company, hold a piece of
strong Tobacco in your hand to smell to; or the Root called Angelica, to bite
now and then, as occasion requires; as for Tobacco, it has approbation from
the most learned Doctors of the Kingdom, to be a most rare Antidote and
Preservative, either being smelled unto, or taken fasting in the morning:
provided, that presently after the taking thereof, you drink a deep draught
of sixshillings beer, and walk after it.

A necessary Prayer for the present time.
O God of g^ory, Lord of power, distributer of vengeance, and yet the
favorable Physicion of sick souls and bodies, look down upon thy sinful,
yet prostrate servants, the people of the City of London, who are every where
heart-strucke with the Arrows of thy angry Visitation: We have sinned, we have
sinned, we have grievously offended, and without thy grace there is no help,
being now shunned and despised, even of all the Country people round about us;
for whom, notwithstanding, we earnestly pray, as for our selves: beseeching
thee, of thy unmeasurable goodness, not to look upon them according to their
deserts, but to have mercy on them and us; and stay thy heavy hand from them
as well as from us. O Lord God of mercy, be good to us, and look not upon our
sins: for if thou weighest the offenses of man, no flesh shall stand before
thee. We have sinned, we confess, O Lord, we have sinned, there is no
righteousness in us, nor any help but thine. O then, let thy Angel stay his
hand, as he did at thy merciful appointment, when David offending thee, saw
the Sword over Jerusalem. Let the doors of our hearts be sprinkled with the
Blood of that Immaculate Lamb, Christ Jesus, that the slayer may pass by us,
as he did when the first borne in Egypt were smitten with the Pestilence. O
God, thou can slay and restore again, strike into sickness, and give
health; for thou art only a Savior. O God, the Maker of us all, look
mercifully on thy workmanship. O God, the Savior of us all, be an Intercessor
to thy Father for us. O God the Holy Ghost, the Comforter of us all, inspire us
with true repentance, that we may humbly seek, and suddenly find mercy from
the Holy Trinity; one God in unity, ever to be honored, while man has
breath, or creatures any being. Have mercy, O God, have mercy, O God: for to
thee mercy belongs, which all true Repentants purchase in our Redeemer Jesus:
in whose Name we beseech thee to free us and our Brethren, from this fearful
Visitation: concluding these our requests with that absolute form of Prayer,
which he himself has taught us, saying, Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

FINIS.
London, printed for H. Gosson, and are to be sold at his shop on
London Bridge. 1636.


