A declararation of the twelve articles of the christen faith with annotations
of the holy scripture, where they be grounded in. And the right foundation and
principal common places of the hole godly scripture, a goodly short
declaration, to all Christians profitable and necessary for to come to the
right understanding of holy Scripture compyled for the commodite of al
christen people. By D. Vrbanum Regium.

Prologe.
When Christendom after the beginnynge of the church thoroughe godly grace,
was grown up into a mighty increase the people thought them selves from day
to day more and more sure, and began after natural flesshely inclination,
to forgette God and his word (as in prosperity is accustumable) for the
scripture says The people sat down to eat and drink, and arose to play.
Exodus xxxiij Isay. lvi
They turned every manne in his own ways every one after his own covetousness
from the highest to the lowest. They dispysed the wholesome true doctrine, and
chose to themselves foregoers and masters after their own will, which
taught men's tradicions and inventions, as they delyted to hear, contrary to
the manifold godly monicio^s in the old and new testament comprehended.
Deuteronomy. xiij Math. v.ij i.ii.miiij Isai. xxx
Their tongues and inuencions were against the Lord. Therewith did they
provoke the eyes of his majesty to displeasure. Wherefore he visited the^ by
many fatherly corrections and benefytes (like as in times paste the
Israhelites) if they from such their ungodly lives would turn again to
him, to the intent, that it might go well with them, But they would not set
their hertes that they might amend. iiij. Re. xxv. Psalm. ij.xxxiiij
Therefore has he permitted the Princes and Chief Capitaynes of the Assyrians
to come upon them, their chosen forgoers, which cruelly with cheynes and
bonds of man's wisdom, and good intentes have bounden and taken them, and
spoillyng them of all Gods ornaments of the tempel of the clear, pure word
of God, have carried them altogether toward Babylon, in their laws and
doctrine of man's tradicion, where, for a great season they have served
heuely. In so much that they by reason of the straight and hard service of the
same, were never able to serve the true gods service (although at the last
of great necessyte they would gladly have done) nor yet to know to live there
after. For the water veins of the word of God, were stopped up for the^ with
earth of me^nes laws and traditions Esaias says. Esa. lvi
Their wachemen and foregoers were all blind, and know not the law of God,
they are dombe dogs not being able to bark, nothing regarding but man's
doings, they are sleapye and sluggysshe, and the shameless dogs can never be
satisfied. The shepeherdes also themselves have had none understanding, so
holy has man's good thinking deceived them all. For all such things had
God often treathened unto them before, in case they did turn away from his
commandments, like as by Esaias. I will give them children, Esa xxx
to be their princes, and the wyuysshe shall ruelle over them, he had, first
warned them for mennys dreams, when he said, My people, Those which uphold
thy cause and praise thy therefore, they deceive thy, believe the^ not. But for
as much as they willingely gave the^ selves into it he suffered them to decay,
to the intent that they might learn to know him by them selves, as Ezechiel
says.

Ezechi. xxxiiij.
In such anguyshe have they acknoweleged them selves as lost sheep, of their
shepeherdes (which have fed them selves) seduced, have been sorry, and repented
with all their hertes for their sins, and have called unto God unfeignedly for
grace and succor. The law of God was holly alienated from them, In so much
that they knew it no more, iiij. Re, xxij.
and took it for inverted news. Like as in the time of Iosia the good king at
Jerusalem, Helchias the priest found the book of the law, in the house of the
Lord, which had lain there for a great season.

When the same was read before the King, as for an old antiquite, he rent his
clothes, and commanded the priests to ask counsel of the Lord thorough the
Prophets, for him and the book, for he feared God, because that his
forefathers had not lived thereafter, and found favor before God, with this
answer. For as much, as he had humbled himself, feared, and weped before
him, would he be merciful unto him, and to the people.

After that, did the king erecte al Gods honor after the tenoure of the
law, and made a covenant with God for him self and the people to keep the
same from thensfurthe, and the people consented therein. After that did he
break down, and destroyed all Idolles with all their appertenaunces, And god
was with the^ in all that they did and left undone. God send us such like
foregoers. When now the desolate Christianite have done penance in such
bondage the in Babylonysh captivity, and cried to god with all their hertes for
delyueraunce, he has immediately heard the^, and brought again to light his
holy, clear, pure law, word and doctrine, thorough means according to his
pleasure, And as we daily see before our eyes, namely, that such aryseth of a
few and despised persons as also in times paste in the beginning of the
church has been done, i. Re. xiij i. Esd. ij Matthew. xxij. Roma. ij.
as apereth here and there in the scripture, whereby we see evidently, that it
is not hard to god to speak through many or thorowgh feawe, for all multitude
is before God, as one man, his power is not in the multitudes or in many, and
there is no respect of persons by him. The light is come again into the
world, God grant that our foregoers love no more the darkness, but
follow the good king Iosia, than shall, them as the shepeherdes, the people
as the sheep gladly follow, Ezechi. xxxiij
that the prophecye of Ezechiel come not over them. Vvoo be unto the
shepeherdes that feed them selves the milk have ye eaten, with the wolle have
ye clothed you, and that which was fat, have ye slain, but my flock, have
ye not norysshed, the weak have ye not strengthened, the lost have ye not
brought again, but with cruel authorite have ye rueled over them. me sheep
have been scattered for so much as they ware without a shepeherd as truly as I
live says the Lord. For so much as my sheep have been robbed and deuoureth of
the wild beasts, because they ware without shepeherde, for the shepeherdes
have not sought my flock but themselves, and have not fed my sheep. I will
require my flock of their hands, and make them to cease from feadynge my
sheep any more, yea they shall feed them selves no more, and I will deliver my
flock out of their mouths.

To be a foregoer is an office, i. tim. iiij
pleasant, and no Lordeshyp whosoever diligently consydereth the same, will
not couete to charge him self with it, nor yet to press into it. Covetousness
works such, which is a root of all iniquytie. Like as love, is a root of
al goodness, as Paul says. i. tim. vi. i. Pe. v
Pride cleaneth to them that be covetous. There of speaks Peter, God
resists the proud but gives grace to the humble.

In Apocalypse writteth S. Ihon thus. Apoc. iij
Christ stands even now before the door of our hertes and knocks if any
man hear his voice, and open the door unto him, unto him will he enter in, and
suppe with him. He provoke and beekeneth us confortably to him by his holy
word many ways, whereby we be delivered from the captivity of man's law, so
that we will hear him. We be waxed so blind, that we se not our redemption
and lyberty. Ioha. v. and.xiiij
Therefore shows he us the way and the door, saying. Seek in the scripture,
for she bears witness of me. And I am the way, the truth, and the life. No
man comes to the father, but by me. Item I am the door: all they that have
entered any other way, Johan. x
than by my, be thieves and murderers. He that enters in by my shall besafe, and
shall goo in and out, and find pasture. The thief comes not into the fold,
but to steal and to destroy. I am come that they might have life, and have it
more abundantly. Mat. xi
Item, come unto me all ye that labor and are lade^, and I shall refresshe
you. Take my yoke, on you, and learn of me, for I am meke and lowely in heart,
and ye shall find rest unto your souls. For my yoke is easy and my burden is
light. Of such like sainges be here and there innumerable many.

Therefore let us joyfully receive and with great diligence thankefully keep
the holy, pure, sincere word of God, the sustenau^ce of the soul, which the
Lord God again of new, mercifully has manifested unto us. For Christ says,
Luce. xi. Deuter viij.
happy are they that hear the word of god, and keep it. Therewith may we
boldly pray, in spyte of the devil, and all his illusions.

And to thintente that we may the more steadfast liar do the same, here
follows most compendiously comprehended, how we ought to hold us in all
Christian lyuinge concerning the faith in doing and living, toward God and
man, and where the same al together and every part thereof is grounded in the
scripture, to the praise of god, and for the succoure and crudicion of the
simple Christen congregation ordained and made to use them selves in the holy
scripture. The merciful God vouchesafe to give and grant us his grace, help
and fatherly succoure there unto. AMEN.

The twelve Articles of our Christen faith, with annotations of holy
scripture, wherein they be grounded. By Vrbanum Regium to the pleasure of the
worshipful wise man Caspar wytbrugge collected
Prologe.
CYprian and Ruffyn be of this opinion, mat. xvi
that the Apostles (when Christ had commanded the gospel universally in the
world to be preached) before their departing the one from the other have
agreed and have made a sum of all their predications to come, what every one
did hold, to the intent that they might preach the Godly doctrine of Christ to
all creatures with one accord. And that should be the twelve articles of our
believe, as every man speaks them daily. Now be it as it will, whether the
Apostles or likewise their successors have extracted it most briefly, The
scripture ought men to read them selves. romans xv. What we believe, is not all
comprehended in the Creed.
it is good in mine opinion, notwithstanding. Let every man also hear or
read the treasure of wisdom, the Bible, as the right well and spring, where
that, and other things more for our instruccyon is written.

We believe, that in the Sacrament of the altar is the body and blood of
Christ. That stands not in these twelve articles, and yet is an article of
faith, therefore must men read the scripture also. In the twelve chief
articles of faith, is the chiefest, comprehended, what to a christen man is
necessary to believe for his salvation. For as much now, that faith is to us
so necessary, mar cxvi Ebre. xi Johan iij
that no man without faith can be saved, as Christ says, He that believes
not, is dampened.

Item, he that believes not, is conde^pned all ready.

Verily the wicked spirit our enemy labors with many crafts to put us
away from the faith of these articles, wherefore it is necessary, that our
heart be very sure bound to these articles with a strong steadfast faith, which
in the field of heavy temptacion may resist. Matthew. iiij. Deute. viij. Psa.
xci Ioh. viij


Christ did set him self against the deuyls temptacion with the scripture,
casting before him the saynges out of the scripture: eue^ so should we do
also. The wicked spirit fears the scripture. For as much as he is a father
of lies, Genesis iij Iho. viij
he can not abide the words of the everlasting veryte. He is a Prince of
darkness, therefore flies he from the words of life.

Therefore shall every Christian surely wall round about and make strong
with saynges of the holy Scripture, these twelve articles, that the Devil be
not able to overcome him.

The holy Scripture is here our wall and refuge where upon the heart may and
shall surely trust whereout comes confirmation of our faith, Profit of the
holy scripture.
whatsoever she teaches and bids us the same is right and Gods will She
is our light and way, she comes of God the holy gooste, teaches us what is
necessary for us to our salvation comforts us in all te^ptacions, refourmeth
us in all errors illumineth us in the darkness of our ignorance. romans xv
Therefore says s. Paul whatsoever is written before time, is written for our
learning, that we through patience and comfort of the scripture might have
hope. And to Timothee, ij. tim. iij
all scripture given by inspiration of god, is profitable to teach, to
improve, to amend, and to instruct in righteousness, that the man of God be
perfect and prepared unto all good works.

god speaks through men. ij. Pet. i.
Laudable perseueraunce, virtue and honor of the godly scripture of the old
and new testament, testifyeth to us, sufficiently, that men have not of them
selves, but God has spoken through the men. Exo, iiij
They be not men's, but Gods words. Even thus spoke God unto Moses. Goo
to, I will be in thy mouth, and will teach the, what thou shall speak.
Christ asscrybeth his doctrine to the father, Ioha^. vij and.xiiij mat. xvi.
as stondeth in John. God the father has given him unto the congregation, as
their right true doctor, whom men should believe as he says him self.

In the articles of our holy faith stands this word, believe, Ebr. xi.
before in the beginning. For as saint Paul says, without faith it is
impossible, to please God, for he that comes to God, must believe, that God is,
and that he is a rewarder of them that seek him.

We say not, I see or I know, Ebr. xi.
but I believe Paul says: Faith is a sure confidence of things which are
hoped for, and a certaynte of things which are not seen. For these articles
be wonderful secrets of God, which thorough men's wit can not be obtained
and understand, but only with the eyes of faith. Man's wisdom can not
understand that god is become man, and from death risen again, and rayseth
also the dead in Christ, that he ascended into heaven sits on the right
hand of God his father. Item that Gods natural son be borne of a virgyn
and such like.

Wisdom of the cross.
The wisdom of the cross is hyden from al eyes of worldly wisdom it is a
mystery, which is known by faith. All worldly policye knows nothing of it.
i. Cor. i.
Even thus says Paul we preach Christ crucified, unto the Jews an occasion
of falling, and unto the Greeks folisshnes, but unto the^ which are called
both of Jews and Greeks, we preach Christ the power of God, and the
wisdom of God. It seems unto the Gentiles to be a folissh thing, that God
should dye, being the incomprehensible majesty. They know nothing of the
mystery of the blessed manhood, which God took upon him for our salvation
from the beginnynge provided Ephesians. i
and ordained.

Saint Paul speaks unto the Corinthians.
When the world through their wisdom know not God in his wisdom, i. Cor. i
it pleased God through folyshnes of preaching to save them that believe
thereon. Luce. ij
Here is set and erected the sign which is spoken against, and which is the
fall and resurrection of many in Israel. Esaias. xxviij
Here is set the stone of stomblynge, and rock of offense, as Esaias says.
Vvhereon many shall be bruised. That is the wisdom of Christen men, which
saved us. As for all the wisdom of the Gentiles was not able to comfort her
teachers effectually in their smalest grefe. Mat. xi
The wysedo^ has God hyd from the wise and prudent, and has opened it unto
babes.

The Jews went about, Romans xi
to be made, and to come ryghteous to God, through the law, and through the
deeds of the law, but so could could they not be ryghteous. Roma. x
They have rejected Christ the precious corner stone, which is the end of the
law, in whom is made righteous, he that believes. Romans ix
But there is another ryghteousnes, whereof the Jews know not, which is
called the ryghteousnes of God, that is no thing else, then to believe in him,
that iustifyeth the sinner, according as saint Paul witnesses, Rom iiij
If I believe truly in Christ, as in the very some of God, and mine only
redemer and saueour, truly then shall this faith and trust be counted unto me
for ryghteousnes before God.

Faith is not a slyght thing, which a man may give unto him self, or make
it, when he will. But it is a great mighty thing, which renueth man, and
leaves him not in his old opinyon, What is faith
and in his, old skin, and desires. To believe is steadfastly to cleave unto
the word sf God, whether it be words of threatenynges or of promise, that
thou do trust there upon. That can no man do of him self, Act. iiij.
the spirit of God must renew and illumyne his heart before. A man may make
to hymfelfe, an opinyon of God, that he is good and merciful, but it has no
efficacye, for as soon as the earnest and need comes, it vanissheth away as a
dream. A right faith.


It is not ynowgh, that we speak the articles of our faith every day, five,
six, or seven times after the pater noster. They must be written in the heart,
and that lively, and not only mumbled with the to^g, that when the affliction
begins that it be then, even as thou speak. Thou say, I believe the
forgeuenes of sins, and when the devil does assail the in necessyte of
death, for thy manyfolde sins sake, then art thou abashed, and wylt
despair. Thereby do I see, that thou spekest this article with thy mouth, but
thy heart knows nothing thereof. Thou beleuest it not truly. Thou saakest,
I believe the resurrection of the body, and the life everlasting, but when
death breaks in, and body and soul must part, than art thou so afraid, as
though body and soul dyed altogether, and as if it were clean done with the:
Se, if there were a right faith in the of this article, that there were no
doubtefulnes with the in it, that thy body and soul, would sone come together
again, thou should not be so fearful. For faith is kept in necessite
even as gold in the fire. daily prayer
Thy daily and most diligent prayer always to god shall be. O Lord
everlasting almighty God give me the right true faith love, and hope, that I
may serve my neighbor according to thy pleasure. AMEN.

The first Article.
I Believe in God, the father almighty maker of heaven and earth.

Here mark first, One god three persons
that there is but one God, but they be three persons. The father and the
son and the holy ghost, as the scripture testifyeth. The three persons be
like everlasting, like mighty, of one majesty and being.

The son in the holy trinitye is sent unto us in the last time, has tagen
upon him humayne nature to the intent that he should fulfylle the scripture, and
redeem us, according to the good will of his father. And he has also created
all things with the father and the holy ghost (after the Godheade) in the
beginnynge. Deu. vi
Thus says the scripture. Hear Israel. The Lord our God is an only Lord,
And thou shall love the Lord thy god with all thy heart, with all thy soul,
with all thy might.

the nature believes not that there is one God.
The nature of mankind is so euel and so sore blinded through sin, that she
of her own power and strength can not well comprehend this article, that
there is one God, yea although she think, there be somewhat, that is God, as
the gentyle Cicero makes mention, yet knows she nothing sure of him, of his
power and will. It is easy to perceive how littel the gentyls have known of
god thorough their own wits, they have made many Gods, Roma. i
and have waxed full of vanities in their imaginacions, and have known nothing
truly of the almyghtynes of God. The light of nature is to weak for such
high matters. The light of grace must shine here in darkness, else is it
error and ignorance.

God our father
God is called our father, that is a confortable thing to the faithful, is he
our father, so be we his children and heirs of his kingdom. Eue^ so does
also Esaias call him, Lord, thou atre our father, our redemer. And in another
place, Lord our father art thou, thou art the work master we all be
works of thy hands. Mat. vi
Therefore pray we. Our father which art in heaven.

Father almyghtye, God is almighty.
God is omnipotent, all things are possible unto him, all things be in his
hand, his power, domynyon, and being is ever lasting and endless. Therefore
call him the Prophets so often Dominum Zabaoth, or exercituum, a Lord of
hosts, Ite^ Baruch speaks. Bar. iij. Ge. xvij Exo. xv and.vi Judith xvi.
Job. viij Luc. i. Apo. iiij
Thou Lord almightye God of Israel, In the first book of Moses. I am the
almighty God. In the second book of Moses, Almighty in his name. Ite^ in the
book of Iudyth, The almightye Lord had hyndered him. In Job, If thou would
pray to the almightye. Item Ioha^. v. xiij. xxi. xxij. xxiiij. xxvij. The Angel
said Luce. i. with God is nothing impossible. Item in the Reuelacions of saint
Ihon. Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord almighty, which was, and is, and is to
come. Item in the.xi, Genesis i Esaye xxxij. xlvij. lxv.
Chap. The Lord the almighty God is their tempel.

Maker, that have thou in the first book of Moses. In the beginnynge made God
heaven and earth. Read thereof, the xxxvij. xl. and xlv. Chapit. of Esaias. The
scripture is full thereof.

Here again mark the light of nature. For nature can not understood the
great wonderful works of creation, she can not comprehend how out of naught
should become ought, but the light of faith understands the creation, Ebr.
xi.
as saint Paul witnesses. Now see, how blind all sciences of the gentyls
be. Their chief points be. Of nothing becomes nothing. The world has
lasted ever and always. The course of heaven has nether beginning nor
ending. The first man never was, and the last shall never be. Gendryng and
dyenge endures for ever. The soul has no propre work, wherein she has no
need of the body, whatsoever dies ones, that same thing can no more come
again. Here do thou see what an errouious and untrue thing Philosophy is,
for all the same is untrue, and yet it is the chiefest, that men learn out
of Aristotell. Therefore is an old woman which believes higher in the right
Philosophye the^ Aristotell. She has by her faith. That God has created the
world: that Adam was the first man: that even her own body in the last day
shall be raised again: that the soul of man as a clear brightness of the
everlasting son which shall never cease to be, but is immortal, That the
bodily dyeng and being shall cease at the day of dome. Therefore ought a young
christen man to be brought up not in books of the gentylls, but in our book of
the Bible, men learn nothing in the heathen books, but ungodly things, which
be clean contrary to the scripture, and the faith, and make us erroneous.

the son of god.
The second Article. And in Jesus Christ his only son our Lord.
God has but one natural son, of one being, with the father, in
inco^prehensyble wise borne of the father from the eternyte. Gal. iiij
The father has not ben before the son, they be coeternall: The same son
is sent in the fulfyllyng of the time, Roma. i
and also temporally borne of a woman. He was promised by the Prophets long
before. And even by the eternal wisdom by the which God has fulmade the
world, Hebre. i
by the same has he brought her again from her heavy fall. He is the right
Messiah, redemer of the world, whereof all the Prophets have written, as he
said unto the woman of Samaria. Ioh. iiij. when he said. I know, that Messyas
shall come, which is called Christ. Then answered Jesus, and said. I that
speak unto the, am he, And the Samaritanes did also knowledge him, and said,
we know, that this is even in deed Christ the sauyoure of the world.

Even so does Peter and the other Apostles knowledge him. mat. xvi
Thou art Christ the son of the living god, he is that blessed sede of
Abraham, wherein God has promised to our father Abraham to bless all the
nations of the earth. Ge. xxij
Genesis iij
He is the seed of the woman, that should tread down the head of the
infernal worm. Only by him are we reconsyled to God, As Paul says. Romans v.
Through the faith in Christ be we made ryghteous and saved, Ebre. vi i, timo.
i Ebre. ix i. Cor. i. Ioha. iiij Ioh. xiiij Ioha. iij Matthew. xxvi.
he is our King and priest for ever, by whom we have a sure intrau^ce unto
God, he is our only mediatoure. A mediator of the new testament. Our hope
and our redemption. No man comes unto the father, but by him. For he is the
way, the truth, and the life, God has therefore sent him into the world,
that he should save us, whosoever believes in him, shall not be dampened. He
has given his life for the redemption of many.

Without faith in the mediatoure Christ could no man be saved. The fathers
before his birth believed in him, that was to come. We believe in him that is
present, his name is Jesus, Zach. ix Esa. lxii Ebre. v. vi. and vij
that is savior, And Christus that is anointed. He is our King and Bishop,
as Zachary says. Lo, thy King comes unto the lowely, His Priestly office
(without the which we come not unto God) declares unto us Paul very
connyngly, The kings of the world be anointed with bodily oil, Esa. lxi.
Luce. iiij Act. x
but Christ our King (whose kingdom is not of this world) is anointed of
God through the holy Ghost, as stondeth in Esaye.

The spirit of the Lord is upon me for he has anointed me, he has sent me
to preach the Gospel unto the poor. etc.

Jesus the son of Naue.
Like as Jesus the son of naue, was an elect Lord and Captain of the
people of Israel, when they ware brought out of Egypt, that he should bring
them into the land promised unto them.

Even so is our Lord Jesus Christ, given of God and ordained, that he bring
us out of the thick Egiptysshe darkness of our life, out of all error of
this world into the land of the lyuinge, as the Angel says.

Mathei. i.

He shall save his people from their sins. Therefore calls him the scripture
in the new Testament so often our Lord, as the Epistles of Paul manifestly
show.

That is the only son of god, whereupon the hole scripture does point and
lead us, as upon our only savior, as Symeon names him. Luce. ij.

But whereas the scripture does call us Christen beleuers also the sons of
god.

That is spoken after another manner. Christ is alone the right natura son of
god. from the eternite, as the scripture testifyeth. Our heart must have such
a mighty Lord, where upon it may surely trust which is able, to defend us
from sin, death, devil hell, He that shall do the same, must needs be God.

Witness out of both Testamentes.
Esa. vij Johan. i
In Esaias is Christ named Emanuell, that is, God with us.

Ihon begins his gospel on this wise. In the beginning was the word, and
the word was with God, and God was the word. The same was in the beginning
with God. Al things were made by it. And the word became flesh. For as
much now, as he is not made, but he is the maker himself, so must he needs be
God.

Ioh. xxi Act. x
Iohannis in the last says Thomas, My Lord, my God. In the Acts of the
Apostles says Paul, that god has purchased the Church with his own blood.
That speaks he of the agreynge of Persons in two natures of Jesus Christ.

To the Romans says s. Paul, Romans ix
which Christ is god over al things, blessed for ever. Phili. ij.
And to the Philippians. Let every man be minded as Jesus Christ was, which
being in the shape of god: thought it not robbery, Colos. ij
to be equal with God. To the Colossyans. In him dwells all the fulness of
the Godheade bodyly.

Unto Titus says Paul: Tit. ij.
that we should look for that blessed hope, and glorious appearing, Ebre. i
of the mighty god and of our savior Jesus Christ. To the Ebrewes speaks he
unto the son. God thy seat shall be for ever and ever. And Iho^ in his
Epistel. i. Ioh. v
In his son Jesus Christ, this is the true God and eternal life. Psa. viij
In the Psalm stands of Christ, what is this man that thou art myndefull of
him, and the son of man, that thou regardest him. Thou made him lower, than
the Angels, to crown him with glory and worship. Thou make him to have
dummyon over the works of thy hands: the declaracyon of this saying seek in
Saint Paul's Epist. To the Ephesians and Colossyans, and to the Hebrews.

Now if god have set Christ on his right hand, and has made him Lord over
all things in heaven and earth then must he be god. For it is not mete in no
wise, that one should be set on the right hand of god, and in like power
with god the Father, if he were no god, for as much as god will give his
honor to none other, as Esaias says. Esa. xlij xlvi and xlviij
God speaks in Osea. Osee. xiij. Thou shall know none other god but me.
There is none other saueour besides me. Even so is it also written in Esaye,
esa. xliij. xliiij. and xlv. Exo. x^. and xxxiiij Deu. v vi. Ioha. v.
and in the second and fyfth book of Moses. There will he, that me^ worship
none other or straun gods, now it stands in Ihon, god will have that men
shall honor the son, eue^ with the honor, wherewith the father is honored,
that is, gods honor. Even so will god, that men shall have one God, and give
the honor of god to no creature. For as much as he gives it here to Christ,
truly so is he god also. As also witnesses Paul, Romans i
to the Romans in the first Chap. sayng. After the flesh is he the son of
David, but after the spirit he is declared to be the son of god with power.
The scripture sometime calls Christ, God: and sometime by other words.
Wherefore infallybly it is concluded that Jesus Christ is very god and what
needs it many witnesses. Read the gospel of s. Iho^, that is almost nothing
else than a witness of the very godheade of Christ. Therefore erred the
Cherintians Ebionytes and Arrianes for they weaned, Christ were but only a man
and no god.

But we beleuers be the sons of God only of grace through election and
adoption, not of very nature. Christians be the children of God. Gal. iiij To.
viij. Ephe. i
Of the same childhode, read the Epistle of Paul unto the Galath. Romans, and
Ephesians. There find thou, how that we through Christ the right natural
son of God, of grace be accepted for the sons of god, and heirs annexed
with Jesus Christ our lord. The faith in Jesus brings us unto such high worthy
childhode, and to his Lordely heritage, and Johan says. As many as received
him, Johan. i
to them he gave power to be the sons of God, in that they believed on his
name.

The third article. Which was conceived by the holy gooste, borne of the
virgyn Marye.
This article has two parts. The first, Christ is not of a man after the
commune course of nature, but of the holy ghost, yet naturally born. The
second. The mother of Christ, was not defiled, as another woman, that
conceyueth a chyldee with hurt of her bodyly and goostly virginite, but she is
a virginal mother, a virgyn before the birth, in the birth and after the
birth.

The wonderful conceyuyng and birth, has the holy ghost prophesied through
the Prophets, Math. i
and by the Eua^gelistes descrybed and proved. For thus says the Angel unto
Joseph. That which is conceived in her, is of the holy ghost. For when the
blessed virgyn Mary heard the salutacio^ angelical, that she should become a
mother of so mighty a Lord, which was the son of the most highest, and
that his princely kingdom should endure for ever, she asked tharchangel
Gabriell with a virginal comlynesse, how that should be, seeing she knew of
no man. Luc. i
Then answered tharchangel. The holy ghost shall come upon the, and the power of
the highest shall ouershadowe the. Therefore also, that holy thing, which shall be
borne, shall be called the son of god.

Here was necessary that a special new man should be borne, Christ most be
borne pure.
that might take away, and wash away the corruption and disease of the first
sin of our damnable birth of Adam with his pureness. Therefore was it here
necessary to be a virginal pure birth, werein were no spot of sin, nor yet
maledictio^. The holy ghost was the work master in the workynge place of the
pure immaculate body of Mary, her pure flesh and blood was the natural sede,
whereout God the holy ghost has shapen the noble pure body of Christ. And the
wonderful holy virginite of Marye the elect virgyn is descrybed in the
Prophets and Eua^gelistes with inuincyble arguments.

The scripture gives to understand, Genesis iij.
that Christ the blessed fruit of Marye must be a natural child of a woman,
for he is called the sede of a woman. Item he must be a man of an excellent
frydom above all men, that he be above all sin. For he shall tread down the
head of the serpent, that is, sin, death, and hell, if he were borne in
sin, then should the devil also have power over him, as over other children
of wrath. But he has no power over him.

For Christ says thus.

Ioh. xiiij
The Prince of this world comes, and has naught in me. And so must Christ
needs be a right natural son of a woman (but with a supernatural wise be
borne, then the children of Adam) of whom all the virginyte is clearly and
undoubtedly kept.

First says the Scripture, the sede of a woman. It says not. The sede of a
man. It names only the name of a woman. Therefore the mother of this child
which conceyueth without the help of a man, is a virgyn, and yet a right
natural mother of the child as also Paul witnesses, Gal. iiij
where as he says. That the son of God is borne of a woman. Other children be
borne of a man and a woman. Here says the Scripture Christ is only borne of
a woman. A woman.
A woman is not here taken, for a woman that knows a man, but it signifies
the person of a woman, or the name of a woman, and gives here to understand,
that this birth is done without all addition of man, or help of man.

Secondarely, Ge. xxij
when God promised to Abraham Christ the right Messiah, he said.

In thy sede shall all the nations of the earth be blessed. Marye comes
bodily of Abraham and David. And Christ comes of Mary bodily and is the same
sede of Abraham, through the which al nations be blessed. Then it follows,
Gal. iij
that Marye is a pure virgyn. For if her son Christ be a blessed sede,
which takes away all male diction, truly than can not he be borne of a man,
if he were borne of a man, than were he borne after the course of nature, and
were a child of Adam polluted with sins. Now is he only a fruit of a
womanes body, and not of a man: for the work of the flesh, and the blessyng
stand not together.

Thirdely speaks the spirit of god, through Esaias. Esa. vij
God himself shall give you a token. Behold a virgyn shall conceive, and bear
a son etc. The Hebrewe text has Alma, that is a virgyn, not as a seruyng
maid, but a young woman person, which as yet has no husband, and wears a
garlonde, which is yet vndefyleth. And that is also nothing else, but a
virgyn. And so do men call the mother of God a pure maiden, that is a virgyn as
the Jews them selves can not deny. And therefore is she a pure virgyn before
the birth, and in the birth. Let the testimony of the Evangelists Mathewe and
Luke be sufficient for the, for they call Mary a virgyn, Math. i Luc. i
allegen the saying of the Prophet Esaye That she also did remain always a
virgyn after the birth, Marye a virgyn also after the birth.
will I defend even with the scripture. Wherewyth the heretyke Heluidius would
prove the contrary part, that she should have had children by Joseph, after
the first borne son.

Mathewe says, Math. i
Joseph knew her not, till she had brought forth her first son, hereout will
the folysshe that mark not the nature and propertye of the language, defyne,
and conclude that she should have borne more children afterward. But I say,
look better upon the circumstaunce. The Evangelist sets a great meruayll
before our eyes: namely that a virgin is with child before the man takes her
into his house and lies with her and before he knows her, for as much as
she has a son before, whom not withstondyng she should have, In case she
were known of him after the common course. And the words of saint Mathewe,
tend not upon that, which is done after the birth.

Ge. viij
Item in the first book of Moses, to speak after such like phrase. The Raven
flewe out and returned not again until the waters were dried up upon the
earth. Here will the text that the Raven is not come again at all. Even so
follows not in the forsayde saying of Saint Mathewe, that Joseph afterward
has lain with Mary, or has known her, but rather the contrary part, that he
never knew her afterward.

Esaias. ix
The temporal birth of Christ, has Esaye prophesied and notifyed. A child is
borne unto us, and a son is given unto us upon his shoulder does his kingdom
lie. And he is called with his own name wonderful, the mighty God, the Prince
of peace, a father of the world to come. Behold also the xi. Chap. of Esaias.

The historye of the birth of Christ read Luc. ij, How Marie the virgyn was
delivered of her child in Bethleem, Mich. v Matt. ij
as the Prophet Micheas did say in spirit, oh which words saint Mathewe
makes relation, sayng: and thou Bethlehem in the land of Judah, art not the
least among the Princes of Judah, for out of the shall there come unto me,
the Captain, that shall govern me people Israel.

The fourth Article. Which suffers under Po^ce Pilate was crucified, The
passion of Christ.
dead and buried.
That was the will of God the father, that his only son Jesus Christ should
dye upon the cross in the humayne nature, to thinte^t that he should bring
together the children of God that were scattered. Ioh. xi
That was the fathers commandment, that he should suffocate our death by
his innocent death. Mat. xx
That same said Christ unto his twelve disciples before in the way toward
Iherusalem, wha^ he spoke. Behold we go up to Jerusalem, and the son of man
shall be betrayed unto the chief priests, and unto the scrybes, and they shall
co^dempne him to death, and shall deliver him to the gentyls, to be mocked, and
to be scourged, and to be crucifyyd. And the third day he shall rise again.
Lu. xviij
And in Luke speaks Christ unto his disciples. Behold we go up to Jerusalem
and all shall be fulfilled, that are written by the Prophets of the son of
man. etc. Whereas even the forsayde words follow also.

The Prophets have descrybed the death of Christ very earnestly and so
plainly every thing, that many times they have also noted, how the pain
was, as of thorns, scourges, buffettes, of the cross, that men did play for
his cote, that men gave him vynagre to drink, and of such like many more.

In the old testament seek, or read wytnes.
We find often in the old Testament thy word, Compact, covenant and
testament, whereby was signified, that god should dye in the nature of man.
Besides that: is his passion and death clearly descrybed and showed. Esaias.
ij.x.xi.xli.xlvi, xlix.l.liij.lxiij.lxv. Iere. xi.xviij.xxiij.xxxi.xxxiij Tree.
iij.iiij, There says Jeremy, christ has been taken for our sins. Baruch. v.
Ezechiel. xvij. Osee. vi. xiij. Iohel. ij. Amos. ij. Ione. ij. Michee. ij.v.
Abacuc. ij. Aggei. ij. Zachary. ix. xij. xiij. xiiij. David, Psalm.
xx.xxi.xxxvij.liiij.lxviij. and also in other Psalms.

I will only bring the into the scripture, that thou thy self may drink of
the clear well. But in especyall look over, and read the.liij. Chapter in
Esaye, how goodly the Prophet there descrybeth the history of the passion of
Christ, and also the fruit of the same passion.

In the new testamente.
Read the Evangelists of the passion, where they handle the Passion of
Christ* there shall thou find, how godly the Prophecyes be fulfilled and
that the Euangelystes accord and agree with the Prophets. Likewise in the
Acts of the Apostles.i. ij. iij. iiij v. vij. x. xiij. xvij. xx. xxvi.

Witnesses of the Apostoles.
Paul Roma. i. iij. where he proves that we have the redemption through the
blood of Christ in the.v. says he, when we were enemies, we were reconcyled
to god by the death of his son. Item Roman. vi. viij. Christ dyed for us.
Roma. xiiij. xv. To the Corinthians.i. Cor. i. ij. vi. viij. x. xi. xv. ij.
Corinth. iiij. v. xiij. To the Galathians. i. ij. iij. iiij. vi. To the
Ephesians. i. ij. v. To the Philippians in the second teaches he, and
shows, that the son of God has humbled himself from the hyghnes of his
majesty for our salvation, even unto the most heinous death of the Cross,
Philippen. iij. To the Coloss. i. ij. iij. To the Tessaloniens. i. ij. iiij. v.
To Timot. i. ij. To Titus.ij. In the Epistell to the Hebrews, in the.i. ij. v.
vi. ix. x. xiij. Cha. Peter. i. Petri. i. ij. iij. iiij. And also in the
second Epistle. Johan. i. Johan. i. ij iij. iiij.

Of the buryall, read. Treno. iij. They have laid a stone upon me. Psalm.
iij. iiij. xvi. My flesh shall lie sure. Item Esaye. xi. In the new
Testamente. Matthew. xxvij. Marci. xv. Luce. xxiij. Johan. xix The unspeakable
fruit of the hoolsome death of Jesus Christ, and the infinite merits shall
thou find also in the places before rehearsed.

The fyfth Article. He ascended into hell: and the third day he rose again
from the death.
Christ is our redemer and savior, therefore ouercometh he all, whatsoever is
contrary to our salvation is sin, death, hell, and the devil, through whose
envy, death is come into the world. Christ also descended into hell, that he
should suppress, all powers and subtelties of the devil, to the faithful.
And he is risen again for to give a new life to the beleuynge, that we here
after may live innocently and godly.

David speaks thereof on this wise. Thou shall not leave my soul in hell.
Christ descended into hell.
Here is it clear, that he descended into hell. For he says not. Thou shall
not leave the work of my soul in hellethe says, my soul, so that the soul
of Christ did truly descend into hell, after her substance, or being, not
only after the work. And although we do not know properly, what manner of
descendynge into hell the same be. Yet nevertheless will we surely and truly
believe the words of the Prophets: when he had commended his blessed soul
into the hands of God his father, than lay his holy body still, but the
soul went down to hell. Oh the merciful Lord has overcome for us every
fearful thing.

The resurrection of Christ.
The resurrection of Christ is a great article. For it has made the pains
and sufferynges of all martyrs light, and is the triumph and joy of all
Christians. His ressurection is our righteousness, and works also our
resurrection both of body and soul. Even so says saint Paul. Christ is
risen again. Rom iiij To. viij.
If the spirit of him that raised up Jesus from death, dwell in you, even he
that raised up Christ from death, shall quicken your mortal bodies, because
that his spirit dwells in you. i. Co. xv
And to the Corinthians, as by Adam all dye, even so by Christ shall all be
made a live, and every man in his own order. The first is Christ, then they
that are Christ's.

The invincible glory of the glorious resurrection of Jesus Christ, declares
and glorifieth all that was weak and fearful before, dryueth away the fear
of death, and exalts into great joy the hertes of all faithful Christians.
What joy is greater, the^ that, Christ is risen in everlasting glory and
honor. Romans vi
He dyed ones for us, and shall dye no more, death shall have no more power
over him, Now be we his members, and he is our only head, wheresoever then
the head becomes and reygneth there shall also the members become. There is
our joy and reioysynge. i. the.iiij
Therefore says Paul, That the Christians should comfort themselves one
another with such words. They are comfortable words truly to all true
beleuers.

Su^ma Euangel ij.
This is the sum of the gospel. Christ is a king of glory, he is borne and
given unto us. We have sin and death, but he has righteousness and life, if
thou believe in him, then be his goods thy goods, his resurrection thy
resurrection, And it is thine also whatsoever he has wrought by his glorious
triumpha^t resurrection, To. viij.
God has given us, his son and all things with him, as saint Paul says.

What has he wrought by his resurrection? Fruyct of the resurrection.
Truly great things, he has destroyed sin, raised righteousness, abolysshed
death brought again life, overcome hell, and he has given eternal glory and
honor. Therefore syngeth the church with great gladness, not without
inspiratio^ of the holy ghost. Christ is risen and if he were not risen, then
were all the world perysshed.

In the old Testament is the resurrection of Christ signifies the prophet
Jonas. Ione. ij Mat. xij Luce. xi.
He lay three days and three nights in the belly of a great whalle, after that
was he delivered, as Christ him self brings in the same. The scribes and
the Pharisees would see but a sign. Then said the Lord unto them. The sign
of Jonas
The evil and aduoutrous generation seeks a sign, but there shall no sign be
given to them, than the sign of the Prophet Jonas. For as Jonas was three
days and three nyghtes in the whalles belly, so shall the son of man be three
days and three nyghtes in the heart of the earth. John. ij.
And in John speaks he also of this his resurrection, saying. Destroy this
temple, and in three days I will rease it up again. There speaks he of his
own body.

Read more there of in Osee, and in the psalter. I have slept and am risen,
That is asscrybed unto Christ.

Item thou shall not leave my soul in hell, neither will thou suffer thy holy
one to see corruption.

Here shows David clearly the bodily resurrection of Christ. For Christ is
properly called in scripture the holy one of god, and he says, thou shall not
leave him in hell, that is as much to say. Thou shall sone bring him from
theus. Item thou shall not suffer thy holy to see the corruption That is, Thou
shall make haste to bring me abroad again to the bodily life. The continual
readyng in the Bible shall bring before the more such like saynges.

Witness of the new Testament.

Mathei. xx. He shall rise again the third day. That is the word of God,
that can not lie nor fail. Mar. x. Luce. xviij. Mathei. xxviij. Mar. xvi Luce.
xxiiij. Johan. xiiij. xvi. xx. Act. i. ij. iij. iiij. v. x. xiij. xvij. xxiiij.
xxvi. Paul Roman. i. iiij. v. vi. vii. viij. x. xiiij. xv. i. Corinth. vi. xv.
and ij. Corinth. v. xiij. Galat. i. iij. iiij. v. Ephesians. i. ij. iiij. Phil. i.
ij. iij. Colloss. i. ij. iij. i. Thessalo. iiij. v. ij. These. i. ij: iij. i.
Tim. i. iij. ij. Tim. i. ij Titu. ij. Ebre. i. ij. iiij. vi. vij. x. xiij.
Petrus. i. Pet. i. iij. v. Johan. i. Johan i. ij. iiij.

The sixte Article. Ascended into heaven and sits on the right hand of God
the father almighty.
Christ ascended up to heaven, not that the eternal word, which is god him
self, was not in heaven before. For as much as the word is always in
heaven, and abides in the father and is essentyally, mightily, and presently
in all places. But for to speak after the humanite, say we, that he is
ascended into heaven, the same was never in heaven before. For because, that
the godly and humayne nature be so agreeable inwardely in unite of the
persons, therefore use we such and such like manner of speaking: He sits
on the right hand of God. That is, he is ordained of God a king, and mighty
lord over all the goods of God, in heaven, hell and earth. Therefore is he
able enough to help his faithful in all necessities.

Witness of the old Testament. In the Psalm has the spirit of God goodly
descrybed the glorinus triumph of the ascension of Christ, sayng. pl. xlviij
Thou art gone up an hye, and haste led captivity captine, and have received
gifts for men. Christ is gone up to heaven by the power of the deite, and
has even there received all power and dignite of the father over all
creatures, and has sent down the holy ghost with the treasure of al manner of
gifts through whom the gospel without fear is preached with power, and the
world converted.

christ's ouercomynge.
The evil enemy has taken men captive, for they were all sinners, he has
carried them away with his crafty subtelties from their Lord God and brought
them into his kingdom of darkness, Iuce. xi.
that is the fearful kingdom of sin and death. But there is yet come one
stronger then he. The strong Lion of the trybe of Judah, a right conqueror, a
strong Sampson, an ouercomer of death, sin, and hell. And has done to the
devil a mighty insullacyon in his kingdom. And as a King of glory destroyed
the gates of hell, spoylled the devil. And has brought again the princely
spoil with the triu^phe of the cross, a Lord of life and of al things, so
that all they, that believe in Christ, be delivered from the power of sin,
death, and the devil. Read more over the.i. xvij. xxiiij. xlvi. xlvij. xix.
and ^x. Psalm.

Witness of the new Testament.
Thus says Christ Matthei. xxvi. Ye shall se the son of man, sittynge on the
right hand of power. Item Marci. xvi. stands thus. He was received into
heaven, and is set down on the right hand of God.

Item Luce. xxiiij. Johan. xvi. I go to my father. Johan. xiiij. Act. i.
In the Acts of the Apostles is the story of the ascension very goodly
described. Even there says Peter. Actu. ij. and.v.
The God of our fathers raised up Jesus, whom ye slew and hanged on the
tree, him has God lift up with his right hand, to be a ruler and a sauyoure,
for to give repentance to Israel, and forgeuenes of sins.

To. viij
Paul says. He is on the right hand of God, and makes intercessyon for us.
Ephesians. i.
In the Epistle to the Ephesyans, have thou a goodly witness. There says
Paul on this wise. God has rayseth Christ from death, and set him on his
right hand in heavenly things above al rule power, might and domination and
above all names that are named, not in this world only, but also in the
world to come, and has put all things under his fete, and has made him
above al things the head of the congregacyon, which is, his body and fulness
of him that fills all in all things. In the iiij. Ephesians. iiij Psalm lxviij
Chap. There does Paul bring in the saying, out of the Psalm. He is gone up
an high, and has led captivity captive, and has given gifts unto men.
That he ascended, what means it, but that he also descended first into the
lowest parts of the earth. He that descended, is even the same, also that
ascended up above all heavens, to fulfill all things.

Read the Epistel unto the Philippians, Phi. i Colo. iij
in what hyghnes or dignity he is set. Likewise to the Colossians and Ebrewes,
in the.i. iiij. vij. ix. x. Chapiters.

Peter says. i. Pe. iij i. Ioh. iij
Christ is on the right hand of god, and is gone into heaven, angilles,
powers, and might subdued unto him.

Mark well the two articles, Comfort of the resurrection and ascentio^ of
christ
of the resurrection and ascension of Christ. For there in is great comfort.
For, to believe, that Christ is risen from death, and ascended into heaven, and
sits on the right hand of God, is nothing else, than to believe, That
Christ by his death has overcome the eternal death, and has taken upon him,
and put away the feruentire of God against us, Romans v.
and reconsyled us unto his heavenly father, made us parteners of his
innocencye, that death from hencefurth shall have no more domination, neither
over him, nor yet over his elect members, so that by his resurrection, we have
received a great benefyte, namely pardon or forgeuenes of all sins.

Ioh. xvi Matthew. xxviij. Ephesians. i. i. Ioh. ij. Ephesians. ij
To sit on the right hand of god is to sit in the power and kingdom as a
Lord. Item al power in heaven and earth, is given unto him. God has cast al
things under his fete. Item he is now before the father, our mediator, and
reconciliation. Through him we have an open way in, unto the father, he has
the everlasting Priesthode, lives for ever, and can perfectly save all them,
that go unto God by him.

The seuenthe Article. From thens he shall come, to judge the quick and the
dead.
The day of dome
That shall be at the day of dome, which shall be a joyful day to all
faithful Christians, as Christ him self witnesses in Luke, when he had
rehearsed the signs and tokens which should come before the last day, Luce.
xxi Matthew. xxiiij
unto his discyples, He said, When all these things begin to come to
pass, then look up, and lift up your heads, for your redempcio^ draws
nyghe. Here he speaks of the blessed they shall rejoice in the last day,
that our blasphemous life has an end, and that Christ is declared in all his
members, who would not be glad with all his heart of his redemption.

He that through the sprete of faith, understands the great calamite of this
miserable life, Romans ix
and the blasphemye of god, which through our sinful life daily in the
flesh is committed, reioyseth that this calamity sone ceasseth. The ungodly.
But the ungodly whom Paul calls, vessels of ire, where on God shall show
his straight judgment, they would wysshe that this temporal life might last
for ever.

They would be content with a good will, that god should keep his heavenly
kingdom alone. O how fearful shall be unto them, the face of Jesus Christ,
which shall show him self in the last day with such great glory and majesty,
Zach. ix
unto all men, Angels, and devils. His first coming, was despised, and a slight
thing before the world, but then when god the father shall give over unto him
all his enemies into such horrible everlasting and in tolerable pains and
punysheme^tes, Esa. lxij
And all the members of Christ shall be set from al calamitye and misery into
all perfection, joy and glory and in all certayntye without end. Verily then
shall he ride no more upon an ass, in mekenes, and show no more necessite,
but all glory, then shall the great day of the Lord be at hand, the day
of wrath and sorowfulnes, the day of mist, and of stormy wynd, as the Prophet
Sophony writes. Soph. i.


He shall come to judge the quick that shall be found, and the dead, that
have dyed. Cyprian understands, that the lyuinge be the souls, and the dead
their bodies. But for as much as Paul says, i. tess. iiij
that we which live and remain in the coming of the Lord, shall be caught
together with the dead also in the clouds, to mete the Lord in the air, and
so shall ever be with the Lord. Truly, so might it be thought, that there
shall be some on live caught to the judgment, as also Saint Jerome says upon
this place. They that be departed in Christ, shall arise first, and the
saints which shall be found lyuinge, they shall be caught to gether with the
first.

Augustyn in the book of the City of God says. Lib. xxij Cap. xx.
That Paul here in this Epistle to Thessaloniens, did not mean hymselues and
those that lived in his days. But that he did mean those, that Christ shall
find on live. He supposes also, that those, which soon live shall be caught
in the air to mete Christ, shall together at one time, in the same catchyng
dye, In Ecc. dog. vi. and.vij.
and rise again, as he says in another place. Now how the same comes to
pass will we commit to God, it is not necessary for us to know.

Witness of this article out of the scripture.
Malachie descrybeth the coming of Christ, and the judgment. Mal. iij dan.
vij.
Daniell does also note, the coming of the son of man to the judgment Item
of his power and kingdom, that this power endures forever, Luce. i. Mic. iiij
Matthew. xxiiij
and that his kingdom endures incorrupt, as also Luke does writ and
Micheas. In Mathewe, is descrybed the coming of Christ, whereas he says.
Even as the lightenyng comes out of the east, and appears into the west,
so shall the coming of the son of man be. Then shall all the kynredes of the
earth mourn, and they shall see the son of man coming in the clouds of
heaven, with great power, and glory, and he shall send his Angels with the
great voice of tro^pettes And they shall gather together his chosen, from the
four wyndes, from the one end of heaven unto the other.

Marci. xij. Luce. xxi. Matthei. xix. xxv and xxvi. fyndest thou also such like

ij. ii. iiij.
Paul. i. Corinth. iiij. i. Thessa. iiij. ij. Thessal. ij. Item to Timothe, I
testitye before God and the Lord Jesus Christ, which shall come to judge the
quycke and dead, To. xiiij
at his appearing in his kingdom. And to the Romans, We shall be al brought
before the judgment seat of Christ. Esa. xlv
For it is written, as truly as I live, says the Lord. Al knees shall bow to
me and al tongues shall give praise to God. ij. Co. v
Item to the Corinthians, we must al appear, before the judgment seat of
Christ, that every man may receive the works of his body, according to that
he has done, i. Pe. iiij
whether it be good or bad. Peter. Vviche shall give accomptes to him, that is
ready so judge the quycke and the dead. Act. ^
In the Acts of the Apostles, says Peter. Christ has commanded us to
preach unto the people, and to testify that he is ordained of God, a judge of
the quycke and the dead.

The eyghte Article. I believe in the holy ghost.
Here speak thou, In the holy ghost, therewith do thou confess, that the
holy ghost is God. For to believe a thing, is to set there on thy trust,
hope, and love, this is an honor which pertayneth only to God his majesty.
The holy ghost is the third person in the eternal deite, procedynge from the
father, and from the son, through an unknown, Matthew. xxviij
and inexplicable wise. In Matthew says Christ, Go, and baptize in the name of
the father, and of the son, and of the holy ghost. Here is mightily showed
the deite of the holy ghost, for seeing, he commanded to baptize in the name of
the holy ghost, so must I believe and trust in the holy ghost, Shall I then
trust and believe in him, then must he also surely be God, for a man may trust
or believe in none but only in god.

Genesis i
In the first book says Moses. The spirit moved upon the water. There does
Moses give and appropriate to the holy ghost his work in the creation. Psalm.
xxxiij
David says in the Psalm. By the word of the Lord are the heavens made, and
all the host of them by the breath of his mouth, That is, The heavens are made
by the holy ghost, and all that is therein. These words give clearly, that he
is God, seeing the creation is asscrybed unto him. And in another Psalm,
Psalm. cxxxix
Whyther shall I go from thy spirit? and whyther shall I flee from thy presence?
There gives he also to understand, that he is every where. To be in all
places, belongs only to God and to no creature, as David says, If I clyme
up into heaven, Psalm. cxxxix.
thou art there, if I go down to hell, thou art there also.

John saw the spirit of god descend, like unto a dove, Johan. i
and abide upon him. Christ says in Johan. I will pray the father, Iho.
xiiij
and he shall give you another conforter, that he may abide with you ever,
which is the spirit of truethe. The comforter (which is the holy ghost)
whom my father will send in my name, he shall teach you all things.

Item in another place. Iho. xvi
if I goo not away, that comforter will not come unto you. And such like
sayenges more declare evidently, the third person in the godheade, the holy
ghost. Ite^ receive the holy ghost.

Act. x.
In the Acts of the Apostles is it written. While Peter yet spoke these words,
the holy ghost fell on al them which heard the preaching. Act. viij
Item they prayed for them, that they might receive the holy ghost. Romans v.
viij. and xv
Paul to the Romans. The love is shed abroad in our hearts, by the holy
ghost, which is given unto us. Item to the Corinthians. ij cor. xiij
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, the love of God, and the felloweshyppe of
the holy ghost, be with you all. There be more other of such like places in S.
Paul's Epistles.

The great majesty, and the abysme of the unsearchable greatness of God, ought
in his essence and persons we to worship with all humilitye, and not presume
to ground or search it, for man's wit ca^ not co^prehende it, neither shall
it also attain to the knoweledge thereof. God has ordained al things, to
thinte^t that we should be ryghteous and saved. Office of the tree persons,
Christ has by his wholesome death deserved, that we should be saved. The holy
ghost fulfilleth now, the deserts of Christ, that we may be ryghteous. And
this is even his office, that he do truly bestow Christ, and all that he
has, and give it the in thy heart, as thine own treasure. Summa. Shall I come
to the father by Christ, and be partener of his life, passion and of al such
goods as he has done for my sake, truly so must the holy ghost work in my
before. The father and the son must move me by the work of the holy gooste,
and draw me up, or else am I spiritually dead. The holy ghost is that great
thing, whereby god the father by his son Christ, and in Christ, works
and quickens all things.

The nynth Article. I believe one holy catholic church, The common Catholyke
church
The communion of saynctes.
These two parts be one thing, for communion and holy catholic church is
nothing else, then the spiritual congregation of saints, of ryghteous
faithful me^ wheresoever they be in earth. It is also proprely no
congregation, that is bound even in one part or place, but a congregation in
one faith, hope, and love of the spirit.

The holy ghost has gathered this church through the word of God, he keeps
and governs it. The church is daily in the word of God and high blessed
sacraments, augmented and nourysshed, as in her food.

Ephe. v
The church is a bryde of the Lord Christ, as Paul says, Christ gave him
self for it, to sanctifye it, and cle^sed it in the fountain of water,
through the word, to make it unto himself a glorious congregation, without
spot or wrynckle, or any such thing, But that it should be holy without
blame.

The unity between the man and the woman in the state of wedlock, signifies
such a spiritual wedlock between the Catholic church, and Christ her
brydegrome, as in the Epistle to the Ephesians, Ephesians. v. Gene. i.
very properly is descrybed and annoted. Even as man and wife be one body,
having all things common, so here also, what soever Christ is and has, that
is and belongs to the congregation his spouse. This is a great joyful, and
blessed thing. We have sin, death hell and all shame, Christ has
righteousness, life, salvation, and all glory. This shall now be ours, if we
through the wedding ringe of faith be married unto Christ and become one body
with him.

Thus says the Prophet Osee, Osee. ij.
I will mary the unto mine own self for evermore. Yea even unto my self will
I mary the, in ryghteousnes, in equity, in louinge kyndnes, and mercy, In
faith also will I mary the unto my self, And then shall thou know, that I am
the Lord. For Christ is not only by his becomynge man, proprely, and
perfectely become the brydegrome of the church, But also by the consenting of
his church in his word and covenant through faith. He that has married a
bryde, Ihon. iij Psalm. xix.
he is a brydegrome, The consentyng makes marriage. Before the consentyng is he
not called a brydegrome. Therefore is his progress as concerning
brydegromeshyppe (whereof David speaks) his manifestacion in the faith of the
church. That is, when there was believed in him of the church, then did it
appear, that he is a brydegrome. He has put on the humanite, and so united him
self with the church in one flesh, Ephesians. v.
which the Apostell calls a great mystery, wherein the rich and poor, the
ryghteous and the sinner, the saved and the dampened, the son of grace, and
the son of wrath and heaviness, are agreed, for here be al his goods given
unto us, as our own, and all our poverty and penury taken away.

i. Cor. iij i. Pet. ij
In the church dwells Christ, he speaks in her, he is the only foundation
and ground thereof. In the Church is one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one
God and father of all things, which is over all things, through all things,
and in all things.

Wheresoever the Gospel is preached, there is a peer of this church, The
christen congregation.
she is in her self inuisyble, not bound to one place. For it is a
congregation in the spirit. And the word works inuisybly in her. And she
does never hear it without fruit, Esai. lv
as Esaias says. My word that comes out of my mouth, shall not turn again
void unto me.

Like as in the time of Noe, Ge. vij.
no man escaped with his life, but was drouned in the floude, except he entered
in to the Arc, or into the Cheste of Noe.

Even so, whosoever is not found, in this felloweshyppe, or Catholic Church,
agreynge with her in one faith, word, Sacrament, hope, and love, he shall be
lost.

Martion, Valentinus, Hebio^, Cherinthus, Manicheus, Heluidius, and such like
heretykes have also had a Church, That is, a heap, a propresecte, or
felloweshyppe. But it was not the Catholyke Church, wherein Christ is a
bridegromes for they had not the right faith.

And whereas such felloweshyppe is yet, which separate themselves from the
Christen communyon and congregation, and have no pure, sincere faith, as the
scripture teaches us, and will not suffer themselves to be reformed they be
heretykes, and sectysshe persons, and shall all be lost, oneles they reconcyle
them selves again with the church of Christ.

Note, we say not, I believe in the holy Catholic church, but I believe, one
holy Catholic church, pardon, or remissyon of sins, and so furthe, for that
word, in, is used to the trinite on or in God the father, God the son, and
God the holy ghost.

Co^munyon of saynctes
What is the communyon of saints: Answer. That the Christians and saynctes
after such a sort, be bound and knytte together in one fraternite, through
the band of love, which seeks not her own. i. cor. xiij
That all things be common unto the in good and evil. The goods of the
sayuctes be thine also, they help and comfort the also, they have compassyon
with the in thy grief, one bears another burden, and so fulfylle the
commandment of Christ. There is great help, Gal. vi
comfort and succoure, as the Sacrament of the altar signifies and
betokens in bread and wine. i. Co. x
For we be called of Paul, one bread, one drink, and one body.

Whosoever believes this article right, can not despair in his heaviness and
temptacyon. For as much as he knows, that Christ and al saynctes as his
brethren, do look to him.

And whosoever does any thing unto him, he does it unto Christ and his
saynctes. All prayers, and all good deeds whatsoever they are, that be done in
the universal Christianite, must at all times aid me, as a brother of this
heavenly fraternite. Such help, comfort, and succor, understood David well
in spirit, and said. Psalm, cxix.
I am in the congregation of al them that fear the, and keep thy
commandments. Thus may we in all necessities speak unto our enemies, as
Heliseus spoke to his servant. Fear not, for they that be with us, are more
then they that be with them.

The tenthe Article. I believe the forgiveness of sins.
Forgeuenes or remission of sins is no where, but only in the christen
congregation or felloweshyppe, for Christ has given her the keye. Matthew.
xviij. Forgeuenes of sins
Nonatianus a blind heretyke, thought if a man were ones fallen in sin, that
than no repentance or penance could help him any more, but were than lost.
This does the scripture reiecte in all places, and opens and declares unto
us, Mat. xi
the mercyfulnes of God, and calls us always from our sinful life to
repentance. Christ says. Come unto me all ye that labor and are laden, and
I shall refresshe you. Now is there no heuyer and more importable burden, then
our sins.

And what needs it to defend this long. Wherefore did Christ else come into
the world and dyed, but for to declare such mercifulnes. He says in Luke.
They that are hool, Luc. v.
need not of the Phisicio^, but they that are sick. I am not come to call the
ryghteous, but sinners to repentance. And the Angel in Mathewe declares also
his office clearly sayng unto Joseph: Mat, i
thou shall call his name Jesus. For he shall save his people from their sins.
This is not, that he forgeueth the sins, but ones, but as often as men desire
it, as the Prophets and Evangelists clearly testifye and show.

Witness of the scripture.
In he second book cries Moses thus unto god. Lord, Exodus xxxiiij.
Lord God mercyful and gracious, long sufferyng and abundant in goodness and
truth, and keeping mercy instore for thousa^des, forgeuing wickedness
ungodliness, and sin, and not leauyng one innocent, visityng the wickedness of
the fathers upon the children, and upon the childrens children, eue^ unto the
third and fourth generation. Behold, how goodly declares Moses here the
grace and mercifulnes of God.

ij. Re. xij
Ite^ in the book of Samuel it is contained that wha^ David had committed
aduoutry with the wife of Vrias, and his sins were opened unto him, when he
was abashed, anon said the Prophet Nathan. The Lord has put away thy
sin. Esa. i?
In Esaye says God: Vvasshe you, make you clean, put away your evil
thoughts out of my sight, cease from doing of evil, learn to do right,
apply your selves to equitye, deliver the oppressed, help the fatherles to his
right: Let the wedowes complaynte come before you, I pray you come, and let us
be defended, then shall the Lord say: Though your sins be as read as
scarlet, Esa. lvij
they shall be as white as snow. And though they were like purple, they shall be
as white as wolle.

Ezechi. xviij.
In Ezechiel says God, if the ungodly will turn away from all his sins,
that he has done, and keep all my commandments, Ione. iij esa. xliij Iuhel.
ij
surely than will I never more think upon al his sins, that he did before.
Read also the.xxxij. li. and lxxxix. Psalm.

When Peter asked, how often, Matthew. xviij.
must I forgive my brother that synneth against me. Is it enough seven times.
Then answered Christ and said, I say not unto the, seven times, but seventy
times seven times. And even upon that word, said he a similitude whereby he
teaches us, that we should gladly forgive our neighbor, whatsoever he has
offended against us, then shall God also be willing to forgive us our sins.

In Luke stands: Forgive, and ye shall be forgeuen, And what needs it many
witnesses? Matthew. xviij.
In Mathewe gives he the keys therefore unto the church, that sin should be
forgeuen, Ioha. xx
and in Ihon also.

Now behold the examples, Christ speaks unto the man that was sick of the
palsy. Son, Mat. ix
thy sins be forgeuen the. Even there he calls Mathewe from the receyuynge
of custom. His office of preaching, Mat. iij and.iiij,
and the preaching of Ihon the Baptiser began both at the repentance.

They said, Repent, the kyngedome of heaven is at hand. Luc. vij.
In Luke absolueth Christ the woman sinner of her sins, saying. Thy sins
are forgeuen the. In another place calls he the sinners to repentance, when
a Toure in Syloe had slain, Luc. xiij
eyghtene. He said, Except ye repent, ye all shall likewise perysshe. In
Mark, says Christ, All sins shall be forgeuen unto mennys children, and the
blasphemy of god where with they blaspheme God, Ioha. iij
what means else, the renewyng of birth which Nicodemus understood not,
but repentance and the renewyng of man.

Ioha. v.
In John had one ben sick thyrty and eight years. Christ made him whole and
said. Behold, thou art made whole, Ioh. viij
sin no more, lest a worse thing happen unto the. Item when he absolved the
woman taken in aduoutry. He said. Go, and sin no more. Act. ij.
Item, in the Acts of the Apostles says Peter. Repent of your sins, and
be baptized every one of you, in the name of Jesus Christ, for the remissyon of
sins. ij. Co. ij
To the Corinthia^s desires Paul, that the open sinner, which had been
excommunicated might be received again to grace, if he did repent.

Briefly, the scripture is of such saynges and examples full, in all places,
that the sins be forgeuen us, and taken away. He that has assured and
promised us such manner of clensyng of sins, is almighty and is able enough
to do it. He is our merciful and gracious father, Mat. vi
therefore will he gladly do it, and has taught us to pray the same in our
Pater noster. In John says he. Iho. xvi
Ask and ye shall receive. Verily, verily, I say unto you: whatsoever ye
shall ask thy father in my name, he will give it you.

The eleuenthe Article. The resurrection of the body. Resurrection of the dead.

This article is to high again for man's capacite, she can not see, nor
understand with her dark light how, even the same body shall come again,
which so diuersely may perysshe. The one is drowned in the sea, him consume the
fysshes, the one is eaten of the fowls in the air, another of the wild
beasts or worms, or is consumed of the fire. Here ca^ not nature comprehend,
how even that same body with all his substance, may be made and brought
together again, that I shall have eue^ my first eyes, hands, fete and
members, as I have now upon me.

Therefore is it called a mystery of God, which man believes and sees not
before his eyes, Even the same body, where with my soul now synneth, or
fasteth, and does any good, shall at the last day be rayseth again, and my
soul shall be coupled with it again. And shall be both together saved, or
together damned.

But there shall be a great alteration in the body. Now in the mortal life, is
my body subject to all manner of miserye. Men may beat me, wound me, the
body is fowl, unhandsome, dark, dull, slowthful, and sluggysshe, and uses
much pain and labor, or it can come from one place to another. It is fearful
and weak, and hyndreth the soul often in her work, If I study long or
imagine some high matter and subtyl, anon orketh my head: Of such like
calamytyes sticks the body full. Therefore did the Platouystes call our body,
a den of the soul, and death a delyueraunce from bo^des. i. Co. xv
But in the last day shall the body of the blessed be garnysshed with fair
gifts and glory. It shall be no more corruptyble, but clear bright and fair.
In the book of wisdom says the Scripture. Sapi. iij
The ryghteous shall shine as the sparks that run through the busshe. mat.
xiij
And in Mathewe says Christ. Then shall the ryghteous shine as the sun in
the kyngedome of their father.

Item the body shall no more be slowfull, sluggysshe and lyther, but quycke and
swyfte, that wheresoever the spirit will be, even there shall also the body be
without delay. It shall no more be wretched and sick or weak, but mighty and
strong, that nothing shall be able to hinder it, or to keep it in, It can come
out and in, thorough doors being shut.

Item it shall be no more corruptible, that it may be beaten, hurted or wounded,
but incorruptible, as the shadow of the son.

i. Co. xv
The four gifts of glory and worship, touches Paul in the Epistle to the
Corinthyans. Moreover how the one shall be clearer then the other, Like as one
star is bryghter and clearer than the other. Whereupon said S. Augusten says
to Diostero, God has made the soul so mighty, that thorough her perfect
salvation, flows into the body a perpetual health and an immovable power. i.
Co. xv
Paul helps our weak faith with a goodly example of a grain, which is sown
in the earth, and it is not quickened, except it dye before, then grows
out, of the small corn a fair fruit, and every corn of the fruit has his
own body. His natural form and fashion is now much syner, fayrer, and
mightyer, then before. Such things see we daily in the workyng of nature in
the incomprehe^sible creatures, how much more glory, power, goodness, wisdom,
and science bestows God the creator of al things upon the reasonable
creatures of men, whom he has given a soul fourmed after him self and
irreprehe^syble.

In times past in the Aquiliane or Carthagiane Church, did men pronounce this
article, thus, I believe the ressurection, eue^ of this body, behold, me^ did
add to it that word, eue^ of this, to thinte^t, that it might be plainly and
clear enough expressed, that none other body, like unto this, shall be raised or
made, but even this same, wherein I now stand, sit, see, hear, walk, and do
such like works, yea which uses it self here with the soul in all manner of
good works.

This shows Job very clearly, Job. xix.
whereas he says: I am sure that me redemer lives, and that I shall rise out of
the earth in the latter day, that I shall be clothed again with this skin and
se God in my flesh, ye a I my self shall behold him, not with other, but
with mine own eyes.

i. Co. xv
To the Corinthians says Paul. Even this corruptyble thing must put on
incorruptibilite, and this mortal must put on immortalite, this is clear
enough declared, that even this body, even these eyes, shall come again.

Witness of the Scripture.
esa. xxvi
Esaye says. Thy dead men shall live and my slain shall rise again. Awake and
live ye that lie in the duste. Christ, when he against the ungodly Saducees
defended the resurrection of the dead, he brought in the saying out of the
second book of Moses. I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the
God of Jacob. But God is no God of the dead, but of the lyuinge. When he spoke
those words, than had those three ben dead long before. But for as much as
god names him self a god, of the aforenamed, surely then they be some, where
and be a live. Therefore shall their body and soul in time convenient be joined
again together.

In Ezechyel speaks the scripture clearly of the general ressurection,
Ezechi. xxxvij.
saying among other words, Thus says the Lord God, Behold I will open your
graves, and bring you forth of your sepulchers. Da. xij.
Daniel says: Many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake,
some to the everlasting life, the other to perpetual shame.

Witness of the new Testament.
In Mathewe, Matthew. xxij. mar. xij.
whereas Christ proves the resurrection of the bodies, against a Iewysshe
sect named the Saducees, is this article of the resurrection of the flesh
grounded.

Mathewe says. Matthew. xxvij
The graves did open, and the bodies of many Saynctes, which slept, arose, and
came out of the graves, after his resurrection, and came into the holy city,
and appeared to many. Luce. vij Luc. viij
Christ rayseth a wydowes son. Item he raised up from death a young in ^yde.
Ioh. xi. Act. xx.
Likewise Lazarum. Paul raised also a young man named Eutichus.

Ioh. vi.
In John says Christ, no man can come to me, except the father which has
sent me, draw him. And I will raise him up at the last day. Ioh. xi
Item in another place: I am the resurrection and the life, he that believes on
me, yea though he were dead, yet shall he live. Item he says to Martha. Thy
brother shall rise again, Martha answered: I know, that he shall rise again,
in the resurrection at the last day.

Ioh. vi
Likewise says he more over, as the father rayseth up the dead, and
quickens the^, even so the son quickens whom he will. The father has
given power to the son also to judge.

The hour shall come in the which all that are in the graves shall hear his
voice, and shall come forth, they that have done good to the ressurection of
life, and they that have done evil unto the resurrection of damnatyon. In the
Acts of the Apostles, Act. xvij
preaches Paul unto those of Athenes, the ressurection of the dead.

Item in another place says Paul, act. xxiiij
I believe all things, which are written in the law and the Prophets, and
have hope toward God, that the same resurrection of death (which they look
for also) shall be, act. xxvi
both of just and unjust. Romans vi
Item to the Romans says he, if we be grafte in death like unto him, To.
viij.
even so must we be like in the resurrection, if we be dead with christ we
believe that we shall live with him.

Item to the Corinthians. i. Co. vi
God has raised up the Lord, and shall raise us up by his power, know ye not,
that your bodies are the members of Christ: if they be the me^bres of
Christ, then must they be glorified and claryfyed with their head.

The fyfthene Chapyter in the first Epistle to the Corinthyans have dearly in
commendation, wherein Sayncte Paul so excellentely and commyngly writes of
the resurrection of Christ and of our resurrection, and makes such an
argument and ground. Christ is risen from death, therefore shall we rise also.
Wherefore dyed he? how has slain him? Truly our sins. The father has
laid all our sins upon him, therefore has he satisfied, Esa. liij.
as Esaias says. Now if he were not risen, then were all our doing in vain,
yea we were yet in sin and dominacyon as deep as ever we were, No man were
poorer and more miserable then we christians, if we only in this short life,
should put our trust in Christ, and afterward all should be at an end.
Then the sins had been to heavy and to strong for him. But now is christ
risen from death, death has no more power over him, Truly then has he
overcome our sin and death, that they can bear no more rule over us. He is
become their mighty and strong Lord. And as by Adam all dye, even so by
Christ shall all be made a live.

Therefore let us be merry in the Lord, our enemies, sin, death, hell, be
laid down. Christ is a king myghtely, his kyngedome endures for ever, where
as he is, there shall we be also. Vvhe have a good cause to rejoice, and with
thankefulnes to be freeharted and blood in Christ our ouercomer and Lord, and
to be with death at defyaunce, death is swallowed up in victory. The Lord
says. O death, Ose. xiij
I will be thy death. O hell, I will be thy stynge. Death where is thy stynge?
Hell, where is thy victory: But thanks be unto God, which has given us the
victory. Through our Lord Jesus Christ.

In the second Epistle to the Corinthians, says he, ij. Cor. i
that we should not put our trust in our selves, but in God which rayseth the
dead to life again. Read a goodly example, the fyfth Chapter in the same
Epistle.

Item we know that, ij. cor. iiij
he which rayseth up the Lord Jesus shall raise up us also by the means of
Jesus. ij. co. xiij
Item we shall live with him by the power of God.

Item to the Philippians. Our co^uersacyon is in heaven, from whence aso, we
look for the savior, even the Lord Jesus Christ, which shall change our
vile body, that he may make it like unto his glorious body, according to the
workyng, whereby he is able also to subdue all things unto him self.

Colo. iij
Item to the Colossyans, ye be now risen with Christ, therefore seek those
things, which are above.

i. Th. iiij
Item to the Thessalonyens says Paul. I would not brethren, that ye should
not be ignorant, concerning them, which are fallen a sleep, that ye sorrow
not as other do, which have no hope. For if we believe, that Jesus dyed, and
rise again, even so them also which sleep by Jesus, will God bring again
with him.

And this say we unto you in the word of the Lord, that we which live and
are remainynge in the coming of the Lord, shall not come yerre then they,
which sleep. For the Lord him self shall descend from heaven with a shower,
and the voice of the Archangell and trompe of God. And the dead in Christ
shall rise first, then shall we which live and remain, be caught up with
them also in the clouds, to mete the Lord in the air, and so shall we ever
be with the Lord, wherefore comfort your selves one another with these words.

The twelfte Artikel. And the life everlasting.
The life here in this world is called a calamitye, for we have no resting
place here, neither shall we abide here always, as Paul says. Ebr. xiij
Here have we no contynuynge City, but we seek one to come.

Heaven is our home, the life everlasting
thither long we in the life everlasting. Summa summarum, there is all the
desire of man, which can be satisfied with nothing else, than with
beholdynge and browkynge of the godly essence, as David says, psa. xvij
I will behold thy presence in ryghteousnes, and I shall be satisfied, when I
awake up after thy lykenes.

The Philosophers and world wysemen, have taken great pains to study and seek
out, what thing it might be, Salvation of man
wherein the heart of man, without all calamity and miserye were satisfied,
and steadfastly rested, an in the end whereunto it is ordained, and which
might be our salvation. But like as they could see no right virtue by the
natural power, without grace, even so could they not know also, that thing
where in the salvation of man consists.

The one thought, that health is the greatest good. Another took riches for it.
Some have named virtue, the salvation, Some did put their salvation in three,
goods, namely the goods of fortune, as riches, honor, power. The goods of
the body, as health, strength. The goods of the soul, as science, and
virtue. But the blind light of nature knows nothing of the right salvation,
and of the right life everlasting. The spirit of God does teach it us by the
scripture. For thus says John. i. Ioh. v Ioh xvij
Christ is very God and eternal life. Item this is life eternal, that then
might know the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou have sent, That
is our heaven, thither be we bound, sayng: This is my rest for ever: that is
our kyngedome, Psalm. cxxxij
wherein Christ has preipared for us many manners of dwellinge places. Ioh.
xiiij Matthew. xxv. Matt. v
Into that housse shall he send the elect, and shall say: Come ye blessed of
my father inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the
world. This is the right salvation which shall begin even after the temporal
life to them, that live in Christ.

In John says Christ, Ioh. iij
God so loved the world, that he has given his only son, that none that
believe in him, should perysshe, but should have everlasting life. The
scripture speaks of the life everlasting every (...) Christ, that men
might know christ a right the son of God. mat. xvi
Therefore asked he his disciples, what thy held of him. Then answered Peter
for him self and for the other. Thou art Christ the son of the living God.
Upon such knowledge which is necessary for us all in the Catholyke church
builded.

i. Cor i. i i Cor. iij
Thus says Paul. We preach Christ, the power, and wisdom of God. He will
also suffer none other foundation, but only Jesus Christ, even as he has
preached him, That he is come from the father in the nature of mankind, and
has redeemed the world: dyed for us upon the cross and is risen again, our
head and Lord. Ephesians. ij.
And is set on the right hand of God, unto whom we come and are saved, not
by our own works, but of grace through faith. Ioh. x


Throughout the hole Gospel of s, John declares he for the most part, that
he him self is the son of God, and preaches for the most part, that God
is his father. In so much that the yewes did reiecte him, and would stone him
for the same. i. Ioh. v.
For Christ is come to teach faith, whereby men believe even in him, as in the
son of God. And faith is the fulfyllinge, of al laws. He is the righteousness
for ever, he is the work of Gods glory, he is the mortification of the
flesh, the raysinge of the spirit, the subduinge of the world the subduinge
of the flesh, the subduynge of hell, the gates of hell cannot prevail
against him. Briefly, Matthew. xvi. Ioh. viij Ioh. xiij
he is all in all things, as he says in John: Except ye believe that I am
he, ye shall dye in your sins. Ite^ he that believes in me shall never dye.

The writings of the Apostles be full of doctrine, as concerning faith for
thereon lies all the matter. mar. xvi
He that believes not, shall be damned: he that believes in the son has
everlasting life. Ioha. iij.
Therefore should we pray continually for the right faith, for he brings
with him love, hope, and all goodness. Faith,


Faith is not a slyght meaning, (...) which the natural wit or will can
make to him self, Act. xv.
but it is a lively thing in the heart, which renueth man and purifyeth the
heart. It is such a lively confidence and trust to God, that man is sure and
certain above al wisdom, that he pleases God, and that he has a merciful
God, which is toward him kind gracious, and merciful, and forgeueth him in
all things that he does.

This faith is the chiefest work of the first commandment and like as the
first commandment is a measure, example, rule, and virtue of all other
commandments, in the which as in the head all members live and have power
thereof. Good works
Even so is faith the head, life and power of al good works. No work is good
except faith has wrought it, ye except it be thorowely mixte with faith, To.
xiiij
even as with new leuyn, whatsoever is not of faith that same is sin.

Ioh. vi
This faith is the dearest work of god, whereof Christ speaks in John. This is
the work of God, that ye believe in him, whom God has sent. Therefore does the
scripture most require faith, as in the Gospel often stands. When Christ
would work any miracle asked he before, if they believed that he could and
would do such things.

Item in mark and Mathewe, Mar. ix Matthew. xiij. mat. vij.
it is written that Christ has not done many miracles in his own country,
because of their unbelieve. In Mathewe says Christ, that his disciples could
not heal the lunatike for their vnbeleues sake. Vvheras a right Catholic
faith is, Ephe. ij
there is a creation of a new heart. The old heart of Ada^ has not this
faith of it self For it is a gift of god Many say the Creed daily, Faith.
and boaste there of very sore. But they know not, what it is. O it makes a
meke, humble obedient godly people, which trusts in god only, hops, loves
him above al things, fears him and serves his even christen willingly, with
body and goods, hinders noma^, suffers gladly damage and persecution. Al
his works be ordered to the vtylyte and profit of his neighbor, be he
friend or foo, even as Christ has done unto us also.

Therefore be not all they Christen manne that be called Euangelical, and be
inclined to hurt or endamage their neighbors in body soul, honor or
goods. They be heathen under the name of Christ, their fruits show, what
they be, if they were right christians or Evangelical, they would be obedient,
seruable unto al men, intendyng to hurt no man. God vouchesaue to illumine
them with true faith, that they may be such in deed, as they will be called.
Amen.

Marci. ix. Lord I believe, help mine unbelieve.

Marci. xvi. He that believes not, shall be damned.

Marci. ix. All things are possible to him that believes.


Here begins the right foundation, and pryncypall common places of the hole
godly scripture, a goodly short declaration, to all Christians profitable and
necessary, for to come to the right understanding of the holy Scripture
compyled for the commodity of all Christen people, By Doctor Vrbanus Regius.

The contents of the common places.
i. Holy Scripture. ij. God. iij. The right honor of God. iiij. Gods
greatest dishonor. v The law. vi The gospel vij Faith. viij Good works. ix
Sacrament. x The death of Christ. xi Flesh. xij Spirit. xiij Virtue. xiiij
The greatest virtue. xv The greatest sin. xvi The soul xvij Life. xviij
Everlasting life: xix Death xx The resurrection. xxi The later day. xxij
Mass. xxiij Righteousness. xxiiij Honor of saints. xxv Difference of meats.
xxvi Holy days. xxvij Prayer. xxviij Vow. xxix Obedience. xxx The will of
God. xxxi Man's will xxxij Offense. xxxiij Almoses. xxxiiij Oath or swearyng.
xxxv Christian lyberty. xxxvi Church. xxxvij Riches. xxxviij Sin. xxxix
Infirmity. xl Health xli Persecution. xlij Joy and heaviness. xliij Peace.
xliiij Free will. xlv Counsayll. xlvi Confession. xlvij Merytes. xlviij
Shepeherde.
End of the Tabell.
To the most reverend father in God, Thomas by the permission of God,
Archebysshope of Canturburye, Metrapolitane and prymate of all England, His
daily oratoure Gwalter Lynne wyssheth life everlasting.
ME thinks (most reuere^de father) that this saying of our Sauyoure Christ
(be occupied til I come) is an admonicyon of all other most necessary and
profitable, Luc. xix. and xij Matthew. xxiiij. and xxv mar. xiij
as well for the parents or masters to declare to their children or
servants, Deu. vi and.xi,
as to meditate and remember with themselves, whylse they be sittynge in their
houses, walking on their iourneye, Nu. xv.
Ex. xiij.
sleapynge or waking. And (as Moses says) worthy to be tied in a ma^s
hand, as a sign or remembrance, and that should be, and move between our
eyes. To be brief, it is worthy to be written on the door sylles, and on the
doors of the house. And (oh) I would to God, that the voice of the lord, might
(as the vehement sown of the heavenly trumpe) astonny the ears of all men so,
that the drousye and slougyshe might leave their slouthe and idleness, and the
forward and willing be encouraged. For we see that mankind (not much
inferioure unto the angels) is negligent, and welmost ignorante of his own
worthiness, so that he is let and holden back with innumerable other
occupations and busynesses, and as the wise man says. I have seen (says
he) al things that are under the sun, and behold all together, is but
vanity and trouble of mind. He saw it, Ecclesi. i.
and we know by experience (and that not without great hynderaunce) that
mankind (as I have said) follows vanities, leaving of in the mean time (yea
contynuyng, laugheynge to scorn) either altogether, other else for the most
part, that most profitable and gaynefull trade of merchaundyse. Neither do
they pass for the manyfolde rewards that wisdom promyseth when she calls
them, nor yet for the punyshmentes that she threateneth. They pass not though
she cry never so often in the mids of the multytudes, and in the great
gates of the city saying. My little ones, how long will you delight in
vanity? And how long will foles desire the things that be hurtefull unto
them? How long will the witless hate wisdom? Convert your selves to
amendeme^t. Furthermore, Matthew. xxij. a Lu. xiiij c Ap. xix c
the lord sends his servants to call the gestes to the supper and all do
excuse themselves. One marieth a wife, an other proves an yocke of oxen: but
none of them does thankefully receive the benefyte of that delycyous supper:
and yet in the mean time think our selves well fed, notwithstanding that we
be utterly famysshed, and very happy: not withstandyng that we be in the
mids of all miserye, and that we suffering great lack of heavenly richesse:
are exceadynge rich. In so great slougysshenesse therefore, wherewith the body
(being corrupted) does so much ouerlade our souls: we ought of congruence
call to remembrance the saying of the Lord, wherein (after he had delivered
his sum of money) he preysed the diligent and faithful servant. And what
diligence was that so greatly praised: or what sum of money was it, that he
lent and would receive again with vsurye: It needs us not to send into far
countries for strange merchaundise. Yea we may gain much more precious things
at home, that is to say, our own souls unto christ, for the which all the
world can not be a sufficient price. we may adourne and deck our souls with
virtues, which are the true and vncou^trefayt richesses. The wisdom also, which
(...) preysed above all martchaundyse of gold, saying unto his son, Happy
is the man that has abundance of wisdom. Matthew. xxv. mar. xiij Luce. xij
xix
So great a treasure, so innumerable commodities may we get us, if we bestow
the talent that is given us a right. The talent is the word of God, as the
psalmist says. The saynges of the Lord are chaste sayenges, Psa. xij.
silver tried in the fire, proved thryse, and purged.vij. times. For after that
the word of God is preysed and setforth by many and sundry names of praise,
Esa. lv. Ioh. vij.
being called the living water, wherewith the flammes of concupiscence are
quentched. the bread of life having in it al delectatio^, Ioh. vi
wherewith we may feed our hungry soul, most pure wine wherewith we may be
made drunken and merye, the light of our fotesteppes, the sword that destroy
the adversaries of the truth, Ephesians. vi
the fyrey shylde wherewith we defend us against our enemies, the sure rock
whereupon we must build the tutchestone wherewith all opinyons must be
examyned and tried, whereby all works must be tried, whether they be just or
unjust, whereby all spirits must be tried whether they be of god or not, the
keye wherewith the heavens be shut and opened, the instrument wherewith we do
confort the werynesse of this our exile, the soueraygne medicyne, wherewith all
dyseases are cured, the present remedy against all dangers, the relyques of
Christ being absent from us, which we ought to keep, observe and worship
with all devotion, the chariote of faith, the carbunkle of charity: after
that, I say, the word of faith is praised and set forth unto us by these
names and many other, Matthew. xxv
christ also praised it calling it a sum of money or talent, and by these
names he does also provoke us unto merchaundyse, to put us in mind, that we
have not received it for our selves only, but for others also. And
notwithstanding that he, by his spirit, works all things in all: yet does
he make us his workmen being but only his instruments. And as he has in
heaven his ministrynge spirits: so has he in the earth appointed us his
spiritual ministers, and stuwardes of his spiritual mysteries, to thentent
that we should communicate unto our brothers for his fake the celestial
philosophy, even with like charity as he brought it from heaven unto us.
Neither is it vnfeamelye to call silver money, but the money that is shut up
in the coffer is not money, even by the testimony of the heathen, which
affirm that there comes no fruit of money, if it be not used, and this
thing takes place chifelye in spiritual things. For they are given, for the
most part, not so much for our private commoditye, as for the profit of
the congregacyon. Wisdom (says the wyseman) that is hyd, and the treasure
that is not seen, what vtilyte or profit comes of either of them. And
therefore has God given us his word, not that we should hyde it under the
ground, but set it abroad for the profit of others. And therefore must we
before all other things see, that through this talent, the faith in Christ,
and the charity toward our neighbors do increase, and that we do deliver
our souls from worldely desires, from the tyranny of pride and envy, and to
be brief, that we get such a treasure, that we be made new me^, strayngers
in this world, and (putting of the old Adam) partetakers of heaven, not
carnal but spiritual. For to dyge in the ground, is to be carnal, and to
know and teach things that be carnal. Now if we being carnal, should
presume to teach other the things that be spiritual: we should not teach
them, but for our sakes shall the word of god be yuell spoken of. And for as
much as in our life we serve the devil, and Christ in our words: we shall
hinder more with our life, then we shall profit with our words. It is the
part of an Hypocryte, to carye in his hand, the Testament, goodly beset with
gold and gylted, and to dispute and reasone of the word of God in every
feast or ba^kette, and yet in the mean time, to live as one voyed of all
mercy, impacient, ignoraunte of charity, vnmyndefull of modestye, and paste
all shame. The eternal wisdom loves none such preachers, notwithstanding
that it suffers them. But we must see that we honor and reverence god in
his miracles and wonders that he wrought, illumyne our souls with his
helthsome doctrine, and that we (conceyuyng a sure hope in god through his
benefyte showed) do inwardely burn with the fire of love. To conclude after
that we (being rich of spiritual gifts) have gained one talent by an other,
and do possess two talentes, that is to say life and doctrine: then must we
go forward merilye, Ephesians. vi
gyrdyng up our loins, and pullyng on our shoes to go forward in the Gospel
of peace, that we may also win the soul of our brothers. For this is the
will of god, that until such time as Christ was gone into heaven, secret
things should be spoken secretly in the ears of our friends, but fence he
is gone, and the spirit come^, deniynge him self to noman that will desire
him unfeignedly: Mat. x. mar. iiij. Lu. viij. xij. Matthew. xxviij mar. xvi i.
co. iiij a Job. xij c Sap. i. b
he would that the gospel should be preached on the tops of houses, and that
the preachers should run into all the costs of the earth, and declare the
gospel unto all nations estates, ages and sexes, in whom was any hope of any
spark of light, what should candles do under a busshell. What should money
do without gains. And what should fire do, mat. v. b mar. iiij. Lu. viijb and
xi. c
without it burn. Furthermore, the Apostles were not sufficed with the
preaching of helthfull doctrine, whylse they were yet on live in this world,
but to the intent to profit their posteryte, they occupied their pens, that
the spiritual traualle might contynually being forth spiritual children. All
they therefore be without Christian charity, and are infideles, which do let
preaching, and do forbid that the christian people should have the new
Testament, and the old, to read there in their common tongue, as though our
mysteries were oracles, and the christian writtynges contained in the any
thing that loves darkness. No doubt we are much bound to thank God, for
that he has given the light of his truth unto al nacyons, in their own
tongues and la^guages. And besides that every nacyon is rich in his own
language: this is also a syngular benifite, that we have his word purelye and
uncorrupted in the greek tongue, even as the Apostles wrote it. So that if they
translatours have in any place sailed of the true meaning. We may by the
first copyes amend the, which thing shall be so much the more acceptable unto
us, by how much more it does conduce unto the reueilynge and openyng of the
works of darkness. Let us be occupied in them therefore. Not as the
Pharisees, we sistynge on their chayres, do teach the things that they do
not. Not as men destituted of charity, and as Angels preaching misteryes.
Not as men tournyng silver into dross and most precyouse wine in water, that
is to say, mat. xv.
chaungyng gods laws into men's traditions, and making merchaundyse of that,
which is godly which thing the Antichrists do continually: for it is not mere
that the word of god do obey us, Exodus xxxij.
but that we do obey it. It was a great offense to make a caulfe of the
Egyptians gold and how much more damnable were it for us to make of the
Lords gold, Idols to be set up in the temple of god what abhomynacyon is in
them, that auaunce their own opinions in stead of christ? mat. vij. Psalm.
cxxxvi.
Let us be occupied therefore, but let us not cast perles before swyne, but let
us give them to such exchaungers as be godly couetouse, and that will render
gains boeth to them selves, and us to. For there is nothing to let in this
matter. There is no lack of money. For looe, we have the Gospel, we have also
the Epistles, and besides that we have the talent, not the crueltye of that
Lord that reapeth where he showed not, Matthew. xxv.
for looe we may occupye this at liberty. Let us not lay for our excuse,
that we lack cunninge or knowledge. For if the word of God be in our hertes:
we shall lack neither diligence nor wisdom. Matthew. xxv mar. xiij Luc. xij
and xix.
Let us think, that Christ has not left us money unnumbered, but numbered, that
is to say a pound of the which he will, that nothing be conveyed away,
nothing altered or changed, nor any thing spent in idleness. For he will
require an account and that only were enough to put away all slouthe, if it
were not all ready to far drouned in dullness. For he says, until I come,
that is, to judgment, and such kind of judgment, that neither the judge
shall be deceived, the sentence altered, nor yet the gyltye. And that more is,
he has left the time uncertain, because we should watch always,
notwithstanding that the time it self is but short. wherefore he says,
watch, because ye know not, in what hour the lord shall come. Such as be
faithful in a small matter, he will make governors of a great deal. And such
as he fyndeth unfaithful, he will condemn to eternal torments. What shall
richesse avail then: what shall honor, what shall great frendshyppe auayl,
what shall any thing avail then. The^ shall the chyldyshe eloquence, the
brutyshe and beastly sophistry, and the uncertain wisdom of the world,
know their vanitye. Luc. xix
Let us be occupied therefore, Ier. vij
and let us walk whilse it is day. And (as Hieremy says) before it wax
dark, and that our fete stumble against the darcke hills: let us give glory
to our God. AMEN.

Your graces daily oratoure Gwalter Lynne.

The contents of Gods holy book, the Old and new Testament, commonly calls
the Bybell.
The Books of the Old Testament.
i The first book of Moses. Genesis ij The second book of Moses. Exo. iij The
third book of Moses. Leui. iiij The fourth book of Moses. Nu. v The fyfth book
of Moses. Deu. vi Joshua. vij Of the Judges Iudicum. viij Ruth. ix Samuel Regum.
i. and ij. x Of the Kings. Regum iij. and iiij xi Chronicles. Paralipo men.i.
and ij. xij Esdras. xiij Nehemia. Esra.i. and ij. xiiij Esther. xv Hiob. xvi
Psalter. xvij Proverbs of Solomon. Prou. xviij Preacher of Solomon. Eccles.
xix High song of Solomon. Canticum Canticorum.
The Prophets.
Esaias. Ieremye. Ezechiel. Danyel
Twelve small Prophets.
i Hosea ij Joel iii Amos iiij Abdia. v Iona vi Micha vij Nahum. viij Habacuck.
ix Sophonia. x Haggi xi Sacharia. xij Malachia Thobie Judith Baruch Esra Esra
iij. and iiij. The book of wisdom. Sapientia. The wyseman Ecclesiasticus.
Machabeus.
The books of the new Testament.
i The Gospel S. Mathewe. ii The Gospel S. Mark. iij The Gospel S. Luke.
iiij The Gospel S. John. v The Acts of the Apostles, descrybed of Saynct
Luke. vi The Epistle of S. Paul to the Romans. vij The first Epistle of S.
Paul, to the Corinthians. viij The second Epistle of S. Paul to the
Corinthians. ix The Epistle of S. Paul to the Galathians. x The Epistle of S.
Paul to the Ephesians. xi The Epistle of S. Paul to the Philippians. xij The
Epistle of S. Paul to the Colossians. xiij The first Epistle of S. Paul to the
Thessaloniens. xiiij The second Epistle of S. Paul to the Thessaloniens. xv
The first Epistle of S. Paul to Timothe. xvi The second Epistle of S. Paul
unto Timothe. xvij The Epistle of S. Paul unto Titus. xviij The Epistle of S.
Paul unto Philemon. xix The first Epistle of S. Peter. xx The second Epistle
of s. Peter xxi The first Epistle of S. John. xxij The second Epistle of S.
John xxiij The third Epistle of S. John The Epistle of S. Paul to the
Hebrews. The Epistle of S. James. The Epistle of S. Judas. The Revelations of
S. John.
Holy Scripture.
The word of God
THese are the laudable right books of Holy Scripture, which came from the holy
gooste, they can not lie or faylthe, wherein is also sufficiently comprehended,
whatsoever is necessary for the salvation of the soul, so that for the rulynge
of the conscience in the kingdom of faith, in the spirit, none other word,
doctrine or commandment is necessary unto man, but only the Bible. How be
it, there is a great battayl in the same, whosoever truly understands the
Scripture, for as much as every man undertakes to use the Scripture, whether
he be apt or unapt.

This battle shall sone be slighted, if the Scripture indifferently be looked
upon, and concordantly expounded, and not only here and there pieces taken
out, but before and behind, and in the mids duly looked upon, and scanded,
It is al one spirit of the old and new Testament. Even the same holy ghost,
that through the holy Prophets has showed the coming of Christ, the same
has also ruled the hertes and pens of the Apostles and Evangelists. Peter
says. ij. Pet. i. Da. ix. b Zac. vij. ij. tim. iij
There came never any Prophecye by the will of man, but holy men of God
spoke, as they were moved by the holy Ghost. It is also no man's doctrine or
word, but Gods own word, of men descrybed. Even so does Christ asscrybe
his doctrine to God the father in John. Ioh. vij
My doctrine is not mine, but his that has sent me. Item it is the food of
the soul, as Christ says in Mathewe. mat. iiij.


Item blessed are they, that hear the word and do it. S. Austen says, that
only the Scripture before named, without any doubt or fayll ought and may be
believed, and that there is the verite of God. But the other which he makes, or
Hierome or other doctors and fathers, shall be judged after the Scripture.

God.


Romans i.
God is known here in this life by the goodly orderyng of his creatures. To
know christ
But the right knoweledge of God, which is necessary unto us, for our
salvation, is the knowledge of Christ, To. viij.
And to know Christ, that is to know, wherefore god has sent his Son unto
us, what great immeasurable and excellent benefits he has given us by him.

The right honor of God.
Ioh. iiij.
and earth, and of all creatures, to set our hope, trust and confidence in
him only, as in him that can help us, for he is almighty, and will do it with
all his heart, for he is our father in heaven. Item to love him above all
things, as the most highest and greatest good, for his own sake, and to fear
him as children not with the fear of bondage.

Gods greatest dishonor.
The greatest dishonor of God is, to

The law.
The law is a sentence, deu v. vi To. vij.
whereby To. viij.
It requires the desire and the heart, It may only be fulfilled by the
spirit, and not by the flesh. The flesh is enemy to the law. Me^ come no
further by the law, then into fearfulness, and knoweledge of their sins and
damnation. Gala. v
Faith which by love is mighty in operation, does only fulfill the law, and
faith is a gift of God.

The Gospel.
The Gospel is a Joyful message, Romans iij
from sin, death, and hell. The law makes man to fear, and showed him his
faults. The Gospel conforteth man, and shows him the Phisicyon. The law
says. Thou art a sinner, and damned. The Gospel says. Be of good chiere and
free herted, Romans iij Esa. liij
Christ has taken upon him thy sins, overcome, and satisfied for them.
Believe in Christ, as thy redemer, that same faith makes thy ryghteous before
God, and kills in thy the old man with his carnal lusts, whosoever through
faith is made one with Christ our Lord, upon the same has sin, death, and
hell no more complaynte nor power, Romans iij iiij. viij
as Paul witnesses in the Epistle to the Romeyns.

Faith.


He that believes right, hangs upon the scripture, which speaks of
judgment, wrath, and also of the mercyfulnes of God, and hangs there on so
earnestlye, that he there in trusts in all necessities, and also dies
thereon.

Such a faith, Faith brings love with her.
is the right Christen faith, which brings with her the Christen love. For
through faith understands man, the aboundante and inestimable love of God,
toward us, whereby his heart is first moved and gets peace, and is
kindled with the fire of Godly love, that he for such mercyfulnes does
joyfully give thanks and becomes wyllinge to please God, again also so to
serve his neighbor, and the commandments to fulfill. To. xiiij
Whatsoever is not done in faith, the same is wicked and sin, where as the
mercy of God is not found in such wise, there is surely despysynge of GOD,
that he is not regarded, nor set by, or there is hatred.

Good works.
Faith brings always her fruits with her, that is, good works, and whereas no
works of charity are showed, there is nothing else but a dead, Iaco. ij
faith. A christen man shall before all things pray for faith, whereby he may
do right good works. Much to babble of good works, or undertake to do the
same, before that faith be there, is as much as to bind the horse behind the
plough. Lu. xviij
Much the work or do without faith, is to take great pains and labors for
naught, and with the sick woman to spend all his substance among the
Phisicia^s and yet for all that remain sick still. Lu. viij
Power of faith.
What power faith has, is descrybed in these places here after followynge.
Genesis. xv. Roma. iij. iiij. xiiij Galacas. iij. Ephesians. ij. Math. vi. viij.
ix. xvij. xxi. Marci. v. ix. xi. Luce. viij. xi. xviij. xix. Iohannis. iij.
iiij. vi. vij. viij. And i. Iohannis. iij. iiij. v. Act iiii. xvi. and in many
places more besides.

Good works.
Ioha. vi
that they might the works of god: he answered. This is the work of God, that
ye believe on him, whom he has sent. First look about for faith, Lu. xvij
and say with the discyples of Christ, Lord, increace my faith. And after that
look what God will have in his commandments, and do it, these are good
Christen works, for they flow out of faith, and are done by the
commandment of god. Whatsoever is not done by the commandment of god
(which ordinately and sufficyently is expressed in the Scripture) the same be
of thy despised. Isa. xxix mat. xv. Deu. xij
For God will not be served with men's tradicyons, laws or inventions.

Whosoever steppeth out of the common street of the Christen life, and seeks
a peculyar way to salvation through his own imagyned works the same stands
daungerousely. For he that follows not Christ in his doctryn, must needs
walk in darkness, and in erronyous by paths. Ioh. viij and.xiiij
Christ is the light of our life, and the way, as it is written in John.

Whosoever makes or instituted a perpetual light for the dead or saints,
and besides that forgets the living saynctes, the poor brethren, and
systers in Christ, he feleth and gropeth in the darkness, and goes a bypathe,
understand by the example somewhat more.


Sacrament is a holy token in our faith, which puts us in remembrance the
promise of God, and stablyssheth our hertes in a confidence toward God, as
Baptism, and the Sacrament of the altar, Thou hear, that God promyseth
unto the pardon and forgiveness of sins. He suffered therefore his son
Christ to dye upon the cross, that thou by the death of Christ myghtest be
reconcyled again to God, Romans v
believe this, so have thou it. And therefore has he ordained and left unto the,
his body and blood in the Sacrament, as a sure holy token and bond of such
promise. Even as sure as Gedeon was, Iudi. vi
that he should overcome his enemy, when God has promised it unto him, and
by the fire and flese has assured it unto him. So sure art thou, that thou
haste obtained mercy, when thou hear in faith. Gods promise of remissyon
of sins, and besides that receyuest Baptism or the Sacrament of the altar,
for an assurance of such promise. Learn the Sacraments a right with their
virtue, for the Conscience has skant a greater comfort in earth, then the
Sacraments. This is taught, Genesis in the xvij. Chapter, and to the Romans
in the iiij.

The death of Christ.
The death of Christ is our satisfaction for sin, Esa. liij i. Co. i
Christ has only satisfied, for he only has redeemed. Our sufferynge
upon earth is no satisfaction for sin properlye, but a mortifyenge of the
old carnal man, to the intent that, according to the workynge and to the
virtue of baptism, To, viij.
a Christian might be conformable to Christ his head, dye and rise again, a
new creature in Christ. Ioh. iij.
A man must be borne again of water, and of the spirit, if he shall come to
heaven, he must bear the cross he must crucifye his flesh, mat. xvi Gala. v
ij. tim. iij
with the evil concupiscences and lusts, if he will be Christ's own. Item, all that will live godly, must suffer persecution.


Flesh is called in the Scripture commonly not only the body, Ephe. ij
but the hole old carnal man. The son of Adam with body and soul, Genesis vi
for he is from the first generation a sinner, and a child of wrath. John. iij
For whatsoever is borne of flesh, is flesh.

A man, before he is borne again through the spirit of faith, is he all
flesh, that is, concerning his body and soul, can he of his own power
understand, think, and desire nothing but earthy and carnal things, heavenly
things are to high for him, and to subtyl, he can not attain to them: he
knows nothing right of God, and godly things. The original sin.
A deadly hurt is happened unto man, in body and soul, of that poisoned
origynall sin. The origynal sin ought not to be counted for a small hurt.
Genesis vi and viij.
The wits are blinded, man understands nothing of him self, without
grace. The will is crooked and turned away from that, which is good, and so
weak and wounded, that he delyreth evil for good, and all that is pernicious.
Like as the ague takes away a man's taste, that nothing sauoureth unto him but
that which is deadly and hurtful unto him, that which is sweet, seems unto
him to be sour. Even so has the stinckynge and filthy origynal sin
corrupted all the powers of man, that to their right works they can not
attain, without a great renewyng. A man must be renewed, and made hole, or
else must he be damned. That comes to pass, The death of Christ.
when the death of Christ has and uses his workyng in man, that the spirit
of faith does strive and fight against the flesh, and at the last the
flesh with death is destroyed, and the carnal man, Ephesians. iiij
according to the signifycation of Baptism is hole drowned, and the fylthynes
of the sinful birth of Adam is hool wassheth away, and becomes a new man,
which is shapen after God, in true ryghteousnes and holiness.


The spirit is the holy Ghost, and his motion or workynge in us.

It is one thing. The outward man the old Adam, the flesh, the body of
sin.

It is one thing, The new man, and the inward man.

To. vij. Gala. v
Between the spirit and the flesh is a contynuall battle, as S. Paul
testifyeth.

Here upon earth as long as body and soul be knitte together. To. viij.
Has the vpryght and ryghteous man only the first fruits of the spirit.
In such manner are here yet al works of man spotted and polluted of the
flesh, and sin before the judgment of God. Therefore let noman build and
trust upon his works. Romans iij iiij.
The faith in Christ is only our ryghteousnes before God.

Virtue.
The three highest virtues Faith. Charity. Hope.


Out of a right faith flow the other two, Charity and hope. Knoweledge of the
kindness of God.
For the knowledge of the godly mercyfulnes makes, that God is loved again,
makes also, that we be willinge, and subdue our selves to serve every
creature, and that is called the love of our neighbor.

Hope flows also out of faith for faith is that, Hope
wherewith thou beleuest the word, and with hope thou lokest for that, which
is promised unto the through the word. What makes me to have hope. Answer.

The faith in the word of God.

Therefore hang these three virtues together.

The greatest virtue.
The greatest virtue is, Gal, v
where of Saint Paul speaks. Faith which through love is mighty in
operation, without faith is no virtue.


The greatest sin is unbelieve. He that believes not in Christ is damned.
Ioh. iij
He shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him. To. xiiij
For whatsoever proceeds not of faith, that same is sin.


The soul of man is highly honored or made honorable, Gene. i.
namely created after the image of the most hyghly blessed trinite, and has
three virtues, or qualities, understanding will, and remembrance, and is yet
but one thing. Notwithstondynge thou learnest to know this creation in that,
that the soul has a respect toward God, Likeness of God.
and his holy word, this testifyeth, that in us is a lykenes and Image of God.
No man can satisfye the large and great desires of the wise and prudent men,
but God the creatoure him self only. Then shall I be satisfied, Ps. xvij.
says the Psalm, when thine Image awaketh up. The soul has a beginning, for
she is created of god, but she has none end for she died not. For thus says
Christ: Mat. x.
Fear ye not the^ which kyl the body, and be not able to kyl the soul, but
rather fear him, which is able to destroy both soul and body into hell. The
soul is such a precious godly work and creature, that no corporal thing,
may be compared unto her, what should it profit a man, mat. xvi
though he should win all the hole world, if he lose his own soul.

Life.
There is two manner of lyfes, the one temporal, the other perpetual. The life
temporal has a beginning and ending, and is full of sorrow, as Job
complayneth, Hiob. iij
and it is only a shadow of the right everlasting life, which the creatures
have in their beginning. A right Christen man counts the temporal life very
littell and small, for he knows through his faith, that he is not created for
this short temporal life. He sees with the eyes of his faith above in the
right true everlasting life, which without death and departing, without
trouble and misery, in certayntye, in Joy and without sorrow endures for
ever. Phil. i
Thus says Paul to the Philippians, Christ is to me life, and death is to me
advantage. I desire to be lowsed and to be with Christ.

Willyngly to dye.
Whosoever is not willing, and glad to dye, and to depart out of this
miserable corruptible time, the same is yet full of the old Adam, and has yet
but a small faith. The right faith kyndleth in us, and makes us to hate this
ungodly life, and to become enemy unto it. Faith makes a man to dye from this
life and all his lusts, whylest he is yet living, and unto the beleuynge is
no greater reioysynge upon earth. He has turned away and plucked away his
heart from all creatures, and lives only in Christ. Thus says Paul. Gal. vi.
God forbydde that I should rejoice, but only in the cross of our Lord
Jesus Christ, whereby the world is crucifyeth unto me, and I unto the world.
Gala. ij
And in another place says he, I live, yet now not I, but christ lives in me.
For the life which I live now in the flesh, I live by the faith of the son
of god, which loved me, and gave him self for me. The temporal life is
delectable unto the heathen that know no better. But a Christian does littel
regard it, because he knows a better. Therefore departed the well-beloved elect
saints of god, with myrthy and joy from hence, as out of wretchedness into
the right country of their father. Cicero in Tuscques.
The heathen fear the te^porall death very sore, for they think, that
hereafter it is clean done with man. Al their wisdom, conuyng and
Philosophy, was not able to conforte them, in the fear of death, albe it that
they did enterpretyse the same. He that knows not CHRIST, and believes not
in him, fears death, and not without a cause, for it is horrible unto him,
and an intraunce into death everlasting.

But he that knows Christ, and has him, does not fear death much (...)
has overcome death. And his holy word does only conforte us effectually,
against the horrible tempeste of death.


The life everlasting is, that we know the very god, Ioh xvij
and Jesus Christ whom he has sent. Now we see in a glass eue^ in a dark
speaking. i. cor. xiij
But then shall we see face to face. Now I know it vnparfectely, That is. We
know here upon earth by faith, all what God is, and what God gives unto us,
but it is not yet the right knoweledge, nothing nygh, she is also dark and
imperfect. But the knowledge to come in our fathers mansion, is the right
bryghtnes, and perfect knoweledge. i. Ioh. iij
For we shall see him, as he is.


There is two manners of death, the one temporal, the one everlasting. The
temporal, when body and soul part the one from the other. Ebre. ix
It is so appointed, that every man must ones dye. The everlasting death, when
the everlasting soul must needs depart from the face of God, that is, from
her right only life ever more and everlasting with out ending.

The eternal death, that is, ij. tim. i.
the damnacyon infernal, is unto the elect christen men overcome al ready by
chrste. Christ has spoiled death of his power, and brought to light, life, and
incorruptyble conuersacyon by the Gospel. The wayght and burden of our
sins, has suppressed and drowned us into the botomeles pit of hell. Esa.
liij
But God has laid this burden upon his dearly beloved son Christ, the same
has satisfied for us, and delivered us from sin, death, and hell. There of
shall thou find in Saint Paul.i. Cor. i. Gal. i. ij. Ephe. i. Col. i. Roma.
ij. Ebre. ix. and to Titus. ij. John. iij


In so much that he that believes in Christ, shall not perysshe, but have
everlasting life. For thus says S. Paul. To. viij.
There is then no damnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, which walk
not after the flesh, but after the spirit. Therefore is there no meryer
thing upon earth, than a right Christen man, for he does not much esteem
the temporal life, he is sure of a better life. He is a Lord over sin,
death, and hell. Why so? Answer. Romans vi
Christ dyed once, and dies no more. Death shall have no more power over him,
John. Now bei
he has overcome it, and taken away sin. Now he that believes in Christ,
has Christ before his eyes, becomes one spirit with him, ouercometh in him,
and by him, sin, death, hell, Devil, and the world. To. viij
For thus says Saint Paul. If God be on our side, who can be against us.
Which also spared not his own son, but gave him for us all. How shall he
not with him give us all things. Psalm. xxx. viij.
We are well delivered into death, but we overcome all those things through
Christ which has loved us.

What has Christ. Answer. He has the righteousness, peace, life and
salvation. Eue^ that same has the christen soul also, which is knytte in
unite unto Christ her lord and head, thoroughe a right faith. To. viij. Hose
xiij
She defyeth death, and says, neither death, nor any creature is able to
separate her from the love of god, which is in Christ Jesus. She speaks
joyfully. i. Co. xv
Death is consumed in the victory. Death where is thy styng. Hell where is thy
victory. But thanks be unto god, which has given us victory thorough our Lord
Jesus Christ, Death is not fearful to a christen man.
The te^porall death is unto such a christen man no more so fearful Yea he
does desire it, for it is to him only a delyueraunce from this sinful,
wretched, blasphemous life, and an intraunce into the right life, unto Christ
our only salvation.

A Christian knows, that the ever lasting death can do nothing to him yea as
littel as to Christ him self, and the temporal death is only a departing of
the soul from the body, to thiutent that they both being puryfyed, pure and
clear in all perfection in the Later day may be again coupled to gether,
glorified and clarifyed, And knows that the soul stondeth in the hand of
Christ, and is well preserved in the bosom of Abraham. Luc. viij
Therefore does the scripture call the Christen death a sleep, because that
then a Christian does first amend his estate, and comes from disquietenesse
to rest. The right Christians also should not behave the^ selves evil, or
sorrow over much, when any thing dies from them. Paul says. i. the. iiij
We would not brethren have you ignorant, concerning them, which are
fallen a sleep, that ye sorrow not, as the other which have no hope. For if
we believe, that Jesus dyed and rose again, even so, them also which sleep by
Jesus, will God bring again with him.


esa. xxix Ezeche. xxxvij and viij
In the latter day, shall the bodies of men by the infinite power, and might
of god be raised again, and be coupled again with the souls. But in the
blessed, shall they wonderfully be changed, and endued with four gifts,
honor and glory with impassiblenes, with brightenes, with swyftenes, and with
subtilenes. For thus says Saint Paul. i. Co. xv
The flesh is sown in corruption and ryseth in incorruption. It is sown in
dishonor and ryseth in honor. It is sowe^ in weakness and ryseth in power. It
is sown a natural body, and ryseth a spiritual body. For a little before
says he. For as in Adam all dye, even so by Christ shall all be made a live,
and every man in his own order. The first is Christ, then they that are
Christ's, at his coming. Then comes the end, when he has delivered up the
kingdom to God the father, when he has put down all rule authorite and power.

Christ is risen from death, therefore shall we rise also. This article of our
faith is all the hole sum. and contained all the hole matter. If Christ were
not risen, then had sin and death ben to strong for him. But for as much as
he is risen from death, so is sin and death overcome, and we shall rise also
in glory purchaced and prepared for us by Christ. To. viij
But then when the spirit of God, that raised up Jesus from death, quickens
your mortal bodies, because of his spirit, which dwells in you.

Ioh. xi
Christ says, I am the resurrection and the life. He that believes on me, yea
though he were dead, yet shall he live. And whosoever lives, and believes on
me, shall never dye. Item this is the will of him that sent me, Ioh. vi
that every man which seyth the son, and believes on him have everlasting
life. And I will raise him up at the last day.

hiob. xix
Item I am sure that me redemer lives, and that I shall rise out of the
earth, in the later day, that I shall be clothed again with this skin, and
see God in my flesh, yea I my self shall behold him, not with other but with
these same eyes. Ite^ the hour shall come, in the which all that are in the
graves, shall hear his voice, and shall come forth, they that have done good,
unto the resurrection of life, and they that have done evil unto the
resurrection of damnation. One Christian should conforte another with such
words of Scripture against the fear of death, as Saint Paul teaches, in
the Epistle to the Thessalonians. i. Th. iiij


The Latter day.
Of the last day has the Scripture two points. The first. Christ has given
sure signs which be the messagers of the last judgment. Read the Gospelles
of Mathewe, Mark, Matthew. xxiiij mar. xiij Luc. xxi.
and Luke. All manner of persecutions of the faithful, shall arise. Item war,
insurrection, offense, evil manners, quenchynge of charity.

Item the abomination in the holy place, in the tempel of God, Dan. ix
which exalteht him self, and shows him self as God.

Item an abominable departing, ij. Th. ij.
and falling from the faith unto man's institutions and traditions. For thus
says Christ, when the trees shute forth their buddes, it is a sure sign,
that So^mer is then nygh at hand. So likewise ye, when ye see those things
come to pass, understand, that the later day is at hand.

The other, Even the same point of this last time, the day or hour can no
man know. Christ gives signs, Matthew. xxiiij
but he says in Mathewe. Of that day and hour knows noman no not the
Angels of heaven, but my father only, and recyteth even in the same place.
How that in the days of Noe, the floudde came vnwarres, and over hasted the
world. So shall the coming of the son of man be, when men will least look
for him. i. these. v. ij. these. ij.
Even thus says Paul also. The day of the Lord comes as a thief in the
night.

Matthew. xxiiij. and xxv. i. the.iiij
The form, fasshyon, process, and judgment of the Latter day. Read in
Mathewe, and in the Epistle unto the Thessaloniens. I will not bring the out
and from the scripture with my labor, but in and to the Scripture. Every
water is better in his first spring, than it is in the fellowynge crekes or
ryuers.


The mass is a testamente of Christ wherein is promised, pardon and remissyon
of sins unto all faithful Christians, and sounds thus.

As they did eat the Lord Jesus, look the bread, and gave thanks brake it,
gave it to his disciples, and said Take, eat, this is my body. And he took the
cup, thanked, and gave it them, and said, drynk of it every one. This is the
cup, the new Testament, in my blood, that shall be shed for you, and for
many for the remission of sins. Matthew. xxvi mar. xiiij Luc. xxij i. Cor. xi.
This do in the remembrance of me. Read Mathewe, Mark, Luke, and the Epistle
of Paul to the Chorinthians. Even there is the mass instituted of Christ.
Therefore what so ever is more there by they additio^s of men.

These foresaid words must every man know perfectely, and remember the^ in a
right steadfast faith. It is not lauful. that they should be hidden and spoken
secretly if thou will hear mass a right, remember that here is a meat and
drink. therefore must thou eat and drink, or else thy mass hearing is of
no valor.

To hear mass a right.
How shall I do then? Take the words of the mass before the, and remember
them in a right faith, that thou doubt not, but as Christ has promised thy,
even so shall it come to pass unto the, and in the faith of the same words,
receive the blessed Sacrament, as a sure holy token, under the which such
promise is made unto the, whereby thine heart is brought to the words, to
believe them. This is spiritually and corporally to go, to gods board.

Going to Gods board.
When the Sacrament is not ministered unto the, but thou hear mass only,
then take the words of the Testament into thy heart, and remember there, what
thy God and Lord Jesus Christ has done for the, how he by his death has
redeemed the, and deserved for the eternal life. And besides this have thou the
very right living token and seall, his body and his blood.

Believe the words and the token, so obtaynest thou the promised inheritance,
and go to Gods board, spiritually, thou do strengthen thy self out of
the words of Christ, thou do conforte the, preserve and amend the. For he
that does accept the words and token in faith is nourysshed and strengthened
against all temptations and necessities, and moved and provoked to give
thanks, unto the plenteous merciful father, which has given and made such a
rich, costely Testamente to us poor damnable sinners.

Here may be no doubt at all in the promise. For it is therefore called a
Testamente, that is, a thing which can not be called again, a sure promise,
which is sealled and confirmed with the precious death of the Son of God.
Ebre. xi
Here is no blood shed of unreasonable cattle, which can not take away
sin, but the precious innocent blood of Jesus Christ, Ebre. ix
which pourgeth our consciences from dead works, which for that cause is a
mediator of the new testament, Romans iij
as Paul does name him.

the mass is no sacrifyce
The mass is properly no oblation, but is a remembrance of the high worthy
oblation or Sacrifice which Jesus Christ the son of God in heaven, Hebr. ix.
offered him self for our sins upon the cross ones. This rememberaunce
shall be very new unto all hertes, whereby man is taught, what he has been,
and what God has done for him. There of grows then confidence in such a
kind Lord and redemer. Also love is raised toward God, and toward our
neighbor, and a renewynge of the old man.

We have now many masses, but the death of the Lord is seldom showed, the
plentyfull grace of the death of Christ should always be showed thereby. And
we should admonysshe and exhort one another to the love of God, and of our
neighbors. For this Sacrament signifies unite in love, as the names thereof
clearly do declare.

A testament.
Briefly, whatsoever a Testame^te has in it self in especyall, that same has
also the mass. The Testatour is Christ. The testamente are the words, as is
a fore said, whereby Christ did institute the blessed Sacrament of the
altar, therein is contained with few words, what Christ has bequethed, and
given us. The sealle, i. Tim. ij
bond, and assurance, is the body, and blood of Christ, a pledge, token,
and sealle of the Godly promise, and redemption for us. The heirs are all
faithful Christians. The inheritance is pardon and remissyon of sins. Where
as remission of sins is, there follow all goods, promised and given in the
Testament. For when the sins be remitted and forgeuen, then have we a
merciful God through Christ. Christ is then ours, To. viij.
and with him all things. This is now the inheritance.

The Sacrifyces of the old Testamente were imperfect, Ebre. x
for they did not take and wasshe away sin, they were a figure of the right
perfect sacrifyce, the oblacion of Christ
which takes away our sins, and makes unto us a merciful God. That was
Christ, which dyed upon the cross, a right only sacrifyce of the new
Testamente, for our sins, our only sanctification, iustifycacyon, and
satisfaction. Now when we have mass, or go to Gods board, than may we not
say properlye, that Christ is offered again, for he dies now no more. Ebre. vi
ix. Romans vi
The Apostle says. He has done it once. And after that faith he again. Once
did he enter into the holy place. He offreth not him self often, he was offered
but ones. But proprely is it a remembrance of the right perfect oblacyon,
which once upon the cross is accomplysshed And here is the passion of Christ
earnestly remembered, through the which faith is strengthened and augme^ted,
love toward God and man kyndeled, and hope stablysshed and confirmed.
Therefore said Christ. This do in the remembrance of me, that is when ye eat
my body, and drink my blood, then remember my death, that I dyed for you, and
redeemed you, and became an oblation for your sins.

Righteousness.
A right faith in the mercy and grace of God, in Jesus Christ, is only our
ryghteousnes. To. iiij.
To him that believes, is his faith counted for ryghteousnes. Abraham believed
God, Genesis xv
and it was counted unto him for ryghteousnes.

There is two manner of ryghteousnes. Two manner of righteousness.
The first is ryghteousnes of works. The Ipocrites understand the law
carnally, and undertake to fulfill the law with outewarde works, without the
heart for the heart is yet unlusty and unwilling to good works, but this
ryghteousnes, Mat. v.
helps nothing to salvation, as Christ says. Except your righteousness
excede, the ryghteousnes of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye can not enter into
the kyngedom of heaven. Romans iij and.iiij.
The other is called, the righteousness of God, which is nothing else, but the
faith in Christ, and this is only of valor before God.

No man may set up his own righteousness or justification out of the works,
build and trust thereon, for it is a sandy ground, but we must knowledge
the true righteousness, Roma. x
which is allowed before God. Christ is given unto us, believe this, the
sins are forgeuen for Christ's sake, Romans iij
he is our sanctification and ryghteousnes, trust in him only, and that thou
shall be saved by no work. The Same faith is the true righteousness, where by
thou art saved.

All works are yet unclean, corrupted through the flesh. Therefore is no
work the ryghteousnes, but only the faith in Christ, thy redemer. In the
sight of God shall no man be justified by the works of the law, Romans iij
Gala. ij
as Saint Paul witnesses.


The blessed elect saynctes, may be honored of us two manner of ways. First
by a way which we our selfs of our own Imagination do set up and
inuente. As when we cause golden or other costely Images to be made for them,
trusting that it is a good deed, build and erecte great churches, not
withstonding that there are churches enough. Run far here and there to the
holy places light candels or tortches in their name. Call them our conforte,
help, life, or hope, hold opinyon that we must have the saynctes, for
mediators to Christ. As though Christ had diuyded his kingdom with his
saynctes, and committed unto them the mercyfulnes, and kept the straight
judgment for him self, and wete a fearful teryble judge, unto whom there
were no certain access or intraunce, but only through the saynctes.

The same invented honoring of saynctes is nothing else, but a mockyng of
the blessed saynctes, and comes by great ignorance of the scriptures. They
will not be honored of us alone. Ioha. xv Ebre. iiij Ephesians. ij and.iij To. viij
Christ is only the mediator between God and us. He only dyed for us.
Christ only does love us so much that he gave his own life for us. And is
more mercyful then al his saynctes. Thorough Christ we have an open way in,
unto the father. He sits on the right hand of God and makes intercessyon
for us. He prays for us, as the Epistle unto the Ebrues says, Ebr. vi,
even there says the text, that Christ has an everlasting priesthode, and
therefore can he save perfectely all them that through him come unto God, what
needs it then to have other mediators.

Summa, God is only our hope, and no sayncte. The hope, and faith, trust and
confidence perteyneth only to God, and to no creature how high so ever she
be, A man must only trust in the Lord GOD, and put his hope and confidence
in him, as in the highest good, from whence comes properly help conforte, and
delyueraunce of all evil, all goodness and salvation. Esa xliij
Esaias says, I am, even I am the Lord, and besides me there is no savior. Ie.
xviij.
Item in Ieremye it is written. The Lord is my refuge in the day of
tribulation. Item cursed be the man, that puts his trust in man. But
blessed is the man, whose hope is in the Lord.

It avails not, that thou say. Good intent,
I do it for a good intent. In the things which perteyne to Gods honor and
to the salvation of our souls, may me^ not follow their own good thinking
(for it erreth and deceives) but the scripture and the commandments of God.
For thus says Moses, Deute xij.
Ye shall not do every man, what seems him good. It is not all good, that is
done in a good intent, the Scripture must judge the intent, and make it right

Secondarily, are the Saynctes honored, according as the scripture holds
thereof, the same is right, and cannot err, we must honor and praise the
saints in God, and god in them. Galat. i Luce. i
S. Paul says. They praised God on me behalf. Elisabeth thus lauded and
honored Marie. She did not take her for a redemer or goddess, but for a noble
creature, and an elect vesshel of god, she lauded god and rejoiced with her,
that God had showed her such great mercy, and said. Blessed is the fruit of
thy womb, and called her a mother, of the Lord, and blessed, because that she
had believed the words of God. And she says her self in the Magnificat, from
hence furthe all generations shall call me blessed. And that is done daily,
that she is praised, and called blessed, as the noble undefiled lodging or
Tabernacle, wherein the eternal wisdom of the heavenly father has rested,
and the holy Gooste wonderfully has wrought the great work of the blessed
humanite of god. The humanite of God.
Her immaculate, pure, virginal flessh of her body, was coupled in unite of
persons of the inestimable high blessed godheade, that by reason of such
inexplicable union, of both natures in her person, she is called a mother of
God.

The true honor unto saynctes
So is now this the right honourynge of the saynctes, that we remember them
with praise and love, and also rejoice with them, that they now in Christ have
valyauntely overcome, the flesh, the sin, and the world, and triumph with
Christ our head in great glory. We see in them the wonderful works, of the
aboundante grace and mercyfulnes of God, that he so highly has illumyned and
endued them, of mere mercy. For they were also Adams children, and had of them
selves done Adams works, Romans ix
but God has made of them such goodly fair vessels of glory.

Out of such beholdynge of the benefytes in the saynctes, To praise God in
his saints
do we learn to know the immeasurable riches of the goodness of God, and we
praise God in his Saynctes, as a rich liberal savior, and praise the elect
saynctes, which now with great love, very perfectely are grafted in christ
their head, and are put in possession of his goods, as heirs of God, and
fellow heirs with Christ.

I see there, in the saynctes, the great wisdom, power, and goodness of God,
whereby in me is kyndeled a strong confydence toward such a merciful God,
that he will also be merciful and propitious unto me, even as unto the
saynctes. I obtain love toward God, and a sure hope toward him, that he
will also make of me wretched sinful child of Adam, and vessel of damnation,
a vessel of glory. Romans ix
Praynge him that he will grant unto me such a faith, such love and hope, as
the dear saints have had, to the intent, that I may be shortly joined with
them, as with my brethren in Christ, and fellow members.

The saints love us
Also I dowte not at all, that forasmoche as here upon earth they were yet
tymorous and frayll, and yet loved their neighbor, truly so do they love us
heartily, and rejoice highly, when our salvation approaches, and the kingdom
of God comes unto us that the will of God is done in us, that our blasphemous
life does crasse, and we be converted, that the spiritual body with all the
members soon may be fullfilled, and to the laud and honor of God may be
song, Hos. xiij i. Co. xv
this merry song, death is swallowed up in the victory, death where is thy
stynge, hell where is thy victory. Where as then the last enemy, the death
shall be destroyed, and all faithful Christians coupled and united with Christ
as the bryde with her bridegroom, i. co. xiij Luc. xv.
then shall there be Joy without end. For the love decreasseth not in
heaven, but she is there first made perfect. For the angels of God in heaven,
Luc. xv.
rejoice over one sinner that does repent, more then over nynty and nine just
persons which need no repe^tau^ce. But how the saynctes pray for us, if they
know and see our prayers, Roma. i i. The. v Coll. iiij i. These. i Ac. xiij.
in the glass of the eternal word, and after what manner it is done is not
necessary for us to know. We ought here upon earth to pray one for another,
as we are taught in the Pater noster. And Paul desires every where, the
supplication for the congregation. He prays also earnestely for it, here and
there in his Epistles. There is but one name, wherein we may be saved, namely,
Jesus Christ, Christ said, Ioh. xvi and xiiij.
whatsoever ye shall are the father in my name, he will give it you. Eue^ so
does also the church conclude her collectes, through our Lord Jesus Christ.

That in the old testament in prayers sometime the names of Saynctes are
brought in, and remembered, as Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, David and such other,
that is not done therefore, that their names should be set up or exalted, as
though they were the helpers but God is only admonysshed there by, to remember
the covenant, which he made with the same saynctes, of his great mercy. Even
so might I say yet. O mercyful everlasting God, that have given to the
blessed saint. Saynct Peter such a faith. I beseech the, strengthen my faith
also. And such remembrance, is not properlye, worshippyng or adoryng of the
saints, but it is to laud God only in the saynctes, and to admonyshe him of
his truth and mercyfulnes. i. John. i
In the name of Jesus should all prayers be made, for he is only our
reconciliation before God. For so is given to the saynctes, that belongs unto
the^, and also unto God, that which is his. Let the lyuinge saynctes be highly
committed unto the, for they have need of thy help, S. Nycolas has no need of
thy money, but the poor which is thy neighbor, Matthew. xxv.
give it unto the poor for Gods sake, this is as acceptable unto Christ, as
though it were done to himself.

Difference of meats.
God did command the Jews in the Old Testamente to absteyne from eating of
certain beasts. But in the new testamente, is no more for biddynge of
meats, but only the abuse of them is forbidden, and not the right use of
them for the necessary sustenaunce of man. Every day may thou Christenly
eat al manner of meats, for the sustentation of thy body, fysshe, eggs, what
soever it be with thanks geuynge. mat. xv. mar. vij Colo. ij.
What soever enters in to the mouth defyleth not the man, but only that
which comes owte from the heart. This is grounded in the Evangelists, Titus.
i To. xiiij
and in saint Paul's Epistles: For unto the pure (that is unto the beleuyng)
are al things pure.

But for as much as many are entangled with men's traditions, i. Cor. x and
viij
thinking, that it is not always laufull to eat flesh. So shall thou
avoid the offense, and for thy neighbors sake somewhat forbear thy Christian
liberty, in that which is not against god, and instruct and teach him, what
is commanded of god, or lycensed. For if thou wylt be a right Christian, then
must thou have a respect unto the words of Christ, and use thy self
thereafter. But if thou regard more the words of me^ the^ the words of god,
the^ art thou no Christian, but a papist. God has not laid his word before
the for naught. Think thou, Thou Ipocryte, blind, miserable wretch, that
God was not able to show the right way to salvation, will thou with thy good
thinking, inuente a better way. ioh. xiiij and viij
Christ is the way and the light. He that follows not his doctrine, and
inuenteth another way, the same does err, and feleth and gropeth in the
darkness.

Then will thou say, shall then the Popes laws, and the institutions of the
Counsaylles be of no reputation. Answer. The pope and the counseylles may
err, and have many times erred shamefully, but if thou will not err, then
follow the scripture. It is to us a sure mark, that the scripture of the
Bybell comes from the holy gooste, if the institutions of the Popes and
counseils be conformable and agreynge with the Bible, then are they conclusyons
out of the Bible, and to be kept. But if they be contrary to the Bible, then
is it error. The holy ghost is not wauerynge, that which he has ones spoken
through the Evangelists for the salvation of the soul, the same is sure, and
he does not again say it, or speak against him self. Will thou prove, and
be sure, if the spirit of the Pope, or of the counseils be of God, then
behold and read their writtynges, co^paring the^ with the Bible, if they be
agreeable to the Bible, then is it the spirit of God, if not, Pro xxx deu. viij
so is it the spirit of the devil. For there ought nothing to be added unto
the word of God.

mat. iiij
The word of God is the sustenau^ce of the soul, and makes a new vprighte
joyful conscience, and shows unto man the next and streyghtest way to
salvation. But the word of men, is a poison to the soul, and makes a
troubled, i. tim. iiij ij. Cor. x
sorrowful, fearful and erroneous conscience, which is marked with an hot
Iron.


Unto a Christen man is now one day as the other, he must keep holy day
every day unto God in the new Testament. The Sabbath must every day be
kept holy, that we leave the evil works, of the old man, and suffer only
Gods works in us. mat. xvi
This is the mortifyenge of our selves, and renewyng of our selves. He that
will come to Christ must for sake him self. The Sunday and other holy days,
are permitted for this cause, that men so much the better, and more
conveniently may come together in those days, to pray with the congregation
in one accord, to hear the word of God, and to receive the Sacrament. When
that is done, the^ may thou work without any sin.

Men did in the time of Jerome, after the divine service, use bodily labor in
the congregation, as he writteth him self in Epitaph. Pauli. Wherefore will
they compel us then to rest, Gal. iiij Colos. ij
with manifest hynderaunce of the body, soul and goods, Read Paul in the
Epistle to the Galathians and Colossians.

Prayer.
The right and best prayer, Mat. vi
is the Pater noster, and it comprehends whatsoever is necessary unto us. A
right Christen prayer must be made earnestly and attentyuely. Take before the,
an extreme necessity and bring that before God. The greatest necessite is,
lack of faith, love and hope, for these three things ought thou to pray,
for therein consists our salvation. For thus says Christ. Seek first the
kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and al these things shall be ministered
unto you, if God does feed the birds of the air, with out all care, and
clotheth the flowers of the field so costely verily trust in him, he shall
also provide for thy living. Abraham trusted well in God, and be came rich
here, and also hereafter.

Mat. vi
The prayer must be short, as Christ says, when ye pray, babble not much as
the heathen do, for they think that they shall be heard for their much
bablinges sake. Superfluous words ought to be avoided in the prayer. Therefore
beware of Hortulus anime, Rosarium, The gardeyn of Herbs, thy Myrour, and
such like foolysshe baggage. For therein is much unprofitable babblynge.
Every man can not seek nor gather out, the gold out of the mire. Jacob. i.
Matthew. xxi. Ioh. iiij.
Let the prayer be faithful, he that prays not in faith, obtayneth nothing.
God has promised to hear us, therefore must we be done in spirit and in
truth.

Prescrybe unto god no sign, way, time, nor hour, when and how he should
give the thy request, he knows well enough, when it is best for the, put
it to his discretion, and say always, Lord thy holy will be done. He hears
him anon, that prays in faith, but he gives not always so soon, for he
knows, when it is time.

Vow.
We have made a promise unto God, in the holy Baptysme, that we will forsake
the devil, and renounce all his works. Here does man promise to fight,
against his own flesh, against the world, and against the devil. He is
borne of his father, Ephesians. ij John. iij
a sinful child of wrath, he must be renewed, and borne again, of water,
and the holy ghost. The old man must be mortifyed, this is done through all
manner of tribulation and aduersite, which grieve the carnal man. ij. tim. iij
For thus says Paul. All that will live godly in christ must suffer
persecutions. Mat. iij and. iiij.
And this is the repentance or ame^deme^t which John and Christ do teach.
This repentance is a mortifyeng of the old man, and a renewyng of the spirit.
His toke^ is Baptism, which is a new birth. Tit. iij
whosoever will not suffer aduersitye and afflictions in this world, Ac. xiiij
the same is untrue, and keeps no promise nor does the things, which he has
promised in his baptysme. Therefore is it good to see, that there be but few
right Christians in earth. Me^ ought not to vow or promise any thynghe
rasshely for every man has both his hands full of works, The promise of
baptism.
and enough to do, if he will satisfye, his Baptism.

The promises or vows of freres etc.
The vows of freres or monks are foolysshnes, and are made without faith. To
vow chastity, is not in their power, for it is a special gift of God. And a
counseyl, not a commandment. The Evangelical pouertye belongs to us all, i.
Co. vij Matthew, xix.
and is nothing else, then in spirit not to desire, and not to cleame the
temporal goods with our heart, and to use the goods, for the commodity and
welthe of our neighbor, as dispensatours, and distributours, not as owners
and Lords of the goods. Luc, xiiij
For thus says christ, if a man come to me, and hates not his father,
mother, wife and children, brethren and sisters. Moreover and his owe life, he
can not be my discyple. This law does bind every man, not only freres and
Nonnes, To. vij.
for it is spiritual, even as the hole law is, and requires a clean pure
heart. To forsake all things, that is, To forsake all things
not to be entangled with any thing, with any inordinate or uncomely desires,
And to use the same only, and not to hang or clean thereon with will or
desire.

Therefore is not the Evangelical pouerte, Evangelical pouerte
to go a beggynge from house to house, and to have nothing at al but not to
hang upon the goods with a covetous mind and desire. All riches are given us
of God, not that we should occupye the^ alone, but that we should serve our
neighbor with them, yea with all that we have, Deu. xv Luce. x.
this requires, the law of nature and the law of God. Moses commanded that
no man should be suffered to beg. Christ says. Go not from house to house.
Into whatsoever house ye enter, there eat and drink such as they have.

Obedience. To. xiij. Philip. i i. Pe. iij
Obedience must we keep even as well as the freres or monks, as Paul and Peter
teach, every man in his City or co^munalty to his Lord, whatsoever the
scripture says of the obedience of God, and of his holy word the same do the
blind guydes draw by the hear upon their invented obedience. Even as also
they wreste this saying in Samuel, i. Re. xv
Obedience is better sacrifyce, and draw it upon man's traditions. The vows
and promyses of the freres or monks, come of ignorance of the free will,
which they presume to have and to defend. The vow of freres is no counseyll
in the Scripture, nor yet commandment therefore is it nothing but mere
seduction, Ipocrisye and unbelieve. Christ will, that our faith, purely and
only shall be builded upon his only word, For upon the same rock does he
build his congregation. mat. xvi John. x.
And in John says he. My sheep hear my voice. For as much now, as there is no
clear or manifest word of God, which counsayleth or commands, that there
should be a bond of eternal vows of chastity or of beggerye, verelye so err
al they that teach freres vows and take them for good and sure gere in the
Scripture, which nevertheless are unsure, and contrary to the scripture. God
will, that his word be only taught for salvation. For thus says Saint Peter.
i. Pe. iiij
If any man speak, let him talk, as though he spoke the words of God, that
is, let him be sure, that it is the word of God, which he speaks and
teaches.

Obedience.
Before all things, To. xiij. i. Pet. ij
must men be obedient unto god, as unto our right Lord, After that also unto
such as god has ordained and given to be rulers over us, as father, and
mother, Lords and judges, and whosoever is ordained for the defense of the
common peace in the hyer powers.

If they command ought that perteyneth to the profit of the commune wealth,
and serves for the common peace, or any thing else although it were tyranny,
then suffer and be pacient, subdue thy self mekely, be obedyent, to this
byndeth the the, brotherly love.

But if they command ought, contrary to the will of God, Act. v. Mat. vi
then say as Peter and the Apostles do say. We ought more to obey God then
men. No man can serve two contrary masters. The king of Babylon commanded
the Prophet Daniel, that he should worship the Dragon for a God. Daniel xiiij.
Daniel said, I worship god my Lord. For he is the living God, but the
dragon is not the living god. Paul says. To. xiij.
The hyer power is gods minister for thy wealth. Therefore when they command
the ought that is wicked and against God, then do it not.


The will of God is a right line of all ryghteousnes, and of all goodness,
which can not err, whatsoever is right and good, is therefore right and good,
because that God will have it so.

Man's will.
Man's will is erroneous, and must be made conformable, and submitted unto the
will of God, wherein the perfection of the reasonable creature does consiste.
Even thus do we pray. Thy will be done. Matthew. xxvi,
Even so did Christ pray also. Father, thy will be done. If Christ did
subdue his most holy, and most ryghtest will unto the will of his heavenly
father, Wherefore would not then, the poor stynkynge worm, the sinful man,
desire in all things, that not man's will, which erreth but gods will
might be done which can not err? In Ieremye says the spirit of God, Ier.
xvij Ge. viij
that the heart of man is wicked, crooked, and unsearchable, Now is man's
heart a place of all carnal desires and wylles. Thou wylt, of thine own
self, without the grace of god nothing, but that which is evil, where is
then the fre will.


There is two manner of offense, The one is given unto the neighbor. As when a
man teaches his neighbor wrong in the faith, this is an horrible offense,
Matthew. xviij.
or offends him with his evil lyuinge, as the open sinners do.

The other offense is taken, as when Christ taught the word of truth before
the Jews, Ioh. viij
which his heavenly father had commanded him, than were the Jews offended
there at, but Christ gave them none offense. Even so are many offended as yet,
when they hear the christen lybertye preached, for their conscience is
miserably entangled with men's traditions and institutions. Luce. ij
The Gospel must needs be preached, whosoever be offended with it. Christ is
ordained to be a fall and resurrection of many in Israel, and a sign which
shall be spoken against. They that be his sheep, shall in time convenient, hear,
and accept the shepeherdes voice, unto them is Christ, and his doctrine
ordained for a ressurection. i. Pet, ij Is. xxiiij Romans ix
They that are not his, shall sto^ble at him down to the ground.

In the things which God commands, be thou obedyent, not regardinge
whosoever will be offended withal. Isa. viij
Of this take an example, God will, that I shall learn his holy word, and
search therein his will, if now any man would forbid me the Scripture, then
would I not be obedient unto him.

In things which are instituted by man, Men's precepts.
which may well be done or left undone therein follow the rule order, the
self therein as faith, love and need requires, and teaches, as to eat
flesh, or not, to eat it, here in have thou liberty of God. There in shall
the brotherly love teach the sufficiently.

If noman thereby be offended, the^ may thou eat, that which is hoolsome
for the, but whereas noman knows of this liberte, there do thou forbear
the same, and absteynest (for the wealth of thy neighbor) from such meats,
which notwithstanding are good in themselves, and not prohibited. Thou do
therefore no good work, when thou eatest no flesh upon the frydaye, but only
if thou do serve thy neighbor therein. Neither do thou sin also, when
thou do eat it, so that thou give unto no man an occasyon of falling.

How long will we continue children, and drink milk. Were it not ones
time, that we believed more the word of god, then the foolysshe tradicions of
men. God says, that unto the pure are all things pure. Tit, i
And yet will men still forth, be afraid for a weak shadow. They had yet an
occasyon in the time of Paul to be offended at the flesh, for it was flesh
that had be^ offered unto Idols. But now will men be offended at the flesh
which comes clean and pure from the shambles or flessh market. When shall we
ones have an end of such foolysshe offendynges. Why do not the words of the
holy ghost move us, which he speaks thorough Paul, i. Cor. x.
whatsoever is sold in the flesh marketh that eat, and ask no questions,
for conscience sake. And yet was there of the same flesh also some sold for
the Idolles.

It preuayleth not that thou say the counseylles, the holy fathers did
forbydde it. Forbid here, forbydde there, whatsoever Christ has not
prohibited, but has left it free unto the, the same may nor can noman forbid
the upon pain of deadly sin, what soever they ordeyne or institute besides
the godly scripture, the same byndeth not thy conscience, ij. Cor. x and xiij.
they have no power to destroy thy conscience, but to edifye it, as Paul
says.

Almose deeds.
Alms is all manner of seruiablenes toward thy neighbor. The Evangelical
Penance, or repentance, consists, principally in three sundry things.
Fasting, praynge, Fast.
and geuinge of alms. Fasting does conclude in it self, all manner of
chastenynges of the sinful flesh, with out any difference of meats or
apparel. Prayer.
Prayenge comprehends in it self all manner of vsyng of the heart toward
God, readyng, hearing, prayenge, and remembrynge. Even so does Almose
comprehend all manner of service, Almose deeds.
toward our neighbor.

By fasting do I serve my self, and mortifye the old man. By prayer do I
serve God. By almose do I serve my neighbor. By fasting does a man overcome
the evil concupisce^ces of the flesh, a man lives soberly, me asurably and
purely. By prayer does a man overcome the pride of this life and lives Godly.
By almose deeds, does a man overcome the lusts, of the eyes, and lives
ryghtfully in this life.


Thereof speaks Christ in Matthew, Mat, v.
on this wise. Swear not at al. But your communicatio^ shall be, yea, yea,
nay, nay, for whatsoever is more then that comes of evil. Here does Christ
inhibite the desire of swearing even as the law does every where forbid the
desire. Christ will, John. v
that a Christian shall be so slyght and right, not full of evil thoughts or
mysdemynges, that he shall believe his neighbor gladly, and drive or compel no
man to make an other, and that he also never will swear himself, to the honor
of the godly majesty, before the which we be always liars. Therefore says the
text, whatsoever is more the^ that comes of evil, as though he would say,
when a man is desirous, to take an oath of his neighbor, or lyghtely requires
an oath of him, or when he swears him self lightely, then is it a sign that
he is untrue, wicked, light minded, and possesses not the godly verite. No
man ought to swear of him self. How be it, when it touches or concerns
the love, necessite and the profit of our neighbors, or the honor and glory
of God, then is it laufull.

Christian lyberte.
The christian liberte is not, that we need not to do no more good, but it is
such a lyberte, wherein not the law, but man is changed. Act, ix
When Paul was converted and illumined, then continued yet the ten
commandments with him inmutable, that he should observe them but he became
another man, for even the same law of God which before his conversion, was
bitter and hole contrary to the will of Paul, as soon, as through faith he
was purifyed, and love was through the holy, ghost infounded into his heart,
then became the law unto him amiable, he was before unwilling, but afterward
willing.

The law can not condemn a christen man (albeit he has yet sin) in case he
believes, that the malediction of the law is taken away by Christ, and that
the ryghteousnes of Christ is his, and the satisfaction of Christ, his
purifyenge as the spirit of God says. i. Cor. i.
Christ of God is made unto us wisdom, ryghteousnes, sanctifyenge, and
redemption. This lyberte has Christ deserved for us, and we must be ware,
Gala. v
that the liberte be not an occasion unto the flesh, to sin, but in love
serve one another.

Thou may not say, if I am free through faith, and if faith does it all
alone, then will we do no good, it is all done already, This is not right,
men may not make a cloak for the rain thereby. It is not such a liberty, i.
Pet. ij
that thou nedest to do no more good works, but the christen lyberte, causes
that we now from hencefurthe without compulsyon, free, without respect of
the reward, first begin to do some good. i. Tim. i
Thus says S. Paul, unto the ryghteous is no law given, the law has no
auctorite, nor action upon him, he does by the spirit of God, of him self
whatsoever he ought, and whatsoever the law requires.

The Church.
In the scripture stands Ecclesia. Ecclesia
This is a Greek word, and as much as a congregation of the faithful people.
And the hole universal Church has the holy ghost by her, by whom she is
governed, and cannot err. The brydegrome does not forsake the bryde. But a
part of this church may well err. The pope and his Cardinals, are not the
Christen church or congregation, but only a part or membre therein when they
be christen me^bres, or else not.

Isa. xlvi De. viij mat. iiij.
The church is congregated by the word of God. The word of God is a body,
wherein the church is received, fourmed, sustained, borne, nouryshed, clothed,
strengthened, and preserved. The hole life and conversation of the church is
in the word of God.

Therefore does the Christen church institute, make, and teach nothing contrary
to the word of god, she abides by the clear, pure, and sincere word of God,
there has she whatsoever is necessary for her, for the spiritual life.
Whenever any institution is laid before us, and commanded to be observed,
then must we judge if it come out of the scripture or not. If it be not out
of the Scripture, then does it not bind our consciences, neither is it the
commandment of the Christen church. If it be against the scripture, then
has not the Church of God commanded it, but the congregation of Behemot the
devil.

Therefore let not this word Catholyke church, The Catholic church
draw the to every ungodly assembel, as has been done hitherto. They have
also taught, that a counsayll which sits in the stead of the church, can
not err. I say thus Cleave and take hold by gods word if thou wylt not
stomble. It is manifest and euydent, Counceyls
that the counsaylles have erred shamefully. As the Counsayll of Arimin, of
Ephesus, the second of Constantinoble. Item the Counsayls be contrary the one
to the other in their institutions, then must needs the one always err.

Riches.
Riches is a good creature of god, and an instrument of virtue. Luc. viij
Matthew. xix
Wherefore does then the holy Scripture call them thorns? Item Christ says.
It is hard for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of heaven, it is easier
for a camel to go through the eye of a nedle, then for a rich man to enter
into the kingdom of God. Answer. Al be it that riches in it self is a
creature of God, and good, yet are we of nature enclyned to al evil. Therefore
when we have occasyon to sin, Ge. viij
we be very swyfte, and can not withholde, and tame our selves. A man may have
much goods well enough, and yet for all that come to heaven, as Abraham,
Job, Namaa^ of Syria, were also in great possessions, but yet ryghteous,
reasonable and godfearyng men.

Therefore is riches not prohibited, but the misvsyng there of is prohibited,
and the covetousness, that is, the inordinate and uncomely desires toward the
goods, Ephe. v
for it is an Idolatry. He is properly called rich in the scripture, that
puts his trust and confidence in his goods, and has his pleasure, joy
and pastyme therein. As the rich man said. Luc. xij.
My soul, thou haste much goods laid up in store for many years, take thine
ease, eat, drink, and be merry. Thereof is it written in the Psalm, Lo, Psa.
lij.
this is the man that took not God for his strength, but trusted unto the
multitude of his riches. Psalm. xxxix
And in another Psalm, he heapeth up richesse, and can not tell who shall
gather them,

Even such persons trust not god, they think, that if they should not
mistruste and be careful, the corn and wynes should not grow in the feldes,
and yet see well enough, that with all their thought and care they be not able
to put one cubite unto their statures. They be heathen, Mat. vi
and know not the care, providence, and grace of God.

Two things does the Scripture speak and touch concerning riches First it is
dangerous to meddle with them. Richesse.
The scripture calls the^ thorns. He must needs have a fair grace of God,
that does not prycke him self being among thorns. They be wytche, blind,
and hinder a man very sore. A certain Jew came unto Christ, which was
counted before the world a right honest man. But when Christ would teach
him the perfection, and bad him forsake his goods and possessyo^s, he went
away mourning, for he had great possessions, Then said Christ unto his
disciples, Matthew. xix Mar. x. Lu. xviij
with what difficultye, shall they that have riches, enter into the kingdom of
God. The goods are loved and man is blinded.

Secondarely, the Scripture does not therefore deny the kingdom of heaven unto
the rich, but only shows them the danger, and ieopardye thereof, and
warns them faithfully, that they should not suffer the goods to be their
master, and Lord, and have none evil concupiscence, after that which is
temporal. Psa. lxij
And if riches do increase unto them, that they should not set their hertes
upon them, and make an Idol thereof. The rich man in S. Luke should be a
warning unto them. Luce. xij
Verily the spirit of God, which knew very well the perilles and dangers
thereof, says in sayncte Paul on this wise. i. tim. vi
They that will be rich fall into temptation and snares, and into many foolyssh
and noisome lusts, which drown men in perdicion and destruction. For
covetousness is the rote of all evil, which while some lusted after, they erred
from the faith, and tangled them selves with many sorrows.

In the end of the same Epistle, gives he unto the rich a very goodly rule to
live by, and faith. Charge the^ that are rich in this world, that they be not
excedyng wise, and that they trust not in the uncertain riches, but in the
living God, which gives us abundantly all things to enjoy the^, and that
they do good, and be rich in good works, and ready to give and to distribute,
layenge up in store for themselves a good foundation against the time to come,
that they may obtain eternal life, Mat. vi
Men can not serve God and Mammon together. Ecclesi. v.
Read in the preacher of Solomon of the rich men of this world.

Whosoever does meddle much with goods by the way of marcha^dyse, customs or
other wise, latte him remember that he medleth with thorns, and forgette not
the brotherly love, but according to the law of nature, as he would that men
should deal with him truly and uprightly so let him deal with his
neighbor. Tob. iiij
Whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, mat. vij.
even so do ye to them. This is the law and the Prophets. Luce. vi
Give, and it shall be given unto you, says Christ. Lend, lokynge for nothing
again, and your reward shall be great, and ye shall be the children of the
highest. Deute. xv.
Item in the fyfte book of Moses says the law. Turn not thine eyes from
thy poor brother handle not deceatfully and craftily with him in his
necessities, that thy Lord God may bless the always, and in all things
that thou go about or take in hand. Deute. xxiij. and xxiiij.
Give unto thy brother no money upon usury.

O Lord God why do men rage so unmannerly and abominable for the temporal
goods, seeing, they must shortly depart from them, when they dye. They can
not preserve them from death what should it profit a man, Matthew, xxvi.
though he should win all the hole world if he loose his own soul.
Christ warns you fatherly, in Mathewe and says. Mat. vi
See that ye gather you not treasure upon the earth, where ruste and mothes
corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal. But gather ye treasures
together in heaven, where nether ruste nor mothes corrupt, and where thieves
nether break up, nor yet steal. For where so ever your treasure is, there
will your hertes be also.

It can not well be done, to follow the naked Christ, and to bear his cross
where as so great riches and all plenty does abound.

Sin.
Sin is all what soever is against the commandment of God.

There is three manner of sins.

The original sin is an evil concupisce^ce where of we be inheritours by
birth desce^dinge from Ada^ upon all Adams children, which provoke and
enticeth to sin. For it is written in the first book of Moses. The
imagination of man's heart is evil, Ge. vi. and.viij
eue^ from his youth. Of this sin complayneth David saying. Psalm. li. Romans
v Ephe. ij
Behold I was shapen in wickedness, and in sin has my mother conceived me.

This sin brings the child with him, even from his mothers womb.

The deadly sin is every sin against the commandment of god, of her own
nature.

The daily sin
The daily sin, is a sin of the Christen men or of the saynctes, and is
called daily, for this cause, not that she is so small of her self, but
because she is forgeuen unto the faithful thorough the mercyfulnes of God, and
is not imputed unto him, for sin, unto death. Briefly every deed of man,
which is not through the faith in Christ, is a deadly sin. For the fruit
is as the tree. The tree is the carnal man, which spiritually is dead, how
should he then of himself bring forth a living fruit, that is, a good work?

Infirmity.
For as much as a Christen man does not fear death, he fears much less
bodily sickness, he escheweth only the infirmities of the soul, that is to say
sin. The bodily infirmitye is unto man a costely medecyne, against the
sinful flesh. For man is never more righteous, then when he is sick when
God scourges, the^ does he heal. Amendment of life happens best in the
time of all manner of tribulation. Sickness does withdraw him from the
inordinate and uncomely love of creatures, that he begins to look for the
creatoure, as for him that only can help on every side, and quycken man in
all his adversities, which he must suffer here. It gives also unto man in
tribulation a spiritual joy, and brings a good confidence toward god,
wha^ he thinks (according as the scripture does show) Whom the lord
loves, Ebr. xij
him he chasteneth, and he scourges every son that he receives. If ye
endure chastenynge, God offers himself unto you, as unto sons, what son
is that, whom the father chasteneth not. If ye be not under correction,
whereof al are partakers, then are ye bastardes and not sons. Moreover seeing
we had fathers of our flesh, which corrected us, should we not much rather
be in subjection, unto the father of spiritual gifts, that we might live.


The best health is the health of the soul, that she is in the right faith.

The bodily health is well a precious gift of God. But she is unto us
oftentimes (according to our natural inclination) an occasyon to sin.
Augustyne says. When we be in health, then is the infirmitye of the evil
concupiscence, most weakest.

Persecution.
A man must needs suffer, he that will be a discyple of Christ, must give him
self lustely and willyngely into all manner of affliction, for, Matthew. xxiiij
for his names sake shall we be hated. The cross must we needs bear, there is
no remedy. To. viij.
For those which he knew before, he also ordained before, that they should be
like fashioned unto the shape of his son.

For thus says S. Peter. i. Pet. ij
Christ suffered for us, leauyng us an ensample, that we should follow his
steps. i. Pe. iiij
Item in another place does he admonyshe us, that we should not be troubled,
and take it for a strange thing, when persecution and trybulation comes upon
us, for thereby are we tried and preserved, as the gold through the fire. We
must be partakers of Christ's passions, for thus says he. If ye be rayled upon
for the name of Christ, happy are ye. For the spirit of glory, and the
spirit of God rests upon you. On their part he is evil spoken of, but on
your part he is glorified.

Where as Christ is preached, there is also always, a Judas, an Annas
Cayphas, Pilate, Herod, and the cross. By them is it seen, where the Gospel
is preached. Now let every man beware that he suffer not as a malefactor, i.
Pe. iiij
that has deserved it. Thus says Peter, Se that none of you suffer as a
murderer, or as a thief, or an evil doer, or as a busy body in other men's
matters, If any man suffer as a Christen man, let him not be ashamed, but let
him glorifye God on his behalf.

Romans v
Paul says to the Romans, we rejoice in tribulation. For we know that
tribulation brings patience, Patience brings experience, experience
brings hope, and hope makes not ashamed.

Jacob, i.
Item James layth. My brethren count it exceeding joy, when ye fall into
diverse temptations, for as much as ye know, how that the tryenge of your
faith brings patience, and let patience have her perfect work, that ye may
be perfect and sound lackyng nothing.

Paul does only rejoice and boaste him self, of the infirmities, ij. Co. ij.
rebukes, need, persecutions, and anguyshe which he suffered for Christ's sake.

And how should not be conforted hearing the fatherly voice of Christ,
Matt. v
where he says to his discyples. Blessed are they which suffer persecution
for ryghteousnes sake, for theyrs is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed are ye,
when men reuyle you, and persecute you, and falsely say all manner of evil
sayenges against you for my sake.

In the Acts of the Apostles says Luke, Actu. v
that Peter and the discyples at Jerusalem when they had been imprisoned and
beaten and let go again, departed from the council reioysyng that they were
counted worthy to suffer rebukes for the name of Jesus Christ.


There is no right joy, that has any continuance, but only the joy of a
pure conscience, all other joy of this present time, and of these temporal
corruptyble things does soon vanyshe away, and is mixte with much sorrow
and bitterness, and has the sorrow upon her back, for the same joy is of a
creature. Now no creature continues immutable, but wauereth to and fro as the
wynd. When any thing is taken from the, or altered, wherein thou had
delight joy and pleasure, than art thou sorry, and heavy, now no creature
contynueth with the always, but she is taken from the, or else thou art
separated from her. Therefore is there no permanent Joy upon earth, in all
creatures, or things created.

The sorrow and joy of the spirit and of the flesh, have a great
difference: not only the sorrow for the creatures sake, but also such
temporal Joy, has smarte and damage. Contrarywyse, not only the spiritual
joy, but also the spiritual sorrow, has pleasure and profit. Therefore says
Paul I now rejoice, ij. co, vij
not that ye were sorry, but that ye so sorowed, that ye repented. For ye
sorowed godly, so that in nothing ye were hurt by us. For godly sorrow
causes repentance unto salvation, not to be repented of, but worldely sorrow
causes death.

A right Christian reioyseth in nothing, but only in his Lord Christ and
this is a right steadfast joy, which may withstonde all adversities, for she
ha^geth not upon any waueryng creature, but upon him, which is the Joy of the
Angels, and takes away all the sorrow and gronynges of his servants, as he
says in John. Ioh. xvi
I will se you again, and your hertes shall rejoice, and your joy shall no
man take from you. To this pure bodily Joy, Phi. iiij
does Paul exhort his Philippians, saying, rejoice in the Lord always, and
again I say rejoice.

A right Christian soroweth for nothing but only for sin, whereby he has
offended his most dear Lord, Therefore when he is persecuted, then soroweth
he more for the sin of the persecutoure, then for his own redukes and
hurtes, he sees that his enemy does and handeleth so cruelly and wilfully
against the Godly majesty, and before he persecuteth another, has he sinned
in God, and hurt him self most perniciously in the soul. And the vpryght
Christen man thinks, I have full well deserved all persecutions for my sins
sake, but O Lord how comes he to this that he must be an instrument of the
godly judgment, and offend God in me wretched sinner, and has compassion
upon his even Christen, and prays unto God for him, because that he knows
not what he does.


There is two manner of peace. The temporal or worldly peace is, when a man
has no disquietnes of any man and stands in certaynte of his life. The
spiritual peace, is certeynte of the heart which no man has, but only a
Christen faithful heart through faith, for it knows and perceyueth, that it
has escaped the most dangerous battle, and the greatest damage, namely the
everlasting wrath of God, and is through Christ made sure, against the fear of
sin, death and hell, and unto him is now persecution, sickness, and
sufferyng in earth, yea death, and whatsoever the world counts, to be
horrible and fearful, a small matter, which he regards not, so ioconde,
peaceable, and sure is his heart unto him. This is the quiet heart which is a
continual feast, as Solomon says. Pro. xv
This is that peace, which the world can not give, neither can she take it
away with all her inimity and rumor, it passes al minds and understanding
as Paul says. The peace of God, Phil. iiij
which passes all understanding, keep your hertes and minds in Christ
Jesus. And to the Ephesians. Ephe. ij Romans v
He is our peace. Item to the Romans. Because therefore through Christ, when
God is a merciful father, and so continues, then desires she no further.

Therefore did the Prophets name the kingdom of Christ, a kingdom of
salvation, Esaye xxxij.
For thus says Esaias. And the reward of ryghteousnes shall be peace, and her
fruit rest and quietness for ever. And my people shall dwell in the innes of
peace, and in sure dwellynges, in safe places of conforte.

The word of God brings this spiritual peace, and destroys the body of
Behemoth, but the carnal peace it brings not, for it is a word of the cross,
and not of the wicked voluptuous life upon earth. Therefore shall no man
merueyll, that through the preaching of the clear, pure and sincere word of
God, ryseth contencion and discord, for it is his nature and propertye to
separate the good from the evil, like as the fire does separate the copper
from the gold.

Therefore know not the enemies of GODS word, what they speak, when they
say, yea what good comes by the preaching that is used now a days, it
causes nothing but discord and sedition. I say dear friend, thou
understand not the matter a right, It ought to be so, It is a blessed
discord, when the elect embrace the word of God, and will not have their
porcyon with the ungodly. It can be none other wise. i. Cor. xi
For this way must the right Christians be known and tried. It was even so,
likewise in the primityue Church. The Christians which did receive the gospel,
separated themselves from the Gentyls, and would not err with the great
multitude. It stood never better with the church, then when every day some
shed their blood, for the knoweledgyng of the holy name of Christ, as
Cyprian says, and this do we learn out of the words of Christ, whereas he
speaks. Luc. xij.
I am come to kindle fire upon earth, notwithsto^ding I must be baptized, with
a baptism, and how am I payned till it be ended, what is my desire but that it
were all ready kyndled. Suppose ye that I am come to send peace on earth. I
tell you nay, but rather debate. For from hence forth there shall be five in
one house divided, three against two, and two against three. The father shall be
divided against the son and the son against the father, The mother against
the daughter, and the daughter against the mother, The mother in law against
her daughter in law, and the daughter in law against her mother in law.

Ebr. iiij
The two edged swearde of the holy ghost, which enters through, even unto the
diuidinge a sonder of the soul and the spirit, and of the joints and the
Mary, and judges the thoughts and the intentes of the heart, is now abroad,
Therefore let noman merueill at the dissension, which now is every where. The
inward peace can not be well, without such an owtewarde battle.


Man had in Paradise, in the state of innocencye, a free will. There upon
sounds the saying in the wise man. But after the time that Adam had sinned,
Eccl. xv
did also the spirit of god forsake man, In so much that he became hole
blind, ignorant and erroneous and the Scripture does call him after the first
birth, flesh. Genesis vi
Not because only the comprehensyble power, is prone to evil, and is carnal,
but because the body and soul, through the poison of sin, is hole infected
and made unclean. In so much that man from his first birth, through al his
natural power can do nothing but sin.

The Scripture calls the heart impure, The heart is unclean. Heb. xij Ge,
viij mar. vij
what goodness and pureness can then be in man. He must be borne a new, else is
he hole unprofitable and nothing but flesh, that is prove to things
terrestrial, and al evil, he seeks not after God? he regards him not:
neither holds he of him. Even thus does the Scripture conterfayte him. To.
viij
Saint Paul speaks to the Romans, They that are carnal, are carnally
minded, but they that are spiritual are goostely minded, they that are given
to the flesh, can not please God. For the flesshely mind is enemitie against
God, for it is not obedient to the law of God, nether can be. Augustyne.
Therefore called Augustine (in the second book, against Julian the heretic)
the will of man, a bond will, Ioh. viij
according to the words of Christ in John, who so ever commits sin is
the servant of sin.

Liberty of the will.
How be it this will may be made free again, through the grace of God. For
thus is it contained even in the same place of John. If the son shall make
you free, Ioh. viij
then are ye free in deed. The son of God Christ, has purchased again for
us, the spirit and grace of God, If we believe, than may we and can do good
again. Notwithstondynge it must all be asscribed unto the grace of God which
works in us, and nothing appropriated to our own natural power or
workinge, whereof the will is also partly named to be an occasion of the good
work, as the miserable Sophistes seduce the world.

In Paul is it written on this wise. ij. Co. iij
We are not sufficient of our selves, to think any thing, as it were of our
selves, but our ablenes comes of God. If then we can think no good of our
selves, why presume the Sophistes by the power of the free will to do any good?

Thus says Paul, It is God, Phili. ij
which works in you, both the will and also the deed. i. Co. xv
Even so does he speak also in another place, I labored more abundantly,
then all the other, not I, but the grace of God which is with me. Even so do
all saynctes asscribe all goodness only to God, and knoweledge them selves, as
an instrument of the Godly grace, saye^ge with David, Not unto us O lord, Psa.
cxv
Not unto us, but unto thy name give the praise.

Item, John. iij
A man can receive nothing at all, except it be given him from heaven.

Item. John. vi
No man can come to me except the father, which has sent me, draw him. And
of such like is the Scripture full.

Therefore is it even as much, when any man boasts of his free will, that he
of him self may begin to do any good, before grace, and to obtain the
grace by works. As if a man should boaste much of a Castle that were brent
and al destroyed with shutyng of ordinance, whereas only were left the place,
with broken walls, where as the towers were fallen down, and no defense left
at all, and yet would presume to keep it perforce. A broken Castle has yet
the old name, that men say. There stands such a Castle, but it has not
the first strenght and power, as it had, when it was yet standing, and had
strong towers, sure walls, good and broad dyches. Even so has our will
only the name and tittell, that he is called the free will. But he is not in
deed, until the grace do make him free But if h^ be so free as they suppose,
how comes it then to pass, that Paul was not able to do what he would, why
did he serve the sin, To. vij.
which notwithstanding he hated.

Behold the chosen vessel of God Paul, complayneth that he is in bondage
under the law of sin, and the ungodly Sophistes, grant to a sinner that he
has a free will. If he be so free, as they make him, why pray we then.
Hallowed be thy name. Thy will be done. Do we that for this cause, that our free
will so much the better and easyer may do good, as the abominable heretics
called Pelagians, affirmed. No, truly, Pelagians.
if we pray, then is it a sign, that we have it not in our possibilite.

Therefore when we read, that the old fathers, defend the free will, tha^ must
we understand, that they will declare and teach, that the will may receive
freedom, and not that he is free of himself. But he may be turned unto the
good through grace, and become free in deed, where unto he was shapen, that he
may do the commandments of God, which else without the grace were
impossible to keep, for he can do nothing of him self but sin. But in the
grace are they possible to be kept of him, as Paul says. Phil. iiij The
co^mandementes of God are impossible to be kept.
I can do all things thorough the help of Christ, which stre^gteth me. Jerome
speaks well, Accurseth be he that says, that the commandments of God are
impossible to us. They are not hole impossible, for they were else given unto
us in vain, but in our power without the grace of God, they are impossible,
but unto God are all things possible.


Mat. v
The Sophistes have taught for a great season, what Christ Matthei in the fyfte
did teach, as to love the enemies, not to resist wrong, not to strive before
the judge, neither to go to law, to turn the other cheke, to love without
reward, and such like. That they are good counseylles, unto those that will
be perfect Christians, how be it, if any man do it not, that nevertheless he
is without danger of his salvation. And that Christ did here only give good
counsel (that is he has conseilled it only) and not commanded. This is not
true. For look upon the text with his circumstaunces, then shall thou see, and
learn, that they be pure commandments of God, which he requires of us
upon pain of losing his grace and assistence. But they are the false
Prophets, of whom God speaks in Ezechiel. Eze. xiij
They deceive the people, and tell them of peace, where as there is no peace.
They preach and teach, that whosoever does not the above mentioned points,
shall not peryshe therefore.

Confession.
There is an Evangelical Confession, Matthew. xviij.
as Christ says in Mat. if thy brother trespace against the. Go and tell him
his fault between him and the alone, if he hear the, Thou have won thy
brother. But if he hear the not, then take yet with the one or two, that in
the mouth of two or three witnesses, all things may be stablyshed. If he
hear not them, tell it unto the congregation. If he hear not the
congregation, take him as an heathen man, and as a publican. That was an open
Confession. i, Tim. v
Thus says S. Paul, Against an elder receive none accusation, but under two
or three witnesses.

At that time were the open crimes and blasphemies heard and examined, with
wetnesses and accusers, until the time, that such as were guilty were known
and reproved. And this Confession, has been kept by the law of God, of the
twelve Apostles, and of their successors and of this confession must the
fathers be understand, as Augustyne, Ambrose, Jerome, Gregory. But the
confession which is done secretly in the ear, is not grounded in the
scripture. I do not reiecte it, but it greueth me, that it is come to such
abomination and compulsion, that men be driven and compelled there to against
their will, and are betrayed, where by they come in hazard of their lives.
Ite^ makes evil entangled desperate consciences.

Merits or Deseruynge.
Deserving is a proud word, Luc. xvij
When ye have done all those things which are commanded you, say, we are
unprofitable servants, We have done that which was our duetye to do.

Christ is our savior, and has done all things for our salvation, not for
any lucre or deserving, but because it was the fathers pleasure. And so
should we do also, we should not serve God for any lucre or profit, as the
servants their masters, but free as the children their father of free love,
not thinking how great things we deserve, but how well we please the good
will of God.

Deseruynge
Deseruyng is not to do any good, to the intent, to deserve ought thereby, as the
Seducers of souls have taught hitherto, to the abominable undoing and
destruction of the world, but to deserve or to merit, that is, with a syngle
heart, willyngly without respect of reward or deserving, to obey the will
of God, for love seeks not her own, i. Co xiij
as Paul says, But deseruynge and reward follow and come of them selves,
without our seeking, out of the obedience, which I do to the godly will.


We have one right, good, true shepeherde, which has given his precious life
for us, that is Jesus Christ. In John says he. John. x.
I am a good shepeherde. He is the door of the sheep, whosoever enters not at
this door, is a thief and a murderer. He is our arche shepeherde, i. Pet. v
Ioh. xxi
and the sheep are his own, and none of ours, In John says Christ to Peter.
Feed my sheep. He says not thine. Whosoever endeavors him self to follow
the voice of the shepeherde, the same shall not be devoured of the wolf
infernal, but shall be well and surely preserved.

There be many hired servants, Phil. ij.
but few shepeherdes, they seek all their own and not that which is Jesus
Christ's, as Paul says. The under shepeherdes should feed with the word of
God syncerely and purely, But they make additions, and teach us man's
doctrine, through the which the soul does hungre spiritually. Man's doctrine
brings money, but Gods doctrine brings persecution. Therefore will noman
truly take the Gospel in hand. mat. xvi
Christ has given us warning of such in Matt. Beware of the Leven of the
Pharisees and of the Saduces, that is, of me^nes traditions.

Thereof read further, Deuteronomy. iiij. Prouer. xxx Esaye. xxxix. Matthew. xv.
xxiiij. Marc. vij. Luc. xvij. Gal. i. Colloss. ij. i. Timot. iiij. Tit. i.
And.i. Pe. ij. If thou will see with what color the Scripture does
counterfaite, and paynte the wicked shepeherdes, then read Ezechiel. xiij. and
xxxiiij. Jeremy. xxiij. Esaye. iij. Michee. iij, To the Philippians iij.

Conclusyon.
AT the last will I admonyshe charitably every good Christian, that he will
beware and take good head, in this last perilous time, wherein Ante Christ
has also his predication, and shows his miracles, and that he will earnestly
read the Bible him self, with humility, and not with presumption, Whereas
the spirit of God opens any thing unto him, let him be thankful. And
whereas any thing is to hard for him, there let him not judge rasshely, and
put no doubts in it but that all thing is well and good, written by the
spirit of God, which can not err. But the fault is in our selves. Moreover,
one day teaches another, what soever thou understand not to day, the same
brings the day of to morrow with him. The holy scripture will not be read as
other books, thou may not rasshely, and with vnwassheth hands (as the
common Proverb sounds) fall into it, but with a precedent devout prayer,
and yeldynge of thy self, that God may work in the, and that thou will not
understand the Scripture after thine own brain, or bring an interpretation
in the Scripture after thine own phantasy, but that thou may seek it even
there, and be taught of god in the right high scoole of the holy Ghooste, and
gladly inquire of the learned, and learn without arrogancye and curiosite.
There must needs be good experience of the language and the spirit, if a man
will truly handle with the scripture. For the one helps the other. i. co.
xiij.
Paul will, that a man shall here know the language, and prophecye.

Therefore let not him that is not very expert in languages, be rasshe and
presumpteous to judge in the scripture, how does it agree, that men ha^dell the
relics of Saynctes with so great reverence, and honorablenes, and handel so
rasshely or indiscreetly the right and true relics, that is the word of God,
which the son of God has confirmed and stablysshed by his holy blood, and
whereby we be all made ryghteous and holy.

How be it, thou shall not therefore be abolished, thinking that, to read,
and to know the scripture, pertains only to prestes.

Mat. vi
It is the word, whereby thy soul make live, whereby thou art made a Christen
man. We are called all together, to one kyngedom of heaven, and inheritance
of God.

There is one Baptism, Ephesians. iiij
one word, and one faith. We must al know, what God requires of us.

Therefore as dear as thy soul, health, and salvation is unto the, even so
earnestly let the word of God be committed unto the. It preuayleth nothing
unto the, that thou say. I will continue in my fathers belefe. The belefe of
our forefathers
Paraduenture thy father was taught that he should be made righteous by
works, that he should institute many soul masses, build Churches, and that
then all were well. If thou should find thy father in hell, thou should
find an evil finding. The sun of ryghteousnes Jesus Christ is risen, the
holy Gospel is purely and syncerely preached, he that now opens not his
eyes, and shuts the truth without the doors, shall surely find himself
deceived.

If Sayncte Paul would have believed as his father, and the great multitude,
then should he have believed, that without the bodily circumsion no man could
be saved, what case had he been in thou. If my father had believed, that
whatsoever a Bishop did institute or ordeyne, were the holy Gospel, should I
therefore follow him in this error. Christ my hope and redemption save me from
so doing, which vouchesafe through the quickenyng spirit to teach us his
scripture him self, that we may understand the unspeakable riches of his
grace. AMEN.

Whosoever says, I will believe as my father has done before me, and will not
be instructed and infourmed to hear the Gospel, the same will not know the
truth, and paraduenture Christ will not know him also, therefore shall he
stand to his own danger, unto him is the Sun risen in vain, he is blind
and a block, or he fears the truth of the Gospel, he fears that he
should be feign to be good. His evil works are espied in in the clear light
of the Gospel, which he has covered with men's traditions. This is then as
Christ says, John. iij
the condemnation, that the light is come into the world, and the men loved
darkness more then light. Every man that does evil hates the light.

Thou will say unto me, The Gospel has be^ darkened with men's doctrine.
The Gospel has always ben preached. But I say nay to it. The text might
well be told unto the, which afterward was so darkened with men's gloses, that
the Gospel, that is, the glad tidings was made a heavy tidings unto the. For
they have only taught, and preached many institutions, but the conforte in the
Scripture was hydden, namely the inenarrable treasure of grace purchased unto
us by Christ. They have not taught Christ but Antichrist. Thou have not ben
set from thy self unto Christ, that thou might have learned, wherefore
Christ is given unto the. Item to know the secrets of the Gospel, and what
is the right peace and joy of al hertes and consciences, but we have been
brought and leadde from Christ upon and into our selves, that we should be
justified and saved by the works of our free will. O Lord, what misery and
calamite have we ben brought up in, and in what great unquietness. For the
conscience can never be, in quiet, sure and content, if she must be justified
by works. She can never be sure in what case she stands with God, as Paul
declares. To. iiij. Gal. iij.
But this is unto a troubled conscience a great conforte when she hears that
man is not justified by works, but by the faith in Jesus Christ. This is the
right preachinge of the Gospel.

Romans iij iiij. Gal. ij Romans iij iiij. and v Ge. xv.
Like as our father Abraham was justified before God, even so must we be
justified also. The scripture calls him a father of all beleuers, and says
in the first book of Moses, Abraham believed God, and it was counted unto him
for ryghteousnes. And so does Paul drive it always every where: we are
justified by faith. This shall thou understand thus for a conclusyo^.

Two manner of faith
We have two manner of beleuynges or knoweledges of Christ. The one is called an
Actual knoweledge. As, when I have readde and know in the scripture, that
CHRIST is GOD and man, Likewise as I believe, that Aristotell was scoole
master to great Alexander, and this goes not earnestly to the heart. I believe
it, as an other historye or act. Such a knoweledge or cold faith of Christ
does not iustifye me, for the ungodly believe this also, and the Deuyls have
this faith also, it is a dead faith with out works, as S. James says. Iaco.
ij
and it is of none effect. Where as no good works follow, there is also no
faith, but only an Ipocrisie in the heart without faith or confidence
toward God. The christen faith
But the right Christian lively faith is a strong trust and confidence in the
promise of God, as that Christ is given for me, that Christ does wassh away
my sins, that Christ quickens me, and this is the right Eua^gelical faith,
which only iustifyeth man, This is only that faith, which is counted of God
for our righteousness. I speak here in comparison between faith and works,
Otherwise knows every man well enough how that God, Christ, the spirit,
and sacrament does justify. But the works seem they or be they never so good
or holy, yet are they not counted for righteousness.

But if faith do grafte and plant us in Christ our lord, then are we made
righteous and therefore will god also count us for righteous.

And so does Paul set it forth very goodly to the Galathians, Gal. iij.
God has promised us justification, and life through Christ. The promise is
believed
Now is a promise believed, or only obtained through faith, therefore be we
also justified only by faith. Like as no man despises a man's testament, or
adds any thing thereto, nor takes any thing from it, even so may nothing
be subtracted from the Testament of God, neither any thing added thereunto.
Now has God ordained, given and appointed life in the Testamente, unto all
beleuers, without respect of any manner of works, for naught, There out
follows that we are not counted just, for any works sake, but only thorough
faith. Gal. iij. and.iiij. To. iiij.
Have in mind the Epistles to the Galathians, and to the Romans, there shall
thou find, that a Christen man, sets his conscience at rest and quiet,
only by faith. The right hollsome doctrine of the Gospel concerning the
right lively faith, is an only conforte and stablysshynge of the conscience,
against death, sin, and hell.

I know very well that the right spiritual Evangelical doctrine, will be at
the first somewhat strange to a man that begins to learn it after the
scripture of the scolers, and after their carnal doctrine. i. Cor. ij
For as Paul says. The natural man perceaueth not the things of the spirit
of God. For they are unto him but foolyshenes, neither can he perceive them,
because he is spiritually examined. It will not sauoure very well unto the at
the first. For thine understanding is yet full of Fantastical Imaginations
of men's dreams. But take thine understanding captive, to the glory of
Christ in faith, then shall the holy spirit of God declare him self unto
the, and teach the a right, such things, as no high scoole teaches. And
this is the cause that now a days slighte and simple persons are found,
which through the maistery of the spirit of God, understand and expound the
Scripture better then great Doctors, and break and pluck down by the
Spiritual armours of our Cheualrye, all high worldely wisdom, which
exalts her self against knoweledge of God.

It is a great error to think that the knoweledge of the scripture perteyneth
only to the prestes, that wear Crounes, long gowns, and whose fyngers are
anointed. No my friend, the time is now at hand, where of Esaye says. Esa.
iiij.
That the science comes not only out of the hye scooles, as has been thaught
hitherto, but the Christians are taught of GOD himself, as it is contained in
Saint John.

It is not necessary that men read Aristotell, Plato, Ioh. vi
and other books of the heathen, for the right understanding of the scripture,
as thus long they have borne us in hand.

The Apostles read never a heathen master, they were also no such doctors,
as now a days are made in the universities, but simple people. Now if the
holy ghost could instruct them the Euangelical truth with out the help of
the heathen Philosophye, Scotistrye, The holy ghost teaches gods word
and other men's books, truly then can he also him self open and teach now
a simple and humble lay man. The right understanding of the godly scripture.

God regards him, Esaye lxvi i. Pet. v
that is poor and of a lowly troubled spirit, and receives his godly words
with reverence and stands in awe thereof, as Esaye writes.

He resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble. The holy Saint
Bernarde learned his science through his devout prayer under the Oken trees.

Aristotell and other heathen, which are taught, do hinder and destroy man's
understanding so pituously, that a man becomes so much the more unapt, to
receive and perceive the Godly wysedom in the scripture. For man's wisdom,
and the Godly scripture, Esa. lv.
do nothing agree together as Esaye declares very goodly. All worldly
Philosophy for the most part has her beginnynge, out of man's wit and
interpretation. For as much now, as the same is carnal, and blinded thorough
sin, so is she dark, and errynge, and understands of her self nothing
but that which is carnal, and knows nothing groundely of spiritual
things, and of GOD.

Therefore when the heart of man is void quyte, not hyndered of such heathen
sciences, and me^nes dreams then is it more apt to receive the godly doctrine
and wisdom, then wha^ it is encombred and entangled, with such fantasies,
invented of man, The wisdom of man whereof they boaste him selves highly, is
terrestrial, carnal, and deuelysshe, Iaco. iij. Colo. ij.
as James elegantly declares. And Paul warns us for man's wisdom,
saying. Beware lest any man come, and spoil you thorough Philosophy and
deceatfull vanity, thorough the tradicions of men, and ordinances after the
world, and not after Christ.

The Philosophy and man's wit and exposition, is clean contrary to our
faith, as it is evident and clear enough among the learned, neither can they
agree together. Therefore let the lay people be of good chere and take no
thought for it, because they have not studied in great universities, but with
humilite, and pure heart and high reverence, read the costely treasure of holy
scripture, both Testamentes, and pray unto Christ for the right
understanding, which has the keep of David. Apo. iij
The knoweledge of the Scripture, is a littel deuyed unto the, as unto the
most excellent doctor of all. Omelia upon John.
Even so taught the holy Chrysostom his people also at Constantinoble.

The Pharisees despised the common people, and thought also that they should
know the truth alone, and said, Ioh. vij.
The common people, which know not the law are cursed. Even so say they
now likewise, How should have taught it unto the plowemen, as though all
science did come from the hye scoles. But I ask them this question, My
masters, I pray you how taught the common simple people that they held more
of Christ, then the chief priests and scribes.

It is evident, that the common people had always a righter judgment, and
better knoweledge of Christ then the chief lords at Jerusalem as Chrysostom
writteth.

FINIS.
Psalm. lxviij. Let God arise, and let his enemies be scattered, let them also
that hate him fly before him.

Imprinted for Gwalter Lynne, dwelling upon Summers kaye, by Byllinges gate. In
the year of our Lord. M.D.XLVIII. And they by to be sold at Poules church
yard at the North door, In the sign of the Bybell. By Richard Judge.

Cum Gratia et Priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

Seek peace and ensueit. Psalm. xxxiij. i. Petr. iij. printer's device of
Walter Lynne

Psalm. C. xi. Proverb. ix.

The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom.


