An inuectiue against vices, taken for Virtue. Gathered out of the scriptures,
by the unprofitable servant of Jesus Christ, Richard Rice.

Roma. xiij. Let us cast away the deeds of darkness, and let us put on the
armor of light. Hieronimus. Let men first read, and despise it afterward,
least they seem to condemn unknown things, by no right judgment, but
rather of a presumpteous hatred. Read and judge. But condemn not before ye
read.

Imprinted at London by Ihon Kyngston, for Henry Kirckham,

To the Christian Reader, Robert Crowley wishes the direction of Gods holy
spirit.
BEing requested to pervse this Inuectiue against small vices: I have
diligently weighed the reasons that the author has used, and do find that
such as are delited in those small vices, that he enueigheth against, may
take some aduau^tage to calumniate the aucthours doing, for that he seems to
enueigh against these small vices, as against deeds so forbidden of God, that
the very deed done, is sin of it self, and that the doer of any of those
deeds, must needs be accounted a sinner, with what mind so ever he have d^^n
it. But as the vauntage may be taken by the ungodly persons, that would
feign have liberty to spend their whole time in idleness and vanity: so the
godly minded shall have occasion to flee from all unlawful gainenyng, and to
seek such recreation when need shall require, as may stand with the laws of
their country, and tend to the glory of GOD. I have therefore thought it my
duty, in these few words, to admonish the reader of the profit, that he
may take by the readyng hereof. First, he shall be put in remembrance of
that profession, that he has made in his Baptism, which is to forsake all
the vanities of this wicked world: and that the whole course of a Christian
man's life, should be a continual walkyng in the way of the spirit, and
fleyng from the way of the flesh. Secondly, he shall be occasioned to seek
to know, what the works of the flesh be, and what be the works of the
spirit: and to bend himself rather to go out of the way on the right side,
then on the left, and rather to walk in the most rough and narrow way that
leads to life, then in the broad way that leads to death and destruction.
Last of all, he shall see plainly painted out, the fondenesse of the reasons
that the fleshly minded men use, in maintainyng their leude liberty, in
riotous and unlawful gamenyng. The lord Jesus guide us al by his holy
spirit: so that the flesh being fully mortified in us, we may walk in the
spirit all the days of this life, and after the end thereof, enjoy that
endless glory that he has promised to such. AMEN.

To the Christian Reader.
WHere as in the notable works of many famous men (most christen reader
(many things in these our latter age, have been searched out, no less
necessary then godly, to the information of the congregation. ^^th. xxiiii.
That the Saints might have all things, meet to work withal, to the
edification of the body of Christ. ^^esi. iiii.
While many things have been necessarily ransaked: other things very meet
have been omitted: the which in the sacred word of God, are sore reprehended
as whoredom, murder, or theft. ^^a. viiii
Not as though I, as a singular person, would of mine own capacity and
wit, now at length, take in hand to correct Magnificat, or to pike out the
Crows eyes. But according to the talente that God has committed unto me. ^ma.
xii.
Seeing vice so rise, and dampnable before God. And i. Corinth. v
no less dangerous, to the open report of the conscience of Christian
beleuers (to whom only, with obscure brightness, I commit this little
treatise (thought my duty no less then somewhat to say, in the reformation
of such wickedness. ii. Timo. iiii
How truly and meetely, let the word of God record. To the which (good
Christian Reader) I wholly commit thee, with the increase of his knowledge.
Amen.

The Lord Jesus Christ, the son of the everlasting God, the restorer of all
purity, give us grace to live innocently in his sight. Ame^.
GOD the mighty maker of things, by his power and word (that is his
well-beloved son and our savior Christ Jesus) intending for his pleasure
only, to fashion that noble creature, and of most delectation in all the
works of his hands, said as the scripture witnesses: let us make man unto
our own similitude and likeness. Gene. 1.
In these two words, similitude, and likeness, knifyng or couplyng manne
unto him self, disceueryng him far both in knowledge and living from the
other works of his making, for as much as he ordained all other things for
his commodity and pleasure, to obey and serve him, and that he should serve,
and be obediente to none of them all, but only to his creator and maker, the
celestial God of heaven and earth, unto whose similitude, and likeness he is
made, in that he is made unto his likeness it certifieth us that he is invested,
and endued with the knowledge, and understanding of Gods benevolence toward
him, and with affections obsequious unto reason, kindeled with the Lantern of
Gods bright countenance, as to know where as a little before, he was but a
vile piece of earth, and the dounge of the filthy ground, that he is now
made of that caranous yearthly slime, a creature most noble and worthy, not
made unto the likeness, either of the earth, or water, either of fish or
foul, either of Angel, or Archaungell, but only unto the likeness of his
Lord GOD in memory, understanding, and pure will, the which he bestowed unto
the glory of his God that made him, and not in vain trifles, musinges of
folly, fantasies of a transitory and waueryng mind, and that shows well
the word that follows, that is, that manne was made to his similitude,
certifiyng us that manne, beside that he was indewed with the Image of his lord
God, with the properties before recited, yet notwithstanding, in as much as
man representyng his Lord GOD in similitude, is not only endued with these
noble gifts: as memory, understanding, pure will, after the Image of his
maker, but also with most excellent, and higheste virtues after his
similitude, as with original Justice, which is else nothing, saving the
innocence of a pure godly life, and a Religion of righteousness, newly
ingraffed in his heart, toward his Lord God, and a pure obedience unto his
commandments, with a single eye to his neighbors profit, with the which
properties is he right made unto the similitude of his Lord God, according to
the saying of the holy Ghost in the third book of Moises: Leuiti. 11.
Be ye holy, for I am holy, now is it manifest with what comely qualities,
man is like his Lord God, both in Image, and in similitude, and thus adourned
with these Godly ornaments and graces, he appoincted a place for him to
exercise these noble virtues, and that they should not through slothfulness
dye in him, as things of small estimation and worthiness, and so sent him
into Paradise. What to do there? To Bowl, or to play at Dise, or Cards,
Penipricke, or slipthrift? Were these noble gifts of no higher worthiness,
then to be bestowed in such trifles of folly? Is the memory that his Lord
God gave him to use, to the remembrance of his first making, no better worth
then to be exercised, in packyng of a card or setting of a Dye, or deliueryng
of a Bowl, or inuentyng of craft to deceive his neighbor? For these or
such like trifles, did not God prepare Paradise for Ada^, with his notable
gifts, and in earnest, to profess the truth, it is to much shame, to
grant these goodly gifts to be received at the hands of the most pure,
and glorious God, and so wickedlie both against Gods blessed pleasure, and
the utility of our neighbor to be used, for our GOD prepared Paradise for
Adam to work in, says the text. Gene. 2*
Is Bowlyng woorkyng? Is Card plaiyng woorkyng? Is the blasphemy of Gods
most holy name a woorkyng? Yea, and meet for Paradise. Is craft, disceiyte,
guile, and dissimulation, a work fit for him that should enter into
Paradise? If these vices and such like, be not found in gamenyng, beside
changing of the color: sighyng from the heart, for the loss of a pilde
halfpenie, more then for the vain taking of Gods blessed name, with the
whorlyng of the Pottes about the house, the Cards into the fire, the Dice
under the feet, where shall ye find the^? In gamening I say, and not in
working, and for this cause did God ordain Paradise for manne to work in,
endued with all these Godly qualities, meet to enter into such a worthy
place, and there at his pleasure to exercise them to the honor of his Lord
GOD. But a lack for pity, long did no man continue in this godly state and
vocation, to occupy him self in Gods Commandments, for, forthwith did
the Serpente (disdainful of man's felicity) blow such blaste^ into his
fleshely ears, that he set a side his Lords will, and gave attendaunce, and
listened to the voice of the Serpent, and in a momente, he lost quite all
these Godly gifts, wherewith he was made unto the Image, and similitute of
his Lord God, and was redacte to such penury and beggerie, that he had
nothing left him but shame only, and had not (as the common saying is) one
good poinct about him, and thus he ran away from the presence of his Lord
GOD, and the farther he ran, the worse he was, and the more shame followed
him, for he had neither the shape nor similitude, that he received of his Lord
God to show him, as obedience, singleness of mind, pure abstinence from
carnal affections, original equity, true religion of his celestial father,
subjection of the heart. etc. But rather the similitude of the Serpente, as
shame, disobedience, presumption of stomach, to be like his lord God in
knowledge and understanding, ready to clime up to heaven by folly, breakyng of
his couenaunte with such like shameful, and wicked enormities, what remeadie
now to restore this lost Image again? Which is the way to obtain this
deformed similitude, to his pristine and former shape again? Is idleness the
way? Is phansiyng the way? Is the way by plaiyng, and sportyng, or resting
of thy weary bones, with the bones of a pair of Dice, or with a pair of
Cards (otherwise now called the books of life) and though it be spoken but
in iestyng, yet is it not altogether for naught, for the nature of some is to
rest more in them, and are more at quiet with the Ace, King, Queen, or
Varlet of Spades, then they can be with a Spade to dig or delue honestly
after Gods precepts for their living: yea, and delighte quietlier in the
Ace, King, Queen, or Varlette of the Hearts, then they do in the book of
life, regestered with the death of an unspotted Lamb, and sealed with the
blood of Christ, springyng from his tender heart, and they are the most part
(I say) very sorry that they have not wherewith to maintain such an idle
life continually, is this the way now to claim the Image and similitude lost
again? No, no, which is then the way? Surely Paul (moved by the spirit of
God) finds how to restore this lost Image again right well, ^^e. 4.
saying. So then, as concerning the conversation in time paste, lay from you
that old man which is corrupt through deceivable lusts, and be ye renewed
in the spirit of your minds, and put on that new man, which after the
Image of God, is shapen in righteousness and true holiness. Here have ye of
saint Paul the Image of GOD repaired again a right. Wherein think ye? in
deceivable lusts and phansiynges of the wanton flesh, after the Image of the
old man, corrupted by nature, no surely. But in righteousness says Paul,
well, is this then right that for my restitution and restoration performed in
Christ, I shall now quitte and recompense the same, with a pair of Cards or
Dice? I would also learn very feign whether such vain pastime belongs to
the old man, or to the new, if it pertain to the new man, then are we bound
in conscience continually to be plaiyng, carding, dicing, bowling, faring,
kailyng, or such like. For christ says plainly. John. xiii.
I have given you to an example, that ye do as I have done. i. Peter. ii.
Also Christ left us an example yt we should follow his foot steps, now
therefore, if these things pertayne to the new man fashioned after Christ,
show unto us clearly by the manifest Scriptures where we shall find them,
that we may follow christ in them. The text says plainly, that the new man
is fashioned to the Image of God in holiness. i. Peter. ii.
That as he which called you is holy, even so be ye holy in all manner of
conversation, all this way, yet find I none occasion to follow Christ in
such trifling fantasies. And to help the matter for the. Luke. ^^.
In his Gospel the first Chapter says, very godly on this wise, that we
being delivered out of the hands of our enemies, might serve him without fear
all the days of our life, in such holiness and righteousness as are accepts
before him: Peter says in all manner of conversation, we must be holy as
Christ is holy, but the old man says, for a fair touch and use it not,
we must some time bear with the weakness of our neighbor, and if we live
in the world, we must now and than dally with the world, the new man
says, fashion not your selves like unto this world. ^^m. xii.
And I would not advise thee, for the pleasure of this blind world, to follow
the folish appetite thereof, and so to be condemned with the world. Cor. ii.
Thou will say, I purpose not to remain in it, but pastime for a day or
two, and so to leave of. Well, thou dooest well to lay for thy self, and to
set Christ to scole, he says for thy deliverance out of thy enemies
hands, thou must serve him in holiness and righteousness all the days of thy
life, and thou as sum what wiser then he, will keep a day or two for thine
own pastyme, to serve thy worldely affection. Now then belike we can not
learn no such daliance or vain pastime to pertain to the Christen or new
man regenerate in Christ. For it is yet unproven, and the scriptures unsought,
and therefore on our part vnbeleued: therefore sore if ye will have be credit
them, prove it unto us by reason, and the sacred Scriptures, and lay them
plainly before us as we have done, and we will willingly receive it with
thanks, and till ye have so done, I pray you hold us excused though we
believe them not.

Then it seems most like, that such vain triflyng pastimes beelong to the
old man unacquainted with Christ and his word if it so be as it is in deed,
then the text commands us to lay them a side, and to have naught to do with
them. Col. iii.
Paul also in the spirit of GOD councelleth us to put from us all things, as
wrath, fearcenes, maliciousnes, cursed speaking, filthy speaking out of our
mouths. Now tell me I pray thee, where shall ye find more wrath,
displeasure, heart burning, hate, envy from the very heart, then ye shall do
in dicyng and cardyng? Yea it chances oftentimes, that two shall enter into
gamenyng, very good lovers and friends, and or ever their gamening be ended,
they shall be mortal enemies, and the one ready to revile the other so
spitfully, that it is a thousand to one if they part without blows. Than
follows straight ways such anger that runs into the danger of judgment,
and Racha. That is worthy of council, yea, and thou fool that is worthy of
Hell fire. ^^th. ^.
Ought not now gamenyng, which engendereth such incommoditie, and
inconvenience, to be avoided as a thing most dangerous, and most pestilent,
among them that profess the^ selves christians? Yea, ought not rather the
very Jews and infidels, the which are without all godly laws, saving only
the law of their conscience, excusing and accusyng them. ^^m. ii.
As their wickedness are enormious to shun such ungodly pastymes? yes truly
ought they, then much more thou being the professor of Christ's holy
Euangely, ought to be an abstayner from all things that have any show or
likelihoode of vice. As the good and true disciple of Jesus Christ. Saint
Peter testifies. ^. Peter. ii.
I beseech you brethren as Pylgrims and strangers to abstain from fleshely
lusts, which fight against the soul: and see that ye have honest
conversation among the Gentiles, that, they which backebite you as evil
doers, may see your good works, and praise God in the day of visitation. But
thou will perchance say, that I am to hard to reprehende that thing, that
may for an honest recreation be frequented, where as the company is sober,
and purposed of a gentle intent, secludyng blaphemie, riot, dro^kenship and
such like excess, only for the passing of time, to refreshe our wits. Well, I
hear thine excuse very well, my think thou call it an honest recreatio^,
and that I am to hard to reprehende such an honest recreation, if plaiyng at
cards or tables, scalyng or bowlyng, be such an honest recreation, I pray
thee for the love of God, find it out of the word of God, and show it me,
that I may also refreshe my self, and give thee thanks.

We have proved a little before, that they are such acts as appertain to the
old man. For we could not find them meet for them that were fashioned after
the Image of God, and so borne a new, and regenerate in Christ, and in as much
as they are the fears and beedes of the old man, call them by what name or
vocable so ever thou will, yet may not we for the honest term that thou
geuest unto it, receive the thing that is naught and wicked never the sooner:
for Paul calls it the old man corrupt through deceiuable lusts. ^^e. iiii.
And here Peter would have us as well acquainted with them, as a way faryng
man is in the country, that he never was acquainted or came in all his life
time, and calls them plainly, fleshly lusts, fightyng against the soul, he
would also we should have good works to show among the Heathen to praise God
with, in the days when thou shalt be circumuented of the enemies of Christ's
cross, and chauncest to be persecuted for thy masters sake, which he
calls the day of visitation, what will thou have to show for thy self?
shall any of these honest recreations, sober pastimes, refreshyng of the wit,
be taken then for good works? because thou geuest them honest names, no, no,
surely, Matthewe declares very plainly, Math. ^.
where he would have our good works for to shine before men, that they may
see our good works, and glory our father which is in heaven, and ye shall
find that he there speaks of the sacred Gospel with his works. Will ye see
what goodness ensues of your honest termed pastimes? first where do children
pitiously cry out for meat and drink and can not get it? forsooth, where
their father is given to Bowlyng, Di^^ng, or Cardyng, Tennis plaiyng, frailyng,
and such like. Where do servants lack work, and stand whirlyng their
knife about their fingers, and gasing idly about the streates and walls,
to occupy the whole half day in vain language? where their masters be
addicte to Bowlyng, Dicyng, Tables, Cards, Tennis-plaiyng, Scailyng with such
like. Where wanders women about the town middaie and midnight, with, wot ye
where my husband is? when se ye my good man? where might she best inquire for
her unthrifty husband? but where the man is given to such uncomely vices?

Where is the name of God wickedly blaspemed, but in such unmeet assemblies?
where is twelve pence spente before eight pence be earned? but in such
unlawful gamenyng? Where fly the ports about the house? where fall men
together by the ears? how come men into extreme poverty? when fall manne
and wife to sighyng and sorrowyng and startyng in their sleeps, and wryngyng
of their hands? but where is given to such excess in pastime? Where are fraies
raised? men stabbed in with wounds, and lie at their wives hands, which
has three or four children, and little work and small friends, and cold
charity? but where there is used such riote and excess in gamenyng. And will thou now say, that a christen man may exercise with a good conscience that
thing that all this mhischefe spryngeth on? seeing also they pertain to the
old man which we ought to put from us? and are called of Peter fleshely lusts
also, the which we must abstain from, look now and mark if thy honest
recreation, gentle pastime, and convenient refreshing of thy wit, with such
like comely terms, will make a wicked, a sinful, a detestable, a fleshelie
and corrupt thing good? No, no, it will not be: therefore I heartily beseech
thee (good christen reader) call me not an hard reprehender, for (before the
righteous God I speak it) I reprehende it none otherwise then I have a cause,
and no harder then thou thy self (if thou do right) ought for to do,
and I pray thee instantly desire God of his fatherly affection, i. Timo. ii.
in thy prayer, that he will grant to the compiler of this simple and rude
matter. Roma. i.
(Yet god he takes to his conscience faithful and true) that he will kindle
his heart i. Peter. i.
With his sacrifiyng spirit, that he may leave of (as he entendeth none
other) such vain and idle trifelyng. Also thou say where a sober company is
met, such pastimes may be used that makes me sore to muse, for I can not
think that sober company will take an vnsober matter in hand, yea though they
were as sober as ever was Abstemius, as constaunt as ever were the Rechabites,
in abstinence. ^em. xxxii.
As austere in living as ever was John the Baptiser. ^ath. xiii.
As circumspect as ever was Iosephe in Egypt under Pharao. ^^nesis. xli.
Yet if they should go about such trifles of follye, and occupy themselves
in phantasis, inhibit by the mouth of God, I can see in them no sobernes, no
wisdom, no circumspection. But rather folly, soberness, that is corrupt with
deceiuable lusts. The old man fashioned after the Devil, and not after the
Image of God. For what sober company can ye appointe me, that freque^tate
such vain pastimes, the which after the custom of the realm when they are
inhibite, are called unlawful games? Except dronkerdes, blaspemers, railers,
gesters, idle talkers, that parteine nothing to the matter. ^phe. v.
Be a sober company? except crafty deceivers, sulbtill workers, false
dissembles be a sober company? for mark the most honest gamesters that will
profess themselves before they enter into play by their false fidelity, that
they will play never a Card false, nor never an Ace wrong, and when they are
once entered into play, there shall be packyng of Cards, winkyng with the
eyes, blaryng out the tongue, renouncyng the Trompe and coming in again, and
when that disceite is spied, then shall they fall to reasonyng why he did so,
then will they have an answer why he has broke his promise, as though he
would have him keep his promise in a foolish matter, when he breaks his
promise daily in a weightier and more deeper matter made between God and his
neighbor, is not this good stuff think you? is not this meet for a sober
company? well go to, admit it be meet for a sober company, as to take
sober men for the discrete men of the world (for more honestlier can ye not
take sobernes) is it therefore (and speak of pure conscience) mete for a
christen company? I dare boldly say that the corrupt old man shall never
enter into the kingdom of heaven. Colos. iii. Ephe. iii.
And if these be the works meet for a christen company, then shall the
Christen company never come in heaven, and I marvel much also if these
works be so meet for a christen company, why Christ taught not his Disciples
such meet works, and the people also in the heavenly Sermon that he made in
the Mountain. ^ath. v.vi.vii.
Where he blessed the poor in spirit, the mourners, the meek, the hungry
and thirsty for rightousnes, the merciful, the pure in heart, the peace
makers, the sufferers of persecution for his names sake, he blessed the^ also
which were reviled, and suffered all manner evil sayings for his names sake,
these with such like were the works which he blessed. But I here not in
this place that he blessed, either Cards, or Dice, Counters to play at
Pen^pricke with, or paysed Groates to play at slipthrifte, Tennis balls or
bowls horse bones for scailes, nor knives for muggle prick, nor Shaftes to
darte over Beams in rainie days? No, neither Dicers nor Carders, Penipricke
plaiers, nor Slidethrifters, Scailers, nor Darters, Tennis plaiers nor muggle
prickers, but if they had been works meet for a christen company, he would
not have forgotten them no more then they did the other. But what was the
occasion that he remembered not the last works in his sermon, as well as he
did the first? Look and search the Chapiters (I pray thee) and thou shall
manifestly see that the former works (which are meet in deed for a christen
company) have the promises of the kingdom of heaven. But the latter works
meet for the old man and the devil has not so, and in deed (to profess
the truth) they that are well acquainted with the first works, will have no
deintie in the last. Now then if the first works be approved of God, meet
for a christen assembly, and such as have the promises also of the kingdom of
GOD, and the latter being fleshely lusts. i. Peter. ii.
Fightyng against the soul, not shapen after the Image of god, but after the
old man, corrupt with deceiuable lusts, Coloss. iii.
destitute also of the promises of the celestial kingdom. i. Corin. v.
Judge I pray thee good reader) if thou be not corrupt with like infection
(which works be meetest for a christen company, as for the first works we
will not make much mention of, for they are in case good enough.

But let us touch a little of the second, that it may be to the glory of
God, and to the reformation (if it may be) of such shameful vices. What is
the occasion that the mother many times lacks all the pinnes on her Pincase?
But because the parents without the fear of GOD, bring up their children in
wanton gamening, and will not rebuke them, but make them delicate and wilful.
^cle^^. xxx.
What means that the father lacks now and then an halfpenie, or a penie out
of his pourse? Even for because their parents suffer them to licenciously, to
rage after their own reane, whose song at length shall be full of
heaviness. For as much as they have rather maintained their folly in riot and
gamenyng, and have spared the rod of correction, that ministered wisdom,
and therefore shall they be both father and mother brought to shame. ^ouerb.
xxix. Kings. iii.
What means it, that a sober manne taking great care, watch, and study
abroad, for his wife and childrens living, comes home at night, and finds
in his house, in steed of a sober houswife, a thing worse then a Dragon, and
Lion, the Serpents head, chaungyng her countenance like a Bear, a drounken
houswife? But because she loves daliaunce, and pastyme, Eccle. xxv.
riottyng, and gamenyng, one pot a bear a broad, better then twenty at
home? What means it that poor men taking much pain for their wives, and
their own living, and walk circumspectly abroad, to fetch with their honest
labor somewhat home, and at his return, finds neither platter, nor dishe
charger, nor saucer, spones, nor trenchers pan, nor pot, meat, nor drink,
because they left shreude houswifes at home delightyng in riotte, and gamenyng,
bowlyng, Cardyng, or Dicyng? What means that we have so many Gailes, lodges,
and prisones, with as many yrons as they may be thrust, so many stocks and
Pillories, Gose houses, and Cokestoles, Bars for thieues to hold their
hands at, and Galowe trees. Romans. xi^
But because the people is so sore set on riotte. Prouer. xxvi^
As the games before recited, with other wickedness. The lord in heaven
suppress these vices once, that there may be many of these swords, and
corrections taken away. What means that we have so many lane Sermones, and
so many fat banquettes? Because there is more affection had to the tables,
then to the Testamente, to the book with two and fifty leaves, then to the
Bible? What is the occasion that the works of mercy are so sore abated?
^ath. xxv.
Because the works of the devil, and vain pastyme is so sore increased.
^ath. xxiiii.
Many mo pastymes there be which I am not acquainted with (though I am
acquainted with to many) that suppress the glory of GOD, and deprive us from
the Image of his glorious son Jesus Christ, by whom only we have an
enteraunce unto the father. ^^n. vi.
Mark now good Christian reader, and ponder well, whether these works of
ignorance, meet companions for the devil. ^^me. v.
These deceivable lusts. ^^l. iii.
Fleshely affections, works of dampnation, the deeds of sin, be meet for
an honest company, or not. Galat. ^.
Yea, and for a Christian company, and specially to be blessed of Christ,
without he bless them, as he promised to Moises, with careful curses. Leuit.
xxvi. Deuteronomy. xxvi^^.
In the city, and in the Town, and in the field, in the storehouse, and in
the baskette, in the fruicte of thy body, that thou shall be baraine, and if
thou haste any children, they shall be blind, dombe, lame, or halte, or in
the fruicte of thy land, and curses upon thy Oxen, and upon thy Sheep: In thy
in going, and in thy out going, to thy destruction, and rebuke: to all that
thou setteste thy hand to, till he bring thee to naught quickly, for the
wickedness of thine inventions, because thou have forsaken thy Lord God, and
given thy mind, and set thy heart of other trifles, with an hundred such like:
we may chance to have our deeds blessed on this manner, and except we
amend in time, after many plagues, pestilences, and ^earthes, without
controversy, look for none other blessings and that shortly.

God open the eyes of our Magistrates that they may se a redress for these
things in season, that in steed of speaking to a Bowl, or Die, or Card,
unreasonable, and dombe things, we may through our prayers, and their aid,
speak unto our neighbor, and our own flesh, and bloudde, things out of the
volume of the sacred Bible, to his edification and souls health. ^^^t. xvii.
^suc. i.
As the good Disciple of Jesus Christ saint Peter counsaileth us. i. Peter.
iiii.
If any man speak, let him talk as the words of God. Now Peter would not
only have our deeds savor, and taste of God, but also our speech, language,
and communication, would he have sound as the words of God, or else not to
speak at all. Now then, do Sise Ace, Kater Deuce, Sink Trey, Ambes Ace,
two Deuces, take him now Dice if ye can, gentle Dice what ye will, I care
not. A shame take these evil favored bones, a pestilence on the^* with blood,
wounds Nails, and Heart, I would these Dice were burnte. Sound these
terms, I say, like the words of GOD? Does mark, well the Cards, take
heed how he packeth them. I have the Ace, therefore must I rob, with
puttyng your hand to your cappe, your fiste on a heap, your finger to your
heart, kissyng of the Cards, taking your self by the nose, with it is mine
already, ye play naughteilye, whorle, take up, the trick is mine, shamfully
cast: I must deal now, do these words I say, sound as the words of
God? They sound in deed but after the trade of the old man, and not after
Christ after the flesh and her appetite, and not after the motions of the
spirit, and in that S. Peter wills here, that our speech should be as the
words of God. Paul to the Collossians. Col. iii.
Adds to the words of Peter, as it were a Paraphrases, puttyng it clearly
out of question, that all things what soever we do in word, or in deed,
should be dooen in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God the
father by him. Look if these words or deeds that are spoken of before, be
done in the name of the Lord Jesus, or as David in his twelve Psalm declares,
Psalm. xii.
what manner of words, the words of the Lord be, to give the more light
to Peter's sentence, saying: the words of the Lord are pure words. Even as
the Silver which from the earth is tried, and purified seven times in the
fire. Now ponder, how the words of the Lord are pure words: and our words
are vnpure, filthy, and wicked, and specially in such light pastymes: pure as
the Silver tried from the earth, are the words of the Lord, and our words
are as filthy as dounge, tried out of a filthy, and stynkyng stomacste,
pollutyng, and defilyng the man. ^ath. xv.
Whereby we shall not miss, but be condemned. ^ath. xii.
And therefore appoincte with thy self assuredly to give accoumptes for all
such idle, unprofitable, and vain words, before the high judge, that shall
weigh both thy acts, words, and works in a pair of even balaunce, and
reward thee after thy deserts, as thou have wrought them in thy caranous
body. Cor. v.
Now yet once again I say, take heed, and be well advised what works ye
will prepare, to appear with before the glorious Judge, thou haste now
warnyng, and both the works of the flesh, and the works of the spirit
laid openly before thine eyes, with the words and communication, mete for a
sober, an honest, and a Christian company, with the contrary, and both their
rewards, therefore take heed and be wise in time. Beside this thou say
that a sober company, now and then may exercise such honest recreations,
for the passing away of the time, excludyng blasphemy, riotte, and excess. I
would gladly hear these recreations, which ye call honest, to be first
proved honest: before ye call them honest recreations, if that be an honest
recreation, to exercise that thing, that thieues, whoremo^gers, blasphemers
murderers, dronkerdes, railers, iesters, mockers, and scorners do occupy, it
is a wonders honest recreation. Now then I perceive very well, that ye can be
partakers with that wickedness, that such a shameful rabble of riottoures and
dronkardes used, with the ve^geaunce of God annexed unto them, for where is the
ve^geaunce of GOD more present, then where the deeds of the flesh are
exercised. Gala. v. Cor. v.
Then ye can be partakers with the poor flock of Christ, that do abhor
such fantasies, and imaginations of the Devil, ^^^n. viii.
wholly addicte to an honest purity of living, and to the searchyng of the
sacred will of God, out of the holy Bible, Christ being in the mids of them.
(...) xvi.
Honest recreations are meet for honest men, but Cardyng, Dicyng, Bowlyng,
Scailyng, and Tennis plaiyng, are not honest recreatio^s: Ergo they are not
meet for honest men. If they be honest recreations, then theft is an
honest recreation, then is murder an honest recreation, then is whoredom an
honest recreation, for things worthy like praise, are of like honesty, and
worthy like reward: But theft, murder, whoredom, with other like deeds of
the flesh, are worthy like praise. Ergo like honest, and worthy like reward.
For what praise is a wicked thing worthy, but the curse of God and
dampnation? As the Scribe in the ninetene of Matthewe, (...). xix.
demanded of Christ what he might do to have eternal life? Christ
answered, thou shall not steal: Thou shalt not break wedlock: Thou shalt
not kill. Now if the Scribe, or any other Christian man, will have eternal
life, he must observe these precepts, that he be no thief, no whoremonger,
nor no murderer. If he be, then let him not look for eternal life: for he
that keeps the commandments, dwells in God and God in him. i. John. iiii.
Then let us thus reason, he that keeps not the commandments, dwells not
in God. But he that is a theife, whoremonger, or murderer, keeps not the
commandments. Ergo he is a thief, whoremonger, or murderer, dwells not
in GOD: and he that dwells not in God, has no life in him. John. i.
In him is life, and the life was the light of men. etc. Also David says
plainly. Psalm. i.
The wicked shall not rise in judgment because they are alwaie dead (says
Augustine) from GOD, and shall not rise to life; and he that has not life in
God, is alwaie addicte to dampnation. Example of Cain the first murderer,
Gene. iiii.
which ran away from the presence of God, in who^ is life: and the whoredom
of the people of Israel, with the daughters of Moab. ^um. xxv.
Nume. xxv. Read the whole Chapter, I pray thee. Judas the thief and
pursebearer. ^^hn vi. ^ath. xxvi.
Now the thief, the whoremonger, and murderer have no life in God, therefore
the thief, whoremonger, and murderer, are addicte to dampnation, then if the
deeds of the flesh (for better deeds can ye not make them, for they will in
no wise agree with the deeds of the spirit) be worthy like reward and
dampnation: then it follows, that they are like evil and wicked vices, like
abominable in the sight of GOD, are worthy like dampnation: but Bowlyng,
Dicyng, Cardyng, Tennesyng, with such like acts and deeds of the flesh, are
of like reward and dampnation, with murder, whoredom, and theft. Ergo they
are like abominable and wicked, that they are of like damnation is manifest.
^om. viii.
Where with a godly antithesis or contrariety he pronounces it on this sort,
there is no dampnation to them, which are in Christ Jesus, which walk not
after the flesh, but after the spirit. Now says Paul, to be in Christ Jesus
is no damnation, because they walk in a new Godly life, after the spirit
fashioned, and not after the flesh, then if there be no damnation to them that
are in Christ Jesus, because they walk after the spirit, it follows on the
other party, that there is damnation to them that are not in Christ Jesus,
because they walk after the flesh. But Dicers, Bowlers, Carders, Scailers,
Crossers and Pilers, Tenessers, Chesterers with such like a thousand mo, when
they are in their most honestest pastime, secluding (as they say) blasphemyng,
riot, and excess, yet are they in the deeds of the flesh. Therefore is there
also such damnation after the sentence of Saint Paul, For be not a shamed
hardely to number these honest recreations amongst deeds of the flesh, till
ye can by the Scripture discharge them thereof. Look also, Math. vii.
where he makes a difference between the good Tree and her fruit, and the
bad tree and her fuicte: and say of an honest heart, in which of these
Trees, bowlyng cardyng, with the residue of their fruits, grow. And he says
in the same place, that every Tree that brings not forth good fruit, shall
be cast into the fire. Gala. v.
And Paul to the Gallathians, very plainly declares the sentence of Matthewe,
and names both the trees with their fruits, and calls the good tree, the
spirit, and the deeds thereof, the fruits of the spirit. But in those
fruits shall ye find no place for none of these deeds, the words are these:
the fruits of the spirit, love, Joy, long sufferaunce, gentleness,
faithfulness, mekenes, goodness, temperaunce. Now mark well this good tree, and
show me what fruit or branch thereof ye can find meet, for to place your
honest pastimes, good refreshyng of the wit, the passing away of the time,
and with riot and such like vain trifles. The fruits of the evil tree are
these: aduoutrie, fornication, uncleanness, wantonness, Idolatry, witchcrafte,
hatred, variaunce, wrath, strife, sedicion, sects, envy, murder, dronkennes,
glotonie, covetousness, pride, lechery, bacbityng, discord, and innumerable
such like. If you mark these fruictes well, you may chance to find some
branches, meet for your purpose. How be it, if any manne be so addicte to
folly, that though he sees it, he will not see it, least his sin should be
reproved, I shall take the pains my self (though I have little thank
therefore) to set one or twain before your eyes, and if you have any
felicity or pleasure, in the searchyng out of the holy word of God, you
shall very easily with your studious endeavor, find out the residue right
well. First, what say you to this branch of uncleanness, may it not take
place (think you) among your vain pastyme? I suppose the deeds of the flesh
be not cleanly, but your recreations are before proved to be deeds of the
flesh. Ergo your foolish vain recreatio^s, are not very cleanly, therefore
lay up this fruict of uncleanness, to be one of your precious iewelles to
serve you a purpose. How like ye also by wantonness, may ye not be nombred
well inoughe among your vain sport and pastyme? i. Peter. iiii.
Look the first and fowerth Chapter, where he declares how we should arm
our selfs with the same mind, to cease from sin, by sufferyng in the
flesh, as Christ did, and to live after the will of GOD. He adds straight
ways, that it is sufficient for us, that we have spent the time that is past,
of the life, after the will of the Heathen, and Gentiles, walkyng in
wantonness, fleshely lusts, in excess of wines, in excess of eating, in
drunkenness, and in abominable Idolatry. Here Peter rehearses wantonness,
to pertain to the life of the wicked Gentiles. ^er. ii.
To lusts, Peter before in the second Chapter says, that they fight
against the soul: and here he says plainly, that they induce us unto
abominable Idolatry. For what can be greater Idolatry, then to depart from
the Lord GOD, through inticyng of the flesh, and wantonness, to cleave to
the wicked Gentiles, which are strangers from the life that is in GOD,
blinded in their understanding, and walkyng in the vanity of their foolish
minds? ^^e. iiii.
Now good Christian Reader, according to the affection that thou haste to
Gods most blessed word, search out the residue. Now may you expressly
perceive and see, Math. vii*
both what Matthewe in the seventh chapter, means by the good tree, which
Paul calls the spirit, and her fruictes, does Paul call the deeds of the
spirit. Where he excludes the flesh, with all her appetites, lusts, and
concupiscences. And that, that Matthewe calls the evil tree, Paul calls
the flesh: and by the fruictes thereof, the deeds of the flesh. In the
which is contained, all your fleshly pastymes, honest recreations, sober
refreshyng of the wit, with such like. And where Matthewe says, that every
evil tree shall be cut down, and cast into the fire: Paul says
manifestly, that as many as commit such things, shall not inherit the
kingdom of God. And to be excluded out of the kingdom of GOD, and to be hewn
down, and cast into the fire: Is to taiste dampnation. For how far was
that branch from dampnation, that was cut from the tree, and cast into the
fire? After his fine Reins and Purple, and delicious fare, does not the text
say, that he descended into hell, and was sore tormented in the flambe. ^^ke.
xvii. ^^e. ^.
Paul also to the Ephesians says, that neither filthiness, neither foolish
talkyng, neither iestyng, which are not comely, neither any unclean person,
has any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ, and of GOD. And how far is
it (think ye) from dampnation to be separate, and divided from the kingdom
of Christ and God. Is there any Salvation, but in Christ only? ^ctes. iiii.
Luke says plainly nay. There is none other name given unto us wherein we
must be saved: And therefore says Matthewe in his first Chapter, ^ath..i
that he shall save the people from their sin. Then is there no Salvation
save only in Christ, then without Christ is there nothing but dampnation.
And is there any life but in GOD only? Saint Ihon says naie in his first
Chapter of his Gospel. ^^hn. i.
Now, for as much as there is no salvation but in Christ only, and no life
but in God: and seeing also, that to have no salvation, nor life in god, is
plain dampnation, then the deeds of the flesh as your fore said pastymes,
are plain dampnation, because they have no salvation in Christ, nor life in
God, nor any inheritance in the kingdom of God and Christ. Now see you
plainly, that these filthy deeds of the flesh (as the games before named,
when they are most purely used) are of like dampnatio^, with murder and
theft: Ergo they are like wicked and abominable. At this time satisfy your
selves (I pray you) with these small warnynges, gentle admonitions, and
dangerous threatenynges: and if ye regard not this, then suppose not the
contrary, but that there shall be a more weightier matter laid to your
charge, and the spirit of Gods mouth shall destroy both you and the^
together. Therefore awake betyme, and put from you the works of darkness,
that you may walk honestly while it is day. Roma. xiii.
Now at the last you say, for the passing away of the time: we may
exercise such vain pastymes and recreations, and that I will go about to
withdraw honest men from their honest fellowshippes, familiare
neighborhood, neighbourly metinges and assemblies. And will also (I am sure)
demand of me, what I would honest company should do? How I would they
should be occupied, and pass away the time, the hours, the days, and the
nights? If all these before named pastymes, and recreations were laid a side,
I shall shortly saciate this question, even with the saying of Solomon in his
Proverbs, ^^ouerb. xxvi.
who says thus. Give not the fool an answer after his foolishenesse, least
thou become like unto him. But make the fool an answer, according to his
foolishness, least he be wise in his own conceipte. Here may you perceive
(if you list) that I compte not this question very wise. For the fleshely
children of this wicked world, think this a right notable question. Yea, and
worthy to be soluted or answered, with great wit, discretion and
learning, when in very deed it is nothing else, but unlearned and witless,
and therefore, according to the Proverbs of Salomo^, not worthy to be
answered, least the foolish rejoice in his folly. For if this question, or
such like were worthy answer, and that a man were bound to satisfy them,
I dare boldly say, that there should be more questions, then might well
either with reason, or learning be answered. For this question is a great
deal meeter for Ethenickes, Turckes, Jews, and Sarasins, then it is for sober
men, then it is for discrete men, then it is for Christian men, or for
godly disposed persons. For will not the banketters (think ye) after their
gurgitation, and ravenous deuouryng of their deintie meats, and sweet wines,
demand with idle brains and beallies, what shall we do all this day? How
shall we bring this long day at an end? How shall we spend our time? Is not
there (think you) good, honest, and verteous bargains made, with, we two
against you two, for what wager so ever ye will, either at Tables, Dice,
Cards, Tennis, or Bowls, as long as a Riall, twenty shillynges, or fowertie
shillynges will last, or till we go to Supper? And to make up the bargain,
they lashe out one oath upon an other, in such wise, that there shall be
never a member of Christ, unsought, or torn, so that it may come to memory.
Yea, the honestest man in a town, if he begin once to face, will think
scorn to be outsworne for forty shillynges at Bowls, Cards, Tables, or
Dice. Will not drounkardes also muse with them selves, where they may get a
company meet for their diete, to pass away the time, in glossyng and
gullyng, either at such time as it were more meet for them to please their
Lord god. If they be of the Spiritual sort, with labouryng in the sacred
word of God, to ^eede their flock on the Sabbath, or holy day next
insuyng: Or if they be of the lay sort, to be occupied in his mystery, or
occupation for his household or family: or else at such time, as it were meet
for sober, discrete, and honest men to be at their rest: For the which
thing, God made the night? What do poor labouryng men, that have two or
three children, and nothing but their manual, and handie craft, to succor
them selves, their wife and family. Will not they (think you) also study to
riotte about streates, and lanes, searching out a company mete for them, in
Ale houses, and beer houses, and inuente how their may bring the day at an
end, and occupy their time in riot and gamenyng, their wives and children in
the mean while at home, criyng out for victualles, and can get none, for the
good manne of the house, has bestowed al his money so warely at Sice and Cinck
or have at all: or at the Spades, Hearts, Diamondes, and Clubbes, and comes
home at night, with as many faces as a Sheep, and can speak never a good
word, neither to wife nor child, and yet notwithstanding, must it be called
an honest pastime, and sober refreshyng of the wit. And thus do they pass
away the time, the hours, the days, and the nights. And why is this vice so
slowely defaced? Because that in the minds of the Stars, the Moon shines
very darckly, and they are both guilty of one offense, so that if the heads
would redress these vices, the members would answer. O Hypocrite, cast out
the beam that is in thine eye first, that thou may perfectly see, to pull
out the moate, that is in thy brothers eye. Luke. vi.
For what do we, but that we see it first spryng from you? Well, you wot
what I mean, amend it therefore in time, least you chance to get an
afterclappe, I mean the sword, Pestilence, or dearth sent from GOD, for the
correction of the same.

Will not the whoremonger also muse with him self, how he may bestow the
time, to obtain his fleshelie and filthy purpose of an harlot? Will not the
thief likewise, and Scailers and Euesdroppers of men's houses, perpend and way
within themselves, where they may bestow the time to obtain their preie, put
man, woman and child, in sore fear and dread, and many times in ieopardie of
their lives? And now at the last comes forth these sober men, with their
honest felowships, sometime from their couches before they have given GOD
thanks for their rest, and as soon as they have said good morrow to their
neighbor, do demand of him what they may do, to pass away the time,
till they go to dinner. And some, to make the matter sure, smite up the
bargain over night, to be in a readiness against the next morning. Some at
their unthankful breakefast or dinner, shall covenant, to praise God all the
day unto night for his abundant benefits, with blaphemies, periuries, and
abominable oaths, in their honest pastimes? Call you this your neighborly
meetings, assembles, honest neighborhood and familiare fellowshippe to pass
away the time? Consider (I pray you) what a wicked rabble ye have annexed unto
you. For in that demand will thieves, whoremongers, murderers, dronkardes,
railers, scoffers, vilanes, slaves, Iesters and scorners be partakers with
you. And think you that this is not a blessed company, to be matched withal,
in these shameful and detestable vices of the flesh. Might not a man (if need
were) ask you also this question, whether all things be so surely stayed, so
circumspectly ordered, so warely provided for, and in such pure state, that
there may so great leisure be had to such vanities of pastime, to the
dangerous loss of time, so precious a Jewel? Is all (think you) so rightly
handeled, both toward god and our neighbor, that each of these things set a
part, ye may freely apply your minds, to dalliyng with wanton sportes and
gamenyng? Is the true worship of God so maintained in all places, that there
lacks nothing to be redressed therein. John. iiii.
And will you yet ask me, how ye should be occupied and pass the time
away, if such vanities were laid aside? Is the word of the most high God,
purely, sincerely and truly preached in all Congregations, ^^ke. xix.
and every Church rid of a papiste, and a true preacher in his room? Is true
prayer, that should incense us, with ardent affection to our heavenly fathers
will, allowed for his anointed Christ's sake, exercised aright in all places?
Is blasphemy so well abated, ^^^d. xx.
that there needs no reformation for it? Is hypocrisy and the strange
worshippyng of the true God, with the obscuryng of days, times and months.
Gala. iiii.
And the holdyng in of the people, Esaie. i.
with such trifles as he can not abide, clean taken away from the christen
congregation? Are Burroughes, Villages, Towns, Corporations and Cities, endued
with sober, grave and prudent officers and councellers, Exodus. viii.
abhorring avarice, coueteousnes, seking the public and common commodity,
handlyng the law in the true fear of god, without respect of persons.
Leuiticus. xix
Are laws so indifferently used, withouth fauouryng of the poor, and
honoring of the mighty in righteous judgment, Leuiticus. xi.
without rewards, gifts and bribes, that no man has cause to complain? Is
the poverty so honestly provided for, both in meat, drink and cloth, and
houses founded for the sick, sore, blind, domme and lame, with honest pencions
parteining to the same, and the deacons appointed for the purpose, being men
notable in word and wisdom, and of honest report, and full of the holy ghost:
meet for such a needful business and necessary office. Acts. vi.
Do the Curates so tenderly favor the flock of the lord, without havoc
making of the same: preaching to them the pure and sincere truth and verity,
without fainyng Fables, tales or lies: ^^ro. xxxiii.
Conuertyng the hearers, both with words and life, seeking the health of his
poor afflicted, comfortyng them that be in heaviness and care, byndyng up the
wounded hearts, preaching deliverance to them that be captive, declaryng the
acceptable year of the Lord and the fearful day of vengeance of our God
^^ic. xli.
? Are there such honest and godly schools, and places of virtuous and godly
exercise, in corporations, borrowes towns and fair Cities, Regum. 16.
for the bryngyng up and honest nurteryng of children, and their tutours and
scholemaisters, Regum. 2.
tried by men of grauetie and pure literature, in what kind of doctrine they
exercise them, either, with such learning as shall afterward make for the
glory of our heavenly father, and the edification of the congregation of
Christ's flock, or in such wicked doctrine, as shall pertain to the
subversion both of themselves and of the communaltie, (for in them is the
expectation, as well of virtue as of vice in all realms) and is the due
inquisition of the same made in all quarters? Is there also diligente search
in all places, for false waightes and measures: that men in buiyng and
sellyng, sustain neither damage nor loss. Proverb. xvi.
Is there such love amongst neighbors, that every manne would no worse to
his neighbor, then to his own heart. Math. vii.
And if it do happen or chance that any person break love, so that strife,
variaunce, discord, debate and hatred do rise and grow between neighbor and
neighbor, are the curates (for the which thing they received that same
appellation) or the eyes of the parish (otherwise called, in our phrase of
speech, the heads of the parish) ready (as their duty is) to reconciliate
and to bring this putrified wound to a concord. Math. v.
If these things, with many other, be in such case that in none of them there
needs reformation: there may the more liberty be given, to your honest
recreatio^ and sober pastimes. But if they be not dooen, take heed, how ye
meddle with the other honest recreations and pastimes. For remember that ye are
they that must bear the great charge and burden of the people. Deuteronomy. i.
Unto whom, for conscience sake, the people must be in subjection. Roma. xiii.
Forasmuch as ye have the oversight of them, and ought so diligently to study
and wait for them, as if you should give accoumpte (as you shall in deed) for
the souls of the subjects. Therefore beware, that ye may make that great
accoumpte, with joy and not with grief. Hebre. xiii.
Now, therefore do I sore muse, how this question (except it were by the privy
suggestion of Satan, Seen. iii.
worker of all mischief) could sink into any honest, and specially, into any
Christian man's stomach, to demand, what they should do, or how they
should be occupied, if these sinful pastymes (otherwise called honest
recreations) were laid aside? If you would be as diligent to demand how ye
should live well, how ye should behave your selves to please GOD, how ye
might remain in the fear and dread of God, as ye are to inquire for such
vain trifles: oh lord what a world should we then have shortly? And in
conscience, I suppose, that this is the more meeter question of both, for a
Christian man to demand. For with what face, dareste thou enterprise, to
inquire how thou shalt consume the day, in such wicked pastymes: with the
abominations that longs there to (as the blasphemy of Gods most holy
name, drunkenness, excess, with many other more such like) seeing and
considering, that thou art not certain, nor sure to live the half day? Dooest
thou think it no danger, to fall into the hands of the Lord, Hebrews. x.
Haste thou no more dread of him that is able to kille both thy body and
soul, and to cast them both into hell fire? Math. x.
Now ponder (I pray thee) the Sacred Scriptures that follow, what occupation
and business, ye should by their counsel have, if these foolish pastymes
were set a part. Math. xxiiii.
Matthewe says, wake because you know not what hour your master will come.
Of this be you sure, yt if the householder knew, what hour the thief would
come, he would surely watch and not suffer his house to be broken up.
Therefore be ye also ready. For, in an hour as you think not, will the
soonne of man come. Hear ye this ye sluggardes? Matthewe bids you wake:
ye will say. We are never less disposed to sleep, then when we are at Tables,
Cards, Dice, Bowls, Tennes, or Chesse. I grant that to be very true. But will
that business please your heavenly master, when he comes suddenly upon
you? Matthewe would have you as diligente to prepare, against the coming of
the Lord: to vanquishe and drive away, the assaults of the Devil, as the
householder is diligente to prepare weapons against the coming of the Thief,
that would break up his house, And would the householder (think you) fall to
Cards, Dice, Tennes, or Bowls, if he knew when the thief would come upon
him? Matthewe says plainly nay, but he would watch says he, if he knew
what hour the thief would come, and prepare weapons to keep him of. And will thou (seeing thou art uncertain, when the Lord will come, as the householder
is, what hour the thief will come) apply thy self to Dice, Tables, and
Cards, and suffer the house of the living God to be broken up? For the temple
of God is holy (says saint Paul) which are ye, i. Cor. iii.
and think ye that there ought not as great study to be taken, for to
defend the house that God made to his own similitude and likeness. Gene. 1.
And redeemed with his precious death. i. Peter. i.
From the snares of the wicked, against the coming of his master: as there
ought to be for an house, that is made of lime and stone, and is in
subjection to every tempeste of water and wind? The which also was builded of
a sinful manne, and paid for, with corruptible silver and gold, that at his
diyng day, shall bid his Master adewe, and never do him pleasure after?
The instruments that ye must prepare, to keep away the thief, against
your Masters coming, are not Boules, dice Cards, Tables, Bows, Knives,
Tennes, Balls, Chessemen, Counters, paised Grotes, Tops and Scourges, with
such like a thousand mo: which the devil has invented, ^^ke. xiii.
no, no. Saint Luke in his thirtene Chapter, tells us of other manner of
instruments, to pass away the time with, then these be, he says with a
deep stomach, take heed, watch and pray, for ye know not when the time
is, and that I say to you, I say to you all, watch. Luke would have a
Christian man's instrumente to occupy himself withal, and to pass away the
time, to consist in watchyng and praiyng, and the fleshly children of this
world would have it to consiste in Dicing, Cardyng, Boulyng, and Tennes
plaiyng, thou will say that it will irke, and weary one, ever to be watchyng
and praiyng. I say unto thee, that of the abundance of the heart, the mouth
speaks, for a good manne, out of the good treasure of his heart, brings for
the good things. ^^th. xii.
As to do all thing what soever they go about, either in word or deed, in
the name of the Lord Jesus, giuyng thanks to God the father, by him: And to
apply them selves, to watchyng, praiyng, and readyng of the sacred scripture:
as the fruits that spring out of the good treasure of their hearts. But an
evil manne, out of the evil treasure of his heart, brings for the evil
things, as Dicyng, Carding with such more a great noumber. For, if he had
any better treasure, liyng in his heart, he would surely bring it forth. But
he has no better, that he can take a man of trust, therefore evil as they
be, so he utters them: For as they lie Canckerfretted at his heart, so he
lays them forth, take them up who list: therefore of thine own mouth I
judge thee. Thou evil servant, Luke. xix.
canste thou find in thy heart, to pass away the time with Cards, Tennis,
Tables and Dice day and night, without weariness and care? And say thou,
to watch and pray and to be given to the wholesome meditation of Gods word,
will weary any manne? Seeing the first is abroad pathe, leadyng to
destruction, the which these unthrifty gamesters, can find out readily
enough. The last is a very narrow pathe, leadyng to life and salvation,
Math. vii.
the which is not yet trodden out of them: for it is unsearched for. ^^ke.
xxii.
Luke in the twelve Chapter also says, Let your loins be girte round
about, and your lights burning, and your selves ready like men, that wait
for their master, when he comes from the weddyng, that as soon as he
comes, and knocks, they may open unto him. Blessed are those servants,
which the lord when he comes, shall find wakyng. Here I think Christ
boroweth a similitude of them, that in the night time, use to prepare them
selves in a readiness, against their masters coming home from the weddyng,
because he would have them so handsomely girte, that they may walk with the
less let and impedimente. But I think, if we should walk in the night,
after our honest passing away of the time, to mete with our master, we had
need I suppose to be well covered about our heads, least the wind make our
brains dissie, and we stagger out of the right pathe, and reele like night
riottours, and dronkardes, and they that walk in the night. For the most
part use to carry light with them (specially if they fetch home any great
manne) for in the broad day, they use to carry no lights (as the
superstitious sort have used now of late days: and as some yet at this
present do, if they were well sought out) for no better will their Curates
teach them: but to light Candelles in the clearest Son shine in the year,
and stick the^ upon posts, stools, and walls, before Idolles, to show them
light, and yet they them selves with their Idols remain stark blind. What
think ye that these lights he, that ye must meet him with, cards, tables,
or Dice, and other such like tromperies? Surely they shall show a fair
light. And as well shall he welcome you with them, as he did the five
foolish virgins, which had no oil of their own, but when Christ came, they
were feign to go a borrowyng, and when they came and knocked, were shut out of
the doors. Math. xxv.
Beware ye pass not away the time so long with such vain follye, that your
good works be to seek, and then ye knock tarde at Heaven Gates, and for
lack of knowledge, ye be shut out of the doors. Take heed in time, for those
servants shall be blessed, whom the Lord when he comes, shall find wakyng.
^^ke. xii. These. v.
says, that the day of the Lord, shall come as a thief in the night, for
when they shall say, peace and no danger, then comes there on them sudden
destruction, as the trauailyng of a woman with child: and they shall not
escape. Hear ye this ye blasphemers? Hear ye this thing, ye wicked gamesters?
Hear ye this thing, ye witty and fleshly children of this world? Now go to,
apply your business, to the Cards, Tables, Dice, Tennes, Chesse and Bowls, as
fast as ye can: for the Lord will come at your pleasure, when ye will, and
not before ye will have him come. So will the thief come and reaue up your
house, and not before. Plie your business, as fast as ye can: haste up your
wickedness, and let not for it: neither care for any threatnyngs at gods
mouth, for he is to weak to perform his promise. But of this be ye sure,
that as justly as a teming woman that is with child, must needs suffer the
travail thereof, whether she will or no, and can not avoid it. Even so, think
not the contrary, but when the Lord comes, ye shall be taken as he finds
you, and shall not escape, but as ye have wrought the works of your body, so
must ye (spite of your guts) appear before the judgment seat of Christ,
to give your accomptes. i. Cor. v.
Be pacient and settle your hearts, for the coming of the lord draws
nigh. Behold the judge stands before the door, Iaco. v Here James plaieth
the bug with you, and in a manner, mouth to mouth: James. v.
he makes him to knock at the door of your conscience, that ye should in
time, if it might be, withdraw your selves from such vanity. Is it meet
think you to pass away the time with such trifles, when the judge stands
at the door? but if ye will needs upon such folishnes notwithstanding al
these comminations and threatninges, beware I say, for the coming of the
Lord draws nigh. i. Peter. v.
Be sober and watch, for your oduersary the devil as a roaring Lion, walks
about, seeking whom he may devour: whom resist, steadfast in the faith. Who
is this, says Peter, that provoke you to this wicked invention, that ye
demand so wittely what we shall do, if these vain pastymes were laid a
part? he says plainly that it is the Devil, who goes roryng about seeking
whom he may devour, where does he search to devour you? in your faieth
says the Apostle, for if ye apply your selves to the deeds of faith,
without the which (says Paul) it is impossible to please God. ^ebrewes. xi.
As to pureness of living, ^uke. i.
to the forsaking of the devil with all his works, ^ Peter. i.
to follow the deeds of the spirit. ^ala. v.
Then forthwith rages the adversary, then fumeth the devil, then seeks he
whom he may devour. But follow the appetite of the wicked flesh, and saciate
her lust and desire, and ye shall be his fair children, ye shall be chekens
meet for his own tooth, he shall strike your heads, and make very much of
you, for ye are well worthy, seeing ye are servants meet for such a master.
Psalm. xviii.
Dice, card, tennes, boule, play and chesse, with all other fleshly pastimes,
day and night. Lay on oaths, tear god with all his holy members as small as
herbs to the pot. And the devil will never hinder you, never roar at you, he
will never seek who he may devour: for he has you fast knit to the deeds of
darkness. Romans xiii.
And keeps you still in the same, as children of unbelief. Ephe. ii.
And what needs the devil to seek for them, seeing they seek so fast to
run to him, with the passing away of time, in such vain sportes and
recreations of the wit, and solacing of the mind? Therefore after the counsel
of Peter, be sober and watch yet a very little while, and he that shall come,
will come and will not tarry. Hebrews x
He will not tarry (says Paul) again or two at the Tables, Cards, Chesse or
Dice, and then have with ye, say you, pass away the time at your pleasure,
apply your selves to such vanities as long as ye list, demand what ye
should do, how ye should spend the time, if these wicked gamenynges were
laid aside, as often as ye list? Paul makes you a plain answer, that he
that comes, will come, and will not tarry. For if with all expedition and
readiness, he would have his disciple follow him, when he intended a matter of
no less godliness, then necessary: as to bury his father. ^atth. viii.
He granted him no liberty, but commanded him, to follow him straight way,
and to suffer the dead to bury their dead. And think you that he will tarry
your leisure, till ye have plaide a game or two, in a matter of wickedness that
defaceth Gods glory (for as much as it is a deed of the flesh (and
prejudicial to the edification of your neighbor? no, no. He that comes:
will come and will not tarry. Therefore if thou will know, how thou should
be occupied, if these vain pastymes were laid a side, resort now and then,
yea, rather continually, ^^c. i.
to the most wholesome word of God, and there meditate and exercise thy self,
and if thou canste not read, then let thy servants or Children read unto
thee, if none of them can read, then fear the vengeance of GOD, for thy
negligente bryngyng up of them. For the good free shall be known by his
fruicte, and the had tree like wise. Math. vii.
And Paul compteth him that provides not for his own and specially for them
of his household: to deny the faith, and to be worse then an infidel. i.
Timo. v.
And to the Galathians Galat. v.
he calls the household of faith, that in Timothe he called his own
household. Let therefore your youth be godly instruct. For as the common
biworde is, such a father such a son, such a master, such a servant:
and as the head of the household is, so are the members Psalm. xvii
And David also, calls the family blessed, that fear the Lord. Psalm. cxx^
For in the verteous nourteryng of the children, consists the quietness of
all Realms, and namely in such as are made unto the similitude of their Lord
GOD. Genesis. i.
Therefore in season, let them taste of the sweet word of God, and savor
of the kingdom of heaven, Psalm. xxxi
that they in the same holy word, comfort both you and them selves. And
as I said unto you, if ye list to know how to pass away the time: busy
your minds in the Sacred Bible, and taste how pleasant the Lord is. Peter.
i.
And when ye have saciate your minds therein, fall to prayer and supplication,
and desire thy almighty Father, who fulfilled the whole sum of his word,
in his son Christ. Timo. i.
That for his reverence and worthiness, he will illuminate the eyes of thy
fleshly heart, that thou may obtain the perfect sense of the same. ^^lm.
cxviii.
Then mark what vocation thou art of. If thou art the chief ruler of the
people, and the principal among the members, and the head of the congregation.
I exhort thee, for conscience sake, let never this question enter into your
stomach, to demand what shall we do to pass away the time in trifles of
folly? But rather ponder these three things, what knowledge is there in our
Realm, if that be wantyng, fall to dreamyng with Solomon that wise ruler, and
God shall appear, and give you your request, therefore inquire for knowledge,
and ye shall have it abundantly, and the things also that ye require not,
shall be given unto you. Regum. 3.
Wherefore look diligently, what knowledge reigns in your Realm: Then mark
what fear of God there is in you, to delate the true word of GOD, and what
an heart you have to maintain the same. For the fear of God is the beginning
of wisdom. Prouer. i.
And therefore, ye that be the governors of the people, fear GOD, and ye shall
ratefie the things that be good. Ecclesi. xv.
Thirdly, mittigate your hearts, and subdue your minds, having no respect
unto the sublimitie, and superiority of your state, in comparison to your
subjects, but rather in subjection to your Lord God. And mark well that you
are ministers, yea, ministers I say to him, unto whom you shall make a
straight account. Hebre. xiii.
And here remember, that in as much as ye are the ministers of God, God has
given you a sword in your hand, to deface malefactors, and to preserve the
innocent. Therefore, occupy it to Gods glory. Roma. xiii.
And to the subversion of the bloody kingdom of Antichrist: after the example
of king Ihon. iiii. Regum
And all we your true loving subjects, will heartily maintain you, with our
prayers to GOD, who always preserve you. Timo. ii.
And here rest and quiet your selves, to the glory of God: for in these
three things, are many things to bewailed. If thou be a Spiritual judge of
Christ's flock, or a superintendent of his congregation. Is it meet to
demand, how thou shall pass away the time, if such vain pastymes are
laid a side? No, no, there should be no such indiscreet words or language,
and specially among such persons. For, your communication, is a sore
incitation to the common sort of the people: For of your words do they
wholly depend. The more pity, if it pleased God: without they were as the
words of God. Peter. iiii.
You rejoice very much, to have taken your power and authority of Peter, and
learn ye these lessons of him, then am I deceived? For I am sure, he made no
such answer unto Christ, when he demanded of him, ^on. xxi.
whether he did love him or no. He answered him, yea lord, thou know that
I love thee. If ye compte Peter to be your predecessor, then follow the
insample of him, and love Christ. What must ye do then, if ye love? Must ye
apply your selves to Dicyng, Cardyng, Huntyng, and Haukyng? No, that is not
the way to follow Peter. What then? Feed my sheep, says Christ to Peter.
Now then, if ye love Christ with Peter, ye must with Peter feed, feed, not
Palfreyes, Geldynges, Horses, and a kenell of Dogs, but my sheep, says
Christ. In deed Christ, often times by a certain metapher, and phraise of
speaking, does mutuate and borowe, the unreasonable, for the reasonable, as it
appears in the xxj. and also in the tenth of saint Ihon, Ihon. x. and. x*
where he says, a good Shepherde will give his life for his Sheep. Yet all
the world in a manner will testify, that he died neither for Sheep, nor Oxen.
i. Corin. ix.
But for the Christian Congregation he died. Esaic. liii.
So when he commanded Peter, and you in Peter (if ye be his true successors)
with pasce, pasce, feed, feed, that ye should feed that Congregation, the
which he died for, that his beloved spouse, the holy Catholic Church, of
the which he is the head. Ephe. vi.
But I pray GOD, ye feed them not, as the Prophet Ezechiel in his xxxiiij.
(...). xxxiiii.
Chapter specifieth, saying. Woe be unto the Shepheardes of Israel, that feed
them selves: should not the Shepeheardes feed their flocks? Ye have eaten up
the fat, ye have clothed your selves with the wolle. The best fed have ye
slain, but the flock have ye not nourished. The weak have ye not holden up
The sick have ye not healed, the broken have ye not bound together. The
outcastes have ye not brought again. The lost have ye not sought, but
churlishely, and most cruelly have ye ruled them. These things are right
contrary, and clean beside the commandment, that Peter received of our
savior Christ. For he commanded him to feed the flock, and not to eat
away the fat from their beardes, and feed them selves, and (in the mean
while) let the flock starve for lack of food. This is not to feed of
love, but of compulsion. ^^^ter. v.
Not for Christ's sake, but for the beallies sake. ^^i. iii.
Mark now Ezechielles Prophecy with a single eye: and fulfill the things
that he, with the residue of the Prophets appoincteth you, and ye shall find
more necessary things pertainyng to your office, then to cast holy water,
and deal holy bread, or to bid fasting, or holy days on the So^daie. For
if you look well on your duty, and ransacke every corner thereof, none
otherwise, then ye shall at the comptyng day, give an answer therefore.
Ezech. iii.
Ye shall (if ye have any conscience, or any dread of god before your eyes)
have small affection to demand, how ye shall pass away the time, if these
vanities were laid aside. But in no wise how soever ye do, what so ever is
written, or spoken unto you, take little heed to your selves. But yet I say,
beware against the time, and have your answer in a readiness, when it
shall be said unto you, give account of thy Bailiwike: for thou may no
longer be Bailife. Luke. xvi,
Therefore be not offended, although I write the truth, for ye know where the
words be contained: not in my imagination, but in the sacred Scripture. If
ye be offended therewith, remember that God and his word are all one ^^n. i.
Now conclude the sequel your selves, for ye know my mind. If thou be a
temporal, or seculare judge, remember well that then there is no time
reserved, for thee to demand, how ye shall pass away the time in such
trifles of folly: but rather day and night, ponder and weighe what is lawful
and right. ^che. ii.
In your judgment be equal and righteous: and diligently search out the
truth. ^eremi. v.
If ye have executed the law vnrightously (the which of it self, is very
just and true) learn now to do right, apply your selves to equity, deliver
the oppressed, help the fatherless to his right: let the widows
complainte come before you. ^^e, i.
Remember that ye ought to be learned, ye that exercise the laws upon the
earth, least ye perish from the right way. ^^^m. ii.
So that by such knowledge, ye may discern, neither to favor the poor,
neither to honor the mighty, ^^^ter. v.
but to pronounce the judgment of the lord, ^i. iii.
and to judge your neighbors in righteousness. iticus. xix.
Now, weigh these things a right, and exercise them according unto your
office, as ye shall give account for it, at the last day when ye your selves
shall be judged, as ye have judged other. Luke. vi.
And join a christian man's life thereto, that is, to serve GOD in holiness
and righteousness, all the days of your life. Luke. i.
And then mark in what corner of a pure conscience, thou shalt demand how
thou shalt occupy the days and nights, to pass away the time. If thou be
of the inferior sort, and of the vulgar company, thou haste thy duty
showed thee before: Saving this one thing remains, that ye must consider, in
as much as ye are subjects, ye must live in all submission, and lowlines, and
in true obedience toward your rulers and governors, as Paul plainly records
to the Romans. Roma. xiii
Let every soul submit him self unto the aucthorite of the higher powers.
Here GOD excepteth no man, no not him, that wears three Crowns at once,
nor none of his rabble, be he spiritual or temporal, if he be comprehended
under the name of a subject (as all men be, saving the Rulers only) For that
Paul here calls every living soul: me^ that are expert in the Hebrewe
tongue do call it every living man. Now of the triple crowned gentleman, that
Antechrist of Rome be a living man (as I think he is, without there be an
alteration made in nature, as there has before this time been in his
predecessor) he must by the rule of Paul, put of his crowns, and lay them
at the temporal rulers feet. And fall to repentance, that by his usurped
power he has suffered so many of his superiors to kneel and to kiss his
filthy feet. And therefore in this behalf, I compte him, as I do all other
of his order beside, very subjects, even equal with them, that are of the
lowest sort, of the temporalitie: yea equal with them that ought to wash men's
feet. ^n. xiii.
And therefore as many as be subjects, must live in all lowlines and just
obedience unto their rulers and governors, yea, although they be infidels. ^n.
xiii.
And to this does Peter well agree, saying, submit your selves unto all manner
of ordinance of man for the lords sake. etc. So long as they ordeine nothing
contrary to the express word of God. Daniel. iii.
If they do: yet resist them not with power of violence, but with the word
and patience, Ierem. xxx^
but be thou steadfast in the promise, Math. v.
and suffer for conscience sake. For he that resists, shall receive to him
self dampnation: for as much as he resists the ordinance of God. Roma. xiii.
I would therefore that our spiritual father should take heed in time, and put
his Sword into the Scabarde again. Math. xxvi.
For without the great mercy of God, they are all damned with the devil of
hell. Now therefore I exhort you by the mercifulnes of GOD, and by that
affection that ye have to be buried with Christ in baptism. Roma. vi.
And in that ye desire to be holy as he is holy, in all manner of conversation,
s. Peter. i.
avoid the wicked deeds of the flesh. Gala. v.
And if ye be risen again with Christ, seek those things which are above,
where he sits on the right hand of God. Set your affections on heavenly
things, and not on earthly things. Colloss. iii.
And backebite not this poor and simple inuectiue, against these swarms of
vices if ye do, mark where ye reprehende it, and confer the Scriptures
withal, (for in a manner without Gods word is nothing spoken. Then if the
scripture be true (as I trust ye will grant no less) beware ye resist not
the truth against your conscience: but rather fortefie it to your power and
strength, to the glory of God, and to the subversion of vices. And thus I
commit you to the word of his grace. God save the Queen and her most
honorable Counsel, with the whole Commons.

AMEN.
These books are to be sold at the sign of the black Boy at the little
North door of Poules.

H K




