THE Dismal Day, at the Blackfriars.
Or, A deplorable Elegy, on the death of almost an Hundred Persons, who were
lamentably slain by the fall of a House in the Blacke-Fryers, being all
assembled there (after the manner of their Devotions) to hear a Sermon on
Sunday-Night, the 26. of October last past. An. 1623.
Figures of Time, Death and?the wheel of fortune

FRom the vast Chaos of distempre'd Minds
My Muse does flutter forth her moystned wings,
Vpheld with Gusts and Gales of sighing winds,
In this sad * Swan-like Elegy she sings,
For inbred griefs her heart so nearly stings,
That from thee (gentle Reader) we must borrow
Some Tears of pity in such Threanes of sorrow.
Oh grave Melpomine assist my Pen,
Whilst I in doleful manner do recite
The heavy death of near an hundred men,
Whose Tragic ends my Soul does much affright,
With fearful horror of that dismal Night.
Ah, Fatal Vesper; whose like has not been
Since the Sicilian Vespers ever seen.
Though Gods great Mercies, (which so boundless are
And infinite) his other works transcend,
Where he might strike he oftentimes does spare,
In expectation when we should amend;
(Yea, though we daily, hourly, do offend)
Yet are his judgments likewise just and true,
To give to Sinners their deserved due.
Such is the might of our All-powerfull God,
That those which dare his Greatness to resist,
Shall feel his furious scourge and Iron Rod,
His wrath can overtake them when he list,
At whose Commands the Winds and Seas are whist.
Let Christians all that his dread voice shall hear,
Serve him in faithful heart and trembling fear.
View here a Spectacle of mournful ruth,
Which (for our crimes) the Lord has lately sent,
London can witness well it was a Truth,
A strange, untimely, fearful Accident,
Which well may make a stony heart relent;
In the Blackfriars, (black disasterous fate!)
A heavy woeful Story to relate.
That Sunday Night, led by their deep Devotions,
Three hundred Persons were assembled there,
Of diverse Sects, sundry Degrees and Nations,
Some English, Scottish, Welsh, and Irish were,
Prepared (it seems) a Sermon for to hear,
Which there a Jesuit was to solemnize,
One Drury fitted to that Exercise.
And having Crossed himself in public view,
He enters straight the Chair and Preaching-place,
The people yield him reverence, as was due,
And to his Sermon numbers flocked apace,
He being (with them) a Man of chiefest grace;
Who there his Text did open and unfold,
Showing such doctrines as their Church did hold.
Thus while he Preached, delivering forth at large
Such Points of strange Belief as they are taught,
The Peoples weight the Chamber did surcharge,
Which breaking down their sad Confusion wrought
When of this Accident they never thought:
The Chamber full three Stories from the ground,
Which brast in sunder with a hideous sound.
And when the upper Floor that first did break,
Falls on the second, where they hoped to stay;
Yet on the sudden ere a man could speak,
They on the ground all bruiz'd and smothered lay,
Some stifled up with Lome, Stones, Dust, and Clay:
And some for help and succor loudly calling,
All broken, bruizd, and mangled in their falling.
The Husband cries out, Oh my loving wife,
The Wife cries out, Oh save my Husband dear,
The Father cries, Would I had lost my life,
His Childrens woes do touch his heart so near,
All things so rufull, dreadful, do appear:
Thus Tyrant death with his all-peircing dart,
Acts many a fatal Scoene, and bloody part.
The Brother bids the Sister quite adue,
The Sister cries, Farewell my loving Brother,
The Infants loss does make the mother rue,
The Child cries out, Oh where is my careful Mother?
All these (alas) stones, lyme, and timber smother.
Yea many there which on their friends had gazed,
Yet knew them not, they were so much amazed.
The Servant cries, Oh I have lost my Master,
The Master for his Servant does complain,
The faithful Friend laments his Friends disaster,
Wishing that for his sake himself were slain:
Thus tears gush out on every side amain.
Some swound with fear, unable for to speak,
Which might a Christians heart with sorrow break.
Thus some were buried up alive in dust,
Some mangled, bruized, wounded with the fall,
Some brained with Timber, some in pieces crushed,
Of those that escaped the number was but small;
A fearful Doom and Summons to us All:
Calling us to repentance many ways,
Considering well the shortness of our days.
O Lord defend thy Church and Commonweal,
Maintain thy Gospel free in this our Land,
And since to us thy Truth thou do reveal,
In zeal unto it let us ever stand:
Protect our King still from his Enemies hand:
And when we must resign our vital breath,
Save us (O Lord) from strange and sudden Death.
Math. Rhodes.

FINIS.
A Catalogue OF THE Names of such persons as were slain at BLACKFRIARS.
Master Drurie, the Priest. Master Rediate, Priest. Lady Web. Lady
Blackstones daughter. Tho: Web, her Man. William Robinson, Tailor Robert Smith
an Apothecaries Man. Mr. Dauisons Daughter. Anthony Hall his man. Anne Hobdin.
Mary Hobdin. Ioh: Galoway. Mr. Peirson, his Wife and two Sons. Mistress Vdal.
Abigall, her Maid, and two more in her House. John Netlan. Nathaniell Coals.
John Halifax Mris. Rugbic. John Worrals Son. Mr. Becket. Thomas Mersit, his
Wife, Son and Maid. Mris. Summel Mary her Maid. Andr: Whites Daughter. Mr.
Stakers. Elizabeth Sumpner. M. Westwood. Judith Bellows. S. Lewis Pewbertons
Man. Elizabeth Moore. John James. Morris Beucresse. Dauy Vaughhan. Anne Field
Mr. Ployden Robert Heisime. One Medalf. M. Maufield. M. Simons. Dorothy Simons.
Thomas Simons. Robert Pauuerkes. Mistress Morton and her Maid. Francis Downs.
Edmund Shey. Iosuna Perry Job Tullye. Robert Drury. Thomas Draper. John
Staiggs. Thomas (...). Michael Butler. Edmund Riuals. Edm: Welsh. Bartholomew
Bauin. Dauy. Rich: Price. Tho: Wood. Christo: Hobs John Butler. Ioh: Brabant.
And M. Buckets man. etc.


Imprinted at London by G. ELD. 1623.


