THE LIFE OF B. FATHER IGNATIUS OF LOYOLA, Author, and Founder of the Society
of JESUS.

Translated out of Spanish into English, By W. M. of the same Society.



Extendit palmites suos vsque ad mare: and vsque ad flumen propagines eius.

Psalm. 79. Permissu Superiorum. M.DC.XVI.

TO THE TRVLY HONORABLE AND VIRTUOUS GENTLEWOMAN Mrs. Anne Vaux.
RIGHT VIRTUOUS,
HAVING translated, and being now to publish this brief History of the Blessed
man F. Ignatius of Loyola; I could not doubt, but that it would be grateful to
YOU, who have deserved so well of his Children living in our afflicted Country.
And therefore my choice was soon made of your Self, before all others, to
direct this my small labor unto: which indeed is so small, that unless the
matter which it co^teyneth were esteemed, it were not worth the offering to
any. Wherefore you must not thank me, but your own virtuous Disposition, if
you take any contentment therein.

To which (if you will needs have some other to partake with you) that Worthy
and Reverend Man Father Peter Ribadeneyra, who is the Author, deserves best to
be added, being in a manner from his Childhood brought up in the Religious
School of the forsaid Blessed Father, and continued therein, with great
edification, above 70. years: and among his many pious and profitable labors,
was very eminent for his writings, especially in the Spanish Tongue, as is well
known to all of that nation, by his many devout and learned Treatises which
are extant. But above all other, by those which appertain to History among
which our Nation was not forgotten; for he translated and augmented D. Saunders
Books, Of our English Schism, beginning with King Henry the VIII. who upon
the foul occasion, which the world knows, was the first cause thereof and
prosecuting the same unto the later days of Queen Elizabeth.

He also wrote with great co^mendations the Lives of all the Saints which are
set down in the Roman Calendar, and of diverse others. By occasion of which he
published this brief Narratio^ of Blessed Father Ignatius, which I have
translated; wherein, as in an, Abridgment, he, in few words, comprehends
that which he had set down more at large in a former Treatise, and withal
inserted many not able miracles, which had been wrought by this Holy Man, for
the most part, after the edition of his former book. And yet he relates not
all: for God has since that time likewise continued to manifest the great
sanctity of this Blessed Father by many more, in diverse parts of the Christian
world. I will only make mention of one, which has been published in print, and
happened in the Province of Peru, and in the City of Lima, of which I make
choice, the rather, because the occasion thereof was taken by reading of those,
which are recited in this Relation.

In the Convent of S. Dominike in the foresaid City there was a Religious man
of that Order, named Father Aluarus de Molina, a man of good account, and only
hindered from great imploiments by long and continual sickness: for he had been
molested with a dead palsy for the space of ten years; eight of which he had
likewise so terrible a conuulsion, as the Physicians call it, that he could not
move his body, nor go one step, nor lift his hands to his head, nor almost
speak any word that could be understood. The Physicians and Surgeons had given
him over, accounting his disease incurable. Wherefore the good Father
conforming his will to that of God, spent most of his time in praying and
reading spiritual books, for which he aceded some help, not being able to
turn over the leaves himself.

Having ended one of those devout books, he desired F. James de Ojeda, a
Religious man of the same Order, to procure him another, which he willingly
undertook, and made choice of this our History, giving great co^mendatio^
thereof. The other accepted it very willingly, and having read the Miracles
contained therein, he conceived so great devotion to B. F. Ignatius, and had
such firm co^fide^ce in his intercession, that he made a vow to fast his
Vigil, or Eve, so long as he lived, and to make a Co^memoration of him twice
every day, besides other deuotio^s which he would always use toward him,
together with a particular affection and good will to his Order, if it pleased
God to restore his health and strength by the prayers of this holy man. This
vow caused him extraordinary comfort, and so he renewed it daily, until it
pleased God to renew and restore him his former health and strength, which he
did within less then a fortnight, after the first making thereof, in manner
following.

Upon the 8. day of Noue^ber, which is the Octaue of All Saints, in the year
of our Lord 1607. between 4. and 5. of the clock in the afternoon, Father
Aluarus sitting in his chair, as he was always wont when he was out of his
bed, felt within himself an inward impulsion or motion, and as it were a voice,
which encouraged him and said: Rise up, and walk; and this was with so great
delight and satisfaction, that he stood up, and began to go: and finding
himself strong and able, he went down a pair of stayres, where he met with
many that came from an Act of Divinity, who did all wonderfully admyre to see
him go in that manner. To whom he related his vow, and how it had pleased God
to cure him thus perfectly by the intercession of B. Father Ignatius.

By which narration of his, they discovered yet more plainly the greatness of
the Miracle: for whereas before scarce any word he said could be understood, so
that it was necessary to make him repeat the same thing often, and to go very
near unto him; now there was no such difficulty at all, for he spoke very
clearly and distinctly. The Religious men of that house, seeing so evident a
Miracle, went presently into the Church, and F. Aluarus with them, who having
prostrated himself before the Blessed Sacrament, the rest sung Te Deum
laudamus, with Music and Organs: which being done, they sent word of all to
the College of the Society of Jesus, diverse Religious men of S. Dominiks Order
going thither to congratulate with them, affirming that this Miracle had as
many witnesses, as there were Religious men in their house, and that it was so
evident, that the Devil himself could not calumniate it: so that it alone were
sufficient to move any Gentile to believe, that the Catholic Roman faith is
the true Religion, and that B. Father Ignatius is a Saint.

The Physicians also did affirm with one consent, that it was a manifest
Miracle, and Father Aluarus his disease was so notorious, that a thousand
witnesses might easily have been found to affirm the same. It was strange to
see, what wonderful Joy, Devotion, and Admiration this Miracle caused in all
that City. God grant we may dispose our selves to find the like effects, which
we may the more easily obtain, if we help our selves with the Holy
intercession of Blessed Father Ignatius. From the reading of whose history, I
will not detayne you any longer, but earnestly entreat you to be mindful of me
in your devout prayers, and particulerly in those which you make to this
Glorious Patriarch. Which request I likewise make to all others, who shall
reap any benefit by this my small labor. And so I end, and rest, This feast
of All-Saintes 1615.

Yours ever assured, VV. M.

THE TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS.
Chap. I. Chap. II. Chap. III. him in this his Pilgrimage. Cap. IIII. Chap. V.
Chap. VI. Chap. VII. B. F. Ignatius, and of their virtuous employments. Chap.
VIII. Cap. IX. Chap. X. Chap. XI. Chap. XII. Chap. XIII. Chap. XIV. Chap. XV.
Chap. XVI. Chap. XVII Chap. XVIII Chap. XIX. B. Father Ignatius. Chap. XX.
Chap. XXI. Chap. XXII. Chap. XXIII. Chap. XXIIII. Chap. XXV.
THE LIFE OF B. IGNATIUS OF LOYOLA, Founder of the Society of JESUS.
Of the Birth and Lineage of Ignatius: and of his Conversion from a secular
life.

CHAP. I.
BLESSED Father Ignatius of Loyola Founder, and Father of the Society of JESUS,
was borne in that part of Spain, which is called the Province of Guipuzcoa,
the year of our Lord 1491. He is borne 31. of July. 1491.
Pope Innocentius 8. sitting in the chair of S. Peter, and Frederick the
third being Emperor, and Don Ferdinandus with Don^a Isabella of glorious
memory governing the Catholic Kingdom of Spain. His Father was named Beltram
Iagnez, Lord of Ognez and Loyola, and head of that Honorable and Ancient
family. His Mother was named Maria Sonez of Balda, daughter to the Lords of the
House and Teritory of Balda, a Matron equal to her husband both in birth and
nobility. These two houses of Loyola and Balda are of those which are called
Great, and of the most principal in the Province of Guipuzcoa.

2. Our Ignatius from his childhood discovered a quick, sharp, and great wit;
and after some few years he was sent to the Catholic Kings Court, that he
might there be brought up among his Equals. His courage increasing with his
age, he gave himself earnestly to all manner of warlike exercise, that he
might obtain the reputation of being valiant, and of military honor and glory.

3. It happened that in the year 1521. the Frenchmen besieging the Castle of
Pampelona, Ignatius entered into it with the Captains and soldiers, that were
appointed for the defense thereof. The siege being very strait, and they who
were within having no hope of succor, began to treat of a composition, and had
concluded it, if Ignatius had not opposed himself, encouraging them to resist
the enemy until death. But the French men continuing their battery of the
Castle, while Ignatius defended it, He is wounded in the defense of the castle
of Pampelona.
he was wounded with a bullet in his right leg, so that the bones thereof
were not only broken, but also shiuered in pieces: and besides a stone being
driven out of the wall with the force of the bullet, had also sorely hurt his
left leg. Ignatius being thus overthrown, the rest were discomfited, and
yiedled themselves to the French, who carrying Ignatius to their Tents, and
understanding who he was, caused him to be very carefully looked unto, and
after sent him home in a litter upon men's shoulders.

4. His sickness increased in such sort, that there was little hope of his life:
but our Lord relieved him in his greatest danger, sending unto him the most
glorious Prince of the Apostles S. Peter, S. Peter appears vnhim, and
restores his health.
to whom he had ever been very devout, upon the Eve of his Feast: and he
appeared unto him as one, who came to favor him, and restore his health. With
this visitatio^ of the holy Apostle our s^^ldier began to wax better, and to
recover his health: but desiring to become a Gallant, and to follow the neatest
and finest fashions, he caused a bone which remained sticking out deformedly
under his knee to be cut of, that so he might (as I have heard him say) draw on
a strait boot. Neither would he be bound while it was a doing esteeming it a
thing unworthy of his noble mind. And though the pain were extreme, and very
sharp (because they were to cut into the quick) yet he kept his countenance,
and showed such courage, as caused admiration, never changing color, nor once
sighing or speaking any word, which might discover any weakness, as he had done
before in all the rest of his cure.

5. In the time of his recovery lying in his bed, and being accustomed to read
profane books of Chiualry, he asked for some such vain Treatise, to pass the
time withal, which seemed long, and tedious. They brought him two books, one
of the Life of Christ, and the other of the Lives of Saints, He is converted by
reading the lives of Saints.
there being none of those others which he would have had in the house.
Wherefore he began to read in these at the beginning, that he might pass away
the time, but afterward he took great delight and affection therein: and our
Lord wrought so far in the heart of Ignatius with that reading, that he was
changed, conceauing a desire to imitate that which he read. So, that though he
found great repugna^ce, many contentions and grievous combats within himself,
because his long and inueterate custom, and the subtilties and tentations of
Satan were of great force to detayne him in the world; yet notwithstanding
Grace prevailed against corruption of nature, and the Comfort of heaven against
the tyranny of his former evil life, and the favor of God who had chosen him
for great matters, against all the crafts, and deceipts of the enemy. Wherefore
one night rising out of his bed (as he was often wont) to pray, and kneeling
down before a picture of our B. Lady, with humble and fervent confidence, he
offered himself by the means of this glorious Mother, to her bountiful and
merciful Son, for his faithful soldier and servant, promising him to
follow his Ensign and to forsake the world.

Of the fervor of his penance, and contempt of the world.

CHAP. II.
AT the very time, that he made this prayer, there was a very great noise heard
in all the house, and the chamber where he was did shake, and a glass window
in it was broken. In this his change of life he greatly feared the weakness of
his flesh, but the most sacred Virgin, and most sovereign Queen of the
Angels (to whom he most devoutly commended himself) appeared unto him one
night while he was awake, Our B. Lady appears unto him with our Savior in
her arms, and gives him the gift of chastity.
with her most precious Son in her arms, by means of which heavenly
visitatio^ our Lord gave him such great grace, and changed him in that manner,
cleansing his soul from all filthy, and dishonest delight, that from that
instant to the end of his life, he remained pure and chaste, without any spot,
in great integrity, and freedom.

2. He sought to embrace that state and manner of life, in which he might
afflict his body with more rigor and pe^nance, and find God more perfectly. To
this end he determined to forsake his house, kindred, and acquaintance; which
he did, his elder brother Martin Garcia of Loyola not being able to dissuade
him to the contrary: and by occasion of visiting the Duke of Najara, he went to
our B. Ladies of Montserat attended by two men, He goes to Montserat, and
disciplineth himself every night.
whom he sent back by the way, giving them part of that which he had.

3. From the day that he departed from home, he used every night to make a
sharp discipline, which he continued al his journey: and being inflamed in the
love of God, and burning with zeal of his honor, he now referred all that he
did, and purposed to do, TO GODS GREATER GLORY for this was always, as it were
the Poesy of Ignatius, and the soul, and life of all his works. Likewise in
this journey he made a vow of chastity, and offered to Christ our Lord the
purity of his soul and body, He makes a vow of chastity.
with singular devotion, and a fervent desire to obtayn it, as he did, in that
entyre and complete manner, which we have already mentioned.

4. In a Village not far from Mo^tserat he bought him a garment, or habit,
which he purposed to wear in the Pilgrimage which he intended to Jerusalem:
and this was a coat of sackcloth, or course canuase, down to the foot, and a
cord for his girdle, a payr of country buskyns, a little botle, and a Pilgrims
staff.

5. Coming to that Holy place of our B. Lady at Montserat, the first thing he
did was to seek (as a sick man who desires health) the best Physician, and
Confessarius which he could find, to discover his wounds unto him. He found a
Holy roligious man of the French nation called Fr. John Clanon, a great servant
of God, He makes a general confession.
known, and reverenced for such. With this good Father, Ignatius made a
general Confession of all his life for the space of three days, with great
diligence, remorse, and feeling of his sins: And this religious man was the
first to whom he opened his purposes, and intents, as to his spiritual Father,
and Master. He gave his horse to the Monastery, and caused his sword, and
dagger with which he had served the world before to be hanged up at our B.
Ladies Altar, seeking other new and more resplendent weapons to serve our Lord
withal.

6. To this end upon the Eve of that joyful, and most glorious day, the 25. of
March, in which the eternal Word clad himself with our flesh in the womb of his
most pure Mother the year 1522. very secretly in the night he went to a poor
Pilgrim, altogether destitute of apparel, which was there, and putting of all
his clothes (unto his shirt) he gave him them, and clothed himself with that
his desired sackcloth which he had bought, and with much devotion placed
himself before the Altar of the B. Virgin, where he remained all that night,
partly standing, and partly kneeling, to watch like a new knight of Christ
those his new and in appearance poor, He watches his weapons after the manner
of new soldiers.
and weak weapons, but indeed very rich, and strong, commending himself
earnestly to the protection of the most Sacred Virgin, bewayling his sins
most bitterly, and purposing to amend them with her favor.

7. In the morning before it was day, that he might not be known, he departed
in great have toward a town called Manresa, which stands at the foot of
the mountayn three leagues from Montserat, and somewhat out of the high way to
Barcelona. In this manner Ignatius went joyful being clad with that poor, and
course sackcloth, girded with a cord, carrying his pilgrims staff in his hand,
without any hat, and wearing a shoo but upon one foot only, which seemed
necessary, because that leg was yet weak, and not thoroughly recovered, in so
much that it swelled a new every night. But this his joy was presently
diminished by the coming of one to demand of him, whether it were true, that
he had given his gich apparel to a poor man, whom the officers had
apprehended* suspecting, least he had stolen them. By this means he was enforced
to tell the truth, to deliver him that was innocent, and he shed many tears,
thinking himself to great a sinner, that he could not so much as help his
neighbor without doing him harm, and putting him to shame. And though they
asked him his Name, who he was, and also from whence he came, yet he answered
them to none of these questions, thinking that there was no cause why he
should, and desyring to be unknown, and despised in the eyes of the world.

8. In Manresa he went directly to the hospital of S. Lucie, What penance he
did at Manresa
that he might live on alms among the poor. He began to afflict, and wast his
body with a very sharp, and rigorous life, and to mortify all the delights and
vain cares which he had before. And because he had bin curious in the world in
trymming his hair, and adorning his person, now he went bareheaded night and
day, never using comb, or any thing else thereto: and with the same contempt of
himself he suffered his nails, and beard to grow out of order. He had no other
bed but the ground, watching in a manner all the night, weeping bitterly for
his sins. He used after this to make three austere disciplynes every day, and
prayed 7. hours upon his knees, and all this with as great devotion, and
fervor as he could.

9. He heard Mass, Euensong, and Complyn every day with great comfort, and
contentment of his mind, which being tender in devotion had easily imprinted in
it such divine things; and those voices, and praises of our Lord pierced to the
inmost of his soul. He did use to eat but once a day a little bread, and
therewith drank a little water, which was given unto him of alms, and he fasted
all the week in this manner except the Sundays, upon which he went to
confession, and received the most Holy sacrament of the Altar.

10. He was so desirous to mortify his flesh and to bring it to the obedience,
and subjection of the spirit, that he deprived himself of all things which
could give any delight to bis body, by which means though he were a strong
man, and of great forces, yet in few days, he came to be very weak, with the
rigor of such austere penance.

How he is freed of Scrupulosity and inioyeth divine Revelations. And of the
Monument erected in his honor at Manresa^.

CHAP. III.
NEITHER did this outward Penance, and affliction of his body weaken him so
much, as the inward scruples, and anxietyes which tormented his spirit. For
though he had with all diligence, and care made a general Confession of his
sins as we have said; yet our Lord who by this way would wash, and purg him
from them, afflicted him in such sort with the remorse of conscience, and that
gnawing worm which did eat, and rear his heart, that he found no rest in
prayer, nor ease in fasting, and watching nor remedy in his disciplynes and
other Pennances; but dejected as it were with the force of sadness, and
dismaide, and discouraged with the violence of that extreme grief, he
prostrated himself on the ground, as one that were overwhelmed, and drowned
with the waves and billows of the sea. This trouble went so far, that having
almost lost himself, and being desolate of all comfort, he resolved neither to
eat, nor drink until he found the desired peace of his soul, unless he
should happen to be in danger of death.

2. And with this purpose he remained seven whole days, without tasting any
thing, not omitting for all this his seven hours of prayer upon his knees,
and his three disciplins every day, together with the other exercises and
devotions which he was wont to use, until giving account to his Confessarius
what he had done, and how he purposed to go forward, was commanded by him in
Gods name to take some thing: to whom he obeyed, though he found himself to
have his accustomed forces, and nothing weakened. By this obedience and for the
entyre affection, and a boundant tears with which he beseeched his Divine
Majesty, our Lord vouchsafed to comfort his servant, and to illustrate him with
new light from Heaven, giving him a wonderful peace and serenity in his soul,
God gives him peace and di cretio^ of spirits.
and such an admirable discretion of spirits, that there scarce ever repaired
to him afterward any scrupulous person, tormented with this infirmity, who was
not delivered by his chunsayle. Neither did he only enrich him with this so
notable a favor, but likewise comforted his spirit with sovereign, and
marvelous Visitatio^s from Heaven, (as shall be said hereafter) that according to
the measure of the former sorrows which he had endured, the consolations of our
Lord might (as the Prophet says) refresh, Psalm. 93.
and rejoice his soul.

3. The light which our Lord gave to this his servant even in those beginnings,
and the care which he took in the courses, by which God directed him, were so
great, that being (as he was) a man until that time given to the noise and
vanity of war, and so unlearned, that he could only write and read: in this
very time he wrote the book which we call the Spiritual Exercises, which is so
replenished with documents, and excellent instructions in spiritual matters,
that it clearly appears, how the unction of the holy Ghost taught him and
supplied the want, which at that time he had of study and learning. For it
cannot easily be thought, how much fruit these have taken by this book, He
writes the book of exercise.
who have exercised themselves in the meditations and rules, that are in it;
and what profit has ensued in the whole Catholic Church, as well in religious,
as secular people by the use of these Exercises. This book after much
examination, Pope Paul the third of happy memory confirmed with his Apostolic
authority, by his letters dated the year 1548. in which he exhorts all the
faithful to read them, and to exercise themselves in the meditations, and
rules which they contain; as may be seen at large in his Breue, which goes
printed with the book it self of the said Exercises.

4. But our Ignatius being so severe toward himself, and not remiting any
thing of the rigor of his austerity and penance, broken with the excessive
labors of body, and continual combats of mind, fell into a very grievous
sickness: in which the Inhabitans of Manresa provided him of all necessaryes
with much charity, and many honest, and devout persons served, and attended him
with the same; for they accounted, and esteemed him as a Saint. And the
devotion which they of that place conceived toward him was so great, that it
being now almost 80. years since this passed, there is at this day in Ma^resa
a very fresh memory, and great signs of the life which he lead there: and
those of that City do very piously frequent the places where he lived, and
used to pray, craving our Lords favor by his intercession. And for a
perpetual remembrance thereof, Doctor. John Baptista Cardona, Bishop of Vich
(in whose Diocese Manresa is situated) and Lord Elect of Iortosa, caused a
Piramesse of stone to be eerected in Manresa at the Church of S. Lucie, which
was before an hospital of poor people, where Ignatius founder of the Society
of JESUS began to do penance, with an Inscription: which because it is a
particular thing, and declares greatly the opinion, and estimation which they
have in that Country of the holiness of our Father, I have thought it not
amiss to translate it out of Latin, and recite it in this place. And this it
is.

5. To Ignatius of Loyola the son of Beltram of the Province of Guipuzcoa
Founder of the Society of Jesus, The pyramesse of Manresa.
who being of the age of 30. years, in the castle of Pampelona fought
valiantly with the Frenchmen for the defense of his country: and having
received some mortal wounds, and being recovered of them, by Gods singular
benefit, enflamed with a desire to visit the Holy Places of Jerusalem, he
took his journey making a vow of chastity: and leaving the weapons, which (as
a soldier) he was wont to wear, hanged up in the Church of our B. Lady of
Montserat, clothed in sack, and hayrecloth, and al most naked, he began to
bewail the synns of his former life in this place, and as a new soldier of
Christ to take revenge of himself with fastings, tears, and prayers.

For the memory of so worthy a thing, and the glory of God, and honor and
renown of his Society, John Baptista Cardona borne in Valentia, Bishop of
Vich, and Elected of Iortosa, for the great devotion which he bears to the
sanctity of the said Father, and of his Order, caused this stone to be erected
as to a most pious man, and to whom the whole Christian Common wealth is so
much indebted: Sixtus Quintus being Pope, and the Catholic, and great Philip
the second of that name King of Spain.

How he went to Rome, and thence to Jerusalem: And what happened unto him in
this his Pilgrimage.

CHAP. IIII.
BEING a little recovered, he presently returned to his accustomed penances,
and so fell down again the second, and third time; for with an vnwearyed, and
perseuerant mind he took upon him a heauyer burden then his forces could
bear. But in the end overcome by his own experience, and with an extreme
pain of his stomach, which tormented him, together with the asperity of
winter, by the counsel of his devout friends, he took two short coats of
course russet cloth to keep his body warm, and a little cap of the same cloth
to wear upon his head.

2. Our Ignatius stayed almost a year in Manresa, leading the life, which we
have related: but our Lord who had ordained him for greater matters, took him
out of that solitude, inspiring him to go, and visit the holy places of
Jerusalem. To this intent he departed from Manresa, and went alone to
Barcelona, He goes to Jerusalem.
without taking any other company with him but that of God, with whom he
desired to treat by himself, and to enjoy his inward communicatio^, without
noise, or hinderance of others, though many had offered themselves to accompany
him in that journey. And likewise because he would wholly depend of the Fatherly
providence of God, without relying, or putting his confidence in any creature.
In Barcelona he went to the Church to hear a sermon, and sat down among the
little children upon the steps of the Altar. There was present a Lady called
Elizabeth Rosell, who beholding our Pilgrim, seemed (as she told me herself
afterward in Rome) to perceive a light, and splendor in his countenance, and
that she heard in her heart, His countenance becomes resplendent.
as it were a voice, which said unto her, Call him, Call him. And so she did at
the end of the Sermon, and invited him to dinner with her husband, who was
blind, all in the house meruailing much at his words, modesty, and the spirit
with which he spoke of Divine things, and exhorted them to love the chiefest
good with all diligence.

3. This Lady hindered him from going in a little ship, with which he had
already agreed, and it was after cast away in the sight of Barcelona, and she
procured him passage in a great ship, which with strong, and boistrous winds
went from Barcelona to Gajeta in five days; from whence he departed toward
Rome with great labor, and difficulty. For this year (being that of 1523.)
Italy was much infected with the plague, and for this cause he was not
permitted to enter into the Towns: so that the hunger, and weakness which he
suffered was so great, that not being able to go one step further, he was
enforced to stay where the night over took him. But at last, as well as he
could so^tyms falling, and rising again he arrived at Rome upon Palm Sunday,
and visited with great devotion the sacred Stations, and sanctuaryes of that
holy City, and likewise obtained the benedictio^ of Pope Adrian the sixth, who
at that time was the Chief Pastor of Gods Church.

4. He remained a fortnight in Rome, and though many endeavored to alter his
purpose of going to Jerusalem, by proposing unto him the great labors,
dangers, and difficultyes which were incident to that long Darney in a year of
such de^^th, and sickness; yet they could make no impression in (...).Only they
persuaded him (...) 7 or 8 crowns, which they gave him at his departure to pay
for his shipping, and passage: which afterward having remorse of conscience and
thinking that it was not agreeable to the spirit of true poverty, which he
desired to follow in all things, he distributed all the said money to the poor
that he met upon the way. In which he endured incredible afflictions, being put
back from the towns, lying in the fields; all those who met him flying from
him, no less then from death it self: because they did see him so pale and
wan, and forsaken by those who went along the same way.

5. But our Lord (who said, I will not forsake, Io^ue 1.
not leave thee,) vouchsafed to visit him, as he went from Choca to Padua in a
plain field, Being alone, and desolate JESUS Christ appears unto him.
comforting him with his sweet, and sovereign presence, and encouraging him to
endure harder things for his sake, after which he found more easy entrance into
Padua, and Venice, where he would not speak with the Ambassador, who for the
Emperor Charles the King of Spain was Legier in that Common wealth. For he
sought not any humane, but the divine favor. In Venice he had new
difficulties, and fears to dismay, and hinder him from this journey, because
the Great Turk Soliman had taken the I Will of Rhodes the year before, and by
reason of the sickness, and agues which he had in that place: but nothing was
sufficient to debate our Pilgrims courage, nor to diminish the secure, and
firm confidence, with which he had settled in his heart, that if only one ship
were to pass that year to Jerusalem, yet our Lord would procure him passage
therein.

6. Being in venice, he asked his meat of alms from door to door according to
his custom, and in the night he lay in the public market place of S. Mark,
which is the chiefest of that City. But one night a Senator, and one of the
most principal of that City sleeping in his bed with much commodity, A
Senator admonished by God, seeks, and finds him lying upon the ground.
and ease, heard a voice which awakened him, and said: How art thou so
daintily, and richly clad, and live with so many commodities in thy house,
whil^st my Servant remains naked in the streets? Thou sleep in a rich, and
soft bed, and he lies abroad upon the hard ground. The Senator being
astonished at this voice, rises out of his bed, and in great have goes out of
his house, up and down the streets, and coming to S. Marks, he finds our
Pilgrim lying upon the ground, and understanding him to be the man, whom our
Lord commanded him to seek, he carries him that night to his house, and uses
him with much courtesy. But he, being desirous to avoid such delicacies and
honor, went to a Spaniards house, an old acquaintance of his, who by many
entreaties had invited him thither. After this he spoke to Andrew Griti, who at
that time was Duke of Venice, and desired him to command, He takes ship for
Jerusalem, and God comforts him and delivers him from a great danger.
that he might have shipping. The Duke granted, commanding that he should be
carried of free cost to Cyprus in the Captains ship in which the new governor
himself went.

7. The 14. day of July of the same year 1523. he went aboard, and departed
from Venice, having immediately before taken a Purgation by reason a of great
ague, which at that very time had assailed him: and yet Physicians told him,
that if he took ship that day he would put his life in manifest danger. But he
being inwardly guided by an other superior Physician made no account of that
which they said, and indeed his going to sea was the cause of his perfect
recovery.

8. In this ship wherein he went there were great sins and wickedness committed,
which our Pilgrim inflamed with the zeal and love of God, reprehended with
great liberty, so that the Mariners taking this in ill part, determined to
leave him in a desolate, and uninhabited Island. But at the very time that they
came to it, a sudden and furious wynd did drive their ship from that Isand,
so that they could not perform their wicked intent. In this his navigations our
Lord appeared unto him many times, comforting, and cherishing him with
incredible consolations, and spiritual joys, and finally he brought him
safely to the haven of Ioppa the last day of August, and upon the 4. of
September before noone, to Jerusalem. He visits the Holy places with
extraordinary devotion.


9. It cannot be explicated in few words, what joy our Lord imparted to this
our Pilgrim, with the only sight of that holy City, and what favors he did
him all the time of his abode there, with a continual consolation, whilst he
employed himself in visiting, and reuerencing all those sacred places, which
Christ our Lord had sanctified with his presence, and delighting exceedingly
with the remembrance of so inestimable a benefit. Our Pilgrim had determined to
remain in Jerusalem, and to employ the rest of his life in this holy
exercise, as likewise in assisting, and serving his neighbors in all that his
forces could asfoard; though he discovered not this last of helping others, to
any, fearing popular applause, and the good reputation, in which some perhaps
might have of him. But imparting the intention which he had to remain in
Jerusalem, to the Father Provincial of S. Francis his order who lived there,
and he finding many difficulties and inconveniences therein, following his
counsel, and the will of God, who called him for greater matters, he resolved
to return to Spain, and to take that estate, and manner of life, which our
Lord should vouchsafe to show him.

10. But before his departure from Jerusalem he had an inflamed desire to
return, What happened unto him upon the Mount Oliuet.
and visit Mount Oliuet, where until this day are seen in a stone the steps
which our Savior left imprinted with his Divine feet, at the time of his
ascending into Heaven: and with this desyrehe stole secretly from the other
pilgrims, and alone without guide, or company, or any Turk to defend him (which
is a very dangerous thing) he went in all have up to Mount Oliuet, and
afterward returned to it again, full of incomparable joy, that he might more
attentively consider, on what side the step of he right, and of the left foot
were placed, which remained imprinted in the stone And because he had nothing
else to give to the watch men, that they would let him pass, he gave them a
little knife, and a payr of sizers which he had carried with him. And although
the Fathers of S Francis order, fearing his danger, reprehended him for it, and
one of the Christians, who had care of the pilgryms, and was sent for him did
both chide, Christ our Lord appears unto him.
and threaten him, yet our Ignatius was not moved or troubled, for Christ our
Savior appeared unto him, and went before him, and bare him company until
they came to the gates of the Covent: and with this celestial favor he
endured this trouble with great comfort

How he returned from Jerusalem into Spain: and of the many dangers that he
escaped.

CHAP. V.
THE time in which our Pilgrim returned from Jerusalem into Italy was very
troublese me with snow, and frost, being in the heart of winter. His garment was
of course canuas, and his doublet which given him of alms, was all cut, and
open in the back: his cloak was short, and third bare, and of bad cloth: he
had no stockings at all, but only shoes upon his feet He found in Cyprus three
ships ready to depart: He returns into Italy and the little ship in which he
sailing comes home safe the other being lost.
one whereof belonged to the Turk, another which was very strong, and well
appointed was of Venice: and the third was a little old bark, almost rotten and
consumed. In this third, our Ignatius shipped himself, for the Captain of the
Venetian ship understanding that he was poor, and had not where withal to pay
him, would not admit him: saying, that if he were as Holy, as some gave out, he
might walk upon the water, for he should not be drowned. All these three ships
put themselves to sail the same day and hour with prosperous wynd; but in the
evening there came upon them a tempestuous storm, with which the Turkish ship
was cast away with all her people: that of Venice ran herself upon ground near
to the Isle of Cyprus, and was cast away, though the men in her were saved: and
only the little bark, in which the servant of God went, being old, and
wormeaten, arrived safe at Venice, in the midst of January the year 1524.

2. In Venice he rested himself a few days, and afterward took his journey
for Spayn, having only 7. or 8. shillings, which were given him of alms, and a
piece of cloth to cover, and keep warm his stomach, which he felt to be much
weakened, and consumed, by the force of the cold and his nakedness. But going
forward in his journey, He gives all he has to the poor, and asks alms
from door to door.
and being at Ferrara praying in a Church, there came certain poor people to
ask of him alms, and he gave them all the money he had, and going out of the
Church, went from door to door asking a piece of bread to eat according to his
custom.

3. From thence he took his way for Genua, and passed by the armies, and camps
of the Spanish, and French soldiers who at that time were at cruel War in
Lombardy: and he was taken for a spy and used by the Spanish soldiers with
little courtesy and modesty: He is taken by the Spanish and French soldiers.
for they accounted him a fool, bearing him with their fists, and spurning
him; all which caused extraordinary comfort in his soul. The French men used
him more friendly. And finally our Lord guiding him he came to Genua, where he
took ship, and with great danger of Pirates, and enemies arrived at Barcelona,
ending his navigations in the same place, where he had begun it.

He begins to study, to the end he might help his Neighbors: And how his
life, manners, and learning is severely examined, and found sound and holy.

CHAP VI.
THE Blessed Father being returned to Spain, was very desirous to please God
and serve him in whatsoever he would appoint, but always with intention to
employ himself in helping of his neighbors. To this end after he had
considered, and commended the matter much to God, he resolved to study, and to
join with the unction of Spirit which our Lord imparted unto him, the study,
He begins to study Gra^mer.
and exercise of learning: and so he did. And being now 33. years of age he
began to learn the first principles of Grammar of a virtuous, and devout
Master called Hierome Ardebalus, who taught School in Barcelona, the Lady
Elizabeth Rosell (of whom we spoke before) giving him all that was necessary
for his sustenance; so great was the spirit and fervor with which he desired
to overcome himself and please God. And though the Devil took upon him diverse
forms, and used new crasis and deceipts to withdraw him from his study: yet
the grace of our Lord, and the perseverance which he gave to this his Servant
prevailed more to make him to go forward in his Holy Purpose, then all the
devises of the Enemy to hinder him.

2. He felt himself in Barcelona somewhat cased of the pain of his stomach, and
he presently returned to the great rigor of his accustomed pennances which by
reason of his want of health, and the labor of so long a journey, he had
somewhat remitted. Wherefore he made certain holes in the soles of his shoes,
and tore them by little and little, so that in the beginning of winter he went
barefoote upon the ground, though his feet were covered with the upper
leathers: and this to avoid oftentation, which he also did in his other
Pennances.

3. In Barcelona there befell him two notable things in which he showed his
patience, and charity: He is misused for the defense of Gods honor.
The one was, that having notice of certain light young men, who disquieted
the Nunnery called Of the Angels, wherein there lived Religious women of S.
Dominicks order, and was situated at that time without the walls of the city:
he procured to persuade the Nunns to avoid those conuersations and occasions,
and to give themselves to all recollection, and denotion. By which exhortations
those good fellows, not finding their former intertaynment in that Monastery,
were much troubled, and threatened the Blessed Father. And finally diverse times
they refrayned not from blows, and once they misused him very much, so that he
had necessity to be cured: but for all this he gave not over his enterprise,
rejoicing greatly to suffer for the love of Jesus Christ.

4. The second thing was, that coming one day from the foresaid monastery Of
the Angels, it happened that a man had hanged himself upon one of the beams
in his chamber, Herestoreth life to one that had hanged himself that he might
be sorry for his sins.
into which the good Father speedily entered, and cut down the rope; and though
all held the man for dead, yet did he fall to his prayers, and cried unto him,
so that the man recovered his senses, and gave signs of repentance, and sorrow
for his sins, and a little after gave up the ghost. In which accident the
circumstances that co^curred were such, that it was miraculous in the whole
City, through which it was soon diuulged. He stayed in Barcelona two years
studying Grammar, until that by the counsel of some learned men in the year
1526. he went to the University of Alcala, that he might pass to other higher
sciences.

5. In Alcala he lied in the Hospital of Lewis of Antezana, which was there
founded: and he began to study Logic, and Philosophy: and withal heard the
Master of Sentences, by the counsel of some, who with a desire to have him
end quickly, knew not how to direct him. But he became now so inflamed with the
love of God, and with an insatiable thirst to help, and remedy the souls, and
bodies of his neighbors, that he contented not himself with the ordinary
labor of his studies, and of asking alms from door to door, His behavior in
Alcala
to sustain himself, but that withal he taught children, and ignorant people
the Catechism, or Christian Doctrine, and guided many in the way of virtue by
prayer, and meditation, and gathered alms with which he provided victuals for
such poor, as suffered most necessity.

6. This caused great admiration in that University, and it was more increased
by seeing our Blessed Father clad with one only coat of course cloth, going
barefoot, and in his company other three in the same attire, who followed him,
as moved by his example; and besides another young man of France adjoined
himself unto them: So that they were called (as it were in mockery) those of
the Blancket, or course cloth. This admiration (caused by the nouelty) gave
occasion, that he and those in his company were diversely spoken of in the
town, every one interpreting that which he did see, or hear, according to his
own affection. And although great diligence, and much inquiry was made, and
diverse and exquisite informations taken by the Licenciate John Figueroa (who
afterward dyed President of Castilla, and at that time was Vicar General of
Alcala to the Archbishop of Toledo) of his life, and doctrine: yet there was
never found in word or deed, any vice in his life, or error in his doctrine,
as the same Vicar testified. Albeit for the greater trial of the Blessed
Father, He is committed to prison without any fault.
and that the truth might be more known, they afterward apprehended him upon a
false suspicion, and kept him in prison 42. days with great joy. of his
spirit, to see himself suffer without fault for Christ, which was the thing
that he desired much.

7. Wherefore though some persons of great Authority who were much devoted to
him, offered him their favor saying, that they would cause him to be set at
liberty, if he would; yet he never gave his consent, nor would take any
Proctor, or Advocate, nor any other to plead for his innocence, thinking
defense not to be necessary, where there was no fault. And likewise if he had
done amiss in any thing, he desired to be corrected by the Ecclesiastical
Superiors, to whom all his life he showed himself a child of obedience. After
42 days the matter being tried, and the Process being concluded, they
restored him, and his company to their former freedom, the Vicar aforesaid
declaring by his sentence that they were found altogether innocent, and
without fault in any thing which was objected against them.

8. There happened one thing to the blessed Father here in Alcala which was
accounted miraculous, A knight is consumed by fire who said, that Ignatius
deserved a faggot.
and this it was: that the Vicar having commanded when he delivered him out of
prison, that he should go apparreled like other scholars, he commended the
matter to a Priest named John of Lucena, who employed himself in works of
charity, desiring him to procure some alms, to buy him clothes. They two went
one day asking this alms, and they came to a street where many of good sort
stood looking on those who were playing at bal, nigh to the house of a
principal Knight, whom I will not name for just respects. This Knight
understanding that they asked alms for that effect, in a great rage, turning
to the said John of Lucena, asked him, Why one of his quality would procure
that alms? And he added, Let me be burnt, if this fellow deserve not to be
burned. Which words were cause of great scandal to those, who after came to
know it, and were acquainted with the Fathers sanctity. But the same day, there
came news, that King Philip the second was borne, in joy whereof there were
great feasts, and triumphs made in Alcala, and throughout all Spain. Upon
which occasion the foresaid Knight went up to a Turret in his house, where then
was a great quantity of gunpowder placed, to make artificial fyers, and by
chance a spark fell into the powder; which presently blew up the Tower, the
Knight being therewith killed and burnt.

9. When the blessed Father was told of this, sheding many tears of pity, and
compassion, he said: He foretold it himself this morning, when I passed by his
house, for I wished him no such harm. This accident was very public, and
notorious in Alcala, and accounted rare, and miraculous, for the declaration of
the Fathers sanctity.

10. From Alcala he went to speak with Don Alfonsus of Fonseca Archbishop of
Toledo, who at that time was at Valliadolid, and he intertayned him with great
benignity, offering him his favor and protection, if he would use the help of
him, or his in Salamanca, giving him money to carry him thither. When he came
thither he began to implov himself (as he was wont) in stirring up the peoples
hearts to the holy love, and fear of our Lord: In so much, that within a few
days, some Religious, and zealous persons, moved with the danger of the times,
and the freedom wherewith he spoke, and the concourse of the people who heard
him (fearing least under the cloak of holiness, some evil might lie hidden
which afterward could not be so easily remedied) gave advise to the Bishops
Prouisor, and procured that he, and one in his company should be apprehended
and cast into prison, being locked together so straightly in a great and long
chain, How and why he was apprehended in Salamanca.
that they could not go one from the other, upon any occasion whatsoever But in
that very place the B Father, omitted not his accustomed exercises, nor to
speak freely in the commendation of virtue and reprehension of vice, exciting
men's hearts to despise the world.

11. The concourse of people which went to hear him was great, as likewise the
fruit which proceeded from his words; but the joy of his heart was far greater,
to see himself in fetters, and chains for Christ. For all his desires, and
wishes were to dye for our Lord, who dyed for him upon the Cross; and so he
told to some, who went to comfort him, and showed much grief for his
sufferings, reprehending this their false pity and compassion, because they
knew not the treasures, which are contained in the Cross of Christ. They
remained in prison 22. days, receiving many favors of our Lord in their
souls, and were well provided of all that was necessary for their bodies, They
set him at liberty, and declare the goodness of his life and doctrine.
by the charity of such devout persons, as had taken notice of them, and bare
them affection. At the end of these 22. days, the foresaid Prouisor with the advice, and consent of other learned men set them at liberty, declaring them to
be men of pure and sincere life, and that he had not found any spot, or
suspicion at all in them.

How he went to Paris to finish his studies. And what happened unto him there.

CHAP. VII.
IT was Gods will, that this Blessed man should be Father of many children, and
therefore, though with contrary wynds, and boisterous waves, he guided him to
that haven where he might serve him according to that which he himself had
decreed. To this end, he gave him a great, and inflamed desire, to draw others
into his company, and to employ himself wholly with them in the spiritual help
of his neighbors: and withal he moved him, to go to the University of Paris;
which at that time was the Mother of all Universities, and the common School,
and Theater of the world.

2. The motion, and inclination which he had to this journey, was with so great
force and vehemence, that many spiritual men, and his best friends could not
divert him from it, by proposing unto him the sharpnes of the time and hard
winter, and the open and bloody war which was betwixt Spain and France
together with the many dangers by the way, He goes to Paris in a cold season,
and with danger.
alleging unto him many, and late examples of horrible crueltyes, which the
souldyers had practiced against those, that travailed in those parts. But all
these things were not sufficient to stay him, because he felt himself carried
with the favorable wynd of the Holy Ghost, fynding peace in war in dangers
security, and rest in labors. And so he took hiiourney through France on
foot, and with the favor of God, who guided him, arrived safe at Paris,
without passing any danger in the beginning of February 1528.

3. At Paris before he went forward in other higher studyes, he perfected
himself in the Latin tongue, studying Humanity almost two years. After this
he began his course of Philosophy, His studyes, labors and persecutions at
Paris.
and ended it with great commendation, taking the degree of Master of Arts, by
his Masters persuasion, and that by this degree he might (before men) have some
testimony of his learning, the better to help others. Having ended his course
of Philosophy, he studied Divinity, our Lord doing him great mercy, and
favors: and besides the labor which he took in studying, he endured other
great, and extraordinary incommodityes For in the beginning he lived in the
Hospital of S. James, asking from door to door that which he was every day to
eat, and he was also enforced the 3. first years to go diverse times to
Flaunders, and once into England to gather some alms of the Spanish merchants
who resided there) with which he might poorly sustain his life. He gave
himself likewise to very austere pennances, and to such a rigorous life, that
it alone was sufficient to bereave him of his health, as in effect it did, in
such sort, that he was constrained (not without evident peril of his life) to
interrupt the course of his studies.

4. Now what shall I say of his other employments in helping, inflaming, and
directing his neighbors to all virtue? What of the most grievous persecutions
which he endured for this cause, which were many, and very continual? For
certain young scholars, being noble and of excellent wits, having forsaken
all that they had, to follow the counsels of Christ our Lord, and moved with
the words and example of this Blessed Father, made a great change in their
life, and gave all their wealth to the poor, begging themselves from door to
door, and living as poor people in the hospital. This caused a great stir
in the University, and their kindred and friends (who were not pleased with
such courses) conceived great hatred against him, whom they knew to be the
author of that new life, which they accounted folly. And so they began to
persecute, and calumniate him, raising many false testimonies against him, as
the world is wont to do, against Gods servants.

5. Neither did the matter end in words alone: for in the College of S.
Barbara* where at that time, he studied Philosophy, they would have corrected
him publicly, with a severe, and public kind of punishment which used to be
inflicted upon such as were unquiet, and of a turbulent behavior: and this,
because he exhorted his schole-fellowes to the devout frequentation of the Holy
Sacraments, and to give themselves upon festival days, more then at other
times, to prayer; and because by this his counsel, a certain Spanish
scholar, named Amadore, had left the College, and the world to follow Christ
naked upon the Cross.

6. And although the Father knew before, what was intended, and devised against
him, and after that the College gates were shut, and the bell rung, His
fortitude and alacrity in ignominies and injuries.
and the Masters ready with their rods in their hands to correct him, and all
the scholars gathered together to behold this spectacle, he remained so
undaunted, that he was neither troubled, nor showed any weakness: yea, least
the glory of Christ should be diminished, and Virtue dishonored, and accounted
an ignomy amongst Christians, and those tender plants, which had begun to
flourish should be blasted with that whirld wind, he spoke to the Rector of the
College with such a majesty, and freedom (offering himself on the one side
very prompt, and joyful to have that Sacrifice made of him; and on the other
declaring the harm, which those who were as yet but beginners, and tender in
virtue, would receive, if he should be punished, for having exhorted them
thereunto) that the Rector there before all those who were gathered together
asked pardon of him, as of a Saint, who made no account of his own ignominy,
but only of the honor of God, and the good of his neighbors.

7. Thus this chastisement was omitted, and Virtue remained with more
reputation, and the Holy Father came to be more known and the Rector (who was
named Doctor James Gouea, of Portugal, a Jearned and pious man,) remained with
such affection to the Father, What means God took to open the gate, for the
children of Ignatius to go to the East Indies.
and for his sake to his children, that in progress of time, he was the
principal Author who persuaded the King of Portugal, Don John the third, to
send the Fathers of the society of Jesus to the East Indies, who since have
done so much good in those remote, and large Provinces, converting innume^able
souls of Infidells, to our Holy Religion: our Lord taking so small and
ignominious an occasion, for so great a thing, and so much to his glory.

8. Out of all that which men did against the Blessed Father, God drew profit
for the Father himself who endured it, and for those who every day joined
themselves unto him with desire to imitate the examples of his virtues; The
Inquisitor of Paris approves the proceedings of Ignatius.
and they served also for a greater, and more clear testimony of the truth. As
it happened here in Paris, where his Adversaries not contenting themselves with
the calumniations, and false suspicions which they had raised against the
Blessed Father, they denounced him also to the Inquisitor, who was a learned,
and a grave Divine, called Master Matthew Ory, a Friar of S. Dominicks order.
But the Inquisitor remained so well satisfied with the Fathers life, and
learning, that he demanded of him the book of Exercises, which he composed in
Manresa (as we have said) and it pleased him so much, that with his leave he
took a copy of it for himself: and gave a testimony by authentical Writing, of
the innocence, and purity which he had found in his life and behavior. And
afterward in Rome, in a great storm, which was raised against him, and against
those of his company, the same Inquisitor was one of the witnesses of the
innocence of Blessed Father Ignatius, and an approuer of his doctrine, as shall
be declared hereafter.

Of those that adjoined themselves to B. F. Ignatius, and of their virtuous
employments.

CHAP. VIII.
AND because the Father had an eye, and desire to get, and procure Company
which might help, and concur to the salvation of souls, our Lord having
called him to this so great an enterprise; he was attentive to nothing more
then to gain some young men of good ability, and laudable conversation, who
might have the same intention: and so he gained Peter Faber of Sauoy, Francis
Xauier of Nauar James Laynes of Almacan, Alfonsus Salmero^ of Toledo, Simon
Rodericus of Portugal, and Nicolas Bobadilla, who was of a place night to
Palentia. After these their came likewise to him other three, who were Claudius
Iaius of Sauoy, Joan Codury of the Delphinat, and Paschatius Brouet of the
Province of Picardy; so that they were in all ten. And though, they were of so
different Nations, as some of Spain, and others of France, at the time that
those two Kingdoms were at such terrible wars, notwithstanding they were all
of one and the same heart, and will.

2. All these were Masters of Art, and studied Divinity, and the day of the
Assumption of our Blessed Lady at a Church not far from Paris called Mons
Martyrum, after they had confessed, and received the body of Christ our Lord,
they made a vow to leave, upon a certain day appointed, all that they had, and
to employ themselves in the spiritual profit of their neighbors, and to go
in Pilgrimage to Jerusalem, if coming to Venice they might have commodity to
do it within a year. And if they could not go within that year, or if in
going they could not stay at Jerusalem, to offer themselves at the Popes feet,
the Vicegerent of Christ our Lord, that his Holiness might freely dispose of
them, in the service of the Church, and the salvation of souls.

3. This being agreed upon among themselves, Blessed Ignatius gave order to the
rest to take their journey toward Venice, when their studyes were ended, where
he would expect them, after that he had been first in Spain, and dispatched
there certain business for some of them, and other important affairs for the
service of God, which caused him to go thither. With this resolution he
departed from Paris, and came to his own Country, where though his Brother
were Lord of the Place, yet he would by no means lodge in his house, nor take
that, which he needed of him, What he did in his own Country
but lived in the hospital, asking his poor Victuals from door to door.
There he taught the Catechism, of Christian Doctrine, and preached with such
concourse of people which came from many villages, that he was enforced to
preach in the fields, because the multitude could not be contained in the
Churches, and many that they might hear, and see him the better, climbed up
into trees: and though the Father was very weak, and sick of an ague, yet he
preached thrice every week; and all the words which he spoke, were plainly
heard more then a quarter of a mile, from the place wherein he stood, which
seemed very strange, and miraculous.

4. With these his Sermons he rooted out many vices, and established many
things profitable for sustayning the poor, and the amendment of those who were
in mortal sin, providing in all things for the good both of souls and bodies,
and leaving all that Country in admiration, and replenished with a most sweet
odor of his virtues, He cures a man of the gout, and a woman in a
consumptio^, and another possessed.
and the miracles which God wrought by him. For in that place he healed a man
named Vastida, who had been many years much troubled with the gout; and a
virtuous woman who had been in a co^sumption for some space; and delivered
another, who had been tormented by the Devil four years. And our Lord wrought
other things by his means, which were held for miraculous; by reason whereof,
and for his holy life, all the people respected him so much, that they did
strive to touch his garments, esteming him as a Saint, and a great Servant of
God.

5. From hence alone, and without money, asking alms by the way, he went to
Pampelona, and from thence to Almacan, Siguenca, and Toledo, to dispatch the
business which was commended unto him. Afterward he took ship, near to
Valentia, for Italy, and with great labor, incommodityes and dangers, he
arrived with our Lords favor at Venice, to expect his company there, as they
had agreed in Paris. But the Devil esteming him now his open enemy, and
foreseeing the war which he was to make against him, did persecute him there
also, He is accused at Venice and declared innocent.
and by certain of his ministers published, that he was a fugitive, and that
his statua being burnt, was fled from Spain, and other things of like nature,
but all false; and were declared to be such by Hierome Verall Archbishop of
Rosa, who after was Cardinal of the Church of Rome, and at that time
Apostolical Nuncius in Venice In the time that he stayed for his company he
did much good, drawing many learned, and pious men to Gods service, who united
themselves with him, and directing some of those Senators to all virtue, and
leaving a most sweet memory of himself, with all that knew, and conuersed with
him.

6. His company came from Paris to Venice the 8. of January 1537. having
endured much by the way, it being long, The rest of his company comes to
Venice, and there serve in the hospitalls.
and the time sharp, and rigorous, and they coming also on foot with much
discommodity: but they overcame all difficultyes by the particular graces,
which God gave them; and with an inflamed desire to suffer much for him. In
Venice they found their Father, and Master Ignatius, with the other company
which was come unto him, and they embraced on another with exceeding great
contentment. They presently divided themselves into diverse Hospitalls, to serve
and assist the poor. Afterward they went to Rome on foot, with extreme
poverty, and need, asking alms, and fasting every day, because it was in Lent:
where having received the benediction of Pope Paul the 3. to go to Jerusalem
with the same poverty, they returned to Venice, where Father Ignatius remained.

7. There those who were not priests took that order, the day of S. John Bapt.
in the same year 1537. having before made the vows of Chastity, and Poverty,
They are made Priests and divide themselves in the state of Venice.
in presence of the Apostolical Legate. And to expect their going to
Jerusalem, they divided themselves in the Cities of the dominion of Venice:
and Fa. Ignatius, with Father Faber, and Father Laynes remained 40. days
without the City of Vincenza, in a little house, or Hermitage, which was left
desolate and half fallen down, without doors, or windows, so that the wind,
and water entered in on all sides. They slept on the ground upon a little straw,
and had nothing to eat, but a few hard, and moldy crusts of bread, which were
given them of alms, not with out difficulty, seething them first in a little
water, that they might be able to eat them.

8. But afterward having wholly lost their hope of going to Jerusalem, they
resolved to divide themselves in the chief Universities of Italy: and B. F.
Ignatius with Father Faber and F. Laynes went to Rome, whither God called them,
to begin the new Society, and Order, which through the whole world, was so much
to increase his glory. It was a very markeable thing that for many years
before that of 1537. and after that until 1570. there never failed some ships
for pilgrims to go to Jerusalem, but only that year. For our Lord directed
the courses of this Blessed Father, and of these in his company for higher
matters, then they understood, or thought of in the beginning.

The Society of Jesus is founded, and confirmed by the Sea Apostolic: and
Ignatius is ordained General.

CHAP. IX.
THE Blessed Father, after he was made Priest, had taken a whole year to
prepare himself for his first Mass. In this time, Ignatius his devotion to
our B. Lady.
he employed himself with all the forces of his soul most humbly beseeching
the glorious Virgin Mary, the Mother of God, that she would bring him unto her
Son: and that since she is the Gate of Heaven, and a singular Aduo cate
betwixt God and Man, she would procure him entrance; that her most Blessed
Son might take notice of him by her means, and he might come to know her
Son, and reverence him with a most entire heart and devotion. He added
moreover, that since the enterprise, which he had undertaken for his service,
was so great and hard, that she would open the gate, and take away the
difficulties which might hinder in so, important an affair.

2. With these desires, and wishes the B. Father took his way toward Rome, on
foot, with F. Faber, and F. Laynes in his company, asking alms, as they were
wont: and he received the most Sacred Body of our Lord every day at their
hands: and in all his journey, he was illustrated, and strengthened with
heavenly inspirations, and spiritual comforts. But one day drawing nigh to the
City of Rome, leaving the two Fathers in the field, he went into a desert, and
solitary Church some mile from the City to pray. There amidst the greatest
fervor of his prayers, he felt his heart changed, and God the Father appeared
to him, together with his most Blessed Son, who carried the Cross upon his
shoulders: and with the eyes of his soul, illustrated with that resplendent
light, he saw that the Eternal Father, turning to his only begotten Son,
commended Ignatius, and those in his company unto him, with exceeding great
love, Christ with his Cross appears to him and promises him his favor.
putting them into his hands. And our most benign Jesus having received the
under his patronage, and protection, as he stood in that manner, with his
Cross, turned to Ignatius, and with a loving, and mild countenance said unto
him: Ego vobis Romae propitius cro: I will be favorable to you at Rome.

3. With this divine revelation, our Father remained very much comforted, and
strenghtned, and he related it afterward to those in his company, to animate
them the more, and to prepare them for the troubles which they were to endure.
And with this vision, together with many other excellent illustrations which he
had, the most Sacred name of JESUS, was so imprinted in his soul, with an
earnest desire to take our Savior for his Captain, carrying his Cross after
him; that this was the cause, that at his, and the other first Fathers humble
su^e, and request, the Apostolic Sea, Why he called his order the Society of
JESUS.
at the Confirmation of our Religion, called, and named it, THE SOCIETY OF
JESUS; I which was first done by Pope Paul the third of that name, after a
terrible tempest, which was raised against it in Rome, by occasion of a
certain heretical Preacher, to whom our Fathers opposed themselves. Which
storm soon ceased, by reason that our Lord brought in that occasion, and in
that very time, not without a singular and particular providence, those who had
been the Blessed Fathers Judges in Spain, France, and Venice, that now they
might be witnesses of his innocence, and virtue. By which means the truth
being known, the Governor of Rome, pronounced sentence in favor of our
Blessed Father, and of those in his company, by order of his Holiness.

4. Who to proceed more maturely in the business of the Confirmation of this
Religion, What (...) there was in the confirmation or the Society.
committed it to three Cardinals, who in the beginning were very opposite and
auerted, especially Cardinal Bartholomaeus Guidichion, because he judged, that
new Orders of Religion were not fit to be begun, but the ancient reformed,
according to the Decree of Innocentius the third in the Lateran Council, and
of Gregory the tenth in the Council of Lions. Which very difficulty, those two
great, and glorious Patriarks S. Dominick and S. Francis had in the
Confirmation of their Sacred Religions: for the works of God must pass
through this examine, and furnace.

5. But our Lord Jesus having now taken Ignatius under his wings, and promised
to favor him in Rome, changed the mind of Cardinal Guidichion in such sort,
that he was heard to utter these words: I like not new Religions but yet I dare
not omit to approve this: for I feel inwardly in my heart such extraordinary
motions, that the divine Will carries me to that, which I am not inclined to
by reason; and embrace that with my affection, which by the force of humane
reasons I utterly disliked. And thus this very Cardinal commended the
Institute of the Society very earnestly to the Pope: and his Holiness read it,
and with the spirit of the Chief Bishop said: Digitus Deiesthic: This is the
finger of God; affirming, that from so small, and weak beginnings he hoped for,
and expected no small fruit for the Church of God. And so he confirmed the
Religion of the Society, in the year 1540. Pope Paul the the third confirms
the Society.
the 27. of September, which is the feast of the S. Cosmus and Darnianus: but
yet he added a certain Limitation, which he took away three years after,
co^firming the Society a new. And the year 1550. Pope Inlius the third, who
succeeded Pope Paul, approved it again: and the other Popes, who have followed
since, have established, and enriched it with many Graces, and privileges, as
may be seen in their Bulls, and in the Summary thereof.

6. But returning to our blessed Father Ignatius, when the Society was thus
confirmed, by the Vicegerent of Christ (as we have said) there met in Rome, the
Lent following in the year 1541. the first Fathers who remained in Italy, for
the election of a General, and the others sent their suffrages by writing. He
is made General.
And by common consent of all, the B. Father was declared General. His
humility was so great, that he could not possibly be persw^ded to accept of it,
but entreated the Fathers most effectuo^sly not to give him that charge, of
which he was so unworthy, and which he could not exercise without the damage,
and harm of the Society. So that finally they were enforced to comfort him,
and to condescend to him so far, as to take other four days to commend that
affayre to our Lord anew, and to beseech him to discover unto them his holy
will. But they continued in their former resolution the second time also, which
notwithstanding was not sufficient to overcome the Fathers humility, and the
true contempt which he had of himself, until being retired for some days,
and having made a general Confession in S. Peter's de Monte aureo, to a Father
of S. Francis Order, called Friar Theophilus, a holy man, and of great parts
(with whom before the confirmation of the Society, he was wont to confess) he
told him, that he resisted the holy Ghost, in resisting, his Election.

7. To this voice our humble Father Ignatius yielded himself, bowing his neck
to the yoke, which our Lord laid upon him: and the 22. day of April of the
same year 1541. he went with the other Fathers, and three Brothers (of which
my self was one) to visit the 7. Churches and Stations of Rome, and in the
Church of S. Paul he said mass, and made his profession, giving the B.
Sacrament to the other Fathers, who likewise made their profession in his
hands, Ignatius and the other Fathers make their profession.
shedding many tears, for their spirituallioy, and fervent devotion: Yielding
many thanks to our Lord, because he had vouchsafed to bring that to effect, and
final perfection, which himself had begun. From that day forward the Society
was acknowldged, for a Religion approved by the Sea Apostolic, having in it
Religious men obliged with their solemn vows, and profession, and with a
Superior and head, who was to govern it for Gods greater glory, and the good
of his Church.

How he behaved himself being made General; and of diners new Colleges
founded by his means.

CHAP. X.
PRESENTLY after he was made General, the first thing that he did, was to rise
very early the next morning, and to awake all the house; judging it to be his
office to watch prepetually over all, and to procure, that all his subjects
should watch and every one attend carefully to their employment. And to humble,
and debase himself so much the more, by how much the degree in which God had
placed him was high and eminent, he went into the kitchen, and performed the
office of Cook, and such other things of like quality for many days, with
such diligence that he seemed a Nouice, who did it only for his own greater
profit, and mortification.

2. This being ended he began to catechize, or teach the Christian Doctrine in
our Church, which he continued for the space of six, and forty days,
explicating daily the commandments, articles, and other things appertayning to
the principles of our holy faith. All which he declared in Italian, with
improper, and unpolished words, but uttered with such spirit, and force, that
they moved the hearers to compunction; in such sort, that they were so pierced
with sorrow, that presently upon hearing him they went to confession, and could
scarce speak by reason of the abundance of tears and sighs, with which they
bewailed their sins. Of which I my self am witness, being at that time but
very young, and repeating every day that which the B. Father had taught.

3. Besides all this, the holy Father attended to plant, propagate, and extend
his new order of religion throughout the world. He sustained it with his
prayers, ruled it with his wisdom, gave it life with his spirit, defended it
with his valor, and edified, and inflamed it to all virtue with his example.
And our Lord, who had chosen, and prevented him with the blessings of his
sweetness, favored him with so large a hand, The propagation of the Society
within a year after the confirmation.
that whatsoever the B. Father undertook, seemed prosperous and sucure. In so
much, that after the Society was confirmed by the Sea Apostolic, (they at that
time being so few) our Lord spread them in such sort over the world, that
within the space of one year, they were in France, Italy, Germany, Spain,
Portugal, Ireland, and the West Indies, not without much admiration.

4. Our B. Father was General for the space of fifteen years, three months,
The B. Fathers employments being General.
and nine days, from the 22. of April, in the year of our Lord ^54^. until
the last of July 1556. in which he departed this world. All this time he
remained in Rome, without going thence, unless it were twice, once into the
Kingdom of Naples, and another time to the City of Oruieto, where Pope Paul
the third was at that season; both which iourneis he undertook for affairs of
great importance.

5. In all these years his employ ments were to found, and govern by
himself, the house of Rome (which is the mother, and Head of the rest) and to
send his children to preach in the world, giving them instructions, by
observation whereof they might become worthy workmen of Jesus Christ; who with
the edification, which by Gods favor they caused in all parts, drew the
peoples affection unto them, and increased their devotion in such sort, that
many desired: Colleges of the Society, to the end they might receive the more
profit by their doctrine, and holy institution. And 20 this the holy Father did
carefully cooperate, sending those of the Society to the places, which seemed
most necessary, and convenient for the foundation of such Colleges, and
houses, as were required: and that this plant, which our Lord of his goodness
would have to increase so much in his Church, might daily be more firmly
rooted.

6. And because the Devil bare great hatred, and envy to the B. Father, and
his religion, and in all parts moved great contradictions, and persecutions
against it; he as a valiant Captain encountered the common enemy, making as
fierce resistance against him, and clearing the truth, not permitting that such
lies, as the Devil by his ministers spread abroad should prevail against it.
Notwithstanding the Father was not content with these so many, and so great
imployme^ts, which had been able to weary a Giant: but with an enflamed
desire, and charity to help his neighbors (as if he had nothing else to do) he
labored to profit them abroad, and procured to extirpate certain vices out of
the City of Rome, and to institute therein many works much to Gods glory, and
the spiritual benefit of souls.

7. As for example: that the Physicians should not cure the bodies of the sick,
before their souls were cured with the holy sacrament of Confession, The pious
works which he did in Rome.
according to the Decretall of Innocentius the third. That there should be a
house erected in Rome for the Cathecumeni; in which the Jews, and Infidells,
who desired baptism, and are brought to the knowledge of the Truth, might be
received and maintained. To him likewise is the work, commonly known by the
appellation of Our Lady of Grace, to be attributed, which was begun in the
monastery of S. Marcha, where there was a Confraternity, or brotherhood
instituted to recollect, and retire all such married, or unmarried women, as
remained in evil estate, until they were reconciled to their husbands, or had
some other condition wherein they might live without our Lords offense.

8. And the charity of the Blessed Father was so great, that when these poor
women forsook their evil life, he himself would accompany them through the
City, notwithstanding his years, authority, or office of General. And
whereas some told him, that he lost his time, because these women through
their evil custom, did easily return to their former vices, the holy man
answered with marvelous repose: I account not this labor lost, yea I assure
you, that if with the labors and cares of my whole life, I could procure any
one of these to pass only one night without sinning, I would esteem them well
bestowed, that the infinite Majesty of my Creator, and Lord, might not be
offended in that short space.

9. He labored no less to relieve the necessity, and solitude of Orphans.
And so the two houses which are in Rome, for such children of both sexes were
by his means erected. Likewise with no less, yea with more care, he procured
the foundation of the Monastery of S. Catherine in Rome, called de Funarijs, in
which Virgins, who either by the negligence or defect of virtue in their
mothers, or by reason of their poverty are in danger, do retire themselves, as
to a sanctuary. For his charity was so great, that he always treated of such
things, as might profit his neighbors, and further their salvation. And that
this charity of the Blessed Father, together with his fortitude, and
constancy, in the works which he undertook for Gods greater service, might the
better appear, our Lord permited terrible persecutions, and tempests to be
raised against him, for these his good, and profitable labors: which
notwithstanding finally did break their furious waves upon the rock of truth,
and the works remained more firm with these contradictions; and the Fathers
sanctity more approved, and known.

10. It cannot easily be believed, how many things were borne up, and sustained
with the shoulders of this divine Giant, and with what valor, and spirit he
sustained them, especially having so weak, and sickly a body. For besides the
affairs already mentioned which had been sufficient to weary many men, diverse
Princes, and persons of all qualityes, did write unto him, from almost all the
parts, and Provinces of the world. Some for their devotion commended themselves
to his prayers: others to benefit themselves by his prudence and wisdom,
demaundinge his counsel: others to help themselves with his favor, and
industry in dispatching business: others to give him thanks for the benefits,
and good assistance received from his children: and others for other respects.
And they were so many, that only this emploiment had been sufficient to tire any
strong man, if he had not been vpholden by the mighty hand of our Lord, who gave
him forces for all. So that when he was most weary, sickly, and alone, and
without the helps which were necessary for so great a charge, he seemed most
strong; and in his weakness was discovered, and shined the virtue and force of
God.

Of the happy Death of B. Ignatius: and what happened thereat.

CHAP. XI.
THE blessed Father with the force of his soul supported ported the weakness
of his body, enduring with great patience the troubles of this pilgrimage, and
conforming himself in all things to the will of God: but he had such an
enflamed desire to see, and enjoy him, that he could not suppress the gladness
which he conceived in thinking upon his passage out of this world, without
tears. Wherefore being now laden with years, wearied with sickness, afflicted
with the perturbation, and new calamityes of the Church, and having an ardent
desire to be with Christ, he began to beseech him with many tears, and sighs,
that he would vouchsafe to take him out of this exile, and banishment and carry
him to that place of rest, where he might praise him, and enjoy his blessed
presence, with the freedom, which he desired.

2. And our Lord heard his request, giving him certain signs, and pledges
thereof. Whereupon, in a letter which he wrote to Don^a Leonora Mascaren^as, He
foreknew his death and wrote of it to Don^a Leonora Mascarenas.
who had been Nurse to Phillip the second, the Catholic King of Spain, and his
very devout daughter, he took his leave of her, telling her (as she her self
afterward told me) that, thet should be the last letter, which he would write
unto her, and that he would earnestly commend her to God in heaven. Wherefore
understanding that this so happy, and joyful a day for him approached (though
at that time he had not any great sickness, but only his ordinary weakness, and
indisposition, which seemed not strange to them that lived with him) the Blessed
Father went to Confession, and received the blessed Sacrament, as he was wont
to do, when he could not say Mass: and upon the 30. day of July at three of
the clock in the afternoon, he called for Father John Polancus Secretary of
the Society: who little thinking what he would have with him, the B. Father
told him with exceeding great repose, that the hour of his departure out of
this world drew near, willing him presently to go kiss the Popes Holiness feet
in his name, and to crave his blessing for him, and a Plenary Indulgence of his
sins, that so he might enter with more confidence and comfort into that his
last journey: all which his Holiness granted very willingly, giving great
signs of love, and grief.

3. The Physicians being called, said, that the sickness was not dangerous,
and the Father made no alteration in his proceeding (for being so humble, he
would not make any ostentation of the gifts received from our Lord, nor of that
which he knew, but let the Physicians do their office, and permitted, that
their opinion, and counsel should be taken, and followed in all things:) and
in this manner the next morning, which was Friday, one hour after sun
rising, lifting up his hands, and fixing his eyes on Heaven, calling upon JESUS
with his tongue and heart, with a serene and quiet countenance, he rendered his
Blessed soul to him, who had created it for his so great Glory, His departure
the last of July. 1556.
the last of July in the year 1556. A man truly humble which he showed eue^ in
that his last hour: since that knowing (as he did) the time of his death, he
named no Vicar General (as he might have done) nor would call his children to
exhort them, and to give them his Blessing, nor make any other demonstration of
a Father, to signify that he had done nothing, and accounted himself as nothing
in the foundation of the Society.

4. He deceased at the age of threescore and five years, and in the 35. year
after his Conversion: in which space he lived in extreme poverty, pennances,
peregrinations, labors in study persecutions, prisons, fetters, with other
great troubles, and molestations, all which he endured with a cherefull, and
admirable constancy, for the love of Jesus Christ, who gave him victory over
the Devils and all his other adversaries which procured to overthrow him. He
lived 16. years after the Society was confirmed by the Sea Apostolic, What
houses, and Provinces of the Society he left founded.
and in them he saw it multiplied, and extended almost thoroughout the whole
world. He left established 12. Provinces, that of Portugal, of Castilla, of
Aragonia, of Andaluzia, of Italy (which co^prehendeth Lumbardy, and Toscan) of
Naples, of Sicily, of Germany, of Flaunders, France, of Brasile, and of the
East Indies: and in these Provinces there was at that time about one hundred
Colleges, or Houses of the Society.

5. The death of so Holy, and excellent a man caused great feeling, and sorrow
in Rome, especially amongst his children, who remained there, and afterward in
the rest of the Society, in which presently after his decease, the favor which
proceeded from their dead, or rather truly living Father was perceived. For
throughout the whole Society there ensued a most tender feeling of his most
fragrant memory, joined with tears of comfort, and a desire replenished with
holy hope, together with a certain vigor, and fortitude of spirit: so that
they all seemed to burn with new desires of laboring, and suffering for
Christ.

6. His body was placed in a low, and humble tomb, the first day of August at
the right hand of the high Altar, in our little Church of the B. Virgin Mary in
Rome. Afterward upon the same day of his death in the year 1569. it was
translated to another place in the same Church, because the high Altar was
changed: and finally in the year 1587. upon the 19. day of November which is
dedicated to S. Pontianus Pope, and Martyr, it was translated again, with
great solemnity to the new, and sumptuous Church of the Professed House, which
Cardinal Alexander Farnesius had erected.

7. It was placed in a chest of lead, under a vault, at the right hand of the
high Altar, with a plain stone, which covers the grave, and in the will a
black shining marble, in which these words are engraven.

D. O. M. IGNATIO SOCIETATIS IESV FVNDATORI. OBDORMIVIT IN DOMINO AETATIS SVAE
ANNO LXV. CONFIRMATI A SEDE APOSTOLICA ORDINIS XVI. SALVTIS HVMANAE MD.LVI.
PRIDE. KAL. AVG. EIVS IN CHRISTO FILIJ PARENTI OPTIMO POSS. That is,

To Ignatius Founder of the Society of Jesus, as to their most loving Father
his children in Christ erected this memory. He rested in our Lord in the 65.
year of his age, and in the 16. after the Confirmation of his Religion by the
Sea Apostolic, and in the year of our redemption 1556. the day before the
Calends of August.

8. In this place remains the body of this Blessed Patriarch at this day,
reverenced not only by all his children, but also by the people, and Court of
Rome, and those who repair thither for their devotion; by reason of the great
opinion, which they have of his admirable life, and excellent sanctity: as also
for the Miracles, which our Lord works every day by his intercession, to
exalt him, and make him glorious in the world: and by reason of the fruit,
which they see brought forth by the labors, industry, and travail of his
children: judging that the root, which has produced such a plant, could not
choose but be exceeding perfect, nor the fountain but very plentiful, and
acceptable to our Lord, from which has flowed so abundant, and wholesome
waters of virtue, and learning, to water the world, which was before so dry and
barren, and replenished with briars and thorns.

9. His stature was with the least: his conntenaunce very grave: his forehead
broad, and plain: his eyes were somewhat hollow; the lids whereof were a little
wrinckled, and gathered together by reason of many tears which he continually
shed: his ears of a middle sise: his nose somewhat high, and lifted up in the
midst: his color though sallow, yet lively, and his head venerably bald. The
manner of his gesture was cherefully grave, and gravely cherefull: so that with
his serenity he rejoiced those who beheld him, and with his gravity composed
them. He halted a little of one lege, which was somewhat shorter then the other
(by reason of the wound, which he received, and the bones, that were taken out
of it) but without deformity; and with the moderation, which he observed in his
gate, it could hardly be perceived.

Of the chiefest Virtues of B. Ignatius: and especially of his Humility, and
contempt of himself.

CHAP. XII.
BUT who can worthily relate in this place, that harmony, and comfort of
admirable virtues which were to be seen in the Blessed Father? The virtues of
the Holy Father.
Who can discover the treasures, and heavenly gifts, with which God enriched,
and adorned him? Who is able to explicate the asperity of his penance? the
perfection of his contempt of the world? his profound humility invincible
patience? amiable meeknes? his so rare spiritual prudence? so sweet, and
effectual government of his subjects? his fortitude, and constancy in
aduersityes, and contradictions? his confidence, and courage in undertaking
hard, and difficult attempts for our Lords love? his vigilance, and solicitude
in seeing them performed? his burning, and enflamed love of God, and of his
neighbors? his continual prayer with which his soul enjoyed the visitations
of her sweetest spouse? and finally his miracles, and the wonderful works
which our Lord has done, and daily does by his means?

2. For to omit the rigor of his pennances, his nakedness, hunger, and cold,
his disciplines, and hayrclothes, and all other kind of penaltyes, with which
he afflicted his body, from the time that he began to serve our Lord, His
humility.
he most affectuously embraced the virtue of Humility, as the foundation of all
other virtues: going torn, and half naked, and living in the Hospitalls as a
poor man, among other of that quality, despised, and contemned and desirous
not to be known, or esteemed of any, and very joyful when he was neglected,
and persecuted for the love of Jesus Christ our Redeemer; by which he taught
us, that he who pretends to ascend on high, must begin very low, and that
according to the height of the building, the foundation must be laid low; and
that for the conversion of souls this affect of true humility helps more,
then to show authority, which has some taste, or savor of the world.

3. I heard him say, that al those of the house gave him example of virtue, and
matter of confusion, and that he was not scandalized at any of them, but only
at himself. And in a letter, which I have seen, he wrote, that he had never
treated with any of spiritual affairs, how great a sinner soever he was, that
he seemed not to have gained much by that communication. Doubtless because he
esteemed himself a greater sinner. And to this purpose he was wont to say,
that he did not think, there was any in the world, who on the one side received
so great, and so continual favors at Gods hands: and on the other, was so
defective, and careless in his service. One day, as we were together alone,
he told me, that he was to beseech our Lord, that his body after his death
might be cast upon a dunghill, that it might be eaten by fowls, and dogs. For
I being (says he) as I am, an abominable dunghill, yea very dung it self,
what other thing should I desire, for the punishment of my synns?

4. He desired, that all should jest, and mock at him, and said, that if he
would suffer himself to be carried away by his fervor, and desire, he should
go up, and down the streets naked, and al bemyred, that he might be accounted
a fool. But he repressed this so great an affect of Humility with his charity,
and desire to help his neighbors. Very seldom (and then not without great
cause) did he speak of any thing belonging to himself, and when others d^^
speak of them in his presence, or of any thing else, which might redound to his
praise, he presently recollected himself, not without fears, and blushing.

5. The Blessed Father had at one time for his Confessarius an ancient Father
of the Society, of the Kingdom of Nauar, who was called Don Diego Eguia, so
perfect, and holy a man, that our Father himself said unto me: when we shall be
in Heaven Don Diego will be so far elevated above us, that we shall scarce be
able to see him. This Father spoke most earnestly of the virtue, and sanctity
of our B. Father, as one who knew his conscience, and the purity, and the
ornament of his soul. The B. Father took this very ill, and commanded him in
virtue of holy obedience, that he should not speak any word thereof so long as
he lived, and not being able to repress him, he left of confessing with him.
And the holy old man was wont to say, that he desired to live some days after
the death of our Father, that he might declare, what he knew; but our Lord so
ordained, that he died three days before, and as it was thought, at the
request of our Blessed Father.

6. He arrived by Gods grace to so great, and perfect a knowledge of himself,
that for many years before his death, he had not any temptation of vain
glory. For his soul was so illustrated with light from heaven, that he was
wont to say, that he feared no vice less then vain glory, which is a worm,
wont to eat, and consume the Cedars of Libanus, and is bred by the blind love,
and estimation of our selves. All that belonged unto him sauoured of Humility:
his apparel was poor though cleanly, his bed poor, his food and sustenance
poor, and so sober and temperate, that it was a perpetual abstinence, being
also course, and homely. He employed himself willingly in the most humble
offices of the house, and in making of the beds, and dressing up the chambers
of the sick: and he suffered himself to be so easily ruled by the judgment of
others, that though he were Superior, yet he equalled himself in all things
to his inferiors; yea he did not only equal, but also submit, and subject
himself unto them, with admirable meekenes, and humility.

7. In the time that he taught the Catechism, or Christian Doctrine, a boy,
which was in the house told him with great plainness and simplicity, that he
spoke bad Italian, and that he should do well to labor to speak better. To whom
the Father answered. Thou have good reason, Boy, I pray thee note my faults,
and tell me of them. One of the causes why he desired to have his religion
called the SOCIETY OF JESUS, was, not to be named, and mentioned himself, and
that it might be thought, that he had no part in it: and when he spoke of it,
he always said this least Society: for as he was the least in his own eyes,
so he would have his children to esteem themselves such. Now what shall I say
of that Humility, with which so earnestly, and so often he refused to be
General, and would never accept that Office, until his Confessarius charged
his conscience and obliged him thereunto?

8. Neither was he content with this, but afterward also in the year 1550. he
caused the grauest Fathers of the Society to meet in Rome, that he might
resign his Charge, protesting before our Lord, and affirming in a letter,
which he wrote unto them, that he had many, and diverse times seriously judged,
that he wanted in a manner infinito degrees of those parts, and talents which
were required in him, who should have that Charge, and Office. For these were
his very words: Whereas all we who were acquainted with him, knew, that he had
so great, and notable a gift in governing, that all the excellent Superiors of
Religions might take him for a pattern, and example. And though he could not
obtain his desire at this time, yet he omitted not to treat of the same
renunciation again, that he might retire himself, as well to give himself
with more freedom to contemplation, and enjoy by solitariness his sovereign
Good, as also because (as he told me) it seemed to him, that he was good for
nothing, and that he hindered some other from governing the Society, who might
profit it more. But he went not forward with his intention at this time: for he
was told, that the Society would in no sort yield unto it, nor consent to have
any other Superior, so long as it pleased God to prolong his life.

9. From this so excellent humility proceeded the contempt of himself, His
contempt of the world and fortitude in tribulations.
and of the world, and all wordly things which this Blessed Father had. For he
who is truly humble, desires to be humbled, and takes humiliation, as S.
Bernard says, for a means to obtain humility. From the same humility
likewise came his fortitude in troubles, and his patience in adversities, and
tribulations. For he, who is truly humble, dwelling within himself, accounts
himself so great a sinner, and so unworthy of comfort, that he thinks all to
be to much for him, and that no evil happens unto him, which seems not
little in comparison of that which he deserves, and rejoices to see all
creatures take revenge of him, as instruments of the divine Justice.

Of his Mortifications, and Charity toward God.

CHAP. XIII.
Now what shall I say of the mortification of his passions, and of all
inordinate affections, by which he had obtained an admirable peace in his soul,
and so great quietness, and tranquillity, that nothing seemed able to disturb
him? The mortification of his passions.
His complexion was very cholerike, but notwithstanding both in his words, and
works he was so mild, and sweet, that he seemed rather flegmatike, and of a
cold complexion. So that having wholly overcome the vicious excess of his
choler, he retained the efficacy, and force which it is wont to give, and is
necessary for the execution of such business, as we deal in. He always kept
one, and the same tenor, and equality in all things: and although that of his
body varied, yet his mind, and inward disposition was always one: neither was
he altered or changed with any diversity of things, or difference of times. Yea
this equality of mind, and perpetual constancy redounded in some sort to his
body, which was ready to receive that outward demonstration which reason
prescribed.

2. Being once sick, the Physician advised him, that he should not give place
to such thoughts, as might afflict him. And with this occasion he began to
examine, what thing in this world could cause him affliction; and after the
consideration of many things he found this only one: If by some casuality our
Society should be dissolved; and withal it seemed to him that if this fell out
without his fault, after a little recollection in prayer for the space of one
quarter of an hour, he should return to his accustomed peace, and allacrity.
Yea he added further, that he should have his peace and quietness in his soul,
althought the Society were dissolved, as salt in the water. How wholly then had
he forsaken himself, and rooted himself in God, who in so great a matter, and
so proper, and peculiar to himself was so subject, and resigned to the will of
our Lord? Which is an evident sign, that his passions were prefectly mortifyed.

3. By this mortification, His charity toward God.
and by that perfect knowledge, and contempt which he had of himself, this
Blessed man, attained to a most high, and excellent degree of charity, which is
the sum of all virtues, and the complement of all perfection. This his
burning, and enflamed love toward God, appeared in nothing better, then in
that, which he did, and suffered for him. For true love is never idle, and is
not content with only doing much for his beloved, but in suffering much also,
and giving his life for him. How much then did this Blessed Father, and what
great things did he suffer for our Lords honor, and to amplify his glory in
the world? Part of it may be coniectured by that, which hitherto has been said.

4. But the Father himself avouched, that all the things of the world put
together in one balance, were to him of no esteem, if in the other were
placed the fanours which he had received of our Lord, in the persecutions,
prisons, and fetters which he had endured for his love. And that there is no
created thing, which can cause so great a joy in a soul, as that is, which she
receives in having suffered for Christ. To which purpose being demanded by a
Father, which was the shortest, and most certain, and secure way to attain
perfection: he answered, that to endure many, and very great aduersityes for
the love of Christ. Ask (said he) this grace of our Lord, for to whom he does
it, he does many more together, which are contained in it. Thus the Blessed
Father both did himself, and taught others, by which we may gather his great
charity toward God.

5. But we have other more clear arguments of this his love to God, and to his
neighbors for the love of God. The scope to which all his actions, cares, and
intentions were directed, was Gods greater glory. For he contented not
himself, that God were not offended in that he did, but procured that he might
be glorified. And when two things of Gods service offered themselves unto him,
he did always choose that, out of which he thought Gods greater glory would
ensue. And this was, as we have said, always his Poesy: and to this scope he
always aimed. Many times speaking with God from the inmost of his heart, he
said unto him: O Lord, what do I desire, or can I desire besides thee? And his
desire to see him, and to be dissolved from the prison of his body, was so
great and ardent, that when he thought on his death he could not refrain from
tears, which distilled from his eyes for pure joy. And this not only to
obtain that sovereign good for himself, but much more to behold the glory of
that most sacred humanity of the same Lord, whom he loved so greatly; as a
friend is wont to rejoice to see the honor, and glory of him, whom he heartily
loves.

6. In the year 1541. in the month of July (I being present) he said, that if
our Lord God would give him his choice, either presently to depart out of this
life, and to enjoy eternal happynes, or to remain in the world, without
having security to persevere in virtue; he would choose this second, if he
might understand, that by remaining for some space in this life, he could do
some great, and notable service for his Majesty, casting his eyes upon God, and
not upon himself, nor respecting his own danger, or security. And he added
the cause: for what King (said he) or Prince is there in the world, who if
offering some great reward to one of his servants, he should refuse to enjoy it
presently, that he might do some notable service for his Prince, would not
think himself obliged to conserve, yea increase the reward of that servant,
since he deprived himself of it for his love, and that he might be able to do
him more service? And if me^ proceed in this manner, what are we to hope for of
our Lord? or how can we fear, that he will forsake us, or permit us to fall,
for having prolonged our happynes, and differred to enjoy him for his sake? Let
others think so if they please (said he) for I will not conceive so hardly of
so good a God, and so gracious, and sovereign a King.

7. There came one time to his mind a thought, what he should think, if God
should put him in hell: and he explicated his conceit in a paper written with
his own hand in this manner: There were two things represented unto me: the
one, what pains I should suffer there: the other, how his Name was blaspemed.
In the first I could not feel, nor find any affliction: and so me thought, and
it was represented unto me, that my greatest mole statio^ should be to hear
his holy Name blasphemed. These are his very words. Now what an enflamed love
did he bear to our Lord, who found this effect, and disposition in himself
toward him? What flames of heavenly fire burned in that breast, since that
those of the fire of hell could not quench them, nor make him feel affliction
in his own pains, but only in the injury, and offense of his beloved?

Of his Love, and Charity toward his Neighbor.

CHAP. XIV.
FROM this ardent, and fervent love toward God proceeded as from a fountain,
His charity toward his neighbors.
the inflamed love which he bare to his neighbors. For he beheld them in God,
and God in them: and so he said that if it were profitable for the salvation of
souls to go through the streets barefooted, and laden with infamous; and
ignominious things, he would make no doubt to do it. And that there was no
habit in the world so base and vile, which he would not willingly wear to
gain a soul.

2. In Paris he desired to deliver a wicked man, who kept a Concubine, from
that evil estate; and diverse remedies which he had put in practice, taking no
effect, he went one day into a Lake of exceeding cold water, by which the
other was to pass, and from thence he spoke aloud unto him in these words: Go
wretched creature to enjoy thy filthy delights: see thou not the stroke of
Gods wrath which comes upon thee? Go, for I will remain here torme^ting my
self, and doing penance for thee, until God release his just punishment:
which is already prepared against thee. The man was amazed with so wonderful
an example of charity, he stayed, and being touched with Gods hand, returned
back, forsaking that dishonest company, to which he had been captive so long.

His charity toward those who did injury or persecute him.
3. He observed always with exceeding great care not to render any man evil,
but striued to do good to his persecutors, procuring that his benefits toward
them should be greater, then the evils, and injuries which he received from
them. One of his fellow scholars who remained in the same house with him in
Paris, ran away with certain money, which was sent in alms to the B. Father,
and was committed to his custody. Afterward this man being in Roan, fell
dangerously sick, and knowing the Fathers charity, wrote unto him, in what
affliction he was, requesting him to take some order for his relief. The
Father having made much and earnest prayer for him, went presently to Roan
(which is 28. leagues from Paris) to find him our, and help him in what he
could, and with great alacrity of spirit, and force of mind, he went in three
days those 28. leagues barefoot, without eating one bit of bread, or drinking
one drop of water, offering this labor and penance to our Lord, for the health
and life of him, who had deceived him in that manner.

4. Another likewise, who in Paris had received much charity at the holy
Fathers hands, assaulted by Satan, and becoming as it were furious, resolved
to kill him, and being gone up the stayres for that purpose heard a dreadful
voice, which said unto him: Thou wretch what will thou do? who terrified with
this voice, cast himself at the Fathers feet weeping, and related unto him,
what his purpose was. The Father cherished, and comforted him; but his charity,
and meeknes was not sufficient to with-hould this very man from blowing the
coals of diverse calummations and lies afterward in that storm, which (as we
have said) was raised in Rome, before the Confirmation of the Sooiety: whore
the Judges having punished him for that cause, and the tempest being past (to
requite good for evil) the Father received him into the Society at the request
of those, who had raised that persecution: but he perseuered not in his
vocation. If the B. Father dealt thus with strangers, and with those that
pretended to do him injury, what marvel is there, that he used the same
charity with his subjects, and children?

5. One of the nine Fathers which came unto him in Paris, being much afflicted
and disquieted with a troublesome, and dangerous temptation, so that he was in
a manner lost; the B. Father delivered him from that danger, by weeping
bitterly, and praying to God continually for him, without eating, or drinking
in three whole days, beseeching our Lord to comfort, and strengthen him and so
he did. Another time another Father was much out of order, exceeding the bounds
of reason, by which means the holy Father was much grieved, and afflicted for
the harm, which the other received. The revenge which he procured, was to put
himself in prayer, and to shed many tears for him, and saying Mass, from the
bottom of his heart, he cried, and sighed unto our Lord, saying: Pardon him, O
Lord, Pardon him, my Creator, for he knows not what he does.

6. Another time a Brother of the Society, being grievously tempted in his
vocation, and resolved to forsake God, who is the fountain of living waters,
and return to drink of the broken cisternes of the world, which contain no
water of grace, nor of true repose; the Father understanding that the cause of
that perturbation was the shame, that the brother had to confess a sin which
he had committed, he went unto him, and declared his former life, and how blind
he had been in following the vanity of his senses and how much addicted to the
false love of creatures, that by this means the Brother might be less
ashamed, and learn to have a true conceit of the goodness, and mercy of our
Lord.

7. Now what shall I say of the meekness, His meekness, and benignity
toward those who were under his charge.
and benignity, which he used toward all men, and especially to those, that
were under his charge? Of the care he had, least they should be ouerlayd? Of
the sweetenes wherewith he condescended to the weak: raised those that were
fallen: comforted the afflicted: encouraged the faint-harted: and took
compassion of the diseased, and sickly? For certainly it was a thing which
caused admiration, to see the care that he used, for the cure, and comfort of
the sick. And he told me sometimes, that our Lord had with particular
providence provided that he should have so little and imperfect health, that by
his own sickness and infirmityes, he might learn to esteem those of others,
and take compassion of the weak.

8. Being in Vincenza sick of an ague, he understood, that Father Simon
Roderiquez, one of the Fathers, was in Bassana (about a days journey from
Vincenza) very sick, and in danger of death: and presently the B. Father took
his journey toward Bassana, in the company of Father Faber, to visit, and
comfort Father Simon, and he went with such courage, and force of spirit, that
Father Faber could not follow him. Another time, being on the way, Father
Laynes, who was with him fell sudainly into a very great pain, for remedy
whereof, the Father presently sought him, an horse, giving six pence for him,
which was all the money they had gotten of alms, and wrapping him in his poor
thrid-bare cloak he set him up, and ran before him with such alacrity, and
lightness, that Father Laynes told me, he could scarce keep him company being on
horsbacke.

9. But he discovered this his Fatherly love toward his children in nothing
more then in providing for their good name, and spiritual profit, and in
burying in perpetual oblivion such faults as they committed, either by humane
frailty, or negligence, when they themselves did acknowledge them with sorrow,
and desire of amendment With this, and other loving, and Fatherly proceedings
he did win the hearts of all his children, and might do with them what he would,
they were so subject, tractable, and obedient to his will; and he p^ouoked them
to his imitation in all perfection, and in that pure, sincere, and divine love
of our Lord in which it consists.

10. Notwithstanding this love toward his children was not feeble and remiss,
but sweet and strong, The Fathers love was sweet and strong.
mild and severe. For as he was sweet, and gentle with the humble and
obedient: so he was terrible to the rebellious, and stiffnecked, having great
care to further his subjects in virtue, and encourage them to perfection, using
every one mildly, or severely according to their capacity, but yet showing love
to all. And he was so dextrous in joining sweetness with severity, that thought
he desired much to have all his children indifferent in matters of obedience,
without inclination to any one thing more then to another, notwithstanding he
examined the natural disposition of every one with great diligence, and
applied himself unto them in all things, wherein he saw them to be well given.
For he understood, how troublesome that is, which is done with natural
repugnance, and that no violent thing is durable: showing his religious
severity in requiring indifferency, and his Fatherly mildnes, and benignity in
condescending to their inclinations.

Of the particular Devotion, and other virtues of B. F. Ignatius.

CHAP. XV.
WE should never make an end, His other virtues.
if we would particulerly treat of the admirable charity of this glorious
Father, and of all his other virtues, which were without number. Of his
prudence rather divine then humane, which our Lord imparted unto him, to the
end he might draw the whole frame of the Society. Of his so excellent fortitude
and magnanimity to undertake great things, and resist contradictions, and
difficulties. Of his mildnes, and meekenes with which he did join the hearts of
those that treated with him, changing, and bending the wills, and affections of
his very adversaries. What shall I say of his Vigilance, and admirable
solicitude in bringing to an end the works, which he did undertake? For he
did not only seek out with prudence what means might help him to the
compassing of them, but having found them he used them with great efficacy,
never giving over that which he had once begun, until he had brought (...) to
perfection.

2. What should I say of the wonderful confidence, which he had always in
God? In his imprisonments that he would protect him: in his labors that he
would help him: in his difficult enterprises, that he would perfect them with
his powerful hand? And in his poverty, that he would relieve him, and sustain
his children, as he did many times miraculously, showing that the hope of this
holy Father had not been in vain? What shall I say of the modesty, and efficacy
of his words? What of his avoiding to judge, or condemn other men's lives? What
of his circumspection in speaking or hearing others speak of their neighbors
faults, thought they were public, and talked of in the very streets? What of
his warines and wisdom, with which he interrupted all speeches, that might be
occasion, though never so light or small, of any murmuration? What of the other
virtues which he had, and all so perfect, as if he had only one, and with such
eminency, that no man knows in which of them he excelled most? But let us
omit them al, to speak of that virtue which is the guide, and mistress of the
rest, and the passage, or conduct, by which our Lord imparteth his gifts to
our souls, that is Prayer, and Devotion, and the familiar conversation with
his Divine Majesty.

3. The Father himself confessed, that our Lord had largely imparted unto him
the grace of devotion, which he for his humility attributed to his own weakness;
and misery; His devotion, and prayer.
because being now old, sickly, and wearyed, he was good for nothing, but to
give himself wholly to God. Presently after he was made Priest; when he said
the Divine Office, the aboundannce of Gods comfort was so great, and the
tears, which he shed so many, that he was enforced to stay almost in every
word, and to interrupt the hours, or part of the office, which he said: And
this went so far, that he had almost lost his sight with weeping* In matters of
importance, he was never wont to take any resolution, though he had never so
many probable reasons, before he had commended them to our Lord in Prayer.
There was no hour in the day, in which he did not inwardly recollect himself,
and setting aside all other businesses, examined his conscience: and if
peradventure some great, or urgent business permitted him not to fulfill his
devotion in one hour, he did presently recompense it so soon as he might:
albeit he never gave himself so much to outward affairs, that he lost the
inward devotion of his spirit.

4. He had God always present before his eyes in all things, and they all served
him for a book to read his divine perfections in, and to eleuate his heart to
him, drawing spiritual documents, and profitable aduises out of every thing
that he did see; teaching that this manner of prayer is very profitable for
all, principally for those who are employed in exterior things belonging to
Gods service. Before his prayer he prepared his soul, and entered into the
Oratory of his heart, and there he inflamed himself in such sort, that it
appeared in his countenance, and he seemed to be all set on fire, as we noted,
and discovered many times. He used such attention in every thing, though never
so little, belonging to his conversation with God, and he was so recollected,
and present in himself when he did it, that he seemed to behold the Majesty of
God present, as when he said grace before or after meat and in other like
occasions.

5. He had a very excellent gift of tears, which he shed in great abundance
in his prayers, with great joy of his spirit, and no less harm to his body;
of which he made no account, that he might not loose the spiritual fruit of
his soul. But finally overcome with reason, and because the Physicians showed
him, how much that continual effusion of tears did hurt his health, he
beseeched our Lord to give him the maistery, and command over them. And he
obtained it so entirely, that he seemed to have them in his hand to shed, or
repress them when, and how it pleased him. And this with to great favor of
the divine Mercy, that though his eyes were dry, yet his spirit remained
always moist, and his heavenly illustrations were not diminished, how much
soever his tears were moderated by reason but their fruit remained in all
force and vigor. No noise, how great soever it were, did trouble, or hinder
him in his prayer if he had given no occasion thereof. But any obstacle
whatsoever was an impediment unto him, if it were in his power to avoid it, so
that, it was not the noise, but the negligence, which he seemed to have
committed, in not taking away, that which disquietted him at his prayer. The B.
Father him self being once demanded by Father Laynes of the manner of his
prayer, gave him this answer: that in matters concerning our Lord, he found
himself rather Passiuely then Actiuely, (for these are the words which the
contemplative, and those who treat of this matter do use:) accounting this the
highest degree of contemplation; in the same sort, that S. Dionysius
Areopagita, speaking of his master Hierotheus, says of him: Erat patiens
Diuina.

6. His devotion to our B. Lady.
He was exceedingly devout to the most Sacred Virgin Mary our B. Lady, whom
from the time that he opened his eyes to behold the light of heaven, he always
took for his especial Patroness and Advocate; having recourse to her in all
his necessityes, difficultyes, and labors; and receiving great graces, and
favors from her mighty, and bountiful hand; as may be gathered by that, which
we have said hitherto, and shall appear by that which we will say heareafter.

Of his divine Revelations, and Contemplations in God.

CHAP. XVI.
BUT what marvel was it, What revelations he had.
that he should give himself so much to prayer, who was so greatly favored by
God in his prayers, and that he should be absorpt in contemplation, who was
illustrated with so many divine visitations, and revelations? For from the time
of his first sickness, and before he was converted from the vanity of the world
to our Lord, his divine Majesty began to favor him, and sent him (as we have
said) his Apostle S. Peter, in his greatest danger, to restore him his health.
And after that he had put himself under the banner of our Lord Jesus Christ,
fearing the weakness of his flesh, the most Excellent, and Sovereign Queen of
Angels, having ^er most precious Son in her ^^mes appeared unto him, as he
was awake, and with the splendour of her glory enlightened him, with the sweetness
of her presence recreated and strengthened him, blotting out of his soul (as it
were with her hand) all unclean cogitations, and dishonest representations.

2. In the time, that he remained at Manresa, afflicting himself with*such
austere pe^nances (as has been related) after he had passed those torments,
tentations, and scruples, which brought him so low, and to such extremity; our
Lord comforted and cherished him, with his sovereign, and heavenly
visitations. For sitting one day upon the steps of S. Dominicks Church, saying
the Office of our B. Lady with much devotion, our Lord illustrated his
understanding, and represented unto him, His revelation concerning the most B.
Trinity
as it were a figure of the most holy Trinity, which exteriourly signified unto
him, that, which interiourly he perceived: and this with such abounda^ce of
comfort, that he could not repress his sobs, and tears, nor think or speak
of any thing, but of the mystery of the most Holy Trinity, with so many
similitudes, and examples, that all who heard him, remained much admired, and
astonished. And from that time forward, this inefable mystery was so imprinted
in his soul, that even then he began to write a book of this profound matter,
which contained 80. leaves, knowing at that time no more then only to write,
and read. And after likewise the intelligence which he had of the most B.
Trinity, the Divine Essence, the distinction and propriety of the three Persons
was so continual, excellent, and abstract, that the B. Father himself in a
Note-booke of his own hand (which was found after his death) says, that he
could not have known so much with many years study. And in another place he
says, that it seemed to him, that there was no more to be known in this life
of those matters of the most Holy Trinity, then our Lord had imparted unto him
in a certain vision.

3. But returning to Manresa another time with great joy of his spirit, he had
represented unto him the manner which God observed in creating the world.
Another time hearing Mass in the Monastery of S. Dominicke, He sees Christ in
the B. Sacrament, and in his Humanity, with our B. Lady.
at the time of elevation, he did clearly see with the eyes of his soul, that
under that veil, and form of bread, our Lord. Jesus Christ true God and Man
was truly covered, and contained. Many times being in prayer, and for a good
space, with the same inward eyes of his soul, he did behold the sacred
Humanity of our Savior Jesus Christ. And some times likewise the most glorious
Virgin Mary his mother: and this not only in Manresa, but also after he was
departed from thence near to Padua, and at Jerusalem, and in many other
places.

4. He went once out of Manresa to pray in a certain Church, distant from that
town a little mile, He is illustrated and taught by God.
and in the way being transported, and elevated in contemplation of our Lord,
he sat him down upon the bank of the river, not far from the way, and
casting the eyes of his body upon the water, those of his soul were opened,
and illuminated with a new, and unwonted light, not so, that he did see any
sensible shape or figure, but after another more high, and intelligible manner.
With this light, he understood very perfectly many things, as well of those
which appertayned to the mysteries of our faith, as of other, which belong to
the knowledge of sciences: in so much, that the same things, that he had seen
before seemed afterward not to be the same. And this Divine rapt, and
suspention endured for a good space.

5. His extasis of eight days.
But that other accident which happened unto him while he was yet in Manresa is
more to be admired. For upon a Saturday, at the time of Complyne, he remained
so alienated, and bereaved of his senses, that he was held for dead: and they
had buried him, if they had not discerned that his heart did still beat though
very weakly. He continued in this rapt or Ecstasy until Saturday of the week
following, at the same time of Compline, when many being present who observed
him, he opened his eyes, as if he had awaked out of a sweet, and pleasant
sleep, and with a still, and loving voice, said. O IESV. And this is testified
by those who were witnesses of it, or at least heard it related by them who
were present.

6. That revelation which he had at his coming to Rome (as we said before) was
very notable, How Christ appeared unto him.
when being at his prayers in a Church, the Eternal Father appeared unto him,
and his Blessed Son with his Cross upon his ^houlders, who spoke unto him
these most comfortable words, Ego vobis Romae propitius ero. Likewise being at
Monte*Cassino (where S. Benedict did see the soul of S. German Bishop of
Capua* carried by Angels in a globe of fire to Heaven, as S. Gregory writes)
the B. Father beheld the soul of Bachelour Hozius, who came unto him at
Venice, go up to heaven, and he knew that it was the soul of Hozius one of his
Society, who being in the City of Padua with Father John Codury passed to a
better life. And when the same Father John Codury died in Rome, upon the day of
the Decollation of S. John Baptist, in the year of our Lord 1541. the B.
Father going that morning before he dyed, to say Mass for him at the Monastery
of S. Peter de Monte aureo, which is on the other side of the river of Tybur,
while he was passing the bridge called of Sixtus, he saw the soul of Father
John Codury, which went to heaven with great glory: and turning himself to
Father John Baptista Viola, who accompanied him, and told me of it, he said:
Father John Codury is now departed

7. Father Leonard Kessel borne in Flaunders, was one of the ancient Fathers of
that Province, and a very great servant of God, He appears in Culle^ to F.
Leonard Kessell.
and so accounted in the Society. I knew him in Cullen, where he laid the first
foundations of the College which we have there, and did govern it many years
with great fame, and opinion of sanctity. This Father Leonard desired much to
see, and converse with his B. Father, and Master, Jgnatius. He wrote unto him,
asking leave to go on foot from Cullen to Rome, which is above 300. leagues,
only to see him, and enjoy his holy communication. The Father answered him;
that his presence was necessary in Cullen for Gods service, and therefore
willed him not to remove from thence; for our Lord could so ordain, that he
might see him without undertaking so long, and difficult a journey. After which
Father Leonard being in Cullen, the Holy Father Ignatius appeared unto him on a
time being awake while he was yet alive, and stayed for some space there
present with him: and when he departed, he left Father Leonard very much
comforted for having obtained his desire in so strange, and marvelous a manner.

8. To John Paschall son of Agnes Paschall (who was wont every morning to go
to the first Mass, which is said in the Chapel of S. Eulalia, in the
Cathedral Church of Barcelona, under the high Altar) he appeared one morning
before the same high Altar, some years after his death; and John Paschall knew
him, and said unto him, O my Father, going toward him; but the B. Father made
him a sign with his hand, that he should come no nearer, and so departed. He
had other visitations, and favors of our Lord like unto these, and wrought
other meruails, which we omit to avoid prolixity. But that, which caused us,
who knew and conuersed with this Holy Father, most admiration, is: that these
favors of our Lord being so ordinary, and daily (as may be seen in the
papers, which he wrote with his own hand, when he made the Constitutions, and
were found after his death) we scarce ever heard him speak, or make any
mention of any revelation, vision, rapt, ecstasy, or other thing of this kind:
but only of humility, charity, patience, contempt of himself, zeal of Gods
glory, laboring for the good of souls, prayer, mortification, and other such
virtues of which he made great account. For these be such as make men, Saints,
and friends of God: and those other things, though they shine more in the eyes
of men, are but signs, and not always certain, of sanctity and grace.

Of certain beams of Glory seen about B. F. Ignatius Head; and how he was
endued with the gift of Prophecy.

CHAP. XVII.
NOT only the soul of this Servant of our Lord was illustrated with the
visitatio^s, and favors which we have mentioned: but part of that fulness, The
Fathers head, and countenance become respledent.
which the soul received, redounded likewise to his body. Whereupon many
times, diverse looking upon him, did see his countenance resplendent, and
casting forth bright beams; as it happened in Barcelona to Elizabeth Rosell,
when the B. Father sat among the children on the steps of the Altar, as we
have said: and to John Paschall, the son of Agnes Paschall, who kept him in
his house a long time, in the same City of Barcelona: and in Loyola, when he
went from Paris, and lived in the Hospital, others did see the same. And at
Rome the B. Father Philip Nereus, a man of known sanctity, and the founder of
the Oratory of those venerable Priests of our Blessed Lady De Nauicula, which
has done so much good in that City (with whom I was very well acquainted) was
a most devout child of our B. Father Ignatius, and came to him for counsel in
all his doubts, and perplexityes: and when he was sad, did feel his heart
lightened, and rejoiced with only seeing him, and was wont to recount that he
had many times seen him with a light about his head, which did cast bright
beams from it. This B. Father deceased the 26. day of May in the year 1595
and upon his day and memory, his Children make a great feast.

2. But that is more notable, which happened to Alexander Petronius, a famous
and much esteemed Physician of Rome, and a great friend of our B. Father, who
being once grievously sick, Father Ignatius went to visit him, and entered into
the sick man's chamber, which was very dark, all the windows being shut; and
at his entrance it was replenished with a new light, which Alexander did see,
and demanded of his wife, what light that was; and presently he felt himself
well, attributing this benefit to the Blessed Fathers presence. And though he
dissembled the matter at that time, passing it over in silence; yet after the
B. Fathers departure to a better life, he did publishe, and manifest it with
great admiration, and esteem of his Holiness. In oother places likewise he
was seen with this supernatural light and splendour, and in Barcelona John
Paschall often beheld him in prayer elevated in the air, a foot and more
above the ground, speaking with God, and saying: O my God, O my Lord, O that
men knew thee.

3. Our Lord likewise imparted unto him the gift of Prophecy, He had the gift
of Prophecy.
so that being illustrated with a Divine light, he foretold many things long
before they fell out. At the time that he departed from Manresa toward
Jerusalem, John Paschall aforesaid who then was but a youth about eightene
Years old, would have accompanied him; but the Father willed him to return,
and assist his Mother; further telling him, that he should marry, and have
children, together with many troubles, and molestations counselling him to
bear them with patience and the like: all which came to pass, as the Father
had foretold.

4. Being in Flanders, whither he went sometimes from Paris to ask alms for
his sustenance (as has been said before) dyning one day at Antwerp with
certain merchants who had invited him, he cast his eyes upon one of them, who
was somewhat far off, a young man, called Peter Quadratus, borne in Medina del
Campo. And beholding him attentively, he bad him come nearer, for being to be
so great a benefactor of the Religion of the Society of Jesus, it was fitting,
that they should presently come acquainted, and take notice one of another:
adding that he had great reason to thank God, because he would vouchsafe to
use him, making him the founder of a College of the Society (this being so
long before the Society it self, began) all which was verifyed. For many years
after Peter Quadratus, and Don^a Francisca Manjona his wife founded the
College, which the Society has at this present in Medina del Campo.

5. When the Father went from Vincenza to Bassana, to visit Father Simon, who
was very sick, and in danger, having in his company Father Faber, leaving him
upon the way, he went a little aside to pray for Father Simon, and in his prayer
was certifyed, that he should not die of that sickness, as he told Father Faber
at his return. And coming to the place, where the sick man was, he embraced
him saying: Fear not, Brother Simon, you shall not dye at this time; and with
these words he presently recovered, as the same F. Simon often testified, and
Father Faber related it to Father Laynes, who remained sick at Vincenza, of
whom I knew it.

6. Likewise in Bassana one of the Fathers began to doubt of his vocation, and
whether it were not better to remain in the company of an Hermit, who lived a
very Holy life, giving himself to contemplation, then to follow the B. Father,
and employ himself in helping the souls of his neighbors. And going one day
to consult this doubt with the Hermit himself, he had great visions, and was
much terrifyed in the way: and coming in that fear, and out of breath, into
the lodging, where Father Ignatius was, he with the light of Heaven knowing
what he had in his breast, said unto him; Modicae sidei quare dubitasti? Man of
of little faith why did thou doubt? And he was confirmed with these words, and
perseuered until death in his vocation.

7. In the year 1541. Stephen Baroelus an Italian, entered into the Society at
Rome, and not long after fell dangerously sick, whereupon the Physicians
having in a manner given him over, our Blessed Father went to S. Peter de Monte
aureo to say Mass for him. I did accompany him that day (as I used to do many
other times) and I served him at Mass: which being ended, and after he had
given thanks, he said to me: Stephen shall not dye at this time. And he
presently recovered, and went afterward to Portugal, and returned back again
to Italy and lived many years, and finally made an holy end in the Society.

8. Doctor Arrouira a very Honorable Citizen of Barcelona, who a few years
since came to Madrid for Ambassador of that City, to King Philip the second,
who is now in glory, told me that being in Rome, he had much acquaintance, and
familiarity with the Blessed Father, and that one day coming from Ara Caeli,
he met him in the street with a letter in his hand, which was given him from
Don Fra^cisco de Borgia, Duke of Gandia, who at that time was married, and
Viceroy of Catalun^a, and that speaking of that letter, which he had received,
he said: Little would you think, that this Noble man, who has written this
letter, shall come to Rome, to be the head of our Religion. Which was fulfilled
afterward, when the Duchess his wife being dead, the Duke entered into the
Society, and having been many years Co^missary General in Spain, in the year
15^5. upon the day of the Visitation of our Blessed Lady, the second of July,
he was chosen to be the third General.

9. And the same Doctor Michaell Arrouira affirmed, that he being then a young
man, and in doubt what state of life to choose, afterward he determined to
marry: and before he told the Father his resolution (for he kept it secret) the
Father himself said unto him. I know well enough, that you are resolved to
marry; O how you will bewail it, and in what troubles will you see your self!
All which fell out in that manner and this which he reported to me, he also
affirmed upon his oath, as a witness before the Bishop of Barcelona. When Agnes
Paschal dyed, they sent him word of her death to Rome, that he might commend
her to God: and he answered, that before the receipt of the letter, he knew,
that she was departed, and in heaven.

10 Father Laynes being in Venice, procuring that that Common Wealth would put
us in possession of the Priory of S. Mary Magdalen in the City of Padua (which
Pope Paui the third had united to the College of the Society there) found very
great difficulties, and potent adversaries: in so much, that he in a manner
despayred of that business: whereupon he wrote to the Blessed Father, requesting
him to say a Mass, that God would give him good success, which he expected
not by humane means. The Father said the Mass upon the Nativity of our Lady,
and wrote to Father Laynes in these words: I have done that which you desired:
be of good courage, and take no care for this business; for you may well account
it ended according to your desire. As the Father wrote, so it came to pass;
for upon the octaue of the same Nativity of our B. Lady, the Counsel met which
in Venice is called Pregai, and in a manner all the Senators with one accord
agreed that we should have the possession given us, to the great admiration of
those, who had experience in the government of that Common Wealth. He likewise
told the same Father Laynes, that he should succeed him in the office of
General, and so he did.

11. In the year 1555. sending the Fathers Hierome of Nadall, and Lewys
Gonsalez de Camera to Spain, he willed them to ship themselue presently at
Genua, for with out doubt, they should have a prosperous navigations; and so
they had, though it were in winter. The German College being in extreme
necessity, and without hope of remedy, in so much that the Cardinals who had
care of it, were so dismayed, that they counseled the blessed Father not to
weary himself in so disperat a matter: he answered, that he would not give it
over, and that the time would come, in which that College should be
sufficiently provided, and stored of all necessaryes. And so it was. For the
Holiness of Pope Gregory the XIII. endowed, and founded it liberally, so that
now it has completly all things needful.

12. The like succeeded in the provision of the Roman College of the Society,
which being in great want, and not knowing by any humane means, from whence or
how to be provided, the Father betook himself to prayer, and after told
certain Fathers, that there was no care to be taken for that business: and that
within a few months, our Lord would provide for it, as he did, and sometimes
as it were miraculously, until the same Pope Gregory the XIII. of holy memory,
founded it. He foretold other things like to these, before they happened: all
which were fulfilled, as he said, and I omit them for breuity

Of the Miracles of B. F. Ignatius: And first of his power over Devils, as
well in his life, as after his death.

CHAP. XVIII.
BESIDES the gift of Prophecy, which our Lord imparted to this holy Father, he
also gave him the grace to do many, and great Miracles, both whilst he lived,
and after his descease. Some of those I mean to touch briefly in this place,
but not all (for that would be too long) which our Lord has wrought by this
his servant. For though when I first set forth his life in La^yn, which was in
the year 1572. I had notice of some other miracles of the holy Father, then
those that I there set down: yet I knew them not so certainly, that I thought
it fit to publish them: but since, with the authentical informations which
have been taken for his Canonization, they have been proved by sufficient
witnesses: and our Lord, who will exalt and make him glorious upon earth does
every day so many miracles by his means, that I am obliged to declare some
part of them here, taking them out of the Authentical and Iuridicall
Informations which many Prelates have made, and are at this time in my hands;
and out of the depositions, which the parties themselves, on whom these
miracles have been wrought, have made under their corpocall oaths, and by the
testimony of others, who deserve credit.

2. First then, he had great dominion, and command over the Devils, and they
abhorred, and persecuted him, as their cruel enemy; fearing him in that
respect and declaring him to be so. For in the time that he remained in
Manresa, What hatred the Devils bare him, and what dominion our Lord gave him
over them.
the Devil appeared unto him many times in a shyning, and beautiful figure
till at length illustrated with divine light, he knew, that it was the Devil,
who would deceive him. And not only in Manresa, but also in his iourneyes, and
at Paris, and Rome, he appeared many times unto him, but so contemptible, and
deformed, that not making any account of him, he did easily drive him away with
the staff which he had in his hand (as if he had been a cat, or a little
dog:) This malignant spirit procured to terrify him whilst he remained in the
hospital of Lewis de Antecan^a in Alcala, but he could not prevail. He would
also have choked him another time at Rome in his sleep, and he throtled him in
such sort, that he was enforced to invoke, and call upon the sweet name of
Jesus, with so great a force, that he remained hoarse many days after.

3. Another time being in his bed, the Devils did strike and beat him, and a
brother called John Paul of Catalun^a who was his companion (and told me of it)
heard him, and rose twice to help, and assist him; but they could do him no
harm, because our Lord permitted them not. They accounted him their mortal
enemy, who made cruel war upon them, and took the souls out of their
claws; and they published many times, that he was the greatest enemy, which
they had upon earth.

4. In the year 1541. I my self heard a Devil, which tormented a poor young
man in Rome called Matthew, say, that he desired us not to speak of Ignatius,
because he was the greatest enemy he had. Another soldier possessed in the
City of Padua; and a woman in the City of Trapana in Sicily said as much. By
reason of this hatred, and enimity of the Devils toward him, they persecured
him so much, and raised so many, and so furious blasts, and tempests against
him, which argued their great anger, and malice; but by the grace of our Lord,
he overcame them all, and subdued them with so great dominion, as may be
gathered by that which we shall here declare.

5. At the time that he remained in the hospital of Azperitia (as has been
said before) by reason of the fame of his sanctity, He casts out a Devil at
Azperitia and also one at Rome
they brought a woman unto him, who had been possessed four years, that he
would exorcize her, and pray unto God for her. He answered with much humility,
that he was no Priest, nor deserved so much at our Lords hands; but that he
would pray to his divine Majesty for her, which he did, and the woman was
presently delivered. At Rome, he cured that forsaid young man, called Matthew,
who was grievously tormented by the Devil, by only speaking unto him, and
shutting himself with him alone in a chamber. And another at Rome.
I knew him both before, and after, and he became religious in the wilderness
of Camaldula, and was called Friar Basil.

6. In the year 1554. the College of the Society which we have at our B.
Ladies of Loreto was begun, and the first Rector thereof was Father Oliuerius
Manaraeus, who lives at this day in Flanders, a man of great religion, He
freeth the College of Loreto from the molestation of the Devils.
and very well known in that respect in the Society: who testifyeth, that the
Devils began presently to make war upon our Fathers which dwelt in that
College, and to disquiet them day, and night; sometime making a great stir,
and noise, others times appearing in diverse shapes, and forms, as of a black
Mare, or of a dog, or cat, or other beast, not permitting them to repose, and
sleep in the night; and that having used all possible means of Masses,
prayers, holy water, exorcismes, relics, and other like, without profit, to
deliver: themselves from that trouble, and importunity of the Devils; he wrote
what had passed to Blessed Father Ignatius, craving the help and favor of his
prayers: who answered, that they should trust in the goodness of our Lord, that
he would deliver them, and he in their behalf would entreat the same very
instantly.

7. When Father Oliuerius had received this letter, he presently called
together all the Fathers, and brethren of the College, and read unto them,
what the Father had written, and from that hour (a marvelous thing) all those
troubles, and fearful representations of the Devils ceased, in such sort
that there was no more sign of them, then if there had never been any such
thing. This happened while our Blessed Father was alive. But presently after
his death, there was a woman in the City of Trapana in Sicily exorcized, being
tormented by the Devil, and the Viceroy John de Vega (who had news of the
Fathers descease, The Devil confesses that the Father is his enemy.
though it were not yet published) caused them to demand, where B. Father
Ignatius the founder of the Society of Jesus was? And the Devil answe^ed: that
his enemy Ignatius was now dead and in heaven with the other Founders of
Religions S. Dominicke, and S. Francis.

8. In the year 1561. I knew, in the City of Siena in Italy, a very virtuous,
and simple maid called Iacoba de Prado, servant to a Lady, who was Aunt to the
Archbishop of the same City. The Fathers picture delivers a maid from the
Devils cruelty.
This maid was very much tormented, and persecuted by the Devils, who appeared
unto her in diverse shapes, misusing, striking, and beating her in very strange,
and cruel manner. The poor maid endured this torment for the space of twelve
years, until she began to carry with her a picture of our Blessed Father
Ignatius: and presently the Devils, though they visibly appeared unto her, and
cried out, saying: that he was their enemy* willing her to cast away that
picture; yet they durst not come night her, nor touch her; yea showing them the
picture, they cast down their eyes, saving: that they could not behold so bad
a thing: and though she provoked them to strike her, if they could, yet they
never durst do it, so long as she kept the picture.

9. At one time desirous for curiosity to be certified, whether that fear of
the Devils proceeded from the picture of the Blessed Father, or from some
other cause, she laid it aside, and presently they came upon her, beating her
so terribly, that they left her dead. And this happened unto her another time
long after, she thinking, that she had been wholly free. And with this experience
she resolved not to bereave herself of that strong breast plate, and buckler of
the Blessed Fathers picture, which terrifyed the Devils in that manner, who
not being able to strike her, gave great blows upon the chamber walls, and
upon certain coffers, and chests which were in it, without ever touching any
one wherein there was a picture of the Blessed Father.

10 The same in a manner happened in the City of Ancona in the year 1599. to
a Schole-maister called Leopar^ius. For he perceiving certain spirits to
frequent his house, who in the beginning, while he was absent, swept his
chamber, made his bed, brought light, and afterward disordered, and fouled it
again; placed a picture of the Blessed Father in his chamber, and afterward
found no molestatio^ in it. But without the doors they made a great noise,
opening and shutting them, and the windows, and striking as upon drums; but
by placing the picture of the Blessed Father in those rooms also, all that stir
ceased, and he was not troubled any more.

He casts out another Devil in Rome.
11. In Rome the year 1597. the eight day of July there being an exorcisme in a
Church, Father John Baptist a Perus^o of the Society of Jesus came in to say
his prayers having a Reliquary, in which among many other relics, there was
one of the Blessed Father. He was no sooner come in, but the devil began to
cry out, and say, that the Father did burn him with that which he brought
about him: and finally being enforced with the exorcismes, he confessed, that
the relics which that Priest had at this breast, were of Blessed Father
Ignatius, a great Servant of God, and founder of the religion of the Society of
Jesus: and that he was a Saint in heaven, though not yet known, but ere long
he should be canonized on earth: and the said Father Perus^o taking the
Reliquary from about his neck, and laying it upon the possessed woman, the
Devil gave great shoutes, sayings that the Relic of that Father burned him,
and so he left the woman free; it being our Lords pleasure that she should
receive that notable favor by the intercession of the Blessed Father.

Another Devil cast out in Majorca.
12. In the City of Majorca a woman called Catharin Roca, was for the space of
eleven years, almost every, day griueously tormented by the Devil. He made
her beat her hands, and head against the wall; he lifted her up in the air, he
made her body so heavy, that diverse strong men could not lift her from the
ground. Sometimes she howled like a dog, and other times grunted like a swyne:
and likewise she was somtymes without judgment or sense, foaming at her mouth.
Yt was a pitiful thing to se her without remedy, having aplyed many, until
the year 1598. the last of August, a Priest called John Pee, took a
subscription of Blessed Father Ignatius, and laid it upon the possessed woman,
who at that time was deprived of her senses; and she used great extremityes,
making many motions and visages, and the Devil presently departed, and left
her, she remaining free, and returning ^o her former, and natural health,
retyring her self to give our Lord thanks for the favor received at his
Blessed hands by the means of his servant Ignatius.

13. In Monti-caelo which is a town in the territory of Siena, there was a
maid called Vlna, Also another disposs^ssed in the country of Siena.
and her fathers name was Gra^an Gala: who in the month of July the year
^^99. was much afflicted by ^he Devils, who appeared unto her in corporal
shapes, spea^ing unto her, and soliciting ^er to filthy, and dishonest ^^ings,
to which when she would not consent, they did beat her cruelly, leaving the
signs and scars of their blows upon her bruised body: but our Lord delivered
her by means of the picture of Blessed Father Ignatius.

Of four Sisters of Modena dispossessed of Devils by the Meritts of B. F.
Ignatius.

CHAP. XIX.
BUT that is more notable, and declares more the Dominion which our Lord has
given to this his Servant, over the Devils, which happened in the year 1600
in Modena, a City of Lumbardy, which I will relate here in the same manner,
that it has been written from thence, though briefly, and in fewer words,
Four sisters and a niece terribly tormented by the Devils, are cured in Modena
by his intercession.
yet with more then I am wont, because it is so notable a thing There were in
that City of Modena four sisters, noble, and honest women, one whereof was
married, and the other three mayds: al which, together with a niece of theirs
(likewise a maid) were for many years tormented with a great multitude of
malignant spirits: and this with such rigor, that it was a very pitiful thing
to see the manifold, and diverse vexatio^s which they continually suffered of
the Devils. They were ordinarily very sickly, the Physicians not knowing how
to cure them being ignorant of their sickness; sometimes the Devils carried them
to high places, to cast them down headlong; and other times to the most remot
places of the house, when shutting the Doors they rent their garments, pulled
of the hair from their heads, beating them, and casting them to the ground,
with danger of their lives; neither did they leave misusing them in this manner
until those of the house, hearing the noise, came to help them.

2. All of them being virtuous women, brought up in the fear of God, and very
modest in their words, they were many times enforced by those infernal beasts,
to utter unseemly speeches, and horrible blasphemies against God, with such
terrible shoutes* as amazed all that heard them. They could not without great
violence apply themselves to prayer, nor say, nor hear any word in the praise
of God. It was an intolerable thing for them to be at Mass, and there the
Devils made them sound, and fall to the ground, making outryes, and shouting
with such violence, that they could scarcely conteyne themselves. When they
went to confession, they hindered them from telling their sins, and bereaved
them of their forces, making them to faint, and causing them to put out their
tongues after a foul manner, in mockery of the Holy Sacrament of Confession,
and of their Confessors. But that which tormented them most, were the motions,
and temptations of the flesh, which continually afflicted them. For they were
very honest women, and some of them had dedicated their virginity to God by
vow. And the Devils themselves, compelled by the exorcismes of the Church,
confessed, that their intent was to deprive them of their chastity, and to put
them in danger of loosing both their spiritual, and corporal health: but that
they had labored in vain by reason of the use of the Sacraments, with which
these good women defended themselves, when they were most of all afflicted.

3. Furthermore, these infernal spirits not being content to afflict them so
many ways, enraged with exceeding great fury, to see that weak women made
them so great resistance, they killed the only son of the married sister, who
was but 14. months old and before they murdered him they threatened her, that
they would kill him upon such a certain day, and so the child dyed at the time
appointed, to the great grief of his Mother, and of all the family. (How
secret, and profound are the judgments of our Lord!) These devout, and
afflicted women had taken all the spiritual remedies which they could imagine,
to deliver themselves from this tyranny of the enemies of mankind. They had
used Prayers, Masses, Exorcismes, Holy water, Relics of Saints, and other
means which the holy Church uses. They had been a long time at the directions
of Priests and religions men of excellent virtue and prudence, that they as
good Physicians might help, and cure them. They had visited often the Holy
house of Loreto, and other Sanctuaries of great devotion, and especially some
in which our Lord is wont more particulerly to show his power against the
Devils, but nothing auailed, because our Lord reserved this occasion to
glorify his servant Ignatius withal: by whose merits, and intercession they
all four, and the niece also were delivered from the torments which they
suffered: and had as good health, and forces, with their disposition both in
wardly and out wardly to their great contentment, as ever before. They found
themselves free from the temptations of sensuality, and from the difficulty in
vocal, and mental prayer. They heard Mass with great devotion, and comfort.
They lived with great modesty, decency, and composition, and conuersed with
those of the house with great affability, and sweetness, as they were wont,
before they were tormented by the Devils; which has been a matter of great
admiration to ^ll that were acquainted with them: and much more by reason of
the manner with which our Lord cured them, by the intercession of his Servant
Ignatius, which was in this wife.

4. Father Rector of the College of the Society of Jesus, which is in the
City of Modena, having understood the pitiful case of those poor women,
after he had thoroughly considered, and commended it to our Lord, by his
instinct (as the effect declared) went one day to the house, carrying with him a
picture of the B Father, which he kept for his devotion. He entered into the
room where the women were, at the very time, that a Priest was exorcising the
Devils; and without saying any thing, or telling any what he brought, he put up
that picture of the Father upon the wall, and betook himself to prayer.
Whereupon presently those hellish spirits began to give horrible shouts, and to
say, that it was the picture of Ignatius Fou^der of the Society, with which
they were grievously tormented. And withal they began to revile at him
egregiously, calling him, bald, lame, and blind: and being pressed by the
Priest who exorcised them, to tell the reason why they called him so: they
answered that they called him bald, because he had not much hair on his head
nor beard; and lame, because his legs were not of the same length, one of them
having been broken; and blind, by reason of his abundance of tears, whereby
he had been in great danger to loose his sight: and they co^playned, that he
came so far, as Spain, to persecute them both in his life, and after his
death. And at the same time many principal Devils departed with horrible
roarings from one of the sisters, leaving her almost dead, and confessing the
virtue of Ignatius.

5. By this means the foresaid sisters, their mother, and all the house
conceived great devotion toward the Blessed Father, with hope by his
intercession to obtain the health which they desired; and they made a vow to
observe holy all the days of their life, the day of his death, and to fast the
Eve. This devotion increased with another new accident, for a Father of the
Society called Augustine Viualdi, being come at that time from Rome to preach
in Modena, brought with him a reliquary, in which among other, he had a relic
of the B. Father, which being placed secretly, and without saying any thing to
any body, in the room where the sisters were, the Devils cried out, saying:
that it was the Relic of Ignati', telling from whence it came, and who had
brought it: confessing the intolerable torment which they suffered, and that by
his intercession they should all be cast forth of those bodies: For God had
determined to glorify him in the world.

6. Another day a great Devil having mocked and blasphemed at Ignatius before
his going out, being enforced by God at the time of his departure, confessed to
his great confusion, that he was burnt with that little piece of bonet and he
called him three times a Saint, saying: S Ignatius, S. Ignatius, S. Ignatius
casts me forth by his humility and patience, and by the devotion, which he
had to the most Holy Virgin. Other times, the Devils desvring to conceal that
they were cast out by the prayers of B. Ignatius, attributing that effect to
the virtue of other Saints, to whom the said sisters had particular devotion,
at the time of their going out, were enforced to confess the lie which they
had told, and to give the glory to Ignatius, saying: that God would serve
himself of him alone, in that occasion.

7. Other times with great fury, at their departure, they cried out, saying:
where is thy might O Lucifer, since that a piece of paper, with the picture of
this Priest casts us forth, thou not being able to make resistance? And many
times having been exorcised the whole day without profit, they said, that they
should never depart, unless Ignatius were inuocated, and called upon, because
God would have it so. And when the Priest said, Impero vobis per merita B.
Ignatij etc. I command you by the merits of B. Ignatius etc they presently went
away with great rage, and fury. Other times they said: O God how do thou
deprive us of glory, to give it to this lame, and wrinkled Priest.

8. The same effects which the Picture and Relic of the Blessed Father had
wrought, were likewise caused by the book written of his life: for it being
carried to the women's house, for them to read upon, and laid upon their head, or
breast, or some Chapter of his life being read, the Devils were in forced to
depart, and to yeald themselves to the will of God, who is marvelous in his
Saints, and gives them strength and virtue to tread upon Lions, and to triumph
over all the powers of hell. This battle and contention, lasted for two months,
at which time the perfect victory was obtained. For as S. Bernard says,
speaking of a Devil, which S. Malachy cast out of two women; this delay was
not for want of power in the Saint, but by divine dispensation, that the
presence of the enemy, and the victory of the Saint, who cast them forth, might
be the better understood.

Of the wonderful force, and eficacy of the words, and sayings of B. Ignatius,
in moving men's hearts.

CHAP. XX.
What force he had to move men's hearts.
HE had not only this dominion over the Devils, but also over the hearts of men,
with whom he dealt. For certainly the force which our Lord gave unto his words,
were wonderful and seemed more then humane, moving men's hearts, not with the
sweetness or elega^cy of his speech, but with the weight of his spirit, and of
the things which he spoke. He mollified hard, and obstinate men like wax, and
altered them in such sort, that they meruailed at themselves, and at the
change, which they had made. With two or three words he often quieted, and
cured the infirm, and afflicted consciences and souls of men, strengthing the
weak, and giving them peace, and security.

2. There was in our house at Rome a Jew, called Isaac, to be catechized, or
instructed, because he would become a Christian. He fell one day into a great
temptation, and as one that were furious, and besides himself, began to say,
that he would begone, and would not be a Christian. The holy Father commanded
him to be brought before him, and said unto him only these words: Stay with us
Isaac: presently he was quieted, and of a furious Lion became a gentle Lamb,
and remained in the house, and was baptized.

3. A brother called John Paul, who accompanied our Blessed Father, was for a
time so assaulted, and afflicted with the Devil, by an occasion of a certain
vain, and frivolous scruple, that he could not breath, nor find any peace in
his soul, either by prayer, or pennances, or the use of the holy Sacraments,
or in any other thing which he used for his remedy: so that he was so sad, and
melancholy, that he seemed a living statua of death. He imparted this his
trouble to our Blessed Father, who with only two words, in answer, took away,
as with his hand, all that perplexity, and agony, and pulled up the roots of
it so perfectly, as if he had never endured any such matter.

4. I knew another also (whom I will not name because he is yet alive) who
being but a child, by reason of a certain fright fell in to so great a fear,
that he trembled at his own shadow, and acquainting our B. Father with that
passion, and vain fear, he with two words, that he spoke unto him, restored
him to his former peace, and security. There happened two other things to the
same man, which do very well declare the efficacy, which God gave to the words
of this his Servant, and what force he had to move their hearts, who treated
with him. The one is, that being once very rebellious, and obstinate, in not
following the wholesome counsels which the Father gave him, with one only word,
that he said unto him, he was in such sort changed, that he began to cry out a
loud, I will do it Father, I will do it. And so he did, it seeming to him,
that he had not power to do otherwise, by reason of the great motion, and
impulsion, which he felt in his soul

5. The other was that the same brother being tempted, and in a manner resolved
not to persevere in the Society, and making his general Confession with the
Blessed Father, with only these words, that he said unto him, I desire you, not
to be ungrateful to one who has done you so many favors, as our Lord has
done, he healed, quieted, and pacifyed him in such sort, that in that instant
he determined to persevere in his vocation: and has devoutly perseuered ever
since, without having any the least trouble in this kind. And we might relate
very many other things of this quality, by reason of which Father Francis
Borgia, a man of such sanctity, and prudence as is known, was wont to say,
that B. Father Ignatius did speak, tamquam potestatem habens, as a man that
had power, to imprint in men's hearts what he would, and to move them to what he
would.

6. S. Bernard says, that the holy Bishop S. Malachy tamed an unruly, and very
choleric woman: and that in his opinion, this was a greater miracle, then if
he had raised one from death, because in the one miracle, he had raised the
outward man and in the other the inward. This says S. Bernard. But let us
follow the course of our narration, and declare some of the other miracles,
which after the death of the Blessed Father, our Lord has wrought by his
intercession, and especially these latter years, in which his Canonization
has been treated of. For those which God has done in diverse Provinces, have
been many, diverse, and great, to stir up the devotion of the faithful toward
him, and to make him glorious upon earth as he has done in heaven.

Of the miraculous Cures of diseases, done by the intercession of B. F.
Ignatius.

CHAP. XXI.
At the instant in which he departed at Rome, he appeared to a Lady at Bononia.
IN the very instant, that the Blessed Father gave up his Ghost, he appeared
shyning, and glorious, to a noble and most devout Matrone in Bononia, who was a
widow, called Margaret Dellio, and greatly affected to the Society: and he
said unto her; Margaret I depart now, and I commend the Society unto you.
Having said these words, he ceased to appear. And the pious woman related
presently, what she had seen to Father Francis Palmius her Confessarius, and
the Rector of that College, telling him, that without doubt Father Ignatius
was deceased, and that she had seen him, describing him as lively as if she
had known him before, whereas in truth she had never seen him. And though
this were not held for certain when she related it, notwithstanding afterward,
when the news, of the Fathers death came, and of the day, and hour in which
he went to a better life, the thing was manifest.

2. The first day of August in the year 1556. in which the Father was buried,
great multitudes of people concured in Rome to his funeral, He cures a maid
of the Kings Evil.
to see and reverence him. Among others which came, there was a very devout
woman who bare affection to the Society, called Bernardina, and she had a
daughter about the age of 14. years, who was molested with a dangerous, and
troublesome infirmity of the Lamperons, or Kings Evil. And though she had
spent a good part of her wealth in curing her daughter, yet she could not get
her health, but, rather was every day worse and worse. Her mother carried her
that day to the Church of the Society, with desire, that she might touch the
holy Fathers body, and commend her self unto him, and by his intercession
obtain of our Lord her health, which the Physicians could not procure. But the
throng was so great, that how much soever the mother, and daughter endeauored,
they could not by any means come where the F. body lay. Seeing their desire
thus frustrate, they requested to have something that had touched the B.
Fathers body, and the mother with great devotion and faith, applied it to her
daughters neck, touching with it the Lamperons, and sores, which were in a
manner festered: and by the mercy of our Lord, and the merits of his servant
Ignatius, the maid was perfectly cured, to the admiration of all those that
heard of it, and acknowledgment of the Fathers sanctity, who after his death
gave health to those, which heartily commended themselves unto him.

3. In the years 1569. upon the 31. Music hard in his to^be.
of July (which was the day of his decease) the body of the Blessed Father was
translated the first time, and there was heard by a certain devout servant of
God for the space of two days, most sweet music and harmony, as it were of
voices, in his Sepulcher.

4. In Rome a Lady called Drusilla Tursellina being very much vexed with a
vehement fever, He cures a burning fever.
and with the headache, having used many remedies, and been let blood in her
arms, nostrills, and head, without profit, her sickness rather increasing every
day; was presently, healed by a relic of one of the Blessed Fathers bones,
laid upon her forehead.

5. Another woman named Olimpia Norina had such a vehement pain in her eyes,
that she came to loose her sight, and for the space of three months had such a
continual ague, He gives sight to a blind woman
and pain in her head, that she could not rest. They brought her a
subscription of the Blessed Fathers hand, at the time that her pain was at the
greatest, laying it upon her forehead, and eyes, and she began to see, and was
ryd of her ague and pain.

6. In the same City in the year 1597. a noble man's child of seven years
old, called Hierome Gabriell, being sick of a pestilent fever (called a
Tauerdillo) and of a plurisy; He restores health to a child in a ma^^^^ past
(...)
having also the worms, so that there was little hope of his life, was healed
with the same subscription of the Blessed Father.

7. In the year 1599. Lady Ioane Vrsina, being but a child, He delivers
another child from a dangerous cough and shortness of breath.
daughter to Cornelia Vrsina Duchess of Cesi, had so great a cough, that she
could scarsely breath, or suck. The Duchess her mother commended her very
earnestly and devoutly to Blessed Father Ignatius, and beseeched him to obtain
the health of her daughter: whereupon the child having been a night and a half
without rest, presently fell a sleep, and her cough ceased, and she began to
suck her Nurses breast. For which cause the Duchess commanded a Tablet to be
set on the Fathers grave in remembrance of the favor, which she had received.

8. In the same year 1599. Angela Ruggiera was troubled with an extraordinary
noise in her head for almost a year, He restores hearing to a deaf woman.
and lost the hearing of her right ear; whereto applying a relic of the
Blessed Father, and making a vow to fast with bread and water the day of his
departure, and to communicate the day following, recovered perfect health, and
remained free from that infirmity.

9. In the same year 1599. upon a monday, being the 19. of July Father Michael
Vazques a professed Father of the Society of Jesus, He freeth one from a
vehement fit of the stone.
and Prefect of the studyes in the Roman College, had such a terrible fit of
the cholicke, and stone, that being in a cold sweat, and as it were in an
agony, and without feeling, seemed ready to give up the ghost. They applied
many remedies to ease his pain, but all without profit: yea it seemed that his
pain increased by the multiplying of remedies. He desired them to bring him a
Relic of B. Father Ignatius, which they did, and he took it with great
devotion, and commending himself very devoutly to his Holy Father, he put it to
the part where his pain was most sharp and vehement: and presently the pain
ceased in that part, but remained in others, which likewise afflicted him much.
But laying the sacred Relic upon those also, the pain seemed to fly from
before it, so that at length he remained altogether whole and free.

10. And four or five hours after he began to cast forth without any pain
many pieces of the stone, imbrued with blood, and as it were enwrapped in
little pieces of flesh; the Physicians judging, that the stone was dissolved by
the virtue of that Relic, and be-because it was sharp, had torn the
passages. Forthwith the sick Father rose out of his bed, against the opinion of
many, because he judged that health not to be humane, but from Heaven, and
obtained by the merits of the B. Father, and consequently that it would be
perfect, and that he had no cause to fear. The said Father Michael Vazques had
at that time the care to deal with the Cardinals of the Congregation of holy
Rites, or Ceremonies, concerning the Canonization of the B. Father, and it
seemed, that our Lord sent him that so sudden, and sharp a sickness, that
having had experience of the Blessed Fathers favor in his own person, he
might be the more earnest in procuring his Canonization.

11. The same year 1599. a godly Matron of Rome, He cures a canker.
having a canker in one of her breasts, and by the judgment of Physicians being
so far gone, that it seemed she would shortly dye; making her prayers, at the
B. Fathers tomb, she began presently to feel the benefit of his intercession,
and without any other corporal medicine, she became well within few days: for
which cause her husband caused an Hearse of cloth of silver to be laid upon his
tomb, and the woman her self sent the portrature of a breast made of silver
and gilt, in remembrance of the benefit received.

12. Another called Orinthia Casali, being with child, and without hope of
life, because the said child was dead in her body, He delivers a woman of a
dead child.
applying a subscription of the Blessed Father thereto, was delivered of the
dead child, the mother her self remaining in good health.

13. Let us omit the other miracles which God has wrought in Rome (being many)
and let us come to other Provinces of Italy. In the Marca of Ancona is
situated the Sacred House of our Lady of Loreto, in which the most Holy Virgin
was borne, and the Eternal Word clothed himself with our flesh. In this place
a child of six years old, A child past cure recovered.
fell into so grievous a sickness, that the Physicians gave him over. They laid
a little piece of B. Father Ignatius his garment upon him, commending him to his
prayers, and presently he began to be better, and was perfectly cured.

14. In the City of Recanati, He healteth diverse diseases.
which is about 3. miles from Loreto, the year 1599. a woman much troubled
with an ague, and pain in her stomach, commending her self to the Blessed
Father, was freed from both. And a youth being in danger of his life, by
bleeding at his nose so abundantly that it could not be staunched, having a
Relic of the Blessed Father applied, left bleeding. And another woman, which
had a great pain in her breasts, there being an impostume bred in them, the
impostume did break by virtue of the same Relic.

15. In the same City a Ge^tlema^ named Horatius Leopardus, being in the
month of October of the same year 1599. in danger of his life by a fit of the
stone, and retentio^ of urine, not finding any remedy, he commended himself
very affectuously to our B. Lady, beseeching her by the merits of B. Father
Ignatius to heal him, and desyring the Father himself to be his good
advocate. At that very instant his pain was eased, and he began to make water;
and afterward, he cast forth much gravel, and stones, broken in little pieces,
and so remained altogether free.

16. Here also the same year and month, a Lady called Lucandia, wife to
Pompeius Georgij, He cures pains of the heart.
having been very sick for the space of five months, and endured great
pains, and palpitations of her heart, applying unto it a little piece of the
Fathers garment, presently found herself well. And the same woman having gone
with child nine months, and cast out of her body twenty pounds of blood, being
therewith much weakened and in a manner without sense, He delivers a woman
twice from danger of death.
she earnesty commended her self to the B. Father, and that bloody flux ceased,
and she came to her self: and afterward being much oppressed with the pains
of childbearing, not being able to be delivered, she was brought to bed of a
dead son without pain, she herself remaining in life, and health,
commending her self to the B. Father.

17. In the City of Macerata, rata, which is about three leagues from Loreto,
He appears to a sick woman, restoring her health.
Blessed Father Ignatius appeared to a woman called Elizabeth Morena, Niece to
the Lord Bishop of the same City, she being like to dye, and without hope of
life, in the month of Noue^ber of the year 1599. and taking her by the hand,
he told her, that she should ere long be restored to perfect health, willing
her to rise, and give thanks to god for the mercy which he used toward her.

18. In the City of Naples, in the month of June of the year 1599. Don^a
Ioana of Aragon, Princess of Beltran, and Duchess of Terra-noua, had a great
pain, and swelling in her right breast: He delivers a Lady from a pain and
swelling in her breast.
and finding no remedy, amongst many which were applied in the space of four
months, omitting them all, as unprofitable, and laying upon her breast, with
much devotion, the picture of the B. Father, she became well the same day: and
coming to Rome this last Holy year of 1600. commanded a Tablet of silver,
with four great wax Tapers to be set upon the B. Fathers tomb, on Easter day,
in thanks giving.

19. In the City of Nola, the year 1599. in the month of November, A Knight
cured of a pestilent fever.
a knight named Francis Blasius, being much vexed with a pestilent ague, and
with a grievous pain in his head and stomach, so that in the judgment of the
Physicians, he was in danger of his life. His mother Zenobia Tolphia exhorted
him to lay a Relic of the bone of B. Father Ignatius to his head, and commend
himself unto him, desyring his favor. He did so, and remained free from all
his pains, and his whole sickness.

20. In the City of Lecha (which is in the Province of Apulia, in the Kingdom
of Naples) the year 1594. a woman called Patientia, A woman cured from a pain
in her side.
servant to a Lady named Antonina Cubella, had such a terrible pain in her
side, that it was accounted incurable, in so much, that they prepared her
grave. They brought her a Relic of the Blessed Father Ignatius, and presently
she fell a sleep (which she could not do before) and in her sleep, the Father
appeared unto her, in priestly attire, and said unto her: Daughter, commend thy
self to God, and he will heal thee: upon hearing of which words, she found
her self free from her pain.

21. In the same City of Lecha a child of three years old, A child healed of
a wound in his knee.
son to the Baron of Begli-boni, fell from his Nurses arms upon the ground,
and did notably hurt his right knee, which grew every day worse, because the
Nurse for fear concealed the fall. And it went so far that it was necessary to
open the child's knee oftener then once, and yet this helped not: wherefore
coming to cut it the third time, the Father fearing his Sons death, (whom
he did see consumed with the wound, and with the ague which followed thereupon)
went to the College of the Society, and there they gave him a Relic of the
B. Fathers bone; which he laid upon the child, before they opened his knee the
third time, and when the Surgeons came to do it, they found him much better,
and within a few days altogether well.

22. A Father of the Society, A Father delivered from a tempest, and captivity.
called Natalis Masuca, sailing to Sicily, was taken by the Turks, and
afterward a great storm arose, in which he expected to be drowned. He
commended himself to B. Father Ignatius, and heard presently a voice, which
said unto him. Doubt not, for thou shall not be drowned in this tempest, nor be
carried into Turkey. The storm ceased, and the Turks ship was taken by the
Christians, near to the I Will Lampadosa, and so he was delivered both from the
sea, and the Pirates.

23. In the City of Palermo, a child of three years old called Cosmus Ferier,
son to a famous Physician, A child cured of an ague, and looseness.
had such a terrible ague, and loosnesse of his body, that his Father himself
having given him over, prepared all things necessary for his burial; but
having laid upon him a piece of a vestiment, in which Blessed Father Ignatius
had said Mass, he forthwith began to be much better, and the same day
recovered his health to the great admiration, and joy of his Father, and those
of the house. Now let us come to Spain.

Of diverse Miracles wrought in Spain, by the intercession of B. F. Ignatius.

CHAP. XXII.
IN the year 1570. or 1571. in the City of Toledo, one day in winter, He
delivers a woman from a pain in her side.
a little before night, an ancient woman, called Vega, servant to Alonso of
Villa-Real Duron* and of Mary de Torres his wife, fell into an exceeding pain
of her side, which was so vehement, that the Phisitia^s willed her to confess,
and receive the most B. Sacrament, and make her last will and testament the same
night, fearing that she would not live till morning: a devout and virtuous, man
called John of Mesa, friend to the said Alonso of Villa-Real, understanding
this, having first betaken himself to prayer, laid upon that side of the sick
women where the pain was, a little piece of a lynnen cap, and another of a
lether stomacher, which B. Father Ignatius was wont to use, and the said John
of Mesa carried about him for his devotion and at the very instant, that he did
this, the sick woman became whole, and well, saying: O Master John of Mesa,
what have you done to me, that you have taken away my pain, and sickness?

2. In the City of Burgos, Don^a Francisca of Beruy, He cures the colicke
stone, and bleeding.
a professed Nun in the monastery of S. Dorothy, of great recollection, and
virtue, being very much tormented with the cholick, and stone, having recourse
to the intercession of the said Blessed Father, in the space of one year
little more or less, came to cast forth, more then an hundredth stones, little,
and great, in a manner without any pain at all. And in the year 1593. having
broken a vein in her breast, not being able to staunch the blood, which she
cast out of her mouth, laying upon her breast a little piece of the first
sackcloth, which the Blessed Father clad himself withal in Montserat, when he
gave his apparel to the poor man, the blood presently ceased, and stayed.

3. There was in the Convent of the Nuns, commonly called Huelgas, one named
Don^a Ioanna of Gongora, very sickly, in so much, that she had procured a Breue
of his Holiness, He cures other infirmities.
that she might go out of her Monastery to take Physic: but commending her
self to the Holy Father, and keeping his picture in her Cell, she remained so
free, and sound, that she stood no more in need of leave to go abroad for her
health.

4. Another devout woman of the order of S. Francis, named Mary of Auala, who
was much afflicted in spirit, had counsel to commend her self to Blessed
Father Ignatins, He helps the trouble of the mind.
that by his means, she might obtain ease, and remedy of her trouble: and she
betaking her self to prayer, forgot the name of Ignatius, and said: O Saint
Athanasius, help me in the sight of our Lord, that he will be pleased to
deliver me from this great temptation, and affliction which I endure. When she
said these words, she heard a voice, that answered: He is not called
Athanasius, but Ignatius: and doubt not, but that by his intercession, thou
shall obtain that, which thou desyrest of our Lord: as indeed she did.

5. Another man named Lancelot Ruffin of Flanders being sick of a pestilent
ague, and given over by the Physicians, He cures a dangerous fever.
by the means of a subscription of the B. Father, recovered perfect health,
and rose up sound, and well, to the admiration of the Physicians, and of all
those that knew his danger.

6. The same happened to to Don Lopez of Castro, nephew to Don^a Eleanora
Gallo, who at that time was Abbess of the Monastery of S. Dorothy, who being
given over by all the Physicians which had him in hand, as well by those who
lived in Burgos, as by others whom he had sent for from Valliadolid,
comme^ding himself to Father Ignatius, and promising to give a certain alms
in his name, was presently healed, and delivered of his infirmity.

7. A religious, and grave Father of the order of Saint Augustine, belonging to
the Convent of the City of Burgos, A maid infected with the plague is healed
with the Fathers picture
being in Quintanilla of Somun^on a Town within the Archbishopric of Burgos,
whither he went, moved by charity, to administer the Sacraments to those who
were sick of the plague: upon the eleventh of November in the year 1599. heard
the confession of a young woman about 22. years old, called Mary, daughter to
John Gomez husbandman, who was sick of a strong ague, and infected with the
plague, he gave her counsel to commend her self very earnestly to Blessed
Father Ignatius, Many that had the plague recover by drinking of the water in
which one of the Fathers bones had been dipped.
and he gave her a picture of the same Father, to put in her bosom; and with
this only remedy, within an hour after he found her without either soar, or
ague.

8. Many that were infected with the plague, in the City of Burgos, drinking
of the water, in which a bone of Blessed Father Ignatius had been dipped, and
commending themselves to him, recovered perfect health. And Francis Ortiz
Curate, and Pastor of S. Peter and S. Felix avouches, that many were so
healed, and that he gave them the water For when humane remedies failed, he
betook himself to divine, and that this was public in the City.

9. The same is testified by Bachelour Sanchius of Cantabrana, Curate, and
Pastor of the Church of S. Stephen, to have happened to himself, being
infected with the plague, and having a great and vehement tertian fever, and
that taking of the foresaid water, and commending himself to Father Ignatius,
he was healed. And Abel de-la-Torre, Curate, and Pastor of S. Martyns, in the
same City of Burgos, being infected with the plague, drinking of the said
water, which his mother brought him, at the same instant that he took it, felt
himself well, and was freed from his ague.

10. Francis Ortez aforesaid, Curate, and Pastor of the Church of S Peter and
S. Felix in the same City of Burgos, He helps one from a lamnesse in his
knees.
having endured by the space of five years a great infirmity of certain
humors in his knees, and ankles, with much pain and trouble, by commending
himself to the B. Father, was healed, never feeling that infirmity afterward.

11. In the City of Madrid Father Michael Garses, He suddenly takes away a
vehement pain of the eyes with his subscription.
a professed Father of the Society of Jesus, had a rhewme that fell into his
right eye, and did put him to such excessive pain, that he could find no ease,
either in letting blood, or in any remedy which was used: but rather the pain
seemed to increase by the multiplying of remedies, so that he could not take
any rest day or night. Finally the ninth of September in the year 1596. having
endured a most vehement pain in his said eye, until seven of the clock at
night, Father Bartholomew Perez, who is at this day Assistant of the Society at
Rome, taking compassion of him, gave him a subscription of B. Father Ignatius
his hand, and willed him to comme^d himself unto him, and to lay it unto his
eye: for he hoped that he would deliver him from that pain, as he had done
othres who had commended themselves unto him. Father Garses kneeled down,
betaking himself to prayer, and laid the subscription unto his eye, when his
pain was at the greatest; which presently was taken away, and a little after
he went to bed, and slept all that night with good repose, and the next morning
heard confessions in the Church: and we of the house did see his eye well,
which we had seen the day before very bloody, and full of water.

12. In Gandia a maid of 13. years old, called Francis Vinoles, had been ill
at ease for the space almost of a year, He heals a lame woman.
of a great pain in one of her legs, which made her halt, and did put her to
much pain, especially when the weather was cold, which was very contrary to
her disease. This maid the day of the Circumcision of our Lord, in the year
1600. went to Mass (not without great difficulty) because it was so great a
day, and returned home much afflicted, by reason of the pain which greatly
tormented her. Her mother willed her to commend herself earnestly to blessed
Father Ignatius, and laid one of his subscriptions upon her: and in that very
instant the sick maid felt her self perfectly well, and free from that pain:
and began to go, as if she never had any. Her Father (who was a Physician) and
all the house accounted it a miracle: and in sign of thankfulness, presently
the day following, the maid, and her mother came to the Church of the Society
of Jesus, to render thanks to our Lord, and to his great Servant Ignatius,
presenting him with a picture of wax.

13. Like to this miracle is another, which happened in the month of October
in the year 1600. in the same City of Gandia, to Iosepha Borgia wife to
Gaspar Harrera. For the said Iosepha, He cures a pain in the knee.
not being able for the space of more then a month, scarce to move her self
by reason of an exceeding great pain in her knee, and finding no remedy by any
medicine, she began to commend herself to the Blessed Father, with great
devotion, and to say five times the Pater noster, and Aue Maria. And having
done this for three days, being one night in her bed, and commending her self
unto him with many tears (because she felt her self much tormented with that
pain) she presently reposed, and slept, and in her sleep the Blessed Father
appeared unto her, and with a serene, and cherefull countenance told her, that
he came to cure her, and touching her knee with his blessed hand, he freed her
from all that pain, and she awaking found her self perfectly well, and
presently the next morning came to the Church of the Society, and brought a
picture of wax in testimony, and remembrance of the favor received at our
Lords hands.

14. But yet more notable is that which happened in the same City, in the
month of November following, to a recollected Virgin of the age of 40. years,
called Iosepha Castella, who was sick of the gout, He cures the Gout.
which was wont to take her with such great force, and violence, that it
deprived her of her judgment, and many people could scarce hold her from
hurting, and beating her self: and when she was out of this fit, she remained
with such a terrible pain of her heart, and so great affliction of mind, her
body also being so wearied, and broken, that for all that day, and the day
following, she could not move her self, nor do any thing. But having
understood of the favors, which our Lord did in this time in diverse places by
the intercession of the Blessed Father; one night when her disease had assailed
her more fiercely and violently, then at other times, coming a little to her
self, she commended her self, as earnestly as she could, to the Blessed Father
with great confidence, saying five times the Pater noster, and the Aue Maria,
and presently in the same instant, she found her self altogether well, and as
sound, and free from that sadness, and pain of her heart, and from the other
accidents with which she had remained all that time, as she was wont at other
times before. She slept, and reposed that night very well (which she could not
do at other times, when she had those fits) and presently so soon as it was
day, she rose out of her bed, whereat her sister, and brother-in-law meruailed
to see her go up and down the house. She bad them not wonder, but give
thanks to our Lord, who by means of B. Father Ignatius had given her most
perfect health, so that she had not so much as any sign of her sickness. After
eight, or ten days, the same maid fell into such an extreme fit of the
Cholicke, Also the cholike.
that she expected death: and with the devotion, which she had conceived
toward the Blessed Father, she commended her self to him, and presently
remained altogether free from that pain also. And in token of acknowledgment,
she came to the Church of the Society, and brought two pictures of wa^, all
that were present concurring with her in praising our Lord.

15. We may add to these miracles another, which God has wrought in the same
City of late, upon the 12. of December of this last year 1600. A Girl of 7.
years old was so sick of an ague, and a swelling in her face, that for two
days, and two nights she could take no rest, nor drink so much as one drop of
water, so that her parents thought rather of burying her, then of curing her.
One of the child's Aunts saw by chance a picture of Blessed Father Ignatius, A
child healed of an Ague and sweelling in the face.
which had been brought to her Father, that he might set it in a frame (for he
was a ioyner) she took it, and laid it upon the sick child's head, with great
confidence, bidding her commend her self to that Saint, and to make a vow,
that she would perform some devotion toward him for nine days together, if
she recovered. Within a quarter of an hour, the child called her mother, and
told her, that she was sound and well, and that the holy Father Ignatius had
healed her, desiring her to give her some thing to eat. She did eat, drink,
and sleep that night, as one that was perfectly well; and forthwith the day
following, she and her Aunt went to the College of the Society, to give our
Lord thanks, and began to perform the devotion promised, and presented a
picture of wax.

Of diverse other Miracles of B. F. Ignatius, done in other parts of the world.

CHAP. XXIII.
Now let us pass to the Island, and City of Majorca, in which our Lord has
wrought great wonders these years past, by the intercession of Blessed Father
Ignatius. Ioane Claray: Noguera, a virtuous, and exemplar widow being very ill
of her eyes, and having lost the sight first of her right eye, A widow
restored to her sight.
and afterward of her left, applying a subscription of Blessed Father Ignatius
his hand unto them, was so perfectly healed, that presently the day following
she could work with her needle, and fix her eyes as sted fastly upon her
work, as before she was blind.

2. Another Lady called N. Sureda, wife to George Sureda who being in exceeding
great pain of childbearing, and could not be delivered in many days; with
the subscription of the Blessed Father brought forth a son safe and sound, He
helps many women in their labor of childbearing.
the mother also having her health, and receiving great contentment, and joy,
as all the rest of that family likewise did.

3. This also happened more notably to another woman, wife to Saluador
Mereader, who having wholly lost her forces, so that she could not be delivered:
and fearing least her child were dead, by the same subscription recovered her
courage, and strength, and brought forth a son, to whom at his baptism they
gave the name of Ignatius, because he was borne by his intercession.

4. Magdalen Suau wife to Peter Suau, endured for three days most terrible
pains of childbearing, and upon S. Laurence his day, in the year 1598. the
subscription which we have mentioned of the Blessed Father, being brought unto
her, whilst she was in that distress in her bed, she rose out of it, and
after a new manner, all that were present calling upon the name of Blessed
Ignatius, she was delivered of a child, having his head growing betwixt his
legs. And yet our Lord vouchsafed to preserve the mother, who was very faint
and weak, without any hurt or harm; the child also being fair, and in good
health, which caused all the standers by to praise our Lord, for the ways
which he takes to honor his Saints. With these, and other like accidents the
fame of the favor which God our Lord does to women in childbirth, by the
merits of Father Ignatius was so spread abroad, that both poor, and rich, when
they found themselves in that danger, did take him for their advocate, and use
his subscription, by which means they found remedy, and relief in their
necessities.

5. Another woman, called Ieronyma Rebaca, was many days in danger of her
life, by reason of the great, and terrible pains, which she suffered in
childbearing, being also exceeding weak and faint, and having used many
remedies without profit, thinking that the child was dead (because it moved
not) they would have given her a certain strong medicine, to make her void it
forth, though not without much danger of her own life. But she instead of that
dangerous potion, betook herself to the remedies from heaven, and desired to
have the subscription of Blessed Father Ignatius brought unto her, by which God
did work so many, and so great wonders in Majorca. They brought it to her upon
the 20. of October of the same year 1598. and within half a quarter of an
hour she was delivered of a son, being alive, and in good health. And that
which caused most admiration was, that the child had his mouth full of the
potions, which the mother had taken three days before. The midwife took them
out of his mouth, and the child presently cried, which made all the rest to
laugh for joy.

6. One of the women, which was present at this miracle, was Ieronyma Py, wife
to Raphaell Py, He heals a woman of a pain, with which she had been
troubled 16. years.
who for sixteen years had endured most vehement, and continual pain in her
jaws, not having found any remedy which could mitigate the same, and together
with this, she was troubled with a loose tooth, which caused her much pain
when she did eat. This woman having seen what God had wrought in that
delivery of Ieronyma Rebaca, moved with devotion; desired to have the said
subscription of the Blessed Father, which she kissed, and reverenced; and
presently in that instant, she was delivered from her pains, and the loose
tooth also, became as fast as any of the rest.

7. This good woman, and her husband were so thankful, and devout to Blessed
Father Ignatius, that they deserved to receive, another greater benefit at our
Lords hand, One cured being in danger of death
by his intercession. For the day following, being the 21. of October, a son
of theirs called John Py, fell sick of so terrible, and dangerous a double
tertian ague, that having confessed, and received, he lost his judgment the
fourth day, his tongue was thick, his eyes holow and cloudy, together with the
other accidents and signs of death. Upon the 19. of October, they laid the
subscription of the Blessed Father upon him, beseeching our Lord with much
devotion, and tears to grant the sick man his health. And at that very
instant the ague was quite taken away, and he recovered his judgment and
speech, and his eyes became clear. And this being at eight of the clock at
night, forthwith the day following in the morning he rose out of his bed found
and well, and the Physician coming at that hour to visit him (thinking that
he would be either dead, or in his last agony) he found him walking, without
any sign of his ague, or former sickness.

8. By chance a horse ran over a Surgeon called Bartholomew Constantius, and
bruized him so sorely, that his head seemed to be frozen, He recoreth a
bruised, and blind man.
and he had so great a pain in his eyes that he could not take any rest either
day, or night. He lost the sight of one of his eyes, and the other remained so
weak and tender, that he could not endure any glimpse of light. The Physicians
had given him over for incurable, and upon Holy Wednesday in the morning, the
year 1599. he desired with singular devotion to have the subscription of the
Blessed Father. At the time that they brought it, and it came into the chamber
where he was, before they gave it him, that great cold in his head, and the
vehement pain in his eyes ceased, and he found both in body, and spirit an
extraordinary comfort. Having seen the marvelous effects of that
subscription, he presently took from his head the kerchers, and caps, which he
had to defend it from the cold that he endured, and he cried out, saying: I am
now well, and sound, and without pain either of eyes, or head. Whereupon he
commanded the doors, and windows of his chamber to be opened, (which before
he had kept shut to keep out the light) and the day following being sound and
cheerful, he went to the College of the Society, to praise our Lord, for
having delivered him by the intercession of the B. Father, and to relate what
had happened unto him

9. A woman called Colonia Vich, A woman recouereth her sight.
wife to Jews Vich, having endured a most vehement headache three months, and
finally lost the sight of one of her eyes, the lyd thereof falling down and
covering it, so that the Surgeons could by no means lift it up again, and
thereupon gave her over as incurable. They brought her the subscription upon
the fifth of May, and in the very instant, that they laid it upon her sore eye,
calling upon the name of the Blessed Father, the lyd was presently lifted up of
it self, and she recovered her sight, and went to the College of the Society,
to give praise to our Lord.

10. Let us not forget Germany, where in a Town called Ebesperge, He
delivers a woman from danger of death in childbearing.
not far from the City of Monachium (in which the Dukes of Bauaria reside) a
woman being in terrible pains of childbearing, and having continued two
days, and two nights in labor, with great affliction and anxiety, not being
able to be delivered, the third day she found her self so faint, and without
strength, that she seemed more likely to dye, the^ otherwise. Her Husband being
very much afflicted, went to a Father of the Society, who was there, craving
his advise and help in that tribulation. The Father remembering the Miracles,
which our Lo^d wrought in many places, by the intercession of B. Father
Ignatius, especially with women who were in Danger by childbearing, kneeling
down, beseeched the Blessed Father with great devotion to favor that poor
woman in such extreme necessity. And because he had no other Relic of the
Father to send her, he took the rules which the same B. Father had written for
the Society, with much devotion, and many tears, and infoulding, and bynding
them up in a paper, he gave them to the woman's husband, that he might lay them
upon her, as a sacred thing, willing him not to doubt, but that God would
favor her. He did so, and the woman presently recovered strength, and within
five hours was delivered of a son, He procures another happy delivery.
strangly wrapped up in a thin skin, to the great admiration of the Midwife
and other women of experience, and both the son, and the mother lived.

11. In Hungary in the Town called Turroz, the year 1594. a woman having
been 3. days, in very terrible pains of childbirth, and in fear both of
her own, and her child's death, with a Relic of the B. Father, was forthwith
delivered of a son; she remaying in perfect health, and yealding thanks unto
our Lord.

12. Let us not pass in silence, what our Lord has wrought in the Indies
(though they be far from us.) In the year 1598. in the month of September, a
little ship, called Sancta Maria de Regla, departed out of the haven of the
Blessed Trinity (which is in the Island of Cuba) toward the City of
Carthagena: in which with don Bartholomeo Lobo-Guerrero, Archbishop of the new
Kingdom of Granada, there went at his request and in his company, the Father
Alphonsus Medranus, and Francis Figueroa of the Society of Jesus, with other
Priests, and Laymen. Sailing thus, and coming within sight of Iamaijca, upon
the 23. of September, they were assailed with such a terrible, and fearful
storm, that they all accounted themselves lost me^. For both the great and
fore masts of the ship were broken, and their sails torn in pieces, and the
wind so furious, that they could not set up any other, and the waves of the sea
entered into the ship, with such violence, that it rather seemed to sail
under, then above the water. The Pilot, called Domingo Rodriguez did let it run
at all adventures thinking that it was past all humane remedy, if God did not
send them some from Heaven. The tempest having endured thus one whole day, and
waxing every hour greater, the passengers made their recourse to our Lord
imploring his Divine help. The Fathers of the Society calling to mind the
miracles, which our Lord did at that time by the invocation of their Blessed
Father Ignatius, commended themselves unto him, with great affect, and
devotion, and with a loud voice advised the Archbishop, and the other
passengers to do the same, with hope to obtain by this means that, which they
could not procure by other. They did so all with one voice, crying out with
much feeling, and many tears, Holy Father Ignatius relieve us in this our
necessity. Presently in that instant they sensibly perceived the efficacy of
the Blessed Fathers intercession. For the wynd being at the highest, became
presently quiet, and calm, to the great admiration and joy of all those who
were in the ship, and did now see themselves alive, where as before they
esteemed themselves but dead me^. The Archbishop promised, to celebrate yearly
the feast of the Blessed Father Ignatius, saying his Mass in Pontificalibus,
so soon as the Apostolic Sea should canonize him: and the other passengers
promised other things, every one according to his devotion, as appears by the
informations made in the City of Santa -- fe of that new Kingdom, before the
same Archbishop Don Bartholomeo, and also in Carthagena by the authority of Don
Iuan de Ladrada, of Saint Dominicks order, Bishop of that City.

13. The Fathers Alphonsus Medranus, Another miracle upon the sea.
and Francis Figueroa, with the others that went in their company, were not
delivered only by this miracle, and at this time, from the evident dangers of
the Sea by the intercession of Blessed Father Ignatius. For returning in the
year 1600. from the foresaid new Kingdom of Granada, toward Spain, in the
Gallion, named Our Lady of Arancacu, passing out of the straites of Bahama,
they endured many, and very terrible storms. For the tide with them was very
strong and vehement, against which encountered a coutrary wynd, and of both
sides they were inuiroted with sands, and shallowes, and in very great danger.
Father Frauncis Figueroa cast a Relic of the Blessed Father into the sea,
beseeching him devoutly to help them; which he did in such manner, that the sea
was presently calm.

14. But this favor from Heaven, and the force of the Blessed Fathers
intercession appeared much more in another greater danger wherein they were,
near unto the Ila^ds, called Terceras. For one morning at the dawning of the
day, suddenly the wind arose so furiously, that it ouerturned the Galleon and
the maryners and passe^gers seeing imminent danger of death, kneeling down,
confessed their sins publikly with a loud voice, beseeching our Lords mercy.
The wynd brake down the greatest sail, and those of the Galleon remembering
the benefit which they bad received before in the cha^nell of Bahama, by means
of the invocation, and Relic of Blessed Father Ignatius, cried out with great
instance to Father Francis Figueroa, desyring him to cast again the same
Relic into the sea, that God might be pleased to deliver them the second time
also from so evident danger by his intercession. The Father did so, and
presently (o goodness of God, who honors his servants in this manner!) the
air became calm, the sea quiet, the sun shining, which was before covered,
and al in the ship were comforted, and moved to thanksgiving, seeing
themselves free from that fear, danger, and terror wherein they were before,
as the same Fathers, and others who came in the Galleon, did testify.

15. There was a woman in India so much inflamed with filthy, and dishonest
love, that nothing seemed able to quench it. He delivers an India^ woman from
temptations against chastity.
She had a Relic of B. Father Ignatius given her, and by the means thereof,
that Devilish inflammation ceased, which had almost consumed, and put her out
of her wits. And in the same manner there have been many others in diverse
Provinces, and places, who commending themselves earnestly to our Lord, and
craving his favor by the merits of his servant Ignatius, have obtained victory
of their temptations, peace, and serenity in their souls, health for their
bodies, case in their troubles, security in their dangers, and remedy in their
aduersityes.

Of the wonderful beginning, and Progress of the Society of JESUS.

CHAP. XXIIII.
BUT though the miracles, which are here related, and many other, which I omit
for breuity, be so great, and so certain; notwithstanding the greatest of all
(in my opinion) is, that God has chosen this Blessed Father to institute,
govern, and extend an Order of Religion, which amongst Catholics, Heretics,
and Infidells, has in so short a space done so much good in the world. And
this Miracle is so great, and so notorious, that although there were no other,
this alone ought to be sufficient, to know and esteem the sa^ctity which our
Lord has given to this venerable Father. Since it is certain, that when our
Lord chooses one for any great matter, he gives him such grace and talents,
as are necessary for the convenient execution, and accomplishment thereof.

2. And I think that any wise, and unpassionate man will judge the same, if he
consider the alteration, which God made, changing Ignatius from a worldly, and
vain soldier, and making him Captayn of this Sacred Warfarre, and Father of
so many, and such eminent Children. He that shall think upon the hard ways, by
which he guided him, and the perseverance, and victory, that he gave him: what
company he joined to him in Paris, some being Spaniards, and others Frenchmen,
at the very time that Spain and France were at cruel wars: and how he united,
and bound them together with the band of perfect charity. The persecutions, and
storms, which this Vessel has endured, from the time that our Lord launched
it into the sea, and that it has always arrived at a secure haven, what wynd
soever it had, when weak men, and such as were worldly wise, made account that
it would have perished.

3. He that shall ponder with attention the frame, and form of the Institute
of this Religion, which God inspired to this B. Father, so like in the
essential points to other orders, and so unlike in some, which are proper to
it self. The progress and propagation which the hand of Almighty God has
given unto it, since that in sixty years which are past (from the year 1540.
in which the Pope confirmed it, until the year 1600. in which I write this
history) our Lord has multiplied, and enlarged it throughout all the Kingdoms
of Christendom, and in so many, and so remote countries of the Indians, and
barbarous people, where the light of the Gospel had not before appeared. So
that in Angola, Monacongum, Monomotapa, Brasil, Ethiopia, Ormuz, Goa, Malaca,
Malucas, China, and Iaponia, and in the kingdoms of Mogor, and Pegu, with
others, our Fathers are resident (to omit, as more known, the firm la^d Peru,
new Spain, the Islands of Manilla, or the Philippines:) and the Society has
more then three hundred, and fifty Colleges, and Houses, distributed into
three and twenty Provinces, and two vice-Prouinces.

4. He will also judge the same, who shall cast his eyes upon that which more
imports, to wit, the fruit which our Lord has drawn out of the labors of
this B. Father, and of his children among Catholics, Infidells, and Heretics.
There is no cause to relate in this place, that which belongs to Catholics,
but only to consider, and ponder it, since that we have it before our eyes, and
we see, and touch with our hands the care, and solicitude, with which our
Fathers employ themselves in teaching children the Christian doctrine and the
youth good learning, and manners: in visiting and comforting those, who are
detayned in prisons, and the sick in the hospitalls, and in releeuing the
poor, and needy, and helping men to dye well.

5. And it cannot be denied, that though the Common wealth has fallen, and
been impaired much in other things: yet there has been great reformation in
many servants of God, concerning preaching more profitably, and more oftener,
touching prayer, and meditation of the divine Misteryes: the use, and
frequentation of the Holy Sacraments of Confession, and Communion; and in
mortification, and penna^ce: though all that is done be little, if we consider,
what we ought to do. Likewise the other orders of Religion have been
replenished with many scollers of the Society, who persevere, and flourish in
them with great praise, and commendation. And these Religions themselves,
encouraged with the help and succor, which our Fathers have afforded them,
have more discovered their holy zeal, and extended greater beams of their
sanctity, and learning, sustayning the Common wealth upon their shoulders, and
moving us with their example, to labor more, and to attend with greater
vigilance, and carefulnes, to our ministeryes and functions.

6. That which concerns the Infidells, is so much, that it cannot be
explicated in few words, neither is it convenient, that we should spend many,
in declaring, what innumerable souls among the Gentills, the children of this
Blessed Father have illuminated with light from heaven, and brought to the
knowledge of Jesus Christ, and to the sweet yoke of his holy law: And what
labors they have endured, and do endure to bring this to pass; and how many,
and what great miracles God has wrought by them, by reason that they were
necessary for the planting of the faith in those places. Neither can any, who
enjoy the peace and quietness, that those who were borne in these Kingdoms do
enjoy (Blessed be our Lord, who gives us this peace, and thanked be our Pyous
Princes who conserve it,) easily believe, unless they see it, what profit our
Lord has done, and continually does in the Kingdoms, and Provinces infected
with Heresies; and what battayles, and combats our Fathers have with Heretics
without intermission.

7. But that, which they who have experience of those countries, say, and which
we who have seen it, know, is that with the exemplar life of our Fathers, with
the Catholic and sound doctrine taught in Schools, preached in Pulpits,
published in printed books, examined and tried in disputations with Heretics
themselves, and the institution of the youth (which in these provinces only was
in former years to the number of above thirty thousand scholars, and now is
far greater) the holy Catholic faith which seemed to be decayed and fallen in
the Northern Provinces, is revived, and has taken head, and recovered
strength, to resist, convince, conquer, and triumph over lies, and falsehood.
And an innumerable number of those which wauered, have been confirmed in the
obedience of the Roman Church: and many Heretics, who had forsaken it, have
returned to it again; and those who continue obstinate, and blind for their
interest, and ambition, have notwithstanding lost their former fury; and fear
those of the Society (whom they call Jesuits) and confess plainly, that they
are their utter enemies, and as such, they abhor; calumniate, and persecute
them.

8. There have been many Colleges, and Seminaryes erected for the education of
poor scholars, especially of those, who are banished, and suffer persecution
for their faith: and there live in them many Priests, and Religious men of all
orders, under the disciplyne, and government of the Society, who having ended
their studyes, return to their Churches, and Monasteryes, and are profitable
for their reformation, and to provoke others by their examples. And by this
means, and by reason, that many from the Schools of the Society have entered
into Religion, the Clergy, and the Orders of Religious themselves (which in
those parts were much decayed) have been reformed, and have recovered their
ancient beauty, and splendor.

9. In like manner, whole Villages, Towns, Cittyes, and Provinces have been
conserved in the Catholic faith: and with Co^gregations, Houses of
Conuictors, Sermons, use and frequentation of the holy Sacraments, fasting,
pennances, and works of mercy, they have revived their faith, and showed by
their actions, that they are children of the Catholic Church. And that this
fruit may be more durable and lasting, and more acceptable and pleasing to our
Lord: the sons of Ignatius water these plants with their blood, dying for the
Catholic faith, and testifying by their death, that it is the truth; since that
they give their life in defense thereof For besides above 25. of the Society,
which in both the Indies have sealed the preaching of the Ghospel with their
blood: more then 60. others have dyed by the hands of Heretics.

10. For because the Heretics abhor so much those of this religion, and
think that by bereauing them of their lives, they shall find less hinderance
in their mischief; it is a very ordinary thing, to persecute, apprehend,
torment, and use them like Traitors, as may be seen daily, and experience it
self has made it manifest. The which also is a great argument, that it is the
work of God, and that he who founded it, was chosen by him, especially with
his own and his childrens labors, to amplify and enlarge the glory of the
same Lord who did choose him, and to illustrate his holy Catholic Church.

11. And this is (as I have said) the greatest, of all the miracles of this
Blessed Father, and the Miracle of Miracles, in which are contained so many,
and so notable Miracles, as the wonderful things are, which our Lord has
wrought by him, and his children. Be he therefore Blessed, and glorified, as the
Author, and worker of all that is good: since that (as the Apostle says)
Neither he who planteth, is anything, nor he who waters: but God who makes
that to increase and fructify, which is planted and watered: and to whom, as to
the root thereof, all the beauty and fruit of the tree is due.

Sundry Testimonies, of Holy men, of Kings, Princes, and Prelates, concerning
B. Father Ignatius.

CHAP. XXV.
WE have enlarged our selves much, in this life of our Blessed Father
Ignatius; but for that we having known, and conuersed so much with him, it
has given us leave to exceed our ordinary course, and indeed we know certainly
that all which has been said to be too little in respect of that which might be
said. And because as yet he is not a Canonized Saint, nor proposed to the whole
Church by the holy Apostolic Sea to be inuocated, and reverenced, as the
others are, whose lives we have written: it has bin necessary to relate some
more particular ^^^ngs, and miracles, which in the lives of other Saints might
be for breuity well omitted. Though it be certain, that we pretermit many
other, esteeming these sufficient for that which we pretend in writing this
life: that is, to glorify our Lord, who has made him a Saint, to discover his
virtues, for our example: and that they who are ignorant of them, may come to
know them, and conceive devotion toward this holy Father.

2. And for this cause before I make an end, I will add, that as this Blessed
Father was a Saint in his life, so he was known, esteemed, and reverenced for
a Saint by all those, who treated with him, and much more by them, who were
more familiarly acquainted with him, because they did see more nearly his
admirable virtues, and touched, as it were, with their hand, the great gifts,
and graces which God had endued him withal.

3. Father Frauncis Xauier an Apostolical man, and of such rare sanctity, by
whom God wrought so many, and great miracles, who illustrated innumerable
Gentiles, bare so great devotion, and reverence to Father Ignatius, that he did
carry a subscription of his in his bosom, as a firm buckler against all
dangers. And from the remote Countries of India, he wrote letters unto him,
upon his knees.

4. Father Peter Faber, who was the first that joined with him, in the erection
of the Society, an admirable man, and of marvelous divine illustrations; took
Father Ignatius for his pattern, and example of Holiness, and of all virtue.

5. Father James Laynes, the second General of the Society, and a man so much
esteemed in the world, for his great learning and religion, told me, that
because God was so much pleased, with the soul of his Servant Ignatius, he did
so much good to the Society, and so greatly favored the children thereof.

6. Father Frauncis Borgia, the third General of the Society, a man so well
known to the world, by reason of his Nobility, and much more of his Sanctity,
went to Rome the year 1550. principally to see, know, and converse with
Blessed Father Ignatius And when he said his first Mass, (which was in the
house of Loyola) he kissed the floor of the Chamber where the Father was
borne, by reason of the great devotion, which he bare unto him, as unto so holy
a man. And this was the opinion of all others who treated familiarly with him.
But not only those who lived with him, had this estimation of his sanctity, but
likewise those abroad had the same conceit and respect of him in like manner.

7. Pope Paul the third, of blessed Memory, who was the first that confirmed
the Society, did very many important things by the counsel of this Blessed
Father; and among others, one was to institute in Rome the supreme Counsel of
the Inquisition, and to appoint four most grave Cardinals to have care of
matters belonging to the Catholic faith, in that holy Tribunal.

8. Pope Julius the third would not make Father Peter Canisius Bishop of
Vienna, as the King of the Romans Don Ferdinand requested very earnestly,
because B. Father Ignatius would not give his consent thereto: so great was the
respect, which the Pope bare unto him.

9. Pope Marcellus the second, who succeeded to Julius the third, said: That in
matters of the Society, the authority of Father Ignatius alone was of more
weight with him, then all the reasons, which could be alleged to the contrary.

10. Pope Paul the fourth, (in the time of whose Popedom the Blessed Father
departed,) honored him so much, that when he spoke with him, he bad him rise
up, and cover his head.

11. Pope Gregory the 13. in the Bulls which be granted the year of our Lord
1582. and 1583. in confirmation and defense, of the Institute of the Society,
expressly says, That the holy Ghost inspired Ignatius to institute the Society,
and to prescribe the form, which the Iustitute thereof contains. He says
more, That all the Christian Common wealth is eased, and refreshed by the
children of the Society.

12. And he, and his Predecessors Pius 1111. and Pius v. do so exceedingly, and
with such exaggeration, praise and extol the ministeryes, and functions of the
Society, and the fruit which God has drawn, and daily draws out of them,
that for modesty I will not relate them in this place: but all this fruit
proceeded (as from the root thereof,) from Ignatius, by the assistance of our
Lords grace.

13. The King of the Romans (whom we named before) Don Ferdinando, besides the
Colleges of the Society which he founded, and his great favor toward us in
respect of B. Father Ignatius, being much inclyned to make Father Claudius
Iayus (one of the first Fathers) Bishop of Trieste, he did it not,
understanding that Father Ignatius was of a contrary opinion, and did not like
it.

14. Don John the third, King of Portugal, by reason of the great devotion
which he bare to this Blessed Father, commanded Father Lewis Gonzales de
Camera, when he went from Portugal to Rome, in the year 1553. to be
attentive, and consider all the actions of Father Ignatius, and write them in
particular to him. Which the Father did, and wrote to the King, that concerning
the matter, which he had commended unto him, he was not so much inflamed in the
love of God, by any spiritual readinge, or prayer, as by the attention, which
he used in behoulding Father Ignatius.

15. The Cardinal Don Gaspar de Quiroga, Archbishop of Toledo, and General
Inquisitor in the Kingdoms of Spain, who in Rome had been the said Fathers
great friend, testifyeth of him, that he was a most perfect man, truly humble,
meek, patient a despiser of the world, and inflamed with the zeal of Gods
glory, and the good of souls: and that he was never troubled, nor changed
countenance, for any variety of prosperity, or adversity.

16. Cardinal Gabriel Paleotto, Bishop of Bononia, calls him, The light of
the Church: and says, That God moved him to institute the Society, for the
greater strengthening, and fortifying, of Ecclesiastical discipilne.

17. The Duke of Bauaria, Albertus, was very much adicted to Blessed Father
Ignatius, and wrote unto him many times, and reverenced him as a Saint, and for
his respect embraced, and favored his children, as his Successors have done
ever since; who have inherited no less the Piety of their Ancestors, then the
Greatness of their House.

18. The President of Castilla, John Vega, being Ambassador for the Emperor
Charles the fifth, in Rome; held very great friendship with the Father; and in
a letter which he wrote to the Society, at the time of his discease, he called
him Blessed, and Holy Captain, and worthy to have his banner placed in Heaven,
with those of S. Dominick, and S. Francis.

19. Master John of Auila, an Apostolical Preacher, (whose life was written
by Father Lewis of Granada, deserving so excellent a Recorder) said of his
humility, That Blessed Father Ignatius was a Giant, and he in his comparison
but a dwarf.

20. The same Father Lewis of Granada, speaking of the Blessed Father, says:
That he meruailed at the life, heroyical, and most admirable virtues of that
new Mirror of Virtue, and Prudence, which God had sent unto the world in our
times, for the salvation of infinite souls. So are his words.

21. And in this manner do many other very wise, and grave men think, and
speak. And many authors of Diverse nations, who have written since the Society
began, do speak of him as of an Holy man: Surius in comme^t. return in
orbegest. an. 1540. Molanus in additad Vsuard. die 31. July. Genebrard in chro.
an. 1521. S^^^der. in hist. Schis. Aug lic. an: 1540. Bozius de signis Eccl.
lib. 5. cap. 3. sig. 11. and ^ib. 7. c. 1. sig. 25. and l. 9. c. 12. sig. 37.
Morig. in hist. de Origin relig. c. 77. Angelus in tract. de praepos. ad
commun. p. 121. Mambri. in hist. l. 3. Ygles. c. 2. part. hist. Pon. tific.
lib. 6. in vita Pauli 3. Villeg. tom. 1. in vita Ign. Garibay hist. Hispan. l.
30. cap. 5. Paiua l. 1. orthod. instit.
As Laurence Surius a Germane by Nation, who briefly writes his life. And John
Molanus of Flaunders, who calls him, Most Blessed. And Genebrard a
Frenchman, who says, That God sent him against Luther. And Doctor Nicolas
Saunders, an Englishman, who calls him, A man of God, and moved by our Lord
to do the work, which he performed. Thomas Bozius names him, A most famous
man for the sa^ctity of his life. Paulus Morigia, of the Order of the Iesuati,
and Angelus del Paz, of S. Francis Order, and Mambrinus Rosa, all four Italian
Authors, write, and commend the life of the Blessed Father. And Gonzales de
Yglescas, and Master Alphonsus of Villegas, and Stephen of Garibay, Spanish
Historiographers of our time, write the same of him, and call him, Blessed,
Happy, and Saint. And Doctor James of Paiua, a Portugese (who as a Doctor of
Divinity for his King, was present in the Council of Trent) names him an
Illustrious example of Sanctity, An admirable man, and given to the world for a
particular benefit from heaven.

22. And if we turn our eyes to the Kings, and Princes, who accounting him a
Saint, have beseeched our most holy Father Pope Clement the eight, that this
day sits into the chair of S. Peter, to declare him to be so, and to put
him into the Catalogue of Saints; we shall find, that the greatest, and most
mighty Princes of Christendom, have desired, and beseeched it with great
instance. For the Emperor Rodulphus the second of his name, and the Empress
Don^a Maria of Austria his mother, and the Catholic King Philip the second of
glorious memory, and King Philip the 3. his Son, who reigns at this day,
together with Queen Margaret, and Duke William of Bauaria, the Archdutchesse
Don^a Maria his sister, and others, have written letters to his Holiness, in
which they call him Blessed, and Holy Father, and from whose most Holy, and
Religious life, as from their fountain, the current of many gifts, and graces
has rejoiced the City of God.

23. And not only these, and other great Princes have showed their piety and
devotion, which they bear to the Father, making intercession for his
Canonization; but also whole Kingdoms have done the same: as that of Castilla
in their Parliament; that of Aragon, that of Valentia, and the Princedome of
Catalun^a, with their Viceroyes, and Governors; the holy Churches of Toledo,
Civil, Granada, and Corduba; the Cittyes of Saragoza, Valencia, and Barcelona,
and the Province of Guipuzcoa (where the Father was borne) and many other
Bishops, Dukes, and Lords.

24. And this is the common consent, and opinion of Christian, wise, and
unpassionate men of all Nations: only the Heretics think, and speak evil of
this Blessed Father, and write books against his life, and against his
Religion; as a great Caluinist heretic has done, named Simon Lithus
Missenus, who wrote five books against the other five of his life, which are
in print; which is no less testimony of his Sanctity, then the praise, which
so many, and so grave men, that have been here recited, do give him. For as it
is a great praise, to be praised by the good: so it is no less, to be
dispraised by the bad, as S. Hierome says, writing to S. Augustine in these
words. The Catholics reverence, and admire you, as the repayrer, and restorer
of the ancient faith, and that which is a sign of greater glory, all Heretics
hate, and revile you: and they persecute, me with the same malice, killing in
desire those, whom they cannot bereave of their life with the sword.

FINIS.

