A book called the Foundation of Rhetorike, because all other parts of
Rhetorike are grounded thereupon, every part set forth in an Oracion upon
questions, very profitable to be known and read: Made by Richard Rainolde
Master of Art, of the University of Cambridge. 1563.

Men's. Marcij. vj.

Imprinted at London, by Ihon Kingston.

To the right honorable and my singular good Lord, my Lord Robert Dudley,
Master of the Queens Majesty's horse, one of her highes privy Coun^^^e, and
knight of the most honorable order of the Garter: Richard Rainolde wishes
long life, with increase of honor.
ARISTOTLE the famous Philosopher, writing a book to king Alexander, the great
and mighty conqueror, began the Epistle of his Book in these words. Two
things moved me chiefly, O King, to betake to thy Majesty's hands, this
work of my travail and labor, thy nobility and virtue, of the which thy
nobility encouraged me, thy great and singular virtue, endued with all
humanity, forced and drove me thereto. The same two in your good Lordshippe,
Nobility and Virtue, as two mighty Pillars stayed me, in this bold
enterprise, to make your good Lordshippe, being a Pere of honor, endued with
all nobility and virtue: a patron and possessoure of this my book. In the
which although copious and aboundaunte eloquence wants, to adorn and
beautify the same, yet I doubt not for the profit, that is in this my
travail contained, your honor endued with all singular humanity, will
vouchsaufe to accept my willing heart, my profitable purpose herein. Many
famous men and great learned, have in the Greek tongue and otherwise
travailed, to profit all times their country and common wealth. This also
was my end and purpose, to plant a work profitable to all times, my country
and common wealth.

And because your Lordshippe studieth all singularity to virtue, and wholly is
incensed thereto: I have compiled this work, and dedicated it to your
Lordeshippe, as unto who^ most noble and virtuous. VVherin are set forth
soche Oracions, as are right profitable to be read, for knowledge also
necessary. The duty of a subject, the worthy state of nobility, the
preheminent dignity and Majesty of a Prince, the office of counsailours,
worthy chief veneracion, the office of a Judge or Magestrate are here set
forth. In most fortunate state is the kingdom and Common wealth, where the
Nobles and Peers, not only daiely do study to virtue, for that is the
wisdom, that all the grave and wise Philophers searched to attain to. For
the end of all arts and sciences, and of all noble acts and enterprises is
virtue, but also to favor and uphold the students of learning, which also is
a great virtue. Who so is adorned with nobility and virtue, of necessity
nobility and virtue, will move and allure the^ to favor and support virtue in
any other, yea, as Tullie the most famous Orator does say, even to love
those who^ we never saw, but by good fame and brute beutified to us. For the
increase of virtue, God does nobilitate with honor worthy men, to be
above other in dignity and state, thereupon virtue does increase your
Lordshipps honor, being a lover of virtue and worthy nobility.

Your lordshippes humble servant Richard Rainolde*

To the Reader.
APHTHONIVS a famous man, wrote in Greek of soche declamacions, to enstructe
the students thereof, with all facilitee to ground in them, a most plentious
and rich vein of eloquence. No man is able to inuente a more profitable way
and order, to instruct any one in the exquisite and absolute perfeccion, of
wisdom and eloquence, then Aphthonius Quintilianus and Hermogenes. Tullie
also as a most excellent Orator, in the like sort travailed, whose Eloquence
and virtue all times ertolled, and the ofspryng of all ages worthily
aduaunceth. And because as yet the very ground of Rhetorike, is not
heretofore entreated of, as concerning these exercises, though in few years
past, a learned work of Rhetorike is compiled and made in the English
tounguei, of one, who flows in all excellency of art, who in judgment is
profounde, in wisdom and eloquence most famous. In these therefore my
diligence is employed, to profit many, although not with like Eloquence,
beutified and adorned, as the matter requires. I have chosen out in these
Oracions soche questions, as are right necessary to be known and read of all
those, whose cogitacio^ pondereth virtue and Godliness. I doubt not, but seeing
my travail touches virtuous precepts, and utters to light, many famous
Histories, the order of art observed also, but that herein the matter itself,
shall defend my purpose against the envious, which seeks to deprave any
good enterprise, begone of any one person. The envious manne though learned,
reads to deprave that, which he reads, the ignorant is no worthy Judge,
the learned and godly pondereth uprightly and sincerely, that which he
judges, the order of these Oracions follows afterward, and the names of the^.

The contents of this Book.
AN Oracion made, upon the Fable of the Shepherdes and the Wolves, the Wolves
requestyng the Bandogges: wherein is set forth the state of every subject,
the dignity of a Prince, the honorable office of counsailours. An Oracion
upon the Fable of the Ante and the Greshopper, teaching providence. An Oracion
Historical, how Semiramis came to be Queen of Babylon. An Oracion
Historical, upon king Richard the third sometime Duke of Gloucester. An
Oracion Historical, of the coming of Julius Ceser into England. An Oracion
Civil or Judicial, upon Themistocles, of the wall buildyng at Athenes. An
Oracion Poetical upon a red Rose. A profitable Oracion, showing the decaie
of kingdoms and nobility. An Oracion upon a Sentence, preferryng a Monarchy,
conteinyng all other states of common wealth. The confutacion of the battle
of Troie. A confirmacion of the noble fact of Zopyrus. An Oracion called a
Common place against Thieves. The praise of Epaminundas Duke of Thebes, wherein
the ground of nobilitee is placed. The dispraise of Domicius Nero Emperor of
Room. A comparison between Demosthenes and Tullie. A lamentable Oracion of
Hecuba Queen of Troie. A descripcion upon Xerxes king of Persia. An Oracion
called Thesis, as concerning the goodly state of Marriage. An Oracion con^^^^^g
a certain law of Solon.
The foundation of Rhetorike.
NAture has endued every man, with a certain eloquence, and also subtilitee to
reason and discuss, of any question Rhetorike and Logike given of nature.
or proposicion propounded, as Aristotle the Philosopher, in his Book of
Rhetorike does show. These gifts of nature, singular do flow and abound
in us, according to the great and ample indumente and plentuousnes of wit
and wisdom, lodged in us, therefore Nature it self being well framed, and
afterward by art and order of science, instructed and adorned, must be
singularly Art furthereth nature.
furthered, helped, and aided in all excellency, to exquisite inuencion, and
profounde knowledge, both in Logike and Logike.
Rhetorike. In the one, as a Orator to pleate with all facilitee, Rhetorike.
and copionslie to dilate any matter or sentence: in the other to ground
profunde and subtle argument, to fortify and make strong^e our assercion or
sentence, to prove and defend, by the force and power of art, things passing
the compass and reach Logike.
of our capacitee and wit. Nothing can be more excellently given of nature
then Eloquence, by the which the florishyng Eloquence.
state of commonweales do consiste: kingdoms universally are governed, the
state of every one priuatlie is maintained. The commonwealth also should be
maimed, and debilitated, except the other part be associate to it. Zeno the
Philosopher zeno.
comparing Rhetorike and Logike, does assimilate and liken them to the hand of
man. Logike is like says he to the fiste, for Logike.
even as the fiste closes and shuts into one, the iointes and parts of the
hand, and with mighty force and strength, wrappeth and closes in things
apprehended: So Logike for the Similitude Logike.
deep and profounde knowledge, that is reposed and buried in it, in soche sort
of municion and strength fortified, in few words takes soche sorce and might
by argument, that except like equalitee in like art and knowledge do mate
it, in vain the disputacion shall be, and the repulse of thaduersarie ready.
Rhetorike is like to the hand set at large, wherein every part Rhetorike like
to the hand. Rhetorike.
and joint is manifest, and every vain as branches of trees set at scope
and libertee. So of like sort, Rhetorike in most ample and large manner,
dilateth and sets out small things or words, in soche sort, with soche
abundance and plentuousnes, both of words and witty inuencion, with soche
goodly disposicion, in soche a infinite sort, with soche pleasauntnes of
Oracion, that the most stony and hard hearts, can not but be incensed,
inflamed, and moved thereto. These two singular gifts of nature, are absolute
and perfect Logike and Rhetorike absolute in few.
in few: for many therebe, which are exquisite and profound in argument, by
art to reason and discuss, of any question or proposicion propounded, who by
nature are disabled, and smallie adorned to speak eloquently, in whom
nevertheless more aboundaunt knowledge does somtymes remain then in the other,
if the cause shall be in controversy joined, and examined to try a manifest
truth. But to whom nature has given soche abilitee, and absolute excellency,
as that they can both copiouslie dilate any matter or sentence, by
pleasauntnes and The virtue of cioquence.
swetenes of their witty and ingenious oracion, to draw unto them the hearts
of a multitude, to pluck down and extirpate affeccio^s and perturbacions of
people, to move pitee and compassion, to speak before Princes and rulers, and
to persuade them in good causes and enterprises, to animate and incense them,
to godly affairs and business, to alter the cou^saill of kings, by their
wisdom and eloquence, to a better state, and also to be exquisite in the other,
is a thing of all most noble and excellent. The eloquence of Demosthenes, I
socrates, Demosthenes. Tisias. Gorgias. Eschines Tullie. Cato.
Tisias, Gorgias, Eschines, were a great bulwark and stay to Athens and all
Greece, Rome also by the like virtue of Eloquence, in famous and wise orators
vpholded: the wise and eloquente Oracions of Tullie against Catiline. The
grave and sentencious oracions of Cato in the Senate, have been only the
mean to uphold the mighty state of Rome, The Emperors of Rome. famous in
Eloquence.
in his strength and ancient fame and glory. Also the Chronicles of ancient
time do show unto us, the state of Rome could by no means have grown so
marvelous mighty, but that God had endued the whole line of Cesars, with
singular virtues, with aboundaunt knowledge and singular Eloquence. Thusidides
the famous Historiographer shows, Thusidides.
how much Eloquence auailed the citees of Greece, faliyng to dissencio^. How
did the Corcurians save them selves from the Corcurians.
inuasio^ and might, of the Poloponesians, their cause pleated Peloponesians.
before the Athenians, so much their eloquence in a truth prevailed. The
Ambassadors of Corinth, wanted not their Corinthians
copious, witty, and ingenious Oracions, but they pleated before mighty,
wise, and grave Senators, whose cause, according to judgment, truth, and
integritee was ended. The eloque^t Embassages of the Corinthia^s, the
Lacedemonia^s, Lacedaemonians. Mitulenia^s. Athenians.
and the Mituleneans, the Athenians, who so reads, shall sone see that of
necessitee, a common wealth or kingdom must be fortefied, with famous, grave,
and wise counsailours. How often did Demosthenes save the common wealths of
Athens, Demosthenes.
how much also did that large dominion prospere and flourish by I socrates.
Tullie also by his Eloque^t please, Cato, Crassus, Socrates. Cato. Crassus.
Antonius. Catulus. Caesar.
Antonius, Catulus Caesar, with many other, did support and uphold the state of
that mighty kingdom. No doubt, but that Demosthenes made a witty, copious,
and ingenious oracions, when the Athenians were minded to give and betake to
the hands of Philip king of the Macedonians, their Philippe the king of the
Macidonia^s
pestiferous enemy most vile and subtell, the Orators of Athens. This Philip
forseyng the discord of Greece, as he by subtle means compassed his
enterprices, promised by the faith of a Prince, to be at league with the
Athenians, if so be they would betake to his hands, the eloquente Orators of
Athens, for as long says he, as your Orators are with you The saying of
Philippe.
declaryng, so long your heddes and counsel are moved to variaunce and
dissencion, this voice ones seized among you, in tranquilitee you shall be
governed. Demosthenes being Demosthenes.
eloquente and wise, foresawe the dangers and the mischievous intent of him,
whereupon he framed a goodly Oracion upon a Fable, whereby he altered their
counsel, and repulsed the enemy. This fable is afterward set forth in an
Oracion, after the order of these exercises, profitable to Rhetorike.

A Fable.
First it is good that the learner do understand what is a fable, for in all
matters of learning, The ground of al learning
it is the first ground, as Tullie does say, to know what the thing is,
that we may the better perceive whereupon we do entreat. A fable what is a
fable.
is a forged tale, co^taining in it by the color of a lie, a matter of truth.
The moralle is called that, out of the which some Moral.
godly precepte, or admonicion to virtue is given, to frame and instruct our
manners. Now that we know what a fable is, it is good to learn also, how
manifold or diverse they be, I do find three manner of fables to be. The first
of them is, Three sorts of fables.
wherein a man being a creature of God endued with reason, is only entreated
of, as the Fable of the father and his children, i. A fable of reason.
he willing the^ to concord, and this is called Rationalis fabula, which is
asmoche to say, as a Fable of men endued with reason, or women. The second is
called a moral fable, ii. Moral.
but I see no cause why it is so called, but rather as the other is called a
fable of reasonable creatures, so this is contrarily named a fable of beasts,
or of other things wanting reason or life, wanting reason as of the Ante and
the Greshopper, or of this the beam cast down, and the Frogs chosyng their
king. The third is a mixed Fable so called, because in it both iii. Mixed.
man having reason, and a beast wantyng reason, or any other thing wanting
life, is joined with it, as for the example, of the fable of the woods and the
housebandman, of whom he desired a helue for his hatchet. Aucthours do write,
that Poets inuentours of fables.
Poets first invented fables, the which Orators also do use in their
persuasions, and not without great cause, both Orators use fables.
Poets and Orators do apply them to their use. For, fables do contain
goodly admonicion, virtuous precepts Good doctrine in fables.
of life. Hesiodus the Poet, intreatyng of the injurious dealyng of Princes
and governors, against their subjects, admonished Hesiodus.
them by the fable of the Goshauke, and the Nightyngale in his clause. Ovid
also the Poet entreated of diverse Ouide.
fables, wherein he gives admonicion, and godly counsel. Demosthenes the
famous Orator of Athens, used Demosthenes used fables.
the fable of the Shepeherdes, and Wolves: how the Wolves on a time,
instauntlie required of the Shepeherdes their band dogs, and then they would
have peace and concord with them, the Shepeherdes gave over their Dogs,
their Dogs delivered and murdered, the sheep were immediately devoured: So
says he, if ye shall ones deliver to Philip, the king of the Macedonians your
Orators, by whose learning, knowledge and wisdom, the whole body of your
dominions is saved, for they as Bandogges, do repel all mischeuous
enterprises and chaunses, no doubt, but that rauenyng Wolf Philip, will eat
and consume your people, by this Fable he made an Oracion, he altered their
counsels and heddes of the Athenians, from so foolish an enterprise. Also
the same Demosthenes, seeing the people careless, slothful, and loathsome to
hear the Orators, and all for the flourishing state of the kingdom the
ascended to the place or pulpet, The fable of Demosthenes, of the Ass and the
shadow.
where the Oracions were made, and began with this fable. Ye men of Athens,
said he, it happened on a time, that a certain man hired an Ass, and did
take his journey from Athens to Megara, as we would say, from London to York,
the owner also of the Ass, did associate himself in his journey, to bring
back the Ass again, in the voyage the weather was extreme burning hot,
and the way tedious the place also for barenes and sterilitee of trees, wanted
shadow in this long broyle of heat: he that satte one the Ass, lighted and
woke shadow under the belly of the Ass, and because the shadow would not
suffice both, the Ass being small, the owner said, he must have the
shadow, because the Ass was his, I deny that says the other, the shadow is
mine, because I hired the Ass, thus they were at great contencion, the fable
being recited, Demosthenes descended from his place, the whole multitude were
inquisitiue, to know the end about the shadow, Demosthenes notyng their
folly, The contencion upon the shadow and the Ass.
afrended to his place, and said, O ye foolish Athemans, whiles I and other,
gave to you counsel and admonicio^, of grave and profitable matters, your
ears were deaf, and your minds slombred, but now I tell of a small trifeling
matter, youthrong to hear the rest of me. By this Fable he nipped their
folly, and trapped them manifestly, in their own doltishenes. Here upon I
do somewhat long, make copy of words, to show the singularitee of fables
well applied. In the Fadles well applied be singular.
time of King Richard the third, Doctor Mourton, being Bishop of Elie, and
prisoner in the Duke of Buckynghams house in Wales, was often times moved of
the Duke, to speak his mind frelie, if king Richard were lawfully king, and
said to him of his fidelitee, to keep close and secret his sentence: but the
Bishop being a godly man, and no less wise, waied the great friendship,
which was sometime between the Duke and King Richard, answered in effect
nothing, but being daily troubled with his mocions and instigacions, spoke a
fable of Esope: My lord said he, I will answer you, by a Fable of Esope.
The Lion on a time gave a commandment, that all horned beasts should fly
from the wood, and none to remain there but vnhorned beasts. The Hare hearing
The fable of the Bishop of Elie, to the duke of Buckyngham.
of this commandment, departed with the horned beasts from the woodde: The
wily Fox metyng the Hare, demanded the cause of his haste, forthwith the
Hare answered, a commandment is come from the Lion, that all horned beasts
should be exiled, upon pain of death, from the wood: why said the Fox,
this commandment touches not any sort of beast as ye are, for thou haste no
horns but knubbes: yea, but said the Hare, what, if the i say I have horns,
that is an other matter, my lord I say no more: what he meant, is evident to
all men.

In the time of king Henry theight (a prince of famous memory) at what time as
the small houses of religion, were given ever to the kings hand, by the
Parliament house: the bishop of Rochester, Doctor Fisher by name stepped
forth, being grieved with the grant, recited before them, a fable of Esope to
show what discommoditee would follow in the Clergy. My lords and masters
says he, Esope recited a fable: how The fable of the Bishop of Rochester
against the grant of the Chauntries.
that on a time, a housebande manne desired of the woods, a small helue for
his hatchet, all the woods consented thereto waiyng the grant to be small,
and the thing less, therevpo^ the woods consented, in fine the housbande man
cut down a small piece of woodde to make a helue, he framyng a helue to the
hatchette, without leave and grant, he cut down the mighty Oaks and Cedars,
and destroyed the whole woodd, then the woods repented them to late. So says
he, the gift of these small houses, ar but a small grant into the kings
hands: but this small grant, will be a way and mean to pull down the
great mighty fat Abbees, and so it happened. But there is repentance to
late: and no profit ensued of the grant.

An Oracion made by a fable, is the first exercise to declame by, the other,
be these, An Oracion made by a
A Fable, a Narracion, Chria, Sentence. Confutacion, Confirmacion. Common
place. The praise. The dispraise. The Comparison, Ethopeia. A Description.
Thesis, Legislatio
OF every one of these, a goodly Oracio^ may be made these excercises are
called of the Greeks Progimnasmata, of the Latins, profitable introduccions,
or fore exercises, to attain greater art and knowledge in Rhetorike, and
because, for the easy capacitee and facilitee of the learner, to attain
greater knowledge in Rhetorike, they are right profitable and necessary:
Therefore I title this book, to be the foundacio^ of Rhetorike, the exercises
being Progimnasmata.

I have chosen out the fable of the Shepeherdes, and the Wolves, upon the
which fable, Demosthenes made an cloquente, copious, and witty Oracion before
the Athenians, which fable was so well applied, that the city and common
wealth of Athens was saved.

A fable. The first exercise.
These notes must be observed, to make an Oracion by a Fable.
Praise.
1.First, ye shall recite the fable, as the aucthour tells it. 2.There in
the second place, you shall praise the aucthoure who made the fable, which
praise may sone be got of any studious scholar, if he read the aucthours
life and acts therein, or the Godly precepts in his fables, shall give
abundant praise. 3.Then thirdly place the moral, which is the interpretacion
annexed to the Fable, for the fable was invented for the moralles sake. 4.Then
orderly in the fowerth place, declare the nature of things, contained in the
Fable, either of man, fish, foul, beast, plant, trees, stones, or
whatsoever it be. There is no man of wit so dulle, or of so gross capacitee,
but either by his natural wit, or by reading, or senses, he is hable to say
somewhat in the nature of any thing. 5.In the fifte place, set forth the
things, reasonyng one with an other, as the Ant with the Greshopper, or the
Cock with the precious stone. 6.The^ in the vj. place, make a similitude of
the like matter. 7.Then in the seventh place, induce an example for the same
matter to be proved by. 8.Last of all make the Epilogus, which is called the
conclusion, and herein mark the notes following, how to make an Oracion
thereby.
An Oracion made upon the fable of the Shepeherdes and the wolves.
The fable.
THe Wolves on a time persuaded the Shepeherdes, that they would join amitee,
and make a leagne of concord and unity: the demand pleased the Shepeherdes,
forthwith the Wolves requested to have custody of the band Dogs, because
else theiwould be as they are always, an occasion to break their league and
peace, the Dogs being given over, they were one by one murdered, and then
the Sheep were wearied.

The praise of the aucthour.
THe posteritee of times and ages, must needs praise the wisdom and
industry, of all soche as have left in monumentes of writing, things worthy
fame, Inuentours of al excellent arts and sciences, commended to the
posteritee.
what can be more excellently set forth: or what deserves chiefer fame and
glory, then the knowledge of arts and sciences, invented by our learned,
wise, and grave au^cestours: and so much the more they deserve honor, and
perpetual commendacions, because they have been the first aucthours, and
beginners to soche excellencies. The posteritee praises and sets forth the
witty and ingenious works of Apelles, Parthesius, and Polucletus, and all
soche as have artificially Apelles. Parthesius. Polucletus.
setforth their excellent gifts of nature. But if their praise for fame
florishe perpetually, and increases for the worthiness of them, yet these
things though most excellent, are inferior to virtue: for the end of arts
and sciences, is virtue The end of all arts, is to godly life.
and godliness. Neither yet these things dissonaunt from virtue, and not
associate, are commendable only for virtues sake: and to the end of virtue,
the wits of our ancestors were incensed to invent these things. But herein
Poludetus, Apelles, and Parthesius may give place, when greater virtues come
in place, then this my aucthour Esope, for his Esope worthy much commendacio^
godly precepts, wise counsel and admonicion, is chiefly to be praised:
For, our life may learn all goodness, all virtue, of his precepts. The
Philosophers did never lo lively set Philophie in fables.
forth and teach in their schools and audience, what virtue and godly life
were, as Esope did in his Fables, Citees, and common wealths, may learn out
of his fables, godly concord Realms may learn concord out of Esopes
fables.
and unity, by the which means, common wealths florisheth, and kingdoms are
saved. Herein ample matter rises to Princes, and governors, to rule their
subjects in all godly laws, in faithful obedience: the subjects also to
love Precepts to Kings and Subjects. Precepts to parents and children.
and scrue their prince, in all his affairs and business. The father may learn
to bring up, and instruct his child thereby. The child also to love and obeie
his parents. The huge and monsterous vices, are by his virtuous doctrine
defaced and extirpated: his Fables in effcet contain the mightic volumes and
books of all Philosophers, in moral precepts, and the infinite monume^tes of
laws stablished. If I should not speak The content of al Laws.
of his commendacion, the fruictes of his virtue would show his commendacions:
but that praise surmounteth all fame of glory, that commends by fame it self,
the fruictes of fame I true praise commended by fame it self.
in this one Fable, rises to my aucthour, which he wrote of the Shepeherd,
and the Wolves.

The Moral.
WHerein Esope wittely admonishes all men to beware and take heed, of
cloked and fained friendship, of the wicked and ungodly, which under a
pretense and offer of friendship or of benefit, seek the ruin, damage,
misery or destruction of man, town, city, region, or country.

The nature of the thing.
OF all beasts to the quantitee of his body, the Wolue passes in crueltee
and desire of blood, The wolue most ravening and cruel.
always insatiable of deuouryng, never contented with his pray. The Wolf
deuoureth and eats of his pray all in fear, and therefore oftentimes he
casts his look, to be safe from peril and danger. And herein his nature is
strange from all beasts: the iyes of the Wolf, turned from his pray
immediately, the pray prostrate under The wolves of all beasts, most
ob^^uious.
his foot is forgotten, and forthwith he see keth a new pray, so great
oblivion and debilitee of memory, is given to that beast, who chiefly seeks
to denoure his pray by night. The Wolves are much inferior to the bandogges
in strength, because The wolue inferior to the bandogge
nature has framed the^ in the hinder parts, much more weaker, and as it were
manned, and therefore the bandogge does ouermatche them, and overcome them
in fight. The Wolves are not all so mighty of body as the Bandogges, of
diverse colors, of fight more sharp, of less heddes: but in The Dog passes
all creatures in smellyng.
smellyng, the nature of a Dog passes all beasts and creatures, which the
history of Pliny do show, and Aristotle in his book of the history of
beasts, therein you shall know their excellent nature. The household wants
not faithful and trusty watch nor resistaunce, in the cause of the master,
the Bandogge not wantyng. Pliny shows out of Pliny.
his history, how Bandogges have saved their Master, by their resistaunce.
The Dog of all beasts shows most love, and never leaves his master: the
worthiness of the ba^dogge is soche, that by the law in a certain case, he is
counted accessarie of Felony, who steals a Bandogge from his master, a
robbery immediately following in the same family.

As concerning the Sheep, for their profit and wealth, The worthiness of Sheep
that rises of them, are for worthiness, waiyng their small quantity of
body, above all beasts. Their flesh nourishes purely, being sweet and
pleasant: their skin also serves to diverse uses, their Wolles in so large
and ample manner, The wolle of Sheep, rich and commodious.
commodious, seruyng all parts of common wealths. No state or degree of
person is, but that they may go cladde and adorned with their wolles. So GOD
in his creatures, has created and made man, being a chief creator, and most
excellent Man a chief creature.
of all other, all things to scrue him: and therefore the Stoicke Philosophers
do herein shows excellency of man Stoike Philosophers.
to be great, when all things upon the earth, and from the earth, do serve
the use of man, yet among men there is a diuersitee of states, and a difference
of persons, in office and condition of life. As concerning the Shepherde, he
is in his state The office of the shepeherdes, are profitable and necessary.
and condition of life, though mean, he is a right profitable and necessary
member, to serve all states in the common wealth, not only to his master
whom he serves: for by his diligence, and wary keeping of the^, not only from
rauenyng beasts, but otherwise he is a right profitable member, to all parts
of the common wealth. For, daily we feel the commodity, wealth, profit, and
riches rises of the wolles of Sheep.
wealth and riches, that rises of them, but the loss we feel not, except
flocks perish. In the body of man God has created and made diverse parts,
to make up a whole and absolute man, which parts in office, qualitee and
worthiness, are much differing. The body of man itself, for the excellent
workmanship of God therein, and marvelous gifts of nature and virtues,
lodged and bestowed in the same body, is called Man called of the
Philosophers, a little world.
of the Philosophers Microcosmos, a little world. The body of man in all
parts at concord, every part executing his funccion and office, florisheth,
and in strength prospers, otherwise the same body in parts disseuered, is
feeble and weak, and The body of man without concord of the parts, perishes.
thereby falls to ruin, and perishes. The singular Fable of Esope, of the
belie and hands, manifestly shows the same and herein a flourishing kingdom
or common wealth, is compared to the body, every part using his pure virtue,
strength and The common wealth like to the body of man. Menenius.
operacion. Menenius Agrippa, at what time as the Romai* were at division
against the Senate, he used the Fable of Esope, wherewith they were persuaded
to a concord, and unity. The vilest part of the body, and baseste is so
necessary, The baseste part of the body most necessary.
that the whole body fails and perishes, the same wantyng although nature
remoueth them from our sight, and shame fastnes also hides them: take away
the most vilest part of the body, either in substance, in operacion or
function, and forthwith the principal fails. So likewise in a kingdom, or
common wealth, the most mean and basest state of man taken away, the more
principal thereby cease: So God to a mutual concord, friendship, and
perpetual society of life, The amiable part of the body do consiste, by the
baseste and most beformeste.
has framed his creatures, that the most principal fails, it not united
with parts more base and inferior, so much the might and force of things
excellent, do consiste by the most inferior, other parts of the body more
amiable and pleasant to sight, do remain by the force, use and integritee of
the simpliest. The Prince and chief peers do decaie, and all the whole
multitude do perish: the baseste kind of men wantyng. Remove the
Shepeherdes state, what good follows, The Shepeherdes state necessary.

The state of the husband manne, most necessary.


yea, what lack and famine increases not: to all states the belie ill fed,
our backs worse clad. The toilyng housebandman is so necessary, that his
office ceasyng universally the whole body perishes, where each labors to
further and aid one an other, this is a common wealth, there is prosperous
state of life. The wisest Prince, the richest, the mightiest and most
valiauntes, had need always of the foolish, the weak, the base and simplest,
to uphold his kingdoms, not only in the affairs of his kingdoms, but in
his domestical things, for provision of victual, as bread, drink, meat
clothyng, and in all soche other things. Therefore, no office or state of
life, be it never so meet, seruyng in any part of the common wealth, must
be contemned, mocked, or skorned No mean state, to be contempned.
at, for they are so necessary, that the whole frame of the common wealth
fails without them: some are for their wicked behavior so detestable, that
a common wealth must seek means to deface and extirpate them as weeds,
and rotten members of the body. These are thefes, murderers, and adulterers,
Rotten members of the common wealth.
and many other mischiuous persons. These godly Laws, upright and sincere
Magistrates, will extirpate and cut of, soche the common wealth lacks not,
but rather abhors as an infectiue plague and Pestilence, who in the end
through their own wickedness, are brought to mischief.

Read Plato in his book, intiteled of the common wealth who shows the state
of the Prince, and whole Realm, to Plato.
stand and consiste by the unity of parts, all states of the common wealth,
in office diverse, for dignitee and worthiness, bearing A common wealth do
consiste by unity of all states.

Aristotle. what is a common wealth.


not equalitee in one consociatee and knit, do raise a perfect frame, and
body of kingdom or common wealth.

Aristotle the Philosopher does say, that a common wealth is a multitude
gathered together in one City, or Region, in state and condition of life
diuering, poor and rich, high and low, wise and foolish, in inequalitee of
mind and bodies differyng, for else it can not be a common wealth. There must
be nobles and peers, king and subject: a multitude inferior and more populous,
in office, manners, worthiness alteryng. Manne needs no better example, or
pattern of a common A lively example of common wealth.
wealth, to frame himself, to serve in his state and calling, then to ponder
his own body. There is but one hedde, and many parts, hands, feet,
fingers, toes, joints, veins, sinews, belie, and so forth: and so likewise
in a common wealth there must be a diuersitee of states.

The reasonyng of the things contained in this Fable.
THus might the Wolves reason with themselves, of their Embassage: The Wolves
daily molested and wearied, with the fearce ragyng Masties, and overcome in
fight, of their power and might: one among the rest, more politic and wise
then the other, called an assemble and counsel of Wolves, and thus he began
his oracion. My fellows and The counsel of wolves.
compaignions, sith nature has from the beginning, made us insatiable,
cruel, living always by prays murdered, and bloody spoils, yet enemies
we have, that seek to keep under, and tame our Woluishe natures, by great
mighty Bandogges, and Shepeherdes Curres. But nature at the first, did so
depely frame and set this his perverse, cruel, and bloody moulde in us, that
will they, nill they, our nature will bruste out, and run to his own course. I
must much, waiyng the line of our first progenitour, from whence we came
first: for of a man we came, yet men as a pestiferous poison do erile us,
and abandon us, and by Dogs and other subtle means do daily destroy us.
Lycaon, as the Poets do Lycaon.
feign, excedyng in all crueltees and murders horrible, by the murder of
strangers, that had access to his land: for he was king and governor over the
Moloffians, and in this we may worthily glory of our first blood and long
auncientree, that he was not only a man, but a king, a chief pere and
governor: The first progeny of wolves.
by his change and transubstanciacion of body, we lost by him the honor
and dignitee due to him, but his virtues we keep, and daily practice to
follow them. The fame of Lycaons horrible life, aseended before Jupiter,
Jupiter the The inuencion of the Poet Ouide to compare a wicked man, to a wolue.
mighty God, moved with so horrible a fact, left his heavenly palace, came
down like an other mortal man; and passed down by the high mountain
Minalus, by twilighte, and so^ to Licaons house, our first auncestoure, to
prove, if this thing was true. Lycaon received this stranger, as it seemed
Lycaon.
doubtyng whether he were a God, or a man, forthwith he feasted him with
man's flesh baked, Jupiter as he can do what he will, brought a ruin on his
house, and transubstanciated Lycaon changed into a wolue.
him, into this our shape and figure, wherein we are, and so sens that time,
Wolves were first generated, and that of man, by the change of Lycaon,
although our shape is changed from the figure of other men, and men knows us
not well, yet the same manners that made Wolves, remains wolue. Manner.
until this day, and perpetually in men: for they rob, they steal, and
live by injurious catching, we also rob, also we steal, and catch to our
pray, what we may with murder come to. They murder, and we also murder,
and so in all poinctes like unto wicked men, do we imitate the like fashion
of life, and rather they in shape of men, are Wolves, and we in the shape of
Wolves men: Of all these things having consideracion, I have invented a
policy, whereby we may work a slauter, and perpetual ruin on the Sheep,
by the murder of the Bandogges. And so we shall have free access to our
bloody pray, thus we will do, we will send a Embassage to the Shepeherdes
for peace, saying, that we mind to cease of all bloody spoil, so that they
will give over to us, the custody of the Bandogges, for The counsel of wolves.
otherwise the Embassage sent, is in vain: for their Dogs being in our
hands, and murdered one by one, the danger and enemy taken away, we may
the better obtain and enjoy our bloody life. This counsel pleased well the
assemble of the Wolves, and the policy much liked them, and with one voice
they houled thus, thus. Immediately co^municacion was had with the Shepeherdes
of peace, and of the giuyng over of their Bandogges, this offer pleased them,
they concluded the peace, and gave over their Bandogges, as pledges of the same.
The dogs one by one murdered, they dissolved the peace, and wearied the
Sheep, then the Shepeherdes repented them of their rash grant, and folly
committed: So of like sort it always chances, tyrauntes and bloody The
counsel of wicked me^ to mischief.
men, do seek always a mean, and practice policies to destroy all soche
as are godly affected, and by wisdom and godly life, do seek to subuerte
and destroy, the mischeuous The cogitacions of wicked men, and their kingdom
bloody.
enterprise of the wicked. For, by cruelty their Woluishe natures are known,
their glory, strength, kingdom and renown, comes of blood, of murders, and
beastly dealings and by might so violent, it continues not: for by violence
and blooddie dealyng, their kingdom at the last falls by blood and bloodilie
perishes. The noble, wise, grave, and goodly counsels, are with all
fidelitee, humblenes and sincere hearts to be obeyed, in worthiness of their
state and wisdom, to The state of counsailours worthy chief honor and
veneracion.
be embraced in chief honor and veneracion to be taken, by whose industry,
knowledge and experience, the whole body of the common wealth and kingdom, is
supported and saved. The state of every one universally would come to
pardicion, if the invasion of foraine Princes, by the wisdom and policy of
counsailers, were not repelled. The horrible acts of wicked men would burste
out, and a confusion ensue in all states, if the wisdom of politic governors,
if good laws if the power and sword of the magistrate, could not take place.
The peers and nobles, with the chief governor, slandeth as Shepherds over the
people: for so Plato alleges that name Plato.
well and properly given, to Princes and Governors, the which Homere the
Poet attributes, to Agamemnon king Homere.
of Greece: to Menclaus, Ulysses, Nestor, Achillas, Diomedes, Aiar, and al
other. For, both the name and care of that state The Shepeherdes name given to
the office of kings.
of office, can be titeled by no better name in all points, for diligent
keeping, for aid, succoryng, and with all equity temperyng the multitude: they
are as Shepeherdes else the sclie poor multitude, would by an oppression of
pestiferous men. The commonaltee or base multitude, lives more quietly then
the state of soche as daily seek, to uphold and maintain The state or good
counsallers, troublous.
the common wealth, by counsel and politic deliberacion, how troublous has
their state always been: how unquiet from time to time, whose heddes in very
deed, does seek for a public wealth. Therefore, though their honor be
greater, and state above the rest, yet what care, what pensiveness of mind
are they driven unto, on whose heddes aucthoritee and regiment, the sauegard of
innumerable people does depend. A comparision from a less, to a greater.
If in our domestical business, of matters pertainyng to our household, every
man by nature, for him and his, is pensive, much more in so vaste, and
infinite a body of common wealth, greater must the care be, and more
dangerous deliberacion. We desire peace, we rejoice of a tranquilitee, and
quietness to ensue, we wish, to consist in a haven of securitee: our houses
not to be spoiled, our wives and children, not to be murdered. This the
Prince and counsailours, by wisdom foresee, The worthy state of Princes and
counsailours.
to keep of, all these calamitees, dangers, miseries, the whole multitude,
and body of the Common wealth, is without them maimed, weak and feable, a
ready confusion to the enemy. Therefore, the state of peers and nobles, is
with all humilitee to be obaied, served and honored, not without great cause,
the Athenians were drawn back, by the wisdom of Demostnenes, when they saw
themselves a slauter and pray, to the enemy.

A comparson of things.
WHat can be more rashly and foolishly done, then the Shepeherdes, to give
over their Dogs, by whose might and strength, the Sheep were saved: on the
other side, what can be more subtlie done and craftily, then the Wolves, under
a color of friendship and amitee, to seek the blood of the sheep, as all
pestiferous men, under a fained profer The amity of wicked menns.
of amitee, proffered to seek their own profit, commoditee and wealth,
though it be with ruin, calamity, misery, destruction of one, or many,
town, or city, region and country, which sort of men, are most detestable
and execrable.

The contrary.
AS to much simplicity and lack of discrecion, is a furtheraunce to peril
and danger: so oftentimes, he tastes of smarte and woe, who lightly believes:
so contrariwise, To believe lightly, a furtheraunce to peril.
disimulacio^ in mischeuous practices begone with fre^dly words, in the
conclusion does frame and end pernisiouslie.

The Epilogus.
THerefore fained offers of friendship, are to be taken heed of, and the act
of every man to be examined, proved, and tried, for true friendship is a rare
thing, when as Tullie does say: in many ages there are few couples of
friends to be found, Aristotle also concludes the same.

The Fable of the Ante, and Greshopper.
The praise of the aucthour.
ESope who wrote these Fables, has chief fame of all learned aucthours, for
his Philosophy, and giuyng The praise of Esope.
wisdom in precepts: his Fables do show unto all states most wholesome
doctrine of virtuous life. He wholly extolleth virtue, and depresseth vice: he
corrects all states and sets out precepts to amend them. Although he was
deformed and ill shaped, yet Nature wrought in him soche virtue, that he was in
mind most beautiful: and seeing that the gifts of the body, are not equal
in dignity, with the virtue of the mind, then in that Esope chiefly excelled,
having the most excellent virtue of the mind. The wisdom and wit of Esope
seemed singular: for at what time as Cresus, Cresus.
the king of the Lidians, made war against the Samians, he with his wisdom
and policy, so pacified the mind of Cresus, that all war ceased, and the
danger of the country was taken away, the Samia^s delivered of this
destruction Samians.
and war, received Esope at his return with many honors. After that Esope
departing from the Isle Samus, wandered to strange regions, at the last his
wisdom being known: Licerus the king of that country, had him in Licerus.
soche reverence and honor, that he caused an Image of gold to be set up in the
honor of Esope. After that, he wanderyng over Greece, to the city of Delphos,
of whom he being murdered, Delphos.
a great plague and Pestilence fell upon the city, that revenged his death:
As in all his Fables, he is much to be commended, so in this Fable he is
much to be praised, which he wrote of the Ante and the Greshopper.

The Fable.
IN a hot Summer, the Grasshoppers gave themselves to pleasant melody, whose
Music and melody, was hard from the pleasant Busshes: but the Ante in all
this pleasant time, labored with pain and travail, she scraped her living,
and with fore wit and wisdom, prevented the barande and scarce time of
Winter: for when Winter time aprocheth, the ground ceasseth from fruict, winter.
then the Ante by his labor, does take the fruicte and enjoys it: but
hunger and misery fell upon the Greshoppers, who in The Ante.
the pleasant time of Summer, when fru^^es were aboundaunte, ceased by labor
to put of necessitee, with the which the long cold and stormy time, killed
the^r^p, wantyng al sustinaunce.

The Moral.
HEre in example, all men may take to frame their own life, and also to
bring up in godly educacion their children: that while age is tender and
young, they may learn by example of the Ante, co provide in their grene and
lusty youth, some mean of art and science, whereby they may stay their age
and necessitee of life, al soche as do fly labor, and pain in youth, and
seek no way of Art and science, in age they shall fall in extreme misery
and pouertee.

The nature of the thing.
NOt without a cause, the Philosophers searchyng the nature and qualitee of
every beast, do much com^mende the Ante, for providence and diligence, in
that The Ante.
not oneie by nature they excel in fore wisdom to themselves, but also they
be a example, and mirror to all men, in that Manne.
they justly follow the instincte of Nature: and much more, where as men
endued with reason, and all singular virtues and excellent qualitees of the
mind and body. Yet they do so much leave reason, virtue, and integritee of
mind, as that they had been framed without reason, endued with no virtue, nor
adorned with any excellent qualitee. All creatures as nature has wrought in
them, do apply themselves to follow nature their guide: the Ante is always
diligent in his business, and provident, and also fore sees in Summer, the
sharp season of Winter: they keep order, and have a king and a common wealth
as it were, as nature has taught them. And so have all other creatures, as
nature has wrought in the^ their gifts, man only leaves reason, and
neclecteth the chief ornaments of the mind: and being as a God above all
creatures, does leese the excellent gifts. A beast will not take excess in
feedyng, but man often times is without reason, and having a pure mind and
soul given of God, and a face to behold the heavens, yet he does abase
himself to yearthlie things, as concerning the Greshopper: as the Philosophers
Greshopper.
do say, is made altogether of dew, and sone perishes The Greshopper may
well resemble, slothful and sluggishe persons, who seek only after a present
pleasure, having no fore wit and wisdom, to foresee times and ceasons: for
it is A poincte of wisdom.
the poinct of wisedo^, to judge things present, by things past and to take a
conjecture of things to come, by things present.

The reasonyng of the two things.
THus might the Ante reason with her self, although the seasons of the year
do seem now very botte, pleasant A wise cogitacion.
and fruictfull: yet so I do not trust time, as that like pleasure should
always remain, or that fruictes should always of like sort abound. Nature
moves me to work, and wisdom herein shows me to provide: for what hurts
plenty, or abundance of store, though great plenty comes thereon, for
better it is to be oppressed with plenty, and abundance, then to be vexed
with lack. For, to whom wealth and plenty rises, at their hands many be
releued, and helped, all soche as be oppressed with necessity and misery,
being cast from all help, reason and providence mainted in them: All art
and Science, and mean of life cut of, to enlarge and maintain better state
of life, their misery, necessity, and poverty, shall continually increase,
Poverty.
who hops at other men's hands, to crave relief, is deceived. Poverty is
so odious a thing, in all places and states rejected for where lack is, there
favor, friendship, and acquaintance decreaseth, as in all states it is
wisdom: so with my self I way discritlie, to take time while time is, for
this time as a Wisdom.
flower will sone fade away. The housebande manne, has he not times diverse,
to increase his wealth, and to fill his barn, Housebande men.
at one time and ceason: the housebande man does not both plant, plowe, and
gather the fruicte of his labor, but in one time and season he ploweth,
another time serves to sow, and the last to gather the fruictes of his
labor. So then, I must forsee time and seasons, wherein I may be able to bear
of necessity: for foolishly he hops, who of no wealth and no abundaunt
store, trusts to maintain his own state. For, nothing sooner fails, then
friendship, and the sooner it fails, as Friendship.
fortune is impouerished. Seeing that, as Homere does say, a flothfull man,
given to no art or science, to help himself, Homere.
or an other, is an unprofitable burdein to the earth, and God doorth sore
plague, punish, and overthrow Citees, kingdoms, and common wealths,
grounded in soche vices: that the wisdom of man may well judge, him to be
unworthy of all help, and sustinaunce. He is worse then a beast, that is not
able to live to himself and other: no man is of wit so vndescrite, or of
nature so dullc, but that in him, nature always Nature.
covers some enterprise, or work to frame relife, or help to himself, for
all we are not borne, only to our selves, but The cause of our bearth.
many ways to be profitable, as to our own country, and all parts thereof.
Especially to soche as by sickness, or infirmity of body are oppressed, that
art and Science can not take place to help the^. Soche as do follow the life
of the Greshopper. are worthy of their misery, who have no wit to foresee
seasons and times, but do suffer time vndescretly to pass, which fades as a
flower, thold Romans do picture Ianus with two faces, a face behind, and an
other before, which resemble Ianus.
a wiseman, who always ought to know things paste, things present, and
also to be expert, by the experience of many ages and times, and knowledge of
things to come.

The comparison between the two things.
WHat can be more descritlie done, then the Ante to be so provident and
politic: as that all danger of life, and necessity is excluded, the stormy
times of Winter cease of might, and honger battereth not his walls, having
soche plenty of food, for unlooked bitter storms and seasons, Providence.
happens in life, which when they happen, neither wisedo^ nor policy, is
not able to keep back. Wisdom therefore, it is so to stand, that these
things hurt not, the miserable end of the Greshopper shows unto us, which
may be an example to all men, of what degree, so ever they be, to fly
slothe and idelnesse, to be wise and discrite.

Of contraries.
AS diligence, providence, and discrete life is a singular gift, which
increases all virtues, a pillar, stay Diligence.
and a foundation of all arts and science, of common wealths, and kingdoms.
So contrarily sloth and sluggishnesse, in all states and causes, defaseth,
destroys, and pulls down all virtue, all science and godliness. For, by it,
the mighty kingdom of the Lidia^s, was destroyed, as it seems no small vice,
when the Laws of Drac^, do punish with Idelnes.
death idelnesse.

The end.
THerefore, the diligence of the Ante in this Fable, not only is much to be
commended, but also her The Ante.
example is to be followed in life. Therefore, the wiseman does admonish us,
to go unto the Ant and learn providence: and also by the Greshopper, let us
learn to avoid idelnes, less the like misery and calamity fall upon us.

Narratio.
THis place followyng, is placed of Tullie, after the exordium or beginning of
Oracion, as the second part: which part of Rhetorike, is as it were the
light of all the Oracion following: containing the cause, matter, person, time,
with all brevity, both of words, and inuencion of matter.

A Narracion.
A Narracion is an exposicion, orderlaracion of any thing dooen in deed, or
else a setting forth, forged of any thing, but so declaimed and declared, as
though it were done.

A narracion is of three sorts, either it is a narracion historical, of any
thing contained, in any aunciente story, or true Chronicle.

Or Poetical, which is a exposicion fained, set for the by inuencion of
Poets, or other.

Or civil, otherwise called Judicial, which is a matter of controversy in
judgment, to be dooen, or not dooen well or evil.

In every Narracion, ye must observe six notes.

1. First, the person, or doer of the thing, whereof you entreat. 2. The
fact done. 3. The place wherein it was done. 4. The time in the which it was
done. 5. The manner must be showed, how it was done. 6. The cause whereupon it
was done.
There be in this Narracion, iiij. other properties belonging

1. First, it must be plain and evident to the hearer, not obscure, 2. short,
and in as few words as it may be, for soche a matter. 3. Probable, as not
unlike to be true. 4. In words fine and elegante.
A narracion historical, upon Semiramis Queen of Babylon how and after what
sort the obtained the government thereof.
AFter the death of Ninus, sometime king of Babylon, Time.
his soonne Nuius also by name, was left Person.
to succeed him, in all the Assirian Monarchy, Semiramis wife to Ninus the
first, feared the tender age of her son, whereupon she thought that those
mighty nations and kingdoms, would not obaie The cause.
so young and weak a Prince. Wherefore, she kept her son The fact.
from the gouernmente: and most of all she feared, that they would not obaie a
woman, forthwith she fained her self, to be The way how.
the soonne of Ninus, and because she would not be known to be a woman, this
Queen invented a new kind of tire, the which all the Babilonians that were
men, used by her commandment. By this strange disguised tire and apparel,
she not known to be a woman, ruled as a man, for the space of two and
forty years: she did marvelous acts, for The fact. The place.
she enlarged the mighty kingdom of Babylon, and builded the same city. Many
other regions subdued, and vallauntlie overthrown, she entered India, to the
which never Prince came, saving Alexander the great: she pa^^ed not only men
in virtue, counsel, and valiant stomach, but also the famous counsailours
of Assiria, might not contend with her in Majesty, policy, and roialnes.
For, at what time as they knew her a woman, they envied not her state, but
marueiled at her wisdom, policy, and moderacion of life, at the last she
desiryng the unnatural lust, and love of her soonne Ninus, was murdered of
him.

A narracion historical upon king Richard the third, the cruel tiraunt*
RIchard duke of Gloucester, after the death of Edward The person
the fowerth his brother king of England, usurped the croune, most
traiterou^^^e and wickedlie: this king Richard was s^^ll of stature, deformed,
and ill shaped, his shoulders beared not equality, a pulyng face, yet of
countenance and look cruel, malicious, deceiptfull, bityng and chawing his
nether lip: of mind unquiet, pregnaunt of wit, quick and lively, a word
and a blow, wily, deceiptfull, proud, arrogant in life and cogitacion
bloody. The fowerth day of Iulie, he The time* The place.
entered the tower of London, with Anne his wife, daughter to Richard Exle of
Warwick: and there in created Edward his only soonne, a child of ten years of
age, Prince of Wales. At the same time, in the same place, he created many
noble peers, to high prefermente of honor and estate, and immediately with
fear and faint heart, both in himself, and his nobles and commons, was
created king, always a unfortunate The horrible murder of king Richard
and unlucky creacion, the hearts of the nobles and commons thereto lackyng or
faintyng, and no marvel, he was a cruel murderer, a wretched caitiffe, a
most tragical tyrant, and blood succor, both of his nephews, and brother
George Duke of Clarence, whom he caused to be drouned in a Butte of (...), the
stairs suddenly removed, whereon he stepped, the death of the lord Rivers,
with many other The fact.
nobles, compassed and wrought at the young Princes coming out of Wales,
the.xix. day of July, in the year of our lord. 1483. openly he took upon him
to be king, who sekyng hastily to clime, fell according to his desert, suddenly
and ingloriously, whose Embassage for peace, Jews the French king, for his
miseheuous and boodie slaughter, so much abhorred, that he would neither see
the Ambassador, nor hear the Embassage: for he murdered his.ij. nephues, by
the hands of one James Tirrell, and.ij. vilaines more associate with him The
time. The manner how.
the Lieutenaunt refusyng so horrible a fact. This was done he taking his way
and progress to Gloucester, whereof he was before times Duke: the murder
perpetrated, he doubed the good squire knight. Yet to keep close this horrible
murder, he caused a fame and rumor to be spread abroad, in all parts of the
realm, that these two children died suddenly, thereby thinkyng the hearts of
all people, to be quietly setteled, The cause.
no heir male left a live of king Edwardes children. His mischief was soche,
that God shortened his usurped reign: he was altogether in fear and dread,
for he being feared and dreaded of other, did also fear and dread, never
quicte of mind faint hearted, his bloody conscience by outward signs,
conde^pned him: his iyes in every place whirlying and cast about, his hand
much on his Dagger, the infernal furies tormented The state of a wicked man.
him by night, visions and horrible dreams, drawed him from his bed, his
unquiet life showed the state of his conscience, his close murder was uttered,
from the hearts of the subjects: they called him openly, with horrible titles
and names, a horrible murderer, and excecrable tiraunt. The people sorowed the
death of these two babes, the Queen, king A doleful stale of a queen.
Edwardes wife, being in Sanctuary, was bestraught of wit and senses,
sounyng and falling down to the ground as dedde, the Queen after revived,
kneeled down, and called on God, to take vengaunce on this murderer. The
conscience of the people was so wounded, of the tolleracion of the fact, that
when any blustryng wind, or perilous thonder, or The wicked fact of king
Richard, a horror and dread to the commons.
dreadful tempest happened: with one voice they cried out and quaked, least
God would take vengau^ce of them, for it is always seen the horrible life of
wicked governors, brings to ruin their kingdom and people, and also wicked
people, the like dangers to the kingdom and Prince: well he and his
supporters with the Duke of Buckyngham, died shamefullie, God permit means, to
pull down tyrauntes.
The knotte of marriage promised, between Henry Earl of Richemonde, and
Elizabeth daughter to king Edward the fowerth: caused diverse nobles to aid
and associate this earl, fled out of this land with all power, to the
attainmente of the kingdom by his wife. At Nottyngham news came to king
Richard, that the Earl of Richmonde, with a small co^paignie of nobles and
other, was arrived in Wales, forthewith exploratours and spies were serit, who
showed the Earl to be encampled, at the town of Li^^hfield, forthwith all
preparacion Lichefelde.
of war, was set forth to Leicester on every side, Leicester.
the Nobles and commons shranke from king Richard, his power more and more
weakened. By a village called Bosworthe, Bosworthe
in a great plain, meet for two battles: by Leicester this held was
pitched, wherein king Richard manfully fightyng hand to hand, with the Earl of
Richmonde, was slame, his body carried shamefullie, to the town of Leicester
naked, without honor, as he deserned, trussed on a horse, behind King Richard
killed in Bosworth field.
a Purseuaunte of Arms, like a hog or a Calfe, his hedde and his arms
hangyng on the one side, and his legs on the other side: carried through mire
and durte, to the graie Friars church, to all men a spectacle, and oprobrie of
tirannie this was the cruel tiramites end.

A narracion historical, of the coming of Julius Caesar into Britain.
WHen Julius Caesar had ended his mighty and huge battles, about the stood
Rhene, he marched into the The time.
regio^ of France: at the same time repairing with a The person.
fresh multitude, his Legio^s, but the chief cause of his wary in France
was, that of long time, he was moved in mind, to see this noble Islande of
Britain, whose fame for nobilitee The cause. The fame and glory of Britain.
was known and bruted, not only in Rome, but also in the vttermoste lands.
Julius Caesar was wroth with the^, because in his war sturred in France, the
fearce Britains aided the Fenche men, and did mightily encounter battaill
with the Romans: whose prowes and valiant fight, slaked the proud and
lofty stomachs of the Romans, and drove the^ to diverse hasardes of
battaill. But Caesar as a noble warrier The prowes of Julius Caesar.
preferryng nobilitee, and worthiness of fame, before money or cowardly
quietness: ceased not to enter on ye fearce Britains, and thereto prepared his
Ships, the Winter time following, that as soon as oportunitee of the year
served, to pass with all power against them. In the mean time, Caesar inquired
of the Merchants, who with marchaundise had access The manner how.
to the Islande: as concerning the qua^titee and bigness of Cesars communicacion
with the merchants, as concerning the land of Britain.

The ware and politic government of yt Britains. Aliaunce in time traitorous.

Britain sometime called of the Greeks Olbion, not Albion.

Caius Volusenus, Ambassador to Britain.


it, the fashion and manner of the people, their laws, their order, and kind
of gouernmente. As these things were in all poinctes, unknown to Caesar, so
also the Merchants knew no more tha^ the places bordring on the sea side.
For, the Britains fearing the traitorous and dissembled hearts of aliau^tes,
politikelie repelled them: for, no stranger was suffered to enter from his
Ship, on the land, but their marchaundice were sold at the sea side. All
nations sought to this land, the felicitee of it was so great, whereupon the
Greeks knowing and tastyng the commoditee of this Islande, called it by a Greek
name Olbion, which signifies a happy and fortunate country, though of some
called Albion, time changed the first letter, as at this day, London is
called for the town of king Lud. Caesar thereupon before he would march with
his army, to the people of Britain, he sent Caius Volusenus a noble man of
Rome, a valiaunte and hardy Captain, as Ambassador to the Britains, who as
he thought by his Embassage, should know the fashion of the Island, the manner
of the people, their gouernemente. But as it seems, the Ambassador was not
welcome. For, he durst not enter from his Ship, to do his masters
Embassage, Caesar knew nothing by him. Yet Caesar was not so contented, but sent
an other Comas Atrebas, second Ambassador from Caesar.
Ambassador, a man of more power, stomach, and more hardy, Comas Atrebas by
name, who would enter as an Ambassador, to accomplish the will and expectacion
of Caesar, Comas Atrebas was so welcome, that the Britains cast him in prison:
Embassages was not common among them, nor the courteous usage of Ambassadors
known. Al these things, made Caesar more wroth, to assaie the vncourtous
Bristaines. In those days Cassibelan was king of London, this Cassibelane king
of London, at the ariue of Caesar Cassibelane a worthy Prince.
Cassibelan was a prince of high wisdom, of manly stomach and valiant in
fight: and for power and valiantness, was chosen of the Britains, chief
governor and king. Dissencion and cruel war was among the^, through the
diversity of diverse kings in the land. The Troinouau^tes envied the state of
Cassibelan, because Immanuencius, who was king of London, before Cassibelan,
was put to death, by the counsel of Cassibelan. The son of Immanuencius,
hearing of the coming of Caesar, did fly traiterouslie to Caesar: The
Imanue^cius
Troinouauntes favored Immanue^cius part, and thereupon promised, as most
vile traitors to their country, an enteryng to Caesar, service and homage, who
through a self will, The Troynouauntes by treason let in Caesar.
and private favor of one, sought the ruin of their country, and in the
end, their own destruction. But Cassibelan gave many overthrows to Caesar, and
so mightelie encountered with him, so invincible was the part of Cassibelane:
but by treason of the Troinouauntes, not by manhod of Cesars power, enteryng
was given. What house can stand, wherein Treason a confusion to the mightiest
dominions.
discord broile? What small power, is not able to enter the mightiest dominions
or regions: to overcome the strongeste fortress, treason open the gate,
treason giuyng passage. Although Caesar by treason entered, so Caesar writes.
Yet the fame of Caesar was more commended, for his enterprise into Britain, and
victory: then of all his Conquest, either against Pompey, or with any other
nation. For in a Pillar at Rome A sentence graven of Britain, in the
commendacion of Caesar.
this sentence was engraven: Of all the dominions, Citees, and Regions, subdued
by Caesar, his war attempted against the fearce Britains, passes all other.
After this sort Caesar entered our Islande of Britain by treason.

A narracion judicial, out of Theusidides, upon the fact of Themistocles.
THe Athenians brought under the thraldom of the Lacedaemonians, sought means
to grow mighty, and to pull them from the yoke, under the Lacedaemonians.
Lacedemonia was a city environed with walls. Athenes at the same time without
walls: whereby their state was more feeble, and power weakened. Themistocles a
noble Sage, and a worthy pere of Athens: gave the Athenia^s counsel to wall
their city strongly, and so forthwith to be lords and rulers by them selves,
after their own facion governing. In finishing this enterprise, in all
poinctes, policy, and witty conueiaunce wanted not. The Lacedaemonians hard
of the purpose of the Athenians, and sent Ambassadors, to know their doings,
and so to hinder them. Themistocles gave counfaill to the Athenians, to keep in
safe custody, the Ambassadors of Lacedemonia, until soche time, as he from
the Embassage was returned from Lacedemonia. The Lacedaemonians hearing of the
coming of Themistocles, thought little of the wall buildyng at Athens.
Themistocles was long looked for of the^, because Themistocles lingered in his
Embassage, that or the matter were thoroughly known: the wall of Athens should
be builded. The slow coming of Themistocles, was blamed of the Lacedaemonians:
but Themistocles excused himself, partly infirmity of body, lettyng his
coming, and the expectacion of other, accompaignied with him in this
Embassage. The wall ended, necessity not artificial workmanship finishing
it, with all have it was ended: then Themistocles entered the Senate of
Lacedemonia, and said: the wall whom ye sought to let, is builded at Athens,
ye Lacedaemonians, that we may be more strong. Then the Lacedaemonians could
say nothing to it, though they envied the Athenians state, the wall was
builded, and lest they should show violence or cruelty on Themistocles,
their Ambassadors were at Athens in custody, whereby Themistocles came safe
from his Embassage, and the Athenians made strong by their wall: this was
politikely dooen of Themistocles.

A narracion Poetical upon a Rose.
WHo so does marvel at the beautee and goodly color of the red Rose, he
must consider the blood, that came out of Venus the Gods foot. The Gods
Venus, as foolish Poets do feign, being the aucthour of Love: loved Adonis
the soonne of Cynara king of Cypres. But Mars called the God of battle, loved
Venus, being nothing loved of Venus: but Mars loved Venus as fervently, as
Venus loved Adonis. Mars being a God, loved Venus a gods, but Venus only was
inflamed with the love of Adonis, a mortal man. Their love was fervent, and
extremely set on fire in both, but their kind and nature were contrary,
whereupon Mars being in gelousie, sought means to destroy, fair amiable, and
beautiful Adonis, thinkyng by his death, the love of Venus to be slaked:
Adonis and Mars fell to fighting Venus as a lover, ran to help Adonis her
lover, and by chance she fell into a Rose bushe, and pricked with it her
foot, the blood then ran out of her tender foot, did color the Rose red:
whereupon the Rose being white before, is upon that cause changed into red.

Chria.
CHria, this profitable exercise of Rhetorike, is for the porfite of it so
called: it is a rehersall in few words, of any ones fact, or of the saying of
any man, upon the which an oracion may be made. As for example, Isocrates did
say, that the root of learnng was bitter, but the fruictes pleasant: and upon
this one sentence, you may dilate a ample and great oracion, obseruyng these
notes following. The saying does contain so great matter, and minister soche
plenty of argument.

Aucthors intreatyng of this exercise, do note three sorts to be of them,
one of them a Chria verbal, that is to say, a profitable exercise, upon the
saying of any man, only conteinyng the words of the aucthour, as the sentence
before.

The second is, conteinyng the fact or deed of the person: As Diogines
being asked of Alexander the Great, if he lacked any thing, that he was able
to give him, thinkyng his demand under his power, for Diogenes was at the
same time warmyng himself in the beams of the Sun: Diogenes answered, ye
take away that, that ye are not able to give, meaning that Alexander by his
body, shadowed him, and took away that which was not in his power to give,
Alexander turned himself to his men, and said, if I were not Alexander, I
would be Diogenes.

The third is a Chria mirt, both verbal and notyng the fact, as Diogenes
seeing a boie wanton and dissolute, did strike his teacher with a staff,
vetteryng these words: why doocst thou teach thy scholar so dissolutlie.

You shall learn to make this exercise, obseruyng these notes.

First, you shall praise the aucthour, who wrote the sentence, waighing his
life, if his life be unknown, and not easy to find his sentence or
sentences: for godly precepts will minister matter of praise, as if these
sayings be recited, they are sufficient of them selves, to praise the
aucthour. Then in the second place, expound the meaning of the aucthour in
that saying. Then show the cause, why he spoke this sentence. Then compare the
matter, by a contrary. Then frame a similitude of the same. Show the like
example of some, that spoke the like, or did the like. Then gather the
testimonies of more writers of the same Then knit the conclusion.
An Oracion.
I Socrates did say, that the root of learning is was bitter, but the
fruictes were pleasant.

The praise.
THis Orator Isocrates, was an Athenian borne, who flourished in the time of
Lusimachus the chief Lusimachus
governor of Athens: this Isocrates was brought up in all excelle^cte of
learning, with the most famous and excellent Orator Prodicus, Gorgias
Leontinus Prodicus. Gorgias Leontinus.
endued him with all singularity of learning and eloquence. The eloquence of
Isocrates was so famous, that Aristotle the chief Pholosopher, envied his
virtue and praise therein: Demosthenes also, who among the Grecians chiefly
excelled, learned his eloquence, of the Oracions which Isocrates wrote,
Demosthenes learned eloquence of Isocrates.
to many mighty and puisaunt princes and kings, do show his wisdom, and
copious eloquence, as to Demonicus the king to Nicocles, Euagoras, against
Philip the king of the Macedonia^s, by his wisdom and counsel, the Senate
and universal state of Athens was ruled, and the commons and multitude thereby
in every part flourished: chiefly what counsel, what wisdom, what learning
might be required, in any man of high fame and excellency: that same was
abundantly in Isocrates, as in all his Oratio^s he is to be praised, so in
this sentence, his fame imports like commendacion.

The exposicion.
IN that he says, the root of learning is bitter, and the fruictes
pleasant: he signifies no excellent quality or gift, virtue, art or science
can be attained, All excelle^^ (...) is attained.
except pain, labor, diligence, do plant and set the same: but when that
noble gift, either learning, or any excellent qualitee, is lodged and reposed
in us, then we gather by painful labors, great profit, comfort, delectable
pleasures, wealth, glory, riches, which be the fruictes of it.

The cause.
AND seeing that of our own nature, all men are inclined from their tender
years and infancy, to the extirpacion of virtue, following with all earnest
study and greedy, the free passage to vice, and specially children, whose
judgments and reason, are not of that strength, to rule their weak minds
and bodies, therefore, in them chiefly, the root of learning is bitter,
because not only many years they run their race, in study of art and
science. With care and pain also, with grievous chastisment and correccio^,
they are compelled by their teachers and Masters, to apprehende the same: the
parents no less dreaded, in the educacio^ of their children, in chastisement
and correction, so that by all means, the foundation and root of all
learning, in what sort so ever it is, is at the first unpleasant, sower, and
unsavory. The root of learning bitter.
To follow the times and seasons, appoincted for the same, is most painful,
and in these painful years: other great pleasures, as the frailty of youth,
and the imbecilitie of nature judges, does pass by, but in miserable state
is that child, and unfortunate, that passes the flower of his Who is a
unfortunate child.
youth and tender years, instructed with no art or Science, which in time to
come, shall be the only state, help, the pillar to bear of the sore bront,
necessity, and calamities of life. Herein the noble Romans, laid the sure
foundation of their mighty dominion, in the descrite prouidente, and politic
Good educacion the foundation of the Roman Empire.
educacion of children: to whom the Grecians gave, that necessary bulwark and
faundacion, to set up all virtue, all art and science. In Greece no man was
known, to live in that common wealth, but that his art and science, gave
manifest probacion and testimony, how and after what sort he lived. The
Romans in like sort, the sword and authority of the Magistrate, executyng
the same, did put forth, and draw to the attainment of learning, art or
science, all youth having maturitie and ripeness to it, and why, because that
in a common wealth, where the parents are vndescrete and foolish, as in all
common wealths, there are not a few, but many, they not ponderyng the state
of the time to come, bringing up their children without all civility, vnframed
to virtue, ignorant of all art and science: the children of their own
nature, unbridled, untaught, wilful, and heddie, do run with free passage to
all wickedness, they fall into al kind of folly, oppressed with all kind of
calamity, misery, and unfortunate chances, which happen in this life.
Nothing does sooner pulle down a kingdom, or common wealth, Evil educacion
brings to rume mighty kingdoms
then the evil and leude educacion of youth, to whom neither substance,
wealth, riches, nor possessions do descend, from their ancestors and
parents, who also of themselves want all art, science and means, to maintain
them to live, who of themselves are not able to get relief, for only by this
means, life is maintained, wealth and riches ar possessed to many great
siegniorics, lands, and ample possessions, left by their parents, and line of
auncetours, have by lack of virtuous educacion, been brought to naught, they
fell into extreme misery, poverty, and wantyng learning, or wealth, to
maintain their state and delicate life, they have robbed, spoiled, murdered,
to live at their own will. But then as rotten, dedde, and putride members from
the common wealth they are cut of by the sword, and authority of the
Magistrate. What kingdom was more mighty and strong, then the kingdom of
Lidia, which by no other means was brought to rume and destruction, but by
idleness: in that they Lydi^.
were kept from all virtuous exercise, from the study of arts and sciences,
so long as they meditated and lived in the school of virtuous life: no nation
was hable to overthrow them, of themselves they were prone and ready, to
practice all excellency. But Cyrus the king of Persians, by no other Cyrus.
means was able to bring them weaker. He took from the^ al furtherance to
arts, destroyed all occupacio^s of virtue whereupon by commandment and
terror, were driven to practice the vain and pestiferous practice, of Cards
and Dice. Harlottes The decay of a kingdom.
then schooled them, and all unhonest pastyme nurtered them, Tauernes an
quaffyng houses, was their accustomed and most frequented use of occupacion:
by this means their nobility and strength was decayed, and kingdom made
thrall. Ill educacion or idleness, is no small vice or evil when so mighty a
prince, having so large dominions, who^ all the East served and obaied. Whose
regimente and gouernemente was so infinite, that as Zenophon says, time would
rather want, then matter to speak of his mighty and large government, how
many nations, how diverse people The mighty dominions of Cyrus.
and valiaunte nations were in subieccion to him. If this mighty Prince, with
all his power and populous nations, was not hable to give the overthrow, to
the kingdom of Lidia, but by ill educacion, not by marciall atte^ptes, sword
Evil educacion.
or battaill: but by giuyng them scope and liberty, to do as he would. No
doubt but that Cyrus saw, by the like example of other kingdoms, this only
policy to be a ruin of that kingdom. Pythagoras the famous and godly
Philosopher, Pithagoras.
saved the kingdom and people of Crotona, they leauyng all study of art,
virtue and science. This people of Crotona, was overcome of the people of
Locrus, they left all Eatona.
exercise of virtue, neclectyng the feats of chivalry, whereupon Pythagoras
having the profitable and godly laws of Lycurgus, which he brought from
Lacedemonia: and the laws of Minos king of Creta, came to the people of
Crotona, and by his godly teaching and Philosophy, revoked and brought back
the people, given over to the neglectyng of all virtue, declaryng to them the
nobility and excellency thereof, he lively set forth the beastliness of
vice. Pithagoras recited to them, the fall and ruin of many regions, and
mighty kingdoms, which took after those vices. Idleness being forsaken,
virtue embrased, and good occupacions practiced, the kingdom and people grew
mighty.

Among the godly laws of Lycurgus, Lycurgus omitted Lycurgus.
not to ordain Laws, for the educacion of youth: in the which he cut of
all pamperyng of them, because in tender years, in whose bodies pleasure
harboreth, their virtue, science, cunnyng rooteth not: labor, diligence, and
industry only rooteth virtue, and excellency. Vices as unprofitable Virtue.
weeds, without labor, diligence and industry grow up, Vice.
and thereby infecteth the mind and body, poisoneth all the mocions, incensed
to virtue and singularity. Who ever attained cunnyng, in any excellent art or
science, where idleness or pleasure held the swaie. Philosophy shows,
pleasure to be unmeet for any man of singularity, for pleasure, Pleasure.
Idleness. Ignorance.
idleness, and ignorance, are so linked together, that the possession of the
one, induces the other. So many godly monume^tes of learning, had not
remained to this posterity of ours and of all ages: if famous men in those
ages and times, had hu^ted after immoderate pleasure. Thindustrie of soche, who
left to the posterity of all ages, the knowledge of Astronomy is known: the
monumentes of all learning of laws, and of all other works of antiquity, by
virtue, noble, by industry, labor, and moderacion of life in study, not by
pleasure and wantones, was celebraied to all ages. the mighty volumes of
Philosophers, both in moral precepts, and in natural causes, knew not the
delicate and dissolute life of these our days. Palingenius enueighyng against
the pa^pered, and lascivious life of man, utters a singular sentence

Qui facere et qui nosce, cupit quam plurima et altum,
In terris virtute aliqua sibi querere nomen:
Hunc vigilare opus est, nam non preclara geruntur,
Stertendo, et molles detrectat gloria plumas.
Who so coueteth to purchase fame by acts, or whose mind hunteth for
aboundaunte knowledge, or by virtue in this life, to purchause good fame. He
had not need to slugge and flepe in his doings: for good fame is not vpholded
by gaie Pecockes feathers. Of this, Demosthenes the famous Orator of Athens,
utters a worthy saying to the Athenians in his Epistle: if any will judge
Alexander the great, to be famous and happy, in that he had success in all
his doings, let this be his cogitacion, that Alexander the great, always did
inure himself to do things, and manfully to Alexander the great, commended
for diligence.
assaie that he enterprised. The felicity of his success came to him not
slepyng, or not cogitatyng thereof: Alexander the great now dedde, Fortune
seeks with whom she may accompany, and associate her self.

Thusidides comparyng the Lacedaemonians, and the Athenians together, showed a
rare moderacion, and temperature of life, to be in the Athenians: whereupon they
are most commended, and celebrated to the posterity.

The contrary.
EVen as idleness and a sluggishe life, is most pleasant to all soche, as
neglecte virtuous exercises, and godly life. So pain, labor, and study,
bestowed and employed, in the sekyng out of virtue, art, or science is most
pleasant to well affected minds: for no godly thing can be attained to,
without diligence and labor.

The similitude.
EVen as housbandmen, with labor and travail, do labor in plantyng and
tillyng the ground, before they receive any fruicte of the same. Even so no
virtue, art, or science, or any other thing of excellency is attained,
without diligence and labor bestowed thereto.

The example.
LEt Demosthenes, the famous Orator of Athenes, be an example of diligence to
us, who to avoid all let from study, used a means to keep himself thereto:
preuentyng also the industry of artificers. The same Demosthenes, wrote seven
times out the story of Thusidides, to learn thereby his eloquence and
wisdom.

The testimony.
Pliny, Plato, and Aristotle, with many other mo, are like examples for
diligence to us: who wrote upon virtue and learning like sentences.

The conclusion.
THerefore, Isocrates does pronounce worthelie, the root of learning and
virtue to be bitter, and the fruits pleasant.

A Sentence.
THe Oracion, which must be made by a sentence is in all parts like to Chria,
the profitable exercise, only that the Oracion made upon a sentence, as
aucthours do say: has not alwaie the name of the aucthour prefixed in the
praise, a small matter of difference, who so can make the one, is expert and
exquisite in the other, aucthours do define a sentence in this manner. A
sentence is an Oracion, in few words, showing a godly precept of life,
exhorting or diswadyng: the Greeks do call godly precepts, by the name of
Gnome, or Gnome.
Gnomon, which is asmoche to say, a rule or square, to direct any thing by,
for by them, the life of man is framed to all singularity. They are diverse
sorts of sentences, one exhorts, an other diswadeth, some only shows:
there is a sentence simple, compounde, profitable, true, and soche like. Frame
your Oracion upon a sentence, as in the Oracion before.

1. The praise of the aucthour. 2. The exposicion of the sentence. 3. A
confirmacion in the strength of the cause. 4. A conference, of the contrary.
5. A similitude. 6. The example. 7. The testimony of aucthors, showing ye
like. 8. Then add the conclusion.
An Oracion upon a sentence.
The sentence.
In a common wealth or kingdom, many kings to bear rule, is very evil,
let there be but one king.

The praise of the aucthour.
HOmere, who of all the Poets chiefly excelled, spoke this sentence in the
person of Ulysses, upon the king Agamemnon, king of Greece. This Homere
entreating of all the princely affairs, and great enterprices of the
Grecians: and of the mighty war against the Trojans, among whom soche
discord rose, that not only the war, for lack of unity and concord,
continued the space of ten years. But also much blood shed, havoc, and
destruction, came upon the Grecians, uttered this sentence. This Homere for his
learning and wisdom remains, intteled in many monumentes of learning: with
great fame and commendacion to all ages. What Region, Isle, or nation is not,
by his inuencion set forth: who although he were blind, his mind saw all
wisdom, the states of all good kingdoms and common wealths. The very
lively Image of a Prince The praise of Homere.
or governor, the faithful and humble obedience of a subject, toward the
prince, the state of a captain, the virtue and noble qualities, that are
requisite, in soche a personage, be there The content of Homers books.
set forth. The perfect state of a wiseman, and politic, is entreated of by
him. The Justice, and equity of a Prince, the strength of the body, all
heroical virtues: also are set forth his eloquence and verse, flows in
soche sort, with soche pleasauntnes: so copious, so aboundaunt, so grave and
sentencious, that his singularity therein excels, and passes.

The mighty prince Alexander, in all his marciall enterprices, Alexander,
and great conquestes, did continually night by night, read somewhat of the
Ilias of the Poet Homere, before he The Ilias of Homere, mete for princes to
look upon.
slepte, and askyng for the book, said: give me my pillowe. Alexander as it
seems, learned many heroical virtues, policy, wisdom, and counsel
thereof, else he occupied in so mighty and great wars, would not employed
study therein.

Julius Caesar the Emperor, commends this Poet, for his singularity, his
commendacion gives, ample argument, in this singular sentence, which
prefers a Monarchy above all states of common wealths or kingdom.

The exposicion.
HOmere the Poet, signified by this one sentence, no kingdom or common
wealth can prospere, or florishe to continue, where many hold government as
kings. For, the minds of many rulers and princes, do most affecte a private
wealth, commodity and glory: and where, many do bear soche swaie and
dominion, the common wealth can not be good. For, they privately to them
selves, do bear that regiment, and alwaie with the slaughter of many, do seek
to attain and clime, to the whole gouerme^t

The cause.
MAny occasions do rise, whereby many princes, and governors in a common
wealth, be diversely affected, The state of many kings in one land.
so that the government of many, can not prosper. For, both in quiet state,
their counsels must be diverse, and uncertain: and where they so differ,
the kingdom stands in great ieopardy and danger. Isocrates intreatyng of a
Monarchy, shows that the common wealth of Athenes, Athenes.
which detested and refused, that form and state, after the ruin and fall of
their city: being under the thraldom of the Lacedemonia^s, both in their
external chivalry and seats, both by sea and by land, and also in
regimente otherwise, their city grew mighty, and state steadfast.

The Carthagineans also, governed by one, had their gonernment Carthage in a
monarchy.
steadfast, and kingdom total: who in puisaunte acts, might compare with the
noble Romans. As the obedience to one ruler and chief governor, sekyng a
common wealth, is in the hearts of the subjects: fervent and marvelous with
love embraced, ^^ the Majesty of him is dread, with love served, and with
sincere barte, and fidelity obeyed, his manners followed, his laws imitated.
Many governors The state of many kings moan land.
bearyng regiment, as their manners be diverse, and fashion of life: even so the
people be like affected, to the diversity of diverse princes. And if we weigh
the reuolucion of the heavens and the marueiles of God therein, the maker of
the same, who being one God, rules heaven and earth; and all things
contained in the same. The heaven also adorned with many a A monarchy in
heaven.

One Sun


star, and clear light, have but one Sun to govern the^: who being of a
singular virtue above the rest, by his virtue and power, gives virtue to the
rest. Also in small things the Ante and the Be, who for providence and
wisdom, at The Ante.

The Be.


much commended: have as it were a common wealth, and a king to govern the^,
so in all things as a confusion, the state of many kings is abhorred in
government. After the death of Constantinus the great, Constancius his son
was made Emperor, and Licinius with him, partaker in fellowship of Constancius
Licinius Marabodius
the Empire. But forthwith, what blood was shed in Italy, with all cruelty,
until Constancius had slain Licinius, partaker of the Empire, and Marabodius
was slain also, whom Licinius did associate with him in the government. So
much princes and chief governors, do hate equality, or fellowship in
kingdoms. After the same sort, in this mighty Pompey. Caesar. Marius. Silla.
Monarchy of Rome, diverse have attempted at one and sondrie times, to bear
the scepter and regiment therein, but that mighty Monarchy, could not suffer
but one governor. The kingdom of Thebes, was in miserable state, the two
sons of Dedipus, Eteocles, and Polunices: striving both to be Monarche, and
only king. The kingdom of Assiria; Assiria the first monarchy.
which was the golden kingdom, and the first Monarchy: having. 36. kings by
succession, continued. 1239. years, this kingdom for all nobility and
roialnes excelled, and all in a Monarchy. The kingdom of the Medes, in a
Monarchy flourished in wealth and glory and all felicity: who in dominion
had gouernmente. 300. lackyng. 8. years. After that, the monarchy of the Medes
ceased, the Persia^ people rose mighty, The monarchy of the Medes. The
Persia^. Macedonia.
both in people and Princes, and continued in that state 236 and 7 months.
Macedonia rose from a base and mean people, to bear the whole regiment, and
power over all kingdoms. So God disposes the state and seat of princes,
ouerthrowyng often times mightier kingdoms at his will: the continuance of
this Monarchy was. 157. and eight months, ten kings linealie descendyng.
Asia and Siria, was Asia

Siria


governed by one succedyng in a sole government. Nicanor governed Siria 32.
years. In the other Antigonus reigned, Demetrius Poliorchetes one year,
Antiochus Soter also, the scepter of government, left to the succession of an
other, then Antiochus Soter, ruled all Asia and Siria, having. 16. kings
which in a monarchy, continued 189. years. The Egipcians, Egipte in a
Monarchy
had famous, wise, and noble princes, whose kingdom and large deminion, in all
felicitee prospered: which was in the time of Ninus, the first king of the
Assiria^s, who having 10* princes, one by one succedyng, Cleopatra their
Queen, governing, stood in a monarchy. 288. This one thing shows, that
kind of gouernmente to be royal, and most famous, not only for the
felicitee and glory thereof: but also for the permanent and steadfast state
thereof. Aristotle and Plato sets forth, the other forms of government. But
in all those, no long co^tinuaunce of felicitee, nor of happy state can appear
in them, as for the contrary to a Monarchy, is tirannis, pestiferous,
Tirannis Nero Domicianus Caligula.
and to be detested, where one man governs to his private gain, pillyng and
polyng his subjects, murderyng with all cruelty, neither Law nor reason,
leadyng thereto: but will bearyng regiment over law, Justice and equitee,
which princes often times see not. How the wilful rashenes, or tirannicall
mind does abase them, and make them, though in utter port the same princes,
yet in very deed, they be thrall and slave to beastly affeccion. Nothing
does so what does beautify the throne of a Prince
much adorn and beautify, the seat and throne of a prince, as not only to
bear dominion, over mighty people and regions, then to be lord over himself.
The state of a few peers Aristocratia.
or nobles, to hold the chief and whole government, who both in virtue,
learning, and experience do excelle, is a goodly state of common wealth. But
the proof of that common wealth and end shows, and the manner of Princes:
who, although they be, of life godly, wise, grave, expert and politic. For,
these virtues or ornaments, ought to be reposed in soche noble personages,
they do marueilously change and alter: So honor and preeminente state,
puffs them up, and blinds them, that every one in the end, seeks to
climb over all, as head and governor. Show me one kind of this state, and
form of gouernmente, which either long prospered, or without bloodshed, and
destruction of the rest of the nobles and peers, have not caught the whole
regimente. Seeing that in all common wealths and kingdoms, equalitee or
fellowship, will not be suffered in gouernmente: for, it can not be, that this
form of common wealth may be good, as Aristotle and Plato shows: The end
of this gouernemente, The end of Aristocratia.
fell ever to one, with a ruin of the kingdom and people. The multitude to
bear dominion, and though a Politeia.
public wealth be sought for a time, much less they continue in any good
state: for in the end, their rule and government, will be without rule,
order, reason, modeste, and their law must be will. The other three states,
are the refuse of good common wealths, not to be tolerated in any region.
The one of them is a tyraunte, to be governor only to his Tirannis.
own glory, with cruelty tormented his subjects, only to have his will
and lust, over all law, order, and reason. The nobilitee rulyng to themselves,
every one for his own time The third, the base and rude multitude, every one
for himself, Oligarthia.
and at his will. This troublous state, all Regions and Democratia.
common wealths, have felt in open sedicions ano tumultes, raised by them,
it is a plagued and pestiferous kind of gouernemente. The example of a good
Monarchy, is of great force, to confound the state of al other common
wealths, and forms of Regimente.

The nobilitee of Persia having no king, linially descendyng, A monarchy
prefarred of the Persians
to rule that mighty dominion of Persia, Cambises being dedde, the usurper
murdered, they took counsel in their assemble, what state of government was
best, they having the proof of a Monarchy: in their long counsel, they
knew the felicity of that state, they knew as it seemed, the perilous state
of the other gouernmentes. If these noble and peers had been ambicious, and
that each of them would have had fellowship, or participacion in kingdoms:
they would not have preferred a Monarchy above the rest. The antiquity of
that time shows, their personages, wisedomegrauitie, and majesty was soche,
that each one of them was mete for his virtues, to have a whole kingdom. If
Aristocratia would have contented them, then was time and occasion offered, no
king remainyng to have preferred that state. But they as upright nobles,
sincere and faithful, having altogether The duty of al noble peers
respect to a public wealth: to a permanent state and felicity of
kingdom, sought no participacion by private wealth, to dissolve this
Monarchy. But they being most godly, each were content to prove, whose
chance might be, to set up again that Monarchy. The kingdom at the last
came to the hands of Darius, who was after king of the Darius.
Persians. This is a goodly example, to show the worthiness of a Monarchy, the
Persian kingdom after many years declinyng, from his power and state, not for
any fault of government, but God as he sees time, raises up kingdoms and
plucketh them daune. Afterward Darius the king, not Kingdoms rise and fall
able to make his part good with Alexander the Great: offered to him the
greatest part of his kingdom, even to the stood of Euphrates, and offered his
daughter to wife: Alexander was content to take the offer of Darius, so that he
would The answer of Alexander to Darius, as concerning a monarchy.
be second to him, and not equal with him in kingdom. For, Alexander said,
that ^^ the world can not be governed with two Suns, (...) the world can
suffer two mighty kingdoms: whereupon it is manifest, that no kingdom will
suffer equality or fellowship, but that if the will and mind of Princes might
brust out, the state of all the world, would be in one mighty governors
hands. For, always Princes do seek to a sole regimente. Alexander the
great Alexander the great prefarred a Monarchy.
co^querour also, preferring for worthiness a Monarchy, at the time of his
death, demanded who^ he would have to succeed him in his mighty dominions, he
by one signifiyng a Monarchy, saying: Dignissimus, that is to say, the
worthiest. After the death of Alexander, Antipater caught the gouernmente
Alexanders monarchy fell by many kings. Antipater. Crates. Meliagrus.
Perdiceas. Ptolemeus. Learcus. Cassander. Menander. Leonatus. Lusimacus.
Eumenes Seleucus.
of Macedonia and Greece, and Crates was Treasurer. Meleagrus and Perdiceas
caught other of his dominions, then Ptolemeus possessed Egipte, Africa and a
part of Arabia, Learcus, Cassander, Mena^der, Leonatus, Lusimachus, Eumenes,
Seleucus and many other, who were for their worthiness in honor and estimacion
with Alexander, caught into their hands other parts of his dominions, every
one sekyng for his time, his own private glory, dignity, and aduauncemente,
but not a public wealth, and so in fine, ambicion broiled in their lofty
stomachs, each to attain to others honor. Whereupon bloodshed, destruction of
the people and countries, the fall of these Princes ensued. So much kingdoms
hate equality or felowshipe let us lay before our iyes, the kingdoms nere at
hand. France, from the times of Faramundus until this day have stood, and
did florishe France. Spain. Germany. Britain.
in a Monarchy. The state of Spain, from the time of the first King, until
this day, has flourished continually in a Monarchy. The great seigniories of
Germany, by one succedyng in government, have been permanent in that goodly
state. Our noble Isle of Britain from Brutus, has stood by a Monarchy: only
in those days, the state of government changed, at the coming of Julius
Caesar, Emperor of Rome. The land being at division, and discord, through the
diversity of diverse kings: so much the state of diverse kings in one
land, is to be expelled, or the government of the base multitude, to have
universally power of dominion, or the state of peers, to be chief in regiment,
no king left to command over the people, and nobles, or else there can not be
but discord in the end, which pulls down moss mighty Regions and
dominious, so that the best state, the most steadfast and fortunate, is in
all times, in all ages, in all laws, and common wealths, where one king
sekyng the advancement, wealth, glory, of him and his people.

The contrary.
THat household or family, can not be well governed, where many and diverse
bears government, necleayng the state prosperous universally: for where
obedience is drawn to diverse and many, there can not be good government, nor
faithful obedience. And so in a kingdom where one chiefly governs, and to a
common wealth there the hearts of the subjects, be most knitte to obaie.

The similitude.
EVen as they, which serve one master, shall soneste with labor please, and
with fidelity, accomplish his will and pleasure. For, the manners of many me^
be diverse, and variable, so in a Monarchy, the state of one is sone obaied,
the mind and law of one Prince sone followed, his Majesty dreaded and loved.

The example.
LET the four thief Monarchies of the Assirian, the Persian, Grecian, and the
Roman, which have continued from the beginning mighty, most happy, be an
example herein. If that state of government, had not been chief of all other,
those mighty kingdoms would not have preferred, that kind of government.

The testimony of ancient writers.
THerefore, Aristotle, Plato, and all the chief Philosophers, intreatyng of the
administracion of a common wealth: do prefer b^^^re all states of
government a Monarchy, both for the felicity of it, and steadfast state.

The conclusion.
HOmere therefore deserves great commendacion, for this one sentence, which
prefers a Monarchy before all states.

The destruction.
THis exercise of Rhetotike, is called destruction, or subversion, because it
is in a oracion, a certain reprehension of any thing declaimed, or dilated, in
the which by order of art, the declaimer shall proceed to cast down by
force, and strength of reason, the contrary induced.

In this exercise of Rhetorike, those proposicions are to be subverted, which
are not manifest true, neither it so repugnaunt from reason, as that there can
appear no bold, to induce a probable reason to confound the same. But soche
proposicions are meet for this part, as are probable in both sides, to induce
probability of argument, to reason thereupon.

It shall behoue you first, for the entryng of this matter, to add a
reprehension there against those, which have confirmed as a truth, that,
which you will confute. In the same place, add the exposion, and meaning of
his sentence. Thirdly, show the matter to be obscure, that is uncertain
Incrediblie. Impossible. Not agreyng to any likelihode of truth. Vncomlie to
be talked of. Unprofitable.
This exercise of Rhetorike does contain in it al strength of art, as who
should say, all parts of Rhetorike, may copiouslie be handled in this part,
called confutacion, so ample a matter Tullie does note this part to be.

The theme or proposicion of this Oracion.
It is not like to be true, that is said of the battaill of Troie.

The reprchension of the aucthor, and of all Poets.
NOt without a cause, the vanities of Poets are to be reproved, and their
forged inuencions to be rejected: in whose writings, so manifestly are set
forth as a truth, and Chronicled to the pesteritie of ages and times, soche
forged matters of their Poetical and vain wits. Who has not heard of their
monsterous lies against God, they inucntyng a genealogy The vanities of Poets.
of many Gods procreated, where as there is but one God. This vanity also
they have set forth, in their monumentes and works. How a conspiracy was
sometime among the Gods and Gods, to bind the great God Jupiter. How
impudentlie do they set forth the Gods, to be lovers of women, and their
adulterous lust: and how they have transformed theimselues, into diverse shapes
of beasts and fowls, to follow after beastly lust: The malice and envy of
the Gods, one to another* The feign also the heaven to have one God, the sea
an other, hell an other, which are mere vanities, and false imaginacio^s of
their Poetical wits. The like forged inuencion have they wrote, of the
mighty The battaill of Troie, x, years for a harlotte.
and terrible battaill bruted of Troie, for a beautiful harlot sustained ten
years. In the which, not only men and noble peers, gave the combat of
battle, but the Gods took parts against Gods, and men wounded Gods: as
their The vain invention of Poets.
lies exceade all number, because they he infinite, so also they pass all
truth, reason, and judgment. These few examples of their vanities and lies,
do show the feigned ground and authority of the rest. According to the
folly and supersticiousnes of those times, they invented and forged folly upon
folly, lie, upon lie, as in the battaill of Troie, they aggrauate the dolor of
the battaill, by pitiful and lamentable inuencion. Plato rejects Poets from
the common wealth.
As for the Poets themselves; Plato in his book, made upon the administracion
of a common wealth, makes them in the number of those, which are to be
banished out of all common wealths.

The exposicion.
HOmere does say, and many other Poets, that the wars of the Grecians
against the Trojans, was for beautiful Helena, and continued ten years. The
Gods and Goddis took parts, and all the people of Greece, aided Menelaus, and
the king Agamemnon, to bring home again Helena, neclecting their own country,
their wife and children, for one woman. The Greeks inuentyng a huge and mighty
horse made of Fur tree, and covered with brass, as huge as a mou^tain, out
of the which the Grecians by treason issuyng, brought Troie to ruin.

The obscurity of the matter.
IT seems a matter of folly, that so many people, so mightle nations should
be bewithed, to raise so mighty a army, hassaroyng their lives, leauyng
their country, their wives, their children, for one woman: Be it so, that
Helena passed all creatures, and that Nature with beauty had induedher with
all virtue, and singularity: Helena.
yet the Grecians would not be so foolish, that universally that would seek
to cast down their own wealth, and much more the common wealth of Greece,
and kingdom to stand in peril. Neither is it to be thought, the Grecians,
sekyng to aduau^ce the beauty of Helena: would leave their own state. But it
is like, the wits of Poets did immagine The cause of the forged inuencion.
so forged a Chronicle, that the posterity of ages followyng, should rather
wounder at their forged inuencion, then to believe any soche war truly
mentioned. There was no soche cause, seeing that the kingdom of Greece, fell by
no title of succession to Helena, for them to move war, for, the bringyng
back of that beutifull harlotte Helena. Neither in Helena was there virtue, or
honesty of life, to move and exasperate the Grecians, to spend so great
treasures, to raise so mighty an army on every side. What comme^dacion had
Nocommendacion in vpholdyng and, maintainyng of hariottes.
the Trojans to advance Helena, and with all roialnesse to entreat her, she
being a harlotte: the folly of the Grecians and the Trojans, is so on every
side so great, that it can not be thought, soche a war truly chronicled. If
violence and power, had taken Helena from her housebande, and not her own will
and lust, caught with the adulterous love of Paris, Helena followed Paris.
being a stranger. If her moderation of life had been so rare, as that the
like fact for her chastity, had not been in any age or common wealth, her
virtues would have given occasion: The Princes and nobles of Greece to stomach
the matter. The example of the fact, would with all praise and Virtuous life,
worthy commendation in all ages. Lucrecia. Tarquinius. the king banished for
rauishyng Lucrecia, and all of his name banished. Penelopes chastity.
commendacion be mentioned, and celebrated to al ages. Lucretia for her
chastity, is perpetually to be advanced, whereupon the Romans banished
Tarquinius their king, his stock and name from Rome. The rare chastity of
Penelope, is remainyng as a example herein: So many shares laid to cast down
her virtuous love toward her housebande Ulysses. But Ulysses made havoc by
murder, on these gaie and gallante Ru^^ins, who in his absence sought to
alienate and withdraw, the chaste heart of Penelope, consumyng his substance.
A greater example remains in no age, of the like chastity. As for the
battle of Troie, raised for Helena, could wise men, and the most famous
nobles of Greece: So occupy their heddes, and in the same, both to hasarde
their lives for a beautiful strumpet or harlot. The sage and wise Nestor, whom
Agamemnon for wisdom preferred, before Nestor.
the most of the peers of Greece, neither it Vltisses wanted at the same time,
having a politic and subtle hedde, to withdraw Ulysses.
them from so leude and foolish a enterprise. Greece wanted not beautiful
creatures, Nature in other had bestowed Greece the land of fair women.
amiable faces, personage, and comely behavior. For, at those days, Greece
they called A chaida calligunaica, that is, Greece the land of fair women. The
dolorous lamentacion of the Ladies and Matron^^^ Grec^, would have hindered
soche a foolish enterprise, seeing their own beauty neclected, their honesty
of life cast up to perilles, one harlot of innumerable people followed and
hunted after, in whom neither Uncomely.
honesty, virtue, nor chastity was harbored.

Incredible.
ALthough the folly of men is great, and the will of princes and governors
beastly and rash, yet by no means it can be so many years, so great folly
to take root in their hearts, and that the wisdom of the Grecia^s should not
rather cast of as naught, the beauty Beauty without virtue, nothing of
valor.
of Helena: rather then the whole multitude, the state of the Prince, the
welfare of the subject, to stand in peril for the beauty of one. What is
beauty, when a beastly and adulterous mind is possessed: Beauty without
chastity, harboreth a monsterous rabelmente of vices, a snare and hair,
Beauty a poison, in a adulterous mind.
to poison other. Beauty in few years, is not only blemished, but decated,
and wholly extinguished: it is incredible, that the Grecians would seek to
bring home Helena, who Beauty sone fades.
had lost the chaste love toward her housband, being caught with the
adulterous love of Paris, soonne to Priamus king Paris Helenas lover. Phrigia.
of Troie. The land of Phrigia was a mighty Region, the people noble,
puissaunte in war: the king for nobility of acts famous. The City of
Troie, wherein the king held his Scepter of government, was rich, mighty,
and populous: ruled and governed, by the wisdom and policy of famous
counsailours, so that by all means it is incredible, without any possibility.
They neclectyng their own state Uncomely.
and kingdom, so to prefer the beauty of one, that the whole multitude of
Greece thereby to perish. It is a matter incredible in all Greece, which for
the fame of wisdom, is most Greece the fountain of al learning.
celebrated among all nations, not one wiseman at the same time to be therein:
whose counsel and politic heddes, might ponder a better purpose. Greece,
which was the mother and fountain of all arts and sciences, all Eloquence,
Philosophy, wisdom flowyng from them, and yet wisdom to want in their
breasts. Reason can not make any parswasion that any probability can rise, of
any soche matter enterprised, what could the intent be of the Grecians, as
concerning Menelaus. In Menelaus there was no wisdom, to seek and Menelaus
housbande to Helena.
hunte after Helena, or by any means to possess her, she being a harlotte,
her love alienated, her heart possessed with the love of an other manne:
foolishlie he hops to possess love, that seeks to enjoy the cloked,
poisoned, and dissembled Harlottes love dissentbled.
heart of a harlotte, Greece was well rid of a harlotte, Troie harbouryng
Helena. In the Trojans it is not to be thought, Trojans.
that either the king, or nobles, for a harlotte, would see the the people
murdered, their own state, the king to be in danger of ruin. In the Grecians
there was neither wisdom, Grecians.
neither commendacion, to pursue with a maine host, with a great Navy of
Ships, to bring back again a harlotte, whose enterprise rather might better
be borne, to banishe and exile soche a beastly disposed person. The Trojans
might Absurdity.
well scorn the Grecians, if that the possession of a beautiful most
amiable, and minsyng harlotte, was of soche valor, estimacion, and price with
them, not only the beauty of all other to be rejected. But most of all the
virtuous life, and chastity of all their matrons and honorable Ladies, to be
cast of as naught. Greece that had the name of all wisdom, The defense of
Helena.
of all learning and singularity, might rather worthelie be called, a
harbouryng place of harlottes: a Stewe and vpholder of whoredom, and all
uncleanness. Wherefore, these absurdities ought to be remoned, from the mind
and cogitacion of all men, that should worthelie ponder the state of Greece.
Troie of like sort to be a kingdom and common Troie a kingdom of whordome.
wealth of all vice: whoredom in soche price with the king, and people, that
most fortunate should the harlotte be, and the adulterour in soche a common
wealth, that for adulterous love, puts rather all their state to hasarde
and peril, for the maintenance of beastly love, brutishe society most, in
price with soche a (...) chastity and moderacion of life, abandoned and cast
of.

Impossible, and not agreyng.
IF we weigh natural affeccion, it can not be, that Nature abhors the
war of the Grecians.
the Grecians so much abhorring from nature, should cast of the natural love
of their wifes, their children and country, to bring home again, by slaughter
of infinite people: soche an one as had left honesty, and chaste love of her
housbande. For, what praise can redounde to the Grecians by war, to bring
home Helena, though she of all creatures Helena.
was most beautiful, being a harlotte: followyng the bridell and will of an
other man. May shame or commendacion riseto the Trojans, can wisdom,
counsel, or gravity, defend the adulterous lust of Priamus soonne, yea,
could Priamus.
Priamus so love Helena, for Paris his sons sake, as that he had rather
venture the ruin and destruction of his city, and the fall of his people, the
murder and ruin of his children, and wife for the beauty of one. For what is
beauty, where honesty and virtue lacks, it is an vncomply matter, though
the Poets so faigne it, not only that in heaven, a contencio^ should fall
among the Goddises of their beauty, or that Jupiter of whom they make an
ignorant God, to choose Paris the kings son of Troic, chief arbitratour and
Judge of that matter, to who^ he should give the golden Apell to her beauty,
as chief of al other, was ascribed these things, are indecent to think of the
Goddeses, and most of all, to think there is more Gods then one. And even
as these are vanities, and forged imaginacions of the Gods, so of the
hattaile.

Uncomely and unprofitable.
THE danger of many people does show, that no soche thing should happen,
either of the Grecians or of the Trojans: for, it is a matter dissonaunt from
all truth, that they should so much neclecte the quiet state, and prosperous
renoume of their kingdom, in all times and ages, since the first can
stitucion of all Monarchies and kingdoms. Who ever hard soche a forged matter
to be Chronicled, and set forth. Or who can give credit to soche war, to be
enterprised of so small a matter: to leave the state of waightier things for
one woman. All the women of that country to stand in peril, the slaughter of
their dear housbandes, the violent murder of their children to ensue.
Therefore, the wilfulness of people and princes, are the cause of the fall
and destruction, of many mighty kingdoms, and Empires. The fall of Greece
ensued, when the chief citees, Athenes and Lacedemonis took parts, and did
consederate Ambicion. Eesar fell by ambicion.
diverse citees to them to assiste them, and aid them in battle only:
ambicion and desire of glory, moved both the Athenians and Lacedaemonians,
from concord and unity Discord.
by which means, the power, glory, and strength of all kingdoms falls.
Ambicion was the cause that mighty Pompey fell, and died violently. Caesar
likewise caught with ambicion, not bearyng the equalitee, or superiority of
Pompei, Pompey.
was turned of violently from Fortunes wheel. Many princes of like sort and
kingdoms. By ambicion only, had the cause of their ruin. The glory of the
Assirian Monarchy grew most mighty, by the ambicion of Ninus king of
Babylon: the offpryng of Ninus, which were kings lineallie descendyng to the
first kingdom of the Medes, both enlarged their kingdoms, and also had the
decate of them by ambicion. Let the Medes also assoriate them selves to the^,
from Arbactus the first king, unto Astiages the last: the beginning and fall
of the Persian Monarchy. The mighty state of Greece, the seat Imperial of
Rome, by ambicio^ first Romulus killed Remus by ambicion.
extolled them selves: and also by it, their glory, scepter, and kingdom was
translated, but the fall of Troie came not, by ambicion, that the Grecians
sought. But as the Poets do saigne, the beauty of one women so wounded their
hearts, that the Grecians did hasarde, the perilles of their ^^untrie. The
Trojans so much esteemed, the beauty o^ ^^^ena, as that the state of all their
kingdom perished. I alas no glory nor honor to the Grecians, to resist by
armor, and to defend the violente taking away of Helena, from her housbande:
nor it was no honor, the Grecians to pursue by armor, the taking away of
Helena, being a harlotte. So that by no means it can follow, these things to
be true, of the battle of Troie.

Confirmacion.
The other part, contrary to destruction or subversion, is called confirmacion.

Confirmacion, has in it so great force of argument, to stablishe and
uphold the cause or proposicion: as destruction has in castyng down the
senten^ce or proposicion.

Confirmacion is a certain oracion, which with a certain reprehension of the
person or fact, by order and way of art, casts down, the contrary
propounded.

As in the other part called destruction, those proposicions are to be
subverted, which are not manyfestlie true, with all other notes before
specified: so in contrariwise, this oracion by contrary notes is declaimed by,
as for example.

1.It shall behoue you first, for the entering of the oracion, to induce a
reprehension against those, which have confutid as a truth, that which you
will confirm. 2.In the second part, place the exposicion and meaning of the
aucthours sentence. 3.Show the matter to be manifest. 4.Credible. 5.Prossible.
6.Agreyng to the truth. 7.Show the fact comely. 8.Profitable.
This exercise of Rhetotike, does contain in it all strength of art, as who
should say, all parts of Rhetorike may (...) ^ee handled in this part,
called confirmacion. You (...) matter rises, ioigne two notes together, as
the reason ^^ the argument comes in place, which Apthonius a Greek aucthour
herein uses. As manifest and credible possible and agreyng to truth, comely
and profitable, but in all these, as in all the rest: the theme or proposicion
by itself, is to be placed, the reprehension of the aucthour by itself, the
exposicion of the theme by itself.

The theme or proposicion.
IT is true that is said of Zopyrus, the noble Persian, who ve^tered his life:
and did cause the deformity of his body, for the sauegarde of his country.

The praise.
Justinius the Historiographer, for worthiness Justinius.
of fame and wisdom, deserves to the posterity of all times, immortal
fame, by whom the famous acts of Princes, and other noble men, do remain
Chronicled. Giuyng examples Chronicles most necessary to be red
of all valiantness and virtue: for, both the acts and worthy fears of
Princes, would pass as unknown in all ages, except the worthiness of them,
were in monumentes of writing Chronicled: For, by the fame of their worthiness,
and virtues, common wealths and kingdoms, do stablishe and make Laws, the
hearts of people are incensed, and inflamed, to the like nobility of acts,
and famous enterprices, The worthiness of histories.
Histories of ancient times, be unto us witnesses of all times and ages, of
kingdoms and common wealths, a lively example. A light to all truth and
knowledge, a scholemaister: of manners a memory of life, for, by it we se the
wisdom what is a history.
of all ages, the form of the best and flourishing common wealths. We learn
by the virtues of Princes and governors, to follow like step of virtue: to
fly and avoid vices, and all soche things, as are to the destruction and
decaie, of realm and country. How brutishe were our (...), if (...) An
ignorant life, (...).
knew no more then we se presently, in the state of (...) wealth and
kingdom. The kyngdome^ (...) and common wealths that (...) by the long
experience, wisdom, policy, counsel, and godly laws of Princes of
ancient times, no small praise and commendation can be attributed, to all such
as do travel The knowledge of Histories makes us as it were living in all
ages.

Historiogriphers.


in the serching out the verity of ancient Histories, for by the knoledge of
them, we are as it were living in all ages, the fall of all kingdoms is
manifest to us, the death of Princes, the subuersions of kingdoms and common
wealths, who knows not the first risyng and end of the Assiriane monarchy,
the glory of the Persians, and the ruynge of the same, the mighty Empire of
the Greeks, risyng and falling, the Roman state after what sort florishyng
and decaiyng, so that no state of common wealth or kingdom is unknown to us,
therefore Iustine, and all such as do leave to the posterity, the state of al
things chronicled, deserve immortal commendacions.

The exposicion.
IN the time of Darius king of the Persians, the Assyria^s who ware subjects to
him, sense the time The treason of the Assyrians.
of Cirus the first king of the Persians, rebelled, invaded and took the
myghtie City of Babylon, which being possessed, with much difficulty, and
not without great dangers could be attained. Darius the Darius.
king hearing of the treason of the Assyrians and that the mighty City of
Babylon was taken, was very wroth waiynge Babylon taken of the Assyrians.
with himself, that there by, the ruin of the Persian Kingdom might happen.
Zopyrus one of the.vij. noble Peers of Persia, seeing the danger of the
country, the state of the Prince, and the welfare of the subjects to decaie,
in the safegarde of his country, leuyng all private commodity, for the
behoufe and felicity of the Persian kingdom, did venture his own life,
commanded his servants at home to The fact of Zopyrus.
(...) re^te his body with whippes, to cut of his nose, his (...) his ears,
these things being unknown to Darius (...)* As soon as Darius saw Zopyrus so
torn and deformed, bewailed his state being astonished, at so horrible Zopyrus
caused the deformity of his body, for the good state of his country.
a faict: but Zopyrus showed to the king his hole intent and purpose that he
minded to go to Babylon, which the Assyrians did traitorouslie possess, and
complained as that these things had been don by the tyrannte and cruelty of
Darius, be went to Babylon, and there complained of the cruelty of his King,
whereby purchasyng the favor and love of the Assyrians, he showed them how
Darius came to be king not by worthiness, not by virtue, not by the common
consent of men, but by the neynge of a horse. Zopyrus therefore admonished
them, that they should trust more to their armor, then to their walls, he
willed them to proclaim open war, The policy of Zopyrus.
forthwith they encountered with the Persians, and for a time victory fell on
the Babilonians side, such was the pollice of Zopyrus. The Assyrians reioised
of the success and felicity of their wars, the King of the Babilonians gave
to Zopyrus, the chief power and office, to leede a mighty army, of the
which being Lientenaunt, he betrayed the Babilonians and their City.

Manifest.
NOt only Trogus Pompeius the famous Historiographer, and Iustine which took
the Story of him, Trogus Po^peius.
but also the Greek writers do set forth, as matter of truth, the
valiaunte enterprises of Zopyrus: so that the strange and mighty fact of him
can not seem incredible, having testimony of it in all ages. Zopyrus having
not respect Zopyrus.
to his own life, to his own private wealth or glory, did thereby put of
the danger that insued to the Persiane Kingdom: It may seem a great matter,
to a mind not well affected toward his country, to destroy or deforme his
The saying of Tullie.
own body, for the sauegarde of country or commonwealth. But if we way the
State of our bearth, our country chalengeth more at our hands then frindes
or parents, so much price Plato the Philosopher, and (...) Plato, (...).
unto our country, the volumes of all (...) do prefare our natural country
before the private state of own manne, wealth, glory, honor, dignity, and
riches of The state of a public wealth, is to bee^ preferred before a private
wealth. Pericles.
one or few, the Statutes of all Princes, sekyng the glory of their country,
do prefare a universal welthe, before a private and particulare commodity.
Pericles the noble Athenian in his oration made to the Athenians, shows that
the glory and welthe of one man or many, cannot plant such glory, and
renown to their country, as that in all parts thereby to be beautified and
decorated, but when glory a happy and florishyng state redoundeth to the
kingdom, the subjects, the nobelles and hye peers, the gouuernour stands
happy and fortunate. Who so hops in sparing costs and charges, money or
ornaments, to the behouf and imploiment of his country and not by all means
to his power and strength aydeth and defends his natural country, from the
danger and invasion of his enemy, what state inioyeth A good subject is
ready to live and die for his country.
he, or what wealth remains priuatlie, when the trone and scepter of his king
fails, the enemy wastes, spoileth and destroieth all parts of his state,
with the rest his life perishes, so that no danger, cost, is to be
refused, to serve the kingdom and prince, by whose scepter, justice, laws, and
equity we are gouuerned, there is no subject well affected, but that he only
lives to proffite his country, to live and dye therein.

Probabell.
IF only Zopyrus had enterprised this valiant act, and that no memory were
remainyng in any age of the noble acts of other men, it may seem not truly
chronacled; but from time to time, in all ages and common wealths, famous men
for their acts and nobility have been, which with like courrage and
magnanimity have saved their country, by the loss of their own lives.
Horatius Horacius Cocles.
Cocles is both a witness and a light to the same, by whose adventure the
mighty and strong City Rome was saved: (...) a^ what time as the Hetruscians
entered on the city, and were on the bridge, Horatius cocles defendid the end
of the same, baryng of the brunte, and stroke of the enemy, until the Romans,
for the sauegarde of the city, had broken down the bridge, as soon as Horatius
Cocles saw the City thus delivered, and the repulse of the enemy, he lepte
with his armours into the flud Tibar, it seemed he had not regard to his life,
that being burdened with the waighte and gravity of his armor, durst venture
his life to so main and deep a water. Marcus Attilius in the defense of his
Prince, his right hand Marcus Attilius.
being cut of, the which he laid on the ship of the Massilians, forthwith he
apprehended with the left hand, and ceased not until he had soouncke the
same ship. Cynegerus the Athenian lineth by fame and like nobility of acts,
ve^teryng his Cynegerus.
life for his country. The mighty city of Athenes, brought under the
dominions of the Lacedaemonians. Thrassbulus, Hismenias and Lisias by their
adventure, and noble atchiue Hismenias. Thrasibulus
reduced Athenes to his falicitie so much love, so faithefull hearts they
had toward their countreie. Leonides the King of the Lacedaemonians,
defendyng the narow straights of the city Thermopolie with sower thousand men
against the mighty and huge army of Xerxes, for Xerxes contemned their
small number and army: Leonides the king heard Leonides king or the
Lacedaemonians.
that the place and hill of the battle was preue^tid of.xx. thousand enemies,
he exorted his soldiers part of them to depart until a better time might
be locked for, and only with the Lacedaemonians he proved the conflicte and the
combat, although the camp of Xerxes was mightier and more in number: yet
Leonides the king thought it good for the sauegarde of his contrie, for says
he, I must rather save it, then to have respect to my life, although the
oracle of Delphos had foreshewed, that even Leonides must die in the field or
battle of the enemy, and therefore Leonides entered battall, and comfortid his
men for their country sake, as to die therein, therefore he prevented the
narrow straightes of the country, and the dangerous places, where the force
of (...) ^nem^e ^^ught bruste in, he lingered not, lest the enemy might
compass him in, but in the quiet season of the night, he set upon his enemy
unlooked for, and they being but six hundred men with the king Leonides, brust
into the ca^pe of their enemies Leonides.
being six hundred thousand men, their valiauntnes was such, and the
ouerthowe of their enemies so great, and Xerxes the King having two wounds,
retired with shame and lost the honor. Agesilaus and Conon valiaunte in acts,
Agesilaus. Conon.
and excellynge in all nobility, what great and mighty dangers have they
atchiued and venterid for their country sake, how much have they neglectid
their own wealth, riches, life and glory, for the advancement and honor of
their country. Lisander also the Lacedemonian, was endued with like nobility
with faithful and synceer heart toward his country. Lisander.
Archidamus also lies not in obliuio^, whose fame death buried not the famous
adventure of Codrus king of the Athenians Archidamus Codrus.
is marvelous and almost incredible, but that the Histores, truly set forth,
and declare a manifest truth thereof, who is more famous then Epaminundas,
both for virtue, Epamniundas.
nobility and marciall feats among the Thebans, the mighty army of the
Grecians, at the long sege of Troie, Grecians.
what valiaunte Capitains had they, which in the defense of their country
hasarde their life: the Trojans also wanted Trojans.
not for proves valiauntnes and al nobility, their peers and nobles: among
the Romans, what a great number was Romans.
of noble peers, whose study always was to live and dye in the glory, aid
and defense of their country, for he lives not by whose cowardlines fainted
heart and courage, the contrie or kingdom stands in perrill, he lives in
shame, that refuses danger, cost or charge, in the defense or procuryng,
better state to his country. The worthy saying of Epaminundas declares, who
lives to his country, who diyng valiantly who lives in shame.
in the field, being thrust through with the spear of his enemy, asked those
questions of these that stoede by him at the poincte of death, is my spear
manfully broken, and my enemies chassed away, the which things his
companions in war affirmed, then said he: now your Captain Epaminundas
begins to live in that he dies valiantly for Epamenundas a most noble and
valiant pere.
his country, and in the proffite and advancement of the same, a worthy man,
noble and valiaunte, his sentence also was worthy to be known, and followed
of all such as be well affected and Godly minded to their country, Marcus
Marcellus of like sort, and Titus Manlius Torquatus, and Scipio Aemilianus,
Marcus Attilius showed in what hye price our natural country ought to be
had, by their valiant atchifes, and enterprises: I might pass by in silence
Scipio Cato, and Publius Scipio Nasica, but that they by like same, honor and
glory live immortal to their country, the fame also of Vibeus, Valerius
Flaccu^, and Pedanius Centurio gives ampell and large matter to all men,
endued with nobility and valiant proves, for the defense of their country
with Quintus Cocctus, Marcus Sceua and Sceuola.

Possibility.
THere needs no donte to rise of possibility, saying that examples do remain
of famous men, of godly and well affected persons, which have with like
magnaunimitie put in danger their life, to save their Prince, kingdom, and
country. Great honor was given of the Athemans, to soche noble and valiaunte
men, which ventered their lives for their common wealth, The order of Athenes.
to maintain the florishyng state thereof. The eloquente and copious oracion
of Thusidides, the true, faithful, and eloquente Historiographer does show:
what honor and immortal Thusidides.
fame was attributed, to all soche as did venture their lives, in the florishyng
state of their country, in supportyng, mainteinyng, and defendyng the same.
Who, although they lost their lives, which by death should be dissolved,
their fame never buried, lives with the soul to immortality, the loss of
their Private wealth, glory, riches, substance, or dignity, has purchased
and obtained fame, that withers not, and glory that fails not.

Agreyng and comely.
Both the true Histories, do leave in commendacion, the fact of Zopyrus, and
the noble and worthy enterprises of other: which have given the like assaie,
and their fame is celebrated and titeled with immortal commendacion and
glory, to the posterity of all ages followyng. What heart can be so stony,
or brutishly The duty of all good subjects,
affected, that will not venture his life, goods, lands, or possessions: if
with the danger of one, that is of himself, the whole body and state of his
country, is thereby supported, and saved. What security and quietness
remained, what wealth, honor, or fame to Zopyrus: if not only Zopyrus had
perished, but the king and people universally had been destroyed. Thereupon
Zopyrus weighing and co^sideryng, the state of his birthe, that his country
challenged his life, rather then the dissolucion of the whole kingdom, the
decaie of the The cause of our birthe.
Prince, the taking away of the scepter, the slaughter of infinite people to
ensue. He was borne to be a profitable member to his country, a glory and
stay to the same: and not sparyng his life, or shunnyng the great deformity
of his body, to be a ruin of the same. Was it not better that one perished,
then by the security of one, a whole land over runned, as parts thereby
spoiled: it was the duty of Zopirus, to take upon him that great and famous
enterprise. It was also comely, the kingdom standing in peril, a sage and
descrite person to preuente and put of, soche a danger at hand: The faicte
altogether shows all virtue and great The fact of Zopyrus.
singularity, and a rare moderacion of mind, to cast of all respects and
excuses, forsakyng presently honor, quietness and obiecting himself to
peril, he saw if he only died, or by ieopardie saved his country, many
thereby lived, the kingdom and people flourished, where otherwise, he with his
Prince and kingdom might have perished.

Proffitable.
ALL the power of the Babilonians, was by his policy The fact of Zopyrus.
thrown down, the City taken, the enemy brought to confusion: on the other
side, the Persians rose mighty, soche a mighty enemy put under foot. The
fame of Zopryus and glory of the fact, will never be obliterated, or put out
of memory, if this were not profitable to the kingdom of Persia: if this were
not a renoume to the prince and people, and immortal glory to Zopryus iudgeye.
Zopyrus therefore, beautified his country, by Zopyrus deformed, a beauty of
his country.
the deformity of his body. Better it were to have many soche deformed bodies,
then the whole state of the realm destroyed or brought to naught: if we weigh
the magnanimity of that man, and his enterprise, there is so much honor in
the fact, that his fame shall never cease.

A common place.
A Common place is a Oracion, dilatyng and amplifiyng Why it is called a common
place.
good or evil, which is incidente or lodged in any man. This Oracion is
called A common place, because the matter contained in it, does agree
universally to all men, which are partakers of it, and guilty of the same

A Oracion framed against a certain Thief, Ertorcioner, Murderer, or Traitor,
is for the matter contained in it, metelie and aptly compiled, against all
soche as are guilty of theft, murder, treason, or spotted with any other
wickedness.

This oracion of a common place, is like to the last argument or Epilogus of
any oracion, which the Greeks do call Deuterologian, which is as much to
say, as a rehearsal of that which is spoken of before.

Wherefore, a common place has no exhordium, or beginning, yet nevertheless,
for the profit and exercise of the learner, you may place soche a proemium,
or beginning of the oracion, as may be easy to induce the learner.

This part of Rhetorike is large to entreat upon, for the abundance of
matter.

This part of Rhetorike is large to entreat upon, for the abundance of
matter.

The common place, which Aphthonius entreats of, is to be aplied against any
man, for the declaimor to invade, either against vices, or to extol and
amplify his virtues.

This oracion of a common place, serves both for the accuser and the defender.

For the accuser, to exasperate and move the Judges or hearers, against the
offender, or accused.

For the defendour to reply, and with all force and strength of matter, to
mollify and appease the perturbacions of the Judges and hearers, to pulle
down and deface the contrary alleged.

There is great force in this oracion, on both the sides.

Properly this kind of Rhetorike, is called a common place, though it seems
to be made against this man, or that man: because the matter of the same shall
properly pertain to all, guilty of the same matter.

Pristianus shows, that this part of Rhetorike, is as it Pristianus.
were a certain exaggeracion of reason, to induce a manifest probacion of any
thing committed.

As for example, a Theife taken in a robbery, in whom neither shamefastness,
nor sparcle of grace appears against soche a one: this oracion may be made,
to exasperate the Judges from all favor or affeccion of pity, to be showed.

The order of this Oracion follows with these notes to be made by.
The first Proheme.*
DEmosthenes the famous Orator of Athenes in his oracio^ made against
Aristogito^ does say, that Laws wherewith a common wealth, city what are
Laws.
or Region is governed, are the gift of God, a profitable Discipline among
men, a restraint to with hold and keep back, the wilful, rash, and
beastilie life of man, and thereupon Aristotle and Plato do show, that
Aristotle. Plato.
through the wicked behauour of men, good laws were first ordained, for, of
ill manners, say they, rose good laws, where laws do cease, and good order
fails, there the life of man Order.
will grow, rude, wild and beestlie: Man being a chief creature Man borne by
nature to societee.
or God, endued with many singular virtues, is framed of nature to a mutual
and Godly society of life, without the which most horrible would the life
be, for not only by concord and agremente, the life of man does consiste
but al things on the earth have therein their being: the heavens and l^ghtes
contained in the same, have a perpetual harmony and concente in finishyng
their appointed race. The elements of the world, where with the nature and
substance of all All things being on the earth, do consiste by a harmony
or concord.
things, do consiste only by a harmony and temperature of each part, have
their abidyng increase and prosperous being, otherwise their substance,
perishes and nature in all parts decaieth: Kingdoms and common wealths do
consiste in a harmony, so long as virtue and all singularity tempereth their
state and gouernemente, and each member thereof obeieth his function, office
and calling, and as parts of the same body, every one as nature has
ordained them occupiyng, their room and place, the use of every part, all
to the use and preseruacion of the hole body, and as in the body so in the
common wealth, the like concord of life ought to be in every part, the most
principal part according to his dignity of office, as most principal to
govern the other inferior parts: and it they as parts most principal of
the same body with all moderacion and equabilitie te^peryng their state, office
and calling. The meanest part according to his low Order conserueth common
wealth.
state, appliyng himself to obeie and serve the most principal: wherein the
perfect and absolute, frame of common wealth or kingdom is erected. And
seeing that as the Philosophers do say, of ill manners came good laws, that is
to say, the wicked and beastly life of man, their iniurius behavior, sekyng
to frame themselves from men to beasts moved Evil manners was theoccasion of
good Laws.
the wise and Godly, elders to ordain certain means, to rote discipline,
whereby the wickedlie disposed person should be compelled to live in order,
to obeie Godly laws, to the vpholdyng of society. Therefore, all such as
dissolve laws, cast down good order, and state of common wealth, out as
putride and unprofitable weeds, to be extirpated and plucked up from City and
Common wealth, from society, who by mischeuous attemptes seek, to extinguishe
society, anntie, and concord in life. Princes and governors with all other
magistrates ought in their government to imitate the practice of the Phisician,
the nature of man, wekedned and made feeble with to much abundaunce of ill
humors, or ouermoch with ill blood replenished, to purge and euacuate that,
and all to the preseruacion and health of the whole body: for so was the
meaning of the Philosopher, intreatyng of the politic, government of kingdom
and commonwealth, when they compared a kingdom to the body of man: the thief
and robber as a evil and unprofitable member, and all other as without all
right, order, law, equity and justice, do break Theiues not mete to be in
any society.
society of life, be the against law and nature: possessing the goods of a
other man, are to be cut of, as no parts, meet to remain in any society.

The second Proheme.
THe chifest cause that moved governors and magistrates, Why theiues and
wicked men, are cut of by law.
to cut of the race of thieves, and viole^te robbers, and of all other
mischeuous persons, was that by them a confusion would ensue in all states. What
City could stand in prosperous state, yea, or what house priuatlie inhabited,
where laws and aucthoritee were exiled: where violence, will, lust, and
appetite of pestiferous men, might without terror be practiced. If the labor
and industry of the godly, should be alwaie a pray to ye wicked, and each
man's violence and injurious dealyng, his own law, the beast in his state,
would be less brutishe and injurious. Who so seeks to cast down this
societee, he is not meet to be of any societee, which he dissolueth. Who so
robs or steals, to live by the gooddes of an other manne, as his
possession, is by violence and against Nature: so by violence and against
nature, their pestiferous doings do frame A due rewards for thieues and
murderers.
their confusion: their execrable and desietable purpose, do make them a
outcaste from all good people, and as no members thereof, cut of from all
societee, their evil life r^^^th perpetual ignomie and shame. And (...) the
tragical end of their enterprise.

The contrary.
HErein the lose and dissolute state of governments called of the Greeks
Democratia, have contented the wilful heddes of pestiferous men: wherein
Democratia.
every man must be a ruler. Their own will is their Law: there lust sets
order, no Magistrate, but every one to himself a Magistrate. All things in
common, as long as that state does remain among the wicked, a most happy
state coumpted, a wished state to idell persons, but it continues not. Herein
the murderer, the thief were meet The thief. The murderer:
to be placed. The greater thief, the better manner the most execrable
murderer, a most mete person, for soche state of gouernemente. There is no
nation under the Sun, but that one time or other, this troublous state has
molested them: and many have sought to set up soche a monsterous state of
regiment, a plagued common wealth, and to be detested. Soche was the order of
men, when they lived without laws. When the whole multitude were scattered, no
city, Town, or house builded or inhabited, but through beastly manners,
beastly dispersed, lived wild and beastly. But the wise, sage, and politic
heddes reduced by wisdom, into a society of life, nature leadyng thereto:
Houses and hab^tacions, Houses. Families. Tounes. Citees.
were then for necessitte made, families multiplied, villages and Taunes
populoustie increased, and Citees raised among so infinite people. Nature by
God invented and stablished Law, and the sage and wise persons, pronounced
and gave sentence upon Laws. Whereupon, by the obedience of laws, and
preeminente authority of Magistrates. The state of mighty kingdoms and
Common wealths, have grown to soche a roialnesse and lofty state, many
famous kingdoms have been on the face of the earth: many noble Princes from
time to time succedyng, which without a order of godly laws, could not have
continued. What Obedience of Laws did stablishe the mighty monarchies.
was the cause that the mighty Monarchies, continued many hundred years: did
the loss and dissolute life of subjects and Princes, cause the same but good
laws, and obedience to orders. Therefore, where Magistrates, both in life and
office, live in the obedience of Laws: the multitude inferior, by The life of
the Magistrate, a law
example of the Magistrates singularity, incensed do place before them,
their example of life, as a strong law.

Theodosius Emperor of Rome, writing to Volufianus The Epistle of Theodosiu^s
Emperor of Rome
his chief Praetor, as concerning his office, in these words, says: Digna
vox est maiestate regnantis legibus alligatum se principem profiteri. Adeo de
autoritate Iuris nostra pendet autoritas et reuera maius imperio est submittere
legibus principatum and oraculo presentis edicti quod nobis licere non patimur
alijs indicamus. It is a worthy saying, and meet for the Majesty of a
Prince, to acknowledge himself under his law. For, our authority, power, and
sword, does depend upon the force, might, and authority of Laws, and it
passes all power and authority, his gouernemente and kingdom to be tempered
by law, as a most inviolable Oracle and decree, so to do as we prouulgate to
other. Whereupon it is manifest, what force godly laws gave to the Prince,
what authority. Take laws away, all order of states fails, the Prince by
Law, is a terror to the malefactor: his Princes Law.
Majesty is with all humbleness served, feared, and obeyed. By laws, his
state makes him as a God, among men, at whose hands the preseruacion of
each one, of house, city and country is sought. Seeing both laws and the
Prince, have that honor and strength, that without them, a Chaos a confusion
would follow, in the body of all common wealths and kingdoms. Let them by
authority and law be confounded, that practice to subuerte authority, to
neclecte the Prince, and his godly laws.

The exposition.
THe theife, or any other injurious persons, does seek Theiues and all
injurious persons.
to be above all laws, exempted from all order, under no obedience, their
pestiferous dealyng, do utter the same: For, as Demosthenes the famous Orator
of Athenes Demosthenes in Aristogiton.
does say. If that wicked men cease not their violence if that good men in
all quietness, and security, can not enioys their own gods, while law and
authority of the magistrate, severely and sharply uses his authority and
sword. If daily the heddes of wicked men, cease not to subuerte laws, orders,
and decrees godly appoincted. Whiles that in all Citees and common wealths,
the Princes and governors, are by laws a terror to them. Laws then ceasyng,
The force of laws.
the dreadful sentence of the Judge and Magistrate wanting. The sword
vndrawen, all order confounded, what a confusion would follow: yea, what an
open passage would be left open to all wickedness. The terror of Laws, the
sword and authority of the Magestrate, depresseth and puts down, the
bloody cogitacions of the wicked, and so hinders and cutteth of, many
horrible and bloody enterprises. Else there would be neither Prince, Law, nor
subjects, no hedde or Magistrate: but every manne his own hedde, his own law
and Magistrate, oppression and violence should be law, and reason, and
wilful lust would be in place of reason, might, force, and power, should
end the case. Wherefore, soche as no law, no order, nor reason, will drive lo
live as members in a common wealth, to serve in their function. They are as
Homere calls them, burdeins to the earth, wicked men burdeins of the earth.
for they are of no society linked with Nature, who through wickedness are
disseuered, abhorryng concord of life, society and fellowship. Whom sinister
and bitter storms of fortune, do daiely vex and moleste, who in the defense
of their country are masmed, and thereby their art and science, for,
imbecilitie not practiced, all art otherwise wantyng, extreme Maimed soldiers
must be provided for.
pouertee falling on them, reason must move, and induce all hearts, to pitee
chiefly their state: who in defense and mainteinaunce of our Country, Prince,
and to the vpholdyng of our private wealth at home, are become debilitated,
deformed and maimed, else their miseries will drive them to soche hedlesse
adventures, that it may be said, as it was said to Alexander the Great.
Thy wartes, O Prince, makes many The saying of a should our to Alexander the
great.
thieves, and peace will one day hang them up. Wherein the Grecians, as
Thusidides notes, had a careful providence, for all soche as in the defense
of their Country were maimed, yea, even for their wives, and children of all
soche, as died in war, to be maintained of the common charge and threasure of
Greece. Read his Oracion in the second book, niade upon the funeral of the
dedde soldiers.

A comparison of vices.
THe dronkarde in his state is beastly, the proud The dru^kard The proud
person. The prodigal The coueites: is. The robber.
and arrogante person odious, the riotous and prodigal person to be
contempned, the coueitous and nigardlie manne to be reietted. But who so by
violence, takes a way the goods of an other man, or by any subtle means,
iniustlie possesses the same, is detestable, with all seueritee to be
punished. The adulterer and the harlotte, who by brutishe behavior, leude
affection, not godliness leadyng thereto: who by their unchaste The adulterer.
The hariot.
behauior, and wanton life do pollute, and co^taminate their body, in whom a
pure muide ought to be reposed. Who therowe beastly affection, are by evil
manners transformed to beasts: and as much as in them lies, multipliyng a
brutishe society. The homicide in his state more horrible, according The
homicide.
to his outrageous and bloody life, is to be tormented, in like sort all
other vices, according to their mischiues, reason, Law and Justice, must
temper and aggrauate due reward, and sentence to them.

The sentence.
NO vice was more grievous, and horrible among the Scithians then theft, for
this was their saying: Theft horrible among the Scitheans.
Quid (...) potent silicet furarl, what can be safe, if theft be ^e^ull or
tolerated. Herein the vniuersalle societee of ^^^ is cast down, hereby a
confusion A sentence agenst theft.
grows, and a subversion in all states immediately follows, equitee,
justice, and all sincere dealyng is (...), violence extirpateth virtue, and
authority is (...) of.

The digression.
THe fact in other may be with more facility tolerated, in that to them
selves, the fact and conversation of life is most per^^^^^us, and h^rtfull,
but by so he kind of nature, whole kingdoms and common wealths would be
(...) for a prosperous state and common wealth, a common woe and calamitee
would fall on them, tumultes and vprores maintained, right and law exiled:
neither in field quitnes, wealth Horrible vices.
or riches, houses spoiled, families extinguished, in all places sedicion,
war for peace, violence for right, will and ^^st for law, a hedlesse order
in all states. And as concerning Usurers though their (...) be never so ample,
and plentiful Vserers.
to enriche them, whereby they grow to be lords, over many thousands of
pounds: yet the wealth gotten by it is so injurious, that they are a great
plague, to all parts of the common wealth: so many dangers and mischiues,
rises of the^ Cato the noble and wise (...) of Rome, being demanded diverse
questions, what was first to be sought, in a family The sentence of Cato
against usurers. Usure is ^^^ther.
or household, the aunsweres not likyng the demaunder: this question was ashed,
O Cato, what senfe^ce give you of Usury, that is a goodly matter to be
enriched by. Then Cato answered in few words. Quid hominem occidere. What
say you to be a murderer? Soche a thing faieth he, is Usury. A brief sentence
against Usurers, but wittely pronounced from the mouth of a godly, sage,
noble, and descrite person, which sentence let the Usurer, ioigne to his
Usure returned, and repeat at the return thereof, this sentence of Cato, I
have murdered. This one sentence will discourage any Usurer, knowing himself a
murderer. Though The sentence of Cato a discomfort (...).
much more may be spoken against it, this shall be sufficient. The Hebrews
calls Usury, by the name of Shecke, that is a bityng gain, of the which
many have been so bitten, that whole families have been devoured, and beggerie
have been their gain. And as Palingenius notes.

Debtor aufugiens portat cum faenore sortem. The debtour often times says
he, runs away, and carries with him, the debte and gains of the Usury.
The Greeks calls Usury Tokos, that is properly the travail of women of
their child: soche is their Usury, a dangerous gettyng. Demosthenes likeneth
their state as thus, as if terrestrial things should be above the stars:
and the heavens and celestialle bodies, governed by the base and low
terrestrial matters, which by no means, can conserve the excellency Usure a
dangerous gave.
of them, for, of them only, is their matter, substance and nature conserved.

Exclusion of mercy.
WHerefore, to whom regimente and gouernemente is committed, on whose
administracion, the frame of the common wealth do stay it self: they ought
with all wisdom and moderacion, to proceed in soche causes, whose office in
worthiness of state, and dignity, makes the^ as Gods on the earth, at
whose mouths for wisdom, counsel, and fortunate Princes and magistrates be
as Gods on the earth.
state, infinite people do depend. It is no small thing in that their sword
and aucthoritee, does set or determine all things, that tendereth a
prosperous state, whereupon with all integritee and equitee; they ought to
temper the affeccions of their mind: and according to the horrible fact, and
mischiues of the wicked, to exasperate and agrauate their terrible judgment,
and to extirpate from the earth, soche as be of no society in life. The
(...), the thief, the adulterer, for by these all virtue (...) out, all godly
society The (...)* The Theue. The Adulteror.
extinguished, cit^^^, r^al^es, and c^untries, prostrate and plagued for the
tolera^ion of their (...) against such ^ren^^hip in judgment must cease, and
according to the state of the cause, equitee to retain friendship, money must
not blind, nor rewards to force and temper Judgments: but according to the
verit^^ of the cause, to add a conclusion. Worthelie the pictures of Princes,
Governors and Magistrates Whey the pictures of magistrates be picturid with
out hands.
in ancient times do show this, where the antiquitee makes them without
hands, therein it shows their office, and judgment to proceade with
equitee, rewards not to blind, or suppress the sincerity of the cause.
Magistrates not to be bound to gifts, not rewards to rule their sentence.
Alciatus in his book called Emblemata, in senatu^ sancti principis.

Effigies manibus trunce ante altaria di^^^e
Hic resident, quarum himine capta prior
Signa potestatis fumme, sanctique senatus, Princes and magistrates, grave and
^^^stante.

Thebanis fuerant ista reperta viris.
Cur resident? Quia mente graves decet esse quieta
Iuridicos, animo nec variare leui.
Cur sine sunt manibus? Capiant ne xenia, nec se
Pollicitis flecti muneribus ve smant.
Cecus est princeps quod solis auribus, absque
Affectu constans iussa senatus agit.
Where virtue and integrity shows it self, in the person and cause, to
uphold and maintain the same. Root out horrible vices from common wealth,
that the more surer and strong foundation of virtue may be laid: for, that
only cause, the scepter of kings, the ^^^ice of magistrates was left to the
posteritee of all^ges.

Lawful and just.
Seeing that laws be godly, and universally they Laws give equitee to all
states.
temper equitee to all states, and give according to justice, every man his
own: he (...) virtue, that dispos^^^e than other manne of his own; and (...)
Justice. And thereupon his beastly life What briueth ye magistrate to horrible
sentence against wicked persons.
by (...) forces and drives, law and Magistrate, to terrible judgment. For,
who so against right, without order, or law, violateth an other man, soche a
one, laws of justice, must punish violently, and extirpate from societee,
being a (...) of societee.

Profitable.
IF soche wicked persons be restrained; and severely punished, horrible vices
will be rooted out: all arts sciences, and godly occunacions maintained,
vpholded and kept. Then there must be a securitee in all states, to practice
godliness, a mutual concord. The Magistrate with Magistrate.
equitee, the subject with faithful and humble obedience, accomplishyng
Subject.
his state, office, and calling. Whereupon by good Magistrates, and good
subjects, the common wealth and kingdom is in happy state stablished, For,
in these two poinctes, as Plato does say, there is virtuous rule, and like
obedience.

Easy and possible.
ALL this may easily be done; when wickedness is cut of, in his first
grows, when the magistrate drives continually, by sword and authoritee, all
men to obedience, both of laws and gouernuurs. Then in all good common
wealths, vices are never tolerated to take root: because The beginning of
vice is to be cutaf.
the beginning and increase of vices, is sone pulled up, his monsterous
kingdom thereby overthrown.

The conclusion.
SO doing, happy shall the king be, happy kingdom, and most fortunate
people.

The part of Rhetorike called praise.
^His Oracion, which is (...) praise, is a declamacio^ of the virtuous or good
qualitees, properties belongyng to any thing, which d^^th proceed by certain
notes of a^te.

All things that may be see^^ with the iye of (...), touched, or with any
other sen^^ appr^hend^d* that may be praised, or dispraised.

(...). (...). F^^^e. Bea^^^. Orthardes Stones. Trees. (...). (...). (...)
(...). Ca^^^^^. T^^^^^. ^a^d^ins. (...). Arts. Sci^nc^^.
Any virtue may be praised, as wisdom, righteousness fortitude, magnanimity,
temperaunce, liberalitee, with all other.

These are to be celebrated with praise.

The person, as Julius Caesar, Octauius Augu^^^^, Hiere^^le, Tullie, Cato,
Demosthenes.

Things, as righteousness, temperaunce.

Times, as the Spring time of the year, Summer, Harvest, Winter.

Places, as Havens, Orthardes, Gardens, Toures, Castles, Temples, I^^andes.

Beasts wantyng reason, as Horse, Sheep, Oxen (...).

In the praise of virtue, this may be said

THe excellencies of it, the antiquit^e and originalls beginning (...) any
region by it, as no (...) without virtues and to extol the same, in making a
comparison, with other gifts of nature, or with other gifts of fortune, more
inferior or base.

Upon a city, praise may be recited, considering the goodly situacion of it,
as of Paris, Venice, London, York: considering Wherein the praise of a city
consists
the (...) of the land, the wealth and abundance, the noble and famous
governors, which have governed the same. The first aucthors and builders of
the same, the politic laws, and godly statutes therein maintained: The
felicitee of the people their manners, their val^aunt prowes and hardines. The
buildyng and ornatures of the same, with Castles, Toures, Havens: Floodes,
Temples: as if a man would celebrate with praise. The old, famous, and
aunciente City of London, showing the ancient buildyng The praise of London.
of the same: the coming of Brutus, who was the first aucthor and erector of
the same. As Romulus was of the mighty Brutus builded London in the. ^. year
of his rain,
City Rome, what kings have from time to time, lineally descended, and
succeeded, bearing croune and scepter therein: the valiauntnes of the people,
what terror they have been to all foreign nations. What victories they have in
battle obtained, how diverse nations have sought their amitee and league. The
false Scotts, and French men truce breakers: France and Scotland vpholdid
by ye governors of this land.
many and sonderie times, losyng their honor in the field, and yet they,
through the puissaunt heart of the kings of this land, vpholdyd and saved,
from the might and force of other enemies inuadyng them. The two famous
Vniuersitees of this land, from the which, no small number of Cambridge.
Oxforde.
great learned men and famous, have in the common wealth sprung, with all
other things to it.

The praise of a King, Prince, Duke, Earl, Lord, Baron, Squire, or of any
other man be may declaimed of observing the order of this part of Rhetorike.

This part of Rhetorike called praise, is either a particular praise of one,
as of king Henry the ^^^te, Plato, Tullie, Demosthenes, Cyrus, (...), Alexander
the great.

Or a generalle and vniuersalle praise, as the praise of all the Britains: or
of all the cit^^^in^ of London.

The order to make this Oracion, (...).
First, for the enteryng of the matter, you shall place a exordium, or
beginning.

The second place, you shall bring to his praise. Genuseius, that is to faie:
Of what kind be came of, which does consiste in four poinctes.

Of what nation. Of what country. Of what a^^cetours. Of what parents.
After that you shall declare, his educacion: the educacion is contained in
three poinctes. In

Institucion. Art. Laws.
Then put there to that, which is the chief gr^^^de of al praise: his acts
done, which do proceed out of the gifts, and excellencies of the mind, as
the fortitude of the mind, wisdom, and magnanimitee.

Of the body, as a beautiful face, amiable countenance swiftness, the might
and strength of the same.

The excellencies of fortune, as his dignitee, power, authority, riches,
substance, friends.

In the fifte place use a comparison, wherein that which you praise, may be
advanced to the vttermoste.

Lasts of all, use the Epilogus, or conclusion.

The example of the Oracion.
The praise of Epaminundas.
IN whom nature has powered singular gifts, in whom virtue, and singularitee,
in (...) enterprises abounds: whose glory and renown, (...) to the (...),
immortal (...). ^n the gra^e, their virtues and godly life, tastes not of
Oblivion, which at the length ouershroweth Oblivion.
all creatures, Citees, and regions. They live only in all ages, whose
virtues spreads same and noble enterprises, by virtue rooteth immortalitee.
Who so lives as that his good fame after death cease not, nor death with the
body Who live in all ages.
rutteth of their memory of use: Soche not only in life, but also in death
are most fortunate. In death all honor, dignitee, glory, wealth, riches, are
taken from us: The fame and glory of singular life is then, chiefly taking
his hold Good fame chiefly routeth after death.

Tuilie.

Demostheues.

Julius Caesar.

Ocrauius Augustus.

Vespasianus Theodosius.

Traianus. Adrranus.


and root, wise men and godly, in life, known famous, after death, remain
woste worthy and glorious. Who knows not of Tullie, the famous Orator of
Rome. Does Demosthenes lies hidden, that noble Orator of Athenes. Is not yt
fame of Julius Caesar, Octauius Augustus remainyng of Vespasianus: of
Theodosius, of Traianus, of Adrianus, who by praise minded, be left to the end
of al ages. Soche a one was this Epaminundas, the famous Duke of Thebe, whose
virtues gane him honor in life, and famous enterprises, immortalitee of fame
after death. What can be said more, in the praise and commendacion, of any
peer of estate, then was said in the praise of Epaminundas, for his virtues
were so singular, that it was doubted, he being so good a man, and so good a
Magistrate, whether he were better manne, or better Magistrate: whose virtues
were so united, that virtue always tempered his enterprises, his lofty state
as fortune oftentimes blinds, did not make him unmindful of his state. No
doubt, but that in all common wealths, famous governors have been, but in all
those, the most part have not been soche, that all so good men, and so good
magistrates: that it is doubted, whether they (...), or better magistrates. It
is a rare thing to be (...), Good man, good magistrate, boothe a good man and a
good magistrate.
but a more difficult matter, to be a good Magistrate: and most of all, to be
both a good man, and a good Magistrate. Honor and preeminent state; does
(...), whereupon they ought the more (...) to wade^ in all causes, and with all
moderacion, to temper their preeminent state. The Philosophers ponderyng the
brickle and slippere state of fortune, did pronunce this sentence: Difficilius
The saiynge of the Philosophers.
est res aduersas pati, quam fortunam eslantem far, it is more easy to bear
sharp and extreme poverty, then to rule and moderate fortune, because that
the wisest men of all have as Chronicles do show, felt this oblivion, that
their manners have been so changed, as that natures molde in the^ Oblivion.
had been altered or nuelie framed, in the life of Epaminu^das moderacion and
virtue, so governed his state, that he was a honor and renown to his state,
nothing can be more ample in his praise, then that which is left Chronicled of
him.

Of his country.
EPaminundas was borne in Thebe a famous city in Beotia, the which Cadmus the
son of Agenor builded, Cadmus.
which Amphion did close and enuiron with walls, Amphion.
in the which the mighty and valiant Hercules was Hercules.
borne, and many noble Princes held therein scepter, the which City is
tituled famous to the posterity by the noble government of Epaminundas.

Of his auncetours.
EPaminundas came not of any high nobility or blood, but his parents were
honest and verteous who as it seemed were very well affected to virtue,
instructyng their soonne in all singular and good qualities, for by good and
virtuous life and famous enterprises from a mean state, many have been
extolled to bear scepter, or to attain great honor, for as there is a
beginning of nobility, so there is an end, by virtue and famous Nobility rose
by virtue.
acts toward the common wealth, nobilite first rose. The stock of Caesar and
Cesars was exalted from a meaner state, Caesar. Scipio.
by virtue only to nobility. Scipios stock was not alwais noble, but his
virtues graffed nobility to the posterity of his line and ofspryng
followynge. And even so as their famous enterprices excelled, nobilite in them
also increased. Catilina wicked, was of a noble house, but he degenerated
Catilina.
from the nobility of his ancestors, the virtues that graffed nobility in
his ancestors, were first ertinguished in Catiline. Marcus Antonius was a
noble Emperor, a Prince Marcus Antonius.
endued with all wisdom and Godly government, who was of a noble pare^tage,
it what a wicked son succeeded him, the father was not so godly, wise, and
virtuous, as Commodus Commodus.
was wickedlie disposed and pestiferous. There was no virtue or excellence,
meet for such a personage, but that Marcus attained to. Who for wisdom was
called Marcus Philosophus, in his son what vice was the^ that he practiced
not, belie chier, druncknes and harlottes, was his delight, his cruelty and
bluddie life was such that he murdered all the godly and wise Senators, had
in price with Marcus his father. Seuerus in like manner, was a noble and famous
Seuerus.
Emperor, in the Senate most grave, politic, and in his wars most
fortunate, but in his son Marcus Antoninus Marcus Antonius Caracalla.
Caracalla, what wickedness wanted, whose beastly life is rather to be put in
silence, then spoken of. In the assemble of the Grecians, gathered to consulte
upon the contencion of Achilles armor, Ajax gloriously aduaunceth himself of
his auncestrie, from many kings descended, whom Ulysses his Ajax. Ulysses.
adversary answered: making a long and eloquente Oracion, before the noble
peers of Greece, concerning Ajax his auncetours. These are his words.

Nam genus et proauos et que non fecimus ipsi,
Vix ea nostra voco, sed enim quia retulit Ajax,
esse louis pronepos.
As for our parentage, and line of auncetours, long before us, and noble acts
of theirs: as we our selves have not done the like, how can we call, and title
their acts to be ours. Let them therefore, which have descended from noble
blood, and famous auncetours: be like affected to all nobilitee of their
auncetours, what can they glory in the nobilitee of their auncetours. Well,
their auncetours have laid the foundation, and renoume of nobilitee to their
ofspryng. What nobilitee Nobilitee.
is found in them, when they build nothing, to their auncetours work of
nobilitee. Even as their auncetours, nobly endeavored them selves, to purchase
and obtain, by famous acts their nobilitee) for, nobilitee and virtue,
descends always to the like) so they contrary retire and give back, from
all the nobiliee of their ancestors, where as they ought, with like nobilitee
to imitate them. Many have been, which through their wisdom, and famous
enterprises, in the affairs A beginning of nobilitee,
of their Prince, worthche to honor have been extolled and advanced: who also
were the first aucthours and founders of nobiliee, to their name and offspring.
Whose offspring endued with like nobilitee of virtues, and noble acts have
increased their ancestors glory: the children or offspring lineally
descendyng, having no part of the ancestors glory, how can they vaunte them
selves of nobiliee, which they lack, and do nothing possess thereof, Even
from low birthe and degree. Galerius Armentarius was advanced, even from a
Shepherdes son, to sit in the Imperial seat of Room. Galerius Maximinus
whom all the East obaied, Galerius a Shepherds, son Emperor of Rome. Probus
a Gardeiners son, Emperor.
his virtues and noble acts huffed him to bear scepter in the Empire of Room.
Probus a Gardiners soonne, to the like throne and glory ascended, so God
disposes the state of every man, placyng and bestowing dignitee, where it
pleases him as he sets up, so he pulls down, his providence and might is
bound to no state, stock, or kindred.

Of his educacion.
EPaminu^das being borne of soche parents, was brought up in all excellent
learning, for, under him Philippe the king of the Macedonians, the soonne of
Amyntas, was brought up. This Epaminundas, the Histories note him to be a chief
Philosopher, and a captain most valiaunte. In Music, in plaiyng, and
singyng finely to his Instrumente, notable and famous, no kind of learning,
art, or science, wanted in his breaste: So great and aboundante were his
virtues, that above all governors, which have been in Thebe, his name and
fame is chiefly advanced.

The praise of his acts.
EPaminundas being most valiaunte and noble, leaving all private commoditee,
glory, and The duty of good governors.
riches a side: sought the renoume of his country, as all rulers and
governors ought to do. For, a kingdom or common wealth, can not rise to any
high nobilitee or Roialnesse, where governors, rulers, and magistrates,
neclecting the universal, and whole Now a kingdom rises to all felicity.
body of the common wealth, do cogitate and vigilantly endeavor themselves,
to stablish to them and theirs, a private, peculiar, and domestical profit,
glory, or renoume. Coueiteousnes, which is in all ambicious Magistrates the
poison, plague, destruction, and ruin of the best and flourishing common
wealths, of al wickedness and mischief the root: a vice, whereupon all vice is
grounded, from whom all mischief Covetousness a great evil.
flows, all execrable purposes issues. That wanted in Epaminundas, for in
the end of his life, his coffers were so thin and poor, that even to his
Funeral, money wanted to solempnise the same. Private glory nor excess, was
hunted after of him, yet his virtues were of soche excellency, that honor,
dignitee, and prceminent state, was offered and given to him unwillingly. This
Epaminundas was in government so famous, and so virtuously and politikelie
ruled the same, that he was a glory, renoume, honor, and felicitee to his
kingdom, by his state. Before the time of Epaminundas, the country of Beotia
was nothing so famous Beotia.
in their enterprises: neither the city of Thebe so royal, puissaunt Thebes.
or noble, the antiquitee of that time shows, that Epaminundas wantyng the
power of Thebes, their glory, strength, and felicitee fell and decayed. The
learning of Epaminundas and knowledge, was so abundant and profounde both in
Philosophy, and in all other arts and sciences, that it was wounderfull. In
chivalry and in feats of war, no peer was more courageous and bold, or
hardy, neither in that, which he enterprised, any could be of greater
counsel in hedde more pollitike, of mind more sage and witty: his
government so good, that being so good a Magistrate, it is doubted, whether he
be better man, or better Magistrate, Epaminundas died in the defense of his
country. The Athenians were enemies to the Thebanes, and many great battles
were assaied of them and foughten: and often times the Athenians felt many
bitter storms, and fortune loured of them, he being so valiant a capitain.
Epaminundas being dedde, the Athenians ceased to practice, any one part of
chivalry, their prowess and dexteritee decaided: they having no aliaunte, and
foreign enemy to moleste them, or whom they feared. So that a famous, wise,
pollitike, and valiaunte captain, is not only a stay, a pillar and strong
bulwark A valiant capitain, to his country a pillar to his ^^^mie, a occasion
to dexterity.
to his country. But also foreign nations, having one, who^ for his
valiauntnes they dread, do practice and inure themselves, to all dexteritee,
counsel, wisdom, and policy: soche a one was Epaminundas, to his enemies
and country.

The comparison.
NEither Hector of Troie, nor Achilles of Greece, might be compared with
Epaminundas, Numa Pompilius Hector. Achilles. Numa Pompeius. Adrianus.
was not more godly, Adriane the Emperor of Room, no better learned, nor
Galba the Emperor more valiaunte, Nerua no more temperate, nor Traianus more
noble, neither Cocles nor Decius, Scipionor Marcus Regulus, did more valiauntly
in the defense of their country, soche a one was this Epaminundas.

The conclusion.
OF many things, these few are recited, but if his whole life and virtues,
were worthily handeled: few would believe, soche a rare governor, so virtuous a
Prince, so hardy and valiaunte a captain, to have remained in no age.

The part of Rhetorike, called dispraise.
THis part of Rhetorike, which is called dispraise, is a suuectiue Oracion,
made against the life of any man.

This part of Rhetorike, is contrary to that, which is before set, called
laus, that is to say, praise: and by contrary notes proceeds, for the Orator
or declaimer to entreat upon.

This part of Rhetorike, is called of the Greeks Psogos.

In praise, we extol the person: First by his country.

Then by his ancestors and parents.

In the third place, by his education and institucion.

Then in the fowerth place, of his acts in life.

In the fifte place use a comparison, comparyng the person with other, which
are more inferior.

Then the conclusion.

Now in dispraise, contrarily we do proceed.

First, in the dispraise of his country.

Of his auncetours and parents.

His educacion is dispraised.

Then his acts and deeds of life.

Also in your comparison with other, dispraise him.

Then in the last place, add the conclusion.

All things that may be praised, may be dispraised.

The dispraise of Nero.
AS virtue meriteth commendacion and immortal renoume, for the nobilitee and
excellency reposed in it: so ougle vices for the deformitee of Virtue.
them, are in mind to be abhorred and detested, and with all diligence,
counsel, and wisdom aucided. As pestiferous poison extinguisheth with his
corrupcion and nautinesse, the good and absolute nature of all Vice.
things: so vice for his pestiferous nature puts out virtue and rooteth out
with his force all singularitee. For, vice and virtue are so of nature
contrary, as fire and water, the violence of the one expels the other: for,
in the mansion of virtue, vice at one time harboreth not, neither virtue with
vice can be consociate or united, for, virtue is a singular mean, what is
virtue.
or Mediocrite in any good enterprise or fact, with order and reason finished.
Whose act in life, does repugne order and reason, disseuered from all
Mediocrite, soche do leave justice, equitee, wisdom, temperaunce, fortitude,
magnanimitee, and al other virtues, both of mind and body: only by virtues
life men show theimselues, as chief creatures of God, with reason, as a most
principal gift, beautified and decorated: In other gifts, man is far
inferior to beasts, both in strength of body, in celeritee and swiftness of
foot, in labor, in industry, in sense, nothing to be compared to beasts,
with beasts as a peculier and proper thing, we have our body of the earth:
but our mind, which for his diuinitee, passes all things immortal, makes
us as gods among other creatures. The body therefore, as a aliaunt and forain
enemy, being made of a most base, most vile and corruptible nature,
repugneth the mind. This is the cause, that wickedness takes soche a hedde,
and that the horrible fact and enterprise of the wicked burste out, in that,
reason exiled and removed from the mind, the ougle perturbacions of the mind,
have their regiment, power, and dominion: and where soche state of gouernemente
is in any one body, in private and domesticalle causes, in foreign and
public affairs, in kingdom and common wealth. Virtue fades and decaieth,
and vice only bears the swaie. Law is ordered by lust, and their order is
will, soche was the time and government of this wicked Nero.

Of his countres.
NEro was a Roman borne, though in government he was wicked, yet his
country was famous, and noble: for, the Romans were lords and heddes over
all the world. The vttermoste Indians, the Ethiopes, the Persians, feared the
majesty and aucthoritee of the Romans. From Romulus, who was the first
founder, and builder of that City: the Romans both had their name of him,
and grew afterward to marvelous puisaunt Rome.
roialnes. There was no nation under the Sun, but it dreaded their Majesty,
or felt their invincible hands: there has been many mighty kingdoms, on
the face of the earth, but no kingdom was able, with like success and
felicitee in their enterprise, or for like famous governors, and continuance of
their state, to compare with them. This was, and is, the last mightee
Monarchy in the world. Room a old aunciente city, inhabited first of the
Aborigines, which came from Troie. The providence of God, so disposes the
Carthage.
times and ages of the world, the state of kingdoms, by the fall of mightier
kingdoms, meaner grew to power and glory. The Carthagineans, contended by
prowes, and magnanimitee, to be lords over the Romans. Carthage was a
great, mighty, old, ancient and famous city, in the which valiaunte,
wise, and pollitike governors, held therein regiment, long wars was
sustained between the Romans and Carthagineans, among whom infinite people,
and many noble peers fell in the duste. Fortune and happy success fell to
the Romans: the people of Carthage vanquished, and prostrate to the ground.
Scipio the noble Consul, being at the destruction of it, seeing with his iye,
Carthage by fire brunte to ashes, said: Talis exitus aliquando erit Rome: eue^
as of Carthage, like shall the destruction of Rome be, as for Destruction of
Rome to ashes in tune.
continuance of the Roman state, of their glory, power, and worthy
success, no nation under the Sun, can compare with them: soche was the
state of Rome, wherein wicked Nero reigned.

Of his anncestours.
DOmitianus Nero, the son of Domitius Enobarbus, Agrippina was his mothers
name: this Agrippina, was Empress of Rome, wife to Claudius Tiberius, the
daughter of his brother Germanicus. This Agrippina, the Chronicle notes her,
to be endued with all mischief Agrippina.
and crucltee: For Tiberius her housbande, having by his first wife children,
they were murdered by her, because she might, they being murdered, with more
facilitee, further the Empire, to her soonnes hands, many treasons conspired
against them oftentimes, Agrippina poisoned her husband, then Nero succeeded.

Of his educacion.
SEneca the famous Poet and Philosopher, was scholemaister Seneca schol
master to Nero.
to Nero, who brought him up in all nobility of learning, mete for his state:
though that Nero was wickedlie of nature disposed, as his beastly government
shows, yet wickedness in him, was by the severity of Seneca, and his
castigacion depressed: for Traianus Emperor of Rome, would say, as concerning
Nero, for the space of five years, no Prince was like to him, for good
government, after five years, losely and dissolutly he governed.

Of his acts.
THis Nero, at what time as his mother was conceived The dream of Agrippina
mother to Nero, in his concepcion.
of him, she dreamed that she was conceived of a Viper: for, the young Viper
always kills his dame. He was not only a Viper to his mother whom he
killed, but also to his kingdom and common wealth a destroier, which
afterward shall be showed, what a tyraunte and bloody governor he was. This
Nero made in the City of Rome, the round seats and scaffoldes, to behold
Nero a viper
spectacles and sightes, and also the bathes. He subdued Pontus a great
country, which ioineth to the sea Pontuswhiche country contains these
realms, Colchis, Cappadocia, Armenia, and many other countrees, and made it as
a Province, by the suffraunce of Polemon Regulus, by whose Pontus. Colchis.
Cappadocia. Armenia.
name it was called Pontus Polemoniacus. He over came the Alps, of the king
Cott^us, ^ttius the king being dedde The life followyng of Nero was so
abominable, that the shame of his life, will make any man a fraied, to leave
any Nero unworthy to be chronicled.

Seneca*


memory of him. This Domitius Nero, caused his Scholemaister Seneca to be put
to death, Seneca chosing his own death, his veins being cut in a hot
bathe died, because he corrected wicked Nero, to train him to virtue. He was
outrageous wicked, that he had co^sideracion, neither to his own honesty, nor
to other, but in continuance, he tired himself as virgins do when they
marie, calling a Senate, the dourie assigned, and as the manner of that
solemnitee is, many resortyng and frequentyng, in maidens tire and apparel. He
went being a man, to be married as a woman: beside this, at The shamful life of
Nero.
other times he cladde himself with the skin of a wild beast, and beastly did
handle that, which Nature remoueth from the sight. He defiled himself with his
own mother, whom he killed immediately. He married two wives, Octauia, and
Sabina, otherwise called Poppea, first murtheryng their housbandes. In that
time Galba usurped the Empire, and Caius Julius: as soon as Nero heard that
Galba came nere Galba. Caius Julius.
toward Rome, even then the Senate of Rome had determined, that Nero should
be whipped to death with rods, according to the old usage of their
ancestors, his neck yoked with a forke. This wicked Nero, seeing himself
forsaken of all his friends, at midnight he departed out of the City, Ephaon,
and Epaphroditus waityng on him, Neophitus and Sporus his Eunuche: which
Sporus before time, had Nero assaied to frame and fashion out of kind. In the
end, Nero thruste himself through, with the poinct of his sword, his wicked
man Sporus, thrustyng foreward his trembling hand: this wicked Nero before
that, having none to murder The death of Nero.
him, he made a exclamacion, in these words. Is there neither friend nor
enemy to kill me, shamefullie have I lived, and with more shame shall (...),
in the.xxxij. year of his age he died. The Persians so atire ly loved him, that
after his death they sent Ambassidours, desiryng license to erecte to him a
monumente, all countrees and Provinces, and the whole City of Rome, did so
much rejoice of his death, that they all wearyng the Toppintant hattes, which
bond men do use to ware, when they be set at liberty, and so they
triumphed of his death, delivered from so cruel a tyraunte.

A comparison.
AS for wicked government, Nero does make Caligula like to Comodus,
Domitianus, Antoninus Nero. Caligula. Domitianus Antoninus.
Caracalla, they were all so wicked, that the Senate of Rome thought it meet,
to obliterate their name, from all memory and Chronicle, because of their
wickedness.

The conclusion.
Much more the life and government of wicked Nero, might be entreated of, but
this shall be sufficient: to show how tyrannically and beastly, he governed
unmeet of that throne.

A comparison.
A Comparison, is a certain Oracion, showing by a collacion the worthiness, or
excellency of any thing: or the naughtines of the same, compared with any
other thing or things, either equalle, or more inferior.

In a comparison good things, are compared with good as one virtue with an
other: as wisdom and strength, which of them most avails in peace and
war.

Evil things may be compared with good, as Justice, with injustice,
wisdom with foolishnes.

Evil things may be compared, with evil things, as wicked Nero, compared
to Domitianus, or Caligula to Co^modus, theft to homicide, drunkenes with
adultery.

Small things may be compared with great: the king with his subject, the
Elephant or Camel to the Fly, a Crocodile to the Scarabe.

In a comparison, where monumente is supputated on both the sides, worthetie
to praise, or dispraise.

Where a comparison is made, between a thing excellent, and a thing more
inferior: the comparison shall proceed with like facilitee.

All things that may be celebrated with praise, or that meriteth dispraise:
al soche things may be in a comparison.

The person, as Cato being a wise man, may be compared with Nestor, the sage
peer of Greece: Pompei with Caesar, as Lucane compares them, and so of all
other men.

Things may be compared, as gold with silver: one metal with an other.

Times may be compared, as the Spryng with Summer: Harueste with Winter.

Places may be compared, as London with York, Oxforde with Cambridge.

Beasts without reason, as the Be with the Ante, the Ox with the Sheep.

Plants, as the Vine, and the Olive.

First, make a proemium or beginning to your comparison

Then compare them of their country.

Of their parents.

Of their ancestors.

Of their education.

Of their acts.

Of their death.

Then add the conclusion.

A comparison between Demosthenes and Tullie.
TO speak much in the praise of famous men, no argument can want, nor
plenty of matter to make of them, a copious and excellent Oracion. Their acts
in life through nobilitee, will crave worthelie more, then the wit and pen
of the learned, ca^ by Eloquence express. Who can worthelie express and set
forth, the noble Philosopher Plato, or Aristotle, as matter worthelie forces
to commend, Plato. Aristotle.
when as of them, all learning, and singularitee of arts has flowen. All ages
has by their monuments of learning, participated of their wisdom. Greece has
fostered many noble wits, from whom all light of knowledge, has been derived
by whose excellency Rome in time florishyng, did seek by nobilitee of
learning, to mate the noble Grecians. So much Italy was adorned, and
beautified with the cunnyng of the Grecians. Among the Romans many famous
Orators and other noble men has spronge up, who for their worthiness, might
have contended with any nation: either for their glory Tullie.
of learning, or noble regiment. Among whom Tullie by learning, above the rest,
rose to high fame, that he was a renoume to his country: to learning a light,
of all singular Eloquence a fountain. Whom Demosthenes the famous Orator of
Athenes, as a worthy mate is compared with, whom not only the nobilitee, and
renoume of their Country shall decorate, but the^ selves their own worthiness
and nobilitee of fame. No age has had two more famous for learning, no common
wealth has tasted, two more profitable to their country, and common
wealth: for grauitee and counsel, nor the posteritee of ages, two more
worthy celebracion. Thusidides speaking, in the commendacion of famous men
shows: as concerning the fame of noble men, whose Thusidides.
virtue far surmounteth the^, and passes al other. Thenuious The envious
manne.
man seeks to deprane, the worthiness of fame in other, his bragging nature
with fame of praise, not decorated. The The ignoraunte.
ignoraunte and simple nature, according to his knowledge, judges all
singularitee, and tempereth by his own acts the praise of other. But the fame
of these two Orators, neither the envious nature can diminishe their praise,
nor the ignorant be of them a arbitrator or judge, so worthily has all ages
raised fame, and commendacion of their virtues.

Of their country.
IN Greece Demosthenes, the famous Orator of Athenes was borne, whose Country
or City, lacks no co^mendacion: either for the nobilitee of the land, or
glory of the people. What nation under the Sun, has not heard of that
mighty Monarchy of Greece: of their mighty citees, and pollitike governance.
What famous Poets how many noble Philosophers and Orators, has Greece bread.
What science and art, has not flowne from Greece, so that for the worthiness
of it, it may be called the mother of all learning. Room also, in whom
Tullie was brought up, may contend in all nobilitee, whose power and puisant
glory, by nobilitee of acts, rose to that mighty head. In both soche
excellency is found, as that no nation might better contend, of their
singularitee and honor of country, then Greece and Rome: yet first from the
Greeks, the light of Philosophy, and the abundant knowledge of all arts,
sprange to the Romans, from the Grecians. The Godly Laws, wherewith the
Roman Empire was decorated and governed, was brought from the Grecians. If
the city may be a honor and glory, to these two Orators, or their Eitees
a singular commendacion, there wants in both, neither honor, or nobilitee.

Of their ancestors, and parents.
Both Demosthenes and Tullie were borne, of very mean parents and
ancestors: yet they through their learning and virtues, became famous,
ascendyng to all nobilitee. Of their virtues and learning, not of their
ancestors, nobilitee rose to them.

Of the educacion.
THE singular virtues of them both, appeared even in their tender youth:
whereupon they being brought up, in all godly learning and noble Sciences,
theibecame most noble Orators, and by their copious Eloquence, counsel, and
wisdom, aspired to nobilitee and honor.

Of their (...).
Both were taught of the mouth of the best learned, Demosthenes of Iseus, a
man most Eloquent: Cicero of Philo and Milo, famous in wisdom and Eloquence.

Of their exercise.
CIcero did exercise himself very mothe, to declaime, both in Greek and
Latin, with Marcus Piso, and with Quintus Pampeius. Demosthenes wanted not
industry and labor, to attain to that singularitee, which he had, both in
Eloquence, and pronounciacion.

Of the gifts of their mind:
IN both, integritee, humanitee, magnanimitee, and all virtue flowed: at what
time as Demosthenes was commanded of the Athenians, to frame a accusacion,
against a certain man, Demosthenes refused the act. But when the people, and
the whole multitude, were wroth with him, and made a exclamacion against him,
as their manner was. Then Demosthenes rose, and said: O ye men of Athenes,
against my will, you have me a counsailer, or pleater of causes before you:
but as for a accuser, and calumniator, no, not although ye would. Of this sort
Tullie was affected, except it were only in the sauegard of his country: as
against Catiline, both were of godly, and of upright conversation, altogether
in Mediocrite, and a new leadyng their life.

Of their acts.
DEmosthenes and Tullie both, gave themselves to trauail, in the causes and
affairs of their common wealth, to the preseruacion of it. How vehemently did
Demosthenes pleate, and ingeniouslie handle the cause of all his country,
against Philip, for the defense of their libertee: whereupon he gatte fame, and
great glory. Whereby not only, he was coumpted a great wise counsailour: but
one of a valiaunte stomach, at whose wisdom, all Greece stood in admiracion.
The king of Persia, Darius. Philip. Demostheues.
labored to enter favor with him. Philip the king of the Macedonians, would
say often times, he had to do against a famous man, notyng Demosthenes.
Tullie also by his Eloquence and wisdom, saved Room and all parts of that
dominion, from great dangers.

Of their aucthoritee.
THeir aucthoritee and dignitee was equalle, in the common wealth: For, at
their two mouths, Room and Athenes was vpholed. Demosthenes was chief in
favor with Caretes, Diophetes, Leostines, Cicero with Pompei: Julius Caesar,
ascending to the chief seat and dignitee of the Consulship.

Of a like fall that happened to them, before their death.
YOu can not find soche two Orators, who borne of mean and poor parents,
that attained so great honor, who also did obiecte themselves to tyrants a
like, they had loss of their children a like, both were out of their country
banished men, their return was with honor, both also fliyng, happened into
the haudes of their enemies.

Of their death.
Both a like, Demosthenes and Tully were put to death, Demosthenes died,
Antipater gouernyng Antipater. Demosthenes. Archias. Marcus Antonius. Tullie.
by the hands of Archias. Cicero died by the commandment of Marcus Antonius:
by Herenius his hedde was cut of, and set in Marcus Antonius halle. His
hands also were cut of, with the which he wrote the vehement Oracions
against Marcus Antonius.

The conclusion.
TO speak as much as may be said, in the praise of them: their praise
would rise to a mighty volume, but this is sufficient.

Ethopoeia.
Ethopoeia is a certain Oracion made by voice, and lamentable imitacion, upon
the state of any one.

This imitacion is in iij. sorts, either it is. Eidolopoeia. Prosopopoeia.
Ethopoeia.


That part, which is called Ethopoeia is that, which has the person
known: but only it does faigne the manners of the same, and imitate in a
Oracion the same.

Ethopoeia is called of Priscianus, a certain talkyng to of any one, or a
imitacio^ of talk referred to the manners, aptly of any certain known person.

Quintilianus says, that Ethopoeia is a imitacion of other mean manners: whom
the Greeks do call, not only Ethopoeia, but mimesis, and this is in the
manners, and the fact.

This part is as it were, a lively expression of the manner and affeccion of
any thing, whereupon it has his name.

The Ethopoeia is in three sorts.

The first, a imitacion passive, which expresses the affection, to whom it
parteineth: which altogether expresses the mocion of the mind, as what
patheticall and doleful oracion, Hecuba the queen made, the city of Troie
destroyed, her housbande, her children slain.

The second is called a moral imitacio^, the which does set for the only,
the manners of any one.

The third is a mirt, the which sets for the, both the manners and the
affection, as how, and after what sort, Achilles spoke upon Patroclus, he
being dedde, when for his sake, he determined to fight: the determinacion of
him shows the manner. The friend slain, the affection.

In the making of Ethopoeia, let it be plain, and without any large
circumstaunce.

In the making of it, ye shall divide it thus, to make the Oracion more plain,
into three times.

A present time. A time paste. A time to come.
Eidolopoeia is that part of this Oracion, which makes a person known
though dedde, and not able to speak.

Eidolopoeia is called of Priscianus, a imitacion of talk of any one, upon a
dedde manne, it is then called Eidolopoeia, when a dedde man talks, or
communicacion made upon a Eidolopoeia
dedde manne.

Eidolopoeia, when a dedde manne talks, is set forth of Euripides, upon the
person of Polidorus dedde, whose spirit enters at the Prologue of the
tragedy.

Hector slain, speaks to Eneas in Eidolopoeia. O Eneas thou gods son,
fly and save thy self, from this ruin and fire: the enemies has taken the
walls, and lofty Troie is prostrate to the ground. I would have thought, I
had died valiantly enough to my country, and my father Priamus, if with this
my right hand, Troie had be defended.

Polidorus being dedde, in Eidolopoeia talks to Eneas which Virgil shows
in his third book of Eneados.

Iulia the wife of Pompei being dedde, spoke to Pomp, preparyng his arm
against Caesar, Eidolopoeia. Read Lucane, in the beginning of his third book.

Tullie uses Eidolopoeia, when he makes talk upon Hiero being dedde.

If that king Hiero were reduced from his death, who was a aduauncer of the
Roman Empire, with what countenance, either Siracusa or Rome, might be
showed to him, whom he may behold with his iyes. His country brought to
ruin, and spoiled, if that king Hiero should but enter Rome, even in the first
entryng, he should behold the spoil of his country.

Tullie also uses the like Eidolopoeia, as thus, upon Lucius Brutus dedde.

If it so were, that Lucius Brutus, that noble and famous Lucius Brutus.
manne were on live, and before your presence: would he not use this oracion: I
Brutus, sometime did banishe and cast out for crueltee, the state and office of
kings, by the horrible fact of Tarquinius, against Lucretia, and all that
name banished, but you have brought in tyrauntes. I Brutus did reduce the
Romain Empire, to a fredome and libertee: but you foolishly can not uphold and
maintein, the same given to you. I Brutus, with the danger of my life, have
saved my country of Room, but you without all danger, lose it.

Prosopopoeia.
AS concerning Prosopopoeia, it is as Pristianus says, when to any one
against nature, speech is feigned to be given.

Tullie uses for a like example this, when he makes Room to talk against
Cateline.

Prosopopoeia of Room.
NO mischief has been perpetrated, this many years, Catiline.
but by thee Catiline, no pestiferous act enterprised, without thee: thou a
lone, for thy horrible murder perpetrated upon the city of Rome, for the
spoil and robberies of their gooddes art unpunished. Thou only haste been of
that force and power, to cast down all laws and aucthoritee. Although these
things were not to be borne, yet I have borne them: but now thy horrible
factes are come to soche an issue, that I fear thy mischiues. Wherefore leave
of Cateline and deminishe this fear from me, that I may be in securitee

Lucane the Poet, entreating of mighty and fearce wars, against Pompei and
Caesar, makes Room to use this Prosopopoeia against Caesar.

Quo tenditis vltra quo fertis mea signa viri,
Si iure venitis si aues hucusque licet.
Prosopopoeia is properly, when all things are feigned both the manners, the
person, as of Room in this place.

what lamentable Oracion Hecuba Queen of Troie might make, Troie being
destroyed.
WHat kingdom can always assure his state, or glory? What strength can
always last? What Kingdoms.
power may always stand? The mighty Oaks Oaks. Cedars.
are sometime cast from root, the Ceadars high by tempests fall, so bitter
storms do force their strength. Soft waters pearseth Rocks, and ruste the
massy Iron does bring to naught. So nothing can by strength so stand, but
strength may ones decaie: yea, mighty kingdoms in time decaie have felt.
Kingdoms weak have rose to might, and mighty kingdoms fallen, no counsel
can prevail, no power, no strength, or might in land. God disposes Princes
seats, their kingdom there with stands. I knew before the brickell state,
how kingdoms ruin caught, my iye the change of fortune saw, as Priamus did
advance his throne, by favor Fortune gat, on other Fortune then did froune,
whose kingdom did decaie. Well, now I know the brickle state, that fortune
has no stay, all rash her gifts, Fortune blind does keep no state, her
stone does Fortune has no stay.
roll, as floodes now flow, floodes also ebb. So glory does remain,
sometime my state on high, was set in Princely throne, my port and train
full royal was, a king my father also was, my housband scepter held. Troie and
Phrigia served his beck, many kings his power did dread, his will their
power did serve. The fame of Troie and Brute, his glory and renouine, what
lands knows not? But now his fall, all toungues can speak, so great as
glory was, though kingdoms strong was set, lofty Troie in duste prostrate
does lie, in blood their glory, people, king are fallen, no Queen more
doleful cause has felt. The sorrows deep do pass my joys, as Phoebus light
with storms cast down. Hectors death did wound my heart, by Hectors might
Troie stiff did stand, my comfort Hector was, Priamus Hector.
joy, of Troie all the life, the strength, and power, his death did wound me
for to die, but alas my doleful and cruel fate to greater woe reserueth my
life, lofty Troie before me fell, sword, and fire has seat and throne
down cast. The dedde on heaps does lie, the tender babes as Lions prays
are caught in blood, before my sight, Priamus dear murdered Priamus.
was, my children also slain, who royal were, and princes mates. No Queen
more joy has tasted, yet woe my joys has quite defaced. My state alwaie in
bondage thrall, to serve my enemies will, as enemy will, I live or dye. No
cruel force will rid my life, only in grave the earth shall close my woes,
the worms shall gnawe my doleful heart in grave. My hedde shall ponder naught,
when death has sense down cast, in life I sought no joy, as death I crave,
no glory was so wished as death I seek, with death no sense. In prison deep
who doleful lies, whom Fetters sore does grieve. Their doleful state most
wishes death, in dongion deep of care my heart most pensive is, unhappy
state that wishes death, with joy long life, each wight does crave, in life
who wants smart? Who does not feel, or bear sometime, a bitter storm, to
doleful tune, mirth full often changed is, the meaner state, more quiet rest, on
high, who climes more deper care, more doleful heart does press, most
tempests hie trees, hills, and moutaines bear, valle is low rough storms
does pass, the bendyng trees does give place to might by force of might,
Oaks mighty fall, and Ceders high ar re^t from the root. The state full mean
in haven has Ancre cast, in surgyng seas, full often in vain to save the
maste, the ship Ancre casts.

The descripcion.
THis exercise profitable to Rhetorike, is an Oracio^ that collecteth and
represents to the iye, that which he shows, so Priseianus defines it: some
are of that opinion, that descripcion is not to be placed among these
exercises, profitable to Rhetorike. Because that both in every Oracion, made
upon a Fable, all things therein contained, are lively described. And also in
every Narracion, the cause, the place, the person, the time, the fact, the
manner how, ar therein lively described. But most famous and Eloquente men, do
place descripcion, in the number of these exercises. Descripcio^ serves to
these things, the person, as the Poet Lucane describes Pompei and Caesar: the
person is described, things or acts, times, places, brute beasts.

Nec coiere pares, alter vergentibus annis
In senium longo que toge, tranquilior vsu.
Dedidicit. etc.
Homer describes the person of Thersites, in the second book of his Ilias.

Homer sets out Helena, describing the person of Menalaus and Ulysses, in
the fowerth book of Ilias.

Things are described, as the wars attempted by sea and land, of Xerxes.

Lucan describes the war of the Massilia^s against Caesar

Thusidides sets forth in a descripcion, the wars on the sea, between the
Corcurians, and the Corinthians.

Times are described, as the Spryng time, Summer, Winter, Harueste, Day, Night.

Places are described, as Citees, Mountains, Regions, Floodes, Havens,
Gardeines, Temples: which things are set out by their commoditees, for
Thusidides often times sets forth Havens and Citees.

Lucane also describes at large, the places, by the which the army of Caesar
and Pompei passed. The descripcion of any man, in all parts is to be
described, in mind and body, what he was.

The acttes are to be described, far passed, by the present state thereof,
and also by the time to come.

As if the war of Troie, should be set forth in a descripcion, it must be
described, what happened before the Grecians arrived at Troie, and how, and
after what sort it was overthrown, and what thing chanced, Troie being
destroid.

So likewise of Carthage, destroyed by the Romans. Of Jerusalem, destroyed
by Titus Vespasianus, what admonicion they had before: of what monsterous
things happened also in that ceason: Of a Comete or blasyng Star, and after
that what followed.

Lucane also sets forth the wars of Pomp and Caesar, what strange and
marvelous things fell of it.

A descripcion upon Xerxes.
WHen Darius was dedde, Xerxes his soonne did succeed him, who also took upon
him to finishe the wars, bego^ by his father Darius, against Greece. For the
which wars, preperacion was made, for the space of five years, after that
Xerxes entered Greece, with seven hundred thousand Persians, The army of
Xerxes.
and three hundred thousand of foreign power aided him that not without cause,
Chronicles of aunciente time do show, mighty floodes to be dried up of his
army. The mighty dominions of Greece, was not hable to receive his houge, and
mighty power, both by sea and land: he was no small Xerxes a cowarde.
Prince, whom so many nations, so mighty people followed him, his Navy of
Ships was in number ten hundred thousand, Xerxes had a mighty power, but
Xerxes was a cowarde, in heart a child, all in fear the stroke of battle
moved. In so mighty an army it was marvel, the chief Prince and Captain
to be a cowarde, there wanted neither men, nor treasure, if ye have respect to
the king himself, for cowardlinesse ye will dispraise the king, but his
threasures being so infinite, ye will marvel at the plenty thereof, whose
army and infinite host, though mighty floodes and streams, were not able to
suffice for drink, yet his richesse seemed not spente nor tasted of. Xerxes
himself would be lasto Xerxes last in battle, and first to run away.
in battle to fight, and the first to retire, and run away. In dangers
he was fearful, and when danger was paste, he was stout, mighty, glorious,
and wonderful crakyng, before this hassarde of battle attempted. He thought
himself The pride of Xerxes.
a God over nature, all lands and Seas to give place to him, and puffed with
pride, he forgatte himself: his power was terrible, his heart fainte, whereupon
his enteryng into Greece was not so dreaded, as his flight from thence was
shamfull, mocked and scorned at, for all his power he was driven back from the
land, by Leonides king of the Lacedaemonians, he having but a small number of
men, before his second battle fought on the Sea: he sent four thousand
armed men, to spoil the rich and sumpteous temple of Apollo, at Delphos, from
the which place, not one man escaped. After that Xerxes entered Thespia,
Platea, and Athenes, in the which not one man remained, those he burned,
woorkyng his anger upon the houses: for these citees were admonished to prove
the maisterie in wodden walls, which was meant to be Ships, the power of
Greece, brought into one place Themistocles, favoring their part, although
Xerxes thought otherwise of Themistocles, then Themistocles persuaded Xerxes to
assaie the Grecians. Artemisia the Queen of Halicarnasis aided Xerxes in his
battle: Artemisia fought man Themistocles.
fully, Xerxes cowardly shronke, so that unnaturally there was in the one a
manly stomach, in the other a cowardly heart. The men of Ionia, that fought
under Xerxes banner, by the treason of Themistocles, shra^ke from Xerxes, he
was not so great a terror or dread, by his maine host, as now smally
regarded and least feared. What is power, men, or money, when God changes and
pulls down, both the success, and kingdom of a Prince. He was in all his
glory, a vnmanlie, and a cowardly prince, yet for a time happy state fell on
his side, now his might and power is not feared. He flies away in a Fisher
boat, whom all the world dreaded and obaied, whom all Greece was not able to
receive, a small boat lodges and harbors. His own people contemned him at
home, his glory fell, and life ingloriously ended, who^ whom God sets up,
neither treason nor malice, power nor money can pull down. Worthelie it is to
be pondered of all Princes, the saying of Vespasianus Emperor of Rome, at a
certain time a treason wrought and conspired against him, the conspiratours
taken, Vespasianus satte down between The saying of Vespasianus.
them, commanded a sword to be given to either of them, and said to them:
Nonne videtis fato potestatem dari. Do you not see? Power, aucthoritee, and
regimente, by the ordinance of God, is left and given to princes: A singular
sentence, A sentence comfortable to al princes.
to comfort all good Princes in their gouernemente, not to fear the poisoned
hearts of men, or the traitorous hearts of pestiferous men. No man can pull
down, where God exalts, neither power can set up and extol, where God
displaseth or puts down: Soche is the state of Princes, and their kingdoms.

Thesis.
THesis, is a certain question in consultacion had, to be declaimed upon
uncertain, notyng no certain person or thing.

As for example.

Whether are riches chiefly to be sought for, in this life, as of all good
things, the chief good.

Whether is virtue the most excellent good thing in this life.

Whether do the gifts of the mind, pass and excelle the gifts and virtues
of Fortune, and the body.

Whether does policy more avail in war, then strength of men.

Who so will reason of any question of these, he has need with reason, and
witty consultacion to discourse, and to declaime upon the same.

The Greek Orators do call this exercise Thesis, that is to say, a
proposicion in question, a question uncertain, included with no certaintee, to
any particular thing.

The Latin men does call it a question infinite, or universal: Tullie in his
book of places called T^pickes, does call Thesis, Propositum, that is to
say, a question, in determinacion. Priscianus calls it positionem, a
proposicion in question on either part to be disputed upon.

As for example.

Whether is it best to marie a wife?

Whether is friendship above all things to be regarded.

Is war to be moved upon a just cause?

Is the Greek tongue mete, and necessary to be learned?

There is an other kind of question called hypothesis, hypothesis is called
question finita, that is to say, a question certain notyng a certain person,
or thing, a certain place, time, and so forth.

As for example.

Is it mete for Caesar to move war against Pompei?

Is not there a certain person?

Is the Greek tongue to be learned of a Divine?

Is the Greek tongue maete for a Physician?

In this kind of exercises, famous men of ancient time did exercise youth, to
attain both wisdom and Eloquence thereby, to make a discourse upon any
matter, by art of lerning

Aristotle the famous Philosopher, did train up youth, to be perfect in the
art of eloquence, that they might with all copionsnes and ingenious inuencion
handle any cause.

Nothing does so much sharp and acuate the wit and capacitee of any one,
as this kind of exercise.

It is a goodly virtue in any one man, at a sudden, to utter wittely and
ingeinouslie, the secret and hid wisdom of his mind: it is a great maime
to a profounde learned man, to want abilitee, to utter his exquisite and
profounde knoweledge of his mind.

Thesis.
tHis question Thesis, which is a question, noting no certain person or
thing: is much like to that Oracion, entreated of before, called a Common
place.

A Common place.

But a Common place, is a certain exaggeracion of matter, induced against any
person, convicted of any crime, or worthy defense.

Thesis.

Thesis is a reasonyng by question, upon a matter uncertain.

Thesis, that is to say, a question general is in two sorts.

A question Civil. Contemplative.


QVestions Civil are those, that do pert^ine to the state of a common
wealth: and are dailypractised in the common wealth.

As for example.

Is it good to marie a wife.

Is Usury lefull in a city, or common wealth.

Is a Monarchis the best state of government.

Is good educacion the ground and root, of a florishyng common wealth.

A contemplative question.

THe other Thesis is a question contemplative, which the Greeks do call
Theoricas, because the matter of them is comprehended in the mind, and in the
intelligence of man.

The example.

Is the soul immortal?

Had the world a beginning?

Is the heaven greater then the earth?

A questionA question is either Simple. Compounde.


Is it good for a man to exercise himself in wrastlyng, or in

Is it profitable to declaime.

A compounde.

Is virtue of more value then gold, to the coueitous man

Does wisdom more avail, then strength in battle?

Do old men or young men, better govern a common wealth?

Is Physic more honorable then the Law?

A Oracion made upon Thesis, is after this sort made.

Use a exordium, or beginning.

Unto the which you may add a Narracion, which is a exposicion of the thing
done.

Then show it lawful.

Just.

Profitable:

And possible.

Then the conclucion.

To this in some part of the Oracion, you may put in certain obieccions,
as thus.

Upon this question: Is it good to marie a wife?

In Marriage is great ear, and pensiveness of mind, by loss of children, or
wife, whom thou loueste. There is also trouble of dissolute servants. There
is also great sorrow if thy children prove wicked and dissolute.

The answer to this objection, will minister matter to declaime upon.

Is it good to Marie.
SInce the time of all ages, and the creacio^ of the world, GOD has so
blessed his creacion, and marvelous workmanship in manne: as in all his other
creatures, that not only his omnipoteucie, is thereby set forth. But also
from time to time, the posteritee of men, in their offspring and procreacion,
do abundantly commonstrate the same. The state of Kingdoms continue by
marriage and common wealth
all kingdoms and common wealths: by procreacion derived, have only
continued on the face of the earth, thereby many hundred years. How sone would
the whole world be dissolved, and in perpetual ruin, if that God from times
and ages, had not by godly procreacion, blessed this infinite The dignitee of
man, shows the worthiness of marriage.
issue of mankind. The dignitee of man in his creacion, shows the worthy
succession, maintained by procreation. In vain were the creacion of the
world, if there were not as manne so excellent a creature, to behold the
creator, and his marvelous creacion. To what use were the Elements and
Heavens, the Stars and Planettes, all Beasts and Fowls, Fisshe, Plants,
Herbs and trees, if men were not, for man's use and necessitee, all things in
the earth were made and procreated. Wherein the Stoike Philosophers do note
the excellency of man to be great: for say they, Que in terris gignuntur
omnia ad vsum hominum creari. To what use then were all things, if man were
not, for whose cause, use, and necessitee these things were made. If a
continuance of Gods procreacion were not, immediately a ruin and ends would
ensue of things. What age remains above a hundred years? If after a hundred
years, no issue were to be, on the Godly procreacion.
face of the earth, how sone were kyngdoms dissolved, where as procreacion
rooteth, a new generation, issue and offspring, and as it were a new soul and
body. A continuance of laws, a permanente state of common wealth does
ensue. Though the life of man be frail, and sone cut of, yet by Marriage,
man by his ofspryng, is as it were new framed, his body by death dissolved,
yet by issue revived. Even as Plants, by the bitter season of Winter, from
their flowers fadyng and witheryng: yet the seed of them and root, vegitable
and living, do root yerelie a new ofspryng or flower in them. So Marriage by
godly procreacion blessed, does perpetually increase a new body, and thereby
a vaste world, A similitude.
and infinite nations or people. Xerres the mighty king of Persia, vewing and
beholding his maine and infinite host, weeped: who being demanded, why he so
did. Doleo inquit post centum annos, neminem ex hijs superesse. It is a
piteefulle and doleful case, that after a hundred years, not one of these
noble capitaines, and valiant soldiers to be left.

The obieccion. But you will say parauenture, marriage is a great bondage,
always to live with one.
The solucion.
To follow pleasure, and the beastly mocions of the mind: what libertee call
you that, to live in a godly, mean, and Mediocritee of life, with thy spoused
wife. There is no The liberty in marriage.
greater joy, libertee, or felicitee, who so practices a dissolute life:
whose love and lust is kindeled, and set on fire with a harlotte, he
follows a brutishe societee. What difference is there, between them and
beasts? The beast as nature leads, A brutishe society with harlottes.
he obaieth nature. Reason wants in beasts, manne then endued with reason,
which is a guide to all excellency how is it that he is not ruled by reason.
Whom GOD has clothed and beautified, with all virtue and all singularitee: If
a godly conversation of life, moves thee to pass thy days without marriage,
then must the mocions of thy mind, be tamed and kept under. Otherwise,
execrable is thy purpose, and determinacio^ of the life. If thou hopest of love
of a harlot Ehastitee in marriage.
though thou enjoy her otherwise, thou art deceived. Bacchis the harlot, whom
Terence makes mention of, in the person of her self, shows the manners of
all harlots to Antiphila, saying.

Quippe forma impulsinostranos amatores colunt:
Hec vbi immutata est, illi suum animum alio conferunt.
Nisi prospectu^ est interea aliquid nobis, deserte viuimus.
For says she, the lover anamoured with our love, and set on fire
therewith, it is for our beauty and favor: but when beauty is ones faded, he
conuerteth his love to an other, whom he better likes. But that we provide for
our selves in the mean season, we should in the end live utterly forsaked.
But your love incensed with one, whose manners and life contenteth you: so you
both are linked together, that no calamitee can separate you: who so hops
love of a The love of a harlotte.
harlotte, or profit, he may hope as for the fruit of a withered tree, gain
is all their love, vice their joy and delight. In virtue is libertee, in virtue
is felicitee, the state of marriage is virtuous, there can be no greater
bondage, then to obaie many beastly affections, to the which whoredom forces
him unto, Love is fained, cloked amitee, a heart dissembled, many a mighty
person and wise, has been overthrown by the deceiptes of harlottes: many a
City plagued, many a region overthrown for that mischief, to obaie many
affections is a great bondage. Who so serves the beastly affections of his
mind to that purpose, he must also as Hercules to Omphala Hercules. Omphala.
be slave, not only to his own will and affection: but to the manners, will,
and exspectacion of the harlotte. So served Thraso, and Phedria Thais, that
Gorgious harlot, Antony and Julius Caesar, Cleopatra, this is a bondage, to live
slave from reason and all all integritee, to a monsterous rableme^t The
harlottes lesson to her lovers.
of vices, who so serves a harlot, they must learn this lesson. Da mihi and
after, give and bring.

The women of Scithia, abhorryng the godly conversation of marriage, with their
housbandes, left them, who in time wax so mighty, that they repelled them
by force: they called marriage not Matrimony, but bondage. For, the chronicles
do testify, they became conquerours over many kings, all Asia obaied them:
they did build many a great city, and for their success, they might compare
with many princes. These women were called Amazones afterward, the The life of
the Amazones.
order of their life was this, ones in the year they would enjoy the compainie
of a man: if it so were that they had a man child, the father to have it, if a
daughter, then they possessed her, and forthwith burned her right pappe: for
they were all Archers, and wonderfully excelled therein, but in the end, they
came all to ruin. One of them, Thalestris their Queen in the time of Alexander
the Great, came to Alexander, Thalestris.
thinkyng that he had been, some monstrous man of stature: whom, when she did
behold (for Alexander was of no mighty The offer of a woman to Alexander.
stature) did contemn him, and offered him hand to hand to fight with him.
But Alexander like a wise Prince, said to his men, if I should overcome her,
that were no victory, nor manhood against a woman: and being overcome, that
were greater shame, then commendacion in all my victories The answer of
Alexander to the offer.
and conquestes, but afterward, there was a great familiaritee between them.
The adulterer and the adulteris, never prospers, for many mischiues are
reserved, to that wicked and beastly love. Sincere love is not rooted,
friendship colored: the sober and demure countenance, is much to be commended
in a chaste woman, whose breaste pondereth a chaste life. The fact of the
matrones of Rome, seems strange to The fact of the matrones of Rome.
be told, of Papirius a Senators soonne, being taken to the Senate house, of
his father: the child being endued with a singular wit, hard many causes in
the assemble, talked and consulted upon, at his return home, his mother was
inquisitiue of their consultacion, to hear somewhat. The child was commanded
by his father, to utter no secret that he heard, whereupon of a long time, he
refused his mothers demand: but at the last subtelie, he satisfied his
mothers request. Truth it is, my father willed me, to utter no secret, you
Papirius.
keeping my counsel, I will show you, it is concluded by the Senate house,
that every man shall have two wines, that is a strange matter, says the
mother: forthwith she had communicacion with all the matrones of Room, that
could do somewhat in this matter, they also full willyngly assembled
themselves, to let this purpose, to the Senate house, they went to utter, their
swollen griues. The Senators were amassed at their coming, but in this matter
bold they were, to enterprise that, which they were grieved at. A Dame more
eloquente then all the rest, and of stomach more hardy, began in these
words. Otherwise then right, we are injuriously The Oracio^ of a matrone, to
the Senators.
handled, and that in this assemble, that now we should be cast of and
neclected: that whereas it is concluded in this counsel, that every manne
should have two wives, more meter it were, that one woman should have two
housbandes. Strange it was in the Senators ears soche a request, whereupon a
proof made how that rumor rose, Papirius was found the aucthor, who told
before the Senate, his mother always inquisitiue to know that, which he
should not tell, and thereupon he feigned that, which he might better tell. It
is to be supposed the Senators mused thereat, and the matrones of Rome went
home ashamed: but their secret cogitacion of mind was manifest, what
willingly in heart they wished. What greater felicitee can there be, then in a
unity of life, the housebande to live with his wife. The beasts in their
kind, do condemn man's brutishe affections herein: there is no fact that
shows a man or woman, more like to beasts, then whoredom.

The obieccion. But you will say, many calamitees happens in marriage?
The solucion.
Fortunne herein is to be blamed, and not marriage, if any misfortune happens
to manne therein, the felicitee and Eleccion in Marriage.
quiet state that any man enioieth thereby. The discrete eleccion is therein
approved, in the state itself, nothing can be found worthy reprehension, if
a man will impute the bitter storms of life to marriage: whatseouer happens,
our own reason may judge contrary. Place before thy iyes all the affairs,
and occupacions of this life, be all times pleasant to the housebande man,
many a cold storm perceth his body, and many a mighty tempeste, does
moiest him and grieve him. Summer is not the time, to cast his seed in the
ground, or implowyng to occupy himself: shall he therefore leave his
housebandrie, or does he rather neclecte it, his diligence therein is the
more, and labor more industrious. From whence comes the tempeste, the
storms and bitter seasons? From his house, from his wife, from his art and
occupacion, all those things by violence are expelled from the air. No state
of life is able to give riches, health, or securitee to his state. There has
been princes and Emperors, nedie, Emperors.
full of infirmitees and sickness, in dangerous state, oppressed with many
calamitees: was their dignity and office, the cause of their calamitees? No,
God tempreth the state of every one, how, and after what sort to possess the
same. Some are fulle fortunate in Marriage, if Marriage were of necessitee the
cause, then all should be only fortunate, or only unfortunate: Marriage.
then in marriage is not the cause, if in marige the manners do disagree, and
love is extinguished, blame thyn own manners, thy choice, and thy eleccion. The
Mariner that passes the dangerous Seas, and by dreadful tempests, and The
Mariners.
huffyng waves is always in perille, and many often times drouned. The
Merchant lesyng his marchaundise by shipwreck, The Merchants.
shall they impute the danger and loss, to their wife at home? Or do the
Mariners leave for all these tempests, their art of Nauigacion? Or the owner
break his ship? Or the Merchant prove no adventures, because of his loss,
and many have been of this sort drouned. No. But more earnestly they do
assaie them selves thereto. Because war spoileth many a man of his life, do
Princes therefore, leave war,
to move armor against the enemy, but because, who so in the defense of his
country, dies manfully, is worthelie advanced, and in perpetual memory,
no danger is refused, because evil things happens in life, is the state of
good things to be avoided and eschued. Were it not unseemly, if housebande
men, for no storm or tempeste, do leave their state, their laborious and
rough condition of life, nor the shipman his art of Nauigacion, because he
sees many drouned venteryng the same, and he himself often times in danger,
nor the soldiour or capitain, their perilous condition of life, do leave for
danger. Should Marriage be less set by, because always riches and quietness
happens not.

The obieccion. The loss of a good wife and children, is a great grefe to any
man, and a cause to blame marriage.
The answer.
You your self are borne to dye, they also by death obaye likewise Nature, this
is the Law of Nature ones to dye, The law of Nature.
which you seem to blame. Thou the death of thy wife and children, is not the
blame in Marriage. What is the cause that you dye? Natures imbecillitie and
weakness, then in them Marriage is not the cause: Nature in her first molde
has so framed all, wherefore do you ascribe that to marriage, that is found
faultee in Nature. They die that marie not, what infirmity, danger or peril
happens to any in marriage, as sharp and perilous, do molest and torment the
other. If any manne by death, leaseth aright honest wife, clothed with all
chastites, demureness, sobrietee, and also with all singularitee of virtue
adorned: he has loss a rare treasure, a jewel of price, not in all to be
sound. Did you love your wife, that A chaste woman.
was so goodly, so honest and virtuous: there was great cause say you, for
her virtuous sake, God has chosen her from a mortal creature, to
immortalitee, with her it can not be better. There is no cause why you should
blame marriage, for the loss of her, or of thy children, or for the loss of
thee, she to blame marriage. If for thy own sake, this sorrow be, Estseipsum
amantis non amici, it is then of a self love, to thy self, not for her cause:
for I must answer as Lelius did to A^^ricanus; Cumea optime esseactu^ quis
neget, quid est quod no assecuta est immortalitatem. Who can deny says he,
but that with her it can not be better? What is it that she has not attained.
Immortalitee. She was virtuous, chaiste, sober, descrete, of behavior
womanly: for her virtues beloved. Well, now she has immortalitee and bless,
are you sorry thereat, that were envious. Did you love her living, love her
also departed, her virtuous showed unto us, her immortalitee.

The obieccion. There is a care for the wife and children; if the housband dye
before them.
The answer.
If thou leave them riches, hope not that thy riches shall be a stay to them,
though they be innumerable: a wretched, a miserable executour, wastes and
destroieth oftentimes, the fruictes of thy travail, who reioyseth more of thy
death, then A wretched executour.
of thy life. Or thy childrens father in Law, shall spoil and spend with a
merry heart, that which thou haste long t^rauailed for. Stay thy self and
thine upon Gods providence, for it has been seen, many a rich widow, with
infinite treasure left, to her children also like porcions descendyng: Gods
providence.
afterward both wife and children, have been brought to misery and beggarly
state. Otherwise, poor children committed to the providence of God, and
virtuously brought up, and the wife in like state, yet they have so passed
their days, that they have rose to a goodly state. See that thy richesse be
not injuriously gotten by falshode, by liyng, by Usury, if it so be, then
Male parta male dilabuntur. That is this, gooddes evil got, evil spente,
soche riches never give deep root to their ofspryng. That is an evil care,
by a injurious care, to purchase things and gooddes wickedlie.

Also marriage takes away widowhed, and does repare with a new fresh
marriage, the lack and priuacion of the other. She that was by death left a
widow, marriage again Death. Marriage.
has coupled her to a new housbande: and does restore that which death
took away. That that death dissolueth and destroieth, marriage increases,
augme^teth, and multiplieth. Be it so, but marriage is a painful life, it
forces every one to travail, to uphold and maintain his state, I commend
not the idell life, neither a life occupied to no virtuous end. Nature moves
every manne to love himself and his, so thy care and pain be to a godly
purpose. It is commendable. It is the duty of every man, as his power, wit,
and industry is able, to emploie thereto his cogitacion. To labor for thy
wife, whom thou loueste, and dear children, thy labor is pleasure, the joy
eases thy labor. To behold thyself in thy children, they being virtuously
brought up, it is a goodly comfort, to live with a chaste woman, sober and
continente, The marriage of a chaste woman.
her virtues be a continual pleasure, a passing joy. In marriage ought to be
great deliberacion, whom thou chosest to thy continual compainie or
fellowship, her life paste well known, her parents and kindrede how honest
and virtuous, her manners, her fame, how commendable, her countinaunce The
choice of a wife.
sober, a constaunt iye, and with shamefastnes beautified, a mouth uttering
few words discretlie. She is not to be liked, who^ no virtuous qualitees in
her educacio^, beutifieth and adorneth, the goodly qualitees shows, the well
framed and nurtured mind. These things may be sufficient, to show what
excellency is in marriage and how necessary it is, to the procreacion and
preseruacio^ of mankind.

Legislatio.
A Oracion either in the defense of a Law, or against a Law.
MAny learned men are in this opinion, that upon a Law alleged, a Oracion
may be made in the defense of it: or matter may be suppeditated, to inuaigh
by force of argument against it.

Although the law alleged be in manner the whole cause, because it does
co^tain all the matter included in the oracion.

In this Oracion, the person is induced to be spoken upon, unknown,
uncertain: wherefore it is to be placed, rather in the state and form of
consultacion, and to be examined with judgment.

The induccion of a Law, is in two sorts.

A confirmacion of any old Law, or a confutacion.

As for example.

The Civil Law does well commend, bondmen to be manumised, that is, to be
made free.

The law is herein to be praised, that wills the cou^sail of the parents
and friends, to be known before the contracte. Upon a Law alleged, worthelie
matter may rise, waighyng the godly end, whereunto the Law was first
invented, derreed and stablished, what profit thereof ensues and follows.
What it is to virtue a mainteiner, otherwise if it be not profitable: What
moved any one to frame and ordain soche a Law, as was to a common wealth
unprofitable, to virtue no aider, if it were a profitable Law and godly, it
is as Demosthenes safeth, of God invented, though by famous wife, and godly
men, stablished and decreed. Good Laws Law.
tempereth to all states equitee and justice, without favor or friendship, no
more to the one then the other.

The order to make an Oracion by a law, is in this sort. First, make a
prohemiu^ or beginning to enter your matter.

In the second place, add a contrary to that, which you will entreat upon.

Then show it lawful.

Just.

Profitable.

Possible.

You may as in Thesis, which was the Oracion before, use a contradiction or
objection: and to that make an answer or solucion.

A confutacion of that Law, which suffered adultrie to be punished with
death, no judgment given thereupon.
SOlon, who was a famous Philosopher, in the time of Cresus king of Lidia, and
a law giver The most rigorous and most cruel law of Solo^
to the Athenians: by whose Laws and godly means, the Athenians were long
and prosperously governed. Among many of his laws, this Solon set forth
against adulterers: Fas esse deprehendentimaechum in ipso adulterio
interficere: it shall be lawful says he, who so takes an adulterer in his
beastly fact, to kill him. Solon being a wise man, was more rigorous and
cruel, in this one Law, then he ought to be. A marvelous matter, and almost
incredible, so wise, so noble and worthy a Law giver, to bruste out with soche
a cruel and bloody law, that without indgement or sentence given, the matter
neither proved nor examined, adultery to be death. Wherefore, reason forces
every manne, to Judge and ponder with himself, that either adultery is a most
horrible vice, most beastly and pestiferous, and not mere to tarry upon the
censure, Adultery a horrible vice.
and sentence of a Judge: or Solon was not so wise, discrete, and a politic
person, but a rash and fond law giver, that in soche a terrible voice, he
should burste out, as adultery so horrible, as not worthy to be pondered,
examined and boulted of in Judgment. The Athenians received that Law, they
did also obaie his other laws. Their dominions thereby in felicitee was
governed: there was no populous number of adulterers, to let that Law, they
lived mosts godly, a strange world, a rare moderacion of that age and
people. Plato the godly Philosopher, who lest in his works, and Plato
against adultrie made a law.
monumentes of learning, great wisdom and also godly Laws in his books:
intiteled upon Laws, and government of a common wealth, did not pass by in
silence, to give and ordain a Law against adultery. Who also as it seemed
Judged adultery as most horrible and detestable, in his.ix. book de Legibus.
This is the Law. Adulteram deprehensam impune occidi a viro posse. The
adultrous woman says he, taken in the crime, her housbande may without
danger of death, or fear of punishment slay her. A strange matter two so
noble, so famous for wisdom, to make adultery present death, no Judgment or
sentence of Magistrate, procedyng to examime and judge, upon the state of the
cause. A man may say, O goodly age, and time in virtue tempered, each state
as seems brideled and kept under, and far from voluptuousnes removed.
There was no stews or Baudes houses, where soche Laws and Lawmakers were.
Sobrietee was in maids, and chastitee harbored in matrones and wedded wives,
a heart inviolable to honest conversation. Where adultery is cut of, there
many detestable vsces, and execrable purposes are removed. Cato the sage Peer
of Catos sentence upon adultery.
Rome, endued with like seueritee, did favor that law and highly extolled
it. Although adultery be a detestable vice horrible, yea, although it be
worthy death, better it were by judgment, and the sentence of the
Magistrate, the fault to be determined: then at the will of every manne, as a
Law Law.
by death to be ended, the common wealth shall be in more quiet state, when
the horrible factes of wicked men, by the Law made worthy of death: are
nevertheless by a lively The Judge, a lively law.
Law, which is the Judge, pronounced and condemned, according to the Law.
Else many mischiues might rise in all kingdoms and common wealths, under a
color of law, many a honest person murdered: and many a murderer, by
cloak of a Law, from danger saved. In Rome sometime a Law there was ordained
against adultery, which was called Lex Iulia, this Law Octauius Augustus
set forth. The Law was thus, Gladio iussit animaduerti in adulteros The law
commanded adulterers to be hedded. The chronicles of aunciente times herein
do show, and the decrees of ancient elders also, how horrible a thing
adultery is, when they punish it with death. Who knows not among the
Israelites, and in the old law they were stoned to death. Well as Magistrates
are in common wealths removed, or as times change, laws also are changed
and dissolved: and as the Proverb is, Lex vt Regio, the Laws are according to
the Region. Afterward Valerius Publicola, a man ascendyng to high nobilitee of
honor, and fame among, the Romans gave this Law. Qua neminem licebat
indicta causa necare. By this law it was not lefull, any manne to be put A
godly law.
to death, their cause not examined in Judgment, this was a goodly Law.
Then afterward, Law giuers rose in the common wealth, that with more
facilitee tolerated that vice, then wickedness flowed, adultery not punished
by death. And sense that, the Roman Empire, wrapped and snared with soche
mischiues has decayed, in fame, nobilitee and virtue. Many a part of their
dominion plagued, devoured, and destroyed. The good and godly men, need not
to fear any The good manne.
Law godly, their life being in virtue and godliness nurtured. The terrible
sentence of a law, forces the good and godly, to persevere and continue in
godliness. The terrible sentence Law.
of a Law, cutteth of the wicked enterprises of pestiferous men. Vice where
law is not to correct, will inure it Vice as a law by custom.
self by custom as a Law, or borne and tolerated against a Law. Therefore
as adultery without Judgment, to be punished worthy of death is ungodly:
so it ought not to be passed over, or tolerated in any Region or common
wealth, as no law severely to punish the same. Adultery.


The contrary.
AL other laws do differ, from that rigorous law of Solon and Plate herein,
yea, and though they be vices horrible, yet they are not determined, with out
the sentence of the Magistrate and Judge. But this cruel Law of Solon, does
repugne all laws, stablished in all Citees and common wealths. And sith the
law The law universal and equal to all men.
is of himself universal, with equitee, giving and tempering to all states.
Fond must that Law be of Solon, which rashely, without consideracion of
judgment does proceed, no man ought in his own cause, to be his own judge or
Magistrate. This is argument sufficient to confound the law of Solon. All
Laws are repugnaunte to that, because with Judgment they proceed against
vices most pestiferous. In common wealths Theft is by law, pronounced
worthy of Theft.
death, whereupon also the Magistrate and Judge, determines the matter, and
hears of both the action of the case, before he condempneth, so in all other
mischiues.

But you may say, many mischiues rises of adultery.

Although it so be, the Judge determines upon Murder, which is in like sort
horrible, soche also as do seek to cast into peril their country, and by
treason to destroy the same, Judgment proceadeth by determinacion of the
Law and Judge. And so in all other wicked factes, and mischiuous enterprises,
the Judgment in every cause proceeds, as Law and right wills, from the
mouth of the Judge, he being a The Judge and lively law.
lively Law, to the Law written. The cruel Law of Solon, is like to the
fantasy and will of a tyraunte, who, as fantasy and will leads,
murdereth at his pleasure, whose will is always a sufficient Law to himself,
as who should say, so I will, so I command, my will shall stand for a The
will of a tyraunte his own law.
Law: but godly laws do justly, according to reason and virtue, tempereth
the cause of every man. No godly Law, makes the accuser his own Judge.

Lawful.
WHo so by Law is judged, and the offense proved, there is no excuse in the
malefactor, nor suspicion Laws were made for two causes.
seeing that, according to law, the fact is punished, and as Demosthenes
says, two things moved the wise Elders to make Laws, that the wicked
should be hindered, and cut of from their purpose, and that good men seeing
by a law, the acts of pestiferous men kept under, by the terror of them,
are afraied to commit the like fact. This was even according to law. The
terrible sentence of a law executed, upon most wicked persons, do keep under
many a mischiuous enterprise, which through the doleful and lamentable end
of the wicked, do drive and force all other to all godliness.

Just.
THe accuser by Law and Judge, is able to defend himself, when his cause is
ended according to law. Virtue thereby vpholded, when by order of law, vice is
condemned. The malifactour has no excuse, all stay and color removed, the
accuser by just Law pleateth, when the law is thereby supported and saved.
And herein a great part of Justice is placed, when the favor of the Judge or
friendship, is only on the cause, the person neclected, that is Justice, to
give to every one his own.

Profitable.
IT must be profitable to the whole body of the common wealth, when by the
Justice of godly laws, virtue is in high price advanced, vice by the open
sentence, and manifest proof convicted, the malefactor shall be known, the
sincere and godly delivered, and from time to time maintained. Laws as they
be universal so they openly ought to give sentence.

Possible.
THen without law to proceed, and judgment of the Magistrate, as Solon did
in this law, it were not possible, any common wealth to florishe thereby.
Therefore in Judgment ought the cause of every one to be pleated and
examined, that thereby all suspicion, and grievous enormitees, may be put of.
Vice is not therefore tolerated, because for a time, Judgment cease, but
hereupon vices are more depely rooted out, all people knowing the determinacion
of the law, and the manifest sentence of the Judge heard. A terror ensues to
al malefactors and pestiferous men, good men are incensed to all godliness,
when vice by Law is condemned, cut of, and destroyed. Good men by Law
and aucthoritee, vpholded and maintained. This is the state of good laws, by
order to proceed, the cause in Judgment examined, the fact proved, The state
of good laws.
virtue in any person vpholded, vice in all cast down and defaced, so there
is good Law, as Demosthenes says, sincere Judge, and sentence inviolable.


