A CATHOLIC CONFERENCE BETVVEENE SIR TADY Mac. Mareall a popish priest of
VVaterforde, and Patricke Plain a young student in Trinity College by Dublin
in Ireland.

Wherein is delivered the certain manner of execution that was used upon a
popish Bishop, and a popish Priest, that for several matters of Treason were
executed at Dublin the first of February, now last past. 1611.

Strange to be related, credible to be believed, and pleasant to be perused.
By Barnabe Rych, Gent. Servant to the Kings most excellent Majesty.

Malui me diuitem esse quam vocari. LONDON Printed for Thomas Adams.

1612.

TO THE HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCE HENRY, THE Most Royal Heir apparent, to the
united Kingdoms of great BRITTAYNE, FRANCE, and IRELANDE. etc.
MOst worthy and renowned PRINCE, I am in hope it shall seem no presumption,
to offer this my unlettered diligence to the sight and view of your Highness,
the cause especially belonging to the setting forth of Gods glory, and after a
certain manner, does very nearely concern the service of your royal Father,
of whose Christian inclination to plant piety, and to relieve innocence, the
world has had long experience. To none more rather the^ to your Highness
therefore belongs these mine endeavors, whom nature and rare virtues with
liberal mind has adorned with singular indowments: and education again
furnished with knowledge and exquisite learning belonging to a Prince. May it
now please your Grace, my self having here (according to my little skill)
stood in defense of our religion against the eager assaults of perverse and
malicious papists: Although I must confess, with more breuity then the
amplenesse of the matter, or the necessity of the cause required: I am
therefore most humbly to crave pardon of your Highness, for passing of those
bounds that custom prescribes in that case: yet if there were no further
cause to press your Highness, for the Patronage of so good a purpose this
might suffice: It is meant for the glory of God, but besides this inducement,
there is yet one other especial inforcement to lead me to this onset namely
when in that unfortunate Country of Irelande, the Popes Vermin (your royal
Fathers mortal enemies) have such scope and liberty, that they draw the
people after them, to run headlong into that extreme perdition, both of body
and soul, and into that horrible downfall of disobedience both to God and
their Prince.

Now where their rests so much presumption in Priests to Impugn the sword
of government, there must be courage in Princes to defend their own. I will
wade no deeper, but in all humble and submissiue manner will leave these lines
to your Gracious vewe. And thus layinge my hands under your Highness feet will
rest.

Your Graces Soldier ever more devoted to do your Highness service BARNABE RICH

A CATHOLYCKE CONFERENCE BETWEEN SIR TADY MAC. MAREALL A Popish Priest of
VVaterforde, And Patricke Plain, a young student of Trinity College by
Dublyne, in Irelande.
Tady I Am glad Patricke, we have slipped the rest of our company, we may now
confer between our selves, and no man to molest us.


Patricke. I thank God Sir Tady, I have nothing to say that I care who does
hear, and therefore in company or out of company all is one to me.


Ta. And I am indifferent too for that, but because you asked me whether I
had forsaken my spiritual function or nay, what was your meaning in that
demand?


Pa. Nothing but this ruffling suit of apparel, that I see on your back, with
your gylt Rapier and Dagger hanging by your side, methinkes it is more
gentleman-like then priest-like, and this makes me to think you have given up
your order, and that you are become the same in profession, that you make show
to be by your attire.


Ta. Alas Patricke necessity has no law, it is not my cause alone that is
driven to this distress, there be many hundreds in Ireland besides my self,
that are glad to disguise themseues from the rygour of those laws that have
been lately contryued and pronounced against us:


Pa. I do not know what laws they be that you do term to be so rigorous, I
hear of no laws that do exact any blouddy executions or any other tragical
tyranies, as burning, massacring murdering, torturing, or any other such
vnchristian-like cruelties:


Ta. Do you not hear of the Proclamation now lately published through the
whole Realm of Ireland, that is set forth against Catholics, either to
enforce them against their consciences, or to hazard themselves into unknown
danger:


Pa. If your cause of complaint proceeded but from that, I see you can exclaim
upon light occasion, and could you but call to remembrance the persecutions,
the tortures and torments, that from time to time has bin prosecuted by
poplings, against the true professors of the Gospel, and that you were but
handeled, as you handeled them: you had then cause indeed to complain for
somewhat.


Ta. And do you think our causes to be so light, when we shall be compelled
against our consciences?


Pa. And when your Pope takes upon him to depose Kings, to interdict Realms,
to authorize rebellion, to dispense with subjects for their obedience to their
sovereign, do you not think it high time for Princes to look about them?


Ta. And I think as high time for us to look to our selves, but Catholics I
can tell you, are neither children nor fools, they will not be easily dashed
out with a Proclamation.


Pa. Belike they do think to dash out the Proclamation in this disguised
sort to keep themselves unknown.


Ta. You need not doubt but that we mean to shift for our selves, and not to
run into wilful danger, so long as we may prevent it.


Pa. But do you think that this disguising of your selves, will serve your
turn to prevent it?


Ta. It has served our turn for forty years together, and why should it
not do so still.


Pa. Because these matters will be more narrowly looked unto, and if you
remember your self well, there is an edict in the proclamation that every
Justice of assise shall give it in charge to the Jury that must both make
inquiry and present it.


Ta. But from whence will you fetch your Iurates that will present against
Catholics, you may well fetch them from Geneus, but they will be very hardly
found in Ireland.


Pa. Why do your Iurates of Ireland make so little account of an oath that they
will forswear themselves?


Ta What account should they make of an oath that is taken to the prejudice of
one Catholic to another, when they have so many dispensations in a readiness,
and do know where they may be absolved for more oaths in one hour, then they
be able to swear in seven years.


Pa. If dispensations be so ready as you speak of, how comes it to pass, that
in every corporate town in Ireland, the Mayor and Sheryues had sometimes
rather to go to prison then to take the oath of obedience to the King?


Ta. the Mayor and Sheryues of every town corporate, is enjoined for that
hour to the service of the prince, and how can a man more honestly express
his zeal to the pope, then flatly to deny his service to his prince* I say
that Catholic that will offer himself to prison in such a case (as yearly
they do almost in every town) is worthy to attain that estimation that he
himself does so much desire?


Pa. And what is that to be accounted a reble, a traitor, and a false hearted
villayne to his prince.


Ta. No sir he does it out of the love he bears to the Pope, and therefore
amongst Catholics to be beloved, honored, esteemed, cherished, and to be
reputed for a patron, a protector, and a demi saint so long as he lives, and
after his death to be canonized, numbered and regestred in the Popes Calender.


Pa. Why then ^o commit a papist to prison, is rather a grace then a disgrace
unto him.


Ta. I tell you it is a glory unto him, he does rejoice in it, he does triumph
in it, he does know himself to be renowned by it.


Pa. But does your townes-men that be thus ill affected to their prince,
endure any great penury during the time of their imprysonment?


Ta. Now God and our blessed Lady defend it, no sir, they live in pleasure,
they lie well, they fare well, they are frequented by their friends, and rather
then they should live in lack, the whole city where they dwell will
contribute toward their charges.


Pa. But is not this a gracious clemency in a sovereign, that will suffer
those corporations to houlde or enjoy any liberties or privileges, that are
thus opposite to himself and repugnant to his laws?


Ta. Speak not of clemency Patricke, where the priests that should sacrifice
for the sins of the people are constrained to live in a disguised sort, but
not in open show:


Pa. And by this counterfeit shift of disguising themselves, they march up and
down the streets of Dublyne, and where they list besides seducing the people,
without impeachment.


Ta. And from whence is that but by the mighty power of God that is able to
protect his servants although in the Lions den, and therefore he that has
any wit in his head, will never seek to apprehend, trouble or molest any
Catholic priest.


Pa. Whereof should we stand in fear or doubt?


Ta. Of more enemies then friends be sure of that. And name me but any one
manne that has most buisied himself in those matters, that has gotten either
gain or grace: and let it be that a Catholic priest be sometimes
apprehended (as God be thanked for it, it is seldom seen in Ireland) does he
not use his priestly dignity, in as large and as ample manner as if he were
at liberty, in what prison can you shut him up, but there he makes holy
water, holy bread, holy falt, holy candell, and for those that have continual
access unto him, as well men, women and children, he confirms them still and
reconciles them to the pope.


Pa. But do you reconcile so many to the Pope when you be in prison as you
speak of?


Ta. Both in prison, and out of prison we reconcile as many, as will hear or
believe us.


Pa. What to be traitors to the prince?


Ta. No sir but to vow themselves to the pope, without any intended treason to
the prince.


Pa. But this reconciled sort must in the end become traitors to the prince,
whether they meant it at the first or nay, for when it pleases your holy father
to depose the prince, and to excommunicate as many as will acknowledge him for
a lawful magistrate (as many times he has done) what shall your reconciled
sort do then?


Ta. If a prince be a heriticke should we communicate with him?


Pa. We may then condemn his heresy, but we must pray for his person, as the
Apostle has taught us: I exhort you therefore, that first of all
supplications, prayers and intercessions be made for Kings, and so for all that
are in authority.


Ta. That is meet, so long as they be good christians.


Pa. The advertisement was written from Paul to Tymothy, and at that time when
princes were both infidels and Idolators:


Ta. I think those kings that be pagans, are rather to be prayed for, then
those that be heretics.


Pa. The church of Christ has prayed for those princes that were heretics,
and that in the midst of their impiety and hottest tyrany: Constantius for
one that was an Arian, and yet was prayed for by the decree of a common
Counsel.


Ta. Perhaps they might do this in the beginning of his reign before his
heresy was discovered.


Pa. Perhaps there are none but papists that would appose any such doubts, and
what are they but traitors that would teach subjects to rebel?


Ta. It is no treason to say the Pope may depose princes, when he has received
that power from Christ.


Pa. If you could but prove that, we might the better believe you in some
other matters:


Ta. Has he not the keys of the kingdom of heaven?


Pa. So has every other person that is a minister of the word of God, but what
have they to do with the kingdo^es of the earth: our Savior being demanded
by Pilate what kingdom it was that he claimed, openly avowed: My kingdom is
not of this world but the Pope that takes upon him but to be his Vicar, would
dispose of all the kingdoms in the world.


Ta. May not the shepherd reclaim the sheep if he will not be ruled?


Pa. So he may sell the sheep to the Butcher if he be fat, but what is that
to your Pope, would you have him to do the like by princes! I hope you
understand Sir Tady, that all similitudes be no sylogismes.


Ta. For all this I cannot think it any treason to defend that the pope may
lawfully depose any prince, for tyrany or heresy.


Pa. I cannot let you to think what you list, but I can tell you truly it is
treason by the laws of the Realm, to subject either the princes sword or his
crown to the Popes courts, or in any sort to his usurped power.


Ta. The time has been when Princes might in no wise meddle with
ecclesiastical persons, and I warrant you the Pope will never give his consent
that any prince of them all should have lawful authority to punish a priest.


Pa. God be thanked of a good amendment, Princes are beecome to be more wise,
and I think you have heard of some pretty store of your traiterous priests
that have already hopped as far as from Tyber to Tyburne, and there is some
hope that shortly more will follow.


Ta. I have heard of some that suffered martyrdom, but I know you will say
they were executed for treason, when in truth it was but for the testimony of
their consciences.


Pa. And if it be a matter of conscience for priests and Jesuits to undermine
a princes estate, and to stir up their subjects to rebel, to go about to
pluck the crown from their heads and to wrest the scepter out of their
hands, then you say truth, they suffered for their consciences, but if your
priests and Iesuytes, were sent from Rome as Pioners to make ready the way for
the Popes Bull, that should have disinherited the Prince, and given his crown
to another, as was apparently proved and confessed by themselves, I wonder with
what faces papists can excuse those justly condemned traitors, and to entitle
them for martyrs.


Ta. I cannot tell what was proved against them, but I am sure they were
cruelly executed, but what should I need to speak of matters that were done
so many years past, when we have examples here at home, that be yet bleeding
new, of two holy martyrs that were executed at Dublyne, but upon Candlemas eaue
now last past, the one a reverend and a learned By shop, invested many years
since to the Bishopric of Down by the Popes holiness, the other a holy
Catholic priest, that did both together suffer martyrdom in a most constant
manner only for their consciences, and for the testimony of the Catholic
faith.


Pa. Now fie of the devil, and out upon popery, is it possible that any
papist should be found so foolish to bring this matter into question, unless
to shame himself, or to make his religion ridiculous? but do you call him a
reuererid and a learned ^yshop, that was a very block, without wit learning or
honesty, he showed it in the manner of his life, but never more manifest then
at the hour of his death.

It is truth, he had his inuestment by the Pope, for those Balamite Idyotes, be
fit instruments to spread the Popes doctrine, especially in Ireland, where the
poor people are so infected with this Locust vermin of priests and friars,
that they will sooner be leeue an Ass that comes from Rome with a Popes Bull,
then an Angel of heaven, that should be sent with the light of Gods word.

Now for your holy priest that accompanied your learned Bishop, me thinks our
papists of Ireland should make intercession to our Lady, that his name might
never more be had in remembrance, that at the time of his death, did show
himself to be the very disgrace of popery, and an utter reproach to the
religion he professed.


Ta. Why Patricke although the priest did show himself to be in some little
astonishment with the terror of the death he was to endure, yet he died
constantly without revolting from his religion, and the Bishop and he together
endured their martyrdom with patience enough.


Pa. I wonder with what shameless faces papists can auow those to be martyrs,
and to die for the testimony of their consciences, that were both of them
euycted of high treason, and no matter of religion enforced against them: was
not your Bishop indicted of sixteen several articles of treason, all of them
openly confessed by himself, and he condemned by his own confession?


Ta. And yet I hope you will not deny, but that all his articles, which you say
were so many treasons, tended all to the advancement of the holy church of
Rome: which every honest man is bound in conscience to do.


Pa. If all our priests in Ireland that do teach that doctrine to the poor
silly people of that country, were drawn hanged and quartered as your Bishop
was, the kings majesty would be both better beloved, and more dutifully served
in Ireland then now he is.


Ta. Then I perceive you do still thirst after blood: is not your insatiate
desire yet glutted enough, with the death of those two worthy martyrs,
especially of that reverend Bishop, who was so dearly beloved through all the
parts of Ireland, as well for his learning as for the several services he had
performed to the holy church of Rome.


Pa. Sir Tady I protest I do thirst after no man's blood, neither do I know
any one papist in Ireland that I would seek his life or wish his death, but do
rather both pity him and pray for him, but I wonder you are not ashamed to
entitle those for martyrs, that were openly known traitors; And what were
those holy services that you say your Bishop was so dearly beloved for, were
they not his seditious practices, that for many years together was still
stirring up of the people to arms and rebellion? were not these the articles
wherewith he was accused, the which himself confessed, and for the which he
was justly condemned? what other wit learning or honesty was in him, that you
so much magnify?


Ta. I hope you will not deny him to be learned.


Pa. I will deny him nothing that was his due, his learning was fit to concur
with that authority the Pope had given him, that was to stir up the people to
treason, and rebellion, for any other litterature, if ought were in him, it
might have been begged for a concealment, for he never showed it.


Ta. Why do you slander the dead, he showed himself to be a great scholar at
the very hour of his death.


Pa. Good sir Tady do me the favor to tell me wherein.


Ta. Being ready to mount up the ladder: when he was preased by some standers
by to speak, did he not itterate, and reitterate Sine me quaso, Sine me quaso,
so distinct and plainly, that every latinist might well understand him: this
was a sign he was learned, and that he could speak Latin.


Pa. And here we see the end of this great learned Bishop, that had live* in
conspiracy for many years against his prince, and being condemned to the
gallows for his treason as he was well worthy, had nothing to say in his own
excuse but Sine me quaso.


Ta. What would you have him to say in such a case, but to give himself to
prayer and contemplation.


Pa. But what bragges be these that are made of his wit and learning, that
had lived like a ravening Woolfe, and dyed like a dumb dog.


Ta. If there were no better worth in him then your words do import, how came
it to pass that the multitude of people, both men and women that did follow
him to the place of execution, made such doll and lamentation after him, as the
heavens them selves resounded the Echo of their outcries.


Pa. Before I answer your demand, I hold it best to make a true relation of
the manners and behauiours of the people that so followed him to the place of
execution, strange and foolish I confess to be rehearsed, but because you
have urged it, thus it follows.

The 28. day of January now last past, the Bishop with his companion the
priest, being brought to an araignment at the Kings bench bar at Dublyne,
were there condemned of treason, and adjudged to be executed the next saturday
following, which was the first of February being Candlemas eve: which day being
come, in the morning something timely, by a Catholic consent, a priest or two
of the Popes brood, were sent with holy water and other like holy stuff, to
sanctify and hallow the gallows where they should be hanged.

Lo here the piety that is in popery, I have many times heard speaking of
hallowed bread, of hallowed water, of hallowed ashes, of hallowed beads, and
of such other like hallowed trash, but I never heard of a pair of gallows
that were hallowed before, but these gallows being thus sanctified, and made
holy before hand, about 2. of the clock in the afternoon, the traitors were
delivered to the Sheryues of Dublyne that were to see execution, who placing
them in a small carre, and being assisted with a convenient guarde, as they
passed along through the streets of Dublyne, diverse citizens (whereof some
that were of good sort and fashion) as the Bishop passed by, fell down upon
their knees in the dirt and mire, craving his fatherly blessing and
benediction, but the poor regardles wretch, sitting still like a block would
neither vouchsafe them word, nor so much as to turn his head aside to look
at them, or once to lift up his eyes to heaven, or to make show either of
devotion or of any religion at all, what was in him, so that he might have bin
a Papist a Turk or a Jew, for any thing that could have bin discerned by him,
either by his words or by his show: And now being come to the place of
execution, it is truth he was followed with troops of citizens, both men and
women, and not of the inferior sort alone, but of the better, and amongst the
women, of the best men's wives within the city of Dublyne: that kept such a
scriking, such a howling, and such a hallowing, as if Saint Patricke himself
had bin going to the gallows, they could not have made greater signs and
shows of grief and sorrow: but when they saw him turned from of the
gallows, they raised the Who bub, with such a maine cry, as if the rebels had
been approached to rob and rifell their city.

Now to answer to your question, if I should say that this deploring of a
traitor, with such signs and shows of sorrow, did argue but little love to
his majesty, perhaps I might offend a great number of papists, but this I
dare bouldly affirm, that those fooleries, that were used both before and
after the execution, argued but little wit; and I think the recital of it
would make the papists themselves to laugh at the folly of popery, for mark
what followed.

The executioner had no sooner taken of the Bishops head, but that the towns
men of Dublyne, began to flock about him: some taking up the head with pitious
aspect, accompanied with sobs and sighs, that of my conscience were breathed
out from their very soul.

Some kissed it with as religious an appetite as ever they kissed the Paxe.

Some cut away all the hair from the head, which lousie commodity, they
religiously reserved, for a lousie relic.

Some others were practicing to steal the head away, the which being espied
by the executioner, he gave notice of the matter to the Sheryues of Dublyne.

Now when he began to quarter the body, the women thronged about him as fast,
and happy was she that could get but her handkercheife dipped in the blood
of the traitor: And the body being once disseuered into four quarters, they
neither left finger nor toe, but they cut them off, and carried them away: And
to show their Catholic zeal, they tare his garments into tatters, and some
others that could get no holy monumentes that appertayned* to his person, with
their knives they shaued of chippes from the hallowed gallows: neither would
they so much as omit the halter wherewith he was hanged, but it was gathered
up to be reserved for holy uses.

I might speak here of the Bishops breeches that the executioner sold for
five shillings to a fellow that carrying them into the town, and tearing them
into fitters made as good a market of them amongst the Catholics of Dublin, as
if they hadd been pardons new come from Rome: the poor hangman again who
but laying his cloak a little apart whilst he was doing of his office, it was
stolen away from him, and could not be heard on till within two or three days,
and then it was known to be cut into shreadds, and so sold amongst the
Papists for holy relics at a very dear rate, thinking it had been some
vestment belonging to the Bishop.

I am sorry for my countrymen that are so blind and blockish but see what
followed: the same night after the execution was done, they flock together
afresh both men and women, with holy water, holy candle: and congregating
themselves at the holy gallows, in the place of execution, they spent the fore
part of the night in heathenish howling, and performing many popish ceremonies,
and after midnight, being then Candelmas day in the morning, having there
priests in a readiness they had Mass, and as some say Mass after Mass: day
light being come they departed to their own houses, all of them made as holy
toward God, as they had showed themselves dutiful to the King.


Ta. You have made a long discourse to little purpose, for say you what you
can, it will never be believed amongst the Catholics in Ireland, but that
these men dyed holy Martyrs, and suffered for matters that did concern the
Church; now for temporal Magistracy to have foueraigntie in spiritual
regiment is very unnatural, say you what you can.


Pa Who should else mayntaine and uphold godly laws but the Prince? who
should banish and displace false religion together with the spreaders and
dispersers of the same but the Prince? who should punish malefactors against
God, as heretics, blasphemers, Idolaters, and such other like which is to be
done in every Christian common wealth, but the Prince.


Ta. The Prince must learn at the priests hand, what is truth, and what is
error, before he set in hand to punish.


Pa. But if the priest does preach error in stead of truth, may not the Prince
both banish the doctrine, and punish the teacher?


Ta. The Pope is the only decider of those doubts, it is he that must judge
between truth and error.


Pa. But if the Pope does find an error, and does command the Prince to
punish it, may he not then do it with authority?


Ta. If the Pope does command, there is no question but the Prince must obey.


Pa. Then Kings and Princes must do more for the Pope, then they may do for
Christ, but if Princes may not judge of the truth, what meant David in his
second Psalm to say: Be wise ye Kings, understand ye Judges, and serve the
Lord.


Ta. Well, let be that Princes may command, yet I say still the Church must
appoint them what they must command.


Pa. But what do you mean by the Church, that you say must thus direct the
Prince?


Ta. What should I mean but the Church, that is the Pope, his Cardinals,
Bishops, Priests, and all other persons ecclesiastical.


Pa. But what meant Saint Paul Acts. 20. when he called the Elders of
Ephesus, and willed them to feed the Church of God, what meant he by the
Church, the priests, or the people?


Ta. Perhaps he meant them both, as well* the people as the priests.


Pa. Can you find in any one text of Scripture, where the Church is taken
for the priests without the people?


Ta. But yet the priests are only called Churchmen.


Pa. Why now you have answered the matter soundly, hereafter when they tell us
that the Church does consist in the whole congregation of the faithful, we may
then answer them, that the priests only were called churchmen, and therefore
they must command Kings and Princes, what they must do, and what religion
they must establish.


Ta. It is very true, for who should judge of religion but the Priest.


Pa. Why then the priest must judge of truth, but the Prince you say may
command for truth, and then we are all this while out of our reckoning, for if
it be in the princes power to command for truth, they will say that our
gracious king, commands nothing here in Ireland, but what Christ has
already commanded, and what is established by the word of God, and thus we have
brought our hogs to a fair market.


Ta. But that princes should have power to compel men's consciences, I say is a
thing most unreasonable.


Pa. And that every ignorant and obstinate person should make a conscience of
every popish fantazy is a thing most intolerable.


Ta. Do you term it to be fantastical that our progenitors, have professed,
and that we our selves were baptized in?


Pa. This is your common enchantment, wherewith you bewitch a number of seely
souls, bearing them believe, that in bap tisme, they have vowed themselves to
your Romish religion: but in whose name were you baptized, was itin the popes,
or in Peter's or in Paul's* if in no other then in the nameof Christ alone, then
are you made the sons of God, and not the slaves and vassels of Rome, and as
in baptism, you received no man's mark but his, so you stand bound to regard
no man's voice but his.


Ta. Yet I say still that it stands with no reason, that a prince may forcibly
compel any man against his conscience.


Pa. But I say still that a Prince may forcibly compel his subjects from
Idolatry and heresy, to the sincere service of God, and the scriptures do
furnish us with sundry presidents tending to that purpose, amongst the rest
take this one: Josiah was highly commended for making the people of Jerusalem,
and all that were ^ound in Israel to serve the Lord.


Ta. Josiah compelled the people to serve the Lord according to the truth, but
does it therefore follow, that every prince, may enforce a religion, that is
but fitting to his own will and fancy?


Pa. It does therefore follow, and by the circumstance of the whole chapter,
it does appear, that every christian Prince throughout his realms and
dominions, may root out heresy, Idolatry, superstition, and having again
restablished the true and sincere worship of God, may compel and enforce his
subjects both to obey and submit themselves unto it.


Ta. But the religion which we profess, is the true ancient and Apostolic
religion, first delivered by Christ himself unto Peter, and by Peter himself
to his successors the Bishops of Rome.


Pa. Indeed your Pope in his doctrine, does as rightly succeed Saint Peter
at Rome, as the Turk does succeed Saint James at Jerusalem, and as the Scribes
and Pharisees did Moses, in whose chair they sat, when they crucified the
Son of God.


Ta. I hope you make no doubt but that the Pope is Saint Peter's successor, and
that the chair whereon he now sits at Rome was first Saint Peter's seat.


Pa. I understand not what you mean by the Popes chair, and by Saint Peter's
seat, whether you mean it by any Throne or Tabernacle, or by some other
Tribunal, or what manner of stool it should be, that you call Saint Peter's
seat.


Ta. I believe you well, for Protestants (God knows) are not only ignorant,
but they are likewise blind and senfeles in those things, that does appertain
to the misteryes of the Catholic Church, but for your better satisfaction,
and to give you true weeting of Peter's Seat what it is: you that are so full
of scripture cannot be ignorant where Christ in the 23. of Mathewe told his
Disciples that the Scribes and Pharisees did sit on Moses chair, and willed
them therefore (in respect of their place) both to hear and believe them,
being as they were successors unto Moses* then the like of Rome where Peter was
sometimes Bishop, and where he constantly preached Christ crucified, must
therefore necessarily be the Seat of Peter, and this holy Sea of Rome is it,
which Peter has left to his successors, and we may as truly say that the Pope
does now sit on Peter's Seat, as Christ told his Disciples, that the Scribes
and Pharisees did sit on Moses Chair.


Pa. There have been many papists that have taken great pains to prove that
Peter was Bishop of Rome, but there was yet never any one of them could make
it so apparent, but that we might deny and that by good authority, that peter
was ever at Rome at all: but let it be granted that Peter were at Rome, does it
therefore follow that the Sea of Rome must be Peter's Seat? Peter preached in
many places before he came to Rome (if ever he were there at all) as it
appears in the Acts of the Apostles, and by the testimony of your own
Legende, Peter was a long time at Antioche, and why should not Antioche, or any
other place where Peter taught and preached, challenge a superiority as far
forth as Rome?


Ta. I see I must render you a reason for the matter, will it please you now to
understand, that besides Peter's being at Rome, Peter likewise dyed at Rome, and
suffered under Nero, and therefore the place more holy, and worthy of authority.


Pa. May it please you now to hear me to render you the like reason, our
Savior Jesus Christ was crucified and dyed at Jerusalem, for the sins of the
world, and therefore in the work of our redemption, his power is more ^ull
and ample at the city of Jerusalem, then it is in any other place where he
had formerly taught and preached.


You say Protestants are blinded, but if papisteswere not both blind and out of
their wits besides, they would never gather such conclusions whereby to uphold
the pride of their pope, that be cause Peter was at Rome, therefore the Sea of
Rome must be Saint Peter's seat: but how hangs this together, where Christ in
the 23. of Matthew, told his Disciples that the Scribes and Pharisees did sit on
Moses Chair, what was meant by Moses chair in this place? it could not be
meant by the city of Ierasalem, as the papists would have Rome to be the
Seat of Peter, because (as they surmise) Peter was at Rome, but Moses was
never at Jerusalem, neither in the Synagogue, neither in the Temple, nor in any
part of the country that was near about it: why then the Chair of Moses,
which Christ here spoke of, was nothing else but the doctrine of Moses, which
he had formerly taught and left unto them, and which Christ in this place
willed his Disciples to hear, and likewise to follow what the Scribes and
Pharisees said and taught but not to do as they did, to follow their sayings,
but not their doings: even so likewise, Peter's Seat, Peter's Keys, and Peter's
doctrine, are all one and the self same thing: but this doctrine of the
preaching of the Gospel, your Pope has abolished at Rome, and in the place
thereof he has set up the preaching of his own laws, of his own decrees,
and of his own traditions: and therefore he sits not on the seat of Peter,
but in the Seat of Antichrist, in the Chair of pestilence, and for Peter's
coming to Rome, it can do your Pope no good at all, he may well brag a
little of the matter: but it will not serve his turn.

Ta. Thus you would conclude that Saint Peter's seat, consisted in nothing more
then in the preaching of the Gospel. And by this you would deprive him not
only of his Patrimony, but also of his Dignity: Saint Peter is little
beholding to Protestants, for of him that was called the Prince of the
Apostles, they would make him to be but Minimus Apostolorum, but if to preach
the Gospel, be to sit in Peter's Seat, was it not Peter to whom Christ
especially recommended the feeding of his flock? And what is meant by the
feeding of the sheep, but the preaching of the word, and ministering of the
sacraments, which as it was commended to Peter especially, so it remains a
precept for ever to the Popes that are his successors? And was it not to Peter
again to whom Christ said I have prayed for thee Peter that thy faith might not
fail? what malicious impiety then in Protestants, to spurn against that
Principality, that Christ himself has confirmed, not only to Peter himself,
but to the rest that be his successors in the holy sea of Rome.


Pa. First for this prioritie that papists would so feign ascribe to Peter
above the rest of the Apostles, I say our Savior Christ has long since
determined, when in the 10. of Saint Marks Gospel, he told them that there
should be no precedencie amongst them, nor the one to be accounted more
worthy then the other, and therefore flatly decreed between them that he that
would aspire to be greatest, the same should be least: now for Saint Peter,
esteem him as you please, choose how you will account him to be either Maximus
or Minimus.

But what blockishnes is in papists to think that because Christ commanded
Peter to feed his flock, that this precept therefore was given but to Peter
himself, as though that commandment to feed the flock of Christ did not
belong as far forth to all the Apostles, as it did to Peter. I will tell you
Sir Tady, there is not so simple a minister in the Church of God (that has
cure of souls,) but according to his measure, is as straightly tied to the
feeding of Christ's flock, as ever was any Pope of Rome: or as Peter, or as
Paul, or as any other of the twelve Apostles.

And now for your Popes, that you say are successors unto Peter, if we
should look into the food, what it is they have distributed, and consider of
the diligence they have used in performing this precept thus left unto Peter,
we should find that in feeding the sheep, they have poisoned the pasture: they
have infected and corrupted it with the venomous leaven of their own laws and
traditions, and in stead of giving food, they have fleeced the flock, they
have made a shambles of the sheep, and have murdered and massacred the
innocent lambs: such havoc your Popes have kept amongst the Saints of God,
and yet they would be accounted to be Peter's successors: but what a counterfeit
Hypocrite is your Pope, that under a show of humility will profess himself to
be Seruus seruorum, and yet will take upon him to control, and dominere over
Emperors and Kings: and because Christ has said, I have prayed for thee Peter
that thy faith should not fail, therefore (say the papists) the Pope cannot
err, thus they do wrest and wrythe holy scriptures, to serve their fleshly
appetites, and as for Saint Peter's Patrimony, Saint Peter's Seat, Saint Peter's
Keys, Saint Peter's Power, Saint Peter's Authority, yea and Saint Peter
himself, they are all made props and supporters to uphold the Popes pride.


Ta. Why how now Patricke, what art thou out of thy wits, will thou impugn
saint Peter's authority, or will thou deny that he has absolute power, both to
bind and to loose, either in heaven or in earth, as Christ himself has given
and warranted unto him?


Pa. I deny him nothing, but that he had full power and authority by the
preaching of the Gospel, both to bind and to loose, to open and to shut, and to
do all things in as large and ample manner as either James, or John, Philip,
or Bartholomew, or any other of the Apostles, whom our Savior himself after
his resurrection, armed with equal authority, when in the 20. of John, he sent
them into the world, to preach to all nations.


Ta. Thus I perceive you can be contented that Peter should march with the
rest of the Apostles in equal rank, but you will not admit him any supreme
authority.


Pa. If you can allege but any one place of scripture that does give unto
Peter, any more then the rest, you shall find me apt enough to acknowledge it.


Ta. Is not this confirmation enough, when Peter is the rock, whereon Christ,
himself said, he would build his Church?


Pa. I wonder papists are not ashamed to urge that place of scripture so
grossly, Peter acknowledging Christ to be the son of God, our Savior
answered* Upon thisrocke, I will build my Church: the Pope would have the
rock to be Peter himself, whereon Christ promised to build his Church: when
indeed it was the faith of Peter, confessing Christ to be the son of God,
for faith is the rock whereon Christ's Church is built: for who is of Christ's
Church, but he only that believes Christ to be the son of God? this faith
is it against which the gates of Hell cannot prevail.


Ta. What malicious despite is this to deprive Saint Peter of his
principality: give him some pre-eminence for shame, if it be but because he
was the first amongst the Apostles, that confessed Christ to be the son of
God.


Pa. It is truth, Peter was the first amongst the Apostles, that confessed
Christ to be the son of God, and so he was the first again that denied his
master, neither do we seek to depryue that blessed Apostle of any pryoritie
that the word of God does allow him, but rather to curtall your Idolatrous
Pope, who by magnifiyng of Peter would thereby exalt himself, Peter's name is
used but to uphold his pride: but if you have no better proofs then these to
confirm Peter's greatness, hear what I can say in the negative, to prove that
Peter was no greater then the rest of the Apostles.


Ta. I would feign see that (quoth blind Hew) for that would seem strange
amongst Catholics.


Pa. Why then to open the eyes of blind popish Catholics, let them look first
into the Acts of the Apostles, Chap. 8. where the Apostles that were at
Jerusalem, understanding that the Samaritans had received the Gospel of Christ
by the preaching of Philip, they immediately sent both Peter and John, for the
better confirmation of the Samaritans: this argues that Peter had no such
jurisdiction over the rest of the Apostles as our papists do dream of, for
then he could not have been sent, but Peter and John were sent, as other
private persons, to preach and minister to the Samaritans.

And in the eleventh of the Acts, when Peter had been warned by a vision to
go to Cornelius, the rest of the congregation called him to an account, and
after a sort rebuked Peter for entering the house of an uncircumcised person,
and Peter was driven in his own excuse to recapitulate unto them the whole
manner of the vision how it appeared unto him, and was warranted by the spirit
of God: by this it does appear that Peter had no superiority above the rest,
but rather argues an inferiority, then any place of principality: we read
how Paul again not only controled Peter about matters of circumcision, but
also withstoode him to his face, in such sort as he that should read over the
second to the Galathians, would think that if there were any superiority
amongst the Apostles, it rather belongs to Paul then to Peter: but there was
no dominering amongst them, nor one greater then another, but as I have said
before, they marched all in one equality, both in power and authority.

True it is that Peter did still show himself to be of a more stirring and
lively spirit then the rest, and was more apt and ready both in propounding of
questions, and in answering of demandes, which proceeded sometimes of ignorance,
as when he demanded of his master, whether it might not suffice to forgive his
enemy 7. times, thinking that to forgive eight had been too much.

Sometimes his readiness in answering was inspired by the spirit of God, as
when Christ demanded of his Disciples, whom they thought him to be, Peter
immediately made answer, I say thou art the son of the living God: sometimes
again over much confidence of himself, made him to be somewhat too forward
in his protestations, as in the 26. of Matthew, where Christ expostulating with
his Disciples, told them that this night they should all be offended by him,
but Peter led partly by zeal, and partly by presumption answered, If all the
world be offeded with thee, yet will not I be offended with thee* and yet the
very same night he denied him to a poor maid: and in the 16. chap. before,
when Christ revealed to his Disciples that he must go up to Jerusalem, there
to suffer many things, Peter rashly advised him to shun the place, and not to
go thither at all.

By these and other like places it does appear, that as Peter was of a more
quick and lively spirit then the rest of the Apostles, so he was more
foreward then the rest, either to speak or to do any thing as time and place
did serve, or as he was fitted by occasion: And as the infirmities not only of
Peter, but also of many holy men besides, are registered in the holy scriptures,
and left unto us for our example, so we do not cite these places of any spite
or malice whereby to impugn Saint Peter's Authority, but rather to make known
the Popes tyrany, that has a long time iuggled with the scriptures, and has
not only made Saint Peter a couerture to his pomp and pride: but also many
times abuses the name of the living God himself, for where he begins with
this preamble: In the name of God, then commonly he contriueth some service to
the Devil.

To wind up all therefore I say, that if that blessed Apostle Saint Peter,
would arrogate but half so much to himself as our grosseheaded papists will
attribute to their Pope, hell fire were fitter for him then so great glory in
the kingdom of heaven.


Ta. I wonder how any presumptuous fool in the world dare avouch these
blasphemies against the Vicar of Christ?


Pa. And I wonder as fast in what place of scripture you do find that Christ
would have any such Vicar, or how the Pope should come to that title, that you
speak of, to be the Vicar of Christ, but I wonder most of all that so many
fools will believe him but upon his own report: having neither scripture,
script nor scroule to confirm it?


Ta. You have forgotten your self Patricke: the matter is better warranted
then you are aware on, how many notable Authors have extolled the pope, so far
that they make it Sacrilege to dispute of his factes, Heresy to doubt of his
power, Paganism, to disobey him, Blasphemy against the holy Ghost, to speak
against his decrees and Canons.


Pa. And presumption, not to go to the Devil with him for company.


Ta. You may jest as you list, but what I have delivered is approved by
several special authors, as it appears testified in their own works and
writings.


Pa. And is not Bonifacius, a holy Martyr of the Popes own making, as good an
author as any of the rest? whose words be these: If the Pope be found to
neglect the salvation of himself, and his brethren, unprofitable or slack in
his office, silent in that which is good, hurtful to himself and to all
others: yea, though he lead with him innumerable souls by heaps to the devil
of hell, yet let no mortal man find fault with, or reprove him for his doings.


Ta. I will be with you to the worlds end, says Christ: And therefore what
soever Bonifacius has written, if the Pope should err as you have said, this
promise could not be kept.


Pa. But to whom was that promise made think you? was it to the Pope alone or
to the whole Church?


Ta. I think the promise was made to all, but to the Pope especially, that is
the head of the Church.


Pa. Keep that head still for your Romish Church, for the Church of God,
knows no other head but Christ.


Ta. But our Savior has said, it is not possible that theelect should be
seduced.


Pa. Not possible they should be seduced to fall from God, but the elect may
sin, yet not unto death, so they may err, but not unto destruction.


Ta. I say that the promise of our Savior that Peter's faith should not fail,
is enough for me to conclude that the Pope cannot err.


Pa. Then you understand Christ's words after this sort, I have prayed for
thee Peter that thy faith should not fail, that is to say, notwithstanding my
prayer for thee, thou thy self shall deny me, and thy successors shall be
heretics, Idolaters, and ^unnagates from me.


Ta. Make you what cauels you list in this matter, I do conclude that the
rulers of the Church must needs have the holy Ghost.


Pa. A happy conclusion for him that wears a mytre, and by this we may
perceive, how probable it is that the Pope can not err.


Ta. The Pope is the head of the Church, and Christ's Vicar general, here
upon earth, and in matters of faith, the Pope can not err.


Pa. It is truly to be proved, that not only the Popes but that wholl
Councels have sometimes erred.


Ta. That a Council may err, I will not gain say, but for a Pope to be an
heretic were strange to be told.


Pa. No wonder at all, if your own stories be true: Honorius dyed an
heretic, and was accursed after his death for heresy by a general Counsel.


Ta. Well, if it were so, there is but one, and one swallow (they say) makes
no summer.


Pa. Why then there was one Pope that was a noted heretic: but if I should
speak of many other abominations that have been committed by Popes, since
your third Bonifacius obtained from that Paricide Phocas, the title of
supremacy, were infinite to be spoken of, and that the greatest number of your
Popes for these 600. years last past, have not entered by Canonical election,
but by violence, sedition, corruption, and bribery.

Let your renowned Abreuiator Apostolicus: Platina, bear witness who
complains: The Popedom (says he) was come to that pass, that he that could
do most with ambition or bribery, he only obtained the papal dignity.


Ta. This is but one doctors opinion, trifles of no account, the malicious
reports of heretics.


Pa. Then I perceive one swallow will make no summer with you nor one doctors
opinion received in a matter of truth, but will you accept of good company,
what say you to Sigebertus, Marianus, Scotus, Martinus, and your holy Abbot
Barnarde, that have all of them inucied against your Pope, insomuch that Friar
Mantuan rayleth at Rome it self, giving this admonishment, you that wish to
live godly, depart from Rome, for all things are there suffered, save godliness.


Ta. The City of Rome has been renowned both for learning, and religion.


Pa, The City of Rome is now infamed for all manner of abomination.


Ta. Rome bears the same name she did 12. hundred years ago, and why
should she not challenge the same virtues which then she had?


Pa. Jerusalem was sometimes the holy city, but now she is become a shameless
strumpet, and Niniuie was spared for her true repentance, but since
confounded for her disobedience.


Ta. You are so full of scripture Patricke, that there is no dealing with you,
but if your College does teach this doctrine, I can tell you it will crack
your credit amongst your friends here in Ireland, but that paltry
Schoolehouse will do much harm here in Ireland, it breeds up heretics
apace, but if good counsel might be accepted, I could advise you of such a
course that howsoever it would be auayleable for your profit, I am sure it
would much better your credit.


Pa. Good counsel comes never out of season to a wise man, and as he may be
esteemed for a friend that will advise it, so he is no less happy that has
wisdom to follow it.


Ta. Then to show my self a friend unfeigned, and to make you happy if you will
not front your own fortune, the matter that I would induce you unto, is to
spend some three or four years study in any one of the Popes Seminaries,
where you should find a more ready and exact method and manner of teaching
then hitherto you have been aquainted with all, and that form of education,
and training up, as your College at Dubline will never be able to afford.


Pa. You mean amongst the Jesuits.


Ta. I mean amongst the Jesuits, that holy society, who for their great
learning, and godly conversation, are above all others most esteemed and
renowned: there you shall not only perfect your own knowledge with divine
wisdom, and understanding, but you shall be further enabled for the good of
your country, where at your return, you shall be received and entertained, by
the best inhabitants, not only of the English people but throughout the whole
realm of Ireland, who would not only receive you into their houses, but who
soever did sit at the table, your place should sure be above the salt.


Pa. The sum of all is this, you would have me to leave my study here at
the College, and for the bettering of mine understanding I should travail to
Rome, or to Remes, there to be instructed amongst the Jesuits.


Ta. You shall there both enrich your mind with knowledge, and advance your
credit with a reverent estimation.


Pa. Your Jesuits indeed are so famous for their learning, that they can make
themselves blind by seeing too much, they can set the holy scriptures at a
jar, and they are as curious in searching out the virtue of the words, as
they be careful to subvert the words of the truth: what is it which they can
not utterly overthrow with their fiery blastes of thundering words, by their
engines of Definitions, Distinctions, Divisions, Sylogismes, Figures Allegories?
then they have so many generals and specials, with such glosinges and
expoundings, that they will presume to measure Gods word and his works with
their logical Sophismes.

The purity of religion is inspired from above, and not to be comprehended by
dividing, defining, compou^ding, nor by any other sophistical manner of
contending.

A miserable and a most ungracious study, that does nothing else but study how
to err.

Who are they but your Jesuits that have brought the cause of Christ to a
mere brabble of words, whom neither the weakness of their own cause, nor the
force of the truth, nor the defense thereof so many times approved against
them, by the Authority of holy scriptures can content or dissuade them to
forsake the way of their contentions, but that they are still whetting
themselves to trouble the Church of God: and to inuey against the truth.


Ta. You were best to take a little breath Patricke, and then you may fall to
your railing again: was there ever a more malicious invectiue breathed out
against that holy societi, that all the world does admire as well for their
learning as for their integrity of life?


Pa. I do not marvel (Sir Tady) though the night Owl that has but a
scriking voice her self, should sometimes commend the Cuckoe for her sweet
and pleasant singing.


Ta. And the Cuckoe for a plain song may compare with your Nightingall.


Pa. So might Pan with Apollo, by the judgment of Midas.


Ta. I see you are too confident in your own conceit, I wished you well and I
would I could have prevailed with you for your own good.


Pa. I am afraid you do prevail with too many, that by these alurements, you
blindly lead to your Romish captivity.


Ta. Do you call them captives that are drawn to our Catholic Community,
whom we chearily feed and foster up with the milk of our holy mother Church?


Pa. The milk that you feed withal, is but Boyne Clubbo, it is not the
sweet milk that is drawn from the Gospel.


Ta. Do you disprove that food, that is as well approved by the Pope, as by
all the ancient doctors of the Church?


Pa. They must be your own doctors that must help you, for I am sure the
doctors and fathers of the Primitive Church, had little to do with your
religion.


Ta. And who be those that you term to be our own doctors?


Pa. Who should they be but the pillars of your Church, Bonauentura, Occam,
Scotus, Thomas Aquinas with an infinite number such other like that be of your
popish rabble.


Ta. Our religion is not so much propped up by them as by the holy scriptures.


Pa. Prove but that, and I will promise you to go to Mass three times a
week.


Ta. Is it not proof enough that has been confirmed by the Pope himself
many hundred years ago and all those confuted that have sought to impugn it.


Pa. Your Pope confureth more by poisons and by treasons, then he does by
arguments or by any other authority either of words or writings, that are
drawn from the holy Scriptures.


Ta. You may make as many cauels as you list, but I say the successor of Peter
cannot err, and therefore the church is safest when it is ruled by him for
whose faith Christ has prayed, that it might not fail.


Pa. Are we come to that again, I have already named you a Pope, that has
erred and dyed an heretic, and I tell you yet again that the divines of
Paris openly confuted the conclusio^s and articles of John the 22. and got the
same to be condemned before Philipe King of France with the sound of Trumpets:
but in whose name will not he craftily set forth his errors, which dare
falsely set forth himself in the place of the Son of God.

And have not some other of your Popes both corrupted, and falsified Counsels,
Canons, and Decrees, and all to uphold their pride?


Ta. Show me but where such a pranke has been played, and I will give you the
Bucklers.


Pa. Where it was decreed by the Counsel of Chalcedon, that Constantinople
should be advanced in ecclesiastical matters, as far forth as Rome, they
shamefully forged that Constantinople should not be advanced so far forth as
Rome, a horrible corruption of a Counsel, turning an affirmative to a negative.


Ta. And what can you make of that, but Vitiu^scriptoris, an oversight in the
writer, a matter easily ouerslipt.


Pa. These be your shameless shifts, when matters be apparently proved
against you, but what have your Romanistes left uncorrupted, no not the holy
Scriptures themselves, and how many books have been forged and foy sted in
several men's names, some of them calling their own dreams and fantazyes the
Gospel of Thomas, of Barthelmew, and of Barnabe: and what Epistles, Canons and
Decretalles, have been published under the names of Clemens Cletus and
Anacletus, and of diverse others well proved to be but forgeries.

And how many Monks and Friars, seeking to color their feigned holiness,
with the reverent titles of ancient Fathers, pre fixed the names of Augustine,
Ambrose, Hierome, Cyprian, Isydore, and of many others, before diverse of their
own fantasies, and forgeries, thereby providing to strengthen their kingdom
of blindness and error, the which if by the wisdom of God, had not been
plainly approved and manyfestly found out, we might have reverenced a
company of lousie Monks and Friars under the names and titles of ancient and
learned fathers.


Ta. Let them answer for themselves that have done these things, and I
believe if your own mynisterie were well sifted we might find amongst them
some that in their conversation of life, are not answerable to that semblance
that they make when they be in the pulpite.


Pa. Have you no better shifts then these whereby to excuse your impieties,
let the world then judge of your religion what it is, that is thus propped up
with such counterfeit stuff, lies, fables, dreams, visions, unwritten
verities, and impossibilities: Popery is a religion that can content it self,
with knowing untruths, without further search to find out the truth.


Ta. They are but heretics and schismytickes that will thus report: our
religion is approved by the Pope, and who is fitter to decide of truth, then
he that is the supreme head of the Church.


Pa. And although that supreme authority were allowed, which your Pope could
yet never prove, yet it will be said, that the right directions unto the
truth, must be discerned by the doctrine and not by the dignity.


Ta. Then who shall be judge of this truth which you speak of?


Pa. God is truth, and who shall be judge of God.


Ta. That God is truth it cannot be denied but of matters in controversy who
shall be judge of truth.


Pa. Who but he that shall judge all at the last day, and in the mean time, he
only is the supreme judge of truth: The Father has committed all judgment
to the Son, and my judgment is true, says Christ. John. 5. 8.


Ta. But if the scriptures be mistaken or misinterpreted, who shall then give
censure but the Pope?


Pa. This strife (says Saint Augustine) requires a Judge, Iudicet ergo
Christus. Let Christ be Judge: and Optatus writing of the same matter says,
There can be no Judgment, we must seek for a Judge from heaven, but why
knock we at heaven, when we have his will here in the Gospel: And we are
further taught, in the Gospel it self: They have Moses and the Prophets, let
them hear them.


Ta. You are loath I perceive that the Pope should be your judge, yet when he
speaks truth, I hope you will vouchsafe him audience.


Pa. No doubt but so long as he speaks truth, we will both hear him and
believe him, and so we would do by Balams Ass.


Ta. Then you will believe nothing for truth but what you find testified by
the scriptures.


Pa. Nothing else but what the scripture does approve, for your Mongrell Monks
and Friars have so corrupted and counterfeyted the ancient fathers, that we
dare trust nothing but what is concordant and agreeing with the scriptures.


Ta. But do you not find it testified that there were many things done by
Christ that were not written?


Pa. And yet a very foolish presumption to impugn things that are written,
upon supposall of those things that are unwritten: and Basyle gives us a
caveat in the matter, It is a manifest fall from faith, and a sin that
argues infinite pride, either to leave that which is written, or to admit of
that which is not written.


Ta. This common frequent that is had to the scriptures by every ignorant man,
has opened the gap to all* kind of division, of heresies, schisms, sects and
disorders.


Pa. By the light which we have received from the scriptures, your holy father
can neither mercha^dize the souls, nor empty the purses of so many men as he
was wont to do.


Ta. I tell you it is not necessary, that the unlearned and ignorant people,
should either look into the Scriptures, or understand our prayers.


Pa. Nor may they not hear them read, when they come to Church?


Ta. Wherefore should they else come to church but to hear both Matins and
Mass?


Pa. Then these words Beati qui audiunt verbum Dei, et custodiunt ipsum; is
thus to be understood, Blessed are they that hear the word of God, and knows
not what it means.


Ta. Our doctrine is very curious not for all to understand.


Pa. Pray God it be not as dangerous, for any to follow.


Ta. If there be any danger in the service of the Church, it must be amongst
Protestants, where every blind minister* may go up into a pulpite and teach
what he list.


Pa. Indeed the Protestant ministers have not half so many tricks and
turns, whips and slips, mops and moes, as your priest that is at Mass.


Ta. Every unlearned Catholic, does know his time, when to stand up, when to
kneel down, when to adore, when to say Amen, when to come, and when to go.


Pa. Indeed use does work mysteries: and long practice has taught them to
keep their Row, to kneel, when they hear the Sance-bell ring, to adore, when
they see the Host over the priests head, to stand up when he is walking of his
statio^s, from the one end of the Altar to the other, but may this knowledge
serve think you for salvation?


Ta. Do you make doubt of that? if the people but know this and when to say
Amen it is enough.


Pa. How unwise was Saint Paul then not to foresee this method, for as it
should seem by his Epistle to the Corinthians, the people were as good to say
Amen, when the Sance-bell ringeth as to the priest when he mumbleth up his
Liturgies, which neither himself nor they understand.


Ta. I will not speak of the peoples knowledge but I say he is but a sorry
priest that does not understand as much as is contained in his Ports.


Pa. It is an easy matter indeed, for a priest to say Mass out of his own
book, but to understand what he reads it were a goodly matter to find one
amongst ten that could do it.


Ta. To read well and distinctly is as much as we require, we are not so
precise as your puritan Protestants.


Pa. Yet none more ignorant then your puritan papists, as one of your
Catholic priests approved himself at the Christening of a child.


Ta. I never heard of the name before, nor I believe your self did ever know a
papist that was a puritan.


Pa. Ireland is full of them, where we may find more precise folly amongst the
papists of that country, then is to be found in Italy or Spain.


Ta. Your countrymen I perceive are little beholding to you, but out with your
ta^e of the christening of a child, where you say a papist did show himself a
puritan.


Pa. If you will have it for a tale, let it pass for a tale, a true tale it
is, and thus it follows, but yet within the compass of memory: an honest
townsman whose name was Brown, had kept his eldest son so long to schooll,
that in the beginning of Queen Mary's raygne (being grown up to man's estate)
for his great learning and clarkeship was thought fit to be made a massing
priest: by the advice of his friends, and his own assent, he took orders and
where before he was called by the name of Tom Brown: by his priestly
dignity, he had this adition, and was called by the name of Sir Thomas Tom
Brown: It was not long but he was invested with a benefice, and a child was
brought to him to be baptized: our priest that had never christened before,
betook himself aforehand to look over his book, and reading till he came to
Abrenuntias Sathanum et omniaopera, at these words he began to bless
himself, and making the sign of the Cross on his forehead, he called to his
assistance the Clarke that stood fast by, and demanded of him what those words
might mean, the Clarke that was as ignorant as master parson himself, told
him he understood no latin, and therefore could not satisfy him: whereupon
Sir Thomas was struck into a great amazement, for he understood never a word
but Sathanum, and that he was sure was latin for the devil: And for the
diuelles name to be used in the christening of a child, he thought was far
unfit for so godly an exercise; thinking therefore the word to be mistaken,
would needs seek out a better to supply the place, and scraping out Sathanum,
he put in Christum: And thus where it stood before* will thou forsake the
devil and all his works, Sir Thomas had in this sort mended the matter, Will thou forsake Christ and all his works: to the which the gossips in the childs
name must answer Abrenuncio, I forsake them.


Ta. I thought your tale would tend to a good purpose, but admit that this were
true, yet here was no purita^isme, the worst you can make of it, was but a
little mistaking, and that proceeded from a godly zeal, and a religious intent.


Pa. If you had joined ignorance with your zeal, you had shot something
near the mark, but by this you may perceive how necessary it is that both
priest and people should understand what is read and taught in the Church.


Ta. In our prayers we speak to God, and not to men, and there fore I see no
reason, why every man should look to understand what we read or what we say.


Pa. But it is the people and not God, that needs the priests voice in the
Church prayer.


Ta. The priest is the mouth of the Church, and therefore he must speak for
the whole congregation.


Pa If it be needful for the priest to speak, it is as necessary for the
people to understand.


Ta. It is needful for the priest to speak and to make intercession for the
people unto God, but in such a language as is acceptable unto God.


Pa. God with whom there is no respect of persons, has less respect to
tongues.


Ta. The Hebrew Greek and Latin, were all three sanctified in our Saviors
Cross, and therefore it has been long since decreede by the holy Church,
that God should be honored and served in one of those three learned languages.


Pa. But who set up those learned titles, was it Christ or Pylate?


Ta. What though they were set up by Pylate, those three languages were only
dedicated to the Cross.


Pa. Then Pilates impiety, that delivered Christ to be crucified, proclaiming
the son of God for a traitor, and to aspire the Crown of Jury in Hebrew
Greek and Latin, must prescribe a rule to the Church of God against the
Apostle Corin. 14.


Ta. It is enough to say that the Church has thus decreede, and a good
Catholic, should admit of nothing else, nor never seek further.


Pa. You were best to stick fast to that ankerholde, for if the authority of
your Pope be not able to countervaile both Peter and Paul, yea and to weigh up
Christ himself, your whole religion is but Idolatry, superstition and
hypocrisy.


Ta. I tell you for the approbation of our religion, although we had no
Scriptures to help us, yet we have such other circum stances, whereby to
confirm it, as I hope the proudest Protestant in all your College, will be
ashamed to make any doubt in the matter.


Pa. Our Protestants in the College would be ashamed to make doubt of any
thing that is apparently true.


Ta. But they must have scriptures for their confirmation, I am sure they do
look for that.


Pa. If it be for doubts in religion, for matters of faith, or for things that
do concern our salvation, they will beleeuc nothing but what is testified and
to be approved by the Scriptures.


Ta. Then they stand upon good security; and so a man may trust a Dog with
a shoulder of mutton: but these are unbelieving Apostles, that will not
acknowledge Christ to be risen, unless with Thomas Dydimus, they may feel the
print of his wounds with their own fingers: but blessing light on them, that
have not seen and yet will believe, the Revelations, that have bin sent, the
Visions that have been seen, and the Miracles that have bin wrought, to the
comfort of Catholics, and the confirmation of their religion* and let all the
Divines that be in your College, that does so much impugn our Catholic
religion, bring forth but one Miracle that does make for them, and we will
drop ten for one against them, for the approving of ours.


Pa. Indeed we bring no Miracles whereby to fortify our religion, but such as
were performed by Christ and his Apostles, many hundred years since.


Ta. And they be old ande over worn, but we have them every day spicke and
span new, Miracles upon Miracles, one in another neck, and those most
admirable and strange to be reported.


Pa. And I think no less incredible to be believed.


Ta. For the certainety of them there is none will doubt but heretics: and
now if I should speak but of half the Miracles that are expressed in our
Catholic hystories, I might easily find matter wherewith to begin, but never
find time when to make an end: I will therefore ouerpasse our Golden Legend,
a whole volume of Miracles extant in Folio, besides many other that are
contained in one holy book of Conformities, where mention is made as well of
birds as beasts, that came flocking together about Saint Francis, to hear
him preach, and how the Nighting gales, and other singing birds, would come
help him to sing Mass* but these are of an old date, I will therefore come to
new matter: what Miracles have been lately performed by our Lady of Hall, set
down by Iustus Lypsius, a most learned Jesuit, who now but within these very
few years, write two learned Books full of Catholic doctrine, in the praise
of two Images, the one of them called our Lady of Hall, the other by the name
of our Lady of Sichem, both of them the Images of our blessed Lady the Virgin
Mary: the which two Images (as Lypsius affirms) have performed greater
miracles, then the scriptures do testify were done by Christ himself.

There is mention made of ten several persons that were delivered in a great
extremity, from the danger of death, but by thinking of our Lady of Hall.

Seven others that were already dead, were restored again to life, being but
laid before her Image: now for curing of all manner of diseases, as to make the
dumb to speak, the deaf to hear, the blind to see, the lame to go, they
are common things matters of small account, she does them with ease and great
dexterity.

But amongst a number of other Miracles, I will deliver one for the comfort of
Falconers.

Lypsius confidently reports in this foresaid book, that an angry disposed
Lord, would have hanged his Falconer for loosing of his hawke, and when the
rope was about his neck, and he ready to be executed, he did but call to
his mind our Lady of Hall, and at the very instant of his thought, the hawke
came flying, and lighted on his shoulders: and so saved his life.

I think I might weary the wisest man in Ireland, if I should set down all
what Lypsius has reported of these two Ladies.


Pa. Does your Lady of Hall use to take no money for these cures you speak of,
does she all these things gratis, without any further consideration?


Ta. What miserable wretch would be so ungrateful as not to bestow an
offering of the mother of mercy.


Pa. Then I see it is not out of kind for Ladies to take offerings, but do
you call your Lady of Hall, the mother of mercy?


Ta. Patricke be not an enemy to thine own destruction, do but consider of
this that follows and use thine own judgment.

This book thus published by Lypsius of the Miracles that were performed by
our Lady of Hall, was contradicted by a Protestant minister of the low
countries* whereupon Clarus Bonarscius, a famous and a most learned Jesuit,
that was abiding in Antiwarpe, but within these three or four years, which
worthy champion of the Church of Rome, incountered this deprauing Protestant,
this low country minister, writing a book against him, which he entitled.
The great Theater of the Jesuits honor: in which book amongst a great deal
of other Catholic matter in a most eloquent and learned manner, he inveyeth
and bitterly rages against Protestants in general, forbearing to disgrace
neither prince nor pesant that are not devoted to the Catholic Church of
Rome, and was not ashamed to detect and reprove some Protestant princes
particularly without any respect either to their estate or dignity: and having
thus clarkly rayled and raged against them: he spends a little time to speak
of his friend Lip sius, whom when he had highly extolled for his Catholic
zeal in writing of those 2. books: he composeth an excellent poem in the
honor of our Lady of Hall, the which he dedicateth to her self and to her
young son.

In this Poem, amongst other Catholic matters he confidently affirms, the
milk of our Lady to be equal in comparison with the blood of Christ, and
that our sins are cured as well by her milk as by his blood.

That God has divided his king dome with our Lady, reserving justice to
himself and yielding mercy to her.

That a man may appeal from God to our Lady, and that sins are sooner forgiven
by her intercession, then by the mediation of Jesus Christ.


Pa. But is it possible (Sir Tady) that any such book should be extant as you
report, wherein should be published so horrible blasphemy?


Ta. Are you not ashamed to use any such terms, or to ask any such question?
I tell you there were two books first written by Iustus Lypsius wherein he
delivered the Miracles that were performed by our Lady of Hall, and by our Lady
of Sichem, and for this book entitled The great I heater of the Jesuits
honor, written by Bonarscius, in the defense of Lypsius, it has been thrice
printed within these four or five years, now last past, twice at Antiwarpe,
and once at Paris, with alowance and authority in both places: and for the
better approbation of the matter, one other learned father Possiuine a third
Jesuit, who in his Apparatus sacer, has given notice to the world, that
Lypsius did publish such awo^ke, and gives him special commendations for his
pains taking in the Catholic cause* who would think now that these books
could be thus published without controlment, but that they are warranted by our
holy father himself, and by the whole Church of Rome, for undoubted truths.

But what need I travel to fetch home miracles from beyond the seas, when
Ireland it self does so plentifully afforde them, and that in every quarter of
the Realm.

What Miracles are continually wrought at Saint Patrickes purgatory: at the
Holy Cross at Saint Sondayes well: and does not all the north of Ireland
admire the Miracles that have bin wrought by Saint Colume Kell?

But let me draw somewhat near to your College it self, are you not eye
witnesses how every 17. of March, what flocking there is of men women and
children, to that same holy sanctified poole, Saint Patrickes well, I hope you
do not think the wholl multitude, that do so yearly frequent the place to
be stark mad, to come running thither so thick, if they did not find
somesanctitie in the water? I warrant you they are not so arrant fools, as a
number of those that do use to take Tobacco, that will be still stuffing
themselves with smoke but upon a vain conceit.

But is not this a miracle especially to be admired, to see so many women
Tavern keepers, that for conscience sake, will eat no flesh on Frydaies, that
some of them do not ride in a Cart on Saturdayes.


Pa. Sir Tady, if these miracles be any confirmation to your Romish religion,
I could furnish your store, with such like, as for the reverence of the Reader
I shame, and for the honor of God I fear to speak of.

But this is a miracle in our eyes, to see that the papists should affye
themselves in a religion, that is but propped up with such stuff as this, and
we do as much wonder to see their blindness, that will be drawn from the truth of
Gods word to believe such gross and palpable follyes, lies fables, and
fantazies of their own devising but that the Apostle has given us this
caveat: And therefore God shall send them strong delusions, that they should
believe Lies, that all they might be damned, which beteeued not the truth, but
had pleasure in unrighteousness. 2. These. 2.


Ta. Do you callthese fables, lies fantasies, and I cannot tell what, that are
thus fortified and confirmed, under these authorities?


Pa. I say, we may boldly pronounce your Romish religion to be accursed, that
would bring that blessed Virgin in comparison with God and Jesus Christ,
thereby eclipsing the glory of Gods mercy, and the worthiness of Christ's
satisfaction.


Ta. If you fall a cursing of those that do give honor to the Queen of
heaven her self, what will you pronounce against those that do both honor
and worship to the Image of our Lady?


Pa. Do not you think that the worshipping of Images is flat Idolatry?


Ta. Yes if you mean the worshipping of the Idols of the heathen.


Pa. I mean the Images of the virgin Mary, of Peter, of Paul, or of Christ
himself.


Ta. Do you call the Image of Christ an Idol?


Pa. If it be worshipped, it is an Idol, and the burning of Incense unto it,
is flat Idolatry.


Ta. Dare any damned heretic avouch this?


Pa. It is approved by the second commandment, Thou shall not make to thy
self any graven Image, nor the likeness of any thing, that is in heaven above,
or in the earth beneath.


Ta. But does this precept touch the Image of Christ, or our blessed Lady?


Pa. It touches any thing that is made with hands, that is worshipped, bowed,
or kneeled unto.


Ta. This can not be understood of the Image of the true God, for if the
Images of Princes may be reverenced, and no Idolatry committed, much more the
Image of God.


Pa. Earthly similitudes of man's own making, must not control the heavenly
precepts of Gods own giving: the Images of Princes, of those meaner
personages, may well be tolerated, and yet to bow the knee, to lift up the
hand, or to do worshipp to such an Image, there is no doubt, but it were
Idolatry.

God has commanded and that directly that no graven Image should be made, now
if any graven Image of God might be worshipped, why might it not be made,
since it cannot be worshipped before it be made?


Ta. O monstrous abomination, what an heresy is this, that the Image of the
true God should be accounted for an Idol.


Pa. The Image of the true God, being made with hands, is a false God, and no
likeness of his, but a lewd and a foolish imagination of those that would so
imagine it, for what resemblance has a dead stock, or a stone, fashioned like
a man, and painted or gilded over, to the glorious, invisible, and infinite
majesty of the ever living God: and how dare any man defend the worshipper of
such an Image, when God himself has accursed the maker.


Ta. Idolatries be those when they be done to the Images themselves, but our
worshippings are not such, for we worship not the earthly matter or shape,
but rather the things that are represented by them.


Pa. So did the Israelites, when they set up the golden Calfe, to testify
their thankfullnes for their deliverance out of Egypt, they erected an Image
unto God their deliverer, and proclaimed a holy day (not to the Calfe) but to
the Lord.


Ta. May we not give some reverence to the Image of Christ though he be in
heaven, as well as you do to the Thrones and Letters of Princes, when themselves
be not present?


Pa. What grosser Idolatry may be committed, if we may not worship the
creatures themselves, that are the works of Gods hands: and yet will adore
and worship those Images and Idols, that are but the works of men's hands.


Ta. Is is not acceptable unto GOD to have the shape of his Son always
before our eyes, that we may the rather honor him in our hearts?


Pa. And since without Images we must remember the Father that made us (which
cannot be resembled to any similitude) why should we forget the Son that has
redeemed us, but we must have an Image at our elbowe, to put us in remembrance.


Ta. It is testified that the Apostles themselves did both make and worship
Images.


Pa. It had need be a strong testimonye that should confirm that for a
certain truth.


Ta. You will hardly believe that Christ himself made the likeness of his
own face and sent it to king Abaragus.


Pa. I could sooner believe he sent it to the Queen rather then to the king
himself;


Ta. And why more to the Queen then to the king himself.


Pa. Perhaps he might send it to the Queen for a love token


Ta. Patricke where have you learned to speak of these nippinge iestes that
you have in such a readynes.


Pa. Sir Tady where have you learned to shake of these shameless lies which you
have in such abundance.


Ta. I tell ye it is testified for certain that he sent it to king Abaragus
himself.


Pa. I tell ye I cannot believe any of these obscure fooleryes.


Ta. You will say it is but a fable, that the Image of our Lady was drawn by
Saint Luke.


Pa. But do you find this to be set down for a written verity?


Ta. What else: it is testified and confidently delivered by Simion
Metaphrastes an ancient writer.


Pa. Does not your ancient author make mention who it was that made our Ladies
Coach?


Ta. As though our Lady that bare Christ did ever ride in a Coache.


Pa. Why not ride in a Coach as well as have her Picture drawn, where it is
common amongst Ladies in this age: and me thinks Simion Metaphrastes should
as well have made mention of the one as he did of the other.


Ta. I see you are too full of scoffs, and I could wish you to leave them.


Pa. I do but toss you back your own balls such as you your self first
served to the house, and mine answers I am sure are not so ridiculous as the
matters you appose.


Ta. I appose you with nothing, but what has been testified by the fathers of
the church, whose wrytinges, although many of them be perished yet being left
unto us by tradition they must be beleeu^d.


Pa. And under the names and tytles of these Catholic fathers, no small store
of monkishe Impietyes have bine forged, but the wisdom of God has so provided
for his church that they are well enough discovered.


Ta. I perceive you are very vehement against the worshipping of Images, what
say you then to the Invocation of the holy Saints themselves, may we call upon
them in the time of necessitye?


Pa. Come unto me (says our savior) all you that are laden and I will ease
you. if he himself has so lovingly called us if we refuse him and seek
toanother, it is of some distrust that we have of him, and what is that but to
make God a liar and not to think him true in the promise he has made unto us.


Ta. Well I perceive there will nothing digest with you but Scriptures, look
into the 5. of Job, how like you of those words call now if any will answer
thee, and turn thee to some of the Saints:


Pa. The words of Elyphaze one of Jobs friends who speaks not of the Saints
departed, but wishes Job to consider, whither any of the godly then living did
so rage and murmr, against God as he did.


Ta. But that God will accept of other men's prayers for us, look into the 4*2
of Job, when his wrath being kindled against Elyphaze and his friends, he
would not hear themselves, but accepted Jobs prayers for them.


Pa. Elyphaze and his two friends, because they contemned Job, and preferred
their own ryghteousnes: God therefore to pull down their pride, and to give a
testimony of Jobs Innocence faith and patience, sends Elyphaze and his
fellows to Job promising to accept his prayers for them: but papystes are near
driven when they must fetch confirmation out of the old testament for the
Invocation of Saints when their own Jesuits do confess that before Christ's
ascension, praying to Saints were not in use especially of those that were dead
and deseased, which by the opinion of the papists were in Limbo, till Christ's
ascension:


Ta. The fathers of the old testament did often allege and appose against
gods wrath the names and merytes of the holy Patryarches remember thy servant
Abraham, Isack and Jacob, for thy seruante Dauides sake refuse not thine
anointed, and why may we not then stand upon Saints merits.


Pa. But these Inuocations thus made, do not depend upon the merytes of those
holy Patryarches but upon the covenant and promise which God had made unto
them, and to their posterity: so says Moses, remember Abraham, Isack, and
Jacob, thy servants to whom thou have sworn by thine own self that thou will multiply their seed, and such other places there be sundry in the old
testament.


Ta. It should stand with reason and common sense that like as we are first
brought into the presence of earthly kings by favorites, and such as are in
grace and lykinge about him even so do Saints, by their holy prayers, bring us
to the presence and favor of the king of heaven.


Pa. Call upon me in the day of trouble says God by his Prophet, and I will
hear thee: if any man sin (says Saint John) we have an advocate with the
father Jesus Christ.

No man comes to the father but by the son, and whatsoever we shall ask in
Christ's name we shall obtain the same undoubtedly.

These and many otherlike places we have in the Scriptures that send us to
Christ, now if you can show us but one text, that does command us to pray unto
Saints, it shall suffice, I will never contend further.


Ta. If we have no text, of Scripture that does command it, yet being (as it
is) approved by the Romish Church, is as much as we care for.


Pa. Your Romish church indeed does avouch what she^ list, without care,
without cause, without shame, or without sense.


Ta. That the Saints are not only medyators and intercessors for us, and that
they have sometimes a hand in our redemptyon, does plainly appear by this
prayer that the church of Rome reads publyquely upon Saint Thomas Beckets
day that was sometynes Bishope of Canturbury, which follows in these words,
Dens, pro ouius Eclesia etc. O God, for whose Church the glorious Bishop
Thomas, was put to death, by the swords of the wicked, grant we beseech thee,
that all that desire his help may atteyne the effect of their petition to
salvation:

By this it does appear, how that glorious Bishop Thomas, did shed his blood
for the church of God: And that the mystery might the more plainly appear,
mark yet again this second prayer contained in these words.

Tu, per Tho: sanguinem etc. Thou O Christ, cause us to come thither where
Thomas is even for the blood which he shed for thy sake.

By this it apeareth that this holy Martyr is not only a medyatour but a
redeemer, for here we make intercession unto Christ that by the blood which
Thomas shed, we may come where Thomas is, the words are plain.


Pa. And that is to the infernal pit of Hell, O doctrine of diueles that does
teach the silly people to fly from the blod of Christ, to seek there
salvation in the blood of a Traitor, a seditious wretch that was only
canonyzed by the Pope for his Traiterous demeanure and disobedience to his
lawful prince:

I tell you sir Tady you could not hauesought out a fitter fragment whereby to
make manifest the adultrous religion of your whorish church of Rome, then this
that you have brought of that traitor Thomas Becket.


Ta. I thought as much before that you would take exceptions to him, because he
with stood the prince, for the Catholic cause but I hope you will take no
exceptyons to those inuocations that have been dedicated to our blessed Lady,
whereof there are no small store, one amongst the rest O Mariagloriosa etc. O
Mary glorious, in dainties delitious, prepare thou glory for us.

Again, Mariamater Domini etc. O Mary the Mother of our Lord, the son of the
eternal God, help us all that fly for help unto thee: Again, Maria gratia
etc. O Mary the mother of grace, the mother of mercy, defend thou us from our
ghostly enemies, and receive us at the hour of death.

Yet again, Veni Regina gentium etc. come Queen of the Gentiles, extinguish
the fiery heat of our sins, blot out whatsoever is a miss, and cause us to
lead an innocent life. These and many other that might be named all of them
proving that the invocation of Saints has been both approved and had in use
in the church of Rome, and I hope you have heard of our Ladies Psalter, that
was printed at Paris almost 100. years since, where the whole number of the
150 Psalms are turned from Dominus to Domina, quite topsie turuie from our
Lord to our Lady.


Pa. I do not so much wonder at that (Sir Tady) when now in the hottest Sun
shine of the Gospel, we see almost every day whole Lordships to be sold, and
but to uphold Ladishippes: but to speak reverently of that blessed Virgin, for
the fruit of whose womb, all generations do call her blessed, her glory
does not so much consist in the bearing of Christ, as in her steadfast faith,
and believing in Christ* which caused her joyfully to sing: My soul does
magnify the Lord, and my spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior: And therefore
what Papists do attribute for honor, is plain blasphemy to that blessed
Virgin, for Christ being our hope (and not our Lady) they ascribing to her what
she is not, do thereby dishonor God, and do her no worship at all.

How wicked a thing is it then to think that the Saints do sometimes plague
and punish us because we do them not that superstitious honor, which is
their dishonor, and not only our shame, but also our sin.


Ta. I see the repugnancy of our religion to be such, as there is no hope of
reconcilement; for what we acknowledge to be holy, that you say is profane,
and those rites and ceremonies, which we do most endeavor for devotions
sake, in the exercise whereof we do seek our greatest piety, those you
condemn to be superstitious, Idolatrous, and blasphemous, and that our whole
religion is nothing else, but sacrilege, and a dishonouring of God, I will
therefore reason no further in these matters, that I see will not be helped,
but tell me now in the way of goodfellowship, did you ever see a priest say
Mass?


Pa. I will never deny it Sir Tady, I confess I have seen a Mass.


Ta. Then you have not lived altogether so irreligiously, but that you have
once seen a Mass, but tell me truly, how did you like it?


Pa. O passing well, I never saw a thing that better pleased me, but once:


Ta. And what was that one thing, that you say pleased you better?


Pa. It was a Puppet play, that was played at Dubline, but now this last summer.


Ta. Then the sight of a Puppet play, was better pleasing to you then the sight
of a Mass.


Pa. When your priest has put on his masking apparel, and has gotten all his
trinkets about him, if there were an Irish Bagpiper by, that had a deep Drone,
to play and entertayne the time whilst the priest were in his Memento, and had
made an end of all his dumb shows: what with the music of the one, and the
gestures of the other, it would pass all the Puppet plays in the world.


Ta. Now I am of the like conceit of your holy communion, that is but a
profanation of the blessed Sacrament, and no ways concordable with Christ's
institution, where you neither receive the flesh of Christ, nor use adoration.


Pa. The flesh of Christ is both eaten in the spirit, and adored in the spirit,
yea the very eating of it, is adoring of it, since it is not eaten but by
believing for he that believes not eats not the flesh of Christ.


Ta. As though the flesh of Christ were not enclosed in the form of bread, and
corporally eaten with the mouth of man.


Pa. But does the infidel or unbelieving man receive Christ so really as you
say, if he receive your sacrament?


Ta. The denial of it is the high way to all those heresies that are held by
the Protestants, and till they believe that, what do they but blaspheme the
doctrine of the Catholic Church.


Pa. And the misconstruction of Christ's words is it that leads the papists
to their Idolatry.


Ta. For our misconstruction take you no thought, for we are past all fear of
that.


Pa. And those that are past all fear are commonly past all recovery, and he
is in most danger of death, that in an extreamitie of sickness feels it
least.


Ta. Our intent is to worship Christ, we have no meaning to worship the
elements, of bread and wine (as you untruly report) but the blessed body of
Christ, that is contained in those accydents of bread and wine.


Pa. But speak truly (Sir Tady) do you adore the body of Christ in the
mysteries by a spiritual understanding, or do you adore the mysteries
themselves?


Ta. Finding him really and corporally in the sacrament, there we worship him,
where we find him.


Pa. If your zeal be such, to worship Christ in every place where you find
him, why do you not worship the Priest when he has been at mass, or any
other man, that is a member of the Church.


Ta. Do you think that Christ is no otherwise in the Sacrament, then he is in
a mortal man.


Pa. I tell thee, he is more truly, really, and naturally in those men that be
his members, then he is in the elements that be used at his table.


Ta. O blasphemy, blasphemy, O horrible and shameless heresy, is any mortal
man, transubstantiated into Christ as the elimentes are by power of
consecration.


Pa. The words of Saint Paul. 2. Corin. 13. Know ye not your selves, that
Christ is in you, except ye be reprobate persons.

Away now with your transubstantiating the elimentes into Christ: the sacrament
is no part of the mistycall body of Christ as we are, for we are knit unto him,
even by the truth of his and our nature, flesh and substance, as members of the
same body to their head: the sacrament is but only annexed as a sign to the
heavenly grace, and therefore your imagination of this real presence is odible
heresy, and your worshipping the elimentes of bread and wine, abominable
Idolatry.


Ta. But tell me Patricke, is this the doctrine of your College?


Pa. No Sir Tady, it is the doctrine of Christ, that is read and taught in the
College.

It was pity that Academe of heresy, was ever founded, for since the erection
of that paultry school house, the Catholic religion is despised, God is
dishonored, and our blessed Lady, is out of all request, throughout the whole
Realm of Ireland.


Pa. O good Sir Tady be not deceived, Ladies were never in better request then
they be at this day in Dublyne.


Ta. You are contemners of the Catholic religion, and in your not adoring the
blessed sacrament you dishonor God.


Pa. I wonder from whence you do fetch your adoration, we have warrant in the
scriptures, to take and eat, but not to kneel down and worship.


Ta. Did not Christ say this is my body?


Pa He did so, but is that all that you have to say for your worshipping.


Ta. Does not your College teach, that Christ is always present with us here
on earth?


Pa. Our Savior himself has spoke it: Lo I am always present with you,
till the end of the world.


Ta. That's well yet, that you are conformable to some thing.


Pa. His divinity no doubt is always present with us, but in his humanity,
neither really, locally, nor corporally, as the papist does grossly imagine.


Ta. Are you there again with your Bears, I say if he be present with us, it
must needs be corporally, and locally comprised in the forms of bread and
wine, in the blessed sacrament.


Pa. You make your real and corporal presence to be a shelter for your
errors, but that being false, as long since has bin proved, what are you then
but most odible Idolators.


Ta. I say that after the words of consecration are once spoken by the priest,
the eliments of bread and wine are presently transubstantiated into the blessed
body of Christ really and substantially, as he was borne of the virgin Mary,
and what think you now, is not the son of God worthy to be worshipped?


Pa. No doubt of it (Sir Tady) but the son of God is worthy of all honor,
but do you think him to be there indeed, in these forms as you have spoke of?


Ta. It has been so received amongst the Catholics for an undoubted article
for these many hundred years.


Pa. I do ask you Sir Tady in the more ceremonious manner, because I have heard
of a mad conceited knight, that was an Essex man called by the name of Sir
John Raynsforde: who in Queen Mary's days, being in the company of Edmond
Bonner, then Bishop of London, who suspecting the knight to be adverse to their
religion, would needs urge him to make manifest to the world, what he did
believe of the blessed sacrament of the Altar: thereby to show himself to be
an obedient child truly legitimate to the Catholic Church.

The Knight would give no other answer, but that he believed as the Bishop
himself believed, and prayed the Bishop to speak truly what he himself did
think in the matter.

To whom the Bishop answered, that he shamed not to make free confession of his
faith, at all times, and in all places: And to satisfy your demand (said the
Bishop) my belief is that in the sacrifice of the Mass, after the priest has
spoken the words of consecration, there remains no more bread nor wine, but
the blessed body of Jesus Christ, is there really contained under the forms of
bread and wine.

Very well (said the knight) it is an easy matter for a man to be leeue all
this: but what else what else, what do you think more of that blessed
sacrament? why (quoth) the Bishop, what should I think more then I have
already said: I think that after the words of consecration being spoken by the
priest, that there remains the blessed body of Jesus Christ, flesh blood and
bone, as he was borne of the virgin Mary.

The Knight began in a ceremonious manner to protest how his belief was, that
after the priest had spoken the words of consecration: Hoc est Corpus meum,
that under the forms of bread and wine, Christ was there remaining, in a suite
of Russet Satine, a velvit Cap, and a feather on his head: a Spanishe Coape on
his back, a pair of silk stockinges, and a gylt Rapyer and Dagger by his
side.

How think you now Sir Tady, by the knights opinion, I promise you for my
part, I believe the Bishop and him both alike.


Ta. Have I all this while listened for such a conclusion: but tell me Patricke
what became of that knight, was he not burned for his heresy.


Pa. It is more heresy for a man to believe that Christ is in the sacrament
gentleman-like, then for our massing priests of Ireland, to suit themselves in
that generous manner every day when they list?


Ta. Well Patricke I do see you are so blinded with presumption and rebellion
against the Catholic Church, that you will believe nothing, but what is
pleasing to your own fantasy.


Pa. Nay, what an absurdity is in you to think that Christ is eaten and
devoured by the wicked: Christ enters the soul, but not the mouth of man:
Eat you, this is my body, Drink you, this is my blood: these speeches cannot
be religious, except they be figurative, for this gross conceit of a carnal
eating, was it that offended the Caperniates in the sixth of John.

Yet that great favorer of Popery of England Sir Thomas Moore that Bellarmine
so much extolles for his wit and learning, does literally press those words
of Christ against John Fryth in this manner following: The very circumstance of
the place in the Gospel in which our Savior speaks of that sacrament, may
well make open the difference of his speeches in this matter and of all the
other: and that as he spoke all those but in an Allegory, so spoke he this
plainly, meaning that he spoke of his very body and his very blood, besides
all Allegories: For when our Lord said he was a very Vine, and when he said he
was a door, there was none that heard him, that any thing marueyled thereat:
And why, for because they perceived well that he meant not that he was a
material Vine or door indeed, but when he said that his flesh was very
meat, and his blood very drink, and that they should not be saved, but if
they did eat his flesh, and drink his blood, then were they all in such a
wonder thereof, that they could not abide. And wherefore, but because they
perceived well by his words, and his manner of circumstances, that Christ spoke
of his very flesh and his very blood.

Now if master Mores opinion be true, that the Capernaites, lighted on the
same manner of eating that Christ proposed unto them, then they deserved rather
praise then blame: but they mistook the words of Christ, who went about to
teach them the spiritual eating of his flesh, and drinking of his blood, for
so does he himself expound his own words afterward to his Disciples,
teaching them how they should be both faithful partakers of his flesh, and
rightful interpreters of his speeches: And as many fathers as have written of
that place, have so understood it, the which our Jesuits knowing well enough,
and are driven to confess that those words were spiritually meant, they are
therefore enforced to fly from that place which Moore so co^fidently auoweth
for that carnal eating and drinking, and will in no wise admit those words in
the 6. of John to appertain to any thing that was spoken by Christ at his last
supper, but do only stick as close to their Hoc est corpus meum, as the Cuckoe
to her song.

Pope Innocent, understanding that place of the sixth of John, as that great
clarke spoken of before Moore had done: caused young children and infants to
receive the sacrament; And of this carnal mind were many other Bishops a long
time, yet afterward looking more spiritually upon the matter, they confessed
their error.

Saint Augustine, giving a certain rule how we should know the tropes,
figures, allegories, and phrases of the scriptures, puts this place of the
6. of John, out of all doubt and question: his words be these: When soever the
Scripture, or Christ seems to command any foul or wicked thing, then must
that text be taken figuratively: that is as it is a phrase, allegory, and manner
of speaking, and must be understood spiritually, and not after the letter.
Except (says Christ) you eat the flesh of the son of man, and drink his
blood, ye shall have no life in you: he seems (says Saint Augustine) to
command a foul and wicked thing, it is therefore a figure, commanding us to
be partakers of his passion, and sweetly and profitably, to print in our mind,
that his flesh was crucified, and wounded for us.


Ta. But tell me Patricke, be these Saint Augustins own words that you have
thus repeated?


Pa. You shall find them in his third book De doctrina Christiana: Cap. 16.


Ta. In despite of all you can allege out of Augustine, Ambrose, Peter, Paul,
or Christ himself, I will believe nothing, but what the holy Catholic church
of Rome does teach and ratify.


Pa. Hold you still there Sir Tady, for that is the just reward of error, to
be every day more perverse, more obstinate, and more malicious, toward the
truth then other.


Ta. Do you deny that the body of Christ is not really contained in the
blessed sacrament?


Pa. Flatly.


Ta. O dangerous impiety, O impious blasphemy, O most detestable and damnable
heresy.


Pa. O now I see your chiding vain is come upon you sir Tady.


Ta. Is it possible for a Catholic priest to be patient, when every school
boy, will be inueying and itterating of matter against the faith of the
Catholic church?


Pa. For your better satisfaction Sir Tady, that the flesh of Christ is
spiritually eaten by faith and belief: what better proof then the Patriarchs
and Prophets of the old law, who before the incarnation of Christ, did eat his
flesh, and drink his blood, but in believing the promise that Christ should
come, as we do now in believing that he is come.


Ta. But they that do believe that the body and blood of Christ is in the
sacrament indeed, have the plain words of our Savior himself, for the
ground and foundation of their faith.


Pa. So have they the very words of God: which say that a broken potshard is
Jerusalem.


Ta. The Jesuits (you say) in the 6. of John, do acknowledge and confess a
spiritual understanding, but in the delivering of the sacrament, we be sure
he spoke of a corporal, and not of a spiritual eating of his body, for when
our Lord said, Take eat this is my body, did he not mean they should take it
with their hands, and eat it with their mouths, and therefore either the one
place does but serve to expound the other, or else in both places is
prescribed a real and a corporal eating of the flesh of Christ.


Pa. In those words Take eat, spoke at the last supper, no doubt, he meant
the corporal eating of that creature which he then gave them. And when he
added, This is my body: he recalled to their minds the doctrine he had
formerly taught them of eating of the flesh and drinkinge of his blood, in
which because they were instructed by the Capernaits error, and their masters
declaration of himself: That the words that he had spoke were spirit and
life, they neither started nor wondered at the matter, because they knew his
speeches to be allegorycall:


Ta. But with what confidence is it avowed by our savior when he said, Verily
verily I say unto you, Except ye eat the flesh of the son of man, and
drink his blood, you have no life in you:


Pa. And with what vehemence in the very same place does he affirm when he
says, verily verily I say unto you, he that believes in me has everlasting
life: thus you see, he that believes only eats the flesh and drinks the
blood of Christ, for if eating and drinking in this place, were referred to
the mouth and teeth, Judas, or any other infidel that were partakers at the
Lords Table, could not perish: or else it must follow, that to believe in
Christ were better then Christ himself, which were a great absurdity, for any
man to think: And Christ himself has said, he that eats my flesh and
drinks my blood dwells in me and I in him: now we know that sometimes the
wicked do eat the sacrament and yet they neither dwell in Christ, nor Christ
in them.


Ta. Well Patryck, I must not give you over thus, I have yet some other nuttes
for you to crack before I leave you.


Pa. Lets see what manner of nuttes they be, you shall see I will make a shift
to crack them, and if they be oughts worth, I may happ to keep the kernels to
my self, and leave the shelles to you.


Ta. To prove the real presence in the sacrament, I will avouch those writers,
that all the Protestants in Ireland, are not able to contradict.


Pa. Out with them in Gods name, letvs hear what they be


Ta. I will first begin with that great and learned Clarke Durandus, who did
confidently affirm, that Christ is present in the sacrament to the mouth and
teeth of the receiver, but he consents with Hugo That we must seek no
longer for a corporal presence then whilst we are achamming of him in our
mouth.

So long as he does remain, In visu, and sapore, so long we have him, but
these two will in no wise permit, that he should be swallowed in the stomach:
but this is enough, they both of them ac, knowledge a real presence to the
mouth and teeth: but now comes Bonauenture, and he affirms flatly, that he
is no less present in the stomach, then he is in the mouth: marry whether he
goes down to the belly or not, he stands in doubt, because of the diversity
of opinions that are holden: and yet he likes not, That the body of Christ
should go into the belly of a mouse, or be cast forth by the drought. And here
he shows a Catholic reason why: Because the ears of well disposed persons
would abhor that: and heretics, and Infidels would jest at it, and laugh us
to scorn that would defend it: But Alexander de Hales, in despite of
heretics and infidels both, does confidently affirm that: if a dog or a
hogg should eat the wholl consecrated Host, is no cause (says he) but the
Lords body should go there withal into the belly of that dog or hogg.

But now amongst the rest blessed Thomas Aquinas that holy Saint, does sharply
reprove those that think contrary: Some have said (says he) that as soon as
the sacrament is taken of a mouse, or a dog, straight way the body and blood of
Christ does cease to be there, but this is a derogation to the truth of this
Sacrament.


Pa. But tell me truth Sir Tady have you not wronged those Authors, that you
have here named, have you cited their words no other wise then they themselves
have set them down?


Ta. Now God and our blessed Lady defend that I should so injury them, it
were a shame for me to belie them, their own works are extant and to be
seen, and there are a huge swarm of others, a wholl sect of Thomistes that
do uphold all these positions, enough to make all the protestants that be in
Ireland to blush, but that they are past shame.

But amongst the rest, and for the better credit to the cause: Antonius,
Archbishop of Florence, and Petrus de pludo, joined both together affirming
that the body of Christ, may not only be eaten of a mouse, but also it may be
vomited up by the mouth, and purged down to the draught, these be their own
words.

Therefore the body and blood of Christ remain in the belly, or stomach, or
vomit, or in whatsoever course of nature: so long as the shows of bread and
wine remain, and if they be vomitted, or purged before they be altered (as
sometimes with those that are troubled with the flux) even there is the body of
Christ.


Pa. O peace Sir Tady no more for the shame of your self, and of all the
papists in the world, be these the nuttes you have to crack? O loathsome
stuff unfit to be spoken of: mine cares do glow to hear these gross and
barbarous repetitions: is this the real presence that you so much strive for?
are these the learned authorities, which you so highly extol, call you these
Saints that do teach such filthy and loathsome divinity? no marvel though
you account traitors for martyrs when your Pope has such cunning to make
Saints of blasphemers.


Ta. I tell thee true, that some of these that I have named are Saints
Canonized by the Church of Rome, and for the divinity they have taught and
spread, if it were not sound, religious and holy, do you think it could pass
as it does, ratified confirmed and approved by the mother Church, so many
years uncorrected or uncontrolled?

But I cannot blame ye though you blush, you may well be ashamed to see our
holy Mass, that so many heretics do seek to impugn, how it is
established vpholden and fortified, by no mean nor simple authority I warrant
ye.


Pa. I see indeed that those that have no regard of their co^scie^ces before
God, have less care of their credites before men, but it is time to give over
reasoning with papists, when they seek out such nuttes as these be for
protestants to crack, and some other business calling me away, I will therefore
leave you.


Ta. Well Patricke then for a parting blow, let me advise thee yet a little
for thine own good, be not obstinate, but be ruld by me it shall be for thy
benefit.


Pa. What is it sir Tady, to forsake my religion, and to turn papist


Ta. A papist as you call it, but in truth a true christian, and a^ ^^co^ciled
child to the Catholic Church, thou shall thereby show thy self to be a
natural Hibernian, where now thou remainest a steine to thy country: what an
Irishman a protestant? it is Rara auis in terris.

I will tell thee Patricke, and I will tell thee truly, thou were better to be
reputed a traitor to the King, then to be accounted as thou art, thus open
mouthed against the Pope, the one perhaps may find some few enemies to
prosecute him, but the other shall find every man ready to persecute him.


Pa. Sir Tady when I mean to turn traitor to the King I will follow your
counsel, I will turn papist. Ta. And until thou do show thy self to be a
professed papist indeed, thou shall find little friendship in Ireland. And
so farewell.


FINIS.

