THE Golden Chain of Salvation.

Written by that Reverend and learned man, Master HERMAN RENECHER.

And now translated out of Latin into English.

Romans 9.16. It is not in him that wills, nor in him that runs, but in God
that shows mercy.

2. Tim. 2.19. The strong foundation of God remains sure, and has this
seal. The Lord knows who are his.

AT LONDON Printed by Valentine Simmes for Thomas Man, dwelling in Pater noster
row, at the Sign of the Talbot. 1604.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable, my singular good Lord and Patron, the Lord Edward,
Earl of Bedford: As also unto the Right Honorable and virtuous Lady the Lady
Lucie, Countess of Bedford, P. A. wishes the inioying and increase of all
true honor and happiness here, and the fruition of eternal glory and bliss
in the world to come.
RIght Honorable my singular good Lord and Lady, as bounty and liberality in
people of the greater sort, is both seemly and very commendable, so
ingratitude and unthankfulness in people that are in the meaner place, is very
much reproachful, and to be shunned. To the former the mighty men of the world
are to be led, not only by the saying of an heathen Orator, who says,
Isocrat. ad Demonic.
Praeclarus est thesaurus, beneficium apud bonum virum collocatum, (i) A good
turn done to a good man, is as great riches, or as a treasure to him that does
it: but also and especially because such treasures are there laid up, where
neither moth nor cankar corrupts, Mat. 6.20.
and where thieves neither dig through nor steal; 1. Tim. 6.19.
this being indeed a good foundation against the time to come, that they may
obtain eternal life. The later, the inferior sort and the receivers of good
turns should labor to avoid, not only because of that brand, which the very
heathen men have set upon ingratitude, as in the short and usual saying it is
said, Perijt quod facis ingrato, That is clean cast away, which is bestowed
upon an unthankful party. And, Si ingratum dixeris, omnia dixeris, He says
all that may be said against a man, which calls him an unthankful man: and,
omnes immemorem beneficii oderunt, All men hiss and hoote at him which is
unmindful of a good turn done unto him. But chiefly because the holy
scripture (whereof one sentence should more move men, then all the sayings of
heathen writers) notes it as a reproachful blemish in men: Ge. 40.23.
as in Pharaos chief Butler, who did not remember Joseph, but forgate him: Lu.
17.117
and in the Leapers, to whom our Savior Christ said, But where are the nine?
It has pleased God, the giver and disposer of all things, to enable and move
your Honors to be both free-harted, and open-handed; and as not ceasing to do
good to the living and to the dead; Ruth 2.20.
so to love sundry of our nation (I mean of our function) as both my self and
others can justly testify: Luke 7.5
which if I for my part should not freely acknowledge, Genesis 41.9.
I might truly say with the aforenamed Pharaos Butler, I call to mind my fault
this day. Amongst sundry other your honorable favors on me conferred, I cannot
without forgetting and blaming my self, pass by those which I received from
you; as also (good Madame) from your good Lady Mother, the right Honorable and
virtuous the Lady Anne Harrigton, when it pleased God so near unto death to
visit me (by which your Christian kindnesses manifested both by word and deed,
I was not only refreshed, but as it were revived) which visitation and
recovery, as I trust I shall never forget, so together with the remembrance
thereof, I continually call to mind (otherwise should I be most unthankful)
the daily and manifold courtesies wherewith it pleased your Honors at that time
to visit me. The which I am the more bold by your Honors patience to mention,
because then I perceived there was nothing in your Honors house, that was
either too much or too dear, which was not for my use, Prove. 23.6.
and that not with an evil eye, or in any sparing sort, but both in bountiful
manner, and with honorable, both speeches and messages. So that I may truly
say, for the heeding and cherishing, which from you at that time (when Death
Gods Seargeant had as it were seized on me, had not the merciful judge of the
world reprived me)

I received: as the Apostle says, for his being received of the Galathians,
who received him as an Angel of God: so likewise was I, at that time by your
Honosr cherished and regarded. Your Honors herein imitating, or rather
exceeding that honorable woman of Sunem, in her kindness toward Elisha. 2. Kin.
1.10
For retribution, the only thing that I either may or can return, is
thankefulnes: which, as by these few lines I do in all dutiful and thankful
sort tender, so likewise by adventuring to present this small work unto your
Honors patronizing and protection: which if it please you to undertake and
accept, I shall both think the work to be the more graced, and myself still
the further obliged and bounden unto your Honors. The work I confess being but
a translation, is somewhat too mean to be dedicated to such noble personages
as I hold your Honors to be, yet sundry reasons have emboldned and enduced me
hereunto. At first, that the Author of this treatise did think this his
original work and labor to be fit to be presented unto our late Sovereign
of famous memory, as in his Epistle it does apeare. Secondly, in regard of the
excellent matter therein contained, it tending both unto the comfort of the
godly, and confuting of the adversary. And thirdly, for that I know your
honorable dispositions to patronize and countenance any treatises of this sort,
whereby God may be either glorified, or good done unto his Church: as may
appear by the godly labors which sundry godly and painful men have
presented unto your Honors, as being undoubtedly persuaded of your soundnes in
religion, as wherein indeed consists true honor, according unto that that is
said unto Eli, 1. Samu. 2.30.
Them that honor me I will honor: and answerable unto that which Solomon says,
Pr. 8.17,18
I love them that love me: and, with me are riches and honor, even durable
riches and righteousness. Of this, as sundry others can testify, so I myself
can say much by experience, as being the poor Minister of the place, where
your Honors for some good space resided: during which time there were apparent
tokens of your soundnes in religion, and care of the service of God, both by
your ordinary resorting unto the public exercises, as also by the religious
government and godly carriage of your family, which was the lantern and
mirror both of religion and piety in our country and county: your Honors
presence making our little obscure place like unto a City, whereas now,
through your necessary absence, it is like unto a wilderness: and your
hospitality and alms, the one entertaining sundry your friends and
neighbors, and the other relieving not only the needy of our congregation,
but also bountifully refreshing the confining poor of our whole country.
Neither that only, but in sundry other fruits does your godly care and love
toward religion appear: which as it is in it self, so I know your Honors do
hold it the very crest and top of your Nobility and Honor: for the which
things sake, the Apostle accounted both his noble birth, and all other things
to be but loss and dung, Phil. 3.4,8
that he might win Christ. Amongst many other testimonies and proofs thereof,
this one comes unto my mind, as not one of the least: which I am the more
bold, and that without any adulatorie or mercinarie motive, particularly to
mention, for that therein I shall but give unto your Honors your due, and
likewise by mentioning your religious and honorable example, aim at the
provoking of others to be imitators of your godly president. It is this:
Namely, for that you have been always ready rather to enlarge, then to
straighten our borders, and to add unto the portion of the Levites, rather
then to think that too much which is already allotted unto your house, name,
and persons, by how much the contrary, in the infallible judgment of sound
divinity, is an undoubted mark of irreligion and impiety. for how can men
say, that they love the temple, when they shall either by their simoniacall or
sacrilegious dealing, injury those that wait about the altar? or how can men
say, that they delight in the law, when they shall wrong the interpreters or
expounders of the law? It were as if a man should say, I would gladly have the
corn trodden forth, and yet I will muzzell the mouth of the ox that should
tread it forth. 1. Cor. 9.9.
Or as if a taskemaster should say I will have my whole tale of brick made up,
and yet deliver no straw to make them withal: Ex. 5.10.8.
which speeches are flatly contradictorie, and cannot stand together. Sampsons
wife said unto him, surely thou love me not, Judge. 14.16.
because thou have put forth a riddle unto the children of my people, and have
not told it me. The word and ministry may much more say to such kind of men,
surely you love me not, because you detain that from me which you ought to
yield. If Sampson were said not to love his wife, because he concealed that
from her, which he was not bound to reveal unto her: then much more may these
be said not to love, because they do detain and withhold that, which by all
law, equity, and conscience they ought to give. These people may be resembled
unto those kind of professors, which S. Iarnes speaks of, who say, Depart in
peace, warm your selves, Iam. 2.16.
and fill your bellies, notwithstanding ye give them not those things which are
needful to the body. So these, I mean the more fair spoken sort of them,
(for there is of them a generation, who as they have the virtue of subtracting
our portions, so have they the vice of detracting our persons) howsoever, they
can be content to give fair words, which, as the common saying is, will pay no
debt, yet they are so far off from thinking this godliness to be great
gain, 1. Tim. 6.5.6
as that they do rather think that that which is gotten this way is clear
gain: yea and do practice it, as though this corrupt gain were godliness.
These and many other sharp and acrimonious speeches, may justly be said against
these forenamed oppressors, so that your Honors have much to thank God and to
rejoice, in that, that by your religious and honorable carriage herein you have
separated your selves from this kind of men. 1. Tim. 6.5
That which your Honors have many ways deserved from me, and that that I do
unfainedly conceive of, and in all dutiful and Christian affection truly
attribute unto your Honors, may both justly occasion me to enlarge my self to
manifest and express my thankfulness: but that, first I do suppose you are not
delighted with having your own praises sounded forth: and withal, your
honorable and christian fame, is so sufficiently known unto the world, as that
my self, the meanest of many that are shrouded under your honorable wings and
protection, need not to be the trumpetter thereof. I will therefore, with all
dutiful and thankful remembrance unto your Honors end, with the saying of
Boaz unto Ruth: Ruth 2.12.
The Lord recompense your work, and a full reward be given you of the Lord God
of Israel. And likewise with that of Ruth unto Boaz, Verse 13.
Let me still find favor in your sight, my Right Honorable patron, and
patroness, for you have comforted me, and spoken comfortably unto me your
poor Minister, though I be not like unto one of your Ministers, but am the
least of those of our sort and order, which are patronized and protected by
you. The Lord continue your prosperous health and christian welfare, and ever
more increase the noble honor of both your Honors.

From your Town of Cheynis the ninth of June. 1604. Your Honors humble and
dutiful poor Minister, ready to be commanded, Peter Allibond, Minister of
Cheynis.

TO THE GENTLE Reader.
COurteous and christian Reader; I confess, that to publish a Translation, is
no more, then what may be performed by a Grammar Scholar: as wherein indeed
is showed more industry then Invention. Yet I pray thee lend me herein thy
charitable conceit and Christian affection, together with thy friendly
acceptance of that, which with an upright mind, aiming at the glory of God,
and at thy good, I do here tender unto thee. And for this small work, I pray
thee, be like minded, as the Apostle was, for the matter of preaching: which
though it were by some performed of contention, and by others of love; Phil.
1.16.18.
yet he therein ioyed, because Christ was still preached. In like manner, so
that God be glorified, and his Church edified, whether it be primarily by the
deep meditations of some, or secondarily by the painful translation of
others, rejoice, and thank God in it. For it is in the edifying and building
of the Church of God, as in an earthly house or building, wherein every stone
is not a carved or corner stone, but some are vnhewen, and fillers, (as they
call them) which, though they appear not; yet are they necessarily of the
building: So is it herein; some labors are more excellent, and some more
mean, Ephesians. 2.12.
yet both tending to the repayring of the Saints, and for the edification of
the body of Christ. That which moved my self and another, who joined with me
in this small work, was the worth and excellency of the Treatise it self: it
not being a frivolous or unprofitable Pamphlet, but a work very well beseeming
such a reverend and learned Author, as wherein is contained strong and sound
doctrine, to furnish thee with knowledge and judgment against the common
Adversary: as also very sweet and comfortable points, to comfort thy
conscience, against those same strong temptations of Satan concerning the
assaults of diffidence or distrust. On these two heads especially, depends
the matter and subject of this book: which if it please thee to peruse, thou
shall find in it no doubt, matter to thine edifying and contentment. We have
taken this pains, for the good and benefit of those, which understand it not
in the tongue wherein it was written: but for others, it shall be best for
them, if they please, to read it in the Original wherein it was written; as
wherein indeed it has the best grace, both by means of the elegant style and
composition thereof; as also because there are sundry terms and words of Art,
which can hardly be familiarly expressed or resolved by our idiome or dialect.
This, I say, gentle Reader, have we, by the Lords assistance, both attempted
and achieved; in regard of the goodness of the Treatise: and a good thing,
the more common and universal it is, the more commendable and the better it
is. The same reasons which do urge, that the holy Scriptures should be written
in a known tongue, do likewise proportionally enforce, that divine and godly
Treatises upon several passages and places of Scripture, should be made
familiar unto the unlearned and common people, as whereby they may be the
better enabled to understand the Scriptures, and so to be furthered in their
Salvation. So that if thou censure the translating of such Authors, thou will
very easily draw upon thee the blemish and suspicion of Popery it self. Thou
must not think, gentle Reader, that the Lord would have it to be amongst us
now, Genesis 11.7.
as he himself caused it to be amongst them which built the tower of Babel,
whose language was so confounded, that they perceyved not one another speech,
but that God would have it so to be in his Church now, as that every man should
say, Acts 2.11.
We heard them speak, in our own language, the wonderful works of God. But
I trust, I shall not need to make excuse for this our small labor, but rather
presume of thy loving and friendly acceptance thereof: whereof persuading my
self, I commend thee to the tuition of the almighty; promising thee, that if
thou will by thy good endeavors, so break the shell of an unknown tongue or
language, as that either my self or the Church, may by thy good means come
unto the sweet kernel of any good Treatise, I would give to God the glory,
and to thee thy due praise. And so I doubt not, but that thou will walk
according to that upright rule set down by our Savior Christ: Whatsoever ye
would that men should do unto you, even so do you unto them: Mat. 2.12.
for this is the Law and the Prophets.

Farewell.
The summarie Contents of this Golden Chain.
WHerein consists man's eternal happiness, or everlasting woe. Chap. 1. Fol.
1. The five linkes of this Chain, are, 1. Gods foreknowledge, 2. his
predestination, 3. his calling of men, 4. his justifying them, 5. his
glorifying them. Chap. 2. Fol. 4. That God exercises those whom he calls in
continual affliction, thereby to conform them to the image of his Son.
Chap. 3. Fol. 9. How many ways the foreknowledge of God may be taken; and the
use thereof. Chap. 4. Fol. 12. Distinction betwixt predestination and
foreknowledge, and of how many degrees it consists. Chap. 5. Fol. 18. Of
Adams fall, and Gods foreknowledge therein. Chap. 6. Fol. 23. The causes of
predestination: the definition thereof: and difference betwixt it and Gods
providence. Chap. 7. Fol. 34. The diverse kinds of predestination, and
properties of election. Chap. 8. Fol. 40. Election, whereon depends
salvation, is the chief foundation of a Christians faith. Chap. 9. Fol. 43. Of
Gods wonderful mercy mixed with his justice. Chap. 10 Fol. 49. Gods free
mercy is the true cause of Election. Chap. 11. Fol. 54. The Papists fiction,
of faith and good works foreseen, confuted. Chap. 12. Fol. 63. The horrible
offense of the Papists, touching faith and good works foreseen, by
unanswerable arguments confuted. Chap. 13. Fol. 71. The proprieties of
Election. The faith of the Elect immovable. Chap. 14. Fol. 84. The Consciences
of the Elect are by this doctrine strengthened most steadfastly. Chap. 15. Fol
94. The strong comforts of the Elect touching their salvation. Chap. 16. Fol.
98. The doctrine of Election, is most necessary to salvation. Chap. 17. Fol.
103. God is debtor to no man, therefore he may save or damn whom it pleases
him. Chap. 18. Fol. 119. The reprobate have not to blame God, but their own
sins, for their damnation. Chap. 19. Fol. 126. The horrible damnation of the
reprobate turns to the good of the Elect. Chap. 20. Fol. 137. That the Elect
cannot become reprobates, nor the reprobates ever be elected. Chap. 21. Fol.
142. In reprobation of the more part, Gods great justice appears, as in
electing the fewer, Gods infinite mercy. And how men should examine themselves.
Chap. 22. Fol. 147. How many things necessary to be known in the doctrine of
Election. Chap. 23. Fol. 152. A passage from predestination unto vocation, as
from the cause to the effect. And how diversely vocation is understood Chap. 24.
fol. 159. The Papists confuted touching man's strength: and how far free will
extends. Chap 25. Fol. 171. Of free Justification known by Vocation: and
what it is to be justified, after the phrase of the Gospel. Chap 26. Fol. 182.
What thing Justification is: with the three properties thereof. Chapter 27.
Fol. 191. What benefits come through Justification by faith: and to whom the
same do properly appertain. Chap. 28. Fol. 207. How to amend our corrupt
nature, and to restore the Image of God in man. Chap. 29. Fol. 210. The
obedience of the Godly, though imperfect, is accepted of God. The meaning and
true use of good works. Chap. 30. Fol. 223. Why God accepts of the imperfect
works of his Elect, and calls his own free gift, our reward. Chap. 31. Fol.
233. The great commodities, both public and private, coming by the studious
care of good works. That the Protestants do not reject good works. Chap. 32.
Fol. 244. Regeneration is begun in this life, though imperfectly: and without
it is no Salvation. To whom it belongs. Chap. 33. Fol. 251. By what bands the
Elect are united to God: by what signs they are known, and how assured of
Salvation. Chap. 34. Fol. 255. The effects and benefits of Predestination.
Chap. 35. Fol. 262. How the Linckes of this Chain must be considered, and how
inseperable they are. Chap. 36. Fol. 265. The world shall fade away, but the
gifts of this Chain are everlasting, Chap. 37. Fol. 268. The effects of
Election and of reprobation are contrary. What benefits of God common to both,
and what not: and Gods judgment touching both unchangeable. Chap. 38. Fol.
270. The Conclusion, exhorting to sincerity of life. Chap. 39. Fol. 273.
THE GOLDEN Chain of Salvation,
Containing and opening all the causes thereof: and orderly reckoning up and
displaying all Gods benefits that come unto us by the eternal election through
CHRIST, out of the words of S. Paul, Romans 8. verse 29. and 30. For those whom
GOD knew before, etc.
The Proeme, showing, wherein both the eternal happiness and misery of man
consists: and so way is made unto the present business that is in hand.

CHAP. 1.
AS there is nothing that can happen to a man more to be desired, or more
comfortable in this miserable life, then for him well and plainly to know the
true God, and his due worship: so can there nothing befall him more miserable
or hurtful, then for him to be ignorant of the true God, and his due worship.
And as nothing can more effectually rejoice the heart of man, then a good hope
and an uncorrupted conscience (for in a good conscience God himself lives,
and in it Christ dwells, and works by his power unto eternal life) so also
is there nothing that more disturbeth a man, or more sharply tormenteth him,
then an evil and a desperate conscience, (for in it Satan has the chiefest
place, and in it rules and works powerfully unto eternal destruction)
wherefore every man ought daily through the course of his whole life, earnestly
to weigh with himself, and always with a deep and serious cogitation, to
consider by what means he may be reconciled to God again, and so be freed
from the slavery and tyranny of the Devil.

Which that he may attain unto, he must labor and strive to come to the true
way to know God, and the proper causes of the attayning of salvation. The
former of which he shall find in Gods word alone, and the latter, in his
goodness only. For, look what things soever God would have known of man here,
concerning his good and acceptable will, those things has he most plentifully
and lively expressed and manifested in his word contained in the books of the
Prophets and Apostles. And that in such sort, as that God himself will
precisely be acknowledged such a one, and so be worshipped, as he is revealed
in his Gospel. They therefore do attribute due honor and glory unto God, who
do acknowledge him to be such a one, and serve him in such manner only, as the
holy Ghost has set him forth in the holy Gospel of our Savior. But whosoever
have a mind to worship and acknowledge God otherwise then he has manifested
himself in his word, they do, not only swarve from the right way to salvation,
but also seek God without God, and frame unto themselves a vain idol in
steed of the true and living God, and enter into an intricate laborinth, where
out they shall never find issue, but eftsoons come to naught, and utterly
perish in their errors.

Furthermore, although God in his eternal essence and majesty be infinite, and
contained in no one natural place, nor can be comprehended and perfectly
known of any creature, either caelestiall or terrestrial, (for between a
thing infinite, and a thing finite, there is no proportion) yet notwithstanding
he has so lively and manifestly declared, and laid open his wonderful goodness
toward man in his son, and in his merits, that no man (except he be
altogether an infidel and an alient from God) can doubt of it. For God has
sent his only begotten Son our Lord Jesus Christ into this world, John. 3.16.
that in him he might give unto us true wisdom and righteousness, true holiness
and redemption. Whosoever therefore do truly acknowledge and freely confess
his Son to be their Redeemer and Savior, 1. Cor. 1.30.
they do not only see the secrets, and as it were the open breast of God laid
open unto them, but also, shall have him their merciful and loving Father, who
otherwise is a seveare and terrible Judge, and may be as sure and certain of
their salvation (if they persuade themselves and believe that God is constant
and true in his word of promise) as if they did sensibly and fully enjoy it
already. For Christ by his blood which was shead upon the altar of the
Cross, has set them free from the power and slavery of the Devil, and God
has taken them to favor again, and by the power of his spirit, has renewed
and reformed them, and drawn them to Christ, and planted them in him by a true
and a lively faith. And to conclude, by his mighty power he does shield and
defend them against all the deceits and assaults of the Devil. Whosoever
therefore go about to overthrow and destroy them, must first overcome God
himself: and seeing that he can be vanquished of none, therefore their
salvation is so sure and firm, as God in his heavenly Majesty and mighty power
is invincible.

Here the sum of the whole work, with a brief declaration and division of
it, is contained.

CHAP. 2.
But that all the causes of Salvation may be laid open in order, some place of
Scripture must be chosen for declaring of them. And although the causes of
Salvation do offer themselves here and there in many places both of the old
and new Testament, which do plainly and distinctly enough declare, and
substantially enforce all the parts of this happiness: yet amongst all others
that place to the Romans especially pleased me, Ca. 8. v. 29. and 30.
and seemed fittest for this purpose. For that place conteyneth and unfolds
whatsoever is necessary to the attayning of Salvation. The words of that place
are these, there the Apostle amongst other things, says thus, Those whom God
knew before, he also did praedestinate, that they should be like fashioned
unto the shape of his Son, that he might be the first begotten amongst many
brethren: Moreover, whom he did praedestinate, them also he called, and whom
he called, them also he justified, and whom he justified, them also he
glorified. There the Apostle especially handles and discourses of the
calamities and sorrows of the godly, namely, that they which are chosen of God
from the beginning unto the fellowship of Salvation, are neither at all
adventures, nor by chance, nor by any their own loss afflicted with these or
these evils and inconveniences, but that by the eternal and unchangeable will
and providence of God, and of his especial goodness, they among all others are
grieved and afflicted with these miseries: for the children of God must here
undergo a long and grievous warrefare, before they can come to the attayning
of victory and triumph. Therefore God brings them to the excellent and
heavenly glory, by an uneasy, and an ignominious cross. So that the Apostle
here terms this grievous cross, continual persecutions, all manner of
reproaches and rebukes, and all other injuries and misfortunes by the name of
the shape or image of Christ, because the elect must endure them patiently as
long as they live, even as Christ has endured them. Therefore although it was
the Apostles purpose, to exhort the godly to an invincible patience, and an
undaunted perseverance, that being sustained with a certain hope and constant
assurance, they should wayt for an happy issue out of all their miseries; yet
notwithstanding he lays open the true fountaynes and springs, from whence
salvation flows and springs forth, and sets down the first causes from
whence it is derived, poynting at them as it were with his finger.

And surely in every word of that place, there is not only great importance
and singular grace, but also the words themselves are for the most part
complete and perfect oracles, and conteyne in them whole sentences. I have
thought good therefore briefly to run over, and compendiously to expound
them. But before I set upon the exposition of the words, the order and course
of the causes of Salvation must seriously be weighed and considered. For the
causes in regard of their coherence are raunged and displayed by Saint Paul by
a most divine skill, and a most exquisite and logical method. For in the
first place he sets down the foreknowledge of God, as the first and
sovereign cause. Then he proceeds unto predestination, as being next to that;
Next he turns his course and manner of teaching to the effects of both these,
as to the subordinate and second causes. For God by his foreknowledge foresawe
all things from before all beginnings. Nothing is exempt from this
foreknowledge of God, but all things, and every one thing is contained and
comprehended in that.

After this, he descends from this general and common foreknowledge of
God, as from a large and unlimited voice unto predestination, as unto a more
special kind included in this foreknowledge, and so he proceeds from a
generality, unto a more certain and particular kind.

For the foreknowledge (as in the larger signification it is taken for his
providence) is Gods eternal decree, by which he determined to make the world,
and all that is therein, and to make his glory manifest unto reasonable
creatures, namely, unto men and Angels, by the government of the things which
he had made.

But predestination chiefly is referd and restreyned unto mankind, which God
by predestination has divided into two kinds of men, so that of his own sole
and undeserved grace he has chosen some from eternity, whom he would make his
heirs in Christ, and bring to everlasting salvation: and has appointed other
some unto everlasting punishment and destruction, to the which also he brings
them by his just judgment from their own deserts. Then the Apostle proceeds
unto the subordinate causes of salvation, and shows by what means and
degrees, the elect on the one side come to eternal life, and the reprobate on
the other side are brought to eternal torments, as hereafter in the
declaration hereof shall clearly and plainly appear.

Furthermore also, I think this worthy the observing, to show in what order
Saint Paul has disposed and placed the causes of Salvation in respect of
time. And he has digested them with such art and method, as that he has
divided them into three distinct differences of times. For, certain of them do
far surpass and exceed all transitory times, as Gods foreknowledge and
predestination: these two causes of Salvation were from eternity appointed of
God without any beginning. Certain of them are made and remain in time, and
in these succeeding ages, as vocation and justification: the former of which is
wrought by the outward preaching of Gods word, and the inward working of the
holy spirit in the heart and will of man; and the latter is gotten and bestowed
upon man, by the only merits and power of Christ his passion. So these two
causes do arise in this life, and in our age. Certain of them are mixed, so
that partly they are wrought in this life, partly in the time to come after
this life, as namely they which are begun here and finished there, as
glorification, and those things that depend thereof.

This glorification consists in the true image of God, and the conforming of
our will with his will. And this image of God and fashioning of our will with
his will, arises and springs from true and effectual regeneration. And
regeneration begins in this life presently upon our vocation, and is
increased and continued through the whole course of our life, until at the
last it be thoroughly consummated and finished in an other life.

Therefore these inferior and second causes are as it were certain means and
interposd degrees, by which the holy men of God, by his eternal counsel, are
brought to the full possession and fruition of everlasting life and salvation,
as hereafter shall be showed in the handling of them.

In the next place, these causes do as aptly agree together between themselves
in their order and placing, as the links of any chain, so that no one of them
can be moved out of his place, but the whole rank and order of them will be
broken, and fall to nothing. The order therefore and placing of these causes,
is in the manner of a golden and princely Chain, whose linkes hang together so
artificially and workemanlike, that not one link can be taken away without the
breaking of the whole Chain. And this Chain is nothing else but an excellent
glass of Gods goodness and mercy (for the holy Ghost has made and linked
together this Chain, of the best and chiefest of Gods benefits) and it is the
highest honor and incredible glory of Gods children, with which they are
beautified in this life, and shall be crowned like Kings in that life eternal
which is to come, and shall shine more bright then the Sun it self in his
chiefest glory. And to conclude, this Chain is as it were a golden and
celestial hook, wherewith the Son of God letting it down from heaven,
draws his elect from out this world, as out of a raging and tempestuous sea,
and brings them into his heavenly and everlasting rest, as into an harbor
most safe from the danger of any storm, and into a most pleasant place of
refreshing and freedom from all miseries.

Lastly, the Linkes of this Chain, are in number five, in every of which,
what, and how great benefits of God are contained and included in the
declaration hereof, shall hereafter be showed.

These things I thought good for certain causes to set down, as some brief
and compendious Preface, before I would handle the exposition of the words:
which now being finished, I do betake my self orderly to those things,
which as yet remain to be handled and discussed.

Now the holy Spirit vouchsafe to be present with me, by his holy inspiration
and direction, and to guide me, that am to speak of such high and hidden
Mysteries of Heavenly things, and so inlighten and direct my understanding by
his bright-shining Light, that those things which shall be spoken concerning
the chiefest Articles of Christian Faith, and Principles of Religion, may be so
spoken of me, that they may tend to the Honor and glory of God, and the
edification and profit of my brethren.

That GOD does exercise his with continual afflictions, for their amendment
and health, and makes them conformeable to the Image of his Son, in
affliction here, and in the life to come in glory.

CHAP. 3.
FIrst, we must understand, that Saint Paul's purpose was, strongly to comfort
the Faithful, and to raise them up in Hope, lest they should be faynt-hearted,
and fall into Desperation, by reason of their infirmities, and daily slippes,
without which they cannot live: as also by reason of any kind of calamities
and miseries, to which they are daily subject and afflicted. Which that he
might thoroughly confirm, and evidently prove by substantial causes and
reasons, he settes forth the most constant and unchangeable Will of God, and
his most favorable and wonderful Goodness and Mercy toward the Faithful,
as a most strong and invincible Bulwark and Rock of Defense; and brings this
forth as a strong, and irresistable Argument, that GOD the Father of Mercy,
does willingly and easily forgive the weak falls of his Children. Next, that
the calamities and other afflictions of this Life, are nothing else, then Gods
fatherly Correction, and wholesome Chasticements. And therefore he sends
afflictions to his Children, that they might know their sins, and knowing
them, might detest them, and seek and have remedy for them, in his more then
Fatherly Compassion. Therefore GOD corrects and beats his Children with one
Rod or other, to the intent that he might better them, and he bettereth
them, to the intent that he might save them. Wherefore, to this end and
purpose does he chastise and exercise his Children with these outward
afflictions, as with a Fatherly Correction, that they might learn to hate
their inward sins, and abhor them, and decline from them. By how much
therefore he sends more and greater afflictions to them in this Life, by so
much the more does he declare and show himself to be careful of their
amendment and Salvation. For such is the sluggishnesse and stubburnesse of
man's Nature, that unless it be subdued and brought under, by sundry and hard
afflictions, it will not acknowledge her sins and wickedness, nor desist
from them.

By this means, GOD indeed does declare, that he has greater care of their
Salvation, then they themselves: because he not only draws them, and invites
them to his Favor, being as it were unwilling, and struggling against him, by
his more then Father-like voice, sounding in the Gospel; but also he awakens
them with sharp Corrections, and terrible threatenings and forces and
compels them to fly to his Mercy. Behold how great Gods goodness and mercy
is toward miserable man, in that he had rather of his own abundant Grace
save him, than for man's sin, though never so great and horrible to condemn
him. He therefore that does not weigh and think of his afflictions, to this
end, and with this Meditation, is scarce a Christian, neither has he as yet
much profited in Gods School, nor in the discipline of the Cross.

Paul therefore from this Chain of Gods benefits, does substantially prove,
and soundly conclude, that the godly are not rejected of GOD for their
infirmities and slippes: because that this is the nature of God, and this is
the office of Christ, that he blotteth and wipeth out the sins of his
Children, so that not the least remaynder of them should remain uncancelled.
And then again, out of this very same Chain, he clearly prooveth and
concludes, that the godly are not separated nor withdrawn from GOD by any
miseries and afflictions, how many or how great soever they be, especially
seeing that these calamities are not only as ladders and fit grifes set up
into heaven, but also seeing these calamities are nothing else, but Gods loving
rods and corrections, and as it were, certain heavenly Hammers, under which,
the godly, as it were under Gods Anvile, are prepared and fitted for that
heavenly glory and life eternal.

Saint Paul therefore intends to comfort the weak and fearful consciences
of the godly, and to ease and assuage their afflictions with this Meditation,
namely, that God for the Bowels of his Compassion, is naturally most ready to
forgive, and freely to remitte the sins of them that repent. Next, that the
trouble and afflictions of this life, which men suffer for the confession and
defense of Gods heavenly Truth, are no signs of Gods hatred, but much rather
most certain testimonies and infallible tokens of his Love and Favor. The
Apostle therefore persuades every godly man, and exhorts them all, to put on
the Armor of Christian Warrefare, and pass the Course and Race of this Life,
manfully and faithfully resisting the sundry sleightes of Satan, and the
manifold injuries of this present World, and faithfully and constantly
bearing the Cross of Christ: Being stayed up with this Hope, and fortified
with this Confidence, that in that Cross of Christ, there is certain
Victory, and eternal Triumph.

Here follows the Exposition of the words, and first of the Foreknowledge of
GOD, how many ways it may be taken, and for what it serves.

CHAP. 4.
Now it remains that according to the ability of my wit, and to the
measure of the gifts of Christ, I should take a view of every Lincke of Paul's
Chain, and diligently weigh and consider what they promise in the beginning,
what in the middle, and what in the end.

The first Lincke therefore of Paul's Chain, is, the Foreknowledge of God; but
least the ambiguitie of the word should deceyve any man, and cause him to err,
we must know that the foreknowledge of God is taken two manner of ways, for
sometimes it is used generally, and sometimes particularly. Of both the
significations I thought good to speak a few things.

The foreknowledge of God, taken generally, is no other thing, then the most
profound and immeasurable Wisdom of God, by which he now knows, and from
before the beginning foresaw and knew all things, which were done from the
beginning of the world, or which are now done, or which hereafter shall be
done, and therefore has relation not only to those things, which God himself
has already done, or does now, or hereafter will do: but also to all those
things, which all the Creatures together, or any one by itself, as well good
as evil, either does now, or hereafter will do.

Neither does it belong only unto the outward endeavors and works which now
are, and fall out in the sight of man, but it has relation also unto the most
secret affections and corners of our hearts, to our pryviest consultations,
and to our most inward and hidden thoughts. For as the essence of God in his
majesty, is altogether infinite, and spread through and above all things; So
is his Foreknowledge also altogether incomprehensible, which stretches it
self through and beyond all ages, and always saw perfectly from the beginning
all things contained in them, as if they lay present before his eyes, and
foresaw and knew them before they were. Therefore nothing, whether good or
badde, whether past or to come, can escape this foreknowledge of God.

And whereas I say, that the foreknowledge of God, did from before the
beginning foresee and foreknow, both things past and things present, I would
not have it so taken, as if I thought that the distances and differences of
times were to be attributed unto him by time past, and time to come: but that
all things which have been created and made in heaven and in earth, and which
shall be created and made unto the end of the world, are present before God,
and so present, as that he sees and beholds all and every of them, not as by
an imagination, but truly and before his eyes indeed. Things past therefore,
and things to come, have always been in Gods sight, as things present, and
so shall ever remain. So that all things, whether things past, or things to
come, are present to Gods foreknowledge, yea, and so present, as that neither
things past, are past, nor things to come, are to come unto him. So these
differences of times, have relation and ought to be applied unto the
creatures, and not to God himself. Wherefore, whereas things past, and things
to come, are attributed unto Gods foreknowledge, it is not in the respect of
God himself, as if these or those spaces and distances of times fell out in
him; but it is in respect of the things themselves, which cannot be made
known and applied unto the creatures, without some certain order and
succession of times. This is the first signification or acceptance of the
foreknowledge of God, which, as it foresaw and knew all things from before the
beginning, it is called the Wisdom of God: and as it does order and design
all things to their proper end, it is called his Providence. So what things
soever God has foreseen from eternity, they are all certain, and cannot
fall out nor be otherwise, then he has most wisely ordained. Therefore, as
God in time begins to know nothing, which he foresaw not for ever: So also
does he nothing in time, which he did not foresee and decree, that he would
do from before beginnings. For God does nothing by a new or sudden Will, but
does and wills all things by his constant and eternal Will. And let this
suffice to be spoken of the general foreknowledge of God; Now a few things
remain to be spoken of his particular foreknowledge.

The particular Foreknowledge of God, is taken for the favorable affection of
his everlasting Love, by which he fore-knew his Elect from everlasting, and
separated them from the rest, and loved them, and that with a great and
incredible Love. For this word of seeing and knowing in the phrase and
propriety of the Hebrew tongue, does oftentimes signify the approbation of
some thing, and a ready and favorable affection and good liking toward it. Of
this Paul speaks properly, whenas he says, Those whom he knew before, those
also has he predestinate.

This knowledge of the eternal Foreknowledge of God, is not only very
profitable for us, but also most necessary and comfortable, that we may know,
that nothing can be hid from, or escape Gods eyes, but that all and every
thing, even the greatest with the least, and the least with the greatest, as
well internal as external, lie manifest and open in the sight of God. These
things ought to instruct us in the fear of God, and keep us in the same, that
we should not think or do any thing, that might displease him, or be
contrary to his good liking. And this fear of God, being gathered from his
foreknowledge, ought to be unto us in stead of a Bridle, by which we should
be bridled and withdrawn from all evil, so that we should fear nothing more,
then to offend God by our wickedness; which is so terrible, so just and so
severe a Revenger of evil. For there is this relation between his anger and
our sins, that sin can no sooner be committed of us, but we bind our
selves as with an obligation or handwriting, given unto God, unto condign
punishment for the same. Therefore if we shall be bold and hasty to commit
sin, God also himself, the just Judge and Avenger of all wickedness, is
ready furnished and armed with his great and dreaded Power to punish us: so
that it is as possible, that God should cease to be God, as that he should
leave sin unpunished; except it be redressed by true and hearty repentance
and amendment of life. Again, the daily remembrance of this foreknowledge of
God, will be as it were, a sharp goade unto us, that being awakened by it, we
may beseech Gods Majesty with our fervent prayers, that he would vouchsafe by
the power of his spirit, to turn our hearts and wills away from all evil,
and incline them to all goodness, lest we follow the sway and course of our
corrupt Nature, running headlong into all kind of wickedness, and lest that
the abominable works and wicked deeds that we have committed and heaped up
together, do separate us from God, and thrust us down into everlasting pains
and torments.

This Foreknowledge therefore of God, and the serious meditation thereof,
ought to be our best instructor, to teach us all humbleness and lowliness of
spirit, especially then, when we fall into great and manifold sins, which
make us odious and abominable before God. So this miserable condition of ours,
ought to excite us daily with severe and sharp discipline, on the one side to
a true mislike and hatred of ourselves, and on the other side to an earnest
invocation of Gods divine power, that for his great mercy sake, he would
graciously forgive and pardon us all our sins through Christ, which we
always have and do commit against him, and that he would daily more and more
form and fashion us by his spirit unto his own Image: that being so renewed,
we may truly acknowledge, and from our hearts detest and abandon our horrible
sins, and every uncleanness: that so at length we may be ashamed of our
selves, knowing that every least offense is such an ugly spot, and detestable
infection in the sight of God, that he does so much abhor it with his whole
Nature and Will, and is so set against it, that he neither can nor will abide
or suffer the least remaynder thereof to stay amongst his Creatures. They
therefore, that willingly and wittingly transgress and sin against the
commandments of God, they despise and dishonor God, and serve the Devil as
their Master, and are become his living slaves and cursed habitations. Look
how much therefore they despise God, and fly from him, so much do they love
Satan and follow him; and how much likewise they dishonor God, and set him
at naught by their uncleanness, so much do they honor the Devil, and
increase his kingdom. For God and the Devil are so contrary one to the other
in their nature and will, that there is a greater and a more vehement
contrariety between them, then there is between fire and water, or then can
be shown between any other natural disagreeing contraries. So that
whatsoever is attributed to the one, must needs be withdrawn from the other:
one and the self same thing does not please nor agree to them both, nor one
and the self same thing, can in no sort be attributed and given to both. They
therefore which follow the one, must needs shun and fly from the other, and
they which shun and fly from the one, must needs follow and embrace the
other: For there can come no mean between two things so extremely contrary.
And let this suffice, to be briefly touched and spoken by the way, concerning
the first Link of Saint Paul's Chain.

Of Predestination, how it is distinguished from Foreknowledge, how many ways
it is taken, of how many Degrees it consists, what it is: and how it is
distinguished from Foreknowledge.

CHAP. 5.
THe second Link of Paul's Chain is Predestination, and this Predestination is
put under Foreknowledge, as under the first and larger Cause. For Gods
Foreknowledge stretches it self unto the whole compass of the universal
World, and to all the parts thereof, and to all the qualities and actions of
the parts of it, and as well to those things that shall be made, as unto those
things that are made; and beholds and comprehends as well the evil works
of the wicked, as the good works of God. But Predestination is restrained and
bound unto reasonable Creatures. Who sees not therefore, that Foreknowledge
is a word of a larger signification, and Predestination a word of a stricter
signification? Yet notwithstanding the Apostle does restrain this general
word, unto the Salvation of the Elect, in this present place: and therefore
rightly affirms, that whom God knew before, that is, whom he determined to
save, those also has he predestinate, that they might be made like unto the
Image of his Son, to wit, first in the Cross, and afterward in glory. For
Gods chosen Children must undergo and suffer many reproaches and slanders, a
hard Warre-fare and Conflictes, and diverse and sundry Persecutions, and
Oppressions, as long as they remain in this life, for the name of Christ and
the Profession thereof, before they can come to that joyful Triumph and
heavenly Glory: There also shall they be like unto Christ, as they have been
Partakers of his Cross here in this life.

But before we begin or declare the Definition of Predestination, three
things must be cleared: first, whether there be Predestination or no;
secondly, in how many Degrees this word Predestination is contained and
expressed: and lastly, how many ways it is taken. First therefore, we must
diligently enquire, whether there be Predestination or no; lest this Labor and
Treatise may seem to be undertaken and pursued in vain. But that there is
Predestination, it appears, and may evidently be prooved, first, by diverse
and pregnant places of Scriptures, and also by famous Miracles. The Scripture
certainly in many places prooveth and declares, that God does always choose
some certain Flock out of the whole company of Mankind, which he loves,
adorneth and beautifieth with eternal blessings over and above all the rest.
For the proof of this, many manifest places of Scripture may be produced and
cited, as namely these: Many are called, Cap. 20. verse. 16. Cap. 15. verse. 16.
Cap. 10. verse. 16.
but few are chosen, says Christ, in Saint Matthewe. And again, You have not
chosen me, but I have chosen you, says Christ in Saint John. And again, And
other Sheep I have, which are not of this Fold, them also must I bring, and
they shall hear my voice, and there shall be one Fold and one Shepherd says
Christ in Saint John: Also, he has chosen us in him before the foundations of
the world were laid, that we should be holy and without blame before him
through love, Cap. 1. v. 4.
says Saint Paul to the Ephesians. Again, I have much people in this City,
says the Lord unto Paul in the Acts of the Apostles. Many such testimonies
may be produced out of the holy Scriptures, which clearly and plainly show
and teach, that God has mercifully chosen some to Salvation, and has justly
rejected some from it. Neither of which come by any chance of Fortune, or Will
of man, but both proceed from Gods eternal and unchangeable Decree. And where
Election is allowed, there cannot be allowed or approved the accepting of all.

Furthermore, there are almost an innumerable company of sayings, and sentences
all about in the holy Scriptures, in which God has promised to a few, even to
such as love him, eternal joys, such as neither eye has seen, nor ear has
heard, nor has entered into the heart of man. Hither belong all those
Testimonies of Scripture, which preach and teach of free Remission of sins,
of Vocation, of Justification and of Sanctification. They therefore which doubt
whether there be any Predestination and Election or no, do call in question
the whole Scriptures of God, and do defame and accuse it of manifest untruth.
And further, they seem to accuse of lightness, and to laugh at all the
Promises, concerning eternal Life, and the Heavenly Glory which is to be
revealed, and bestowed; as though they were old wives fables: As if God had
inserted vain and fruitless words in his holy Scriptures, which should feed
man with vain hope, and not perform and make good the Promises indeed. And
to conclude, they which waver, and remain doubtful concerning Election, do
also doubt whether there be any certain Judgment of GOD, whereby he knows
and discerns, as by a true and infallible mark, the godly from the wicked,
and those that shall be saved, from those that shall be damned; and by making a
doubt of that, they make a doubt whether God be God or no: which things,
seeing they are false and absurd, we must conclude as a most certain and
known Truth, that Election is a thing certain and undoubted of.

Over and besides these testimonies of Scripture and words of promise, there
are diverse and sundry Miracles of the conservation of the Godly, found in many
places of the Scripture, which God has wrought since the beginning of the
world, whereby it is clearly and undoubtedly confirmed, that there are some
chosen of God from among the rest, and beloved of him more then others. Hither
belongs the saving of Noah in the Flood; Genesis 6.7. Genesis 13.
the delivering of Lot from the destruction of Sodom; the bringing of the
people of Israel out of Egypt: Exodus 12.13.14.
hither also belong all the places of Scripture, wherein we read that GOD has
defended the good, and beaten down and destroyed the wicked. These Miracles
and wonderful works of God, do confirm more clearly then the Noone-light,
that there is a certain Flock, which above the rest, God loves with a most
tender affection, and with his Fatherly care does conserve and keep
wonderfully in this life, and which he defends and vpholdeth by his mighty
Power, against all the sleights of Satan, and against the devices and injuries
of his instruments. These and such like unusual works and more then
marveilous wonders of God, are so clear and manifest, that no man can doubt of
them, though never so little, except he desire willingly and obstinately to
be blind and ignorant. Now of these things that are spoken here, it may
clearly and strongly be gathered and prooved, that there is Predestination:
And these things shall suffice concerning the first thing, now we must speak
something of the second.

To predestinate therefore is, to purpose and determine something with ones
self, that it should have a being, before such time that it be, or do any
thing: and withal, it is the setting apart, and ordeining of that thing unto
some certain end. This belongs not peculiarly only to God himself, but
also ought to have relation unto every wise and prudent man, which before he
take in hand to bring to pass any thing, is wont seriously and advisedly to
have some consultation, concerning the end for which he will bring that thing
to pass. But when this is attributed unto God, it is also very large, and is
extended generally unto all creatures, which God from everlasting by his
certain decree has ordained and disposed to this or that use and end before
they were created. But here, when we speak of Mankind, and their end; this
word of Predestination is to be referred unto that deep and hidden Counsel of
God, by which he has from everlasting firmly decreed and appointed, what he
would have done with every particular man. Further, that the nature of
Predestination might the more rightly be understood, it must be explaned by
certain degrees. The first degree therefore of Predestination is; That God
from everlasting, before the foundations of the world were laid, decreed to
create Mankind in true holiness and righteousness according to his own
Image. And that this is so, the Scripture witnesses in many places, and the
event it self confirmed it by experience of the deed done. The second degree
of Predestination is, whereby God in his most just and most wise judgment
determined to permit and suffer that Mankind should be tempted of the devil,
and should fall into sin and eternal destruction.

Here is inserted a certain Digression of the Fall of our first Parents,
which, although they consented unto the Serpents persuasion by their own
proper and voluntary Will, and so fell from God, yet this their falling away,
was not altogether without Gods eternal purpose.

CHAP. 6.
AS God from everlasting did foresee and ordain all other things, so among
these, this Fall of Mankind, in the person of our first Parents, and all other
evilles which followed and flowed from thence. So that he was willing to
suffer, and not to hinder this Fall, that it might be done by others, and not
by himself: otherwise, it had been even as easy for him to have kept our
first Parents from falling, as it was to create them. For look how easy it is
for him to do that which he wills, so easy likewise is it for him to hinder
that which he wills not, as Saint Augustine says. Lib. de corrept. and great.
ca. 96.
Neither was it any injustice in him, but altogether just, in that he did not
keep them from falling, but suffered them to be overcome by the Serpents
persuasion, and so to fall into eternal Death. For God was not bound unto them
that he should preserve them and keep them from falling, because he did not
promise it: Nay, God was not bound unto them, to create them according unto his
own Image, because he is a most free Agent: therefore much less was he
bound unto them, to save them from falling. Yea, our first Parents of their
own voluntary and free will, without any constraynt, did treacherously fall
away from God, and so falling away, did infect both themselves, and all their
posterity with sin, and made them alliable unto eternal Destruction.

But God not unwillingly, but willingly permitted them to fall; otherwise, if
any thing, though never so little, could be brought to pass, God not being
willing thereunto, then God should not be God: Our first Parents therefore in
regard of themselves, did that which God would not have them; but in respect of
the omnipotency of God, they could by no means do it. Wherefore it is not to
be doubted, but that God does righteously, in suffering those things which are
done wickedly, Lib. de corrept. and great. capit. 100.
as S. Augustine says. And although God do suffer this or that evil to be
committed, and not hinder it: yet for all that, he does not of himself bring
to pass that evil, nor allow of it. But good things which are conformable to
his heavenly wisdom, those he foresaw from everlasting, and decreed to bring
to pass and effect them. Therefore God by himself is the first cause, and the
only effecter of these things: because that good things spring and flow forth
out of the power of his divine Providence, as out of the only fountain that
is never dried up. But evil things, although God also foresaw them from
everlasting, and knew that they would come to pass; yet he himself, neither
approoveth them, nor furthereth them, nor helps them, nor brings them to
pass directly, but by his just judgment suffers them to be committed and
done by others. Therefore God is not to be counted as the first cause and
effecter of them, but Satan himself, and man's free will do begin them and
end them. So that Satan and wicked men are the true and proper causes of
evil. All things therefore whatsoever are done, although they be done by Gods
Providence, from which nothing can be exempted; yet some of them are done, his
Providence effecting them, and some of them are done, his Providence
permitting, apoynting and directing them to their proper ends. Therefore all
evil and wicked deeds whatsoever, are committed and done, Gods providence not
effecting, but suffering them, because that God decreed not that he would
himself effect them from everlasting, but because he decreed to suffer, and
not to hinder them to be done of others. So that God not unwillingly, but
willingly suffered our first parents to sin. They therefore which attribute
unto God a permission, which should be contrary to his will, they deny him to
be omnipotent. For he that permits any thing to be done, which by no means
he would have done, surely he is not of such power, as to let and hinder that
which he would not have done. Therefore what things soever God suffers to be
done, he suffers them willingly, for nothing can possibly be done, if he be
unwilling, or against it. Hence it follows not, that God allows and
approves sins in themselves, as they are things simply evil and contrary
unto his will, but rather he hates them with his whole will and nature, and
(except he mercifully pardon them) he revengeth and punishes them with
eternal torments.

This therefore must firmly be resolved upon, that al those things which are
brought to pass, either by God, he himself effecting them, or which are done
by other by his permission, are not exempt from his providence, but are brought
to pass by his just judgment. And God, seeing he is the only and sovereign
goodness, could not but make man good at the first, and like unto himself. For
every piece of work usually is like and correspondent to the workman, because
that every cause brings forth an effect like it self: So that it is often
seen, that a good cause generally and naturally brings forth a good effect,
and an evil cause likewise an evil and corrupt effect. But when God by his
eternal and unchangeable decree had appointed mankind for the manifestation,
partly of his mercy, and partly of his justice, it was therefore necessary,
that man should be created such a one by God as should be meet and fit to
attain unto those ends for which he was created. Therefore although man were
created by God, good, and without sin, yet notwithstanding he was created
good and without sin in such sort, that of good he might become evil,
otherwise God could have neither manifested nor exercised his justice nor mercy
in him, and those ends which were fore-knowne and appointed of God from
everlasting, had fallen to the ground, and had not come to their proper effect
and purpose, Man therefore was to be created of God, not necessarily good, but
changeably: so that in respect of the things that happened in his way, he might
be changed and become otherwise. But if he had been created necessarily and
unchangeably good, he had been rather a God then a creature. For
unchangeableness in it self is the propriety of God alone, and cannot be
found in any creature, which alone is or may be changed. But God only is one
and the same, always constant, ever like himself, and is never changed. And
howsoever the holy Angels are already, and holy men shall be in the world to
come placed in such degree of goodness, as that they may by no means fall from
it into the contrary: yet in both these this unchangeableness is not a natural
propriety, but is and shall be the free gift and benefit of God.

Moreover, God was not the proper author of this change in man from God to
evil. For he created man such an one, that if he would himself, he might have
remained without sin. For as his will was made free by God, so he also of his
own accord, without any outward constraint or compulsion, chose the evil that
was forbidden by God, and by choosing that, did contrary to the will of God,
and so sinned. But if God should have made that change in man from good to
evil, certainly he should have been no less accounted the cause of the
evil, then if he had created it from the beginning. For if he had either
constreyned man to do evil by some forced and violent motion, or by any other
means inclined his will to this evil, certaynely God himself had sinned
together with man, yea had sinned much more then man. For there remains more
evil in the cause that does compel, then in the cause that is compelled. But
in as much as man of his own accord leaned unto the persuasion of the Devil,
and withal, of his own free will, without any outward compulsion desired the
evil that was forbidden by God, and so fell from God: this change therefore
from good to evil did arise from Satan's persuasion, and from man's will freely
choosing and committing the evil. Therefore Adams free will and the Devils
motion, are the true causes of man's misery. So that although our first Parents
were created by God according to his own image in holiness and righteousness,
both in body and mind, and had free will given unto them: yet this their free
will was not sufficient of it self to retain Gods image and original
righteousness, because they were overcome by temptation and sinned. But if the
participation and aid of the divine grace had vpheld them, they had not
fallen, but had remained innocent, as at the first they were created.

Therefore although man was deceived by the temptation and subtilty of Satan,
and brought into sin: yet notwithstanding because that of his own free will
he did assent and agree unto the persuasion of the Devil, therefore he
himself was the first and chiefest cause of his own ruin and decay: for
Satan may persuade a man to evil, but he cannot by force draw or compel any
man to evil. Therefore this willing revolting from good to evil, is the cause
of original corruption, which first began to be in the first man's will, and
afterward that infection and corruption by the just judgment of God descended
and was derived unto all and every of his posterity, which has made them
altogether and every one apart by himself subject to Gods just judgment, and
guilty of eternal damnation, and that so, that God the continual enemy and
revenger of all evil, may justly suffer all and every of them to be destroyed
and to perish in that corruption, without doing injury to any of them, because
he is indebted to none of them. So that the first man was so created of God,
and so left unto the free choice of his own will, that he might remain in his
innocence, or fall from it if he would himself. Although therefore, that to
fall, and not to fall were unto man indifferent and contingent, and either of
them as well one as the other might have happened and fallen out: yet of these
things (which were otherwise mere matters of contingency) that only fell out,
which God from everlasting had foreseen and decreed that it should happen. So
that those things which in respect of man are doubtful, and of their own
nature apt to fall out on either side, which may happen or not happen, or which
may come to pass otherwise then man had purposed; these very same things, I
say, in respect of God, are certain and determined, so that they cannot fall
out otherwise, then God from everlasting has foreordained. Hereby it is
manifest, that in things that pertayne unto man, if a man respect the counsel
and end of man, they are as it were matters of chance: But if a man consider
Gods decree, and the end appointed of him, there are no matters of chance at
all in inferior things, nor in any thing else whatsoever. For the creatures,
which are said to be second causes, by reason of the want of wisdom, do not
foresee and know the future events of things: and if peradventure they do
foresee any, yet they have them not in their power, nor are endued with any
such ability as to accomplish them, and bring them to their wished and
appointed end: wherefore many things oftentimes fall out and happen contrary to
their intent and meaning, and even their settled counsels are many times broken
off, and hindered, that they cannot come to their purposed and determined end;
so the effect and end does not always answer the purpose and intent of the
doer, because one thing is intended, and an other thing happens. But God does
now see the future events of things, and beholds them as if they were
present, and by his almighty power, can direct and bring them to their
foreappoynted end and scope, against all lets and hindrances whatsoever. The
event therefore and end is always answerable to his eternal intent and
purpose, so that that comes to pass in time, which he purposed to himself
before time. The will of God, is the precise and absolute necessity of things,
as Augustine elsewhere speaks.

Moreover, although the first man could not of himself change his will that
was created good, into evil, without the motion of God coming in and
concurring with it (for in God all things are moved, and without him there is
no motion) yet the fault and crime that was committed by the first man, can
not, nor ought not to be ascribed unto God, for that remains only in the
will of man. That this may be understood more plainly and distinctly of every
man, there are two things to be considered in sin, to wit, the action, and
the evil that is annexed and knit unto the action. For the action it self, as
far forth as it is an act and work, is good, and God does begin and finish it:
but as far forth as it is wicked, and has evil annexed unto it, it
proceeds and flows from the corrupt nature of man. Moreover, although God
may produce and perform some work in the evil actions of men; yet God does
nothing but that which is good: for in him there is no evil, therefore also
out of him can proceed no work but good. Seeing therefore that he is wholly
good, likewise must all his works be good also. For the effects are wont to
imitate and resemble their causes, so that they are such as their causes have
been before them. So that whomesoever God stirs up and moves, he does it
well and right wisely, although the creature so moved by him may sin, and so
fall from him. But man sinned against the express commandment of God, in
that he freely chose the evil; therefore the sin that was committed by him,
is to be ascribed properly to his own will, and to be judged as proceeding
from it.

Therefore although the fall of the first man did proceed of his own free and
voluntary will, yet could it by no means be done without Gods eternal decree,
because that only falls out which God from everlasting did purpose and
foresee. But sin it self, as it is a thing contrary unto God, did spring
from the will of man, approoving and committing it, Gods heavenly will
suffering and permitting it. Therefore it may be gathered by the fall of man,
that the first man was pliant, and easy to be inclined on either side. For such
a will was given him, that if he would he might have stood still, and remained
innocent, but he had no promise nor constancy given him to continue so, and
therefore did he fall so easily, and took the fruit that was forbidden by
GOD, and did eat it: Wherefore this change and fall from good to bad, was by
all means necessary for the accomplishment of Gods eternal counsel. For by
it on the one side there was as it were an open door, and a most fit occasion
offered, for God to show his mercy by, and on the other side, an open gappe,
and a most just cause given him to exercise his justice. For as the elect could
not have been saved by mercy, except they had first sinned, and thereby
deserved Gods most just wrath and eternal damnation; so likewise the reprobate
could not have been condemned by his justice, except they had been first
subject unto just condemnation, by reason of their sin and falling from God.
So God on the one side did erect his everlasting judgment seat, and on the
other side opened and laid forth the infinite treasures of his mercy.

God therefore, that he might show forth his power and his wisdom, together
with his unspeakable goodness, thought it better of evil things to produce
good things, then to suffer no evil things at all, In Enchirid. cap. 21.
says Saint Augustine. For what can be better and wiser then he is, who
knows how to bring forth exceeding great goodness out of that which is very
bad, and to convert unto salvation those things that are ready for destruction.
For except God could have produced good out of evil, he would never have
suffered the evil to have been committed. In as much therefore as he hindered
not the fall of the first man, who shall call him into question, and who can or
dare accuse him of unrighteousness? for by permitting that fall, he gat a most
ample occasion to show forth his glory by. So that the fall of the first man
Adam, was no less necessary, then the manifestation and execution of Gods
eternal purpose.

By all this it is manifest, that God is such a worker, that he is able to
fulfill and perform his good will even by the wicked and ungodly wills of men,
not that the wicked have any purpose to be obedient unto Gods will, but because
by the secret working of God, and his direction, they are drawn unto it,
themselves not knowing of it. For God by his hidden power, as with an invisible
cord, does draw the wicked, although they know it not, to the performance of
those ends which themselves never aimed at. So the ungodly are directed to an
end which themselves know not of, by the secret power of God, without any
purpose or endeavor of theirs, like as arrows fly without any feeling unto
the mark to which the Archer directs them.

Here behold and admire Gods provident bounty and favor, which disdaineth not
for our sake to direct the wandering steps and endeavors of the wicked unto an
wholesome end, to turn the greatest hurt into the chiefest health, and a
desperate evil into good. In as much therefore as the wicked sin and do
wickedly, it is their own work; but in as much as they bring to pass this or
that by their sinning, that is by the power of God, says Saint Augustine.
Epist. 48. ad l'incentium.
And although that God and wicked men seem to do one and the selfsame work,
yet the men are faulty, and God only just, because in that one thing which they
do, there is not one cause for which they do it, Lib. 21 de Gratia. and libero
Arbitrio.
says Augustine. So the wicked do not become good, nor are held excused,
although they do the same things which God would have done, because in their
actions, they have not respect unto the will of God with a desire to obey it,
but follow their own lewd counsels and wicked desires. So also God becomes
not evil and unjust, but remains good and holy, although he wills those
things which the ungodly do, because God wills them with a far other manner
of counsel and end, then the ungodly do will and do them. So in the death of
Christ the action of the wicked was so evil, that in respect of them it could
not be worse nor more vile, for they slew the innocent, and killed the Lord of
glory, and intended in that one consent and outrage of theirs, to hinder the
salvation of mankind, yet that very same action, in respect of God, was so
good and holy, that no other could be better, nor more holy: because he by
the death of his son would redeem miserable sinners from eternal death, and
translate them into heavenly glory and eternal life. Wherefore wicked and
unjust men oftentimes unwittingly, and intending some other thing, do fulfill
and perform the good and righteous will of God. Yet notwithstanding afterward,
God justly punishes and condemns them: because they pursue their own wicked
desires and ungodly enterprises, and respect not, nor regard Gods will at all.
They prefer their own perverse affections before God, and before his will.
So the actions of Almighty God and of wicked men differ by their diverse
purposes, and are distinguished one from another in their diverse ends.

So also at this day God suffers many sins to be committed of wicked men
throughout sundry Nations, and in the greatest kingdoms where he does not
vouchsafe them his word, nor reform them by his spirit, and does not
enlighten their minds with the knowledge of himself, nor govern and incline
their wills and affections so, that they may propose to themselves this
principal end, as their only mark, namely to endeavor to execute Gods known
will earnestly and continually, and to frame and fashion themselves, their
life, and their manners unto it, as unto a continual rule to walk by, and to
honor God by their obedience, in eschewing of evil and doing of good: these
things except God work in them by his word and spirit whatsoever they intend
or do, howsoever before men it may seem good and just, yet all that in the
sight of GOD, is nothing else but ugly and execrable sin. For God does not
at all regard nor respect the outward works except the integrity of the heart
go with them and appear in them, therefore where that wants, there sins
are accounted for no sins, and virtue with vices, and one thing with an other
are confounded, and so there will be but little difference between honesty and
dishonesty.

Here the author returns to his purpose, and joins the third degree of
praedestination, then the causes of praedestination are unfolded, next the
definition of it is given, and lastly, praedestination is distinguished from
providence.

CHAP. 7.
THese things it seemed good to touch by the way, and lightly to handle
concerning permission, which is the second degree of predestination, now we
must come unto the third degree of predestination. Thirdly to predestinate
here, is nothing else, then to purpose to choose some, and to adopt them for
sons in Christ, out of the universal company of wicked men. For God by his
merciful foresight did ordain and appoint, from amongst sinful men, and such
as were past cure, in respect of themselves, to receive some unto mercy without
any merit of theirs, to redeem them through Christ, and by him also to bring
them unto eternal life. But here more properly and peculiarly is meant, the
other acceptance of this word election, as in the definition hereof a little
before we have declared. This word election is taken diversely in the
scripture, so that sometimes it has reference unto some office or duty, and
sometimes to life eternal. After the former manner Saul and Judas were
elected, the one of which was chosen to a Kingdom, and the other to an
Apostleship, neither of them to eternal life. But seeing that no definition
can rightly be made or understood, unless the causes of which it is
compounded and made be well perceived and known, therefore I think I shall
not do amiss, if first I lay open the causes of predestination before I set
down the definition of it.

As for the efficient and first moving cause of predestination, there can no
other be set down and appointed, but only the eternal and only purpose and
good pleasure of God. For God only is he, which by his most wise counsel and
judgment does discern between men and men, and has decreed from everlasting
what shall become of every man. God has lively expressed and declared this in
his word manifestly and plainly: for men considered in themselves and by
themselves, are all alike corrupted, so that some are no whit better then other
some. Therefore in the judgment of man, some cannot be preferred before others,
because there is one and the selfsame condition of all. But God the highest
judge of all, has elected some men to eternal life in Christ, and has in his
just judgment appointed others to everlasting destruction; and whom he has
chosen unto salvation, those has he chosen by his own mere mercy and
undeserved grace, he regarded nothing that is without himself, but whom he
has elected, he did only for himself and in himself, and not for any other
cause. Moreover, he could find nothing in those whom he has chosen that
might be worthy of election, because they were all defiled, and strangers from
God; also he could foresee no good thing in them, as proceeding from them, for
which they should be chosen. If he foresaw any good thing in them, himself
wrought it wholly and altogether in them. For there can be found no good thing
in them nor elsewhere, of which God is not the sole author, and only effector.
Therefore what good thing so ever is, and abides in them, that God himself
wholly begins and finisheth in them. And he begins and finisheth nothing
in them, but he decreed from everlasting, that he would begin it and finish it
in them. For if in time, he should work any thing in them how little soever,
which he decreed not before time, then should there be found manifest change in
God, which should do some thing by a new will, and not by his eternal will.

Those things which the Papists pratle of here concerning works foreseen,
whose cause and beginning should be man, are vain and frivolous fictions,
which after in their places shall more largely be confuted and rejected: seeing
the efficient and first moving cause of election is only and alone Gods mercy
and goodness, he by his bountiful, and more then fatherly good will, has
from everlasting made and finished the whole decree of Election; Ephesians. 2.5.
moreover Election is altogether the free and undeserved favor of God. For all
men by nature were wholly corrupt, and the children of wrath, therefore in them
God could foresee nothing at all but extreme and most absolute wretchedness.
They also which take the name of election which is found in many places of the
scripture for a certain singular excellency, whereby a man may be worthy to be
chosen, so that he should be called elect, which is excellent and singular,
they (I say) are the authors of fables, and trifle with toys, seeing that
every man is esteemed far otherwise in this civil and earthly court then he
is, or judged to be in the court of heaven.

Moreover, no other cause of reprobation can be alleged or produced out of the
scriptures, but the just and unchangeable will of God, for as much as he in
that his eternal and secret counsel, has of himself and by himself
adjudged some men unto eternal death and destruction, and that before they
were and had done any evil. For sin can in no wise be the cause of
reprobation. For all have sinned, and are alike polluted, Ephesians. 2.3.
and by nature the children of wrath, so that all, even every one should have
perished, if sin had bin the cause of reprobation. Sin verily is the cause
of those things that necessarily follow reprobation, of which we shall speak
more hereafter. Although sin that is committed of man, be in it self a just
and efficient cause of damnation, yet the cause of reprobation is not to be
sought for in man, but the first and chiefest cause thereof is even the free
and righteous will of God. But in as much as the reprobate are damned, that
they have deserved by their own sin: this is the just cause of damnation,
for if they had not sinned, they should not have been punished. For God is
every way so just, that he punishes none, except he be inthralled to sin,
and most worthy of punishment.

And now, seeing that it is proved by evident testimonies of the scripture,
that there is praedestination; and that the doubtfulnes of the word, and diverse
signification thereof is plainly discussed, and that the causes thereof are
produced and laid open; it remains, that we should plainly define what this
praedestination is, which except it be done, those things which follow to be
handled, cannot be conceaved and understood. Praedestination therefore is the
eternal, free, just, and unchangeable purpose of God, by which of his mercy he
has determined to adopt some men for sons through Christ, and has appointed
them to eternal life and glory, and has not vouchsafed othersome that grace
and favor, but has rejected them by his just judgment, and appointed them to
eternal death. This definition many places of the scripture do deliver and
prove, Romans 9.13. Malac. 1.3.
but chiefly the example of Jacob and Esau do wonderfully declare it. These
two, although they were brethren, borne of the same parents, although they
were sinners both alike, and by nature the children of wrath, yet the wisdom
of God did so discern between them, that by his free grace he loved and
elected one of them, and by his just judgment hated and rejected the other:
and that not according to the good or evil works foreseen either of the one,
or of the other, but according unto his purpose he did choose Jacob, Romans 9.11.
and hated Esau, and that when as yet neither of them were borne, and had done
neither good nor evil. The scriptures have set forth these two persons, as it
were two opposite and contrary arguments, from which it infers two general
propositions, namely, that Almighty God from everlasting before all ages, has
so discerned between men by his firm and unchangeable wisdom, that some
without any merit of theirs should obtain undeserved grace, and that some
should have and undergo deserved justice and due punishment.

This praedestination is distinguished from providence, as a special thing
from a general, or as a part from the whole, seeing that predestination is not
so common nor so large as providence. For predestination has his operation and
working, either in the saving or condemning of men: although the created
spirits, namely the Angels, may not unfitly be referred hereunto. But
providence reaches further, spreading and extending it self unto all the
works of God. So that praedestination is as well the just council of God, in
forsaking the reprobate, and casting him off into eternal punishment, as the
voluntary purpose of God in the salvation of the elect, to be begun in this
life, and finished in the life to come.

Also providence is the eternal counsel of God, and such an order and
ratified government in things that are created, according to which all things
are directed and do fall out to the glory of God, and for the profit and
salvation of the elect. To this his government even the temptations and
sleights of Satan are held in subjection, which are so guided by the most wise
God, that they still turn to the good of his Saints, although his devises are
hurtful in themselves, yet God knows how to prevent them, and to turn them
to a contrary event. Therefore although the endeavors of Satan are in their
own nature most pernicious, yet by Gods direction they become wholesome unto
his children. For God is such a workemaister, as is able to alter and withdraw
the effect from the cause, so as the effect by an accident becomes good and
helpful, whose cause was most ill and hurtful.

This providence of God, although it reach unto the creation of all things, and
to the ordering and government of them: yet it chiefly intends the counsels
and actions of reasonable creatures, and is so intentive about them, that
although they be very much confused and out of order, yet it does most wisely
turn and bring them to those ends, which from everlasting were foreordayned
and appointed for them. So that all those things which God from everlasting by
his unsearchable wisdom, did foresee and know before they were, those things
by his wonderful and mervailous providence in the instant and moment of time
appointed he does create, orders them being created, maintains them being
ordered, governs them being mayntayned, and in governing them he does so draw
forth the course and line of his providence in this world, that nothing can
happen or be done in it, then that which God from all eternity did fore-ordayne
and appoint. All things do so depend and hang upon this providence and power of
God, that without it, not one action can be done, nor one motion be produced in
any creature. For God is he, by whose power and working is brought to pass all
in all; and that so, as without this power and working of God, neither the
godly can do that which is good, nor the wicked commit that which is evil.
This providence of God is so joined and combined with his foreknowledge, that
the one of them seems as it were to shake hands with the other. For what
things soever God by this his unsearchable foreknowledge, did from all ages,
and from everlasting determine to do, those things being created in time, he
does by his infinite providence bring unto those appointed ends, even as he had
decreed from everlasting.

What and how many are the kinds of praedestination, and by what proprieties
election which is one of the kinds of praedestination is described, which that
they might more largely be explaned, they are divided into certain several
Chapters, even as they seem to have most affinity amongst themselves.

CHAP. 8.
SEeing then that praedestination has two kinds or parts, which in their
effect and ends do much differ the one from the other, to which by reason of
their diverse objects, and contrary ends, one and the self same thing can not
be attributed nor given unto them, it is behoovefull therefore, and necessity
does require it also, that for the more clearenesse and perspicuity sake, every
of them should be handled severally. The order of teaching therefore requires,
that in the first place we should speak of the Election and Salvation of the
Godly; and next, of the reiection and destruction of the wicked. Election is
the eternal, free, and unchangeable purpose and good pleasure of Gods Will,
whereby God has decreed with himself, to convert unto Christ, some separated,
from out of the whole company of Mankind, and in him to save them, and through
him to give them everlasting Life. This Definition, as well for the matter of
it, as the manner and end, we find expressly set down in Saint Paul to the
Ephesians, where the Apostle says: Cap. 1. verse. 4.5
He has chosen us in him, (namely in Christ) before the foundations of the
world, that we should be holy and without blame before him through love, who
has predestined us into the adoption of children by Jesus Christ unto
himself, according to the good pleasure of his Will. Whereas he says In him
(that is in Christ) he has chosen us before the foundations of the world: he
expressly points at this eternal Counsel; for as much as God from all
eternity has by his determinate Counsel fore-ordayned some men unto Life
eternal. Whereas he says, In Christ, he shows the means, whereby, of
unworthy, he made us worthy, to wit, that Salvation wholly is gotten, and
bestowed upon us, through Christ; for he made satisfaction for our sins, by
the sacrifice of his Death, and by the power of his Spirit turns unto
himself, us that were gone astray, and draws us unto him, and grafteth us
into himself by a true faith, being grafted into him, does mercifully and
mightily preserve us in this life, and does daily renew and fashion us more and
more, according to the Image of God, until at length, we having put off this
flesh, and laid aside all other infirmities, he may bring us into eternal
Life.

Therefore although God has separated and chosen into the fellowship of
Salvation, men, which in themselves were wholly defiled, and most unworthy,
from among others, to whom in respect of themselves, they were every way alike;
yet by electing them in Christ, of most unworthy, he has made them most
worthy, through his worthiness. Whomsoever therefore God has loved from
everlasting, those he determined to make dear unto himself in Christ their
Redeemer and Savior. As often therefore, as in the Scripture there is mention
made of the eternal love and election of God, so often (as concerning the
causes of the execution of both) there is understood and presupposed Christ the
Mediator, as the only ground and sure foundation of them both. But that this
Definition of Election may the more easily be conceyved, and more plainly be
understood of every one, the Proprieties thereof must orderly be set down and
laid open. As for the Proprieties of Election, although all of them are not
contained in this short abridgement of the Definition (because usually the
Definitions of things are made of more general words, which under them
contain the more particular) yet all of them are either contained as
understood under these, or do necessarily follow them in the order of
attayning of Salvation, and do depend of them, like as the Linkes of any Chain
are combined one within an other.

Here is a most strong Foundation laid for the Faith of Gods Children, for as
much as Election, and so consequently Salvation, that depends of it, can by
no means be annihilated and perish, because it is stayed and grounded on the
eternal good pleasure of God.

CHAP. 9.
THe first Propriety therefore of Election is, the eternal Decree, which was
beyond and before all ages, in as much as God in his infinite goodness, did
think of the Salvation of Mankind before he had created any thing. This
circumstance of eternal time does declare, that God alone did of himself bring
to pass the work of our Salvation, according unto the good pleasure of his
will. This decree of Election, he did only once make before all beginnings,
which always after remains firm for ever, and continues unchangeable
throughout all succeeding ages. It is not contrary to this Decree, whereas the
Prophets say, that God yet chooses Sion, and Jerusalem. For such an election
is the manifestation, the continuance, and the applying of that heavenly and
eternal election. For God in man's judgment, seems then to elect a man, when
he calls him, and blesses him, and makes him partaker of his Grace. And of
this Eternity, there is often mention made in the holy Scripture, that all
merits, and all other means whatsoever, to which men are wont to bind and
attribute their salvation, might be wiped out of the number of the causes of
salvation, and that the goodness of God alone might only be acknowledged and
honored for the sole cause of our salvation. Ephesians. 1^.
So Paul manifestly and in express words affirms, that we were chosen in
Christ before the foundations of the world were laid, 2. Tim. 1.9.
and that God has called us with an holy calling, not according to our works,
but according to his purpose and grace, which was given us in Christ Jesus,
before the world began. By these and the like testimonies of scripture are
taught, that Gods Decree touching our Salvation, is no new nor sudden thing,
but eternal, and without any beginning: And that God is the only cause of our
Salvation, and that he had no regard of our merits or worthiness, because
there were none at all: for as yet, we our selves were not created. As often
as there is mention made in the Scriptures, of the causes of Salvation, we are
called unto this eternal Election, as to the fountain of Salvation, and that
for sundry causes. These are the especial causes, why God in the matter of our
Salvation, reduces us to his eternal Counsel. First, that we might know,
that there is no change in God: for if after Sin committed, he had be thought
himself of compassion toward us, and had taken no care for it before; he
might surely seem changeable, as he that willed and appointed one thing before
sin, and another thing after sin. But seeing that God from everlasting has
decreed and ordained Salvation for us, long before sin was committed; hereby
is prooved manifestly, the settled unchangeableness, and continual constancy
of his Will. Therefore the everlasting good pleasure of God, is the only
vnmooveable ground of our Salvation; so that our Salvation is subject and in
danger to none of the devices of Satan, to no troubles of the world, nor to no
waverings of the flesh, because it has a most strong foundation upon Gods
everlasting Decree. Secondly, this circumstance of eternal time has prevented
the entrance of Satan's temptations. For if God should have taken the first
care of our Salvation, after the Fall of man was committed, and had not thought
of it before, then surely this Will of God might seem to have a beginning: And
Satan might thereby take occasion, maliciously to allege against God, and to
persuade us, that the Will of God concerning our Salvation, is not certain and
constant, because that as it had a beginning, so it might likewise have an
end: and we being prone unto all diffidence might quickly have thought it had
been so, and by this means, might have been in doubt of our Salvation.
Therefore God by his provident goodness has timely prevented these
temptations and sleights of Satan, and has found out an excellent remedy for
our diffidence, teaching us that his Decree for our Salvation is no sudden
thing, nor limited within the listes of momentany time, but eternal and
unchangeable. So our faith is then builded and grounded upon a strong and
vnmooveable foundation, when we hear and know that our Salvation was ordained
and appointed of God from everlasting.

Lastly, this Note of eternal Time, is profitable for this purpose, namely, to
withdraw and reclaim us, as well from all regard or respect of our own merits
and worthiness, as also from the opinion of the intercession of other men for
us. For God did know, that the divellish opinions of our own satisfaction and
merit, would often times steal upon us, so that we should think that there
is some goodness in us, by which we should be gracious and acceptable before
God. For man does not willingly humble and cast himself down thus far, as
to attribute all the praise of his Salvation unto the Grace of God only. These
things and the like, the holy Scripture does prevent and dispell, showing that
God has elected us from everlasting, before we were, and has given us
Salvation in Christ; and so does condemn us of foolishnes and ungodliness, if
we now created, would get or deserve our Salvation by any other means. For
such is the untowardness and blindness of man's disposition, because that
wretched men are so bewitched of Satan by sin, that when there is any speech
of Salvation and everlasting Felicity, they would gladly begin from
themselves. Hence they frame to themselves diverse preparations, by which they
strive to prevent and deserve the favor of God. But by what means, I pray
you, can they deserve any thing, which are not at all? And what good works or
merits of theirs could there be, before the world was made, and before their
own Creation? Therefore the eternal Election of God, does every where
throughout the whole Scripture prove, that this Mercy is the free gift of GOD,
and that he for his own sake only was moved to elect us. So that this
eternal Election, does not only set far aside all respect of man's
worthiness, but also throws man down even to Hell, together with all his
merits, if he should be dealte withal according to his own deserts, and
Gods just judgment.

Here therefore is set down a continual contrariety and opposition, between
man's merit and worthiness, and Gods eternal Election, yea, such and so great
an opposition, that the affirming of the one, is the manifest denial of the
other. Look how much therefore the Scripture attributes to Gods Election, 2.
Tim. 2.9.
so much it detracteth from man's worthiness. For this cause the holy Scripture
has set that eternal Election, and man's worthiness as two things extremely
contrary one to an other, teaching us, that a man may sooner and easier wring
oil out of a Flint stone, or strike fire out of the midst of the Ocean, then
that God should find any thing in man's Nature, worthy of his Election.

They therefore which seek for Salvation or the least part thereof without
the eternal Election of GOD, they do not only seek Life in death, and
Salvation in the midst of condemnation; but also, they seek God without GOD,
and by such seeking shall find nothing else but hell fire and eternal
punishment, because that one and the self same thing cannot proceed from
diverse causes. For God only is good, and so good, that he can find no good
elsewhere at any time, or in any place, but only in himself: and
contrariwise, man's Nature is so wicked, and depraved, that out of it can
proceed nothing but wicked deeds and ungodly practices. But of this hereafter
we will speak more largely.

It is therefore the undeserved, and altogether the free goodness of God, in
that he from everlasting ordained and appointed eternal Salvation for us,
when we were not as then created. And therefore of so good and bountiful a
God, who would not hope well?

Moreover, seeing God has elected us to Salvation and Life everlasting, hence
it manifestly appears, that none could be our Intercessour to God for us.
Because then there was no man, beside God only and alone, which was the whole
cause of our Election. Hence likewise, as out of a most clear Glass, we may
see what care God has of our Salvation, because that from everlasting, he did
so providently prevent and turn away all the hindrances of our Salvation. So
the incredible, and more then fatherly goodness of God is chiefly made known
in this, namely, that he was careful for our Salvation, before we were. And
let these things suffice to be briefly compiled concerning the first
Propriety of Election.

The second Propriety of Election is, that Election is an high and hidden
Decree, not only because God from all eternity, before the foundation of the
world, before any thing was created, did fore-ordaine and appoint it with
himself, but also in respect of those things, which are contained and ordained
in that eternal decree, which are so deep and hidden in the meaning and
understanding of them, that they do not only far out-strippe man's capacity,
but also do as far exceed the understanding of the Angels themselves, as
the highest Heaven is distant from the lowest earth. For the manner of
redeeming and saving of Mankind, is so deep and secret, that the very Angels
themselves cannot surmise the least of it, much less consider and determine of
it. For this cause, it is often called in the Scripture, the Mystery that is
hidden in God; Ephesians. 3 9. Col. 1.26.
because it is manifest and known unto God only, and because no Creature can
know it, but by Revelation. And so it is called by Paul to the Romans, Cap.
16.25.
the secret Mystery, that is, unknown to the Creatures.

In this great and secret Consultation, the Son of God did consult with the
Father everlasting, and the holy Ghost, and determined how and when he would
take man's Nature upon him, and redeem his Chosen with the sacrifice of his
Death. Surely this Mystery of the Incarnation and benefit of Christ his
Passion, are of all Gods wonders the greatest, (as elsewhere says Saint
Augustine:) the manifestation of which Mystery, is not a common School to men
and Angels, but an high and an heavenly University, in which, more things
remain to be learned of both of them, then both of them are able to conceive
and learn. Therefore we must receyve it with great reverence, and repose our
selves with a ready and thankful heart and will, in this most secret Counsel
of the heavenly Court. And thus far for this propriety.

The wonderful mixture of Gods Justice with his Mercy, is so high a Mystery,
that Mankind should have been quite past remedy, by reason of the greatness
of sin and damnation, unless Gods wisdom had found a means of deliverance
for it.

CHAP. 10.
THe third Propriety of Election is, that Election is a most wise Decree. For
Mankind was not only simply subject unto Gods just Wrath and Damnation, but
also was thrown down headlong into so deep a pit and gulf of death and
damnation; that there was no reason nor counsel found with any Creature for
the delivery of it. For God would be merciful unto none, except his Justice
had been first satisfied: but that it might be satisfied, and that man might
be reconciled to God again, there could no way nor means be found to appease
Gods wrath in any Creature, either in Heaven above, or in the Earth beneath.
For Gods just Wrath is a far greater weight, and a more heavy burden, then
can be vnder-gone of any Creature, as may appear in the damned, both Men and
Angels, who sustain the greatness and weight of Gods wrath, and are not
able to remoove it, and therefore are, and so remain condemned for ever. So
that when no means and way at all could be found amongst men, to reconcile
God unto them: God infinitely wise, of his own accord, sought out a remedy and
means to redeem Mankind, and by his unsearchable Wisdom found out such a
Sacrifice, upon which he might cast all our sins, and justly punish them in
it and make satisfaction for them. Cap. 4.25.
At this Saint Paul aimed, when he says to the Romans: That God sets forth
Christ to be a Propitiation through Faith in his blood.

1. Pet. 1. verse. 20.
Saint Peter also in his first Epistle, considering this, affirms, that Christ
was ordained a Redeemer for us aforehand, even before the world was made. Both
these Apostles do teach us in express words, that Christ our Redeemer
proceeded and came from no place else, but even from the bosom of God most
wise, as out of the heavenly Sanctuary. This mixture of Justice and Mercy in
God, is such a difficult and high secret, that it does not only infinitely
exceed man's understanding, but also in the depth thereof, it does as it were
swallow up and consume the capacity of the Angels themselves, although it be
very quick: For men are so blinded in sin, and so contrary and abalienated
from God and their own Salvation, that of themselves they cannot take the very
least cogitation thereof. And the Angels, 1. Epist. Pet. 1.12.
as Peter witnesses, do desire to behold the hidden Mystery of Redemption,
which is now revealed. Therefore surely they understand it not fully, as it is
revealed; much less could they know it, before it was made manifest.

In this so admirable manner of redeeming Mankind, God has not only declared
his unsearchable Wisdom, but also has manifested his infinite Mercy, and
unspeakable goodness toward Mankind, and has expressed it, and painted it
forth, in this means of our Redemption, more clearly, then in any Glass. For
herein he has done contrary to the nature and disposition of all Creatures;
For Creatures, when they are offended, are wont to deliberate and take
counsel, how they may surprise, and utterly destroy their enemies and
adversaries: but contrariwise, God took counsel, and sought how he might save
and deliver his adversaries from eternal destruction, and bestow upon them all
spiritual and heavenly blessings. This his acceptable goodness, that he
might make more manifest and more clear then the noone light, he did clean
contrary to the custom used amongst men, in that he sought a means to
reconcile us to himself again, which by all right, we ought rather to have
sought. For he had not only not offended us, but much rather had enriched us
with infinite blessings: yet we had not offended him once, but a thousand
ways; so that we by right and equity were bound to endeavor our selves to
find a means, whereby we might pacify him being offended so many ways,
and procure his favor again.

But there was not so much goodness in us, as to have even the least thought
of reconciling God unto us. So our merciful God stayed not so long with his
remedy of Grace, until we were become Sinners and wretched Creatures, but
prevented our mischief, and determined to restore Life unto us, (before we had
lost it) by his heavenly wisdom and goodness.

And lastly, he restored and prepared for us a Life through Christ, an infinite
deal better, then that we had lost in Adam, as hereafter shall more fully
appear.

Furthermore, out of this Foreknowledge of God we learn, that GOD by his
Wisdom, did most perfectly fore-knowe all these Eventes which are brought to
pass by wicked Creatures, and are repugnant to his Heavenly Will and
Commandment: Seeing that he brought a fit and suitable Remedy for the
Evil committed, and laid to a Plaster, evenly answering the wound in just
proportion: Which he could never have done, unless he had most perfectly
and exactlie foreseen and perceyved the sore, and the greatness thereof. But
in as much as men and Angels did not know the means of reconciliation, from
thence it is evident that they were not endued with infinite Wisdom, nor
wisdom of their own, but with a limited wisdom, and such as they had
receyved from God. And if they had been endued with their own wisdom, they
would have been as wise, as to themselves had seemed best, and would have
dived into the most secret Mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven. But seeing they
were endued with wisdom that they had receyved from God, their wisdom
therefore was listed and limited with certain bounds. For the Wisdom of God
is the only cause and measure of all wisdom, in such sort, that there can
be no more wisdom in men nor Angels, then GOD works and preserves in
them.

And in as much as God sought and found out a means of our Salvation and
Redemption, freely of his own accord, without any entreaty of ours, it is no
common nor slight, but an exceeding great and singular commendation both of his
Wisdom and Favor: inasmuch as (I say) he ordained Christ from everlasting,
to be the Mediator for the Salvation of the world, that he might reconcile God
unto the world by the Sacrifice of his death. Here behold and admire the
inestimable Mercy of God, in that he had rather his own Son should die,
then that all Mankind should perish. Here again behold, and reverently
embrace the incomprehensible goodness and mercy of the Son of God, toward
wretched man, in that he accounted the Salvation of Mankind more precious
then his own life. Christ himself having respect to this, says in Saint
John: John 3.16.
So GOD loved the World, that he sent his only begotten Son, that by him
he might restore and bestow upon Mankind, Life that was lost, and Salvation
that was past hope. Therefore this provident Wisdom of God, was wonderfully
necessary for Mankind, and very profitable; yea, and in such sort, that
without it, all Mankind had perished. So that the Wisdom of God is to be
adored and reverenced of us, and ought continually to be the only rule and
measure of our wisdom: and that so, as that all other wisdom without it
should be base and of no value, and be no more regarded then mere folly and
foolishness it self. And for as much as God of his infinite Wisdom found a
means to deliver us from such a bottomless depth of misery; hence should the
Godly entertayne and conceyve great hope in all their adversities. For seeing
he has found out a most wise means and way out of so deep and intricate a
mischief, out of which, the wisdom of men nor Angels could give no
direction how to escape, therefore surely he can very easily deliver us from
any dangers of this life, how great soever they be, for in his hand are many
and incredible means of delivery. So that where there is no counsel nor
means of delivery with man, there is there a certain issue and ready way with
God. Therefore in these dangers, which threaten assured death presently, and
savor of nothing else, but of the open grave, and vn-avoydable destruction, in
these, GOD most wise has many means of help, and deliverance from them. For
it is an easy thing with him to make an issue where there is none, sooner then
in the twinkling of an eye, if it be his pleasure. This then is our only hope
and strong consolation in our extreme temptations and troubles, that we have
God for our Helper and Deliverer, which in the midst of death can stretch
forth his hands and restore us to life, and has many more means to help us,
then there are Creatures in the whole universal world. And thus far of the
third Propriety of Election.

The free and undeserved Mercy of God, is the true cause of Election, and that
is greater by many degrees, then that the greatest Sinner can or ought rightly
to doubt of it, though never so little, much less despair of it.

CHAP. XI.
THe fourth Propriety is, that Gods Election is altogether a merciful, free,
and voluntary Decree: that is to say, that God had no other reason, to induce
him to choose miserable man, but only his own mere mercy and favorable
good will, as is aforesaid in the causes of Predestination. This Mercy of God,
is not any affection in God, which begins of a sudden sometimes, and
sometimes ends of a sudden, neither is it any Passion, which sometime
increases, and sometime decreaseth (for if there were any such succeeding
change in God, God should in no wise be God) but it is an eternal and a most
ready good Will, to do good unto miserable men. Therefore this eternal good Will
in God himself, is the only and sole cause, why he elected miserable man to
the attainement of Salvation. Ask now what is the reason, that he has
receyved this or that man into favor, and has pardoned his sins and
remitted the punishment, and there can no other cause be rendered, but even
Gods undeserved Mercy. And he is said to be merciful to him, whom he
vouchsafes his favor and grace: such a favorable and gracious affection of
his good Will, (to speak after the manner of men) is called Mercy; which in
God is nothing else, but an eternal and gracious purpose to have mercy on
those, on whom he will have mercy: that is to say, to give them freedom from
their misery. This is always one and the self same in God, which never
alters, but stands and abides continually in one state and degree. For the
names of these affections that are given unto God, from the Passions that are
in man, do not set forth any Passion or Change in God, but paynt out unto us
his unspeakable liking or hatred of those things which then are in hand. So
this Mercy of God is no new or sudden motion and affection in God, but his
eternal and unchangeable Propriety: which as it is once, such it is always;
without which God cannot be God.

As often therefore, as any man thinks of God, let him remember his
unspeakable goodness, and readiness to help, which can in no means be
separated, nor dis-ioyned from God.

But many times those things that are proper unto man, are attributed unto him,
because his Properties cannot be comprehended of man: and therefore they are
shadowed forth unto man, by the properties of man, as it were through a
Lattice, and so are made known unto him. So God does after a sort represent
unto us, as in a Glass, his spiritual and heavenly Mysteries and hidden
Decrees, by the speech or affections of man. And thus God for his unspeakable
Loves sake toward Mankind, does not think much to descend from his
greatness, and from the Throane of his Majesty, and debase himself so low,
as to apply himself to the capacity of a rude and frail man. And from hence
is seen better then in any Glass, how great care God takes for the Salvation
of Mankind.

This Mercy, is that most special goodness of God, which is not bounded and
restrained within the limits of this life, but stretches and reaches unto
all Eternity: so that it brings with it everlasting Life, and eternal
Salvation; and contains and includes those only which are elected from
everlasting, and those that shall be blessed for evermore. This differs very
much from the general Mercy of God, by which he cherishes and maintayneth
all living Creatures: for it is one thing to have a care over all living
Creatures, to provide things necessary for them, and mercifully to guide and
govern them. So that although God in his Fatherly care does not forsake even
the brute beasts, but cares for each of them: yet more especially God
declares his goodness in Mankind. For he does good, not only to the
righteous and godly, but also to the unjust and unthankful. For he makes
the Sun to rise upon the good and the badde, Mat. 5.45. Luke 6.23.
says Christ in Matthew, and in Luke. Such benefits of God are temporal and
common to the Godly and to the wicked: so that out of them, Gods saving good
Will cannot be known. For many abound here with riches and honor, which yet
come not to eternal Life, Luk 13.19.
as we may see in the rich glutton, and in many other. And it is an other thing
to elect in Christ those that were lost, to forgive them their sins, and to
draw them unto Christ by an effectual calling, to sanctify them by the power of
his spirit, and in the end, to crown them with eternal glory.

This mercy of God is wonderfully and singularly extolled and commended in many
places of the Scripture. This is erected as an heavenly banner, unto which as
to a sanctuary and a most safe haven the elect children of God are called by
the glad tidings of the Gospel: This excels and bears the prize amongst
all the works of God: This breaks the gates of hell, and sets open heaven
door: this is the only sacred refuge, which whosoever lays hold upon,
swimmeth happily out of the waves of every storm, and avoydeth the danger of
death, which otherwise would be at hand, and escapes without making shipwreck
of salvation. This mercy of God, is a most sovereign balm to a dismayed mind,
which heals their wounds without any pain. To this appertains that golden
sentence of Augustine, whereas he says, when man prayseth himself there is
vanity and pride, when God prayseth himself there is grace and mercy, for what
he prayseth in himself, that will he give to them that put their trust in him.
As often therefore as he prayseth himself, so often does he invite and call
men unto his mercy. In this mercy of God there are two virtues to be
considered. The first is, that it is by infinite degrees greater then can be in
any creature. For what kindness and mercy soever is in any creature, it
flows and issues only out of this mercy of God, as out of the only living
fountain. So that although there be a great and an earnest affection of
kindness in many creatures, yet compared with the mercy of God, it will scarce
be a little part or sparkle thereof. Psalm. 103.11.12. Ephesians. 3.18.19.
For this mercy of God does not only far exceed the capacity of man's mind,
but is also higher, broader, and deeper then the whole universal world.

Wherefore although that love which is in parents be a most earnest and tender
affection, whereby they love and embrace their children as their own bowels,
yet that love and goodness of God is far above, and much exceeds all the
love of men. This God himself testifies in Esaias, Esa. 49.15.
Although a Mother do forget her child, yet will I not forget thee, but will
always be mindful of thee. What compassion soever therefore can be found in
man, it is far inferior to Gods mercy. For look how great God himself is,
so great also is his mercy. Therefore like as God in his essence is infinite,
so likewise is he infinite in mercy, for with it the whole earth is filled,
says the Psalmist. Psalm. 33.5.
It is given and aplyed unto all the elect children of God throughout the whole
world, which could not be if it were finite and bound unto one certain place:
but seeing that at one time it shows forth the saving virtue thereof in
diverse places, it follows therefore that it is infinite in all places. This
mercy of God, is too basely and meanly esteemed of us, except this praise be
given unto it, as an honor due unto it: That it does infinitely exceed all
the senses of flesh, and all the affections either of Fathers or Mothers. Psalm.
27.10
This the Psalmist signifies when he says, My father and my mother have
forsaken me, but the Lord has gathered me up. This therefore is far above
and exceeds the compassion of all creatures.

The other virtue of Gods mercy is, that it is altogether a free gift, that God
found in us nothing at all, but most absolute and extreme misery, and that he
was induced by his own mere grace and mercy to save us, that he elected man
(that in himself was utterly a castaway) and appointed him to salvation. And
that election is the free and undeserved gift of God, it may be proved by many
reasons and arguments. First, because he elected man from everlasting, before
he was, and had neither done good nor evil. Hence it plainly appears, that
in electing man God had no respect of his merits or worthiness. For if there
had been any merits, it should necessarily follow, that man should first have
been and have done some good, for the effects are not before their causes, but
after. But seeing man was not then, when he was elected unto life, therefore
also could there then be no work of his. For the causes go before their
effects in the order of nature, and in the manner of working; and effects can
in no wise be produced, except the causes first be, by whose power and virtue
the effects be brought forth. Therefore out of this circumstance of eternity it
is plainly gathered, that election is the free gift of God. For I would feign
know what man could do or deserve before the world was made, and before his
own creation? Therefore whatsoever the Papists dream of here concerning
godliness and faith foreseen, is absurd and false, as hereafter shall be
declared. But that election is free and flows from the mere favor of God,
and that it excludes all the endeavors and works of men, the holy Scripture
does expressly teach in many places. For Paul to Timothy says, 2. Tim. 1 9.
Romans 16.25 Ephesians. 3.11.
that GOD saves us not according to our own works, but according to his own
purpose and grace, which was given unto us through Christ before the world was.
Here Saint Paul for the better clearing and expressing of it, sets down
man's works, and the grace of God as two contraryes opposite one against an
other, and severeth salvation from man's merits, and attributes it wholly to
the grace of God.

And again man (take him at the best) is so corrupted and polluted with sin,
that there is no good thing in him which remained unspotted and vnsteined from
sin. Therefore whole man is not only turned away from God and all goodness, but
withal, is so prone unto evil in the whole affection of his nature, and in all
the parts thereof, that of himself he can bring forth nothing else but sin,
and all manner of wickedness, that shows it self even in his least thoughts,
because man without the grace of God and the benefit of regeneration is so
wicked and perverse, that he cannot think, much less do any good thing, as
the holy scripture testifies and proves: 2. Cor. 3.5.
yea, he is so far out of love with goodness, Genes. 6.5.
that he cannot without offense endure that once it should be mentioned. For
when some evil is forbidden him of God, and the good commanded, then does he
set himself wholly against it, and rages and is angry against God: and his
wicked affections break forth openly like unto wild and untamed beasts, and
run out like wild horses: and the more severely that God forbids any evil,
the more egerly does miserable man rage and resist it, so that a man may sooner
wring oil out of an hard stone, then that a man not regenerate should do any
good thing that should please God, or be avayleable for his salvation. Seeing
then that man in his whole nature and will is a foe and an enemy to God, I see
not by what means he may deserve life at Gods hands. Moreover, seeing that man
was drenched through sin, in so deep a pit, and bottomless gulf of
damnation, that he could not understand nor comprehend it, therefore also he
had perished for ever in it, if God by his grace had not plucked him out of it,
and delivered him through Christ his only begotten Son. For miserable man is
so blinded through sin, that he cannot understand his own evil, much less
can he cure it. Sin therefore as an unavoidable destruction lurketh in man's
nature, as in a deep pit of hipocrisy: and if God had not revealed it in his
law, and withal, found a remedy for it in his Gospel, man altogether ignorant
of his mystery, had run headlong into eternal destruction. Again, the least
sin that is, in the nature of it, is so ugly, that it redoundeth to the
dishonor of God, and deserves his fierce indignation, the greatness whereof no
creature is able to suffer and overcome, as a man may see in the Angels that
fell and were condemned. So that man had for ever perished in his misery, if
God by the death of his Son had not drawn him out of it. This untowardness of
man's nature and backwardnes to all good, does wonderfully set forth Gods mercy,
and proves it to be free, because God in choosing man being such as he is unto
life, does declare his free bounty, and undeserved mercy.

Upon this mercy of God, is grounded the hope and consolation of all the
faithful, wherefore although they excel in no worthiness, nor have any merits
which they may bring unto God, yet this one thing may be sufficient for them to
come to all happiness, namely, that God in his nature is good and merciful, and
so far forth good and merciful, as that he would rather help and advance unto
happiness miserable men, such as were almost past help, then those that were of
great account, and trusted in their own strength. They therefore which trust
that God will be their Savior even for his own free goodness sake, it
necessarily follows, that they have their faith grounded upon, and
correspondent unto the grace of the Gospel. But they which trusting in their
own merits think that God will be their rewarder, have their hope in no wise
framed according to the tenor of the Gospel, so that they waver in doubtful
and hurtful perplexities, till being at the length overcome, they are at the
last cast down, and swallowed up of desperation. This therefore is the mutual
and continual relation between a Christian man's faith, and Gods free bounty,
that an humble and prostrate sinner should by faith lay hold on Gods mercy,
though he bring nothing else unto God, but a contrite and a broken heart, Psa.
51.17.
for he exacteth this one thing, and requires nothing else. Therefore out of
this mercy of God miserable sinners may suck this most sweet comfort, that by
their humble and lowly confession and loathing of their sins, they have Gods
exceeding mercy prepared and exhibited unto them, as a certain and present
remedy for all their evils. Also here is a thing worthy to be noted, that God
who of his undeserved favor did deliver miserable mankind from so great a
mischief, does teach and command us by his example, that to our power we
should help those that are in misery. Yea, and the greater that their misery
is, the more should every of us know, that we are bound unto God for to help
them: and if we do not help them as much as we can when need requires, by
that we show our selves to be enemies and adversaryes to God. For they which
are wicked against God, can not be good toward men. And they do indeed
declare that they are man-sleyers in the sight of God. For if others should
forsake them likewise, and not help them, they should decay and perish in
their misery, and so they are the occasion and cause of their death, as
farre-forth as in them lies, and therefore are judged and shall be condemned
of God as manifest man-sleyers. This the Scripture sets down in express
words, saying, that judgment merciless shall be to him that shows no mercy.

Here the wicked and fond fiction of the Papists concerning faith and good
works foreseen, which they dream to be the causes of election, are confuted
as false by plain testimonies of holy scripture.

CHAP. 12.
NOw whatsoever the Papists do talk of concerning faith and godliness
foreseen, is nothing else but a most vain dream and foolish fiction; For in
that they say, that God from everlasting knew such or such, that they would be
good, and that they would deserve election by their good works, it is to forge
a weak and fond fable, about which they may trifle at their pleasure, and
without fear. For God is so the cause and beginning of all good, that the
least drop of goodness cannot any where be found, of which he is not the only
author and finisher. The Papists in this doctrine are confuted by many places
of holy scripture, and are convinced of manifest untruth. For holiness and a
godly life, are the fruits and effects of election. For God did elect his from
everlasting, not because they would be good in themselves, and worthy of their
election, but he elected them being evil, that afterward by his grace they
might become good. This the Scripture does testify in manifest and express
words, when it says, that God has chosen us, Ephesians. 1.4.
that we should be holy and without blame before him through love.

Here we may clearly see, that God did not find such as should be elected,
good, but that being elected of him, he makes them good. So that integrity of
life and good works do follow election as the true effects thereof, and go not
before it as the cause. And if good works should be the cause of election, man
should have chosen God, and God should not have chosen man, so salvation should
be man's merit, and not Gods gift, and election should be, not because God is
merciful, but because man is good and just. Again, the Papists, in setting up
works foreseen as the cause of salvation, deny God to be God, and make his
grace of no account. For God alone is good, Iam. 1.17.
and the only fountain of goodness. Therefore whosoever think that they have
the very least good thing in them without God, do deny him to be the only
author of all good, and so deny him to be God. For God cannot be God, except he
alone be set up and acknowledged the only fountain of all goodness: For what
manner of God should he be, if not the only author, and sole effecter of all
goodness?

But if the Papists should be urged somewhat nearer and harder, as namely, out
of what fountain those works foreseen should slow and have their beginning:
if they answer from man's nature and free will, they are far deceived, and
are blinder then the very Moles. For man's whole nature, with all the parts
thereof, either of soul or body, even unto the least drop of his blood, is so
corrupted and defiled with sin, that all his thoughts, and whatsoever
proceeds from him any manner of way, is only evil, Gene. 6.5.
and against God. So that man's nature after his fall, neither will nor can do
any thing else but strive and wrestle against God, and that with a continual
and earnest desire. This the holy scripture does not only testify, but also
experience proves to be so: for men when they are left to themselves, do not
only not acknowledge their sin, but also think that there is nothing in
them, but that which is good and holy, although they have nothing in them, but
that which is polluted and defiled with much uncleanness. And again, this
corruption and untowardness of man, has taken so deep root in the nature of
man, as that it cannot be plucked up by man's power, therefore the amendment of
man's nature does far exceed man's power. For the restoring of Gods image is a
far greater and harder work then the first creation of man. And as no man
could create himself, so also could no man by his own power amend his evil
nature, nor change his perverse will into good. Therefore seeing man in his
whole nature is depraved, and that he cannot change nor amend his corrupted
nature, whatsoever the Papists do talk of works foreseen, is not so much
their own vain fiction, as the mischievous invention of the Devil.

Surely God from everlasting did foresee good works, and knew them very well,
but yet no other but such as he himself determined to work and bring forth in
man. By these good works man can deserve nothing at Gods hands, because they
are his gifts and benefits. God bestows life and salvation upon man, for his
own everlasting goodness sake, and not for any good deeds which he himself
works in his children. These good works are the manifest effects, and
infallible testimonies of his mercy.

By all this it appears, that the Papists understand nothing rightly nor
soundly in the doctrine of Election, for to understand a thing rightly, is to
know it by the true and proper cause thereof. But they know not Election by the
true and proper cause thereof: Therefore they understand not Election at all,
or if they understand it, of mere malice they hide it, and will not manifest
it. Wherefore the Papists do wander amiss beside their purpose, and talk of a
thing they know not, much more ridiculously and foolishly, then if a Shepherd
or a Neate-heard should out of Astrology describe the rising and the setting of
the Stars; or out of Geometry measure out all the scituations and distances
of places, without the knowledge of either science. Therefore the Papists when
they refuse Gods free bounty as the first and proper cause of salvation, and
substitute faith foreseen as a false and feigned cause thereof, they run
into a gross fallacy from that which is no cause, as if it were a cause, and
so fall into a dangerous error. And this fallacy is committed, as often as for
a true and natural cause of some thing there is assumed that which is no cause
of it: as the Papists do here, in imagining and bringing forth good works
foreseen as the cause of election, whenas those good works are not apt nor
fit to bring forth salvation. For those good works which they dream of,
neither are, nor can be produced or showed in that sort as they do imagine.
Therefore they do not only bring a false cause, but that which is no cause at
all. A false cause is that, which is not fit to effect that for which it was
purposed, but is the cause of some other thing: and so when in place and time
convenient it is applied unto a thing that agrees with the nature and quality
thereof, it may bring forth somewhat. But no cause, is that which can bring
forth nothing, because it self is nothing. For those good works foreseen,
which the Papists so brag of, and build election upon, are not at all,
neither indeed can be, as is showed before: and to expect something from that
which is nothing, is extreme and ridiculous madness, by which they mock God,
and deceive men. But seeing they feign that to be the cause of salvation, which
is not at all, nor can be, they entangle themselves in a manifest
contradiction, and make themselves a laughing stock for very children. But if
GOD infinitely good and wise, had not found out and showed us a better cause
and way to salvation, then the Papists have, woe had it been unto mankind.
Therefore far be from us that dream of the Papists, as the palpable
invention of the Devil, and most manifest breake-necke of man's Salvation,
because it derogateth from the grace of God, and undermines and subverteth the
Gospel for the foundation of it. And let all the godly reverence and adore the
mercy and goodness of God, which the scripture every where sets down for the
only and most true cause of salvation.

Also man's purpose, when once it begins to be good, is helped indeed by
the grace of God. But here we must diligently mark and observe, that this
purpose of man could not be good, if the grace of God had not gone before, and
made it good: Col. 1.21. 2. Cor. 3.5. Genesis 6.5. Ephe. 1.18. Eze. 36.26. 1. Ioh.
5.20. Luke 24.45.
For the whole nature and mind of man in himself, and in his own nature, is
only bent unto evil, so that he cannot have the least thought unto any
goodness: and so man's purpose is always evil in it self, but then it
begins to be good, when God enlightneth his mind by the power of his
spirit, and changes and renueth his will. Furthermore, it is GOD only, that
of unwilling makes willing, and of a stiff-necked man, makes him more
tractable and mild. This he teaches by the Apostle to the Philippians,
Phili. 2.13.
where he says, it is God which works in you both the will and the deed
even of his good pleasure. Here Paul shows, that man by his own power is
not fit, either to begin or finish any good work, but that all the power both
of willing and doing good, proceeds from Gods only free mercy, because he
of an evil will makes a good will, and turns and inclines unto good, man's
heart which is most proane unto evil. Hence it is clearly proved, that God
could foresee no good thing in man, but that which he himself does work in
him. Therefore the Papists in this point, do betray their own gross
ignorance or wicked malice, in that they are not ashamed to affirm and to
defend, that Gods foreknowledge is contrary to his grace, especially seeing
that we hear nothing throughout the whole Scripture in the doctrine of
Election, but only Gods good purpose and mere mercy; and concerning works
foreseen, and man's merits, there is not a word spoken. Therefore the
Papists, seeing that they wrest this word of fore-knowing from the true and
natural sense thereof, into a strange and mischievous understanding, by a
gloss of their own interpretation, and understand not the propiety of the
phrase, they fall into an error of ambiguity of words, and through the
likeness of words bring in a fallacy, and by their like kind of speaking as
with a cloak, they hide the color of their mistaking of the word, and as much
as they can, suppress and diminish the truth.

Out of this which is spoken may be gathered, not darkly nor doubtfully, but
clearly and plainly what is the disposition of the Devil and wicked men,
which because they are enimyes unto God, and do hate him, they cease not to
darken and obscure his glory, wheresoever they may. And in this respect they
show their malice two manner of ways: First, in that they do most earnestly
hate and detest that, which most especially pleases God, and is acceptable
unto him. Secondly, in that they only love and most desire those things which
God has in the greatest hatred and abomination. So likewise the Papists in
this matter are most against that which pleases God most, and on the contrary
side do most approve and desire that which God hates. For God is most
delighted with this, and this is his certain will, that the elect should
attain salvation by his only free mercy. But the Papists pleasure is, that the
elect should be saved by their own worthiness and merits. Again, God does
reject and altogether exclude man's merits in the matter of salvation: but the
Papists like of them, and make them the causes of election and salvation. So
that betwixt God and the Papists there is a most manifest and vehement
contrariety. Therefore they are not lovers of God, but his sworn enemies. And
that they are such, they do sufficiently declare by this, in that they make
works foreseen the causes of salvation. In which thing they commit two
grievous offenses; namely, first, in that they set nothing by the first and
true cause, in respect of their own merits, and so erect an imaginary and
false cause thereof. Secondly, in that they labor to withdraw mankind from
God, and having withdrawn the^ from him, as much as in them lies sell them as
bondslaves to the devil. So that the Papists on the one side are cruel and
injurious against men, and on the other side sacrilegious and blasphemous
against God, because they always hinder his glory, and derogate from his
Majesty as much as their ability can stretch unto. On the contrary S. Paul
although before his conversion he was in the Jewish profession vnreproveable,
and after his conversion far more holy then all the popelings, yet he to the
Philippians, Phi. 3.6.8.
not only constantly and boldly excludes all works and merits, as well
going before as following after faith, but also accounts them for dung, that
in steed of them having gained Christ, of an ungodly and wretched man, he might
become just and rich.

Here also we must know that the Papists, as they do forsake God, and resist
his grace, so also they do not only shut up the door of his mercy against
themselves, but even pluck on their own necks an horrible curse, and most
certain destruction. For cursed is he says Jeremy, Iere. 17.5.
that trusts in man. Therefore this gloss of the Papists concerning good
works foreseen, is to be rejected as wicked and blasphemous, because it is
not only not found in all the holy Scriptures, but also is most extremely
contrary unto them. For God in the electing of man had respect unto himself,
and had no regard unto works, either past, or to come, which the Apostle to the
Ephesians delivers in express words, Ephesians. 1.5.
saying, he has predestined us, whom he has adopted through Jesus Christ in
himself, according to the good pleasure of his will. In that he says, in
himself, he teaches, that God in choosing us, saw nothing but himself, which
he made any account of. Therefore Gods goodness and love is the only root of
our election. Whereas he says, according to the good pleasure of his will,
that is put down for the better clearing and expressing of the truth, and by
that we are taught, that Gods free goodness could not but with great difficulty
by persuasion have been beaten into us. And what I pray you could God foresee
in us in our election? seeing that our whole being, Act. 17.28.
and what good thing so ever we have, 1. Cor. 4.7.
we have received it and enjoy it by him only. Wherefore that the true cause
of election may be held of us, we must in no wise frequent the school of the
Papists, but we must search and follow the holy Scripture which is the only
Schoolemaister, and the most faithful expositor of eternal salvation. Satan
has inspired and suggested into the Papists this opinion of works foreseen,
that by it he might withdraw men from the true cause of their salvation, and so
cast them headlong into eternal destruction. For Satan well knew, that man's
whole salvation would fall to the ground, except it were wholly fetched and
derived from God. Surely there cannot be given unto mankind a greater nor more
pernicious hurt, then this opinion is, and there is no vice worse then this
divelish pride, which snatcheth from God his chiefest honor, and steals away
the praise of his mercy. Therefore this more then frantike opinion of faith
foreseen, is utterly to be cast off and refused.

Here is showed by clear and vnanswereable arguments, how horribly and
grievously the Papists do offend against Gods divine Majesty, by their
pestilent opinion of faith or works foreseen.

CHAP. 13.
FOr the Papists in that divelish opinion do offend against God and against his
Majesty many ways, and do commit many sacrilegious offenses. First, they do
offend against the fatherly goodness, and free mercy of God. For Gods mercy is
the only fountain of all goodness, in such sort, that there is no good which
may any where be found, but it flows and springs of that fountain.
Moreover, God is so good and merciful, that he will be acknowledged and
honored for no other virtue nor property more, then for his free goodness and
mercy. Hence it comes to pass that the holy scripture when it speaks of
Gods mercy, does heap and reckon up as it were in a catalogue, many words
signifying one and the selfsame thing, saying, that God is gracious, Exodus
34.6. Joel. 2.13. Jonah. 4.2.
merciful, long-suffering, abundant in goodness and truth: so, look how many
words are joined together for to set forth Gods fatherly love, so many mouths
as it were and toongs has God sounding from heaven, by which, as with the
words of a father, our merciful God inviteth and allureth men unto his mercy.
By these so many praises of Gods mercy we are taught, not only that God is the
sole fountain of all goodness, but also this is likewise showed, that we are
not so hardly persuaded of any thing, as to know and believe that God will be
gracious and merciful unto us, for the praising of Gods mercy, is for the most
part a reproof of man's incredulity. The scripture therefore with these praises
of Gods goodness, as with so many wedges, does drive out and expel man's
unbelief. But the Papists here do most grievously offend, in that they feign
God to be other then indeed he is. So that they bewray their own unbelief and
malice, in that they attribute and trust more in themselves, and their own
works, then in God infinitely merciful. Otherwise they would leave this fable
of works foreseen, and rest themselves wholly upon Gods mercy. But they shall
surely feel, though then too late, when God comes unto judgment, that they
deceive themselves and others by these their feigned and lying works. For he
that peevishly resists Gods mercy, is worthily deprived of it.

Secondly, they do grossly offend against Gods Justice, because they are not
ashamed to bring before God most just, their feigned and defiled works, as if
they were good and perfect, as if God were blind, and wanted judgment and
discretion to discern between good and bad, betwixt perfect works and
imperfect. Surely the Papists in this respect do like those, which take a
false cause in hand; and yet to make it good, they labor to blindfold and
corrupt the Judge with bribes; that they might obtain that by deceyt and
bribery, which by Justice and Equity they could not attain. So the Papists
with their works foreseen, as with so many rewards, labor to corrupt God,
and to turn him from the right, and draw him to the wrong cause, and so do
not only make God like unto an unjust Judge, but also much worse. For choice
gifts and bountiful rewards are usually brought unto a Judge, that he may
the easier be corrupted to favor unjust causes. But the Papists bring unto
God, not perfect works, but filthy and abominable sins. For God (as we have
said before) could foresee no good works, but those which he himself wrought
in man: but of these, the Papists dispute not in this place. We have showed
before, that man, not partly, but wholly, take him at the best, is corrupted and
depraved through sin. Therefore all works, which man of himself does, or
brings forth by his own proper and native virtue, can in no wise be good nor
acceptable unto God. For from a corrupt and wicked man can proceed nothing but
corrupt and wicked deeds: for the effects are usually like the causes. Such
therefore as the cause has been, such effects likewise must needs proceed
and follow thereon. Therefore as out of an unclean fountain there proceeds
an unclean stream, and as from an evil tree, there grows evil fruit; so
also, by a corrupt and wicked man can be wrought nothing but corrupt and wicked
deeds and endeavors. For the effects can not be better nor more excellent
then their causes. So that when the Papists make such works the cause of
Election, do they not after a sort turn God into a sinful man? do they not
make him the patron and allower of wickedness, wherein is seen their
Sathanicall blindness, and divelish madness? So that out of this Fiction of
the Papists, as out of a glass, manifestly appears what a terrible and
dangerous mischief it is, lewdly to stray out of the word of God, and to
whirle up and down in frantic speculations, and to feign and suppose false
causes for true.

Again, if God from everlasting could have foreseen, that very good and
perfect works would proceed from man, yet those by no means could have been
sufficient to deserve or get Salvation by. For an eternal and infinite life,
cannot be attained, as a reward for a temporal labor and finite work:
because there ought to be a just proportion, between the labor and the hyre,
that according as the labor was, so also should the wages be paid. So that for
a great labor, there is usually allotted and appointed a great reward. But
Life eternal and heavenly Glory, is a far greater and more excellent good
thing, then can be deserved by man's labor or industry: nay, Life eternal
does in the worth, greatness and excellency of it, far exceed and surpass
the heavens and the whole world: nay, nothing that is created, may justly be
compared unto it. So that as there is no comparison between a temporal
desert, and an eternal benefit: so also is there no proportion between an
infinite good and a finite work. Whosoever therefore braggeth of his own
works, let him take heed, that he be not punished rather then rewarded.

Thirdly, they offend against the Wisdom of God, in that they endeavor to
show an other way to attain Salvation, then he has revealed in his word.
For God will have his Mercy and free Election, to be the only way and gate
into eternal Life. That the Scriptures teach manifestly in diverse places,
saying, Blessed are all they whose sins are forgiven, Psalm. 32.1. Romans 4.6,
7, 8.
and to whom the Lord imputes not sin. But the Papists prefer their good
works foreseen, to be the cause of Salvation, rather then Gods goodness.
So they would erect and set up their own righteousness, which God bestows
not upon them by faith, neither has Christ merited by his Passion. Wherefore
they do not obey Gods divine wisdom and counsel, neither will they be subject
unto it: which in the end shall fall out evil for them, and turn to their
destruction. For they which despise and cast off Gods counsel, do loose his
mercy, and are condemned, as Augustine says in one place. Wherefore their
wisdom is not only vain, but also tending to destruction, which are wise
against God. But surely, such wisdom, speaking properly, and according to
divinity, is not to be called wisdom, but the subtilty of Satan, and
craftiness of wicked men, whereby they mock God, and delude men. For the
wisdom of God is so the fountain and spring of all wisdom, that no other
living creature can have any greater wisdom, then God does communicate and
bestow upon him. Look therefore how much wisdom God does work and preserve
in a man, so much wisdom he has, and better or more wisdom he cannot
have. They therefore which will be more wise then God would have them, their
wisdom comes not so much of God, as of the devil. Therefore the
superstitious and blasphemous Papists, seeing in this point their wisdom is
contrary to God, are not to be accounted wise men, but sottes and fools. For
it were better for them, that they had no wisdom at all, and that they were
more blockish then fools, then thus to resist and rebel against the wisdom
of God. Therefore whatsoever they talk of, concerning works foreseen, and
our own merits, it is a mere and manifest illusion of the devil, and a most
certain ship-wracke of their own Salvation.

Moreover in this they greatly offend, in that they are not afraid, to turn
the great and excellent gifts of God to the dishonor of him, and to the honor
of the devil. For they abuse their wisdom, by which men do excel beasts,
against God, and against their own Salvation. For to this end God would have
man to be wise, and endued with reason, that by the word of the Gospel, he
might acknowledge God to be his Creator, and Christ his Redeemer, and that he
might honor God, and attain Salvation by meditating upon eternal life. But
they apply the strength of their wisdom to this, namely, to the invention and
coining of those things, which are repugnant to the will of God: so they of
their own accord, and of set purpose, do convert those helps which are good
in themselves, unto hurtful impediments. Therefore this wisdom of the
Papists, which is exercised about works foreseen, and about merits, is not
only carnal, but also divelish: because it is contrary to the will of God. As
far as right differs from wrong, so much do the Papists differ from God:
because all their wisdom does make open war against the wisdom of God,
whilst they set up their works foreseen, against his grace. For they strive
earnestly for this, to make the grace of God, not altogether free, but partly
deserved, and so do derogate from the mercy of God. But praise and glory be to
God, because he has prevented us by his free goodness and abundant grace,
and has predestined us unto eternal life freely, and not for our works or
merits foreseen. And surely it is a grievous thing to hear, that the
Papists are so fallen from the word of God, and that they without the wisdom
of God, and Christ his spirit, boast themselves to be Christians. For if they
had the spirit of Christ, and did submit themselves to the wisdom of God,
they would know, as instructed by the word of God, that we were freely elected
by God from everlasting, and that they should not think nor determine of
Election otherwise, then God has revealed and prescribed in his word: and
being regenerate by the spirit of Christ, they would have a care of Gods
glory, and not be the servants of Satan. But now their whole study and
wisdom consists in this, to judge of what pleases them, according to their
own judgment and discretion. And so indeed do show, that they are altogether
strangers from the spirit and Gospel of Christ, and that they do wholly
detest it. Far therefore be from us this study and doctrine of the Papists,
being as the shop and illusion of the devil: yea, let it be from a Christian
heart farther, then the heaven is distant from the earth.

Fourthly, they offend against the truth of God, in that they affirm, that
works foreseen are the cause of our Salvation. For God has ordained Jesus
Christ from everlasting, that he should make satisfaction for our sins, and
redeem us from all iniquity, faith Peter, 1. Pet. 1.20
Moreover, the Son of God himself affirms often in the Evangelists, John
3.36.
that all which believe in him, have eternal Life, John 5.24.
and shall not come into condemnation. For he is that Lamb of God, which
takes away the sins of the world: Heb. 9.12.
he suffered once for us, and by suffering, purchased for us eternal
Redemption. Therefore in the virtue of his Passion, our whole Salvation and
Life consists. These and the like testimonies of Scripture do ascribe Life
eternal unto the Sacrifice of Christ only, as to a meritorious cause. For God
is true, and therefore will perform those things, which he has promised,
faithfully and truly. But he has promised in the Scripture, in diverse
places, that the only Sacrifice of Christ, (...)
is the only price of our Redemption from all our sins. For by Isaiah he
promises expressly, that his Servant, meaning Christ, should by his knowledge
justify many, because he has vnder-gone and borne their iniquities.
Therefore how much soever the Papists do attribute unto works foreseen,
so much do they necessarily detract from the merit of Christ; because those
works foreseen, and these merits of Christ are such contraries, as that one
and the self same thing cannot be attributed to them both. But the Scripture
of God, which is the only and most simple truth, does every where ascribe the
cause of our Election, unto Gods free Bounty, and likewise ascribes Redemption
and Salvation that proceeds and comes thereof, unto the only Merit of
Christ. Therefore it does not only leave no room for their works foreseen,
but does also convince them of falsehood, and reject and condemn them as
manifest wrongs against Christ. For whatsoever is not of Grace, that is deadly,
and tends to damnation. But these works foreseen of the Papists, are not
of Grace, for they say, that they are the virtues of humane nature: therefore
those works foreseen are deadly, and tend to damnation. Wherefore seeing
they bring destruction with them, these works are wholly to be rejected: on the
contrary, Christ his Merits, seeing they bring Salvation with them, are with
heart and mind readily to be embraced. But if the Papists did believe God when
he promises, and did rest themselves only upon his word of truth, they would
let go their works foreseen: But seeing they do produce them, they do
manifestly declare, that they put more confidence in their works, then they
do in God, or in his word. And so they offend against the truth of God,
before which they prefer their own works, and merits foreseen, and do
perversely accuse God of infidelity and falsehood. For if they did believe that
God were faithful and constant in perfourming of his promises, they would
never fly unto works foreseen, as to the helpers of his Grace.

Fifthly, they do offend against the Omnipotency of God, because they presume
and undertake things that are far above their strength and power. For God is
only omnipotent, and he is the only effecter and beginner of all power and
strength, in such sort, that no Creature can be more powerful, nor able to
do or perform more, then God has given him ability and force to do.
Wherefore every creature can bring to pass and perform so much, as it is
enabled by the strength that God works and preserves in it. But God gives
not infinite strength and omnipotency unto any creature, for so of a creature
he should make him God, and give his glory to another, which by the Prophet
Esaias he flatly denies to do, saying, Esaias. 48.11
I will not give my glory to another, that is, God will not cause, that any
Creature should have infinite strength, or infinite wisdom. For of ones self
to perform and bring forth those works which may merit Election and
eternal life; is not in the power of any creature: For life eternal is a
far more excellent good, and greater work, then man's strength is able to
compass. That life is heavenly and infinite, and therefore not to be gotten
or procured, but by an heavenly and infinite power. For (as we have said
before) there is no comparison nor proportion, between an infinite good thing,
and a finite work and merit.

Therefore when as the Papists brag, that they are able to make themselves
worthy of their elelection, by their own proper works and merits, they do
more foolishly and fottishly, then if they should take in hand to build and set
up a new heaven and a new earth, with mallets and other tools. For albeit
that this be altogether impossible for them to do; yet that other is far
more hard, and much more impossible. For God the only Almighty One was able to
create the Heaven and the Earth, and all that is contained in Heaven and in
Earth, by his word only without any difficulty: but he could not redeem
Mankind from eternal damnation, but by the precious blood of his Son. So
the Scripture calls them that shall be saved, the Chosen in Christ, namely,
in that he has redeemed them by his blood, and restored Gods Image in them.
Wherefore seeing that Salvation could not be recovered by any other means,
but by the most bitter death and passion of Christ, hence it clearly
follows, that there-obtayning of Salvation does far exceed the strength and
power of any creature whatsoever. Wherefore it is most false and wicked which
the Papists dream of, that man is elected unto Salvation, for such or such
good works foreseen: Because those works cannot pacify the exceeding great
wrath of God, nor make satisfaction for the sins of man. For (as we have
said before) they are altogether repugnant and contrary unto God, therefore
they do not pacify him, but offend him, and provoke him the more to anger.
Surely the whole mass of the world may far more easily be stayed up with a
staff of reed, then Salvation can be gotten or obtained by the power of man.
But that fiction concerning works foreseen, should have the more likelihood
of truth, if they did bring forth such works to deserve Salvation, as were
truly good, but they can bring forth no such; for, as we have said before,
man is wholly corrupt and wicked, therefore there can be expected from him,
nothing but corrupt and wicked deeds.

Lastly, by their works foreseen, they do manifestly tempt God, as if he
were not able to save his Elect, and bring them to happiness by his mere
grace, being apprehended by faith, unless they should put to their own good
works, as helpers and furtherers of his Grace. And surely by offering their
works, they show that they are in doubt, whether the Grace of God be able and
sufficient to save them, and so deny God to be God. For God cannot be God,
unless he be absolutely good, and infinitely merciful: otherwise, he should
be imperfect, and conditionally good, such an one as the Papists do make him
to be, with their good works and merits foreseen. And a greater dishonor
cannot redound unto God, then for a man to doubt of his infinite goodness and
free mercy, and God cannot be injured more, then if a man should prefer his
own works foreseen, before the mercy of God, as if by them God could be
moved or turned this way or that way, like man. Certaynely, whomsoever he has
not chosen for his own mercy sake, him will he not choose hereafter for any
foreseen good works of his own. For it is all alike to choose a man to
Salvation for his own works; as if God should cease to be God. For if God
should choose a man for his works, there would be found manifest change in
God, and so God should cease to be God: but they which think themselves
unworthy of Election; and yet do truly and constantly believe, that they are
from everlasting elected unto Salvation, by the free mercy of God, they give
unto God his deserved honor. For a greater honor cannot be given unto God,
then that he is much more good and merciful unto us in Christ, then if we
had never sinned at all. For he that believes in Christ, and lays hold on
him by a true faith, he has the love of God, and shall as truly and
certaynely attain life everlasting for his Passion sake, as God in his Nature
is everlasting, and unchangeable in his Will. But the Papists which make their
own works and merits the cause of their Election, do labor to abolish his
mercy, and to establish their own integrity and righteousness: as if God had
chosen man, not because he himself was God and merciful, but because man was
thought acceptable and approoved of God, for such or such good works
foreseen: when as the Gospel teaches the clean contrary, Luke 18.
that before Gods judgment seat, no works nor merits of man may be suffered
to approach, but that a lowly and humble prayer, powered out in the blood and
merits of Christ, shall be heard and accepted. Therefore the least
imagination or establishment of man's merit, is the manifest abolishing of the
grace of God, and the merits of Christ, and a most certain hazard and loss of
eternal life.

By these things that are spoken, it appears evidently enough, that this
fiction of works foreseen, is as an il favored head, which has many
unseemly members under it. For where one absurdity is granted, a great many
must needs follow after: 2. Tim. 2.17.
For error is as a fretting canker. For where the least chincke is opened to
error, there the very greatest Monsters of errors throng in by troops, and
other most ungodly sins are heaped together upon them. So out of this false
opinion, as out of Pandoraes box, there do fly horrible reproaches and
blasphemies against God: For they which do misunderstand, and falsely expound
one place of Scripture, it must needs follow, that they mis-interpret, and
misunderstand many places. Because that all the Articles of Christian faith are
so artificially lincked together, that one of them cannot be hurt, but all the
rest are wronged; neither can one be taken out from amongst the rest, but the
whole rank and order of all the rest will be broken, and fall to nothing.
Certaynely the Papists, being the subtle teachers and patrones of good works
fore seen, do openly declare, that they neither know the strength of sin,
nor the untowardness of our corrupted nature, nor the justice and wrath of God
against sin: and so they are most ignorant of that, which it most behooved
them to know. As often therefore as they speak or write of these Mysteries, so
often do they scatter abroad vain words of things which they know not, neither
have any experience of. But God enlighten the eyes of their mind, that they
may at the length, out of the word of God, rightly and sincerely learn and
know their own corruption, that so they may give due honor unto God, in
confessing, that he for his own absolute mercies sake, has chosen man freely
unto Salvation in Christ, and that he had no respect of men's works, either
past or to come.

The fifth and sixth Proprieties of Election are set down, and we are taught,
that the faith of the Elect remains safe against all the temptations of
Satan, against all the assaults of the world, and against all the waverings
of the flesh, because that it is settled in the hand of almighty God, and
grounded on his everlasting Decree.

CHAP. 14.
THe fifth Propriety of Election is, that the Decree of Election is an
omnipotent Decree: not only because God is able to create and produce
whatsoever he will, only by his word and appointment, without any more ado,
without any delay or difficulty: but also, because he is able indeed to
perform and give us all those things which he has appointed for us; not
only so, but also, that he is able to free us and deliver us from every
evil, although they be very great and fearful, even by his least power:
because that God is infinitely powerful, therefore nothing is able any ways
to resist his power. Those therefore whom he has chosen, it is very easy for
him, even in despite of the whole world, to deliver them from all danger, and
to bring them to eternal Life. So that the Elect, and such as believe, are as
sure to be saved, as God in his Majesty and Power is almighty and above all.
Hence may all the godly conceive most sweet comfort in all their adversities;
seeing that there is no evil so great, but that God is able on a sudden, even
in the twinkling of an eye, by his mighty Power to deliver them from it. So
that the Faith of Gods Children, looking upon the promises of God, does rest
and uphold it self by his omnipotency, which is able to help then, when as no
way nor means of help appears in the sight of man. For the power of God is
such, and so great, that whatsoever he will have to be done, comes to pass
in a moment, so that the perfect work appears in the very deed doing.
Wherefore in the midst of death we may hope for life from his hands. For his
hand is furnished and instructed with means of help and deliverances without
number, and wheresoever and whenever he will, he is able to save and
deliver his children. For this cause the very first Article of Christian faith
brings us to Gods omnipotency, as unto a most strong ground and foundation
of all his promises, in that God almighty can no more recall and break his
promises, then he can deny himself to be God, or cease to be that which he
is.

Sixthly, the Decree of Election is an unchangeable Decree; For God in his
Nature and Essence, is most simple without any mixture; in whom, as there
cannot be found any mixture, so likewise can there be found no change. And
that his Essence and Nature is unchangeable, that the Scripture in many places
does plainly declare. First, it does amplify his Eternity, Psalm. 102.26.
from the time past and time to come; namely, that God alone was before all
things, without any beginning. Secondly, that he alone remains, when all
other things perish, and that he never cease to be. And he that was before
all things, and shall be after all things, must needs be eternal. From this
Eternity of God, his constant Immutabilitie may clearly be prooved on this
wise. Whosoever was without any beginning, and shall continue for ever without
any end; he certaynely is not changed, but remains immutable: But God was
from everlasting, without any beginning, and remains for ever without end,
and therefore is he in his nature and essence unchangeable, and remains
always the same, and shall for ever continue like himself.

If God were mutable, he should consist of parts; but God does not consist of
parts, because he is God from everlasting, and nothing was, nor could be
before him. Again, if he were made of parts, he should consist of some matter
that was before him; but he consists not of any matter, for he is of
himself, and takes his whole essence and being from himself. For there is
nothing more proper to God, then to be from everlasting of himself, and not
to be by the help of any other. Therefore he is called Jehovah, which Name is
proper unto his divine Essence, and does express the eternity of God, that he
alone from everlasting has been without any beginning of being. Again, if
God were composed or made of parts, he might be dissolved again into those
parts. For this is a sure and infallible rule, that there are the same
beginnings, both of composition, and dissolution, so that whatsoever is made,
may be changed and dissolved into those things of which it is made, although it
never be changed and dissolved. And so, as God had a beginning, he should
also have an end: which were blasphemy, but once to think. For it cannot be,
that God should cease to be that which he was, or begin to be that which he is
not. Lastly, if God did consist of any matter, then should he be subject unto
these terms, of being sooner and later: for whatsoever is made of any thing,
it proceeds from a not being, unto a being, and admits of distances of
time: but no success of time can be found in God. For as in his essence he
was from the beginning, so from the beginning he knew all and every thing.
Therefore nothing with him is past or to come, but his proper time is always,
for ever, and present. Seeing therefore, that God is not included in any
limits or space of time, he is everlasting and unchangeable.

Furthermore, like as the Essence and Nature of God is eternal and
unchangeable, so that it neither increases nor is diminished, nor cease to
be: So also his favorable good will and mercy is eternal and unchangeable, so
that it neither does increase nor diminish, nor ever cease to be. For as God
is, so also is whatsoever is in him: but he is eternal and unchangeable, such
likewise is his favorable good will and mercy. For the Proprieties of God are
called essential, because they do belong unto his essence, and cannot be
separated nor disioyned from it, unless God should cease to be God. For
without this favorable good will, and fatherly compassion, God cannot be God.
For the Proprieties of God are so in God, that not one of the can be wanting,
but all of them must fall to decay, and God cease to be God. But as for
accidents, which may be increased or be diminished, or be separated from
their subject without the hurt thereof; there are no such to be found in God;
for whatsoever is in God, it is essential and perpetual in him. So then, his
fatherly good will and compassion, are two Proprieties in God, which can no
more be separated or set apart from him, then his essence or nature can. And so
as God in his nature and essence is everlasting and unchangeable; so likewise
his fatherly good will and mercy is unchangeable and everlasting. Therefore
eternal life and salvation that is promised of God, is so sure and certain, as
the nature of God is eternal and unchangeable. So the fatherly goodness and
mercy of God, does not depend of any external cause or occasion, for so it
should be in certain and unstable: for when that cause or occasion is taken
away or changed, the goodness and mercy of God should be taken away or changed
also: but both these, as well his favorable goodness, as his enduring mercy,
do depend of his nature and essence, and therefore are firm and unchangeable,
and remain for ever. Therefore although we, as weak and frail men, do
sometimes fall this way or that way, yet Gods affectionate good will toward
us, and his merciful compassion, slideth not, nor once moves, nor tottereth
any manner of way, but continues and remains firm and unshaken.

Moreover, as the Will and Mercy of God is eternal and unchangeable, so also
are his Decrees eternal and unchangeable. For God is an all knowing God,
because he most perfectly fore-sawe all things from everlasting, before they
were created, or had any being. Therefore nothing can happen or fall out now,
which may lie hid or secret from God. So that his wisdom cannot be deceyved
nor beguiled. With us many things fall out of a sudden, unlooked for, and past
expectation, which so trouble us, that we are constrained to change our
counselles, and to go in hand with others. But God does fore-knowe all the
events of things, yea, even of those things, which in man's judgment happen
by chance, and has them in his own hand, and does direct and bring them
thither, where to him seems best. So that neither things present, nor things
to come can be exempt from his knowledge. Again, God is omnipotent, which is
able by his wisdom and mighty hand, to bring those counselles to pass,
which he has fore-ordayned. Therefore no hindrances can be so great, as to
let and hinder the counselles of God from being brought to their appointed
end. Therefore whatsoever God did determine that he would do before time,
that does he now begin and finish in time: and that falls out infallibly
so, as he has fore-ordayned and appointed. And that GOD changes not his
Counselles, but fulfilleth them, as he has appointed, the holy scripture
expressly witnesses, saying, The counsel of the Lord endures for ever, Psa.
33.11.
and the thought of his heart abides from generation to generation. Here the
Prophet first teaches, that God remains constant in his purpose, and
pursues it, until it be brought to the end and fullness thereof. Secondly he
teaches, that nothing comes into his mind now, but that which he thought of
and determined before, and that he repents him not of any action, as if he
would have that undone which he has once done. Seeing therefore that God
changes not his counsel and decree, nor turns this way or that way, as men
use to do, there is no danger that he will seek new means of delay, undo his
promises, or break his word, as repenting himself. Mala. 3.6.
Therefore by Malachy he does manifestly witness, that he is not changed. And
S. James affirms, Iam. 1.17.
that no variablenes can be found in him. And so S. Paul to the Romans says,
Romans 11.29.
that the gifts of God are such as are without repentance. These testimonies of
scripture, and other like to these, do aver and constantly conclude this one
thing, that God will in no wise change or frustrate the decree of our
salvation, but that he has appointed it firm and durable for ever, so that
the frame of heaven, and the groundwork of the whole world will rather be
dissolved and subverted, then that God will change or repeal his merciful
good will toward us, and free promise of our salvation: for whatsoever has
once pleased God from everlasting, that does please him so, that for ever
hereafter it cannot displease him.

Seeing then that the will of God is the chiefest cause and original of
salvation, whomesoever therefore he has elected and appointed unto salvation,
their salvation is most certain; because it cannot possibly be, but that they
shall without doubt attain unto everlasting life and salvation, because that
the will of God being the first cause of their salvation, is most omnipotent,
and most loving, by which he has not only chosen them freely unto salvation,
but also freely gives, and mercifully bestows upon them all things which are
necessary unto salvation; and whatsoever he does freely give and bestow upon
them, can be taken from them by none, except God be first vanquished: but God
cannot be vanquished of any, because he is omnipotent. Therefore their
salvation is most sure and certain, because it has, Ioh. 10.28.
and always shall have God for the protector and defender thereof.

This unchangeableness of Gods purpose the scripture calls the foundation of
God, 2. Tim. 2.19.
because it is firm and immutable, and it is an elegant metaphor, which does
express the sure and stable strength, and everlasting continuance thereof,
that as a strong and well fortified foundation is not easily overthrown nor
weakened, but continues firm against all tempests and force of winds, and is
not moved, so likewise this decree of God is firm and constant, and remains
sure for evermore. So that the salvation of the elect being grounded upon that,
shall not be battered down by the assaults of Satan, nor hindered by his
temptations: it shall not be inwrapped in the troubles, nor endangered in the
ruins of the whole world, though that should perish and fall to nothing: and
lastly, it cannot be shaken nor made frustrate by any infirmity or weakness of
the flesh, so that the elect and such as believe, being set past all danger of
being cut off and perishing, are so sure of their salvation by the help and
power of God, as if they inioyed it already indeed sensibly, and in full
possession. So John the Baptist says in John the Evangelist, John. 3.36.
He that believes in the Son, has everlasting life. But temptations and
other troubles which happen unto the godly in this life, are either exercises
and trials of their faith, or their patience: or they are like light skirmishes
and bickerings, by which the godly, as it were by trayning, are exercised and
instructed in Christian warfare: but they are not hurtful encounters, nor
deadly battles in which they may be overcome and beaten down: for that cause
they are said to be called with an holy calling, because that salvation unto
which they are called, is inviolable and eternal. And it is called an holy and
inviolable calling, 2. Tim. 1.9.
because it depends upon an unchangeable and eternal decree. Wherefore the
salvation of the godly is so sure and certain, as that the overthrow and decay
of it, is no more to be feared, then the change of an eternal decree.
Moreover, although this decree of it self be most sure, yet it is confirmed
and sealed unto us in the blood and merit of Christ, like as the Patents of
Princes sealed with their public Seal, are made authentical and
unchangeable. Therefore, that GOD might confirm us more thoroughly in the
assurance and certaynety of his grace, it pleased him to seal unto us the
decree of our election, in the blood of his only begotten Son, and in it
thoroughly settle and strengthen our faith. So, God made the foundation of our
election so sure for ever, that nothing either in heaven above or in earth
beneath, is so firm and sure, as the foundation of our election and salvation.
For God does as much esteem this decree of our salvation, and accounts it as
precious, as the most precious blood of his own Son. Therefore to change this
decree were to deny Christ, and abolish his blood, which God will never do, for
he loves and accepts Christ and his blood as his own self: so that more
easily may the frame of heaven, and the whole foundation of the world be
dissolved and overthrown, then that there should be even the least change or
renewing of his decree. And if that it should be changed, the Son of God
should have no Church, and should have dyed and shed his blood in vain; but he
neither dyed in vain, nor shed his blood in vain: therefore he has always a
Church, and will have, which he has delivered and will save, by his blood and
by his death. Hence by a true and infallible consequent it is gathered, and
soundly concluded, that the decree of our election and salvation is
unchangeable.

That God sometimes repealeth his sentence pronounced, and does not execute it,
does not at all contrary this his unchangeable counsel. As often as this
comes to pass we must know, that that sentence of God was not absolute and
simple, which draws with it a sure and an infallible consequent, but such a
sentence which is denounced, and yet repealed, and not accomplished, was
pronounced with some certain condition, as Gods promises and his threatenings
have their conditions annexed unto them. If God have promised thee life, thou
must presently think of true faith, and sincere desire of obedience unto him,
and thou must seek for both these, not in thy self, but in God. If he have
denounced and threatened some curse unto thee, think with thy self to desist
from those things which he reprehendeth and blames in thee, which if thou
shall do, God knows how to reverse that sentence of threatening pronounced
against thee. And the absolute will of God was this, namely to spare thee, but
with this condition, if thou do cease from the evil that thou were
threatened for. And that condition is certain, although we hear it not
mentioned in express words in the manner of the threatening, yet it appears
and may be gathered by the event and end of the matter. So God spared the
citizens of Ninivy, for they hearing the fearful sentence of their overthrow,
repented, and renounced their former evil life.

So that God knows how to change his sentence when men depart from evil, but
God never knows how to change his counsel, as S. Gregory says. But the
absolute and resolute counsel of God was, that he would spare them, therefore
he would deter them from their wicked ways by this fearful sentence, and
so call them to repentance, so that this change ought nor to be referred unto
the council of God, as if that could be bowed and turned one way or an other,
but it must be applied to the sense and capacity of men, in which there ought
to be a turning from evil unto good. Again, although that has not always
come to pass, which God by his Prophet did foreshew should come to pass, yet
for all that, no contradiction or contrary will ought to be supposed or feigned
in God. For the will of God is in it self one and the same for ever, but yet
the same is sometimes partly revealed, and partly concealed. So likewise that
condition which was manifested by the event, was not expressly set down by
God, but he kept that close and concealed it, that he might touch the Ninivites
the more thoroughly, and the sooner and more easily drive them from their
sin. For by that fearful edict he would humble them, and being humbled, he
would spare them, and so he applied the doctrine unto their capacity. But
because God is one and the selfsame, and always immutible, therefore also his
will is, and ought to be accounted one and the selfsame, firm, and
vnremoveable.

Also God knows how sometimes to execute most resolutely his sentence
denounced against the wicked, when as men leave no place for wholesome
admonitions, and are no more moved with threatenings and rebukes, then stones or
hard rocks, and continue, not only obstinately in their sins, but also add
sin unto sin, and harden their hearts, and nuzzell themselves in their
sins freely without any fear, as we may see in the men that lived before the
flood, and in many others, as in a clear glass or mirror. Therefore
wheresoever men shall show themselves bold and hasty to commit sin, there God
also is wont to show himself a sharp and severe judge and revenger of
misdeedes, in punishing their offenses. Surely if Gods wholesome admonitions
do light upon men of pliable and repentant hearts, they move them and make
them better: but if they light upon men of reprobate sense and profane minds,
they do provoke them, and make them worse. So the holy and wholesome warnings
of God, are unto them an occasion of greater sin, and do turn unto their
destruction, and more grievous punishment.

Here the consciences of the elect are so strengthened in the most infallible
stedfastnes of Gods promises, that there is no matter of doubt left unto them,
concerning Gods most loving affection toward them.

CHAP. 15.
SEaventhly, the decree of election is a true and faithful decree. For God is
not only true in his words and promises, but even truth itself; and that so,
that the least suspicion or shadow of falsehood, cannot be found in him. Seeing
therefore that he is true and constant in his purpose, he therefore promises
that which he determined to give, and perform. So that whatsoever he has
promised in matters touching salvation, that will he as truly without any
fraud of deceit pay and perform, as he himself is true and everlasting.
This the scripture expresses by this most proper and significant word Emunah:
for that word does signify a most firm, stable, and permanent thing, because
that the promise of God is a certain and constant promise, so that nothing can
be found to be more constant and certain then Gods promise and plighted faith.
So also is there nothing either in heaven above, or in the earth beneath, in
which we may more safely put our trust and belief, then in GOD, and in his
word. For if a man do more thoroughly look, and more intentively search into
the true interpretation and sense of the Hebrew word, he shall find, that the
word does not signify every truth, but that truth only which is indeed
firmly grounded and established, and so the truth of God has his strength
settled and grounded on the nature and essence of God, as on an everlasting
foundation never to be subverted. Therefore the truth of God is not any
quality, gotten by some action which appertains not unto the essence of God,
but it is an essential propriety of his divine nature. This truth of God is
only the most strong ground and never-fayling foundation of the promises of
GOD. Hence it necessarily follows, that the promises of God in themselves and
in deed are most certain and most true, which shall certainly have their issue
and accomplishment, and do always carry with them their everlasting and
infallible Amen. So that God, as well in the second act, 2. Cor. 1.20.
in his word of promise, and the accomplishment thereof, as in his first act,
in his nature and essence is true, yea everlasting and infallible truth it
self. For seeing that God is truth it self and cannot lie, therefore
whatsoever he either speaks or promises, is true and infallible. Psalm. 31.6.
Hence is God in the scripture termed faithful, and the God of truth, because
he promises nothing but that which is true, and because he fulfilleth and
perfourmeth that which he promises, in deed and in truth.

This therefore is a most strong prop, and as it were a sacred anchor for the
faith and hope of a Christian, that God is not deceitful, but true; that he
gives and perfourmeth in deed, what he offered and promised in word, and
deceives not any man with vain and empty words; that he speaks nothing in
vain, nor boasts not of his bounty above measure, when he promises any
thing largely and liberally; but that he will truly and without doubt perform
that, which he determined with himself to give, therefore what he promises in
word, shall at length be fulfilled in deed: for this infallible truth sake,
the promises of God are called pure words, Psalm. 12.7.
and silver, tried and fined seven times. Therefore this immovable truth, and
settled constancy of God in the perfourmance of his promises, is, and shall be a
most strong instrument and fit engine, and the best weapon to expel and drive
away all distruct and wicked doubts that may arise in us concerning God and his
will. For our nature is most proane unto diffidence and distrust, and many
wicked and ungodly doubts concerning the will of God do steal upon us, and
work us much hurt and vexation. Therefore, if then Gods truth did not confirm
and uphold us, being weak and frail men, we should fall into despair, and be
swallowed up with it a hundred times in a day: wherefore the knowledge of this
heavenly and infallible truth, is most profitable and necessary for us, for it
is as a celestial shield stronger then brass, whereby all noisome distrust
and doubts of Gods mercy, like unto the pernicious fiery darts of the Devil
may be quenched and driven back. Wherefore, in adversity and temptation we
must have recourse and refuge unto this assured truth of God, as to our only
and safest Sanctuary, and that with our whole mind, and by a steadfast faith
and fervent prayer, that in the daily meditation thereof, we may strengthen our
faith, and add peace unto our consciences: otherwise there is no strength nor
stedfastnes whereby to uphold our selves. Whosoever therefore does truly
believe that God is faithful and true in his word, and has a hearty desire
daily to profit and proceed in that faith more and more, he does not only
understand the scriptures, and attain unto the sense and meaning of them the
better thereby, but also by that faith built and framed out of the word of Gods
truth, has conquered and overcome the world, and all evils contained in it, so
that he is rather to be accounted a citizen and heir of heaven, then a
pilgrim or inhabitant of the earth, for his hope and faith has cast anchor,
and fixed it upon the heavenly Sanctuary, as on a foundation of Adamant,
wheresoever therefore he is in his more excellent and better part, there also
is he said to be wholly after a figurative manner of speaking: Synechdoche.
for that which in it self was weak and feeble, being strengthened by the
word of promise, as with steel, from heaven, gets great strength, and
becomes invincible. For whereas that promise of God is, there follows true
and and absolute victory, for the spiritual truth becomes conqueror in the
midst of trial, yea in death it self it promises life, and gets the
victory. Therefore they which praise God for his truth, honor him greatly. For
there can not be a more wicked contumely and reproach, nor a greater injury and
blasphemy committed against God, then for men to account him flexible and
unconstant in his promises. For he that does so, denies him to be God, 1. Ioh.
5.10.
and makes him a liar, as S. John says, which surely is a most horrible and
grievous sin. Woe therefore unto the popish fool divines, which say, that
the word of the scriptures is vain and of none effect, except it be
established in the foundation of truth by the traditions of the fathers, as if
there were more credit to be given unto man by nature subject to frailety and
lying, then unto God, who by nature is only true and constant. Certaynely the
word and truth of God does outweigh the authority of all men, as much as God
himself is better then man.

Here by the premises is infallibly inferred, that the elect and the godly,
may in all their troubles strongly comfort themselves with the certainety of
their salvation, because God does as truly perform his promises, as he in his
nature is eternal and unchangeable.

CHAP. 16.
Eighthly, this decree is a comfortable decree, for what can so refresh a
miserable and sorrowful man, and bring him into hope and consolation, as the
doctrine and knowledge of free election. For our whole salvation, and all
things that belong necessarily unto it, do depend upon the free mercy and
election of God, so that salvation and life everlasting is certain unto a man,
and cannot fail him, because that God from everlasting, before the foundation
of the world, has appointed and ordained it for him, and that of his own free
mercy, without any of the works and merits of man's own doing. Salvation is
in the almighty hand of God, and has her abiding-place in his unchangeable
counsel, and is reserved by God for man. Therefore how can a faithful man
more certainly comfort and refresh himself, then by this means, namely, by
considering that God the only fountain of all grace and mercy, has chosen him
before he was, and has so loved him, Romans 8.32. John. 3.16.
that he spared not to bestow his only be gotten son for his life and
salvation, that he might deliver miserable and wretched man from all sin, and
from the power of Satan, and bring him into life eternal. Does not God by
this inestimable benefit show that he loves the salvation of mankind better
then his own Son, seeing that he had rather that his Son should suffer and
dye, then that man should be condemned and perish for ever? How can a man more
effectually and more strongly comfort himself, then with this meditation, that
the Son of God would suffer and endure the pains and torments of hell in
soul as well as in body, for the redemption of man? Did not the son of God
thereby show, that he accounted the salvation of mankind more precious then
his own life, whilst he had rather to dye for miserable man, then that he
should dye everlastingly? How can a man more strongly raise himself up in
hope, then by this means that he is beloved of God, with that love, wherewith
his only begotten Son is beloved, John. 17.23.26.
and that the Son of God does love and esteem him no less then his own
members, and his own bowels? How can a man more truly rejoice with true joy,
Math. 25.40.
then by this assured and infallible meditation, that God by the merits of
Christ is reconciled unto him, and made far more gracious and merciful unto
him, then if he had never offended, and sinned against God, and that God does
more willingly and more lovingly bestow salvation upon man, then man can
desire it: for this is the admirable goodness of God, that he vouchsafes to
convert his enemy unto him, and of rebellious to make him loyal. By this
means he plainly declares, that he takes more care for man's salvation,
then man does for himself. How can a man be better comforted, then by this
most certain hope, that his salvation is certain and sure, and that salvation
can no more fall from him, then he can fall from Christ. Certaynely whom
Christ has redeemed with his blood, and whom God has taken to mercy, who
shall hurt or condemn? except first he make the death of Christ of none
effect, and first vanquish and overcome God himself; but neither the whole
world, nor the gates of hell shall never be able to do this. Therefore the
salvation of the believer is as firm and as sure, as the omnipotent nature of
God is eternal and invincible.

Lastly, a faithful man may worthily triumph with incredible joy and gladness,
that all his sins are forgiven and pardoned unto him, even for and by the
only sacrifice and merit of Christ, so that not the least sign of them
remains nor appears. For Christ has satisfied for them by his death, he
has paid the uttermost farthing, and by his blood has cancelled the
handwriting that was against us, being fastened to his Cross. Therefore
seeing that Christ has paid the whole price of our redemption, and has
sustained Gods anger against sin, and taken it away for ever. I know not
anything, whereby a faithful man may more confirm himself, and add more
perfect peace and rest unto his conscience, then by this. Seeing therefore that
Gods justice is satisfied, the everlasting throane of his mercy is so erected,
that it works effectually for the salvation of mankind, and does mightily
show and declare the strength thereof against the power of Satan, and the rage
of the whole world, and that so, that all the power of hell, or any other
dangers, be they never so great, shall in no wise be able to hinder or
annihilate the salvation of man. For God with his almighty hand does so govern
all things, that they be not only, not hurtful and noisome unto man, but on
the contrary, Romans 8.28.
shall tend to the good and salvation of him. So that rank and deadly poison
shall become wholesome physic unto him, and the greatest dangers of this life
shall become as spiritual Chariots to carry him into heaven. For God is
Almighty, therefore it is easy for him to do it; he is a merciful and a most
loving father, therefore he will not think much to do it. So that everlasting
felicity, and incomparable glory shall ensue and follow after the miseries and
the dangers, which the godly do endure in this life.

Therefore the godly believers have wherewith to comfort themselves most
certaynely, and whereof to rejoice, in that they are the sons of God, Ephe.
2.19.
and the brethren of Christ, and heirs of the kingdom of heaven. They have
also cause to praise and glorify God and his son Christ; to praise God (I
say) for his so great love toward them, in that by his eternal love he did
choose them unto everlasting salvation; and to praise and glorify Christ for so
great a benefit, in that by his most precious blood he redeemed us from the
anger of God, from eternal death, and from the slavery of the Devil, so that
they shall be saved and redeemed for ever; and so may as certaynely rejoice of
their salvation, and of eternal life, as Christ himself, who has taken their
burden upon him, and paid their debt. Far therefore be from a Christian man's
heart all troublesome doubts concerning his election and salvation, because
those doubts have a distrustful nature, and Satan himself for their author,
which can do nothing else but lie and deceive. Yea much rather let every
Christian man with a steadfast faith believe, that he is elected unto salvation
from everlasting, and that he shall be blessed for ever in the world to come.
For that faith and persuasion has God and his holy spirit for an author, who
can promise nothing but truth, and will fulfill and perform their promises,
because they cannot lie. For this is the highest step, and the surest stay of a
Christian man's faith, to believe that God is merciful unto him, and well
pleased in his Son Christ. This is a great glory unto God, then which man
cannot give him a greater, firmly to believe, that he is elected by God
through Christ unto salvation. This faith is the certain salvation of
Christians, this hope is the highest glory of the elect, and their everlasting
triumph, that they are elected of God, and redeemed by Christ; and, so elected
and redeemed, as that they shall remain so for ever, in despite of the whole
world, and the kingdom of Satan; and that they need no more to fear the
danger of falling away and perishing, then that God will cease to be God, and
Christ be of none effect.

Here is taught, that the doctrine of election, and the knowledge thereof is
so necessary for Christians, as that it ought to be propounded unto them, and
insisted upon by the public ministry, for without it they cannot have a true
knowledge of the grace of God, neither can they be certain of their salvation,
nor manfully resist the temptations of the devil. They therefore which desire
that this doctrine should be scilenced or suppressed, they do take away the
chiefest comfort from the Church of God, and therein grievously offend.

CHAP. 17.
NInthly, this decree of election is necessary to be known, for without the
knowledge of it we can not have a true and saving knowledge of the grace of
God, neither can we determine or define of any thing certaynely or soundly
concerning salvation, nor resist the Devil and his temptations. For as often
as he tempts our faith (and indeed he tempts it very often) so often
ought we to have recourse unto election, as unto the only strong foundation
of our salvation, and we must most certaynely determine and set down with our
selves, that we are freely elected unto salvation, and that we cannot fall
away, which if we do not, we cannot acknowledge GOD for our Father, and
CHRIST for our Redeemer, nor hope and look for eternal life, by the grace of
the one, and merit of the other. Whosoever therefore does truly acknowledge,
and soundly believe, that God is his Father, and Christ his redeemer, and does
place and ground all his faith, and all his hope and confidence of salvation in
him alone, he may know as verily that he is chosen of God, as God both in his
essence and nature, and in his word and promise is true and faithful. For this
sentence and promise of Christ is not only true, but also more steadfast then
the frame of heaven. John. 3.16.
Whosoever believes in me, says Christ, shall not perish, but has
everlasting life. This faith which does acknowledge and lay hold upon Christ,
is the first and chiefest effect and fruit of salvation. Therefore Gods
election, and the knowledge thereof is the only strong foundation, on which a
Christian and saving faith may safely lean, and remain constant against all
the assaults and temptations of Satan. Wherefore seeing that election is as a
strong and invincible fortress against all the subtilties of Satan, against
the assaults of the world, and against all the doubts and waverings of the
flesh, the knowledge thereof is very necessary for us. Again, the doctrine of
election is very necessary to be known of us for this cause, because it is one
of the chiefest causes of our salvation. This the scripture delivers and
expresses plainly and expressly, that we are therefore called and drawn
unto Christ, and unto salvation, because that we were first predestinate and
elected. For they only and none other are called unto Christ, Act. 13.48.
and endued with true faith through him, which were fore-ordeyned unto
salvation. Therefore he which denies and rejects the doctrine of election,
he denies and rejects the grace of God, and can have no hope of his
salvation. But that we may know and understand the true cause of salvation,
there is nothing more necessary to be known of us, then the decree of
election. For God has ordained and appointed it from everlasting for the only
fountain of salvation, and has revealed it, and laid it open in his word:
They therefore, which dream that there is no Election, they deny and reject
God and his grace, because that without grace and mercy, and that infinitely
free, God is not God.

Moreover, this Decree is necessary for us to know, for this cause; because it
teaches us true and profitable humility. And that it sets out and declares
unto us on this manner: in that Salvation cannot begotten and attained at any
hand by our own works and endeavors (because it is set out of the reach and
power of all mortal men,) but much rather that we are miserable and sinners,
and that so, as that of our own strength we are not able to bring, no not the
least thought tending unto good, which may be acceptable or well pleasing unto
God. Whatsoever therefore of our own power we shall undertake or do, either
by thought, word, or deed, we do offend in it, and do draw unto our selves
deservedly, just and eternal damnation: and have deserved it so often in the
just judgment of God, as we have conceyved any thing in thought, or done any
thing either in word or deed: yea, and more often. For albeit that no evil
works either outward or inward were committed of us, yet our corrupt and
depraved nature does convince us all, and find us guilty of most just
damnation. Therefore this our most miserable estate, and most desperate
condition does make us much ashamed and confounded, and ought to humble and
debase us with much meekness. For men are then wont to blush for shame, and
to be humbled, when they are compelled to confess and acknowledge their own
misdeeds, they being many and great, so that they cannot defend nor excuse
them: so they begin to be out of liking with themselves, and distrust
themselves, and are in despair as concerning their own merits, which despair
is profitable for them. For as long as men be persuaded, that they can do any
good, whereby to attain Salvation; so long they remain and abide stiff in
their own conceit, and do not distrust themselves, as indeed they should, nor
are not truly humbled before God, as they ought to be. For the flesh always
suggesteth to a man, that there is some good thing in him, which went before
the grace of God, for which he should be elected and saved, and so thinks
that the grace of God is dispensed and given according unto man's desert; and so
presupposes some natural or moral good thing to be in him, or else thinks
that he can prevent the grace of God with some preparation, or some good
desires, and by so thinking can never come to be saved. For God will save and
bless man with his grace, not by the halfes, but wholly, that so all the glory
and praise may redound unto God, as unto the only author of Salvation. For God
does not promise nor impart his grace unto any, but to such as are in despair
and out of hope in regard of themselves. For man is then capable of the grace
of God, when as he thinks himself not only void and destitute of all
goodness, but also replenished and overwhelmed with all ungodliness.
Wherefore, if a man desire to be saved, he will suppose no good thing to be in
himself, as if he could do any thing for his Salvation: but being thoroughly
humbled and dejected, will fly only to the incomprehensible goodness of God,
and will know that his whole Salvation depends upon the will and good pleasure
of God. This humiliation from the heart, is the first step to Salvation: Psalm.
145.14.
for the Lord vpholdeth such as fall, and lifts up such as be down; but he
which thinks there is any goodness in himself, striveth against humbleness
of mind, and is an enemy unto the grace of God, and is a secret adversary
against God, and prowdly set against his own Salvation. But Predestination
brings down a man, that it may lift him up again by the grace of God. For
the least thought of the least goodness in man, is repugnant against the grace
of God; Therefore this must first be taken away, and driven out, that the grace
of God may take place.

Furthermore, the Decree of Election is necessary for us to know, for this
cause also; because that it edifieth and builds up our faith strongly and
surely, and makes us most certain that Salvation cannot fail us. For there
is no better, nor fitter means for the building up of our faith, then free
Election, which does consist in the eternal and unchangeable Decree and good
pleasure of God; so that Salvation which depends thereupon, cannot be
intercepted or taken from us by any creatures. For therefore Salvation is
certain and vnmooveable, because it is grounded upon the Counsel of God and
is reserved and kept untouched, against all the assaults and subtilties of
Satan. Here therefore we ought to know, that Salvation proceeds from two
distinct causes: First, it flows from the love of God, as from an heavenly
fountain; and then, it is purchased by the blood and merits of Christ. Christ
joins both these causes together, saying, God so loved the world, Ioh. 3.16.
that he gave his only begotten Son, that all which believed in him should
not perish, but have everlasting life. Upon this therefore, is our whole
Salvation, and the infallible hope and safety thereof settled and grounded; in
that God, the most Mighty, has given us unto his Son, as his own proper
goods, and does justify us in him, and does not suffer us being justified,
Ioh. 10.29.
to be taken out of his hand. Hence is the Salvation of the Faithful steadfast
and sure.

Therefore this doctrine of Election, seeing it is the only gate unto
righteousness, the only way unto God, and the only entrance into heaven; it is
not, (as some falsely think) the occasion of desperation, the breakenecke of
Salvation, and (as it pleases some) the deep pit of perdition; neither is it
a subtle and dangerous speculation (as others report) which tyreth men's minds
without any fruit, and beguileth and deceyveth them with vain words: but it
is a sound and profitable doctrine, which tends unto godliness, and to a
serious fear of God, and chiefly it is profitable to repress and keep under
the pride and arrogance of man. For what thing can more ravish us with the love
and admiration of Gods exceeding great goodness toward us, then Gods free
and more then fatherly Election, in that of his abundant grace and mercy, he
has appointed certain Salvation for us before we were, and stayed not so long
till we came unto him, and desired Salvation of him? Was it not a mercy above
all mercies, in that he ordained Salvation for us which believe in Christ, and
embrace his Gospel, before he had created us? Was not this also a singular and
inestimable mercy above all mercies, in that he has elected us in Christ, and
adopted us for sons, which were in our selves altogether wretched and
unworthy, and deserved rather to be condemned then to be saved? was it not an
honor above all honors, in that of the children of wrath, he made us the
children of God, and the brethren of Christ? Is not this nobleness above all
nobility, and dignity above all dignity, to have God for our Father, to have
Christ for our brother, and to hear his Church as our mother, and to be a true
and lively member thereof?

This doctrine of Election is not only the chief part of the Gospel, but also
the foundation of the Gospel, and the issue and chief point of our Salvation.
For Augustine of the Predestination of Saints, Cap. 15.
does expressly teach, that Christ himself was predestinate that he should be
our Head and Redeemer, and we were predestinate that we should be his members.
So that seeing Christ is the chief and singular light of Predestination, and
the same is the Head and Foundation of the whole Gospel: Therefore the whole
Gospel does flow and depend from nothing else, but from Predestination together
with Christ. For the whole work of the Gospel is in this one thing, and there
it is called Gospel, that is, joyful tidings, because it witnesses unto men,
that their sins are forgiven and pardoned through the death of Christ,
without any respect had unto their works, that so they might be freely
justified, and absolved and delivered from their sins in the judgment of
God. And this justification proceeds from Predestination, as from the first
fountain of Salvation, as Paul in this his chain does expressly teach,
saying, that those only are justified, which are predestinate before of God.
Therefore free justification cannot be held and maintained, except free
predestination be first granted and defended. Wherefore, seeing that
Predestination is the cause and original of justification, it is in no wise to
be concealed or suppressed, but ought publicly and openly to be published, and
preached freely without restraint, throughout the whole world, that this
exceeding and infinite goodness of God toward men might be made manifest and
known unto them, that they might learn to distrust themselves, and to put
their confidence in God, that they might seek for Salvation, and find it, not
in themselves, nor by their own merits, but in God, and from his goodness.
The Son of God himself, and his holy Apostles, and also the Prophets have
taught and stood upon this doctrine publicly in the whole assembly of the
Church. The Scripture of both the Testaments is full of this mattter;
especially the Gospel of saint John is as a clear glass, wherein
Predestination is represented and published abroad. For there is no Chapter in
that Book, where there is not mention of Predestination, either in express
words, or in the sense and meaning of it.

And although there have been always some, from the beginning of the Gospel,
which persuaded by the allurements and wisdom of the flesh, have thought that
the doctrine of Predestination should not be openly taught and published
abroad, because they feared that it would be the occasion and mistress of
desperation or of a dissolute life: yet they are in no sort to be believed nor
followed. For the causes which they allege, although at the first sight, they
may seem to have some color or weight, yet indeed they do but cast a miste
before our eyes, and are of no importance. For the danger which they fear, is
vain, and almost none at all: For Predestination is the true cause and the
absolute matter of our greatest hope and sweetest consolation, 1. Pet. 1.20
in that God our heavenly Father from eternity has ordained his only begotten
Son to redeem and save us. Seeing therefore that Christ (as we have said
before out of Augustine) is the head of all those that are predestinate, and
that all they that do fly unto him, as unto their only refuge, are redeemed of
him, and do attain unto everlasting Salvation: surely, I see not how the
doctrine of Predestination should be the matter of desperation, especially
seeing that Salvation, which it brings with it, and bestows upon us, is
altogether of free gift. But if that our Salvation were to be merited and
gotten by our own ability or works; then surely a man might fear certain
and present danger of desperation. For we are all sinners, and not able to
fulfill the least tittle of the Law, much less can we make satisfaction for
our sins, and redeem our selves from the wrath of God, and the power of
Satan. Moreover, although we were perfect at this day, yet we could by no
means satisfy for the sins that we have committed already. For sin does
most grievously offend God, and deserves his wrath, and his curse, and
eternal damnation, which no creature, as it is barely a creature, can turn
away or put off. For the wrath and curse of God is infinite, and not to be
borne of the Angels themselves. Without all doubt, in the doctrine of
Predestination, a man ought to be in despair, and yet to hope well:
concerning himself and his own merits, whereby to attain Salvation, he
ought to be in great despair, because that by this means he shall never come
unto Salvation: but concerning the grace of God, which is by all means free,
he ought to be in very good hope: especially seeing that God does more
willingly afford and bestow Salvation upon man, then miserable man can require
or wish that Salvation might be imparted or bestowed upon him. For God for his
unspeakable goodness sake, does make man earnest and desirous of his
Salvation, which was an enemy of his Salvation: Also God does prevent a man,
and seeks him out: man seeks not for God, but hates him extremely and
does dread and shun him as a terrible Judge.

Therefore in this work of Salvation, the grace of God is so great, as that it
cannot be said to be greater.

Therefore there arises no desperation at all out of this doctrine of
Election, if it be well and truly understood and according to the meaning
expounded, but contrariwise great consolation comes there from; which if it
be well taught unto men, and diligently insisted upon, an admirable trust and
confidence in God, and a most certain hope of Salvation proceeds and comes
out of it.

Therefore has God appointed the holy ministry of the Gospel, that men might
diligently be informed of his so great mercy. Also he would that admonitions
and threatenings should be drawn from thence, and be propounded unto men. For
they are certain means, by which God is powerful, and expels all
drowsines from his children, and strikes in them a serious fear and reverence
of himself. So God by this means, does bring men unto Salvation, ordained for
them from everlasting. They therefore which suppose that the course of a good
life is overthrown or hundred by this doctrine of Election, are grossly
deceyved. But of all, they do most grievously sin, which reason thus. If I
be predestined unto Salvation, then, howsoever I live, I shall be saved, and
shall not perish: But if I be appointed to destruction, it will nothing avayle
me to live well: yea, though I should exercise my self in all kind of virtue,
yet it would do me no good, but in the end I shall of necessity be condemned
and perish everlastingly: why therefore shouid I be careful of the course and
order of good living: and exercise my self one while with this, and an other
while with that kind of labor or study? This is not a speech of the children
of God, but of the children of the Devil. Ephesians. 2.10.
For whomsoever God has elected, those also does he call to repentance
(although some sooner, some later) and does regenerate them to the performance
of good works: so that they shall here begin to study, how to hate and
shun those things that are evil, and love and practice those things that are
good: but they which remain obstinate in their wickedness, and stubborn in
the hatred and contempt of the truth of the Gospel, and do prostitute and sell
themselves unto all kind of vices and wickedness boldly, without any fear or
reverence of Gods divine Majesty, and continue as it were buried in them
without any fear, neither will by admonitions be brought to leave them; they
are to be warned, that they should watch. For the judgment of God, which
hangs over them, to destroy and condemn them, sleeps not, neither is idle.
So that in their objection, there is nothing of any strength, but there is a
manifest fallacy in it, in that a supposed and false cause is of them put for a
true cause. So that of the contrary side, they should conclude thus, changing
the former sentence or proposition in this wise. If I be predestinate unto
eternal life, I must call upon God, and live godly, because to this end am I
elected of God, that I may live godly and holily. For the Scripture says;
Ephesians. 1.4.
God did elect us before the foundations of the world were laid, that we
should be holy and unblameable before him through love. Therefore the Elect
must shun wickedness, and not commit it. Again, they which think
themselves to be reprobates, must not for that cause do wickedly; but ought
rather to hate and fly all ungodliness, least that by their more grievous
wickedness, they do likewise pluck more grievous condemnation upon their own
heads. For they shall be far more gently dealt withal, which do avoid
these or those sins, and defile not themselves with all wickedness, and all
pollution of sin; then with them, who do plunge themselves into all
wickedness and ungodliness, and wallow and defile themselves in it, as a Sow
in the mire. For this is a perpetual law, and unchangeable rule of Gods
justice, that punishments should be proportioned unto sin. So that more
grievous and more heinous sins, shall be tormented with more grievous and
more heinous torments. Wherefore, to avoid evil, and to do good, is profitable
unto the reprobate; For so their punishment of condemnation is eased, and made
more gentle. Again, they do greatly offend, because they do think
themselves reprobates from everlasting, and that they shall be damned for ever.
For so they would prevent Gods judgment; For he has fore-appoynted a set,
and certain time, to call his Elect in: which seeing they expect not, but do
judge and condemn themselves, they do not only prevent God and his
judgment; but also by their rash attempt, they go about to prescribe God a
time and means to call them, and do invade and arrogate the parts of that
work unto themselves. Therefore, they ought while they live here, to hope
well, yea, very well, concerning the infinite and free goodness of God, and to
awayt the time of their vocation and calling, and to attend upon God for his
works both present and to come, until he reveal his judgment and counsel,
by his calling of them: especially seeing that he calls and saves his
children oftentimes in the latter time of their life, and in the very agony of
death, at the last gasp. So that although at this day, they neither see nor
feel in themselves, any tokens of Gods love, yet by Gods good gift, they may
see and feel them to morrow. For although the Sun shine not in the night
time, it does not follow, that it shall never shine nor show it self more: but
after a while, the Son will rise, and disperse his light and his beams all
about far and wide: So likewise, although men be unbelieving to day, yet to
morrow they may obtain faith by the goodness of God, Ezech. 36.26.
and become sound believers. God has promised, that he will give us faith.
Therefore we must pray unto him, and patiently awayt the time of the giving of
faith: for he will deny us nothing being asked earnestly and heartily.
Therefore it becommethall men, as long as they live here, not to despair, but
to have their hope in God their most merciful Father: for so great abundance
of the grace of God is shed abroad through Christ, that it is not only
equal unto sin to doubt thereof, but goes beyond it infinitely.

Therefore, by how much the more men are guilty of these or any other sins,
by so much the more is the grace of God made glorious in their Salvition and
Redemption. For these are the words of God, which cannot lie nor deceyve,
which the Apostle pronounces plainly from the mouth of God, saying, Where
sin abounds, there grace does much more abound. Romans 5.20.


By these things thus spoken, it is undoubtedly true, that the doctrine and
preaching of Predestination is neither the cause of desperation, nor the
occasion of a dissolute life: but where that is not taught, and diligently
urged amongst men, there they run out, and let loose the raynes to all
uncleanness, and run headlong into the lust of committing wickedness, so
that not only a window, but even a great Gate is left wide open for them unto
all manner of iniquity. For where the doctrine of Predestination is not urged
and publicly preached unto men, there men cannot come unto the sure and saving
knowledge of their Salvation, but being still uncertain and doubtful of it,
Ephesians. 4.14.
are carried about hither and thither, and waver like a reed, until at the
last they fall out of this troublesome distrust, and continual fear, and
run headlong into desperation, and deep pit of darkness. They therefore,
which suppose that the doctrine, and preaching of Predestination is
unprofitable and do refuse it, or do prohibit and suppress it as dangerous,
do endeavor utterly to take away and overthrowe the whole ground work of man's
Salvation; and do imagine for mankind nothing else, but certain downe-fall
and everlasting destruction. For they themselves shun it, as they would a
rock, and shut up the entrance into it from others, and so do injury unto men,
and diminish Gods glory. For the glory of God is there most diminished, whereas
men are seduced by false opinions, so that they cannot come to the true
knowledge of God, and the proper cause of their own Salvation: but such do
lead men away from the true cause of their Salvation, and bring them to a
false and erroneous cause. 2. These. 2.13.
For Salvation flows and proceeds from no cause else, but even from the
free mercy and favor of God. Therefore the Scripture does often reduce us to
Election, as to the only true original of our Salvation, showing thereby,
that Salvation proceeds not elsewhere, but from the eternal Election and
free mercy of God. Far therefore be from us, these fanaticall spirits, which
with a proud look, and face of brass, do reject and spurn at this most
wholesome doctrine of Predestination. For of that which they think they know
best, they are most ignorant, and when as in their own carnal senses they
would seem most wise and most godly, then are they of all other most vain and
most profane.

But thou O man, which art but a vain and fading shadow, why do thou with
thy impure lips and malicious tongue reproach or vilify the wholesome truth
of God, and layest it open to the common contempt and scorn of the disordered
common people? Will thou be wiser then God? in that thou art not content with
that means of attayning salvation, which God from everlasting has appointed
and ordained before thou were? Will thou have God which created thee, subject
unto thee? Will thou ask him the reasons of his counsel? Acknowledge and
bewail thine own wickedness and uncleanness; and heartily detest and
abhor those works foreseen, together with thine untowardness and
pollution, and humbly fly unto, and beseech the infinite free mercy of God,
that he, taking pity upon thee, would vouchsafe, in and through his Son to
receyve thee into his favor, and to save thee: otherwise thou and thy works
foreseen, which are odious unto God, must needs perish everlastingly. What
art thou that forbiddest that to be taught, which God will have to be published
and preached all about? Think thou that he is foolish or ill advised, that
hitherto he knows not what ought to be taught, and what ought not to be
taught, that thou art become his master to prescribe a rule, how to ordain
things, and what to teach? as though he knew not what ought to be done,
except thou should instruct and teach him, as if he were rude and
unskillful. Ought the Creator come to learn of thee, being an unclean
creature, what is meet to be preached abroad? Tell me I pray thee, where is
thy face and conscience? where is that fear and honor, which the creature
ought to give the Creator? Surely it is not in thee, for then thou would
submit thy self to God, and to his wisdom with all humbleness of mind, and
would with due reverence give deserved thanks unto him, for this so merciful
Decree of his. But it is no marvel, that thou iudgest so rashly and wickedly
of Predestination, and the doctrine thereof, seeing that thou presumest to
search and find out that Decree of God, without the help of his word, by thine
own mad and distracted speculations. And therefore most fitly has Austine
spoken of thee, Epist. 105.
and of such that are like thy self. Let him that can, search this deep and
hidden mystery, and pry into this great depth: but let him take heed he fall
not into it. There the holy man speaks of those, which when they dispute or
speak of Gods Predestination, do straggle beyond the compass and bounds of
Gods word, and follow their own speculations and fantasies. But thou, if thou
be wise, withold thy self, and follow the Analogy of Christian faith, as a
trusty guide and directer. For that will bring thee most safely into the most
secret closet of Gods Predestination. Renounce all carnal wisdom, that thou
may be instructed of that heavenly wisdom in this so secret and deep a
matter. For, to learn of God, and to be wise in him, is true and saving
wisdom indeed. Cease therefore betimes from this wicked endeavor and study,
and beware of the sleights and subtilties of the Devil. Take heed he seduce
thee not from the true way to Salvation: for he knows well, that the whole
Salvation of man falls to nothing, except it be attained by that means which
God has decreed to give it by. Therefore follow not any longer the
preposterous fore-stalled opinions, and wandering affections of men: but read
daily, and mark diligently the holy Scriptures, from the first Chapter of
Genesis, unto the last Chapter of the Revelation. For by the serious reading
and continual meditation thereof, the holy Ghost is wont to become effectual
in the heart and mind of man. So also may thou be brought easily to the
true and natural sense of the Scripture: which when thou have gotten, thou
shall become more sober in thine understanding and judgment, and shall taste
the lively sense and feeling of the grace of God in thy heart, and shall be
able not only to condemn and cast off this proud and preiudicate opinion of
works foreseen, and of suppressing the doctrine of Predestination, but also
to stamp and trample it under thy feet. I pray God bring thee into this mind,
and confirm and strengthen thee therein. Amen.

God is bound to no man, neither owes any thing to any man: wherefore without
all controversy, it was a most free thing for him to choose some unto
Salvation of his free mercy; and by his just judgment to appoint others unto
eternal destruction: and man's reason ought not to murmr at this separation
and difference that God makes between men, but to rest contented with it.

CHAP. 18.
TEnthly, this Decree of Election, is a most free Decree: because that all
things which God does, he does freely without any compulsion or impediment.
This consists and may be set down in two members. The first is taken from
his infinite wisdom, in that of himself he always understands and
knows perfectly all things which have been, and which are to come; so that
there can be found in him no ignorance of any thing, nor any error in
judgment: therefore there is nothing that can lie hidden or secret from him;
for whatsoever he does, he does most freely, and no man is able to prevent or
deceyve his wisdom. The other depends of his infinite power, in that God
has none above him, nor equal to him. Therefore his Will cannot be governed
nor turned by any cause, but depends wholly of it self so, that simply and
absolutely it has power of it self. For as God has no cause that made him,
so also has he no cause that rules and governs him. Therefore whatsoever
he wills and does, he wills and does it most freely, and none can resist
or hinder his will. Therefore God has most absolute and sovereign power,
Psalm. 105.6
and most free authority over all things and in all things. This the Scripture
shows in express words, saying, God did whatsoever he would, both in heaven
and in earth: For as he made all things that are contained in heaven and in
earth, so also by his infinite power he always governs and vpholdeth all
those things. For God is not a Creator that endures for a while, but he is
the continual preserver and governor of all things that are created,
otherwise God should not be God. So that God has most absolute power and
command over all creatures; so also does he exercise his most absolute and
free power upon all men. Romans 9.11.
Therefore in as much as he chose Jacob to Salvation before he was borne, and
had done any good: and cast Esau away from his mercy, and reprobated him before
he was borne, and had done any ill: both these he did by his free and
voluntary will: and who can accuse him of unrighteousness, because he has
done so? So also in the whole estate of mankind, in that for his mercy sake he
has chosen some from everlasting unto Salvation, to inherit the heavenly
Glory: and on the other side, in his just judgment has ordained other some
unto everlasting destruction and confusion before the foundations of the world
were laid: both these has he done freely by his own will. So also at this
day, in that he suffers his Gospel to be preached in certain Kingdoms and
Provinces, and will have some men to be converted to Christ by it; and does not
so in other nations, but suffers men to remain there, in the ignorance of
God, and finally to perish in it, both these also he does by his own free and
determinate will. So that God by his sovereign power does what he will in all
things even as it best likes and pleases him. This most absolute power of God
in executing what pleases him upon all men, is an essential propriety of his,
without which he could not be God. They therefore which go about to take away
from God this most free authority, in the choosing of some men, and in the
rejecting of others; they, I say, do what they can to take away the essence of
God, and so indeed deny God to be God at all. For when the proprieties of any
thing are taken away and denied, it must needs follow, that the thing it self
also is annihilated and denied. Therefore, that the glory of God might remain
untouched, and that due honor might be attributed to him alone, he ought to
have this power, to discern between men by his free will and absolute mercy,
and by his wisdom to make them different and unlike, which otherwise by
nature were every way alike.

Here weak flesh and man's reason ought not to fret and murmr against God,
because that in his wisdom he does judge and determine so unequally of those
that are equal. For God owes nothing to any man, neither is he bound to any
man. Again, all mankind, as the Apostle witnesses, is in the almighty hand
of God, Romans 9.21.
as cley is in the hand of the potter. Therefore as it is in the free power of
the potter to make some vessels unto honor and some to dishonor, 2. Tim. 2.20.
so also is it freely in the hand of God to ordeyne some men to celestial
glory, and some to everlasting confusion. And, as the potter takes nothing
from the clay, though he make it after this or that fashion as it pleases him,
so likewise God takes nothing from man, of what condition soever he make him.
Moreover the clay makes no answer to the potter, although of it he make a
vessel to dishonor: so also man has no right to contend with God, though he
be created of him unto destruction. By this most fit example we are taught,
that it is in the free choice of God only to make a difference between men,
and by his wisdom to ordeyne and appoint what shall be done with every one:
So that God does love and choose most freely whomesoever he loves and
chooses; as also he does refuse and condemn most freely whomesoever he
refuses and condemns. For this is the force and liberty of predestination,
namely, that God has freewill to save and choose that man, whom of his mere
grace he chooses and saves; so also that he has free liberty to reject and
condemn whomesoever in his just judgment he will have refused and condemned.
So that this is the eternal and unchangeable will of God, of his undeserved
favor to choose and save some, and in his just judgment to cast others off
from all mercy, and to condemn them. This will of God in both these decrees is
most absolute and simple, which has no other cause, so that he saves some
because it is his pleasure and will, and he condemns others because it is his
pleasure likewise. Therefore it is at Gods free choice to show or deny mercy to
whomesoever he will. It is in his power to have mercy on whom he will, Romans
9.18.
and whom he will to harden. And he takes mercy of his own great goodness
only, and hardneth with no injustice; that he that is saved should not boast of
his own merits, and he that is condemned, should complain of nothing but of
his own deserts, In Euchiriad Laurentium, ca. 99.
as Augustine says. So there is no cause above Gods will, but that is in the
highest degree, that unto us it might be in steed of all causes. So the will of
God is the first and chiefest determiner of our election and of all other
things. Therefore the only absolute will of God ought to suffice every one as
the most weighty cause, and the chiefest reason of every thing. So that it is
an execrable wickedness to ask the causes of the will of God, seeing that is
the first and the only sufficient of all other causes, which has no other
cause above it: Lib. de pradestina. sanc. 1.9.
wherefore Saint Augustine said most truly and most rightly, Call not into
question why God chooses this man, or reprobateth that man, except thou will
fall into error, for this will of God is sure and constant, because he has
created mankind, Romans 9.22.
partly to show his free mercy, and partly to declare his justice, for he were
unmerciful if he should condemn all, and on the other side he might seem
unmindful of his justice, if he should save all. Therefore God created men
such, that they might fall, that by their fall he might show what the benefit
of his mercy, and the judgment of his justice were able to do: of which read
Augustine in his book De correp. and great.

And this ought not to trouble the godly, because that all are not appointed to
salvation, and but a few only shall be saved: for they know and believe,
having learned it by the word of God, that all have fallen into most just
condemnation; and, why all men are not delivered from thence, is not in man's
power to determine and judge, but must be left wholely to the judgment and
wisdom of God. Further it does hence appear that all are not elected,
because that the scripture affirms in many places that some only are
elected, and the rest rejected.

Again, the scripture says manifestly, that he has mercy on whom he will,
Romans 9.^8.
and whom he will he hardens. Again, if all were elected, the Gospel of the
son of God should be preached every where throughout the whole earth, and
faith should be given at randam to all and every one. Cap. 1.1.
For Paul to Titus teaches, that faith is proper to the elect. But the
Gospel is not preached through all parts of the earth, 2. These. 3.2.
and faith is not given to all men, therefore all men are not appointed unto
salvation. And that faith is not given unto all men it is evident, Mat. 25.46
because many shall be condemned, and go away into everlasting pain. Again,
it may hence appear, that all are not elected and shall be saved, because that
election or choosing is of some, and not of all, for if all were received,
there were no election: so that there are some elect and some reprobates. But
they which have a true and a lively faith in Jesus Christ our only Savior,
and do put their whole trust and confidence of salvation in him alone, they are
the very elect: for to this end are they elected of God, that by the power of
the spirit they should believe in Christ, and in him obtain salvation. And let
such embrace with thankful hearts the incomparable goodness of God toward
them, and freely with their mouth make the same known unto others, praising
God.

And although God has not ordained every one unto salvation, but has
appointed some unto eternal destruction, yet there is no accepting of persons
with him: as if God did elect and save this or that man for any outward good
things, such as are riches, honors, noblenes of birth, cuntry, comely
proportion, beauty, excellent knowledge and learning, and other things of the
like sort: these things albeit among men they are in great estimation, yet with
God they are of no account. For God respects and esteems the sincerity of
the heart, and the innocence of life, (although that as concerning the decree
of election he respects not these neither,) but these outward good things,
howsoever they be most precious, and to be esteemed as the good gifts of God,
and his name ought to be praised for them, yet in the matter of election he
sets nothing by them, for they are not of such worth, as that any for them
should be elected unto eternal life. If they were the cause of election, it
would manifestly follow, that everlasting salvation might be attained by the
goods of nature, or by the study and merits of man. Wherefore they which here
make a question of the accepting of persons, do neither know themselves, nor
the justice of God rightly as they ought to do; and do grievously offend
herein, because that in this matter they stick not to liken and compare God
with lying and deceiveable men, who often times are blinded with the outward
hew of things, and are withdrawn from the right way, so that they give their
verdit and sentence in the behalf of unjust causes.

Moreover, they fall into a fallacy full of ignorance, or else of wickedness,
for they foyst in feigned and imaginary causes in stead of true and necessary
causes, as if they should set mouse-doong to sale in stead of pepper. For if
those outward good things were the cause why these or these should be chosen,
then surely oftentimes the worst should be elected, and the best rejected. For
there are many good men found which want those outward things, and many times
they are wicked which overflow and abound with them. Therefore that objection
of the accepting of persons, is not simple, but does comprehend many evils
under it, by which Satan on the one side does with main force push at the
glory of God, and on the other side does openly set himself against the
salvation of mankind, and labors to overthrow and hinder it. For salvation
cannot be obtained, if the true cause of salvation be not understood and
known, for nothing can be brought forth by any thing else, but by his own
proper and true cause. But if this objection should take place, salvation
should be transported from the true cause thereof unto a false cause, and so be
in ieoperdy of losing. Moreover, God when he elected us, did call us as it were
from nothing. For there was no good thing in our nature, which could be
acceptable and approved unto him, therefore of his free goodness and mercy he
decreed to adopt us for children by election. By all these things it evidently
appears, and is sufficiently proved, that God has absolute power and free
will in the electing and reprobating of men. For God is bereft of the chiefest
part of his honor and glory, unless this authority be granted him over men, to
be the only judge and disposer of life and death eternal.

Although God from everlasting has in his just judgment cast away the
reprobates from all hope of salvation, yet they are condemned for nothing but
for their own sins and misdeedes, so that they cannot complain but of their
own deservings.

CHAP. 19.
ELeventhly, this decree of Predestination, is a just decree. For God in his
works is not only most free, but also in the same is most just, and upright.
Therefore whatsoever he wills and does, he wills and does justly. In as
much therefore as he has reprobated some men, and appointed them to eternal
damnation, he has reprobated, and decreed to condemn them justly. But that
this question may the more clearly be discussed, and the better understood,
we must note two things. First, that God in his nature is just. Secondly, that
over and besides his nature he wills and does nothing in his works but that
which is just. Moreover, God is so just in his nature, as that his justice is
not any accidental quality, which is gotten and attained by such or such
actions, or which sometimes admits augmentation, and sometimes diminution,
but it is an essential propriety in God, which cannot be absent from God,
except he cease to be God. So that justice most properly agrees unto God, for
he is just indeed properly, and so just, that not the least part of justice
can be found to be, which proceeds and comes not from Gods justice.
Therefore the creatures have so much justice and vprightnes, as it pleases God
to instill and power into them. So that Gods justice is the fountain and
welspring of all other justice. Certaynely God in his nature and will is so
just, that no unjust thing can not only be found in him, but withal likewise
he can endure no iniquity in his creatures. For the will of God is not only
just continually, but also it is the only imitable measure and rule of all
other righteousness: and that so, that no other things can be either just or
unjust, but those which GOD shall pronounce just or unjust. Therefore
whatsoever he shall judge unjust, cannot in any wise be just, and on the
contrary, those things which he shall esteem as just, no man ought to think
unjust. Therefore seeing that GOD, both in his nature and in his will is
exceeding just, it follows that all things which he wills and does, must
needs be just. For as every cause does bring forth his effect, so also that
effect does declare of what sort the cause is. For as the essence of the effect
proceeds from the cause, so in like manner the knowledge of the cause is by
his effect. For such as the cause was, such also must the effect needs follow,
therefore from a just cause there must needs proceed just effects: wherefore
in that that God has reprobated many men, and rejected them from his grace, he
has reprobated them, and rejected them justly. For all the works of God are
just, as the scripture says; but reprobation is a work of God, therefore it
must needs be just. For who would deny that to be in the Species.
particular kind, which is in the Genus.
general? or who would say that the nature of the causes is not in the
effects. This justice or righteousness of God is altogether incomprehensible,
and stretches and enlarges it self as far as the very nature and essence
of God does. Therefore God can deliberate and do many and infinite things,
far above the capacity of man, and that most uprightly, although they seem
to be otherwise in the wisdom of man. Therefore howsoever God from
everlasting has appointed certain men to eternal perdition before they were
created, or had done any evil; yet for all this he cannot be convinced of any
injustice, because that he has free power over all things, and a just will in
all things, so that he may justly do in all his creatures whatsoever he does or
will do. Therefore in that he has appointed some men unto everlasting
destruction, he has done justly, for he is a most free agent. Therefore
though he take pity upon some, and reject others; though he regenerate some and
harden others; though he save some and destroy others, yet these and such like
works are the just works of God, which he may do freely. Is it not lawful
form, says that Lord of the Vineyard in the Parable, Mat. 20.15
to do what I will with mine own? Therefore those works as they are done of
God, are just and good works: but if the same works, or the like to these
should be done of man, they were unjust and great offenses, because they would
be manifestly repugnant and contrary to the law of God. For the law commands
that men should love others as themselves, and that they should at all times
and by all means and duties that they can, save and defend them, and not
destroy them. So that God gave a law unto men to love and save others, but he
gave not that law to himself, for he may justly hate them, whom men by the law
are commanded to love. Therefore God is just at all times and in every place,
although some things which he wills and does seem very unjust unto flesh
and the wisdom of man. For what can seem more unrighteous or unjust unto
flesh, then to condemn a man unto eternal destruction before he has done any
evil, when as notwithstanding it is the just work of God, which is therefore
just because it is Gods will.

This work and decree of reprobation, in the judgment of man seems contrary
to the law, and Christian charity. For the law commands, and charity wills,
that there be no hurt done to any man, but good unto all, but there is no good
but hurt done unto them, which are ordained unto this miserable condition and
cursed estate, therefore it is repugnant to charity and contrary to the law: I
answer, God is not bound nor subject unto the law; so that he gave that
commandment to men only, and not to himself. Again, the justice of God is
altogether infinite, whose greatness the shallownes of man's capacity cannot
conteyne, nor search out, therefore it is not to be measured by the law and
rule of civil justice. For there is no consequence from an infinite thing unto
a finite thing, because there is no proportion between them. Therefore a man
in this matter must renounce all natural reason, and submit himself wholly
unto the only wise God, knowing, that the justice of God cannot be examined,
or comprehended by the shallow conceit of man, nor be measured according to the
rule of civil justice. Therefore it were extreme madness, and blasphemous
impiety, not to attribute more wisdom and vprightnes unto God, then man can
understand or imagine. Surely this were to erect and worship a vain idol in
the steed of God, or rather to deny God himself. Moreover, there are certain
particular works of God, which are not to be reduced to the general rule of
equity, as for example, the fact of Abraham, who in his obedience unto God,
would have killed his son, and have sacrificed him unto God; when as
notwithstanding the law says, Thou shall not kill. The holy man of God knew,
that God was not subject to the law, but that it was given unto men only, so
that he did not examine the special commandment (which he had received
concerning the sacrificing of his Son) according to the law, but simply
obeyed the commandment of God, and desired to execute it with a ready and
good will.

By this example we are taught, first, that God sometimes does decree somewhat
in his secret will, which he prescribes not in his law. Secondly, that we
must obey this his secret will when God commands, though the law after a
sort command the contrary, otherwise the will of God revealed in his word is
the only continual rule of good life. So, there may be some work which God
does not therefore will because it is just, but it is therefore just because he
wills it, and thinks it good. Furthermore, although of two men, of which
neither had done any thing, he has predestined the one unto life, and the
other unto death, and that before the foundation of the world, yet this
predestination is no less just, then if both had bin created, and committed
many great offenses. But it apeareth manifestly, that reprobation was decreed
before all time, and not ordained in time, both from the nature of God, and
also by the holy scripture. From the nature of God it appears, because God
does nothing with a new will, but all things by his everlasting will:
whatsoever therefore God does in time, that did he determine to do before all
time; otherwise there should manifest change be found in him, if he should do
the least thing in time, which he did not determine to do, before time from
everlasting. By the scripture it is evident, because that every where, as well
in the doctrine of reprobation as election it reduces us unto the eternal
counsel of God, that men might certaynely be persuaded, that nothing happens
unto them in this life, which was not ordained and decreed for them by God from
everlasting. So that, that happens to them in time, which God has
fore-ordeyned before time. Moreover, although the reprobates be rejected from
this mercy of salvation by the just and eternal judgment of God; yet they are
not condemned but for their own sins and misdeeds, by which they deserve,
and pull upon their own heads the just wrath of God, and eternal destruction.
Therefore, although they are not reprobated and rejected for any infidelity or
wicked deeds foreseen, but because God has so willed it and decreed it
justly, yet they shall not be condemned but for their own ungodliness. To
conclude: as there is no merit foregoing in election, so also is there no
desert foregoing in reprobation, but both do proceed and flow from the good
pleasure of God. Now here remains to be showed briefly, for what causes the
reprobates are subject and liable unto just condemnation. The first cause of
their destruction, is the corruption of their nature: this is so great, that it
is fully sufficient for to condemn them justly, as we may see in the death and
condemnation of infants and little children that are reprobated, who although
they be polluted with few or none actual sins, yet for the original
corruption of their nature they are thrust hedlong into everlasting
destruction. Therefore this corruption of nature is the first and meritorious
cause of damnation. Again, God vouchsafes not to bestow upon them the mercy
of regeneration, but leaves them by his just judgment in their former
depravation of nature. Neither can God be accused or charged with injury,
because he does not reform nor better them; for God does not owe them so much,
because he has not promised it unto them, and therefore is not bound to
perform it. And as for the promises, although by the public ministry of the
Church they be pronounced unto all that hear in general, yet indeed and
effectually they do properly pertayne and belong unto the elect only: for
whatsoever God has promised in the Gospel, and in the matter of salvation,
they only obtain and enjoy. Again, the promises do not declare what God has
decreed and determined concerning every one, but do show how he is affected
toward them that believe, therefore they belong to none but to the believers,
so that God owes nothing to the reprobates, but deserved wrath, and just
indignation. Therefore in that he does not call them, nor draw them to Christ,
nor justify them in him, nor create faith in them, it is for this cause,
because he has not chosen them, so that when the cause is denied them, the
effects must needs be denied them also. For to whomesoever he vouchsafes not
election, he also denies those blessings and benefits, which are the effects
of election.

These being by the just judgment of God thus left to themselves, are hardened
daily more and more, so that they fear not to commit great and detestable
sins and iniquities, neither stand in awe of Gods vengeance, but nuzsle
themselves in their sins with delight and love, and commit sins willingly,
and that so proudly and securely, as if God the avenger of wickedness did wink
at them, and would take no account of them for their lives passed. These God
does not only reject and repel from all saving grace, and all the effects
thereof, but also in his just judgment does deliver the^ over being so
rejected, partly unto Satan, and partly to their own concupisce^ces and
desires. So that they follow not so much the swinge of their own corrupt
nature, as the persuasion and temptation of the Devil, by which they are
carried hedlong into all filthiness and lust of sin, 2. Tim. 3.13. Apoc. 22.11
and are so besotted with the custom of sinning, that being blinded with it,
they wax daily worse and worse. This hardening and delight in sin, is opposed
as contrary unto true faith and saving repentance; and this inborne corruption
is with actual sins, as it were with fuel, augmented and increased.
Therefore the wicked being left to the corruption of their nature, and hardened
by the enticements of sin, can do nothing else but sin. So that these are
those vessels which Saint Paul to Timothy says, 2. Epist. 2.20.
were made and appointed to shame and dishonor. So the reprobates by filthy
and odious means, are brought to everlasting shame and dishonor. For, for the
most part, the ends are judged of by the means, and the means by the ends.
Therefore although the reprobates do commit sin, the affection and endeavor of
their whole nature tending hastily unto evil, yet notwithstanding by sinning
freely and of their own accord, they do accomplish those things which God will
have done by them, that by them they might justly be condemned according to
Gods purpose from everlasting. For in their open misdemeanures God executes
his hidden and secret judgments, as in all the actions of each man else. So
that those sins which the wicked commit, are the secondary causes, by which
they descend as by certain steps into everlasting perdition.

Therefore the reprobates, although from everlasting they be ordained unto
damnation, yet they cannot justly murmur against God, nor excuse or defend
themselves, because they themselves are the cause of their own damnation:
therefore they are forced to acknowledge their own guiltines whether they will
or no, and that the judgment of their condemnation is just. But God is not
therefore the author and causer of their perversenes, because that he does not
correct them and amend them. For before that they be forsaken and hardened by
God in their wickedness, the root and welspring of their corruption abides and
sticks fast within themselves, and in their own nature, which they procured
unto themselves by their wilful falling away from God, in the loins of Adam.
But it is Satan which does excite and stir up in them evil thoughts and
wicked desires, and does hurry them and incense them as his own bondslaves,
at his pleasure, into all manner of wickedness whatsoever: and does take from
them all sense and feeling of their misery, that they might consume and perish
in it. Hence is it, that they contemn and scoff at the judgments of God
against sin, and extenuate their sins as much as they can. So that it is no
mervayle though they perish in their evils, because they know not the causes of
their evil, neither feel nor consider with themselves the greatness of them:
yea, they are so far off from seeking to the physician for remedy against it,
as that they refuse it being offered. Moreover, the reprobates by their free
and voluntary will (which is the only cause and original of all actual
sins) do choose the things that are evil, and pursue them with a most eger
desire, and so are carried from sin into sin, and daily even to their dying
day do add and heap sin upon sin, until they fall into everlasting
destrucction, unto the which by such means they were ordained. By these things
it most evidently appears, that the cause of sin ought not be laid upon
God, but to be acknowledged in them which have offended. And although God for a
while do seem to wink with his eyes as it were closed up, at their great and
detestable wickedness, yet that temporal forbearing of their wickedness is not
the forgiving and pardoning them for ever: but God, for his infinite goodness
sake does favor them many times in this life, and deals gently with them,
Romans 2.4.
that so he might allure them unto repentance; but they for the hardness of
their hearts come not unto this undeserved mercy, therefore he comes unto
them at the length with deserved punishment.

These sins and evil deeds which the reprobates commit, do necessarily
follow their reprobation, but they are not the causes of it. But the reprobates
do bring forth them of themselves, and are properly the cause of them: and that
in time, when as they were reprobated of God before time: therefore their
condemnation is properly the wages of their sins, and the peculiar fruit of
their evil deed: So the wicked themselves are the first and true cause of
their own destruction: but God is a just judge, which takes from them nothing
which was theirs, but rewards and pays unto the^ that which they by their
enterprises and actions have deserved. Therefore when he condemns them he
does them no injury, but does make and pronounce upon them the sentence of
their deserved condemnation even for their own facts. Math. 25.43.44.
So that such reward shall be rendered them before the judgment seat of
Christ, as their labor has been here, and such wages shall be paid them
there, as their deserts have been here. So, two beinnings or causes do go
before the condemnation of the wicked, to wit, the just decree of God, and
their own corruption and impiety: Gods decree is the cause farthest removed,
which has justly ordained, and wisely disposed this their condemnation: their
own corruption is the nearest cause, which is still in operation, and by that
operation deserves condemnation. Moreover, as often as two causes do concur
to one effect, then the effect takes his nature and name of the nearer cause.
Therefore the judgment of the effect ought to proceed and be taken from that.
Now, where there is stiff-necked incredulity, and a wicked life seen,
replenished and overwhelmed with sundry sins and iniquities, continually as
long as life does last, there do the tokens of reprobation appear. Yet
notwithstanding sometimes some are converted unto God at the last gasp of
death, and attain salvation, which through their whole life long have lived
dishonestly and leawdly: in such God does manifest his incredible mercy, and
does indeed show more clearly then the Sun at midday, that life eternal
is by all means his own mere gift and benefit. So that God teaches us in
them, that we should hope well of every one, as long as they live here; but to
denounce the sentence of damnation upon this or that man, for such or such
misdeedes, is a thing very rash, and much dissonant from charity.

The horrible damnation of the reprobate, by the wise and merciful providence
of God, turns unto the good of the Elect: and therefore ought publicly to be
preached, although some restless bust-bodies rage and storm thereat.

CHAP. 20.
THis most just and horrible condemnation of the wicked, makes for the best,
and is very profitable for the Elect and the godly. For they being affrighted
by the hurt and example of others, are thereby more humbled in spirit, and the
more moved and stirred up to the better acknowledgement, and more earnest
desire of Gods grace and mercy. Again, that they may learn the more
diligently and studiously to hate and eschew sin, which has procured so
great damage, and such fearful condemnation unto others, and heartily to
abhor it. And on the contrary, that they may frame and apply their whole
studies and endeavors to this, namely, to the care of conforming themselves,
their life and manners, according to the will of God in all things: that there
may be between their God and them, one and the same will, and one and the
same unwillingness in all things, as there is wont to be between mutual and
faithful friends. So that no evil can be so great, so noisome or hurtful,
but God knows how to order and direct it unto the edifying and Salvation of
his chosen: whereby every man may easily perceyve with what tender affection
God loves his Children, when as out of deadly poison, he produces instruction
and wholesome medicine for them. Let them therefore with fervent prayers, give
great thanks to God, their so good and merciful Father, in that he has
vouchsafed to save them from eternal death and confusion, and to elect them
unto everlasting Salvation and Glory, before others whom they excelled neither
by nature nor birth, nor were in the least respect better then they.

From hence it clearly appears, and is without all controversy true, that
the reprobates and such as shall be condemned, have not only any just cause
for which they should murmr against God, and frette at his so severe
judgment; but far contrariwise they are bound to praise and thank God for
his benefits receyved: partly, because they were by him created men: partly,
because he has forborne them here a long time, Romans 2.4.
with much patience, and long suffering, and has bestowed sundry and great
benefits upon them, filling them, and refreshing their hearts with meat and
drink: Acts 14.17.
partly, because he has beautified and adorned many of them with notable and
excellent gifts; whilst he has made some excellent in the knowledge of
narurall things; some he has not debarred from the knowledge of his word, but
has wrought in them a certain consent unto religion, and begotten in them
some show of faith: as appears in Judas the traitor; and in Balaam, and in
many others, of whom Christ speaks in Saint Matthew. Cap. 7.22.
But when these do wickedly abuse those benefits and spiritual gifts, they
do turn to them to their greater damnation. Therefore by how much they have
receyved from God the greater benefits and more excellent gifts, by so much
the more grievous judgment and more bitter punishment do they by their own
default deserve, and pluck upon their own heads. Further likewise, the longer
that their life lasts here, the greater curse is there prepared for them. But
in that he forbore them here so long, and bestowed on them so many good
turns, it is his incredible goodness, and admirable clemency. And in
condemning of them, on the one side he shows his justice, and on the other
side he sets forth his power: his justice, in that he hth condemned them for
sin, which his holy Nature and Will cannot suffer unpunished: and his power
in this, that he could impose and inflict upon them everlasting punishment and
most exquisite torments. Lastly, the reprobates, while they are in this life,
do hate God their Creator, cast away, and make no account of his word and
grace, and do deryde and mock at the whole religion and worship of his divine
Majesty: and so honor and love not God, but the devil rather. Again, many
times they do most cruelly persecute the religious worshippers of God, which
profess and embrace his holy Gospel, that so they might satisfy their hatred
they bear against God; and do molest and kill them with most exquisite
torments. So that they are the cause of many troubles unto the godly in this
life, and incense and arm the hatred and power of the whole world against
them: all which things notwithstanding, God for his unspeakable goodness and
love sake toward the Elect, does so guide and direct, that by them their faith
is the more edified, and their Salvation furthered. For all things both
external and internal must needs turn and work together for the best, to
them which have the most mighty God for their Father. For although that godly
men be predestined by God, and elected unto the heavenly Glory through Christ
from everlasting: yet they can come unto that glory by no other way, but by the
bitter cross, and sundry troubles and afflictions of this life. 2. Tim. 3.2^
Psalm. 34.20
For although that GOD do love them with his most tender love that surmounteth
all things: yet such a lotte and condition is assigned and appointed unto them
in this life, that an heavy and a continual cross is joined as an
inseperable companion unto that his more then fatherly love. For God loves his
children, not with a pleasing, but with a severe love; so that he chasteneth
them sharply here for their great profit, that they might be made partakers of
his holiness. But this is their only hope and most strong consolation, that
the fatherly will of God, for the verifyng and performance of their Salvation,
is more strong then an vnbatterable wall of brass.

This reprobation ought to be preached abroad as well as Election; because that
this is a great part of the holy Scriptures, which are to be propounded wholly,
and not piece meal. Rom 9.18.
So Saint Paul flatly and freely affirms, that God hardens who he will. So
the same Paul affirms, 2. Tim. 2.20.
that in a great house there are some vessels for dishonor. So the same Paul
says, that Pharaoh was raised up and appointed for this, Romans 9.21.
that God might show his power in him. Romans 9.12.
So also he affirms, that Esau was reprobated of God, Romans 9.11.
before he had done any evil. So also Christ himself denies, John. 10.26.
that the unbelieving Jews are any of his stock. Matthew. 22.11.
So likewise he affirms in Matthew, that to them which are without, it is not
given to understand the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven. So also in the
same Gospel of Saint Matthew, Cap. 13.19.
he does by sure signs and infallible tokens discern and make a difference
between the elect and the reprobates, and there calls the Elect, the wheat
of God; and the reprobate the tares of the Devil. These and the like sayings
and testimonies of Scriptures do teach us, that the doctrine of reprobation
ought publicly to be propounded and preached, and that for these causes.
First, that the Elect might so much the more certainly and surely repose
themselves in the free mercy of God, and might so much the more strongly be
confirmed. Secondly, the Election might be so much the more made known and
manifest. For contraries being set one against an other, and compared together,
are made the more apparent and familiar unto us: as also that men may know
that this world is so governed by the providence of God, that nothing else can
happen unto men, but that which was fore-ordayned and appointed for them, by
God, before the world was made. Lastly, this doctrine is to be urged, that the
Elect might so much the more carefully eschew and avoid sin, and exercise
themselves in all the study of godliness; and also that the reprobates may
know, what and what manner of things shall fall to their share, and what they
have deserved by their sins and wickedness. So that this doctrine is very
profitable and necessary on both sides. Therefore it ought daily and diligently
to be propounded and preached both to the godly and to the wicked. Therefore
let all religious and godly Ministers of the word of God, apply themselves to
this, namely, to preach this Decree of God publicly in the Church, as the
Scripture commands; and let them not esteem nor care for the Popes censures
and curses, which are like lightning, breaking forth without any natural cause
appearing, and not to be feared. But the Papists with their conventicles cry
out, that this is an horrible opinion, and not to be tolerated in the Church:
and this they do very craftily. For they see, that by this doctrine, that fable
which they have dispersed concerning free will, and many other trifles, which
they chaunt out in their Synagogues, with big words and lofty sentences, will
altogether vanish and fall to the ground. Therefore they go about to wound and
stabbe the doctrine of the Apostles and of Christ, concerning reprobation,
through the sides of the Ministers. Others pretend a shadow of desperation, and
that this doctrine should not be preached, lest men should be cast down and
fall into desperation. This danger is not so much to be feared, but that the
Ministers may pronounce all those things which God has revealed in his holy
word. I do confess indeed, that they must speak wisely of reprobation unto
the people; and I think also, that a wary Caveate should be used in the
preaching thereof, lest a good cause and a profitable doctrine, by evil
dealing and preposterous handling, should be spoiled and made unprofitable. And
yet so, that nothing which the holy Ghost has delivered in the Scripture,
concerning that matter, should be omitted by silence. Let the whole world go
to wrack, rather then that any thing should be diminished from the truth of
God. Let the Ministers therefore, faithfully and diligently handle that
doctrine, and commit the event unto God: and let them know, that the Papists
or others, cannot, nor ought not to forbid those things, which God will have
opened before the whole world. For, are they the masters and teachers of God
that they ought to teach, and prescribe unto him what ought to be preached?

This Decree of Election and reprobation, is so sure and certain on both
sides, that none of the Elect can be reprobated and condemned; nor any of the
reprobates can be elected and saved: and it is showed by sure testimonies of
Scripture, that there are more of the reprobates, then of the Elect.

CHAP. 21.
TWelfthly, this Decree of Predestination, is a sure and certain Decree:
because that with God there is a certain and set number as well of the
reprobate, as of the Elect, so that the number both of the one and of the other
can neither increase nor be diminished. For the state and condition of the one
and of the other, is an unchangeable order, so that the reprobates cannot be
elected and saved, nor the Elect cannot be reprobated and condemned.
Otherwise, Gods Decree concerning the one and the other, could not be constant:
and faith it self wanting a sure groundwork, should be wavering in
continual suspense, and should no where have any certain proppe, whereon
safely to rely: and so should become rather an unconstant and wavering
opinion, then a settled and steadfast faith. Therefore, as his Fatherly good
pleasure of Election is unchangeable, so also is his severe Decree of
reprobation. Mat. 25.46
So that the Elect shall go forth into everlasting Life and joy, and the
reprobates shall go into everlasting death and torment. Now the Scripture
plainly teaches, that there is a certain number of the Elect. John 10.14, 17.
Christ himself in Saint John expressly and plainly affirms, that he
knows his sheep, that is, his Elect, and that none is able to take them out
of his hand: If Christ (as he says) know his Sheep, therefore every one by
himself is known of him. So that with him there is a certain number of them:
for if the number of them were uncertain, he could not be able directly to
know them. For of a thing uncertain, none can have certain knowledge. So also
Saint Paul says, that the foundation of God stands sure, and has this
seal, 2. Tim 2.19
The Lord knows them that are his. God also has numbered all the hairs of
the heads of his children, how much more therefore does he know how many are
his? Furthermore, God knew all and every thing before they were created, and
nothing is able to escape or be hid from his infinite Wisdom. How therefore
should he not discern and know all his Elect and chosen in general, and every
one in particular, whom he loves and tendereth with singular care above all
things: Surely, if he should not know them every one in particular, he could
have no great care of them, and so they should of necessity perish: but they
shall never perish, therefore they are known of him, and preserved unto
Salvation.

Moreover, the Scripture manifestly teaches, that there is a set number of the
reprobates. Mat. 25.32
For Christ shall separate them from the Elect, and condemn them in the last
and great judgment of the whole world. Therefore he knows severally and
distinctly who they are, otherwise he could not separate them from the Elect,
unless they were known to him by their particular persons severally, every
one by himself. And further, God which numbreth and knows the stars of the
Sky, the sand of the Sea, and all things that are contained in heaven and in
earth, from the least unto the greatest, and from the greatest unto the least,
knows them also. For he that knows greater and infinite things; cannot be
ignorant of the lesser and finite things. And for a man to think or say, that
there is not a set number of the Elect and Reprobate, that were to deny God,
and to think that there is no God. For there is nothing more agreeable or
proper unto God, then to discern and know all things in general, and every
thing in particular, far more plainly and distinctly, then we can know
those things that lie open under our eyes. And therefore, if any things, though
never so little, should be exempt from the knowledge of God, his wisdom and
providence should not be infinite, (which ought to extend it self, as well
above all things, as through all things) and so God should not be God; whose
knowledge were straightened unto a few things and particular, and not enlarged
unto all things and universal.

Also, here is further to be noted briefly and by the way, that there are many
more reprobated then elected. This may first by most manifest testimonies of
Scripture, and then by daily experience be truly verified and declared. Christ
himself plainly affirms and pronounces in Saint Matthew, that many are
called, Mat. 22.14
but few are chosen. Luke 12.32
For this cause also in Saint Luke Christ calls the number of the Elect, a
little flock: Also the Parable of the seed in Saint Matthew, Mat. 13.4.
does in evident and express words explane and set forth this, when as only
the fourth part of men are capable of the heavenly and spiritual seed, and
bring forth fruit. And the rest either do not receyve that spiritual seed,
Mat. 13.19
or else suffer it not to grow, but set their studies and desires upon things
below, which shall perish; so that they neglect and and contemn the treasure
of eternal Life. By this Similitude, Christ himself declares, who are elect,
and who reprobate: the Elect are compared to the good and fruitful ground, and
bring forth fruit, either more or less, according to the measure of the grace
that is bestowed upon them. But the reprobate are compared either to barren and
stony ground, or to thorns, which do choke the heavenly seed by one means or
an other, and bring forth no fruit. So that in Gods just judgment, they are
left in the corruption of nature, and are not renewed: therefore they are
reprobates and shall be condemned. And although that there are more reprobated
then elected, yet the number of the Elect is so great, that it contains
infinite millions of men, so that with Moses they are compared unto the stars
of the sky, and the sands of the Sea.

Again, daily experience teaches us, that the number of the reprobate, is
greater then the number of the elect. For how many and how great kingdoms and
regions are there, where the blessed Gospel of the Son of God was never
preached, nor heard of? For none can attain true Faith and Salvation in
Christ, without the word of God preached or taught. For faith, says the
Scripture, Romans 10.17
comes of hearing, and hearing by the word of God. They therefore which
neither have not hear the word of God, cannot attain unto faith, and so to
Salvation. And to dream of some secret inspiration, without the ministry of
the word, is an harebraind conceyt, which needs no confuting. For although
God be not tied unto the outward word, and that an extraordinary way may bring
men unto faith, yet he has so tied us unto the word, that without it in this
matter we cannot judge any thing. Therefore, how many millions of men, as well
young as old, have departed out of this life, before they have heard any thing
at all concerning Christ and his Gospel? Such ought rather to be left unto the
judgment of God, then to be judged by the censures of men. For it is evident,
that Salvation comes from nothing else, but from faith; and faith proceeds
from nothing, Tit. 1.1. John 17.3.
but from a true and sincere knowledge of God and of Christ. And this true
knowledge of God and of Christ cannot be had el ewhere, but from the Gospel
only. Therefore how can they obtain faith and Salvation, which have neither
heard nor read the Gospel? But seeing this kind of men is one of the four
secret mysteries of God, which man ought not to search out and determine, (as
Augustine elsewhere speaks:) we must leave them to God, and must hope that
for his great Mercy sake, if they be not converted to day, they may be to
morrow converted. Concerning false christians, which are mingled among the true
ones, as tares amongst the good corn, I say nothing in this place: That
Similitude of the seed and of the Sower in Saint Matthew, does plainly show,
Matt. 13.3.4.
that there are many of them; For we are taught by that Similitude, that all
are not true Christians before God, which hear Gods word, and profess
themselves to be such: for because that many brag and boast of the show and
title of godliness, whose heart notwithstanding is most far from it.
Therefore our faith will be shaken and waver, except we remember, that many
of them are false brethren, which speak and boast of the name of Christ. Let
not their falling away, which surely will come, overthrow our faith and bring
it to ruin.

As by the multitude of them that shall be damned, the greatness of Gods wrath
against them may be gathered; so also by the scarcity of those that shall be
saved, the abundance of the Love of God toward them may be collected. And men
ought to examine by their faith, in what account they are with God.

CHAP. 22.
ANd in as much as there are more condemned then saved, it may from hence
easily be gathered, how great the wrath of God is against rebellious and
unrepentant persons: which being oftentimes admonished by the word of God, or
endued with other good benefits, or afflicted with such or such calamities,
yet repent not, nor cease from sin. Again, by how much the greater and more
severe the wrath of God is against the rebellious and stiff-necked, by so much
the greater and more notable is his Love and Mercy toward the penitent, and
such as cease from evil. So that the fewer they are, the dearer they are unto
God; for rare things are usually more fervently beloved, and more carefully
tendered. This scarcity of the Elect, and multitude of the reprobates, ought to
trouble no man, nor weaken any man's faith: neither is the grace and mercy of
God for that to be thought straightened into a narrow room: and Christians ought
not to despair for this cause, but to be in the better hope. For where the
Gospel of Christ is preached and taught, and the holy Ghost made powerful by
it, there God has his Elect. Therefore all they which embrace the Gospel of
Christ, and by a true faith put their whole trust and confidence of the
obtaining of Salvation, in the sole mercy of God, and in the only Sacrifice of
Christ; and are not strangers from the holy Spirit, but do bewail their
sin, and have an hearty desire and care to profit in true faith and
amendment of life; they may surely persuade themselves, that they are elected
from everlasting, and that they shall never perish. For the Scripture does
every where reduce men unto Christ, and to true faith in him, that men might
confirm themselves concerning their Election; and pronouncerh such blessed.
And Christ himself in Saint John says, that God so loved the world, that he
gave his only begotten Son, Chap. 3.16.
that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life.
Christ here, does not restrain faith unto those only, which were then present
and believed in him: but enlarges it unto all the Elect in general, which
have believed in him from the beglnning of the world, and shall believe in him
unto the end of the world. This he evidently shows and expresses by this
word, (world) by which he comprehends and poynteth out the Elect and chosen
only of all ages, which have been, and which are now, and ever shall be, unto
the end of the world, dispersed through all the Coasts and Countries of the
world. And so Christ figuratively puts the whole for the most chief and
most excellent part. But Christ therefore calls his Elect, the world; because
that in their nature they are corrupted, and in their will strangers from God,
and in their desires and studies only bent and fixed unto things of the
world, and not to things that are above and spiritual. And so Christ does
highly extolle and commend the love of God in loving them, and does condemn,
and throw down to hell their works and merits. So that by the name of the
world, he does signify the Elect only; which alone he so loved, that he gave
his only begotten Son for them: but he did not mean the reprobates by that
name: for he vouchsafes not them so much love, as to give his Son for them:
for so they also should be saved, (which cannot be.) Indeed he loves them
with a temporal love, as to create them, to preserve them, and to enrich and
endue them with many benefits, which end with this life. But he loves them
not with his everlasting and free Election. And Christ will have us instructed
here, that the gift of heavenly understanding and saving faith, is not only a
certain and altogether an infallible token of the grace of God, Act. 13.48
but also that it is not common to the reprobate, but proper and peculiar unto
the Elect only. Therefore faith is called by S. Paul to Titus, the faith of
the Elect. Tit. 1.1.


Seeing therefore, that faith is given only unto the Elect, and that the
greater part of men refuse the pure doctrine of Christ and of faith, and lend
their ears unto fables; the multitude of the reprobate ought not to make the
faith of the Elect unconstant or wavering: because that their incredulity and
stubburnesse, does not derogate any thing from the doctrine of the Gospel and
Christian faith. Certainly it is no marvel, that the whole world, from the
East unto the West, and through all other coasts thereof, is so replenished and
over-flowed with such gross errors, and so many corruptions and disorders;
and that the wholesome and blessed Gospel of the Son of God, is of so many,
and such great ones despised, scorned and hated: seeing that faith is so rare a
gift: Cap. 2 3.
for that, as S. Paul says to the Thessalonians, is not of all men. Therefore
although the multitude of the Infidels do go about to put to the worse, and to
scatter this small company of the godly; yet because this relyeth upon the
faithfulness and power of God, it shall never be vanquished; and that multitude
shall never obtain that, which with great and continual contention it
coveteth to obtain. Forasmuch therefore, as faith of the Gospel, and sure
trust in Christ, are two most true arguments and tokens of everlasting Election
and Salvation: let all Christians which profess the Gospel of God, and do
believe in Christ, believe and be resolved of this, as of a most sure and
certain thing, that they are elected of their merciful God from everlasting:
and let them incessantly beseech God with fervent prayer, that their faith by
daily addition and increase may be augmented and strengthened: Phil. 1.6.
For faith, and the increase of it, is promised of God, and he will begin and
perfect both: so that he which believes not to day; or wavereth in doubt, may
believe to morrow, and have a more settled hope. For every one ought, from the
great goodness of God, to conceyve and entertayne great hope also. And let not
a man doubt or distrust of free mercy and eternal election, for these or these
slippes or falls. For the examples of all Ages, and the lives of the most holy
men do openly enough declare, that man as long as he is in this transitory
life, is frail and subject to falling; but the grace of God stands and
remains sure and never fails. So that he sustayneth those that fall, Psalm.
145.14.
and lifts up those that be down. But more signs, whereby a man may more
surely know and be persuaded that he is elected, shall be produced hereafter,
in the Tract of glorification, and these things here spoken, shall be then
further enlarged.

THese things I thought good to speak of the Proprieties, which are under the
doctrine of Election, and ought to be considered with this mind and purpose,
that so great a thing, in which the whole matter of Salvation consists, might
the more plainly and familiarly be conceyved and understood in this particular
distinction. For in the general handling of any thing, there is indeed some
light and knowledge, but in the particular doctrine, where the whole is divided
into his parts, and the parts are handled orderly one by one, there appears
and is conceyved much more light and perspicuity. So that in these Proprieties,
a man may most safely build up, and soundly confirm his faith and salvation,
as in the most infallible principles of Christian religion. For these
Proprieties are such, both in effect and second act, and also in their nature,
as in the first act. Therefore each of them as causes, have their virtue and
effects following them; so that the effects with the Proprieties, and the
Proprieties with the effects, have a continual agreement, and an inseperable
relation. Such therefore as the Proprieties are in themselves, such things
likewise do they effect and bring forth in the elect. So that as Election it
self is eternal and free, in like sort the gifts and graces which do spring
and redound unto the Elect, out of it, as out of an heavenly Fountain, must
needs be eternal also; by which they are changed and reformed unto the Image
of God, from glory to glory, until they come to life everlasting, and into
that blessed and heavenly world to come.

Here is taught, what and how many things are necessary for them to know,
which desire to be conversant in this doctrine of Election rightly, and with
sound profit to themselves. Again, although many more shall perish
everlastingly, then obtain Salvation, yet no Christian should for that
distrust any thing of his Salvation, because the Scriptures do no where
expressly affirm, that this or that man in particular is of the number of the
reprobate.

CHAP. 23.
FVrthermore, that every man may the more safely exercise himself in this
doctrine of Predestination, and profit soundly in it, these four heads must
always be known and considered. First, that eternal and free Election in
Christ, be accounted to be the only groundworke of all Salvation: and that so,
that not the least part of Salvation be sought elsewhere, then from that one
doctrine of Predestination: which, if it should be sought elsewhere, the true
and natural meaning of the Scripture in many places will not only be missed,
and the conscience out of quiet, and tormented, being vexed as well with
continual fear, as doubting; but also Salvation it self will be hazarded.
But seeing that I have spoken more fully of this matter in the Chapters
foregoing, and that this doctrine is confirmed by testimonies of Scripture, I
think there need no more to be spoken of it in this place.

Secondly, that concerning God he conceive nothing but a most sure and strong
hope of his salvation, and be most certainly persuaded in himself, that he is
one of the number of the elect; and let no sins, or continual slippes weaken
his faith, or discourage his hope concerning his election. For oftentimes many
are of the number of the elect, which live a very bad life, and yet by the
goodness of God are brought to repentance, through whose patience they are not
taken out of this life in the very committing of their wickedness, that it might
be made known unto them and their fellow heirs, out of how great a mischief
the grace of God can deliver them, as Augustine speaks. Moreover, Tom. 7.
Colum. 170 Romans 8.
although the holy spirit do govern the children of God, yet many times it
suffers them to fall into great sins, that they might be more and more
humbled, and being so humbled, they might repent the more heartily, and have a
fellow feeling of others that fall; and yet afterward he brings them again
into the right way to salvation by true repentance: and if a man believe not
that he is of the number of the elect, he shall surely do great injury against
God; as if he would mock any man, or call any man unto Christ in vain. Again,
although many more be ordained unto destruction then to salvation, yet that
ought not to move or trouble any man, because that the Scripture does no where
say, that this or that man in particular is a reprobate; therefore let not this
or that man think himself of the number of the reprobates, which if he shall
do, and believe that he is a reprobate he is injurious against God, and envious
of his own salvation: but let him much diligently betake himself unto
continual prayer, and give himself to the reading of the Gospel, and
exercise his faith in Christ by the study of holiness, and say with the Apostle,
Luke. 17.5.
Lord increase my faith: and then in the end he shall truly feel in his soul
more and more that he is of the number of the elect. Furthermore, let no man
presuppose that he is hated or detested of God, by reason of any afflictions,
how great or how lasting soever they be. For God is then most ready to bestow
life everlasting, when he shows himself to be contraryly minded, as
Augustine elsewhere well observes. So that when he afflicts Christians with
these or those troubls, he does either chastise their sins, or else they are
exercised in a spiritual trial: and such are proposed unto others as valiant
and worthy captains, either for their willing obedience, or else for their
invincible patience and strength: and they being stricken with these afflictions
as with Gods rod, are reduced unto a more sober carriage, and right-course of
life. So the fatherly love of God striveth with the perverse wickedness of man,
until at the last it softneth it, and makes it better. And so S. Augustine
rightly witnesses elsewhere: The common cross and calamity of the godly is
not a sentence to punish, but an affliction to heal, therefore he often
punishes his children to drive them to repentance, and draw them to himself.
Hither apperteineth that of S. Austine, which says elsewhere. The afflictions
that oppress us compel us to go to God. To this also belongs that of the
Prophet Amos, Amos. 4.9.
who says, I have smitten you with blasting and mildew, your great gardens and
your Vineyards, and your figge-trees, and your olive trees did the palmer-worme
devour, yet have ye not returned unto me, says the Lord. By these things
therefore it appears, that God afflicts his children, that he might amend
them; and he amendeth them for this cause, to save them. Therefore let all the
godly, not only submit both their hands, but also their whole body and soul
under his rod, especially seeing that the afflictions that are sent unto them
are as Gods hammers, by which as upon an anvile they are fourmed and made fit
for his kingdom and celestial glory. Seeing then that afflictions are as
spiritual chariots to carry men into heaven, they do minister much better
matter to trust well in God, then any matter at all to despair, so that they
are to be accounted the medicines of our sins and the remedies of our falls.
Again, out of them the godly learn, that God does not grant nor promise unto
his children a freedom from punishment, but that he only promises them a
fatherly moderation in their punishments, that he will not execute vengeance on
them in the highest degree. So that between this great gentleness of God, which
otherwise might be some alurement unto sin, and his extreme rigor which
would cast men hedlong into destruction, this middle chasticement of his is put
as wholesome temperature. So also must we judge of the inward temptations, with
which as often as God does prick and urge his children, so often does he try
their faith, and prove their patience, and stir them up unto earnest prayer.
Therefore God will have his children to live here under a continual cross,
both that being convicted of their own infirmity they might be humbled, and
that being humbled, they might learn to seek strength and help from God;
(for if things went always well with them according unto their own mind,
they would not acknowledge their own weakness, nor think that they stand in
need of Gods help) and also that the stubbornes of the flesh might daily more
and more be subdued, and brought under, by the remedy of the cross. And
lastly, that they might be withdrawn from the desires of the world, and the
concupiscences of the flesh, and be incited to the meditation and search of
heavenly things, knowing that their felicity consists not in the things of
this world. By this it may be plainly gathered, that the afflictions of the
godly are unto them as it were spiritual provokements to call upon God, and
most wholesome remedy and medicine for their sins. In which respect, those
things which men think many times to be noisome evils unto them, are most
profitable furtherances of their salvation. Therefore the afflictions which are
sent of God unto his children, are to be accounted and esteemed in steed of a
great blessing, because that in them Gods more then fatherly goodness is seen,
because when his children refuse to come unto him being called by the loving
voice of the Gospel, then he cease not to seek them up, but draws them
unto him with his rod, as it were against their wills, otherwise they would
consume away, and perish in their miseries. From whence may be noted again
that our merciful God is more desirous to save miserable sinners, then they
are to be saved by him, otherwise he would not so carefully sometimes by this
and sometimes by that means seek their salvation. So that when God does visit
his children with these or those afflictions, he does then give them an inward
taste of his fatherly good will toward them, and so chastises them with his
left hand, and refreshes and susteyneth them with his right hand. Thus in
their common miseries they have a lively sense and experience that God is
merciful unto them.

Thirdly, he that will soundly edify himself in this doctrine, and well
fortify and strengthen himself on every side against all the assaults of
Satan, he must conteyne himself within the compass and bounds of the word of
God, that is and shall be a true rule for him to learn by, and the utmost
limit of his proceeding. But he that without the word will rush into the hidden
secrets of so deep a mystery, his proceeding shall not only be in darkness
out of the way, but also shall be overcome of this so secret and hidden
mystery: every man must therefore deal wisely and warily in this matter, for
if a man with a foole-hardy enterprice should covet to climb up such an high
and steep hill, he may quickly catch an hedlong fall backward. Surely
whosoever desire to pry into that secret decree without the light of Gods word,
they shall twinde themselves into an endless laborinth, in which they shall
ever err, and never find issue out, seeing that secret counsel of God does
infinitely far exceed all the understanding and capacity of the Angels, for
the Angels themselves, as Peter witnesses, 1. Pet. 1.12
do desire to look into the Gospel, and if the Gospel be closed up and
hidden from the Angels, which always behold the face of God, how much less
are they able to search out or understand that hidden decree of predestination,
which was decreed and ordained before they were created: for he that is
ignorant of the lesser, cannot have notice and knowledge of the greater.
Therefore the word of God is the only way, which can bring every man safely
and readily unto the finding out of those things which they may know and
understand in this mystery of predestination. So that where God has opened his
sacred mouth to teach, there let man also open his ears to learn; and where
he has closed up his holy mouth, there must also all way and means of enquiry
be stopped by man, and where God cease to teach, there let not man be
desirous to learn and know any more. Therefore when God makes (...), then let
man also make an end of learning: and so that he may be safe from all error
and danger, let him follow God going before him in his word, and that shall be
unto him as a most clear shining light to find out those things which are to
be known concerning predestination.

Fourthly and lastly, to be assured of our election and salvation, and to reap
fruit thereby, we must not begin at the first cause, namely the causes and
first beginnings of election, for all means of learning and knowledge that
way, is not only debard and shut up from us on every side, but even from the
Angels themselves: but we must learn and come to the knowledge of the
certainety of our salvation from the later, as it were by the effects. But of
this hereafter shall be spoken more largely and plainly, when all the linkes
of this chain are handled, and what those effects of election are, which may
thoroughly confirm us, and make us sure of our election and salvation, as most
true and infallible arguments, we shall hear hereafter more at large, when
we have spoken of vocation, justification, and glorification. So, hitherto we
have spoken of the foreknowledge of God, and those things which pertayne unto
it, likewise of predestination, and those things which belong unto it. Now
those things which remain to be spoken, follow orderly one by one in this
chain which we have in hand.

Here is a passage made from the doctrine of predestination unto vocation, as
from the cause to the effect: and is showed how the secret predestination of
God is made known unto the elect by vocation. In vocation, first the ambiguity
of the word is expressed, how many ways it is taken, and how it is divided.
Then is showed by what means it is done.

CHAP. 24.
NOw in Paul's chain vocation follows, and the Apostle proceeds from the
cause unto the effects, and shows how this secret predestination is revealed
and applied unto men, therefore vocation is the third link of the chain of
salvation, which is set next to predestination in an order most convenient, for
by this God does give open testimony of his will, and shows whom he did elect
and mean to save before all ages. Predestination indeed, in a generality and
universally, does pronounce that some men are elected from everlasting unto
salvation, and that some are justly appointed from everlasting unto
destruction: but vocation does open and reveal this hidden decree of God unto
every of the elect: they are enlightened and regenerate by the spirit of God;
and so it is manifested, how that of unworthy, they are made worthy: the
remnant are forsaken justly in their wickedness and ignorance, that being
unregenerate they may perish and be damned. But the Apostle shows, that the
grace of God is to be considered of the elect two manner of ways: Fi^ ^ee
sets forth the incomparable favor and (...) of GOD toward them in the word
(...) Secondly, in this word (vocation) he comprehends, and as it were
poynteth at with his finger unto the elect the great gifts and excellent
benefits which slow from predestination, as from a bottomless fountain, for
God will make himself known, and impart himself unto the elect by his
benefits, in which his lively image and shape appears, for God cannot be
searched out and known of any man in his hidden essence nnd secret
predestination. Therefore the Apostle does here orderly declare and reckon up
certain means and several ways, by which the elect are drawn unto Christ,
and brought unto life everlasting; and so shows, that our whole salvation,
and whatsoever is necessary and pertayneth unto it, does depend and proceed
from Gods eternal election.

Concerning vocation, somethings must be spoken more at large for our better
learning and understanding sake, but least any man should be deceived by the
ambiguity of the word, the significations thereof must be unfolded and
distinguished, for vocation in the holy scripture does signify oftentimes the
very action of calling; otherwhiles it signifies that happiness to which men
are called, namely everlasting life, and heavenly glory. Then, in respect of
the twofold kind of men, there is likewise a twofold kind of vocation, the
one is unto some office, and not unto salvation. So Saul was called to a
kingdom, so Judas was called to the Apostleship, when notwithstanding neither
of them were ordained unto salvation. In these and such like the goodness of God
is so great, that he vouchsafes oftentimes an honest calling even to the most
wicked men. The other kind of vocation is, unto some office, and unto salvation
also. So Paul and the rest of the Apostles were called unto the office of
preaching the Gospel through the whole world, and unto salvation likewise. So
also many other godly men are called, both unto some certain office and kind
of life, and also unto salvation and everlasting life.

That these things may the better and the more familiarly be conceived and
understood, we must know, that one vocation is outward, and not effectual unto
salvation; and another is inward and effectual unto salvation. The outward
calling is that which consists only in the outward preaching of the Gospel,
this concerns only the superficies or outside of the understanding. This
indeed beats the ears with the outward sound, but enters not into the
heart, and has no firm and steadfast root in it: and therefore this vocation
is not durable, but continues only for a time, and is like unto the corn that
fell upon the stony ground, Math. 13.6.
which because it has not sufficient moisture under it, it can not fasten, and
take deep root, but when the Sun rises and parcheth it, it is dried up,
and withers away. From this vocation the reprobate themselves are not
excluded, but many of them also are called by it as well as the elect. And
although that some of the reprobate do come unto some knowledge of the truth,
and consent thereunto, and are enlightened therewith, yet notwithstanding they
never come unto the true acknowledgement of the Gospel, nor to the plain
confession of a true faith, but as Saint Paul says unto Timothy, 2. Epist.
3.7.
they are always learning, and never come to the knowledge of the truth. Their
study seeing that it is accursed fom above, is a preposterous study, to which
knowledge never accords, for they are always unconstant, and tossed up and
down in their restless mind like a reed, so that they can apprehend no
certaynety, and whatsoever they do attain unto, does exasperate the judgment
of God against them, and turns to their greater condemnation, and makes them
the more without excuse.

By this it plainly appears, that all to whom the doctrine of the Gospel is
revealed, are not effectually taught thereby, and inwardly called. The
vengeance of God is wont to punish the wickedness of the reprobate two manner of
ways, Amos. 8.11
for either he takes from them the use of the word, or leaving them the word,
he takes away their understanding, Esaias. 6.9.
and darkeneth their capacity, that in seeing they should not perceive, and in
hearing they should not understand. So that the whole doctrine of the scripture
is unto them as a book shut up and sealed: Esaias. 29.11
wherefore although God do shine unto them with the most clear light of his
word, yet Satan has so blinded them, that they altogether grope for their way
in the great brightness of light, and understand nothing at all, and so see not
the Sun shining at midday. Hence it may plainly be gathered, that the word
of God is not preached unto men to one end, but for diverse ends, and by Gods
wonderful judgment, is in such sort tempered and disposed on both sides, that
it is no less the savor of death unto death unto the reprobate, then the
savor of life unto life unto the elect. So by one and the selfsame word of
God the reprobate are as well distressed unto condemnation, as the elect
refreshed unto salvation. This is by all means a fearful and a very great
judgment of God, in that many of the damned are called by the outward
ministry of the word, as the children of light, and are adorned and endued
with some knowledge of the truth, which notwithstanding afterward are separated
and rejected from the Church, as the children of darkness, and the bondslaves
of Satan.

But the sound and true knowledge of the truth of the Gospel, is proper to the
elect only. This Christ himself does express and declare in Matthew, saying,
Mat. 13.11 Mark. 4.11
To you it is given to know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, unto others
it is not. So also in John he says, John. 17.6.
I have declared thy name unto the men which thou gave me. So likewise the
Prophet David says, Psalm. 25.14.
The secret of the Lord is revealed unto them that fear him, and he will make
known his covenant unto them. By these three testimonies of scripture it is
proved, that the elect only are enlightened into the true and saving knowledge
of the scripture, and therefore they are said to be of the truth, and to hear
the voice of Christ. Of such does the Church of God consist, which is called
the pillar and foundation of truth. These love the pure doctrine and truth of
the Gospel, and keep it safe and unpolluted from all errors and corruptions,
2. Cor. 4.3.
but unto the rest the Gospel is covered and hidden, and therefore they
remain and perish in the blindness of their heart, and ignorance of God.

That vocation which is inward, and effectual unto salvation, is the powerful
motion and working of the holy ghost in man, whereby the mind is enlightened to
understand the mysteries of the kingdom of God, and the will renewed to like
well of Gods good will and pleasure. In this vocation five things ought to be
considered and marked. First, how God reveals his eternal election unto us.
Secondly, by what and how many means this calling to Christ is wrought.
Thirdly, that it is set far out of our power, and only in the hand of GOD.
Fourthly, how it may be certaynely acknowledged and known of us. Fifthly, that
the times of this calling are sundry and diverse. For the first we must know,
that the eternal election of God is revealed and made known unto us two
manner of ways, to wit, by the word of the Prophets and Apostles delivered
unto the Church, and by the Holy Ghost, by which the elect are illuminated unto
the true knowledge of God, and unto everlasting life. For although that all
things which God would have known in this life concerning him, and which are
necessary for us to the attayning of salvation, be absolutely and perfectly
contained in the word of the Prophets and Apostles, yet by reason of the
blindness of man's understanding, and the backwardnes and frowardnes of his will,
they are not sufficient to work in us a true knowledge of God and of Christ,
but that God must needs work effectually in us by his holy spirit, that we
may understand them as we ought to do, and soundly consent unto them being so
understood. Therefore there can come no greater benefit from heaven unto man,
then the true knowledge of God, and faith in Christ.

Here for our better vnderstanding-sake we must mark, that God by his word
does lay open his will unto all men in the whole Church, but he reveals it,
and makes it known by his spirit unto the elect only, and that not only
unto all together in general, but to everyone by himself in particular. This
kind of revealing is the proper work of the Holy Ghost, they therefore which
stubbornely and of set purpose resist it, do sin against the Holy Ghost, and
shall be condemned without any hope of forgivenes, (as the scripture
witnesses. Mat. ^2.31.


And this effectual vocation is manifested and revealed almost by the same
means as election is revealed by. But it appears by the outward preaching of
the word of God, and by the inward instinct and operation of the holy ghost. In
the outward preaching of the word, God does plentifully and plainly declare
his will toward us, to wit, that he wishes well unto us, in that he inviteth
and calls us unto himself, which were wholly corrupted, and altogether
enemies unto him. Here therefore does he indeed and by lively experience teach
us, that he is more prompt and ready to defend and save us, then we can desire
to be saved and defended by him, whilst that of enemies and foes he makes us
his friends; whilst that of unwilling he makes us willing; whilst that of
infidels, he makes us believers. Does he not thus offer salvation unto us of
his own accord? Surely except God should call us unto him, we should not only
never come unto him, but also we should remain sworn enemies and adversaries
to him, and to our own salvation. But in the mean time by the inspiration of
his spirit, Ephesians. 1.9. 1. Ioh. 5.20.
he does make fit and dispose our will to trust and believe in him. For God
does not only reveal unto us the misteryes of his hidden will, but also
gives us a mind, that we may understand and know those misteryes. In this
calling, there is no violent motion to be dreamed of, by which men are drawn
against their will, but it is a quiet and fatherly persuasion of the Holy
Ghost, by which of an unbeliever, Phili. 1.13.
a man is made a believer. For first, he does clear and illuminate our mind by
his holy spirit, that we may understand. Secondly, he does renew and change our
will to affect that which is good, and do that which is right. So God by this
effectual calling does beget faith in us, whereby we may apprehend the
obedience and merit of Christ, and apply it unto our selves.

This incomprehensible goodness and mercy of God toward us, is to be embraced
and beloved with our whole soul. For when he draws us unto Christ, and
calls us unto himself, then are we as it were created anew, and do arise out
of nothing, because we have not the least sparkle of the least good thing in
us, which may make us worthy or fit for the kingdom of God. So that faith and
a spiritual life is wrought in us from above, altogether of nothing. Faith
follows this calling, which arises from the word of God being well
understood, and the inward motion of the holy spirit. Here is to be noted,
that the word of God and the holy spirit ought to be joined together in this
effectual calling: so that neither the word should be separated from the
spirit, nor the spirit from the word. For those things which God has joined
together, are by no means to be put asunder. And that God has joined togother
the word and the spirit in the public ministry of the Church, it is
manifestly cleared out of Esaias, Esa. 59.21.
where God speaks thus: This shall be my covenant with them, says the Lord,
My spirit that is upon thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall
not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, says the Lord,
even from henceforth for ever. This is a most sweet promise, that God by his
ministry will always, even to the end of the world, teach and gather together
his Church with his word and spirit. They which reject this order which God
has established in his Church, are but vain boasters, that they obey God: so
that they which separate the spirit from the word, and seek for new
revelations, are mad, and turn aside out of the right path of heavenly
wisdom, and wander altogether from the way of salvatio: for the spirit
separated from the word, is not the spirit of God, but of the Devil. They
therefore wliich brag of the name of the spirit, despising and rejecting the
word, they are not the ministers of God, but of the devil, for whom also they
gather together a Church: but the spirit joined together with the word, is the
soul and life of it. For the spirit does quicken the word in the ministry of
the Church, and makes it fruitful, and takes wholesome root in the hearts of
men, and brings forth fruit. Seeing therefore that this word of God is that
only instrument, by which the holy ghost shows forth his power to the saving
of men, his ministers therefore should with earnest and undaunted study, give
themselves unto it, that they may handle it rightly, and deliver it unto the
people most diligently. And that they may the more commodiously perform this,
they must duly consider, and daily practice these three things. First, that
they keep that word of God pure and uncorrupted, not adding to it, nor taking
from it, as do the Papists, being liars in adding, and sacrilegious in taking
from it. Secondly, that they understand it rightly according to the will of
God, and the analogy of Christian faith. Thirdly, that they interpret and apply
it unto those ends and uses, for the which God has ordained and appointed it.
These three things, except they shall daily consider and practice, they shall
not only beat the peoples ears with an empty sound without any edifying: but
also they shall set open a wide gap for Satan himself for to sow errors by:
for he neglects not such an occasion offered, but most carefully lays hold
upon it wheresoever he may. For the word of God being distracted and drawn
from the right and natural meaning thereof, cease to be the word of God, and
becomes a snare to entrap and deceive men. But the whole fault shall fall
upon the Ministers, which shall in no wise escape vengeance. And where it is
well understood, and rightly expounded, it is the effectual and wholesome
instrument of the holy spirit to convert and save me^. So that the word of God
and his spirit, is the singular and inestimable treasure, and the excellent and
peculiar goods of the Church: of which the Church according to that promise
ought never to be deprived, but to be always begotten of it, and to be
continually directed and preserved by it.

Therefore the Holy Ghost is the begetting cause of faith, he does create and
work it in the hearts of the elect, and by the daily proceedings and increase
thereof does augment and preserve it unto the end of their lives. But the
steadfast apprehension and applying of the promises of God, and the merit of
Christ, is the express form and lively image of faith: in this consists the
whole force and efficacy of faith. Gal. 2.20.
So S. Paul does in express words set down, saying, The son of God loved
me, and gave himself for me. So true faith does behold the general promise of
God, and apprehends it, and makes particular application to it self,
certainly setting down this, that that promise of grace and salvation does no
less appertain unto it, then unto the rest of the believers. For then the
promise of God is effectual in men, and comes to the proper end and issue of
it self, when it is apprehended by a true faith. Again, the word publicly
preached in the ministry of the Gospel, is the isntrumental cause of faith,
and therefore that word is called by Paul the power of God unto salvation, Romans
1.16. Romans 10.17.
unto every one that believes, because that the holy ghost works by it in
the hearts of the elect, so that faith springs from the preaching and hearing
of the Gospel. Therefore whatsoever the elect do hear with their outward
ears from the public preaching of the word, that does the Holy Ghost make
fruitful and effectual in their hearts. Furthermore, a steadfast confidence,
and a true hope in Christ, a fervent love toward God, also a sonne-like fear
and reverence of God, a sincere love of our neighbor, and other honest and
holy actions, are such effects of the holy spirit, which do accompany and
attend upon true faith as natural and inseparable virtues. So true faith does
rest self upon the fatherly love of God, and does heartily reverence and
worship God, as a good and loving Father, and does continually study how to
please him, and cleave unto him, and carefully avoydeth whatsoever may offend
him, and lastly does steadfastly hope, that it shall be partaker together with
Christ of everlasting life and heavenly glory. But the final cause of faith,
is, 1. Pet. 1.9.
the comprehending and conceyving of good things, to wit, life eternal and
blessed immortality. And if any shall here subtily object unto a man, and say,
that faith is always here lame and imperfect, and therefore cannot make a man
perfect and happy. For that which ought to save one, must be every way perfect
and absolute: we must answer him, that faith, as far forth, as it abides
in the heart of man, as in the subject thereof, is always imperfect here, and
scarce deserves the name of virtue: But as it beholds and apprehends
Christ, so it is effectual, and makes men, of the sons of perdition, the
children of God: then great power and saving actions are ascribed unto it by
the Scripture, as, that it justifies men, that it quikneth them, and saves
them. So that faith does not save and make happy any man, in regard of the
subject in which it remains; but it is said to save and justify a man in
regard of the object whither it tends, and which it apprehends. For Christ
being laid hold on by faith, saves a man, whether that faith be great or
small. And, that Christ being apprehended, with a little and slender faith,
does yet save and justify a man, the examples of the holy Scripture declare
manifestly enough. For that Ruler in John, although he were endued with a very
slender and weak faith in Christ, John 4.49.53.
yet for all that, Christ rejects him not, but justified and saved both him
and his son, with all his household. So likewise he in Mark, Mark 9.24.25.
although he was said to have a mean and a weak faith, yet Christ being laid
hold on by it, took pity upon him, and healed his son, that was possessed
of the devil. Here is notwithstanding diligently to be marked, that in these
manner of speeches, wherein in the virtue of saving is attributed unto faith;
the power and force of the efficient cause, is attributed unto the instrument,
by which it works and is effectual. So that when justification and salvation
is ascribed unto faith, as unto the cause, then the object of faith is
understood. For Christ cannot be apprehended, but by says only, as by the
instrument wherewith it is done.

Furthermore, here is carefully to be considered, that this saving Calling is
produced and wrought, more by the inward working of the spirit, then by the
outward preaching of the word. For, although God by his Ministers should speak
and call unto us a thousand times by the voice of his word in the Ministry,
yet, unless we be drawn inwardly by the spirit of God, we shall never come
unto him. Many and most wonderful examples of all ages, have sufficiently
declared this, and do yet at this day declare it. Whereby it may be gathered,
that this Calling is placed in the good will and hand of God only, far out
of our own reach. For he alone can illuminate us, and convert and change us
into new creatures. For in this calling, the whole man is repugnant unto God
that calls. John 6.44. Psalm. 51.12.
Therefore Christ in S. John uses this word (drawing;) and David uses this
word (creating) speaking of the conversion of man. Christ by the word (drawing)
shows, that this heavenly grace cannot be conceyved of the natural man, but
that there must be a new mind and a new understanding to conceive it. And David
by the word (creating) would teach us, that the renewing and amendment of man,
is so difficult and hard a work, that it can be wrought or brought to pass by
no creature. Bara.
This he shows by the Hebrew word (Bara) he created, which properly
signifies, he made a thing of nothing, which which was not before. Secondly,
it signifies, to bring to pass some singular and wonderful work, out of
some matter already created, which cannot possibly be imitated by any creature.
So that this regeneration of man, is a certain spiritual creation, by which
the regenerate are transported into a new life, and prepared for that heavenly
glory, which never shall have end.

Here is refuted the error of the Papists, concerning the strength that is in
man, and showed in what things an unregenerate man has free will, and in what
not, and how far free will stretches it self. And the gross ignorance or
manifest impiety of the Papists is disclosed.

CHAP. 25.
THe Papists in this doctrine of Vocation, do err most shamefully, which
think and write, that there is a certain natural faculty in man, by which
he may come of his own accord unto the embracing of the grace of God. For so
they do not only wickedly seduce and miserably deceyve men, but also do open
injury unto God. For they take so much from the justice and grace of God, as
they do give unto the natural faculty and power in man. For the grace of
God, and the power and faculty of man, are in this matter opposed as contrary
one unto an other, by which jointly together, Salvation cannot be wrought. For
one and the self matter and thing cannot by any means be brought to pass
and proceed from contrary causes. And in this matter, they do follow and
maintain the damnable opinion, and manifest dotage of the Pelagians. For they
did wickedly think, and teach as ill, that it was in the power and will of
man, to believe or not to believe. But the Scripture of God depriveth man of
all goodness, and that so, that it leaves him not so much as a good thought,
the least part of a good work. For the Apostle to the Corinthians does
expressly say, that we are not sufficient of our selves to think any thing
that is good. 2. Cor. 3.5.
So that this spiritual grace cannot be conceyved with our natural senses,
and natural reason cannot direct a man unto God.

This place ministers occasion, to speak some few things concerning free
will. But that they may the more rightly be understood, and the more familiarly
be conceaved, we must consider the two estates in man: The first in a good and
innocent nature, before the fall of man; the second in an evil and depraved
nature, after his fall. Man before his fall, was endued with most free power,
to will and do that which was good: for man was created wholly according to the
Image of God. Genesis 1.27.
Therefore all his actions, as well outward as inward, were agreeable to the
will of God. But by his fall, man lost not only himself, but also his
free will together with himself. So that look how great ability there was in
him before his fall, to please and serve God; so great desire of sinning is
there in him now, and wilfulness of rebellion against God. Again, as before
his fall, there was in him the habit of all goodness, and the absence of all
evil; so now there is in him the habit of all evil, and the absence of all
good: for there is no evil in man, but by the loss of the contrary good. Here
therefore we must know, that in outward and civil matters, a man has some
free will, as that he may be obedient and subject unto civil justice: so he
may obey his Parents, and reverence the Magistrates: so he may yield a certain
kind of duty unto his Masters and Instructers: so he may keep his hand from
theft and murder, so he may keep his tongue from slandering and reproching: So
in other outward actions and things, man has some freedom to will or not to
will, accordingly as reason shall persuade him, that the thing is to be chosen
or refused. And although that there be in man by nature, a desire of good and
profitable things, and a loathing and hatred of things evil and hurtful;
yet in all these, and in every of these, there is imperfection and error:
because he does not choose and do these natural and civil good things, so as
they ought to be chosen and done, nor avoid the contrary evilles, as he should
avoid them. So that the love and loathing, in choosing and avoiding of those
things which by nature are to be chosen and avoided, is common unto men with
bruit beasts: for they desire those things which are agreeable unto their
nature, and avoid and hate things contrary and hurtful. Notwithstanding, these
things which the unregenerate man wills, and does, in these outward things,
rather deserve the name of vice, then of true Virtue, because they are not
aimed unto that end, unto which they ought to be directed. For every thing
has his reward, and is to be esteemed by the end. The honor of God, and
Salvation of men should be preferred before private commodities. But a man that
is left unto himself, cannot think nor do any thing unto these ends:
therefore that which seems fair in the sight of men, and carries a great
show of virtue and godliness, is unclean and abominable in the sight of God.

But in inward and spiritual things, a man of himself has no free will and
liberty at all: but in man there is a mere bondage of sin, and a most
miserable slavery of Satan. Here man is so untoward and impotent, as that he
is not able to begin or perfect any good work; nay, he is not able in his
least thought to attain unto any thing that may be acceptable or well pleasing
unto God; 2. Cor. 3.5.
but with all the affection of his whole nature, he is obstinate and rebellious
against God: because that of himself he can do nothing but sin, and that
continually and of necessity; yea, beside all this, he is so corrupted and
blinded, that he can neither see nor acknowledge his sin, except God by his
law reveal it, and by his spirit declare it unto him. So that the misery of
man consists chiefly in these things. First, because he is so corrupted both
in body and in soul, and in all the parts of both, that he is more repugnant
and contrary unto God, then any one thing can be to another. Secondly, because
he neither knows this his corruption, neither will be brought to confess it,
without much indignation and murmuring. Thirdly, because he daily increases
this his corruption with many actual transgressions, and makes it always
worse and worse. Fourthly, because that by this access and increase of sins,
he provokes the judgment of God against himself, and day by day makes his
condemnation the more grievous. Fifthly, because that by his own strength of
nature he cannot amend his own corruption of nature, nor pacify the wrath of
God, nor overcome and escape death. Therefore, as man by his own voluntary
will depraved himself, and offended God; so by his own power he cannot amend
himself, nor reconcile himself unto God. So that man could proceed from the
habit of goodness unto the privation and loss thereof, but he cannot return
from the privation unto the habit. Therefore free will in man is so maimed,
that it is sound on no side. For God when he created man in the beginning, gave
him over unto his own will. But he by abusing his free will, lost both
himself and it, as Augustine says. And to conclude, In enchirid. cap. 130.
the Scripture does not only teach us, but even the experience of every one
does prove unto us, that all liberty to will that which is good, and all
power to do that which is right, is lost by sin.

But here the Papists do shamefully err and are grossly deceyved, in that
they measure the ability of man by the commandments of God. For when God
teaches that which is right, he does not regard what man can do of himself,
but he shows and commands man that which he is indebted and bound to do.
So that man is not loosed and freed from this obligation, because he is not
able to satisfy and pay it. Therefore when as he cannot perform that which
the law of God exacteth of him, he is convinced as guilty of his iniquity, that
he may be constrained to acknowledge his sin, lest he should lay the cause
of his condemnation upon some thing else. So that as often as the law of God
does will and command man this or that, it stands not to skan how far man's
power is able to stretch, but exacteth that simply of him, which by right it
may. And when man cannot perform it, he is fast in bonds on every side, so
that he can neither excuse his fault, nor lay it elsewhere. And so all
cavilling and complaining are at an end. And although man be not able to
perform those things that are prescribed and commanded by the law, yet
notwithstanding he cannot be excused or defended as guiltless; seeing this
infirmity and defect of strength came not nor proceeded from the Creation, but
from the fall and fault of our first Parents. Therefore from this our frailty
and weakness, there is no excusing of our self to be taken or pleaded, but
rather an accusation: For the law in the commandments, requires that which
was given us in our first creation. Therefore the Elect and godly do understand
by the commandment, that they are not able to do that which is prescribed in
the law, and therefore they fly unto the mercy of God, and help of the holy
spirit, and pray that just revenge be not inflicted upon them: but all excuse
and defense is cut off from the reprobate. Therefore that unsavory inference
and conclusion of the Papists ought to be hissed out, by which they conclude
thus: God has commanded it, therefore man may perform it: whenas God by that
means shows man his iniquity and frailty, that acknowledging it, he may fly
unto his grace; for it is he that works in man, both to will, and to do,
Phil. ^.13.
as Saint Paul teaches the Philippians. Let every man therefore sincerely and
from his heart acknowledge, that he is the servant of sin, that he may be
delivered and freed by the benefit of Christ: no other freedom may be found,
which mny prevayle with God. As often therefore, as we find the commandments
of God in the Scripture, which inioyne us that which we cannot do, so often
let us remember that notable saying of S. Augustine, Epistol. 24.
which says, Give me O Lord, that which thou command, and command what
thou will; otherwise, if thou enioynest us but the least thing, we shall not be
able to bear it.

Here the Papists discover their gross ignorance of the Scripture, because
they feign any concurring of freewill with grace, as if man in things
spiritual, pertaining unto Salvation, could of himself perform any things
by which doctrine they labor to prove, that man is not beholding to the grace
of God, for that good which he has, and is able to perform. But the true
Church of Christ does most rightly believe, and most soundly confess, that God
causes and works all that good in man, which he has and does perform. For
the Scripture does every where, and manifestly attribute that wholly unto God:
as when God says by the Prophet EZechiel; I will give unto you a new heart,
Chap. 36 26 and 11.19.
and will put my spirit in the midst of you, and will take away the stony
heart out of your bodies, and will give you an heart of flesh. Here God
ascribes regeneration unto himself, because he alone does mollify and
change an hardened and stubburne heart. Therefore this cannot be translated
unto the ability in man, but that something shall be detracted from the grace
of God. Therefore this ground and principle must firmly be holden, and kept;
that there can no good thing come into our minds, which proceeds not from
God. This whosoever does from his heart believe and freely confess, holds
the foundation of piety unshaken, Li. 1. ca. 20.
as Augustine says in his book of Free Will. Therefore this whole division,
which they make between the grace of God, and the ability of man, ought to
be rejected as wicked and blasphemous: for it has no proof out of the holy
Scriptures. Furthermore the Papists, whenas they prefer their own ability
before the grace of God, and make his promises of no effect by their precepts,
do indeed sufficiently declare, that they have more confidence in themselves,
then in God that promises. Out of doubt, being glutted with their own
righteousness, they do not hunger much after the righteousness of God. But
let the godly, which love the righteousness of God and their own Salvation,
know this; that all the power of free will, such as the Papists dream of, is a
vain fantasy of man's brain, and a feigned and cursed fable; which these idle
bellies have invented for filthy lucre sake, and do force it upon the ignorant
common people, and labor to persuade them thereof, under the show of
holiness. But the word of God expressly and manifestly teaches us, that the
will of man of his own power is not able to begin any inward obedience,
without the holy spirit, much less to perform it. For God is he alone which
works in man both to will and to do; Phil. 1.6. John. 15.5.
The holy spirit is the only teacher of all heavenly wisdom; and he is the
only author and finisher of all spiritual goodness and virtue; he only
works in us all the knowledge and worship of God; he works in us faith and
the fear of God; he sanctifies us and quickneth us; he comfort us and
saves us; to him only be praise and glory for ever. Certainly, the
wickedness and corruption of man's nature is horrible, in that it is so much
void and empty of all goodness, and so deprived and bereft of all power to
will well, or to do good, that not the least thought can proceed or be drawn
out of it, which may be acceptable and well pleasing unto God. So that man in
his own nature is wholly turned away from God, and from all goodness, and by
his own power is not able to change or subdue this his rebellion: whereby it
comes to pass, that he sins of necessity, and erreth continually, until
he be renewed and amended by spiritual power from above. From hence therefore
it may most truly be concluded, that the saving knowledge of God, and true
faith in Christ, is a far more high and heavenly wisdom, then the
understanding of man by his own ability can attain unto.

Moreover, this Vocation which we speak of, as it neither arises nor
depends of any natural causes; so also can it not be known by them.
Again, the knowledge thereof is not to be sought in the secret and hidden
foreknowledge of God; but to be found out by the latter, namely by the
effects and signs thereof. For there is nothing more preposterous, nothing
more dangerous, then omitting and neglecting the effects of Vocation, to seek
for the certaynety thereof in the counsel of God. And they which labor to do
this, enter into an endless Labyrinth; out of which the light of man's reason
can never rid or deliver them. Now the effects, whereby every man may know
his Calling, are sundry and manifest. First, whosoever are called effectually
unto Christ, John 8 47.
do desire earnestly to hear the word of God, and to profile truly in it.
Secondly, Gal. 4 6.
the holy Ghost does stir up in them a diligent worship of God, and does
kindle and inflame their hearts with the desire of thinking and doing good
works; Tit. 2.14.
and does beget in them a true hatred of evil, as to detest and avoid sin
with all their strength. They therefore which love God, are called of him: 1.
Cor. 8.3.
for no man can love him, except first he be called and taught of him. Thirdly,
God does beget in his children an hatred of this world, and a love of their
heavenly Country: which can be in none but in those that are called and
regenerate. So that faith, and the fruits of faith, are the true and
infallible effects and signs of a saving Calling: all which, as inseperable
companions, and undoubted witnesses do follow an effectual Calling: by which
is begotten in a man a lively and an effectual feeling of the favor of God.
Whereas otherwise, if a man were not called and regenerate, his whole mind and
will would be set upon evil things; he should feel no true taste of the grace
of God, and should be able to do no good thing before God, as furnished only
with humane strength. They therefore which do conceave in their mind any good
thing, and feel it in themselves; all that has his beginning from God that
calls them, which works in them every good thing that makes for the
Salvation of their souls, and justification before God. For he only enclineth
the wills and the hearts of men to think and do that which is good and just.
They therefore which have an hearty desire to do that which is good, howsoever
the worthiness of their work answer not their will, yet nevertheless they
may know, that they are called of God, and that they have the holy spirit
within them, which works effectually unto their Salvation. For where he
stirs up that spiritual contention, between virtue and vices, there does
an effectual calling manifest it self, and declares and shows the power
that it has: because that striving between the spirit and the flesh can be in
none, but in those that are called, and regenerate. For sin does wholly
possess the unregenerate men, but it does but only hinder the regenerate, and
set upon them with great and continual bickerings. They therefore which do
acknowledge and confess themselves to be imperfect, they may certaynely
resolve with themselves that they are called and renewed. For this is (as one
says) the perfection of Christians, to acknowledge their own imperfections.

But if men feel no such effects at all, or very small and slender effects,
yet from thence they ought to take no occasion to doubt of the mercy of God, or
of their calling. For God does not give all his gifts and benefits at the
first, and in one day, but enlarges and increases them by degrees, Romans 1.17.
and by little and little. Again, there are sundry and diverse times of
calling: Matthew. 20. verse. 1. and so forward.
For some he calls in their first age, some in their middle age, some in
their old age, and some for his great mercy sake he draws to himself in
their last gasp of life. So that they which as this day feel not the effects
of their Vocation, they may feel them to morrow, or the day after. But when
God deferreth faith and repentance even unto the last pang of death, then does
he witness his singular love and mercy toward miserable sinners. For by
such examples he comfort them, who have fallen into such or such sins, and
have remained in them as it were ensnared and lulled a sleep for a long time;
that they should not for those sins, though grown old by long continuance,
be cast down and despair of obtaining mercy: because that the
incomprehensible grace of God does remit all manner of sins unto those, which
are penitent from the bottom of their hearts: and because that the greatness
and power of grace is of far more force to save man, then the strength and
power of iniquity is to condemn him, as Barnard elsewhere speaks.

Lastly, we must think this, that true conversion unto God, and repentance, is
never too late. Whosoever therefore shall truly and heartily repent, even at
the panges and point of death, for him is the grace of God prepared, and he
may hope for certain Salvation. Again, true and lively experience teaches
us, by the examples of those whom God calls, even in the last gasp of life,
that Salvation and Life eternal is altogether free, and every way an
undeserved benefit. Therefore no man should despair of the great Grace of
God, but all should be in very good hope of it, as long as they live here in
this world. And these things be spoken of Vocation: Now it remains to
speak of Justification.

Here is entreated of free Justification, and showed how it may be known by
Vocation or Calling: also what it is for a man to be justified after the phrase
of the Gospel: and lastly, what are the special causes of Justification.

CHAP. 26.
Justification is the fourth lincke in Paul's Chain, and this is set under
Vocation or calling, in a most convenient and methodicall order. For after that
God has called a man unto himself, and has wrought faith in him by his
spirit, through the word, straight ways are showed by the Apostle those
benefits, which faith seeks in God, and receyveth of him. Faith therefore
that arises from an effectual calling, has respect unto Justification.
Moreover, faith does not by the proper merit and work thereof absolve and
justify any man; but it is said to justify a man, because it beholds and
apprehends the free mercy of God in his promises. So that true faith
embracing the promises of God, and applying them unto it self, is imputed by
God unto man for righteousness, or (that I may speak more properly) the
obedience of Christ his death is imputed to him for righteousness through
faith. For our righteousness before God consists in the forgiveness of our
sins, Romans 4.6.7.
as it appears by the words of Saint Paul unto the Romans. But the
remission of our sins could not be obtained for us, but by the obedience of
Christ his death. Therefore sin, which is set as a wall between God and us,
must first be taken away. For as long as sin remains and is imputed unto a
man, there is such and so great disagreement between God and man, as that he
shuts up from man all entrance unto his grace. So that the forgiveness of
sins, without which nothing can fall out happily for any mortal man, as it
is always the first and greatest benefit of God toward us, as concerning
Salvation; so always by right it takes and challenges unto it self the
first place: for of it, all other the gifts of God do depend. For God does not
lively and savingly do good and show favor unto any, but to those, whose
sins he has first pardoned and forgiven. So that when they by the Fatherly
compassion of God, are taken away and wiped out, then the spirit of
sanctification comes in place, by the virtue and operation whereof miserable
sinners are renewed unto the pattern and study of godliness. Therefore God
does first reconcile men unto himself by the free remission of their sins.
Then does he regenerate them by his spirit into righteousness and newness of
life, and calls them to himself, and draws them to Christ. Saint Augustine
having respect unto this, said rightly, Regeneration begins from the
remission of all our sins; with which saying that holy man would teach us,
that God then works by his grace in man unto righteousness and eternal
life, and is then truly and lively perceyved, when a man's sins are pardoned.
By this it clearly appears that free remission of sins is the first
benefit that comes unto man in this world, tending unto eternal life. They
therefore which begin from any other benefit of God which concerns
Salvation, are like unto foolish Physicians, which are careful only to
curesome grief, and little or nothing desirous at all to know and take away
the cause of the disease. For that is the sound curing of any disease, which
begins at the cause and takes that away. So likewise that is a true
deliverance indeed, whenas God by the free remission of sins, shows him
self a good and merciful father. Therefore this remission of sins, in
respect of God, goes before our Calling; for God does not reconcile man unto
himself, nor take him unto mercy, by any other means, but by the free
remission of sins. But in respect of us, our Calling goes before it: for, by
it we begin to know and understand that we are justified. For when we are
called, then is the gate unto righteousness opened unto us, then is declared
what is given unto us, and what we are to look for: then also do we behold
the mild and merciful countenance of God, as in a clear and crystal
glass. But that Justification may the more plainly be understood, and the
more familiarly conceyved, these five things ought to be marked and
considered. First, what that word to Justify, does signify, and whence it is
taken. Secondly, what true Justification is, and what is the cause thereof.
Thirdly, what manner of thing Justification is, and what proprieties it has.
Fourthly, what good comes unto us by it, and how it may be known. Fifthly,
who are they that are justified, and do obtain free remission of their sins.

To Justify, in the Hebrew phrase, is to acquit one, and to pronounce him
just. This is a political word, and a term of law, which is very often and
much used in civil government. As if an innocent man should be accused of
others as guilty, and should stand before the judgment seat of a just Judge;
there, when judgment shall be given and sentence pronounced, according to his
innocence, then is that man said to be justified before that Judge. Then this
word of Justifying is translated from a politic and civil order, unto
spiritual matters: and so in the usual manner of the Scripture, to Justify,
is to forgive and pardon a man his sin. But before this be more largely
unfolded, two phrases or fourmes of speech in Divinity are to be explaned for
the understanding sake of the more simple sort, namely, what it is to be
justified by works, and what it is to be justified by faith. He is said to be
justified by works, in whose life and manners there is thought to be so great
integrity and holiness, as that it may deserve the praise and testimony of
righteousness before God. So in this our time, there is found that wicked sect
of the Papists, which attributes so great integrity unto it self, as that in
the perfection thereof it may fully answer and satisfy the just judgment of
God. How true this is, Romans 10.
the day of the last and great judgment of Christ shall declare. But they
which so establish their own righteousenes, do fall from the truth of the
Gospel, and lose the mercy of God. But he is said to be justified by faith,
which lays aside all thought of his own merits, and does apprehend and apply
unto himself the righteousenes of Christ purchased by his death, with which
being invested and clothed, he appears in the sight of God not as a sinner,
but as just. Therefore in this article of justification we must pray for true
faith and hope from God, that we may be able to renounce our own merits and
worthiness, and rest our selves upon the mercy of God only, otherwise we shall
never have entrance unto true righteousenes, which is of worth before God: for
the grace of God only is abundantly sufficient unto righteousenes, as Saint
Barnard elsewhere speaks most wisely and godly, when as he says, It is
sufficient for me unto all righteousenes, to have him merciful unto me,
against whom only I have offended.

Therefore he is said to be justified before God in the phrase of the Gospel,
which in his judgment is thought righteous, and is accepted and approved of
him for his righteousenes, and is no more accounted of him as a sinner, but as
a righteous man, and by that name stands before his judgment seat with an
undaunted conscience, and joyful countenance. For a miserable sinner being
excluded from his own righteousness, does by faith apprehend the righteousness
of Christ, (that is to say righteousness purchased by his death) whilst that he
applies the obedience of his death unto himself, with which being clothed as
with his own obedience, he appears now in the sight of God, not as a sinner,
but as a righteous man, and being endued with the obedience of Christ his
death, he is much more gracious in the sight of God then if he had never
sinned, and had righteousness of his own, gotten by the just and perfect works
of the law. Here therefore to justify is not of unrighteous to make a man
righteous, which can be righteous indeed, and have no sin in him: but it is
to account and repute him for a righteous man which wants righteousness in
himself, to acquit him from all sin and guiltines, not to punish him for
his sins, but to love him as dearly as if he had never offended, and that
for the death of Christ imputed and bestowed upon him; and whom God justifies,
he makes equal to him which is just and has not sinned. Therefore no man is
justified by any other means then by believing, by apprehending the mercy of
salvation by says, and by applying it unto himself. But they which desire to
be justified by works, shall never come unto righteousness, for it is a thing
by all means impossible for any man to merit eternal life as a reward. So
that man is then said to be justified by faith before God, when he has
obtained remission of his sin, not for any worthiness of his own, or for his
own merits, but for Christ his sake his only mediator, such a one is wiped
out of the number of sinners, and is esteemed as righteous before God.
Therefore whomsoever God receives into favor for the merit of Christ, him
does he account for a righteous man, and pronounces as righteous, his sin
and guiltiness being taken away. By this justification the godly do attain
three great commodities and benefits. First, that Christ has taken away the
severe strictnes of the exact perfourmance of the law, in the attayning of
righteousness. Secondly, because he has taken away the curse due for the breach
of the law. Thirdly, in that he has brought unto them a great and an
everlasting freedom, so that they neither can nor ought to be condemned,
though they have not perfectly nor absolutely fulfilled the law. By these
things here spoken it is easy to be gathered, that justification is no other
thing but the free remission of sins for Christ his sake: by this remission
of sins we are cleansed from all our sins: for this is our purity, that our
sins be not laid to our charge, but pardoned freely. The Scripture uses this
word clensing in this matter. For John says plainly, 1. John. 1.7.
that the blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin. And again in the
same place a little after he says, that Christ is faithful and just to
forgive us our sins, 1. John. 1.9.
and cleanse us from all iniquity. But lest the doubtfulnes of the word might
deceive any man, we must declare the significations thereof. First therefore
and properly it appertains unto things outward and unclean, which are said
to be cleansed, when the spots and staynes are washed out and taken away.
Then by a most fit resemblance this very same word is translated to inward
and spiritual things: and so sins and wicked actions are most aptly compared
or resembled unto spots and stains, with which whosoever are defiled and
polluted, are filthy and nasty in the sight of God, and also odious and
abominable, as long as their sins are not forgiven them. But they are then
said to be cleansed, when they are forgiven and pardoned, for then are they
taken away, and remain nor appear no more. So that they are purged and
cleansed from their sins, Psalm. 32.1. Romans 4.7.8. 2. Cor. 5.19.
or said to be cleansed from them, whose sins are forgiven and covered, and
not imputed unto them. They therefore which believe in Christ, are righteous
before God, not because they are without sin, but because their sins are
forgiven them, and not laid unto their charge. This therefore is the only and
chief felicity of man, that his sins are freely and mercifully forgiven him,
so that God allows and accepts them for righteous, to whom he imputes
righteousenes, pardoning their sins; so on the contrary they are guilty, and
shall be condemned before God, whose sin and iniquity is not pardoned, but
imputed unto them: and to whomsoever he imputes righteousenes, their sins
being rased out, they rejoice, not with fading joy, but are in full possession
of the sound joy of everlasting life, and rejoice as if they were carried into
heaven already.

Now the cause of this justification is the incredible mercy of God, and the
merit of Christ. Christ joins them both together in S. John, John. 3.16.
saying, God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes in him should not perish but have everlasting life.
Therefore God of his infinite love toward us gave us his Son, and the Son,
of his unspeakable goodness toward us, set forth his own body for the price
of our redemption, and by his precious blood satisfied for our sins, and by
satisfying pacified the wrath of God toward the elect, and reconciled the
elect unto God. Here the word (satisfying) taken according to divinity, is
added by a similitude for the better light and understandings sake. And the
similitude is taken from creditors, to whom debtors make no satisfaction but
with ready money. Now our sins whatsoever they are, in the phrase of the
Siriack tongue are called our debts, because they make us debtors unto God: for
they which sin, owe a punishment unto God. But we as long as we sin, do not
pay that which we owe unto God, but do much rather increase our debt, and are
more and more firmly bound unto God as unto our creditor. And he that shall
take our debts upon himself, and shall free us from the bonds of sin, he is
worthily said to have satisfied for our sins. But Christ has taken from us
the curse of the law, sustained and pacified the wrath of God. Here has he
overcome sin, death, and the devil together with his Angels, who had us in
their power, and were most cruel adversaryes of our salvation: he overcame
them I say, and that by his death, contrary unto the custom of all other
conquerours, which are wont being alive and armed to assail their adversaryes,
and to subdue and overcome them by fighting manfully, Hebr. 2.14.
but he overcame and subdued his enemies by death, and when as he seemed to be
overcome and slain of them, then did he conquer them and obtain the victory.
He paid our debts for us which we were not able to pay: he took away the
handwriting which was against us, and accused us of the debt, Col. 2.14.
and urged us to the payment thereof, and he cancelled it being fastened unto his
cross. Christ therefore overcame all the enemies of our salvation, and led
them captive as a conqueror to disgrace them. This victory of Christ is a
monument of an everlasting satisfaction for us, and is as a pillar set up in
token of victory. Therefore the cross of Christ is as a triumphant chariot, in
which he does openly declare himself to have subdued and overthrown all our
enemies. Seeing therefore that Christ alone dyed for our sins, seeing that he
alone has redeemed us with his blood, and has made most full satisfaction for
us, he is the only meritorious cause of our salvation. For the death of Christ
by which he has satisfied for us, is so farreforth the only meritorious cause
of our justification and salvation, that without it God will not be merciful
and favorable, no not to any one. They therefore which do behold this victory
of Christ with a true faith, have wherewith they may fortify themselves
against the assaults of Satan, they have whereby they may set light by his
sleights and subtilties, they have wherein they may place their faith and hope
in Christ alone, and in his merit only.

In this justification, howbeit we are justified and acquitted of our sins by
the only merit of Christ, yet there is no let, but that the three holy and
inseparable persons of the Trinity, may have and execute their several actions
in it. For the Father is therefore said to justify us, because that of his
own mere grace and free love, 1. Pet. 1.20 Gal. 4.4.
he has from everlasting fore-appoynted his only begotten Son to redeem
us, and sent him at the time appointed. The Son is therefore said to justify
us, because that for his incomprehensible and unspeakable goodness sake toward
us, vouchsafing by the power of the holy ghost to take man's nature upon him, he
was obedient unto his Father even unto the death of the cross, Phil. 2.
and so satisfied the justice of God for us, and delivered us from all the
power of the Devil, by making amends for our sins. The Holy Ghost also is
said to justify us, as far forth as he does beget in us true and steadfast
faith, by which we may apprehend and apply unto our selves the righteousenes
that is purchased by the obedience of the death of Christ. Therefore this free
remission of sins is the only very form of justification, by which
justification is that which it is, and is distinguished from all other false
and fained satisfactions and sacrifices, of which sort the Papists do invent
many, and offer them unto God. And the final cause of justification is the
praise and glory of Gods goodness, and the everlasting happiness, and excellent
blessed estate of those which are thus justified. Now there was nothing else
which moved God to justify us, but his own love toward us, and the obedience
of Christ, and our misery. But the isntrumental cause is a true and a lively
faith, laying hold on, and applying to it self the obedience of Christ, and
righteousness purchased thereby, and relying with a good conscience upon the
sole mercy of God, and the only merit of Christ.

This justification is then avayleable and acceptable unto us, whenas every of
us does stand as guilty before the heavenly judge, and being careful of his
acquitall, does of his own accord humble and prostrate himself as unworthy.
And this is profitably done, when a man does seriously weigh and consider with
himself the perfection and severity of Gods justice on the one side, and the
multitude and greatness of his sins on the other side. For by such a
consideration he is seriously humbled with the feeling of his misery, and
rightly prepared to desire and embrace the mercy of Christ. So that by how much
the more every of us shall be severe in condemning himself, by so much shall
we find God more merciful, and more easy to be entreated; for then will a man
be capable of the grace of God, and benefit of Christ, when he shall know
himself and his whole nature to be full of uncleanness and filthiness, and
shall condemn it. For he which judges himself unworthy of the grace of God,
as one says, him does God receyve into favor, and makes him worthy through
Christ. But they which swell and are filled with the opinion of their own
righteousness, and hunger not after the righteousness of God, they perish in
their miseries, and never come unto true righteousenes. Again, they which
being hardened with the custom of sinning, and drunken with the delight of
their vices, do extenuate their faults, and securely despise the judgment of
God, they shut up from themselves the gate of mercy.

What manner of thing Justification is, where are set forth the three
proprieties thereof, namely, that it is free, perfect, and everlasting; and
withal there is refuted the opinion of the Papists concerning the merit of
works, being contrary to the first propriety.

CHAP. 27.
NOw we must lay open what manner of thing justification is, and the quality
thereof consists especially in three things; first, that it is free, for the
remission of sins is not for any merits of man, but it is a mere grace, and
an undeserved mercy promised for Christ his sake alone. For God finds nothing
in a man whom he justifies, but an horrible sink of sin, and extreme
misery. The scripture every where affirms, that Christ only is the author of
all grace, and the whole hope of our salvation consists in the blood of
Christ alone. Without the merit of Christ there can be no justification, for he
alone has deserved righteousenes for us, and having deserved it, he gives and
imputes it unto us. They therefore which desire to be righteous without the
merit of Christ, are altogether without God, and profane. And they which
dream that they are justified, partly by grace, and partly by merit, are
Pelagians, or Papists, the followers of their heresy, but they which believe
that they are justified by the only merit of Christ, are true Christians.
These by believing and receiving the righteousness of Christ purchased by his
death, as the righteousness of an other, are justified indeed, but they which
by their works and merits do affect their own righteousness, shall never
attain unto it. The Papists therefore have forged a certain kind of merit,
which is weak of it self, but when it is dipped in the blood of Christ, it is
effectual and forcible; and so they say, that a man is partly justified by
grace, and partly by works. But this cannot be, because that grace and merit
are two manifest contraryes, from which one and the self same thing cannot be
brought forth. For this is the nature and rule of contraryes, that from
contrary causes contrary effects proceed likewise. Moreover, we are all
debtors, for we are obliged and bound unto God, so that he may justly
challenge as his due whatsoever good thing can proceed or be performed of us.
Now that which may be demanded of us as duty, that can not merit: But Christ
says, that what good thing soever we do, or can do, Luke 17.10.
all that, how much soever it be, is our duty, wherefore there is no merit at
all.

Again, the cause of justification, to wit, eternal election in Christ is
free, therefore likewise justification it self must needs be free; for there
cannot be more in the effect, then there is in the cause thereof. Therefore the
Papists, whilst that they dream of any merit in us, they do commit a manifest
fallacy, from that which is no cause as if it were a cause, for they remove the
merit of Christ which is the perfect and true cause of justification, and set
in the room thereof the merit of man, a false and feigned cause thereof. And
although the scripture do oftentimes promise a reward unto the works of the
godly, yet from thence can be gathered no merit, wherein God as a debtor should
be bound unto us, because that reward depends upon the mere mercy of God,
and not upon any worthiness of the works. Therefore the Papists, whilst that in
this question they do join the reward and merit in a mutual relation, are
very much deceived. Certainly such are despised and rejected of God, which
shall put the least part of their confidence in their own works. This does
the Son of God lively express and teach us in the example of the Pharisy.
Luke 18.11.


Moreover the Papists get nothing in this, when as they bring forth the
examples of the Saints, how that they oftentimes did freely rehearse and plead
their integrity and innocence before God: this they do not to this end and
purpose, as if they would declare themselves to be free, and exempt from all
imperfection, and stayne of sin; nor as if they hoped that they could stand
in the sight of God being endued with their own power, but they do it to a far
other end, namely to show that they have a good and lawful cause against their
adversaryes, of whom they are unjustly hurt and oppressed. So that the holy men
do not compare their own integrity by the s^uare and rule of Gods justice, but
they oppose it against the violent injury of their enemies, and do call God as
a just judge, and the only witness of the truth between themselves and their
enemies. Therefore by that comparison made with their enemies, by whom they are
unjustly oppressed, they show forth their own righteousness and singlenes of
heart, that by that reason they might the more easily persuade God to help
them. This therefore is the reason why the holy me^ do labor so earnestly in
pleading the cause of their own righteousness, so that in those speeches of
their own cause the question is not concerning their whole life, and
continual perfection and innocence thereof, but only the goodness of the cause
is laid open and declared against the injury of the wicked. Again, although
the Saints sometimes lay open their good works, 2. King. 20.4. Psa. 18.21.
that they have walked before God with an upright heart, and have not departed
from his commandments; yet notwithstanding they do not produce those works
as meritorious, but only bring them in as signs and fruits of their calling,
that they might comfort themselves concerning their free adoption, and so do
not extol and praise their own merits, but the gifts and benefits of God, and
do testify, that they do rely with a quiet conscience upon the only favor of
God, and obedience of Christ. Also sometimes when the Scripture speaks of the
integrity of the Saints, it distinguishes them from hipocrites, to whom it is
sufficient to have an outward show of godliness. So this integrity is not every
way the perfection of the whole life, but it is taken for the singlenes of
heart, which is contrary to dissimulation.

Also, the Papists by their interpretation do corrupt all those places of
Scripture which promise a reward unto good works, and wrest them into an other
sense, and so do fall into a fallacy of the ambiguity of a word. And further,
because they ascribe that unto the merits of man, which is due alone unto the
grace of God, and to the only merit of Christ, they mingle contrary causes
together, and out of them do frame and forge I know not what. But to enforce
some merit from a free reward, they do not only make a foolish and rash
consequence, but also do deny God to be the only fountain of all goodness, and
do conclude, that there is some good thing in wretched sinners which are wholly
corrupted.

Furthermore, that which they babble of inherent righteousness, is altogether
vain and foolish, for the free forgivenes of sins, and the imputation of
Christ his merit does quite overthrow as well this inherent righteousness, as
that righteousness of works, for these are two contraryes which can never stand
together, nor be attributed unto one and the selfsame thing, but one of them
always confounds and drives away the other. Surely such fictions of the
Devil and vain men, are altogether to be rejected and condemned, which pull
in pieces the whole doctrine of the free remission of sins. For they which
go about to establish and set up their own righteousness, do not submit
themselves unto the righteousness of God, Romans 10.3.
they do not only deceive, and as much as in them lies condemn themselves
and others, but also they arrogate the honor of God unto themselves, or at the
leastwise much weaken it, for as soon as they set up their own righteousness,
they throw down the righteousness of God; for this is the only beginning to
obtain the righ^nes of God, that men should altogether renou^^^ their own
righteousness, and to confess and ackn^^^^dge themselves to be void of all
righteousness. For as long as a man thinks that he has the least good thing
of his own, he is unfit to receive the righteousness of God, which he gives
and imputes freely, for God receives into favor, and saves none but
sinners, such as are void of all righteousness.

Hence is it that the Prophets and Apostles do set the only grace of God, and
sole merit of the Messiah, Dan. 9. 1. Tim. 1.15
as contrary unto all the merits of man, and all outward causes which profane
and wicked men in their inconstancy and rash attempts do invent; for by this
means they teach us, that there is no other way for men to become righteous
and enter into heaven, but the only and mere goodness of God, and the merit of
Christ alone. Again they teach us, that all and singular the endeavors and
merits of man, by which men go about to deserve the grace of God, are nothing
else but manifest illusions and sleights of the Devil, by which ignorant men
are made strangers from God, and thrown headlong into the deep pit of
condemnation. Therefore this free justification ought always to be remembered
and thought of, for Satan labors and watches for nothing more, then that
he might quite put out, or at the least darken this free justification of
faith. This he has gone about in all ages, and obtained in many places. But
let this suffice to be spoken of the first quality of justification.

Secondly, this justification is by all means perfect, and most absolute, for
God does not pardon one or two sins only, but he forgiveth all and every
sin. Neither does he only forgive sins that are already committed and past,
but he does remit the daily falls of his children, if they repent. This the
scripture teaches us in many places, and diligently urges. John says
plainly, 1. John. 1.7.
that the blood of Christ cleanses us from all sin. S. Paul to the
Colossians says expressly, Cap. 2.13.
that God pardons all our trespasses. I have put away, says God by Isayas,
all thy sins as a cloud, and thine iniquities as a mist. Isay. 44.22.
Again, in the same Prophet he speaks thus, I am he which puts away thine
iniquities, Isay. 43.25.
and that for mine own sake, and will remember thy sins no more. So also
David teaches us, Psalm. 103.12.
that God removes our sins as far from us, as the East is from the West.
So also Michah teaches us, Michah. 7.19.
that God will cast all our sins into the bottom of the sea, and blot them
quite out. Likewise S. John in the Revelation affirms, Revel. 1.5.
that Christ has loved us, and washed us from our sins in his blood. The
same Isayas likewise affirms, Isay. 1.18.
saying, though your sins were as Crimsin, they shall be made white as snow,
though they were red as Scarlet, they shall be as wool. So the holy Prophets
and Apostles speak all as with one mouth, and constantly affirm, that not
some of our sins only are forgiven us of God, but that all our sins are
pardoned unto us, how great and fearful, how many and sundry soever they be.
But God does not only wipe out those sins that are committed and past, but
does also pardon the daily slips of the penitent. This let no man storm at, as
a paradox unheard of. For if God would punish the daily falls of his children,
and take vengeance on them for their sins that are to come, and yet pardon
those that are past, what would it profit I pray you? So that the great and
incredible goodness and mercy of God does extend and stretch it self as well to
the pardoning of sins that are to come, as to the remitting of those that are
past, otherwise the mercy of forgivenes of sins should be but half a mercy
only, and not perfect and absolute.

None of us ought to take unto himself liberty to sin, from this fatherly
compassion of God, for this were to make a mock of God, and to tread his grace
under foot, and to show that a man is a stranger from God, and from his
spirit. For the least sin cannot be committed of any man without manifest
contempt of God. But it should rather be an encouragement and provocation unto
us to the more earnest study of godlynes, for by how much the greater benefits
God has bestowed upon us, by so much the greater obedience are we bound to
yield him, which we cannot perform, without a studious care to avoid evil,
and to do good. They therefore which sin rashly and securely, do indeed
show that they are profane, and have nothing to do with God. Jude. 4.
This the scripture delivers plainly saying, that they are appointed of old
unto condemnation, which from the grace of God take to themselves liberty to
sin securely, and let loose the reins to their own lusts, and obey them;
for they which so abuse the grace of God, and his lenity in pardoning, unto
wantonness, do not only abrogate the kingdom of Christ, and deny that there is
a God, but also do show that they are wholly given over unto Satan as his very
bondslaves. But the godly, which do fear and obey God as their father and
Lord, though there were no hell nor punishment to be feared, yet they would
utterly abhor to sin and displease God. Wherefore that infinite goodness of
God in forgiving sin, should be unto no man an enticement to sin, but a
teacher unto every one, to live holy and without blame. For, he which lives
wickedly, loses the price of his redemption, and belongs not unto Christ as
long as he sins securely, and defiles and poluteth himself with
abomination. But they which earnestly labor to order and frame themselves
according to the rule of Gods law, they do indeed and lively declare that they
have the holy spirit, and belong unto Christ.

Moreover it ought to move nor trouble no man, because that some of the
promises of the forgivenes of sins before rehearsed, are spoken without any
general note, and seem to be as it were particular. So that we must know,
that notwithstanding they are indeed universal and general, for indefinite
propositions are equal unto general propositions. This the multitude of them
does argue and show. Or if a particular word, or a word that signifies but one
thing be set down, John. 1.29.
as, The Son of God takes away the sin of the world, then the general
word is signified, which contains under it all and every particular kind. And
he that takes away the general thing, it must needs be that he must take away
also all and every particular kind thereof. For sin, that is here put in the
singular number, although it be referred by some unto the common vice and
corruption of nature, and that not amiss, yet nothing hinders but that it may
be taken figuratively for every iniquity: Synecdoche.
as if the Evangelist should have said, whatsoever corruption or unrighteousness
is amongst men, by which God may be offended, or alienated from me^, all that
is taken away, and satisfied for everlastingly, by the only sacrifice of Christ
made once for all. This benefit of Christ ought to be enlarged and applied, as
well unto all actual sins, as unto the original sin and corruption of
nature, that all occasion of cavilling should be shut up from the Papists,
which in their Synagogues do babble and blatter that Christ has satisfied only
for original sins, and not for actual, for which they impudently say, that
we ought to make satisfaction. So that sin in the singular number with the
Evangelist, is as an il-favoured head, under which many unseemly members are
couched; and it is as an unclean fountain, out of which many unclean channels
do spring and flow; and as an evil and corrupt tree, out of which much evil
and corrupt fruit do bud and grow, all which, and every of which the Lamb of
God has taken away with his precious blood.

In this free forgiveness of sins, the most excellent glory of the Mercy of
God shines brightly, and triumphs infinitely over the rest of the works of
God. Therefore the Prophet says in express words, Psalm. 145.9
God is loving unto every one, but his mercy is above all his works. For the
Hebrew word which the Prophet uses in the place rehearsed, signifies an
inward Mercy, such as remains in the very bowels: which the Scripture is wont
to use, when there is any speech of the Free-mercy of God, and the receyving of
a wretched sinner unto grace. Therefore the Prophet does prefer the infinite
mercy of God, far before all temporal benefits, as if he should have said,
The goodness of God is great, in that he mercifully vpholdeth this world, in
that he favorably provideth for all creatures, and maintayneth and keeps
them in their estate: but that goodness of God, by which he plucketh
miserable man out of everlasting death, and redeemeth, and saves him in
Christ, is by infinite degrees greater and more excellent. This Mercy of God is
the only refuge for miserable sinners, a most sure Sanctuary from all danger,
and a most welcome refreshing. The whole Scripture teaches us, and daily
experience prooveth it true, that God is easiie to be entreated, and merciful
unto none, but unto such only, which reverently and humbly fly unto his Mercy
with an unfeigned confession of their sins, and bewayling of their
guiltiness. Whosoever therefore seek for acquitall from sin without the
grace of God and merit of Christ, do set light by the mercy of God, and the
blood of Christ, and shall never attain to the remission of their sins. For
no pleading of a man's own worthiness, has any place before Gods heavenly
judgment seat, Luke 18.14
but an humble deploring of sin is there accepted. They therefore which
desire to be justified and to be acquitted both from the punishment and from
the offense, must altogether withdraw themselves from the righteousness of
works, and betake themselves wholly unto the Mercy of God only: for he alone
can put away sin, and wipe out the guiltiness thereof. For whomsoever the
goodness of God and merit of Christ has not delivered from sin, let him
see and try what it is that can set him free from the law and the penalty
thereof.

From this it may be concluded for a most certain and an approoved thing, that
wretched men can no other ways be freed from their sins, but by the Mercy of
God only. This therefore is the first and chiefest prop and foundation of our
faith and Salvation; that we are accepted of God: not that we deserve this by
our own worthiness; but that our sins are forgiven us, by the Mercy of God,
and not laid to our charge. So that God does justify his children, by
forgiving them their sins, and imputing the obedience of Christ his life unto
them for righteousness. Now, no man ought to marvel that we are just before
God, not by our own inherent righteousness; but by that, which being in
Christ, is imputed unto us through faith. Certaynely in our selves we are
unrighteous, and cannot by any power of our own attain unto righteousness
before God. But Christ satisfying for our sins by his death, brought to
pass, that this satisfaction should be imparted unto us, and that we in
respect of this should be accounted just before God. For even as he made our
sins his, so also on the other side, he makes his righteousness our
righteousness, In Psalm. 22.
as Saint Augustine says. As therefore Christ in our sins was guilty, so
likewise we in his righteousness (purchased by him in his death) are reputed
and become righteous. This the Apostle plainly testifies, when he says, 1.
Cor. 1.30.
that Christ is made unto us of God, righteousness. By which words he
signifies, that Christ was appointed of God, for us, a Priest and a Sacrifice,
to wit, that by offering up himself, he might purge our sins, and obtain
remission of sins for us, in which our righteousness consists before God:
and also that this obedience, which he yielded unto his Father, by tasting of
death for us, should be imputed unto us for righteousness. And although this
obedience of Christ his death is properly that thing which is imputed unto us
of God for righteousness, as which God esteems as if it had been done by
us, and that we our selves had satisfied his just judgment: yet we must
know, that the obedience of the life of Christ, which he yielded unto the Law
by living holily, and that holiness of the nature of Christ, by which he was
holy from his Conception, are not by this altogether excluded from the matter
of Justification.

For that holiness of Christ, both of his nature and life, was necessary for
this purpose, that the Sacrifice of Christ might be imputed and imparted unto
us for righteousness.

For Christ could not have satisfied for our sins by his Sacrifice, and so
have obtained remission of them for us, if he had not been an holy Priest, and
also offered up an holy Sacrifice.

Hence is it that Saint Paul unto the Hebrews says, Hebr. 7.26, 27.
Such an high Priest became us, which is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate
from sinners, and made higher then the heavens: which needed not daily, as
those high Priests, (namely the Leviticall) to offer up sacrifice, first for
his own sins, and then for the peoples: for that did he once when he
offered up himself.

Behold a most clear and evident testimony of the holiness of our Priest:
Of the holiness of our Sacrifice, 1. Pet. 1 18 19.
Saint Peter speaks, when he says, that we were not redeemed with gold nor
silver, but with the precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb undefiled and
without spot. By these words Saint Peter signifies, that those lambs which
were killed in the old Testament, and did resemble Christ, as types and
figures, ought therefore to be without blemish, that by this the innocence and
holiness of Christ our Sacrifice, should be shadowed forth unto us. For
Christ as John Baptist says, is that Lamb of God, that is, that Sacrifice
ordained of God, to take away the sin of the world. By these things it may
now be understood, how, and how far forth the holiness both of the life and
nature of Christ appertains unto this matter of Justification: namely, how
far forth it was necessary to this purpose, that Christ by his holy
Sacrifice, or obedience of his death might deserve remission of sins for us,
in which remission of sins consists our righteousness before God, as we
may understand by the words of Paul to the Romans. Romans 5.19.
And hence also may this be gathered, whenas Paul to the Romans says, that by
the obedience of one, to wit Christ, we are made righteous; that he meaned it
of the obedience of his death, which Christ yielded to his Father, by tasting
of death for us. For we are reconciled unto God by the death of Christ, Romans 5
9, 10
and justified by his blood, as the same Apostle says in the same Chapter.

Furthermore, this Justification is not only free and perfect, but also
everlasting, in as much as sin ought not to be imputed unto them that are
justified, any more for ever. For whom God has once receyved into favor,
having blotted out their sins and offenses, those does he still preserve in
his favor as righteous, so that they can fall from grace and perish by no
manner of sins, (they being and remaining pardoned in them.) For God will
never remember those sins, to which the regenerate are as yet subject. This
the Scripture expresses, and diligently affirms in many places. For God by
Isaias says, I will remember thine iniquities no more. Isay. 43.12.
Again, he says by Jeremy: Ierem. 31.34.
I will be merciful unto their iniquities, and remember their sins and
transgressions no more. These and such like places of Scripture, promise the
grace of God and forgiveness of sins, Hebr. 8.12.
not for a day or two only, but affirm that it shall always be of force,
and continue while life lasts, so that the forgiveness of sins is daily
and continual, all our life long. For a full and sufficient satisfaction has
been made for them, by Christ, once for all. For with one offering, Hebr. 10.14
as the Apostle says, he consecrated for ever them which are sanctified.
Therefore seeing that Christ by his own blood, has entered into the Holy
place, and has obtained everlasting Redemption for us, and that our sins are
taken away in his blood: God cannot by right remember them any more. For God is
so just, as that he will not have payment and satisfaction made for one thing
twice. But he is so well pleased with the satisfaction of Christ, that he
requires no other satisfaction. Isay. 53.7.
For the Lord has laid upon him the iniquity of us all, and Christ himself
has taken upon him all the sincke of our iniquities, that he might redeem and
free us from eternal destruction. This is our only hope and comfort, that
Christ has so once for all taken away all the sins of the world, that not the
least sign of them remains. For this cause the Evangelist calls Christ,
The Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world. Surely, Christ has
so satisfied for our sins by his death, that not one of them remains, for
which satisfaction is not made fully and sufficiently. So that by the benefit
of Christ we are redeemed and justified, Romans 5.1.
and through him we have peace toward God.

This satisfaction of Christ, whosoever does with a true and steadfast faith
apprehend and apply unto himself, has wherein he may rejoice and be glad in
himself, and that much more then he is wont to rejoice, which has run so
far into other men's debt, that he has nothing to pay: who, when he shall
hear that an other has paid it in his name, and has fully discharged the
whole debt, rejoices heartily, and is more glad in his mind, then if he in his
own person had discharged the debt. So also our conscience, when it hears
that Christ has satisfied for all our sins, both great and small, so that
God will never call them to his remembrance, does much rejoice; and conceaveth
true peace within it self, and relyeth most peaceably upon that satisfaction
of Christ, and favor of God recovered again, and is exceeding glad in it
self, that it has and shall have everlasting reconciliation and peace with
God. By this we may plainly see, how necessary the grace of God is to the
remission of our sins. Let every man therefore diligently weigh his own
misery: for except a man do well consider this, he can never understand how
much the remedy thereof is to be desired. Let every man therefore truly
acknowledge, that he is every way past recovery in himself, that so he may be
justified by God only, and transported by Christ from destruction to
Salvation. And let no man repose himself, or put any trust in his own
wisdom, in this Article of Justification. For by how much the more a man
leans upon his own wisdom and opinion, by so much the more swift and
grievous judgment does he pluck upon his head. Furthermore, let every man
think, that amongst all there is not one, which stands not in need of this
inestimable benefit of God. Psalm. 14 3. Romans 3.23.
All are gone out of the way, and corrupted. For the Prophets and Apostles,
whenas they thus speak, do universally accuse all of iniquity, and do make
every one guilty of just condemnation; and so do frame their order of teaching
from the general unto the particular, that every man in particular may
consider and weigh in his own conscience, whether it be so in him or no, which
is spoken generally of all. For a man is little touched with a general speech,
unless he understand it particularly to appertain unto himself. Therefore
seeing all excuse is cut off on every side; let every man seriously
acknowledge his own sins and offenses, that so by Christ his Redeemer and
Savior, he may be delivered from them.

Here is showed, what and how great good comes unto those that are justified,
by this Justification, by Faith. Likewise unto whom this Justification does
properly appertain.

CHAP. 28.
NOw in a few words we must show, what and how great good things do issue and
are to be looked for from this free remission of sins. And these benefits
are especially four; and these, the greatest of all benefits: the first of
which, is everlasting reconciliation with God. For when God does forgive and
pardon our sins freely, he does then receyve us into favor, and continue us
therein. For whom he thus justifies, those he embraces and affects with the
same love, John 17 23.26.
wherewith he loves his only begotten Son. For when he pardons us our
sins, he loves us as dearly, as if we had never offended. For the
obedience of Christ is imputed and imparted unto us, and for this imputation
sake, we are as dear and as acceptable to God, as Christ himself is.
Secondly, in this, that God does freely pardon us all our sins, he llikewise
forgiveth all and every punishment, which we have infinitely deserved and
plucked upon our selves by our sins. For when the offense is taken away, the
punishment must needs be taken away likewise: for the offense is forgiven
that the punishment might be taken away. The third benefit is, that our
corrupt nature is reformed by the power of the holy Spirit, and framed unto the
Image of God, so that we begin to love and worship God, even in this life. The
fourth benefit which we receyve by Justification, is eternal Life and
Salvation, which God only imparteth unto those, whom he has justified through
the remission of sins, and by his spirit made new creatures. These are the
four great and excellent Benefits, which follow upon Justification. So that
when our sins are abolished and blotted out, the merciful and fatherly
countenance of God begins to shine upon us.

Therefore this Justification may be discerned and known by that which
follows it, as by the effects and benefits which proceed and flow from
thence: Among those, the feeling of the love of God toward us, and the calling
upon him, do chiefly excel. For when he justifies us, then does he
manifest and show his love toward us. For although he loves us in Christ with
an everlasting love; yet does he then lively and manifestly show and declare,
that his love toward us, when he forgiveth us our sins, and reformeth us with
his spirit. Then do we by certain experience feel in our hearts, the
strength and most effectual power of the love of God toward us. Romans 8.26.
For the holy Spirit does stir up and make in us hearty prayers, by which we
do call upon God, Gal. 4.6.
as our loving and merciful Father without trembling. So that faith, by which
we rely upon God; and love, which we have toward God; and prayer, by which
we call upon him; are three most certain signs of our Justification: For
these do necessarily follow Justification. But of these more shall be spoken
hereafter in Glorification.

Last of all, this Justification belongs only to the Elect, and such as shall
be saved. This Paul plainly teaches here, whilst he says, that God calls
and iustifyeth those only, whom he has predestinate. Here therefore Vocation
and Justification, are set under Predestination, as the effects under their
cause. So that Justification does not reach farther then Predestination. For
the effects cannot be larger, and reach farther then their causes. They
therefore which think that Justification belongs unto all in general, ought
first to teach and prove, by the word of God, that Predestination or Election
is common to every one. Again, Act. 13.48. Tit. 1. John 10.26.
the Scripture plainly teaches us, that Justification is given and belongs
only unto those, that are appointed before unto Life eternal. But this thing
is so clear and manifest, that it needs no long proof. Let these things
therefore be spoken here briefly concerning Justification.

Here is declared, by what remedy the corruption of our nature is amended, and
the Image of God restored in man, and in what parts especially regeneration is
wrought. Likewise, how grossly the Papists, and the grosser sort of
Vbiquitaries do err, which think that there is an hidden power in the
outward water of Baptism, which is able to convert a man in the very act of
Baptizing.

CHAP. 29.
NOw Glorification being the last Lincke of Paul's Chain, this follows to be
set under Justification very fitly. For so Paul teaches, that the gift of the
holy Spirit, and the renewing of our corrupt nature unto the Image of God, does
necessarily follow our free receyving into the favor of God, and cannot be
separated from it. Wherefore Glorification follows Justification, in a most
divine order: because it is the final cause of it. For therefore is this or
that man justified, that in the end he may be glorified. Therefore after Paul
had taught that sins are forgiven men by the only free mercy of God, now he
proceeds rightly to teach and declare how sins are abolished and purged:
and so shows how Glory and the Image of God is recovered in man. This he
shows in the word (glorifying.) Therefore to glorify, is nothing else, then
to abolish the corrupt nature of man, and so to reform man unto the Image of
God, and make him fit for eternal Glory. So that regeneration from the effect
and last end thereof, is called by the name of Glorification: in as much namely,
as the Elect by it are renewed unto the Image of God, and then translated into
everlasting Glory. For God will have his Glory and holiness to shine in the
Elect here after a sort. And faith being in some sort inflamed by the holy
Spirit in our calling, and our will somewhat changed, is here more inflamed
and changed. But this is performed and brought to pass by no other means,
but only by our regeneration. For God does not begin and finish the work of
our regeneration in one day, and at one instant, but does continue and perfect
it by little and little. Here therefore a few things ought to be spoken
concerning Regeneration; which, that they may be handled and entreated of the
better and more plainly with the greater fruit, we ought to consider these
four several heads. First, what Regeneration is, and by what means it
comes. Secondly, in what parts it consists, and of what sort it is in this
life. Thirdly, how necessary it is, and for what things it is profitable.
Fourthly, by what signs and tokens it may be known.

Concerning the first thing: Regeneration is not the abolishing of the former
substance, and the establishing again of a new, neither is it the changing of
one substance into an other: but it is the reforming of our corrupt nature, and
the repayring and restoring of the Image of God in man. So that in this
Regeneration, there remains the same frame of the body and substance, but the
inward and wicked affections of the mind only are amended and changed: which
seeing it is a spiritual change, it is felt inwardly before it be learned, as
Saint Cyprian speaks elsewhere. And it is nothing else, but the amending and
abolishing of the corrupt and wicked qualities, that remain in the substance
of man.

Therefore whom God has justified, those also he does regenerate and change
unto his most blessed glory and purity of life, that they may repent and be
ashamed of their former life, that so they may betake themselves unto a better
course. For no man can have an earnest desire unto the grace of God, except
first he know his sins, and be displeased with himself in them. So that a
renewing is required. For God will not have his Elect to abuse his gentleness
and long suffering, and therefore does he renew and frame them to sincere
manners and holy actions. Therefore they which are effectually regenerated, do
begin to be displeased with themselves for their sins, and to be grieved in
their hearts, that they have displeased God, and with their whole heart do
detest all wicked deeds whatsoever, so that hereafter they will not commit or
do them; and so do show their thankfulness, by eschewing of evil, and
doing of good: and there is in them, a turning away from Satan and evil
deeds, and a turning unto God and to good works. And although the regenerate
do fall often, yet they do not defend nor allow of their sins, but desire
daily more and more to hate and eschew them. So, they which are converted,
begin to savor of better things, and do change their evil custom, and kind
of life, and revoke their former course of living, and so convert their actions
and endeavors from evil unto good, as from one contrary unto an other. They
which are thus affected, do feel true joy in their hearts, in that they have
God at one with them, for their Mediators sake, from whence follows an
earnest desire to obey God in all his Commandments. Let the regenerate
therefore know, that now the time is come, wherein they ought to approve and
fulfill those most wholesome precepts of divinity, not so much by discoursing
of them, as by performing them constantly, and living godly: because they can
by no other way obtain blessed immortality and heavenly Glory, but only by
true faith and ready obedience unto the commandments of God. Therefore how
much or little soever it be, which the children of God have, and savor of
regeneration, to it they ought to frame their manners, says Augustine. Tom. 7.
colum. 694.


Now this renewing, as is abovesayd in the Treatise of Vocation, is begun and
finished by the word and spirit of God. By the word, he shows us, what things
he will have done or not done by us: and by his Spirit there is strength
ministered unto us to perform them. This regeneration is especially wrought and
continued in the mind, will, and heart of man. So that God shows forth and
declares his goodness toward his children, here, three manner of ways.
First, he does enlighten and dispell the blindness of the mind, by the
Sunshine of his Spirit. For whatsoever man savoureth of his own self, Romans
8.6, 7.
is enmity against God, and brings death with it. This blindness of man's
mind, is not simply the ignorance of God and of himself, but it is a stubborn
rebellion, and proud presumption against God. So that by how much a man
excels and is endued with the greater quicknes of nature, by so much the
more does he resist and strive against God himself and his own Salvation.
Because such an one fears not to charge the wisdom of God with extreme
folly. For all men, as long as they are not renewed with this new and heavenly
light, do think the holy mysteries of God to be foolishness. So Paul whilst
he preached Christ crucified unto the Grecians, says, 1. Cor. 1.23.
that to them he preached foolishnes. So that the enlightening of this
rebellious and hurtful blindness, is a great and inestimable benefit of God.
After this inlightning follows a right judgment and opinion of God, of his
will and of his works: because that then men begin to know God rightly, and to
judge of him accordingly, when they be enlightened by the spirit of God.
Secondly, it changes and reformeth the will of man, which is extremely
contrary unto the law of God. And of evil it makes it good, and of unwilling
and stubborn, it makes it ready and obedient. Phil. 2.13.
So the will of man does then begin to be good, when it is reformed and renewed
by God. Here also the infinite goodness of God shows it self, whilst that
it makes man of an adversary and foe to become a friend and heir of heavenly
glory: which otherwise in himself is so corrupted and depraved, that he has
mind to nothing but evil, and hates God extremely. This will of man,
howsoever by nature it be so wicked and perverse, as to resist and withstand
God and his will; yet no will can be so wicked and stubborn, but God if he
will can mollify it, and make it good, as Augustine says well. Now God will
do this in the Elect, Ezech. 36.26, 27.
because that of his own accord he has promised that he will do it.
Thirdly, it converteth and renews the stubborn, unapt and disobedient heart,
and so does weaken and debilitate the strength of sin in his children, and
does create in them an earnest study and desire to live godly, and makes them
altogether forward unto all piety. Lastly, it stirs up in them good works,
and endueth them with sincere and holy behavior. Phil. 2.13.
So God works in them, both to will that which is good, and do that which is
right. So that all power to live godly, proceeds and comes, not from their
own power, but from God only which works in them effectually by his Spirit.
For this spiritual renewing is called in many places of the Scripture by an
excellency, The creation and work of God; because that it is his work to
illuminate the blind understandings of men with the knowledge of himself, and
to change their crooked wills and hard hearts, and to frame them unto the
obedience of his own will. For these are so hard and difficult works, that
they can be brought to pass and effected by none other but by God only.
Therefore the Lord by EZechiel promises, that he will cause, that we shall
walk in his commandments, showing, that regeneration, and power to do well,
is a work far surmounting all creatures. The use of this doctrine is diverse:
First, that the grace of God, by which only the Elect are changed into new
creatures, may be maintained, against that divellish invention of free will,
which the Papists dream of. But here the Papists offend grievously; for look
how much they attribute unto the power of man, so much do they detract from
the grace of God, and merit of Christ. For the grace of God and the power of
man, are in this matter two contraries, which cannot be maintained of one and
the self same subject at one time. Therefore Saint Austine in one place says
very well, that that is not free, which the grace of God has not made free.
For the Scripture, as we have said before, does not leave a man so much as a
good thought, which is the least part of a good work. 2. Cor. 3.5.


For such is the blindness and frailty of man's wit, that it is not only
unable to conceyve and bring forth of it self any thing rightly or truly, but
also that it frames and inventeth to it self many and most dangerous errors,
even from most true principles. An evident example of this, we may see in the
free will of the Papists. But that most fond dream of theyrs, vanishes like a
vapor, by this doctrine of regeneration; and the spirit of God only is
prooved to be the only beginning and true cause of every good work. Again,
seeing God does regenerate man, and make him fit for good works, that other
fiction which the Papists have dreamed, concerning works foreseen, is
overthrown and beaten to pieces. For seeing no man can do good, except by the
grace of God he be changed into a new creature, it thence follows, that God
could foresee no other works in man, but such as he himself should work in
him; whence a man may easily gather, which considers the matter any thing at
all, that this opinion concerning works foreseen, is a mere and forged
fable.

Moreover, the Papists, and the more gross sort of Vbiquitaries, do in this
place, after their manner err and invent a new fiction, whenas they think
that there is some secret and hidden power in tne water of Baptism, which is
able to convert and renew a man. And from thence they labor to infer, that
they which are baptized are regenerate in the very act of Baptism. This
unsavory invention is the fosterer of noisome errors. But the falsehood thereof
is found; first in this, that it evidently appears by the holy Scriptures,
that all are not regenerate which are baptized: as we may see, not only in
Simon Magus, but also in many others, either openly wicked, or hypocrites under
hand and secretly: which although they have been baptized, and receyved
Baptism as a true mark of their regeneration, yet their lives sufficiently
declare that they were not regenerate. For although that the Sacraments are
means or instruments, by which the holy Ghost is effectual in the Ministry
of the Church: yet in his power and efficacy, he has not tied himself unto
them, neither does he so work by them, that that working should always show
it self and exercise the strength thereof in the very act of administering
them. Again, they do offend and sin exceedingly and out of measure, against
the office of the holy Spirit, and the blood of Christ. For the holy Spirit
is the only efficient cause and principal worker of regeneration, and the
blood of Christ is the meritorious cause thereof: therefore they attribute that
unto the outward water of baptism, which is due only unto the holy spirit and
the blood of Christ, and so fall into a fallacy, from that which is no cause as
if it were a cause, for they do cast that unto the false and feigned cause,
which ought to be attributed unto the true and proper cause, and so, as much as
in them lies, do overthrow and undermine the principal heads of Christian
religion. And whereas they infer, that the purer and preciser sort of Divines
do deny that Baptism is the washing of the new birth, Tit. 3.5.
as Paul to Titus speaks. This is an unsavory and a vile cavil, for they do
not only admit and like of those words of Paul in their true and natural
meaning, but do receive them as a most sound confirmation and strengthening of
our cause: for Paul there plainly pronounces, that the power of the holy
spirit does effect and work regeneration in us. But our adversaryes do
misunderstand those words of Paul and do abuse them, whilst they wrest them
into an other sense, as seducers use to do, and apply them amiss, and so do
fall into a fallacy of the ambiguity of a word, whilst they interpret that
ill, which they apply worst of all. Among true and sound Divines it is a thing
firmly resolved and agreed upon, that the Sacraments do not bring grace, but
do for the strengthening of faith seal up that which was bestowed before, as
we may see in Abraham, Romans 4.10.
as in the common example and father of all them which believe.

Lastly, they err not a little by this their most vain fiction, whilst that
they place the first beginning of salvation, and the ground thereof in the
water of baptism, for so they forge and frame the causes of salvation from the
instruments that are used as means, and from the manner of applying them; but
with deep silence they do pass by, and with wonderful craft neglect the true
and proper cause of salvation, namely, everlasting and free election, and the
only merit of Christ, that they might the more easily deceive, and cast a mist
before the eyes of the ignorant. For there is no greater nor more plentiful
occasion to beguile and deceive, then where false and imaginary causes are
supposed for true and proper causes.

Moreover, this regeneration here is always defective and imperfect, and a
small beginning of a new life, and a certain onset unto it. This is prooved by
manifest testimonies of Scripture, and also by daily experience of the godly.
The testimonies of Scripture say, that we ought to be changed into the image of
God from glory to glory, 2. Cor. 3.18.
Romans 1.17.
and to go forward daily more and more from faith to faith. Also that the
children of God ought to walk in his commandments, Eze. 36.27. Tit. 2.14.
and to keep his statutes, and to be zealous of good works. These and the
like places of Scripture do teach us, that the elect are not the first day
polished unto the highest perfection, but that by little and little as it were
by degrees, they are brought from one virtue unto an other, until after this
life they shall come unto the highest perfection, for they are not perfect
which must be changed from one glory to another, and go forward from faith to
faith. Secondly, they which walk in the commandments of God are yet in the
way, and are not come unto the end of their race, therefore they are imperfect.
For wayfaring men are often weeryed, and now and then stumble and fall by
reason of these or these lets and hindrances: so also the regenerate men,
being as it were weeryed in the course and study of godliness, do slip often,
and fall into these and these sins. Therefore the Apostle Saint John says
plainly, 1. John. 1.8.
that they which say they have no sins deceive themselves, and the truth is
not in them. Also the most holy Prophets do plainly and freely confess of
themselves, that their best works are poluted and stained with many and great
imperfections, Esaias. 64.
for in them always the dregs of sinful flesh remain and abide, and very
often the sparkles of their lewd affections do break forth and show
themselves: but these hinder them not, because they have a promise of a pardon.
These things the testimonies of Scripture teach us, that the children of God do
only obtain some beginnings of a new life here, so that regeneration here
is maimed and imperfect. For the holy spirit does so illuminate and renew the
minds of the elect, 1. Cor. 13.9.
that here they do know but in part, and does so change and refine their
wills, that they can will and do that which is good but in part, as long as
they live in this life. So that whether a man respect the understanding of the
regenerate, or whether a man consider their will, he shall easily find that
they are imperfect, for they which are renewed still day by day, are not as yet
wholly renewed, but the children of God as long as they live here are renewed
day by day, therefore they are not as yet perfect nor wholly renewed. Besides
these, there are many other tokens, whereof the scripture is very plentiful,
as which are wrought successively by the children of God, either in rejoicing
at the benefits of God, or sorrowing at their own sins, and surely these do
bewray their imperfections. So that infirmity always abides and dwells in
them, with which they must strive even unto the death of the body, with an
intercourse of going backward and going forward, as Augustine says in one
place.

Secondly, daily experience it self does convince and prove the imperfection
of the godly. For the most holy men of all ages have offended and sinned very
often, which they could not have done if they had not bin imperfect, for they
which by regeneration are quite perfected, are set out of all danger of sinning
any more: furthermore God has no where promised that he will indue his
children in this life with exquisite perfection, therefore they cannot be made
perfect here, for God does not perform more in this work of regeneration by
the power of his spirit, then he has declared in the revealed word of promise;
and they themselves by their own power cannot make themselves better and more
holy, then God will have them to be. Also the most holy Apostles themselves
say, James. 3.2.
that in many things they sin all. John also in his Epistle pronounces most
plainly, saying, 1. John. 1.8.
If we say that we have no sin we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in
us. These testimonies of scripture teach us, that not one lives here which is
not a sinner. So S. Austine says in an other place most fitly to this purpose,
Woe unto the life of men although most holy, if it be examined and judged
without Gods mercy. But surely although regeneration be here but only begun
and be imperfect, yet for all that it is not unprofitable, but is very
commodious unto the elect, for from thence a most sure and evident token of
their election and salvation is ministered unto them. But of this matter shall
be spoken more largely and purposely in the end of this treatise.

Regeneration has also this commodity which is very great, for when men are
regenerate, they are not only delivered from the most miserable slavery of
sin and tyrany of the Devil, but also are made partakers of the life of God,
for then are they truly grafted into Christ, and Christ is joined unto them
again, so that they are made one with Christ by the spirit, and Christ is made
one with them. Also Christ then lives in them savingly, and reigns
effectually, so that he gives and bestows upon them life everlasting; for
whom he once has begun to renew, those he never forsakes, for he leaves not
this holy and chief work of all his works as it were broken of, Psa. 138.8.
but brings it unto the end and accomplishment thereof: Mala. 3.6.
therefore it cannot be made void because God does not change his nature, nor
disroabe himself of that goodness wherewith he is endued. In this goodness of
God the salvation of the godly is grounded and settled, so that, what the elect
have once laid hold on by a steadfast faith, that does God never take from them,
for the gifts and calling of God are such as are without repentance: for which
cause Paul says plainly and boldly, Romans 11.29
that God would perform that which he had begun in the Philippians, Phil. 1.6.
and bring it unto the last end and perfection, until at the last after their
happy resurrection their vile bodies be fashioned unto the glorious body of
Christ. So this regeneration is the near fellowship and strong band of Christ
and the regenerate: And where this grace is effectual, there eternal
salvation, and life and happiness everlasting follows and ensues, for the old
man with the concupiscences perishes and is abolished, 2. Cor. 4.16.
but the new man is renewed and fashioned unto the image of God. This grace
therefore brings with it a double benefit, for on the one side the strength
and body of sin is weakened and decayed, and on the other side our lost
righteousness is repaired, and the image of God restored, so that we proceed
from the abolishing and putting away of the one, unto the restoring of the
other, as from one contrary unto an other. Therefore regeneration is the only
remedy of the grace of God, by which the corruption of nature is here after a
sort restrained and amended, which renewing of nature shall be wholly perfected
in the world to come, for then shall we necessarily love that which is good
with a perfect liking, and necessarily hate that which is evil with a perfect
hatred.

Furthermore we must note here and diligently observe, that this power of
renewing is in God by nature, and is changed by no outward cause, or mutable
occasion whatsoever, and therefore is as sure and certain, as God himself in
his essence is everlasting: for God is as constant in his promises, as he is
unchangeable in his essence. So that seeing he is always the same, and
continually as good as his word, and ever remains like himself, therefore
also does he truly and indeed perform and fulfill those things which he has
promised in his word: for the promise of God is sure, because that grace,
whence it depends and springs, is sure, and grace is only of that which is
both by word promised, and indeed performed freely and mercifully without any
expectation of reward. They therefore which doubt of the promise of God, and
the accomplishment thereof, they do rather by deeds then words accuse and
argue God of inconstancy and falsehood: therefore the distrust of the good and
favorable will of God, and of the perfourmance of things promised, is without
doubt a very great sin, for God by his almighty power does begin, continue,
and end this his work of regeneration, wherein it consists, and is grounded:
therefore this work can no more be broken off and fall to the ground, then God
can of any man be vanquished and overcome.

The works and obedience of the godly, howsoever they be imperfect, and
interlaced with diverse blemishes, yet God in that his fatherly goodness loves
and accepts them. Then some things are propounded and dilated somewhat
largely and plainly concerning the meaning and true use of good works, that
the Papists error might be the more evident in any man's sight.

CHAP. 30.
FVrthermore, seeing this regeneration is in this life maimed and imperfect,
hence it follows necessarily and infallibly, that all good works also which
proceed out of it, as streams out of a fountain, are maimed and imperfect:
for such as the cause is, such an effect likewise usually follows. Therefore
seeing those works are imperfect, they can deserve nothing as due debt: for to
the producing and effecting of any thing, there is required necessarily sound
and sufficient causes, for maimed and mangled causes have never brought forth
any thing, for imperfect causes are esteemed as no causes. And although the
works of the godly be interlaced and stained with many blemishes and
imperfections, yet they are pleasing and acceptable unto God, because in them
he acknowledges the image of his spirit, which makes the persons, whence
those works proceed, acceptable unto God, and mixeth a good quality among their
good works, in which being dipped as in an heavenly and spiritual perfume,
God does approve and accept them. God in his fatherly compassion does pardon
the staynes and defects of good works, so that the works when the corruption
of them is abolished and wiped away, are accounted just and righteous, and the
satisfaction of Christ is imputed unto them for righteousness, like as it is to
the persons from whom they do proceed: therefore as he does by his favor,
love and justify his Saints unto death (for the righteousness of the most
perfect man consists always in faith, and the daily forgivenes of sins) so
also with the same favor does he love and justify their works, that is to
say, he blotteth out and wipeth away the faults which remain in them in this
life, and imputes righteousness unto them. As therefore the Moon does borrow
and take her light of the Sun, so also faith justifies the works of the
faithful, and makes them have a good savor, therefore faith gets the
reward and name of righteousness, both unto the works, and also unto the
persons. So that although those works in themselves, and in respect of
themselves be infected and stained with many faults and blemishes, yet in
respect of God which wipeth away all those blemishes, they are holy and
righteous, and so their righteousness does much more consist in the forgivenes
of sins, then in the perfection of virtue and good works, as Augustine in one
place says very well. The Scripture in some places compares this favor of
God unto the compassion which a father has toward his son, for fathers do so
love their children, that albeit they see such or such blemishes in their
bodies, they do not yet thrust or drive them out of doors: yea rather if they
have children that are lame, or tender eyed, or otherwise marked or misshapen
by any other blemish, their fatherly love and natural affections are sturred
up and break forth so much the more unto pity and compassion of them; and they
do not only not cease to love them, but also they are much more careful for
their health and welfare, then for others which are not so diseased. So also
God the most merciful Father of all fathers does pardon our faults when he
has adopted us for his children, therefore he will neither drive us out of
doors though we be imperfect, nor cast our works out of his sight though they
be staynd with many spots. Hence is it that the scripture says in plain
words, Though the righteous fall, (that is, Psalm. 37.24
though he sin thus or thus) yet he shall not be cast off: Let the godly
therefore remember, though they stumble and fall this way or that way, that God
remembers, and will not forsake his work, so that God will finish the
beginning of salvation which he has begun to work in them, Phil. 1.6.
because God loves and accepts both them and their works. Therefore
although God do punish the sins and transgressions of his children by sundry
ways and diverse afflictions, yet does he not execute revenge upon them in
that extremity, as he does upon the reprobates, but uses toward them a
fatherly and mild chastisement, as a most wholesome medicine, whereof there is
a most comfortable promise, Psalm 89. verse 31. and so forward.

Furthermore, seeing the works of the godly are imperfect, their obedience
also which they perform and yield unto God must needs be imperfect. But
although it be such, yet God not for any inward merit and worthiness of it, but
for his own grace and mercyes sake, does no less approve and accept it, then
if it were altogether perfect, and absolute in every point. As a father is
contented with any endeavor of his son, and requires not of him an exact
perfection of work, so that he see him obedient and dutiful from his heart,
so God also does not reject the earnest and sincere study and endeavor of
obedience in his children, but God does approve it as perfect, because he
esteems an obedient will as a work done: for that cause he does accept and
like of any care of obedience, so that it be sincere and proceed from the
heart. And albeit that care be defective and imperfect, which in it self
deserves rather to be rejected then favored, yet God does behold it with a
merciful countenance and fatherly love. This condition and circumstance the
Prophet Malachy sets down in plain words, Mal. 3.17.
saying, They shall be unto me (says the Lord) in that day, for a flock, and I
will spare them, as a man spares his own son that serves him. As therefore
a father does not require full and perfect obedience of his son, so likewise
God does not demand exact and perfect obedience of his children, but is
content with such, as they for the measure of humane fraylety are able to
perform: therefore whatsoever God promises unto the keepers of his law,
that he will give them. This do the regenerate and godly obtain and come unto,
not that their works deserve this in their worth and excellency, but because
the infinitenes of Gods goodness and mercy has so disposed and appointed it.

To conclude, although the works and obedience of the godly be imperfect, and
cannot merit salvation, yet for all that they are not unprofitable, nor to be
left undone: for they may be profitable for other ends, many of which are
ordained for one thing. Here therefore I suppose it very fit, and not
unprofitable, if I speak somewhat largely and plainly concerning good works,
and that for the Papists sake, who do wholly corrupt, and quite overthrow the
use of these works, as also of all the scripture beside. But that these things
being contained in a brief summary, and set down in a plain method, may the
more orderly be handled of me, and the more easily be understood of the reader,
these three things ought to be considered, as marks set before us. First,
what, and what manner of works there be in this life, and whether the grace of
God may be attained and gotten by them or no. Secondly, seeing that life
everlasting is by all means the mere and free gift of God, why the scripture
in many places does promise a reward, and ascribe salvation unto them. Thirdly,
why good works are to be done, seeing salvation is by no means attained by
them.

That the first may rightly be understood, we must know, that the works of man,
by reason of his diverse condition, are diversely to be considered; for we must
judge of the effect, by the nature and condition of the cause. If therefore
there be a diversity found in the cause, it ought likewise to be considered in
the effect; for one and the selfsame thing cannot be spoken and affirmed of
diverse matters, and of unlike things the judgment must likewise be unlike.
Therefore man as touching his nature, is wicked and untoward, yea, and so
wicked, that he is extremely contrary unto God, and his will: so that his
works also before regeneration must needs be evil. For from an evil cause,
there can proceed and be expected nothing but an evil effect, because the
effect differs not from the cause: so that these works are worthily rejected
of God, as worthy of eternal death, and the punishment thereof, and being so
rejected, are most justly condemned, because they are extremely contrary unto
the will of God. Thus man and his works are so contrary unto the law of God,
as that there can be nothing more extremely contrary. How then can man
perform any thing in this estate of corruption and iniquity, which may be
approved or acceptable unto God, when as man in the corruption of his nature,
and in all his thoughts and actions is an enemy unto God, how can he deserve
any thing at Gods hands? Therefore as man in this estate is wholly corrupt and
evil, so likewise does he bring forth evil and corrupt works, by which he
can deserve nothing else of God but eternal death. But here the Papists with
all their wit are out of the way, in that they feign that there are certain
moral works, which by their own worth can make men gracious and acceptable
unto God, before they have bin regenerate and grafted into Christ by faith. And
those merits they call merits ex congruo, so called, because that (as they say)
by right and equity they deserve some reward, which God by right is bound to
repay them. If this were true, why then man belike should not be wholly infected
and corrupted with original sin. But man, as we have testimonies in the holy
scripture, is wholly infected and corrupted with original sin, Genesis 6.5.
Psalm. 51.7.
therefore that idle fiction of the Papists is nothing else but a mere
invention of the Devil. Surely those works which proceed from any man before
his regeneration, are every way foul and ugly sins, to which by right and
equity there is no reward else due, but only everlasting torment: But it goes
very well and fayrely with us, if God do not punish them in us as they
deserve. Again, all those works of men, although they seem fair and comely
in the sight of man, yet if they be skanned according to the rule of Gods law,
they will be found to be mere filth and unsavory pollution: And that as the
Stars, which although they seem most bright in the night time, yet at the
arising and presence of the Sun, they lose their brightness: so likewise those
works of men, which in the common view seem to be right and beautiful, shall
be manifest iniquity in the sight of God; so, lawdable sincerity here, shall
be greater uncleanness there, and that which here is approved as great glory,
shall there be rejected as extreme shame and reproach. Far therefore be from
us these faire-shewing and foule-meaning hipocrites, which cover the corruption
and wickedness that is wrapped up in the heart of man with a vain flourish and
feigned mask, and by their merits, which are worse then extreme filthiness, do
labor to win the favor of God, and to make him beholding unto them. Surely
it is without all doubt, that they do provoke God more and more by these their
works, seeing that they are execrable sins. Again, they do pluck upon
their heads the more grievous judgment, and do aggravate their punishment, in
that they think that their works, which are nothing else but damnable sins,
extremely contrary unto the law and will of God, are pleasing unto God, and
worthy of his favor, for by this means, as much as in them lies, they do as
it were change God into a Devil, and make him the patron of sins, to
appoint a reward for them: therefore far be from a Christian man's heart all
those works which are thus far opposite unto the will of God, and condemned
of him as mere offenses.

Then after that God has begun to renew men by the power of his spirit, of
evil they become good, and that but in part only, for the corruption of
nature is but only restrained and amended in some sort, for, (as is aforesaid)
the elect are regenerate but imperfectly in this life, therefore they are not
wholly good, and conformeable unto the law of God: wherefore their works also
can be good but in part only, and not perfect, for there cannot be more in the
effect, then there is in the cause, but whatsoever is in the effect, that shall
be in the cause much more: therefore the works of the godly are partly good,
and partly evil. They are good, as they proceed from the operation and motion
of the holy spirit, and are agreeable unto the law of God. And they are evil,
as they proceed from the flesh and unregenerate part, and do decline and stray
from the rule and obedience of Gods law. By this it manifestly appears, that
no work of man is so prayse-worthy (as Augustine says well) which is not
defiled and stained with some blemish or other.

These works deserve nothing at all toward the attainement of salvation,
because they are imperfect, and stray and swarve very far from the law of
God. For the law requires so great perfection, as that it condemns the least
thought of the least sin. Again, imperfect works (according unto the
Canonical rule which the Lawyers so call) are as if they were not done at all,
for such as the cause is, such also must the effect needs be. Seeing therefore
that the cause is imperfect, the effect must needs follow imperfect, for it
were extreme and ridiculous madness to look for a perfect and durable work,
from an imperfect and transitory cause, therefore these works are proved and
convinced to be imperfect, from their cause which is imperfect; so that if a
man seek for a reward by them, he shall find punishment, as Saint Augustine
says, for man in the least thing is not able to perform so much as the law
requires, therefore he cannot be thought righteous, and acquitted before God
and before his just judgment seat, by the merit of his own works. Woe
therefore unto the life of men, even the most commendable (as the same
Augustine says) if it should be judged according unto the strict rigor of the
law without the mercy of God. Moreover, seeing these good works proceed not
from man's strength, but do spring the power and grace of the holy spirit, man
cannot deserve or get any thing by them, seeing they be not his own, but the
works of God, for man does them not of himself, but God does work them in him.
So that to do that which God commands, and to receive those things which he
promises, are both the gift of God, and so man had no merits of his own:
therefore the free works of God fall not within the compass of man's merit,
because those works are the effects of the holy ghost, and not the deeds of me^
proceeding from their own strength.

Therefore the Papists, in as much as they hunt for salvation by these works,
are of all hunters the most vain, for their labors and endeavors are always
frustrate and without effect, for they shall never attain unto that which they
seek for by them; and they play the fools more absurdly, then if they should
say they were able to strike fire out of the sea. Certaynely in this their
foole-hardy enterprise they do manifestly tempt God, in that they go about to
bring to pass things that are infinitely far greater then their strength
will suffer or permit. Again, in that they boast their own deserts so
confidently and boldly, it is a manifest sign that they are not regenerate,
and that they know not themselves at all: for by how much the more a man is
regenerate, by so much the more does he see and bewail his own sins and
infirmityes, and so finds and perceives by experience, that he can do no
good thing without the grace of God. Therefore from his heart does he humble
himself before God, and in the grief of his heart with much lamenting does he
earnestly pray against those plagues which he has deserved: also he confesses
his sins which are many and grievous, and is silent as concerning his merits
which are none at all. Such humbling of ones self is the exalting of God, that
is, he which thinks himself unworthy of the grace of God, God makes him
worthy, and exalts him to heaven. For an unfeigned acknowledging and
confession of a man's own humility, has the compassion of God as a remedy
prepared for it, as Augustine in one place speaks: so that by how much a man
is the more weak in himself, by so much the more does the Lord sustain him.
Therefore a true confession of their own imperfection, is the chiefest
perfection of the godly, as is aforesaid: but they which with full and open
mouth boast and praise their own worthiness and strength, are not regenerate at
all, neither do rightly know their own sins, nor humble themselves before
God, for then are men wont to humble themselves before him, when they see and
know their own corruption.

But if they shall make an argument of contraryes, and conclude thus: Evil
works condemn, therefore good works save, because that contraryes have
contrary consequences: by concluding thus they conclude nothing, and talk much
to no effect, because these are not true contraryes, for evil works are
perfectly evil, but good works are but partly good only, so that they are not
equal on both sides, nor stretch not one so far as another, which is required
in true contraryes, and ought to be in them, for seeing that evil works are
perfectly evil, there is more evil in them unto death, because they are
altogether contrary unto the law of God: but seeing that good works are but
only good in part, therefore there is less good in them unto life, because
they are not every way agreeable unto the law of God. By this it is manifestly
proved, that these contraryes of the Papists are not every way equal. So that
the objection and conclusion of them prooveth nothing at all, because it is
wholly sophistical, and in no wise according to a Syllogism. And let it not
trouble any man, that one and the self same work is said to be good and badde
at one time: because the respect has relation and reference unto diverse heads.
It is said to be evil, in respect of the flesh, from which it proceeds: and
it is said to be good in respect of the spirit, from whose motion it comes.
So that there is no contradiction in this, because good and badde may be in one
thing both at once, in a diverse respect. And let these things suffice to be
spoken of the first.

Seeing the works of the godly are here always imperfect, why God does
ascribe Salvation unto them, and calls his own free gifts our reward.

CHAP. 31.
NOw the second thing remains to be handled in a few words, namely, why the
Scripture does ascribe life and salvation unto imperfect and maimed works;
seeing that they also are the free and undeserved gift of God. Here therefore
we must know, that God does oftentimes call his own free gifts our rewards, not
because they are due unto our merits and good deeds, but because they are added
as supplies unto the graces that have formerly been bestowed upon us. For to
whom God has vouchsafed his Election, which is the first grace, those also
does he adorn and beautify with all other benefits which follow and depend
thereof. So that whom he has chosen, being induced thereunto by his own
mercy, those also does he justify by the free forgivenes of their sins, and
being justified, he calls them; being called, he regenerateth them; and being
regenerate, he glorifieth them. With these benefits does God enrich and adorn
his children, that nothing may be wanting in them unto Salvation. And these are
with such an inseperable knot lincked one within an other, that he which
receyveth one of them, becomes partaker of all the rest. In this respect,
these latter benefits are, after the usual manner of the Scripture, called
the rewards and wages of the former, not in respect of man that deserves them,
but in respect of God that gives them. So that God takes occasion to give
these latter benefits unto men, not for such or such merits of theyrs, but for
his own former benefits which he has bestowed and powered upon them.
Therefore the Schoolmen do in this point err grossly, in that they make
these latter benefits to be the rewards of man's merit, and that because they
have used those former graces well and wisely. Surely we must not deny, but
that God does reward the right use of his gifts with greater graces, but we
must always take heed, that man's merit be not opposed unto Gods bounty. So
that the reward which God has appointed unto good works, does not depend upon
their perfection and worthiness, but descends from the greatness of Gods
goodness, and from his bountiful liberality. Therefore (as Augustine in one
place speaks very well) God crowns not our merits, but his own gifts in us.
Therefore whatsoever reward is given unto our good deeds, it is much rather in
regard of undeserved grace, then of a deserved reward. For the infirmity of the
flesh, hinders us, that we cannot merit grace and everlasting life. Therefore
al obedience which we yield unto God, deserves not the worth of an hair. For
which cause no reward can be appointed unto our works, as due by desert or
equity.

And when as God calls his free gifts our rewards, he seems to put on the
person of man, and as a Father to make much of us, to whom nothing is pleasing
but reward, and thinks not much, as it were, to make a covenant with us. He
surely for his part, does not only not owe us any thing; but on the contrary,
holds us all bound and indebted unto him, and so bound, as that we are not
able to pay the least part. Again, when as God ascribes that unto the godly,
beyond their desert, which he gives freely, he shows how acceptable and
wel-pleasing, a sincere endeavor to live well, is unto him. Therefore by this
term of reward, he does inflame and stir them up unto the greater study of
godliness, so that they employ themselves wholly in his service. Therefore the
reward is not promised and given unto the godly for their merit or desert, but
for the undeserved favor of God: otherwise, the most absolute observing of the
law, could not deserve the least reward. For God has all mankind every way so
bound and indebted unto him, that he may rightly challenge for his own,
whatsoever proceeds, as well from each man in particular, as from all men in
general. Again, the righteousness and holiness of the law of God, is so great,
that even the most perfect misseth much, and comes far short of it in this
life. For as he leaves undone many things which he ought to have done, so he
does many things which he should have left undone. Again, among those good
works which he does, the flesh always mixeth some evil. And so the good
works of the best are partly imperfect and evil. If therefore they should be
examined and weighed in themselves and by themselves, in the just balance of
the Law of almighty God, being defiled and polluted with their own
uncleanness, filthiness and deformity, they will be found much more vile and
unsavory in the sight of God, then any leprosy by the uncleanness thereof can
be unsightly and abominable in the sight of men. This Esayas does confess
freely of himself, and other religious worshippers of God, Esaias. 64.6.
saying, We are all of us as an unclean thing, and all our righteousness as a
filthy and most vile cloth. Here the Prophet, although he had profited much in
the matter of godliness, and in the worship of God, yet he confesses, that he
is infected and polluted with many and filthy sins. If the works of so great
a Prophet were defiled with sin, as with the uncleanness of leprosy, what
shall we think of our own works, which are in no sort to be compared with
his? Certaynely, he is altogether unclean, that sees not his own
uncleanness. But the more holy that a man is, the more also does he confess
and acknowledge his own pollution and uncleanness, as the example and
confession of the Prophet does manifest and declare. So that no man can be
certain of the free pardon and remission of his sins, except by a sound
faith and steadfast assurance he do rely upon the sole and mere goodness of
God, and consider with himself, and detest his own imperfection, and manifold
sins. For God does nothing by the halfes. Therefore he has determined,
either to save him wholly, or else is ready to condemn him wholly. So that
works, if they be considered in themselves, and without mercy, are worthy to
be cast together with men, into everlasting torments.

Here the Papists do again betray their own gross ignorance, or obstinate
malice, in that they dream and dare affirm, that the works of the Saints are
not only every way perfect in this life, but also more exact then the law of
God requires, to which God owes Life everlasting and Salvation. And those
works they call by a new found name, merits ex condigno, to which, rewards are
due, and ought to be paid, even for the worth of the work, according unto the
rule of Justice. So these will have the works of the godly to be altogether
perfect in this life, and wholly agreeable unto the Law of God, so that they may
by their inward virtue, deserve the grace of God as a reward. For so they make
an equality between those works and life eternal; so that God should be
bound by right to yield a reward unto them. This imagination of the Papists is
vain and fond; because that bond in which God first bound himself, is not
meritorious of the least reward, but depends wholly upon the promise and mercy
of God. But the works of the godly in this life, are imperfect, and only but
begun; therefore there cannot be in them such force and power, as that by
them, the sins of the godly, should be made a means for, and put away, and
the grace of God attained, as these would have it. Therefore this obligation or
bond, wherein God is bound, cannot be prooved to proceed from the worth of
their works; and so this equality, which they have forged and drawn out of
their own brain, is altogether void. So Job being regenerate, says most
truly, and confesses his own imperfection and frailty, when he says; If I
would justify my self, mine own mouth shall condemn me: if I shall say I am
perfect, he shall judge me wicked. Let every man therefore confess and
acknowledge that he is imperfect, that he may have passage and entrance unto
the mercy of God. Far therefore be the name of perfection and righteousness
from those works, which by Gods own mouth are convinced to be full of
pollution and uncleanness. They add yet further, that they are able to
perform and do more and better works then the Law prescribes and
commands, for which cause they term them very impudently, the works of
Supererogation. And in these they do not only put much confidence, but also do
ascribe the praise of their righteousness unto them, and do place no small part
of their glory in them. By this vain and wicked fiction, they do offend most
grievously. First, in that they dare feign, that these works are wholly
consonant unto the law of God, yea, more absolute then the law it self, and
stick not to vaunt and thrust out these feigned works unto God and the Church,
as if they were true and very works indeed. Secondly, in that they are not
afraid by these works to dim the glory of God, and to make the merir of
Christ of none effect. Lastly, in that they are not ashamed to put and
attribute that confidence and glory, unto their execrable wickedness and great
offenses, which is due and proper only to God and the merit of Christ. But the
Son of God does altogether overthrow and batter down these works of the
Papists, as well those of Supererogation, as those of Congruity; in the
Evangelist Saint Luke. For he says flatly unto his Apostles, Luke 17.10
When ye have done all that is commanded you, say, we are unprofitable
servants, we have done that which was our duty to do. Therefore let that most
vain dream of the Papists, and manifest invention of the devil, with great
detestation be hissed out of doors, and condemned unto the pit of hell,
because it does derogate from the glory of God, and hazardeth the faith of the
godly. But let the godly seriously acknowledge, and unfeignedly confess their
own imperfection, that they may be clothed and crowned with true perfection
and the glory of Christ, by the Son of God in his blessed coming. But the
works of the Papists, by which they boast themselves and make such a show, are
chiefly these: to interpret the whole Scripture of God wickedly and frowardly,
and wrest it into a contrary sense: to add many hurtful opinions unto it, and
to take many wholesome things from it, and so to call in question the whole
Scripture: to heap up idolatry and innumerable superstitions without measure
or end: to waver up and down like a reed by unbelief: to doubt and be
uncertain of the goodness of God, and merit of Christ with a staggering
faith: and to despair of Salvation: to commit whoredom without fear or
respect, in the contempt of Matrimony, so that they fear not to exercise their
most filthy lusts, and commit execrable wickedness. These are the principal
works of the Papists, in which they chiefly exercise and weary themselves, so
that they call them heretics which refuse to commit the like things with
them, and persecute them with most exquisite torments and punishments, until by
some means or other they have taken them out of the way.

And whereas God in many places of the Scripture, does promise a reward unto
the works of the godly, he does it not, as if the works by their worth and
dignity deserved any thing; but as a good Father he applies himself to the
affections and desires of his children. For he knows, that men are thus
affected, that they will take pains for no man freely, but that they look for
some reward from him for whom they labor: and so, that he might make his
children diligent and obedient in his service, he calls his own free gifts
and undeserved benefits bestowed upon them, by the name of a Reward. Therefore
God sets the title of a Reward before his benefits, not to that end to
obscure the praise of his bounty, or any way to diminish it, but to encourage
his children, and make them more willing and ready to the sincere study of
obedience. And so that he might give them the more encouragement to live
innocently, he casts that upon their works, which is proper to his own free
goodness and mercy. So that whatsoever God promises or performs unto the
works of the Saints, he does it not for the perfection and worthiness of them,
but because he has justified them, and perfumed them with the sweet savor of
his grace. For he justifies their works, and cleaseth them from all the
spots, wherewith they are defiled and polluted. So that he gives a reward unto
them, not as they are imperfect in themselves, and do savor of the flesh, but
because by his grace he does account them just and righteous. By this it is
more clearly apparent, then the light at midday, that the reward which God
promises unto the works of the godly, is not to be referred unto the merit of
man, but unto the benefit of God. Therefore whomsoever God pardons, to those
also does he give and bestow the spirit of holiness and righteousness, by
which they are cleansed and made studious of good works. Therefore for this
cause are the godly and their works wel-pleasing and acceptable unto God;
because he does behold and accept them and their works, together with his own
gifts of the spirit. Again, he does appoint sure and great rewards unto his
children, that so he might ease and assuage all the troubles, all the injuries
and reproaches to which they especially are subject, and with which they are
afflicted in this life, as in a miserable and sorrowful exile. So that the
promise of a reward does contain a great measure of the mercy of God, and does
exclude all worthiness of works. Otherwise, if God would sift and examine the
works of his children, as they are in themselves, according unto the rule of
his law, surely there could not be found among all mankind one work, though
performed of the very best, which might seem worthy of the least reward. Here
therefore we must neither dream of any relation between the reward and the
merit, nor yet of any recompense that should be due unto us.

Moreover, if any mortal man could be found, which had most perfectly
fulfilled the law in every respect, or could fulfill it, yet could he deserve
nothing for himself thereby, nor justly ask any reward at Gods hands for it:
Luk 17.10.
because he has performed that only unto him, which by the right of creation
he was bound to perform unto him. Wherefore, although a man shall do all
things which are commanded him; yet he is to be counted as an unprofitable
servant, because he has done but that which he ought to do, and cannot
interest or entitle himself unto any thing from God thereby. So that they are
all to be condemned of intolerable pride, and extreme arrogancy, which say,
that they that they can deserve any thing at Gods hands, for the worthiness of
their own works. For God in this matter has no respect of any merit and
worthiness of our own, but is altogether a free debtor. So that unto the
godly, which stand faithfully, and fight manfully under his banners, God is
made a debtor, not by receyving any thing of them, whereby he should be bound
unto them: but by promising them that which pleased him. Thus the godly are
they which say unto God, Thou art indebted unto us, because thou have promised:
and the wicked are they, which say unto God; Thou art indebted unto us, because
we have given unto thee, as Augustine speaks. Sermon. 16. col. 336.
Therefore all good works which the regenerate and the godly do, are not
works that deserve any thing, but obedience, which is due unto God, by the
right of creation and redemption.

Again, although the Scripture in some places do seem to ascribe salvation
and life eternal unto good works, this is not so to be taken, as if they were
the true and proper cause of Salvation; but because they from whom such works
do proceed, are justified through the merit of Christ, and regenerate by the
holy Ghost, and renewed unto a diligent care of religion, and to the bringing
forth of good works. Secondly, there is showed from the effects of
Justification, what are the parts and exercises of true and unfeigned religion.
So the Son of God in S. Matthew, Cap. 25.35.
ascribes eternal life unto good works, not because those works do deserve
life eternal, but because they are certain means, by which God brings his
children into the heavenly inheritance. So Christ will teach us, that this
heavenly life and salvation is appointed and promised only unto them, which
with a ready and undaunted spirit give themselves unto good works, and strive
daily unto the price of their high Calling. Thus the Scripture sets forth
true faith by that which follows, namely, by good works and the fruit
thereof, and shows certain tokens, whereby men that are justified and
regenerate may be discerned. Hither appertain all such like places of
Scripture, which seem to attribute Salvation unto the works of men. So faith
is not defyned by the causes, from that which goes before, but is only
described by the effects from that which follows after. Let these thus
suffice to be spoken of the second thing. Now the third thing remains to be
handled.

First, here is to be noted, that we reject not the good works which God
commands, and the law sets down, as certain popish divines with their
lying lips do slander us: but we admit here a wise and necessary distinction;
because that they are not to be done to that purpose, that by them the justice
of God might be satisfied, and Salvation attained. For this were nothing else,
but to deny the merit of Christ, to mock God, and lead men out of the true
way to Salvation, seeing there is none to be found that can perform perfect
works, and agreeable unto the Law of God. So that concerning works, this is
the controversy and manifest difference between us and the Papists: For they
admit, and defend works to be the causes of grace; but we embrace them as
the effects of grace. And they have no ground for their opinion, but only
their most vain imaginations; but we for our opinion have the mouth of God
himself, and the whole Scripture, as the only most faithful teacher.
Moreover, we separate good works from justifying, and not from the party
justified: but they place them as well in the act of iustifyng, as in the
person justified. We do this justly, because man can be justified by no other
means, nor acquitted of his sins but by the only, Acts 4.12.
and free mercy of God, and merit of Christ alone. But the Papists do
unjustly, because all and each of those works, which they brag of, and the
Monckes dream of, are rather an hinderance then a furtherance unto
justification. Therefore those works which follow a justified man, and flow
from true faith, are wholly to be embraced, and done, as far as man's
weakness can perform. These works are necessary unto every Christian,
because they cannot be separated from true faith. For on whomsoever God does
bestow and inspire faith by his spirit, through the word; him also does he
renew, and make willing and fit for the performance of good works: so that
works do follow faith, as the effects do follow the cause. And as effects
cannot be separated from the cause, so neither can good works from faith.

Here by evident reasons is showed, how great, both public and private
commodities do flow from the studious care of good works: And the unsavory
slanders of the Papists, (which say that good works are rejected by the
Protestants) are refuted.

CHAP. 32.
ANd why these good works should be done, the reasons which follow in order,
will declare. Amongst these reasons, some appertain unto God, some unto our
selves, and some unto our neighbor. Therefore good works ought chiefly to be
done for Gods cause: for he commands that we should depart from evil and do
good. Psalm. 37.29
So that first of all, good works are to be done, because God will have it so,
that in this life we should begin our new obedience that is due unto him, and
finish it in the life to come. We are not left unto our own selves, to do what
seems good in our own eyes; but it stands us upon to do his will, under
whose jurisdiction we are. Hence it is, Ioh. 15.12.
that Christ in S. John says, This is my commandment, that ye love one
another, as I have loved you. This therefore is the chiefest end, to obey God
and his commandments: for God is glorified by a godly life, and an holy
conversation. For he that lives godly, honors God, because he performs
obedience unto him, and expresses and resembles his image, and gives
occasion that others may glorify God also. Mat. 5 16.
On the contrary, they which live a dissolute and an ungodly life, do dishonor
God: for albeit they praise him with their lips and tongue, yet by their
wicked deeds, and ungodly life, they speak evil of him, though they keep
silence and say not a word. Secondly, good works are to be done for the
Gospels sake, that it may be beautified and adorned with good manners, and
virtuous and honest actions. Tit. 2.10.
For a godly and blameless life is an honor and ornament unto the Gospel. So
by godly endeavors and holy works it is brought to pass, that the doctrine of
the Gospel is approved and well spoken of among the adversaries. For often it
happens, that they by this means are allured to the embracing of the Gospel.
Further, good works are to be done for the cause of our thankfulness; for it
is a just and equal thing, that we should love and praise him, by whom we are
redeemed from the power of sin and of the devil; and of whom we have
receyved, and daily do receyve so many benefits: which cannot be done, without
a pure mind, an holy life, and chaste body: For an impure and wicked life is
rather the dishonouring then praising of God. Again, as we are justified by
faith through the grace of God and merit of Christ, and freely made heirs of
the heavenly kingdom; so also by a careful desire of good works we ought
daily and continually to show and manifest our selves to be thankful unto God
for so great a benefit. These are the reasons, why good works are to be done
for Gods sake.

Now the reasons follow, why they are to be done for our own sake. First
therefore we ought to do good works, because they are sure and infallible
signs of our faith. For as the tree cannot be known what manner of one it is,
but by the fruits thereof, so also is faith known by a godly and holy life.
For although faith has her secret abiding inwardly in the heart, yet there it
remains not idle, but brings forth good works outwardly, and shows it
self unto men. So that where honest actions and a godly conversation is, and
appears in the outward work, there must true faith needs be likewise: for
dissimulation and hipocrisy does not long deceive and keep itself close.
Therefore, in whose mind soever, a sincere care and desire to do good
dwells, let him know, that he has true faith, For without faith there
reigns in man no care nor desire, but only how to sin. On the contrary,
faith is exercised and strengthened by good works, 2. Pet. 1.10
so that continually by daily increase it is augmented and grows greater.
Therefore Paul admonishes Timothy, 2. Tim. 1.6.
to stir up the gift of God that is in him, that it might increase more and
more, and make larger proceedinges. Also, it is seemly, for a man to adorn
and garnish his life and calling with holy and religious manners. Therefore the
Scripture admonishes and exhorts, Ephesians 4 1.
that every one should so walk, as beseems the Calling wherewith he is
called. Likewise, temporal punishments are often avoided by good works. For
where sins are committed and heaped up with a strong hand, there also the
judgments of God against them sleeps not. For that tree which brings forth
no fruit, is wont to be cut down, Mat. 7.19.
and cast into the fire: by which saying we are taught, that punishment is an
inseperable companion of an ungodly life. For the more securely that man
sins, the more severely God punishes.

Lastly, by the serious and sincere study of good works, the goods, both of the
body and of the soul are augmented. For the more earnestly that a man gives
himself unto godliness, and striveth unto integrity, the more is his corrupt
and sinful nature amended, and he the more renewed unto the image of God. For
this cause the Prophets and Apostles do so greatly exhort and urge men unto
all godliness and innocence of life. Likewise, good works are very profitable
and much avayleable to the attaynement of prosperity in this life. For God
suffers not that his children should languish and die, being consumed with
want. Of which thing there are many testimonies of Scripture extant in diverse
places, wherein he promises many and sundry good turns and rewards unto the
religious worshippers of him: Of which we may read Moses his books. Deuteronomy. 28.
Surely such like promises are like so many heavenly spurs, by which all and
every one is pricked on to the doing of good: as if the Prophets and Apostles
should collect and conclude thus; 1. Tim. 4.6.
Whatsoever things have the promises of this life and of that which is to come,
they ought to be thought upon, and to be done above all things. But the works
of godliness have the promises of this life, and that which is to come;
therefore those works above all things ought to be thought upon and done. In
this world, God gives unto the godly, some taste of his goodness in temporal
blessings, that by such a taste, he might allure and whet them on more and
more, unto the desire of heavenly things. S. Paul having respect unto this, 1.
Tim. 4.8.
writes unto Timothy, that godliness is profitable unto all things, and has
the promises of this life and the life to come. By this saying he does stir
up all the godly unto true and sincere religion, for the great goodness sake of
God, in as much as God suffers nothing to be wanting unto them which love the
ways of God. Therefore Paul sets down godliness alone, to be the beginning
and accomplishment of an happy and prosperous life; as if he should say,
whosoever attaineth unto true godliness indeed, possesses God himself, and
all good things do attend upon him, and the Scripture requires nothing else at
his hands. Seeing therefore that faith is nourished by good works, that the
holy spirit is cherished in man, and that God is moved and stirred up unto a
larger measure of liberality, every man should daily take heed that the
transitory things of this world do not hinder the study and course of
godliness. So the godly and holy men, by giving themselves daily unto good
works, Phil. 2.15.
and by serving God faithfully are the lights of the world. For on the one
side, by the good works that they do, they do set forth and further the glory
of God, and do adorn his Gospel, and enlarge it unto others; on the other
side they do mutually edify and benefit both themselves and others together
with them. Therefore good works are precious ointments, which send forth their
savor far and wide unto others, and do allure them unto it by the pleasant
odor; whose wounds it cures and heals like balm: and thus much of this
matter.

Now we must briefly run over the reasons, why good works are to be done,
Phil. 2.4.
for our neighbors sake. A Christian man ought not only to think on, and be
careful of those things that are his own, but also on those things which do
concern his neighbor For what good thing soever a man receyveth of God, he
ought not to suppress and conceal them in his own power, as if he might
enjoy them alone; but is bound to stretch and enlarge them further, to the
benefiting of others. And so he should endeavor himself to be profitable unto
his neighbor, not only by good counsel and other temporal commodity, but
much rather by a good and godly example of life; that he may either be more
furthered and edified in true faith, or converted unto the faith and continued
therein. For this often is effected by a godly life and an honest conversation,
that men which are altogether enemies of the Gospel, are converted unto the
love and liking thereof. So that the very infidels by a godly speech, or by one
good work and holy example or other, are gained to Christ, and do attain
salvation. Again, good works ought to be done, lest others being offended
with such or such faults should start back from the love of the Gospel, or
should be discouraged from embracing it: for they think that the Gospel is
such as their manners are which profess it, for the world is wont to measure
all religion by the manners of men. If then the professors of the Gospel be
holy and without blame, then do they commend and praise the Gospel it self.
But if they live wickedly after this or that sort, their minds are changed,
and they dissallow and reject the Gospel, which certaynely ought not to be so.
For the Gospel does not depend upon this or that event, or upon any manners of
men, but upon God himself, and has authority from it own nature: so that the
Gospel is holy, and remains true, yea, though the whole world should abandon
it self unto the committing of all manner of wickedness, and should with one
consent condemn the whole worship of God together with the Gospel unto hell
and utter darkness, notwithstanding they which live wickedly and dissolutely,
are infectious, and bring assured destruction both to themselves and others. So
a wicked and profane life is nothing else but a shame and reproach of true
religion, and of the Gospel: and not only so, but also it gives matter and
occasion unto others to skorne and eschew the Gospel. For they which profess
and embrace that, have after a sort the name of God engraven in their
foreheads. As often therefore as they do wickedly, so often do they by their
uncleanness disgrace the very face of God, and make his blessed Gospel a
reproach and laughingstock unto others. And all they work wickedness, and live
ungodly, Romans 2.24.
not only which commit evil, and things that are forbidden of God, but also
which neglect good, and things commanded by God, both which God has decreed
to punish. For the Lord says in Matthew, I thirsted, Mat. 25.35
and ye gave me not to drink, and so forth.

These are the chiefest ends for which good works are to be done, for all they
are so necessary for a man of a ripe age, Mat. 25.42.
that without them not one can enter into eternal life: not that they are the
causes of salvation, for of it there is not, neither can be any other cause but
the merit of Christ alone, and Gods only goodness. Again, men are reconciled
unto God, and justified before they have done any good works: for first, their
sins are forgiven and pardoned them. Secondly, the Holy Ghost, by which they
are renewed unto a new life, and to the doing of good works, is given unto
them. So that in the order of nature, justification does go before the
renewing of man, and the perfourming of good works. Therefore the Papists
which seek for justification by good works, do make a cause of the effect,
and change the cause into the effect. But good works are necessary unto men of
ripe age, as certain means without which men cannot attain unto salvation:
for God does acquit and justify man freely, but he will not have man to abuse
his grace by ungodly living: Ephesians. 2.10.
therefore he has ordained good works for men, that they should walk in
them. Again, in the last judgment of the whole world, he will pronounce
either the sentence of condemnation or salvation according to their works, so
that none shall then be saved except he be endued and clothed with good works.

By all this it appears manifestly with what an unjust and undeserved slander
the Papists do accuse and backbite us among the rude and ignorant common sort
of men, when with open and impudent mouth they cry out upon us, that we despise
and reject good works, when as they rather are they which do this, for they
reject and despise those works which are acceptable and well pleasing unto
God, and out of their own brain do forge and invent works of their own, by
which they say, they can prevent and deserve the grace of God. With these
feigned works they vaunt themselves unto the rude and simple, that they can
attain unto glory by them: but seeing they have not true works which proceed
from the renewing of grace, or at the least do not teach the right use of true
works, they lost their glory with God. And here an end of these things, thus
spoken briefly as by the way, concerning good works. Now return we unto the
further handling of regeneration.

Although the regeneration of the godly be imperfect, and but only begun in
this life, yet it is so necessary unto every Christian, as that without it not
one can be saved. Secondly, although it he imperfect, yet it is never at an
end. Lastly, it is declared by the scripture unto whom regeneration happens.

CHAP. 33.
ALthough regeneration be imperfect, and be but only begun in this life, so
that the godly can never in deed and in act perform so much as in will they
are pressed to do, Heb. 12.14.
yet nevertheless it is so necessary unto every one, that without it no man
can attain unto salvation. For the generation of every one is condemned in
Adam, as in the common father of us all: for which cause, as Augustine says,
Tom. 10. col. 336.
every one that is begotten is condemned, except he be begotten again.
Therefore the scripture says plainly and absolutely, that no man can see the
kingdom of God, except he be borne again: John. 3.3. Heb. 12.14.
their eyes only shall see God, which have been renewed unto his image. For
man in his nature is wholly corrupted, and a stranger from God, Ephesians. 4.18.
and from the life of God, and sin does wholly possess him. By this it is
clear enough, Romans 7.16.
how necessary regeneration is, and a new creature in Christ Jesus. Moreover,
although regeneration in this life be very small and imperfect continually, yet
by the holy spirit it is made so great in the elect, as that the power of sin
is restrained and weakened in them, that it bears not the whole sway, nor
reigns and rules at large. So that, although the godly and the regenerate
do fall now and then into such or such sins, Romans 7.18.
yet they never sin with all their mind, and with their whole will, but do so
resist the corruption of nature, that they never fully approve, and do that
which it persuades and bids. So that in them there is such reluctation and
striving, Romans 7.25.
that the reformed will desires one thing, and the corruption of nature
persuades another. Thus they do not that which they would, but that which
they hate that do they. So, with their mind they serve and obey the law of
God, but with their flesh the ^^^w of sin: so that in them there is in a
diverse respect, both a will and no will. There is a will, as they are reformed
and renewed by the heavenly grace. There is no will in them, as far forth as
they are not regenerate, and obey the flesh. In them the reformed and renewed
will fights and striveth with the unregenerate part, that at the length it
becomes conqueror and overcommer. For the grace of regeneration, that
persuades and inviteth men unto goodness, is more mighty, then the corruption
of nature that tempts unto evil. And thus far of the second point to be
observed in this regeneration: now the third remains briefly to be unfolded
and declared.

This regeneration and renewing of the corrupt nature, is afforded unto none
but unto the elect only. This the scripture in express words says, and
plainly proves, that they only are enlightened, and do come unto faith,
which are ordained unto eternal life; Act. 15.48
for faith proceeds and comes from regeneration, and both are contained
under election. Therefore none are regenerate but the elect, and again, none
are elected, but they which shall be regenerate and endued with faith. Here
therefore are convertible terms, which are equal one to an other, and may one
be affirmed of the other. Also Paul in this cheyne affirms plainly, that the
elect only are glorified. For so he says, whom he predestined, those also
he called, and whom he called, those also he justified, and whom he
justified, those also he glorified: therefore this glorification happens
unto none, but unto those that are predestined. By this most heavenly
gradation from the highest unto the lowest, it comes to pass, that the
conclusion of the grace of God, answers and agrees very fitly unto the
preface or beginning thereof.

Now they which are glorified, are first regenerate unto a sincere and holy
life, then, they are renewed more fully and perfectly daily by continual
proceeding toward the attaynement of everlasting life, until that their
glorification being fully ended and finished, they be made happy both in body
and soul together, and translated into the heavenly rest. So God does prepare
man, and make him fit by regeneration, for the heavenly inheritance, which can
neither perish, nor be defiled, 1. Pet. 1.4.
nor fade away. Therefore whom he adorneth in this world with his grace, those
also he crowns in heaven with glory. This regeneration, howsoever in respect
of man it be very weak, yet in respect of the foundation and beginning
thereof, it is far more firm then the frame of heaven, for it has the holy
spirit the Almighty God for the effector and preserver thereof. He therefore
which will disanull and overthrow that, must first vanquish God, and thrust him
from his throne, for God does not only glorify his children, but also does
preserve them in that glorification and other spiritual gifts, until at the
length he finally glorify and crown them both in body and soul. For after
that true faith has once begun to be in a man, it can never fall quite away
and wholly decay, for it is grounded and propped up by the power of God, 1. Pet.
1.5.
and in it it has a most strong foundation.

Indeed it may be, that the course and fervency of faith may be much
interrupted and alayed by this or that fall, but the root of faith being
fastened and planted in the heart of man by the holy spirit, and the bud that
springs from thence, can never be quite supplanted, and clean rooted out.
And if that faith once given and grafted in the heart of the elect by the
finger of God, could utterly fall away, and come to nothing, then certaynely,
the counsel of God it self, concerning the salvation of the elect, should be
variable and not sure, mutable and not constant. Again, if they whom the
father has planted into his Son, by a true and steadfast faith, might be
cut off and perish, then without doubt the Salvation of the Elect would be
uncertain. But seeing that Christ is the most faithful keeper of the Elect and
Believers, Ioh. 10.29.
he will not suffer them to perish. Therefore they are set far beyond all
danger of perishing and falling away. For God takes them into his keeping and
safeguard: his will remains unchangeable in the preservation of them, and is
fortified with sovereign power. So that albeit in themselves they be weak and
subject to falling: yet because they are vpheld and preserved by the hand and
power of God, they are steadfast and permanent, and can never fall from the
blessed estate of Salvation. For God makes them to persevere in goodness,
because he himself has made them good, Tom. 7. col. 1345.
says S. Augustine. If therefore some of the elect do fall grievously, God is
able to restore them. For he it is that vpholdeth those that fall, Psalm. 145.14.
and lifts up those that are ready to fall, says the Scripture. God gives
and bestows upon them certain and continual perseverance in the faith,
because he has appointed undoubted salvation for them. So that although they
be weak and frail in themselves, yet they have more perseverance in their
weakness, than Adam had in his perfection. Because they have a promise of
perseverance, which Adam had not. For God is faithful, says S. Paul, 2. These.
3.3.
which will establish you, and keep you from evil. Therefore they which dream
that true faith may be lost again, do err in their vain conceit and offend
grievously. For they take away from Christians the sure comfort of their
Salvation. Therefore a final perseverance in the faith, is an inseparable
companion of true faith, from which it can be separated no more, than can the
light from the Sun, and heat from the fire. For it is fortified with power
from heaven, against all the sleights of Satan, and against the very gates of
hell, Mat. 16.1^
and so preserved from every hurtful annoyance, that it can never be lost, nor
fall away.

By what bonds the elect are united unto God, so that they cannot perish* nor
fall away. Also by what signs they may be known, and how they may be assured
of their Salvation.

Chap. 34.
ANd God has united them to himself by two bonds stronger than Adamant. The
first of which is his unchangeable and everlasting election before the
foundations of the world were laid. For, whom he has chosen from everlasting,
those will he have to be blessed for ever, therefore they cannot perish: so
that the salvation of the elect does not depend upon any doubtful event, but
it was appointed and prepared for them by God from everlasting before they were
borne. Thus it is showed, that their salvation is so sure and certain, that
the troublesome motions of the whole world, nor all the feends of hell cannot
overthrow nor weaken it, the other bond is an effectual calling unto Christ in
time. But they, whom God grafteth into Christ effecctually by a true faith, can
no more fall away and perish, then Christ himself, because he has redeemed
them with his blood, and being redeemed does preserve them safe and without
danger of every evil and deadly hurt. John. 10.28
They are his sheep, which no man can take out of his hand. Hence we may
resolutely and strongly conclude, that the salvation of the elect and true
believers is so sure and certain, as Christ is the omnipotent and Almighty
God. Therefore who can pluck and withdraw them from Christ, whom God has
called and drawn unto Christ by his almighty spirit? Surely the gates of hell
shall not prevayle against them, therefore their immovable constancy, and
steadfast certaynety of salvation ought not to be considered in their nature,
but consists in, and is grounded upon the might and power of God. Therefore
in this and in nothing else does the salvation of the elect depend and stand.

Fourthly and lastly, regeneration may be known by the fruits thereof, as the
Sun rising may be known by the light, and the fire by the heat, for it may
be known by sundry motions and operations of the holy spirit, as by infallible
tokens and assured signs, for as the life of a living creature may be
discerned by the sense and motion, so also this regeneration may be known by
those things and works which necessarily follow it, for they which are truly
and effectually regenerate, in them the love of God is begotten. This Saint
Paul expressly affirms, saying, If any man love God, 1. Cor. 8.3.
the same is taught of him. He therefore which loves God with his soul, and
has an earnest desire to keep his commandments, let him know that he is
elected and regenerate, and be most certainly persuaded that he shall be saved.
Secondly, they which are regenerate, hear Gods words, and receive them by
faith. John. 8.47.
He therefore that has an hearty desire to hear the word of God, and to profit
in it, in him there shines and appears a visible sign of election, and of a
godly and regenerate mind. So that he which hears Gods word, enjoys God
himself, and has fellowship with him. So on the contrary, there is no more
evident sign of a reprobate and profane mind, then to contemn and reject the
word of God, for they of set purpose do deprive themselves of righteousness and
life eternal. Thirdly, the holy spirit does kindle a sincere and serious
desire to do well, and to please God, in the hearts of the regenerate, so that
on the one side they do love and seek after righteousness, and on the other
side they hate and eschew iniquity, Psa. 34.15. 1. These. 4.4.
and therefore the Prophets and Apostles do exhort the children of God, that
they should depart from evil, and do good. Paul says plainly, that this is
the will of God, even our sanctification, that every one should abstain from
fornication, and from every profane and wicked course of life, and should
possess his vessel in honor. They therefore which do heartily love God, and
abhor evil, may be most certainly persuaded, that they are regenerate, and
that therefore they are elected from everlasting unto salvation.

Moreover, this regeneration works in man a vehement strife between the
flesh and the spirit. So that when the flesh, which is the unregenerate part
does withdraw man from the care and obedience of Gods law, and tempts him
unto the committing and doing of that which is evil, then on the other side,
the spirit being the part regenerate by God, does labor the contrary way, for
it aspireth and striveth unto the obedience of Gods law with a careful
endeavor. Therefore this wrestling between the flesh and the spirit, and the
love of goodness and hatred of evil, are such works in a man, as can be found
in none but in the regenerate only: for where there is no regeneration, there
can be no strife between the flesh and the spirit, but men wallow and nuzzle
themselves in sin without fear. But in a regenerate man there are contrary
affections, which always fight one with an other. They therefore which feel
within themselves this conflict between the flesh and the spirit, and yet in
the mean while doubt whether they be elected unto salvation or no, they do
great injury unto God, as if he did regenerate and call men unto Christ in
vain, and would not save them. By this conflict, the imperfection of the godly
in this life may easily be perceived, because that the corruption of nature is
not fully and wholly vanquished and subdued in this world, so that the godly
should strive and contend manfully against it, until by the holy spirit they
have subdued it, and so obtain a joyful victory and rule over the stubbernes
of the flesh. Therefore Paul commands, Gal. 5.17.
that the godly should not do that which they would. So in this life, there is
such a condition and conflict in the Saints, that the flesh always lusts
against the spirit, Romans 7.15.
and the spirit against the flesh. So that what they do, they approve and allow
not, for that which they would they do not, but that which they hate, that do
they. So Paul in his own person, as in the common example of all the godly,
does teach us, that such is the infirmity of the best, that they cannot do that
good which they would, but contrariwise that they do that evil which they
would not. By this it is evident, that the children of God, are never such good
proficients here, as that the perfection of their work should be answerable
unto their will. And so Paul says plainly, and confesses freely of himself,
That to will is always present with me, but I find no means to do that which
is good: so the corruption of nature does always hinder the most godly in this
life, that they cannot perfectly serve and obey God. Therefore let every
Christian carefully examine himself, whether he do acknowledge Christ for his
redeemer, and steadfastly believe in him, or no, and if he shall find that he
has any whit of Christ within him, so that for the love and fear of God he
hates evil, and loves that which is good, then surely he has the beginning
of life in himself, Romans 8.1.
and need to have no fear of condemnation at all. They therefore which
believe that they are elected, do honor God by giving credit unto his word.
Certainly we should by faith embrace the promise of God, and not respect the
frailty of man, for they which by a true faith do believe that they shall be
saved for Christ his sake and his merit, are the sons of Abraham, and shall be
the heirs of promise. Gal. 3.29.


Therefore by faith may every one be assured of his salvation. So that this is a
sure and infallible conclusion, I do believe truly and sincerely in Jesus
Christ, and do put the whole confidence of my salvation in him alone, therefore
I am elected and cannot be lost. For true faith is a most certain and
undoubted argument of salvation, that is to say, a most infallible and evident
token, which makes an end of all wavering and doubting. For the scripture
says in plain and express words, 2. These. 3.2. Tit. 1.1. Act. 3.28. Romans
5.1. and 14.17.
that faith is not given unto every one, but is a gift peculiar unto the elect
only. Now this faith is not idle, but does glad the conscience, and brings
peace unto it. This the scripture expresses saying, that God sheadeth abroad
the feeling of his love into the hearts of the elect by the holy spirit, by
which they cry Abba, father. So Paul says plainly, that he knows whom he
has believed on: 2. Tim. 1.12
teaching every of the godly by his example, that he may judge and discern of
his own faith. Therefore whosoever believes in his heart, and desires to go
forward, that is, to make better proceedings in faith, and in the works
thereof, he may set it down for a certain truth, that he is elected of God,
redeemed by Christ, and regenerate by the Holy Ghost. So, God witnesses and
declares in their consciences, how he is affected toward every one: so that
where there is a quiet and peaceable conscience toward God, there does God set
up the throane of his fatherly and saving grace, and rules and works by his
holy Spirit unto everlasting life. Moreover, although faith be an evident
testimony of election, yet the want of faith is no evident sign of
reprobation. Therefore this consequence is false and deceitful: I believe not,
therefore I am not elected but reprobated. That is as untrue as this. The Sun
is not as yet risen, therefore it will never rise, for after a little while it
may rise. So also, although this or that man believe not to day, nor feels
any effect of faith, yet when the time shall come, which God has appointed and
set down for his calling, he may have faith, and attain unto the true
feeling thereof. Therefore we should hope very well in our good God, eve^ until
the last gasp of life, especially seeing he is endewed with so kind and
merciful a nature, as that he is infinitely more desirous to save miserable
sinners, then they are to be saved of him. Let every man therefore repent him,
and betake himself unto a better way, and through Christ he shall obtain
salvation. For sins passed, as Augustine says, do not hurt a man, if sins
that are present do not delight him. And he that is displeased with himself in
his sins, he is well pleasing unto God in grace. For the favor of God and a
wicked life agree not together, neither can be in one man both together.
Therefore, 2. Tim. 2.19
let every man that names Christ depart from iniquity, for so he shall
indeed feel that he is not of the number of the reprobates, but of the
elect. So that whosoever loves God truly, 1. Cor. 8.3.
and studieth and desires to order his life according to his will, let him
know that he is truly elected, and regenerate indeed. For the unregenerate
men, with their whole soul and will, are at enimity with God, Romans 8.7. Col.
1.21.
and are wholly carried headlong into all wickedness, and every kind of sin,
for their mind is alienated from that which is good, and is wholly addicted and
given unto that which is evil.

These things being thus considered, both in a generality and common view,
concerning the chain of salvation, is also being divided and unfolded through
the five linckes thereof, as it were by several branches, having bin by a
divine order conceived before time, are set down in time by an Apostolic
method, and ordered and ranged with excellent skill. And if a man should more
intentively and deeply consider all the linckes of this chain, the only will
of God shall be the efficient cause of all the rest, for upon it the sum of
all the rest depends and consists. Therefore the freewill of God is the
first and most general cause, for from it proceeds the first motion and
whole power of working, so that without it in this matter nothing can be
wrought or brought to pass. And here is a most excellent and artificial
order of the causes of salvation, for from the first and highest cause unto the
secondary causes, and from thence unto the effects, there is a continual
gradation, until we come unto the last end, whether all and every of them tend
and have recourse.

What are the effects of predestination, and how great benefits come from it
unto every believer. Next there is showed, that this cheyne of salvation is
made of the mere benefits of God.

CHAP. 35.
HEre now remains briefly to be handled what and how great effects and
benefits do arise and come unto us, by the free grace of predestination. These
effects may be declared and enlarged by sundry and several degrees, and they
are in number ten, all which are set down in order. The first of them is
Christ the Mediator, the head and beginning of all the elect. He in this
doctrine of election, is to be esteemed the only foundation and groundwork
of salvation, for without him there can be no election unto salvation, so that
of him depends the election of all the rest, for he vouchsafed to come down
from heaven, and to become man, that by his sacrifice and blood he might
redeem and save others for ever. The second effect is the creation, and
bringing forth of every of the elect into this world. The third is an
effectual calling unto Christ by the holy Spirit and the word of the Gospel,
and a true conversion unto God. The fourth is justification, a steadfast faith
and a certain hope, which lays hold upon and applies unto it self Christ
and his merits, and relyeth wholly on him, not desiring nor longing after any
thing else. The fifth is regeneration and the good works which necessarily
follow it, for whom God has appointed unto any end, he also ordayneth and
shows him certain means, by which he may attain unto the end that he is
appointed unto. Therefore good works are not the beginning and cause of
election as the Papists dream, but they are only the effects and means, by
which as by certain succeeding degrees the elect are brought unto life
everlasting. The sixth is the daily increase and access of faith and
sanctification, so that the works of charity, and effects of faith do one
after an other daily grow greater and better, for a man is not good, except he
have a desire to be made and become better. And he that goes not forward in
the ways of God, goes back from them, as Saint Barnard says elsewhere. The
seventh is invincible patience and courage, in enduring adversity quietly. The
eight is undaunted and perpetual constancy, and final perseverance in faith
and sanctification daily increasing. The ninth is resurrection from the dead,
and the reuniting of body and soul. The tenth is glorification and life
eternal, that is to say, spiritual joy in God with thanksgiving, and
everlasting gladness in Christ. By these things we may see clearly, what great
and saving gifts and benefits are included in predestination only. They
therefore which feel the effects of the grace of god within themselves, ought
with great admiration to have them in continual remembrance, and to consider
of them within themselves, for they which do acknowledge how greatly they are
bound unto God for so great a benefit, which has vouchsafed to choose them
from out of such a number of wretched persons, and being elected, to reform
and renew them into his own image and heavenly glory. Let them then with
certain hope and found confidence rely upon that free goodness of God, and that
his unchangeable counsel, concerning their salvation, and let them be as
surely persuaded and made as certain of their salvation, as if they had it
already laid down unto them in their hand, and did enjoy it in full and
present possession. So that these gifts of God, and merits of Christ are to be
thought upon seriously and religiously, and to be preferred before all the
riches of the whole world, for they do bring with them everlasting life, and
blessed immortality. But they which turn aside unto transitory and fading good
things, are not wise for themselves, for they perish at the last with certain
destruction.

Moreover, these effects are some of them of one only respect and sort, which
are such effects as can never put on the nature, nor take upon them the turn
of an efficient cause, of which sort are all the secundary effects from the
first effect unto the last end. Others are of a twofold respect and sort,
which may sometimes be effects, and sometimes efficient causes. Such is the
first effect, namely, Christ Jesus, which though he be God eternal, and in
this respect can be an effect unto nothing, when as he makes all things; yet
as he is man and a mediator, he is the first effect of predestination: and he
is such an effect thereof, as notwithstanding may nevertheless be an
operative, and efficient cause of all the rest, for he is the cause of all the
effects which are placed between predestination and glorification which is the
last of all, for it is he which has called, which has justified, which has
glorified us. So that all the linckes of this whole chain, are the mere
benefits of God, and no merits of man are found in it. Therefore he that
reckons up man's merits among these free benefits of God, as he does derogate
from the bounty and glory of God, so also does he hazard his own Salvation.
But all they which love God, and do seek for their Salvation in his goodness
and in the Sacrifice of Christ, do know for an assured truth, that all the
lincks of this Chain, are the very effects of Christ, and the mere benefits
of God himself. Therefore to him only ought they to be thankful for them.
Moreover, out of this Chain we may see, that in the whole course of
Salvation, the Scripture mentions and speaks of nothing but the grace of
God only, and many other gifts which proceed from that. Therefore also the
true faith of the godly, ought to receyve and acknowledge nothing besides them.

The Linckes of this Chain ought to be considered by an Antithesis, that the
goodness of God may the more appear and be magnified, so that we proceed
from the enjoying of the one contrary, unto the remooving of the other.
Secondly, the Linckes hang together with an inseparable knot; so that he which
receyveth one of them, becomes partaker of the rest.

CHAP. 35.
FVrthermore, that the goodness of God, and the greatness thereof, may the
more and more appear to be free every manner of way, and may the better be
known, and the more easily be understood, we must know and hold for a
certainty, that there is a continual Antithesis in every Lincke of this
Chain, so that our proceeding is from one contrary unto an other. So that this
Chain, as it does attribute unto God only all the benefits that it has and
contains: so it denies them to any mortal men. For what good things soever
man does here give and bestow upon man, the evils contrary to them are in every
man by nature. For he did choose us when we were not: he called us when we
were enemies and strangers from him: he justified us when we were sinners,
yea, the most miserable bondslaves of sin: he sanctified us, when we were
impure and unclean: he glorified us, when we were mortal and vain men; as
Augustine says. Tom. 10. col. 339.
Also we must seriously weigh and consider in this Chain, that the Apostle
did use and take these three last words after the manner of the Hebrews in
the form of the preterperfect tence in stead of the future tence, and that
for two reasons. First, they to whom the Apostle wrote this, were already
called, justified, and in some sort regenerate; and therefore had obtained some
part of this glorification. Secondly, for the certainty of those things, which
as yet remained. For that which was promised of God, and which they by hope
laid hold upon, is before God all one, as if they had already receyved it of
God indeed, and did already enjoy it in full possession. Again, all things
that are to come, are present with God. Therefore the Scripture does as freely
speak of a thing to come, as if it were already performed and fulfilled. This
propriety of the Hebrew phrase, is wont only to be used in those things, which
admit no contrary exception, but draw with them a continual and necessary
consequence. So that these promises, which being certain and infallible, are
lincked and bound up in this Chain, ought to be embraced with the whole
affections of the heart: for they are such as can bring everlasting life both to
the body and Soul.

This Chain, is as it were of Adamant, and eternal; so also is the order,
from one lincke unto an other, continual, not possible to be undone. Therefore
he which has receyved one lincke of this Chain, shall be sure to receyve the
rest; because he has God for his debtor, which uses not to recall his
promise: but not such a debtor, as if he had him bound to him by his merits,
but because God himself, by his own voluntary goodness and free promises,
has made himself his debtor. Let the faithful therefore consider, what, and
how many Linckes of the degrees of this Chain, they have already obtained of
God, and how many remain for to be obtained, that they may both give thanks
to God for them which they have receyved, and also hope well of the rest, which
as yet they want. For they ought to take great confirmation of their hope and
good courage, by those benefits which they have and do feel in themselves
already. For this is the true remembrance and acknowledgement of benefits
receyved of God, when as men by them, conceyve matter of good hope, for the
time that is to come. For surely it were an open sign of unthankfulness, and
an argument of distrust, daily to enjoy the bounty of God, and so many, and so
great benefits of his, and yet to conceyve and take no hope, nor confirmation
of hope thereby. And to confirm hope, there is no stronger means, then the
eternal and unchangeable fidelity and constancy of God in the performance of
his promises. For there is nothing that does more faithfully and surely
perform, and more truly fulfill his promises, then God does: For if all the
Princes of the earth, should with one mind and one mouth, promise a man this or
that, and should withal give their charters sealed with their own seals, yet
their promise ought not to be accounted so sure and certain, as the least of
Gods promises. For their promise may sundry ways be hindered and made
frustrate. But the promise of God can be shifted off by no device, overthrown
by no slight, altered and interrupted by no impediments. Therefore to him a
man may safely give credit, because his promise is everlasting and
unchangeable truth.

All the world and all the goods thereof are subject to destructions, and shall
at the last fade and pass away, but the gifts of this Chain are everlasting,
and shall never decay.

CHAP. 37.
FVrthermore, we must here know and understand, that all things in general,
and every thing in particular, are found to be subject unto continual change,
and fading: which although in their estate and place, they seem to have more
steadfastness and divine excellency in them, then the rest of the creatures
have, and have receyved no hurt, that we can see, by so many succeeding ages
gone and past: yet notwithstanding all of them almost in every moment, are
seen to vary much in their motion, and in the effects of their motion, and
many times to be subject, sometime to this, and sometime to that variation and
change. So that although there can be found nothing in the whole universal
world, whether it be in the heavenly bodies, or in these inferior bodies and
earthly things, which is firm and steadfast, perpetual and durable; yet this
one work of regeneration, is such a piece of work and affect of the Majesty
of God, as wherein God would have the express stamp of his eternal glory to
remain, and the lively image of his everlasting mercy to appear plainly.
Therefore, although man in his nature seem to be more frail and weak then
almost any other creature, and to be more near unto nothing, so that he may
worthily be called dust and ashes, rather then man: yet when God begins to
frame him anew, and to make him like himself, presently in that very instant,
of a miserable man, he is made and becomes happy; of a condemned person, he
is made blessed; of mortal, he becomes immortal; of a frail man, ready to
come to nothing, he is made to endure for ever. So that in man all things are
frail and weak, and nothing shall be permanent or durable in him, except it
spring from regeneration, and be affixed unto the only anchor of true
Religion. Therefore although all things be frail and subject unto decaying,
yet the regenerate and the godly do always continue, and never perish. Albeit
in this world they are many times oppressed, and oftentimes slain of their
enemies, yet even by death it self, they do obtain and come unto
immortality. So that dying here always, they shall never die. Therefore this
Chain is as it were the only strong anchor, which fastneth and preserves the
ship of Christian faith, in the heavenly Sanctuary, as in an haven most sure
from all the dangers of storms, against all the rage of hell, and the
turbulent motions of the world. So that no floods, nor no tempests can arise
and swell so great, as by which this anchor may be loosed, and the ship broken
and drowned.

Also this Chain, is as a strong engine, to destroy all the loftiness of men,
which does arrogate any thing, as proper unto it self: and it is as a sharp
sword, to stabbe and quell their presumption and pride, which does extol and
lift up it self more then it should. Lastly, it is as a long and golden line,
which stretches it self from one part of the heaven unto an other, that every
of the Elect wheresoever, may lay sure hold upon it, and very well apply it
unto themselves. Therefore (as is said before in a word or two) he that
desires to profit in the knowledge of this Chain, and to confirm himself in
it fruitfully, must above all things take heed, that he begin not at the
highest cause of Predestination, that lies hidden in the counsel of God: but
that he ascend by little and little, as it were by degrees, from the last
effects thereof unto the first cause: so that he begin at regeneration; from
thence, that he go to justification; from thence, unto true faith; from that,
unto vocation; from this, unto eternal election: from that, let him pass and
ascend unto the gracious will of God, that effects all these things, There
must he settle and ground the anchor of his faith. But God begins a
contrary way in descending unto us: For he begins at the first cause, and
proceeds through means unto the last effect, until he bring and draw us
unto himself.

Of the effects of reprobation, which are contrary unto the effects of
Election. Also what benefits of God, the Elect and reprobates have common, and
what not. And that the judgment of God concerning both, is steadfast and
eternal.

CHAP. 38.
NOw the effects of Election being set down and declared, the effects of
reprobation are briefly to be set forth. For the effects of Election cannot
rightly be understood, unless the opposite effects of reprobation be likewise
weighed and considered; that so one contrary may be more illustrated and made
more plain by an other. Now, certain effects are common unto the reprobate
with the Elect, as namely Creation, and other, both many and great temporal
blessings, and helps of this life, as food and apparel, and the rest of the
blessings of this life, which belong rather to the body then the soul. But of
those blessings that belong unto Salvation, the reason is far otherwise: they
are in a continual opposition and contrariety. For the Elect are called unto
Christ by grace; the reprobate are deprived of that grace: whereas the Elect
are enlightened and converted unto God; there the reprobate are blinded and
hardened: whereas these hate sin, and depart from it; there they give
themselves over unto it, and continue in it: where these are raised up unto
heavenly glory, and are endued with everlasting life; there they arise unto
judgment, and are cast into everlasting torment. So that the reprobates
remain hardened in their sins, and strangers from God. Therefore by these
notes and infallible tokens, God does point at, as it were with his finger,
what manner of judgment is prepared for them, and does distinguish them from
his children whom he has begotten again. This is in a generallitie true of
all, but it is a dangerous thing, to conclude this of any one in particular.
For many of the Elect being oftentimes endued with faith, even in the agony of
death, are converted unto Christ in the last gasp of life. Both these come to
pass thus, God so willing and disposing them; he brings some unto
repentance, through his compassionate goodness, and brings not others,
according to his just judgment: that in the one we may perceive his undeserved
grace; in the other his just judgment and their deserved punishment, as
Augustine says. In Epist. ad Sixtum.
This condition on both sides is steadfast. For God is eternal, so likewise the
decrees of Election and reprobation are everlasting and unchangeable: therefore
none of the Elect shall perish; neither shall any of the reprobates be saved.
Let no man hence take occasion to live licentiously, because the condition of
both is unchangeable: for that Predestination is a cause to every man, why he
should stand fast; Tom. 7.1244.
but unto none a cause, why he should fall, says Augustine.

These things come necessarily to pass on both sides, God so disposing the
matter, and cannot happen otherwise; because no other efficient cause can be
found in them, but only the free and righteous will of God. For there is
nothing without God, which may moove him to this or that thing. So that God
wills a thing, and directs it unto the end, because it so pleases and
seems good unto him. So he alone and none other, is the only cause of his
will; for none can prescribe any thing unto him, because no man is superior or
equal unto him. Therefore in as much as he saves some by grace, and condemns
others in justice, we ought to seek no other cause hereof, but only his
determinate will, and absolute good pleasure. And that he has ordained
certain unto destruction, it is as certain, as God himself is God. For if he
were willing, simply and absolutely to save all and every one, then surely he
would give all men all things necessary unto Salvation; but he gives not all
men all things necessary unto Salvation, therefore he will not save all and
every one. For he that denies a man the means to attain unto some end, does
much more deny him the end it self. For he that bestows not the lesser upon
a man, how will he bestow that which is greater?

A short conclusion of this work, showing the chief use thereof, and
exhorting every of the godly unto thankfulness and sincerity of life.

CHAP. 39.
THe use of this doctrine is very great, and above all most wholesome: First,
that all the praise and glory of our Salvation, should be wholly attributed
unto God only; in that he of his merciful goodness has vouchsafed to choose us
miserable sinners unto everlasting Salvation, and to adopt us for children
through Jesus Christ, when as he had a thousand most just occasions, for which
he might worthily condemn us, and whenas there was not one cause in us,
wherefore he should give us, no, not the least drop of cold water. So that
by choosing us altogether most unworthy, he has made us worthy, through the
worthiness of his Son. Therefore this free and everlasting Election, has
the goodness of God, and the merit of Christ, and the worthiness thereof,
for his sure foundation and ground. For if the Son of God had not been
willing to suffer and satisfy for our sins; and if God had not been willing
to impute this his satisfaction unto us for righteousness, not one of us had
been elected unto Salvation, but every one had been condemned unto
everlasting death. So that in this Election, the great and incredible goodness
of God, and the most vehement and affectionate love of God toward us, does
appear, as in a most clear mirror. Secondly, all that embrace the pure
doctrine of the Gospel, and do by a true faith believe in Christ, and
persevere in him, have strong and excellent consolation from hence; in that
they are elected from everlasting unto eternal Salvation, without any merit
either foregoing or following: and that this blessed and saving Decree
concerning our Salvation is unchangeable, and therefore that they can no more
fail and be prevented of Salvation and heavenly glory, then God can be
separated from his Godhead. For as God is everlasting and unchangeable by
nature; so also that his Decree and good pleasure, concerning the Salvation of
the Elect, is everlasting and unchangeable.

For the unchangeableness sake of this Decree, all and every of them which
truly believe in Christ, have most strong and certain consolation, with which
they may comfort and refresh themselves in adversity and other spiritual
temptations. Wherefore all idolatry and superstition, all hypocrisy and
unbelief, all false doctrine and desperation being condemned and set aside,
let us from the bottom of our hearts and inward affections give thanks unto
God, and to his Son; because that we are freely elect by God from
everlasting, and fully redeemed by Christ from all evil, and shall so remain
elected and redeemed for ever without any disturbance. Let us therefore all and
every of us, with the whole affection of our mind, heartily with one mind and
one mouth, beseech the most merciful Son of God our Redeemer, that he would
purge us from the filthiness of our sins, by the power of his spirit, and
renew and fashion us daily more and more unto his own Image, that by living
holy and without blame here, we may walk faithfully and constantly in his holy
commandments, and in the true path of the Elect, until we come unto the price
of our high Calling, and to that heavenly Glory and blessed Life to come; where
abounding in great and unspeakable gladness, no trouble or sorrow being
mixed with it, we shall triumph with gladsome countenances and joyful hearts,
and possess unspeakable joys, world without end. Amen.

*

To God the Father, the Son and the holy Ghost, be given all praise and
glory, for ever. Amen.

