A SERMON Touching the PEACE And EDIFICATION Of the CHURCH.

Preached at the second Triennial Visitation of the Right Reverend Father in
God, FRANCIS Lord Bishop of Peterborough, at Daventry in Northamptonshire, July
12. 1637,

By EDWARD REYNOLDS Rector of the Church of Braunston.

Non habent Dei Charitatem qui Ecclesiae non diligunt Vnitatem. AUG. de Bapt.
lib. 3. c. 16. LONDON, Printed for Robert Bostock, at the sign of the Kings
Head in St Paul's Churchyard. 1638.

THE PEACE OF THE CHURCH.
ROMANS 14.19. Let us therefore follow after the things which make for Peace, and
things wherewith one may edify another.


EVery gift of God, by how much the more excellent it is in it self, by so much
the more (through the subtilty and malice of Satan) is it subject unto abuse;
and as the Wisdom of God does order evil things unto good, so the cunning of
sin does pervert the best things unto evil, and turn the very Grace of God into
wantonness.

Christ's coming was to set Prisoners at Liberty, Isai. 61.1. And of all other,
this of Christian liberty is one of the choicest Jewels, with the custody
whereof he has entrusted his Church.

This Liberty is twofold, either from Bondage Spiritual under Sin and Satan, or
from Bondage Carnal under the Ceremonies of the Mosaical Law, which in
opposition to the Jam. 1.25 2.8
royal and perfect Law of Liberty is called an Act. 15.10
intolerable yoke, and Ezekiel. 20.25 vid. Irenae. l. 4 cap. 29
Commandments which were not good.

Two sorts of men there were, who professing the Religion of Christ, did yet
(through the subtilty of Satan) stumble at this Liberty. Some were false
Brethren, who dogmatically taught against it; and to these the Apostle Gal.
2.4, 5
would not give place for an hour. Others were weak Brethren, who in their
Consciences were not persuaded of this Liberty, and were offended at the use of
it in those whose faith was better settled. With respect to these, the Apostle
in this Chapter states the difference then depending in the Church; so that
neither the knowledge of the one might breed scorn of those who were doubtful,
as weak; nor the scruples of the other breed censure of those who were free, as
wicked; wherein premising a most wise and pious maxim, That weak Christians
ought to be plied and cherished in the main matters of Religion, and not
perplexed with impertinent disputations; and then giving directions to both
sides touching their mutual behavior toward each other, he proceeds to
state the question it self.

For the ground whereof, he lays an excellent distinction touching Things
Indifferent, which may be considered either per se, alone by themselves, and so
he states the question for the strong, verse. 14. or in Ordine ad aliud, with
respect to some other thing: and so he gives these three Rules.

1. In order to the Weak: so Liberty must give place to Charity; I must rather
restrain my self, than scandalize and hazard the safety of my brother, v. 13,
15.

2. In order to the Doctrines of the Gospel. So Fundamentals, wherein the
Kingdom of God does stand, are to take place of such, In quibus non vertitur
salus Ecclesiae, which therefore, however to be strongly vindicated against
malicious corrupters, are yet not to be unseasonably obtruded upon tender
Consciences, otherwise agreeing in the Substantial grounds of righteousness
and peace, verse. 16, 17, 18.

3. In order to the Church of God. And so the Peace and Edification of that is
to be preferred before the rigorous and stiff asserting of our own private
Liberty: for the Edification of the Church is Gods Work, and we (...) Peace;
in one word, a perfect Moses, the meekest Man, and yet the mightiest Warrior;
a true David, a man much versed in Battle, and yet made up all of Love, Matthew.
10.34
sending a Sword in one place, and John 18.11
sheathing up a Sword in another; Matthew. 13.57
careless of offending in case of piety, and Matthew. 17.27 (...). Chrysostom.
fuse in Psa. (...). 5.6. vid. etiam in Psalm. (...). page 690. Edit. Savil.
tender of offending in case of liberty. Thus He, and thus his Church too,
Salem, a place of Peace; Jerusalem, a vision of Peace, and yet therein a Fort,
and an Armory for shields and bucklers, Cant. 4.4.

To know the difference, we are to distinguish both concerning Persons, and
concerning Things.

For Persons: the same Apostle who here teaches us to compassionate the Weak,
does teach us elsewhere to Gal. 5.1.
withstand the obstinate; and he who out of tenderness to some Acts 16.3.
yielded to circumcise Timothy, out of jealousy of others Gal. 2.3.
refused to circumcise Titus, 1 Cor. 10.23
pleasing all men in one case, and Gal. 1.10. 1 These. 2.4
forbearing to please in another, a 1 Cor. 9 19 2 Cor. 4.5.
servant to all himself, and yet, 1 Cor. 7.13.
Be ye not the servants of men.

Concerning Things: though the Heathen man spoke truly Valor. Max.
Nihil minimum in Religione, yet we know Matthew. 23.23
our Savior distinguishes between Mint or Cummin, and the great things of the
Law. And the Acts 15.28.
Apostolical Synod, between things necessary and unnecessary; and Saint Paul
here between meats and drinks, and the Kingdom of God; and 1 Cor. 3.10, 11.
elsewhere between the foundation and superstruction.

Some Truths there are, which belong ad fidem Catholicam; others which pertain
only ad scientiam Theologicam: Some are Nazian. Orat. 14. (...).
Quaestiones (...), and others (...), as Gregory Nazianzen distinguishes. Some
are de fide, against those who deny Fundamentals: Others, circa fidem, against
those who by perilous super-inducements bruise and wrench the foundation:
Others, praeter fidem, Aug. de Peccato Origin. cap. 23.
in quibus salva fide qua Christiani sumus, ignoratur verum, as S. Austin
speaks. In which we may err or be ignorant, believe or suspend, without any
hazard to the common Faith. In one word, as Tert. de Pudicit. cap. 19.
Tertullian distinguishes of sins, so may we of Opinions. Some are Quotidianae
incursionis, Method. apud Epiphan. Haeres. 64. (...).
such as are usually incident to humane frailty: some are Dogmata devoratoria
salutis, such as proceed from Heretical pride and blindness.

Now the Rule is certain, Uti de praeceptis distinguit Greg. Nazianz. Orat. 3.
De creatura, si quid aliter qua^ sese habet senserimus, dummodo non id pro
cognito praeceptoque teneamus, Nullum periculum est -- De Creatore, si aliud
quam oportet ac sese res habet nobis persuadetur, perniciosissimo Errore
decipimur. Aug. de Lib. Arb. lib. 3. cap. 21. and de Genesis ad lit. lib. 10. cap.
23.
That in the great things of the Law and Gospel, which either are Foundations
themselves, or are most visibly and immediately adjacent and contiguous to the
Foundation, we ought Jud. ver. 3.
(...), as Saint Jude speaks, to contend earnestly; as there was no small
dissension and disputation between Paul and Barnabas, and the false Brethren,
who taught the necessity of Judaicall Rites unto Salvation, Acts 15. v. 2. And
Athan. Epist. ad Orthodoxos. De hujusmodi Epistolis quae formatae
Communicatoriae and pacificae vocabantur. Vid. Aug. Epist. 136. and Opt. lib. 2.
Athanasius the Great would not have the Orthodox Brethren to receive (...),
any forms or Letters pacificatory from George the Arrian Persecutor. And Basil.
Ep. 325 ad Epiphan.
Basil the Great gives an excellent reason of it, (...). If once we shake the
simplicity of the Faith, and retain not that as a Rule and measure of inferior
differences, Disputes and Contentions will prove endless.

This care then and circumspection is chiefly to be used in these three Cases,
as a Bith. Davenant in Epist. Pacificat. nuper edita.
learned Prelate of our Church has observed.

1. In case Vid. Eusebius. Hist. l. 4. c. 13. and l. 5. c. 19. and Gregr. Naz.
Orat. 12. page 203. Paris. 1609.
of Heresy, when Adversaries deny or deprave the faith of the Gospel; as 2 Timothy 2.18
Hymeneus and Philetus, who teaching against the Resurrection, overthrew men's
Faith.

2. In case of Idolatry: Hos. 4.15 2 Cor. 6.16
If Israel play the harlot, let not Judah transgress; for (...), What
agreement has the Temple of God with Idols?

3. In case of Tyranny: when any shall usurp and exercise Domination over the
Consciences of men to bring them into bondage unto Doctrines of errors, and
make Articles of Faith for all Churches to submit unto: In which case the
Apostle had no patience, Gal. 2.4, 5. Cypr. lib. de sentent. Episc. de Heretic.
rebaptizand.
Neque enim quisquam nostrum Episcopum fe esse Episcoporum constituit, aut
tyrannico terrore ad obsequendi necessitatem collegas suos adegit: they are the
words of Saint Cyprian in the Council of Carthage, upon the case of
Re-baptization.

This then being laid for a firm foundation, that Christ where he is Heb. 7.2
King of Salem, must be King of Righteousness too; that the Jam. 3.17
wisdom which is from above must be first pure, and then peaceable; that our
unity must be the Ephesians. 4.3
Unity of the Spirit: Ea enim sola Ecclesiae pax est, quae Christi pax est, as
Hilar. contr. Aria. and Auxent.
Saint Hilary speaks; The state of this Point is in these two words: (...), War
there must be (I speak in a spiritual sense) with Principalities, and Powers,
and spiritual Wickednesses: For the Church is Militant, and has Weapons of
spiritual Warfare, given of purpose to resist Enemies. Christ came to send a
Sword against all dangerous Errors of mind, or manners. And as in this War,
every Christian must have (...), as Saint Paul speaks, The whole Armor of God:
so, above all, Timothy, and such as he was, must be good Soldiers, 2 Timothy 2.3.
with the Eye to watch, with the Tongue to warn, with the Sword of the Spirit to
convince and to correct gainsayers. War there must be, but (...), Contention
and inward jarres there must not be, and that for this very reason, vid. Greg.
Naz Orat. 1. page 35, 36
because there is War; for as our Savior says, A Kingdom divided within it
self cannot stand at any time, much less when it wageth War with a Foreign
and Potent Adversary, such as Satan, and all other Enemies of the Church are,
who by the advantage of an intestine Commotion would save himself the labor of
drawing the Sword, and become rather a spectatour than a party in the Conquest.
A notable example we have in Meletius, and Peter Bishop of Alexandria, both
Confessors of the Christian Faith, Epiphan. Haeres. 68.
both Martyrs designati, and condemned Ad Metalla for their Profession, who
upon a small difference, touching the receiving of the Lapsi into Communion,
fell unto so great a Schism, that they drew a partition between each other in
the Prison, and would not hold Communion in the same worship of Christ, for
which notwithstanding they jointly suffered; which dissension of theirs did the
Church of God more hurt by causing a great rent and Sect among the members
thereof, than any persecution the Enemy could have raised.

Greatly therefore does it concern all of us in our places and orders to put to
all our power, prayers, interests, for preserving the unity of the Spirit in
the bond of Peace, and for pursuing and promoting the Peace of Jerusalem, that
in nothing we give offense to the Church of God; rather be willing to silence
and smother our private judgments, to relinquish our particular liberties and
interests, to question and mistrust domestica judicia, (as Tertullian calls
them) our singular conceits and fancies, (...), Christ. in Genesis Hom. 4.
than to be in any such thing stiff and peremptory against the quiet of Gods
Church. The Weak to be humble and tractable; the strong to be meek and
merciful; the Pastors to instruct the ignorant, to reclaim the wandering, to
restore the lapsed, to convince the froward with the spirit of meekness and
compassion: The People to obey, honor and encourage their Ministers by their
docible and flexible disposition, to suspect their own Judgments, to allow
their Teachers to know more than they; not to hamper themselves, nor to censure
their Brethren, nor to trouble their Superiors by ungrounded Scruples, or
uncharitable prejudices, or unquiet, and in the end uncomfortable
singularities. How did our Savior pour out his Spirit in that heavenly
Prayer, for the Unity of his People: That they may be one, and one in us, and
made perfect in one? How does the Apostle pour out his very bowels in this
respect unto the Church? If any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love,
if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowels and mercies, be ye like minded.
Take heed of strife, of vainglory, of pride in your own conceits, of censure
of your Brethren, of private respects. Lay aside your own reputation, be in the
form of servants; have such humble judgments, as that you can be willing to
learn any, though unwelcome Truth; to unlearn any, though darling Error: have
such humble lives and purposes, as that you can resolve to obey with duty,
whatsoever you are not able with reason to gainsay. The godly Princes, how
careful have they ever been to suppress and remove Dissentions from Gods
Church? Eusebius. de vit. Constant. l. 2 c. 63-68. lib. 3 c. 12. and 20.
Constantine the Great writes Letters, publishes Edicts, makes large Orations
to the Bishops of the Nicene Council at their Sitting and Dissolution, to no
other purpose than only for preservation of Peace. Euagrius l. 3 cap. 30
Anastasius in the great Dissentions of the Eastern and Western Churches
about the Council of Chalcedon, Nicephorus lib. 15. c. 25
touching the two Natures of Christ, King James in his Declaration to the
States against Conradus Vorstius, and in his Instructions to his Bishops, Anno
1622
how severe was he to require his Bishops to promote and conserve Peace in the
Church? as Euagrius and Nicephorus note. To say nothing of the Pious examples
of our Dread Sovereign and his most Renowned Father, who both by Writings, and
by Injunctions, by Pen, and Power, by Argument, and by Authority, have showed
their care to supresse those unhappy Differences, wherewith by the cunning of
Satan, the Churches of God have of late years been too much disquieted.

Consider we (beloved) that we are Genesis 13.8 Acts 7.26 Psalm. 133.1 Ephesians. 4.36
Ex codem utcro, Ignor. Tert. Jude v. 3 2 Pet. 1.1 Acts 4.32 Phil. 1.27 Unum
signum habemus: quare non in uno ovili sumus? Aug. To. 7. sermon. ad pleb. in
Caesoriensem.
Brethren, that we have one Body, one Spirit, one Faith, one Hope, one
Baptism, one Calling, brought out of the same womb of common ignorance, heirs
of the same common Salvation, partakers of alike precious Faith, sealed with
the same Sacraments, fed with the same Manna, ransomed with the same Prize,
comforted with the same Promises; in so much, that Justin Martyr dialog. cum
Tryphon. Optat. l. 1. Aug. contr. Epist. Parmen. lib. 3. cap. 1
Iustine Martyr and Optatus have been charitable so far as to call Judaizing
Christians, and Donatists by the name of Brethren. Whosoever therefore by
Pride, or Faction, or Schism, or Ambition, or novel Fancies, or Arrogance, or
Ignorance, or Sedition, or Popularity, or Vainglory, or Envy, or Discontent,
or Correspondence, or any other Carnal reason, shall rend the seamlesse Coat of
Christ, and cause Divisions and Offenses, Non habent Dei char itatem, qui
Ecclesiae non diligunt unitatem.
I shall need load him with no other guilt than the Apostle does, That he is
not the Servant of Christ, Romans 16.17. For how can he who is without Peace or
Love, serve that God who is the God of Peace, Aug. de Bapt. l. 3. c. 16. vid.
Greg. Naz. Orat. 14. p. 215, 216
whose name is Love, and whose Law is Love?

Besides this, we in our Calling are Brethren, Consortio muneris, and there is
a special tie upon us to be no strikers, 1 Timothy 3.3. not to strike our
fellow laborers with an Eye of scorn, or a Tongue of censure, or a Spirit of
neglect, or a Pen of gall and calumny. We need not in any Controversy fly to
stones, so long as our Reason and Learning holds out, Not to strike the
People of God, either with the Rod of Circe, (...). Odyss. u.
to stupifie and benum them in sensual security, crying, Peace, Peace, where
there is no Peace; or with unseasonable and misapplied terrors, (...), as the
Apostle speaks, To wound the Conscience, and to make sad the hearts of those
whom the Lord has not made sad: Christ our Master was Consecrated to this
Office by the Spirit in the shape of a Ideirco and in columba ven it Spiritus
fanctus; Simplex animal and laetum, non fell amarum, non morsibus saevum, non
unguium lacerationi violentum. Cypr. de unitat. Ecclesiae.
Dove, as an emblem of that meekness which was in him, and which from him
should descend upon all his subordinate Officers.

And as the love of Brethren should hold us, so our jealousy of Enemies should
drive us to keep up the Tower of David, the Peace of the Church, that by
intestine differences we cause not the Adversary to (...). Hom. Iliad. (...).
Iliad. (...). Iliad. (...).
rejoice, and to speak reproachfully. When Commune periculum concordia
propulsandum. Tacit. in vit. Agric. (...), etc. Chry. Hom. 7. in Genes.
all the members of the Church are fast joined together vinculo fidei, glutine
charitatis, by the bond and cement of faith and love; when Governors, Teachers,
People, join hand in hand, the one to rule with authority and meekness, the
other to teach with wisdom and compassion, the third, to honor both by humble
submission to the judgment, 2 Samuel 1.20 12.14
and willing obedience to the guidance of their Governors and Pastors; then
do they cut off occasion from those who seek occasion, and disappoint the
expectation of those who (as a learned Civilian speaks) do Captare tempora
impacata and inquieta, whose best fishing is in troubled waters: for as the
Devil (as Optatus speaks) is tormented with the peace of Brethren; so is he
most quickened and put into hopes of success in his attempts against the
Church, by those mutual ruptures and jealousies which the members thereof
foment and cherish among themselves: When by the defection of Jeroboam, (...).
Basil. Epist. 296. ad Satalens. Vit. etiam de Spiritu sancto, cap. 30. Nazianz.
Orat. 1. page 34. Petr. Aerod. decret. lib. 1. Tit. 2. sect. 8. Dolebat hoc
Diabolus, qui semper de fratrum pace torquetur. Optat. lib. 2. Non esset pravis
Haeresium dogmatibus locus, (...). Greg. Nyssen. de vit. Mosis. p. 190.
Judah and Israel were rent asunder, then came Shishak and troubled Jerusalem,
2 Chronicles. 12.2. It has been we know one grand Objection of the Papists against
the Reformed Churches, Bellarm. de notis Eccle. lib. 4. c. 11
That the Dissentions amongst themselves are evident signs of an Heretical
spirit, as Bellarmine, Stapleton de princip. fidei doctrinal. lib. 4. cap. 13.
Stapleton, and others argue; and Fitz-Simon, an Irish Jesuit has written a
just Volume of this one Argument, Kellisons Survey lib. 2. cap. 6 vid. Dr Field
of the Church. l. 3. cap. 41, 42. and Iuel. Apolog.
which he calls Britannomachia, the Wars of the Divines of our Country
amongst themselves. How happy they are in that pretended Unity, which they make
a note of their true Church, I refer to any man's judgment who shall read the
cross Writings of the English Seminaries and Jesuits, the Jesuits and
Dominicans, Smith and Kellison, Loemly and Hallier, Daniel Jesus and Aurelius,
the different judgments concerning the Judge of Controversies between the
Gallican Church, and those more captivated to the Popes Chair in Italy and
Spain: to say nothing of the two hundred and thirty seven Differences observed
by Pappus, and three hundred and odd by a Reverend Bishop of ours amongst the
Roman Doctors: so that, were all this calumny a truth, we could Answer them
as Gregory Nazianzen did those in his time, who used the same argument, (...).
Greg. Naz. Orat. 13.
That they are never the less faulty, how ever we may be blameworthy too.
Only this want of Charity in them should teach us never to want Unity within
our selves, but to let such a Spirit of Peace and Meekness show it self in our
Lives, Doctrines, and Writings, Ut nihil de nobis male loqui sine mendacio
possint, Hierom.
that they may never have advantage with the same breath to speak both truly
and reproachfully against us.

And hereby, as we shall stop the mouth of the Adversary, so shall we preserve
the honor of our Religion, the success of our Ministry, the Reverence of our
Persons and Functions in the minds of the People, who may happily be apt enough
to catch hold, as of others, so most of all of those occasions which our selves
by our mutual Differences shall at any time administer, to neglect both our
Preaching and our Persons; and when they shall observe hot disagreements
amongst Learned men in some things, how easily, think we, may such as are more
led by the force of examples, than by the evidence of light, be induced to
stagger and to question all? Domesticae calumniae gravissimum fidei excidium,
Hilar. in Psalm. 118. P.
no greater hindrance to the growth of Faith than Domestical disagreements.

vid. Vincent. Lirinens. cap. 15, 16.25 Isid. Pelut. l. 2 Epist. 90. Aug.
Epist. 105. de Civit. Dei. l. 16 c. 2. de vera Relig. cap. 8
Desired it may be, but hoped it cannot, That in the Church of God there should
be no noise of Axes and Hammers, no difference in Judgments and Conceits.
While there is corruption in our Nature, narrowness in our Faculties,
sleepiness in our Eyes, difficulty in our Profession, cunning in our enemies,
(...), hard things in the Scriptures, Defense Part. 2. p. 319. and vid. Jewels
Reply, artic. 8. p. 294.
and an envious man to superseminate, there will still be (...), men that will
be differently minded: no instrument was ever so perfectly in tune, in which
the next hand that touched it did not amend something; nor is there any
judgment so strong and perspicacious, from which another will not in some
things find ground of variance. See we not in the ancient Churches those
great lights in their several ages at variance amongst themselves? Eusebius.
hist. l. 5. cap. 26.
Iraeneus with Victor, Eusebius. l. 7. c. 3
Cyprian with Stephen, Aug. and Hier. in Epist. amaeb. apud Aug. Ep. 8.19.
Jerome with Austin, Basil. Ep. 10. and 77. Baron. an. 372. Sect. 15, 25.
Basil with Damasus, Sozomen l. 8. c. 14, 15.
Chrysostom with Epiphanius, Cyril. lib. ad Euoptium Niceph. Hist. l. 14. cap.
35.
Cyril with Theodoret? In this hard necessity therefore, when the first evil
cannot easily be avoided, our wisdom must be to prevent the second; that
where there is not Perfection, yet there may be Peace; that dissension of
Judgments break not forth into disunion of hearts, but that amidst the variety
of our several conceits we preserve still the unity of faith and love, by
which only we are known to be Christ's Disciples.

Give me leave therefore out of an earnest desire of Peace and Love amongst
learned men, in the further handling of this Argument briefly to inquire into
these two Questions, 1. How Peace may be preserved amongst men, when
differences do arise? 2. How those differences may in some degree be composed
and reconciled?


1 Cor. 8.2, 3. Prove. 13.10.
For the former, let us first remember, That Knowledge is apt to beget Pride,
and Pride is ever the mother of Contention, and in Saint Superbia Haereticorum
matter Aug. de Genesis contr. Manich. lib. 2. cap. 8. and Ep. 89.
Austins phrase, the mother of Heresies too; Quint. Curt. lib. 10.
Raro quisquam circa bona sua satis cautus est, says the Historian; A very
hard thing it is, and rarely to be seen, for a man endued with excellent parts
to be wary, temperate and lowly in the employment of them. And therefore Satan
has usually set on work the greatest wits in sowing Errors in the Church; as
Agrippina gave Claudius poison in his delicatest meat, or as Thieves use to
pursue their prey with the swiftest horses. Ornari Aug. ad Licentium Ep. 49.
abs te diabolus quaerit, as Saint Austin said once unto Licentius, a man of a
choice wit but a corrupt mind: wherein certainly Satan would fail of his end,
if men would make no other use of their parts and learning than the same Aug.
Ep. 119.
Father directs them unto, Vt scientia sit tanquam machina quaedam per quam
structura pietatis assurgat; if they would use their learning as an engine and
instrument for the more happy promoting of piety and pure Religion. And indeed
why should thou who art happily a man of more raised intellectualls, of more
subtle and sublime conceits, despise the judgment of thy meaner Brethren? Who
is it that has made thee to differ? And why has he made thee to differ? As
he has given thee more variety of learning, it may be he has given thy
Brother more Experience of divine things: and you know a great Cosmographer may
miss a way which a man less learned in Theory, but more versed in travel may
easily keep. Basil. Hexam. Homil. 5.
Certainly as the juice of the same earth is sweet in the grape, but bitter in
the wormwood; Greg. Nyssen. in Cant. Hom. 3. p. 514.
as the same odor is a refreshment to the Dove, but a poison to the
Scarabaeus: Epiph. Hares. 40.
so the same learning qualified with charity, piety and meekness, may be
admirably useful to edify the Church, which with pride, contempt, Arist.
Rhet. Fab. lib. 12. cap. 1.
and corrupt judgment may be used unto harmfull purposes; (...), as the
Philosopher speaks, Male vim suam potestas alioru^ contumeliis experitur.
Plin. l. 8. Ep. 24.
Nothing is more dangerous then wickedness in armor.

This therefore shall be my first Rule. To correct and keep down the rising of
our Knowledge with Humility in our selves, (...). Naz. Orat. 3. p. 97.
Studiorum rudes, literarum prophani, expertes artium. Minut. Felix. Hoc est
fastidium vestrum, sapicutia haec arrogans, qua nos ut rudes despuitis. Arnob.
cont. Gentes lib. 3. Aug. de Bapt. l. 2. cap. 4, 5. Cypr. ad Quir.
and Charity to our Brethren. Not to censure every one for dull and brutish who
in judgment varieth from our own conceits. It was an old trick of the Gentiles
(as Gregory Nazianzen, Arnobius, and Minutius tell us) to object
illiteratenesse unto the Christians; but a very unfit way it is for Christian
men amongst themselves to refute adverse opinions, or to insinuate their own,
by the mutual undervaluing of each others parts and persons. Ever therefore in
our censures let us look to what is wanting in our selves, and to what is
useful in our Brethren. The one will make us humble, the other charitable, and
both peaceable. Pride made the Donatists forsake the Catholic Unity, which
St. Cyprian in the same judgment, but with more humility, did not disturb.

Secondly, Peace may in this case be preserved by moderating the fervor of our
zeal against those that are otherwise minded. There is in the nature of many
men a certain (...), Vid. Causab. in Baron. Exercit. 14. Sect. 6. (...). Naz.
Orat. 26.
an heat and activeness of spirit, which then principally, when conversant
about Objects divine and matters of Conscience, is wonderful apt, without a
due corrective of wisdom and knowledge, to break forth into intemperate
carriage and to disturb Peace. It was zeal in the Women which persecuted Saint
Paul, Acts 13.50. and it was zeal in him too which persecuted Christ before he
knew him, Phillip. 3.6. Acts 26.9. Tacit.
For as the Historian says of some men, that they are Sola socordia
Innocents, bad enough in themselves, and yet do little hurt, by reason of a
phlegmatic and torpid Constitution, indisposing them for action: so on the
contrary, men there may be, who having devotion, Spiritus magni magis quam
utiles. Live. dec. 3 lib. 10.
like those honorable Women, not ruled by knowledge; and zeal, like
quicksilver, not allaied, nor reduced unto usefulness by wisdom and mature
learning, (...). etc. Naz. Orat. 26.
may be, as Nazianzen says they were in his time, the Causes of much unquiet.
It was a grave censure which Tacitus gave of some over-violent Assertours of
their Liberty, and it may be verified of others, who as violently maintain
their Opinions, Tacit. in vita Agric. cui contrarium plane erat exemplum magni
Basilii apud Nazian. Orat. 20. p. 362 and Epist. 26.
Quod per abrupta inclarescerent, sed in nullum reipublicae usum.

Two great Inconveniences there are which may in Controversies from hence arise.

1. Nimium altercando veritas amittitur. A. Gell.
That by this means Truth it self may be stretched too far, and by a
vehement dislike of Error on the one side, we may run into an Error on the
other; as vid. Basil. Ep. 41. integro autem libello Dionysium hunc ab Arianismi
suspicione vindicat M. Athanasius. Tom. 1. l. Quod una cum Nicaena Synodo
conspirarit Dionys.
Dionysius Alexandrinus being too fervent against Sabellius did lay the grounds
of Arianisme, Ardore feriendi adversarios, premit interdum socios. Joseph.
Acosta. de Hieronymo citante Riveto in Psalm. 16. Sixth. Senens. l. 5. in
Prooemio.
and Chrysostom in zeal against the Manichees did too much extol the power of
nature, and Illyricus out of an hatred of the Papists lessening original sin,
ran another extreme to make it an essential corruption.

2. Hereby men do marvelously alienate the minds of one another from Peace,
by loading contrary Doctrines with envious consequences, such as the
Consciences of those whom we dispute withal do extremely abhor, which course
usually tends to mutual exacerbation, whereby Truth never gains half so
much, as Charity and Peace do lose.

Thirdly, requisite it is to the preservation of Public Peace, that we all
keep our selves in our own station, and labor to do God service in the places
and callings wherein he has set us, and not (...), to busy our selves with
matters which (as the Apostle speaks, 1 Pet. 4.15. Prove. 26.17. (...) --
(...). Naz. Orat. 9. vid. etiam Orat. 26. p. 450, 453, 454.
are (...) unsuteable to us, and without our measure, 2 Corinthians. 10.13, 14. By
this one thing has the Church of Rome caused that great Schism in the
Christian World, because she does (...), stretch her self above her measure,
and not content her self with that degree which belongs unto her, as Nilus
Archbishop of Thessalonica does largely declare in a Book purposely written on
that Argument. Excellent counsel is that of Solomon not only in a case he
there puts, but in diverse others. If the spirit of the Ruler rise up against
thee, leave not thy place, Eccles. 10.4. Esede itio may with a little heat turn
into Seditio. Consider all are not eyes and hands in the Body of Christ to take
upon them the burden of great affairs; Quidam in corpore Christi oculi,
quidam manus etc. Basil. in Psalm. 33.
and Truth can seldom be worse served, then when a man who indeed loves it,
(...), etc. Naz. Orat. 33. Tuscul. Quaest.
but has not parts nor learning enough to be a Champion for it, shall put
himself unseasonably upon disputes, and so as he spoke, Veritatem defendendo
concutere, to betray the Truth by a weak defense. Are all Apostles? says Saint
Paul, Are all Prophets? are all Teachers? Has not God dealt to every man a
several measure? Has he not placed every man in a several order? Have we not
all work enough to do in Our own places, except we rush into the labors, and
intrude our selves on the businesses of other men? Haec magistro relinquat
Aristoteli, cavere ipse doceat. It was a smart rebuke of Tully against
Aristoxenus the Musician, who would needs turn Philosopher; Theod. hist. l. 4.
cap. 17. (...), Iliad. (...). vid. Eusebius. l. 5. hist. cap. 24.
whereunto agrees that answer of Basil the Great to the Clerk of the Emperors
Kitchen, when he jeered him for his soundness against the Arrian Faction,
(...). Your business it is to look to the seasoning of your broth, and not to
revile the Doctrine, or the Doctors of the Church. Let us therefore content our
selves with the Apostles Rule, Every man to abide in the calling, and to keep
the station wherein God has set him, 1 Cor. 7.24. and not out of ambition,
discontent, emulation, or any other Polypragmaticall distemper to grow weary of
our own employments, and to immixe and interpose our selves in things which are
without and above our Order.

Fourthly, hereunto much conduces, A Brotherly mildness toward those who are
contrary minded, (...), Basil. Epist. 203. vid. elegantissimum Naz. locum Orat.
p. 12.203.
a mutual (...), and condescension to the weaknesses of one another, as the
Apostle advises, Romans 15.1. Acrimonie indeed and sharpness of rebuke is
sometimes necessary toward men of obstinate and pernicious minds, Tit. 1.13.
Gal. 2.5. But amongst Brethren, yea Adversaries, that are not incorrigible, Dum
alter alteri anathema esse coepit, prope jam nemo Christi est. Hill. contr.
Constable. Haeretici argumentis victi calumnias meditantur. Athan. ad Adelph.
contr. Arian. istae sunt Haereticorum machinae, ut convicti de perfidia, ad
maledicta se conferant. Hier. Apol. contr. Ruff. vid. Aug. Ep. 14.
all things ought to be carried with lenity and meekness, Gal. 6.1.5.13. 2 Timothy
2.25. Sepis morsus non nocet. Epiph. Haeres. 36. vespa quo acrius pungit, minus
laedit. Haeres. 44.
Epiphanius tells us of some Creatures, that the more they sting, the less
they hurt; Rationibus victi, dentibus vincunt. Bas. Ep. 80.
and surely in any dispute it is a strong presumption, that that man does least
hurt with his Argument, and Tom. 4. quest. ex. Math. c. 11. cont. lit. Pet. l.
3. c. 1. contr. Crescon. Grammat. l. 4. c. 3. Nazianz. Orat. 51.
who betakes himself to biting, and to intemperate language. In these things
therefore we should carry our selves non (...), sed (...), as Brethren, and
not as Enemies, not to uncover the nakedness, or to put (...). Iliad. v.
our feet on the Breasts of our Brethren; but as it is said of Nazian. Orat. 21.
p. 392.
Athanasius the Great, that he was Dissidentibus magnes, by his meekness he
drew those who dissented from him; so should we make the Truth a gainer by our
mild handling of those that vary from us. Naz. Orat. 14.
(...). It was the grave and pious advice of Nazianzen, Let us yield to our
Brethren that we may overcome them, as a Flint is easily broken upon a Pillow
which yields unto it.

Lastly, so long as there is sound agreement in Fundamental Truths, and in the
Simplicity of the Gospel, we ought rather to deny our wits, and to Non minus
interdum Oratorium est Tacere quam Loqui. Plin. l. 6. Ep. 7. vid. Basil. contr.
Eunomium l. 1. verb. prim.
silence our disputes in matters merely Notionall and Curious, which have no
necessary influence into Faith and Godly living, than by spending our precious
hours in such impertinent Contentions; Ne majus malum incurratur ex Scandalo,
quam bonum percipiatur ex vero [ita enim legendum, non verbo] Aug. Ep. 85.
for gain of a small Truth to shipwreck a great deal of Love; and while we
perplex the minds of men with Abstruse and Thornie Questions, Urbem produnt
dum Castella defendunt. Cic. lib. 2. de divin.
we take off their thoughts from more necessary and spiritual employments. A.
Gel. l. 1. cap. 2.
It was a wise and seasonable rebuke which the Mariners in a dangerous tempest
gave to the Philosopher who troubled them with an impertinent discourse, (...),
We perish whilst thou triflest; Vid. G. Naz. fuse and eleganter, Orat. 14 page
220, 221 Ora. 26. p. 445, 446. Orat. 35 Aug. de Genesis ad lit. lib. 2. cap. 9
let it never be said so of any of us, that while we wrangle about
scholasticall notions, and questions that gender strife, those, whose poor
souls, ready happily to sink under the Tempest of sin and death, cry out,
like the man of Macedonia in Saint Paul's vision, Come and help us, for want of
that plain and compendiary way of Faith, repentance, good works, spiritual
worship, and Evangelicall obedience which should be taught them, become a prey
to that envious man, who, while we sleep, will be sure to watch, and go
about seeking whom he may devour. Ut Areopagitae causas quasdam in annum
centesimum differebant. Aul. Gell. l. 12. cap. 7. quaedam quaestiones sunt.
Let us therefore leave our smaller disputes to Elias, Quando venerit, (...).
Naz. Orat. 14.
and let us speak to the People (...), as holy Ignat. Epist. ad Ephesians.
Ignatius says, those things which may make men confess that God is in us of
a truth, and that certainly it is Christ which speaks by us. God leads not
his People unto eternal life by knotty and inextricable Questions, Hilar. de
Trin. lib. 10. juxta finem. Vid. Epiph. Haeres. 35.
In absoluto ac facili est aeternitas, as St. Hilary excellently speaks; no
need of verbal wranglings, or of contentious Disputes, (...). It is the godly
counsel of great Athan. Orat. Unum esse Christum, and ad Serapion. page 191. --
(...). Epist. ad Antiocheus.
Athanasius. We have no need of Curiositate opus non est post Evangelium: Tert.
curiosity after the Gospel of Christ; (...). Nazian. Orat. 35.
our work is to make men Christians in their holy Religion, and not Critics,
to Romans 14.1 Chryso. in Genesis Hom. 21. p. 149 150. Aug. Ep. 56.
bring them unto Faith, and not unto doubtful Disputations, to feed their
Souls, and to guide their Consciences, not to dazzle their eyes, nor to puzzle
their judgments, nor to perplex their conceits, nor to please their humors,
nor to tickle their fancies, nor to foment their jealousies and censures of
things or persons, by novell, specious, and unpracticall Curiosities. If we
will believe him, who for his judgment and learning had the surname of
Theologus given him, this is the right way of being a Sound Divine. It is
Gregory Nazianzen in this 29. Oration, at the latter end of that Oration, whose
judgment shall put an end unto the handling of the first Question; (...).
Basil. de Martyr. Manante, and in Psalm. 33. in illud Gustate and videte; (...).
Naz. Orat. 26 and Orat. 33.
the next I will pass over with more brevity, and that for memories sake, in
these few expressions.

1. The right way to Compose Differences amongst men is (...) and (...). Ex
mandato mandata cernemus: Hilar. in Psalm. 118. G. Si in lumine Christi ambulare
volumus, a praeceptis ejus et monitis non recedamus: Cypr. l. 2. Epist. 3. ad
Cecil.
A joint obedience to the Truths wherein all agree, and pursuance of those
pious ends which all profess. This is the Apostles Rule in this very case.
Whereunto we have already attained, let us walk by the same rule, let us mind
the same things, Phil. 3.16. For indeed the love of God, Nisi fidelium operum
usus praecesserit, doctrinae cognitio non apprehendetur: Hilar. in Psalm. 118. B.
and Conscience of his Commandments is the right way to know him, and the
secrets of his Word. If any man will do the will of God, he shall know the
Doctrine, Ioh. 7.17. And hereby we know that we know him, if we keep his
Commandments, 1. Ioh. 2. 3, 4. And in all knowledge which is intended for
practice, that of the (...), Arist. Ethic. l. 2. c. 1. Video multos parvo
ingenio, literis nullis, ut been agerent agendo consecutos, Plin. l. 6. Epist.
29. Vid. Afra. and Pacuvium apud A. Gell. l. 13. cap. 8.
Philosopher is most true, Those things which we learn to do, we learn by
doing: now the knowledge of divine Truths is not barely intellectual for the
brain, but experimental for the Conscience, and consists much in the Taste
of spiritual things. It is the expression of Saint Basil. Reg. Brevior.
interrog. 279 Jobi 12.11 Psalm. 119.66 Jobi 34.3
Basil, Quod in cibis gustus, in sacris intellectus, and the Apostle calls it
Knowledge according unto Godliness, 1 Timothy 6.3. They therefore who can resolve
to keep a good Conscience, and not to vitiate the palate of their mind with
any morbid humors, are most likely by the other helps of learning and
industry to find out the Truths wherein they disagree; for the very (...),
Arist. Eth. l. 6. c. 5
Philosopher could say, that Wickedness does putrify the principles of the
mind; and that (...), Arist. lib. 1. Metaphys.
Such as are men's courses of life, such likewise are the dispositions of their
minds toward practical truth. A corrupt heart does usually make a corrupt
judgment, Hilar. de Trin. l. 10. Aug. de doctr. Christ. li. 2. c. 6. de
moribus Ecclesia l. 1. c. 17, 18, 27
Dum his quae volumus doctrinam coaptamus. It concerns us therefore not to be
like Painters, (it is the similitude of Apud Epiph. Haeres. 64.
Methodius) that can draw a ship on a table, but are not able to build a ship
for use; that can write and discourse of Doctrine in Papers, but not express
the Truth of it in our lives: but by our unanimous obedience to the Truths we
know, to dispose our selves for the discovery of those we do not know.
Justin. Apolog. 1. page 51.
Justin Martyr Confesses, that it was the lives of the Christians which taught
him Christian Religion. There are extant Basil. Epist. 203, and 204.
two Epistles of Basil the Great Ad Presbyteros (...) by whomsoever professed.
Because Quisquis bonus verusque Christianus est, Domini sui esse intelligat
ubicunque invenerit veritatem. Aug. de doctr. Christ lib. 2. c. 18.
Truth is Gods wheresoever it grows, as a Mine of Gold or Silver is the
Princes in whose ground soever it be discovered, Gr. Naz. Orat. 20. Fides est
veritatis, non voluntatum; Evangeliorum, non temporum: Hilar. contra Constant.
(...). We have our Faith, and our Appellation from Christ, and not from any
other Person: and therefore they, who (upon any undue respects) can with equal
facility hold or let go Truth, the Fathers fear not to call them, Ignat. ad
Trall. Basil. Ep. 192. Naz. Ora. 21. p. 392. and Ora. 40. p. 643.
(...), and (...), men that make merchandise of Christ and his Truth, contrary
to that of Solomon, Buy the Truth, but sell it not, Prove. 23.23. And therefore
we find the Orthodox Believers still keeping themselves to the Style of
Antioch, Christians; and (...), Ignat. ad Magnes. Naz Orat. 30. Epiph. Haeres.
42. and 70. Athanas. Orat. 2. contr. Arian. page 308. and Apol. 2. pa. 777.
Optat. l. 3.
refusing the names of Petriani, or Pauliani, or Melitiani, or pars Donati. And
indeed, partial and personal respects will be ever apt to lead unto
contention. I cannot affirm any thing; but a conjecture I think we may make,
that if Barnabas had not been Col. 4.10 Act. 15.39.
Marks uncle, the difference between him and Paul had not been so hot.

5. (...), To be Wise unto sobriety, Romans 12.3. When we are to deal in things
divine to set bounds unto our selves, that we break not through to gaze,
Exodus 19.12, 21. Not to draw every thing in Religion to the Rule of our Right,
or rather crooked and presumptuous Reason, to take heed of Just. Martyr. de
vera Confess. Epiphan. Haeres. 70. and in Ancorat. Cyril. Alex. in Joan. lib.
4. cap. 13, 14. Athanas. ad Serapion. man. Christi Generatione.
Quomodo in things of Faith; the Fathers call it a Judaicall word, and
unbeseeming Christians. Saint Paul charge us to Tert. Apol. c. 46. de
praeser. c. 7. Idol. c. 10. cont. Marc. li. 2. ca. 16
Take heed of Philosophy and vain deceits, Col. 2.8. Not but that there is
Tert. de Resur. ca. 3. de Testim. animae c. 1. Cle. Alex. Stro. l. 1. p. 203,
207, 214, 233. li. 7. page 510
admirable use of sound Philosophy, and of Reason raised and rectified, so long
as it is subordinate to Faith; Conantur autoritatem stabilissimam fundatissimae
Ecclesiae quasi Rationis nomine and pollicitatione superare: Aug. Ep. 56. Epip.
Haer. 76. in confutat. Aetii cap. 38. Just. explicat. fid. page 375. and 388.
Hilar. de Trin. lib. 4.
but when it shall be so proud as to judge of Faith it self, and to admit or
reject it as it shall be consonant or disagreeing with her prejudices, this is
a tyranny which would quickly overthrow all.

Other cause there has been none of those desperate Heresies wherewith the
Socinians have pestred the World, but that they will have all Truths to stand
or fall at the Tribunal of their presumptuous Reason: as if all the present and
ancient Churches of God besides consisted but of brute Creatures, and they
only in a corner of Polonia, as sometimes the Donatists in Africa, the only
reasonable and holy men. Foelix Ecclesia, cum nova and curiosa de Deo dicere
lascivia crederetur; Happy indeed the Church of God, when curious novelties,
Viderint qui Stoicum et Platonicum, and Dialecticum Christianismum protulerunt.
Tert. de praescript. cap. 7.
and as it were Tourneaments in sacred things are esteemed profane; when men
do not (...), but (...), nor disparage the Majesty of so Honorable and solemn
a Foundation, with the levity of slight, chaffie, and trivial superstructions.
It was a grave and serious speech that of Seneca, Naz. Orat. 21. page 380
and worthy the consideration of the greatest Divines, Basil. Epist. 61. Senec.
not. qu. li. 7. Pet. Aerod. decret. Tit. 6. Sect. 2.
Nunquam nos verecundiores esse debemus, quam cum de Deo agitur.

6. (...), To keep our selves to the form of sound Non parum interest ad
Christianam pietatem quibus vocibus utamur. Aug. de Civ. Dei li. 10 ca. 23.
words, Romans 12.6. 2 Timothy 1.13. to hold those Doctrines which accord best with
the grounds of faith and love in Christ, those which ascribe most glory to God
and his Grace, which most conduce to the humbling and debasing of the pride of
man, which most tend to the practice of godliness, to the purifying of
Conscience, to the edifying of the Body of Christ. Our Doctrine must be
according unto godliness, 1 Timothy 6.3. and our knowledge the acknowledging of
the Truth which is after Godliness, Tit. 1.1.

7. (...). Contra Ecclesiae fundatissimu^ more^ nemo sentiat. Au. ep. 28. Ad
antiquissimas recurrere Ecclesias: Iren. l. 3. ca. 4. Tert. de Coro. milit. c.
3, 4. de veland. virgin. c. 1, 2 Nemo nobis molestias exhibeat, sic enim sentit
ac docet sancta Dei Ecclesia ab origin. Epiphan. in Ancor. Quod nec (...).
Basil cont. Euno. li. 2. Aug. Epist. 118. c. 1. and 119. ca. 19. contra Jul.
li. 1. c. 4, 7. l. 2. c. 10.
The Custom of the Churches of God To retain that, (when there is no express
and evident variation from Divine Authority) which is most consonant to the
received usage of the ancient and pure ages of the Church. This Rule the
Apostle gives for suppressing of differences, If any seem to be contentious,
we have no such custom, neither the Churches of God, 1 Corin. 11.16. Inquire
of the former age, says Bildad, and prepare thy self to the search of their
fathers, Job 8.8. Look to the old way, says the Prophet, Ier. 6.16. It was not
so from the beginning, says our Savior, Mat. 19.8. Vid. Mercer. in Job. 12.12.
Only this Rule is to be qualified with this necessary distinction, That Adoro
Scripturae plenitudinem -- scriptum esse docoat Hermogenis officina. Si non est
scriptum, timeat vae illud adjicientibus aut detrahentibus destinatum, Tert.
cont. Herm. c. 22. Vide etiam de praescicont. Haer. ca. 10, 11. Quod cunque
adversus veritatem sapit, hoc erit Haeresis, etiam vetus consuetudo. Tert. c.
1. de veland. virg. Consuctudo sine veritate vetustas erroris est: Cypr. ad
Pomp. contr. Steph. Si solus Christus audiendus est, non debemus attendere quid
ante nos aliquis faciendum putaverit, sed quid qui ante omnes est Christus
prior fecerit; neque enim hominis consuetudinem sequi oportet, sed Dei
veritatem: Cyp. l. 2. Ep. 3. ad Caecilium. Vid. C. Alex. Stro. l. 7. pa. 544.
a. 6. Basil. de Spiritu sancto c. 7. and Ep. 80. Moral. Reg. 12. cap. 2. Aug.
Epist. 112. in prooem. de moribus Ecclesiae Cathol. l. 1. cap. 7. contra Epist.
Parmen. lib. 3. cap. 2. de unitat. Eccles. c. 2, 3, 6, 17, 18, 19. contra
Cresc. l. 2. cap. 32.
no Antiquity has any Authority in matters necessary of Faith, Worship, or
Doctrines of Religion, to prescribe or diliver any thing, as in it self and
immediately obligatory to the Conscience, which is either contradicted or
omitted in the written Word, which we believe to be fully sufficient to make
the man of God perfect, and thoroughly furnished unto every good work, 2 Timothy
3.16, 17.

But, 1. In matters accessory of indifferency, order, decency, and inferior
nature. 2. In matter of Testimony to the truths of Scripture, and for
manifesting the succession, flourishing, and harmony of doctrines through all
ages of the Church, the godly learned have justly ascribed much to the
authority and usage of the ancient Churches. The study of the doctrine and
Rites whereof is justly called by the most learned Primate of Ireland, a noble
study. I will conclude this particular with the words of S. Austin, Aug. Epist.
85.
In those things, says he, wherein the holy Scripture has defined nothing,
mos Populi Dei and instituta majorum pro lege tenenda sunt, The custom of Gods
people, and appointments of our forefathers must be held for laws. Lastly,
(...), Submission to the spirits of the Prophets, and the judgments of the
godly learned: Ego quidem fateor me ex eorum numero esse conari qui proficiendo
scribunt, and scribendo proficiunt, unde fi aliquid vel in cautius, vel
indoctius a me positum est, -- nec mirandum est, nec dolendum, sed potius
ignoscendum atque gratulandum, non quia erratum est, sed quia improbatum, etc.
Vid. August. Epist. 7.
not to be stiff and inflexible in our own conceits, nor to be Acceptors of
our own persons, but to be willing to retract any error, and with meekness and
thankfulness, to be led into the right way by any hand. Excellent was the
resolution of Job in this case Teach me, and I will hold my peace, and cause me
to know wherein I have erred, Job 6.24. In which one disposition did all men,
who otherwise differ, firmly agree, and were not too partially addicted to
their own fancies, nor had their judgments (which should be guided only by the
truth of things) too much enthralled to their own wills, ends, or passions; soon
might they be brought, if not wherein they err, to change their judgments, yet
at least so to allay them with humility and love, Cypr. ad Quir. Praefat.
Council. Carthag. and in initio Concilii. Aug. de Baptis. contr. Donat. li. 1.
cap. 18. and lib. 2. cap. 1, 5.
(as Saint Cyprian did his) that they should never break forth into
bitterness toward their Brethren, or disturbance of the Church of God.

Thus have I, with as much light as my weakness could discover, and with as
much brevity as the weight of the Argument would allow opened the means of
procuring and preserving Peace amongst Brethren.

The other Particular in the Text would require as large a portion of time as
this has already spent. I shall spare to be so injurious to your patience,
and to the business we attend upon; only because those things which God has
joined together no man ought to put asunder, I shall therefore as Architects
use to do, give you in but a few lines a Model of the building here by the
Apostle commended unto us, and so leave you, and it to Gods Blessing.

(...)] 1. Then, It is not any kind of Peace which must be thus pursued. Such
the things in difference may be as must be earnestly contended for, Jude v. 3.
If Peace hinder Edification, we must then build, as Nehemiahs servants did,
with our spiritual Weapons in our hands. It must be an edifying, but no
destroying Peace. It has an (...) to bound it, Romans 12.18. and we know, Id
solum possumus, quod jure possumus.

2. He purposely severeth Peace and Liberty, that he may join Peace and
Charity. In our services to the Church of God, we must ever more look to what
is helpefull to others, than to what is lawful for our selves; to part from a
little of our own ground, rather than our brothers house should be unbuilt.
All things, says the Apostle, are lawful, but all things edify not.

3. It is not (...), Let us follow peace; but (...), The things which make for
peace. It is not enough that we have pious affections to the Peace and
Edification of the Church, as an End; but we must put to all our skill and
wisdom, and cast about for the most proper and seasonable means conducing to
so good an End. For a man may have an indifferent good will to Peace it self,
and yet when it comes to the (...), to the means for the (...) Edification, an
yielding to be built, 1 Pet. 2.5. nor only Immanent Edification, a building up
of our selves, Jude v. 20. but a mutall and transient Edification, as iron
whetteth iron, a considering of one another to provoke unto love, and unto good
works, Heb. 10.24.

7. It must be (...) too. It is not enough to desire it, to accept it, to meet
it half way, to let it in, and welcome it when it comes to us; But we must
Pursue and go after it. If any man refuse Peace, so that it flies from us, we
must put it to an (...), and venture our selves for it to a si forte, and
quantum in nobis, if by any means we may overtake and apprehend it, Romans
12.18. If any man refuse Edification, and thrust away the Grace and Mercy which
is preached unto him, it must be (...) here too, not give him over, and to let
him alone for desperate, but to pursue him still, to dig about him, and dung
him (as it is in the Parable, Luke 13.8.) It may be he will yet bring forth
fruit: many there are which come into the Vineyard at the last hour. We must
here put it to a (...) too, if God peradventure will give him Repentance, 2 Timothy
2.25. and in the mean time to show all meekness to all men, because we our
selves were sometimes foolish and disobedient, Tit. 3.2, 3.

Now lastly, unto the substance of this Building, there pertain but these
three things. A Foundation, a Superstruction, a Contignation.

1. A stable and solid Foundation, which is either personal, and that is
Christ only, 1 Cor. 3.11. or Romans 6.17. and 12.6. 1 Cor. 15.14. 2 Cor. 10.14
Gal. 6.16 Ephesians. 4.13 Phi. 1.27. and 2.2. and 3.15, 16 Col. 1.23 1 Timothy 6.3* 2 Timothy 3.14 Tit. 1.1. and 4.3, 8. Heb. 6.1 Jude ver. 3 Rev. 14.12 Regula
veritatis per Baptismum accepta. Iren. l. 1. c. 1, 2, 19 Fides ecclesiastica,
Epip. Her. 57. et 35. Naz. Ora. 14, 26, 40. Hilar. de Trin. l. 10. Character
Christianism. Atha. ad Serap. Regula parvis magnisque communis. August. Epist.
57.
practical, the knowledge whereof is requisite as a groundwork unto some
further end; and this again is twofold.

Either, the Foundation of Theological Doctrines, upon which they are raised,
and by which they are to be measured, and so the Doctrine of the Apostles and
Prophets is called a Foundation, Ephesians. 2.20. or else the Foundation of
Salvation, whatsoever things are simply and absolutely necessary to the
spiritual, vital, and salvificall state of a Christian, Quae posita ponunt,
and sublata auferunt salutem, which have by the Ordination of God a necessary
and intrinsecal connection unto eternal life. St Paul gives it us in three
words, Faith, Hope, and Love.

1. Laudo super edificationem boni operis, sed agnosco Fidei fundamentum, Fidci
radicem. August. in Psa. 31. de praed. sto. c. 7. Rhem. in Explan. c. 6. ad
Heb. Ambr. Offic. l. 1. c. 29. de Sacramentis, l. 1. c. 1. Eus. Emissen. Hom.
2. de Symb. Fulg. prolog. l. de Fide ad Pet. Dial. Aug. Sermon. 115. de temp. de
fid. and oper. c. 16. Enchirid. c. 2. Prosp. de vit. contemp. l. 2. c. 21.
Faith, as the primo primum, without which no other motions, though materially
in moral construction good, are yet in foro Coeli vital and salvificall. This
Faith is contracted into the Creeds of the Church, requiring an intellectual
assent of the mind to the Truth, and a fiduciall reliance of the heart on the
Goodness of God in Christ in all those Evangelicall Doctrines for our own
righteousness and salvation: and thus Faith is by Tert. de Orat. c. 9.
the Ancients often called a Mar. 16.16. Joh. 3.18, 36. and 8.24. 1 Cor. 15.17.
Gal. 2.20. 1 Jo. 5.1, 12, 13.
Foundation.

2. Romans 8.24, 26
Hope as the Ground and Foundation of all Romans 10.12, 13
Invocation, and spiritual Worship, and therefore the Apostle says of such as
destroyed the incommunicable Worship of God, 1 Pet. 1.3
that they did not Hold the head, Job. 4.22, 23 Gal. 4.6
Col. 2.18, 19. and thus the Lords Prayer containing the adequate object of all
our Hopes, is called by Turtullian, A fundamental Prayer.

3. John 14.21 1 Cor. 13.1, 2, 3
Love, as the Principle of all Obedience and newness of living. In a 2 Cor.
7.9, 10
Godly sorrow for all sin past, a Godly purpose abrenouncing all sin Heb.
9.14 1 Timothy 1.5, 19 1 John 3.8, 9.4.18.5.3
in Conscience, profession, and endeavor of Conversation for the time to come,
Act. 2.38 Luc. 13.3
Neh. 1.11 Esa. 26.8
a desire to fear Gods name, a Romans 7.22
delight in his Law, a Love of our Brethren, a Conscience void of offense
toward God and men. And so Love is by the Apostle called a Aug. de spir. and
lit. cap. 14
Root and Ground, Ephesians. 3.17.

Now the laying of this Foundation aright, and causing ignorant men in some
measure to understand the mysteries of Religion and Salvation, is indeed the
masterpiece of the wisest Builder, and that, without the which all our other
Sermons to the People will be little better than lost labor, till these
Principles be soundly fastened in their Consciences.

2. To this Foundation of Faith in Doctrine, hope in worship, and love in
obedience, must be joined a progress in the Superstruction, because something
will be ever wanting to the Grace and Knowledge of God in us: and in this
superedification, it will be needful to observe these two things:

1. A due order and disposition: Vid. Fab. praef. in lib. 7. Instit. Orat. Non
debemus onerare infirmitatem discentium, sed temperare ^ires nostras, et ad
intellectum audientium descendere, Idem l. 1. cap. 2. lib. 2. cap. 3, 6.
for though all the Truths of God are to be taught, yet each in its due place
and time, according as the strength and growth of our hearers is able to bear.
As the Scripture was delivered (...), by pieces and degrees, so should it be
preached too, line upon line, precept upon precept. It was (I think) wise
counsel, that of a learned Cardinal, That with vulgar people, it were best
beginning at the later end of S. Paul's Epistles, where he speaks of Duties, and
then after that to go to the beginnings, where he is more profound in Doctrines.

2. A due Connection, that we sever not those Doctrines which God has joined.
Quicquid narras, ita narra ut ille cui loqueris audiendo credat, credendo
speret, sperando diligat. Aug. de Catech. Rudib. c. 4. Tert. de praescr. c. 9.
Aug. de fid. and oper. cap. 14. de Great. et li. Arbitr. cap. 7.
Not to preach Works without Faith, which in the Jews begat pride, and
opinion of their own righteousness, Romans 10.3. Nor Faith without Works, which
some Heretics doing, (for that the learned observe to have been the cause of
the Epistles of Saint James and Saint John) did thereby cause great scandal and
licentious living. To preach the Law so, as to show men still, upon Repentance,
a Refuge to the Gospel; and so to preach the Gospel, as to show them withal
upon their contempt and presumptuous disobedience, the curses of the Law.

3. There is the Contignation and covering,

(...) And here let me speak one word to to you who are Churchwardens, and are
entrusted with the care of Presenting Disorders to the Governors of the
Church; to beseech you to consider the Religion and Sacredness of that Oath,
which in the House of God, and as you expect help from God, you promise to
perform; with the reverence of which Oath, and fear of Gods dreadful Name,
were you so thoroughly affected, as indeed you ought, we should not see what
with grief we do, so great contempt of Gods House and Ordinances, as if they
were common and profane things; many scarce throughout the whole year making
their Confession of sins to God in the Assembly of his People, many seldom or
never hearing any one Psalm of David, or Chapter of the holy Scriptures read
unto them; nay, many neglecting the whole Liturgy of the Church, and dropping
in after the Sermon is begun; and though the Preacher have taken sad pains for
what in the Name of God he speaks unto them, having not yet the patience to
stay till that piece of the hour be ended. Certainly, David had learned more
reverence to the Lords House, I was glad when they said, Let us go into the
House of the Lord, Psalm. 122.1. And so had Cornelius, who with his kindred and
near friends waited for the coming of Peter, Acts 10.24. And so had Solomon,
who teaches men to wait daily at the gates, and to give attendance at the
posts of the doors of Gods House, Prove. 8.34. And the Prophecies foretell the
like of Gods People under the Gospel, that they should call upon one another,
and should Go speedily to pray before the Lord, and to seek the Lord, Zach.
8.21. I speak this in zeal to the service of God, and to the reverence of his
Sanctuary, and beseech you by the sacredness of your Oath, and for the fear
of Gods Name to think upon it.

3. General, and so all the People in their places must labor by inoffensive
and holy lives, and by the peaceable fruits of righteousness to cover the
Church wherein they live from the reproaches of all those who caluminate our
Doctrine and Worship, as tending to licentious, profane, rebellious, or
superstitious living.

And now when all this is done, Except the Lord build the House, they labor
dut in vain that build it. Paul may plant, and Apollo may water, but his
Blessing it is which must perfect all. We all are but walls of mudde, which
may easily be broken through; He only is a Wall of fire which no enemies can
approach unto. And therefore we must all (and we in our Calling especially)
be frequent and urgent in our Prayers to him to preserve the Peace, to repair
the Breaches, and to build up the Walls of his Jerusalem, that he would give
us eyes to see, and hearts to love, and mouths to utter, and lives to express
the praises of his Word. And that he would give his Word a free passage into
the heads and hearts, into the consciences and conversations of all his People:
that so beginning at the unity of the Faith, and knowledge of the Son of God,
we may grow up together unto a perfect man, to the measure of the stature of
the fullness of Christ; which the Lord grant for the merits and mercies of his
Beloved Son Jesus Christ the Righteous; to Whom with the Father and the
blessed Spirit, Three Persons, and One Immortal and only Wise God be all
Glory, Majesty, and Thanksgiving, now and for evermore, Amen.

FINIS.

