VOX MILITIS: FORESHEWING WHAT PERILS ARE PROCVRED WHERE THE people of this, or
any other kingdom live without regard of Marshall discipline, especially when
they stand and behold their friends in apparent danger, and almost subverted by
there enemies unjust persecution, and yet with hold their helping hand and
assistance.

Divided into two parts, the first manifesting for (...) causes Princes may
enter into war, and how necessary and usual it is, drawn from the actions
of the Prince of Orange. The second discourses of war, soldiers, and the
time when it is convenient: collected out of the heroical examples of Count
MANSFIELD.

Where, as in a mirror, meet to be perused by Kings, Princes, Nobles, Knights,
Gentlemen, and men of all degrees throughout the whole kingdom, to behold with
what consideration they should first enter into the war, with what courage
they should prosecute them, and how to deal with a common Enemy.

Dedicated to Count Mansfield, and the honorable Council of War.

Printed at London by B. A. for THOMAS ARCHER, and are to be sold at his shop
in Popes head Alley, over against the sign of the Horse-shoe. 1625.

ILLVSTRISSIMO HONORATISSIMO NOBILISSIMOQVE DOMINO ERNESTO Mansfieldiae,
Comiti, Marchioni Castelli noui and maximi exercitus Duci, etc.
ILLVSTRISSIME Princeps (vere non blande sic te appellem) quitam virtutum quam
rerum polles claritate, acre militari tum Mart vt aiunt, tum Mercurio long
superas, quem natura non tanquam dura Nouerca, quin potius Charamater, non
solum bello Strenuum at consilio sapientem constituit, vt prius timorem
posterius temeritatem abs te ferret, ac certe vtrum men's an manus sit fortior
dictu difficillimum videtur: Neque quid miri dignitati tuae sit, qua causa
ductus hoc opus aut potius opusculum bellicosum tibi potissimum dedicarem?
quandoquidem tu dignissimus Miles (pene dixissem militum Atlas) merito
habearis: qui ficut alter Hercules vsurpantes ac in alienas possessiones
ruentes Tyrannos pia mente and potenti manu penitus euertere conaris. Quis
igitur melior de bello tractatus Patronus? quam qui in bello tractat, quis
mayor amicus erit libro cuius subiectum bellum quam ipse vir qui est subiectum
belli? Preterea sicut armis, sic etiam artibus semper non parum beneuolentiae
oste^disti, and musarum seruis non solum amicus amictus victus, sed etiam ipsa
vita, ab in eunte fuisti aetate, deinde quam gratus plerisque Britaniae
accessus tuus est ex little oculis and vultibus qui sunt indices animi facillime
colligas, inter quos ego mediocre non concipiens gaudium ac nihil habens, quo
aduentum tuum gratuler nisi hos ingenij mei and laboris fructus quos honori tuo
consecro: parum dubitans immo confidenter sperans quod sicut ex amore more and
officio sunt supra Altar, plusquam humanae bonitatis tuae impositi. Sic erunt
tanquam gratum sacrificium accepti, and sereno accipies and aspicies front, in
quibus legitimum immo necessarium belli vsum militum varios iniquos tum equos
mores, similiter tempusad bellum gerendum opportunum, and militaris disciplinae
exercitium cernas.

Quae si perleges parum pertimesco, (si modo sine Philautia dieam) quin ex hoc
officioso opere a me tibi oblato, non minus vtilitatis quam voluptatis capies:
exoptans itaque dignitati tuae summam (aut si quae summa sit superior)
foelicitatem in conscientia pacem in bello victoriam, vtcunque internam,
externam, and aeternam valetudinem in omne aeuum maneo.

Tuarum virtutum obseruantissimus, G. M.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE and noble favorer of all Virtue and Learning, OLIVER,
Viscount Grandison, One of the Council of War in Great BRITAIN.
RIGHT Honorable, and truly Noble, as well famous for all virtues in
general, as valor in particular: There is no work can be so worthy, but in
this mimike and Spleensike age, it is ready every moment to be rackt upon the
rack of a harsh censure, but most especially such as write any thing in the
defense of those so much persecuted professions, as the Scholar and the
Soldier, the which though none pity them for their poverty, yet most men
envy for their worth the one, because they can not attain unto it: The other,
because they dare not be of it, it is not then to be hoped for: But this my
Treatise will meet with many calumnies, and the voice of the Soldier will
have many soggy misty vapor, which breath proceeding from malicious mouths,
will seek to prevent the passage of it: the covetous Carle, who makes his gold
his gold, cries out against it, and cannot endure so much as the Echo of it,
he says it is so chargeable, and he had rather endanger his person, then
indammage his purse: Another is so loath to leave his Mistress to find out
honor, that the very voice seems to him as thunder, and he cannot suffer it;
another has bathed himself so long in the sunshine of peace, as this storm
goes to the heart of him, in so much as these my labors are like to encounter
with many adversaries, and this Treatise of War, to have a multitude of
warriors against it, it is forced therefore to seek to shelter it self under
the wings of your protection, whereby it may be preserved from the sury of all
the foes, and envious darts of all the despisers of it. The reason why I
commend it to your Honors tuition, and become an earnest and humble suter to
your Honor for your patronage: especially, is in regard I hope you will
somewhat respect it for the names sake you are chiefly elected of the King, as
the most experienced soldiers of this Kingdom to be of his Counsel of war,
and this is the voice of a Soldier which does concord with your Counsel,
being as an Alarm, to awake all men out of the slumber of Security, to
persuade them never so much to desire peace as to detest war, seeing it is an
action not only lawful but necessary to assume arms, either for the defense
of our selves, or the relief of others, whose Dominions are unjustly detayned,
or tirannically usurped. Far be it from me to be too saucie, as to offer to
advise you that were a sin of horrid presumption, and as great a folly as
for the feet to guide the head, or the Ass to Counsel the Lion, but my intent
is to instruct the ignorant, to awake the secure, to commend the valiant, to
condemn the cowardly, to raise the reputation of Soldiers, who are now looked
upon with a contemptfull eye, whose souls are captiuated with want and misery,
who fight faintly because they are not rewarded bravely, to show how in former
times they which had behaved themselves valiantly were recompensed honorably,
whereas now a days, the meede of their deserts for the most part is a bag
and a wallet, and there gain the gallows to deplore the decay of Marshall
discipline, the neglect of warlike affairs, the which for a long time lay
bleeding and were giving up the Ghost, until your Honorable Counsel recovered
them and gave unto them life and action. Vouchsafe therefore most worthy Peers
to Patronize this work, and to daigne to accept of this mite cast into your
treasury, respecting not the greatness of the gift, but the might of the
giver, who though he can not present unto you a work according to his will,
yet to the uttermost of his power, whose only hope is built upon your
acceptance? Oh then do you respect this present, as God does our petitions of
whom it is said, Non vox sed votum, non musica cordula sed cor,
Non clamans sed amans, sonat in are Dei.
It Is not the voice, but vow, the heart, not musickes string,
The love, and not the cry, that in Gods ears do ring.


Respect therefore in this work, not the stateliness of the style, but the
uprightness of the heart, not the well placing of the words, but the goodness
of the intent, for it is the intention that crowns the action, and what better
drift can there be of a man's designs then the weal public, the presernation
of his Country, the honor of his Countrymen, the provision of an Antidote
against forrainefoes and forces, the Centinell has not an idle or unnecessary
office, the watchman in the City is not in vain, he that forewarnes his
friends fore-armes them, and surely I think then, this can not distaste any
honest, though it may be some curious Palates howsoever: Howsoever let me
entreat you, nay more obtain so much of your Honors, that as you are a
Counselor of War, so you would be Countenancers of this soldiers voice:
that so by your furtherance a more happy success may crown my indeauoures, my
labors be more fruitful, causing all men to awake out of Security, and to be
in a readiness to make resistance against him that is always aiming to give
an assault. So shall you show your selves to be worthy Counselors of War,
Comsorters of Warriers, Causers of the welfare of this Kingdom, and make the
Author of this work eternally obliged unto you, who entreats you to accept
his labors as graciously as he offers it officiously, And rests

As ready in his person as his pen to do his Sovereign service, his
Country good, and your Honors duty. G. M.

VOX MILITIS: OR, An Enemy to Security.
Remembering how the anticke Poets faign'd,
The Gods did punish those which them disdaind:
How woeful Troy in flaming fires did mourn,
Cause Paris did the suite of Juno scorn;
How fair Narciss into a flower was turned,
Cause he at Venus dainty darlings spurnd:
J deemd that angry Mars could do no less,
Then his fell sury upon those express;
Which do all Marshall Discipline neglect,
And none of his brave Paramours respect,
Who let there weapons hang secure and rust,
Surely it should not seem in him unjust,
If he should make them heavy pains endure,
Which do contemn his honor, live secure:
And so he does as neighboring Kingdoms show,
Who by their peace nursed up their overthrow:
The milk white Swan that in Meander swimmes,
And in that Christ all flood does bath his limbs,
Did from the Crow receive no mickell hate,
Who enuide at her happy fair estate,
And labourd by all means her beauty fair
To soil, and so her whiteness to empaire:
But all in vain, whiles as the careful Swan,
With watchful eye obserud him, but when
She did not watch, but when as silent sleep,
Possession of the Swanues fair lights did keep;
Then at that hour she sat upon her skirt,
And all her white array besmeard with dirt:
Oh let not then this our fair Swan-like I Will.
All fear of future harms from it exile,
Promising peace, when an unhappy fate,
Is eminent unto her envied state:
Neither let those, whose faces black as hell,
In whose black hearts, all black designs do dwell;
Iniure her blessed condition, neither Spain
Hinder her peace, give life unto her pain;
I doubt not if she wake, they cannot hurt her,
Yet if she slumber, they may chance bedurt her,
Which to prevent, here is the Soldiers voice
Awakes for fear her foes, should her deboyce:
And let her Neighbors harms, her arms be made,
Let her sole bliss be on their ruin laid,
So is it not fit in our House should befeare,
When in our Neighbors fierr flames appear,
Will not the Soldier fence his proper head,
When he his fellow sees stricken dead;
Will not the Scholar to himself take heed,
When as the rod does make the others bleed
Consider then how these thy enemies,
Did forr aigne lands in state secure surprise,
Let Antwerpes fall like thunder in thy ears,
Rouse thee from slumber, summon thee to fears,
Which Town could nere have liberty forsook,
If that her foes had not her napping took:
So did the Greeks unto the Town of Troy,
Which being dead in sleep and drink, they did destroy.
And as for late times, the Palatinate
Through former ease, brought to unhappy fate:
Hear but what France of haughty Spain can speak,
And it will slumber from your souls eye, break,
Examine a^y Land each place on earth,
Says danger from security has birth;
It casie seems to strike a standing Bucke,
When as a tripping Do has better luck.
The stauding Poole with speed does putrify,
When we no filth in running streams discrie:
All which does manifest no other,
Then that ease is of sorrows all the mother:
Whiles Sampson slept in his fair minions lap,
He was yeatched in his strumpets trap;
Whiles Holifernes slept on downy bed,
He lost the sought for conquest, and his head:
And it is a maxim that excess of rest,
Has bad success, and sild, or ueuers blessed.
Mars can t'indure Bacchus and Venus shout,
Have all the honor from terrestrial mould;
It Is meet he should have some, it is against right,
That in his worship man should nere delight:
Then stay no longer from God Mars his broyle,
Learn to defend your selves, your foes to foil:
You which so much adord the pipe and pot,
Ascribe now worship to the pike and shot,
Make Mars his Altars smoke, his Angels fly,
Leave lust, and follow matchless Chiualry,
That so you may immortalize your name,
And purchase to your selves eternal fame;
Blunt the edge of their fury, which do spite
This our fair Albion, the Worlds delight:
There is no honor, like to that in which
One suffers death, to make his Country rich:
Then on my Lads, do not lie slugging here,
To smoke tobacco pipes, and suck the beer;
But rather arm, and for your Country stand,
Remember Honors harvest is at hand,
In which you reap renown, if vile disgrace,
And cowardice produce not shame of face:
Then for your arms prepare with all the speed,
To make Religions foes from heart to bleed,
Think how the praise of an heroicke sprite,
With his Countries foes in field to fight.
For this your Worthies had their Temples crowned,
And were of all this Universe renownd;
In that they labourd for their Countries good,
And all her foreign Foes with force withstood:
Were, be such now, here in a chimney corner,
One fellow quakes and shakes like Thomas Horner;
When once he hears the rumors of the Wars,
He is a man of peace, and loves not iarres:
Yet want and poverty does haunt him so,
He knows not where to fly, nor what to do;
Another fellow seems to applaude,
Bellonas coming, and her person laud:
But if to follow her one should him try,
Like Thraso then heed in infidiis lie,
As some in office other men do press
Unto the wars, when they love nothing less:
And a third sort perhaps the wars do curse,
Because they do suppose they will charge his purse:
Another that can scarce endure a scratch,
Made with his Mistress pin, when he does catch
Her by some part forbidden, if be hears
That Mars within this Hemysphere appears,
A palsy takes him, he says he is undone,
He fears he shall be killed with a gun:
And he another fault in them does see,
He fears his lodging too too hard will be.
But up base mind, and learn to soar a loft,
Honor lies not upon a bed that's soft,
Nor worthy knowledge, to the war make have,
And strine to get aname that ere may last.
Now least thou should be dull, and loath to stir,
Peruse this work of mine here as a spur,
To prick thee forward, where as thou may read
The worth of wars, and how they all exceed,
Where thou may understand a Soldier true,
His labors meede that honor is his due:
And that like Atlas on his shoulders he,
Vpreares the Commonwealth from dangers free.
The time when we these our arms up should take
The which observed the wars does prosperous make.
And fourthly, this to thee does show the way,
By which does Marshall discipline decay.
Then let these flowers which I with pain collected,
Not be with scornful Eye of thee rejected.
The Toil was mine, the Pleasure thine; the Pain
Mine own, do thou but daygne to reap the Gain.
I like the Be, the Honey home have brought,
Vouchsafe thee but to taste that I have sought:
Which if thou doest't will so encourage then,
Thou shall reap riper fruits from this my pen.
FINIS.
VOX MILITIS, FORESHEWING WHAT PERILLES ARE PROCVRED WHERE THE PEOPLE OF THIS
OR any other kingdom, live without regard of Marshall Discipline: especially,
when they stand and behold their Neighbors and Friends in apparent danger,
and almost destroyed by their enemies unjust persecution, and not to assist
them.
IT is free from all doubt or suspicion that multitudes may conjecture me to
have suffered more then sufficient travail in this enterp ise: To wit, This
description of Wars and Martial affairs, primarily in regard that they have
ever had the estimation of plagues and punishments, and to the Palats of some
persons apprehension are so distasteful, that it is the most pernicious,
superlatiue, and malignant of all mischiefs, being as well accounted an
affliction to the harmless as to the hurtful, to the innocent as to the
injurious: for by it wholesome laws and salutiferous Precepts are violated,
Humanity defaced, Justice perverted and suppressed, Pious places are profaned,
Horryd murders committed, undefiled Virgins desloured, chaste modest Matrons
defiled, spacious Kingdoms subverted, great Cities subdued and ruinated. As
Numace admired for the valor, Corinth famous for the magnificence, Thebes
unparalleled for the stateliness of the building and edifices. delicate Tire
accomplished, Athens, holy Jerusalem, Contentious Carthage, Antwerp, and in this
our modern and miserable age, Prague the Palatinate, and Breda now languishing
in the like misery, the which with diverse of her companyons by the means of
wars have bin sacked and spoiled, robbed and ruinated, and oftentimes laid
wast and desolate, and therefore it is but merely a punishment inslicted by
God, upon some place for some notable sin and heavy affliction, being used of
him as a corasiue to eat out the dead flesh of security, the only means to
humble us for our own sins, and to reduce us from the following of our own
corruptions to the favoring of Christian religion.

A Secondary cause which induces me to suspect, that this my work is likely to
be rackt with many a rash censure, is this, viz. That as it is obuious in it
self: so it is odious in respect of the instruments which are used in it, as
the professors and followers of it are in such mean respect and estimation, as
they are rather deemed sit for Ruffians, Roy sters, and people of a vile abject
condition, rather then an exercise for honest holy men of conscionable
conversation: who neither bear any zeal to Gods glory, nor any affection to
their brothers good: in so much as it is Cornelius Agrippas assertion, that if
you desire to see a true Tyrant, a Prophaner, or a Murderer, a Robber, a
Rauisher, a Desiourer, if you would have all these several conditions in one
singular person, and if you desire to include all this matter in one word, it
is comprehended in this one name Soldier.

But to the end we may address our Treaty to our intended Subject, viz. WAR,
because I know many be so scrupulous and tender consciences, as they deem them
absolutely unlawful. I held it not fruitelesse and of no small import and
consequence to produce some proof, as well out of Scripture as other writers,
to show the lawfullnesse and good approbation of Military proceedings even by
God himself.

I could here produce whole clouds of Testymonies out of Scripture for the
confirmation of the trneth of this position: to prove that wars have been
acceptable before the Majesty of God, and sometimes of more preuailence then
peace, as it appears more clearly, then the Meridian light, in the second
Chapter of the Book of the Judges, where the children of Israel were reproved,
for concluding a peace with the Cananites, neither has only approbation by
the Scriptures, but is also received as a lawful proceeding by diverse other
famous Authors, and that it is not only convenient, but necessary for Princes
to make a breach of amity, that they might better make a confirmation of
inviolable friendship, that their love might be like a limme which being broken
and well set, becomes more strong and stable; and it is a War most worthily
initiated, whereby the security and safety of the States effected, and on the
contrary that peace is not well permitted, but most pernicious, which is the
mother and causer of the peoples peril, and the Countries hazard: And that
true mirror of eloquence, Cicero, tells us; Ad hunc finem bella suscipimus vt
cum pace and sine iniuria viuimus, To this end we undertake wars, that we
may enjoy peace without injury: and in another place of the same Book, writing
to the same purpose; We must in matters of advice not so deny war, as to
neglect our own welfare: And one says no less pithily then prettily, Bellum
bello susceptum bellum est; Wars well undertaken, are good and lawful, for
as we must be cautelous not upon every light occasion to undertake it, so we
must not be cowards upon just cause to refuse it, for both of them are the
extremes of fortitude, as well a rash attempt, as a base refusal: From hence
Demosthenes that King of Orators, in a inuectiue Oration against King Philip,
for his insatiable ambitious desire of gonernement, as he already had besieged
the Olinthians, upon the conquest of whom he had a free passage into Athens,
which to prevent, Demosthenes exhorts them not only to aid the Olinthians,
but also to raise an Army to send into Macedonia, that so being wounded at
home, he might have the less liberty to hurt abroad, alleging that aid to
their Neighbors is very requisite, since as their safety was founded upon
their good success, for whosoever withdraws his helping hand, when as his
neighbors house is on fire, may want assistance to quench his own, according
to that old and usual verse, I am mea res agitur paries cum proximus audet; It
is my case: so when the next walls burned, either for the subversion of any
tyrant, which does wrongfully usurp more by might then right any others
dominions: in so much that in former times, it was held a thing convenient in
former times, that if any Prince did tyrannically abuse any of his Subjects,
either with cruelty, murder, rape, rauine, or such like oppressions, wherein
he might offer his subjects opprobrious injury, the which (in regard they
cannot redress themselves, for what subject dares lift up his hand against
Gods Anointed, or to stand up in Arms against his Sovereign) it was
requisite that the next adjoining Prince, who was a borderer upon the confines
of his Dominions, should assume arms against him, to chastise, correct, and
reform so great enormities, to the end that the name of a King might not seem
odious, and be hateful unto the people, as was Nero, Heligabulus. Dionysius,
and too many others of that barbarous disposition and horrid cruelty.

From whence he purchased unto himself such an immortal name, and never dying
memory, as they did diefie him for vilefying such monsters, and exercising his
prowess upon such tyrants.

But for the better satisfaction of those, whose precise consciences, will not
allow any Wars or dissentions, to keep any harmonicall consent either with
goodness or godliness, give but an attentive and patient ear unto the words
of Hieronymus Osorius, as they be recorded and written in his Book entitled
True Christian Nobility.

Neither has this allowance of Wartes only approbation from him, but is
received as a lawful practice by the common consent of the most, or at least
the best part of Doctors; Divine Plato extolleth this art of Arms, and
commands that children should be instructed in it, so soon as they came to
ability of body, or any aptitude to discharge the Offices of Soldiers, and it
was Cyrus his opinion, that it was as necessary as agriculture or husbrandy,
neither is it denied by Augustine and Bernards those two famous Fathers.

The Romans also who were of matchless worth in marshall affairs, being no
less to be admited for their carriage abroad, then for their counsel at
home, appointed for their chief Commanders two Consuls, the one to determine
City affairs, the other to be occupied in marshall discipline, being assured
that they could never have peace within their walls, except they had wartes
abroad; to omit the judgment of Hipodam us Milesius, a man so expert in all
learning, who thought it convenient for that City or Country which coueted
quietness, and sought for safety, to divide their people into three parts,
the one of which were to be appointed to be Artificers, the other for
Husbandry, and the third sort set apart to be employed in martial exercises.

Indeed peace is a precious pearl, and is chiefly to be desired, but
oftentimes Wars must be performed, that peace may be maintained: even like a
ship which being in her quiet Harbor, is constrained to loose Anchor, and to
seek for safety in the vaste and raging Sea: if a man cannot attain his right
without violence, he may lawfully take up Arms, and get it by force, for some
men are like a nettle, the more kindly they use them, the worse they will sting
them, the fairer they entreat them, the fouler they intertaine them.

Solomon likewise prescribes a time for peace, and a time for War, a day of
mirth, and a day of mourning, and therefore to use time when oceasion serves,
is a maine pont of principal wisdom, and to assume Arms upon due
premeditation, not incensiderately to enter into conslict and skirmish, for
that faucurs of savage beastliness, and not of sage humanity: but when time
permits, and necessity requires, then on with your Armor, fight manfully,
preferring an happy and honorable death, before a disgraceful and miserable
death.

There is a double kind of Injustice, the one in offering, the other in
suffering Injustice: the one is actiuely, the other passiuely unjust, wittingly
to offend against a neighbor, is a sin against our brother, and wilfully to
bear an injury, is an offense against ones self, and therefore I will not be
a foe to my Neighbor, in wronging of him, neither will I be an enemy to my
self, in permitting him to offend me, when I am of ability to defend my self:
But me thinks I hear some object against the former resolution, saying, that
Truth it self has prohibited the rendering of evil for evil to any man, and
has enjoined, that if one has received a blow of one ear, he ought to turn
the other: It is true that he has said; I believe that vengeance is the Lords,
and he will repay it, yet notwithstanding a Christian does not go about to
revenge it, as it is an injury done to himself, but as an offense committed
against God, who has forbidden all injustice, and commanded to give unto
Caesar that which belongs unto Caesar, and I trust that no man will be so
foolishly opinionated, that when he is oppressed by any Tyrant, should
willingly surrender into his hands his possessions, his Crown, and Signiory,
or that it should not be a legal honest course, and not dissentane either from
reason or religion, for a Prince to defend and maintain his right, or that it
should not be lawful for him to war upon him either for it, in the defense
of true Religion, or the maintenance of their freedom and liberty, as the
Athenians against King Philip.

And howsoever in this our Pilgrimage, fortitudes estimation is in the wayne,
yet in ancient times prowess was of such price and valor, of so great
account, as no glory was counted so great, no renown so honorable, as that
which has been won in the field by the force of martial prowess, and to
make men more greedy of such gain, and more thirsty of such atchieuements,
great meedes and rich rewards were conferred upon such as had deserved
worthily, and behaved themselves bravely in the wars.

The noble Caleb, who by a constant courage and courageous constancy of mind,
had reperswaded the children of Israel, that had a determinate inclination to
make a return into the Land of Egypt, to continue still in their courage,
their former manhood and virtue: and therefore the Lord promised to be his
rewarder, who having a Daughter of incomparable matchless beauty, whose name
Achsat, would espouse or give her in marriage upon none but he that by his
valor could take the City Cariath, which in the end was taken by Othniel his
brothers son.

And did not David receive great riches with the Daughter of King Saul, for
overthrowing Goliath? who also promised a great reward to those which would
work the destruction of the lebusites: The Carthaginians rewarded the
Soldiers with so many rings as they had been in battles: The Scithians
permitted none to drink in a great cup of gold, that was carried about, except
they had wrought the overthrow, or brought an Enemy to destruction.

The Romans the more to accend men's minds, and to set their breasts on fire
with the desire of honor, and to prick them on to prowess, invented stately
triumphs, whereby his name might mount on the wings of Fame, which had deserved
worthily, but on the contrary, such as had been of cowardly carriage, or had
any affinity with our carpet Knights, were in a most shameful manner
disgraced.

The Macedonians did constitute a Law, that whosoever had not got the conquest
of some one in fight or battle, because he had not striuen like a man for
victory, he should be hanged like a dog in a halter.

The Women of Cimbria beyond the valor of their See, slew all such that being
so followed with fear, forsook the Field, although they were of their never
so near alliance, and were conjoined never so unto them in the bond of
consanguinitie,

The Women of Sparta would go into the Field, the battle being ended, to see
in what places their Husbands had received their wounds, the which if they
found them to be before, (from whence they might conjecture he had fought
manfully) they would with great solemnity perform his; but if behind, they
left him as being ashamed of such a coward, and would not afoord his carcass
so much as burial.

Tierias a certain woman of Lacedemonia, having intelligence that her son had
received a fatal wound in the wars, and had shaken hands and taken his
farewell of this world, replied, was it not necessary that my son, going unto
the wars, should be the death of others, then wherefore should I lament if
others have been the death of him, surely with less sorrow and more solace I
remember him, supposing him no whit unworthy of me or his predecessors in that
he lived not in shame and idleness, but died with honor: let cowardly hearts
lament such a loss, as for my part, I will intombe my son and never weep
upon his vrne.

Another woman of Lacedemonia bereaved her son of his vital breath, to whom
her womb had given life, because he had basely fied from the wars, in whose
reproach this epitaph was written.

Here does the dastard knight Damation lie,
Who like a coward from the wars did sly:
And for that fact was by his mother slain,
Because he her and Spartan blood did stain.
Solon that wise and worthy Philosopher, whom we all admire, but scarce
imitate for his wisdom; being demanded of Crasus the King, of who in his
conceit was most fortunate, replied, Tellus an Athenian from whose loins was
sprung (in a country flowing with milk and honey, and abounding with all good
commodities) a great many of children, both for the indowments of the mind,
and beauty of the body, absolutely accomplished, who defended his country
manfully, lived with honor, died with glory.

Here then you may perceive the great estimation that valor was in former
times when as it was so worthily reputed the exercisers of it so much
encouraged, and the neglecters of it so much contemned, now what incommodity
has insued upon them, who have placed there sole and whole selicity in peace
that they have not only despised war, but have utterly refused to learn all
Marshall discipline, hereafter I will demonstrate unto you.

But still me thinks there remains a ribble rabble of secming religious
people, whose queasie consciences strain at a Gnat, but swallow a Camel,
whose wary minds stumble at a straw, but leap over a block, which still do
oppose and make assault against our position, in regard that murder spoils,
and sundry other inconveniences are the effects of them: but it is not enough
to reprove an opinion as erroneous, except they prove it false, neither does
this there mere assertion sufficient to infringe the verity of this position.
Suppose War to be the mother of Murder, yet it is oftentimes such as is by
God allowed, nay more commanded: Did not Iosuah, fearing the day would have
imposed too speedy and present a period to his slaughter, command the Sun to
stay in Gideon, and the Moon in the Aialon, and the Lord did countenance his
commandment, for there succecded an immediate Solstyne, and the Moon
continued not her course, nay oftentimes the too much favoring of ours and
Gods enemies, has been the only means to root us out of Gods favor: For
what was the original of Saul's destruction? but the not destroying of the
Amalekites, neither do I produce these examples, to prove wars always
necessary: but sometimes lawful, and I can not choose but admire the foolish
frenzy of some fantastique Coxcombes, who do so much misconceiue of wars as
they hold them directly displeasing to God, because murder, and diverse other
misdemeanors are committed in them.

But by these arguments they kill themselves with their own weapons, and
seeking to maintain the prerogative of peace, do quite cuert it, for by that
argument it is the most to be euited enormity that can be imagined: for is it
not the nurse of vices, the root of ruin, the prop of pride, to be short, the
mother of all mischief: for in the time of peace we fix our fancy only
upon uncertain riches, for the satisfying of which sacred hunger of gold, what
offense will we not perpetrate, what sin will we leave vnacted, who will
not become an Usurer, or an Extortioner, nay, that which is something better, a
hangman, or an Executioner, a parasite, nay, a paracide, to purchase them? And
when they have attained them, they are but the irratamenta malorum, the ingines
of iniquity, the instruments of vanity, the stirrers up of strife and
contention, making the possessor of them proud, presumptuous, vainglorious,
and like leaven sowring the whole lump. This Augustine perceiving, writes in
a Book of his entitled De Ciuitate Dei, The City of Carthage was more
hurtful to the City of Rome after her destruction, then in the time of the
wars which the Romans had with her, for whilst they had enemies in
Affticke, they knew not what vices meant at Rome.

Yet is it not my drift to prefer Wars before Peace, but to intimate, that
as Peace is the great blessing of God, so Wars undertaken upon due
consideration, do nothing offend him: and although in the time of peace there
is plenty of vice, yet notwithstanding it is not absolutely to be condemned,
so though in the Wars there be many outrages committed, yet it is not wholly
therefore to be neglected: the Sun shining upon some pleasant Garden, makes
the flowers have a more fragrant and delightful smell, but displaying his most
radiant beams upon a dunghill, makes the stink greater, and the sent more
noy some: The sick man's stomach turns all his meat into bad humors, Peace
may be prosperous, and War lawful, yet both of them may be abused.

Moreover, if I should speak of the particular commodities that several
countries have reaped by wars, I could be infinite, and to the intent I may
not range far abroad for example, let thy consideration make but a step into
our neighboring nations, and let us look into the Low Countries, these you
shall see the Prince of Orange, that treasury of all virtue and goodness,
though with mean forces, withstanding a mighty nation, that his liberty might
not be infringed, of his country injured; neither has he maintained his own
case only valiantly, but has afforded his neighboring friends aid and
assistance. Let Spain speak how often she has received a repulse and a non
visitauit from him? how often in vain she has attempted his overthrow, but
be like a well built fort has valiantly withstood all their assaults? and
though he has happily been moved, yet could not be removed by their attempts:
whereby as all men sufficiently understand, he is now grown potent and
powerful, rich and renowned: whereas on the contrary, if Asse-like he would
have borne the king of Spaines heavy burden, submitted to the yoke of his
obedience, he had lost his liberty, nouer attained the honor with which his
name is now crowned, for he remains as a mirror and terror to all nations,
for as his Excellency did justly, and with due consideration undertake, so he
has nobly and with true valor maintained his quarrel against the King of
Spain. Surely an act well beseeming so worthy and noble a Prince, who as he
should not be like a raw wound ouer-apprehensiue of injuries, so he should be
unlike dead flesh, not too senseless of wrongs done unto: the one shows folly
the other fea^e. Neither would it ill befeeme any Potentate to tread in the
steps of so excellent a Prince, and not so much to respect peace as to neglect
a just occasion of war, for does it stand with reason or religion that a
Prince having sufficient power to make resistance to an open enemy, should
expose his open breast to his threatening sword, nay when he sees he has already
cut off some of his lims to trust him with his whole body. Has he any great
good meaning to the tree that hackes and hewes down the branches: does he
bear any good affection to the father that strives to iniure the child? or
does not he that oppresses the child, express his hatred to the father? can
one which loathes the effect love the cause? will not he which cannot
tolerate the heat, labor to quench the fire? yes surely, and it was formerly
lawful for Kings to seek to depose a Tyrant though he had no interest in
those which were injured. Then how much more forcible a motive has he if his
posterity be abused, and he be wounded in his own bowels: Surely his sword
ought not to rest in his sheath when he has such just cause to draw it, but
his angry canons to thunder in the ears of his enemies, and tell them they
have injured him. And is not this the cause of our Sovereign, if ever Prince
had just cause of war, it is he, for they have exiled out of his inheritance
the Palsgraue, a Prince so hopeful; they have laid wast his country which was
the Paradise of the world, a land so fruitful, they do unjustly usurp his
Diadem, they have falsely promised the restoring of it, when as the pulses of
their promises did not beat according to the motion of their hearts. Certes it
did not beseem Princely piety in them to offer, neither does it consent with
kingly courage in him to suffer, that me thinks this voice of the Soldier is
but as an echo to the voice of heaven, which says the cause is just, and
counsels all Christan Protestant Princes jointly to assume arms to drive
this Boar out of the Vineyard, and to re-seate this royal Prince in his
Throne and dignity.

Hear oh you brave English Spirits which once were admired, I had almost said
adored for your valor when you had employment; how can you any longer desist
from the pursuit of honor in so just a cause? do you not long to fight for
the safety of a limme, nay the half part of your Sovereign. But why should I
use these needless persuasions, or spur a free horse, I dare say you are
easily entreated, nay hardly persuaded from it, and you are as restless being
staued from the combat, as the Stone violently detained from the Center.

Never was Bear robbed of her whelps more angry of revenge then you of this
enterprise; it may be indeed there be some Spanish English (as they term
them) who are neither true to God, their King, or country, which have not the
least drop of loyal blood lodged in their hearts, that would be somewhat
unwilling to act a part in this matter: perhaps likewise there be others who be
guilty of so little valor, that they had rather live like drones in this hiue
of our commonwealth, and be loitring lubbers at home, then any ways to offer
there service for their Sovereigns welfare, or spend a dram, nay a drop of
blood in the defense of the truth, who are very well content to enjoy the
warmth they have under the wings of their Sovereign, but will not do any
service in the requital of this benefit being not much unlike to ungrateful
curs which will fawn upon their master so long as he feeds them, but when he
has any futther employments for them, they bid him adue, and hasten to their
kennels: So these men, or rather beasts indeeed, that are borne, bred,
fostered, sed, in their country, and yet can suffer an indignity done to
their Prince, and when their country stands in need of their aid or
assistance, to slip their collar and come to combat in the defense of it as
willingly as Bears to the stake: that argues an ungrateful mind, free from
all virtue as well as valor, and indeed are no more worthy to enjoy the
commodities and benefits of their country then a Swine deserves a pearl.

But as Plutarque makes mention of an Island in Greece called Cobde, in which
there was a lineage descended from that noble valiant captaiue called Agis the
good, amongst which Agitas this law especially was most strictly observed, that
none durst presume to style himself naturally borne in the I Will, unless he had
performed some memorable valiant act: or at the least, showed himself forward
and willing in the defense of his King and Country, and I dare truly say,
though he dare style himself one of the Country naturally borne, yet he is
not so, for a true English man has a heart more full of Celestial fire, and a
bosom better furnished with noble thoughts, then to be a Porter of injuries
done to his Sovereign, or any of those which belong unto him: And I do speak,
ex animo, there never went a hungry man with a greater or better appetyte to a
feast, then they would to this fray. They know the Prince so worchy, the cause
so just, the success so certain: I doubt not, but it has bin so sufficiently
proved, that wars are lawful, that a blind man may apparently see it: but
still there are some, who though they can not disallow of the action, yet they
seem to dislike of the Agents, and perhaps they will say, a Soldiour can not
be an honest man, because in wars they be ministers of so much mischief:
this is their reason. But in this place I will but reason of soldiers, as I
have already done or wars: that is, but to show what manner of people
soldiers have been: As for such as do but usurp the name of soldiers, I
leave them till another occasion.

We find in the 14 Chapter of the book of Genesis, Genesis. 14.
that Abraham was a captain and leader of men, unto whom Melchizedech the King
of Salem brought forth bread and wine: albeit he wore a Priest of the most
high God. And S. Paul in his Epistle to the Hebrews the 6. Chapter, speaking
of our Savior Christ, says, That he was made a high Friest for ever after the
order of Melch zedech: and all the Divine and ancient Doctors by general
consent do agree, that the first true figure of Christ, was here offered to
soldiers, that were returned from the flaughter and spoil of their enemies.

A special cause wherein soldiers may worthily triumph, and a choke pear
sufficient, to stop their mouths, that would so absolutely condemn them.

Moses, Exodus 18.21. Deuteronomy. 1.13.15.
though he were otherwise a Prophet, yet he was likewife a captain, to whom
Jethro his father in law, by the motion of Gods spirit, gave counsel to
provide such to be judges over the rest, which should be found to be men of
courage, to fear God, to be lovers of truth, and hating covetousness, etc.
and that of them he should make some Mil^enaries to rule over thousands; and
that he should cre^te others C^nteniers, to rule over hundreds: other Conquest
^iers to bear authority over fifties: and Disniers to command our tennes.

Joshua, at whose commandment the son was obedient, Judges. 7.
was a soldier and a leader of an army.

When the whole host of the children of Israel was utterly dismaide for the
multitude of their enemies, whose number was like the sands of the sea, the
Lord commanded Gedeon to make his choice of such to serve for soldiers to
encounter them, as were most faithful, that doubted not of his promises made
unto them, which were in number but 300. and were chosen by lapping of water.

Who ever stood more in the good grace and favor of God, then that noble King
and captain David, whom the Lord termed to be a man after his own hart^s
desire?

What should I here speak of J^ph^heth, of Jehu, of Judas Macchabaeus, and of
many other, which were notable soldiers? shall they be condemned to be wicked
and evil, because they were warriors? or shall we think of them, that in
that vocation they offended God?

When the s^uldiers demanded of John Baptist, Luke. 3.
what they ought to do, he willed them to hurt no man wrongfully, but to live
by their wages: he said not unto them, Forsake your vile profession, you can
not be the children of God, to follow any such manner of e^cys^: the which
questionless he would have done, if he had so thought.

And when the Captain, who had sent unto lesus for the healing of his servant
that lay sick, as Jesus was going toward his house: Luke. 7.
( Nay Lord quoth the Captain) I am not worthy that thou should enter into
my roose, do but speak the word only, and my servant shall be safe: for I
also am a man set under power, and have under me soldiers: and I say unto one
go^, and he goes: and to another come, and he comes: and to myseruant do
this, and he does it. Jesus maruelling at his words, turning him about to those
that followed, said: I have not found so great faith, no not in Jsrael.

And what godlyer commendation may be given to any man then we find in the 10.
Chapter of the Acts of the Apostles, Acts. 10.
where it is written as follows.

There was a certain man in Caesarea, whose name was Cornelius, a captain of
the soldiers of Italy, a devout man, and one that feared God with all his
household, etc. To this Cornelius the Angel of the Lord appeared, and willed
him to send into Joppa, and to inquire for one Simon Peter, who should instruct
him and baptize him in the name of Jesus, and when the Angel was departed,
thus says the text: He called to him two of his household servants, and a
devout soldier, that waited on him, and told them all the matter, and sent
them to Ioppa, etc. This may seem sufficient to prove, that not only
Captains, but also private soldiers, have been found to be both zealous and
fervent in the love and fear of God, and that he has likewise accepted them
into his special grace and favor.

But what should I stand here to manifest the virtues, wherewith a number of
noble captains have been most plenteously endued: as the bounty and
liberality of Alexander, the continency of Scipio; the justice and equity of
Iultus Caesar, the patience and humility of Agathocles, the mercy and pity of
Agesilaus, the faith and fidelity of Regulus to his very enemies. Here might (I
say) even of this only matter a huge volume be written, only of the virtuous
dispositions of noble soldiers: in so much that this oath, By the faith of a
Soldier, has been so inuiolably kept, that a soldier has been better to
have been credited by that oath, then some merchants now by their obligations.

But here if any will conjecture, that in time past soldiers have so exceeded
in virtues, that at the time present they have none at all lest for them to
boast on: although in England our multitude be not many, yet amongst those few
there be both honorable and worshipful, whose magnanimity in the time of
wars has made them famous in foreign countries, and whose noblenes and
virtues now in the time of peace, do shine coequall with the best.

But here peradventure some curious caueller will reply, that these may be
better called sage and wise counselors, then bloody or cruel Captains: and
rather may be termed sober, and discreet lustices, then rash and harbrayned
soldiers: and thus by denying them to be soldiers, will think I am never the
nearer my proof. But here if there were no other shift, or that the matter
were so needful to be reasoned on: it were very easy to prove, that the
best and noblest soldiers be ever found to be the wysest and meetest
Counselors: and for that cause the Poets have feigned Minerua to be armed,
signifying that Captains and soldiers should be (as it is reported of
Iugerth) not only wise in counselling, but courageous in conquering: as
politic in keeping, as valiant in getting.

And Tullie in his first book of Offices speaks of a double commodity that
these men do yield to their country, Tull. de os^, lib. 1.
who armed, do make wars: and roabed, do govern the common wealth.

What though there be some that in the time of service, will intrude
themselves, and become soldiers, of purpose rather to spoil, rob, and
filch, then to do any good service, shall the honest Soldier therefore be
condemned? so every profession, how necessary so ever it seem, would be
misliked, and men of every faculty would be despised.

As first for example, the Merchants, whose trade, as Pliny says, was
invented for the necessity of man's life, transporting from one region to
another, that which lacks in the one and abounds in the other: yet there
be many that under this cloak and good pretense, continually do practice, to
transport out of their own native countries, such commodities as may not well
be spared: whereby many times great scarcity and dearth does happen, wherein
the people are pitiously oppressed.

In England once a year we find the extremity, either for want of corn,
leather, hides, tallow, butter, cheese, bacon, beef, beer, and many other
such like, which by his Majesty are prohibited: but no restraint may serve
against those thieves, unnatural robbers and spoylers of these own country.

And yet these are commonly the greatest find-faults that will inuey against
soldiers, whose spoils are much more tolerable, because they spoil but
their enemies: these rob and spoil their friends, and make wrack of their
own countries, by conueying away their commodities, and by returning of
incommodities, vain trifles, which are not necessary for humane life, but
only to maintain women and children in pride, pomp and vaineglory, such
things as do procure delights, wanness and delicacie: the very vanities and
vices of every nation by these men are brought home. And then what p^^u^^e,
what fraud what deceit by themselves, their brokers, and retailers is used to
utter them, my wits be too weak, nor I think there is no other that is able
to express, unless it be a Merchant himself that has used the trade.

Furthermore, under this trade and traffic, they have conference with strange
Princes, and utter unto them the secrets of countries, lend them money, and in
the end will not stick to betray their own country and commonwealth.

There is another kind of Merchants, that deck their shops with other men's
goods, borrowing here of one, and there of another: and when they have gotten
into their hands some great mass or value, then they become bankrupts, and
live in a corner with other men's goods.

Thus you may see, that although this trade or traffic of merchandise is very
beneficial to every state and commonwealth, and that there have been many
wise and notable men thet have used it, as Thalust, Solon, Hippocrates, and
others, yet it is by some abused: but shall we therefore condemn the trade,
or other good and honest merchants that use it? not so, for the exercise of it
may not be forborne, and the honest trading Merchant is to be had in reverence
and estimation.

In like manner amongst the Lawyers, are there not found many that creep in to
the Innes of Court, that seek by law to over throw law, such as be termed by
the name of Peti foggers, brethels, that practice nothing but to breed
dissentions, strifes suits, quarrels, and debates between neighbor and
neighbor brother and brother, yea sometimes between the father and the son?

First they animate them to commence actions, persuading them that their
quarrels be just, and will very well stand with law: but when they have once
gotten them in, then they feed them with delays, procrastinating their suits
from day to day, from term to term, yea from year to year: in the end, when
the matter is like to fall out against them, then they blame their clients,
that in the beginning they did not thoroughly instruct them.

These be people that of all other are most to be detested: for in the time of
peace, these procure continual wars, and civil dissentions, not amongst
enemy, but amongst friends, not amongst foreign foes, but amongst their
natural country men, rejoicing when any bral or brabble does fall out amongst
their neighbors.

And yet they would be accounted the authors of peace, and will not let to
exclaim against the soldier, and condemn him, because they do think him
to be like unto themselves, that is, to be desirous of wars and troubles.

There is no Parliament or convocation that is called, but if there be any good
motion had in question, for the quietness or quick dispatch of matters in
controversy, but that lawyers be the only lets that it shall not come forth:
because that if it were not for delays and shifts, the one half, nay not a
quarter of them might be able to thrive by their occupation, there are such a
shameful company.

Yea, many times there are found great coriuptions even amongst the Judges
themselves: that for fear to offend a Prince or some Noble man, will not
stick with Pilate to condemn Christ. Sometime with Gold and Silver or other
gifts, they be so corrupted, that they regard more the presents that are given
them, then either justice or equity: they are diligent in rich men's causes,
put the poor they deserre: the complaint of the widow or fatherless cannot be
heard amongst them.

But shall we therefore reprove the law, which is the only prop and stay to
every commonwealth, without the which we could not live in any good order,
otherwise then as brute beasts neither could those that be good and harmless,
enjoy either goods or possessions from cruel Firants and oppressors? neither
were any one man assared of his life or living, were there not law to punish
murderers, and to maintain right: or shall the abuses of some, condemn all
honest and true dealing lawyers, who in their profession of all men are worthy
to be honored? As there is no reason in the one, so they be too much to blame,
that for the lewdness of some losses, that do but vsurp the name names of
soldiers, will therefore so absolutely condemn all soldiers, thinking there
can be no good, because some are ill. But what profession may there be, wherein
wicked men will not seek to cloak and cover themselves? Be there not that
enter even into the Ministry of the holy sacraments, proud prelates, blind
guides, and lazy lubbers: some that during the space of twenty years, have
received the fruits of benefices, that have not three times visited their
slocke, but commits them to Sir John lack latin and his fellow, poor
ignorant Chaplains: such as they hire best cheap: while they themselves live
in pleasure, pomp and pride: not like S. Peter nor S. John, that had not one
penny to give to the poor lame man, that sat begging at the temple gate: and
yet they would be called their successors? These be they of whom the Prophet
Ezechiel so exclaimeth, saying, They serve for nothing, but to serve
themselves, and in steed of feeding their flock, they take the fleece, draw
the milk, kill the fattest, eat the flesh, break the bones: they are dumb
dogs, that know nothing, they dare not bark, but are very curious to have
horsekeepers for their Palfries, Falkconers for their Hawks, Cooks for their
Panches, but the poor sheep perish through their default. I know likewise
that there be a number of a learned Pastors, godly ministers, diligent
Preachers, and faithful followers: they which (God defend) should bear the
abuses of the others. Then if the holy temple of God, cannot be cleansed from
such Ministers of mischiefs: they be something too nice, that would have
soldiers to be all Saints, and much more to blame that would make them all
devils: because some do amiss. And here withal I must think them to be very
partial, that with such blunts terms will entitle Soldiers in the time of
War: and in the time of peace, can so cleanly cloak the very same Actors,
with names and titles of credit and estimation. For in the time of Wars, he
that is found to be bloudily minded, killing without compassion all that
lightteth in his wrath, they term him by the name of a Tyrant and a murderer,
where in the time of peace, they sometime shadow him under the title of my Lord
Judge, but many times by the name of Master lustice of Peace and Quorum. In the
time of War, whom they term a seditious mutiner, a peruerter of good Laws,
a maintainer of ungodly quarrels: In the time of Peace they call him Master
Sergiant of the Quoife, a wise Councellor in the Law, or an honest viligent
Attorney. In the time of War, whom they term a thief, a robber, a spoiler.
In the time of peace they call him an honest trading Merchant. In the time of
Warrie whom they call a violator of Women, a rauisher, and deflowrer: In the
time of peace they call him a friendly and loving gentleman: yea, and some
foolish soother, that will speak they know not what, will say he is a right
Courtier, and a Courtlike gentleman. In the time of War, he that can tell a
filed tale, and that can creep into men's bosoms to serve his own turn, they
call him a Parasite, a flatterer, and a dissembler: In the time of peace they
call him an excellent learned man, and a very good Preacher.

Such partiality (I say) is amongst them, that no faults are espied, but such
as be committed amongst Soldiers: Neither do I here go about to excuse all
Soldiers, as though there were none ill: but those that be, are commonly found
in these new levied bands, and not a among old soldiers, as hereafter I will
show.

But here (peradventure) some will think, that although many of them may be
excused from a number of vices, wherewith they have been charged: yet that
they of force must be all murderers, may not be denied: for they go into the
Field as well weaponed to kill, as armed to defend. This objection I have many
times heard, but those people are in too scrupulous an opinion, considering how
many examples we may find in the holy Bible: where God has not been
offended, with those that have killed their enemies: but that is sometimes
lawful in the presence of God to shake off the yoke of bondage by the death of
Tirants, as Judith by Holofernes, and many other like. But as justice without
temperance is reputed injury: so magnanimity without mercy is accounted
Tyranny: and as it cannot be counted a noble victory which brings not with
it some clemency, so to use pity out of time and season is as great folly,
as to use mercy in any conflict till victory attained.

And sometimes policy excludes pity, as the Greeks, who after the
destruction of Troy, slew Astinax the son of Hector, to the end that there
might remain no occasion of quarrel, fearing if he had lived, he would have
sought some revenge.

Indeed they may say soldiers are most merciless, but there are sundry most
miserable. First, in the time of wars, they spare not in their countries
behalf, to forsake their wife, children, father, mother, brother, sister, to
leave their friends, and only betake them against their enemies, contented to
yield themselves to continual watch, ward, fasting, hunger, thirst, cold,
heat, travel, toil, over hills, woods, deserts, wading through rivers, where
many sometimes lose their lives by the way, lying in the field in rain, wind,
frost and snow, aduenturing against the enemy, the lack of limbs, the loss
of life, making their bodies a fence and bulwark against the shot of the canon.

But the wars being once finished, and that there is no need of them, how be
they rewarded, how be they cherished, what account is there made of them, what
other thing gain they then slander, misreport, false impositions, hatred and
despite.

How small is the number that be in England of sufficient men, such I mean as
be able in deed, in the time of service, to stand their country in stead, to
any purpose, and yet how many of this small number have ever been brought to
credit, or been any thing preferred, for the service they have done?

And O England, would to God so many presidents of others mishaps might make
thee take heed, and call thy self to remembrance: consider thy enemies be not
so secret, but they be as malicious, and have staide all this while neither for
want of quarrel, neither for want of will, if they themselves were once at
quiet: nor flatter not thy self because thou have enjoyed a peaceable time,
that it shall still endure, but remember the longer it has been calm, the
sooner the storm is looked for, and the greater the rage when it falls.

If thou do well look into thy self, and ponder thine own case, thou
shall sinde, that if any sudden alarm should happen, thy greatest want shall be
only of those men that now thou hold in so small estimation, and do
esteem of so little account.

If thou think thy great numbers of vntrayned men, are sufficient to defend
thee, do but remember what happened to Antwerp, where they wanted neither men,
nor any other provision for the wars. But they wanted soldiers to direct
them, and men of understanding to encourage them: For the want of knowledge
breeds the want of courage, as Solomon says, A wise man is ever strong:
Prou. 14.
yea a man of understanding increases with strength: for with wisdom must
war be taken in hand, and where there are many that can give counsel, there
is the victory, etc.

And Xerxes, who with a great army, was put to the worst but with 300
Lacedaemonians, confessed that he forced not so much for the multitude, as for
their knowledge and experience. I could here rehearse many other examples of
like effect, but I leave them till other occasion, and will conclude with what
care and provision sundry noble Princes have provided for their souldiouts,
not only in the time of war when they have had need of them: but as well in
the time of peace for their service already done, that they should not want,
according to the mind of Alexander Seuerus, who says, The soldier is worthy
his keeping in the time of peace, that has honestly served his country in the
time of war, although for age he can not travel, yet his counsel may non be
spared. And Jesus the son of Sirach says, There be two things that grieve
my heart, and in the third is a displeasure come upon me, when an expert man of
war suffers scarcenes and poverty, when men of understanding and wisdom
are not set by, and when one departes from righteousness to siune, etc.

Octauian Augustus honored soldiers with this law: Whatsoever thou be that
shall serve with us in wars ten years space, so that thou shall be forty
years old, whether thou have served on foot or on horseback, hereafter be
thou free from wars, be thou Heroes, an old soldier: let no man forbid thee
the city, the street, the temple, nor his house: let no man lay any blame to
thy charge, put any burden upon thee, or ask thee any money: if thou shall
offend in any thing, look to be chastised by Caesar and by no man else. In all
dishonefty that men shall commit, I will that thou be the Judge, and discloser,
whether they be private or officers: that which thou shall say and affirm for
truth, no man shall reprove for false. I will that all ways and places be
open for thee, thou shall have authority to eat and drink at princes tables:
thou shall yearly have wages of the common treasury to find thee and thy
household: let her be preferred before other women, whom thou shall take to be
thy lawful wife: and he that thou shall call infamous, let him be wicked and
infamous: thou being Heroes, shall have authority to bear arms, badges, names,
and ornaments, which be decent for a king: do what thou list in every place
and country where thou come, if any do thee wrong let his head be cut off.
etc.

Charles the great, when he had translated the name of the Empire to the
Gormanes, after the Saxons and Lombards were vanquished, gave this honor to his
soldiers, saying: You shall be called Heroes, the companions of Kings, and
Judges of offenses: live ye hereafter void of labor, counsel Kings in the
public authority, reprove dishonest things, favor women, help Orphans, let
not Princes lack your counsel, and ask of them meat, drink and money, if
any shall deny it, let him be unrenowmed and infamous: if any do you injury,
let him know he has offended the Emperors Majesty: but ye shall foresee, that
ye distaine not so great an honor, and so great a privilege, gotten by the
great labor of war, with drunkenness, railing, or any other vice: to the
end, that that which we have given you for glory, redound not to punishment,
which we will for ever reserve to be given you by us and our successors,
Emperors of Rome, as often as you shall transgress.

And Polycrates of Samos, appointed living for the wives and children of the
dead soldiers, straightly commanding, that no man should offend them, or do
them any wrong.

Solon made this law, that those children, whose fathers had spent their lives
in fighting in the defense of the common wealth, should be brought up at the
charges of the common treasure.

But what do I stand reciting of strange histories, forepassed so many years
sithence: Why do I not remember the Frenchmen and Spaniards, amongst whom at
this instant men of service be not a little honored, and had in estimation:
And go to the drunken countries of Denmark and Swethen, and those other
parts of the East, and how be soldiers cherished, and men of service provided
for.

Here might be many other things said in the behalf of soldiers, the which I
omit, and leaving them to the benefit of better fortune, will come to speak of
the abuse of the time.

THE SECOND PART SHOWING THE time, when wars ought to be put in execution.
Howsoever I know some will condemn my discourse as frivolous and fruitelesse:
Fot howsoever in other nations there has been a greater effusion of the blood
of men, then of Beasts, yet we have securely slept upon our Couches of ease,
and furfeited of ease and plenty, yet though it be the part of a fool at the
sea, to wish for a storm, when the weather is calm: so I know likewise in the
time of calm, to provide for a storm, is the point of a wise mariner: for who
considers not, to whatdisposition Kings and Princes be commonly inclined
unto, in these latter days: which is, to have greater felicity, with Tyranny
to offend others, then with justice and equity to keep their own: it ought
therefore with great diligence to be provided for, that like as in the time of
war, circumspect care of peace may not be omitted: so in the time of peace,
such things may be foreseen, appertayning to the war, that the want of
warlike provisions, be not prejudicial to the maintenance of this sweet and
quiet peace.

And the very occasion that urges me to write, is to wish that in England we
were expert warriers, though not war lovers: and that we had many that were
wise, rather then willing soldiers. But where peace is so immediately desired,
that in preferring thereof they forget all Martial exercises, which is the
very preserver, and maintainer of peace, (according to the mind of Valerius
Maximus, who says, That the custody of blessed peace consists in the
knowledge of war) it can not be chosen therefore, but those people be ever
nearest their own harm, that will so carelessly spend the time of peace, as
though they should never more have occasion to enter into war,

And generally it is seen, where pleasure is preferred so excessiuely, and the
people follow it so inordinately, that they lie and wallow in it so carelessly,
they commonly end with it most miserably.

For how many Cities, how many Countries, which sometime most of all flourished,
only by reason of their far stretched Empire, glory and renown, purchased
by famous and noble acts, are now beaten flat to the ground, covered with
mould, and almost out of remembrance.

Where are now become the dominions of the Assyrians and Persians? What is
become of the glory of the rich city Athens: which had been so often
forewarned by that excellent Orator Demosthenes? Or where is now the pomp and
power of the Macedonia^s? Or what has wasted the fame and renown of the city
of Rome, that it had not been perpetnall.

What other thing then this inordinate delicacie, riot and idleness: For when
they over neglected the seats of war, laid aside their weapons, sought more
for their own private advancement, then for the liberties of their Country:
then came their kingdoms to calamity, and began headlong to fall to the
ground: and then in the stead of frugality sprung up outrageous riot: in stead
of hardiness and courage in the wars, exceeding tenderness, and niceness,
both of body and mind: and thus when the knowledge of Souldierfare was
extinguished: then insatiable desire of riches made entry amongst them, and
nothing so much practiced, as to have experience in buying and selling, that in
the end, the Imperial Crown was bought and sold for money amongst them: and
the Roman Empire which so mightily had flourished: was now made subject to
common thraldom.

But for that there are some, that are nothing moved with reading of histories,
monuments, or the examples of ancient writers, unless they have known the
like in their age, or seen with their eyes, or as it were touched with their
singer, I will therefore put such in remembrance of the state and condition of
Holland, Zeland, Flanders, Brabant, and other parts of the low cuntries: How
many years continued they in peace and quietness: in drunkenness, in lechery,
in riot, in excess, in gluttony, in wantonness? (I will not say in the like
predicament that we now remain in England) the which to continue, they were
contented to submit themselves to any manner of thraldom, and to every kind
of slavery, to receive the Spaniards into their cities and towns, which were
naturally seated so strong, that no foreign Prince could forceably have made
entry into them.

How the Spaniards governed them, with what rigor they ruled them, and how
tyrannously they reigned over them, is so well known, as I will not spend the
time to relate: in the end, to disburden themselves from that which before they
had yielded unto, by necessity they were enforced to go to Mars his school,
and to practice the art of war, which had ever bin most loathsome unto them,
not without great ruin and wrack, of many noble cities and towns, and with no
less spoil and hauock of infinite goods and riches.

For like as the desire to have dominion over many kingdoms, and to have
Soueraingty over far stretched Empires, is a common infirmity amongst Kings
and Princes: so there is nothing may sooner provoke them to give attempt, then
where they see such forgetfulness amongst the people, that sloth and
idleness bears the whole sway among them: As Plutarch in his Apothegmaes,
makes report of a famous captain, to whom a certain reader of the Athemans
made his complaint, that the men of arms in his camp reproched them of Athens,
to whom the captain made answer, that as the thing that is well kept, is
hardly lost, and that nothing prouokes the thief sooner then negligence: So,
if the Athenians had tied care and circumspection to their words and deeds,
they had never fallen into the hands of the Lacedaemonians.

And Cambyses the father of Cyrus King of Persia, being asked by what means
Cities might best be kept in safety, answered, If they that kept the same
Cities, do think they can never be wary enough of their enemies: the which
in the Massilians was charily performed, who kept both ward and watch in their
Cities in the time of peace, as if they had been continually vexed and
troubled with war, and to that purpose, instituted sundry good ordinances,
upon the holy days to see their Soldiers standing upon the walls, and
exercising themselves in the feats of arms. And that notable Captain
Epaminondas, while the Citizens of Thebes gave themselves to feasting,
banqueting and belly cheer, ran hastily to arm him self, and marched
toward the city walls, to the end the rest might be the safelier drunk,
and as well to signify, that the safety of their City should at no time be
forgotten.

And although King Solomon. who in the holy Scriptures is called Rex pacificas,
and was promised by the mouth of God a peaceable reign, and was still busied,
and turmoyled with the building of the holy Temple: yet notwithstanding, he was
not forgetful to furnish his garrisons with innumerable men of war, horses
and chariots. To be short, there is, neither has been any well governed
Commonwealth, but the laws of Arms be as carefully provided for, as any
other city causes: but where delicacy once preuayleth and gets the upper
hand, there adieu Martial minds, and farewell magnanimity, where
slothfulness has once made entry: for the nobleness that is to be looked
for in a princely and hautie courage, though it be chiefly wrought by the force
of the mind: so the body must be exercised, and brought in such plight, as it
may be made able to follow pain and travel.

Were not the old soldiers of Hanniball, in lying but one winter in Capua,
spending the time in wantonness amongst the delicate Dames, so effeminated and
infeebled, both in body and mind, that they never did any thing afterward,
that was worthy of report.

And Xerxes being offended with the Babylonians, because they traitorously had
shrunk from him: when he had again brought them under, he forbad them to
bear any more weapons, and further commanded them, that they should sing to
the Lute, and other Instruments, learn to keep harlots, and haunt Tauernes,
which policy he of purpose prepared, to weaken their courages, whereby he might
the better keep them under awe.

The knowledge of war therefore, and the exercise of arms are especially to
be sought, neither can I tell whether any thing be more noble, by the which so
great dominions and noble Empires have been purchased, Kingdoms enlarged,
Princes preserved, justice maintained, good laws protected, and the common
wealth defended.

Great is the glory in the knowledge of war therefore: neither has the city
of Athens achieved so great renown and glory, although it merited to be
called the mother of all arts and sciences, as Rome has done, only by
magnanimity, and force of Martial might: which brought such reputation to
their Common wealth, that far and strange regions sought their aliance and
friendship, and thought themselves assured against their enemies, if they had
confederation with them, that in the end, they grew to such admiration, that
for their lenity and surmounting courtesy, they were of all men beloved, and
for their valiant magnanimity, they were of all men feared. Neither was this
magnificence vpholden by doing wrong and injury: for they never attempted
wars but for things in claim, or in defense of league friends. Tull.
officiis lib. 1.
Then (as Cicero says) The Senate might rather have been termed, the
protection, haven, and refuge of kings, people, and nations, more truly then
the Empire of the world. Neither were they found rash to enter into wars
headily, although they had occasion, as did appear at the city of Sagunto,
where the people of Carthage brake the league, and defied peace: yet the Senate
sent thither Ambassador Fabius Maximus, with two tables, the one contalning
peace, the other wars, putting the election to their own choice, as it is
liked themselves to choose, although the Romans themselves, could best defend
their cause. But did the Romans game this glory by enuring themselves to live
in delicate idleness, in dicing, in carding, in dancing, in whoring, in
banqueting, in reuelling, and in roysting: no, but ordained most sharpand
bitter punishments to expel them, and with disgrace to dant those that were
the practisers and followers of them.

Where contrarily, to provoke and prick forward Martial minds and manly
wights, to the study of chiualry and Martial affairs, they ordained glorious
triumphs, liberal rewards and honorable titles: which was the very cause that
the city grew to be so great, and large in Empire: for where valiance and
prowess was so honorably rewarded, not only Noble men, but also inferior
persons were so inflamed with desire of renown, that no danger was left
vndealt withal, nor no peril left unproven, where there was glory to be
gained, or the saftie of their country might be preserved.

The two Decit, by race and birth were no gentlemen borne yet by their valiance
and fortitude, they aspired to the highest type of dignity in their
commonwealth, and in their countries defense, consecrated themselves, as
valiant and vowed vessels, to glory and immortality.

Neither was Lucius Martius, borne but of a mean parentage, yet for his
puissance showed in S^aine, he received of his country great honor and
principality.

By these means, the liberty of their countries were most strongly defended,
and the indifferency of their laws were chiefly maintained, where well doing
is so liberally rewarded For what greater dishonor may there be in a
commonwealth then where worthy acts and high attempts receive but cold reward?
Or what reward, may that country think to much to bestow on him that has not
spared his own life to fight in the defense.

There be sundry examples in the holy Scripture, tending to the same effect,
for when the children of Israel were pursued by Pharoh, and th^^ they began to
stagger in the promises of God: the tribe of Inda did manifestly show forth,
far greater courage and valiance then the rest, who lingered not nor drew
back, but with a marvelous constancy, by the example of Moses adventured
first the sea, by whose stout stomaches the rest were encouraged to follow: For
which fact, the people of Juda were ever afterward more honored then the
rest, and such had the principality amongst the twelve tribes, as were
descended of the tribe of Judah.

In like manner, Solomon made the Hethites, the Amorites, the Pheresites, the
Heuites and the Iebusites, to become tributaries, and to labor in the
building: but of the children of Israel, he made men of war, captains, great
Lords, and rulers.

And Socrates in a certain fable uses these words: All you that live in one
city, are brethren, being straightly linked and united together: but when God
created you, he gave not every one a like property, for they that were most
meet to rule, he tempered with gold: and those that in defense of their
country would valiantly assist Kings and Princes, he mingled them with silver:
and to such as should apply themselves to tillage and other mean occupations,
he bestowed brass and iron: now it falls out generally that they engender
children like to themselves: but sometimes it happens a golden father to have
a silver son. He wills therefore, that they should take in no one thing,
more special regard, then diligently to search, with what metal their
childrens minds be tempered with, so that if there be found any brass or
iron in their childrens senses, they should assign them such a trade
convenient, and agreeing with their gross and rude nature: but if they find
in them any gold or silver, they should bestow on them honorable rooms, and
that they should be trained up in the knowledge of Martial affairs.

The Romans ordained for that purpose, a long spacious sield, which they
called, Campus Martius, wherein the youth of the city was exercised in
Martial feats, and to enure their bodies, both for their own health, and
also that they might be made the more profitable members for their common
wealth in the time of wars.

The Lacedaemonians used their children to go barefooted, exercising them in
running, in leaping, and in casting the dart, in which exercises they were
continually practiced: from whence Diogenes on a time returning, and going to
Athens, was asked from whence he came, and whither he would: I come (said he)
from amongst men, and am going among women.

I wonder if Diogenes were now living, and going into England, whither he would
say he were going, if he were demanded: where we be wholly nusled in
wantonness, and only nourished in daintiness, both in mind, manners, and
diet: where we be altogether made strangers to Martial actions, and utterly
alienated from Laws and deeds of Arms, where no consideration is had of
Martial minds, where provision for defense is never called in question.

Here peradventure some will say unto me, Good sir, if you would but put on
your spectacles, and look into the Tower of London, you might see that neither
Ordnance, shot, powder, pike, caliuer, armor, nor any other furnitures
convenient for the Wars were any whit lacking: from thence, if it pleased you
but to sail down in Grauesend Barge, you have but five miles to Rochester,
where you might likewise take the view of so worthy a Fleet of royal ships,
as no Prince in Europe may make comparison with the like. Call you not these
provisions of defense, where no munitions fit for the wars are any whit
wanting?

Very true indeed, which does argue the special care his Majesty has ever
had, not only in making of such provision, but also at sundry times, he has
likewise instituted diverse good ordinances for the training of men, the which
has been still discontinued by his subjects, such as will pine at the
spending of one pound of powder, toward the practicing of those that should
fight for their safety.

Wherefore I need use no other answer, then King Philip used to that noble
Captain Antipater, which was this.

What searest thou man, any Captain of Athens? Their Galleys and their Peers
are but trifles and toys unto me: For what account is to be made of those
fellows that give themselves to dancing, hoyting, banqueting, and to belly
cheer? that if Demosthenes only were not amongst them, I would sooner get
Athens then Thebes or Thessaly, etc. So, to what effect serve all these
warrelike furnitures, where there are not men experienced to use them; and
where men be trained only in pleasure, how apt be they to endure the
perplexities of war: and how hardly are they fashioned to the use of weapons,
that never have had any exercise in them, and with what difficulty are they
prepared to the field, when they have never been accustomed to march.

But I have heard many say, that soldiers may well be trained in one month,
and made fit for the wars, and indeed I I am of this opinion, that he that in
one month will not learn the use of his weapon, whereto he shall be sorted,
and to learn to march in order of array, being thoroughly instructed by a
diligent and painful Captain, I am fully resolved, that that man will never
make good soldier. But as our soldiers in England are accustomably levied, a
Captain shall have much to do to make a great part of them for ever being
soldiers at all.

But admit, that Souldies may be trained and made ready in a month, yet during
that space, our enemies would commit greater spoils upon us, then we should be
able to recover again in six weeks after.

Moreover in the day service, I had rather have one thousand such as have
already seen and skirmished with the enemy, then four thousand of such hasty
mad soldiers, that are but trained up, as it were at a Midsummer sight, or at
the fetching home of a Maypole. For proof hereof, I could show many examples,
but it were but in vain, considering there is no man of reason but will
conceive it to be true: and such as have experience will confess I am nothing
deceived in my opinion.

And to say the truth, if in England we should have need to use any reasonable
number, there would hardly be found conductors, such as be sufficient in deed
for the training of them.

For Gentlemen that are descended of honorable families in these days, give
themselves rather to become Battalus knights then Martial wights, and have
greater desire to be practiced in Carpet trade, then in that kind of virtue,
which extends it self to the common profit, and preservation of the Country.

And I cannot but matuel, what moves so many men to make such great account of
their gentility, that they think themselves worthy of such honor and
estimation: and yet have no regard to the renown or prceminence, that is
annexed unto it: for (as Cicero says) Truly, the best inheritance that
Fathers leque to their Children, and more worthy then all alive, is the glory
of virtue, and worthy deeds, whereunto to be a stain, it is to be accounted
both vice and shame.

But what reputation bring they to their Houses, that licentiously in riot rome
to and fto, not knowing in what fashion to disguise themselves, what
countenance they should bear in the streets nor with what curiosity they
should give intertainment, furnished with three or four French, Italian, or
Spanish words, thinking that the whole glory consisted in being newfangled in
their apparel, strange in their conceits, and as dainty in their diets, as
Dame Folly her self, when she is going of her first child. To be short, in
England Gentlemen have robbed our Women of their minds, and our Women have
bereaved us of half our apparel.

Where Gentlemen ought rather to endeavor themselves to such exercises of
virtuous acts, whereby they might give such clear light, and purchase true
fame to their posterity, according as their predecestors have left unto them,
of which they themselves do so mightily boast of: and especially, to give
themselves to such exercises, wherein labor prepares the body to hardiness,
and the mind to couragiousnesse, neither suffering the one to be marred with
tenderness, nor the other to be hurt with idleness.

As we read of Sardanapalus, who was scorned as an effeminate King, who choose
rather to sit and spinne amongst Women, then to learn to weld weapons: against
whom, when Belochas and Arbases made insurrection, he fled, and durst not show
himself in the field.

Xenophon makes mention how Hercules being but a young man, musing whereunto
he might apply his noble mind, there appeared unto him two goodly young women,
the one very gorgious and brave: with ringes on her fingers, a chain about her
neck, her hair set and frizeled, with pearls and diamonds in her ears: the
other sober in her cheer, comely in her apparel, modest in her behavior,
shamefast in her countenance. The first said: Hercules, if thou will serve me,
thou shall have gold and silver enough, thou shall feed daintily, thou shall
live Princely, thou shall enjoy pleasures, embrace delights, possess mirth.
In fine, thou shall have all things to thine own contentation, that appertain
to ease, rest and quietness. Then spoke the other with demure countenance: if
thou will serve me, Hercules, thou shall be a Victor of Conquerours, thou shall
subdue kingdoms, and overthrow Kings, thou shall be advanced unto fame,
renowned in the world, and shall deserve praise both of man and woman. Hercules
perceiving the idle service of the first, and the fame and renown that was to
be gained by the second, chose her for his mistress: and I think sent the other
into England, where at this present she is duetifully served. But I think the
very occasion why many do not endeavor themselves to practice to be soldiers
now in England, is because they see those few that be there already to thrive
fo ilfauouredly by their occupation, that they rather seek to endeavor
themselves where there is either pleasure or profit to be gained, which is not
in Soldier fare, and therefore makes them to become Courtiers, Lawyers, or
Lovers. The Court, I confess, is a place requisite for Gentlemen to know, so
their minds might not be seduced with the vanities thereof, whereby they
should be enticed, not to follow other exercises, tending more to their honor
and estimation: and forsake those places, where greater glory is to be gained
then any does ordinarily attain unto, that consumes their days wholly in the
Court: for he that fully frames himself to become a courtier, must likewise
fraught his head so full of courting toys, that there will be no room left,
to consider of matters appertaining more to his credit. For the most in number
of our young courtly. Gentlemen think that the greatest grace of courting,
consists in proud and hautie counteuances to such as know them not, to be
very fair spoken, bountiful and liberal in words to all men, to be curious
in cauilling, propounding captious questions, thereby to show a singularity of
their wisdoms: for the helping whereof, they diligently study books for the
purpose, as Cornelius Agrippa de vanitate sciuntiarum, and other like: to seem
to talk of far and strange countries, of the manners of the people, of the
fertility of soyles, and by the way of communication, able to dispute of all
things, but in deed to know nothing, to apply their pleasant wits to scofting,
quipping, gybing, and taunting, whereby they may be accounted merry conceited
gentlemen, and withal, they must learn to play the parasites, or else I can
tell them, they will never learn to thrive. And in their apparel, they must
be very nice and neat, with their ruffes finely set, a great bundle of feathers
thrust into a cap, which must like wise be of such a bigness, that it shall be
able to hold more wit then three of them have in their heads.

They must be rash in their judgments, curious in their conceits, they must
be bold, saucie, and mallapert, which they themselves term to be good
audacity. They must be ready to espy every man's faults, but not to see their
own folly. But what should I stand to deciphre the vanities of our courtiers,
which are already so painted forth in their colors, and that by so many men,
as I do but wast the time in vain about them: I do likewise acknowledge, that
the law is especially to be practiced by Gentlemen. For as the law it self is
most honorable amongst men: so those that should be practisers, professors,
and ministers of the laws, ought likewise to be of credit and estimation.

But our Innes of court in these days are so furnished with Shomakess sons,
Taylers sons, Inholders sons, Farmers sons, and almost there is not so
mean a man, but his son must go to the Innes of court: and they, when they
have gotten a little law, because they will not mend shoes, and do as their
fathers have done before them, there is no ho in their getting, no measure in
their taking, no mean in their brybing, nor no reason n their extorting.

These be they, that by Law will pervert Law, and what one Law does make, they
will bring another Law shall mar. These be they that laugh, when other men
mourn and that make themselves rich, by other men's follies: and these be the
only men that bring Law and Lawyers into such Exclamations.

But of all other people that do most surmount in vanities, are those that in
such contagious passions, consume their time in love, that as Marcus Aurelius
does affirm, he that does once fall in love with another, does even then
begin to hate himself.

It has many times been had in question, from whence the fury of this malady
should spring: but the greatest part do conclude, that the original thereof
does proceed of idleness.

Love where it once takes hold, it tormenteth the patiente with such strange
and bitter passions, that it reduces reason into rage, pleasure into pain,
quietness into carfulness, mirth into madness, neither makes it any
exceptions of persons, either old or young, rich or poor, weak or strong,
foolish or discreet, that as Peter Bouaystuan, a notable French Author does
write, that if all the Lovers that are in the World, were made in one whole
Army, there is neither Emperor, nor Monarch, but would be amazed to see such a
company of Bedlem fools in a cluster.

But he that should take the view of their countenances, gests, manners,
furies, and all their frantic toys, might confess that he never saw a more
strange Metamorphosis, or a spectacle more ridiculous to laugh at. If at any
time they have received a merry countenance of their beloved, good God, how gay
shall you see them in their apparel, how cheerful in their countenance, how
pleasantin their conceits, how merry in their moodes: then they bathe in
brooks of bliss, they swim in seas of joy, they flow in floods of felicity,
they houer all in happiness, they fly in sweet delights, they banish all
annoy.

Contrarily, if they receive a lowering look, then you shall see them drowned
in dumpes, they plead with piteous plaints, they cry with continual clamours,
they forge, they feign, they flatter, they lie, they forswear, other whiles
falling into desperate moodes, that they spare not to blaspheme the Gods, to
curse the Heavens, to blame the Planets, to rail on the destinies, to cry out
upon the furies, to forge hell, to counterfeit Sisiphus, to play Tantalus, to
feign Titius, to groan with Prometheus, to burn the Winter, to freeze the
Summer, to loath the night, to hate the day, with a thousand other such
superstitious follies, too long for me to rehearse.

Now if he be learned, and that he be able to write a verse, then his Pen must
ply to paint his Mistress praise, she must then be a Pallas for her wit, a
Diana for her chastity, a Venus for her face, then she shall be praised by
proportion: first her Hairs are wires of gold, her Cheeks are made of
Lillies, and red Roses, her Brows be Arches, her Eyes Saphires, her looks
lightnings, her mouth Coral, her teeth Pearls, her paps Alablaster balls,
her body straight, her belly soft, from thence down ward to her knees, I
think is made of Sugar Candy, her arms, her hands, her fingers, her legs,
her feet, and all the rest of her body shall be so perfect, and so pure, that
of my conscience, the worst part they will leave in her, shall be her soul.

But what need I heap up so many words in this matter? My Pen has not the
power to paint their doting devises: neither do I mind otherwise then to
wish, that Gentlemen should set aside all such trifling affairs, and vain
follies, and to shake off those delightful desires, and rather to endeavor
themselves to such exercises, which have gained Hercules, Achilles, Theseus,
Caius, Marius, Epaminondas, Themistocles, Alexander, Pyrrhus, Hannibal, Scipio,
Pompey, Casar, with diverse others, such immortal glory, as neither the envious
rage of cruel death may blemish, neither the furious force of Fortunes fickle
wheel may diminish, neither the tract of devouring time shall ever be able to
remove from memory. And I would to God, that while time does yet serve us in
England, that such care might be had for the training and practicing of men,
that we should not be found altogether so careless, that to satisfy all our
voluptuous pleasures, we never consider the preservation of our Country and
Common wealth. So likewise, if it be not altogether too late, as I fear me it
is, I would wish that another thing were looked unto, and that very narrowly,
wherein we have made such a rod for out own tails, as there is no question,
but in the end it must of force fall out to be our own scourge. And this it
is: We had in England so great a benefit, as it might have been used, as no
other Country inuironing about us, is possessed with the like, which is the
casting of iron Ordnance: but as the proverb is, that every commodity brings
his discommodity, so this commodity brings us double discommodity. First in
the casting, it consumes us our woods and timber, in such sort, that one of
the first things that England shall want, will be of timber for ships, which is
all made havoc on, only about those iron mils. In the end comes M. Merchant,
who cares not (for his own private gain) what mischief he works to his
Country: or sometimes some old bruised soldier, that has served the Queen
in her wars, about London, Lambeth Marshes, or the out sles of Islington, all
the days of his life, and in respect of his good service, must get a
commission to sell two or three hundred pieces of this iron Ordnance out of the
Realm, that between M. Merchant and him, I dare undertake, there is thrice as
much Ordinance sold out of the Realm, as is within the Realm, and that some
of our Merchants have felt. For John the Frenchman has been at Host with some
of their ships, and Dauy Drunkard of Flushing, and his fellows, have not been
behind: and these with other mo, were not able to go so strongly to the Sea,
were it not that they were furnished with our English Ordnance. The Spaniards
and Portugals have some pretty store of it. In France there is Rochel, Rosco,
S. Mallous, and Deep, their ships be generally as well surnished with our
Ordnance, as any Merchants ships in the Thames. The mighty Hound of D^nkerke,
and the rest of the Beagles that were of her consorts, God knows, had been
able to have made but a slender cry, when they had come to chase, had it not
been for our English barkers. The other parts of Flanders, Zeland, and
Holland, both upon the walls of their Towns, and also in their shipping, are
furnished with the like. I have seen every street in Flushing, lie as full of
English Ordnance, as if it had been the Tower Wharfe of London. To be short,
there are diverse Towns in East Freesland, with Emden, Hambrough, Denmark,
Danske, Lubecke, Rye, Revel, Swethen, with diverse other Cities and Towns of
those East parts, that she is but a very mean Hulke, appertaining to any of
these places, which has less then a dozen or sixteen pieces of our English
Ordnance in her.

Such has been the carelessness of this our peaceable time, that it has not
only made us weak, by our own neglecting the feats of arms: but also with
our own artillery, and our warrelike munitions, we have made such strong as
be our enemies, as I fear we shall find, if they were at quietness amongst
themselves.

And thus once again I can wish, that such consideration might be had of the
time that is present, as in the time that is to come, we should not have cause
to rue it.

And here although I know my skill will not serve me, nor my occasion at this
time may well permit me, to speak of Martall discipline, how far it is
decayed from the first ordidinance and institution, yet gentle Reader, not
doubting but thou will bear with me, as well for the want of the one, as for
the necessity of the other, I will adventure to speak some thing thereo.

We do find in holy Scriptures, and that in several places, both in the
books of Moses, in the book of Josua and others where they have used no little
regard as well in choosing of their captains, leaders, and conductors, as also
in their prescribing laws, and disciplines of war, which were many times
appointed by the almighty God himself.

But let us peruse the examples of the Romans, which of all other people did
most exceed, as well for the greatness of their glory, as in all their other
martial actions, and we shall find that they had not only consideration to the
equity of their cause for the which they would enter into wars (as by these
words of Tully, in his 1. book of Offices may better appear: And the justice
of war is most sincerely described in the Phesiall Law of the people of Rome,
whereby for things in claim, is moved, or else proclaimea before, and bidden
by desiance, etc.) But also they had as great regard to maintain their
quarrels, with like equity and justice, not suffering their captains to enter
into actions of treason or treachery where their wars were al together arreared
upon causes of honesty, as by examples they did plainly show.

When king Pyrrhus, unprovoked had moved wars against the Romans, and
Timochares whose son was yeoman for the mouth to the king, promised to
Fabrieius then being Consul, to slay king Pyrrhus, which thing being reported
to the Senate, they presently warned king Pyrrhus to beware of such treasons,
saying, The Romans maintained their wars with arms and not by treason or
treachery.

Likewise, when Lucius Pius in a banquet that he made, had filled the people of
Samaria full of wine, and made them so drunk, that yielded themselves subject
to Rome, for which exploit Lucius Pius at his return required triumph. But the
Senators understanding the manner of his fact, caused him openly to be
beheaded, and a slanderous Epitaph set upon his grave. Neither would they
suffer that soldier, which amongst other being taken by Hannibal, and licenced
upon his oath to deprrt, conditionally that he should either make return, or
else send his ransom, the soldier with others of his companions, being
departed the camp of Hannibal, and licenced upon his oath to depart,
conditionally that he should either make return, or else send his ransom; the
soldier with others of his companions, being departed the camp of Hannibal,
feigned an arrand back again for something that he had forgotten, and thus
coming to Rome, did think himself discharged of his oath: but the Senate
allowing of no such d^ceit to ^evsed, made a decree that the same Souidier
should be carried pinioned to Hannibal. And ten other, that in like manner were
dismissed by Hannibal, upon their oath were sessed at a yearly fine, as long as
any of them did live for being forsworn. So nobly were the Romans disposed,
and so honorably minded, that no act was allowed of amongst them, seemed it
never so profitable, wherein was found either fraud or deceit. And this
magnificence, gate them condign commendations of their very enemies, and
between whom there had been mortal hostility, and many times was of greater
effect to subdue them, then huge or mighty armies. And as they did excel in
the excellency of these virtues, justice and equity, to such as were able to
stand in arms against them: so likewise they did surmount in humanity and
courtesy, and in ministering of comfort, to such as they had already vanquished
and subdued, as by no example may be better expressed, then, by a letter
written by Marcus Aurelius Emperor of Rome, to Popilio, captain of the
Parthies, a notable discourse for captains to peruse, and follows in this
manner. I cannot deny the glory I have gained by this battle, neither may J
hide the perplexity I feel for thy present misfortune: for noble minds are
bound to show no less compassion, to such as are subdued, then to express toy
and gladness with those that are victors. Thou being the chief of the
Parthies, did show great courage to resist, and in me the leader of the
Romans, was found no want of force to fight: notwithstanding, though thou lost
the battle, and J remain possessed of the victory, yet as I know, that thou will not acknowledge this chance to happen for any want of stomach in thee, so
it belongs to my gravity not to attribute it altogether to the greatness of my
virtue, since God does always minister victories, not to such as do their
duties best, but to those that he love most: for the effect of all things de
pending upon God, man can have no power to command the destiny of a battle,
seeing he is not able to stay the course of the least planet in Heaven. Darius
against Alexander, Pompeius Caesar, Hanniball against Scipio, had above all
equality far greater Armies then their enemies, by which thou have reason to
conclude with me, that against the anger of the sovereign God, cannot prevail
most huge and mighty Hosts. J marvel Popilio, that being great in birth,
valiant of stomach, welthy in goods, and mighty in estate and dignity, why thou
bear with such sorrow, the loss of this battle, seeing that in no worldly
things Fortune is more uncertain and variable, then in the action of War. It
is told me, thou drawest to solitary corners, and seek out shaded places,
thou eschewest the conversation of men, and complainest of the gods, which
extreme perplexities since thou were not wont to suffer in others, much less
ought thou to give place in thy self: For that the valiant man loses no
reputation, for that Fortune fails him, but is the less esteemed of, if he
want discretion to bear her mutability.

To assemble great Armies, is the office of Princes, to leauy huge treasures,
belongs to sovereign Magistrates, to strike the enemy is the part of a
courageous Captain: but to suffer infirmities, and to dissemble mishaps, is a
property duly annexed to noble and resolute minds so that one of the greatest
virtues that worldly men can express, in the common behavior of this life, is
neither to rise proud by prosperity, nor to fall into despair by adversity.
For Fortune having a free will, to come and go when she list: the wise man
ought not to be sorry to lose her, nor rejoice to hold her. Such as in their
misery show heavy countenance, do well prove, that they made account to be
always in prosperity, which is a great folly to think, and no less
simplicity to hope for: Seeing the gists and graces of Fortune have no better
thing more certain in them, then to be for the most part, in all things most
uncertain, according to the success of the day, wherein thou gave me
battle: for there thou orderedst thy Camp according to a wise Captain,
made choice of the place, in great policy, tookest advantage of the Sun,
as a leader of long experience, in consideration of which things thou have
cause to complain against thy Fortune, which favored not thy virtue, and not
blame thy discretion, wherein could be found no error.

Consider that in wise and grave men, it is an Office, that if they cannot do
what they will, at the least they yield to time, and are content with what they
may. And as the virtuous and valiant mind ought not to grieve for not
obtaining that which he would, but because he desired that which he ought not:
so Popilio, I wish thee take heed, that the honor which so many times thou
have won, with the hazard of thy valiant person, in enterprises of war, be
not lost at this present, for want of bearing well thy Fortune: assuring thee,
that he bears his misery best, that hides it most. And as of all valuble
things, there is nothing more light then renown: so in cases of war and
hazard, it is not enough for the valiant man to do what he may, but also he
is bound to attempt nothing but what he ought: For as well the consideration as
the execution of a fact, belongs duly to a discreet mind.

I hear thou wanderest here and there in great uncertainty of mind, fearing
that if thou be taken of my Soldiers, thou shall be evil entreated of me,
which if no man have told thee, it is against reason thou believe it of thy
self, because to us Princes of Rome, it is familiar to show our liberality to
such as yield to us, and with others that are our prisoners to communicate in
great clemency. We raise armies against Camps proudly furnished, and Cities
strongly walled, but to captives in thy condition, we hold it more honorable
to minister comfort, then to add increase of affliction. For as it suffices
the valiant Captain to fight against the enemy that resists him, and
dissemble with him that flies: so the wise man ought to require no more of his
enemy, then that he acknowledge that he stands in fear of him, because to a
daunted and timorous heart, is sildome left courage to renew a enterprise. And
therefore a man takes greater revenge, when he puts his enemy to flight,
then if he take his life from him. For the sword dispatcheth a man in a day,
but fear and remorse torments the mind continually. And better it were to
suffer without fear that which we expect in grief and sorrow, then by fear
to be always in martyrdom. It is right terrible to flesh and blood to die of
a sword, but to be in perpetual sorrow and disquiet of mind, is the very
fury and torment of Hell.

If thou eschewest my presence, in fear that I will not use pity to thee,
thou art abused in the opinion of my disposition, and do wrong to the
reputation and experience of my actions past. For J never refused to show merey
to him that asked it, and much less deceived him that put his trust in me. The
doubt and fear that thus do travel thy mind, ought not to be so much of my
person, as of the custom of Fortune, who uses not to unloose her sharp
Arrows with better will against any then such, as think they be in best
security of her: her nature being such, as not to meddle with those that she
finds prepared, the better to assure them, but follows the fearful and
negligent, to the end to deceive them: yea, she preuailes turn over the
counsels and actions of men, and being exempt to make reckoning to any, her
prerogative is to require account of all men. I assure thee Popilio, that more
do I fear the revolution of fortune at this hour, then I doubted her before
the battle. For she delights not so much to keep under the vanquished, as to
bridle and check the victors. And worse does she mean, when shoe smiles the
fairest, then when she frowns most. But to speak on thy behalf, J tell thee
that without danger thou may resort to my presence, since in thy state is no
cause of suspicion, and in my heart no malice to thy person: for indeed, that
cannot be called true victory, which brings not with it some clemency. And
therefore he cannot be called victorious, in whom rests intent of rigor and
cruelty. For Alexander, Julius, Augustus, Titus, and Traianus, won more renown
by the clemency they used to their enemies, then by all the victories they
obtained in strange regions. To obtain a victory is a thing natural and
humane, but to give pardon and life, is the gift and blessing of God. By which
it comes to pass, that men fear not so much the greatness of the immortal
God, for the punishments he does, as for the mercy he uses. Notwithstanding as
I cannot deny, but that great is the value and estimation, which we Roman
Princes make of a victory won by battle: so also J assure thee, we hold it
more honorable, to pardon such as do offend us, then to chastise those that
do resist our power.

Therefore if thou fly from my presence, as fearing the justice which I have
executed upon the Romans, thou ought to take security and courage even in
that which makes thee jealous and doubtful: for so much greater ought to be
clemency, by how much the offender is in fault. And therefore as there is no
offense which cannot be either forgiven or favored, so right worthily may that
pardon be called honorable and famous, which is given to an injury malicious
and manifest, since all other common and light wrongs with greater reason we
may say we dissemble them, then that we pardon them.

The thing that most draws me to enter friendship with thee, is for that in
our first capitulations and truce, thou performedst all things that were
concluded for the peace, and yet in the battle thou did express the parts
of a valiant Captain, the same giving me cause to believe, that as in war I
found thee a just enemy, so in the time of peace, thou would prove an
assured friend. Alexander never repented the pardon he gave to Diomedes the
tyrant, nor Marcus Antonius the favor he showed to the great Orator Cicero.
Neither shall I have cause (I hope) to forethinke the respite I give to thy
liife. For the noble mind, albeit he may have occasion to be sorry for the
unthankfulness of his friend: yet has he no license to repent him of his
good turns done for him: and therefore in the case of liberality or clemency,
by how much the person is unworthy that receives the benefit, by so much more
he is to be commended that bestows it: for that only may be said is given,
when he that gives, gives without respect.

So that he that gives in hope of recompense, deserves not to be called
liberal, but to pretend usury.

Thou know well that in the time of the battle, and when the encounter was
most hot, J offered thee nothing worthy of reproach: even so, thou have now to
judge, that if in the fury of the war, thou foundest me faithful, and
merciful, I have now no reason to exercise rigor, holding thee within the
precinct of my house: so that if thou saw mercy in me at that instant, when thy
hands were busy to spill my blood, think not that my clemency shall fail,
calling thee to the fellowship of my Table.

The prisoners of thy Camp can assure thee of my dealing, amongst whom the hurt
are cured at my charges, and the dead are buried according to the place of
soldiers: wherein if I extend this care upon such as sought to spoil me,
think there is far greater plenty of grace, to thee that come to serve
me. And so leaving thee in the hands of thine own counsel, I wish thee those
felicities, which thy houourable heart desires.



Lochere a mirror, meet to be perused by Kings and Princes, wherein they may
learn, with what consideration they should first enter into Wars, with what
valiance and courage they should prosecute them, and with what justice,
temperance and mercy they should use their enemies.

Captains may likewise learn how to use fortune, either when she favors,
either when she frowns,

But leaving a great number of necessary lessons worthy to be noted, how is it
possible in so few lines, more amply to describe the glory of the Romones:
neither are their virtues here so lively painted forth in words, as they
themselves did nobly show it in their deeds.

But all other examples of humanity, amongst a great number used to their
enemies, this in my opinion deserves not the least commendation, that having
taken Siphax King of Numantia, who being kept prisoner in the house of
Tiberius, dyed of sickness before he was ransomed, notwithstanding now when
there was no manner of hope of requital, his funeralles were yet performed,
with such solemnity, such pomp, and such honor, such large gifts were given,
and such liberality used, being but a Roman prisoner, as might have wanted at
Numantia, where he was Lord and King over all. I have thus far briefly, and
in this short manner showed some part of the magnificence of the Romans, in
their Martial actions, whereby may be perceived, how far we be digressed,
and how clean we be degenerate at this present from their honorable
institutions. For if we consider in these days the impiety that is found
amongst Princes, which for the most part are so led by the fury of ambition,
where they think they may oppress, that without any other respect of cause
they are ready to accompany themselves, with a sorr of bloody captains, that
should have the leading of a company of as lewd and ungracious soldiers, and
even according to their quarrels and to the quality of their own dispositions,
they prosecute their wars, and perform all their enterprises, the which for
the most part are executed with such treason and treachery, as no Prince almost
may be so surely guarded, but his life shall be finished with some deadly blow
with a weapon, with some sudden shot of a pistol, or at the least practiced
with some secret poison nether is there any town, that may be so surely walled,
so strongly ra^pered, or so thoroughly fortified which shall not be betrayed.

For in our wars we be now come to this pass, that fraud and deceit is
reputed for policy, and treason and treachery are called gravity and wisdom,
and he is holden the noblest champion, that by any of these means can best
deceive: where, in the opinion of all men, which exactly do honor justice, it
has ever been condemned, and accounted most horrible. And no doubt it can not
be acceptable in the sight and judgment of God, who in the Scripture is called
the God of truth and verity: but rather proceeds from the devil, who is
(indeed) the father of fraud, and the forger of all deceit.

And these enormities have ever been especially practiced amongst those that
have arreared wars, rather to oppress and, ravish the goods of others, then
amongst such as have but defended their own right, or entered into wars only
upon causes of justice and equity, for that it has been ever holden a matter
most inconvenient, rather by subtilty to undermine, then by force to conquer.

Now for the incitements to valor, there is no motive more mighty to incite
men to valor and courage, then when they shall call to mind the rightnes of
theirs: the which does animate and set an edge on their hearts, according to
the opinion of Cicero, who affirms that manliness is well defended of the
Stoiks, which is a virtue that is a Champion of equity, wherefore no man has
ever attained to the honor of fortitude, or get praise by policy. For nothing
is deemed honest that is deuoyde of Fustice: he likewise makes a further
proceeding in the same place, reciting the saying of Plato to the same effect,
that science not accompanied with conscience and knowledge disioyned from
justice, is rather subtilty then solid wisdom, and those enterprised which
are undertaken for our own profit, and not the weal public is more truly
termed foolish hardiness then famous valor.

Aristotle would by no means that Diomedes should be reputed either wise or
valiant, for that when fear had made wings for the Grecians heels, and they
were discomfited in fight, he still continued fight in the field, and
adventured himself to encounter with Hector, with more audacity and courage;
then understanding and consideration, more respecting the babble of fame and
vain praise of men, the which though for a time it may seem delightful, yet
is but of short continuance, when the safety of his soil and commodity of his
Country, the which is the scope of all virtuous actions, and an immortal
glory.

In such sort he censured Hector, who many times casting up his eyes to his
wife, and other Women standing upon the walls of Troy, would with greater
courage and audacity adventure and hazard his life, only to gain favor and
reputation in the Women's opinions, and fearing least any rumor should beraised
which might wound his credit, when otherwise he would have had a more
respect^e care of his life: They are therefore far remote from the renown of
true valor, which will so rashly run upon their own ruins without any due
considerate premeditation, for what auailed the audacity of Varro and
Flaminius, two renowned Roman Captains, who rejecting the prowess, and
contemning the craft of Hannibal, and undervaluing the counsel of Fabius,
firing the anchor of their hope in their own hardiness, endangered and ruined
two noble armies, whereby the power of the Romans lay a bleeding, and was
almost utterly perished: It is a common received opinion, that a man cannot
attain to the exact perfection of the meanest occupation under seven years
practice, and does it stand with likelihood? nay, has it almost any
possibility, that the art of War should be so suddenly won, wherein there
is always a Plus vltra, and a furthermore. For they which have all the course
of their life been followers of that course, and have continued the faithful
men of Mars, they have not proceeded so far, but still they might go one
degree further, and have been to seek in something: this was the matter which
moved Philip to marvel, that the Athenians did yearly choose new Generals
and Captains of their wars, when he in the whole course of his life had
found one worthy of his approbation, which was Parmenio; Plato would not allow
any man authority in Mars his employments, till he was thirty years of age:
and Alexander would admit none to the place of a commander under sixty:
finally by the general consent and confirmation of al men, there ought not to
be a slight or small respect used in the choice of Captains. Cicero mentions
four things requisite in a ruler of the wars, to wit Justice, Fortitude,
Policy and Temperance: First, Justice to revenge, Fortitude to put his
intention in execution, Policy to prepare the way to lead him to his ends, and
temperance to stay him in his fury, when he has sufficiently discharged it
upon his enemies; and it is free from doubt, and certain without suspicion,
that a Captain thus endowed with these virtues, shall be of no small
preuailance in all his proiects, but they have very little respect of any of
these in the election of our English Soldiers, who are appointed according to
master Constables command, and who if he has taken a distaste, and conceived a
displeasure against any in his circuit, cannot excogitate a better means to
vent his revenge, or think of a speedier course to oppress him then to press
him forth to be a Soldier: but if he chance to be in charity with his
neighbors, then does he select some silly odd fellow that does least good in
the parish, as who should say, he cannot be too bad to be a Soldier, and for
the most part they scour their prisons of thieves, and their streets of rogues
and vagabonds when they are to set any Soldiers forth, so that they seek such
men for such employments as were better lost then found. I hese are the authors
and fountains from whence such abuses flow, and the causers of a Soldiers
name to be so odious to the vulgar and common people: and another discommodity
has birth from the pressing of such a ribble rabble, for in the wars they
become mutiners, who ought to be punished with no small severity for infringing
the institutions, and violating the orders of the general Captain, the which
how distasteful it is to God, the punishments which God has inflicted upon
such persons may sufficiently testify in the book of Numbers it is recorded,
that the earth opened and swallowed up Corath, Dathan and Abyram, for mutining
against Moses, an evident and apparent proof, how displeasing to the Almighty
these kind of insertions be, and that they are rebels to God that resist their
Captain.

Manlius Torquatus showing more severity then affection, caused his own
natural sons head to be moved from his body, because he removed out of the
place whereto he was appointed; notwithstanding he went out of it to fight
with an enemy, who had formerly challenged him. And Salust does report that
there were more soldiers suffered for assaulting there enemies before they had
command from the Captain, then for running out of the field before the combat,
who were very severe in inflicting heavy punishments on such like offenders,
and to the end that they might the better subject Soldiers to their
discipline, adjoined to their own Laws the authority of God, and were
accustomed with great ceremonies solemnly to swear them to observe their
ordinances. Cicero records how Pompilius when he was general of the Romans
in the Persian wars, had discharged one legion in which Catos son had
served for a Soldier, who although he was discharged, yet still continued
there, being desirous to see the wars, which Cato understanding, did write to
Pompilius that he should not permit or suffer his son to remain or abide in the
army, unless he did swear him Soldier again, because otherwise it was
unlawful for him to fight with the enemy, for being freed from his former
oath, he was likewise discharged from being a Soldier: it was a general
custom amongst the Grecian to swear there Soldiers being armed and brought
to Church in this manner. I will not do any thing unworthy the sacred holy
wars, neither will I relinquish or forsake my Captain to whom I am appointed;
I will not be the causer of my countries illfare, but I will to the uttermost
bounds of my ability and limits of my power endeavor that it may reap all
possible benefits by my service, and I will continually frame and fashion my
self to the obedience and observance of such orders, as are now or shall be
hereafter determined by the state. Moreover as I will neglect them my self so
far as I am able force others to keep them. I will perpetually maintain and
retain the religion of my country, the which my promises I call the Gods to
record and witness: the which custom if it were now observed and put in
execution amongst soldiers in our times, it could not but be a means to
secure their General and governor, incite them to the undertaking of all
worthy enterprises, be an Antidote and preservation against such treacheries as
are daily practiced, and would in like manner gain credit and reputation to
their profession.

All which things are manifested in that true mirror of true worth Count
Mansfield: who as he has kept their service free from mutiny severely, so he
has rewarded his soldiers bountifully, which has so animated them, and
given them life in all their proceedings, that they have with matchless
courage performed all their enterprises: And Mansfield the general of there
army, has had no less then general applause: who to his eternal memory and
never dying fame, has enlarged his own renown, made an addition, especially
to his reputation by being constant to the King of Bohemia, and a most worthy
maintainer of the Gospel of Christ: of whose worthy actions if I should
endeavor to make a particular discourse, it would far exceed the power of my
pen: and I am afraid, I should wrong him in the relation: and I sear, in this
more lascivious then laborious age, he wi^ scarce attain to the happiness of
Achilles to have a second Homer, to trumpet forth the truth of his worth, who
has all the virtues lodged in his breast, that can be imagined to be resident
in a Prince or soldiers bosom: For as he htah courageous valor, denying to
permit him to carry coals or suffer excess of injury, so he has a measure of
honest policy to perform what he proiecteth, and least there might be any
defect in him undeserving the name of a Captain, or a Commander, like a
second Demosthenes, he is so well furnished with perswasiue oratory, that the
souls of his soldiers in time of his exhortation to him, seem only to be
placed in their ears, and his very breath is a wind to blow, (as I may so
say) the coals of their courage and to accend their fury: For at what time as
he obtained the famous victory against Leopoldus before Hguenae, he moved his
soldiers in a well composed speech, to behave themselves boldly and with
courage, and to make a full expression of their valor, since that they were to
have such a noble compagnion in combat as the King of Bohemia, who was royally
resolved to pursue his foes in person.

I need not therefore seek far for a Commander, whose example may serve
for every captains instruction, who as he should look for duty from them in
his service, so should afford them means whereby they may live (as they are
to be truly considered) professors of a worthy calling: he should likewise
encourage them with moving speeches, incite them to valor and noble actions.
To conclude, a true substantial soldier, and a gainefull general, ought to
be powerful in men and means, politic in plotting means as well for the
defense of himself as the offense of his enemy, royal in rewarding in the
well-deseruing, eloquent in persuading his men to prowess: So shall the wars
be more prosperous, the soldiers more respected, and a happy success shall
crown all Marshallists earnest endeavors.

FINIS.

