MEDITATIONS ON THE HOLY SACRAMENT OF THE Lords last Supper. Written many
years since BY EDWARD REYNOLDS* then Fellow of Merton College in Oxford.

LONDON, Imprinted by Felix Kyngston for Robert Bostock, and are to be sold at
his shop in S. Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Kings Head. 1638.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL SIR HENRY MARTEN Knight Judge of the Admiralty, and
of the Prerogative Court of Canterbury.
Sir,
SAint Hierom having in the heat of his Youth written an allegorical
Exposition upon the Prophet Obadiah, Hieron. in Prooem. ad Obad.
did in his riper Age solemnly bewail unto his Friend Pammachius both his
rashness in that attempt, and his infelicity further herein, that what he
thought had been buried amongst his private papers, was gotten into the hands
of a certain Young man, and so saw the Light. The self same complaint am I
forced to make touching this little Manuell of Sacramental Meditations, which
I humbly put into your hands. It was written with respect only to mine own
private use many years since, when I was a young Student in the University, as
my first Theological Essay. And now lately, by means of a private Copy long
ago communicated unto a Friend, it had without my knowledge received a License
for the Press, my earnest care was upon the first notice thereof wholly to
have suppressed the Publication: but the Copy which had been licenced, being,
by I know not what miscarriage lost, I have found it necessary, for fear of
the like inconvenience again to review a broken Copy which I had by me, and
have rather chosen to let it pass forth with some brief and sudden
Castigations of mine own, than once more run the hazard of a surreptitious
Edition. Mine Apology shall be no other than that of the good father,
Infanseram, nec dum scribere noveram. Nunc, ut nihil aliud profecerim, saltem
Socraticum illud habeo, scio quod nescio. And now since I find that the
Oblation of the first fruits, though happily they were not always the best and
ripest, did yet find favorable acceptance with God himself, I have bin
emboldened to present this small Enchiridion, (the very first fruits of my
Theological studies) unto the hands and patronage of so greatly learned,
eloquent, and judicious a person, and that upon this assurance; That as many
times aged men when they walk abroad lean upon the hand of a little Child,
so even in this little and youthful Treatise, such comfortable Trueths may
be, though weakly, delivered, as may help ^n your journey toward a better
Country to refresh and sustain your aged thoughts. The Blood of Christ, and
the Food of Life, 2 Reg. 5. 2, 3.
are subjects worthy of all acceptance, though brought unto us in an earthen
vessel. Elisha was not a whit the less valued by that noble Naaman, 2 Samuel
17. 17.
though it were an handmaid which directed unto him. 1 Samuel 30. 13.
Neither was David's comfort in rescuing of his Wives, and recovering of the
spoils from the Amalakites any jot the smaller because a young man of Egypt
made way for the discovery. The Sovereignty of the Gospel is herein most
excellently set forth in that it many times leads the Soul by the hand of a
child, Isai 1^. 6.
and is as truly, 1 Timothy 4. 12.
though not as abundantly powerful from young Timothy as from Paul the aged.
As christ can use weak elements to exhibit, so can he also use a weak pen
to express the virtue and comforts of his Body and Blood. In this confidence I
have made bold to prefixe your name before these Meditations, that therein I
might make a public acknowledgement of my many and deep engagements for your
abundant favors, and might with most hearty prayers commend you and yours to
that Blood of sprinckling, which speaks better things for us than that of
Abe^. In which desires I daily remain,

Yours in all humble observance, EDWARD REYNOLDES.

MEDITATIONS ON THE HOLY SACRAMENT OF THE LORDS LAST SUPPER.
CHAP. I
Man's Being to be employed in working: that working directed unto some Good,
which is God; that Good, a free and voluntary Reward, which we here enjoy
only in the right of a Promise, the seal of which Promise is a Sacrament.
THE Almighty power and wisdom of God has given unto his creatures, a triple
degree of perfection, their Being, their Working, and their Good; which three
are so subordinate to each other, that Working is the end and scope of Being,
and Good is the end and scope of Working. But no Being, can produce any Work,
no Work reach unto any Good, without something that may be a rule of working,
and a way to Good; and therefore Almighty God in the work of the Creation
imprinted in each creature a secret principle, which should move, govern, and
uniformly direct it to its proper work and end, and that principle we call a
Law, which by assigneing unto each thing the kind, measure and extent of its
working, does lead it on by a strait and in fallible line unto that Good, for
which it works. All other Creatures below the sphere of reason, being not
only in the quality of their nature of a narrow and strait perfection, but in
their duration finite and perishable, the good unto which this Law of their
creation directs them, is a finite Good likewise. But men and Angels being both
in nature more excellent than all others, and in continuance infinite and
immortal, cannot possibly receive from anything, which is a mere creature,
and less perfect than themselves, any complete satisfaction of their desires,
and therefore must by a circle turn back unto God, who is as well the Omega,
the end and object of their working, as the Alpha, the cause and author of
their being. Now God being most free, not only in himself, but in the
diffusion and communication of himself, unto any thing created (which
therefore he cannot be naturally or necessarily bound unto) and being also a
God infinitely beyond the largest compass of the creatures merit or working,
it follows that neither Men nor Angels, can lay any necessary claim unto God,
by a debt of Nature, (as a stone may unto the Center by that natural impresse
which directs it thither;) but all our claim is by a right of Promise and
voluntary Donation, so that that which in other mere natural creatures is
called the Term or Scope, is in reasonable creatures the Promise or Reward of
their working. Fear not Abraham, I am thy exceeding great reward; So then we
have here our Good which is God, to be communicated unto us, not in the manner
of a necessary and naurall debt, but of a voluntary, and supernatural Reward:
Secondly we have our working required as the means to lead us in a strait line
unto the fruition of that Good: and in as much as man's will, being mutable, may
carry him unto several operations of different kinds, we have thirdly a Rule
or Law, to moderate the kind and manner of our working, whereby we reach unto
our desired Good; which Rule when it alters (as in the new Covenant of grace
it does) the quality of that work, whereby we reach unto our desired Good does
alter likewise. Now fourthly we must farther observe that between our working,
which is the motion toward our Good, and our fruition, or resting in it, there
is a distance or succession of time: so that while we are in our estate of
working, we do not enjoy God by any full, real presence or possession, but
only by a right of a Covenant and Promise, which makes the Apostle say, that in
this life we live by faith and not by sight. Now Promises or Covenants require
to have annexed unto them Evidence and certainty, so far as may secure the
party that relyes upon them: which in humane ^ontracts is done, by giving our
words, and setting to our seals for confirmation. And now lastly in as much as
that Duty, on condition whereof God makes this Promise of himself unto us,
is the work of the whole man, the Evidence and Confirmation of the Promise is
by God, made unto the whole man likewise, and to each faculty of man, which it
pleases him in mercy the rather to do, because of that dependence of our
souls on the inferior and subordinate powers, and of that necessary connection
which there is between the inward reason, and the outward senses. God then
(presupposing ever the performance of conditions on our part) does secure h^s
Church, and give evidence for the discharge of his covenant and promise, first
to the soul alone by the testimony of his Spirit (which is both the seal and
the witness of Gods Covenant:) and secondly both to the soul and to the
senses by that double bond, his word written or preached, and his seal visibly
exhibited to the eye, and taste, but especially unto the taste, in which
objects are more really and with less fallibilitie united to the faculty, in
which there appears a more exquisite fruition of delight, in these good
things which are pleasing; and lastly in which the mystical union of the
Church to its head, unto the making up of one body is more naturally expressed.
And these seals annexed unto the word or patent of Gods Promise, have been
ever proposd unto the Church in all its estates, and are nothing else but that
which we call a Sacrament. So that as the testimony of the Spirit is an
invisible seal, and earnest to the soul, so is the Sacrament a visible seal
and earnest to the sense; both after a several manner, ratifying and
confirming the infallible expectation of that future Reward, which as well the
senses as the soul shall in Gods presence really enjoy after they have
fulfilled the service which God requires.

CHAP. II.
Sacraments are earnests and shadows of our expected glory made unto the
senses.
THE Promises, and word of grace with the Sacraments, are all but as so many
sealed Deeds to make over unto all successions of the Church, so long as they
continue legitimate children and observe the Laws on their part required, an
infallible claim and title unto that Good which is not yet revealed, unto that
inheritance which is as yet laid up unto that life which is hid with God, and
was never yet fully opened or let shine upon the earth. Even in Paradise there
was a Sacrament; a tree of life inded it was, but there was but one; whereas
Adam was to eat of all the fruits in the Garden: He was there but to taste
sometimes of life, it was not to be his perpetual and only food. We read of a
Tree of life in the beginning of the Bible, and of a tree of life in the end
too; that was in Adams Paradise on earth, this in Saint John's Paradise in
heaven: But that did bear but the first fruits of life, the earnest of an
after fullness. This bare life in abundance, for it bare twelve manner of
fruits, and that every month, which shows both the compleatnesse, and
eternity of that glory which we expect. And as the Tree of Paradise was but a
Sacrament of life in heaven, so Paradise it self was but a Sacrament of
heaven. Certainly Adam was placed amongst the dark and shady trees of the
Garden, that he might in an Emblem acknowledge, that he was as yet but in the
shadow of life, the substance whereof he was elsewhere to receive. Even when
the Church was pure, it was not perfect; it had an age of infancy, when it had
a state of innocence: Glory was not communicated unto Adam himself without the
veil of a Sacrament: the light of God did not shine on Paradise with a
spreading and immediate ray; even there it was mixed with shadows, and
represented only in a Sacramental reflex, not in its own direct and proper
brightness. The Israelites in the wilderness had light indeed but it was in a
cloud, and they had the presence of God in the Ark, Exodus: 13. 21.
but it was under several coverings; Exodus: 26.
and they had the light of God shining on the face of Moses, Exodus 34. 33.
but it was under the veil; Exodus 34. 5.
and Moses himself did see God, but it was in a cloud: so incapable is the
Church while encompassed with a body of sin, to see the luster of that glory
which is expected. Certainly as the Son of God did admirably humble himself
in his hypostaticall union unto a visible flesh, so does he still with equal
wonder and lowliness humble himself in a Sacramental union unto visible
Elements. 1 Pet. 1. 12.
Strange it is that that mercy which is so wonderful, that the Angels desire
to look into it, so unconceiveable as that it has not entered into the thought
of man; of such height, and lenghth, and breadth, and depth, as passes
knowledge, should yet be made the object of our lowest faculties: That that
which is hid from the wise and prudent in man's little world, his mind and
spirit, should be revealed unto the babes, his senses: It were almost a
contradiction in any thing, save Gods mercy, to be so deep as that no thought
can fadome it, and yet so obvious that each eye may see it; Luk 24. 39.
Handle me and see, for a spiritual substance has not flesh, was sometimes
the argument of Christ; and yet handle and see, take and eat, for a spiritual
grace is conveyed by flesh, is the Sacrament of Christ. So humble is his mercy
that since we cannot raise our understandings to the comprehension of divine
mysteries, he will bring down, and submit those mysteries to the apprehension
of our senses. 2 Cor. 5. 2. 4.
Hereafter our bodies shall be over-clothed with a spiritual glory by a real
union unto Christ in his kingdom; 1 Cor. 15. 24.
mean time that spiritual glory which we groan after, is here over-clothed
with weak and visible elements, by a Sacramental union at his Table. Then
shall sense be exalted and made a fit subject of glory, here is glory humbled,
1 Cor. 13. 12.
and made a fit object of sense; Then shall we see as we are seen, face to
face; here we see but as in glass darkly; in the glass of the creature, in
the glass of the word, in the glass of the Sacraments. And surely these are
in themselves clear and bright glasses, yet we see even in them but darkly, in
regard of that vapor and steeme which exhaleth from our corrupt nature, when
we use them: and even on these does our soul look through other dark glasses,
the windows of sense. But yet at the best they are but glasses, whose
properties are to present nothing but the pattern, the shadow, the type of
those things which are in their substance quite behind us, and therefore out of
sight: so then in general, the nature of a Sacrament is to be the
representative of a substance, the sign of a covenant, the seal of a
purchase, the figure of a body, the witness of our faith, the earnest of our
hope, the presence of things distant, the sight of things absent, the taste of
things unconceivable, and the knowledge of things, that are past knowledge.

CHAP. III.
Inferences of Practice from the former observavations.
HERE then we see first the different

even taste and touch how gracious the Lord is, in that he is pleased even to
unroabe his graces of their natural luster, to overshaddow his Promises, and
as it were to obscure his glory that they might be made proportioned to our
dull and earthy senses, to lock up so rich mysteries as lie hidden in the
Sacraments in a basin of water, or a morsel of bread. When he was invisible
by reason of that infinite distance between the divine nature and ours, he
made himself to be seen in the flesh; and now that his very flesh is to us
again invisible by reason of that vast distance between his place and ours, he
has made even it in a mystical sense to be seen and tasted in the Sacrament.
Oh then since God does thus far humble himself and his graces even unto our
senses, let not us by an odious ingratitude humble them yet lower, even under
our feet. Let us not trample on the blood of the Covenant, by taking it into a
noisome sink, into a dirty and earthie heart. He that eats Christ's in the
Sacrament with a foul mouth, and receives him into an unclensed and sinful
soul does all one as if he should sop the bread he eats in dirt, or lay up
his richest treasures in a sink.

Thirdly we learn how we should employ made even them the organs and
instruments of our spiritual nourishment. Mix ever with the natural a
heavenly use of thy senses. Whatsoever thou see* behold in it his wonder:
whatsoever thou hear, hear in it his wisdom: whatsoever thou tastest,
taste in it the sweetness, as well of his love, as of the creature. If Christ
will not dwell in a foul house, he will certainly not enter at a foul door. Let
not those teeth that eat the bread of Angelsgrinde the face of the poor; Let
not the mouth which does drink the blood of Christ, thirst after the blood of
his neighbor: Let not that hand which is reached out to receive Christ in the
Sacrament, be stretched out to injure him in his members: Let not those eyes
which look on Christ, be gazing after vanity. Certainly if he will not be one
1. Cor. 6. 15.
in the same body with a harlot, neither will he be seen with the same eyes: he
is really in the heaven of the greater world, and he will be no where else
Sacramentally but in the heavenly parts of man, the lesser.

Lastly, we see here what manner of conversation we have; The church on earth
has but the earnests of glory, the earnest of the Spirit, and the earnest of
the Sacrament; that Romans 8. 16.
witnessing, this Romans 4. 11.
signifying; both confirming and Ephesians. 4. 30. Romans 4. 11.
sealing our adoption. But 1. John 3. 2.
we know not what we shall be, Colos. 3. 3.
our life is yet hid, and 1. Pet. 1. 4.
our inheritance is laid up for us. A Prince that is happily bred up in a great
distance from his future kingdom in another Realm, and that amongst enemies
where he suffers one while a danger, another a disgrace, loaded with dangers
and discontents, though by the assurance of blood, by the warrant of his
fathers own hand and seal he may be confirmed in the evident right of his
succession, can hardly yet so much as imagine the honor he shall enjoy, nor
any more see the gold and luster of his crown in the print of the wax that
confirms it, than a man that never saw the Sun can conceive that brightness
which dwells in it by its picture drawn in some dark colors. We are 1 Pet.
2. 9.
a royal people, Romans 6. 17.
heirs, yea coheirs with Christ: but we are in a far country and 2. Cor. 5.
6.
absent from the Lord, in houses ruinous and made of clay, in a region of
darkness, in a shadow of death, in a valley of tears, though compassed in with
a wall of fire, yet do the waves of ungodly men break in upon us; though shipped
in a safe Ark, the temple of God, yet often tos'd almost unto shipwreck, and
ready with Jonah to be swallowed of a great Leviathan; though protected with a
guard of holy Angels, which pitch their tents about us, so that the enemy
without cannot enter, yet enticed often out, James 1. 14.
and led privily but voluntarily aaway by the enchanting lusts, the Dalilahs of
our own bosom. The kingdom and inheritance we expect is hid from us, Ephesians.
3. 9.
and we know no more of it, but only this, that it passes knowledge. Truly
the assurance of it is confirmd by an infallible pattent, Gods own promise, and
that made firm by a seal colored with that blood, and stamped with the image
of that body which was the price that bought it. What remains then but that
where the body is, thither the Eagles fly, where the treasure is, there the
heart be also, that we groan after the revelation of the sons of God, when
the vayl of our mortallity shall be rent, the mudwall of the flesh made
spiritual and transparant, the shadows and resemblances of the Sacraments
abolished, the glass of the creature removed, the riddle of our salvation
unfolded, the vapors of corruption dispelled, the patience of our expectation
rewarded, and from the power of the spirit within, and the presence of Christ
without shall be diffused on the whole man a double luster of exceeding
abundant glory. The hope and assurance of this is it which in those holy
mysteries of Christ's Supper we receive, which if received without dependence
and relation on that glory which they foreshadow, and on that body which
withal the merits of it they obsignate, does no more good than the seal of a
king, without any grant or patent whereunto it should be joined, in which there
is no profit beyond the bare wax, and much danger in triflin with so sacred a
thing.

CHAP. IIII.
Whence Sacraments derive their value and being, namely from the Author that
instituted them.
BUt why are not the instruments more glorious where the effects are so
admirable? whence is it that there should lie so much power in the narrow room
of so small and common elements? It had been worth the creating of a new
creature, to be made the pledge of a new covenant; the first fruits are of the
same nature with their crop, and earnest uses to be paid in coin of the same
quality with the whole after-summe. If then Sacraments are the earnests of our
glory, why are not the faithful instead of eating a morsel of bread, taken up
with St Paul into the third heavens? why are they not in stead of drinking a
sip of wine transformed with their Savior; and have with Steven a vision of
him at the right hand of the father? how discursive is foolish pride when it
would prescribe unto God? vain man who undertakest to instruct thy maker in
stead of praising him? to censure his benefits when thou should enjoy them?
will thou not receive salvation without thine own counsel, or art thou so
foolish as to conceive nothing precious without pomp? and to judge of the
things conveyed by the value, and quality of the instrument that conveighs
it? tell me then, why it is that water a vulgar element, is held in a Cisterne
of lead, and thy wine a more costly liquor, but in a vessel of wood? Tell me
the reason why that wax which in the shop happily was not prized at a penny,
should by cleaving unto a small parcel of parchment be valuable unto a million
of money? Tell me why should that clay, which while it lay under foot was vile
and dishonorable dirt, John 9. 6.
when it was applied by Christ unto the eye of a blind man, be advanced unto
the condition of a precious and supernatural salve? Is not even in works of
Art, the skill of the workman more eminent in the narrowest and unfittest
Subjects? Are not the Iliads of Homer more admirable in a Nutshell than in a
volume? do not Limmers set the highest value on their smallest draughts?
Sen^c. naturaralium quaest. Augustine ep 3. Ambros: Hexam: lib. 6. c. 6.
Chrysostom. hom. 12. ad pop. Antioch.
and is there not matter of admiration, and astonishment in the meanest and
most vulgar objects? And what madness is it then by those reasons to
undervalue faith, which are the arguments to confirm it? as if the power of an
Agent were not there greatest where the subject on which he works does
confer least; Tertul. de Baptis. c. 2. and contra Marc. l. 5. c. 5.
as if the weakness of the element did not add unto the wonder of the
Sacrament. If it were an argument of Christ's miraculous power to feed five
thousand with so few loaves, why should not the miracle of his Sacrament be
equal which feeds the whole Church with so slender elements? certainly they
who any way dis esteem the seeming meanness and emptiness of the Sacrament,
entertaining but low and vulgar conceits thereof, stumble at that same stone of
foolishness, by which the Gentiles fell from their salvation. But will thou
needs know both the reason why we use no other Sacraments, and why these carry
with them so much virtue? one answer resolves both. It is the Majesty of the
same King that coins his money, and that values it; he that frames a private
mint, or imposes another rate, is in both equally a traitor; in the former by
stealing the Kings authority, Vide Ambrose de Sacrament. lib. 4. cap. 4.
in the other by altering i^: the same Author did both institute the Sacrament
and value it; from the same power did it receive the necessity of its being,
and the efficacy of its working. In covenants or conveyances the articles and
instruments may be happily drawn by some Lawyer, but the confirmation of them by
hand and seal, are ordinarily performed by the men themselves who are
interessed in them. A Secretary may write the letter, but his Lord will
himself subscribe and seal it. Thus the pattent of Gods covenant has been
drawn out for the benefit of Gods Church by many selected and inspired
instruments, unto whom God did dictate so much of his will by divine
suggestion, as his pleasure was to acquaint and edify his Church withal. But
when he comes to confirm this his gift by hand and seal, behold then an
immediate presence of his own; then comes Gods own finger, that is in the
phrase of Scripture Matthew. 12* 28.
, his spirit to write as a witness in the soul; Luke 11. 20.
and then does God stretch out his own hand, and reach unto us that Supper
which is the seal to obsignate unto the senses the infallible truth of those
covenants, and our evident interest in those benefits, which were before
proclaimed in the pattent of his word. The 1 Cor. 11. 23.
Apostle delivered nothing as it were by a second hand to the Corinthians, but
what he had formerly received from the Lord. Divine things are unto us 1 Timothy
1. 11.
deposited, we must first be receivers, 1 Timothy 6. 20.
before deliverers.

CHAP. V.
Inferences of practice from the Author of this Sacrament.
HEre then we see, first both the absurdity and the wickedness of a
will worship, when the same man who is to perform the obedience shall dare to
appoint the laws, implying a peremptory purpose of no farther observance than
may consist with the allowance of his own judgment. Whereas true Vid. Tertul.
de po^^itent. c. 4. and A^gust. de Civit. Dei. l. 1. c. 26. and de Genes. ad
lit. lib. 8. c. 12.
obedience must be grounded on the majesty of that power that commands, not on
the judgment of the subject, or benefit of the precept imposed: divine laws
require obedience, not so much from the quality of the things commanded (though
Romans 7. 12.
they be ever holy and good) as from the authority of him that institutes them.
We are all the servants of God, and servants are but living Arist. Polit. lib.
1.
instruments, whose property it is to be governed by the will of those in whose
possession they are. Will Worship, and services of superstition, well they may
flatter Plutarch de superstitione.
God, they do not please him. He that requires us to deny our selves in his
service, does therein teach us that his commands stand ratherin fear, than in
need of us; in fear of our boldness lest we abuse them, (...) Chr^sost. in
Romans Hom. 2.
not in need of our judgments to polish or alter them. The conquest of an
enemy against the perscript of his General cost a Roman Gentleman his life,
though his own father were the judge. The killing of a Lion contrary to the
established Laws of the Kings hunting, (though it were only to rescue the King
himself, Live. lib. 8.
whose life was set upon) lost a poor Persian the loss of his head. Brisson.
de. Reg. Pers. lib. 1.
The overwise industry of the Architect in bringing not the same but a fitter
piece of timber than he was commanded to the Romish Consul, A. Gell. l. 1. c.
13.
was rewarded with nothing but the bundle of rods. So jealous and displeased
are even men themselves, Cyprian cont. Demetrimum.
to have their own Laws undervalued by the private judgments of those who
rather interpret than obey them. And therefore even those men who erected the
fabrics of superstition and will worship, Numa. apud Live. lib. 1.
have yet ever endeavored to derive the original of them on some divine
revelations. And that great Roman Captain Scipio, ever before the undertaking
of any business, was wont first to enter the Capitol and pretend a
consultation with the Gods touching their allowance of his intended designs,
grounding all his attempts and governing all his actions by the unerring
judgment of their Deities. S^mper Agatni rogat, nec nisi justus agit. Ovid.
Fast. lib. 2.
And generally in all the Roman sacrifices the minister or servant was to
attend a command before he was to strike the beast that was offered. Horrible
then and more than heathenish is the impiety of those who mixing humane
inventions and ceremonies of their own unto the substance of these sacred
mysteries, and imposing them as divine duties with a necessity of absolute
obedience, do by that means wrench Christ's own divine prerogative out of his
own hands, and make themselves, shall I say confounders and joint authors of
his Sacraments? nay rather indeed the destroyers of them: since as he that
receives otherwise than Christ requires, 1 Cor. 11.
receives not Christ but rather damnation; so he that gives otherwise than
Christ instituted does not indeed give Christ, but an Idol of his own making.

Secondly, we see here with how great reverence we ought to approach Gods
Temple, to receive these deep mysteries of Salvation, which it pleased Christ
in his own person to institute, and with his own presence to exhibit unto the
Church: was a beast slain for touching the Mount, and shall not a man of
beastly and vile affections, Heb. 12, 20.
be punished for touching that table where the Lord is present? was Moses to
put off his shoes at that bush which represented Gods power, and must not we
shake off our earthly and corrupt desires at those mysteries which represent
his mercy? were Nadab and Abihu destroyed before the Lord for offering strange
fire at his Altar, and shall we plead immunity if we present strange souls,
and a false faith at his Table? was Adam thrust out of Paradise for his sin
in eating of the tree of knowledge; and shall we escape if we sin in eating
of the bread of life? even unto the institutions of mortal men, though often
in their substance needless, in their observance difficult, and in their end
not much beneficial, so long as they keep within the compass of indifferent
things, there is required not only our obedience, but our reverence. The word
of God, though delivered unto us in earthen vessels, by men of like, weak, and
frail affections with our selves, yet because of that native pretiousnesse
which resides in it, and of that derived glory which it brings from the spirit
that reveald it, is so far to be honored, as that the vessels that bring it,
are to be had in high estimation, even for their works sake: But the Sacraments
are not either of humane authority, as are positive laws, nor of; divine
inspiration unto holy men, as were the Scriptures, but they are by so much the
more the immediate effects of divine power, by how much they are instituted
without the least concurrence of any other instrument; being reached out first
unto the Church of God by that immaculate and precious hand, which was it self
presently stretched forth on the Cross to embrace the weary and heavy laden.
Let us not then venture to receive so sacred things with unwashen hands, as
matters of mere custom, fashion, or formality. But let us look unto that high
authority that ordayn'd them, on that holy mouth that blessed them, on that
arm of mercy that exhibits them; being ever assured that as Christ has one
hand of bounty and redemption which reaches forth life to the worthy
receiver, so has he another of justice and power ready to avenge the injuries
and contempt that shall be done to his own holy institution.

Thirdly, we see here the honorable condition of the faithful, in that they
not only receive Christ, and all the benefits of his merits and actions, but
all this they receive from his own hands. For we may not think that the
actions of Christ in looking up and blessing, and breaking, and giving, were
merely temporary, local, or confined actions, terminated only to the present
company that were then with him. Certainly as the Apostles were then the
representative Church, so was that a representative action, the virtue and
effect whereof descends, and passes through all successions of the Church. The
arm of the Lord is not shortened or any way shrunk that it cannot still exhibit
what then it did. If he can so lengthen the arm of faith in us, as to reach as
far as heaven to embrace him, he can as well stretch out his own arm of
mercy from heaven to present that unto us which he did unto his disciples. It
was an admirable and unexpected honor that was showed to Mordecay when the
royal Crown and the Kings own apparel was put upon him, Easter. 6. 10.
though by the service of wicked Haman: But Christ does not only bestow on us
his Kingdom in the Sacrament (which seals unto us our inheritance with him)
nor does only invest us with his own meritorious purple roabs, 1 Pet. 2. 9.
his red garments from Bozrha (the garments of innocence and of unity) but does
all this with his own immediate hand; Romans 8. 17.
so that our honor must needs be so much greater than was Mordecay's, by how
much the roabs of Christ are more royal than the Persian Kings, and his person
more sacred than was wicked Hamans.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Circumstances of the Institution, namely the Time and Place.
AND as the Author, so the Circumstances of the Institution do not a little
add unto the excellency of this Sacrament: first for the circumstance of Time;
1 Cor. 11.
It was the same night wherein he was betrayed: Matthew. 26. 20.
in the evening and after Supper. In the evening or night, a time fit to
prefigure a passion, and eclipse, his especially who was the Sun of
righteousness, and the light of the world; a passion that brought darkness on
the very fountain of light, the Sun, even in the midday: In the evening,
Chrysostom. in Matthew. 26.
to note that now the fullness of time was come, wherein Christ was to
accomplish the redemption of the world. In the evening or twylight when the
Passover was celebrated, learn from the condition of the time the nature as
of that Legal, Exodus 12. 6.
so in some sort of this Evangelicall Sacrament; it is but a shadow and dark
representation of that light which shall be revealed. It has but the
glimmerings, and faint resemblances of that mercy which redeemed us, of that
glory which expects us. In the evening at the eating of the Paschall Lamb, to
note that Christ's active obedience to the commands of the Law went together
with his passive obedience to the curse and penalty of the Law. Chrysostom. Tom.
5. sermon. 80. de proditione Iudae.
He first celebrated the Passover that therein he might restifie his
performance of the Law, and then he instituted his own Supper, that therein he
might prefigure his suffering of the Law. Id sacrificium successit omnibus
Sacramentis veteris Testamenti. Aug. Civ. Dei l. 17. ^. 20.
In the evening after the Passover, to signify the abolishing both of the
Evening, and of the Passover, the plucking away of Moses his vail, of all
those dark and misty prefiguratio^s of that light, which was within a few days
to rise upon the world. He would first celebrate the Passover, and there
nullify it, (...) Chrysostom.
to make it appear unto the world that he did not therefore abrogate that holy
ordinance, because he oppugn'd it, but because he fulfilled it, and therefore
to the substance he joins the shadow, the Lamb of the Jews, to the Lamb of
God, the true sacrifice, to that which was typical, that the brightness of
the one, might abolish and swallow up the shadow of other. In the evening at
the time of unleavened bread, to signify that we also (it is the Inference of
the Apostle) should keep our Feast not with the leavened bread of malice, 1
Cor. 5. 7.
or of wickedness, but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth: That
we should not venture to play the hucksters with so divine and pure mysteries,
2 Cor. 2. 17.
by adulterating them with either the mixture of humane inventions, or with the
mud of our own sinful affections. In the evening at the time of Supper, to
note the most wiling and ready, yea, the forward and greedy resigning himself
into the hands of bloody and cruel men; John 4.
to signify that unto him it was meat and drink not only to do, but to suffer
his Fathers will. In the evening of that same night, 1 Cor. 11.
wherein he was betrayed to give first a warrant unto his Church, of his
approaching passion, which, though so intolerable for the quality and burden
of it, that it could not but am^ze his humanity, and draw from him that
natural and importunate expression of the desire he had to decline it, Mat.
26. 29.
yet in their elements did he ascertaine the Church, Psalm 110.
that as he came to drink of the brook in the way, so he should not shrink
from drinking the very bitterest part of it.

And secondly in the night wherein he was betrayed, to forearme his poor
disciples with comfort against the present loss of him, and against all that
anguish which their tender hearts must needs suffer at the sight of that bloody
and savage usage, which Judas and the Jews would show toward their Master.
And therefore in these elements he acquaints them with the nature and quality
of his passion, that it should be as Bread to strengthen, and as Wine to
comfort the faint hearted, to confirm the knees that tremble, and the hands
that hang down. Thirdly it was the night wherein he was betrayed, Vid. Aug. de
unitate Eccl. cap. 11.
to let us understand that these words were the words of a ding man, and
therefore to be religiously observed, Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. 11.
and that this Sacrament was the work of a dying man, Plerique mortales
postrema meminere. Caesar apud Sal. in Catil: vid. Augustine. epist. 118. prope
finem.
and therefore in its nature a Gift or Legacy. In his life time he gave his
Church, his Word, and his Miracles, he went about doing good, but now in his
passion he bestowed that which added weight and value, to all his other gifts,
himself. Other men use to bequeath their bodies to the earth, from whence it
came; Acts 2. 27.
but Christ's body was not to see corruption, and therefore he bequeathed it
unto the Church. It was his body by his hypostaticall and real but it is ours
by a mystical and spiritual union. John 1. 16.
Whatsoever fullness is in him, Scivit (Latro) quod illa in corpore Christi
vulnera non essent Christi vulnera sed Latronis. Ambros. de sancto Latrone
Sermon. 44.
of it have we all received; whatsoever graces and merits flow from him as the
head, they trickle down as far as the skirts of his garment, the meanest of
his chosen: the pains of his wounds were his, but ours is the benefit; the
sufferings of his death were his, but ours is the mercy; the stripes on his back
were his, but the balm that issued from them ours; the thorns on his head
were his, but the Crown is ours; the holes in his hands and side were his, but
the blood that ran out was ours: in a word, the price was his, but the purchase
ours. The corn is not grinded, nor baked, nor broken for it self; the grape
is not br^ized nor pressed for it self; these actions rather destroy the
nature of the elements than perfect them; but all these violations that they
suffer are for the benefit of man. No marvel then if the Angels themselves
stoop and gaze upon so deep a mystery, in which it is impossible to decide
whether is greater the Wonder or the Mercy.

If we look unto the Place Place.
where this Sacrament was celebrated even there also shall we find matter of
meditation, Matthew. 14. 15. Luke 22. 12.
for we may not think that two Evangelists would be so express and punctual
in describing the Place, i^ there were not some matter of consequence to be
observed in it. First then it was a borrowed room, Matthew. 8. ^0. (...)
Chrysostom. Tom. 5. Sermon. 80.
he that had no hole where to lay his head in, had no place where to eat the
Passover. We may not then expect in Christ's new Supper any variety of rich and
costly dishes; as his Kingdom is not, so neither is his Supper of this world.
It was not his purpose to make our worship of him a chargeable service, and to
enjoyne us such a table, as should six our thoughts on the meats rather than on
the substance which they resembled. He knew that where the senses are
overcharged faith lies unexercis'd: and therefore he proportioned his Supper
both to the quality of his own estate, which was poor, and to the condition of
our weakness, apt (as the Church after in her love feasts found) to be rather
tempted than edified in too much variety of outward meats. Jude verse. 12.
It was likewise an upper room, to note the dignity and divinenesse of this
Sacrament, and that property of lifting up the hearts, which it should work in
the receivers of it. Sursum corda Aug. de dono persever.
Our thoughts and affections while conversant about these mysteries should not
lie grovelling on the earth, but should be raised unto high and noble
contemplations. Hi^ron. ad Hedib. quaest. 2. Cyprian de Orat. Domini^a Cyrill.
catech. mist.
And this particular of the place may seem to have been imitated by the
Churches, in placeing the Lords Table and celebrating the Lords Supper in the
Chancell or upper room of the Temple; besides, it was a spacious and great
room, and so it should be, for it was a great Supper, the Supper of a King.
The Disciples were then the type and representative of the whole Catholic
Church, which was now by them to be begotten unto God, and therefore the Chamber
must needs be a resemblance and Model of the whole world throughout which the
sound of Christ's name, and the memory of his passion, should in his Supper be
celebrated until the end of all things, and then no marvel if it were a great
Chamber. Lastly, it was ready spread, fitted, trimmed, and prepared. So sacred
a mystery as this may not be exhibited in an unfitted, or unclean place, much
less received into a corrupt and unprepared soul. The body of Christ was
never to see corruption, and therefore it will never be mixed with corruption.
It lay first in a clean womb, it was after buried in a virgin Sepulcher; it
then was taken into the brightest heavens, and it still resides in molten and
purifide hearts. He that had the purity of a Dove, will never take up the
loding of a Crow. Here then we see from these circumstances with what reverence
and preparation, with what affection and high esteem we should receive these
sacred mysteries. The gift of a dying friend (though of contemptible value) is
yet greatly prized for the memory of the donor; for though the thing it self
be small, yet is it the pledge of a great love. debetur maximo operi haec
veneratio, ut novissimum sit authorque ejus statim consecrandus. Plin. Paneg.
The words of a dying man, though formerly vile and vain, are for the most
part serious and grave, how much more precious was the gift of Christ, who is
the Almoner of Almighty God, and whose only business it was to give gifts unto
men: how much more sacred were his last words, Ephesians. 4. 7. 8. 11
who all his life time spoke as never man spoke. The very presence of a dying
man estamps on the mind an affection of fear and awe, much more should the
words and gifts of him who was dead and is alive again. Certainly he has a
flinty soul whom love as strong as death, Cant. 8.
and death the work of that love cannot melt into a sympathy of affection. In
sum: the Time of this Sacrament was a time of passion, let not us be stupid;
it was a time of passover, let not our souls be unsprinkled; it was a time of
unleavened bread, let not our doctrine of it, be adulterated with the leaven of
heresy, not our souls in receiving, tainted with the leaven of malice; it was
the time of betraying Christ, let not our hands again play the Judas by
delivering him unto jewish and sinful souls, which will crucify again unto
themselves the Lord of glory; let not us take that precious blood into our
hands rather to shed it, than to drink it, and by receiving the body of Christ
unworthily, make it as the sop was to Judas even an harbenger to provide room
for Satan. Again the place of the Sacrament was a high Room, let not our
souls lie sinking in a dungeon of sin; it was a great room, let not our
souls be straightned in the entertaining of Christ; it was a trimmed room,
let not oursoules be sluttish and unclean when then the King of glory should
enter in: but as the Author of those mysteries was holy by a fullness of grace,
the elements holy by his blessing, the time holy by his ordination, and the
place holy by his presence; so let us by the receiving of them be transformed
as it were into their nature, and be holy by that union unto Christ, of which
they are as well the isntrumental means whereby it is increased, as the
seals and pledges whereby it is confirmed.

CHAP. VII.
Of the matter of the Lords Supper, Bread and Wine, with their Analogy unto
Christ.
WE have considered the Author or efficient of this Sacrament and those
circumstances which were annexed unto its Institution: we may now a little
consider the essential parts of it, and first the elements, or matter of which
it conconsisteth consecrated bread and wine: it neither stood with the outwad
poverrty of Christ, nor with the benefit of the Church to institute such Non ad
elaborata i^pensis and art^ convivia populi invitantur. Cy^ri.
sumptuous and gaudy elements as might possess too much the sense of the
beholder, and too little resemble the quality of the Savior. And therefore he
choose his Sacraments rather for the fitness, than the beauty of them, as
respecting more the end, than the splendour or riches of his Table, and intended
rather to manifest his divine power in altering poor elements unto a precious
use, than to exhibit any carnal pomp in such delicious fare as did not agree
with the spiritualnesse of his Kingdom. Though he be contented out of
tenderness toward our weakness to stoop unto our senses, yet he will not
cocker them; as in his real and natural body Esaias 53. 2.
, so in his representative, the Sacrament, a sensual or carnal eye sees not
either form or beauty, for which it may be desired. Pictures ought to
resemble their originalls, and the Sacrament we know is the picture or type of
him who was a Esaias 53. 3.
man of sorrow, and this picture was drawn when the day Lament. 1. 12.
of Gods fierce wrath was upon him, and can we then expect from it any
satisfaction or pleasure to the senses: this body was naked on the Cross, it
were incongruous to have the Sacrament of it pompous on the Table. As it was
the will of the Father, which Christ both glorifies and admires, to reveal
unto babes what he has hidden from the wise; so is it here his wisdom to
communicate by the meanest Instruments, what he has denied unto the choicest
delicates: to feed his Daniels rather with po^lse than with all the dainties on
the Kings table. And if we observe it, divine miracles take ever the poorest
and meanest subjects to manifest themselves on. If he want an army to protect
his Church, flies Esaias 7. 18.
, and frogs Exodus 8. 6. 24.
, and catterpillers, and lamps Judge. 7. 20. Josh 6 4. Judges 15. 1^.
, and pitchers etc. shall be the strongest soldiers Joel 2. 25.
and weapons he uses; the lame John. 5. 3. Matthew 12. 10.
, and the blind John 9. 1.
, the dumb Matthew. 9. 25.
, and the dead Matthew. 12. 22.
, water John 2. 7.
, and clay John 9. 6.
* these are materials for his power: even where thou see the instruments of
God weakest, there expect and admire the more abundant manifestation of his
greatness, and wisdom; undervalue not then the Bread and Wine in this holy
Sacrament which do better resemble the benefits of Christ crucified than any
other the choicest delicate^. Bread and Wine, the element is double to increase
the comfort of the faithful, that by Heb. 6. 18.
two things wherein it is impossible for God to deceive, we might have strong
consolation who have laid hold upon him. The Genesis 41. 32.
dream is doubled said Ios^ph to Pharaoh, because the thing is certain: and
surely here the element is doubled too that the grace may be the more certain.
No marvel then if those men who deny unto the people the certainty of grace,
deny unto them likewise these double elements: so fit is it, that they which
preached but a half comfort, should administer likewise but a half Sacrament.
Secondly Bread and Wine. In Lexesum sanguinis prohibet, Evangesium praecipit
utbibatur. Cypr. de caeua D^m.
the Passover there was blood shed, but there was none drunken: yea that flesh
which was eaten was but once a year. They Vid. Ambr. To. 4. lib. de ^is qui
initiautur. c. 9.
who had all in types had yet their types as it were imperfect. Gal. 4.
In the fullness of time came Christ, and with or ^in Christ came the fullness
of grace, and of his fullness do we receive in the Gospel, which the Jews
only expected in the promise, that Heb. 11. 40.
they without us might not be made perfect: these things John 15. 11.
have I spoken says Christ, that your joy might be full: the fullness of our
Sacrament notes also the fulness of our Salvation, and of his sacrifice who
is able Heb. 7. 15.
perfectly to save those that come unto God by him. Thirdly Bread and Wine:
common, vulgar, obvious food, (wine with water being the only known drink
with them in those hot Countries) amongst the Jews a lamb was to be slain, a
more chargeable and costly Sacrament, not so easy for the poor to procure,
And therefore in the Sacrifice of first fruits, the Levit. 12. 8.
poor were dispensed with, and for a Lamb offered a pair of pigeons. Christ now
Ephesians. 2. 14.
has broken down that partition wall, that wall of enclosure which made the
Church as a Cant. 4. 12.
garden with hedges, and made only the rich, the people of the Jews, capable
of Gods Covenants and Sacraments: now that Gods Table has crumms as well as
flesh, Matthew. 15. 27.
the Dogs, the Gentiles eat of it too; the poorest in the world is admitted to
it, even as the poorest that are do shift for bread, though they are not able
to provide flesh. Then the Church was a Cant. 4. 12.
fountain sealed up, but in Christ there was a Zech. 13. 1.
fountain opened for transgressions and for sins. Fourthly Bread and Wine,
Bread Psalm. 104. 19.
to strengthen, and Wine to comfort. All temporal benefits Matthew. 11. 6. Genesis
1^. 5. 8.
are in divine Dialect called Bread, it being the staff Levit. 26. 26.
of life, and the want of which though in a confluence of all other blessings
causes famine Amos 8. 11.
in a Land. See here the abundant sufficiency of Christ's passion, It is the
universal food of the whole Church, which sanctifies all other blessings,
without which they have no relish nor comfort in them. Sin and the corrupt
nature of man has a venomous quality in it to turn all other good things into
poison, unless corrected by this antitode, this Bread John 6.
of life, that came down from heaven. And well may it be called a bread of
life, in as much as in it resides a power of trans-elementation, that whereas
other nourishments do themselves turn into the substance of the receiver,
Vita Christu^ and viva panis.
this quite otherwise transformes and affirmilates the soul unto the Image of
it self, whatsoever faintness we are in, if we hunger after Christ he can
refresh us; whatsoever fears oppress us, if like Arist. probl.
men oppressed with fear, we thirst and gasp after his blood, it will comfort
us; whatsoever weakness either our sins or sufferings have brought us to, the
staff of this bread will support us; whatsoever sorrows of mind, or coldness
of affection do any way surprise us, this wine, or rather this blood (in
Levit. 17. 11.
which only is true life) will with great efficacy quicken us. If we want
power, we have the power 1 Cor. 1. 33.
of Christ's Cross; if victory, we have the victory 1 Cor. 15.
of his Cross; if Triumph, we have the triumph Col. 2. ^5.
of his Cross; if peace, we have the peace Col* 1. 20.
of his Cross; if wisdom, we have the wisdom 1 Cor. 1. 23.
of his Cross. Thus is Christ crucified a Treasure Col. 2. 3.
to his Church, full of all sufficient provision both for necessity and
delight. Fifthly, Bread and Wine, both of parts homogeneall, and alike; each
part of Bread, bread; each part of Wine, wine; no crumme in the one, no drop in
the other, differing from the quality of the whole. O the admirable nature of
Christ's blood to reduce the affections and the whole man to one uniforme and
spiritual nature with it self. In so much that when we shall come to the
perfect fruition of Christ's glorious Body, our very bodies likewise shall be
spiritual 1 Cor. 15.
bodies; spiritual in an uniformity of glory, though not of nature with the
soul. Scelera diffid^nt. Senec. James 4. 1.
Sins commonly are jarring and contentious; one affection struggles in the
same soul with another for mastery, ambition fights with malice, and pride
with covetousness, the head plots against the heart, and the heart swells
against the head; reason and appetite, will and passion, soul and body set the
whole frame of nature in a continual combustion, like an Arist. Eth. l. 3.
unjoynted or broken arm, one faculty moves contrary to the government or
attraction of another, and so as in a confluence of contrary streams and
winds, the soul is whirld about in a maze of intestine contentions. But when
once we become Philip. 3.
conformable unto Christ's death, it presently makes of Ephesians. 2. 15. 16.
two one, and so works peace, it slays that hatred and war in the
members, and reduces all unto that primitive harmony, unto that uniforme
spiritualnesse, which 2 Cor. 3. 18.
changes us all into the same Image from glory to glory. Sixthly Bread and
Wine: as they are homogeneall, so are they Vid. Cyp. l. 1. epist. 6.
united together, and wrought out of diverse particular grains and grapes into
one whole lump or vessel: and therefore Vide Gul. (...) Antiq. Convival.
Bread and blood even amongst the Heathen were used for emblemes of leagues,
friendship, and Marriage the greatest of all unions. See the wonderful effi^acy
of Christ crucified to sodder as it were, and joint all his members into one
body by love, as they are united unto him by faith. They are built up as 1 Pet.
2. 5, 6.
living stones through him who is the chief corner stone elect and precious
unto one Temple; they are all united by love, by the Ephesians. 4. 16.
bond or sinews of peace unto him who is the 1. Cor. 12.
head, and transfuseth through them all the same vital nourishment; they are
all the John 10.
flock of Christ reduced unto one fold by that one chief 1 Pet. 5. 4.
Shepherd of their souls, who came to gather those that wandered either from
him in life, or from one another in affection. Lastly Bread and Wine, severed
and asunder; that to be eaten, this to be drunken; that in a loaf, this in a
Cup: It is not the blood of of Christ running in his veins, but shed on his
members that does nourish his Church. Impious therefore is their practice, who
power Christ's blood as it were into his body again, and shut up his wounds,
when they deny the Cup unto the people under pretense that Christ's Body being
received, the blood by way of concomitancy is received together with it: and so
seal up that precious Fountain which he had opened, and make a monopoly of
Christ's sacred wounds, as if his blood had been shed only for the Priest, and
not as well for the people; or as if the Church had power to withhold that from
the people of Christ which himself had given them.

CHAP. VIII.
Practical inferen^es from the materials of the Lords Supper.
HEre then we see first, in as much as these Elements are so necessary and
beneficial to that life of man, with what appetite we should approach these
holy mysteries, even with hungry and thirsty souls, longing for the sweetness
of Christ crucified. Wheresoever God has bestowed a vital being, he has
also afforded nourishment to sustain it, and an inclination and attractive
faculty in the subject toward its nourishment. Even the newborn Babe by the
impression of nature, is moved to use the breasts before he knows them. Now we
which were dead in sins has Christ quickened, Ephesians. 2^
and has infused into us a vital principle, even that faith by which the just
do Hab. 2. Gal. 2. 20.
live; which being instilled into us, Christ begins to be formed Gal. 4. 19.
in the soul, and the whole man to be made conformable Phil 3. 10.
unto him. Then are the parts organced and fitted for their several works;
there is an eye with Stephen to see Christ, an ear with Mary, to hear him; a
mouth with Peter, to confess him; a hand with Thomas, to touch him; an arm
with Simeon, to embrace him; feet, with his Disciples, to follow him; a heart
to entertain him, and bowels of affection to love him. All Romans 6. 19.
the members are weapons of righteousness; and thus Epes. 4. 24.
is the new man, the new 2 Cor. 5. 17.
creature perfected. Now he that left not Acts 14. 17.
himself amongst the Heathen without a witness, but filled even their hearts
with food and gladness, has not certainly left his own chosen without
nourishment, such as may preserve them in that estate which he has thus framed
them unto. As therefore new Clem. Alex. Paed. ^. l. 1. cap. 6.
Infants are fed with the same nourishment and substance of which they consist;
so the same Christ crucified, is as the cause and matter of our new birth, so
the food which sustaineth and preserves us in it: unto whose body and blood
there must needs be as proportionable an appetite in a new Christian, as there
is unto 1 Pet. 2. 2.
Milk in a new Infant; it being more nourishable then Milk, and faith more
vital to desire it then nature. And all this so much the rather, because he
himself did begin unto us in a more bitter Cup. Did he on his Cross drink
Psalm. 69. 21.
Gall and Vinegar for me, and that also made infinitely more bi^ter by my
sins, and shall not I at his Table drink Wine for my self, made infinitely
sweeter with the blood which it conveighs? Did he drink a Cup Mat. 26. 39.
Mat. 20. 23.
of bitterness and wrath, and shall not I drink the Cup of blessing 1 Cor. 10.
16.
? Did he eat the bread of affliction, and shall not I eat the bread of life?
Did he suffer his Passion, and shall not I enjoy it? Did he stretch out his
hands on the Cross, and shall mine be withered and shrunken toward his Table?
Certainly it is a presumption that he is not only sick but desperate, who
refuses that nourishment which is both food to strengthen, and Physic to
recover him. Secondly, the benefit of Christ being so obvious as the commons,
and so sufficient as the properties of these Elements declare: we see how
little we should be dismayed at any either inward weaknesses and bruses of
mind, or outward dangers and assaults of enemies, having so powerful a remedy
so near unto us: how little we ought to trust in any thing within our selves,
whose sufficiency and nourishment is from without. There is no created
substance in the world but receives perfection from some other things; how much
more must Man who has lost his own native integrity go out of himself to
procure a better estate, which in vain he might have done for ever, had not
God first (if I may so speak) gone out of himself, humbling the Divine Nature
unto a personal union with the humane. And now having such an Immanuel as is
with us, not only by assuming us unto himself in his incarnation, but by
communicating himself to us in these sacred Mysteries: whatsoever weaknesses
dismayes us, his body is bread to strengthen us, whatsoever waves or tempests
rise against us: his wounds are holes to hide and shelter us: what though sin
be poison, have we not here the bread of Christ for an Antidote? What though it
be red as Skarlet, is not his blood of a deeper color? What though the Darts
of Satan continually wound us, is not the issue of his wounds the balm for
ours? Let me be fed all my days with bread of affliction, and water of
affliction, I have another bread, another Cup to sweeten both. Let Satan tempt
me to despair of life, I have in these visible and common Elements, the
Author of life made the food of life unto me; let who will persuade me to trust
a little in my own righteousness, to spy out some gaspings and faint
relics of life in my self: I receive in these signs an all-sufficient
Savior, and I will seek for nothing in my self when I have so much in him.
Lastly, we see here, both from the example of Christ who is the pattern of
unity, and from the Sacrament of Christ which is the Symboll of unity, what a
conspiracy of affections ought to be in us, both between our own, and toward
our fellow members. Think not that thou have worthily received these holy
mysteries, till thou find the image of that unity which is in them, conveyed
by them into thy soul. As the breaking of the bread is the Sacrament of
Christ's Passion, so the aggregation of many grains into one mass should be a
Sacrament of the Churches unity 1 Cor. 10. 17.
. What is the reason that the bread and the Church should be both called in the
Scripture by the same name? The bread 1 Cor. 11. 24.
is the body of Christ, and the Church 1 Cor. 12. 27.
is the body of Christ too? Is it not because as the bread is one Loaf out of
diverse corns, so the Church is one body out of diverse Believers; that the
representative, this the mystical body of the same Christ. Even as the Word,
Mat. 13. 19.
and the Spirit, 1 John 3. 9.
, and the faithful, Mat. 13. 2^^.
, are in the Scripture all called by the same name of seed (...) Isid. Pel^t.
, because of that assimulating virtue, whereby the one received, does
transform the other into the similitude and nature of it self Cypria^. de
unit. Eccles.
. If the beams of the Sun, though divided and distinct from one another,
have yet a unity in the same nature of light, James 3. 13. Romans 11. 16.
because all partake of one native and original splendour: if the limbs of a
Tree, though all several, and spreading different ways, yet have a unity in
the same fruits, because all are incorporated into one stock or root: if the
streams of a River, though running diverse ways, do yet all agree in a unity
of sweetness and cleerenesse, because all issuing from the same pure
Fountain: why then should not the Church of Christ, though of several and
divided qualities and conditions, agree in a unity of truth and love, Christ
being the Sun whence they all receive their light, the Vine John 15. 1.
into which they are all ingrafted and the Fountain Zach. 13. 1.
that is opened unto them all for transgressions and for sins.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Analogy and proportion between the holy Actions used by Christ in this
Sacrament, and Christ himself who is the substance of it.
IT follows now, that we enquire farther into the nature of this holy
Sacrament, which will be explained by considering the Analogy, fitness, and
similitude between the signs, and the things signified by them, and conferred
or exhibited together with them, which is Christ the Lord. Now, this Analogy
or fitness as it has been in some general manner expres'd in the nature or
quality of the elements substantially or physically taken; so more expressly
and punctually is it proposed unto us in those holy Cypri. de Caen. Tertul.
cont. marc. lib. 1. c. 23.
actions which do alter in the use, and make it a Sacrament. And first we
find that Christ took the Bread and Wine, and blessed it, and gave thanks,
and so consecrated it, or set a part unto a holy or solemn use, Matthew. 26. 16.
Luke 22. 19. 1 Cor. 10. 16
which is the reason why Saint Paul calls it a Cup of blessing; so that unto
the Church it cease Ambros. lib. de iis qui initiantur c. 9. and de
Sacramentis l. 1. c. 5. and l. 4. c. 4. lustin Martyr in Apolog. 2.
to be that which nature had made it, and begins to be that unto which the
blessing had consecrated it: In like manner did the eternal Son of God
assume into the subsistence of his own infinite person, the whole nature of
man, the body and the soul, by the virtue of which wonderful union
notwithstanding the properties of the divine nature, remain absolutely
intransient and uncommunicable unto the humane; yet are there shed from that
inexhaustible fountain many high and glorious endowments, by which the
humanity under this manner of subsistence is Esaias 61. 1. Luke 4. 18.
anointed, Heb. 1. 9.
consecrated, John 6. 23.
sealed, and set apart for that work of incomprehensible love and power, the
redemption of the world: and secondly as the Bread is taken by us from Christ
in the nature of a gift, he brake it and gave it to his Disciples; so is the
humane nature taken by Christ from the Father as a gift Matt. 11. 27. Matthew.
28. 18* Philip. 2. 9. John 5. 26.
, from the good pleasure of God. Thirdly, as the taking of the Bread by Christ
did alter only the manner of its being, the operation, and efficacy, the
dignity and use, but no way at all the element or nature of the Bread. Even so
the taking of the humane body by Christ did confer indeed upon it many
glorious effects, and advance it to an estate far above its common and
ordinary capacity (always yet reserving those defects and weaknesses which
were required in the aeconomie, and dispensation of that great work for which
he assumed it) but yet he never alterd the essential and natural qualities of
the body, but kept it still within the measure and limits of the created
perfection which the wisdom of God did at first share out unto it. Lastly, to
(come nearer unto the Cross of Christ) as he did by prayer and thanksgiving
consecrate their elements unto a holy use; so did he immediately before his
passion (of which this is the Sacrament) make that consecratory John 17.
prayer and thanksgiving which is registered for the perpetual comfort of his
Church.

The second Action is the breaking of the Bread, and powering the Wine into the
Cup, which does nearly express his crucified Body; where Psalm* ^2. 14.
the joints were loosed, the sinews torn, the flesh bruized and peirced, the
skin rent, the whole frame violated by that straining and razeing and cutting,
and stretching, and wrentching, which was used in the crucifying of it, and by
the Sangui^^ (...) de^u^a ven^la revocamus. Tertul. Cont. Gnost. c. 5.
shedding of that precious blood which stopped the issue and flux of ours. It
were infinite and intricare to spin a meditation into a controversy, about the
extent and nature of Christ's passion: but certainly, whatsoever either
Ignominy, or Agony his body suffered (which two ^ conceive to comprize all the
generals of Christ crucified) are if not particularly expressed, yet typically
and sacramentally shaddowed and exhibited in the Bread broken, and the Wine
powered out.

The third Action was the giving, or delivering of the Bread and Wine: which
first, evidently expresses the nature and quality of Christ crucified, with
these benefits which flow from him, that they are freely bestowed upon the
Church, which of it self had no interest or claim unto any thing save death.
Secondly, we see the nature of Christ's passion, that it was a free, voluntary,
and unconstrained passion, for though it be true that Judas August. Vid. Tom.
8. in Psa. 93. and Tom. 9. tract. 7. in epist. Iohanis.
did betray him, and Pilate deliver him to be crucified: yet none of this was
the giving of Christ, but the selling of him. It was not for us, but for money
that Judas delivered him, it was not for us, but for fear that Pilate
delivered him: Romans 8. 32. Acts 2. 23. Gal. 4. 4.
but God delivered the Son, and the Son delivered himself with a most
merciful and gracious will to bestow his death upon sinners, and not to get,
but to be himself a price. The Passion then of Christ was most freely
undertaken Gal. 2. 20.
(without which free will of his own, they could Ephesians. 5. 12. Phil. 2. 7. John
19. 11.
never have laid hold on him) and his death was a most free and voluntary
explication, his life was not wrentched nor wrung from him, nor snatched or
torn from him by the bare violence of any foreign Impression; but was with a
loud voice (arguing nature not brought to utter decay) most freely John 10. 11.
17. 18. Augustine, Tom, 9. tractat. 31. in Johan. and tract. 47. and de
tri^itate l. 3. cap. 13. Tertul. in Apolog. cap. 21. Cyprian de c^na Dom. non
necessitate, sed obedientia ^rgetur ad mortem, and lib. de dup. martyr.
surrendered and Heb. 8. 3. Mark. 8. 31. Luk, 24. 7. 26. 46.
laid down by that power which did after reassume it. But how then comes it to
pass that there lay a necessicie Matthew. 26. 39
upon Christ of suffering, which necessicie may seem to have enforced and
constrained him to Golgatha, in as much as he himself did not only shrink,
but even testify his dislike of what he was to suffer by a redoubled prayer
Aristot. Eth, lib. 3. cap. 1.
unto his Father that that Cup might pass from him? does not fear Heb. 5. 7.
make Actions involuntary, or at least derogate and detract from the fullness
of their liberty? and Christ did fear Act. 2. 33.
, how then is it that Christ's Passion was most voluntary though attended with
necessity, fear, and reluctance? surely it was most voluntary still, and
first therefore necessary because voluntary, the maine and primitive reason of
the necessity, being nothing else but that immutable will which had
fore-decreed it. Christ's death then was necessary by a necessity of the event,
which musts needs come to pass after it had once been Acts 2. 23.
fore-determined by that most wise will of God, which never uses to repent him
of his counsels; but not by a necessity of the cause, which was most free and
voluntary. Again, necessary it was in regard of the Scriptures, whose truth
could not miscarry, in regard of the promises made of him, which were to be
performed, in regard of prophetical predictions which were to be fulfilled, in
regard of typical prefigurations, which were to be abrogated, and seconded
with that substance which they did fore-shaddow, but no way necessary in
opposition to Christ's will, which was the first mover into which both this
necessity and all the causes of it are to be finally resolved.

And then for the fear and reluctance of Christ, noe marvel if he who was in
all things like unto us, had his share in the same passions and affections like
wise though without sin. But neither of these did any way derogate from the
most free Sacrifice which he himself Heb. 9. 14.
offered once for all, in as much as there was an absolute submission of the
inferior to the higher will, and the inferior it self, shrunk not at the
obedience, but at the pain. To explain this more clearly, consider Vid. Hooker
l. 5. sect. 48. and D^ctor field of the Church lib. 1. c. 18.
in Christ a double Will, or rather a double respect of the same Will. First
the natural Will of Christ, whereby he could but wish well unto himself, and
groan after the conservation of that being, whose anguish and dissolution did
now approach; whereby he could not upon the immediate burden Heb. 5. 7.
of the sin of man, and the wrath of God but Heb. 5. 7.
fear, Matthew. 26. 39
and notwithstanding the assistance of Angels Luke 22. 43.
drop down a sweat Luke 22. 44.
, as full of wonder as it was of torment, great drops of blood, and then no
marvel if we here, Father if it be possible let this Cup pass from me. But
then again consider not the natural, but the merciful will of Christ by which
he intended to appease the wrath of an offended, and by any other unsatisfiable
God; the removal of an unsupportable curse, the redemption, of his own, and
yet his fellow creaturs, the giving them access unto a father, who was before
a consuming fire, in a word, the finishing of that great work which the Angles
desire to look into, and then we find that he did freely lay down his life
and most willingly embraced what he most naturally did abhor. As if Christ
had said (if we may venture to paraphrase his sacred words) Father thou have
united me to such a nature whose Created and Essential property it is to
shrink from any thing that may destroy it, and therefore if it be thy Will let
this Cupp pass from me: But yet I know that thou have likewise anointed me
to fulfill the eternal Decree of thy love, and to the performance of such an
office the dispensation whereof requires the dissolution of my assumed nature,
and therefore not as I, but as thou will. So then both the desire of
preservation was a natural desire, and the offering up of his Body was a
free will offering. And indeed the light of nature has required a kind of
willingness, even in the Heathens bruit Sacrifices. And therefore the beast f
Macrob. Satur. lib. 3. c. 5. Plin^ lib. 8. c. 45. su^t. in ^ alba. c. 19.
Valor. max. l. 1. c. 6. Plutarch. sympos. l. 8. c. 8.
was led, and not haled to the Altar; and the struggling of it, or flying and
breaking from the Altar, or bellowing and crying was ever counted ominous and
unhappy. Now our Savior Christ's willingness to offer up himself is herein
declared, in that he opened Pet.
not his mouth; in that he suffered such a death wherein he first did bear
John 19. 17.
the Cross before it bore him, in that he dehorted Luke 23. 28.
the women that followed after him to weep or express any passion of
willingness for his death. Thus did he in his passion, and still does in his
Sacrament really, perfectly, and most willingly give himself unto his Church.
In so much as that the Oil of that unction which consecrated him unto that
bitter work, is called an Oil Heb. 1. 9.
of gladness. So then Christ freely offreth both in himself Originally, and
in his Sacraments Instrumentally, all grace sufficient for nurishment unto
life, to as many as reach forth to receive or entertain it.

CHAP. X.
Of the fourth Action, with the reasons why the Sacrament is to be eaten and
drunken.
THe fourth and last Action made mention of in this Sacrament, is the eating of
the bread, and the drinking of the wine, after we have taken them from the
hands of Christ: to signify unto us, that Christ crucified is the life and
food of a Christian that receives him. Here are the degrees of faith: first we
take Christ, and then we eat him. There are none that find any nourishment or
relish in the blood of Christ, but those who have received him, and so have an
interest, propriety, and title to him. He must first be ours, before we can
taste any sweetness in him; ours first in possession and claim, and after
ours in fruition and comfort. For all manner of sweetness is a consequent and
effect of some propriety which we have unto the good thing which causes it;
unto the which the nearer our interest is, the greater is the sweetness that
we find in it. In natural things we may observe, how nothing will be kindly
nourished in any other place or means, than those unto which nature has given
it a primitive right and symthy. Fishes perish in the air, and Spice-trees dye
and wither in these colder Countries, because Nature had denied them any claim
or propriety unto such places. John 15.
We are all branches, and Christ is a Vine: now no branch receives juice or
nourishment, unless first it be inserted into the stock. If we are not first
ingrafted into Christ, and so receive the right of branches, we cannot expect
any nourishment from him. Revel. 2.
As the name which was written in that white Stone, was known unto him only
that had it, so in these mysteries which have the impresse and character of
Christ's Passion on them; Christ is known and enjoyed only by those, who first
take him, and so have a hold and right unto him. But why is it that Christ in
this Sacrament should be eaten and drunken? Cannot the benefit of his Passion
be as well conveyed by the eye as by the mouth? It was the joy John 8. 56.
of Abraham that he saw Christ's day, the comfort Luke 2. 30.
of Simeon that he had seen Gods salvation, the support Acts 7. 55.
of Stephen that he saw Christ in his kingdom, the faith John 20. 29.
of Thomas that he saw his resurrection; and why is it not enough that we see
the passion of Christ in this Sacrament, wherein he is crucified Gal. 3. 1.
before our eyes? Certainly vid. John 6.
if we look into the Scriptures we shall find nothing more common, than the
Analogy and resemblance betwixt spiritual grace and natural food. Hence it
is that we so often read of 1 Cor. 10. 3, 4.
Manna from Heaven, Water from the Rock, Trees in Paradise, Apples Cant. 2. 5.
and Flagons for Christ's Spouse, Wisdoms feast Prove. 9. 2. 5.
, and the marriage feast Matthew. 22. 4.
of hungring Matthew. 5. Psalm. 63. 1. Ps. 119. 103. Psalm. 42. 1, 2. Ps. 119. 131.
Esaias 66. 11.
and thirsting, and sucking of marrow and fatness, and Milk Esaias 55. 1. 2. 1
Pet. 2. 2. Heb. 5. 12.
, and Honey, and infinite the like expressions of divine grace: the reasons
whereof are many and important. First, to signify the benefit we receive by
Christ crucified, exhibited unto us in his last Supper, by that Vid Iackson of
Justifying faith. Sect. 1. cap. 9.
Analogy and similitude which is betwixt him and those things we eat and
drink. Now meats are all either Physical, common, or costly, either for the
restoring, or for the supporting, or for the delighting of nature; and they
have all some of those excellent properties of good (...) Rhet. lib. 1. and Eth.
which Aristotle has observed, either to conserve nature entire, or to restore
it when it has been violated, or to prevent diseases ere they creep upon it.
And all these benefits do the faithful receive by Christ. First, his body and
blood is an Antidote against all infections of sin, or fear of death. When he
said, Fear Matthew. 14. 27.
not, it is I. It was an argument of comfort which no temptation could repel.
Secondly, it has a purging and purifying property. The 1 John 1. 7.
blood of Christ cleanses us from all sin. Thirdly, it has a quickening,
preserving, and strengthening power. Christ Phil. 1. 21.
is our life, and our Col. 3. 3, 4.
life is hid with Christu, and Christ lives in us, and he has quickened Ephesians.
2. 5.
us together with Christ, and we are Phil. 4. 13.
able to do all things through Christ that strengthens us. And lastly, it
has a joying and delighting property, I rejoice Gal. 6. 14.
in nothing but in the Cross of Christ: I count Phil. 3. 8. Phil. 4. 4.
all things dung that I may win Christ, and I protest 1 Cor. 15. 31.
by our rejoicing which we have in Christ. Whether we want Physic to cure us,
or strong meats to nourish us, or sweet meats to delight us, Christ is unto us
all in all, our health, our strength, our joy.

Secondly, the Sacrament is eaten and drunken, to signify the necessity we
stand in of Christ crucified: many things there are usual in the life of man
both for delight and profit; beautiful and pleasant objects for the eye;
melody and harmony for the ear; ointments and odours for the smell;
curiosities and luxuriancies of invention for the fancy: but there is no
faculty of nature that does so immediately concur to the support and
preservation of the whole man, as the sense of Tasting, which is, as it were
the Sluice and inlet to life; without which we have not so much as a capacity
of that delight, which other objects of an inferior and subordinate nature can
afford: even so many things there Eccl. 2. 24. 3. 12. 22. 5. 17.
are wherein the children of God may and ought to take pleasure and solace,
even as many as we acknowledge from God for blessing; but there is nothing in
the world which is the object and principle of our life, but only Christ: no
quality in man, which is the Instrument and Organ of our life, but only a
lively and operative faith, by which only we taste Creed et manducasti. Aug. in
Johan.
how gracious the Lord is. The just Hab. 2.
shall live by faith; and I live Gal. 2. 20.
by the faith of the Son of God: and where Vid. Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. Hom. 24.
the body is, thither do the Eagles fly, that they may eat and live.

Thirdly, the Sacrament is eaten and drunken to show unto us the greedy desire
which is and ought to be in the hearts of Believers toward Christ crucified.
There is no one faculty in man will so much put to its utmost for procuring
satisfaction, as this of Tasting if once brought into anguish or straits.
Because as Death (...). Arist.
in the general is most terrible, so much more that lingering (...). Hom.
Odyss. lib. 12. and lib. 17
death which consumes with famine; and therefore no power of nature more
importunate and clamorous for satisfaction; no motive stronger to work a love,
and attempt a conquest on any nation, than an experience of such excellent
commodities as may from thence be obtained for the releeving of this one
faculty. And therefore Almighty God when he would provoke the people to forsake
Egypt, and comfort them with the news of a better Country, describes it by
the plenty that it brought forth; I Exodus 3. 17.
will bring you to a Land which flows with Milk and Honey. And when the
people murmured against God in the Wilderness, all that hatred of Egypt which
the tyranny of the Land had wrought in them, all the toil and servitude that
was redoubled on them, was wholly swallowed up by the one consideration of
fleshpots Exodus 16. 3. Numb. 11. 5.
and Onions which they there enjoyed. And Number. 13. 21. 24.
when by Gods appointment Spies were sent into Canaan, to enquire of the
goodness of the Land, their Commission was to bring of the fruit of the Land
unto the people, that thereby they might be encouraged unto a desire of it. And
we find how the Roman Emperors did strictly prohibit the transportation of
Wine, or Oil, or other pleasant commodities unto barbarous Nations, left they
might prove rather temptations to some mischievous design, than matters of
mutual intercourse and trafique. No marvel then if the Sacrament of Christ
crucified, who was to be the Desire Hag. 2. 8.
of all Nations, the desire of whom was not only to transcend and surpass, but
even (after a sort) to nullify 1 Cor. 2. 1. Mat. 13. 44, 45. Luke 18. 28 Phil.
3. 7, 8.
all other desires, be received with that faculty which is the seat of the most
eager and importunate desire.

Fourthly, we eat and drink the Sacrament, to intimate unto us the conformity
of the faithful unto Christ. As in all the appeties and propensions of
natural things we find an innate amity, betwixt the natures that do so
incline toward, or embrace one another, so principally in this maine appetite
unto food, is there ever found a proportion between nature and its
nourishment: insomuch, that young Clem. Alex. Paedag. 1. l. c. 6.
Infants are nourished with that very matter of which their substance
consists. Whatsoever has repugnant qualities unto nature, she is altogether
impatient of it, and is never quieted till one way or other she disburthen her
self. And thus is it, and ought to be betwixt Christ and the faithful; there
is a conspiracy Romans 6. 4, 5. Romans 8. 17. 1 Cor. 15. 49 2 Cor. 3. 18. Phil. 3.
10. Phil. 3. 20.
of affections, motions, passions, desires, a conformity of being in holiness,
as well as in nature, a similitude, participation, and communion with Christ in
his death, sufferings, glory. All other things in the world are very unsuitable
to the desires of faith, nor are able to satiate a soul which has tasted
Christ, because we find something in them of a different, yea, repugnant
nature, unto that precious faith by him infused: Luke 5. 39.
no man having tasted old Wine desires new, for he says the old is better:
and therefore howsoever the wicked may drink iniquity like water, and role Job
20. 12.
it under their tongue as a sweet thing; yet the children of God, who have
been sensible of that venomous quality which lurketh in it, and have tasted of
that bread which came down from Heaven, never John 6. 48. 50, ^1.
thirst any more after the deceitful pleasures, the stolen John 4. 14.
waters of sin; but no sooner have they unadvisedly tasted of it, but
presently they feel a war in their bowels, a struggling and rebellion
between that faith by which they live, and that poison which would smother and
extinguish it, which by the efficacy of faith, whereby we 1 John 5. 1.
overcome the world, is cast out and vomited up in an humble confession, and so
the faithful do re-gaine their fellowship with Christ, who as he was by his
m^rits our Savior unto remission of sins, 1 Pet. 1. 15. 1 Pet. 2. 21.
so is he by his holiness our example, and by his Spirit our head, unto
newness of life.

CHAP. XI.
Of other Reasons why the Sacrament is eaten and drunken, and of the manner of
our union and incorporation into Christ.
FIfthly, we eat and drink the Sacrament of Christ crucified, to signify
that real and near incorporation of the faithful into Christ their head; for
the end of eating is the assimulation of our nourishment and the turning of it
into our own nature and substance, whatsoever cannot be assimulated is
ejected: and thus is it between us and Christ; whence it comes that we so
often read of the Ephesians. 3. 17.
Inhabitation of Christ in his Church, of his more peculiar presence Rev. 3.
20. Mat. 20. 8. Ephesians. 1. 6. Gal. 2. 20. John 14. 20.
with and in his people, of our spiritual Romans 11. 17. John 15.
ingrasture into him by faith, of those more near and approaching relations of
Brotherhood John 20. 17 Matthew. 25. 40. Mark. 3. 35.
, and coinheritance Romans 8. 17.
between Christ and us, that mutual interest, fellowship, and society which
we have each to other, with infinite other expressions of that divine and
expresselesse mixture whereby the faithful are not only by a consociation of
affections Affectus consociat and confederat voluntes Cyprian. de Caena Dom.
and confederacy of wills, but by a real though mystical union ingrafted,
knit, and as it were joynted unto Christ by the sinew of faith, and so made
heirs of all that glory and good which in his person was purchased for his
members, and is from him diffused on them as on the parts and portions of
himself. So that it pleases Gods spirit (as some August de peccat. merit. and
remiss. l. 1. c. 31. de Genesi ad lit. l. 11. c. 24. Beza in annotat. ad Ephesians.
1. 23. Hook^r. page 306.
do observe) so far sometimes to express this union betwixt Christ and his
Church, as to call the Church it self by the name of Christ, and every where
almost to interest Mat. 25. 45. Acts 9. 4.
himself in the injuries and sufferings of his Church, yea Hooker l. 5. Sect.
56.
to esteem him self incomplete and maimed without it. And here this mystical
unity between Christ and his Church being by eating and drinking so expressly
signified, and in the Sacrament so graciously obsignated unto us, it will not
be impertinent to enlarge somewhat on so divine a point: whersoever any thing
has so inward a relation and dependancy on something else, as that it
subsisteth not, nor can retain that integrity of being which is due unto it,
without that whereon it depends, there is necessarily required some manner of
union between those two things by means whereof the one may derive unto the
other, that influence and virtue whereby it is preserved: for broken,
discontinued and ununited parts receive no succor from those from which they
are divided. (All manner of activity requiring a contract, and immediatnesse
between the Agent and the subject) and this one proof of that omnipresence and
immensity which we attribute unto God, whereby he fills Deum namque ire per
omnes terrasque tractasque maris Caelumque profundum Virg. vid. Hugost. vict.
de Sacrament. l. 1. part. 3. c. 17. Psalm. 138. Esaias 6. Amos 9. 1. 3. Ier. 23.
24.
all creatures, bestowing on them all that general influence and assistance of
his Providence whereby they live Acts 17. Vid. Aug. de Genesi adlit. lib. 4. c.
12 and confess. lib. 1. cap. 2. 3.
and move and have their being.

But besides this universal presence of God wherewith he does equally fill all
things by his essence, which were from eternity wrapped up in his power and
wisdom; there is a more special presence and union of his unto the creature;
according as he does in any of them exhibit more express Characters of his
glorious Attributes: In which sense he is said to be in Psalm. 103. 19. Matthew.
6. 9.
Heaven, because he does there more especially manifest his power, wisdom,
and majesty; in Exodus 3.
the soft and still voice because there his lenity was more conspicuous, in the
burning bush Exodus 34. 5.
and in the light cloud, because in them his mercy was more expressed, in the
mount Sinah Exodus 19. 18
, because there his Vide Tertul, adver. Praxeam. c. 23. and Aug. epist. 3. ad
volup.
^errour was especially declared. According unto which different diffusions of
himself on the Creature and dispensation of his Attributes, God (without any
impeachment of his Immensity) may be said to be absent, to depart, and to turn
away from his Creature, as the words are every where in the Scriptures used.
Thus is God united to the creature in general, by the right of a Creator,
upholding Heb. 1. 3.
all things by his mighty word, without the participation whereof they could
not but be annihilated and resolved into their first nothing: but besides,
there is a more distinct and nobler kind of union unto his more excellent
Creature, man? for as there are some things which partake only of the virtue
and efficacy, others which partake of the Image and nature of the Sun; as the
bowels of the earth recceive only the virtue, heat and influence, but the beam
receives the very Image and form of it, light: so in the creatures, some
partake of God only as an Agent, as depending on his eternal power from whence
they did originally issue, and by which they do now still subsist, and so
receive only some common Impressions and foot prints of divine virtue, whereby
they declare Psalm. 19. 1.
his glory, others partake of the Image Ephesians. 4. 24.
of God, of the divine 2. Pet. 1. 4.
nature as Saint Peter speaks, and receive from him those two special
properties wherein principally consists the Image of God, holiness and
happiness, that giving perfection to our working, and this to our being,
(which two satisfy the whole compass of a created desire) and so declare his
love; some acknowledge God as their maker, others as their Father, in them is
dependence and gubernation only, in these is cognition and inheritance. The
bond of this more special union of the reasonable creature unto God, was
originally the Law of man's creation, which did prescribe unto him the form,
and limits of his working, and subordination unto God, which knot he by his
voluntary aversation violating and untying, there did immediately ensue a
disunion between God and man, so says the Prophet, your sins Esaias 59. 2.
have separated between you and your God. Now as the parts of a body so long as
they are by the natural bonds of joints and sinews united to the whole, do
receive from the fountains of life, the heart and the brain, all comfortable
supplies for life and motion, which are due unto them; but being once dissolved
and broken off, there then cease all the interest which they had in the
principal parts: so as long as man by obedience to the Law, did preserve the
union between God and him entire, so long had he an evident participation of
all those graces spiritual, which were requisite to the holiness and
happiness of so noble a creature: but having once transgressed the Law, and by
that means broken the knot, he is no more possessed of that sweet illapse and
influence of the spirit, which quickneth the Church unto eternal life; but
having united himself unto another head, and subjected his parts unto another
Prince, even the Prince Ephesians. 2. 2.
that rules in the children of disobedience, he is utterly destitute of all
divine communion an alien Ephesians. 2. 12.
from the commonwealth, and by consequence from all the privileges of Israel,
a stranger from the covenant of promise, unacquainted with, ye unable to
conceive aright of spiritual things, quite shut 1 Cor. 2. 14.
out from the Kingdom, yea without God in the world. And thus far we have
considered the several unions, which are between the creatures either in
general as creatures, or in particular as reasonable, and God considered in
the relation of a Creator, which will give great light to understand both the
manner and dignity of this mystical and evangelicall union betwixt the Church
and Christ considered under the relation of a Redeemer, by whom we have
reunion Revel. 22. 15
and access to the Father; in whom only he has accepted Ephesians. 2. 13. 18
Ephesians. 1. 5. 6.
us again, and given unto us the adoption of children. Now as in the union of
God to the creatures, we have before observed the differences of it, that it
was either general unto all, or special unto some, in which he did either
more expressly manifest his glory, or more graciously imprint his Image: so
also in the union of Christ unto us, we may observe something general whereby
he is united to the whole mankind, and something special whereby he is united
unto his Church, and that after a double manner; either common unto the whole
visible assembly of the Christians, or peculiar and proper unto that invisible
company who are the immediate members of his mystical body.

First, then Vnius naturae sunt vites and palmites propter quod cum esset Deus,
cujus naturae non sumus factus est homo ut in illo esset vitis humana natura
cujus and nos omnes palmites essemus. August. Tom. Tract 80. Ioh.
all man kind may be said to be in Christ, in as much as in the mystery of his
incarnation he took on him the self same nature, which makes us to be men,
and whereby he is as properly man as any of us, Esuriens subdiabolo sitiens
subsamacitide flens Lazarum, anxi^usque ad mortem. Tert de carn. Christi. ^ 9.
and adver. praxeum c. 27.
subject to the same infermities, liable and naked to the same dangers and
temptations, moved by the same Passion, obedient to the same laws with us,
with this only difference, that all this was in him sinlesse and voluntary, in
us sinful and necessary.

Secondly, besides this, there is a farther union of Christ unto all the
Professors of his truth in knowledge and explicit faith, which is by a farther
operation infusing into them the light of truth, and some general graces that
which make them serviceable for his Church; even as the root of a tree, will
sometimes so far enliven the branches as shall suffice unto the bringing
forth of leaves, though it supply not juice enough for solid fruit: for
whatsoever graces the outwad professors of Christianity do receive, they have
it all derived on them from Christ; who is the dispencer of his Fathers bounty,
and who inlightneth every man that comes into the World.

Thirdly, there is a more special and near union of Christ to the faithful,
set forth by the resemblances of building 1 Pet. 2. 4. Ephesians. 2. 15. 1 Cor. 3. 16.
, ingrasture John 15. 5.
, members Ephesians. 4. 15, 16 1 Cor. 12. 12.
, marriage Ephesians. 5. 32. Psalm. 45. 2 Cor. 11. 2.
, and other the like similitudes John 4. 14. John 6. 51.
in the Scriptures, whereby Christ is made unto us the Original, and
wellspring of all spiritual John 14. 19. 1 John 5. 12.
life and motion, of all fullness John 1. 16.
and fructification John 15. 5.
. Even as in natural generation, the soul is no sooner infused and united but
presently there is sense and vegetation derived on the body: so in spiritual
new birth, as soon as Christ is formed Gal. 4. 19.
in us as the Apostle speaks, then presently are we quickened Ephesians. 25. Gal 2.
20.
by him, and all the operations of a spiritual life, sense of sin, vegetation,
and growth in faith, understanding and knowledge of the mystery of godliness,
taste and relish of eternal life, begin to show themselves in us. We Romans 5.
12. 15. 17, 18, 19. 1 Cor, 15. 22. 45. 49.
are in Christ by grace, even as by nature we were in Adam. Now August.
Enchirid. cap. 26. and Epist. 23. ad Bonisacium. Traxit reatum quia unus erat
in illo aquo traxit, and Tertul. de testim. Anim. c. 3.
as from Adam there is a perpetual transfusion of Original sin on all his
posterity, because we were all then not only represented by his person, but
contained in his loins; so from Christ, who on the Cross did represent the
Church of God, and Regeneravit hominem in uno C^risto ex uno Adam g^n^rat^
August. Epist. 23
in whom we are, is there by a most special influence transfused on the
Church, some measure John 1. 16.
of those graces, those vital motions, that incorruption, purity, and
holiness, which was given to him without measure; that he alone might be the
Author Heb. 5. 9.
and Original of eternal salvation, the consecrated Prince Heb. 2. 10, 11
of glory to the Church: from which consecration of Christ, and sanctification
of the Church, the Apostle inferres a union between Christ and the Church; for
he that sanctifies and they that are sanctified are of one. And all this, both
union or association with Christ, and communion in those heavenly graces which
by spiritual influence from him are shed forth upon all his members, is
brought to pass by this means originally, because Romans 8. 9.
Christ and we do both partake of one and the selfsame spirit, which spirit
conveighs to the faithful, whatsoever in Christ is communicable unto them. For
as the members natural of man are all conserved in the integrity and unity of
one body, by that reasonable soul which animates, enlivens, and actuates them,
by one simple and undivided information, without which they would presently
fall asunder and moulder into dust: even so the members of Christ are all
firmly united unto him, and from him receive all vital motions, by means of
that common Spirit, which in Christ above measure, in us according unto the
dispensation of Gods good will, works one and the selfsame life and grace;
so that by it, we are all as really compacted into one mystical body, as if we
had all but one common soul. And this is that which we believe touching our 1
John 1. 3.
fellowship with the Son, as S. John calls it; the clear and ample Nam and
nunc est in nobis, and nos in ill^; sed hoc nunc credimus, tunc etiam
cognos^emus: quamvis and nunc credend^ ^overimus, sed tunc contemplando
noscemus August. Tom. 9. Tract. 75. in John.
apprehension whereof is left unto that place where both our union and
likeness to him, and our knowledge of him shall be made perfect.

Sixthly, we eat and drink the Sacrament of Christ's Passion, that thereby we may
express that more closse and sensible pleasure which the faithful enjoy in
receiving of him. For there is not any one sense whose pleasure is more
constant and express, than this of Tasting: the reasons whereof are manifest.
For first it follows by the consequence of opposites, that that faculty when
fully satisfied, must needs be sensible of the greatest pleasure whose penury
and defect brings the extremest anguish on nature. For the evil of any thing
being nothing else but an obliquity and aberration from that proper good to
which it is opposed. It must needs follow, that the greater the extent and
degrees of an evil are, the more large must the measure of that good be in the
distance from which that evil consists. Now it is manifest that the evil of
no senses is so oppressive and terrible unto nature, as are those which violate
the taste and touch (which later is ever annexed to the former;) no ugly
spectacles for the eyes, no howles or shrikings for the ear, no stench or
infection of air for the smell, so distastefull, through all which the anguish
of a famine would not make a man adventure to purchase any food, though
affected even with Moriensque recepit quas nollet victuras aquas, etc. vid.
Lucan. lib. 4.
noisome qualities. Secondly, the pleasure which nature takes in any good
thing, is caused by the union thereof to the faculty, by means whereof it is
enjoyed; so that the greater the union is, the more necessarily is the pleasure
of the thing united. Now there is not any faculty whose object is more closely
united unto it than this of Tasting: in Seeing, or Hearing, or Smelling, there
may be a far distance between us and the things that do so affect us, but no
tasting without an immediate application of the object to the faculty. Other
objects satisfy though without me, but meats never content nor benefit till
they be taken in. Even so is it with Christ and the faithful: many things
there are which affect them with pleasure, but they are without, and at a
distance; only Christ it is, who by being and dwelling (...) Gal. 4. 19.
(...). Ephesians. 3 17
in them, deligheth them. Lastly, we eat and drink the Sacrament of Christ
crucified, that therein we may learn to admire the wisdom of Gods mercy, who
by the same manner of actions does restore us to life, by which we fell from
it. Satan and Death did first assault our ear, and then took possession of us
by the mouth; Christ and faith chose no other gates to make a re-entry and
dispossess them. Thus as Tertul. cont. Gnost. c. 5. Arist. Probl. sect. 1.
quast. 45. and sect. 3 qu. 26. vid. August. de Doctrina Christiana. lib. 1. c.
14.
skillful Physicians do often cure a body by the same means which did first
distemper it, quench heats with heat, and stop one flux of blood by opening
another: so Christ that he may quell Satan at his own weapons, does by the
same instruments and actions, restore us unto our primitive estate by which he
had hurried us down from it. That those mouths which were at first open to
let in death, may now much more be open, not only to receive, but to praise
him, who is made unto us the Author and Prince of life.

CHAP. XII.
Inferences of Practice from the consideration of the former Actions.
THESE are all the holy actions we find to have been by Christ and his
Apostles, celebrated in the great mystery of this Supper: all other humane
accessions and superstructions, that are by the policy of Satan and that
carnal affection, which ever labors to reduce Gods service unto an outward
and pompous gaudinesse, foisted into the substance of so divine a work, are all
of them that straw 1 Cor. 3. 12.
and stubble, which he who is a consuming Heb. 12. 29.
fire, will at last purge away. Impotent Christ was not that he could not, nor
malignant that he would not appoint, nor improvident that he could not
foresee, the needfulnesse of such actions, which are by some proposed, not as
matter of ornament, comeliness and ceremony, (a thing left ever arbitrary to
the Church) but are obtruded on consciences (swayed with superstitious
pompousnesse) for matters substantial and necessary to be observed. As if God,
who in the first Creation of the world from nothing, did immediately after the
work produced cease from all manner of further Creations, did in the second
creation of the world from sin, not finish the work himself, but leave it
imperfect, to be by another consummated and finished. Certainly whatsoever
humane Inventions do claim, direct, proper, and immediate subscription of
Conscience, and do propose themselves as essential, or integrall, or any way
necessary parts of divine mysteries; they do not only rob God of his honor,
and intrude on his Sovereignty, but they do farther lay on him the aspersion
of an imperfect Savior, who stands in need of the Churches concurrence, to
consummate the work which he had begun. Away then with those Actions of
elevation, adoration, oblation, circumgestation, mim^call gestures, silent
whisperings, and other the like encroachments, in the supposed proper and real
sacrifice of Christ in the Mass, (wherein I see not how they avoid the guilt
of Saint Paul's fearful observation. To crucify again the Lord of glory, and
put him unto an open shame:) In which things Doct. Reynolds conference with
Heart. Cap. 8. divis. 4. et M^rnay de Eucharist. page 82. in fol.
as in sundry others they do nothing else, but imitate the carnal ordinances
of the Jews and the Heathenish will worship of the Ethnicks, who thought
rather by the motions of their bodies, than by the affections of their hearts,
to wind into the opinion and good liking of their Gods. Certainly Mentior si
non Idolorum solemnia de suggestu et apparatu deque sumptu fidem et
authoritatem sibi extruunt Tert. de Bapt cap. 2.
affectation of Pomp, Ceremony, and such other humane superstructions on the
divine institution (I always except Ecclesiastical observances which being
imposed for order, and used with decency, Paucity, and indifferency, are not
lawful only, but with respect to the Authority which requires them, obligatory
also) I say all other pompous accumulations, unto the substance of Christ's
Sacramentr, are by Tertullian made the characters and presumptions of an
Idolatrous service. True it is indeed that the Ancients make mention, out of
that fervor of Love and Piety toward so sacred mysteries of Adoration Carne
Christi in mysteriis adoramus Ambros de spirit: sancto. l. 3. c 12. Ma^d^cant
and ado^ant. Aug cp 12^. c. 27.
at them, and of carrying (...). Justin. Mart. Ap 2. pro Christian.
the remainders of them unto the absent Christians; but as in other things, so
here likewise we find it most true, that things by devout men begun piously
and continued with zeal, do after, when they light in the handling of men
otherwise qualified, degenerate into superstition, the form purpose, end and
reason of their observation being utterly neglected; It being the contrivance
of Satan to raise his Temple after the same form, and with the same materials
whereof ^ods consists, to pretend the practice of the Saints for the
enforcement of his own Projects, to transform himself into an Angel 2 Cor.
11. 14.
of light, that he may the easier mislead unstable and wandering souls, and to
retain at least a form 2 Timothy 3. 5.
of Godliness, that he may with less clamor and reluctance withdraw the
substance. And as in many other things, so has he herein likewise abused the
Piety of the best men, unto the furtherance of his own ends. That Adoration,
which they in and at the mysteries did exhibit unto Christ himself, (as indeed
they could not choose a better time to worship him in) he impiously derives
upon the creature, and makes it now to be done not so much at, as unto the
elements, making them as well the term, and object, as occasion of that
worship which is due only to the Lord of the Sacrament: That carrying about and
reserving of the Eucharist, which the primitive Christians used for the benefit
of those who either by sickness, or by persecutions, were withheld from the
meetings of the Christians (as Justin. Mart. ut supra.
in those days many were) is by him now turned into an Idolatrous
circumgestation, that at the sight of the Bread, the people might direct unto
it that worship, which is due only to the person whose passion it represents,
but whose honor it neither challenges nor knows; and certainly if we veiw
the whole fabric either of Gentilisme or Heresy, we shall observe the methods
and contrivances of Satan, most often to drive at this point, that either under
pretense Scriptum est Matthew. 4.
of divine truth or under imitation Vid. ^ert. de coron, milit c. 15 and de
baptis. c. 5. and de praescript. cap. 40. de cont. Praxea^. ^. 1. and de
specta. cap 27. and Apolog. c. 47. and Ioh. stuck. de Antiquit. convival. lib.
1. 33. and lib. 3. c. 21.
of divine Institutions retaining the same material Actions which God
requires, or with the godly have piously, or upon temporary reasons observed,
he may convay into the hearts of men his own poison, and imprint an opinion of
holiness toward his own devices: for howsoever his power and tyranny have
done much mischief to Gods Church, yet his masterpiece is that cunning and
deceit which the Scriptures (...) 2. Cor. 11. 3. (...) Ephesians. 6. 11. (...) Revel.
2. 24. (...). 2 Cor. 2.
so often takes notice of.

Secondly, we see here what manner of men we ought to be in imitation of these
blessed Actions, that we may be conformable Phil. 3. 10. 1 Pet 4.
unto the death of Christ. First, as he when he took these elements, did
consecrate them unto a holy use, so we when we receive them, should first
consecrate our selves with thanksgiving and prayer, unto a holy life. For if
not only amongst Christians 1 Cor. 10. 31. 1 Timothy 4. 4. 5 Non prius.
discumbitur quam oration ad deum praegustetur. Tert. Apolog. c. 39.
but even amongst Heathens Inter epulas ubi been pre^^ri mos ess^t. Li^. lib.
39.
themselves, it has been by the Law of nature received for a religious custom
not to eat their ordinary food without blessing, and prayer, with how much more
fervency of prayer should we call upon the name of the Lord, when we take this
Cup of salvation, this bread of life, wherein we do not only taste how
gracious the Lord is, but do eat and drink the Lord himself. And therefore
Justinius Martyr ^use explicat in Apolog. 2. et Tertul. cont. Marc. l. 1. c. 23.
the Church has both at first and since most devoutly imitated our blessed
Savior in consecrating both these mysteries, and their own souls by
thanksgiving and prayer, before ever they received the elements from the hands
of the Deacons, that so that same pure Wine, that immaculate Blood might be put
into pure Math. 9. 17. Vasa purae ad rem divinam. Plaut. in Captiu. Act. 4. sc.
1.
and untainted vessels, even into sanctified and holy hearts, lest otherwise
the wine should be spilt, and the vessels perish. And indeed the Sacrament is
ignorantly and fruitlessely received, if we do not therein devote, consecrate,
and set apart our selves unto Gods service; for what is a Sacrament, but
Sacramentum visibile Iuramentum. Pareus, in Heb. 6. 17. vid. Aug. ep. 57.
Verbum a militari Iuramento sump^um. vid. Dempter. s in Rosin. Antiq. l. 10.
cap. 3.
a visible oath, wherein we do in consideration of Christ's mercies unto us vow
eternal alleigeance and service unto him against all those powers, and lusts
which war against the soul, and to make our members weapons of
righteousness unto him?

Secondly, as Christ brake the bread before he gave it, so must our hearts
before they be offered up to God for a Romans 12. 1.
reasonable sacrifice, be humbled and bruised with the apprehension of their
own demerits, for a Broken Psalm. 51.
and contrite heart O Lord thou will not despise: shall we have adamantine and
unbended souls, under the weight of those sins which brake the very Rock 1
Cor. 10. 4.
of our salvation, and made the dead Math. 27. 51.
stones of the Temple to rend in sunder? Was his body broken to let out his
blood, and shall not our souls be broken to let it in? Was the Head wounded,
and shall the Ulcers and Impostumes remain unlanced? Would not God in the Law
accept of any but pushed Levit. 16. vid. Tertul. cont. Iudaeos. cap. 14.
, and dissected Levit. 1. 6.
, and burned sacrifices Levit. 1. 9.
? was his Temple 1 Kings 6. 7.
built of none but cut and hewed stones, and shall we think to have no Sword
Ephesians. 6.
of the Spirit divide us; no Hammer Ier. 23. 39.
of the Word break us; none of our dross and stubble burned 1 Cor. 3. 13.
up; none of our flesh 1 Cor. 9. 27.
beaten down; none of our old Ephesians. 4. 22. Col. 3. 5. Math. 5. 29. 30.
man crucified and cut off from us, and yet be still living Romans 12. 1.
sacrifices, and living 1 Pet. 2. 5.
stones in his Temple? Whence did David Psalm. 69.
call on God, but out of the pit and the deep waters, when his bones Psalm. 51.
were broken and could not rejoice? Certainly we come unto God, either as unto
a Physician, or as to a Judge: we must needs bring souls either full of sores
to be cured, or full of sins to be condemned. Again, in that this Rock of ours
was broken, we know whither to fly in case of tempest and oppression, even
unto the holes Cant. 2. 14.
of the Rock for succor. To disclaim our own sufficiency, to disavow any
confidence in our own strength, to fly from Church treasures and
supererrogations and to lay hold on him in whom were the treasures Col. 2. 3.
, the fulness Col. 1. 19.
of all grace John 1. 16.
, of which fullness we all receive; to forsake the private Lamps of the wisest
Virgins, the Saints and Angels, which have not light enough to shine into
another house; and to have recourse only unto the Son of righteousness, the
light not of a House, but of the World, who inlightneth every man that comes
into it. Think when thou see these Elements broken, that even then thou
applyest thy lips unto his bleeding wounds, and do from thence suck
salvation. That even then with Thomas thy hand is in his side, from whence thou
may pluck out those words of life, My God, my God; that even then thou see
in each wound a mouth open, and in that mouth the blood, as a visible Heb. 12,
24.
prayer to intercede with God the Father for thee, and to solicit him with
stronger cries for salvation, than did Abels for revenge. Let not any sins,
though never so bloody, so numberless, deter thee from this precious
Fountain. If it be the glory of Christ's blood to wash away sin, then is it
his greatest glory to wash away the greatest sins. Thy sin indeed is the
object of Gods hate, but the misery which sin brings upon thee is the object
of his pity. O when a poor distressed soul, that for many years together
has securely weltered in a sinck of numberless and noisome lusts, and has
even been environed with a Hell of wickedness, shall at last, having received
a wound from the sword of Gods Spirit, an eye to see, and a heart to feel, and
tremble at the terrors of ^ods judgments, shall then I say fly out of
himself, smite upon his thig^, cast away his rags, crouch and crawle unto the
throne of grace, solicit Gods mercy with strong cries for one drop of that
blood which is never cast away, when powered into sinful and sorrowful souls,
how think we will the bowels of Christ turn within him? How will he hasten to
meet such an humbled soul? to embrace him in those arms which were stretched
on the Cross for him, and to open unto him that inexhausted Fountain, which
even delights to mix it self with the tears of sinners? Certainly, if it
were possible for any one of Christ's wounds to be more precious than the rest,
even that should be opened wide, and powered out into the soul of such a
penitent. Yea, if it might possibly be, that the sins of all the World could be
even thronged into the conscience of one man, and the whole guilt of them made
proper and personal unto him, yet if such a man could be brought to sue for
grace in the mediation of Christ's broken body, there would thence issue balm
enough to cure, blood enough to wash and to drown them all. Only let not us
sin, because grace abounds; let not us make work for the blood of Christ, and
go about by crimson and presumptuous sins, as it were to pose Gods mercy. The
blood of Christ, if spilt and trampled under foot, will certainly cry so much
louder than Abels for vengeance, by how much it is the more precious. It may be
as well upon us, as in us. As the virtue and benefit of Christ's blood is in
those that embrace it unto life and happiness, so is the guilt of it upon
those that despise it unto wretchedness and condemnation.

Thirdly, in that Christ gave and delivered these mysteries unto the Church* we
likewise must learn not to ingrosse our selves, or our own gifts, but freely
to dedicate them all unto the honor of that God and benefit of that Church,
unto which he gave both himself and them. Even nature has made men to stand
in need of each other, and therefore has imprinted in them a natural Arist
polit. l. 1.
inclination unto fellowship, and society, in one common City: by Christ we are
all made of one City Ephesians. 2. 19. 21.
, of one household, yea, of one Church, of one Temple 1 Cor. 6. 19. 1 Pet. 2. 5.
. He has made us members 1 Cor. 12. 12.
of one body, animated by one 1 Cor. 12. 13. Romans 8. 11. Ephesians. 4. 4.
and the same Spirit; stones 1. Pet. 2. 5.
of one entire building, united on one and the same foundation Ephesians. 2. 20. 1
Cor. 3. 11.
; branches John 15. 2.
of one undivided stock, quickened Romans 11. 16, 17, 18.
by one and the same root, and therefore requires from us all a mutual
support, succor, sustentation, and nourishment, of each other a kind of
trafique, and continual intelligence from part to part; a union of members by
the supply of nerves Ephesians. 4. 16.
and joints, that so each may be serviceable unto the whole. The eye sees not
for it self, but for the body; and therefore if the eye Mat. 6. 22.
be simple, the whole body is full of light, for the light of the body is the
eye. Nay, God in each creature imprinteth a love of community (which is that
whereby one thing does as it were bestow it self on another) far above the
private and domestic love, whereby it labors the preservation and advancement
of it self: from which general charity and feeling of communion it comes to
pass, that if by any casualty the whole body of the Universe be like to suffer
any rupture or deformity (as in the danger of a vacuum, which is the co^tumely
of nature) each particular creature is taught to relinquish his own natural
motion, and to prevent the public reproach, even by forsaking and forgetting
of themselves. Agreeable unto which noble impresse of nature was that Heroical
resolution of Pompey, when the safety of his country depended on an expedition
dangerous to his own particular: It Necesse est ut eam, non ut vivam,
is not (said he) necessary for me to live, It is necessary that I go. And
more honorable that of ^odrus to dedicate his own life as a sacrifice for his
Countries victory: But yet more honorable that of the blessed Apostle Acts 20.
24.
I count not my life dear unto my self, that I may finish the Ministry which
I have received of the Lord: But lastly, most admirable was that of the same
blessed Paul Romans 9. 3.
and Moses Exodus 32. 32
, whose feeling of Community transported them not only beyond the fear, but
even into a conditional desire of their own destruction. In man's first
Creation what was that great endowment of Aquin. sum. part^^ quaest. 95 (...) 1.
original righteousness, but such a harmony of all man's faculties, as that
there was no Schism in the Body, no part unsubordinated, or unjoynted from the
rest, but did each conspire with other unto the service of the whole, and with
the whole unto the service of God? and what was the immediate effect of that
great fall of man, but the breaking, and Zeemannus de Dei Imagine in* Hos^. c.
5. (...). Vide Arist. Ethic. l. 3. c. 12. (...). Vide Arist. Eth. l. 1. cap. 13.
unjoynting of his faculties, the rebellion of his members each toward other,
whereby every faculty seeks the satisfaction of it self, without any respect
unto the Common Good? And as it bred in man an Enmity to himself, so to his
neighbor likewise. So long as Adam remained upright, his judgment of Evah was
a judgment of unity, Genes. 2. 33.
Bone of bone, no sooner comes sin but we hear him upbraid God with the Genesis
3. 13.
woman that thou gave me, terms of dislike and enmity. For the removal
whereof we must imitate this great example of Christ our head, whose
sufferings are not only our merit but our 1 Pet. 2. 21.
example, who denying himself, his own natural Math. 26. 39
will, and life, bestowed himself on us, that we likewise might not 1 Cor. 10.
24 Phil. 2. 21.
seek every man his own, but every man the good of another, Phil. 2. 17. Acts
20. 24.
bestowing our selves on the service and benefit of the Church, and so Ephesians.
4. 15.
grow up and be built up together in love which is the (...). Ephesians. 4. 12.
concinnation, or perfecting of the Saints.

Secondly, in that Christ gave this Sacrament, and did thereby testify his
most willing obedience unto a cursed death, we likewise should in all our
respects back unto him, break through all obstacles of self-love, or any
temptations of Satan, and the world, and though contrary to the bent of our
own desires, to the propension of our own corrupt hearts, most willingly
render our obedience unto him, and make him the Lord of all our thoughts. First
for our understandings, we should offer them as free and voluntary sacrifices,
ready not only to yield unto truth out of constraint, but out of willingness
and love to embrace it, not only for the evidence, but for the Author Tertul.
de paenit. cap. 4.
, and goodness of it, and thus to resign our judgments into Gods hands to be
(though never so much against its own natural and carnal prejudices)
informed and captivated unto all kind of saving knowledge, even to the
extirpating of all those presumptions, prepossessions, and principles of
corruption which use to (...). Arist. Eth. l. 6.
smother and adulterate divine truth; for there is naturally in the minds of
men, (though otherwise eagerly pursuing knowledge) a kind of dread and
shrinking from the evidence of divine truths, (as each faculty avoydeth too
excellent an object) a voluntary and (...). Arist. Eth. l. 3. cap. 1. 2 Pet. 2.
5.
affected ignorance, lest Simul ut desina^t ignor^re cessant and od^sse.
Tertul. Apolog. cap. 1.
knowing the truth they should cease to hate it; a faculty of making doubts
touching the meaning and extent of such truths, whose evidence would cross the
corruptions of our practice, and then a frameing of arguments and presumptions
for that part which is most favorable and flattering unto nature, a certain
private Domestica Iudicia Tertul. Apol. cap. 1. Clemens Alex. strom. lib. 4.
vid. Herald. in Tertul. Apol. c. 1.
prejudice against the luster of the most strict and practical principles, a
humor of cavilling and disputing Audacium existimo de bono divini praecepti
disputare Tertul. de paenit. cap. 4.
about those parts of Gods will, which bring with the^ a more strait obligation
on the conscience, a withdrawing the thoughts from acquainting themselves with
the more spiritual parts of divine truth under pretense of more important
employments, about scholasticall and sublime speculations. All which do
evidently prove, that there is not in the understanding that willingness, to
give up it self unto God, which there was in Christ to bestow himself unto us.

Secondly for our wills and affections, we should be ready to cross and bend
them against all the noise of corrupt delights, to cut out our right eye, our
right hand, to be crucified to the world, to be disposed of by Gods providence
cheerfully in any course whether of passive obedience to have a mind submiting
Qui perspicit apud te paratam fuisse virtutem, reddet pro virtute merc^dem.
Cyprian de mortal.
unto it, and rejoyceing Vide Tertul. Apol. c. 49.
in it; or of active obedience to obey him contrary to the stream, and current
of our natural desires, though it be to offer Quid faceres si filium jubereris
occidere? Cyprian. de mortal.
unto him our Isaac, our closest and choysest affection, though to shake of
the child that hangs Licet parvulus ex collo pendeat nepos, etc. Hieron. ad
Heliodorum.
about our neck, to stop our ear to the voice of her that bare us, to throw
the wife out of our bosom, when they shall tempt us to neglect God, to spit
out the sweetest sin that lies under our tongue, briefly to take under
Christ's banners the Roman (...). Vid. Brisson. de formulis lib. 4. and Justin
Martyr. Apolog. 2.
oath to go and do where and whatsoever our great Captain commanded, neither
for fear of death or dread of enemy to forsake service, or resign weapon till
death shall extort it.

Lastly, in that Christ gave his Sacrament, and therein himself, the Author
H^b. 12. 2.
and finisher of our salvation, we learn how to esteem of our salvation,
namely as of a free and unmeritted gift Deus cogitavit salutem qua redempti
sumus, Judas cogitavit Pretium, etc. Aug. Tom. 9. Tract. 7. in Ep. 1. Ioh.
. Christ was sold by Judas, but he was given by God, and that in the absolute
nature of a gift, without so much as suit or request on our part for him. True
it is that if man had persisted in the state of his created integrity, he might
after an improper manner be said to have meritted the glory which he was after
to enjoy, in as much as he was to obtain it in the virtue of those legal
operations, unto which he was by the habilities of his own nature, without the
special influence of a supernatural infused grace, fitted and disposed;
though even this was not from Habemus nos aliquid Dei sed ab ipso non a nobis,
sed ex gratia ipsius, non ex nostra proprietate Tertul. Cont. Hermogi. c..
the dignity and value of our work, but from the indulgence of almighty God,
who would set no higher price on that glory which he proposed unto man for the
object of his desires, and reward of his works: for Vid: Hooker Eccl. policy.
l. 1. sect. 11.
if we go exactly unto the first rule of justice, unqualified with clemency and
bounty, it could not possibly be that God should be bound to requite our
labors with eternal bliss, there being so vast a disproportion Vid. Dr.
Field of the Church. l. 1. c. 2.
between the fruition of God an infinite Good, and any the most excellent, yet
still limited operation of the creature. For as water in its own nature rises
no farther than the spring whence it first issues: so the endeavors of
nature, could never have raisd man (without a mixture of Gods mercy) unto an
higher degree of happiness, than should have been proportionable to the
quality of his work. But now having in Adam utterly disabled our selves to pay
that small price, at which God was pleased to rate our glory Nec qu^squam dicat
meritis operum suorum vel meritis fidei sibi traditam, etc. Aug. Ep. 46. ad
Valentem.
, all those who are restored thereunto again, must acknowledge both it, and
Christ the purchaser of it, as a free gift of almighty God, by them so far
undeserved, as he was, before the promise unknown and unexpected. If it be
here demanded how salvation can be said to be freely given us, when on our part
there is a condition required, for the work whereby we obtain life, is not
quite Evangelium aliud a lege non alienum, diversum, sed non contrarium.
Tertul. Cont. Marcion. lib. 4. cap. 11.
taken away but only alterd; before it was a legal work, now an evangelicall;
before it was an obedience to the Law, now a belief in the promise; before
Genes 2. 17.
eat not lest you die, now Ioh. 6. 51.
eat and you shall live: We answer, that the hand of the beggar, without which
the Alms is no way received, does not prejudice the free donation thereof,
that being only the Instrument whereby the gift is convayed. The labourer does
not deserve his wages because he receives it, but he receives it because he
has before deserved it, receiving convayeth, it does not merit it. Neither is
salvation given us for our faith in the virtue of a work, but only because of
that respect and relation which it has unto him who trod the winepresse alone,
without any assisting or comeriting cause. Even Adam in innocenry could not be
without an Assent and firm belief that the faithful God would perform the
promise of life made and annexed unto the Covenant of works: But this faith
could not be the merit of life, but the fruit and effect of merit anteceding;
for his performance of the Law (in the right whereof he had interest unto
glory) preceding, there should immediately from thence have issued, by faith, a
prepossession (as it were) and preapprehension of that glory which by virtue of
that legal obedience he should have had interest unto; so that it is repugnant
absolutely to the nature of faith to be any way the cause meritorious of
salvation, it being nothing else but the application and apprehension of that
salvation, which in vain our faith lays claim unto, unless in the right of
some anteceding work either our own or some others in our behalf it be first
merited for us. He which believes and so by consequence lays hold on life,
without a ground preceding for his claim thereunto, is a robber rather than a
Believer, and does rather steal heaven than deserve it, though he is not
likely so to speed, Math. 6. 20.
for in heaven thieves break not through nor steal. Again, suppose Faith, in
the quality of the work, should merit that, which until merited can in truth
be never by Faith apprehended, yet in as much as nothing can merit for another
any farther than as it is his own proper work, Ioh. 6. 29.
Faith therefore being not within the compass either of natural or of
acquired endowments, but proceeding from a supernatural and infused Grace, it
is manifest that even so, it cannot possibly obtain salvation by any virtue or
efficacy of its own. For as he which bestows money on his poor friend, and
after, for that money sells him Land far beyond the value of the money which
he gave, may be thus far said rather to multiply and change his gifts, than
to receive a price for them: so God bestowing eternal life on man upon the
condition of believing, Gratias ago tibi Domine quia quod quaeris a me, prius
ipse donasti. Cyprian de Baptim. Christi. Remunerans in nobis quicquid ipse
praestitit et honorans quod ipse perfecit. Cyprian. l. 3. epist. 25.
the ability whereunto he himself has first bestowed, and between which
life and faith there is an infinite disproportion of worth, may be said rather
to heap his gifts, than to bargain and compact for them, rather to double his
free bounty, than to reward man's impotent merit; unless we take it improperly
for the performance of a voluntary debt, Deus prom^tte^do seip^um secit
debit^rem. August.
wherein it has pleased God in mercy, as it were, to oblige and engage
himself upon condition of our faith.

Neither do we herein at all make way for that cursed doctrine of
Socinianisme (than which a more venomous was never sucked from so sweet and
saving a truth) that because salvation is a free gift, Christ therefore did not
suffer for the satisfaction of Gods wrath, nor pay any legal price for the
salvation of the world, nor lay down himself in our room, as the ransommer
of us, and purchaser of life for us, but became incarnate in the flesh, made
under the Law obedient unto death, only for an example of Patience and
Humility unto us, not for a propitiation to his Father, and reconcilement of
the world unto God. (...) Mat. 20. 28 (...) ^ T^m 2. 5. (...) (...) 5. 2. H^b.
9. 12. (...) Gal. 3. 13. (...) 1 Cor. 1. 30. (...) 1 ^o^n 2. 2.
A price was paid, and that so precious, as that the confluence of all created
wealth into one sum, cannot carry the estimate of one farthing in comparison
of it; (and indeed it ought to be a price more valuable than the whole world,
which was to ransom so many souls, the loss of the least whereof cannot by
the Math. 16. 2^.
purchase of the whole world be countervail'd.) A price it was valuable only
by him that paid and received it, by us to be enjoyed and adored, by God only
to be measured. Neither could it stand with the truth and constancy of Gods
Law, with the sacredness and Majesty of his Justice, to suffer violation and
not revenge it, and when all his attributes are i^ him one and the same thing,
to magnify his mercy not by the satisfaction, but the destruction of his
Justice, and so to set his own unity at variance with it self, Mercy and
Truth, Righteousness and Peace* they were in man's redemption to kiss and not
to quarrel with each other, God di^ not dis^unite his Attributes, when he did
reunite his Church unto himself. A price then was paid unto Gods justice, and
eternal life is a (...) Ephesians. 1. 14.
purchase by Christ bought, but still unto us a gift, not by any pains or
satisfaction of ours attained unto, but only by him who was Ioh. 3. 16 Gal. 1.
4. Tit. 2. 14. Esaias 9. 6. Romans 8. 32.
himself given unto us, that together with himself he might give us all
things. He unto whom I stand engaged in a sum of money, by me ever impossible
to be raised, if it please him to persuade his own heir* to join in my
obligation, and out of that great estate by himself conferred on him for that
very purpose, to lay down so much as shall cancel the bond and acquit me,
does not only freely forgive my debt, but does moreover commend the abundance
of his favor by the manner and circumstances of the forgiveness. Man by
nature is Math. 6. 12.
a debtor unto God, there is a handwriting Coloss. 2. 14.
against him, which was so long to stand in virtue till he was able to offer
something in value proportionable to that infinite justice, unto which he stood
obliged; which being by him without the sustaining of an infinite misery
utterly unsatisfiable, it pleased God to appoint his own co-essentiall and
co-eternall Son to enter under the same bond Gal 4. 4.
of Law for us, on whom he bestowed such rich graces, as were requisite for the
economy of so great a work; by the means of which humane and created graces,
concurring with, and receiving value from the divine nature, meeting
hypostatically in one infinite person, the debt of mankind was discharged, and
the obligation canceled, and so as many as were ordained to life effectually
delivered by this great ransom, vertually sufficient, and by Gods power
applicable unto all, but actually beneficial and by his most wise and just
will, conferd only upon those, who should by the grace of a lively faith apply
unto themselves this common Gift. So then all our salvation is a gift Esaias. 9.
6.
, Christ a gift, the knowledge Matthew 13. 11
of Christ a gift, the faith Iud. verse. 3. Phil. 1. 29.
in Christ a gift, repentance Acts 5. 31. 2 Timothy 2. 25.
by Christ a gift, the Phil. 1. 29.
suffering for Christ a gift, the reward Romans 6.
of all a gift, whatsoever Restat ut propterea recte dictum intelligatur non
volentis neque currentis, sed miserentis est Dei, ut tolum Deo de* tur qui
hominis voluntatem bonam and preparat adjuvandam, and adjuvat preparatam, vid.
Aug, Enchir. cap. 32.
we have, whatsoever we are, it is all from God that shows mercy.

Lastly, in that Christ gives his Sacrament to be eaten, we learn first not
only our benefit, but our duty; the same Christ it is who in eating, we both
enjoy and obey, he being as well the Institutor as the substance of the
Sacrament. If it were but his precept, we owe him our observance, but besides
it is his body, and even self-love might move us to obey his precept Nauseabit
ad antidotum, qui hiavit ad venenum? Tertul. cont. Gnost. cap. 5.
: our mouths have been wide open unto poison, let them not be shut up against
so sovereign an Antidote. Secondly we see how we should use this precious gift
of Christ crucified, not to look on, but to eat, not with a gazing, speculative
knowledge of him, as it were at a distance, but with an experimental and
working knowledge, none truly knows Christ but he that feels him. Come Psalm.
taste and see says the Prophet, how gracious the Lord is: in divine things,
tasting goes before seeing, the union before the vision Ephesians. 3. 17. 18
Christ must first dwell in us, before we can know the love of God, that
passes knowledge. Thirdly, we learn not to sin against Christ, because
therein we do sin against our selves, by offering indignity to the body of
Christ, which should nourish us, and like Swine Portis comparandi ^ui ^a prius
concu^eant ac ^uto canoque involv^^t quae mox avide devor^nt. Parker de antiq.
Brit. in praesat.
by trampling under foot that precious food which preserves unto life, those
that with reverence eat it, but fatteth unto slaughter those who profanely
devour it. Even as the same rain in different grounds serves sometimes to
bring on the seed, other times to choke and stifle it, by the forwardness of
weeds: for as it is the goodness of God to bring good out of the worst of
things, even sin; so is it the malignity of sin and cunning of Satan, to
pervert the most holy things, the word Matthew. 4. 6.
of God, yea the very blood Matt. 4. 3.
of Christ unto evil. Lastly, we learn how pure we ought to preserve those
doors of the soul from filthiness and intemperance; at which so often the
Prince of glory himself will enter in.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the two first ends or effects of the Sacrament, namely the exhibition of
Christ to the Church, and the union of the Church to Christ. Of the real
Presence.
HAving thus far spoken of the nature and quality of this holy Sacrament, it
follows in Order to treat of the Ends or Effects thereof, on which depends
its necessity, and our comfort: our Sacraments are nothing else but
Evangelical Types or shadows of some more perfect substance; for as the
Legal Sacrifices were the Heb. 10. 1.
shadows of Christ expected, and wrapped up in a Cloud of Predicting, and in
the loins of his Predecessors: so this new mystical Sacrifice of the Gospel
is a shadow of Christ risen indeed, but yet hid from us under the Cloud of
those Heavens which shall contain him until the dissolution of all things;
for the whole heavens are but as one great cloud which intercept the luster of
that Sun of Righteousness who enlighteneth every one that comes into the
world: now shadows are for the refreshing of us against the luster of any
light unto which the weakness of the sense is yet disproportioned: as there
are many things for their own smalnesse imperceptible, so some for their
magnitude do exceed the power of sense, and have a transcendency in them which
surpasses the comprehension of that faculty unto which they properly belong.
No man can in one simple view look upon the whole vaste frame of Heaven,
because he cannot at the same moment receive the species of so spreading and
diffused an Object, so is it in things Divine, some of them are so above the
reach of our imperfect faculties, as that they swallow up the understanding,
and make not any immediate impression on the Soul, between which and their
excellency there is no great disproportion. Now Vid. Aquin. part. 1. quaest.
62. art. 2. ad 2 (...).
disproportion uses in all things to arise from a double Cause; the one
natural, being the limited Constitution of the faculty whereby even in its
best sufficiency, it is disabled for the perception of too excellent an Object,
as are the eyes of an Owl in respect of the Sun.

The other Accidental, namely by some violation and distemper of the faculty
even within the compass of its own strength; as in soreness of eyes in
regard of light, or lamenesse in regard of motion. 1 Timothy 3. 16.
Great certainly was the mystery of man's Redemption, which poted and dazzled the
eyes of the Angels themselves: so that between Christ and man there are both
these former Disproportions observable.

For first of all, man while he is on the earth, a Traveller toward that Glory
which yet he never saw, and which the tongue of 2 Cor. 12. 4.
Saint Paul himself could not utter is altogether even in his highest pitch of
Perfection unqualified to comprehend the excellent mystery of Christ either
crucified, or much more, glorified: and therefore our manner of assenting in
this life, though in regard of the authority on which it is grounded (which is
Gods own Word) it be most evident and infallible, yet in its own quality it
is not so immediate, and express as is that which is elsewhere reserved for
us; 1 Cor. 19.
for hereafter we shall know even as we are known, by a knowledge of Vision,
fruition and possession, here darkly, by stooping and captivating our
understandings unto those divine Reports which are made in Scripture, which is
a knowledge of Faith, distance and expectation; we do I say, here bend our
understandings to assent unto such truths as do not transmit any immediate
species or irradiation of their own upon them, but there our understandings
shall be raised unto a greater capacity, and be made able without a secondary
report and conveyance to apprehend clearly those glorious Truths, the evidence
whereof it did here submit unto, for the infallible credit of God, who in his
Word had revealed, and by his Spirit obsignated the same unto them; as the Joh.
4.
Samaritans knew Christ at first, only by the report of the Woman, which was
an assent of Faith, but after when they saw his Wonders, and heard his Words,
they knew him by himself, which was an assent of vision.

Secondly, as the Church is here but a traveling Church, therefore cannot
possibly have any farther knowledge of that Country whither it goes but only
by the Mappes which describe it, the Word of God, and these Numb. 13. 21.
few fruits which are sent unto them from it, the Gal 5.
fruits of the Spirit, whereby they have some taste and relish of the World to
come: so moreover is it even in this estate, by being enclosed in a body of
sin, (which has a darkning property in it, and adds unto the natural
limitednesse of the understanding, an accidental defect and soreness) much
disabled from this very imperfect assent unto Christ the Object of its Faith:
for as sin when it wastes the Conscience and bears Rule in the Soul, has a
power like Dalila and the Philistines, to put out our eyes, (as Hom. Odyss. l.
9.
Ulysses the eye of his Cyclops with his sweet wine) a power to e corrupt
Principles, to (...). Arlis. Rb. lib. 1. cap. 1.
pervert and make crooked the very Rule by which we work; conveying all moral
truths to the Soul, as some concave glasses use to represent the species of
things to the eye, not according to their natural rectitude or beauty, but
with those wrestings, inversions, and deformities which by the indisposition
thereof they are framed unto; so even the least corruptions unto which the best
are subject, (having a natural antipathy to the evidence and power of divine
Truth) do necessarily in some manner distemper our understandings, and make
such a degree of soreness in the faculty as that it cannot but so far forth
be impatient and unable to bear that glorious luster which shines immediately
in the Lord Christ. So then we see what a great disproportion there is between
us and Christ immediately presented; and from thence we may observe our
necessity, and Gods mercy in affoording us the refreshment of a Type and Shadow.

These Shadows were to the Church of the Jews many, because their weakness
in the knowledge of Christ was of necessity more than ours, in as much as they
were but an Gal. 4. 3.
infant, we an adult and grown Church, and they looked on Christ at a
distance, we near at hand, he being already incarnate; unto us they are the
Sacraments of his Body and Blood in the which we see and receive Christ as
weak eyes do the light of the Sun, through some dark Cloud, or thick
Grove: so then one maine and principal end of this Sacrament is to be an
instrument fitted unto the measure of our present estate for the exhibition or
conveyance of Christ with the benefits of his Passion unto the faithful Soul,
an end not proper to this mystery alone, but common to it with all those Legal
Sacraments which were the more thick shadows of the Jewish Church: for 1 Cor.
10. 1, 2, 3, 4. Tert. de Baptis. cap. 9. and cont. Mercion. lib. 3. ca. 16. and
l. 5. 6. 7.
even they in the red Sea did pass through Christ who was their Way, in the
Manna and aequ^ e petra habebant in se figuram futuri mysterij quod nunc
sum^mus in commemoraetionem Christi Domini. Ambros. in 1 Cor. 10.
Manna and Rock did eat and drink Christ who was their Life, in the Brazen
Serpent did behold Christ who was their Savior, in their daily Sacrifices did
prefigure Christ who was their Truth, in their Passover did eat Christ by
whose Blood they were sprinkled; for howsoever between the Legal and
Evangelical Covenant there may be sundry Vid. Mor^ay de Eucharist. lib. 4.
cap. 1. Dr. Field of the Church, l. 1. c. 5. Pareu^ in Heb. cap. 8. and cap 10.
and ca. 12. 18. 28.
Circumstantiall differences: as first in the manner of their Evidence, that
being obscure, this perspicuous, to them a Act. 13. 32. Gal. 3. 17.
Promise only, to us a Act. 13. 32.
Gospel. Secondly, in their extent and compass, that being confined to Act.
13. 46. Matthew. 10. 5, 6. Romans 3. 2. Ephesians. 2. 12.
Judea this universal to all Mark. 16. 15. Esaias 49. 6.
Creatures. Thirdly, in the means of Ministration, that by Priests and
Prophets, this by the Heb. 1. 1, 2.
Son himself, and those delegates who were by him enabled and authorized by
a solemn Commission and by many excellent endowments for the same service.

Lastly, in the quality of its durance, that being mutable and Heb. 10 9. 7.
12. 16.
abrogated, this to Heb. 6. 20. and 7. 16. 24. 28.
continue until the consummation of all things; yet notwithstanding in
substance they agree, and though by sundry ways do all at last meet in one
and the same Christ, who like the heart in the midst of the body, coming
himself in person between the Legal and Evangelicall Church does equally
convey life and motion to them both; even as that light which I see in a
star, and that which I receive by the immediate beam of the Sun, does
originally issue from the same Fountain, though conveyed with a different
luster, and by a several means.

So then we see the end of all Sacraments made after the second Covenant (for
Sacraments there were even in Paradise before the Fall) namely to exhibit
Christ with those benefits which he bestows on his Church unto each
believing Soul; but after a more especial manner is Christ exhibited in the
Lords Supper, because his pretense is there more notable; for as by Faith we
have the evidence, so by the Sacrament we have the presence of things farthest
distant and absent from us. A man that looks on the light through a shadow
does truly and really receive the self same light which would in the openest
and clearest Sunshine appear unto him, though after a different S^cundum
quen^^m modum Sacramentum corporis Christi corpus est and Sacramentum sanguinis
sanguis e^^. Aug. Epist. 23.
manner; there shall we see him, as Job speaks, with these self same eyes,
here with a spiritual eye after a mystical manner: so then in this Sacrament
we do most willingly acknowledge a Real, True, and Perfect Presence of
Christ, not in, with, or under the Elements considered absolutely in
themselves, but with that relative habitude and respect which they have unto
the immediate use whereunto they are consecrated; nor yet so do we
acknowledge any such carnal transelementation of the materials in this
Sacrament; as if the Body or Blood of Christ were by the virtue of
Consecration, and by way of a local substitution in the place of the Bread and
Wine in, but are truly and really by them, though in nature different, conveyed
into the Souls of those who by Faith receive Him. And therefore Christ first
said, Take, Eat, and then, This is my Body; to intimate unto us (as Hooker
lib. 5. page 359.
learned Hooker observes) that the Sacrament, however by Consecration it be
changed from (...). Just. Mart. Apol. 2.
common unto holy Bread, and separated from common unto a divine use, is yet
never properly to be called the Body of Christ till Taken and Eaten, by means
of which Actions (if they be Actions of Faith) that holy Bread and Wine do as
really convey whole Christ, with the vital influences that proceed from him
unto the Soul, as the hand does them unto the mouth, or the mouth unto the
stomach. Otherwise if Christ were really and corporally present with the
consecrated Elements severed from the act of faithful Receiving, the wicked
should as easily receive him with their Non dentes ad mordendum acuimus, sed
fide sincera panem frangi^^^ and partimur. Cypr. qui manducat intus non foris
qui manducat in cord, non qui premit dente. Aug. Tract. 26. in Ioh. and vid.
de Civit. dei lib. 21. cap. 25.
teeth, as the faithful in their Soul, which to affirm is both absurd and
impious.

Now Christ's Presence in this holy Sacrament being a thing of so important
consequence and the consideration thereof being very proper to this first end
of the Sacrament, the exhibiting of Christ (for to exhibit a thing is nothing
else but to present it, or to make it present unto the party to whom it is
exhibited) It will not be impertinent to make some short digression for setting
down the manner, and clearing the truth of Christ's Real Presence, the
understanding whereof will depend upon the distinguishing of the several
manners in which Christ may be said to be present. First then, Christ being
an infinite Person has in the virtue of his Godhead an infinite and unlimited
Presence, whereby he so fills all places as that he is not contained or
circumscribed in them, which immensity of his making him intimately present
with all the Creatures is that whereby they are quickened, supported and
conserved by him; for by him all things consist, and he upholdeth them all by
the Word of his power, and in him they live and move and have their being. But
this is not that Presence which in the Sacrament we affirm, because that
presupposes a Presence of Christ in and according to that nature wherein he
was the Redeemer of the World, which was his humane nature. Yet in as much as
this his humane nature subsisteth not but in and with the infiniteness of the
second Person; there is therefore (in the second place) by the Lutherans framed
another imaginary Presence of Christ's humane Body, (after once the Divinity was
pleased to derive glory in fullness on it) which gives it a participated
ubiquity unto it too, by means whereof Christ is corporally in or under the
Sacrament all Elements. But this opinion as it is no way agreeable with the
truth of the humane nature of Christ, so is it greatly injurious to his
Divinity: for first, though Christ's humane nature was in regard of its
Production extraordinary, and in regard of the sacred union which it had with
the Divinity admirable, and in regard of communication of glory from the
Godhead, and of the unction of the Holy Ghost far above all other names that
are named in heaven or earth, yet in its nature did it ever retain the
essential and primi^ive properties of a created substance, which is to be in
all manner of perfections finite, and so by consequence in place too, for glory
destroies not nature, but exalts it, nor exalts it to any farther degrees of
Perfection than are compatible to the finitenesse of a Creature, who is like
unto us in regard of all natural and essential properties* but these men give
unto Christ's Body far more than his own divine nature does, for he
glorifies it only to be the Head, that is, the most excellent and firstborn
of every Creature, but they glorify it so far as to make it share in the
essential properties of the divine nature; for as that substance unto whom the
intrinsecall, unseparated, and essential properties of a man belong, is a man
necessarily (man being nothing else but a substance so qualified) so that being
unto which the divine attributes do belong in that degree of infiniteness as
they do to the divine Person it self must needs be God; and immensity we
know is a proper attribute of the Divinity, implying infiniteness, which is
Gods own Prerogative; neither can the distinction of ubiquity communicated,
and original or essential salve the consequence: for God is by himself so
differenced from all the Creatures, as that it is not possible any attribute of
his should be participated by any Creature in that manner of infiniteness as
it is in him; nay it implies an inevitable contradiction that in a finite
nature there should be room enough for an infinite attribute. We confess
that in as much as the humane nature in Christ is inseparably taken into the
subsistence of the omnipresent Son of God; It is therefore a truth to say,
That the Son of God, though filling all places, is not yet in any of them
separated or asunder from the humane nature, may by the virtue of the
communication of the properties; it is true likewise to say that the Man Christ
is in all Places, though not in or according to his humane nature. But now from
the union of the Manhood to the Godhead to argue a coextention or
joynt-presence therewith is an inconsequent argument, as may appear in other
things. The Soul has a kind of immensity in her little world, being in each
part thereof whole and entire, and yet it follows not because the Soul is
united to the Body, that therefore the Body must needs partake of this
Omnipresence of the Soul, else should the whole body be in the little finger,
because the Soul unto which it is united is wholly there. Again, there is an
unseparable union between the Sun and the beam, so that it is infallibly
true to say, the Sun is no where severed from the beam, yet we know they
both occupy a distinct place: again, Misle^oe is so united to the substance of
the Tree out of which it grows, that (though of a different nature) it
subsisteth not but in and by the subsistence of the Tree, and yet it has not
that amplitude of place which the Tree has.

Letting go then this opinion, there is a third Presence of Christ, which is a
carnal Physical, local Presence, which we affirm his humane nature to have
only in Heaven: The Papists attribute it to the Sacrament, because Christ has
said, This is my Body: and in matters of fundamental consequence, he uses no
figurative or dark speeches; to this we say, that it is a carnal Doctrine,
and a mistake like that of Nicodemus, and of Origin, from the Spirit to the
letter. And for the difficulty, it is none to men that have more than only a
carnal ear to hear it: for what difficulty is it to say that then the King
gives a man an Office when he has sealed him such a Pa^ent in the right
whereof that Office belongs, and is conveyed unto him? And if Christ be thus
locally in the Sacrament, and eaten with the mouth, and so conveyed into the
stomach: I then demand what becomes of him when and after he is thus received
into the stomach? If he retire from the accidents out of a man, then first
accidents shall be left without any substance at all under them to sustain
them, and which is (if any thing can be) yet more absurd, bare accidents
should nourish, be assimulated and augment a substance; for it is plain, that
a man might be nourished by the Bread; yea, the Priest by intemperate excess
made drunk with the consecrated Wine; unto which detestable effects we cannot
imagine that God by a more especial concurrence and miracle would enable the
bare accidents of Bread and Wine. But if Christ stay, and do corporally unite
himself to the Receiver; then I see not how all they that receive the
Sacrament, being physically and substantially united to Christ's Body have not
likewise a natural union to his Person too, that being no where separated from
this, which is blasphemous to affirm.

Secondly, how Christ's Body may not be said to have a double subsistence,
Infinite in the second Person, and Finite in all those with whom he is
Incorporated.

Leaving then this as a fleshly conceit, we come to a fourth Presence of
Christ which is by Energy and power; thus where two or three be gathered
together in his Name, Matthew. 28.
Christ is in the midst of them by the powerful working of his holy Spirit;
even as the Sun is present to the Earth, in as much as by its influence and
benignity it heateth and quickens it. For all manner of operation is by some
manner of Contact between the Agent and the Patient, which cannot be without
some manner of presence too; but the last manner of Presence is a Sacramental
Relative, mystical Presence. Understand it thus, The King is in his Court or
Presence Chamber only locally, and physically; but representatively he is
wheresoever his Chancellor or subordinate Judges are, in as much as whatsoever
they in a Legal and judicial course do determine, is accounted by him as his
own personal act, as being an effect of that power, which though in them as
the instruments, does yet originally reside no where but in his own Person;
just so Christ is locally in Heaven, which must contain him till the
restitution of all things, yet having instituted these Elements for the supply
as it were of his absence, he is accounted present with them, in as much as
they which receive them with that reverend and faithful affection as they
would Christ himself do together with them, receive him too, really and
truly, though not carnally or physically, but after a mystical and spiritual
manner. A real Presence of Christ we acknowledge, but not a local or
physical; for Presence real (that being a metaphysicall term) is not opposed
unto a mere physical or local absence, or distance, but is opposed to a
false imaginary, phantasticke presence; for if real presence may be
understood of nothing but a carnal and local presence, then that speech of
Christ, Where two or three be gathered together in my Name, there am I in the
midst of them; cannot have any real Truth in it, because Christ is not
locally in the midst of them. This real Presence being thus explained may
be thus proved, The maine end of the Sacrament (as shall be showed) is to
unite the faithful unto Christ, to which union there must of necessity be a
Presence of Christ by means of the Sacrament, which is the instrument of that
union. Such then as the union is, such must needs be the presence too: since
Presence is therefore only necessary that by means thereof that union may be
effected. Now united unto Christ we are not carnally, or physically, as the
meat is to the body, but after a mystical manner, by joints and sinews, not
fleshly but spiritual: even as the faithful are united to each other in one
mystical Body of Christ, into one holy 2 Pet. 2. 5.
spiritual Building, into one fruitful olive, into a holy, but mystical
marriage with Christ. Now what Presence fitter for a Spiritual union than a
spiritual presence. Certainly, to confine Christ unto the narrow compass of a
piece of Bread, to squeeze and contract his Body into so strait a room, and to
grind him between our teeth is to humble him (though now glorified) lower
than he humbled himself, he himself to the form of a servant, but this to
the condition of a monster. That Presence then of Christ which in the Sacrament
we acknowledge is not any gross Presence of circumscription, as if Christ
Jesus in Body lay hid under the accidents of Bread and Wine; as if he who was
Joh. 20. 20. 27.
wont to use the senses for witness and proof of his Presence, Luke 24. 39.
did now hide from them, Matthew. 28. 6.
yea deceive them under the appearances of that which he is not; but it is a
spiritual Presence, of energie, power, and concomitancy with the Element, by
which Christ does appoint that by and with these mysteries, though not in or
from them, his sacred Body should be conveyed into the faithful Soul: and
such a Presence of Christ in power, though absence in flesh as it is most
compatible with the properties of a humane Body, so does it most make for the
demonstration of his power, who Erat c^ro eju^ in monumento, sed virtus ejus
operabatur^ coelo. Ambros de Incarnat. cap. 5.
can (without any necessity of a fleshly Presence) send as great influence from
his sacred Body on the Church, as if he should descend visibly amongst us.
Neither can any man show any enforcing reason why unto the real exhibition and
reception of Christ crucified there should any more physical Presence of his
be required, than there is of the Sun unto the eye for receiving his light,
or of the Romans 11.
root unto the utmost branches for receiving of vital sap, or of the Ephesians.
1. 22.
head unto the feet for the receiving of sense, or of the land and (...)
Ephesians. 1. 14.
purchase made over by a (...) Romans 14. 11.
sealed Deed for receiving the Lordship; or lastly, (to use an instance from
the Jesuits own Doctrine out of Aristotle) of a final Cause in an actual
existence to effect its power and causality on the the will: for if the Greg.
de Valen. Tom. 2. di^p. 1. qu. I punct. 1.
final Cause do truly and really produce its effect, though it have not any
material, gross Presence, but only an intellectual Presence to the
apprehension: why may not Christ (whose Hooker lib. 5. sect. 55. p. 303. 304.
sacred Body, however it be not substantially coextended (as I may so speak)
in regard of ubiquity with the Godhead, yet is in regard of its cooperation,
force, efficacy unlimited by any place or subject, it having neither sphere of
activity, nor stint of merit, nor bounds of efficacy, nor necessary subject of
application, beyond which the virtue of it grows faint and uneffectuall) why
may not he, I say, really unite himself unto his Church by a spiritual
Presence to the faithful Soul, without any such gross and carnal descent,
or rehumiliation of his glorified Body unto an ignoble and prodigious form? So
then to conclude this digression, and the first End of this Sacrament together;
when Christ says, This is my Body, we are not otherwise to understand it than
those other Sacramental speeches of the same nature, Joh. 6. 51.
I am the Bread of Life, Christ was that rock, and the like, it being a common
thing not only in 1 C^r 10. 4. Genesis 17. 10. Exodus 12. 11.
holy Scriptures, but even in Foedus ferire. Live. (...) Homer.
profane Writers also to call the isntrumental Elements by the name of that
Covenant of which they are only the Sacrifices, seals, and visible
confirmations, because of that relation and near resemblance that is between
them.

The second End or Effect of this Sacrament which in order of Nature
immediately follows the former is to obsignate, and to increase the mystical
union of the Church unto Christ their Head; for as the same operation which
infuseth the reasonable soul (which is the first act or principle of life
natural) does also unite it unto the body, to the making up of one man; so the
same Sacrament which does exhibit Christ unto us (who is the first act and
original of life divine) does also unite us together unto the making up of one
Church. In natural nourishment the vital heat being stronger than the
resistance of the meat, does macerate, concoct, and convert that into the
substance of the Body; but in this spiritual nourishment, the Joh. 6. 63. Romans
8. 2.
vital Spirit of Christ having a heat invincible by the coldness of Nature
does turn us into the same image and quality with it self, working a Affectus
consociat and confoederat voluntates. Cyprian.
fellowship of affections and confederacy of wills: and as the body does from
the union of the soul unto it receive strength, beauty, motion, and the like
active qualities; so also Christ being united unto us 1 Cor. 3. 16. Romans 8. 9.
11. 2 Timothy 1. 14. Ephesians 3. 17.
by these holy mysteries, does comfort, refresh, strengthen, rule and direct us
in all our ways. We all in the virtue of that Genesis 17. 17. Deus ut personam
non accipit, sic nec atatem, Cypr. lib. 3. Ep. 8.
Covenant made by God unto the faithful and to their seed in the first instant
of our being do belong unto Christ that bought us, after in the Tit. 3. 5.
vid. Coquae. Comm^n. ad lib. 1. Aug. de Civ. dei, cap. 27. number. 2.
Laver of Regeneration, the Sacrament of Baptism, we are farther admitted and
united to him: our right unto Christ before was general from the benefit of
the common Covenant; but in this Sacrament of Baptism my right is made
personal, and I now lay claim unto Christ not only in the right of his
common Promise, but by the efficacy of this particular Washing, which seals
and ratifieth the Covenant unto me. Thus is our first union unto Christ
wrought, by the grace of the Covenant effectively, and by the grace of Baptism
(where it may be had) Instrumentally, the one giving unto Christ, the other
obsignating and exhibiting that right by a farther admission of us into his
Body. But now we must conceive that as there is a union unto Christ, so there
must, as in natural bodies, be after that union, a Ephesians. 4. 13. 15.
growing up, till we come to our (...), the measure of the fullness of Christ.
This growth being an effect of the vital faculty is more or less perfected in
us, as that is either more or less stifled or cherished: for as in the soul
and body, so in Christ and the Church. We are not to conceive the union without
any latitude, but capable of augmentation, and liable to sundry diminutions,
according as are the several means which for either purpose we apply unto
our selves. The union of the soul and body, though not dissolved, is yet by
every the least distemper slackned, by some violent diseases almost rended
asunder, so that the body has sometimes more, sometimes less hold-fast of the
soul; so here we are in the Covenant and in Baptism united unto Christ; but
we must not forget that in men there is by Nature a Heb. 12. 15.
root of bitterness, whence issue those Gal. 5.
fruits of the flesh, a spawne and womb of actual corruptions, where sin
is daily Jam. 1. 15.
conceived and brought forth, a mare mortuum, a lake of death, whence
continually arise all manner of noisome and infectious lusts; by means of
which our Union to Christ (though not dissolved) is yet daily weakened and
stands in need of continual confirmation; for every sin does more or less
smother and stop the principle of life in us, so that it cannot work our
growth which we must rise unto with so free and interrupted a course as
otherwise it might. The Principle of life in a Christian is the very same from
whence Christ himself according to his created Graces receives life, and that
is the Gal. 4. 6. Romans 8. 2.
Spirit of Christ, a Joh. 6. 63.
quickening Spirit, and a Ephesians. 3. 16.
strengthening Spirit. Now as that great sin which is incompatible with faith
does bid defiance to the good Spirit of God, and therefore is more especially
called The sin against the holy Ghost, so every sin does in its own manner
and measure 1 ^hest. 5. 19.
quench the Spirit that it cannot quicken, and Ephesians. 4. 30. Iste qui vulnus
habet medicinam requirit; vulnus est quia sub peccato sumus, medicina est
coeleste and venerabil^ sacramentum. Ambr. de sacram. li. 5. c. 4. Simul
medicamentum and holocaustumed sanand as infirmitates and purgand^^
iniquitates, Cypr. decoen. Dom.
grieve the Spirit that it cannot strengthen us in that perfection of degrees
as it might otherwise: and thus is our union unto Christ daily loosened and
slackened by the distempers of sin: for the reestablishing whereof God has
appointed these sacred Mysteries, as effectual instruments, where they meet
with a qualified subject, to produce a more firm and close union of the Soul
to Christ, and to strengthen our Faith which is the joint and sinew by which
that union is preserved, to cure those i wounds, and purge those iniquities
whose property it is to separate betwixt Christ and us, to make us Potus quasi
quaedam incorporatio. subjectis ^bsequus, volun^^tibus junctis, affectibus unit
is: esus carnis hujus quaedam aviditas est, and quoddam desiderium manendi in
ipso. Cypr. ibid. (...), Chrysostom ho. 24. in 1 Cor. Qui vult vivere habet ubi
vivat, accedat, credat, incorporetur, vivi^icetur, Au. ep. 59. and vid. de civ.
deil. 10. c. 6.
submit our services, to knit our wills, to conform our affections, and to
incorporate our persons into him; that so by constant, though slow proceedings
we might be changed from glory to glory, and attain unto the measure of
Christ, there where our Faith can no way be impaired, our bodies and souls
subject to no decay, and by consequence stand in no need of any such Sic olim
sacramentum appellatum. vid. Dur. de ritibus ecclesiae lib. 2. cap. 55.
viaticums as we here use to strengthen us in a journey so much both above
the Perfection, and against the corruption of our present Nature.

CHAP. XIV.
Of three other Ends of the holy Sacrament, the fellowship or union of the
faithful, the obsignation of the Covenant of Grace, and the abrogation of the
Passover.
NOW as the same nourishment which preserves the Union between the Soul and
Body, or head and members, does in like manner preserve the Union between the
members themselves: even so this Sacrament is as it were the sinew of the
Church, whereby the faithful, being all Ephesians. 4. 3, 4.
animated by the same Spirit that makes them one with Christ, are knit together
in a bond of Peace, conspiring all in a unity of thoughts and desires, having
the same common Enemies to withstand, the same common Prince to obey, the same
common rule to direct them, the same common way to pass, the same common Faith
to vindicate, and therefore the same mutual engagements to further and advance
the good of each other; so that the next immediate effect of this Sacrament is
to confirm the Union of all the members of the Church each to other in a
Communion of Saints, whereby their prayers are the more strengthened, and their
adversaries the more resisted: for as in natural things, Advancement of
learning. l. 2.
Union strengthens motions natural, and weakeneth violent; so in the Church,
Union strengthens all spiritual motions, whether upward as meditations and
prayers to God, or downward as sympathy, and good works toward our weak
Brethren, and it hinders all violent motions, the strength of sin, the
darts of Satan, the provocations of the World, the Judgments of God, or
whatever evil may be by the flesh either committed or deserved. And this
Union of the faithful is both in the Elements and appellations, and in the
ancient ceremonies, and in the very act of eating and drinking most
significantly represented.

First, for the Quand^ Dominus corpus suum panem voc^t de multorum Granorum
Adunatione congestum, populum (...) quem por^abat indicat adunatum, etc. Cypr.
li. 1. Epi. 6. (...), etc. Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. Hom. 24. 1 Cor. 10. 17.
Elements, they are such as, though naturally their parts were separated in
several grains and grapes, yet are they by the art of man molded together
and made up into one artificial body consisting of diverse homogeneous parts:
men by Nature are disjoynted not more in being, than in affections and desires
each from other, every one being his own end, and not any way affected with
that tenderness of Communion, or bowels of love, which in Christ we recover;
but now Christ has redeemed us from this estate of enmity, and drawing us all
to the pursuit of one common end, and thereunto enabling us by one uniforme
rule his holy Word, and by one vital Principle his holy Spirit; we are by the
means of this holy Sacrament after the same manner reunited into one
spiritual Body, as the Elements (though originally several) are into one
artificial mass. And for the same reason (as I conceive) was the Exodus 12. 26.
holy Passover in the Law commanded to be one whole Lamb, and eaten in one
Family, and not to have one bone of it broken, to signify that there should
be all unity, and no Schism or rupture in the Church which is Christ's Body.

Secondly, for the appellations of this Sacrament, it is commonly called The
Lords Coena (...)communione vescentium, Plut. and Isi^.
Supper, which word, though with us it import nothing but an ordinary course
and time of eating, yet in other Language it expresses that which the other
appellation retains, Communion or fellowship: and lastly, it was called by the
Ancients (...). Dionys.
Synaxis, a collection, gathering together, or assembling of the faithful,
namely into that unity which Christ by his merits purchased, by his John 17.
prayer obtained, and by his Spirit wrought in them; so great has ever been
the Wisdom of Gods Spirit and of his Church, which is ruled by it, to impose
on divine institutions such names as might express their virtue and our duty:
as Adams Sacrament was called the Genesis 3. 22.
Tree of Life; the Jews Sacraments, the Genesis 17. 10.
Covenant, and the Exodus 12. 17.
Passover; and with the Christians, Baptism is called Tit. 3. 5.
Regeneration, and the Lords Supper 1 Cor. 10. 16.
Communion, that by the names we might be put in mind of the power of the
things themselves.

Thirdly, for the Ceremonies and Customs annexed unto this Sacrament in the
Primitive times, notwithstanding for superstitious abuses some of them have
been abolished, yet in their own original use they did signify this uniting
and knitting quality which the Sacraments have in it, whereby the faithful are
made one with Christ by faith, and amongst themselves by love.

And first they had a custom of Quando in calice vino aqua miscetur, Christo
populus adunatur: si vinum tantum quis offerat sanguis Christi incipit esse
sine no^u; si vero aqua sit sola, pl^bs incipit esse sine Ch^i^^o, Cypr, li. 2.
Epist. 3. (...). Just. Mart. Ap. 2 (...). Cle. Alex. (...) ^ib. 2. c. 2. Ambr.
de Sacr. l 5. 6. 1.
mixing Water with the Wine (as there came Water and Blood out of Christ's side)
which, however it might have a natural reason, because of the heat of the
country, and custom of those Southern parts, where the Stuck antiq. conviv.
l. 3. c. 11.
use was to correct the heat of Wine with Water; yet was it by the Christians
us^d not without a mystical and allegorical sense; to express the mixture
(whereof this Sacrament is an effectual instrument) of all the People (who
have faith to receive it) with Christ's Blood; Rev. 17. 15.
Water being by the Holy Ghost himself interpreted for People and Nations.

Secondly, at the receiving of this holy Sacrament their custom was to (...)
etc. Iusti. Mart. Apol. 2.
kiss one another with an holy kiss or a kiss of love, as a testification of
mutual dearness, it proceeding from the Scalig. de subt. exercit. Arist.
Pol. l. 2. c. 4.
exiliency of the spirits and readiness of Nature to meet and unite it self
unto the things beloved; for love is nothing else but a delightful affection
arising from an attractive power in the goodness of some excellent Object,
unto which it endeavors to cleave and to unite it self, and therefore it
was an argument of hellish hypocrisy in Judas, and an imitation of his father
the Devil, (who transformeth himself into an Angel of Light for the
enlargement of his kingdom) to use this holy symbol of love for the
instrument of a hatred so much the more devilish than any, by how much the
object of it was the more divine.

Thirdly, after the celebration of the divine Mysteries, the Christians, to
testify their mutual love to each other, did eat in common together; which
Feasts from that which they did signify (as the use of God and his Church is
to proportion names and things) were called Act. 2. 26. 2 Pet. 2. 13. Jud. v.
12. Coena nostra de nominerationem sui ^stendit. Tert. Apolog. c. 39. vid.
stuck. Antiq. conviv. l. 1. c. 33.
love feasts, to testify unto the very Vide inquiunt ut invicem diligunt.
Tertul. and Minut. Fell.
Heathen, how dearly they were knit together.

Fourthly, after receiving of these holy mysteries, there were extraordinary
oblations and (...). etc. Just. Mart. Ap. 2 Deposita pietatis vi. Ter. Ap. c.
39.
collections for refreshing Christ's poor members, who either for his Name, or
under his hand did suffer with patience the calamities of this present life,
expecting the glory which should be revealed unto them: those did they make the
Treasures of the Church, their bowels the hordes and repositaries of their
piety, and such as were orphans, or widows, or aged, or sick, or in bonds
condemned to Mine-pits, or to the Islands, or desolate places, or dark
Dungeons (the usual punishments in those times) with all these were they not
ashamed in this holy work to acknowledge a unity of condition, a fellowship
and equality in the spiritual Privileges of the same Head, a mutual relation
of fellow members in the same common Body, unto which if any had greater right
than other, they certainly were the men, who were conformed unto their Head in
suffering, and did go to their Kingdom through the same path of blood which
he had before besprinckled for them.

Lastly, it was the Vid. Stuck. An. Conv. lib. 1. ca. 3.
custom in any solemn testimonial of Peace to receive and exhibit this holy
Sacrament, as the seal and earnest of that union which the parties whom it did
concern had between themselves. Such has ever been the care of the holy
Church in all the customs and ceremonial accessions whether of decency or
charity which have been by it appointed in this holy Sacrament, that by them
and in them all, the concinnation of the Body of Christ, the fellowship,
sympathy, and unity of his members, might be both signified and professed: that
as we have all but one Sacrament, which is the Food of life, so we should
have but Act. 4. 32. Phil. 1. 27. Vnum signum habemus, quare non in uno ovili
sumus? Aug. To. 7 Sermon. ad pleb. Caesariensem.
one Soul, which is the Spirit of life, and from thence but one heart, and one
mind, thinking, and loving and pursuing all the same things, through the same
way, by the same rule, to the same end. And for this reason amongst others I
take it, it is that our Church does require in the Receiving of these Mysteries
a uniformity in all her Members, even in matters that are of themselves
indifferent, that in the Sacrament of unity there might not appear any breach
or Schism, but that as at all times, so much more then, we should (...)
A^les. Ethic. lib. 9. ca. 6.
all think, and speak, and do the same things, least the manner should
oppose the substance of the celebration.

Lastly, if we consider the very act of eating and drinking, even therein is
expressed the fellowship and the union of the faithful to each other, for Vid.
fus. debat re Stuck. antiq. conviv. li. 1. ca. 3.
even by Nature are men directed to express their affections or reconcilements
to others in feasts and invitations, where even Scipio and Hasdrubal apud
Scyphacem Live. 20. l.
public Enemies have condescended to terms of fairness and plausibility,
for which cause it is noted for one of the Ar^s Polit. lib. 5. cap. 11. vid.
Baron. an. 100. number. 8.
Acts of Tyrants, whereby to dissociate the minds of their Subjects, and so to
break them when they are asunder, whom all together they could not bend, to
interdict invitations and mutual hospitalities, whereby the body politic is
as well preserved as the natural, and the love of men as much nourished as
their bodies. And therefore where Genesis 43. 34.
Joseph did love most, there was the mess doubled, and the national hatred
between the Jews and Egyptians springing from the diversity of Religions
(whose Religio a religando. Cicero.
work it is to knit and fasten the affections of men) was no way better
expressed than by their Genesis 43. 32.
mutual abominating the tables of each other. So that in all these
circumstances we find how the union of the faithful unto each other is in this
holy Sacrament both signified and confirmed, whereby (however (...) Chrysostom.
in Romans Hom. 1. 2
they may in regard of temporal relations stand at great distance, even as
great as is between the Palace and the Prison) yet in Christ they are all
fellow members of the same common Body, and fellow-heires of the same common
Kingdom, and spiritual stones of the same common Church, which is a (...)
Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. hom. 1.
name of unity and Peace. They have Ephesians. 4. 5, 6.
one Father who deriveth on them an equal Nobility, one Lord who equally
governs them, one spirit who equally quickneth them, one Baptism which
equally regenerateth them, one faith which equally warrants their inheritance
to them, and lastly one sinew and bond of love which equally interesteth them
in the joys and griefs of each other, so that, as in (...), Eth. li. 8. cap.
5. and 8.
all other, so principally in this divine friendship of Christ's Church there is
an equality and uniformity, be the outward distances how great soever.

Another principal End or Effect of this holy Supper is to signify and
obsignate unto the Soul of each Believer his personal claim and title unto
the new Covenant of Grace. We are in a state of corruption, sin, though it
have received by Christ a wound of which it cannot recover, yet as Maxim
mortiferi esse solent morsus morientium bestiarum. Flor. lib. 2. cap. 15.
beasts commonly in the pangs of death use most violently to struggle and often
to fasten their teeth more eagerly and fiercely where they light; so sin
here, Romans 7. 24.
that body of death, Heb. 12. 1.
that besieging, encompassing evil, that Jos. 23. 13.
Cananite that lies in our members, being continually heartened by our arch
enemy Satan, however subdued by Israel, does yet never cease to Jos. 23. 13.
goad and prick us in the eyes, that we might not look up to our future
Possession, is ever raising up steemes of corruption to intercept the luster of
that glory which we expect, is ever suggesting unto the Believer matter of
diffidence and anxiety, that his hopes hitherto have been ungrounded, his
Faith presumptuous, his claim to Christ deceitful, his propriety uncertain,
if not quite desperate; till at last the faithful Soul lies gasping and
panting for breath under the buffets of this messenger of Satan. And for this
cause it has pleased our good God ( Heb. 13. 6.
who has promised never to fail nor forsake us) that we might not be
swallowed up with grief to renew often our right, and exhibit (...) Chrysostom. in
1 Cor. Ho. 27.
with his own hands (for what is done by his Officers is by him done) that
sacred Body with the efficacy of it unto us, that we might fore-enjoy the
promised Inheritance, and put, not into our chests or coffers which may happily
by casualities miscarry, but into our very bowels, into our substance and soul
the pledges of our Salvation, that we might at this spiritual Altar Gal. 3. 1.
see Christ as it were crucified before our eyes, Cruci haeremus sanguinem
sugimus and inter ipsa Redemptoris nostri vulnera sigimus linguam, etc.
Cyprian. de coena D^m.
clinge unto his Cross, and graspe it in our arms, suck in his Blood, and
with it salvation, put in our hands with Thomas, not out of di^^idence, but out
of faith into his side, and fasten our tongues in his sacred wounds, that being
all over dyed with his Blood, we may use boldness, and approach to the Throne
of Grace, lifting up unto heaven in faith and confidence of acceptance those
eyes and hands which have seen and handled him, opening wide that mouth which
has received him, and crying aloud with that tongue which having tasted the
Bread of Life has from thence both strength and arguments for prayer to move
God for mercy: this then is a singular benefit of this Sacrament, the often
repetition and celebration whereof is as it were the renewing, or rather the
confirming with more and more seals our Patent of life; that by so many
things, in the Heb. 6. 18.
smallest whereof it is impossible for God to lie, we might have strong
consolation who have our refuge to lay hold on him who in these holy Mysteries
is set before us; for the Sacrament is not only a Genesis 17. 11. Romans 4. 11.
Exodus 12. 13.
Sign to represent, but a Seal to exhibit that which it represents. In the
Sign we see, in the seal we receive him. In the Sign we have the image,
in the seal the benefit of Christ's Body, for Aug. de doctr. Christ. l. 2. c. 1.
the nature of a Sign is to discover and represent that which in it self is
obscure or absent (as (...). Arist. de Interpr. cap. 1.
words are called signs and symboles of our invisible thoughts) but the Plus
annulis nostris quam animis creditur, Seneca.
property of a Seal is to ratify and ^o establish that which might otherwise
be uneffectuall; for which cause some have called the Sacrament by the name of
a Bernardus.
Ring, which men use in sealing those writings unto which they annexe their
trust and credit. And as the Sacrament is a Sign and Seal from God to us
representing and exhibiting his benefits, so should it be a sign and seal
from us to God, a sign to (...). Chrysostom. in Genesis Hom. 39.
separate us from sinners, a seal to oblige us to all performances of faith
and thankfulness on our part required.

Another End and Effect of this holy Sacrament was to abrogate the Passover,
and testify the alteration of those former Types which were not the
commemorations, but the predictions of Christ's Passion: and for this cause our
blessed Savior did celebrate both those Suppers at (...). Chrysostom. in Mat. ^.
Hom. 81
the same time, (but the new Supper after the other, and in the evening,
whereby (...), Ibid.
was figured the fullness of time) that thereby the presence of the substance
might evacuate the shadow: Est. haec natura syderibus ut parva and exilia
v^lidiorum exortu^ obscuret. Plin. Paneg.
even as the Sun does with his luster take away all those lesser and
substituted lights, which were used for no other purpose but to supply the
defect which there was of him. The Passover however in the nature of a
sacrifice it did prefigure Christ, yet in the nature of a Solemnity and annual
commemoration it did immediately respect the temporal deliverance of that
People out of Egypt, by the sprinkling of their doors with blood, which was it
self but a shadow of our freedom from Satan: so that their Sacrament was but
the Type of a Type, and therefore must needs have so much the weaker and more
obscure reference unto Christ; even as those draughts do less resemble the
face of a man which are taken from a former piece; Cum velut e speculo in
speculum tralucet^. (...). Lucret.
or that light the brightness of its original which shines weakly through a
second or third reflection. Besides this small light which shined from the
Passover on the people of the Jews, and by which they were something though
darkly enabled to behold Christ, was but like the light in a house or family,
which could not shine beyond the narrow compass of that small people, and
therefore it was to be eaten in such a Exodus 12. 46.
family, to signify, as I conceive, that the Church was then but as a handful
or household in respect of that fullness of the Gentiles which was to follow.
Now then the Church being to enlarge its borders, and to be coextended with
the World, it stood in need of a greater light, even that Sun of
Righteousness, who was now to be as well the Luke 2. 32.
light to lighten the Gentiles, as he had been formerly the Glory of his People
Israel. And therefore we may observe that this second Sacrament was not to be
eaten in a private separated Family, but the Church was 1 Cor. 11. 33.
to come together, and to stay one for another, that in the confluence of the
People, and the publikenesse of the action, the increase and amplitude of the
Church might be expressed. Besides the Gentiles were uninterested in that
temporal Deliverance of the Jews from Pharaoh, it being a particular and
national benefit, and therefore the commemoration thereof in the Paschall
Lamb, could not, by them, who in the loins of their ancestors had not been
there delivered, be literally and with reflection on themselves celebrated.
Requisite therefore in this respect also it was, in as much as the Ephesians. 2. 14.
partition wall was broken down, and both Jew and Gentile were incorporated
into one head, Hos. 1. 10, 11.
that national and particular relations ceasing, such a Sacrament might be
reinstituted; wherein the universal restoring of all mankind might be
represented. And certainly for a man at midday to shut his windows from the
communion of the general light, and to use only private lamps of his own,
as it is toward men madness, so it is impiety and Schism in Religion. There
is between the Gospel and the Legal Ceremonies (as I observed) the same
proportion of difference as is between household Tapers and the common
Sunshine, as in regard of the amplitude of their light, and of the extent of
their light, so in the duration of it likewise; for as Lamps within a small
time do of themselves expire and perish, whereas the light of the Sun does
never waste it self: even so Vid. Aug. Ep. 5. ad Marcellinum, and Epist. 19.
ad Hieron. cap 2. and Tert. cont. Iudae. cap 2. and 6. and de monogam. c. 7.
and de O^at. cap. 1.
Jewish rites were by Gods institution perishable and temporary, during that
Gal. 4. 3.
infancy of the Church, wherein it was not able to look on a brighter object,
but when in the fullness of time the Church was grown unto a firmer sense,
then Ephesians. 2. 15, 16.
in the death of Christ did those Types likewise die, and were together with
the sins of the World cancelled upon the Cross. Amongst the vid. Brisso.
deri. Pers. l. 1. p. 27.
Persians it was a solemn observation to nullify for a time the force of
their Laws, and to extinguish those fires, which they were wont idolatrously
to adore, upon the death of their King, as if by him both their policy and
Religion had been animated: even so at the death of our blessed Savior were
all those Legal Ordinances, those holy fires, which were wont to send up the
sweet savor of incense, and sacrifices unto heaven, abolished he (who before
had substituted them in his room, and by an effectual influence from himself
made them temporary instruments of that propitiation, which it was Heb. 10. 4.
impossible for them in their own natures to have effected) being himself
come to finish that work which was by them only foreshadowed, but not
begun, much less accomplished.

CHAP. XV.
The last End of this holy Sacrament; namely, the Celebration and Memory of
Christ's Death. A brief Collection of all the benefits which are by his Death
conveyed on the Church. The Question touching the quality of temporal
Punishments stated.
THe last and most express End of this holy Sacrament is to celebrate the 1
Cor. 11.
Memory of Christ's Death and Passion, which was that unvaluable price of our
double Redemption, Redemption from Hell, and Redemption unto Glory. Great
Deliverances as they have moved the Hest. 9. 17. 1 Mat. 4. 55. 56.
Church unto anniversary celebrations of them, John. 10. 22.
which Christ himself has been pleased to honor with his own Presence; so
have they drawn even heathen men also not only to Cypr. de Idol. Vanit. Min.
Fell. in Octav. Clem. Alex, in protreptico.
solemnize the Festivals and deifie the memories of those unto whose inventions
they owed the good things which they enjoy, but farther to honor even Anseres
quotannis apud Romanos splendida in Lectica sedebant, quod in obsidione
Capitolij excit assent. vid, Ros. Antiq. Romans lib. 4. cap. 17.
brute creatures themselves with solemn triumphs and memorials: nay Leo apud
Aul. Gell. lib. 5. ca. 14.
beasts have not been forgetful of those unto whom they owe any way their
life and safety; how much more then does it become Christians to celebrate with
an eternal memory the Author of their Redemption, a work beyond all that ever
the Sun saw; yea, a work whose luster darkened the Sun it self, and which
the Angels cannot comprehend: matters circumstantiall, as Time, and Place; and
matters Typical, and representative, as Ceremonies, Sacrifices, and
Sacraments, as they receive their particular advancement and sanctification
from those works which they immediately respect, so are they not by us to be
solemnly celebrated without continued memories of those works which do so
dignifie them. All places naturally being but several parcels of the same
common air and earth, are of an equal worth. But when it pleases God in any
Exodus 40. 34. 1 King. 8. 11.
place to bestow a more especial ray of his Presence, and to sanctify any
Temple unto his own service, as it is then by that extraordinary Presence of
his made a holy and consecrated Place, so are we when we enter into it to
Eccles. 4 17.
look unto our feet, to Exodus 3. 4.
pull off our shoes, to have an eye unto him that fills it with his
Presence, or otherwise if we enter into it as into a common place, we shall
offer nothing but the sacrifice of fools. All Times are naturally equal, as
being distinguished by the same constant and uniforme motion of the heavens,
yet notwithstanding when God shall by any notable and extraordinary work of
his, honor and sanctify some certain days, as he did the Jewish Sabbath
with respect to the Creation, and our Lords day by raising up Christ from the
dead, as they are by this wonderful work of his severed from the rank of
common times, so are we ever when we come unto them not to pass them over
without the memory of that work which had so advanced them: otherwise to
solemnize a day without reference unto the cause of its solemnization, is but a
blind observance. And for this cause when God commands reverence to places,
and sanctification of days, he annexeth the ground of both, and leads us to
a sight of those works from which they receive both their dignity and
institution; so likewise in Sacraments, to eat Bread, and drink Wine, are
naked, common, simple actions, and in themselves always alike, but when Christ
shall by that great work of his (...), Iu. Mart. Dialog.
Death set them apart unto a holy use, and make them representations of his own
sacred Body, as they are by this divine relation hallowed, so to partake of
them without commemotating that great work which has so sanctified them, is
not only impious in that it perverteth the divine institution, but absurd
likewise, it being all one, as if a man should with much ceremony and solemnity
receive parchment and wax, never so much as thinking on the land it conveyes,
or look on a picture without any reflection on the pattern and original which
it resembles, which is indeed to look on the wood and not on the picture, it
being naturally impossible to separate things in notion whose being do consist
in relation to each other. So then the Sacrament being a Typical service, is
not, nor can be celebrated without a remembrance of the substance which it
resembles; which thing, according as is the pretiousnesse, value, and
importance of it, does proportionably impose on us a greater necessity of this
Duty; which is then rightly performed, when there is a deep impression of
Christ crucified made on the Soul by these Seals of his Death, than which
there is not any thing in the world more fit to fasten a stamp of it self in
the minds of men.

Permanent and firm impressions do use to be made in the minds of men by
such causes as those. First, if the Object be wonderful and beyond the common
course of things, it does then strangely affect the thoughts, whereas Aug. de
Genesis ad literam, lib. 12. ca. 18. amant homines inexperta mirari, etc. Ea quae
sub oculis posita sunt negligimus, quia natura comparatum est, ut proximorum
incuriosi longinqua sectemur, sed quod omnium rerum cupido languescit cum
facilis occasi^ est, Plin. lib. 8. Epist. 20. Magnitudinem rerum consuetudo
subducit: sol spectatorem nisi cum deficit non habet, nemo admiratur Lunam nisi
laborantem, Senec. not. quaest. li. 7. c. 1.
obvious and ordinary things pass through the soul, as common people do
through the streets without any notice at all. And this is the reason why
naturally men remember those things best, which either they did in their Arlet.
Polit. l. 2.
childehood, because then every thing brings with it the shape of novelty, and
novelty is the mother of admiration; or those things which do very rarely fall
out, which howsoever they may be in their causes naturally, yet with the
greater part of men, who use to make their observations rather on the events
than on the originals of things, they pass for wonders. Now what greater
wonder has ever entered into the thoughts of men, even of those who have spent
their time and conceits in amplifying Nature with Creatures of their own
fancying than this, that the God of all the World, without derivation from
whose life, all the Creatures must moulder into their first nothing should
himself dye, and expire, the frame of Nature still subsisting? that he who
fills all things with his Presence, should be stretched out upon a piece of
wood, and confined within a narrow stone? he who upholdeth all things by his
power, should be himself kept under by that which is nothing, by death?
Certainly, that at which the World stood amazed, that which against the course
of Nature brought darkness on the Fountain of Light, (which could no longer
shine, when his Glory who derived luster on it was it self ecclipsed) that
which made the earth to tremble under the burden of so bloody a sin, that
which the Angels stoop and look into with humble astonishment and adoration,
that which consists of so great a combination and confluence of wonders, must
needs make a deep impression on the Soul, though hard as Marble, at which the
stones themselves of the Temple did rend asunder.

Secondly, those things use to make impressions on the understanding which do
moove and excite any strong Passion of the mind, there being ever a most near
activity and intimate reference between Passion and Reason, by means of that
natural affinity and subordination which is between them. Observe it in one
passion of Love, how it removes the mind from all other objects, firmly fixing
it on one thing, which it most respects; for as knowledge makes the object to
be loved, so Non pati^r me quicquam nescire deco qu^m amem. Plin. Epist.
love makes us desire to know more of the object: the reason whereof is that
inseparable union which Nature has fixed in all things between the truth and
the good of them; either of which working on the proper faculty to which it
belongs, provokes it to set the other faculty on work, either by distinction
as from the understanding to the passion, or by insinuation, as from the
passion to the understanding: even as fire does not heat without light, nor
enlighten without heat. Where the treasure is, the heart cannot be absent,
where the body is the Eagles must resort. If I know a thing be good I must
love it, and where I love the goodness of it I cannot but desire to know it,
all divine objects being as essentially good as they are true, and Dr. Iackton
of Faith, Sect. 1. cap. 8.. 8.
the knowledge and love of them being as naturally linked as the nerve is to
the part which it moves, or as the beam is to the heat and influence by
which it works: now what object is there can more deserve our love than the
Death of Christ? Certainly if it be (...), Arles Rhet. lib. 2.
natural for men to love where they have been loved before, and if in that
case it be fit that the quantity of the former love should be the rule and
measure of the latter, how can it be that our love to him should not exceed
all other love (even 1 John 14. 19.
as he justly requires) since Romans 5. 7, 8.
greater love than his has not been seen, that a man should neglect the love
of himself and lay down his life for his enemies. And if we love Christ, that
will naturally lead us to remember him too, who as he is Joh. 1 5. 13.
the Life, and so the object of our love; so is he the Ibid.
Truth likewise, and so the object of our knowledge: and therefore the same
Apostle, who did Gal. 6. 12.
rejoice in nothing but Christ crucified (and joy is nothing else but love
perfected, for they differ only as the same water in the pipe and in the
fountain) did likewise, notwithstanding his eminency in all Pharisaicall
learning, Desire to 1 Cor. 2. 2.
know nothing but Jesus Christ and him crucified. Such a dominion has love on
the mind to make permanent and firm impressions.

Lastly, those things work strongly upon the memory, which do mainly
concern, and are beneficial to man; there is no man, not dispossessed of
reason, who in sickness does forget the Physician, neither did ever man hear
of any one straved because he did not remember to eat his meat. Senec. de.
Benef*
Beasts indeed I have heard of (but those very strange ones too) which upon
turning aside from their meat have forgotten the presence of it; but never
were any so forsaken by Nature as to forget the desire and inquiry after what
they wanted: and the reason is, because wheresoever Nature has left a capacity
of receiving farther perfection from some other thing, there she has imprinted
an appetite to that thing: and there is such a sympathy between the faculties
of Nature, that the indigence of one sets all the rest on motion to supply it.
Now what thing was there ever more beneficial unto mankind than the Death of
Christ? in comparison whereof all other things are as dross and dung. The
Totum Christiani nominu and pondus and fructu^, Mors Christ's, Tertul. cont.
Marc. l. 3. c. 8.
name, and fruit, and hope of a Christian would be all but shadows if Christ
had not dyed. By his humility are we exalted, by his curse are we blessed, by
his bondage are we made free, by his stripes are we healed, we who were
vessels of dishonor had all our miseries emptied into him in whom dwelled the
fullness of the Godhead. Illa incorpore Christi vulnera non erant Christi
vulnera sed latronis. Ambros. sermon. 44. de sanctolatrone.
Whatsoever evils he suffered, ours was the propriety to them, but the pain
was his, Sibi quidem indigna Homini autem necessaria and ita sam Deo digna,
quia nihil tam dignum deo quam salus hominis, Tert. cont. Marc. li. 2. c. 27
quodcunque Deo indignum est mihi expedit. Id. de carn. Chri. c. 5.
all that Ignominy and Agony which was unworthy so honorable a Person as
Christ, was necessary for so vile a sinner as man.

Infinite it is and indeed impossible to take a full view of all the benefits
of Christ Death, yet because the remembrance of Christ's Death here is nothing
else but a recordation of those unvaluable blessings which by means of it were
together with his holy Blood shed down upon the Church, I will touch a little
upon the principal of them.

That Christ Jesus is unto his Church the Author and Original of all
spiritual Joh 6.
Life, the Romans 11. 26.
deliverer that should come out of Sion, that should Joh. 8. 36. Gal. 2. 4.
set at liberty his People, Col. 2 15.
spoil Principalities and Powers, Ephesians. 4. 8.
lead Captivity, captive, Luke 11.
take from the strong man all his armor and divide the spoils, is a Truth so
clearly written with a Sun-beame, that no Craconian Heretic da^e deny it.
Let us then see by what means he does all this; and we will not here speak
of that work whereby Christ, having formerly purchased the Right, does
afterward confer and actually apply the benefit and interest of that right
unto his members, which is the work of his quickening Spirit, but only of
those means which he used to procure the right it self, and that was in
general Christ's Merit. The whole conversation of Christ on the earth was
nothing else but a continued merit, proceeding from a double estate, an estate
of Ignominy and Passion procuring, and an estate of Exaltation and honor
applying his benefits.

The Passion of Christ was his Death, whereby I understand not that last act
only of expiration, but the whole space between that and his Nativity,
wherein being Gal. 4.
subject to the Law of Death, and to all those Esuriens sub diabolo, sitiens
sub samaritide, etc. Tert.
natural infirmities, which were the Harbingers of Death, he might in that
whole space be as truly called A man of Death, as Vid. Zeaman de Imag. Dei in
Homine. cap. 8. artic. 2.
Adam was a dead man in the virtue of the Curse that very day beyond which
notwithstanding he lived many hundred years, that which we call Senec. Epist.
Death, being nothing else but the consummation of it. The estate of exaltation
is the Resurrection of Christ, whereby the efficacy of that merit which was on
the Cross consummated is publicly declared, and his Intercession wherein it
is proposed and presented unto God the Father as an eternal Price and Prayer
in the behalf of his Church. Now the Benefits which by this merit of Christ's
we receive are of several kinds. Some are Privative, consisting in an
immunity from all those evils which we were formerly subject unto, whether of
sin or punishment: others are Positive, including in them a (...) Joh. 1. 12.
right and interest unto all the Prerogatives of the sons of God. The one is
called an Expiation, Satisfaction, Redemption or Deliverance. The other a
Purchase, and free Donation of some excellent blessing. Redemption thus
distinguished is either a Redemption of Grace from the bondage and tyranny of
Sin; or a Redemption of Glory, from the bondage of Corruption: and both these
have their parts and latitudes; for the first,

In Sin we may consider three things. The state or mass of sin: the Guilt
or damnablenesse of sin: and the Corruption, stain or deformity of sin.

The state of sin is a state of Ephesians. 2.
deadness or immobility in Nature toward any good: the understanding is dead
and disabled for any spiritual perception: the will is dead and disabled for
any holy propension: the affections are dead and disabled for any pursuit: the
body dead and disabled for any obedient Ministry; and the whole man dead, and
by consequence disabled for any sense of its own death. And as it is a state
of death, so it is a state of enmity too; and therefore in this state we are
the objects of Gods hatred and detestation: so then, the first part of our
Deliverance respects us as we are in this state of death and enmity, and it is
(as I said before) a double Deliverance, negative by removing us out of this
estate; and positive by constituting us in another, which is an estate of life
and reconcilement. First, the 1 Cor. 2. 14. Genesis 6. 5. 2 Cor. 3. 5.
understanding is delivered from the bondage of ignorance, vanity, worldly
wisdom, misperswasions, carnal principles, and the like, and is (after
removal of this 1 Pet. 2. 9.
darkness, and 2 Co. 3. 15, 16.
veil) Act. 26. 18.
opened to see and acknowledge both its own Darkness, and the evidence of
that Light which shines upon it. Our wills and affections are delivered from
that disability of embracing or pursuing of divine Objects, and from that love
of darkness and prosecution of evil which is naturally in them, and after
this, are wrought unto a sorrow and sense of their former estate, to a desire
and love of Salvation, and of the means thereof, with a resolution to make use
of them: and the whole man is delivered from the estate of Death and enmity
unto an estate of Life and Reconciliation by being adopted for the sons of
God: of these Deliverances Christ is the Author, who works them (as I
observed) by a double Causality, the one that whereby he meriteth them, the
other that whereby he conveyeth and transfuseth that which he had merited.
This conveying cause is our Vocation, wrought by the 2 Co. 3. 16, 17 2 Cor. 3.
8.
Spirit of Christ effectively, by the Romans 10. 8. Jam. 1. 18. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 14.
Word of Life, and Gospel of Regeneration instrumentally, by means of both
which (this latter as the seed, that other as the formative virtue that does
vegetate and quicken the 1 Pet. 1. 23.
seed) are we from dead men engrafted into Christ, and of enemies made sons
and Coheires with Christ; but the meritorious cause of all this was that Price
which Christ laid down, whereby he did ransom us from the estate of Death,
and purchase for us the Adoption of sons; for every Ransom and Purchase
(which are the two acts of our Redemption) are procured by the l^ying down of
some 1 Cor. 6, 20.
Price valuable to the thing ransomed and purchased. Now this Price was the
precious Blood of Christ, and the laying down or payment of this Blood was the
pouring it out of his sacred Body, and the exhibiting of it unto his Father in
a passive obedience: and this is to be applied in the other Deliverances.

The second consideration then of sin was the Guilt of it, which is, the
binding over unto some punishment prescribed in the Law: so we have here a
double Deliverance, from the Guilt of sin, and from the Bondage of the Law.

First, for sin, though it leave still a stain in the soul, yet the sting
of it is quite removed, though we are not perfectly cleansed from the soil,
yet are we soundly healed from the mortalnesse and bruises of it.

Then for the Law, we are first freed from the Gal. 3. 13.
Curse of the Law, It is not unto us a killing letter, nor a word of Death, in
as much as it is not that rule according unto which we expect Life.

Secondly, we are freed from the Exaction of the Law, we are not necessarily
bound to the rigorous performance of each jot and title of it, a performance
unto which is ever annexed Legal Justification; but our endeavors though
imperfect, are accepted, our infirmities though sundry are forgiven for his
sake, Mal. 3. 17.
who was Gal. 4. 4, 5.
under both these Bondages of Law for our sakes. And as we are thus delivered
from the Guilt of sin, so are we farther endued with positive Dignities,
Romans 5.
interest and propriety to all the Righteousness of Christ, with which we are
Romans 13. 14.
clothed as with a garment: claim unto all the blessings which the Law
inferres upon due obedience performed to it, and the comforts which from either
of these Title and Prerogatives may ensue. And this is the second branch of
Deliverance, conveyed by the act of Justification, but merited as the rest, by
the Death of JESUS CHRIST.

The third consideration of sin was the Corruption of it, from the which
likewise we are by Christ delivered, sin does not any more rule, nor reign,
nor lead captive those who are ingrafted into Christ, though for their
patience, trial, and exercise sake, and that they may still learn to live by
faith, and to prize mercy, the remnants of it do cleave fast unto our Nature,
like the sprigges and roots of Ivy to a Wall, Epiphan.
which will never out till the Wall be broken down and new built again.
Sin is not like the people of Ierico utterly destroyed, but rather like the
Gibeonites, it lives still, but in an estate of bondage, servitude, and decay;
and besides this, we are enabled to Romans 7. 22.
love the Law in our inner man, to delight in it, to perform a ready and
sincere, though not an exact and perfect obedience to it, we are made partakers
of the divine Nature, the Graces with which Christ was anointed do from him
stream down unto his lowest members, which of his Joh. 1.
fullness do all receive, and are all renewed after Ephesians. 4.
Gods Image in righteousness and true holiness.

The next part of our Redemption was from the Bondage of Corruption, unto the
Romans 8.
Liberty of Glory, which likewise is by Christ performed for us, which is a
Deliverance from the Consequents of sin; for sin does bind over unto
punishment, even as the perfect obedience of the Law would bring a man unto
Glory. Now the Punishments due unto sin are either Temporary or Eternal,
consisting principally in the oppressions and distresses of Nature: for as
Sin is the evil of our working, so Punishment is the evil of our being: and
it includes not only bodily and spiritual death, but all the Ze^man de Imag.
Dei in Homine, cap. 8.
inchoations and preparatory dispositions thereunto, as in the soul doubtings,
distractions, tremblings, and terrors of Conscience, hardness of heart,
fearful expectation of the wrath that shall be revealed: in the body
sickness, poverty, shame, infamy, which are so many earnests and petty
payments of that full debt which will at last be measured out to all the
wicked of the World. Lips. Satur.
Even as amongst the Romans their Prelusory fight with dull and blunt weapons
were but introductions to their mortal and bloody games. And besides this
Deliverance there is in the soul Romans 5. Romans 8.
peace and serenity, in the body a patient waiting for Redemption, and in the
whole man the pledges of that eternal glory which shall be reveled; of all
which the only meritorious cause is the Death of Christ. This Aug. de doctr.
Christia l. 1. c. 14
alone is it which has overcome our death, even as Tertul. cont. Gnost. cap. 5.
one heat cures, one Flux of blood stops another, and has Cypr. in Symb.
caught Satan as it were by deceit, with a bait and a hook; this is it which
has taken away the Ephe. ^. 16. 19 Col. 2. 14.
enmity between God and man, reconciling us to the Father, and by the Heb.
prayer of that precious Blood has obtained for us the Joh. 20. 17.
right of Children; this is it which took away the guilt of sin, and Col. 2.
14.
cancelled the Bond that was in force against us, swallowing up the Gal. 3. 13.
Phil. 2. 7. Joh. 8. 36. 1 John 1. 7.
Curse of the Law, and humbling Christ unto the form of a servant, that thereby
we might be made free; this is it which removes all both temporal and
eternal punishment from the faithful, it having been a perfect payment of
our whole debt; for in as much as Christ himself said on the Cross, It is
finished, we are to conclude, that the other work of Resurrection was not
properly an essential part of Christ's merit, but only a necessary consequent
required to make the Passion applicable and valuable to the Church. As in
coined metals, it is the substance of the coin, the Gold, or Silver, only
that buyeth the ware, but the Impression of the Kings Image is that which makes
that Coin to be current and passable, it does not give the value or worth to
the Gold, but only the application of that value unto other things: even so
the Resurrection and Intercession of Christ do serve to make actual
applications of those merits of his to his Church, which yet had their
consummation on the Cross.

And if it be here demanded how it comes to pass, if all these consequents of
sin be removed, that the faithful are still subject to all those temporal
evils both in life and death which even in the state of Nature they should have
undergone; we answer in general, that the faithful dye in regard of the
state, but not in regard of the sting of Death, they are subject to a
dissolution, but it is to obtain a more blessed union, Phil. 1. 23.
even to be with Christ: and though a man may not take the whole World in
exchange for his Soul, yet he may well take Christ in exchange for his life.
Mercatura est paeuca amittere, ut majora lucreris. Tertul. ad Martyr.
It is not a loss of our money, but traffic and merchandise, to part from it
for the procuring of such commodities as are more valuable; and Saint Paul
tells us that to Phil. 1. 21.
dye is gain. The 1 Cor. 15. 56.
sting we know of Death is sin, (for sin is the cause of all inward
discomforts; for which cause the Psalm. 124. 5. Esaias 55. 20. Jud. ver 13.
wicked are often compared to the foaming Sea, which is still tossed and
unquiet with every wind) and the 1 Cor. 15. 56.
strength of sin is the Law, with the malediction and bondage thereof, from
the which we being perfectly delivered, by him who was himself Gal. 4. 4, 5.
made under the Law, and by that means became a Heb. 7. 25.
perfect and sufficient Savior, we are in like manner delivered from the
penalty of Death; for weaken sin by destroying the Law, (which is the
strength of it) and Death cannot possibly sting.

To examine this point, though by way of digression, something farther will not
be altogether impertinent, because it serves to magnify the power of Christ's
Passion. The evils which we speak of are the violations of the nature and
person of a man: and that evil may be considered two ways, either
physically* as it oppresses and burdeneth Nature, working some violence on the
primitive integrity thereof, and by consequence imprinting an affection of
sorrow in the mind, and so it may be called pain; or else morally and
legally, with respect unto the motive cause in the Patient, Sin; or to the
original efficient cause in the Agent, Justice; and so it may be called
punishment. Punishment being some evil inflicted on a subject for
transgressing some Law commanded him by his Lawmakers, there is there unto
requisite something on the part of the Commander, something on the part of the
Subject, and something on the part of the Evil inflicted. In the Commander
there must be first a will unto which the actions of the Subject must
conform, and that signified in the nature of a Law. Secondly, there must be a
Justice which will. And thirdly, a Power which can punish the transgressors of
that Law. In the Subject there must be first Reason and Free Will (I mean
originally) for a Law proceeding from Justice presupposes a power of
obedience, to command impossibilites is both absurd and tyrannous, befitting
Pharaoh and not God. Secondly there must be a Debt and Obligation whereby he
is bound unto the fulfilling of that Law. And lastly, the Conditions of this
Obligation being broken there must be a Forfeiture, Guilt and Demerit following
the violation of that Law. Lastly, in the Evil it self inflicted there is
required first something absolute, namely a destructive Power, some way or
other oppressing and disquieting Nature (for as sin is a violation offered
from man to the Law, so punishment must be a violation retorted from the Law
to man.) Secondly, there must be something Relative, which may respect first
the author of the evil, whose Justice being by man's sin provoked, is by his
own power, and according to the sentence of his own Law to be executed.
Secondly, it may respect the end for which it is inflicted, it is not the
torment of the Creature, whom as a Creature God loves, neither is it the
pleasing of the Devil, whom as a Devil God hates, but only the Satisfaction
of Gods Justice, and the Manifestation of his Wrath. These things being thus
premised, we will again make a double Consideration of Punishment, either it
may be taken improperly, and incompletely, for whatsoever oppressive evil does
so draw its original in a Reasonable Creature from Sin, as that if there
were not an habitation of sin, there should be no room for such an evil, as
in the man that was borne blind, though sin were not the cause of the
blindness, yet it was that which made room for the blindness: or it may
be taken properly and perfectly, and then I take it to admit of some such
Description as this Punishment is an evil or pressure of Nature, proceeding
from a Lawgiver just and powerful, and inflicted on a Reasonable Creature,
for the disobedience and breach of that Law unto the performance whereof it was
originally by the natural faculty of free will enabled, whereby there is
intended a Declaration of Wrath, and Satisfaction of Justice.

Now then I take it we may with conformity unto the Scriptures, and with the
Analogy of Faith set down these Conclusions.

First, consider Punishments as they are dolours and pains, and as they are
impressions contrary to the integrity of Nature, so the temporal evils of the
godly are punishments, because they work the very same manner of natural
effects in them which they do in other men. Secondly, take Punishments
improperly for those evils of Nature which do occasionally follow sin, and
unto which sin has originally opened an entrance, which declare how God
stands affected toward sin, with a mind purposing the rooting out and
destroying of it; in this sense likewise may the afflictions of the godly be
called Punishments, as God is said to have been Numb. 12. 9.
exceeding angry with Aaron. But now these evils though inflicted on the godly
because of their sins, as were, the death of the child to David, the tempest
to Jonah, and the like, yet are they not evils inflicted for the Revenge of sin
(which is yet the right Nature of a proper Punishment) (so says the Lord,
Vengeance is mine, I will repay it) but they are evils by the Wisdom of God,
and love toward his Saints inflicted for the overthrow of sin, for weakening
the violence, and abating the outrageousnesse of our natural corruptions. As
then in the godly sin may be said to be, and not to be in a diverse sense,
(so says Saint John in one place, 1 John 1. ^.
If we say we have no sin we deceive our selves, and yet in another, Joh.
3. 9.
He that is borne of God sins not) It is not in them in regard of its
Condemnation, although it be in them in regard of its inhabitation, though
even that also as daily dying and crucified, even so punishments or consequents
of sin may be said to be in the godly, or not to be in them in a different
sense. They are not in them in regard of their sting and curse as they are
proper Revenges for sin, although they be in them in regard of their state,
substance, and painfulness, until such time as they shall put on an eternal
Triumph over Death, the last enemy that must be overcome. Lastly, I conclude,
that the temporal evils which do befall the godly are not formally or
properly punishments, nor effects of divine malediction or vengeance toward
the persons of the godly, who having obtained in Christ a plenary
reconciliation with the Father, can be by him respected with no other affection
(however in manner of appearance it may seem otherwise) than with an affection
of love and free grace.

The reasons for this position are these: first, Punishment, with what
mitigation soever qualified is in suo formali, in the nature of it a thing
Legal, namely the execution of the Law, for divine Law is ever the square and
rule of that Justice of which punishment is the effect and work. Now all those
on whom the execution of the Law does take any effect, may truly be said to be
so far under the Law in regard of the sting and curse thereof, (for the curse
of the Law is nothing else but the evil which the Law pronounces to be
inflicted, so that every branch and sprigge of that evil, must needs bear in
it some part of the nature of a Curse, even as every part of water has in it
the nature of water) but all the godly are wholly delivered from all the sting
and malediction of the Law, Christ Romans 10. 4.
is unto us the end of the Law, abolishing the shadows of the Ceremonial, the
the Curses of the Moral; Romans 6. 14.
we are no more under the Law, but under Grace, under the precepts, but not
under the Covenant, under the Plane and nos sic dicimus decessisse legem quoad
onera non quoad Iustitiam, Tert. de Monog. cap. 7.
obedience, but not under the bondage of the Law: unto the 1 Timothy 1. 9.
righteous there is no Law, that is, there is no condemnation to them that are
in Christ: we are dead unto the Law by the Body of Christ, it has not the
least power or dominion over us. Secondly, the most proper nature of a
punishment is to satisfy an offended Justice, but Christ bearing the iniquity
of us all in his Body on the Tree, did therein make a most sufficient and ample
satisfaction to his Fathers wrath, leaving nothing wherein we should make up
either the measure or the virtue of his sufferings, but did himself perfectly
save us: for an infinite person suffering, and the value of the suffering
depending on the dignity of the Person, it must needs be that the satisfaction
made by that suffering must be likewise infinite, and by consequence most
perfect. Lastly, if we consider (as Omnis rei inspectio Authore cognito planior
est. Tert. de fug. in persec. cap. 1.
it is in all matters of consequence necessary) but the author of this evil,
we shall find it to be no true and proper punishment; for it is a reconciled
father Heb. 12. 6.
who chasteneth every son whom he receives, who as he often does
Indignantis Dei major haec plaga est ut nec intelligant delicta nec plangunt
Cypr. de Lapsis.
declare his severest wrath by forbearing to punish, so does he as often even
out of O servum illum beatum, cujus emendationi Domin^^ instat cui dignatur
irasci; Tert. de patient. ca. 11. In corripi endo filio quamvis aspere nunquam
profecto amor pater^^^ amittitur, Aug. Epist. 5.
tenderness, and compassion chastise his Children, who has 1 Thessalonians. 3. 3. Job
5. 6.
predestined us unto them, does 1 Cor. 11. 32.
execute his decrees of mercy in them, does by his providence govern, and by
his love sanctify them unto those that suffer them, in none of which things
are there the prints of punishment.

But if Christ have thus taken away the malignity of all temporal punishments,
why are they not quite removed? to what end should the substance of that
remain whose properties are extinguished? Deu^ est adeo bonu^ ut non
permitteret malum fieri, si non esset adeo po tens ut posse^ ex malo bonum
educere. Aug. in Euchir.
Certainly God is so good as that he would not permit evil to be, if he
were not so powerful as to turn it to good. Is there not honey in the Be
when the sting is removed? sweetness in the rose when the prickles are cut
off? a medicinable virtue in the flesh of Vipers when the poison is cast out?
and can man turn Serpents into Antidotes, and shall not God be able to turn
the fiery darts of that old Serpent into instruments for letting out our
corruptions, and all his buffets into so many strokes for the better fastening
of those Graces in us, which were before loose, and ready to fall out? Briefly
to conclude this digression, some ends of the remaining of Death, and other
temporal evils (notwithstanding the Death of Christ have taken away the
malignity of them all) are amongst others these. First, for the Heb. 1^. 36.
Zech. 13 9. Deuteronomy. 8. 2. 1 Pet. 4. 12. Conslictatio in ^dversis probatio est
veritatis, Cypr. de mortal. and de Lapsis.
trial of our faith and other Graces; Sed quando Deus magis creditur nisi cum
magis timetur? Tert. de f^g^ in persec. cap. 1. and vid. Apol. ca. ult* Aug.
Epist. 28. and de civ. dei. li. 10. cap. 29. and Chrysostom. ad populum An^ioch.
Hom. 1.
our Faith in Gods Providence is then greatest, when we dare cast our selves
on his care, even when to outward appearances he seems not at all to care
for us: when we can so look on our miseries that we can withal look through
them. Admirable is that faith which can with Israel see the Land of Promise
through a Sea, a Persecution, a Wilderness, through whole Armies of the sons
of Anak, which can with Abraham see a Posterity like the stars of Heaven
through a dead womb, a bleeding sword, and a sacrificed son* which can with
Job see a Redeemer, a Resurrection, a restitution, through the dunghill, and
the potsheard, through ulcers and botches, through the violence of heaven and
of men, through the discomforts of friends, the temptations of a wife, and the
malice of Satan; which can with Stephen see Christ in heaven through a whole
tempest and cloud of stones; which can with that poor Syrophenician Woman see
Christ's compassion through the odious name of Dog, which can in every Egypt
see an Exodus, in every red Sea a passage, in every fiery Furnace an Angel of
Light, in every Den of Lions a Lion of Judah, in every temptation a door of
escape, and in every grave an arise and sing. Secondly, they are unto us for
Heb. 12 10. Psalm. 94. 12, 13. Sicut sub uno igne aeurumruti^at palea sumat, it
a una eademque vis irruens ^onos probat, purificat, eliqudt, malos damnat,
vastat, exterminat, Aug. de ^iv. Dei. l 1. c. 8
antidotes against sin, and means of humility and newness of life, by which
our I^centem fidem and pene dixeram do^mien^e^ censura coelestis erexit Cypr.
Exercitia sunt ista non funera, Id. de mort. Sic quoties ferro vitis
abscinditur erumpentibus pampinis melius (...) vestitur. Id. de Laud. mart.
Incidisti in mantenis sed feliciter incidi^li, incidit and ille in agritudines
tuas. Tert. con^. Gnost.
faith is exercised and excited, our corruptions pruned, our diseases cured,
our security and slacknesse in the race which is set before us corrected,
without which good effects all our afflictions are cast away in vain upon us.
He has Perdidistis utilitatem calamitatis, and miserri mi facti estis, and
pessimipermansistis. Aug. de civi. dei l. 1. c. 33.
lost his affliction that has not learned to endure it, the evils of the
faithful are not to destroy but to instruct them, they loose their end if they
* teach them nothing. Thirdly, they make us Romans 8. 17.
conformable unto Christ's sufferings. Fourthly, they 2 Cor. 12. 9.
show unto us the perfection of Gods graces, and the sufficiency of his love.
Fifthly, they Hos. 5. 15. 6. 1.
drive us unto God for succor, unto his Word for information, and unto his
Son for better hopes, for nothing sooner drives a man out of himself than
that which oppresses and conquereth him; in so much as that public
calamities vid. Brisson. de form. l. 2. p. 204. and 208.
drove the Heathen themselves to their prayers, and to consult with their
Sybils Oracles for removing those Judgments, whose author, though ignorant
of, yet under false names, and idolatrous representations, they labored as
much as in them lay to reconcile and propitiate. Sixthly, God is in them Levit.
10. 3. 2 Samuel 12. 14. Joh. 9. 3. 11. 4.
glorified, in that he spares not his own People, and yet does so punish,
that he does withal support and amend them. Heb. 11. 26. 12. 2. (...)
Chrysostom. ad pop. Antioch. Hom. 1. A^avit quos vocaverat in salutem invitare ad
gloriam, ut qui gaudeamus liberati, exultemus etiam coronati, etc. vid. Tertul.
cont. Gnost. cap 6.
Lastly, it prepares us for Glory, and by these evils convincing the
understanding of the slipperinesse, and uncertainty of this worlds delights,
and how happiness cannot grow in that earth which is cursed with thorns and
briars, it teaches us to groan after the revelation of that life which is
hid with Christ, where all tears shall be wiped from our eyes. So that in
all temporal evils that which is destructive the sting and malediction of them
is in the Death of Christ destroyed: having therefore so many motives to make
impr^ssions on the Soul, the Wonder of Christ's Death, the Love of it, and the
Benefits redounding unto us from it; there is required of us a multiplied
recordation, a Celebrantes sacramenta commovemur quasi ungulam findens, and
ruminans pecus revecare ad fauces, and minutatim communori Dominica
institutionis exemplum, ut semper passio si^ in memoria, etc. Cypr. de coe^^
Do^.
ruminating, and often recalling of it to our thoughts, if it were possible at
all times, to have no word, or thought, or work, pass from us without an eye
unto Christ crucified, as the pattern, or if not, as the Judge of them; but
especially at that time when the drift, and purpose of our whole sacred
business is the Celebration of his Death.

CHAP. XVI.
Of the manner after which we are to celebrate the memory of Christ's Passion.
BUt we may not presume that we remember Christ's death as he requires, when
either with an historical memory, or with a festival solemnity only, we
celebrate, or discourse of it, except we do it with a practicke memory,
proportioned to the goodness and quality of the thing remembered. And first we
must remember Christ with a memory of faith, with an applying and assuming
memory, not only in the general, that he died; but in particular, that the
reason of his death was my salvation and deliverance from death. Pilate and the
unbeleeving Jews shall one day see him whom they have peirced, and remember
his death, Judas shall see and remember him whom he kissed, the Devil shall
see and remember him whom he persecuted, and in every one of these shall their
remembrance produce an effect of horror and trembling, Iam. 2. 19.
because they remember him as their Judge. If our remembrance of the love and
mercy of his death, not only testified, but exhibited, and obsignated unto us,
were no other than that which the wicked spirits have of his justice and
severity, it could not be but that we should as readily believe, as they do
tremble at his death.

And indeed (if we observe it) the remembrance of Christ's death, and the faith
in it are one and the same thing; for what else is faith but a review and
reflection of our thoughts upon Christ, a multiplied, and reiterated assent
unto the benefits of him crucified? and what is remembrance, but the returning
of the mind back unto the same object about the which it had been formerly
employed? The remembrance of Christ is nothing else but the knowledge of Christ
repeated, and the John 17 3.
knowledge of Christ is all one with the belief in him, they which are not by
faith united unto him, are quite ignorant of him. And therefore we find that
Saint Pe^ers second denial of Christ, is by the Evangelists diversely related.
In some John 18. 25. Mat^h. 26. 72.
I am none of his, in others I know not the man: and certainly, if the one had
been true, the other had been true too, for all complete knowledge must have a
commensuration to the objects that are known, and the ends for which they are
proposed. Now all divine objects, besides their truth, have together annexed a
goodness which is applicable to those that know it; so that to profess the
knowledge of it, and yet not know how to apply it to our own use, is indeed
therefore to be ignorant of it, because there is no other end why it should be
known, then that thereby it might be applied. And therefore in the Scripture
phrase, a wicked man and a fool are terms equivalent, because the right
knowledge of divine truths, Nullum bonum (...) noscitur quod non perfect
amatur, etc. vid. Aug lib. 83. quaestionum. Tom 4. p. 208 q 35.
does ever infer the love and prosecution of them; for every act in the will,
whether of embracing, or abominating any object, is grounded on some precedent
Judgment of the understanding. Nothing that by the ultimate dictate of each
particular and practical judgment is proposed as totally and supremely good,
can possibly be by the Will refused, because therein it must needs resist the
impresse of Nature, which leads every, as well voluntary as necessary Agent,
unto an infallible pursuit of whatsoever is proposed unto it, as a thing able
by the accession of its goodness, to advance and perfect the nature of the
other: and therefore whosoever believe not in Christ Jesus, and his death, nor
do embrace and cling unto it, with all the desires of a most ardent affection,
cannot possibly be said to know him, because however they may have some few,
broken, faint, and floating notions of him, yet he is not by this knowledge
proposed unto the Will, as its sole and greatest good (for then he could not
but be embraced) but is in good earnest by the practick judgment undervalued
and disesteemed, in comparison of other things, whose goodness and convenience
unto sensual and corrupt nature, is represented more clearly. Many men may
be able to discourse of the death of Christ, after a speculative, and
scholasticall manner, so profoundly, as that another who truly believes in
him, shall not be able to understand it: and yet this poor soul that desires
to know nothing but him, that accounts all things else dung in comparison of
him, that endeavors to be made conformable unto him in the communion and
fellowship of his sufferings, that can in Christ's wounds see his safety, in
Christ's stripes his Medicine, in Christ's anguish his peace, in Christ's Cross
his triumph; does so much more truly know him, as a man that is able safely to
guide a ship through all the coasts of the world, does better know the regions
and situations of Countries, than he who by a dexterity that way is able to
draw most exact and Geographicall descriptions. Vid. Ar. Eth. lib. 7. cap. 3.
Boys may be able to turn to, or to repeat several passages of a Poet or
Orator more readily than a grounded Artist, who yet notwithstanding knows the
elegancy and worth of them far better: and a Stage Player can happily express
with greater life of passion the griefs of a distressed man, than he can
himself, although altogether ignorant of the weight and oppression of them.

It is not therefore Logical, Historical, Speculative rememhrance of Christ,
but an experimental and believing remembrance of him, which we are to use in
the receiving of these sacred mysteries, which are not a bare Type and
resemblance, but a seal also, confirming, and exhibiting his death unto each
believing soul.

Secondly, we must remember the death of Christ, with a remembrance of
thankefulnes for that great love which by it we enjoy from him: certainly he
has no dram of good nature in him, who for the greatest benefit that can
befall him does not return a recompense of remembrance, Qui mem^^t sine
impend^o gratu^ est. Senec de Benef.
which costs him nothing. Our salvation cost Christ a precious price, his own
blood, and shall not we so much as lay up the memory of it in our minds, that
we may have it forth-comming to answer all the objections that can be made
against our title to salvation? consider with thy self the fearefulnes and
horror of thy natural estate, wherein thou were exposed to the infinite wrath
of Almighty God, whom thou therefore being both finite and impotent were no way
able to appease, subject to the strokes and terrors, not only of thine own
Conscience, a bosom Hell, but of that most exact justice, which it is as
impossible for thee to sustain with patience, as with obedience, to satisfy.
The creatures thine enemies thine own heart thy witness, thy Creator, thy
Judge, eternity of expreslelesse anguish, gnawing of conscience, despair of
deliverance, and whatsoever misery the most searching understanding can but
imagine thy sentence, for according to his fear, so is his wrath, from this,
and much more has the death of Christ, not only delivered thee, but of a cast
away, an enemy, a deplored wretch, weltring in thine own blood, rotting and
stinking in thine own grave, has restored thee not only to thine original
interest, and patrimony, but unto an estate so much more glorious then that
could have been, by how much the obedience of Christ, is more precious, then
any thy innocence could possibly have performed. Consider the odious filthiness
of sin, the pertinacious adherence thereof unto thy nature, so that nothing
but the incarnation, and blood of the Son of God, the Creator of the World
could wash it out; consider the Justice, and undispensable severity of our God
against sin, which would not spare the life of his own Son, nor be
satisfied without a Sacrifice of infinite, and coequall virtue with it self:
consider that it was thy sin, which were thy associates with Judas, and
Pilate, and the Jews to crucify him: It was thy Hypocrisy which was the kiss
that betrayed him, thy covetousnes the thorns that crowned him, thy oppression,
and cruelty the nails, and Spears that peirced him, thy Idolatry and
superstition the knee that mocked him, thy contempt of religion the spittle
that defiled him, thy anger and bitterness the gall, and v^negar that distasted
him, thy Crimson, and redoubled sins the Purple that dishonord him, in a word
thou were the Jew that killed him. Can thou then have so many members as
weapons wherewith to crucify thy Savior, and have thou not a heart wherein to
recognize, and a tongue wherewith to celebrate the benefits of that blood which
thy sins had powered out? The fire is quenched by that water which by its
heat was caused to run over, and shall not any of thy sins, be put out by
the overflowing of that precious blood which thy sins caused to run out of
his sacred Body? Lastly, consider the immensitie of Gods mercy, and the
unutterable treasures of his grace, which neither the provocations of thy
sin, nor the infinite exactnes of his own justice could any way overcome, or
constrain to despise the work of his own hands or nor to compassionate the
wretchedness of his creature though it cost the Humiliation of the Son of God,
and the exinanition of his Sacred person to perform it. Lay together all those
considerations, and certainly they are able even to melt a heart of Adamant
into thoughts of continual thankfulness toward so bountiful a Redeemer.

Thirdly, we must remember the death of CHRIST with a Remembrance of Obedience
even the commands of God should be sufficient to enforce our obedience. It is
not the manner of Lawmakers to use insinuations, and plausible provokements,
but peremptory, and resolute injunctions upon pain of penalty: but our God
deals not only as a Lord, but as a Father, he has delivered us from the
penalty, and now rather invites, then compels us to obedience, least by
persisting in sin we should make void unto our selves the benefit of Christ's
death, yea should crucify him a fresh, and so bring upon our selves not the
benefit but the guilt of his blood. Is it nothing think we that Christ should
die in vain, and take upon him the dishonor, and shame of a servant to no
purpose? and disobedience, as much as in it lies does nullify, and make void
the death of Christ: Is it nothing that that sacred Blood of the covenant
should be shed only to be trodden, and trampled under foot as a vile thing?
and certainly he that celebrates the memory of Christ's death in this holy
Sacrament with a wilfully polluted soul, does not commemorate the Sacrifice,
but share in the slaughter of him; and receives that precious blood not
according to the institution of Christ, to drink it, but with the (...).
Ch^ysost in 1 Cor. Hom* 27. Verb^no (...) connot an^ essect^^.
purpose of Judas and the Jews, to shed it on the ground; a cruelty so much
more detestable then Caines was, by how much the blood of Christ is more
precious than that of Abel. In the phrase of Scripture, sinning against God,
and forgetting of him, or casting of him behind our back, or bidding him
depart from us, or not having him before our eyes, are all of equal
signification, neither is any thing called remembrance in divine dialect which
does not frame the soul unto affections befitting the quality of the object
that is remembered. He August de Gen^s ad literam l. 7. cap. 20.
is not said to see a pit, though before his eyes, who by Starre-gazing or
other thoughts falls into it; nor he to remember Christ, though presented to
all his senses at (...), who makes no regard of his presence. Divine knowledge,
being practical, requires advertence and consideration, an essicacious
pondering of the consequences of good or evil, and thereby a proportionable
government of our several courses, which who so neglects, may be properly
said to forget, or to be ignorant of what was before him, though not out of
blindness, yet out of Vid. Casaub. comment. in cap. 8 Theoph^ast. charact. p.
271.
inconsiderateness, as not applying close unto himself the object
represented, which if truly remembered, would infallibly frame the mind unto a
ready obedience and conformity thereunto.

Lastly, We must remember the Death of Christ with Prayer unto God, for as by
faith we apply to our selves, so by prayer we represent unto God the Father
that his death as the merit and means of reconciliation with him: as prayer is
animated by the Death of Christ (which alone is that character that adds
currantnesse unto them) so is the Death of Christ not to be celebrated without
Prayer, wherein we do with confidence implore Gods acceptance of that
sacrifice for us, in which alone he is wellpleased. 1 King. 8. 52
Open thine eyes unto the supplication of thy servants, to hearken unto all for
which they shall call unto thee, was the Prayer of Solomon in the consecration
of the Temple. What, does God hearken with his eyes unto the prayers of his
people? Has not he that made the ear an ear himself, but must be feign to
make use of another faculty unto a different work? Certainly unless the eye
of God be first open to look on the blood of his Son, and on the persons of
his Saints bathed and sprinkled therewith, his ears can never be open unto
their prayers. Prayer does put God in mind of his Isa. 43. 26. Psalm 89. 49.
Esaias 64. 8. 12. Iere. 14. 8. 9, 21.
Covenant, and Covenants are not to be presented without seals; now the seal
of our Covenant is the blood of Christ, no Testament is of force but by the
death of the Testator, whenever therefore we present unto God the truth of
his own free Covenant in our prayers, let us not forget to show him his own
seal too, by which we are confirmed in our hope therein. Thus are we to
celebrate the death of Christ, and in these regards is this holy work called
by the Ambros. de Sacram. lib. 4. c* 6. and Chrysostom. scope ^itabil^s hos^ia
bonas animus, pura meus, sincera conscien^i^; Haec nost^a sacrifici^, ^hoec pia
saev^ sunt. Minut. Felix in Octavio.
Ancients an unbloody sacrifice, in a mystical and spiritual sense, because
in this work is a confluence of all such holy duties, as are in the Scripture
called spiritual sacrifices: and in the same sense was the Lords Table
ofttimes by them called an Altar, as that was which the Reubenites erected on
the other side of Jordan, not for any proper sacrifice, but to be a pattern
and memorial of that whereon sacrifice was offered.

CHAP. XVII.
Inferences of Practice from the several ends of this holy Sacrament.
Here then in as much as these sacred Elements are instituted to present and
exhibit Christ unto the faithful soul, we may infer with what affection
we ought to approach unto him, and what reverent estimation to have of them.
Happiness as it is the scope of all reasonable desires, so the confirmation of
that happiness is the solace and security of those that desire it. He (said
the Prophet, speaking of Christ) shall be the desire of all Nations, in as
much as without him that happiness which all do naturally desire, is but a
Meteor and fiction. So then we see that even the light of our inbred reason,
seconded and directed by Divine truths does lead us unto a desire of Christ,
who alone is the Author and Matter of that Happiness, which is the true
though unknown object of all our natural desires. Now this happiness in Christ
we cannot have till we have actual fruition of him, enjoy this blessedness we
never can till we are united to him, no more then a dissected member enjoyes
the vital influences of the soul, and Spirits. Union unto Christ we cannot
have until it please him, by his Spirit as it were to stoop from that
Kingdom where now he is, and to exhibit himself unto those whom it pleases
him to assume into the unity of his body. Other way to enjoy him here we can
have none, since no man can at his pleasure or power lift up his eyes with
Steven to see him, or go up with S. Paul to the third Heavens, to enjoy him.
Now it has pleased the Wisdom of Christ 1 Cor. 1. 2. Cor. 4. 7.
(whose honor ever it is to magnify his power in his creatures weakness and to
borrow noe parcel of glory in his service from those earthly and elementary
instruments which he uses in it) by no other means to exhibit, and confirm
the virtue of his sacred Body unto us, with the life, and righteousness that
from it issues, but only by those poor and ordinary elements of Bread, and
Wine in his Sacrament unto which therefore he requires such reverence, such
hunger and affection as is in reason due to the Hand that reaches, to the
Seal that secureth, to the food that strengthens that spiritual life in us,
without which we cannot possibly reach unto the end of our very natural, and
created desires, happiness and tranquillity. It behooves us therefore to beware
how we give entertainment to any carnal thoughts, which go about to vilify,
and undervalew the excellency of so Divine mysteries from the outward meannesse
of the things themselves. Say not like sullen 2 Kings 5. 12, 13.
Naaman, Is not the Wine in the Vintners Sellar, or the Bread of mine own
Table as good, as nourishing as is any in the Temple? certainly if thou be
commanded some great Work for the procuring of so great a good, as there had
been between the service, and the reward we disproportion, so would even
reason it self have dictated unto us a necessity of obeying rather then of
disputing, how much rather when he bids us only to eat, and live. True it is
that these creatures naturally have no more power to convey CHRIST, then wax
has in it self to convey a Lordship: yet as a small piece of wax when once in
the virtue of a humane covenant or contract it is made the instrument to
confirm, and ratify, such a conveyance is unto the receiver of more
consequence then all the wax in the Town besides, and is with the greatest
care preserved: so these elements though physically the same which are used at
our own Tables, yet in the virtue of that holy Consecration, whereby they are
made the instru^ments of exhibiting, and the seals of ascertaining Gods
Covenant of grace unto us, are unto us more valewable then our barnes full of
grain, or our presses full of grapes, and are to be desired with so far
distant an affection from the other that are common, as Heaven is above Earth.

Secondly, in that these elements are consecrated and exhibited for
confirmation of our Faith, we thence see how the Church has her 1 Thessalonians. 3.
10. Luke 17. 5. Romans 1. 19.
degrees of faith, her 1 John 1. 16
measure the spirit, her Phil. 1. 19
deficiencyes of grace, her languishings, ebbings, imperfections, her decays,
blemishes and falls, which makes her stand in need of being Ephesians. 4 12* 13.
perfected, builded, Colos 2. 6. 7.
rooted, established Ephesians 4. 15 1 Pet. 2 2.
in faith and righteousness, Pars superior m^ndi^t ordinatior nec in nubem
capitur nec in tempestatem imp^l^tur, n^c ve^satur in turbinem omni tumultu
(...), in^^rio^a ful^^^ant: Senec^ de ira l. 3. c. 6. ^inim^s rerum discord^a
versat. Pacem summa tene^t. Lucam.
all things under the middle region are subject to Winds, Thunders, Tempests,
the continual uncertainties of boisterous wheather, whereas in the Heavens
there is a perfect uniforme serenity, and calmenes: so when a Christian comes
once to his own Country unto Heaven, he then comes unto an estate of peace,
and security, Job 1. 7. 2. 2.
to be filled with the fulness of GOD, where thieves do not break thorowgh nor
steal, where neither flesh nor Satan have any admission, noe storms of
temptation, No Shipwreck of conscience, Ephesians. 3 19.
but where all things are spiritual, Ehes. 4. 13.
and peaceable. But in this Earth, where Satan has power to go from place to
place to Job 1. 7. 2. 2.
compass the World, to raise his tempests against the Church even the Psalm^.
Waves of ungodly men, can have no safety from any danger, which either his
subtelty can contrive, or his malice provoke, or his power execute, or his
instruments further, and therefore we are here subject to more or fewer
degrees of faintnes in our Faith according as our strength, to resist the
common adversary is less or greater. As in the natural, so in the mystical
Body, though all the parts do in common partake of life, yet one is more
vital then another, the Heart, and Head, then the Hands, and Feet, yea the
same part is at one time more active, and quick then at others. One while
overgrowne with humors, and stiffned with distempers, another while free,
expedite, and able for the discharge of any vital office. And this is that
which drives us to a necessity of recovering our strength, and making up our
breaches by this holy Sacrament, which should likewise tell us in what humble
esteem we ought to have our perfectest endowments, they being all subject to
their faylings, and decaies.

Thirdly, in that these mysteries do knit the faithful together into the
unity of on common body, we see what fellow feeling the faithful should have
of each other, how they should interest themselves in the se^verall states, and
affections of their fellow members, to Romans 12 15.
rejoice with those that rejoice, and to weep with those that weep. As we
should Phil. 2. 2.
think the same things, and so agree in a unity of judgments because Ioh. 14
26.
all led with one, and the same Spirit which is the Spirit of ^oh. 15. 26.
truth, so we should all Gal. 6. 2.
suffer, and do the same things, and so all concur in a unity of affections,
because Romans 8. 11.
all animated by the same Spirit, which is the Romans 5 5.
Spirit of love too, Romans 7. 23.
where there is dissension, and disagreement, there must needs be a several
Law, where the Law is diverse, the government differs too, and in a different
government there must of necessity be a different subjection. He then that does
not sympathize with his brother, but nourishes factious and uncharitable
thoughts against him, does therein plainly testify, that he is not subject (at
least totally) unto the same prince with him and then we know that there are
but two Princes, a Prince of peace, and a Prince of darkness. Nature is in all
her operations uniforme, and constant unto her self Luke. 6. 44
one Tree cannot naturally bring forth Grapes, and Figgs, Iam. 3 11. 12
out of the same Fountain cannot issue bitter water, and sweet, the self
same vital faculty of feeling which is in one member of the body is in all,
because all are animated with that soul which does not confine it self unto
any one. The Church of God is a Esaias 5. 7. Ezek^l. 17. 24.
Tree planted by the same hand, a Cant. 4 12. 13.
Garden watered from the same Fountain, Ephesians. 5. 23 Romans 12. 5.
a body quickened by the same Spirit, the members of it are all brethren; Acts
11. 1. 15. 36.
begotten by one Father of mercy, generated by one Seed of the Word, delivered
g from one womb of ignorance, fed with one bread of Life, employed in one
Heavenly calling, brought up in one Household of the Church, travelers in one
way of grace, heirs to one Kingdom of glory, and when they agree in so many
unities, should they then admit any fraction or disunion in their minds? from
Adam unto the last man that shall tread on the Earth is the Church of GOD but
one continued, and perfected body, and therefore we find that as in the 1 Cor
12. 26.
body the head is affected with the grievances of the feet, though there be a
great distance of place between them; so the Esaias. 64.
holymen of God have mourned, and been exceedingly touched with the afflictions
of the Church even in after Ages, though between them did interveane a great
distance of time. Certainly then Amos 6. 4. 7
if the Church of God lie in distress, and we stretch our selves on beds of
Juory, if she mourn in sackcloth, and we riot in soft raiment, if the wild
Bore of the Forest break in upon her, and we send not out one prayer to drive
him away, if there be cleanenesse of teeth in the poor, and our teeth grind
them still, if their bowels be empty of food, and ours still empty of
compassion, if the wrath of God be enflamed against his people, and our zeal
remain still as frozen, our charity as cold, our affections as benumbed, our
compassion as stupid as it ever was, In aword, if Sion lie in the dust, and we
hang not up our Harpes, nor pray for her peace, as we can conclude nothing but
that we are unnatural members, so can we expect nothing but the curse of
Judge. 5. 29.
Meroz, who went not out to help the Lord.

Fourthly, in that this Sacrament is Gods Instrument to ratify and make sure
our claim unto his Covenant, we learn. First, therein to admire and adore the
unspeakeable love of God, who is pleased not only to make, but to confirm his
promises unto the Church. As Iam. 1. 17.
God, so his truth, whether of judgments or promises, are all in themselves
immutable, and infallible in their event; yet notwithstanding, as the Sun
though in it self of a most uniforme light and magnitude, yet by reason of the
great distance, and of the variety of mists and vapors through which the rays
are diffused, it often seems in both properties to vary: so the promises of
God; however in themselves of a fixed and unmovable certainty, yet passing
through the various tempers of our minds one while serene and clear, another
while by the steeme of passions, and temptations of Satan, foggie and
distemperd, do appear under an inconstant shape. And for this cause, as the
Sun does it self dispell those vapors which did hinder the right perc^^tion
of it; so the grace of God, together with and by the holy Sacrament
communicated, does rectify the mind and compose those diffident affections
which did before intercept the efficacy and evidence thereof.

God made a Covenant with our fathers, and not accounting that enough he
confirmed it by an oath, Heb. 6. 18.
that by 2. immutable things, wherein it was impossible for God to ly, they
might have strong consolation who have had refuge to lay hold on the hope that
is set before them. The strength we see of the consolation depends upon the
stability of the covenant. And is Gods covenant made more firm by an oath than
by a promise? The truth of God is as his nature without Iam. 1 17.
variableness or shadow of changing, and can it then be made more immutable?
Certainly as to infinitenes in regard of extension, so unto immutabillity in
regard of firmenes, can there not be any accession of degrees, or parts: All
immutability being no^thing else but an exclusion of whatsoever might possibly
occur to make the thing variable and uncertain. So then the Oath of God does
no more add to the certainty of his word then do men's oaths and
protestations to the truth of what they affirm; but because we consist of an
earthly and dull temper, therefore God when he speaks unto us does ingeminate
his compellations, Ierem. 22. 9 Vel praesentem desideramus. Plin. Paneg.
O Earth, Earth, Earth, hear the word of the Lord. So weak is our sight, so
diffident our nature, as that it seems to want the evidence of what it sees:
peradventure God may repent him of his promise, as he did sometime of his G^n 6
6.
Creature. Why should not the Covenant of grace be as mutable as was that of
gwords? God promised to Psalm. 48. 8.
establish Sion for ever, and yet Sion, the City of the great God is fallen;
was not Ierem 7 12
Shilo beloved, and did not God forsake it? had Ierem 22. 28
Comah been as the signet of his hand, had he not yet been cast away? was
not Esaias 5. 1.
Jerusalem a Vine of Gods planting, and has not the wild Boar long since
rooted it up? was not To. 11. 21 24
Israel the natural Olive that did partake of the fat and sweetness of the
root, and is yea cut off, and wrath come upon it to the uttermost? Though God
be most immutable, may he not yet alter his promise? did the abrogation of
Ceremonies prove any way a change in him who was as well the erector as the
dissolver of them? Though the Sun be fastened to his own Sphere, yet may he
be moved by another Orb. What if Gods promise barely considered, proceed from
his Antecedent and simple will of benevolence toward the Creature, but the
stability and certainty of his promise in the event depend on a second
resolution of his consequent will, which presupposes the good use of mine own
liberty? may not I then abuse my free will and so frustrate unto my self the
benefit of Gods promise? Is not my will mutable, though Gods be not? may not I
sink and fall though the place on which I stand be firm? may not I let go my
hold though the thing which I handle be it self fast? what if all this while
I have been in a Dream, mistaking mine own private fancies and
misperswasions for the dictates of Gods Spirit? mistaking Satan (who uses to
transform himself) for an Angel of light? God has promised, it is true, but
has he promised unto me? did he ever say unto me, Simon, Simon, or Saul,
Luke 22. 31.
Saul Or Samuel, Samuel? Or if he did, Act. 9 4.
must he needs perform his promise to me, 1 Samuel 3. 10.
who am not able to fulfill my conditions unto him? Thus, as unto men floating
upon the Sea, or unto distempered brains, the land and house though immovable
seem to reele, and totter, or as unto weak eyes, every thing seems double:
so the promises of God however built 2 Timothy 2 19.
on a sure foundation, his Counsel, and Foreknowledge, yet unto men
prepossest with their own private distempers do they seem unstable and
frail, unto a weak eye of faith Gods Covenant to be (if I may so speak)
Duos Deos caeci perspexisse se existim^verunt, unum enim non ^^tegre viderant,
lippientibus enim singularis lucerna numeros^ est. Tert. Cont. Marc. l. 1. c. 2.
double, to have a tongue, and a tongue, a promise, and a promise, that is, a
various and uncertain promise. And for this cause (notwithstanding Senec.
Epist. 3.
diffident and distrustful men do indeed deserve what they suspect, and are
worthy to suffer what they unworthily do fear) does God yet in compassion
toward our fraitly condescend to confirm his promises by an Oath, to engage
the truth of his own essence for performance, to seal the Patent which he has
given with his own blood, and to exhibit that seal unto us so often as with
faith we approach unto the Communion of these holy mysteries. And who can
sufficiently admire the riches of this mercy which makes the very weaknesses
and imperfections of his Church occasions of redoubling his promises unto it?

Secondly, in that this Sacrament is the isntrumental cause of confirming our
faith from this possibility, yea, facility of obtaining, we must conclude the
necessity of using so great a benefit, wherein we procure the strengthening of
our graces, the calmeing of our consciences, and the experience of Gods favor;
in the natural body there being a continual activity and conflict between
the heat and the moisture of the body, and by that means a wasting depassion,
and decay of nature, it is kept in a perpetual necessity of succouring it
self by food: so in the spiritual man there being in this present estate an
unreconcileable enmity between the spirit, and the flesh, there is in either
part a propension toward such outward food, whereby each in its distresses may
be releeved. The flesh pursues all such objects as may content and cherish the
desires thereof, which the Apostle calls the provisions of lust. The Spirit
of the contrary side strengthens it self by those divine helps which the
wisdom of God had appointed to confer grace, and to settle the heart in a
firm persuasion of its own peace. And amongst these instruments this holy
Sacrament is one of the principal, which is indeed nothing else but a visible
oath, wherein Christ gives us a taste of his benefits and engages his own
sacred body for the accomplishing of them, which supporteth our tottering faith
and reduces the soul unto a more settled tranquillity.

Fifthly, In that in this one all other Types were abrogated and nullified, we
learn to admire and glorify the love of God, who has set us at liberty from
the thraldom of Ceremonies, from the costlinesse, and difficulty of his
Service, with which his own chosen people were held in Gal. 4. 3. 5 1. Act^
15. 10. Gal. 4. 1.
bondage, under the Pedagogie and government of Schoolmasters, the
ceremonial and judicial Law, as so many notes of distinctions
charactristicall differences, or Ephesians. 2. 14
wall of separation between Jew and Gentile, until the coming of the Messiah,
which Heb 9 10. Gal. 4 4.
was the time of the reformation of all things, wherein the Gentiles were by
his death to be ingrafted Romans 11.
into the same stock, and made partakers of the same juice and fatness, the
Heb 10. 1.
shadows to be removed, the Colos. 2. 14
ordinances to be canceld, the Law to be 2 Cor. 3. 11. 13.
abolished: for John 1. 17
The Law came by Moses, but Grace and Truth by Jesus Christ; Grace in
opposition to the Curse of the Moral Law, Truth in opposition to the figures
and resemblances of the Ceremonial Law. The Jews in Gods service were bound
unto one place, and unto one form, no Temple or ministration of Sacrifices
without Jerusalem, nor without express prescription, no use of Creatures
without difference of common and unclean: whereas unto us Ioh. 4. 21. 23.
all places are lawful and pure 1 Cor. 6 12. Tit. 1. 15.
all things lawful and pure, every Country a Canaan, and every City a
Jerusalem, and every Oratory a Temple. It is not an ordinance but a 1 Timothy 4. 5.
Prayer which sanctifies and makes good unto our use Romans 14. 14. Act. 10. 15.
every creature of God.

But yet though we under the Gospel are thus set at liberty from all manner
ordinances which are not of intrinsecall, eternal, and unvariable necessity;
yet may this liberty in regard of the nature of things indifferent be made a
necessity in respect of the use of them. We may not think that our liberty is
a licentious, and unbounded liberty, as if CHRIST had been the Author of
confusion, to leave every man in the external carriages of his worship unto
the conduct of his private fancy. This were to have our 1 Pet. 2. 16.
liberty for a cloak of naughtines, and as Gal. 5. 13.
an occasion to the flesh: but we must always limite it by those general, and
moral rules of piety, loyalty, charity, and sobriety. Use all things we may
indifferently without subjection or bondage unto the thing but not without
subjection unto GOD, and superiors. Use them we may but with Gal. 5. 13.
temperatnes, and moderation, use them we may but with respect 1 Cor. 10. 31.
to Gods glory, use them we may, but with Romans 13. 1. 2. 5.
submission to authority, use them we may, but with 1 Cor. 8. 9.
avoiding of scandal. Christian liberty consists in the inward freedom of
the S^e Doctor Field of the Church lib. 1. cap. 32. 33.
conscience, whose only bond is a necessity of Doctrine, not in outward
conformity or observances only, whose bond is a necessity of obedience, and
subordination unto higher powers, which obeying, though we become thereby
subject unto some humane, or Ecclesiastical ordinances, the conscience yet
remains uncurbed and at liberty.

Secondly, we have hereby a great encouragement to serve our God in John. 4. 24.
spirit, and in truth, being delivered from all those burdensome accessions
which unto the inward worship were added in the legal observances. In spirit
in opposition unto the Carnal, in truth, in opposition unto the Typical
ceremonies. The services of the Jews were celebrated in the blood, and smoke,
of unreasonable creatures, but ours in the Gospel must be a spiritual, a Romans
12. 1.
reasonable service of him, for as in the Word of God the 2 Cor. 3. 6.
letter profits nothing, it is the spirit that quickneth, so in the worship
of God likewise, the Knee, the Lip, the Eye, the Hand alone profits not at
all, it is the spirit that worshippeth. It is not a macerated body, but a
contrite soul which he respects; if there be palenes in the face, but blood
in the heart, if whitenes in the Eye but blacknes in the soul, if a drooping
countenance but an unbended conscience, if a knee bowing down in the Temple of
God, and thoughts rising up against the grace of God the head like a Bul-rush,
and the heart like an Adamant, in a word if there be but a bodily, and
unquickned service, a schism in the same worshipper between his outward, and
his inward man, he that is not a God of the dead but of the living, he that
accompteth in the leviticall Law, carcases, as unclean things, (as being in
the nearest disposition to rottennes, and putrefaction) will never smell any
sweet savor in such services. Esaias. 1. 11. 13. 14. Amo^ 5. 21.
What have I to do (says God with your Sacrifices, and my soul hates your
new Moons, and your appointed feasts. My Sacrifices, and my Exodus 20. 10 Ezekiel.
20. 12. Esaias 58. 13.
Sabboths they were by original institution, but your carnal observance of
them has made them Vestra dicit quae secundum libidinem suam non secundum
Religionem Dei celebrando sua jam non Dei fecerant: Tert. Cont. M^rcion. l 2 c.
22.
yours. Even the Cultus Deorum op^mus idemque cast^ssimus ut co^^semper pura,
integra, incorrupta et mente and voce venereris. C. c. De not. Deorum. l 2.
Sicut nec in victimis quidem licet optimae sint, auroque praef^lgeant, deorum
honos, sed pia ac recta voluntate venerantum. Sen de Benes. l. 1 c. 6. and
Epistola 95., Ad d^^os. ^deun^o cast C^c. de l^^^b lib 2. Animad^^^to etiam
Deos ipsos non tam accu^^^ adorantum pr^cibus quam innocentia and sanctitate
laetari. Plin. Paneg.
Heathen Idols themselves did require rather the truth of an inward then the
pomp of an outward worship, and therefore they forbad all Semper impiae
institutiones arcent profanos, etc. Tertul. in Apolog. c. 7. (...) Clem. Alex.
Ierom. l 5. vid. B^esson, de formulis. lib. 1.
profane people any access to their services. And God certainly will not be
content with less then the Divill.

Sixthly, in that by these frequent ceremonies we are led unto the celebration
of Christ's death, and the benefits thereby arising unto mankind, we may hence
observe the natural deadnes, and stupidity of man's memory in the things of his
salvation. It is a wonder how a man should forget his Redeemer that ransomed
him with the price of his own blood, to whom he owes whatsoever he either is
or has, him whom each good thing we enjoy leads unto to the acknowledgment
of. Look where we will, he is still not only in us, but before us. The
wisdom of our minds, the goodness of our natures, the purposes of our wills
and desires, the calmenes of our consciences, the hope, and expectation of our
souls and bodies, the liberty from law, and sin, what ever it is in or about
us which we either know, or admire, or enjoy, or expect, he is the Treasury
whence they were taken, the fulness whence they were received, the head which
transferreth the hand which bestows them, we are on all sides compassed, and
even Job. 1. 10.
hedged in with his blessings; so that in this sense we may acknowledge a kind
of ubiquity of Christ's body, in as much as it is every where even visible, and
palpable in those benefits which flow from it. And yet we like men that look
on the River Nilus, and gaze wonderously on the Streams, remain still
ignorant of the head, and Original from whence they issue. Thus as there is
between blood, and Poison such a natural antipathy as makes them to shrink
in, and retire at the presence of each other: so though each good thing we
enjoy serve to present that precious blood which was the price of it unto our
souls, yet there is in us so much venom of sin as makes us still to remove
our thoughts from so pure an object. As in the knowledge of things many men are
of so narrow understandings that they are not able to raise them unto
consideration of the causes of such things, whose effects they are happily better
acquainted with, then wiser men; it being the work of a discursive head, to
discover the secret knittings, obscure dependances, of natural things on each
other: so in matters of practice in Divinity many men commonly are so fastened
unto the present goods which they enjoy, and so full with them that they either
have noe room, or not leisure, or rather indeed no power, nor will to lift up
their minds from the streams unto the Fountain, or by a holy logic to
resolve them into the death of Christ from whence if they issue not, they are
but fallacies, and sophistical good things, and what ever happiness we expect
in or from them, will prove a non sequitur at the last. Remember, and know
CHRIST indeed, such men may, and do in some sort, sometimes to dishonor him, at
best but to discourse of him. But as the Philosopher speaks of intemperate
men, who sin, not out of a full purpose uncontroled swinge of vicious
resolutions, but with checks of judgment and reluctance of reason, that they
are but (...). Ar. Eth. l. 7. c. 10
half vicious (which yet is indeed but an halfe-truth.) So certainly they, who
though they do not quite forget Christ, or cast him behind their back, do
yet remember him only with a speculative contemplation of the nature and
general efficacy of his death, without particular application of it unto their
own persons and practices, have but a half and halting knowledge of him.
Certainly a mere Schoole-man who is able exactly to dispute of Christ and his
passion, is as far from the length, and breadth, and depth, and height of
Christ crucified, from the requisite dimensions of a Christian, as a mere
Surveiour or Architect, who has only the practice of measuring land or
timber, is from the learning of a Geometrician. For as Mathematics, being a
speculative Science cannot possibly be comprised in the narrow compass of a
practical Art; so neither can the knowledge of Christ, being a saving and
practick knowledge be complete, when it floats only in the discourses of a
speculative brain. And therefore Christ at the last day will say unto many men
who thought themselves great Clerks, and of his near acquaintance, even such
as did preach him and do wonders in his name, that he never Math. 7. 22. 23.
knew them, and that is an argument, that they likewise never knew him neither.
For as no man can see the Sun, but by the benefit of that light which from
the Sun shines on him: so no man can know Christ, but those on whom Christ
first shines, and whom he vouch safeth to know, Mary Magdalen could not say
Rabboni to Christ, till Christ first had said Mary to her. And therefore that
we may not fail to remember Christ aright, it pleases him to institute this
holy Sacrament as the image of his crucified body, whereby we might as truly
have Christ's death presented unto us, as if he had been Gal. 3* 1.
crucified before our eyes.

Secondly, we see here who they are who in the Sacrament receive Christ, even
such as remember his death with a recognition of faith, thankfulness and
obedience. Others receive only the Elements, but not the Sacrament, As when
the King seals a pardon to a condemned malefactor, the messenger that is sent
with it receives nothing from the King but paper written and sealed, but the
malefactor (unto whom only it is a gift) receives it as it were a
resurrection. Certainly there is a staff as well of Sacramental as of common
bread, the staff of common bread is the blessing of the Lord, the staff of
the Sacramental is the body of the Lord; and as the wicked, which never look
up in thankfulness unto God, do often receive the bread without the blessing,
so here the element without the body, they receive indeed, as it is fit
unclean Birds should do, nothing but the carcass of a Sacrament, the body of
Christ being the soul of the Bread, and his blood the life of the Wine. His
body is not now any more capable of dishonor, it is a glorified body, and
therefore will not enter into an earthy, and unclean soul: As it is
corporally in Heaven, so it will be spiritually and sacramentally in noe place
but a heavenly soul. Think not that thou have received Christ, till thou have
effectually remembered, seriously meditated, and been religiously affected, and
inflamed with the love of his death, without this thou may be guilty of his
body, thou can not be a partaker of it: guilty thou art, because thou did
reach out thy hand with a purpose to receive Christ into a polluted soul,
though he withdrew himself from thee. Even as Mutius Sevola was guilty of
Porsena's blood, though it was not him, but another whom the Dagger wounded;
because the error of the hand cannot remove the malice of the heart.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of the subject, who may with benefit receive the holy Sacrament, with the
necessary qualifications thereunto, of the necessity of due preparation.
WE have hitherto handled the Sacrament it self; we are now briefly to
consider the subject whom it concerns, in whom we will observe such
qualifications as may fit, and predispose him for the comfortable receiving,
and proper interest in these holy mysteries. Sacraments, since the time that
Satan has had a Kingdom in the World, have been ever notes, and Characters
whereby to distinguish the Church of God from the Ethnic, and unbeleeving part
of men; so that they being not common unto all mankind, some subject unto whom
the right, and propriety of them belongs must be found out. GOD at the first
created man upright, framed him after his own Image, and endowed him with
gifts of nature, able to preserve him entire in that estate wherein he was
created. And because it was repugnant to the essential freedom wherein he was
made, to necessitate him by any outward constraint unto an immutable estate of
integrity, he therefore so Justin martyr^ in dialog. Cum Tryph.
framed him that it might be within the free liberty of his own will to cleave
to him, or to decline from him. Man being thus framed, abused this native
freedom, and committed sin, and thereby in the very same instant became
really, and properly dead. For as he was dead iudicially in regard of a
temporal, and eternal death (both which were now already pronounced though
not executed on him) so was he dead actually, and really in regard of that
spiritual death; which consists in a separation of the soul from God, and
in an absolute immobility unto Divine operations. But man's sin did not
nullify Gods power. He that made him a glorious creature when he was nothing,
could as easily renew, and rectify him when he fell away. Being dead, true it
is, that active concurrence unto his own restitution he could have none, but
yet still the same passive obedience, and capacity which was in the red Clay of
which Adams body was fashioned unto that divine Image which God breathed into
it, the same had man being now fallen unto the restitution of those heavenly
benefits and habitual graces which then he lost; save that in the clay there
was only a passive obedience, but in man fallen there is an Act. 7. 51. Romans
7. 23.
active rebellion, crossing resistance, and withstanding of Gods good work in
him. More certainly than this he cannot have, because howsoever in regard of
natural and reasonable operations he be more selfe-moving than clay, yet in
regard of spiritual graces he is full as dead. Even as a man though more
excellent then a beast, is yet as truly and equally not an Angel as a beast
is. So then thus far we see all mankind do agree in an equallity of
Creation, in a universallity of descrtion, in a capacity of restitution.

God made the world that therein he might commuicate his goodness unto the
creature, and unto every creature in that proportion as the nature of it is
capable of. And man being one of the most excellent creatures is amongst the
rest capable of these two principal attributes, holiness, and happiness,
which two God out of his most secret Counsel and eternal mercy, conferreth on
whom he had chosen and made accepted in Christ the beloved, shutting the rest
either out of the compass, as Heathen, or at least out of the inward
privileges and benefits of that Covenant which he has established with
mankind, as hypocrites and licentious Christians. Now as in the first Creation
of man, God did into the unformed lump of clay infuse by his power the breath
of life and so made man, so in the regeneration of a Christian does he in the
natural man who is dead in sin, breathe a principle of spiritual life, the
first Act, as it were, and the original of all supernatural motions, whereby
he is constituted in the first being of a member of Christ.

And this first Act is faith, the soul of a Christian, that whereby we 1 Ioh.
5. 13.
live in Christ, so that till we have faith we are dead and out of him. And
as faith is the principle (next under the Holy Ghost) of all spiritual life
here, so is Baptism the Sacrament of that life, which accompanied and raised
by the Spirit of grace, is unto the Church though not the cause, yet the Ioh.
3. 5. Tit 3. 5.
means in and by which this grace is conveyed unto the soul.

Now as Adam after once life was infused into him, was presently to preserve it
by the Genesis 1. 29.
eating of the fruits in the Garden where God had placed him, because of that
continual depashion of his radical moisture by vita^l heat* which made Nature
to stand in need of succors and supplies from outward nourishment: so after
man is once regenerated and made alive, he is to preserve that faith which
quickneth him by such food as is provided by God for that purpose, it being
otherwise of it self subject to continual languishings and decays. And this
life is thus continued and preserved amongst other means by the grace of this
holy Eucharist, which conveyes unto us that true food of life, the body and
blood of Christ crucified. So then in as much as the Sacrament of Christ's
supper is not the Sacrament of regeneration, but of sustentation and
nourishment; and in as much as no dead thing is capable of being nourished
(augmentation being a vegetative and vital act) and lastly in as much as the
principle of this spiritual life is faith, and the Sacrament of it Baptism,
It follows evidently that no man is a subject quallified for the holy
communion of Christ's body, who has not been before partaker of faith and
Baptism.

In Heaven, where all things shall be perfected and renewed, our souls shall
be in as little need of this Sacrament, as our bodies of nourishment. But this
being a state of imperfection subject to decays, and still capable of further
augmentation, we are therefore by these holy mysteries to preserve the life
which by faith and Baptism we have received: without which life, as the
Sacrament does confer and confirm nothing, so do we receive nothing neither
but the bare elements. Christ is now in Heaven, no eye sharp enough to see
him, no arm long enough to reach him but only faith. The Sacrament is but the
Romans 4. 11.
seal of a Covenant, and Covenants essentially include conditions, and the
condition on our part is faith, no faith no Covenant, no Covenant no Seal, no
Seal no Sacrament. 2 Cor. 6. 15.
Christ and Beliall will not lodge together.

Having thus found out the first necessary quallification of a man for the
receiving of the holy Eucharist, without which he is absolutely as incapable
of it, as a dead man of food, we may the more easily look into the next more
immediate and particular, consisting in that preparatory Act of 1 Cor. 11.
examination or trial of the conscience touching its fitness to communicate,
because the former is to be the rule and measure by which we proceed in the
latter.

(...) (...) Eth. l. 2. c. 1. In (...) Genesis 22. 14.
Some things there are which men learn to do by doing of them, and which are
better performed, and the dangers incident unto them better avoided by an
extemporary dexterity, than by any premeditation or forecast. But yet generally
since matters of consequence are never without some perplexed difficulties not
discernable by a sudden intuition, and since the minds of men are of a limited
efficacy, and therefore unfit for any serious work, till first dispossessed of
all different notions which might divert, and of all repugnant principles or
indispositions which might op^pose it in the performance of any great business
set upon with sudden, uncomposed and uncollected thoughts; It is very necessary
before we undertake any serious and difficult work, both to examine the
sufficiency, and to prepare the instruments by which we may be enabled to
perform it. Thus we see in the works of Nature, those which admit of any
latitude or degrees of perfection are seldom done without many previous
dispositions to produce them. In Plants and vegetables the Earth is to be
opened, the seed to be scattered, the rain to moysten, the Sun to evocate
and excite the seminall virtue, and after all this comes a Fruitful Harvest:
and so in generation of all other natural bodies there are ever some
antecedent qualities introduced by means whereof Nature is assisted and
prepared for her last act. So in the works of Art we find how Quiat. Instit.
wrestlers and runners in races did supple their joints with ointments and diet
their bodies that by that means they might be fit for those bodily exercises;
how Vid. Li^s^i Satur. l. 2. c. 19.
those Roman Fencers in their gladiatory fights did first use presatory or
dulled weapons before they entered in good earnest into the Theater, and then
their custom was, first to carry their weapons to the Prince to have his
allowance of the fitness of them before they used them in fighting. The Ac
Gell. noct. A^tic. lib.
Lacedaemonians were wont to have musical instruments before their wars, that
thereby their courage might be sharpened, and their minds raised unto bold
attempts. And we read of Live lib. 26
Scipio Africanus, that ever before he set himself upon the undertaking of
any great business, his manner was to enter the Capitole, to submit his
projects unto the judgment of the gods, and to implore their aid and allowance
for the good success of such his enterprises. A thing for the substance of it,
practiced by all the Ethnicks before they addressed themselves unto any work
of consequence, whose constant use it was to have recourse unto their gods in
Plin. Paneg. in initio. Cic. de legib. l. 2. and in ^atinium sol^ne hoc ^nte
bella. Virg. Ar. l 8 and 11 Zenoph. Cyro^. l 7 Macrob Sa^ur l 3. ^. 15. Ante
e^^las, Athenaeus. l. 4. Iav. l. 49. Virg En^la An^ Nuptias. Servi^^ad Virg.
Aen^. lib. 3.
prayers, for benediction and encouragement. And it was a religious observation
in the Roman superstitious sacrifices for a Vid. B^isson. de formu^s. l. b. 1.
servant that stood by, to put the Priest in mind what he was about, and to
advise him to consider maturely, and to do with his whole mind, and endeavor
that work he was to perform. And Servius ad illud Virg. Puraque in vest
Sace^dos. Aehe. 12.
whatsoever vessels, or garments were in those solemnities used, were
beforehand washed and cleansed, that they might be fit instruments for such a
work. Thus far we see the light of reason, and the very blindness of
superstition enforces a necessity of preparation unto any great, especially
divine, work.

If we look into the holy Scriptures we may find God himself a pattern of
these deliberate preparations. In making the world it had been as easy for
him in one simple command to have erected this glorious frame at once, as to be
six days in the fashioning of it. But to exhibit unto us an example of
temperate, and advised proceedings, he first provides the materials, and then
superadds the accomplishment and perfection. In the dispensing of his judgments
he first prepares them, before he inflicts them, He has whet his sword, and
bent his bow, and made ready his arrows, before he strikes or shootes: his eye
comes before his hand; Genesis 18. 21.
He comes down to see Sodom before to consume it. He examines before he
expells, Genesis 3. 9.
Adam where art thou? before he drive him out of Paradise. Nay in the very
sweetest of all his attributes, his mercy we find him first Exodus 3. 7. 8.
consider his people Israel, before he sends Moses to deliver them. In like
manner our blessed Savior, though having in him the fulness of the Godhead,
the treasures of Wisdom, and Grace without measure, he was therefore perfectly
able to discharge that great work unto which the Father had Sealed him, was
yet pleased to prepare himself both unto his prophetical, and sacerdotall
obedience by Math. 3 13
Baptism, Math 4. 12.
Fasting, Temptation, and Mat. 26 36.
Prayer, That the practice of this great Work, where it was not necessary,
might be a president, unto us who are not able of our selves to think, or to
do any good thing, 1 Kings. 6. 7
In the building of Salomons Temple the stones were perfected, and hewed before
they were brought, there was neither Hammer, nor Axe, nor any tool of Iron
heard in the house while it was in building. And so should it be in the Temple
of which that was a type even in the mystical body of CHRIST, every man should
be first hewed, and fitted by repentance, and other preparatory works before
he should approach to incorporate himself into that spiritual, and eternal
building. In the observation of Leviticall ceremonies we may note that Exodus
12. 3. 6.
before the celebration of the Passover the Lamb was to be taken and severed
from the flock three days ere it was slain, in which time the people might
in that figure learn to sanctify themselves, and to be separated from
sinners. And our savior Christ in the celebration of the last Supper, would
not have so much as the Mark 14 13. 15.
room unprovided, but he sent his Disciples before hand about it. Teaching us
that in sacred things there should be first a preparation before a celebration.
So then we see in general the necessity of preparing, and deliberating before
we address our selves unto the performance of any holy work, and if any
where, certainly in this work of the Sacrament most necessary it is. Though
Gods commands by his Apostle were bond enough to enforce us the Prior and
authoritas imperantis quam vtilitas servientis Tertul. de paenit cap 4.
necessity of obedience, depending rather on the Author then on the emolument
of the Law, yet GOD, who is not wanting all ways to win men unto the
observance of what he requires, urges us thereunto not only with an argument
of debt because we are his servants, but with an argument of profit too,
because the omission of it will not only nullify unto us the benefit of his
Sacrament but make us, guilty of that very blood which was shed for the
Salvation of the World, and turn that into Judgment which was intended for
mercy.

What this danger of being guilty of Christ's blood is, I will not stand long to
explain. Briefly, to be guilty, of the body and blood of Christ, is to offer
some notable contempt, and indignity unto the sufferings of Christ, to sin
against the price of our redemption, and to Heb. 10. 29.
vilify and set at naught the precious blood of the new covenant, as if it
were a common, and profane thing when men out of ignorant, sensual, secure,
presumptuous, formalizing, inconsiderate, and profane affections approach unto
Christ's Table to Communicate of him. To be guilty of blood is in some sort, or
other to Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. Hom^l. 27.
shed it, and to join with the Crucifiers of CHRIST. A sin, which as it
drove Judas to despair, and to end with himself, who had begun with his
Master, so does it to this day lie with the heaviest curse that ever that
people endured, on the offspring of those wicked Jews, whose imprecation it
was, His blood be on us, and on our children. As Christ on the Cross was in
regard of himself offered up unto the Father, but in regard of Pilat, and the
Jews crucified; so is his blood in the Sacrament by the faithful received, by
the wicked shed, and spilt on the ground, when not discerning or differencing
the Lords body from other ordinary Food, they rush irreverendly to the
participation of it. Voluntas sacit Homicidam.
For a man may be guilty of the blood of Christ though he receive it not at
all, as a man may of murder though he hit not the party against whom his
Weapon was directed. Omnia s^^lera ^^iam an ^^ffectum operis, qu^ntum (...)
setis est, Perfecta sunt. Sen. de Constable. Cap. 7.
It is not the event but the purpose which specifies the sin. The anger of a
Dog is as great, when he barks at the Moon which is above his malice, as when
at a man whom he may easily bite. The malice of the apostate who shot up Quid
tuputas cum stolidu^ ille Rex multitudine telorum di^m obscurasset ullam
sagittam in solemn incidisse ^ Sen. Ibid. Cap. 4.
Darts against Heaven was no less then if he had hit the body of Christ at whom
he shot. If that which is done unto the Apostles of Christ is done unto him,
because they are his Ambassadores, and if that which is done unto the poor,
and distressed flock of Christ, is done unto him because they are his members,
then surely that which is done unto the Sacrament of Christ must needs be done
unto him too, in as much as it is his representation, and Image. For a man may
be guilty of treason, by offering indignity to the Picture, Coin, Garment, or
Seal of a Prince. The dishonor that is done to the Image (it being a relative
thing) does ever reflect on the original it self. And therefore the Romans
when they would dishonor any man, would show some disgrace to d^cendunt statuae
restemque sequntur, etc. juuenal. Sati. 10. cap. 8. (...) traxemat in Temonias
ac divellebant. Tac. Hist. lib. 3. V^^^llarius comitan^^ Galbam conge^^
derectam Galbe imagine solo afflixit. Tac. Hist. l. 1.
the statues that had bin erected to his honor, by demolissing, breaking,
down, and dragging them in the Dirt. Again a man may be guilty of the blood
of Christ by reaching forth his hand to receive it having noe right unto it. A
sacrilege it is, to lay hold wrongfully on the Lords inheritance, or on any
thing consecrated to the maintenance of his worship, and service; but this
certainly by so much the greater by how much the Lords body is more precious
then his portion. To counterfeit right of inheritance unto some Kingdom has
been ever amongst men unfortunate, and Capital. We know how ill it is
succeeded with the counterfeit Tac. Hist. l 2
Nero amongst the Romans, and that forged Duke of York in the time of Henry
the seventh. And surely no less succesfull can their insolence be, who having
by reason of their unworthy approach noe claim nor interest unto the benefits
of Christ's body, do yet usurp it, and take the Kingdom of Heaven as it were
by rapine, and presumptuous violence. Certainly if Christ will not have the
wicked to take his Psalm. 50. 16
Word much less his body into their mouths; If the Heb 6. 7.
Rain that falls to the ground returns not empty, but according to the
quality of the ground on which it falls maks it fruitful either in Herbs meet
for the use of men that dressed it, or in Thorns, and Briars that are near
unto cursing, impossible it is that the blood of Christ in his Sacrament should
be uneffectuall, whether for a blessing unto the faithful, or for a curse to
those that unworth^ly receive it. So then necessary it is that before the
Communication of these sacred mysteries, a man prepare himself by some
previous devotions; and for this cause we find our John. 13 5.
Savior Christ washing his Disciples Feet, that is cleansing their earthly, and
humane affections before his institution of this Sacrament. And we find Joseph
of Arimathea Math. 27. 59. 60.
wrapping his dead Body in a clean linen Garment, and putting it into a new
Tomb, never yet defiled with rottennes, and corruption. And can we imagine
that he that endured not an unclean grave or shroud will enter into a sinful,
and unprepared Soul. The everlasting Doors must first be lifted up before the
King of Glory will enter in.

CHAP. XIX.
Of the form or manner of Examination required, which is touching the maine
quallification of a worthy receiver, Faith: The demonstration whereof is made,
first, from the causes secondly, from the nature of it.
HAving thus discovered the necessity of preparation, and that standing in the
examination and trial of a man's Conscience; it follows that we conclude
with setting down very compendiously the manner of this examination, only
naming some principal particulars. The maine querie is whether I am a fit
guest to approach Gods Table, and to share in the fellowship of his sufferings.
The sufferings of Christ are not exposed unto the rapine and violence of each
bold intruder, but he who was first the Author, is for ever the despenser of
them. And as in the dispensation of his miracles, for the most part, so of his
sufferings likewise, there is either a question premised, beleevest thou, or a
condition included, be it unto thee as thou beleevest. But a man may be
alive, and yet unfit to eat, nor capable of any nourishment by reason of some
dangerous diseases, which weaken the stomach, and trouble it with an apepsie,
or difficulty of concoction. And so faith may sometimes in the Habit lie
smothered, and almost stifled with some spiritual lethargy, binding up the
vital faculties from their proper motions. And therefore our faith must be an
operative, and expedite faith, not stupefied with any known and practiced
course of sin, which does ever weaken our appetite unto grace, they being
things unconsistent. The matter then we see of this trial must be that
vital quallification which predisposeth a man for the receiving of these holy
mysteries, and that is faith. To enter into such a discourse of faith, as the
condition of that subject would require were a labor beyond the length of a
short meditation, and unto the present purpose impertinent. We will therefore
only take some generallities about the causes, nature, properties or effects
of faith (which are the usual mediums of producing assents) and propose them
by way of interrogation to the Conscience, that so the major and minor being
contrived, the light of reason in the soul may make up a practical
syllogism* and so conclude either its fitness or indisposition toward these
holy mysteries.

First, for the causes of faith, not to meddle with that extraordinary cause, I
mean miracles, the ordinary are the word of God, and the Spirit of God, the
Word as the Seed, the Spirit as the formative and seminall virtue making it
active, and effectual: for the Letter profits nothing, it is the Spirit
which quickneth. What the formality of that particular action is, whereby the
Word and Spirit do implant this heavenly branch of faith in the soul.

(Faith it self having in its nature several distinct degrees, some
intellectual of assent, some fiduciall of relyance, and confidence, some of
abnegation, renouncing, and flying out of our selves, as insufficient for the
contriuance of our own salvation, and so in congruity of reason requiring in
the causes producing them several manners of causalities) as I take it not
necessary, so neither am I able to determine. I shall therefore touch upon some
p^incipall properties of either, all which if they concur not unto the
original production, do certainly to the raduation and establishing of that
divine virtue, and therefore may justly come within the compass of those
premises, from the evidences of which assumed and applied, the Conscience is to
conclude the truth of its faith in Christ.

And first for the word, to let pass those properties which are only the
inherent attributes, and not any transient operations thereof (as its
sufficiency, perspicuity, majesty, selfe-Authority, and the like) let us touch
upon those which it carries along with it into the Conscience, and I shall
observe but two, Its 2 Pet. 1* 19. Psalm 119.
Light, and its Rom 1. 16.
Power: Even as the Sun where ever it goes does still carry with it that
brightness whereby it discovers, and that Influence whereby it quickneth
inferior bodies. First, for the Word, the properties thereof are first to make
manifest and to discover the hidden things of darkness, for whatsoever does
make manifest is light. The heart of man naturally is a labyrinth of Rom 1* 21.
Plangendae tenebrae in quibus me mea facultas la^et. Aug. confess l. 10. cap.
32.
darkness, his works, Ephesians. 5. 11.
works of darkness, his Prince, a Prince of darkness, whose projects are
full of darkness, they are Rev. 2. 24.
depths, 2 Cor. 2. 11.
devices, 2 Cor. 11* 3.
craftiness, Ephesians. 6. 11*
methods. The Word of God alone is that light 1 Cor 14* 15.
which makes manifest the secrets of the heart, that Iam. 1.
glass wherein we may see both our selves, and all the devices of Satan
against us discovered. And secondly by this act of manifesting does light
distinguish one thing from another. In the dark we 1 Ioh. 2. 11.
make no difference of fair or foul, of right or wrong ways, but all are
alike unto us: and so while we continue in the blindness of our natural
estate, we are not able to perceive the distinction between Divine, and
natural objects, but the Word of God like a touchstone, discovers the
differences of truth, and falsehood, good, and evil, and like fire seperateth
the precious from the vile.

Secondly, light is quickening, and a comforting thing. The glory of the Saints
is an Colos. 1.
inheritance of light, and they are Ephesians. 5.
children of light who shall shine as the Sun in the Firament, whereas
darkness is both the Title, and the Portion of the wicked. The times of darkness
men make to be the times of their sleeping, (which is an Image of Death,) it is
in the light only that men work: And so the Word of GOD is a comforting Word;
It was Psalm. 119.
David's delight, his hony-Combe. And it is a quickening Word too, for it is the
Heb 312. Ioh 668.
Word of Life. Lastly, Ioh 12*35.
light does assist, direct, and guide us in our ways, and so does the Word of
GOD, it is a Psalm. 119.
Lantern to our feet, and a light unto our paths. Secondly, for the power of
the Word, it is two fold, even as all power is, a governing power in respect of
that which is under it, and a subduing power in respect of that which is
against it. First the Word has a governing power, in respect of those which
are subject to it; for which cause it is every where called a Law, and a Iam.
2. 8.
royal, that is, a commanding Sovereign Law, It bears Dominion in the soul
conforming each faculty to it self, directs the righteous, furnishes unto
good works, raises the drooping, binds the broken, comfort the
afflicted, reclaimeth the straggling. Secondly, it subdueth all emnity, and
opposition, discomfiteth Satan, beats down the strong holds of sin, it is
Heb 3. 12.
a Sword to cut off, a 2 Cor 10 4.
weapon to subdue, a Ierem 23. 29
Hammer to break in pieces whatsoever thought rises up against it. Now then
let a man's conscience make but these few demands unto it self.

Has the light, and power of Gods Word discovered it self unto me? Have the
Scriptures made me known unto my self? have they unlocked those crooked
windings of my perverse heart? have they manifested unto my soul not only
those sins which the light of reason could have discerved, but even those
privy corruptions which I could not otherwise have known? have they acquainted
me with the devices of Satan, wherewith he lies in wait to deceive? have they
taught me to distinguish between truth, and appearances, between goodness, and
shadows, to find out the better part, the one necessary thing, and to adhere
unto it? am I sensible of the sweetness and benefits of his holy Word, does it
refresh my soul, and revive me unto every good work? Is it unto my soul like
the Psalm. 119.
honey Comb, like Psalm. 23.
pleasant pastures, like Esaias 12. 3. Esaias 49* 10.
springs of water, like [d] the Tree of life? do I take it along with me
wheresoever I go, to preserve me from stumbling, and straggling in this valley
of darkness, and shadow of death? Again do I feel the power of it like a
Royal commanding Law, bearing rule in my soul? Am I willing to submit, and
resign my self unto the obedience of it? do I not against the clear, and
convincing evidence thereof, entertain in my bosom any the least rebellious
thought? Do I spare noe Agag, noe ruling sin? withdraw noe wedge or
babilonish Garment, noe gainefull sin? make a league with noe Gibeonite, noe
pretending sin? But do I suffer it like Joshua to destroy every Cananite,
even the sin which for sweetness I roled under my tongue? does it batter the
Towers of Ierico, break down the Bul-warkes of the flesh? lead into captivity
the corruptions of nature? mortify, and crucify the old man in me? does it
minister comforts unto me in all the ebbs, and droopings of my spirit, even
above the confluence of all earthly happiness, and against the combination of
all outward discontents? and do I set up a resolution thus always to submit
my self unto the Regiment thereof? In one word, does it convince me of sin in
my self, and so humble me to repent of it? of Righteousness in CHRIST, and so
raise me, to believe in it, of his spiritual judgment in governing the souls
of true believers by the power of love, and beauty of his graces, and so
constrain, and persuade me to be obedient unto it? These are those good
premises out of which I may infallibly conclude, that I have had the
beginnings, the seeds of Faith shed a abroad in my heart, which will certainly
be further quickened by that holy spirit who is the next, and principal
producer of it.

The operations of this holy spirit being as numberless, as all the holy
actions of the Faithful, cannot therefore all possibly be set down, I shall
touch at some few which are of principal, and obvious observation. First of
all, the spirit is a spirit of liberty, and a spirit of prayer, It takes away
the Romans 8.
bondage, and 2 Timothy 1. 7.
fear, wherein we naturally are (for fear makes us run from God as from a
punishing, and revenging Judge, never any man in danger fled thither for
succor whence the danger issued, fear is so far from this that it Wisd. 17.
11. Timor ctiam anxilia reformidat, q Curt.
betrayeth and suspecteth those very assistances which reason offers) and it
enableth us to have access and recourse unto God himself whom our sins had
provoked: and in our prayers, like Aron, and Hurr, it supporteth our hands that
they do not faint nor fall. It raises the soul unto divine and unutterable
petitions, and it melts the heart into sights and groans that cannot be
expressed.

Secondly, the holy Ghost is compared unto a witness, whose proper work it is
to reveal and affirm some truth which is called in question. There is in a
man's bosom by reason of that enmity and rebellion betwixt the flesh and the
spirit, and by means of Satan's suggestions sundry dialogues, and conflicts
wherein Satan questioneth the title we pretend to salvation. In this case the
Spirit of a man (as one cannot choose but do when his whole estate is made
ambiguous) staggereth, droopeth and is much distressed: till at last the Spirit
of God, by the light of the Word, the Testimony of Conscience, and the
sensible motions of inward grace, lays open our title, and helps us to
read the evidence of it, and thus recomposeth our troubled thoughts.

Thirdly, the Ephs 430.
Spirit of God is compared to a Seal: the Cui ca^q, rei ponis signum, id ^
ponis signam, me confusa cum^ ilus a te non (...)* ag^usci. Aug. Ia Ioh. trad.
2^.
work of a Seal is first to make a siampe and impression in some other
matter, secondly, by that means to difference, and distinguish it from all
other things: And so the Spirit of God does fashion the hearts of his people
unto a conformity with Christ, framing in it holy impressions, and renewing the
decayed Image of God therein; and thereby separateth them from sinners, makes
them of a distinct commonwealth under a distinct government, that whereas
before they were subject to the same Prince, Laws, and desires with the world,
being now called out, they are new men and have another character upon them.
Secondly, a Seal does obsignate, and ratify some Covenant, Grant, or
conveyance to the person unto whom it belongs. It is used amongst men for
confirming their mutual trust in each other. And so certainly does the Spirit
of God Ephesians. 1. 14.
pre-affect the soul with an evident taste of that glory which in the Day of
Redemption shall be actually conferd upon it, and therefore it is called an
hansell, earnest, and first fruit of life.

Fourthly, the Spirit of God is compared to an ointment; now the properties of
ointments are first to supple to assuage tumors in the body: and so does the
Spirit of God mollify the hardness of man's heart, and work it to a sensible
tenderness and quick apprehension of every sin. Secondly, ointments do open,
and penetrate those places unto which they are applied; and so the 1 Ioh. 2. 20.
Unction which the faithful have, teaches them all things, and opens their
eyes to see the wonders of Gods Law, and the beauty of his graces. In Sonus
verborum nostrorum aures percutit magister intus est quantum ad m^ pertinet
omnibus locat^ sum, sed quibus uncti^ illa intus non loquitur indocti redeunt;
magisten a* fo^m: se^us adjutoria quaedam sunt Cathed^um in Coelo habet qui
(...) Aug. in Ep. Ioh. (...) 4
vain are all outward sounds or Sermons, unless this Spirit be within to
teach us. Thirdly, ointments do refresh and lighten nature, because as they
make way for the emission of all noxious humors, so likewise for the free
passage and translation of all vital spirits, which do enliven and comfort.
And so the Spirit of God is a Spirit of consolation, and a spirit of life, he
is the Ioh. 14*16.
comforter of his Church. Lastly, Ex. 30. 25. 30.
ointments in the Leviticall Law, and in the state of the Jews were for
consecration and sequestration of things unto some holy use. As Christ is said
to be Heb 1. 9.
anointed by his Father unto the economy of that great work, the redemption
of the world: and thus does the Holy Ghost anoint us to be a 1 Pet. 2. 9.
Royal Priesthood, a holy Nation, a people set at liberty.

Fifthly, and lastly, I find the holy Ghost compared unto 1 Thessalonians. 5. 19
fire, whose properties are, first, to be of a very active and working nature,
which stands never still, but is ever doing something: and so the Spirit of God
and his graces are all operative in the hearts of the faithful, they set all
where they come on work. Secondly, the nature and proper motion of fire is to
ascend, other motions whatever it has, arise from some outward, and
accidental restraint, limiting the nature of it: and so the Spirit of God,
ever raises up the affections from earth, fastneth the eye of Faith upon
Eternity, ravisheth the soul with a servent longing to be with the Lord, and
to be admitted unto the fruition of those precious joys which here it
suspireth after, as soon as ever men have chosen Christ to be their Head,
then presently ascendunt de Terra, they go up out of the Land. Hos. 1. 11. and
have their conversation above where Christ is. Thirdly, fire does inflame and
transform every thing that is combustible into the nature of it self: and so
the Spirit of God fills the soul with a divine fervor, Spiritus Ardor is
Isai 44.
and zeal which purges away the corruptions and dross of the flesh, with the
spirit of judgment, and with the Spirit of burning. Fourthly, fire has a
purifying and cleansing property, to draw away all noxious or infectious vapors
out of the Air, to separate all soil and dross from mettalls, and the like:
and so does the Spirit of God cleanse the heart, and in heavenly sighs, and
repentant tears, cause to expire all those steemes of corruptions, those
noisome and infectious lusts which fight against the soul, Fifthly, fire has
a penetrating and insinuating quallity, whereby it creeps into all the pores
of a combustible body, and in like manner the holy Spirit of God does penetrate
the heart though full of insensible and inscrutible windings, does search the
reins, does pry into the closest nookes, and inmost corners of the soul,
there discovering and working out those secret corruptions which did deceive
and defile us. Lastly, fire does illighten, and by that means communicates the
comforts of it self unto others: and so the Spirit being a Spirit of truth
does illuminate the understanding, and does dispose it likewise to discover its
light unto others who stand in need of it: for this is the nature of Gods
grace, that when Christ has manifested himself to the soul of one man, it
sets him on work to manifest Christ unto others, as Andrew to Simon. John
1. 41. and the Woman of Samaria to the men of the City. Ioh. 4. 29. and Mary
Magdalen to the Disciples. Ioh. 20. 17. It is like Ointment poured forth, which
cannot be concealed, Proverb. 27. 16. We cannot (says the Apostle) but speak
the things which we have heard, and seen Acts 4. 20. And they who feared the
Lord, in the Prophet, spoke often to one another. Mal. 3. 16.

These propositions being thus set down, let the conscience assume them to it
self in such demands as these. Do I find in my self a Freedom from that
spirit of fear, and bondage, which makes a man like Adam to fly from the
presence of GOD in his Word? do I find my self able with affiance, and firm
hope to fly unto God, as unto an Alter of refuge in time of trouble, and to
call upon his Name? and this not only with an outward battology, and
lipp-labour but by the spirit to cry Abba Father? does the testimony of Gods
Spirit settle, and compose such doubtings in me as usually arise out of the
War between Flesh, and Faith? do I find a change, and transformation in me
from the vanity of my old conversation unto the Image of Christ, and of that
original Justice wherein I was created? do I find my self distinguished,
and taken out from the World by Heavenly mindednes, and raised affections, by
renouncing the delights, abandoning the corruptions, suppresing the motions of
secular, and carnal thoughts? solacing my soul, not with perishable, and
unconstant contentments, but with that blessed hope of a City, made without
hands, immortal, undefiled, and that fades not away? do I find in my heart
an habitual tenderness, and aptnes to bleed, and relent, at the danger of any
sin, though mainly crossing my carnal delights, and whatever plots and
contrivances I might lay for furthering mine own secular ends, if by
indirectnes, sinful engagements, and unwarrantable courses, I could advance
them? do I find my self in reading, or hearing Gods Word, inwardly wrought
upon, to admire the Wisdom, assent unto the truth, acknowledge the holiness,
and submit my self unto the obedience of it? do I in my ordinary, and best
composed thoughts prefer the tranquillity of a good conscience, and the
comforts of Gods Spirit before all outside and glittering happiness,
notwithstanding any discouragements that may be incident to a concionable
conversation? Lastly, are the graces of God operative, and stirring in my
soul? Is my conversation more heavenly, my zeal more fervent, my corruptions
more discovered, each faculty in its several Sphere more transformed into the
same Image with Christ Jesus? Are all these things in me, or in defect of any,
do the desires and longings of my soul after them appear to be sincere and
unfeigned by my daily employing all my strength, and improving each advantage
to further my proficiencie in them. Then I have an evident, and infallible
token that having thus far partaked of the spirit of Life, and by consequence
of Faith, whereby our souls are fastened unto Christ, I may with comfort
approach unto this holy Table, wherein that life which I have received, may be
further nourished, and confirmed to me.

The second medium formerly proposed for the trial of Faith was the nature,
and essence of it. To find out the formal nature of Faith we must first
consider that all Faith, is not a saving Faith. For there is a Faith that
works a Iam. 2 19.
trembling as in the Devils, and there is a Faith which Rom 5. 1.
works life, and peace as in those that are justified. Faith in general is
an assent of the reasonable soul, unto revealed truths. Now every medium, or
in ducement to an assent is drawn A^ in. 22. quaest. 1. Artte. 4.
either from the light which the obejct it self proposes to the faculty, and
this the blessed 2 Cor. 5. 7.
Apostle contradistinguisheth from faith by the name of light; or else it is
drawn from the authority, and Authenticalnes of a narrator, upon whose report
while we rely without any evidence of the thing it self, the assent which we
produce is an assent of faith or credence. The John. 4.
Samaritans did first assent unto the miracles of CHRIST by the report of the
woman, and this was faith, but afterward they assented because themselves had
heard him speak, and this was sight. Now both those assents have annexed unto
them, either evidence, and infallibility, or only probability admitting
degrees of fear, and suspicion. That faith is a certain assent, and
Certitudine rei in regard of the object, even above the evidence of
demonstrative conclusions is on all hands confessed: because howsoever qantum ad
certitudinem mentis, in regard of our weakness, and distrust we are often
subject to stagger, yet in the thing it self it depends upon the
infallibility of Gods own Word, which has said it, and by consequence is
nearer unto him who is the Fountain of all truth, and therefore does more
share in the properties of truth which are certainty, and infallibility, then
any thing proved by mere natural reasons, and the assent produced by it is
differenced from suspicion, hesitancie, or dubitation in the opinion of
Schoolmen themselves.

Now then in as much as we are bound to yield an evident assent unto the
Articles of our christian Faith, both intellectual in regard of the truth, and
fiduciall in regard of the goodness of them respectively to our own benefit,
and salvation. Necessary it is that the understanding, be convinced of those
two things. First that GOD is of infallible Authority, and cannot lie nor
deceive, which thing is a principle unto which the light of nature does
willingly assent. And secondly that this Authority which in Faith I thus rely
upon is indeed, and infallibly Gods own Authority. The means whereby I come
to know that may be either extroardinary, as revelation; such as was made to
prophets concerning future events: or else ordinary, and common to all the
Faithful. For discovery of them we must again rightly distinguish the double
Act of Faith. First that Act whereby we assent unto the general truth of the
object in it self, secondly, that Act whereby we rest persuaded of the goodness
thereof unto us in particular, with respect unto both with these does a double
question arise.

First touching the means whereby a believer comes to know that the testimony,
and authority within the promises, and truths of Scripture he relieth upon,
are certainly, and infallibly Gods own Authority. Which question is all one
with that how a Christian man may infallibly be assured (ita ut non possit
subesse falsum) that the holy Scriptures are the very dictates of Almighty God.

For the resolution whereof in a very few words we must first agree, that as
noe created understanding could ever have invented the mystery of the Gospel,
(it being the counsel of Gods own bosom, Vid. Chrysostom Hom. 7. in 1 Cor.
and containing such manifold wisdoms as the Angels are astonished at) So, it
being dictated, and revealed by Almighty God, such is the deepnes, excellency,
and holiness of it, that the natural man, whose faculties are vitiated by
original, and contracted corruption cannot by the strength of his own naked
principles be able to understand it. For notwithstanding the gramaticall sense
of the words, and the logical coherence, Vbi ad prosunditatem Sacramentorum
perventum est, omnis platonicorum caligavit subtilitas. Cyprian. de Spirit. S^o
Ioh. 16 8.
and connection of consequenses, may be discerned by the common light of
ordinary reason, yet our Saviors (...), conviction, and the Apostles (...),
and (...), demonstration, and manifestation of the spirit, is a thing
surpassing the discovery, 1 Cor. 2. 4.
and comprehension of natural men. 2 Cor. 4. 2. Ephesians. 4. 19.
And therefore it is called a knowledge which passes knowledge. And this does
plainly appear upon this ground. One principal end, we know, of the Gospel
is, To cast down every high thing that exalts it self against the knowledge
of GOD, 2 Cor. 10 4. 5.
and to bring into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ. So that
until such time as the light of Evangelicall truth have thus far prevailed
over the conscience, certain it is that the practical Judgment is not yet
fully convinced of it, or acquainted with it. It is an excellent speech of the
Philosopher that according as every man is himself in the Habit of his own
nature, (...). Arist. Ethic. l. 3 c. 7.
such likewise does the end appear unto him. And therefore natural men whose
inclinations, and habit of soul are altogether sensual, and worldly, never
have a supernatural good appear unto them under the formal conceit of an
ultimate, and most eligible end, and therefore their knowledge thereof must
needs be imperfect, and defective.

Again the Scripture every where, besides the external proposing of the
object, and the material, and remote disposition of the subject (which must be
ever a reasonable creature) does require a special help of the grace of
CHRIST to open, and molifie, and illighten the heart, and to proportion the
Palate of the practical Judgment unto the sweetness, and goodness of
supernatural truths. Psalm 119. 18. Deuteronomy. 29. 4. Ier. 27. 7 31. 4. Ioh. 6. 45.
Ephesians 1* 17. 1 Cor. 12. 7. Ioh 14. 21. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 9. 2 Cor 3. 18. 1 Ioh. 5. 20.
Qusquis ^on venit profecto nec d^dicit, ita. (...) Deus docet perspiritus
gratiam ut quod qus^ didicerit non tantum cogniscendo videa, sed etiam valendo
a^petat, and agendo prositiat. Aug. de great. Christi. lib. 1 c. 14. et vid de
praedest. ss. c. 8. Nemo potest deu^ scire nisi Deo docenti. Ir^nae^s lib 4. c.
14. Adeo descendum quod de Deo intelligend in Hilar de Trinit l. 5. Council.
Aransican. Can 7
He it is who opens the eye to see wonders in the Law, gives an heart to
understand, and to know GOD, teaches all those which come unto Christ, without
which teaching they do not come, gives us an understanding to know him,
illightneth the understanding to know what is the hope of our calling, enableth
us to call Jesus Lord, and draws away the Veil from before our eyes, that we
may see with open face the Glory of God.

Again, there is a vast distance, and disproportion between a supernatural
light, and a natural faculty, the one being spiritual the other sensual, and
spiritual things must be spiritually discerned. Ignorantia and difficulta^.
Aug. (...) C^m. Alex. Stro^^. l. 7.
Two great impediments there are whereby the minds of mere natural men are
bound up, and disabled from receiving full impressions, and passing a right
sentence, upon spiritual things. First the native, and original blindness of
them which is not able to apprehend (...), the height, and majesty of the
things which are taught. Secondly, That which the Apostle calls (...), Ratio
communium opinionum consil^i caelestis incapa^, hoc socum peeta^ in natura
verum esse, quod aut in ^raseinteligit, aut praesiare possit ex ^sse Hilar de
Trin. lib. 1.
the wisdom of the flesh which is enmity against God. For as the appetite of
the flesh lusts against the Spirit, so the wisdom of the flesh reasons,
and rebelleth against the Spirit. For such ever as are the ways, and Wills of
men whereby they work, such likewise would they have the light, and the Law to
be which rules them in their working. And therefore where there is a meek
Spirit, and a heart devoted unto the obedience of Christ, and a purpose to do
the things which the Gospel requires, there is never any swelling, nor
resistance against supernatural truths, for as the cleanenesse of the window
does much conduce to the admission of light, Ioh. 7. 17. Psalm. 25. 9. 14. Ioh.
10. 4. 5. Iam 3 13. 1 Ioh 2. 20.
so does the cleanenesse of the Conscience to the admission of Truth. If any
man will do his will, he shall know of the Doctrine whether it be of God,
Aug. de doctrine* Christ. l. 2. c. 6. Hillar. de Trin. lib. 10.
and he will reveal his secrets to them that fear him.

And yet by all this which has been spoken we do not go about so to disable
Natural Reason, as to leave it no room at all in matters of supernatural
Assent. For though Nature alone be not able to comprehend Grace, yet Grace is
able to use Nature, and being it self a spiritual Eye Salve, when it has
healed and rectified Reason, it then applies it as an Instrument more exactly
to discover the connection and mutual consequences, and joynings of spiritual
Doctrines together. Besides thus much vigor we may safely attribute to
Natural Reason alone, that by the force of such premises as it self can
frame, the falsenesse, vanity, and insufficiency unto humane happiness, of all
other Religions or Doctrines which are not Christian may by a wise man be
evidently discovered, neither have there Vid. Justin Martyr. paraenos. ad
G^aecos. Clem Alex. in protrept. Tertull Apolog. c. 12. 17 and de Testimon.
animae. c. 1. 2. Cyprian de van^t Idoloram. Sophocle* and alii apud Clem. Alex.
Strom. l 5 Theod^^^ de (...). Graec. (...) Sermon. 2. 3. Cy^il contr. (...). l.
1. Aug. de Civ. Dei. l. 4. c. 31. et Lud. vivem ib^ l^b. 6 c. 10 (...) l. 3. c.
3. Joseph lib 2. con^r. App^a. Eusebius. (...). l. 13. c. 13. l. 4. c. 16
been wanting amongst Infidels and Idolaters, men of more generous, piercing,
and impartial judgments, who have made bold to confess the vanity of that
polutheisme and corrupt worship which was amongst them.

Natural Reason then being (notwithstanding any remainders of strength, or
vigor in it) too impotent to discover the certainty of Gods Word, and unable
alone to present the Gospel, as objectum credibile, and as the infallible
Oracle of God. It remains that we consider by what further means this may
be effected. And, in one word, there is a threefold different, but
subordinate causality requisite to the founding of this Assent.

The first is ministerial, dispositive, and introductory by Ecclesiastical
dispensation, which is likewise twofold. First, to those that are bred in her
bosom, and matriculated by Baptism, and so from their infancy trained up to
have a reverend and due esteem of her authority, there is her act of
Tradition, delivering to her children in this age, Aug de doctr. Christ. in
pro. Hooker. lib. 3. ss. 8 Camer. de Eccl. page 411.
as she her self by a continued succession has also received, this as an
indubitate principle to be rested on, that holy Scriptures are the Word of
God. Secondly, If the Church meet with such as are without her bosom, and so
will not ascribe any thing to her maternall Authority in Testification and
Tradition, except she can by strength of argument evince what she affirms,
she is not in that case destitute of her Arma praelusoria, valid and
sufficient arguments to make preparation in minds not extremely possessed
with prejudice and perverseness for the entertaining of this principle.

As first, that all Sciences have their Hypotheses and Postulata. Certain
principles which are to be granted, and not disputed, and that even in lower
Sciences and more commensurate to humane reason, yet Oportet discentem credere,
he must first Believe principles for granted, and then after some progress
and better proficiency in the study, he shall not fail more clearly to
perceive the infallibility of them by their own light. That therefore which is
granted unto all other Sciences more descending to the reach of humane judgment
than Divinity does, cannot without unreasonable pertinacy be denied unto it,
Especially considering that of all so many millions of men, who, in all ages,
have thus been contented to believe, first, upon Ecclesiastical Tradition and
suggestion, there has not in any age been enough to make up a number, who upon
inducements of argument, and debate have forsaken the Scriptures at the last,
which is a strong presumption that they all who persisted in the embracing of
them, did after trial, and further acquaintance by certain taste and
experience find the Testimony and tradition of the Church to be therein
faithful, and certain.

Secondly, That man being made by God, and subject to his will, and owing unto
him worship and obedience, which in reason ought to be prescribed by none
other than by him to whom it is to be performed, that therefore requisite and
congruous it is, that the Will of God should be made known unto his Creature,
in such a manner, and by such means, as that he shall not without his own
wilful neglect mistake it; in as much as Law is the rule of obedience, and
promulgation the force of Law.

Thirdly, that no other Rule or Religion can be assigned, either of Pagans or
Mahumetans, which may not manifestly by the strength of right reason be justly
disproved, as not proceeding from God, either by the latenesse of its
original, or the shortness of its continuance, or the vanity and brutishness
of its rules, or the contradictions within it self, or by some other apparent
imperfection. And for that of the Jews, notwithstanding it had its original
from Divine ordination, yet from thence likewise it may be made appear out of
those Scriptures which they confess, to have received its period and
abrogation. God promising that as he had the first time shaken the Mount in
the publication of the Law, and first founding of the Mosaicall Pedagogie, so
he would once again shake both the Earth, and the Heaven, in the promulgation
of the Gospel. To say nothing, that force of reason will easily conclude, that
with such a God, as the old Scriptures set forth the Lord to be, the blood of
Bulls, and Goats could not possibly make expiation for sin, but must
necessarily relate to some greater sacrifice, which is in the Gospel revealed.
And besides whereas the Lord was wont for the greatest sins of that people,
namely Idolatry, and pollution of his worship, to chastise them
notwithstanding, with more tolerable punishments (their two greatest
captivities having been that of Egypt, which was not much above two hundred
years, and that of Babylon, which was but seventie;) yet now, when they hate
Idolatry as much as ever their fathers loved it, they have lien under wrath to
the uttermost, under the heaviest judgment of dispersion, contempt, and
baseness, and that for fifteen hundred years together; a reason whereof can
be no other given than that fearful imprecation, which has derived the
stain of the blood of Christ upon the children of those that shed it unto this
day. Matthew. 27 25.


Fourthly, the prevailing of the Gospel by the ministry of but a few, and
those unarmed, impotent, and despised men, and that too, against all the
opposition which power, wit, or malice could call up, making it appear, that
Christ was to rule in the midst of enemies. When Lucian, Porphyrie, Libanius,
and Julian, by their wits; Nero, Severus, Diocletian, and other Tyrants by
their swords, the whole world by their scorn, malice, and contempt, and all
the arts which Satan could suggest, labored the suppression, and extinguishing
of it. The prevaling, I say, of the Gospel by such means, against such power,
in the midst of such contempt, and danger, and that over such persons as were
by long custom and tradition from their fathers trained up in a Religion
extremely contrary to the truth, and very favorable to all vicious
dispositions, and upon such conditions to deny themselves, to hate the world,
and the flesh, to suffer joyfully the loss of credit, friends, peace, quiet,
goods, liberties, life and all, for the name of a crucified Savior, whom their
eyes never saw, and whom their ears daily heard to be blasphemed, such a
prevailing as this must needs prove the original of the Gospel to be divine,
for had not God favored it as much as men hated it, impossible it must needs
have been for it, to have continued.

Fifthly, that the doctrines therein delivered, were confirmed by miracles, and
divine operations. And certain it is, that God would not in so wonderful a
manner have honored the figments of men, pretending his Name, and Authority to
the countenancing of their own inventions. And for the Historical Truth of
those miracles, they were not, in those Ages when the Church in her Apologies
did glory of them, and when, if feigned, they migh most easily have been
disproved, nor yet by those enemies who marvailously maligned and persecuted
Christian Religion, ever gain said.

Lastly, That were it not so that omne mendacium est pellucidum, and has ever
something in it to bewray it self, yet it could not be operaepretium for them
to lie in publishing a Doctrine whereby they got nothing but shame, stripes,
imprisonment, persecution, Torments, Death. Especially since the holiness of
their lives, their humility, in denying all glory to themselves, and ascribing
all to God, must needs make it appear to any reasonable man, that they did not
lay any project for their own glory, which they purposely disclaymed, refused
to receive from the hands of such as offered it, yea, and registered their own
infirmities upon perpetual Records.

With these and many other the like arguments is the Church furnished to
prepare the minds of men, swayed with but ordinary ingenuity, and respect to
common Reason, at the least to look further, and make some sad inquiry into
the Doctrine of the Gospel. There being therein especially promises of good
things made without money or price, of incomprehensible value, and of eternal
continuance.

But now though a Philosopher may make a very learned discourse to a blind man
of colors, yet it cannot be that any formal and adaequate notion of them
should be fashioned in his mind, till such time as the faculty be restored,
and then, all that preceding Lecture being compared with what he afterward
actually sees in the things themselves, does marvailously settle and satisfy
his mind. So though the Church by these and the like inducements does prepare
the minds of men to assent to divine Authority in the Scriptures, yet till the
natural ineptitude and disposition of the soul be healed, and it raised to a
capacity of supernatural light, the work is no whit brought to maturity.

Two things therefore do yet remain after this ministry and manuduction of
the Church. First, an Act of the Grace of Gods Spirit healing the
understanding, and opening the eye that it may see wonders in the Law, writing
the Law in the heart, and so making it a fit receptacle for so great a light.
Secondly, the subject being thus by the outward motives from the Church
prepared and by the inward Grace of God repaired, then lastly the object it
self being proposed, and being maturely considerd by reason thus guided, and
thus assisted, does then show forth such an Heavenly light of holiness,
purity, majesty, authority, efficacy, mercy, wisdom, comfort, perfection, in
one word, such an unsearchable Treasury of internal mysteries, as that now
the soul is as fully able by the native light of the Scriptures to distinguish
their Divine original, and authenticalnesse from any other mere humane
writings, as the eye is to observe the difference between a beam of the
Sun, and a blaze of a Candle.

The second question is how the Soul comes to be settled in this persuasion,
that the goodness of these truths founded on the Authority of God, do
particularly belong unto it? Whereunto I answer in one word, That this arises
from a twofold Testimony grounded upon a preceding work of Gods Spirit. For
first, the Spirit of God puts his fear into the hearts of his servants, and
purges their consciences, by applying the blood of Christ unto them, from dead
works, wish affections strongly, and very sensibly altering the constitution
of the mind, must needs notably manifest themselves unto the soul, when by
any reflex act she shall set her self to look inward upon her own
operations.

This being thus wrought by the grace of God, thereupon there ensues a twofold
Testimony. The first of a man's own spirit, as we see in the examples of Job,
David, Job. 31. Ps 116. 1. 26. 1. 11 Isai. 38 3 Nehe 13. 14. 22. Act. 24. 16.
Job. 21 15. 17. 2 Cor 1. 12. Romans 8. 16.
Hezekiah, Nehemiah, Saul, and others, namely, That he desires to fear Gods
name, to keep a conscience void of offense, to walk in all integrity toward
God, and men, from which, and the like personal qualifications, arise joy in
the Holy Ghost, peace of conscience, and experience of sweetness in the
fellowship with the Father, and his Son. Secondly, the Testimony of the holy
Spirit, bearing witness to the sincerity of those affections, and to the
evidence and truth of those persuasions which himself, by his grace stirred
up. So then first the Spirit of God writes the Law in the heart, upon
obedience whereunto arises the Testimony of a man's own spirit: And then he
writes the promises in the heart, and by them ratifieth and confirms a man's
hops, and joys unto him.

I understand not all this which has been spoken generally of all assents unto
objects Divine, which I take it in regard of their evidence, firmnes, and
stability do much differ according unto the diverse tempers of those hearts in
which they reside; but principally unto the chief of those assents which are
proper unto saving Faith. For assent as I said in general is common unto
Divils with men, and therefore to make up the creature of true Faith. There is
required some differencing property whereby it may be constituted in the entire
essence of saving Faith. In each sense we may observe that unto the general
faculty whereby it is able to perceive objects proportioned to it, there is
annexed ever another property whereby according to the several nature of the
objects proposed it is apt to delight or be ill affected with it: for example,
our ear apprehends all sounds in common, but according as is the Harmony or
discord of the sound, it is apt to take pleasure or offense at it. Our taste
reaches unto whatsoever is the object of it, but yet some things there are
which grievously offend the Palate, others which as much delight it, and so it
is in Divine assents. Some things in some subjects bring along with them
tremblings, horrors, fearful expectations, aversation of mind, unwilling to
admit or be pursued with the evidence of Divine truths, as it is in Divils, and
despayring sinners. Other assents on the contrary do beget serenity of mind,
a sweet complacency, delight, adherence, and comfort: Into the hearts of some
men does the Truth of GOD shine like Lightning with a penetrating, and amasing
brightness, in others like the Sun with comfortable, and refreshing Beams.

For understanding whereof we are to observe that in matters practical, and
Divine (and so in all others, Doctor Iack^on of Faith.
though not in an equal measure) the truth of them is ever mutually embraced,
and as it were insolded in their goodness; for as truth does not delight the
understanding unless it be a good truth, that is such as unto the
understanding bears a relation of convenience (whence arise diversities in
men's studies, because all men are not alike affected with all kinds of truth)
so good does noe way affect the will, unless it be a true, Isay. 29. 8.
and real good. Otherwise it proves but like the banquet of a dreaming man,
which leaves him as hungry, and empty as when he lay down. Goodness then added
unto truth does together with the assent generate a kind of rest, and delight
in the heart on which it shines.

Now goodness Moral, or Divine has a double relation. A relation unto that
original in dependency on, and propinquitie whereunto it consilleth, and a
relation unto that faculty or subject wherein it resideth, and whereunto it is
proposed. Good in the former sense is that which bears in it a proportion unto
the Fountain of good; for every thing is in it self so far good as it
resembles that original which is the author, and pattern of it, and that is
GOD. In the second sense that is good which bears a convenience, and fitnes to
the mind which entertaines it. good, I mean not always in nature, but in
apprehension. All Divine truths are in themselves essentially good, but yet
they work not always delight, and comforts in the minds of men until
proportioned, and fitted unto the faculty that receives them. As the Sun is
it in it self equally light, the water in a Fountain of it self equally
sweet: but according unto the several Temper of the eye which perceives the
one, and of the vessel through which the other passes, they may prove to be
offensive, and distasteful. But now further when the faculty is thus fitted to
receive a good, it is not the generality of that good which pleases neither,
but the particular propriety, and interest thereunto. Wealth and honor as it is
in it self good, so is it likewise in the apprehension of most men; yet we see
men are apt to be grieved at it in others, and to look on it with an evil
eye, nothing makes them to delight in it, but possession and propriety unto it.
I speak here only of such Divine good things as are by God appointed to make
happy his creature, namely our blessed Lord, and Savior Jesus Christ, his
Obedience, Satisfaction, Resurrection, Ascension, Intercession, Glory, and
whatever elce it is of which he has been unto his* Church the Author,
Purchaser, conveyer, and Foundation.

Now, unto these as unto other good things there is a double right belonging by
free donation from him unto the Church, a right of propriety unto the thing,
and a right of possession in the thing. This latter is that which here in Earth
the Church suspireth, and longs after; that other only it is which here we
have, and that confirmed unto us by a double Title. The first as the Land of
Cannan was confirmed unto the Israelits by some few clusters of Grapes, and
other Fruits of the Land, I mean by the earnest first fruits, and pledges of
the spirit: Secondly, by the free promise of Christ who cannot deceive. Thus
then at last we have discovered the proper, ultimate, and complete object of
faith, which is all Divine truth, and goodness, unto which there is a right and
propriety given to all such as are Christ's, though not in actual possession,
yet in an infallible promise, and the Acts by which they entertain that
object, assenting, adhearing, and delighting in it as particularly good. By
these two, to wit the object and the Act. (as all other habits of the mind) so
is this of faith to be defined. So that from these observations I take it we
may conclude that the nature of saving faith admits of some such explications
as this, Faith is a particular, personal, applicative, and experimental
assent unto all Divine Revelations, as true, and good not in general only, but
unto me arising out of that sweet correspondency which is between the soul,
and from that relish, and experience of sweetness which the soul, being raised,
and illightned by Gods Spirit, does find in them.

I have been over teadious in finding out this definition of the nature of
faith, and therefore briefly from these grounds, let the conscience
impartially examine it self in such demands as these. Do I find in my self
a most willing assent unto the whole compass of Divine truths, not out of
constraint, nor with grief, reluctancie, and trembling of spirit? does Gods
Word shine on me not like lightning which pierces the Eyelids though they
shut themselves against it, but does this find in my heart a welcome, and a
willing admittance? Am I glad when I find any Divine truth discovered of which
formerly I had been ignorant? do I not of purpose close mine eyes, forbear
the means of true information, stifle and smother Divine principles, quench
the motions, and dictats of Gods Spirit in me? am I not ignorant willingly of
such things, the mention whereof would disquiet me in my bosom sin, and the
inquiry whereunto would cross the reserved resolutions, and unwarrantable
projects which I am peremptory to prosecute? am I not so in league with mine
own corruptions that I could heartily wish some Divine truths were not
revealed, Vi^ Augustine. de (...) Christian. 1. l. 2. cap. 7.
rather then being so they should sting my conscience, and disable me from
secure enjoying some beloved sin? do I assent unto all Divine truths as a
like precious, and with equal adherence? am I as little displeased with the
truth of GODS threats as of his promises? do they as powerfully work upon me
to reform, as the other to refresh me? do I believe them all not only in the
Thesis or general, but in the Hypothesis, and respectively to mine own
particular? again, do I find my heart fitted unto the goodness of Divine
truth? am I forward to embrace with much affection, and loving delight
whatsoever promises are made unto me? do I find a spiritual taste and relish
in the food of life? which having once tasted of, I find my self weaned from
the love of the World? from admiring the honors, pursuing the preferments,
hunting after the applause, adoring the glories, and selling my soul and
liberty for the smiles thereof? do the sweetness of those promises like the
fruits brought by the spies from Canaan, so much affect me as that to come to
the full possession thereof, I am at a point with all other things, ready to
encounter any Cananite, or sinful lust that shall oppose me, to adventure on
any difficulties that might deter me, to pass through a Sea, a Wilderness,
through fiery Serpents, the darts of Satan; yea, if need were by the gates of
Hell? briefly do I find in my heart (however in it self froward, and wayward
from any good) a more then natural liveliness, and vigor which disposes me
to approve of the word, promises, and purchases of my salvation as of an
unvaluable Jewel, so precious as that all the things in this World are but as
dung in comparison? to a most fervent expectation, and longing after them, to a
heavenly perswation of my happiness by them, and Lastly, to a sweet delight in
them, working peace of conscience, and joy in the holy Ghost, a love of CHRIST'S
appearing, an endeavor to be like unto him, and a desire above all things to
be with him, and enjoy him, (which are all so many secret, and pure issues of
the spirit of adoption)? I may from these premises infallibly conclude that I
am possessed of a lively faith, and thereby of those first fruits which bring
with them an assurance of that great harvest of glory in the day of redemption.
And in the mean time having this wedding garment, I may with much confidence
approach Gods Table to receive there the renewall of my Patent unto life.

CHAP. XX.
Of the third, and last means for the trial and demonstration of Faith,
namely, from effects or properties thereof.
THE last Medium which was assigned for the examination of Faith was the
properties or effects of it, by which as by stepps we raise our thoughts to the
apprehension of Faith it self. To assign all the consequences or effects of
Faith is a labor as difficult as it would be tedious. I decline both, and
shall therefore touch upon some special ones which if present, all the rest in
there order follow with a voluntary train. And now as in the soul of man
there are two kind of operations, one primitive, and substantial, which we
call the act of information, others secondary, and subsequent, as to
understand, to will, to desire, and the like: so Faith, being (as has been
formerly observed) in some sort the Actus primus, or form of a Christian, I
mean that very medium unionis whereby the soul of man is really united to
CHRIST, has therefore in it two kinds of operations. The first as it were
substantial, the other secondary. The former of these is that act of
vivisication or quickening, by which, Faith does make a man Gal. 2. 20.
to live the life of Christ, by Ephesians. 4. 16.
knitting him unto Christ as it were with Joints, and Sinews, and Job. 15, 1. 2.
ingrafting him into the unity of that Vine whose Fruit is Life.

That which does quicken is ever of a more excellent nature then that which is
quickened, now the soul being a spirit, and therefore within the compass of
highest created perfection, cannot possibly be quickened by any but him who is
above all perfection, which the Heathen themselves have acknowledged to be God.
For S. Paul has observed it out of them, that in him we live, and move, and
have our being. Now unto life necessary it is that there be a union unto the
principal or original of life, which to the soul is God. In regard of the
essence of God nothing can be separated from him he being immense, and filling
all things: but yet in regard of his voluntary communication, and dispensing of
himself unto the creature, the manner of his special presence does much vary,
unto this special union of the creature unto God (in virtue whereof the
creature is quickened) and does in some sort live the Life of God. There is
necessarily presupposed some sinew or ligament, which may be therefore called
the medium, and instrument of life. This knot in the estate of man's Creation
was the obedience of the Law, or the covenant of works, which while man did
maintain firm, and unshaken, he had an evident Communion with God in all
those vital influences which his mercy was pleased to shed down upon him: but
once untying this knot, and cutting asunder that bond, there did immediately
ensue a separation between GOD, and man, and by an infallible consequence
death likewise. But God being rich in mercy, and not willing to plunge his
creature into eternal misery, found a new means to communicate himself unto
him, by appointing a more easy Covenant, which should be the second knot of
our union unto him, only to believe in Christ incarnate, who had done that for
us which we our selves had formerly undone. And this new Covenant is the
covenant of faith by which the just do live.

But here a man may object that it is harder for one to discern that he does
live in Christ then that he believes in him, and therefore this can be noe good
mean by which we may find out the truth of our Faith. To this we answer,
that life must be discerned by those tokens which are inseparable from it, and
they are first a desire of nourishment, without which it cannot continue, for
nature has imprinted in all things a love of its own being, and preservation,
and by consequence a prosecution of all such means as may preserve, and a
removeall of all such as may endanger or oppress it. Secondly, a conversion of
nourishment into the nature of the body. Thirdly, augmentation, and growth till
we come unto that Stature which our life requires. Fourthly, participation of
influences from the vital parts, the Head, the Heart, and others, with
conformity unto the principal mover amongst them, for a dead part is ever
withered, immovable, and disobedient to the other faculties, Fifthly, a
sympathy, and communion in pains, or delights with the fellow members. Lastly,
a free use of our senses* and other faculties, by all which we may infallibly
conclude that a creature lives.

And so it is in Faith. It frames the heart to delight in all such spiritual
food as is requisite thereunto. Disposing it upon the view, at lest upon the
taste of any poisonous thing to be pained with it, and cast it up. The food
that nourishes Faith is as in little Infants, of the same quality with that
which begat it, even the word of life, wherein there is sincere Milk, and
strong meat. The poison which endangereth it is heresy, which tainteth the
root of Faith, and goes about to prevert the assent, and impiety, which
blasteth, and corrupts the branches. All which the soul of a Faithful man
abhors.

Secondly, in Faith there is a conversion likewise, the virtue whereof ever
there resides where the vital power is. In natural life the power of altering
is in the man, and not in the meat, and therefore the meat is assimilated to
our flesh: but in spiritual life the quickening faculty is in the meat, and
therefore the man is assimilated, and transformed into the quality of the
meat. And indeed the word is not cast into the heart of man, as meat into the
stomach, to be converted into the corrupt quality of nature, but rather as
seed into the ground to convert that Earth which is about it into the quality
of it self.

Thirdly, where Faith is there is some growth in grace, we grow nearer unto
Heaven then when we first believed, an improvement of our knowledge in the
mysteries of godliness, which like the Sun, shines brighter, and brighter unto
the perfect day: An increase of willingness to obey God in all things; and as in
the growth of natural bodies if they be sound, and healthy, so in this of
Faith likewise, it is universal, and uniforme, one part does not grow, and
another shrivell, neither does one part grow too big, and disproportioned for
another, the Head does not increase in knowledge, Ephesians 4. 16.
and the Heart decay in love, the Heart does not swell in zeal, and the Hand
wither in charity, but in the nourishment of Faith every grace receives
proportionably its habitual confirmation.

Fourthly, by the spiritual life of Faith, the faithful do partake of such
heavenly influences as are from the head shed down upon the members. The
influences of Christ in his Church are many, and peradventure in many things
imperceptible. Some principal I conceive to be the influence of his truth, and
the influence of his power. His truth is exhibited in teaching the Church,
which is illumination, his power partly in guiding the Church, and partly in
defending it, that is direction, this protection. Now in all these do they who
are in Christ, according to the measure and proportion of his Spirit,
certainly communicate. They have their eyes more or less opened, like Paul,
to see the terrors of God, the fearfulness of sin, the rottenness of a
spiritual death, the pretiousnesse of Christ and his promises, the glimpses
and rays of that glory which shall be revealed: they have their feet loosned
with Lazarus, that they can now rise, and walk, and leap, and praise God.
Lastly, they are strengthened and clothed with the whole arms of God, which
secureth them against all the malice, or force of Satan.

Fifthly, where faith is, there is a natural compassion in all the members of
Christ toward each other. If sin be by one member committed, the other
members are troubled for it, because they are all partakers of that Spirit
which is grieved with the sins of his people. If one part be afflicted, the
other are interested in the pain, because all are united together in one head
which is the Fountain, and original of Sense. The members of the Church are
not like paralyticke, and unjoynted members, which cannot move toward the
succor of each other.

Lastly, where Faith is, there all the faculties are expedite and free in their
operations. The eye open to see the wonders of Gods Law, the ear open to hear
his voice, the mouth open to praise his name, the arm enlarged toward the
relief of his servants, the whole man tenderly sensible of all pressures, and
repugnant qualities.

The secondary effects of faith are amongst sundry others such as these. First,
(...)
a love and liking of those spiritual truths which by faith I assent unto.
Justin Martyr. quaest. Orthod. q8.
For saving Faith being an assent with adherence and delight, contrary to that
of Divils which is with trembling and horror (which delight is a kind of
relish, and experience of the goodness of those objects we assent unto.) It
necessarily follows even from the dicate of Nature (which instructs a man to
love that which works in him delight and comfort) that from this assent must
arise an approbation and love of those objects whence does issue such
sweetness. A second effect is affiance, and hope, confidently for the present
relying on the goodness, and for the future waiting on the power of God, which
shall to the full in time perform what he has in his Word promised, when
once the mind of a man is wrought so to assent unto divine promises made in
Christ, as to acknowledge an interest, and propriety unto them, and that to be
at last actually performed not by a man, who is subject both to unfaithfulness
in perseverance and to disability in performance of his promises (for every man
is a liar, either by imposture, ready to deceive, or by impotencie, likely to
disappoint the expectations of those who rely upon him) but by Almighty God,
who the better to confirm our faith in him, has both by his Word, and Oath
engaged his fidelity, and is altogether omnipotent to do what he has
purposed: Impossible it is but from such an assent, grounded on the veracity,
and on the All Sufficiency of God, there should result in the mind of a
faithful man a confident dependence on such promises, renouncing in the mean
time all selfe-dependance, as in it self utterly impotent, and resolving in
the midst of Temptations to rely on him, to hold fast his mercy, and the
profession of his Faith without wavering, having an eye to the recompense of
reward, and being assured that he who has promised will certainly bring it to
pass.

A third effect of Faith is joy, and peace of Conscience, Rom 5* 1.
for being justified by faith we have peace with God. The mind is by faith,
and the impression of sweetness in Gods Promises, composed unto a settled
calmness, and serenity. I do not mean a dead peace, an immobility, and
sleepiness of Conscience, like the rest of a dreaming prisoner: but such a
peace as a man may by a syllogism of the practicke judgment upon right
examination of his own interest in Christ, safely infer unto himself. The
wicked often has an appearance of peace as well as the faithful: but here is
the difference. Between a wicked man's sin and him there is a Door shut,
which will surely one day open, for it is but either a door of Error, or the
door of Death: for sin lies at the door, ready to fly at his throat as
soon as it shall find either his eyes open to see it, or his life to let it
in upon the soul: but between a faithful man, and his sin, there is a
Cornerstone, a Wall of fire, through which Satan himself cannot break, even
the merits of Christ Jesus. Briefly, the peace which comes from Faith has
these two properties in it, tranquillity and serenity too; otherwise it is but
like the calmness of the dead Sea, whose unmoveablenesse is not Nature, but a
Curse.

The last effect which I shall now name of Faith, is that general effect of
fructification Act. 15.
purifying the heart, and disposing it unto holiness, and new obedience, which
is to be framed after Gods Law. Faith unites us unto Christ, being thus united
we are quickened by one and the same Spirit, having one spirit, and soul we
must needs agree in the same operations, and those operations must necessarily
bear conformity unto the same rule, and that rule is the Law, under which
Christ himself was for our sakes made. So that the rule to examine this effect
of Faith by, should be the whole compass of Gods Law, which to enter into,
were to redouble all this labor past, for thy Law (says David) is exceeding
wide. Briefly therefore in all our obedience observe these few rules. First,
The obligatory power which is in the Law depends upon the one, and sole
authority of the Lawgiver who is God. He that breaks but one Commandment
venturs to violate that authority which by the same Ordination made one equally
obligatory with the rest. And therefore our obedience must not be partial,
but universal unto the whole Law, in as much as it proceeds from that Faith
which without indulgence, or dispensation yields assent unto the whole
compass of Divine Truth. Secondly, as is God, so is his Law, a spiritual, and
a perfect Law, and therefore requires a universality of the subject, as well as
of the obedience. I mean (besides that perfect integrity of Nature, which in
regard of present inherence is irrecoverably lost in Adam, and supplied only
by the imputed righteousness and integrity of Christ) an inward, spiritual,
sincere obedience of the heart, from thence spreading like lines from a Center
unto the whole Circumference of our Nature, unto our Words, Actions, Gestures,
unto all our parts, without crooked, mercenary, and reserved respects, wherein
men often in stead of the Lord, make their ends, or their fears their God.
Lastly, remember that in every Law all homogeneall matters to the maine duty
which is commanded, every sprigge, or seed, or original, or degree thereof is
included, as all the several branches of a Tree are fastened to one and the
same stock. And by these rules are we to examine the truth of our obedience.
But here before I draw down these premises to an Assumption, I will but name
one caution which is this, That Faith as it may be either habitual or
Actual, so it is the cause of these holy actions either habitually by framing
and disposing the heart unto them, or actually, when it is it self, as it
ought ever to be sound, and operative. But sometimes Faith (so great is the
corruption of our nature) admits of a decay, and languor, wherein it lies as it
were like fire under ashes raked up, and stifled under our corruptions. Again
in some there is a weaker, in some a stronger Faith, according unto which
difference, there must be a difference in the measure, and magnitude of the
effects. But yet it is infallibly true that all, or most of those holy fruits
do in some seasons or other bud forth of that stock which is quickened by
Faith, though sometimes in some men less discernable by reason of corruptions
interposed. For it usually thus falls out, that our graces are but like the
Army of Gedeon, a small handful whereas our corruptions are like the Midianits
which lay on the ground as Grasshoppers innumerable. But yet in these God
crowns his own meanest gists with victory, and success.

So then these things being thus proposed let the conscience without connivence
examine it self by such interrogatories as these. Do I find my self live by
the Faith of the Son of GOD who gave himself for me? Do I delight in his
Word more then my appointed food, never adulterating it with the Leaven or
Dreggs of heretical fancies or dead works? Does the word of Truth transform
me to the Image of it self, Crucifying all those corruptions which harbored
in me? Do I find my self to grow in all graces universally, and uniformely
toward God and man, not thinking to recompense some defects which my nature
drives me unto, with supererogation (as I conceive) and over performance of
such duties as are not so visibly repugnant to my personal corruptions? Do
the beams of the Sun of righteousness shining on my soul illighten me with
his truth, and with his power sway me unto all good? Am I heartily affected
with all the conditions of Gods Church, to mourn, or to rejoice with it even
at such times, when mine own particular estate would frame me unto affections
of a contrary temper? Have I free use of all my spiritual senses, to see the
light of God, to hear his Word, to taste his mercies, to feel with much
tenderness all the wounds and pressures of sin? Do I love all divine truth,
not so much because proportionable unto my desires, but because conformable
unto God? Am I resolved in all estates to rely on Gods mercy, and providence,
though He should kill me to trust in him? Do I wholly renounce all trust in
mine own worthiness, or in any concurrences of mine own naturally toward God?
Do I not build either my hopes or fears upon the faces of men, nor make
either them or my self the rule or end of my desires? finally, do I endeavor
a universal obedience unto Gods Law in all the whole latitude, and extent of
it, not indulging to my self liberty in any known sin? Is not my obedience
mercenary, and hypocritical, but spiritual, and sincere? Do I not swallow
gnats, nor stumble at straws, not dispense with my self for the least of
sins, for irregular thoughts, for occasions of offense, for appearances of
evil, for the motions of concupiscence for idle words, and vain conversation,
and whatsover is in the lowest degree forbidden? And though in any, or all
these I may be sometimes overtaken (as who is it that can say I have washed my
hands in innocence, I am clean from my sins?) Do I yet relent for it,
strive, and resolve against it? in a word, does not mine own heart condemn me
of selfe-deceite, of hypocrisy, of halting and dissembling in Gods service.
Then may I safely conclude that I have partaked of the saving efficacy of
Faith, and am fitly qualified to partake of these holy mysteries, whereby this
good work of Faith begun in me, may be strengthened, and more perfected
against the day of the Lord Jesus.

In the receiving of which we must use all both inward, and outward reverence,
secret elevations of spirit, and comfortable thoughts touching the mercies of
God in Christ, touching the qualities, and benefits of his passion, and of our
sins that caused it: and Lastly, for the course of our life after we must
pitch upon a constant resolution to abandon all sin, and to keep a strict
hand over all our ways; Desertor de charactere damnatur de quo militans
honoratu: Augustine. Brisson. de Reg. Perfis lib. 2.
least turning again with the Swine to the mire that which should be the
badge of our honor, prove the Character of our shame. The Persians had a
festival time one day in the year which they called Vitiorum interitum, wherein
they slew all Serpents, and venomous, creatures, and after that till the
revolution of that same day suffered them to swarm again as fast as ever: If
we think in that manner to destroy our sins, and only one day in the year,
when we celebrate this holy Festival, the evil spirit may hapily depart for a
day in policy, but surely he will turn again, with seven other spirits, and
make the end of that man worse then his beginning. But that ground which
drinks in the rain which comes of upon it (and what rain comparable to a
shower of Christ's blood in the Sacrament?) and brings forth herbs meet for
the use of him that dressed it, receives blessings from God; A Cup of Blessing
here, but Rivers of Blessedness hereafter, in that Paradise which is above,
where He who is in this life the Object of our Faith and Hope, shall be the
End, and Reward of them both for ever.

FINIS.
A Summary of the several Chapters contained in this Book.
Chap. 1. Man's Being, to be employed in working: that working is directed unto
some good, which is God, that good a free, and voluntary reward, which we here
enjoy, only in the right of a promise, the scale of which promise is a
Sacrament. page 1. Chap. 2. Sacraments are earnests, and shadows of our
expected glory made unto the senses. p. 6. Chap. 3. Inferences of practice from
the former observations. p. 10. Chap. 4. Whence Sacraments derive their value,
and being, namely, from the Author that instituted them. p. 15. Chap. 5.
Inferences of practice from the Author of this Sacrament. p. 19. Chap. 6. Of
the Circumstances of the institution, namely, the time, and place. p. 24. Chap.
7. Of the matter of the Lords Supper, Bread, and Wine, with their Analogy unto
Christ. page 32. Chap. 8. Practical inferences from the materials of the
Lords Supper. p. 40. Chapter 9. Of the Analogy and proportion between the holy
actions used by Christ in this Sacrament, and Christ himself who is the
substance of it. p. 45. Chapter 10. Of the fourth action, with the reasons why the
Sacrament is to be eaten and drunken. p. 53. Chap. 11. Of other reasons, why
the Sacrament is eaten, and drunken, and of the manner of our union, and
incorporation into Christ. p. 60. Chap. 12. Inferences of Practice from the
consideration of the former actions. p. 72 Chap. 13. Of the two first ends, or
effects of the Sacrament, namely, the exhibition of Christ to the Church, and
the union of the Church to Christ. Of the real Presence. p. 81. Chap. 14. Of
three other ends of this holy Sacrament, the fellowship, or union of the
faithful, the obsignation of the Covenant of Grace, and the abrogation of the
Passover. p. 102. Chap. 15. The last end of this holy Sacrament, namely, the
Celebration, and memory of Christ's death. A brief collection of all the
ben^fits which are by his death conveyed on the Church. The question touching
the quallity of temporal punishments stated. p. 116. Chap. 16. Of the manner
after which we are to celebrate the memory of Christ's passion. p. 137. Chap.
17. Inferences of practice from the several ends of this holy Sacrament. p.
148 Chap. 18. Of the subject, who may with best benefit receive the holy
Sacrament, with the necessary qualification thereunto, of the necessity of due
preparation. p. 170. Chap. 19. Of the form, or manner of examination required,
which is, touching the maine qualification of a worthy receiver, faith: The
demonstration whereof is made, first, from the causes, secondly from the nature
of it. p. 185. Chap. 20. Of the third, and last means for the trial and
demonstration of Faith, namely, from effects or properties thereof. p. 224.
FINIS.
Perlegi eruditum hunc de S. Eucharistia Tractatum, dignumque judico qui typis
mandetur. R. P. Epis^. Land. Capell. domest.

April. 7. 1638. Tho. Wykes.

Errata.
Page* 3. Lin. 18. for naucals, r. naturalls, p. 21. l. 9. for confounders r.
cofounders. p. 55. l. 18. for concern, r. preserve, p. 82. for poted, r.
posed, p. 87. l. 16. for pretense, r. presence, p. 150. l. 12. for we, r. no,
p. 160. l. 4. for depassion, r. depastion, p. 173. l. 29. for depashion, r.
depastion.


