AN ANIMADVERSION TO Mr RICHARD CLYFTONS Advertisement. Who under pretense of
answering Chr. Lawnes book, has published an other man's private Letter, with
Mr Francis Iohnsons answer thereto. Which letter is here justified; the answer
thereto refuted: and the true causes of the lamentable breach that has lately
fallen out in the English exiled Church at Amsterdam, manifested, By HENRY
AINSWORTH.

Imprinted at Amsterdam, by Giles Thorp. Ano. Di. 1613.

The Preface, to the Christian reader.
OF all sorrows that do befall the people of God, there are none so greevous as
intestine troubles, which Satan rayseth among themselves. With these, above
others, we have been often afflicted, the Lord so chastening our synns,
humbling us, and exercising our faith and patience: whiles many among us, at
sundry times, have turned aside from the way of truth, and holy commandment
which God gave unto them. And not contented to stray themselves alone; they
have sought by all means to draw others after them: if they follow not, they make
war against them. What challenges and provocations we have had by others, the
world has seen heretofore by works published: what now is further come upon
us, they may see in part, though not as we have felt. Our adverse brethren,
(although themselves have not answered the things formerly published against
their present errors, yet) have not ceased to urge us with boastful speeches,
private letters, and publik treatises, to come into this field: and whiles we
were otherwise employed, they have much insulted against us; and now, rather
then we should be quiet, they take our private letters and print them: so
restless is error in it self, so troublesome unto others. And whereas Chapter Lawn
and others, first declined to these our Opposites faction, and afterward fell
from evil to worse, and have set out a lewd pamphlet, to the disgrace of the
truth and of sundry men's persons: Mr Clyfton (who has printed my letter with
M. Iohnsons answer,) intitleth his treatise, An Advertisement concerning Chapter
Lawns book: but taking occasion by Articles therein printed, the most that he
advertiseth, is against me. It was my desire and purpose to have left
controversies, and have exercised my self in more quiet and comfortable
meditations: but it pleases not God as yet, to grant my request therein. My
prayer therefore is, that his gracious spirit may guide me in this conflict for
his truth, and gyrd me with strength unto this battle. A few things I will here
briefly note, touching our present controversy.

1. The power of Christ which he left with his Church, has been continually
assailed by Satan and his instruments. Diotrephes 3. Ioh. 9.10.
began the love of preeminence, in the Apostles time: Bishops have prosequuted
the same, in all ages sithence: but the high Priest of Rome did get the
victory, and wears the triple crown. Two pillars there are, which do most
underprop the towr of Antichrist: 1. a proportion drawn from the government in
Israel, 2. and a pretended privilege from Peter's keys. Pope Innocent the 3.
from Deuteronomy. 17.8.12. bolstreth his canon law, C. aper venerabilem. Extrav. qui
sunt sil. legit.
for exercising his jurisdiction over all causes and persons, proportionable to
the high court and Synedrion of Israel. Pighius Hierarc. l. 4. c. 3. and l. 2.
c. 3.
writing for his Lords hierarchy, and Dorman (our countryman) his disciple,
laboring T. Dorm. Proof of certain articles, denied by M. Jewel. fol. 7.
to prove the same, plead from the Jews state, how God provided to take away
schisms that might arise, by appointing a place and Judge to flee unto in all
such doubts, Deuteronomy 17. and would have us think that God has provided as well for
his church now, which has no less need then they. And because they had the
same God, the same Christ, the same faith, the same covenant etc, that we, and
the law contained Heb. 10.
a shadow of the good things to come, they think their proofs impregnable,
concluding from the high Priests court in Israel, to their high Prelates
consistory in Christendom. Bellarmine and other popish writers (as this
treatise after page 15.16 etc.
manifests,) allege the like arguments. Our opposites now, do plead against
us, from the very same grounds: Treat. on Mat. 18, 17. Advertisement, page 32
-- 35. etc.
wresting a proportion from the Princes of Israel to the Ministers of the
gospel, and telling us we may not be strangers from the polity of Israel,
whereof see after in this treatise page 13.14. etc. neither of them observing,
how the Angel foretold that Christ should destroy the City and the Sanctuary
of the Jews, Dan. 9, 26. and so abolish Moses polity, and bring an other into
his house, wherein he should be found as faithful as Moses, Heb. 3, 2, 5, 6. And
he has forbidden his ministers to exorcise princelike authority, or dominion
over his heritage; Mat. 20, 25, 26 1. Pet. 5, 1.3.

2. The Papists seek shifts and distinctions, to turn away the reasons that
disprove their errors. Bellarmine being pressed, with judgments used
heretofore in the Churches, would ease himself thus. Bell. de Council. et
eccles. l. 1. c. 16.
There is a double judgment (says he) publik and private. Publik, is that
which is uttered by a publik judge with authority, so as others are bound to
rest in that judgment. Private, is the sentence which every one chooses as
true, but it binds no man. Public judgment in the cause of faith, is never
given to the people, but private judgment sometimes is given them etc. In like
manner these our opposites, who themselves heretofore reasoned well for the
churches judging of sinners from 1. Cor. 5.4 -- 12. do now seek to solute
their own arguments, with the same distinction. There is also Mr John's. treat.
on Mat. 18.17. p. 21.
(say they) a publik judgment and a private, etc. The publik judgment comes
out from the Lord and from his ministers, for him and the church or common
wealth, whose publik officers they are. The private judgment is to every
particular person, touching their discerning, assenting or dissenting to or
from the things spoken etc, as every one is persuaded. Jf this their judgment
agree with the publik, it is already signified by the officers, and so is the
same with the publik. Jf some disagree, it is the dissent of such particular
persons judgment from the publik, of what sex or condition soever they be,
that so are diversely minded, and is to be regarded as there shall be cause.
Alleging for this private judgment, 1 Cor. 6.2.3. Act. 26.10. with 22.20. and
21.25. with 15.6.22. and 16.4. with 1. Cor. 5.12.13. 1. Cor. 10.15. and 11.13.
Now although these men quote scriptures, which the Cardinal does not: yet are
the places but for a show; they yield no sound proof of the question. For none
of them do manifest, that in the Churches judging of sinners, Paul intended
the Elders only should have a publik judgment, and all the people beside, but a
private: nay the contrary does appear, by the whole argument of that chapter:
to omit things which may be pressed against their distinction, from Act.
15.22.25.28. and other places. As, when he mentions sorowing, 1. Cor. 5.2. he
meant not that the Elders sorrow should be publik, and the peoples private. When
he wills that the wicked man, by the power of Christ should be delivered to
Satan, and cast out from among them, verse 4.5.13. he did not purpose that the
Elders should deliver and cast him out publikly, and the people privately* all
being gathered together for that business. When he would have them purge out the
old leven, that they might keep the passover with unleavened bread; verse 7.8,
he meant not that the Ministers should purge the leven, and keep the feast
publikly, and the church privately: neither did the type of the Passover in
Israel, teach them such a thing. No nor the judging of malefactors in Israel:
for when the Magistrates gave sentence of death, and the people stoned wicked
persons at the gates of the cities: the rulers fact was not then publik, and
the peoples private; the scripture teaches us not thus to distinguish, nor
reason it self: but that the execution was a part of the publik judgment. The
Apostle writes in 1. Cor. 5. to all the Church, blaming their neglect of the
Censure, even as in 1. Cor. 11. he writes to al, reproving their abuse in the
Lords supper. Wherefore, if me^ will, they may misapply this distinction to all
church actions, as to Sacraments, prayers, election of officers, and the like,
making them publik in the Elders, and private in the church or people: and so,
as the Papists do also in other cases, give all lay men but a private spirit
(as Kellisons Survey, 1. book. 3. chapt.
they use to speak,) and the ministers only a publik. We find not that
Christian people are more excluded from being publik members of the body, and
actors with their ministers in the Kingdom of Christ, then they are in the
Preisthood and prophecy. And we know no reason, why the Pastor himself, if he
consent not with the Church in casting out such an incestuous person, may not
be said to have a private judgment, as well as an other man. But by such popish
distinctions, the clergy were severed from the laity, and so the people by
degrees, turned out of al. And what now do these our Opposits allow the
people, if they see their Elders to corrupt judgment, and therefore do dissent
from the^; they make it but the dissent of particular persons judgment from the
publik, of what sex or condition soever they be, (the Christian Magistrate,
when he is a member of the Church, not excepted, touching ecclesiastical
proceedings,) and it is to be regarded (they say) as there shall be cause: they
mean, I trow, as the Elders themselves shall see cause. And so if a church have
3. or 4. officers, and they corrupted with heresy or other vice, the whole
congregation of people, of what condition soever any persons be, can pass no
publik ecclesiastical judgment upon them, by this doctrine: as for their
private judgment or censure, the Elders themselves will regard it as there
shall be cause. If this be not a Prelacie which the Elders would usurp, I know
not what is. But of these things, see after in this Treatise, page 22, 23.

3. Come we to reproaches and disgracings of the truth and way of God; and we
shall see among the Papists, how they disdeyn that the people should meddle in
matters of religion and judging of controversies. They complayn of them for
their ignorance, unrulynes, disobedience unto government: they say Dorman,
Proof of articles, denied by Mr Jewel. fol. 11.
the Protestants reason as Chore Dathan and Abyram did, Nu^. 16. when they
rebelled against Moses and Aaron the Ministers of God; saying that there
needs here in the Church no head to govern it, because Christ is always with
it. And did not those wicked men (says the Papist) in their rebellion against
Moses and Aro^, use the same reason, when they told the^ to their face, let it
suffice you that all the multitude is holy, and they have God present with the^.
And why then take you upon your selves, the rule over the people of our Lord?
As who would say, having no need of any other ruler, God being with them etc.
The very same reproaches do our Opposites now, cast upon us, advancing the
Elders, disgracing the people, See after in this treatise, p. 37.39.
by intimating their simplicity and error; charging us as oppugners of
government; and abusing against us the example of Corah Datha^ and Abiram, (as
we have often heard with grief,) telling us, we go upon their grounds, and the
like. For which we wish they may find repentance and mercy with the Lord, least
he turn the evil upon their own heads, as Moses then did upon the Levites. For
unto them Number. 16.9.10.
it seemed a small thing that the God of Israel had separated them from the
multitude of Israel, to take them near unto himself, to do the service of the
Tabernacle, and to stand before the Congregation, and to minister unto them,
but they sought the office of the Priest also: so these our opposers are not
content with their office, to be Romans 1.1.
separated unto the gospel of God, to stand and minister before and unto the
Congregation, but will needs be the Congregation it self, and take more
authority then is given them from Ioh. 3.27.
heaven: whereof see after in this book, page 17.21.22.23. etc.

4. What enmity and persecution the Papists have raised against the
withstanders of their heresies, I need not speak: al nations have felt of their
cruelty. Neither would I here mention our opposite brethrens hard measure to
us, but that themselves have printed, and seek to defend it, and cease not still
to prosecute their purposes against us. Although themselves have lately
professed, practiced, and publikly mainteyned the truths, which now they
oppugn and persecute: and bringing innovation into the Church, would needs
obtrude their errors upon our consciences, either in judgment or in practice,
or in both. Yea breaking the peace which themselves had devised, agreed unto
and confirmed; because their brethren would not agree to the undoing of
themselves and their families, for the satisfying of their wills, as is after
manifested in this treatise, page 123, etc. If the Lord should reward them
according to their works herein toward us, their account will be heavy: but my
prayer shall be against their evils.

5. Whereas many Treatises have been written in defense of the truths we
mainteyn: these our Opposers answer them not; neither yet are they silent, nor
will give rest unto others, but urge aad provoke more writing still. For the
Churches power now in controversy, our Apology page 62.63.
brings nine reasons: these have answered only one of them, which is the
sixth, drawn from Mat. 18.17. all the other they let stand. And yet what
clamours have we heard, because their exceptions against that one, are not by
us refuted! So in our other articles of differences, the scriptures and reasons
set down in our Apology and other books, they pass by without answer. If they
can make any colorable exception, they spare it not: otherwise, for want of
argument, they fall to asking of questions, seeking if they can to ensnare us.
Of which things the reader may see after in this book, page 45, etc. and 51.
etc. and 59, etc. and 23, etc. The reasons pressed by our common adversaries,
Mr Some, Mr Giffard, Mr Bernard and others, touching the baptism and church of
Rome, and other like matters, these men now take up against us. The answers
published by Mr. Barrow, and Mr Robinson, they pass by, as if they knew them
not: yea their own former answers and writings, they take not away; and yet
(which is most strange,) they ceass not to press us with the same things. I
might well have stayed my pen upon these considerations, at least until our
Opposers had given themselves further answer, and manifested what of their
former profession they will still abide by: but their importunacie will not suffer
me to be silent. Wherefore, (humbly craving the Lords asistance,) for the
defense of the faith once given to the Saints, and for my brethrens good (if
it may be,) who are thus fallen into error and evil, I have written this
answer to their ADVERTISEMENT, (so far as it concerns me,) laboring by the
word of God, to reduce them again into the right way. Their straying from it,
is a reproach to the world, a scandal to the weak, dangerous to their own souls,
and to me most dolorous, and my soul shall weep in secret for them, remembering
our former amity and concord in the truth. And I shall yet labor for their
good, both by prayer unto God, and by the utmost of my poor indevours
otherweise, so long and so far as I may.

The principal things handled in this treatise.
THe Occasion of publishing this controversy, and the state thereof. page 1.
etc. Articles agreed of by the English Church at Frankford in Q. Mary's days;
touching the Churches power, contrary to our Opposites errors. page 8.9. A
defense of the Letter which Mr. Johnson has answered and published. page 10.
etc. The first point of difference, about the power of the Church and
Eldership. page 12. etc. The 2. of the Churches power to receiv in and cast out
members, when it has no Elders. page 45. etc. The 3. of the Churches power for
election and deposition of their ministers. page 51. etc. The 4. of executing a
ministry without lawful caling. page 59. etc. The fifth of the Baptism in the
Church of Antichrist. page 67. etc. Of the Church of Rome, and whither it be
still Gods true Church. page 76. etc. Mr. Iunius his judgment of the Church of
Rome, tried. page 68. etc. The 6. of using the help of other Churches, in hard
controversies. page 107. An answer to the 7. articles objected by Mr. Johnson
to us; page 110. etc. Mr. Robinsons answer to Mr. Iohnsons exceptions against
his book. page 111. etc. Of the conditions of peace by us desired, by our
opposites refused, page 123. Of the Agreement by our opposites propounded, made
and ratified; and by them again broken. -- page 127. etc. The Testimony of the
Elders of the Church at Leyden, touching the foresaid agreement, and breaking
thereof. page 123. etc.
An Animadversion to Mr Richard Clyftons Advertisement.
Of the occasion of publishing this controversy* and of the state thereof.
AS they that styrr up wars and strife, Judge, 11.13. etc.
impute the cause unto others, which lies on them selves: so these our
opposers, which will needs bid us battle, yet begin it as occasioned by us
thereunto. They object 1. our private letters, and 2. printed Articles, as
reasons moving them to print against us. But how weighty motives these are on
their part; let the discreet reader judge, by these our answers.

1. I wrote no such letters to any, til they had printed their first book, and
so possessed the world with the strife. 2. Mine were private, to friends and
brethren; theirs public, even to enemies also. 3. They did it of their own
proper will and motion; I was provoked sundry ways, by letters from abroad, and
friends at home. For example, one writes to me thus: Because it is doubted by
some, not only whither [Mr Jo.] his practice with you, be answerable to his
writing: but also whither in his writing there be not a discoherence, he being
so intricate that many cannot apprehend his meaning: my earnest desire is, and
the desire of many others among us, that you would afford us this favor, to
signify to us by your letter, the certaynty etc. Another writes to my friend
thus, we not knowing well to send a letter unto M. A. thought good to write unto
you to entreat him to write unto us concerning the differences that be amongst
you etc. Those that come over of M. J. his side, say they hold no more
concerning the Eldership, then M. A. has written against M. Smyth: others say
to the contrary; we do therefore entreat M. A. to certify us of the truth etc.
Upon these and the like motives there and here by some that went over to their
friends, I have written as I was necessarily occasioned privately, of the
differences between us; making account my letters would come to our opposites
hand, as is fallen out: for which I am not sorry, save so far as hereby they
occasion their own evils to be further manifested, which I had rather (if so it
pleased God) they were hid and buried by repentance. 4. Themselves have done
the like, and even this Advertiser well knows, who wrote to a friend in Engl.
persuading against us that saying of the Apostle, Receiv him not to house
neither bid him God speed: 2. Joh. 10. which letter (if we would have sought
occasion as they have,) we might ere this have printed, with the answer. By
this al may see, how partial these men are, which advertise the world of our
writing coversly; when themselves (if it be a fault) are guilty of the same.

2. Touching the printed Articles, so often spoken of in their Advertisement;
as we had no hand in, or knowledge of the publishing of them: so must we now
show the reason, of giving them out, as we did, being even against our wills
forced thereunto, by the frowardnes of these our Opposers.

1.
First, for the Scornful that printed those articles, they Lawnes book. page 78.
82.
bear the world in hand, as if the Congregation whereof I am, and my self had
sued others at the law, for the meeting house: whereas the contrary was publikly
agreed in our Church, that we would rather bear the wrong, than trouble the
Magistrate with our controversy: neither have we ever commenced such a suit.
2. But whereas two of our brethren and a widow, were chief owners of the
building, they sought first in private freindly manner to come to agreement
with their opposite brethren, but could not; then they desired to put it to the
arbitrament of indifferent citizens, but the other party refused: whereupon our
brethren signified to us, that they must seek help of the Magistrate, for the
estate of some of them was such as they could not bear the loss and damage.
And asked us, if the churches right were caled in question* (for our
adversaries plea was the church the church,) what should be answered before the
magistrate? We, with signification as before, that we would rather suffer
wrong, then sue at law; yet could not hinder them of seeking for their
particular right: and if in so doing the churches right were called in
question, that then some certain appointed, should answer for the same. 3.
Those our brethren (before they went to the Judges,) entreated the help of the
Burgemasters, the chief of the City: who labored by persuasion with our
Opposites, to put the matter to the arbitrament of good men chosen by both
sides, but they still peremptorily refused. 4. When it was brought before the
Judges, they also at first both persuaded unto, and nominated two indifferent
men to hear the case: but when our opposers came before them, they refused to
stand to their arbitrament. The Judges the second time appointed them, with a
mulct or forfeit upon those that refused their arbitrament: but our adverse
party, persisted in their refusal as before: and urged sentence of the
Magistrates, and pleaded that they which build on another man's ground, are by
law to loose their building; which plea they made, because the assurance of the
ground was made in the name of one man only, (now among them,) whose name was
used but in trust, for any other might have had the same as well as he, as was
proved before the Magistrate by sufficient witness. Now unto these Arbiters
appointed, did our brethren willingly referr the cause, and to them (inquiring
of the differences) were those Articles exhibited: which it seems those
Libellers, or their Scribe, by some means that we know not of, procured a copy
of, and so printed them. What cause now have these our opposers, to find such
fault with our giving out those articles, which we were constreyned by them
selves to do, unless we should have suffered the truth to have been trodden
down? They rather have cause to acknowledge their own stiff and refractary
carriage, who would not yield to any good counsel given them, by our brethren,
by Arbiters, or by Magistrates; til law forced them thereunto: and so have
occasioned many ways, our common adversaries to rejoice.

3. But we have not (says the page 17.
Advertisement) as we ought, handled and justified the causes for which we
separated; which were annexed at the end of the Treatise on Mat. 18.17. but
have gone about also to possess the world with other matters. So page 31.
after they urge again this point, that we leav the Treatise unanswered, which
was purposely written upon that occasion and argument. I answer. 1. We handled
and justified the causes for which we separated, by word of mouth in much
disputing, before we left them: and this for them was as we ought, and
sufficient, according to the Apostles practice, Act. 1^.8.9. And now we are by
their importunacie, caled to handle and justify them before the world in
writing: which whither we do as we ought, the sequel shall show, to the
judicious reader. 2. It is not we, but they which have gone about to possess
the world with other matters: for the things we charge them with, themselves in
effect acknowledge; and as well as they can do defend them. But their
declaration against us in the Treat. on Mat. 18. is defective; and the 7.
points they article Advertis. p. 27. etc.
now against us, are superfluous; and injuriously wrested against us, as our
answers to them shall manifest. The controversy in deed began upon the
exposition of Mat. 18.17. but so as we have heard in times past Anabaptists
begin controversy upon Mat. 28.19. who have reasoned both from that and al
other scriptures, against the baptising of infants: so these opposites from Mat
18.17. and al other scriptures that we could bring, reasoned against the power
of the people in judging syn and sinners. We formerly Apol, p. 65.
professing the Church there to be Elders and people jointly: they now striving
that it is not so, but the Elders only, we knew it must be either the name or
the power of the church, that they would have. And we never thought them so
vayn, as to make such a styrr for a name or title: we held therefore to the
power which Christ has given to his church for judging of them that are
within, 1. Cor. 5.4.12.13. Of this when we pressed them, they first gave this
answer, that the Elders had the rightful power to excommunicate though without
and against the consent of all the people, but not the able power: even as
David had rightful power to put Ioab to death, but was not able, because others
were too hard for him: 2. Sam. 3.39. To which we answered; in matters of this
life, which are external, men may be hindered by outward force: but in the
spiritual administration of the Church not so: Gods word (by which they
administer) is not in bonds, 2 Timothy 2.9. But if one man only have the power
from Christ, he may use it, Ier. 1.9.10
against all the world. So upon better consideration, a week after, they
affirmed the Elders to have both rightful power, and able power, to
excommunicate, though without and against the consent of all the people. And
thus was full power put in the Elders hands: and of the people they said, their
power and right was as in Israel, and in the primitive churches. But being
asked what that was? answer was made, it was to be inquired. So the poor people
are left to seek their right where they can find it: the Elders have enough,
they have found that they sought for.

As Paul to dissuade the Corinthians from their error in denying the
resurrection, showed them the dangerous consequences of the same, as 1 Cor. 15
13, 14. etc.
that if there be no resurrection of the dead, then Christ is not risen, then
the Apostles preaching was vayn, then the Churches faith was also vayn, etc. so
I held it my duty to show the people the consequences of the former error,
which though at first it may seem small, yet is it as a strong fort in the mouth
of a country, which if the enemy win, the whole land is soon lost. For if all
the power of receiving in and casting out, were given to the Elders: then our
Church which was first gathered and constituted, did receiv in and cast out
members without Elders, was not planted by the power of Christ; neither had
they authority to set up Elders if they could not again upon desert depose
them, and if they had not power to judge their brethren, much less could they
judge their Elders. And here came in the gathering of the church by virtue of
popish baptism, and of receiving the ministry from Rome, as well as the
baptism, and the like, which our opposites were and must necessarily be driven
unto, for defense of their error. And as for the first gathering of this
church, they said an error in the doing, overthrows not the action: for Isaak
erred in blessing Iaakob in sted of Esau, yet the action did stand. To which we
answered, that it was done by a person who had power from God to give the
blessing, and the action was also confirmed by the evidence of Gods spirit
afterward: but this people (upon our opposites doctrine) had no authority from
God, to do as they did, neither could they show any confirmation of the work
by God, if our former grounds fayl us.

The sentence given in the end by the Elders that leaned to the Pastors error,
was, not that discourse they speak of at the end of the Treatise on Mat. 18.
(for that was privately penned afterward by the Pastor himself,) but a brief
and yet large approbation of the things which the Pastor had showed, to be the
truth; and a promise that by the grace of God they would so practice. Upon
which sentence giving, we on the contrary approved our former profession
published, and showed sundry reasons (which hereafter shall be set down) why we
could not yield to their new vowed practice.

And because they always sought to extenuate the controversy, as if it were
but a strife about words, or about the meaning of Mat. 18.17. We purposely
prevented it, signifying expressly, before we parted, that we would bear with
them in their understanding of Mat. 18.17. so as they would yield the point in
controversy, (which was about the Churches power,) from other scriptures,
showing it also by an other case, that if we had to deal upon John. 1. with an
Arian that denies the godhead of Christ, if he would plainly and sincerely
yield to the truth of that doctrine, though he thought it not proved by John.
1, (where yet it is evidently proved,) we would bear with him therein. And this
we still offer unfeighnedly to these our opposite brethren, let them yet
directly and plainly renounce the error it self touching the power of the
church now engrossed into the Elders hands, and the other errors that
necessarily flow from the same: and we will bear with their judgment concerning
Mat. 18.17. though we think of it otherweise that do they.

Moreover seeing we offered much more, (which concerns not only Mat. 18.17.
but al other scriptures,) that we would notwithstanding our difference of
judgment, have continued together, if our former practice might have been
retained; and themselves in their Advertisement page 73.
can not deny this: how do they then bear the world in hand, that the breach
among us was for the understanding of Math. 18.17?

Touching their Treatise on Mat. 18.17. the causes why I have not answered it
are. 1. When others heretofore (as namely Mr. Smyth) wrote against the truth
which they formerly professed: we al thought best not to answer, til the second
and third time we were excedingly provoked: for we considered how the common
adversary would rejoice at our intestine troubles. The same I minded here* and
these men should (if they were not partial) have done the like. 2. I had
experience, in former dealing with M. Smyth, of his unstayednes, that would
not stand to the things which himself had written: I mind the like in these
Opposites, who are not settled for the constitution of their Church and
Ministry, upon any ground that I know of, unless it be popish succession.
Their former vvritings about the Church and ministry, and their present
estate, will not stand together. Seeing those books are unanswered by others,
they should answer them (if they can) themselves; and show us by Gods word what
is allowable, what disallovvable in them. Till they do this, who would
willingly deal with them? 3. There are 9. reasons in that our page 62.63.
Apology to confirm the power of the Church now in question: the foresaid
Treatise deals but against one of them, leaving the rest there, and
whatsoever is written of that argument in other our books, unansvvered: what
reason have they to call so upon others to write, when so much is already
written? If they yield us the cause, upon the other reasons, we will not strive
about the meaning of one scripture, as before we shevved.

4. The meaning of Mat. 18.17. is handled by Mr. Robinson against Mr Bernard
(whose book, our opposites so much respected,) and the false gloses upon that
text, sufficiently refuted: why do not these men answer the things there
written, but call still for more; as if al men must leav other studies, to
follow them in their hunting for preeminence. 5. I have had intelligence of Mr.
Robinsons further purpose to answer in particular that their treatise, as
occasion shall be given. And in deed, I for the love and respect that I have
alvvayes had to these now opposite brethren; have desired their conviction
rather by others then by my self; who are both better able to perform it, and
are likely to be more regarded then I, and to do it with less publik scandal
to the world: who desire nothing more, then to see us, that were so nearly
joined, to sharpen our penns one against another. Thus have I been stayed
hitherto, though now as the things in that Treatise are repeted in this their
Advertisement, I shall discover also the insufficiency of their reasons there
alleged.

Now as the Advertiser page 18.19
shows by examples of troubles in ^hurches heretofore, that the godly wise
should not be offended at these dissensions: accordingly do I desire all
sincere hearted for to walk. And further that he himself with others, would
look into the 3. particulars that he allegeth. 1. For the troubles in Corinth,
the Apostle composeth by shevving the Church their place in Christ above their
ministers, 1. Cor. 3.21.22.23. which might also if it were well observed, end
the strife that is now among us.

2. The contention about Easter, as it was evil in it self, being about men's
traditions: so was it as ill carried. For they learned not to redress things as
Paul before taught, 1. Cor. 3. but contrarivveise as Hierom after tells
Comment in Tit. 1.5.
us* by setting up one Elder about others, that the seeds of schisms might be
taken away. Which humane wisdom furthering the mystery of Antichrist so far
prevailed, that about this their Easter strife, Victor Bishop of Rome,
determined to have excommunicated the East churches, and had done it, but
Eusebius. l* 5. c. 26.
that Irenaeus blamed him and stayed it. Thus ambition having vvrung the power
first out of the whole Churches hands into the Elders only, and then out of
the Elders hands jointly, into ones alone: began to work factions and styrrs
in the churches, worse then ever before.

3. The troubles which they speak of, in the English church at Frankford in Q.
Maryes days, is even a picture of our present calamities, and worthy of
perpetual remembrance. For there when M. Horn the pastor with his fellow
Elders usurped authority above the church; they were well withstood by the
body of the congregation, among whom were sundry men of wisdom and learning.
And to appease that strife, by the Magistrates counsel they agreed upon
articles, which directly overthrow the errors so stood for by these our
opposers. For thus the printed Discourse of the troubles of that church says.

Discourse of troub. at Frankford. p. 11^. etc.
The Discipline reformed and confirmed by the authority of the church and
magistrate.
Art. 38. The ministers and seniors severally and jointly, shall have no
authority to make any manner of decrees, or ordinances to bind the congregation
or any member thereof: but shall execute such ordinances and decrees as shall be
made by the congregation and to them delivered.

44. The ministers and seniors elect, have authority as the principal members
of the congregation, to govern the said congregation according to Gods word,
and the discipline of the church: and also to call together and assemble the
said congregation for causes and at times, as shall to them seem expedient.
Provided always, that if any dissension shall happen between the ministers and
seniors, or the more part of them, and the body of the congregation, or the
more part of it: and that the said ministers and seniors in such controversy,
being desired thereto, will not assemble the congregation; that then the
congregation may of it self come together, and consult and determine as
concerning the said controversy or controversies, and the said assembly to be
a lawful congregation, and that which they, or the more part of them so
assembling, shall judge or decree, the same to be a lawful decree and ordinance,
of sufficient force to bind the whole congregation, and every member of the
same.

46. Item in case some do depart [out of the said congregation] that yet not
withstanding, those which still remayn, (if they be the greater part) to be a
lawful congregation: and that which they or the more part of them shall decree,
to be a lawful decree, of force to bind the whole body, ministers, seniors,
deacons, and every other member or members thereof without exception.

53. If any of the congregation be offensive etc. to any of the brethren, so
that the offense be private, he is first brotherly to admonish him alone. If
that do not prevayl, to call one or 2. witnesses. If that also do not prevayl,
then to declare it to the ministers and Elders, to whom the Congregation has
given authority to take order in such cases, according to the discipline of
the Church.

54. There be 3. degrees of ecclesiastical discipline: first, that the offender
acknowledge his fault, and show himself penitent before the ministers and
seniors. The 2. that if he will not so do, as well his original crime, as also
his contempt of the ministers etc. be openly declared by one of the ministers,
before the whole congregation etc. The 3. that if he remayn still obstinate
before the whole congregation, after a time to him by the whole congregation
limited to repent in, he then shall be openly denounced excommunicate: which
excommunication, seeing it is the uttermost penalty of ecclesiastical power,
shall not therefore be executed until the matter be heard by the whole Church, or
such as it shall specially appoint there unto.

62. If all the ministers and seniors [which have authority to hear and
determine etc.] be suspected, or found parties, or if any appeal be made from
them: that then such appeal be made to the body of the congregation, the
ministers, seniors, and parties excepted: and that the body of the congregation
may appoint so many of the congregation to hear and determine the said matter
or matters, as it shall seem good to the Congregation.

65. That the Ministers and Seniors, and every of them, be subject to
ecclesiastical discipline, and correction, as other private members of the
Church be.

67. If any controversy be upon the doubtful meaning of any word or words in
the discipline; that first it be referred to the ministers and seniors. And if
they cannot agree thereupon, then the thing to be brought and referred to the
whole congregation.

These and the like things were agreed of by that church, to suppress the
exorbitant power which the ministers then challenged: whereby the reader may see,
1. what the learned and most conscionable of the church of England held
heretofore: which if they had continued in, would have freed them of al
antichristian prelacie, the bane of so many churches. 2. That this opinion of
the churches power above the Elders, is not new, or first professed by us, as
some do reproach us. 3. And that these Advertisers, which now oppose against
us, if they had looked upon the examples which themselves allege, might have
seen their errors resisted by others, against which the Lord has now caled us
also to witness. He vouchsafe to be with us in this busynes; and guide my heart
and hand, to defend his truth.

Of the Letter by M. Johnson answered and published, and by H. Ainsworth now
defended. Wherein the Articles of difference between both parties, are set down
and discussed.
THree things are to be treated of. 1. The points wherein they are gone from
their former profession. 2. The points wherein they now charge us to differ from
our former profession. 3. The conditions of peace, which they refused.

For an entrance into this controversy, M. Johnson gives 5. observations.
Advertis. p. 25.
First, that we left them upon two particular matters, (concerning the
Churches government* and the exposition of Mat. 18, 17.) and do not directly
keep to them as we ought, nor answer the things printed. I answer: this their
beginning is ambiguous and fraudulent. The churches government, is sometime
taken largely; sometime strictly: sometime it is spoken of Christ, upon whose
shoulders the Isa. 9.6.
government is; and hereof there was no controversy. Sometime it is spoken of
the ministerial 1. Tim. 5.17. 1. Cor. 12.28.
ruling and governing the church by Elders: neither of this do we make any
question; but hold (as Confess. art. 19.
heretofore) that Christ governs his church outwardly by their ministration.
Sometime men use it generally for the whole outward polity, power, and (as
many call it) discipline of the Church: and about this in part our controversy
was. But I will manifest the frawd. We in our published writings, distinguish
the government, and the power: acknowledging Confess. art. 17.19.26.
government to be by the officers; but Conf. art. 22.23.24. Apol. p 46.47.60.62.
power in the whole body of the Church. And for this point of power, are 9.
reasons set down, whereof one is drawn from Christ's speech, Mat. 18.17. tell the
Church. Apol. page 62.63.

Between these two is the matter so conveyed, as while we plead for the
churches right and power, we are said to oppugn government: and when we yield
the Elders to govern, they thereby would enclose the whole power in their hands;
as in the further handling of these things shall appear. But if a church have one
minister only, he is to teach and govern them by the word of God: yet is not
any one man a Church, neither has the power of a Church. Yea this distinction
is in one particular, by themselves acknowledged, in the same book: Advertis.
p. 46.
it is (they say) undeniable, that to give voices in election is not a part of
government, or a duty peculiar to the governors of the church, but an
interest, power, right and liberty, that the saints and people out of office
have. Very well said; whereupon we infer also, that to give voices in Act.
15.7.12.22.23.25 1. Cor. 5.1^ 13.
deciding of controversies, and judging of sinners, is not a part of
government, but a power and right that the saints out of office have. The
Elders are to teach direct and govern the church in election of officers; they
are to do the like in judging and excommunicating wicked persons, and in all
other publik affairs. Of the exposition of Mat. 18.17. and why their Treatise
was not particularly answered, I have spoken before: and the special things
therein, are in this treatise repeted, and so shall be here answered.

2. Their second observation I like well, and yield unto; that men may change
and redress, according to Gods word, things that are amyss: but withal, I would
have them, 1. plainly to acknowledge wherein they erred, and what they stablish
for truth; and 2. to take away by Gods word, the reasons whereupon they builded
before. Which wither these our opposers have done as they ought; I leav it for
the discreet reader to judge by their writings, compared with those which were
published heretofore to the contrary.

3. The third, for the churches government by the officers, is that which we
always have and still do yield to, as even now I showed. As for our former
practice altered, and as he says, by me acknowledged: towching the order and
manner of the practice in one particular, I grant it; but for the power of the
Church, whereof we treat, I deny it. There never was such a practice in my
days, as whereby the Elders should be esteemed the Church, and to have the
power of the same.

4. The 4. observation is that our exceptions are such as the Anabaptists would
object in much like manner. Yet does he not show this so to be: and I know,
for their successive Ministry, they are nearer the Anabaptists than we: and
both for it and other points, they build upon the very grounds of popery, as
after shall be manifested. But what do we except? is it not from our former
Articles, and Apology confirmed by scriptures, from which these are departed:
in penning also vvherof these that thus write, had a principal hand? So they
do hereby not only join with our common D. Some. M. Giss. M. Bern.
adversaries, who intvvite us with Anabaptistrie: but impute weakness to their
own former vvritings and cause, vvherin more strength of truth has appeared
then ever they shall be able to pull down, howsoever they may assayl it.

The 5. observation is a mist cast before the readers eyes, a collection of 7.
things vvherin they would make men beleev, we are gone from that we held
heretofore. The error vvherof I vvil show hereafter when (as order
requires,) I have examined the answers that they make for themselves, to
these our Articles, which now next follow.

The first point of difference: in the Letter.
1. Whereas we had learned and professed, that Confess. art. 24. Apol. p. 62.63.
Christ has given the power to receiv in or to cut off any member, to the
whole body together of every Congregation, and not to any one, or more members
sequestered from the whole: now we have been lately taught, that the Church
which Christ sends to, for the redress of synns Mat. 18.17. is not to be
understood of the whole body of the Congregation, but of the Church of Elders.
And it being granted of al, that with the Church is the power, the Elders being
the Church, have the power, and so not the whole body of the congregation
together.

And in the copy which Lavvne printed.

The 24. Article [of the Confession of our faith,] (confirmed in our Apology,
page 60.62.63.) professes that the power to receiv in, or to cut off any
member, is given to the whole body together of every Christian Congregation,
Mat. 18.17. etc. These have pleaded for the Eldership to be the Church, Mat.
18. and to have both rightful power and able power to excommunicate, though
without and against the consent of the body of the Congregation.

The scriptures to confirm our former doctrine and practice, are in our
Confession, Psalm. 122.3. Act. 2.47. Romans 16.2. Mat. 18.17. 1. Cor. 5.4. 2. Cor.
2.6.7.8. Levit. 20.4.5. and 24. 14. Number. 5* 2.3. Deuteronomy. 13.9.

The reasons in our Apology are nine, the first referring to proofs of former
positions, the other 8, confirmed by sundry arguments doctrines and practices
gathered from the Prophetical and Apostolical scriptures.

For answer hereunto, their Advertisement tells us many things. First of
their Treatise published on Mat. 18.17. touching which, I also have spoken
before. Neither is this point of the Churches power therein plainly handled, but
closely carried: neither is there any thing at al said, to take away the other
8. reasons, in our Apology. Let the reader compare the writings, and judge.
There be also things formerly written both by others and by them selves,
touching this of Mat. 18. and things lately published against M. Bernard about
it: to these they give no answer at al, yet call they upon us to write more.

2. Secondly they carp at this phrase, the Church of Elders; and would have it
the Congregation or Assemble of Elders: saying that so men might sooner perceiv
the vanity of our error. And that I my self elsewhere show the word is sometime
used for an Assembly of Elders. I answer; 1. If they will raze the word Church,
out of the Bible, as unfit, they may do so in Mat. 18. and in this
controversy: or else they must give us leav, to keep wonted known words, which
help men to discern the truth of matters. 2. Neither show they any one
scripture for the phrase they would have, the Congregation of Elders: neither
did I ever show or could see the word Church so to mean in all the new
Testament: but in the old (which now is changed,) I have observed it in some
few places. 3. But be it Church or Congregation, I will not much contend: yet I
know their eyes will dazel that look hereby to discern in our doctrine either
vanity or error. Albeit I confess these our opposites, have the Papists on
their side; for so Card* Bellarmine De Verbo Dei, lib. 3. c. 5.
expounds this Tell the Church, that is the Prelate, or the Congregation of
Prelates; and De author. eccles. co^tra Whitaker. l. 1. c. 1* S. 5.
Stapleton interprets the Church, Mat. 18. to be the Ministers. 3. Thirdly,
they observe that the scriptures of the old testament are quoted for our 24.
Article, as directly carrying us for this matter to the Church of Jsrael; which
now we would not be brought unto. etc. I answer; the first is true, for the
scriptures cited do show that the people were interessed in those public
actions with their magistrates: and therefore there is no reason that now there
ministers should claym the whole power to themselves. The latter is untrue; for
we did consider and decide the matter between us, by the scriptures of the old
Testament, compared with the new, and so are still ready to do. But always
with observing the differences between the state of the church then and now;
which are many, as the Apostles do teach us. Heb. 8. and 9. and 10. chapters.
Gal. 4.1.2.3. etc. Heb. 12.1^. -- 28.

4. Their last observation has two branches: the 1. that the power of
receiving in and cutting off in Jsrael, was to be performed according to order;
and not to weaken but to stablish thhe Elders authority. This we willingly
grant: neither ever doubted of. But we observe withal, a deceyt which they couch
under this name Elders: which usually in the old Testament, is given to
Magistrates* which are also caled in respect of their authority Lords, Princes,
Judges, yea and Gods, 1. Sam. 23.12. Number. 21.18. and 22.7.8. Deuteronomy. 19.17.18.
Exodus 21.6. Psalm. 8 2. and by the Apostles they are caled ^owers (or
Autorities) and Glories, (or Dignities,) Tit. 3.1. 2. Pet. 2.10. But the name
Elders, now in the Church of Christ is given to the Ministers, 1. Pet. 5.1. who
are forbidden to exercise authority, or to be as Lords over Gods heritage, or
to be caled by such stately titles, Mat. 20.25.26. 1. Pet. 5.1. Luke 22.25.26.
They streyn therefore too far, which will proportion the authority and power
of the Elders that should stand and minister to the Church (as Number. 16.9. 2.
Chro. 35.3.
did the Priests and Levites:) with the authority of the Elders the
Magistrates, that Ier. 26.10.
late and judged in the gates. 2. The second branch of their observation is,
that we must not be strangers from the policy of Jsrael; Ephe. 2.12. etc. I
answer, by polity, they mean not, I hope, the inward faith which Israel had:
but the outward order of administering in that Church: otherweise they reason
neither properly nor to the question in hand. Yea in this very place the
Apostle distinguishes the polity, from the covenants of promise. And so I
deny that we are bound now to keep the polity of Israel; neither does the
Apostle mean any such thing. For he puts the Ephesians in mind of their
estate being paynims, when they were Ephesians. 2.11.12.
uncircumcised, without Christ, without Isreal's polity, without covena^ts of
promise, without hope, without God. But now in Christ they were united and
brought near; but whereunto, to circumcision? nay, he says elsewhere, Gal. 5.2.
if they were circumcised Christ should profit them nothing? or, to the
ordinances of worship in the Temple? nay, for he says Heb. 13.10.
we have an altar, whereof they have no authority to eat, which serve in the
tabernacle. Or were they now to go up, as Psalm. 122.4 5.
did the Tribes to the earthly Jerusalem, where thrones of judgment were set,
thrones for the house of David? nothing so, for Christ was Dan. 9.24 26. Luke
19.41.44.
to destroy both City and Sanctuary; so to force the Jews to an end of their
polity. But now the Ephesians were come Ephe. 2.18
unto the Father, by one Spirit, and unto Christ, who verse 15.
abrogated through his flesh the hatred, that is, the law of commandments,
which stood in ordinances; and was Heb. 3.2.
faithful, as Moses, in all his house: and to be citizens with Ephesians. 2.19
the Saints and howshold of God; which are built, not upon Moses polity that
is done away, but upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, that is the
1. Cor. 3.10. etc.
doctrine which they taught of Christ and of the ordinances of his Testament,
which is Heb. 12.27.28.
a kingdom that cannot be shaken, as was the commonwealth of Israel according
to the flesh. Look therefore what polity the Apostles have taught and taken
from the Law; or Moses and the Prophets foretold should continue under the
Gospel, so much will we reteyn, the rest we leav to Jews and Iewishly affected.
And these are the things which they have answered to the first objection in the
Letter: which whither they have proved the Elders now under the Gospel to be
the Church which is to judge of syn and sinners, and to have power as the
Church, in their own hands; let al indifferent men judge: as also what cause
they had to conclude that we oppose against Jsrael, Moses and the Prophets, and
to cry out against us as they do, that such is our error, and so great is our
transgression and iniquity. But because of the printed copy, they set upon us
afresh, with many observations, and questions, and by matters, with longsomnes
enough: whereas a few sound arguments, would much better have cleared the
controversy, and contented the reader. They Advertis. p. 32.33.
observe 1. that the scriptures of the old Testament are quoted in our Article,
as well as of the new. 2. That Mat. 18. is to agree with the other scriptures
cited. 3. That it must be understood with proportion to the manner in Jsrael.
4. That therefore their understanding is according to the ancient faith; and not
ours, who would make them strangers from Jsrael, and would persuade them that
Christ's doctrine in Mat. 18.17. is a new rule etc.

I answer; these are in effect the things we heard before, and which in my
answers I have partly granted, partly refuted. 1. The proportion they speak of,
is a disproportion concluding from Magistrates authority in the Common^wealth*
to Ministers in the Church; which is against Christ's doctrine Mat. 20.25.26.
And if they will not learn it of Christ, they may learn it of Cato, an alien
from the common wealth both of Israel and of Christ, who yet said to such
Plutarch. in Cat.
It becomes you to be mindful of your condition, that you are not Magistrates
but Ministers. 2. It is a mayn pillar of Popery, to proportion the Church now,
in the outward polity to Israel. The Rhemists would have the Rhem. annot. on
Mat 23.2.
the sea of Rome, in the new law, to be answerable to the chair of Moses.
Cardinal Bellarmine De Romans Pont. l. 4. c. 1.
makes his first argument for the Popes judging of controversies, from the
Priest and Judge that was appointed in the Law, Deuteronomy. 17. And as Moses sat as
Prince of the Church, and gave answer to al doubts arising about the Law of
God, Exodus 18. so by proportion Bellar. de verb. Dei, l. 3. c. 4.
he will have now in the papacy. And in deed, for show, the papists proportion
to have one supreme court above al, to end weighty causes and appeals; more
resembles Israel, then does these men's Eldership in every particular Church.
3. It is an argument that others (except papists) have disclaymed. D. Bilson,
(whose learning and goodwil has helped the prelacie as much as any man's, and
whose understanding of Mat. 18.17. these our opposites in some points do now
follow,) he Perpet. goverm. chapter 4.
confesses that to reason from the Magistrate to the minister, from the sword
to the word, from the law to the Gospel etc. the leap is so great, that
cart-ropes will not tie the conclusion to the premises. Prolect. de Romans Pont.
Con. 4. Q. 8. c. 2. ^ 2.
D. Whitakers, Animadv, ad contr. 1. l. 3. c. 4. et ad. cont. 3. l. 1, c. 2.
D. Iunius, and others, refuting the Papists, disalow the reasons drawn from
the law, and magistracy of Israel; which these our opposers make their
chiefest bulwark. M. Cartwright answering D. Whitgift, says T. C. 2. Repl. p.
614
the argument is not good from civil government to ecclesiastical. When
Bellarmine De Romans Pont. l. 1. c. 9.
allegeth the civil Monarchies to justify the ecclesiastical: Iunius answers,
the Animad. in Bellar. ibid.
example is altogether unlike, of temporal empire and spiritual ministry:
between these, there is not, neither ought, neither can a proportion or
comparison be rightly made. 4. It is an argument that is yet hid, and by our
opposites themselves unmanifested how the proportion they speak of, shall be
shaped. For in Israel there were Magistrates in the cities, and Priests and
Levits, in the Tabernacle, and Ministers in the Synagogues. Let them show us
who now are proportionable to the Magistrates, who to the Priests; and who to
the Ministers in the synagogues. The Magistrates also were of sundry sorts, as
Josh. 23.2.
Elders, Heads, Judges, and Officers. The Judges again differing both in number
and power. In Deuteronomy. 16.18.
all the cities throughout the tribes, were Judges, (which the Iew^doctors call
the ^almud Babylon. tract. Sanhedrin, c. 1.
lesser Sanhedrin or Session, and say it consisted of 23. Judges,) and Deuteronomy.
16.18.
Officers which Maimon. in Sanhedrin, c. 1.
they say were weaponed, and executed the Judges sentences. In the chief City
Deuteronomy. 17.8 9.2. Chro^. 19.8.
Jerusalem were also Judges and Priests, for the weightiest and hard causes:
this Talm. ibidem.
they caled the great Sanhedrin, or Session, and it had Number. 11.^4. etc.
71. Judges, of whom first Moses was chief, and sucsessively, one caled Maimon,
ibide^.
Nasi the Prince, next whom they place Ibide^.
A^beth di^^, the Father of the judgment hall, besides other officers as two
Scribes to write the causes of the condemned and the absolved: Maimo^.
Sanhedrin. chapt. 15.
Sh^lc^^h ^^th din, the Messenger (or Angel) of the Court, even as there was
also in other cases Shelia^h ^sibbur, the Messenger or Angel of the Church or
Congregation, in the synagogues: whereunto it may be thought that in Rev. 2.1.
etc. has allusion. Again they make an other court Talmud Sanhedr. c. 1.
of three, for lesser strifes and money matters* caled d^ies m^^monoth: the
lower Synedrion of 23. judged matters of life and death di^^i nephashoth: and
the high Senate of 71. judged weightiest matters of state, of wars, of a
Tribe, of a False prophet, of appeals brought etc. Also among the Priests and
Levits, there were 1. Chron. 23. and 24. and. 25. and 26. chapt.
diverse orders and functions, some chief, some inferior, some ministering in the
sanctuary by course, some overseers and judges, some Musicians, some Tresurers,
some Porters etc. In the synagogues there were Act. 15.21.
always lecturers and preachers of the law and prophets, in every city, and
in Jerusalem it self were Act. 24.12.
many synagogues, besides the Temple there. Now they that would proportion
their power with Israel, showld show whither they mean al these fore-spoke^, or
but some. They should tell us to who^ the Pastor is proportionable, to whom the
Teacher, to whom the ruling Elders. And seeing they will have that rule in Mat.
18. to be as it was in Israel, they should tell us to which of those Synedrions,
or Priests, or Rulers, Christ sends. Whiles these things are not cleared, but
we are told generally of a p^oportion with Israel, we are led as in the clouds;
and know not into what errors we may fall.

5. They referr us in the beginning of their Treatise on Mat. 18.17. to a place
in Mat. 5.22.23. etc* where Christ (they say) teaches the offending brother
how to carry himself, as in Mat. 18.15. etc. he does the brother offended: and
that in both places Christ shows to whom the offender may be brought, viz, to
the Church or Congregation Mat. 18.17. to the Synedrion or sitting of Elders,
Mat. 5.22. which must be either all one with the other, or else how should his
hearers then understand him, or these things then be observed, or these two
places be reconciled?

I answer; Christ might far better be understood then, then our opposites may
now: his words are clear, but not to the purpose that they cite them. Christ
there speaks not of men judging on earth, but of Gods judging in heaven. For
men had not power to condemn to Mat. 5.22.
hell fire, there spoken of: neither could they by Moses law, condemn a man to
death for unadvised anger, as Christ there God would do: neither was every
man, that caled his brother Raka, to be brought to the Synedrion at Jerusalem,
the lesser courts in the cities, could hear and end such matters. The Jew
Doctors say, Talmud Bab. tract. Sanhedrin. c. 1.
that such as bring an evil same on their neighbors, were to be judged, by the
Court of 3. or by that of the 23. but for the high Synedrion, both they and
Moses Exodus 18.22. Deuteronomy. 17.8.9.
law show it was for the more weighty and difficult cases. Our savior in Mat.
5. interprets the law otherweise then did the scribes. They said, verse 21.
whosoever kills shall be culpable of judgment, that is, he should Exodus 21.12.
dye by Gods law: and further then outvvard actual murder they went not. But
Christ shows 3. kinds of kylling otherweise then with the hand: the least
whereof, even Mat. 5.22.
unadvised anger, should be punished with death by God; and as it did increase
and show it self in evil speeches, so should their punishment be increased in
hell: which he sets down by allusion to the sundry civil judgments in Israel.
And so he proceeds to teach men the true keeping of the law, by love and
reconciliation; without which they should be cast into verse 25.
the prison of hell: how ever such synns were not punishable by men. But in Mat.
18. Christ speakketh of judgments Mat. 18.17.18.
on earth, in this life; and that not of the civil punishments by the
Magistrates sword; but of verse 18.
binding and loosing by the word of God, to be performed by verse 17.
the Church, that is, (as Paul 1. Cor. 5.4.5.12.
shows) the ecclesiastical assembly gathered in Christ's name. Wherefore the
church in Mat. 18*17. is not the Synedrion in Mat. 5.22. as these would have
it. Or if it be, then is it meant of the Magistrates, and not of the church
ministers, unto whom these would now draw it. For, were Luke 4.20.
the Ministers and preachers of the law in the synagogues; judges in the
synedrion? Sheliach Isibbur, Angelus ecclesiae, the messenger of the
Congregation, was he the chief of the synedrion, as the Pastor (who they say
is Angelus ecclesiae) is now chief in the Eldership? If Christ must needs speak
to the understanding of the Jews, and order his Church like their common
wealth; there must be more then one court or Synedrion; and he could not give
that to Mat. 18.20.
2. or 3. gathered any where in his name, which belonged to the Senate of the
Realm.

6. So vvheras they say we would persuade them Christ's doctrine in Mat. 18.17.
is a new rule which Jsrael had not: I think it will be good for them to yield
unto this persvvasion. For the Elders in Israel, to whom they In their Treat.
on Mat. 18.
referr us, by Psalm. 82. Josh. ^0.4.5.6. Number. 35, 12.24.25. 29. Deuteronomy.
19.11.12.16.17. and other like places, being Magistrates, that had power of
life and death; if Christ sends unto such, the Ministers of the Church, I
hope vvil not intrude into their places. Wherefore either let them acknovvledge
the Heb. 8.8.
new Testament, to have new rules and ordinances: and that the kingdom being
changed as well as the Preisthood, there must needs be Heb. 7.12.
a change of the law thereof also: or else, let them leave it to the Magistrate,
unto whom it belongs.

Next this, they give us Advert. page 33.
a distinction between the sentence of excommunication, and between the
execution thereof. As in Jsrael, the Elders, and Priests, had a rightful power
to give out the sentence of death and of leprosy according to the law, without
asking the peoples consent, yea though it should have been without and against
it; Deuteronomy. 1.16. and 17.8.12. and 24.8. with 2. Chro^. 26.16.20. Levit. 13. etc.
and then it was for the people to perform the execution accordingly: so the
Elders now may by office give out the sentence of excommunication according to
the law of God, and the people should accordingly put it in execution, by
avoiding the excommunicate persons til they repent. I answer; this comparison
is faulty many ways. First, it speaks only of a rightful power, whereas the
thing they should answer to, is both rightful and able power, as themselves
once distinguished: or let them say, whether the Church that Christ sends to
for redress of syn, has not able power to excommunicate. 2. Secondly it
matcheth the power of the Ministers in spiritual things, with the power of the
Magistrates in civil things: which what is it, but to make the one Lords
spiritual, as the other are Lords temporal; according to the Popish hierarchy?
3. Thirdly it misseth in the proportion of the Priests judging leprosy; for
Gods law in Lev. 13.2. is, that the suspected person should be brought to Aaron
the Priest or to one of his sons the Priests; and the verse 3.6. etc.
Priest should look, and pronounce him unclean, or clean, as he discerned it.
The proportion hereto now, is one Bishop or Minister, rather than a Church of
Ministers: for if one Priest might judge then, why may not one Minister judge
now? Do not the Papists, which Bellarm. de Romans Pont. l. 5. c. 8.
allege this very example, and apply it to one Priest: make a fitter proportion,
then they that deny this power unto one, and yet apply it unto many? 4.
Fourthly, thus far I grant this proportion, that as every Priest then might
according to the law, declare what was leprosy: so every Minister now, may and
ought by the law to declare what is syn and heresy; and this though it be
without and against the consent of the Church and of all the world. Ezekiel. 3.17,
-- 21.2. Tim. 4..1.2. Tit. 1.9. But as then, not the priest only, but the Number.
5.2.
children of Israel, put every leper out of the host: so now, not the minister
only, but the children of Christ, the church, are to 1. Cor. 5.12.13.
put the wicked out from among them, as the Apostle shows. 5. Fifthly, if the
Elders the Magistrates, might (as these men say) give sentence of death against
a man, though without and against the peoples consent; and then it was for the
people to perform the execution: then that people, I say, were in great
subjection and servitude to their Elders, that must execute that man, to whose
death they consented not: and to shape the Ministers power now accordingly, is
to make them Lords, and the Church their subjects and servants: yea the Pope
himself never had men in greater slaverie. I know, when Gods law condemned a
man, if it were showed by all or any one of the Judges, or Priests, or
Prophets, yea or Israelites; the people should in order have executed him: but
often times the heads of the people Mich. 3.11.
judged for rewards, the Princes Zeph. 3.3 4. Isa. 1.23.
as Lions, the Judges as Wolves devoured them, the Priests polluted the
sanctuary, and wrested the law. And then the people of the land, Levit. 20.2.4.
whose duty also it was to look to open wickedness, were neither to follow Exodus
23.2.7.
the many nor mighty in evil. And that the Judges had power to put any man to
death, whom the people judged innocent, I find not, but would see it proved. I
find how in Naboths case (though it were a wicked fact,) there was 1 King.
21.12^13.
a solemn fast and assembly of the people with the governors: how in Ieremies
case, he was accused Ier. 26.11.12.16.
to the Princes and people, made his defense to princes and people, and was
acquitted by princes and people. When 1. Sam. 14.39.44.45.
King Saul swear that Jonathan should dye; the people swear the contrary, and
saved him from death: when the high priests and scribes would have killed
Christ, they feared the people, Luke 20.19. and 22.2. and the people as well as
the rulers, were caled before Pilate about Christ's death, Luke 23.13. and by
their voices prevayled, Mat. 27.20.22.25.26. Luk 23.23. So that to prove the
Ministers sole power now, for to cut off a man from the Church, by the
Magistrates power then to cut off a man from Israel, neither is the proportion
just, if it were so, neither yet is it manifested that so it was in Israel. 6.
Sixthly, the proportion which they here make, is so misshapen; that I marvel
wise men would ever bring it forth to the view of the world. For they make the
avoiding of the excommunicated person by the people, to be the executing of the
sentence of excommunication; whereas this censure is properly executed by him
that in the name of Christ and with consent of the Church, delivers the
wicked man to Satan, as the Apostle wills, 1. Cor. 5. which being done, the
man is certainly excommunicated, whither the people avoid his company or not.
And if they otherweise here understand the word execution; they do but deceiv
the reader with an aequivocation.

This their other example of the sentence of death, and the execution thereof,
will plainly manifest. For Pilate Luke 23.24.
gave sentence of death upon Christ; the Ioh. 19.23.34.
souldjers that killed him with nails and spear, they executed the sentence of
death, as we commonly speak and understand. Then verse. 38. -- 43.
Joseph of Arimathea and Nicodemus, embaulmed him with myrrh, wound him in a
sheet, and laid him in grave: shall we say that these two now were the
executioners of Christ; because they carried themselves toward him as toward a
dead man? Or if any refreyned from touching a dead man that had been hanged,
least by him they Number. 19.11.
should be polluted: did they here by execute him? No more do they properly
execute the sentence of excommunication, which avoid the company of one
excommunicated. 7. But because all the weight of their wrested proportion from
Israel, is couched herein: let us look upon it a little more. In their Treatise
on Mat. 18. there page 19.
they say: in Jsrael, such as would not hearken to the Priests and Judges, were
to dye by the hands of the people, Deuteronomy. 17. Again they say, ibid. p. 20.
delivering to Satan, in 1. Cor. 5. is in sted of death in Jsrael. Levit.
20.11. By this, one would think, that the people now should deliver a wicked
man to Satan, when the Elders have judged him worthy: otherweise, how stands
the proportion? But they mean nothing less: for a little after, they ibid. p. 26
tell us, in the Churches excommunication, there is the giving of a sentence
judiciarie, which perteyneth to government and authority; there is also in
particular, a delivering to Satan, by the power of our Lord Jesus Christ etc.
which likewise implies authority; and that it is proportionably answerable to
the taking away by death etc, that it is a special use of the keys given by
Christ to the Apostles; that the force hereof is such, as thereby a man is not
only cast out of that particular Church whereof he was a member, but is cut
off and excluded from all churches upon earth: as on the contrary by baptism,
we are entered into communion with all Churches of Christ in the world. By these
things compared together, we may observe: 1. that the church elders may by their
sole authority give judiciarie sentence, that a man shall be excommunicated:
answerable to the Magistrates in Israel, that gave sentence a man should be put
to death. 2. That the Elders may also by authority in particular deliver a man
to Satan by the power of Christ; which is proportionably answerable to the
taking away by death: which in Israel, themselves grant, was to be done by the
hands of the people. Thus do the Elders now challenge by proportion in the
Church, that which belonged both to Magistrates and people in the common
wealth. But because they fear the Act. 5.26.
people, they shape them this deceitful proportion, that their avoiding the
excommunicate person, is the executing (or putting in execution, as they
ambiguously speak) of the sentence: answerable to the peoples stoning of a
malefactor in Israel; how fitly, let all that have understanding judge. For
whether the people avoid him or not, the man is judged and delivered to Satan,
and so cut off from the church: as on the contrary, when one is baptized by the
minister, whether the people keep company with him or not, he is made a member
of the church: and as a man beheaded in Israel, was surely dead, whether the
people refreyned from touching him or no. 2. Again they give no more to the
people of that Church whereof he is a member, then to the people of all other
churches, that are bound to avoid the excommunicated person, as well as they. 3.
Yea they give hereby their people no more power, then the Pope does to his
marked servants; for he also will have the people avoid such as he does
excommunicate: and if this be the boasted right and liberty of the people,
they had as much in the greatest bondage of popery, as now when they are
carried thus blindfold by propertions. But they tell the people, Advert. page 34.
that if any can except against the Elders proceedings they shall be heard. I
answer, First before whom and unto whom, shall any man except against the
Elders: is it not before and unto the Elders themselves? And is it meet that
they should be judges in their own cases? In Israel when any complained of
wrong in the Synagogues or Cities, there was an Deuteronomy. 17.8 9. 2. Chro^. 19.8.10.
higher Court to control unruly Elders, and to help the oppressed. But now 2. or
3. Elders in a Church, bearing themselves upon their forged authority from
Mat. 18.17.20. may be lawless; and who shall let them in their proceedings?
Secondly, how should the people except, when by these men's doctrine, they are
not bound to be present at the hearing and deciding of the controversy: will it
not be a just blame upon them, if they except against a matter, which they have
not heard discussed? Thirdly, when the party accused shall except against the
Elders proceedings, (as commonly he will do, for if he acknowledged himself to
have sinned, he should not need to be excommunicated:) may the people now
require to hear the case debated between the Elders and him? nay, they plead in
their Treatise on Math. 18. saying, page 16.
But where has the Lord appointed a rule of further proceeding, beyond that of
the Elders and governors, for hearing the brethrens causes, and judging
between a man and his brother? etc. And again, the Elders also are the Churches
officers, etc. so as when they have heard, examined, admonished, and judged
according to the word of God, it is to be esteemed as done by the Lord and the
Church etc. Thus let the man except what he will, the judgmt is at an end, the
Lo: has done it, the Church has done it, because the Elders have done it: and
it must be presupposed, that they have done it according to the word of God,
though the man except never so much: and though the scriptures foreshew of
judges that were Zeph. 3.3.
wolves not sparing the flock, and latter days abundantly confirm the same.
And thus when a Naboth is condemned by wicked Elders, if any except on his
behalf, they will Isa. 2^.2^.
take him in a snare that reproves in the gate: perhaps he shall hear it said,
by what authority do you speak? and, are you one of the Church spoken of in
the 1^. of Matthew? for the Elders have power to deal with him also that shall
except, and can easily bring him within the compass of a contentious person, or
an oppugner of government, and cast him likeweise out of the Church; that a man
sometime were as good take a Lion by the paw, as except against the Elders
proceedings.

Next follow their many questions; and other matters imputed unto us: wherein we
observe how when arguments fayl them for their own cause, they seek to darken
the truth, by casting clouds before the readers eyes. 1. First they ask,
whither in Jsrael the Lord abridged the people of their right and liberty etc.
I answer, No: but these men that by wrested proportions, give the ministers of
the church, the power that Magistrates, Priests and people had in Israel; do
abridge the people of their right, as before is manifested.

And for the further clearing of it, seeing there were diverse governors in
Israel, as the Number. 18.
Priests and Levites in the Temple; the Luke 4.20
ministers in the synagogues; the Deuteronomy. 16 1^.
Elders or Magistrates at the gates of the cities, and these also diverse and of
unequal power, as before page 16.
is showed: I ask of them again, whither now the Eldership of every church, be
proportionable in power and government, unto al those governors: and if not
unto al, unto which of them?

2. Secondly they ask, whither the people have any more right and authority in
the churches government now, then the people of Jsrael had in those days. I
answer, they should not seek to entangle by ambiguitie of terms. First, we give
not to the people government, as before page 10.
I have showed, but a right and power to Mat. 28.20.
observe and do all the commandments of Christ, touching his prophetical
preistly and kingly office, by the Elders teaching guiding and governing of
them in the Lord. 2. The govermt in Israel was diverse, by Magistrates in the
gate, by Priests in the sanctuary, by ministers in the synagogues. To the
Magistracy, al Christians are to be subject Ro^. 13.1.
now, as they were then: for it is an 1. pet. 2.13.
humane ordinance, tending to civil peace, and concerns al men whither within
the church or without, indifferently. The external Preisthood of Israel, is
accomplished in Christ and now abolished, Heb. 7. yet in David's Kingdom, and
Levies preisthood, there was Ier. 33.21.22.
a figure also of the kingdom and preisthood that Rev. 1.6.
Christ bestows on the saints. Who have as much more power and liberty in
the Gospel now, than the Jews had; as the heyr when he is of years, has more
then in his childhood; Gal 4.1.2.3. yet always in order, and with submission
to the ministerial government of their Heb. 13.17.
Leaders. And I ask of these again, whither the Christian Magistrates now, are
not to have their voices with the ministers of the church whereof they are, in
the admonishing and censuring of sinners ecclesiastically, and in other publik
questions and controversies of religion.

3. Thirdly they ask, Whether the people of Jsrael were not Kings and Priests
etc. as well as the Christian people are now, Exodus 19.5. Psalm. 149.1. etc. with
1. Pet. 2.9.10. Rev. 1.6. I answer, first as touching the communication of
their external kingdom and preisthood, it is evident, that the Israelites were
not so the natural seed of David and of Levi, as Christians now are the
spiritual seed of them in Christ, Jer. 33, 22. Secondly, for communication with
the spiritual kingdom and preisthood of Christ by them shadowed, the Israelites
were Kings and Priests as well as we, but with differences. For Isreal's state
and ours, are not simply opposed, yet do they differ in manner and degree.
They were Kings and Priests as they were Christians, and partakers of the
Anointing, and that is, as they were under the new Testament. But they were
Heb. 8.8.9. etc.
not so under it as we are: neither are we so under the old Testament as were
they. They were heirs of the heavenly things, but as children, and so (as Paul
Gal. 4.2, 3.
says) under tutors and governors, and in servitude under the rudiments of the
world, until the time appointed of the Father, that is until Christ's coming.
The scriptures which they quote, do confirm this. For the promise in Exodus
19.5.6. is legal, if they kept Gods covenant; as in another place Levit. 18.5.
if they did his statutes, they should live by them, which Paul Gal. 3.12.
shows to be a speech of the law, not of the gospel. Now that condition,
Israel Heb. 8 9.
kept not, neither Rom 8.3
could: therefore not the law, but Christ has made us Kings and Priests, Rev.
1.5.6. and until Christ came, Israel was kept under the law, as under a Gal.
3.23 24.
scholemaster, and had an external preisthood, which could give them no Heb.
7.11.19.
perfection, and therefore is abolished, and our state much bettered, as is
showed at large, Heb. 12.18, 19, 20.21, 22. etc. as the prophets also foretold,
Jsa. 61, 5, 6. Jer. 33, 15. -- 22. Mal. 3.3.4. and of this estate under the
gospel, is the 149. psalm a prophecy, (though in their mesure they then also
fulfilled it,) and the place of Peter confirms it. Whereunto we may add the
testimony of the Jews Rabbis touching their estate, under that scholemaster
of the law. Maimon. in Treat. of the discipline of the law; chapter 3.
With three crowns (say they) was Jsrael crowned: with the the crown of the
law, and the crown of the preisthood, and the crown of the kingdom. The crown
of the preisthood was bestowed upon Aaron and his seed, Number. 25.13. The crown
of the kingdom, was bestowed on David and his seed, Ps. 89.36. The crown of the
law, lo it is appointed stablished and confirmed unto all Jsrael, as it is
written, Moses commanded us a law, the inheritance of the congregation of
Ja^kob. In that they al had the law to use so freely, and were so restreyned
from the kingdom and Preisthood; it argues their childhood: yet might they see
by faith their inheritance in those types: how all Christians should by
participation of Christ's Ioh. 2.27.
anointing, be that seed of David and of Levi, promised Jer. 33.22. Rev.
5.9.10. and 20, 6. And here I also ask of our opposers, whither the Ministers
of the Gospel, be Kings and Priests now, by their office of ministry in the
Church.

4. Fourthly they ask, whether the Churches power be not a ministerial power
only. I answer, the power it self is 1. Cor. 5.4 5.
Christ's; and so royal or kingly: but all that the Church does, is only to
administer that power, under Christ. And I ask of them again, whether they
think the Elders have the whole power, which Christ has given to his Church.

5. Fifthly they ask, whether the Elders power be not ministerial, under the
Lord, in and for the Church. etc. I answer, an ambiguous question cannot be
answered til it be cleared. First this word power is large, and they must show
how they limit it: for by comparing this question with the former, they seem to
put all the Churches power into the ministers hand; which I deny. They have also
misshapen the proportion of their power from the Magistrates of Israel, as
before we have heard; contrary to Christ's commandment, Mat. 20, 25, 26. 1.
Pet. 5.3. Secondly the word ministerial is also diversely used: in a special
sense, the Officers only are caled 1. Cor. 4.1.
Ministers; in a general sense the whole Church are Isa. 61.6. 1. Pet. 4.10 11.
1. Cor. 14, 31. Act. 13.2.
Ministers, and do administer and dispose the manifold graces of God: and the
word Cohen, Priest, given to all saints, does properly signify a Minister.
Thirdly for the Elders function, I grant it to be ministerial under the Lord,
in and for the Church; but also unto, yea and under the Church secondarily, as
the Ioh. 3.29. 1. Cor. 3.22 23.
spowse of Christ, in that sense that Paul speaks, the spirits of the
Prophets are subject to the Prophets, 1. Cor. 14, 32. And I ask of them again,
whether the Ministers of the Christian so caled, Iam. 2.2.
synagogues now, have any more authority, then had the Ministers in the Jews
synagogues, or then they to whom it was said, Serve the Lord your God, and his
people Jsrael. 2. Chron. 35, 3. Ezekiel. 44.11. But here (before they have our
answer) they conclude, that therefore there is no weight in our objections about
the Elders power, as if it were not the churches etc. I answer, first they
conclude not the question set down in the article, but because it was too
heavy, they leav it and turn to other matters. Secondly they conclude with an
aequivocation in this word power, which is not in the same sense to be applied
to the Elders, as it is to the body of the Church. Thirdly the Jesuits do in
this wise conclude also for the Pope. For the power and government which they
dispute for, is not Bellarm. de Romans Pont. l. 1. c. 5.
absolute, but such (they say) as may be in ministers and stewards, 1. Cor. 4,
1. And that the power which the Pope and prelates execute, should be the
Churches power, it is the thing that they ibid. c. 6.
would have. So vvheras our opposites tell us of the Elders power that in deed
it is the Churches; the papists also tell us the same: but the more is their syn
that deprive the Church of it, by engrossing it into their own hands alone;
thus did the Pope clime by steps unto his primacie. And it is (say they) to be
ministered by the Officers: but not (say I) by them only; therein is the deceyt.
The whole Church is a Exo. 19.6. 1. Pet. 2.9.
kingdom of Priests, that is of ministers: who are to be Heb. 13.17.
guided and governed by their Officers, (caled also Colos. 4.17.
ministers in more special manner,) for the holy and orderly practice of the
power. And thus the Prophets foretold the state of the Christian Church,
saying, Isa. 61.5.6
strangers shall stand and feed your sheep, and the sonns of strangers shall be
your plowmen and dressers of your vines; but ye shall be named the Priests of the
Lord, and men shall say unto you, The Ministers of our God. Where the Officers
of the Church are compared to pastors and husbandmen, (as the new testament
also Ephesians. 4.11. 1. Cor. 3.9.
confirms,) which should be of the converted Gentiles: and the Church it
self, is the Lords 1. Pet. 2.9. Rev. 20.6.
preisthood, and his Ministers.

Sixthly they ask, whither we in the Churches government, as the Anabaptists in
the sacraments would not make them aliens from the common wealth of Jsrael,
etc. I answer, this was in their fourth observation before, and p. 14.15.
there is by me answered, I trust without absurdity, or ungodlynes, errors or
evils, all which they here insinuate against us, for to fill up their mesure.
But here again the reason deceives the reader, for in sted of commonwealth or
polity, they bring in one body, one Lord, one faith of theirs and ours: etc.
Ephe. 2. etc. All this we grant: but the outward polity and government, we deny
to be the same, it being changed by Christ both for City and Sanctuary, Dan.
9.26. There was always one Lord and faith of the Church: but not always one
polity. The kingdom and preisthood were first executed by one person, as in
Genesis 14.18.
Melchisedek: afterward these functions were divided, and Kings might 2 Chronicles.
26.18.
not do the Priests work. Also the civil government in Israel was Deuteronomy. 17.14.
1. Sam. 8.
changeable, sometime without a King, sometime with one: yea sometime by hethen
Kings, as Nebuchadnezar, Cyrus, etc, to whom the Israelites were bound Ier.
27.6.8.12.
to be subject, but not so in their sacraments: that there is no just
consequence to be drawn from the one of these to the other. We rather may ask
of our opposites, whether they as the Bellarm. de Romans Pont. l. 4. c. 1.
Papists would not draw us from the testament of Christ, (who was Heb. 3.2.
faithful as Moses in all his house,) to the Jewish polity now abolished. And
let them tell us whether there may be now Archbishops, over other Bishops and
Ministers, as in Israel there were Archpreists Nu^. 3.6.32 Nehem. 12 7.12.
over other Priests and Levites; or a superior court 2. Chron. 10.8.10.
to hear the appeals from particular synagogues and cities now, as was then:
and whether the ministers of the Church, now, may be captayns of politik
armies, as 1. Chro. 27.5.1. Kin. 2.34.35.
Benajah son of Iehojada the chief Priest, was general of the field in Ioabs
room? Such orders have been heretofore in Israel.

Seventhly they ask, why we speak not of our selves, what we pleaded to be the
church spoken of Mat. 18, 17. etc. I answer, because our plea is already set
forth in sundry books, as the Page 242.243.
Discovery, the p. 75. -- 81.
Re^itation of M. Gifford, the p. 60. -- 64
Apology, p. 61.74.
the Treatise of the Ministry against M. Hildersh the p. 55.56*
Answer to White etc. And I ask of them again, why they answer not the things
already published in so many treatises, but fish for more matter by subtle
questions, as if men had nothing else to do, but answer al things that they
write and demand: and to let them range at will, without orderly answering as is
meet.

They say, some of us taught it to be the whole church, alleging to that end
Number. 15.33. and 27.2. and 35.12.. I answer, first, we taught then no otherweise
then as them selves taught heretofore with us. Secondly we alleged many other
scriptures and reasons both Ruth. 4.9.11. Ps. 149.6. -- 9. Ier. 26.11.12.16.
Mat. 18.18. -- 20. and 28.20. Act. 15.22.23.30. and 11.2. etc. and 21.18. --
22.1. Cor. 5 4 -- 13. Rev. 2.7.11 29.
from the Prophets and Apostles, though it please them to omit those, and cull
out these against which they think they have more color to contend. For
hereupon they thus argue, 1 Jf this rule be found in the book of Numbers etc.
then it is not a new rule first given in Mat. 18.17. I answer, they wrong us,
and would deceiv the reader: we alleged not those scriptures to prove the rule
to be the same then and now; but to give light unto the question, by showing
what was the peoples right then, under the law, and under the Magistrate: which
may be more, but can not be less now under the gospel, where the church
ministry, has not Math. 20.25.26. 1. Pet. 5.3.
the power of Magistracy over Gods heritage. The Apostle applies many things
from Aarons preisthood Heb. 5.4. and 9.6.7. and 13.11.12.
to Christ: yet he makes Christ's preisthood not to be after Aarons order Heb.
7.1^.12.^5.
but Melchisedeks: should men now thus carp at his allegations?

Then they say, those scriptures speak of civil government, which we except
about the Elders, but they suppose we will not give to the people civil
authority. I answer, first them selves grant that the people have as much
right and power now as they had in Israel: but we deny, and they can never
prove that the ministers now have as much authority over the people, as had the
Princes of Israel: so our reasoning is good, though theirs be naught. Secondly
for civil authority as we never challenged it: so neither should it be objected
to them, but that they will have it to be no new rule. Then say we, it must be
left to the Magistrate, and ministers may not intrude into their place. And
seeing they thus urge it, let them, if they please, clear them selves, whither
they think not that the Elders of the church, may have civil authority also,
as had the Elders in Israel.

Thirdly they say, that by these and the like scriptures it is certain, sinners
in Jsrael were brought before the congregation of Elders. I answer, if they
mean Elders only, (as they must if they reason to the matter in hand,) I deny
it: and there is no weight in their proof. For, it is also certain that Paul
imposed hands on Timothee, 2. Tim. 1.6. but elsewhere it appears, others also
imposed hands as well as he. 1. Tim. 4.14. So, the Apostles and Elders came
together about a controversy, Act. 15.6. but the whole Church came together
also, verse 22.23. Titus was left to ordeyn Elders, Tit. 1.5. but was he to do
it, himself alone? The keys were promised to Peter, Mat. 16.19. but were they
meant to him only? In Rev. 2.1. John wrote to the Angel (or Messenger) of the
church: but by Rev. 1.11. and 2.7. it is plain the whole church was intended.
So in Israel, the law says in a case of marriage, let her go up to the gate to
the Elders: Deuteronomy. 25.7.8.9. but the practice of this shows, that the people
were also interested with the Elders, Ruth. 4.2.7.9.11. Jn Exodus 5.1. Moses and
Aaron went to Pharaoh, but by Exodus 3.18. we may gather that the Elders of
Israel went with them also. So in the place cited Number. 15.33. they brought him
to Moses and to Aaron, and to all the Congregation; the people are here meant
with the Magistrates, for God then said, verse. 35.
let all the congregation stone him; and verse. 36.
all the Congregation brought him without the host and stoned him. Now by M.
Iohnsons own grant, they whom the Judges condemned, did dye Treat. on Mat. 18.
p. 19.
by the hands of the people: who is it then that cannot see, the Congregation
here to mean both Elders and people? So in the other place, Number. 27.2. when
they stood before Moses, and Eleazar the priest, and before the Princes, and all the Congregation, this distribution of the persons, together with the place,
the door of the Tabernacle of the Congregation; may show that the Elders only
were not meant: besides in the same chapter, Joshua being there ordained over
the Congregation etc. it cannot with any color be gathered, that the Elders
only were the congregation, Number. 27.16.17.19.20. etc. Wherefore when one
scripture mentions the Elders, Jos. 20.4. and an other the Congregation Number
32.12. Jos. 20.6. we should not restreyn it to the lesser, but let the
scripture have the largest sense, unless apparent reason do urge a restreynt,
which is not here, but the contrary. For if they were to dye by the hands of
the people, conscience required the people, to hear their cause tried also,
seeing the law charged every one, Exodus 23.7
thou shall not slay the innocent and the righteous: and it was not safe for
them to trust their Judges, which so often and so many ways corrupted judgment
Isa. 1.23. 1. Sam. 8.3. Zeph. 3.3.
as all the prophets do complayn. It is therefore an evil argument to say, in
Israel by one scripture men were sent to the Elders, and by an other to the
Congregation, therefore it was the congregation of Elders, and not of the people
also. For by such wrested reasons, one might prove that the Elders only were
bound to keep the passover, because in one place it is said, speak to all the
Congregation of Israel, that every man take to him a Lamb, Exodus 12, 3. and in
an other place it is said, Moses caled all the Elders of Israel, saying choose
out and take for every of your howsholds a Lamb; Exodus 12, 21. therefore it was
meant of the Congregation of Elders, and so the other people were not bound to
this service. Again, it was commanded, Exodus 19, 3, 5. tell the children of
Jsrael, if ye will hear my voice and keep my covenant, ye shall be my chief
treasure etc. afterward it is said, Moses caled Exodus 19.7.
for the Elders of the people, and proposed unto them al these things: shall we
now conclude, therefore the covenant was made with the Elders only? Who sees
not the weakness of such consequents: and that it is usual in scripture, to name
but the principal of a company, and yet to include others with them?
Notwithstanding between Israel and us, there were two mayn differences, the
one, that Church ministers now, have not such ecclesiastical authority over
the people, as is proportionable to the Magistrates authority then: for this is
forbidden, Mat. 20, 25. vvher Christ says, the rulers of the nations have
domination over them, and they that are great exercise authority over them:
but it shall not be so among you. And 1. Pet. 5.2, 3. Feed the flock of God etc.
not as having domination over (his) heritage. The other is, that they were a
national Church, and the Magistrates in the gates of Jerusalem, the Priests in
the Temple, being for the whole Realm; it could not be that all the people
should be present at the daily judgments of the Magistrates, or sacrifices of
the Priests. And therefore it was not required so of them; as now it is of us,
who are but particular Churches, to be present at al publik administration of
Christ's kingdom and preisthood. Yea even in their most solemn assemblies, they
could not do, as we ar bound to do. For they did eat the passover Luke
22.10 11.12. etc.
in their private houses, because all the thovvsands of Israel could not eat it
in one room: but we are bound to eat the passover now (I mean the Lords
supper) in 1. Cor. 11 20. etc.
the publik Church, and not otherwhere.

Whereas therefore they next except, that the people were 600. thousand men, and
would we have them to think that they came together to hear examine and judge
the cases of syn etc. I answer, no: neither all the Elders. For I have before
shevved, there were diverse officers, for several causes. And Boaz took but
Ruth. 4.2.
ten of the Elders of Bethlehe^ to hear his cause. The Elders also did meet by
themselves as there was occasion: and so are Act. 21.18
they to do now. Secondly for this exception of so many thowsands in the
wilderness, that could not come to hear and judge: they should mind how the same
lies against the execution. When God said of the blasphemer, Levit. 14.14.
let all the Congregation stone him: will they say six hundred thousand men came
together to do it? yet themselves grant this was to be done by the people. It
was as easy for them to come to hear his cause tried, as to come and stone
him: and care of equity taught them to do the first, as well as the last, as
before is shevved.

Next they except against our expounding the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 18.1. etc.
to be the church under the gospel, since Christ: this they say is not sound,
because the same phrase is spoken of the church of the Jews, Mat. 22.2. etc. I
answer; this their reason is unsufficient, for I could so except against the
exposition almost of any scripture, by showing a diverse use and meaning of the
words. When The Apostle proves Christ's excellency above the Angels, because
Heb. 1.4.5
of his name, the Son of God: the Jews might allege, that the Angels are also
caled Job. 1.6. and 2.1.
Sonns of God, yea holy Deuteronomy. 14.1.
men have the like title: but were this a sufficient answer? Well, I will not
st^ive with them, about the phrase (although in some places they may see the
Kingdom of Heaven opposed to the state of the Jews church, as Mat. 11.11) but
as the prophets tell us of Isa. 65 17 and 66.22. 2. Cor. 5.17.
new heavens under the Gospel, so will I distinguish and call the Jewish church
the old heaven, (as that which is Heb. 12.26.27.
shaken and removed,) and the Christian church the new heaven; of which the
Gospel usually speaks, as Repent for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand, Mat.
3.2. and 4.17. Now when the disciples asked Jesus, Mat. 18, 2.
who is the greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven? there might be reason of their
demand touching the Christian church then to be planted: but to ask such a
thing about the Jewish church; I see little reason. They knevv already the
state of it, and who was chief therein. Secondly Christ's answer leads us
hereto: for there being great expectation of that Kingdom, and an erroneous
persuasion that it should be a glorious vvorldly state, Christ tells them the
contrary, that it was for the verse. 3, 4.
converted and humble sovvles to enter into: that many scandals and offenses
should arise herein, both from v. 7.
the world, and from men's corruption v. 8.
in them selves, and from v. 15. etc.
their brethren. Against al which he armeth his disciples, and teaches the
orderly way to redress them. And that his rules should not be despised, he
assures them that their censures executed on earth, shall be ratified v. 18.
in heaven: the ground vvherof is his v. 20.
name vvherin they should be gathered together, and his presence in the mids of
them. And this phrase of Christ's name, leads us also evide^tly unto the
church under the gospel: for it means the clear manifestation of Christ with
the power and profession of him, as Act. 2, 38. and 3, 16 and 4, 12, 17. 2 Timothy
2, 19. In respect whereof, Christ said to his disciples, hitherto have ye asked
nothing in my name, Joh. 16, 24. These rules therefore, do most properly serve
for the Church since Christ's coming: and therefore he sends not his disciples
to the Jews synedrio^s, much less to the hethen magistrates, for redress of
the synns that should arise in his kingdom. But our opposites do except, what
is here taught that the Jews should not observe as well as we? should not they
be humble, harmless, etc. I answer, that which the gospel teaches touching
faith, repentance, humility etc, the Jews were also bound unto; though these
and the like things are otherwise opened and urged now under the gospel, Romans
16.25.26. but there was to be an other form and order of the Christian church,
than of the Jewish: and in that respect, Moses polity must give place. Ye*
they proceed and infer, that the offender if he repent not should be brought
to the Congregation of Elders. This I deny in their understanding, who make
this to be one with the Synedrion or Council of Magistrates, in Mat. 5.22.
(which place I have also treated of p. 17.18.
before,) and I affirm it to be the Christian Church or Congregation of faithful
people, the spowse and bride of Christ, with whom his 1. Cor. 5.
power is left to judge al sinners within the same; their Elders guiding and
governing them in their judgments. For the outward form of the Jewish Church
was abolished Dan. 9, 26. Isa. 65, 17. Heb. 8. and 9 and 10. chap.
by Christ; the common wealth of Israel dissolved, and given up to the Romans,
whose Caesar Ioh. 19.15
they preferred before Christ. The Temple Mat. 24.2
ruinated, the ministry Ephesians. 4.11 1. Cor. 12.
also changed, and the ordinances, though in many things proportionable with
Israel: but for Ministers authority over his people, to govern them Magistrate
like, it is forbidden Mat. 20.25, 26. Luke 22, 25. 1. Pet. 5, 3. 1. Cor. 3, 22,
23. and for any church of Elders, the whole new Testament knows it not; nor
any such practice as these would bring in: but that the same church which 1.
Cor. 11.20. -- 33.
came together to the word and sacraments, came also together 1. Cor. 5.4. --
13.
to judge and cast out obstinate sinners, and were verse. 1.2.
all blamed for the neglect of this duty, as for any other. And for deciding
controversies, the Apostles, Elders, and brethren did Act. 15.23 25.
come together with one accord. And such order continued in Churches some years
after the Apostles, for Tertullian relates the manner of Christian assemblies
in his time, Tertull. in Apologet.
how they came together into a congregation, for to pray unto God, and for to
rehearse the divine scriptures, and with holy words to nourish faith, styrr up
hope, and fasten confidence. How there also were exhortations, reproofs and
divine censures; and judgment given with great deliberation: the approved
Seniors being presidents in the assemblies. And Cyprian Bishop of Carthage
Cypr. l. 3. epist. 14.
shows how with him men's causes were handled not only before the Elders but
apud plebe^ universa^.
the whole multitude: without whose consent also, ibid. epist 10.
nothing was done.

Next follows their exception about women and children; asking if they should
in a controversy be the greater part, whither then they be the church spoken
of? Also, whither in the congregation and presence of the Elders, the women and
children have authority by virtue of that rule Mat. 18.17. to examine, rebuke,
admonish their husbands, parents etc. for, they that are of the church there
spoken of, may examine etc. I answer; first they omit what heretofore we
answered them, when they fished about this matter: namely that the whole church
of men women and children are to be present at ecclesiastical judgments, as at
al other public administrations of the church, where whatsoever is performed,
is done Act. 6.4.
by prayer and the ministration of the word, that al may receiv instruction by
the word there ministered, and as is written Deuteronomy. 13.11. and 17.13.
al Israel may hear and fear and do no more any such wickedness. But no other
to have voices or suffrages in excommunications etc. then they that have voices
in election or deposition of officers. And they know well, it was never our
judgment or practice, that in Elections women or children should give their
voices, the 1. Cor. 14.34.
Apostle and nature it self requiring women to be silent in the church: they
also themselves have thus professed and practiced with us many years. Secondly
they have seen Mr. Robinsons answer Iustisic. p. 204.205.206.
to M. Bernard (cavilling likewise about women and children,) to the same
effect. Yet will they take no notice of his answer, or of ours; nor make any
reply, but thus trouble the world, and us in special, to answer again and again
whatsoever they please to demand. For after in page 43. of their book, they are
twice up again with these questions of women and children, as if we had naught
else to do, but to answer and answer their tautologies. Thirdly seeing they
thus deal, to make the truth seem odious, and to set the more color upon their
prelacie, imitating the papists and popish affected, they shall have the like
things demanded of them, not by us, but by others. Themselves as yet allow
popular election of officers, because they say Adver^. p. 46.
to give voices in election is not a part of government, but a power right and
liberty that the saints and people out of office have and should use. Now
those of the prelates faction which deny this power of the people, say thus
unto them; D. Cousins, answ. to the abstract. p. 99* 100.
By this reckning men women and children (for all the faithful be interested)
shall have voices in election of their ministers; if any dissent, al must be
dashed. It had been very requisite that our author for the appointing of these
Democratical elections the better unto us, should with proof out of scripture
for every particular have showed whether women or children of some reasonable
discretion, should have voices in election of their Minister? whether he should
be chosen by all, by the greater part, or by the better part? whether the wives
voice should be accounted several, or but one with her husband, or whether she
might dissent from her husband, or the father from the son? etc. They that
compare these two writers, may see how they wrote by one spirit, and almost
with one pen. Yet because in this point of popular election they do differ:
we leave it for our opposites to answer these demands to the Prelates; and
then if need be, they shall hear further of us, touching popular
excommunication. Fourthly, if some would thus cavil against Moses law, which
requires Deuteronomy. 13 9 10.
the hands of all the people to stone a wicked man; and ask, whether women also
and children must be present and cast stones: he might have as good color for
his question as have these, if not better. For these say, Treat. on Mat. 18. p.
19.
in Jsrael, such as would not hearken to the Priests and judges, were to dye by
the hands of the people: and the proportion that they cast for the people now,
is Advertis. page 34.
that they shall put the sentence in execution, by avoiding the excommunicated
persons. Now, I think, they will have women yea and children also, to avoid
excommunicated persons; so then by proportion, women and children in Israel
must cast stones at malefactors. Yea this may be further urged against them, by
reason of a pregnant note which they give in their page 8.9.
Treatise on Mat. 18 that that is such a church, as where women may speak and
are to be heard in their cases and pleas as well as men, but, it is not
permitted to women to speak in the Churches of the saints, etc. where either
they aequivocate with this word speak, using it in diverse senses, (a common
Aristot. in reprehens. Sophist.
practice of such as would deceiv,) or they must permit women to have voices
and suffrages as well as men, in all their churches of Elders: and so, by their
proportion, women were to cast stones in Israel. For if women are to do
execution now, why not then also?

5. Now whereas they intimate to the reader, as if we would have al men
examine, rebuke, admonish in the presence of the Elders; they do but labor
the disgrace of the holy order in the church: where the Minister as the mouth of
the congregation, propounds examineth and carries matters: and then the
people if there be defect or default, may speak in due order, but if in matter
or manner they transgress, they are to bear their rebuke. Al things in the
public judgments of the church being carried holily, peaceably and by the
government of the Elders, even as in elections of officers, in prophecy, or
any other thing wherein men have liberty for to speak. And when the Ministers
carry things well, we commonly find it as in Act. 15.12. that all the multitude
keeps silence: otherwise strife (and sometime disorder) does often arise, by
the evil dealing of the Elders. 6. It is also to be observed how these our
opposites will require by their proportion from Israel, children to stone their
parents, wives their husbands, and servants their masters, by avoiding their
communion: yet will they not have the^ to be of that church which is to hear,
examine and judge of the causes why their parents, etc. should be stoned and
excommunicated; not bound to be present at the trial of their case? Did ever
any common wealth in the world require such execution at the hands of wives
children and servants; and yet teach them so little to honor and regard their
parents, as not to think themselves bound to hear their case tried, but upon
the Elders report, to stone their own fathers, husbands, masters, which do
take it on their death that they are innocent?

Against 1. Cor. 12.21. -- 26. which was by some alleged, they except, 1. that
the Apostles purpose is not to speak of cases and pleas about syn, and of the
manner of dealing therein: but of the diversity of gifts and functions, given
for the help and service of all, to the building up of the body of Christ. I
answer; 1. the Apostle speaks generally of the verse. 4* 5.6.
diversities of gifts, Ministeries, and operations in the church, as they are
given to to verse. 7.
every man to profit with all; and names in particular the verse. 8 etc.
gifts, operations and ministeries, and among the rest the verse. 28.
governors or governments: and there is no church action, which the Apostle
purposes not in that his dispute to comprehend: their first exception therefore
is not true. 2. Neither does it agree with it self: for if he speak (as they
confess) of the diversity of gifts and functions given for the help and service
of all, to the building up of the body of Christ: then can he not but speak of
cases and pleas about syn: seeing they are to be judged by the gifts and
functions 1. Cor. 5.7 12.
of the church; they are for the help and service of Iam. 3.2.
all; they help to Gal. 6.1. Ephe. 4.12. -- 16.
build up the body of Christ. Unless they would have us think, that the Elders
prelacie which they strive for, is none of those gifts or functions, nor for
the help and service of all, nor for the building up of Christ's body but of
Antichrists: this we will grant them to be true.

2. Secondly they except, the Apostle shows it by the similitude of the
natural body and faculties; and applies it to the feeblest members, even the
youngest children newly baptized, verse. 13*^22. to whom he appoints not the
cases of syn to be brought to judgment and censure, as we hereupon would
infer. I answer; in thus speaking they injury us, and the truth it self.
Would we infer, that the judgment of syn should be brought to infants newly
baptized; because we say, not the Elders only but the church is to judge, as
Cor. 5.12
Paul teaches? And would The Apostle also infer (think they) that infants
should rebuke and judge unbeleevers, because he says, 1. Cor. 14.23.24.
when the whole church is come together in one, if al prophecy, and there come
in one that believes not, he is rebuked of al, and is judged of al. And did
Joshua also mean, that the youngest children newly circumcised threw stones at
Achan, because he says, Ios. 7.25.
al Jsrael stoned him? we had not thought wise men would ever have made such
inferences. And what weight is in their reasoning from infants? that if other
besides Elders may judge sinners, then infants: if not infantes, then no other
but Elders. Might not men thus elude al Paul's arguments? As when he says 1.
Cor. 12.7.
the manifestation of the spirit is given to every one to profit withal; they
to conclude, therefore the youngest children newly baptized can manifest the
spirit to the profit of others. We have been verse 13.
all made to drink into one spirit: therefore infants also were partakers of the
Lords supper. verse. 26.
Jf one member be had in honor, all the members rejoice with it: therefore even
the sucking babes* for they also are members. But did not these men think to
find babes of us, that they have given such an answer to our allegations?

3. Thirdly they except that this similitude, might likewise be applied to
Jsrael: which we grant. Also we acknowledge that it may not either then or now
pervert Gods ordinance about the Elders hearing etc. They say, the governors
are set in the Church for that use: I answer, not the governors only: this is
that which they should prove. They are to govern the Church in all actions, but
not to do them alone. Also they say, al members have not fit gifts for
examining of persons, deciding of questions etc. I answer, that is true, for
infants (as they excepted,) have not. But that only the Elders have fit gifts
for such purposes, is untrue: the Act. 25.22. -- 25.
scripture, and daily experience tells us the contrary: yea some other members
may have fitter gifts then the Elders. And they themselves that now are
officers, had they not gifts fit to examine judge decide etc. before they were
chose^ into office: or did their election give them gifts, which had none fit
before?

4. Fourthly, they will have this scripture direct against us; in that it
shows how some have a more chief place then others, as the head and eyes and
hands in the body. This is not against us at all, for we grant so much. But
they say we little regard it, who in cases of controversy will look where the
greatest number of people is, (though they may be of the most simple) and will
have them to be the church, and to have the power etc. as if the multitude
should still be followed, and that there were no difference of gifts, of office,
or other respect at al to be had. I answer, 1. they keep their wont, in abusing
us before the world: we look not in any case to the greatest number, either of
people or Elders: but in all cases we look to Gods law and testimony as we are
Isa. 8.20.
commanded; which when it is shevved by whom soever, al ought to yield unto.
We know neither the multitude, Exodus 23.2
neither yet the mighty or Rabbis are still to be followed; there are
differences of gifts and offices in the church, yet no man's gift or office (no
not though he were Gal. 1.8.
an Angel from heaven,) may carry us from the written word, by which the
Godly people tried even the Apostles doctrine, Act. 17.11.
and were commended. Although therefore the Church has that liberty which al
societies (that have none to exercise dominion or authority over them) have,
namely that the greater number overswayeth the lesser, when al accord not: yet
the faithful are not so to look unto or follow the greater number, as to decline
from the least of Gods commandments. This we may see in the 12. tribes of
Israel, where the greater number, even ten of the tribes fell to false worship,
and they carried away with them, not only the tribute of 2 King. 3.4. Isa.
16.1. 2. Sam. 8.2.
two hundred thousand lambs and ramms, which were due yearly from Moab to the
Kings of Judah, and were wrongfully challenged and taken by the Kings of
Samaria: but carried away also the title of the Church, being usually even by all
the Prophets Ier. 3.8. Ilos. 4.15. 1. King. 12.19. and 15.9.16.17. etc. 2 Chronicles. 10 16, 17. etc.
named Jsrael, whereas Judah and Benjamin were Israel as well as Ephraim and the
rest, yea in deed they were the only Israel of God, as the scripture Ps.
7*3.1. and 125.5. Gal. 6.16. Ro^. 9.4.6.
counts Israel. Yet did not the faithful respect this greater number, but
left 2. Chron. 11.16.
them with their title, and usurpation, and went to the lesser part which was
the better.

2. But is it not strange that these our opposites will object these things to
us; when in some things they do the same, and in their new established
hierarchy much worse? For in their popular election of officers (which they
still allow, if it may continue,) must not the greater number of voices carry the
thing? And yet there is no action of the church, that needs more wisdom,
government or circumspection then this. And therefore many precepts are left for
the careful and holy performance of it, 1. Tim. 3. and 5. Tit. 1. And will not
the Papists now cast the reproaches on their own faces, as they that would have
the multitude still followed, as if there were no difference of gifts etc.

3. And touching their hierarchy the Eldership they will not I think deny, but
the greater number of voices among them must prevayl. Now that being so, a
Church having a Pastor, and a Teacher that are learned, and 3. or 4. ruling
Elders, which are as unlearned as the other of the people, taken of trades men
and the like: these 3. or 4. Rulers (whose power they have proportioned with
the Princes of Israel,) shall by their number of voices carry matters, though it
be against Pastor, Teacher, and 500 brethren. Yea these may excommunicate or
depose the Pastor and Teacher, and cast out of the brethren: but none can
excommunicate them, or depose them jointly from their offices. The utmost that
we can find these men to allow In their Treat. on Mat. 18. p. 25.
the Church in these exigents, is when they have done al they can, to separate
from them: and this power any man has in the church of Rome. But I hope every
one that ^avoureth the things of God aright, will abhor such an unruly
prelacie. For if these Elders prove such as Paul foretold of, Act. 20.2^ 30.
greevous wolves not sparing the flock, but speaking perverse things to draw
disciples after the^; and as the Church has had woeful experience of, now so
many hundred years: what havoc and misery will not they bring upon Gods
people? And if we add unto this their other opinion of Gods covenant to
continue with a Church, though they fall into so many horrible synns,
idolatries and blasphemies as the Romish synagogue has done, which now they
plead for to be still the true church of Christ: what will not a presumpuous
Eldership do, and yet bear out themselves with this that they are the true
church, and all that leave them (for what cause soever) are schismatics.

4. Let the reader also observe their manner of pleading, when they speak of the
Elders proceedings, they annex, according to the Law of God: but speaking of
the people, they annex, p. 28.40.
though in error, and though never so erroneously carried, and though they be of
the most simple: as if they would persuade men, that the Elders usually through
their wisdom and godlynes walked aright, and the people through simplicity and
error went astray. Whereas if either the scriptures be searched, or humane
histories, or the present state of churches be looked upon, we shall see the
greatest errors, heresies, schisms and evils to have both arisen and been
continued by the Elders, priests and learned Rabbines in all ages: even Christ
himself found no greater enemies then the Mat-26.3 4. and 27.1. etc.
high priests, scribes and rulers of the people, which turned to his reproach
then, (whereof his church now is made partaker,) so that they said, does any of
the Rulers or of the Pharisees beleev in him? but this people which kn^w not
the Law, are cursed. John. 7.48.49.

5. Neither (if it were true) does their supposition that the Elders will judge
according to the law, bear out their supremacy, which Christ Mat. 20.25 26.
has forbidden. For (besides that one man may judge according to law,) both
the princes of 2. Chron. 19.5.6.
Israel, and the princes of Plato de repub. l. 4. and 5.
other nations, were bound to the laws prescribed: yet may not the ministers
now by proportion have princelike authority, 1. Pet. 5.3. The philosopher
could say Aristot. 3. Pol. c. 11.
They that bid the Law bear rule, do bid God to bear rule by his own voice:
but they that bid man bear rule (meaning without law) do bid a beast to bear
rule.

6. Here also they do violence to the Apostles similitude of a body, and say,
p. 41.
when a part of the body is hurt, the hand is not used nor sought unto to see
withal, nor the foot to hear, neither does the head take them to consult and
determine what to do, but when the head it self has considered and
determined, then it uses the help of the hand or foot etc. as there is need and
occasion. I answer, 1. first much abuse may be offered to al parables, by
wresting them beyond their general scope, as is here to this. For by this
manner of reasoning the Elders as the head, have all the wit, and the people as
the hands and feet, have none at al. The Elders as the eyes, see al things: but
the people see no more then the ears. For if the people have some understanding
and insight into matters as well as the Elders, why should they not be used also
in consulting and determining public things which co^cern al. Unless the
Elders now have such abundance of wisdom, as they can afford enough to al, and
need supply from none. But the scripture tells the contrary, saying, who is
sufficient for these things? 2. Cor. 2.16. And what meant the Apostles and
Elders of Jerusalem, to have all the people with them at their consulation and
determination of a controversy, Act. 15.2. -- 22, 23. And why did The Apostles
being the eyes, speak to the multitude, (which it seems saw no more then do
the hands and feet,) to look out men of wisdom, for office among them? Act.
6.2.3. But what if there be of the people that see more then all their Elders,
being illuminated as was David Psalm. 119.99.100.
by Gods precepts: and what if the Elders be blind guides as Mat. 15.14
Christ caleth some, and without understanding, Isa. 56.11
as the prophet co^playneth? Then men must leav the blind Eldership, and go to
the prudent brethren, and they must consult and determine, yea without the
Elders, if these men say true. Do not these things manifest how they have
wrested the similitude? 2. Secondly, it is direct against the Apostles meaning:
who because of dissentions in the church of Corinth, shows 1. Cor. 12
by that similitude of a body, that the chiefest members have need of the
inferior, and the head verse 21.
cannot say to the feet I have no need of you: but now the Elders can say to
the people, we need not your help to judge and determine questions and
controversies, this gift and duty is ours; neither are you bound to be present
to hear and decide public causes; but when we have judged, you shall execute
our judgments. And if the people again should say to the Elders when they are
about choice of officers, we need not your help, or counsel: you are not bound
to be present when we do this busynes; the feet have no more need of the eyes
to go, then the eyes have of the feet to see. Were not this to make a division
in the body, verse 25.
which The Apostle there condemns. 3. Moreover, it is vayn to think that any
officer or brother in the Church should so be one special member of the body,
as that he cannot be an other. The Prophets in Israel were 1. Sa^. 9.9.
Seers, and so in sted of eyes in the head: but when they La^. 2.14.
looked out vayn things, then as the Lord says, the Prophet that taught lies,
was the tail* Jsa. 9.15. The Elders, by directing the church in the right way,
are as eyes to the body; by administering the sacraments and censures, they are
as hands; when they are sent on the Churches message, they are as feet; when
they reprove synns, they are as the mouth, when they are reproved for their
synns, they should be as ears; and so other Christians in their places and
employments. And as God has bestowed his graces upon any, so is he to be
regarded of al, without respect of person: neither should the Elders be minded
like Achitophel 2. Sam. 17.
and take it ill, if at any time their counsel be not followed. A man may see
that in the Church, which Solomon saw in the beseiged city, Eccles. 9.13 14.
etc.
a poor wise man, that delivered the city by his wisdom: though both he and
his wisdom were despised. A 2. Sam. 20 16. etc.
woman in Abel when it was in danger to be spoiled, verse 22.
persuaded all the people with her wisdom to cut off Shebaes head; and so
preserved the city. Was she in this action, a part of the foot, or of the heart
and head in that body, may we think? 4. Finally, this their reasoning is one
with the Jesuits, that exclude the people from church affayrs. The Church
(says De sacrament* in genesis l. 1. c. 25.
Bellarmine) binds and loses, but by their Prelates, not by whomsoever:
even as the body speaks, but by the tongue, not by the hand. Thus does the
Cardinal answer M. Luthers argument, and thus do these men answer ours.

6. Yet have they not said enough, but they will make it page 41.
Antichristian servitude, to have the people bound to come to the public
ecclesiastical judgments; unless perhaps when the Elders call them together to
execute their sentence, for then I trow they are bound to come. And is not this
again to divide the body, when the head must be present, and the showlders with
the other parts and members may be absent? The Apostle writing to the Church of
Corinth, how to do when 1. Cor. 11.18.33.
they came together for the Lords supper, writes also to them how 1. Cor. 5.4
5.
when they were gathered together, they should deliver the wicked unto Satan.
We find no difference, but they were bound to come to the one as to the other.
And if they answer, they are bound to assemble for to excommunicate him, but
not to hear him by the word convinced in the trial of his cause; they may as
well teach the people they are bound to come to eat the bread and wine in the
Lords supper, but not bound to hear the word teaching and preparing them here
unto. We do so understand Gods law, that when it commands us any thing, it
does also command us to use al means for the right and holy performance of it:
and al will be little enough. The people therefore that were bound to stone an
idolater in Israel, were bound by that law Exodus 23.7.
thou shall not slay the innocent, to look that he were duly convicted of the
crime: and now by this law, 1. Tim. 5.22.
be not partaker of other men's synns, keep thy self pure, every sowl that is
bound to cast out a man condemned for heresy or other syn, is also bound to
see him convicted, least 3. Ioh. 9.1^.
Diotrephes cause to cast out faithful brethren. He that stands out to
excommunication, will commonly plead his cause to be just; and complayn that the
Elders have perverted judgment: with what comfort of heart can the people now
excommunicate him, if they have not heard the proceedings against him, and yet
must execute the Elders sentence upon him? Let wise men judge whither this be
not spiritual tyranny which the Elders would bring upon the consciences of the
Church.

But they allege further, the Elders are to have maintenance for the doing of
it and of the other duties etc. I answer, let them then excommunicate alone, as
well as try the case alone: seeing they have maintenance for both, and let the
people be bound to come to neither: no nor to the Pastors ministering of the
word and sacraments (if this reason be good,) because he is more worthy
maintenance than the ruling Elders, as The Apostle shows. But then, they say,
1. Tim. 5.17.18.
men must leav their trades, women their families, children their schools,
servants their work, and come to hear and judge cases that fall out between
brother and brother. I answer, 1. First they restreyn things too much, when
they say between brother and brother: for what if it be a public case of
heresy or idolatry, as that mentioned Deuteronomy. 13, 12, 13, 14. etc. will they say
women children and servants were then, or are now bound to leav their callings,
and come together to try out the matter? 2. Secondly many controversies
between neighbors, are for civil things of this life: such are Luke 12.14
not church matters, nor there to be heard, but by Romans 13.
Magistrates, or 1. Cor. 6.4.5.
arbiters chosen. 3. Thirdly for doubtful cases ecclesiastical, people are to
inquire the law Mal. 2.7.
at the Priests mouth, and to ask counsel of their Elders severally or jointly,
who are to have their Act. 21.18.
meetings apart for such and other like ends: so many things may be composed
without trouble of the Church. 4. Fourthly, when apparent sinners so convicted
by witnesses, are to be judged by the Church: there is no time more fit then the
sabbath day; wherein all men are Exo. 20.10
bound to leav their own works, and tend to the Lords, of which sort this is.
Or if that day suffice not, they may take any other for them convenient: for
unto public affayrs the Church is to be assembled, 1. Cor. 5.4. Act. 14.27.
and 15.4, 30. and 21.18. -- 22.

Against this I know, they except saying, Treat. on Mat. 18. p. 17.
who can show such an ordinance of God? find we such a course used in Jsrael on
the Sabbath days? Did they not meet on the Sabbath, in the temple and
synagogues for Gods worship etc. and the Elders sit in the gates on the week
days to hear controversies etc.

I answer; for this later point they bring not any one scripture to confirm it:
yet will I not strive there about, for I think it is true* Sure I am, the Jews
canon laws so declare; R. Ios. Karo, in Choshen ^amishpat, tract. de Iudi^.
chapter 5.
It is not lawful (they say) to judge on the Sabbath, or on a festival day: yea
further, that Maimony Tract. Sanhedrin, chapter ^1.
matters of life and death may not be judged on the evening of the Sabbath, or
on the evening of a festival day, least [the accused] be found guilty, and it
be impossible to kyl him on the morrow. I account civil controversies, of things
perteyning to this life (as 1. Cor. 6 4.
Paul caleth them,) to be of our own works, which by the law, Exodus 20.^.
are to be done in the six days: and therefore think it not lawful for
Magistrates to keep courts or Assizes, to judge and execute malefactors on the
Sabbath. And this, among other things, shows a mayn difference between the
Eldership of the Church, and the Magistracy of Israel. But for ecclesiastical
works by priests or people, they were to be done on the sabbaths, as Ioh. 7.23.
circumcision, Number. 28.9. with Levit. 1.
kylling, slaying, cutting and burning of sacrifices, which was very laborious
work, and even a Mat. 12.5
breach of the sabbath in outward show, but that the different nature of the
action made it blameless. Now the church judgments are the Lords works, not
ours, and therefore fittest to be done on the Lords day: they belong to Christ's
kingly office, and therefore are holy, as the works of his prophetical and
preistly office. These our opposites themselves Treat. on Mat. 18. p. 26.
compare the casting out by excommunication, with the contrary receiving in by
baptism. Al churches baptize on the Sabbath, and also excommunicate on the
Sabbath: why should not the cause be heard, as well as the judgment executed on
that day? We find, ecclesiastical controversies were disputed on the Sabbath
days in Israel, as the Apostles practice shows, Act. 13.44.45.46. and
17.2.3. and 18.4. It was lawful on the Sabbath to Luke 13.15.16.
heal the body: and is it unlawful to heal Psalm. 41.4
the sowl? It was lawful to save a Mat. 12.11.12.
sheep from dying in a ditch: and is it not lawful to Iam. 5.20
save a sowl from death, and cover a multitude of synns? Seeing therefore the
Sabbath is to be sanctified by the word of God, and prayer: and all that the
church ministers are to do, belongs unto these, as The Apostles teach us,
Act. 6.4. we think it is too Pharisee like to carp at church judgments on the
Sabbath: and then servants (which are 1. Cor. 7.2^.
the Lords freemen) and al other, resting from their own works, may attend to
the Lords, without such inconveniences as these would cast in their way. And
hitherto of the first point in controversy.

The second point of difference: in the Letter.
2. WE had learned, that every true Church of Christ, has this power to cast
out obstinate sinners from amongst them, Treat. of the Minist. of Engl. p. 62.
Apol. p. 63.
and this not only when it has officers, but also when it wants them: but
now we were taught, that a people without officers have not power to cast out
obstinate sinners. Which doctrine amongst other evils, overthrows the
constitution of the Church that so taught; for it was gathered and constituted
by Christians without officers, receiving in the repentant, and casting out the
disobedient, whereas by this opinion, they had power from Christ to do neither;
for they that cannot cast out, cannot receiv in, one power is for both.

With this they join out of the printed copy.

6. The 33. article [in our Confession] which our Apology also confirms,
page 45. professes that people being come forth of the Antichristian estate
etc. are willingly to join together in Christian communion and orderly
covenant, and to unite themselves into peculiar and visible congregations etc.
These have pleaded, that al are bound to communion by virtue of their baptism
received in the Church of Rome, or other Antichristian assemblies.

These things are confirmed by Mat. 18.17. -- 20. with 28.20. 1. Cor. 5.4.5.
and 12.27. and 1.2. Romans 12.5. Heb. 12.22.28. Mat. 5.14. Phil. 1.1.5- Act.
2.41.42.47. and 17.4. The latter is also confirmed with sundry scriptures and
reasons expressed in our foresaid Apology.

Against this their former profession, these men now thus write.

1. Where find we in the scriptures, Advertis. p 45. Treat. on Mat. 18. p. 23.
that God has thus laid upon the people without officers to excommunicate?
where is the precept for it? which be the examples of it? or what are the
grounds requiring and bearing it out?

I answer, 1. First as their manner is, they would put others to prove, that
which by others and themselves Discov. p. 46.242, 243 Treat. of the Minist. p.
62.63.64
has been proved and approved; and is not as yet by them or any taken away. It
is easy for any to dispute and trouble men after this manner. 2. Secondly in
that place of their Treatise on Mat. 18. they quote Mat. 2^.20. as alleged for
a ground: yet they give not any answer to that scripture, but still call upon us
to answer their questions, and write more. Whereas Christ there enco^mendeth to
his disciples of all nations to the worlds end the observing of all things
whatsoever he commanded The Apostles. And excommunication was one of those
things commanded, Mat. 18. 1. Cor. 5. Therefore to be observed by a Christian
people though they want officers, unless these men can show some prohibition.
Christ requires to observe al things; these men say, nay, not excommunication:
it lies now, on them to show where Christ or his Apostles have excepted
excommunication. But from that place, and by the very same reasons, do the
Anabaptists deny baptism of Children, caling for scripture, example, precept,
and ground to warrant it, as these do now in this case.

3. Thirdly, besides al things heretofore written, they have a ground in the
article it self, which they neither do nor can take away; which is the power
that the church always has to receiv in members: and therefore consequently to
cast them out again if they deserv it. Which ground if they deny, they in
effect deny that there can be any church without Elders, contrary to the express
scripture Act. 14.23. 1. Cor. 12.28. Tit. 1.5. Yea or that there can be any
visible Christians without Elders: for how can they be Christians without Ioh.
15.1.2.3.4.
union with Christ? And if men cannot be united with his members and body,
because there wants Elders, how should they be united with him the head? 4.
They have it proved a point of false doctrine by Mr Johnson himsef, to teach
that the Church of Christ has not always power to receive in and to cast out
by the keys of the kingdom. Answer to M. Iakob, page 159.160.

2. They secondly allege sundry examples and grounds that it has been done by
the Lord himself and by his officers, etc. This we never doubted of, but a
Church having officers may excommunicate. Though yet the proof for the Elders
will be excepted against by the Prelates and such like. For, the examples of
Abraham, of Paul, of Titus, of Timothee, and of the Priest judging a leper,
make rather in show for one Bishop, then for a Church of Elders: and so are
alleged by Papists, for the Prelacie. The other scriptures do none of them
show the Elders power to excommunicate, but to watch, take heed, reprove,
admonish etc, al which the Prelates grant to their inferior Priests: whom yet
they will not suffer to excommunicate, with out the Bishop or his Official, as
these will not the Church, without an Eldership. The examples of excommunicating
by the Rulers of Israel, I will turn against them thus: If the Magistrates and
people of Israel might not only punish civilly with death, but also execute a
spiritual censure of excommunication upon the consciences of evil doers, though
they had wanted ministers of the Temple, and synagogues: then a Christian
magistrate and people may do so now, though they want ministers
ecclesiastical. And if the Church may excommunicate having a magistrate, it may
also do it wanting one: seeing the power of spiritual censure depends Io^.
18.36
not upon the civil magistracy, as the state of the Churches in the Apostles
days shows.

3, Thirdly they will have us to consider how a people can challenge the
ministration of excommunication, more then of the sacraments etc. This we have
considered, and find that if the reason be good, the ruling Elders may not
excommunicate, any more then minister the sacraments: which whither they hold
or no, let them tell us in their next. For they know well, the Prelates object
these things against the ruling Elders, as themselves do now against the
people.

4. Fourthly they say, In Treat. Mat. 18. p. 24.
they cannot find in scripture but when the church is caled the body of Christ,
or compared to a body, house, city or kingdom: it is spoken either of
particular Churches having officers, or of the catholic church, in respect of
Christ the head etc. I answer, it appears then plainly, they have lost that
which they had found; and let them take heed least for not 1. Tim. 6.20.
keeping it, God deprive them of finding it any more. But I will help them, if
it may be by their own writing, where this same author says, Treat. of the
minist. against M. Hilders. p. 63.64.
A company of faithful people, (though considered a part by themselves, they be
private men, yet) being gathered together in the name of Christ, and joined
together in fellowship of his gospel, they are a 1. Cor. 12 27. Ro^. 12.5. Heb.
12 22.28. Mat. 5.14. and 18 17.20. 1. Co 1.2. and 5.4. Phil. 1.1.5. Act.
2.41.42.47. and 17 4.
public body, a church, a city, a kingdom, and that of Jesus Christ, who is
present among them to guide bless and confirm what they do on earth in his
name, and by his power. So that like as in a city the citizens considered a
part, are commonly private members, yet jointly together are the corporation and
public body of that town: so is it also in the church of Christ, whither it
consist of more or of fewer, yea though they be but 2. or 3. so as they be
joined together in the communion of the gospel, and gathered together in the
name of Jesus Christ* as before is said. These things they have acknowledged:
though now it seems they have forgot them, or (which is worse,) do dissemble
them. Unto these I will add The Apostles testimony, concerning a house; 1. Pet.
2.6.
Christ, is the chief corner stone: Mat. 18.19.20.
and Christians that come unto him, as lively stones are made a spiritual
house, an holy Preisthood to offer up spiritual sacrifices. Men come unto
Christ by verse 7. Ioh. 6.35.
belief, and are joined unto him and one to another by mutual Ier. 50.5. and
32.40. and 31 33.34. Act. 2.47. and 5.13.
covenant. The ministers of Christ are as 1. Cor. 3.9, 10. etc.
builders of this house, by preaching the gospel, laying first the foundation
Christ, then upon him Christian people, Gods building. But if (as often comes
to pass,) the Psalm. 118.22, 23. Mat. 21.42.
builders do refuse, yet the Lord without them puts Christ for head of the
corner, and causes the faithful to 1. Pet. 2.4.7.
come unto him, and makes them his verse ^.
spiritual house to dwell in them, whose house they continue to be, not by having
officers always among them, but by Heb. 3.6.
holding fast their confidence and rejoicing of hope unto the end. Wherefore
these men that can find no house of God without Elders, must prove that men can
not come unto, no^ continue in Christ, unless it be by ecclesiastical officers,
(which they shall never be able to manifest:) or al may see, how they are
beguiled with error, that they can not find things so apparent, and heretofore
acknowledged by themselves. There opinion is injurious not only to Christians,
but to Christ himself; whiles they will not grant him being the corner stone,
the head, the king; and the faithful, the living stones his members and
subjects, to make a house, body or kingdom; if the Elders want or refuse:
though he as is written, Rev. 2.1.
walks among his Churches and Mat. 28.20
is with them al days to the worlds end.

5. Fifthly they say, our controversy was about a Church established with
officers: and things concerning people without officers, are left to further
consideration. I answer, true it is, they sought always to hide their errors,
and to put off things which pressed them, to further consideration, and the
Elders having got the Churches power into their hands, they lysted not to scan
the peoples right. But we were necessarily drawn to controvert this point two
ways: first because their error did eat out the very constitution of the
Church whereof they were, as shall after be manifested. Secondly because it was
by themselves acknowledged that whatsoever power the people have before; is
not to be taken away by their officers; this therefore was an argument that
manifested the evil which lurketh in their new doctrine. And who can soundly
discuss any question, if they look not to the foundation; as Christ said to the
Pharisees, Mat. 19.8.
from the beginning it was not so.

6. Finally, vvheras we shevved how their doctrine overthrows the
constitution of their Church; as being without power from Christ, they say,
First it were worth the knowing by whom the first man or two men of this church
were received in, and by what power. I answer, it is true they say; and pray
them therefore to show by what power their church began, if they would have
men acknovvledge it for true, and planted by the power of Christ Othervveise
they must renounce their estate, and begin a new. As for ours, it is shevved
in our published vvritings, which if they can, let them disprove; as, in
Treat. of the ministry, against M. Hildersh. p. 73.74. Apology, p.
44.45.46.47.

2. Secondly they say, by our baptism, as also by accord in the truth, we are
bound to communion in any thing lawful, as God gives occasion and opportunity.
I answer; 1. they here turn from the question: we speak of constitution of a
particular church, they tell us of communion by baptism and accord in the truth;
which extends to al churches in the world, and to Saints that are not
gathered and constituted into any particular church. We speak of a church with
power to receiv in and cast out, though it have no officers: they touch not
this point, unless they closely grant us the question, to the overthrow of
their opinion. For if they yield such power and practice, to be a lawful thing
in the communion of al such as ar baptized, or do accord in the truth; they
refute themselves: if not, al men may see how they seek to divert from the
matter in hand. 2. Secondly by their baptism, they mean not only the true
baptism in Christ's church, but the false baptism in Antichrists, as the
article expresses, and after we are to scan: which if it be according to the
scriptures which they cite, the Ephesians. 4.4.5. 1. Cor. 10.1.2. and 12, 13.
one baptism, that by one spirit baptiseth al into one body; then are they
returned into the co^mmunion and body of Antichrists synagogue, (if the church
of Rome be it,) and are bound to communicate even with Friars and Jesuits in
any thing lawful as God gives occasion, and that is, I suppose, to hear them
when they preach nothing but the truth, or to pray with them, when they in
spirit pray to God in Christ etc. I would be loath to wrong them, their own
Treat. on Mat. 18. p. 26.
words lead me to this, if I gather amyss let them pardon me, and show their
meaning plainly: for, Ioh. 3, 21.
he that does truth, comes to the light. 3. Thirdly, without baptism there
may be a Church entered into covenant with God and one with an other: as all
Israel Deuteronomy. 29.10, -- ^3.
passed into the covenant renewed by Moses; when Ios. 5.4.5
all the men under 40. years old, were uncirsed: besides all the women.

3. They thirdly say, it is plain and undeniable that to choose or give voices
in election, is not a part of government etc. but an interest power, right and
liberty, that the Saints out of office have and should use etc. I answer,

1. First this is plain and undeniable, so long as it pleases them not to deny
it: but if they change their mind in this point to morrow, as they have done in
the former about the peoples power to excommunicate, then we shall hear, as we
did before, where find we in the scriptures that God has thus laid on the
people without officers to make election? where is the precept for it? which be
the examples of it? etc. They tell us it is plain; but not one scripture is
brought to show it: yet is it needful, seeing they know the Papists and other
Prelates deny such elections without officers. The Prelates will show them
sundry examples, where it was done by the counsel, direction and government of
officers, as Act. 1.15.21, 22. and 6.2, 3. and 14, 23, 1. Tim. 3, 1. -- 14.15.
Tit. 1.5. but not one place where a people without officers attempted such a
work. Wherefore we wish our opposites not to deal so slenderly, as to tell men
it is plain and undeniable, and so to leav it: for we make no doubt, but the
sound proof of this point, will disproov their former error. 2. Secondly, we
have upon their bare word, that to give voices in election of officers is no
part of government: we pray them in their next to show, whether then to give
voices for deposition of unworthy officers, be a part of government; as also
how they prove that to give voices for the reciving in, and putting out of
members in the Church, is a part of government, more than the other. 3. Thirdly
the reader may observe their covert carriage of this point, whiles they speak but
of giving voices in election: but what say they about giving power of
administration to the ministers: who must do that? or how had these men that,
but by the people? And if the people have power in the name of Christ, to say
to the elected Pastor, Take thou authority to preach the word etc. or in any
other terms to give him pastoral office which had none before; I hope they will
not deny but if that Pastor afterward proov a Act. 20.29
Wolf, the same people may put him out of al his pastoral office: and if they
have that power, why also may they not put him quite out of the fold and Church
by the power of Christ, that is, excommunicate him? And if it be not lawful for
a people to give authority of Ministry unto a man: how then do these
administer, which renounced some of them their former office and preisthood
given by the Prelates, and as private men received a nue caling and ordination:
others from private estate, were constituted Elders by the people. Is this
Ministry now from heaven, or from men?

4. Lastly they say, seeing their doctrine overthrows not the constitution of
the Church of Jsrael, nor of the primitive Churches, it cannot therefore
overthrow the constitution of their church, or of any that is accordingly built
upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets etc. I answer, this in deed is
the surest argument of al: save that it is a fair begging of the quaestion. For
the thing they should prove, is, that their constitution is according to
Israel, or Apostolik. For, if Israel or the primitive Churches before they had
officers, did or might receiv in and cast out members, and if the people might
set up, and depose officers by power from God: then are these men's errors
overthrown. If not, but that the thing is unlawful for any then or now so to
do, then is the constitution of their Church overthrown, as that which did grow
up to such estate without power Ioh. 3.27. Heb. 5.4.
from heaven, and they are to let it fall, and be Mat. 15.13.
rooted up, and come to a better (if they can find it) according to the
scriptures. Whether therefore our exception, or their defense be more vayn and
frivolous, (as they speak) let the prudent judge.

The 3. point of difference: in the Letter.
1. WE had learned, Confess. art. 23. and 3^ Apolog. p. 46, 47.
that every Christian congregation has power and commandment to elect and
ordeyn their own Ministry, according to the rules of Gods word: and upon such
default in life doctrine or administration, as by the rule of the word
depriveth them of the ministry, by due order to depose them from the
ministry they exercised, yea if the case so require, orderly to cut them of
by excommunication. But now it is by some mainteyned, that the Congregation can
neither put into office, nor put out of office unless they have officers to do
both: and can neither for heresy or other wickedness excommunicate or depose
their Eldership.

With this they join the first out of the printed copy: which is as the former.

These things are confirmed in our Articles, by Act. 6.3.5.6. and 14.23. and
15.2.3.22.23. 2. Cor. 8.19. 1. Tim. 3.10. and 4.14. and 5.22. Number. 8.9.10. 1.
Cor. 16.3. Tit. 1.5. etc. Ephesians. 4.11.12. 1. Cor. 12.7.8.14.15.28. Levit. 8. chapter
Romans 16.17. Phil. 3.2. 1. Tim. 6.3.5. Ezekiel. 44.12.13. Mat. 18.16. And in our
Apology by 7. reasons deduced from the Scriptures.

Advertis. p. 47.
Hereunto they say 1. That the church may excommunicate an officer as well as any
other member. I answer, they yet touch not the point; We speak of the churches
ministry or Eldership in general; they tell us of one in particular: who
because there ar other ministers, he may be censured by them. Bur if a church
have only one minister, and he prove a wolf: they can neither put him out of
office, nor excommunicate him, by their doctrine. 2. Secondly they say, if all the officers jointly transgress and so persist: then the church which did choose
the^, may also depose and refuse them from being their officers any longer, and
may separate themselves from them. But that the people may excommunicate al
their officers, they desire to see it showed from the word. I answer, though
they can not deny the Article, yet they seek covertly to carry the reader aside.
The article speaks of choosing and ordeyning, and so putting into office: they
answer only of choosing: the other they pass by. But let them show ever any
church, where men were chosen, and not also ordained and put into office: or
that God committed the beginning of such a work to any people, and not the
ending also. And why will they sever the things God has joined? In the law; the
church had authority Deuteronomy. 16.18.
to make them (that is as the Greek version shows constitute or ordeyn, which
word Paul uses Tit. 1.5.) Judges and officers in all their cities: and not to
elect them only. 2. The article speaks of deposing from ministry and
putting out of office: they answer only of deposing and refusing from being
their officers any longer: That is to say, as men that have left the church of
Rome, have deposed the Pope: for in separating from him, he is their officer no
longer. But is he not, trow we, a Pope still* And shall not an Eldership, when
the people have done all this that they speak of, reteyn a ministry still?

The separation which they tell us of, is thus opened by their own comment,
Treat. on Mat. 18. p. 25.
that it implies the power we have over our selves, whereas excommunication
implies power and authority over others. Thus they allow not the body of the
Church power and authority over their heretical Eldership, (though it be but 2.
or 3. wicked men,) to cast them out of the Church in Christ's name and power, or
to depose them from office, but from being their officers. Even thus they
themselves h^ve deposed all the Bishops of England long ago. But whether this
be not to aequivocate with the word depose, let wise men j^dge: for a little
after they ask Advertis. p. ^8.
whether it can be showed by any scripture, that any did ordeyn or depose
officers, but Governors. Now whereas our (...) and Apology is confirmed by
many scriptures and reasons deduced from them, they answer them not, as is meet
they should, seeing they will abrogate their former profession, and bring in a
new: neither do they (as they then Apol. p. 48.
wrote must be done) show some other manner of entrance [into the ministerie]
ordained by Christ; but thus they labor to confute themselves. 1. The
particuculars of the 23. Article of our Confession being found true in the
churches of Jsrael, and of the Gentlies since Christ: the exception made
hereabout can not be of weight against this or any other Church established
according to the word of God, as those were, but must be also against those
Churches withal. What to make of this their answer, as yet I cannot tell: my
slendernes co^prehendeth not the depth of it. That the particulars of that 23.
article, were found true in the Churches of God; I doubt not of it: that is the
thing we stand for. That exception should be made by us hereabout, against this
or any Church, established according to the word of God as these were: is far
from our thought. What is it then that they have said: but an ostentation of
the name of Jsrael, their mayn colorable argument, which yet is against them,
not for them at all, as our Confession and Apology shows. In Israel the Number.
8.9.10.
whole Congregation was assembled at the ordination of their ministers, and the
children of Israel imposed hands upon them. This rule we follow: but these our
opposites will not allow churches (unless they have ministers before,) to do
thus: they will rather have their ministry from the great Antichrist of Rome,
(as after shall be manifested,) for which they have no show in the scriptures.
For did Israel ever take Egyptian or Babylonian priests to minister in their
sanctuary? or did the primitive churches ever take any Bishop of the 1. Ioh.
2.18.19.
Antichrists that were in there time, and set them by virtue of their
Antichristian ordination over the flock of Christ? why then do these men so
often tell us of Jsrael and the primitive churches, unless they think their very
names would make us afraid?

But they except against Number. 8.9.10. saying, by the children of Jsrael etc.
are the Elders of Jsrael often meant. I answer, 1. First this being granted, it
disprooveth not our argument; for it may be often so used elsewhere, and yet not
here. When we reason from Heb. 1.8. O God thy throne is for ever, to prove
Christ's Godhead: the Arians object, that Princes and Magistrates are often
caled Gods, Psalm. 82. Exodus 21.6. but is that a sufficient answer? 2. Secondly
that which these say, is here true, but not the whole truth. (...) Elders, are
meant as principals, but not they to be all the congregation: which I thus
manifest. The Levites now to be ordained Ministers, were taken in stead of all the firstborn of Israel, and not in stead of the firstborn of the Elders only:
Number. 3.40.41. The Levits were now to be offered before the Lord, as a shake
offering of the children of Israel, Number. 8.11. being freely given as a gift of
theirs unto the Lord, to do the service of the Tabernacle of the congregation,
Number. 18.6. and 8.16. Al offerings were by those that offered them, to be
presented at the door of the Tabernacle, with imposition of hands, Levit. 1.
verse. 2.3.4. etc. For as much therefore as these Levites were offered by all the
Congregation (and not the Elders or officers only,) in sted of their own
firstborn: it is evident that not the Officers only, but the other people also
are here meant, Number. 8.10. the rather also for that before verse. 9. and after
verse 11. others besides Elders are intended. 2. Secondly they object, how
should so many hundred thousand of Jsrael, either at once hear, or do the
things there spoken of? I answer, as well as they heard and did other publik
affayrs in the Tabernacle: unless they think, that all the people never heard or
did any thing there. When the whole Congregation of Israel sinned, all the
Congregation was to bring a sacrifice, Number. 15.24, 25, 26. will they ask how so
many 100000. could do it? By this reason, nothing at al should ever be done in
Israel by the multitude, either for word, prayers, sacrifices etc. And so by
their proportion of the Church now, let the people be exempted from word,
prayers, sacraments, as well as from ordination of officers, and censuring of
sinners: and let the Eldership be al in all.

3. Thirdly they except, if it be said some did it for the rest: first, who
were those some, but the Elders! secondly, under whom did they it, but under
the Lord, who set them over the people to minister and govern in his sted? I
answer, first the multitude and not the Elders only were assembled. Secondly
the multitude and not the Elders only, gave these Levits to the Lord: both
these are before proved. Thirdly for the order and manner of giving, Moses
governed the action, to him it was said, Number. 8.7.9.
thou shall sprinkle water, thou shall bring them before the Lord etc. and then
verse. 10.
the children of Jsrael imposed ^ands: this I understand, not of every
particular man, but of some of the chief for the rest: as the Elders, heads of
tribes, chief fathers of families etc. as when Number. 15.24.25.
a^ the multitude brought an oblation for their syn, the Elders put their hands
on the head of the sacrifice, Lev. 4.14.15. Accordingly have we practiced in
our ordination of officers (as these our opposites well know,) some of the chief
of the Church, the ancientest, and fathers of families, imposed hands in name
of the rest. Now to their second question I answer, they did it under the Lord,
and for the other people. But this will not satisfy them, for they say they were
over the people to minister and govern in Gods sted, Exodus 20.12. Number. 11.16.
-- 30. Deuteronomy. 1.9. -- 18. and 16.18. and 17.12. and 19.12, 17. etc, I answer,
admit that al they which imposed hands were governors, (though that cannot be
proved, neither does honor thy father and mother Exodus 20, 12. I am sure,
show any such thing:) yet they did not this thing as a work peculiar to their
office of government, neither do any of the scriptures alleged, show so much,
but the contrary may be manifested. For if they did it as governors, then was
it either as governors ecclesiastical and ministers in the sanctuary: but so
were not they, for Aaron and his sonns had peculiarly that charge, Levit. 8. Or
they did it as governors civil, and Magistrates of the common wealth. Which if
it be affirmed, then first, Christian Magistrates now (which have civil
authority equal with the Magistrates of Israel;) may ordeyn and impose hands
on church ministers: and so men need not run to Rome to borow a Ministry from
Antichrist, as many now do fancy. Secondly if civil Magistrates may impose
hands on Ministers: it will follow, that the Church wanting Magistrates, may also
by the Fathers of families, or other fittest members impose hands. For it is
not properly a work tied to the magistrates office: 1. because then the
churches in the Apostles times wanting Magistrates, could not have had
Ministers: but they Act. 14. Tit. 1.
had, and yet never intruded into the Magistrates office. 2. Because the
Magistrates sword and office is not subordinate to Christ as he is mediator
and head of the Church, (for so there should be no lawful magistrates but
Christians and members of the church:) but Magistrates have their office next
under Ro^. 13.1.
God, to be Job. 12.24.
heads of the Commonweals (whether they be members of the church Act. 25.11
or not,) as Christ has his office under God to be Ephesians. 1.22
head of the Church: and these two goverments are so distinct, as they neither
may be confounded, neither do one take in hand the work peculiarly belonging
to another. Christ professed his Ioh. 18.36
kingdom not to be of this world, neither meddled (...) with the Mat. 26.52
outward sword, nor Luke 12.14.
civil controversies: neither on the other side, might the Kings of Israel
meddle with the Priests work, 2 Chro^. 26.16, 18.
to burn incense, or the like. 3. Because the works of the civil Magistrates
office in Israel, might be performed by hethe^s when they ruled over that
nation: as appointing of officers, judging of controversies, punishment of
malefactors etc. So Nebuchadnezar the Babylonian lawfully Ier. 27.6..8.12.
(as concerning God,) reigned over the Jews, and did Ier. 40.5.
set over them a governor, and put some of them to death Ier. 29.22 23.
for adultery and other evils. And the Jews were bound to obey him and his
substitutes, and to Ier. 29.7.
pray for his common wealth. But to the Babylonian Priests they might not be
subject. Neither do I think that our opposites will say, Nebuchadnezar and his
Princes might give office of Ministry, or impose hands on the Levites in the
sanctuary. Wherefore I conclude that the chief fathers of Israel imposed hands
on the Levites, not because of their office of magistracy (if they had such an
office,) as if it could not else have been performed: but because they were the
principallest members of the Church, and therefore by order to do it before al
other, and in the name of al other, which for the multitude of them could not
perform it: which order al churches now are 1. Cor. 14.40.
bound to keep for ever. And this which I have said, the words of the text in
their natural sense do confirm, Number. 8.10.
the sonns of Jsrael shall put their hands upon the Levites: showing that they
did it not by title of Magistracy, but as Israelites. So also in the other
case, when the Elders imposed hands on the syn offering, Levit. 4, 14, 15. it
was not a work peculiar to the ecclesiastical Elders: for afterward Chron. 29,
23.
King Hezekiah with the Congregation laid their hands upon the sacrifices.
Which thing also he did not by peculiar right of his kingly office, but as he
was principal of the Church of Israel; for when they had no King, the Church
might do it, by the next chief members; and an unbeleeving King reigning over
them might not do it. Also if any people returning from captivity, had wanted
Magistrates; they were not deprived thereby of offering sacrifice for their
publik syn. For if every private man might impose hands on his own sacrifice,
as Levit. 1.3.4. how can we think that the whole company synning, the chief
fathers might not have imposed hands, according to that rule, Lev. 4.15. Yea
the word Elders does not always (though often) mean Magistrates or ministers
by office, but Exodus 10.9. and 17.5. Lev. 19.32. Ezr. 3, 12. Joel. 2.16.28.
Prove. 20 29. 1. King. 12.6.8.
sometime ancient in years.

The other things which they allege, about the variety of phrase, as they do
not disprove the thing forespoken: so make they nothing for them. They say such
as are caled Elders, Lev. 9.1. are caled children of Jsrael, Lev. 9, 3. this is
true: for who ever doubted but the Elders were sonns of Jsrael as well as the
other people. But if they bring it to prove the Elders or Officers only to be
there intended, I deny it: the whole chapter after manifests the public
church to be meant. For when Aaron had offered his own verse. 8.
syn-offring, and verse 12.
burnt-offring; then offered he the verse 15, 16.18.
peoples syn-offring, and their burnt-offring, and their peace offerings: and
after lifted up his hands to the people and verse. 22. etc.
blessed them. This was one of the most publik assemblies, and who would ever
dream that the Elders only were here expiated by sacrifice, and blessed of the
Priest? they might even as well say, the Elders only did keep and eat the
passover; co^paring Exodus 12.3. with Exodus 12.21. where one verse says all the
congregation, and an other, all the Elders.

The next exception of the Septuagints translating the sonns of Jsrael in Greek
the Eldership: is not of weight, though the translators should have minded as
do their Commenters. But they purposed not hereby to exclude the people, any
more then in 1. Sam 8.4. they would exclude the Elders: where when the original
text says, the Elders of Jsrael came to Samuel, they translate it in Greek,
the men of Jsrael. So the Elders of Jabesh, 1. Sam. 11, 3. the Greek caleth the
men of Jabesh. Of like weight are their observations about the word Church or
Congregation, which being but once Pro. 26, 26
turned in Greek the synedrion, they In Treat. Mat. 18. p. 7.
skore it up, as making for their Eldership: but though it be once, twice and
thrice turned 2 Chr. 30.24. and 31.18 Exodus 12, 6. Ier. 31, 8. Ezekiel. 17.17 and
23.46,
laos, plethos, ochlos, that is, the people, and multitude; they can let them
places pass, and say never a word. Moreover touching this place in hand, Number.
8, 10. the Greek version as well as the Hebrew it self says, the children of
Jsrael, shall impose their hands upon the Levites: so that their exception here
stands them in no sted.

Finally they observe the clauses in the article, according to the rules in Gods
word, and by due order etc. which as they bind them to show by scriptures, that
the people not being in office may choose their officers, as is proved there
and in Apol. p. 46.47. so they bind us to show like rules practice or warrant
of ordination, deposition and excommunication. I answer; first if a man would
except as they do, he might ask them how they prove that people without
officers may by due order choose any into office: for in the scriptures which
they stand upon, al things were done by the counsel, ordering and government of
the officers, even the election it self, Act. 6.2.3. and 1.15. -- 22. and
14.23. etc. Secondly their new devise of having their ordination successively
from Rome, is neither according to the rules in Gods word, nor by due order,
nor by any example in Israel; no though Rome were as true a church as they now
plead her to be. For that the ministers of one particular church should ordeyn
officers for an other church, is more unorderly then when every church
ordeyneth them in it self: the Apostles and Evangelists had their offices in all
churches, so have not Pastors. Magistrates are limited within their own
precincts: and the Mayor or Bailive of one corporation, has no jurisdiction in
another. So should al ministers be bounded within their own charges, and not
challenge catholic authority in all churches, as does the 2. These. 2 8.
lawless usurping man of syn, Antichrist. Thirdly, the scriptures and reasons
in our Articles and Apology, serve also for the ordination and deposition of
ministers; though it please these men to pass them over in silence, because
they are too heavy for them to lift. In our Apology page 43. there are 6.
arguments, and in page 47. six other arguments confirmed by scriptures, as the
reader may see: til our opposites answer the^, we think it needless to set down
more.

Fourthly, we hold it necessary that al church actions be orderly carried,
either by the officers if there be any, or by the Magistrates as in Israel, or
by the Fathers of families, or the most excellent in gifts requested thereunto
by the congregation: this we firmly mainteyn, against al popular confusion and
disorder whatsoever. And M. Johnson himself has expressly defended this truth
heretofore against M. Iaakob, page 210.
that where people first come to the order of Christ, imposition of hands is to
be done by the fittest among them, being thereunto appointed by the rest of the
church, alleging Number. 8.10. though now he uses for defense of his contrary
error, the Jesuits answers. For even so does Bellarmine turn away the reasons
of the protestants, saying, De Romans Pont. l. 1.^.6.
the people did never ordeyn nor create ministers, nor give them any power, but
only named and designed them. Act. 1. and 6.

The 4. point of difference: in the Letter.
4. WE had learned that none may execute a ministry but such as are rightly
caled by the Church whereof they stand Ministers, Co^fes. art. 21.
unto such offices and in such manner as God has prescribed in his word. But
now these will execute a ministry, which have not rightly been caled by the
Church whereof they stand ministers, according to their own account and
doctrine: which hold (as before) that a people without officers have no warrant
from God, to make or depose Ministers.

With this they join, out of the printed copy.

3. The 29. article (of our Confession, as also our Apology page 51.52.)
professes that the hierarchy of Archbishops, Lord bishops, Priests etc. are a
strange and Antichristian Ministry and officers, not instituted in Christ's
Testament, nor placed in or over his church. These have placed over them, one
that was made Priest by a Lord bishops ordination, so as because of it, they
did not ordeyn or impose hands on him, when at the same time they ordained and
imposed hands on others, whom together with him they set over the Church.

5. The 32. article (whereto our Apology agrees page 52.53.54.) testifies
that al such as have received any of those false offices (of Lord bishops
Priests etc.) are to give over and leave them: and so has it been practiced
here before by all such Priests as came to our faith and Church. Now one is
Minister over the^, ordained Priest by the Prelates, as is before said.

The Confirmation of these points in our Apology (besides the scriptures
quoted in our Confession,) is of the one by 8. of the other by 12. reasons
deduced from many scriptures.

Hereunto they make these answers. First, that this point is of like nature
with the 2. and 3. here before, where therefore see the answers. And there also
let the reader see our replies. But they would blind their reader with show of
answer, where none is. For the first point was of every Churches power to cast
out obstinate sinners: the second of their power to elect and ordeyn officers.
Now what are these to justify any unlawful ministry, either set up by a
people without the power of Christ, or received by the tradition of Antichrist?
It had been their part, seeing they deny their former grounds, to have showed us
some better by the scripture: which how they have done either there or here,
let their writings being viewed manifest.

Secondly, they say if we would here imply a particular matter concerning one
of their Ministers, about imposition of hands, that is a point also left to
further consideration, etc. I answer, no, we mean others of them that were
Ministers before, and such as have had (some of them,) imposition of hands
twice: and this they could not but see plainly to be our intent in that 4.
article: though they wink and will not see it, and are mute, and will not defend
it, but wind away to other things not there intended. Let them therefore in
their next, bring a plain defense of their Ministry, which by their new
doctrine is overthrowen: and use no more such tergiversation.

Unto the other thing objected in the 3. and 5. articles by Lawn printed: First
they signify that their testimony against the antichristian hierarchy treated
of in the Confession, is not by them reversed or weakened any way etc. I answer,
these are but words: in deed and truth, the contrary will appear. For as
heretofore they Apol. p. 108.109.110.111.112.
proved Antichrists baptism to be not a true but a false sacrament; but now
they plead for it Advertis. p. 54.55.
to be the one true baptism of Christ: so having heretofore witnessed against
the whole Antichristian Confess. art. 29.30. and in many treatises.
hierarchy of prelates Priests etc. their offices, entrance and
administration: they now compare the popish ordination with the baptism. Also
they bring to warrant this, the Priests and Levites which were caled of God; as
after is to be seen: and yet they would be thought, not to reverse their
testimony. Secondly they tell us how they were combred with the Anabaptists,
and occasioned to think of their ministry; as 1* That imposition of hands is
of God, and not an invention of Antichrists etc. I answer, thus also they
shall be occasioned to think of the Popes excommunication, for that is Gods
ordinance as well as their sacrament of orders: and of the Romish Mass or
supper, for that is Gods ordinance also; though by them abused to idolatry.
Yea thus the Jews that 1. Macc. 1.12.16.
f^l to paganism, might take occasion to think of the hethe^s sacrifices, for
they also were Gods ordinances in their first institution, as well as
Antichrists sacraments. But as for the Anabaptists, themselves long since so
refuted them, without this their new plea: that there needed no fear of their
strength at al. Finally, the impositio^ of hands by an Antichristian prelate,
upon that ministry which is not of Christ but of Antichrists apostasy, I
deny that such imposition of hands is of God: and that such the whole
ministry of Rome is, is proved at large by many scriptures, in M. Iohnsons
Reasons and Arguments against spiritual communion with the M^nist page 17.18.
etc,

^. Their second observation is, that baptism and imposition of hands, are
joined together among the principles, Heb. 6, 2. I answer, so are baptism and
the Lords supper (now of Antichristians caled the Mass) joined in 1. Cor.
10.2.3. and 12.13. that if this reason be good, their next thoughts must be,
about the lawfulnes of the Mass.

3. Thirdly they allege that imposition of hands is in Rome still given to the
office of ministry, and in the name of the Lord. I answer, so also the Popes
bulls of excommunication go forth from the office of Ministry, and in the
name of the Lord: but so all mischief began, and gave occasion to the proverb,
in nomine Domini incipit omne malum. But let us take a view, how imposition of
hands is used now in Rome, as they say in the name of the Lord. Ordination of
ministers there Bellarm. l. de sacr. ordinis. c. 2.
is a sacrament, the outward sign or rite whereof, is imposition of hands: the
thing signified, is the promise of grace. They have seven Ibid. c. 5.
orders, Priests, (or Sacrificers,) Deacons, Subdeacons, A^oluthes, Exorcists,
Readers and Ostiaries (or keepers of the door.) They are made Priests, when by
the Bishop, (who Ibid. c. 11 and 9.
only can give this order) it is said, Bellarm. ibid. Pontisical. lib. de
ordinat. presbyt.
Receiv power to offer sacrifice unto God, and to celebrate Masses, both for
the living and for the dead, in the name of the Lord. The Bishop says with all,
Receiv the holy Ghost: the Priests are also shaved on their crowns, and
anointed with oil on their hands; that by that unction, and the Bishops
blessing those hands may be consecrated and sanctified of God. A stole of
innocence is put upon the Priest, and he promises to the Bishop and his
successors, reverence, and obedience; and the Bishop gives him again the
blessing of God the Father, and the Son and the holyGhost that he may be
blessed in his preistly order, and may offer placable hosts (or sacrifices) to
God for the synns of the people. This ordination has a Bellarm. ibid. c. 10.
double effect, 1. a perpetual spiritual power; in sign whereof a character (or
mark indeleble) is imprinted on them; and 2. grace making them acceptable,
whereby they are enabled to execute their office. So this Bishoply ordination
Ibid. c. 5.
conferreth grace; and if any shall say, that the holy Ghost is not given
hereby, let him (says the Council of Trent Sess. 23. can. 4.
) be accursed. This is that holy ordination (or rather, that abominable Idol,
and Rev. 13, 16
mark of the beast,) so commended unto us by these men, as done in the name of
the Lord. And as for the Office of ministry, to which they say now it is
given. M. Johnson himself ha^h Treat. of the Minist. p. 98. -- 105.
set down heretofore 33. reasons and differences proving by many scriptures,
that the popish priests office, is not the Christian Pastors office. Yea he
affirmed the Answer to M. Iakob in pref. sec. 6.
hierarchy of Antichrist, to be the most detestable anarchie of Satan that
ever was: and what now will imposition of sacrilegious hands in the name of the
Lord, do good unto such a detestable ministry?

4. Fourthly they say, they find not precept, example or ground in scripture,
binding them to the repetition of [that ordination.] I answer, it is very true;
no scripture binds men to repete or do again such abominations. And we pray
them show us where is there precept, example or ground to keep the preisthood
and indeleble character of Antichrist? But be it as they say; what then will
become of their own Ministry, for some of them have both received, and given
unto others, reordination: are they not in as evil case (by their own grounds)
as the Anabaptists with their rebaptisation? They unjustly insinuate
Anabaptistrie against us very often: but themselves are in like actual
transgression with the Anabaptists (if their doctrine be true), and yet
manifest not their repentance, nor tell us by virtue of which ordination, they
do now administer.

5. Fifthly they say, the Priests and Levites in Jsrael, being cleansed of their
uncleanness, retained still their places, and their children after them, did
minister without a new anointing or new imposition of hands etc. I answer, then
belike the Romish priests must keep their Antichristian preisthood still; for
so the Priests in Israel did theirs. Otherweise if they must have a new office;
how can they do it by their old ordination? Even in Rome it self, when a
Priest is promoted to a Bishops office, he is new Pontific. de co^scer. elect.
in episc.
anointed, both hands and head; the holy Ghost again given him, the pastoral
staff, the ring, the Gospel is also given him, to go preach to the people
committed to him etc. and he has a new imposition of hands besides that he had
before.

2. If the Priests children Heb. 5, 4.
caled of God, did in Israel minister without imposition of hands upon them at
al, as they suppose: yet this will make nothing for Antichrists hierarchy,
caled of the Rev. 16.13, 14.
Divil, with greasing, shaving, and imposing of hands, to sacrifice
blasphemously for the quick and dead; that they should now minister by virtue
of this office and calling in the Church of Christ. Neither might Baals Priests
or 2. King. ^3.5. Zeph. 1, 4.
Chemarims, administer in Gods temple. Their reason therefore from the Lords own
Ministry, is altogether unfit; the hethenish Flamins or Druides, are fitter
matches for Belials clergy. And this M. Johnson himself acknowledged, when he
wrote against M. Hilderdersh. thus, Treat. of the Minist. p. 89.
Jf Jupiters Priest, Act. 14.13. or if Mahumets Priests now in Turkye, should
by the laws of their nations be enjoined, and thereupon should execute the
Ministry of Gods word, sacraments and censures: would it follow therefore that
such Priests had the substance of the Pastors office? And why then should this
Preisthood of Antichrist have more privilege then those, seeing the word of God
has laid this duty no more upon it then upon the other, but has left them al,
with their followers and adherents under the curse. Psalm. 119, 21, 128. Rev. 9,
3. and 14.9, 10, 11. Thus he then wrote, but now we find an other manner of plea.

6. Sixthly they say, That they find in scripture some officers admitted with
it, some without it. This I find not. They allege Act. 13.1.2.3. where Paul and
Barnabas had it. It is true: yea Paul had imposition of hands twice, Act. 9.17.
and 13.3. but where is the scripture that says some had it not? They say, we
read not that the other Apostles had. what then? does this proov they had it
not? So we may also conclude the other Apostles were never baptized, for we
read not that they were. We read not (say the Anabaptists) that children were
baptized in the Apostles days: will these men now conclude, therefore they were
not baptized. But do not they know, that arguments thus drawn negatively from
scripture, are generally blamed for insufficient?

7. Seventhly they say, that some churches hold it not of necessity to be had
etc. I answer: that is nothing to such as hold it, and have Elders to do it.
But they diminish the state of the question; for when the Apostle speaks of
Jmposition of hands Heb. 6.2. does he mean the outward ceremony only, or the
doctrine of the ministry, caling, and ordination signified by the sign? I
hope the reformed churches deny no principle of religion, such as that is. So
in this case spoken of, were it only the outward sign, I would not contend.
But they compare the baptism of Rome and the Ministry of Rome together: no
new baptising into the church, therefore no new ordeyning unto the ministry:
but as al come out of the Apostasy baptized Christians, so some do come
ordained ministers. Wherefore if these be alike, they bring with them in their
account, the substance of a true 1. Cor. 1^ 5.28.
office and of a true Heb. 5, ^.
caling. Otherweise if a new office and caling be given them, I assure my self
they that say Receiv the Teachers office etc. may impose hands: even as they
that say: J baptize thee into the name of the Father etc, may put on water. Now
these men's testimony heretofore has been strong Apol. p. 46, 47 -- 54.
Reasons and arg. against spiritual communion with the Minist. of England, the
whole book.
against the Office or ministry it self, with the caling, administration etc.
And now let them show by the word, that a new caling into a new office which
men had not before, may be by the ordination or imposition of hands given by
Antichrist unto a false office with a false calling.

8. Thus (say they) we show our keeping of communion with all other churches
etc. I answer, this reason is good, if communion be kept in the 1. Ioh. 1.6.7.
light not in darkness: let Gods word therefore try the case. Yet let these men
say, whither they know not, that the ministers made in these reformed churches,
are not admitted in Engl. without a new ordination by the Prelates. And that al
Scholars admitted into Geneva, must expressly Ex Calvini opusc. Form. co^f. cui
se adstring. etc.
detest the Popish hierarchy so caled, as a Divilish confusion: which
hierarchy consists of Bishops, Priests and Ministers, and they that say it
is not by divine ordination are by the Council of Sess. 23. can. 6.
Trent, accursed. Is not here good communion? Yea let me further tell them, how
the learned and better sort in England, have disclaymed communion with that
Romish clergy. D. Fulk, in the Answ. of a true Christian to a counterfeyt
catholic, says, Answer to art. 13.
Although al godly men wish more severitie of discipline to be used, in
receiving them that come out of heresies to serve in the Church, then is
commonly practiced in England: yet you are highly deceived if you think we
esteem your offices of Bishops, Priests, Deacons, any better then the state of
lay men, but far worse: for we judge them to be nothing else but
Antichristianitie, heresy and blasphemy. And therefore we receiv none of them
to minister in our church, except they forswear your religion: and so their
admission is not an allowing of your ordering, but a new caling unto the
Ministry. Thus wrote M. Fulk: but now these our opposites, to show how they
would keep communion with Rome, allow of their ordering, as of their baptising,
which they plead to be true baptism, as after shall appear. Yet let them show
us whither all the hierarchy of Antichrist, as Popes, Cardinals, Archbishops,
Bishops, Friars, Monks, Jesuits, Seminaries, Priests, Parsons, Vicars, with the
rest of that crew, be all of them to be admitted true Ministers into a
Christian church, by virtue of the Imposition of hands, had in that kingdom of
the Beast: and if not al, which of them must be reordeyned, and which not.
Themselves have acknowledged Answ. to M. Iakob. p. 122.
that the Ministers of Antichrist, are the spirits of Divils, Rev. 16, 13.14.
let them now if they can, manifest them to be the Ministers of Christ.

9. We thought best (say they) to stay and consider further etc. if we find it
ought to be done, we can do it at any time, etc. Then (say I) they should have
stayed the practice of admitting such a teacher to administer, til they had
been resolved whither his office and ordination had been of God or no. But
first they let him administer, then they inquire of the lawfulnes: the Godly
heretofore did not so in a case of doubt, but stayed the administration of some
priests, til they had assurance from God. Ezr. 2.62.63.

10. The church (say they) did choose him into office, and we by prayer
commended him to God for his grace and assistance in the ministration thereof.
Which we did without imposition of hands at that time; as both our selves had
before done, at our first growing into order: and as the French and Dutch
churches also did etc. I answer, things are darkly set down: by saying first
the church did, then, and we; they occasion us to ask what church they mean,
their own particular, or some other. If their own, whether they chose him to an
office that had none before: or chose him from a false office to a true: or
chose him being already a true officer, to be theirs, as they admit the
members of an other Church to be a member of theirs by prayer. If the last were
not, how stands their comparison between baptism and ordination? If they did
so: then they abuse the reader with the example of their own ordination before.
For they had renounced their former Ministry as false; and received a new, by
the election and ordination of the people (though at the first without that
sign spoken of,) who gave them a ministry which they never had. The outward
sign at that time was not used, only because there were not Elders before: now
there were Elders which imposed hands at the same time on others. It is a known
fallacy, to pretend that for a cause which is not the cause. Moreover let them
say whither their Teachers former election were not as holy as his ordination:
and why then they rep^te one and not an other?

11. Observe (say they) how these and their partakers can hold that the people
having no office may excommunicate, and some of them that they may also
minister the sacraments: and yet can except against such as are in office, if
they do but make question of a ceremony etc. I answer; the first we hold but
as themselves heretofore did: and upon what ground they have left it, is before
discussed. The second as touching us, (so far as I know) is a slander, a mere
untruth. I know not one among us, that holds men without office, may minister
the sacraments. The third, if it be as they say a question but of a ceremony,
and not of the very substance of the ministry, to be retained as their
baptism, I will profess to cease striving thereabout, (though I think they err
in it,) yea and repent that I have striven so far. But if it be in deed more
then a ceremony, as I suppose the things forespoken will manifest; let these
men take heed how they so dissemble, for Isa. 29.1^
Woe unto them that seek deep to hide their counsel from the Lord. Of the
Anabaptists objections we have spoken before. And now let him that reads,
consider, what weight there is in their later thoughts, compared with their
former judgments confirmed by so many reasons, as the publik writings show. Let
him also note, how for this later point which they count but a ceremony, they
say many things as we have heard: but for the former, their own ministry,
which is a matter of substance and most nearly concerns them, they say nothing,
but turn aside as if they saw it not. And for this also, let the reader observe
Mr Iohnsons own words, in answer to Mr Hildersha^, Treat. of the Minist. p. 122.
who can bring a Job. 14.4.
clean thing out of filthynes? Is it possible that a lawful ordination, should
be had from the ministers and Apostasy of Antichrist? Mat. 7.16. 2. Cor. 6,
14, 15, 16. with 2. These. 2.3. And if he be loath to stand to his former
assertions: let him yet show what comfort or assurance any can have of the
ordination in the Papacy, that it is from Ioh. 3.27.
heaven; considering the Priests have their authority from the Bishops, the
Bishops from the Pope: the Popes (as their own writers and Chroniclers do
record,) have been divided by schisms, 2, or 3, Bell. de Romans pont. l. 4. c.
14.
Popes at once, one cursing and condemning another, and among the successors,
one repealing Platina in Steph. 2. Romans and Th^od. 2.
the acts of an other. And among the rest, one she Platinain Ioh. 8.
Pope Joan an harlot. And among many schisms one (which was the 22.) dured
Ioh. Ma^ij de schism. and Council. c. 13.
forty years, wherein the Antipopes so rent their Babel-church into factions,
that the chiefest and learnedest of the clergy, could not discern which of
them was the true successor of Peter, (as they use to speak) but some clave to
one Pope, some to another. Had these no^ power from Christ to make ministers in
his church? or are not they strangely carried, that had rather derive their
Ministry by uncertayn succession from such beasts* then from the Lords true
Church and people? And may we think that when God bring the Jews again to the
faith (as he has Rom, 11.
promised,) that they will go to Antichrists throne for to erect a ministry
for them? These and the like things considered, may show what soundnes is in
their doctrine and practice, that fetch their ordination from Rome, as they do
their baptism.

Finally let me admonish the reader, that The man of syn, who boasts himself
to be Sext. decr l. 5. tit. 9. c. 5 in glossa.
the Bishop of the whole world, as also to have the Ibid. l. 3. tit. 16. c.
unico, in gl.
Princedom (or soveraygntie) of all the world; and may not only order and
degrade priests, but set up and depose Princes, so exalting himself above 2.
These. 2.4.
all that is caled God; is for thus doing, to be accounted a traitor against
Christ and al Princes of the world. And as the days have been when he
challenged both church and crown of England (as in Matthew. Parisiens. in vita
Johan* regis.
King John's time,) to have the Prince his vassal, as well as the Priests his
subjects: so is his will to do always and in all places. But this being
tyranny and usurpation in him both over church and common wealth, he has
always had as good authority to make a Lord Mayor in London, as to make a
Bishop there, and to create a Prince as well as a Priest or prelate: the one is
injurious to the State, the other to the Church. And for men to hold or derive
the preisthood or ministry from that Usurper, has no more warrant that I
know of, then if one would hold or derive a magistracy from him; for as God
has given every common wealth power next under himself, to call and set up
Magistrates, according to the laws of Realms; so Christ has given every
church power next under himself, to call and constitute ministers according to
his word: and not to derive their spiritual functions from his professed
Adversary, whom he has promised to 2. These. 2.8.
consume with the spirit of his mouth, and to abolish with the brightness of his
coming.

The 5. point of difference: in the Letter.
1. We had learned that it was gross error, and notorious absurdity, Apolog.
p. 113.
either to hold the Popish Church to be a true Church, having a true Ministry
and true sacraments, or else that men men must admit of rebaptising. But now
we have heard, that the baptism of the Popish church is true baptism (by
which we are bound to communion,) or else that men must be rebaptised: and that
the church of Rome is the Church of God, because Antichrist should sit in the
Temple of God.

With this they join the 4. and 8. out of the printed copy.

4. The 31. Article of our Confession, (and also our Apology, p. 109.)
professes that such ecclesiastical assemblies as remayn so in confusion and
bondage under that Antichristian ministry, courts, canons, etc. cannot be
esteemed true visible churches etc. These now plead, not only for the^, but for
Rome it self, to be the true church of God.

8. The 8. is as the 5. before expressed.

These things are confirmed by sundry scriptures and reasons in the places
quoted, as the reader may there see.

Against these their former testimonies they now Advertis. p. 54.
thus dispute. 1: It is true baptism: as the circumcision in Jsraels Apostasy
was true circumcision. I answer, these are their own assertions: but we would
hear, Thus says the Lord. True circumcision was the seal of the righteteousnes
of faith: Romans 4.11. Israel in their Apostasy were fallen from the faith, Hos.
11, 12. they were without the true God, and without priest to teach, and
without law, 2. Chron. 15.3. and how then could they have the true
circumcision, the seal of the righteousness of faith, and forgivnes of their
synns, in that sinful estate? 2. The matching of Popish baptism and Isreal's
circumcision, though in this they agree that they are both false sacraments and
lying signs: yet is baptism ten times more defiled in Rome, then circumcision
was in Israel. Let us take a view thereof, as it is at the best, and now refined
by the Jesuits. When any man comes to be baptized in Popery, after some
quaestions praemised, 1. Bellarm. de sac bap. l. 1. c. ^5.
He has the sign of the Cross made on his forehead and breast; which holy
sign among other good properties, has power to drive away B^llarm. de imag.
l. 2. c. 29.
divils, 2. Then follows Bell. de bapt. l. 1. c. 2^.
Exorcisme that is, adjuration of the Divils to go from the man that is to be
baptized. 3. After that comes Bell. ibid
Exsufflatio^ or blowing of the Divils away, and an afflation of the good
spirit in their sted. 4. Next follows the tasting of salt, which is unto them
in sted of the Eucharist. 5. Then the touching of the nosthrills and ears with
spittle, and saying Ephata, that is, be opened. 6. After that the priest gives
him imposition of hands, and his blessing. 7. And then he is anointed with
blessed oil on his breast and showlders. Bellarmin. ibid. c. 26.
8. When he is thus sanctified, a name is given unto him. 9. He must have
Godfathers or Godmothers, to instruct him in time to come. 10. Then folowes
consecration of the water, 11. And a dipping three times into the water, in the
name of the Father of the Son and of the holy Ghost. 12. After comes Bellarm.
ibid. c. 27.
the kyss of peace, in sign that the brother is baptized. 13. And an Unction of
the Chrisme, on the crown of his head. 14. Then is a wax candle lighted given
him, for a sign of faith and grace received, and that he is translated out of
darkness into light. 15. And a white garment is put upon him, which he wears
for a certain time. These pageants are played in Babels language, an unknown
tongue: and this baptism ex opere operato, by the work wrought (for here is a
great deal more done then Christ ever would,) does Bellar. de de effect. sacr.
l. 2. c. 3
conferr grace, and in very deed Bell. de bapt. l. 1. c. 13.
takes away al synns, so as they are not only not imputed, but there is not
any thing that can be imputed for a blame unto him. And if any shall say, that
grace is not conferred by the work done, the Fathers of the Council of Trent
have decreed, Council. Trident. ses. 7. de sacr. in Ge^. can. 8.
Let him be accursed. And although this baptism be of it self so gracious, yet
any graceless person may baptize in time of need, be it man or Bell. de bapt.
l. 2. c. 7. and l. 1. c. 25.
woman, be it Christian, Jew, Turk or Pagan: baptism has his effect, and
conferreth popish grace, and washes away synns notwithstanding. This is the
baptism about which we contend: now let us proceed with our opposites
arguments. Jf ^ be not a true baptism ( Advert. p. 54.
say they) it is a false: and false baptism is not Gods baptism. etc. A true
baptism we are bound to have, when we have the means, wherefore they that hold
it not to be true baptism, must be rebaptised. I answer, we doubt not but it
is a false baptism, and a lying sign, wherewith Antichrist deceives his
subjects, under a show of Christianity: 1. because it is not possible for any
work of a mere man (much less of a sacrilegious priest) to give grace, or to
take away synns, for this is peculiar to Ioh. 1.17. Heb. 10, 10, 14. 1. Ioh.
1.7.
Christ God and man, and to his most precious blood, which only cleanses us
from al syn. 2. because true baptism being a sign of the Act. 22.16 Romans 4,
11. and 6, 3, 4. 1. Cor. 12, 13.
washing away of synns, and a seal of the righteousness of faith, of our
ingraffing into Christ, his death, burial and resurrection: it cannot be that
Antichrist the man of syn, and his worshippers, which are by the sentence of
God devote unto 2 These. 2, 4 -- 12. Rev. 14, 9, 10.
damnation, should have from God such a sign and seal; but they falsely usurp
the same, as many other things to their just judgment. Yet need not men that
discern and forsake those lies and impostures, to have any new washing: because
the Idolaters heretofore 2 Chro. 30, 1. etc. Ezr. 6, 21,
repenting and forsaking their false synagogues and lying signs in the^
usurped, needed not a new outward cutting or circumcising, as is showed at
large in our former writings, Discovery, p. 116. -- 120. Apology p. 110. --
113. For though the degree of syn in Rome be greater by far then that of
Apostate Israel, (as elsewhere Arrow against Idol. c. 5.
is also manifested:) yet seeing they then were fallen 2. Chro. 15.3.
from God and from his church, and so were Ier. 3.8.
divorsed from the Lord, and were Hos. 2.2.
not his wife, but Hos. 13.1
dead in their synns: the ordinances of God which they in show retained, could
not be unto them the signs and seals of forgivnes of synns, and of life
eternal, and therefore were in their use of them, false and deceytful; as were
also the ordinances of God retained in other nations, as Numb. 23, 1. Pompon.
Laetus de sacerdo. Tibull. l. 1. Eleg. 10. and l. 2. eleg. 1. 2. Homer. Odyss.
3. and Iliad. 1. Virgil. Aen. 2. Caesar. bell. Gall. l. 6.
Altars, Sacrifices, Priests, tithes, firstfruits, incense, meat offerings,
drink offerings, feasts, baptismes or washings, anoyntings, exco^munications,
prayers, vows, and many the like, whereof al histories do bear record, that
the Gentiles did reteyn them.

2. They proceed secondly and say, Jf the baptism had in the church of Rome be
not true baptism, then it is not the Lords baptism: and then they which have
no other but it, should get the Lords baptism, before they come to the Lords
table, to eat the Lords supper etc. I answer, this reason is the same in effect
with the former, and there answered, as also long ago objected by the enemies
of the truth, and refuted by Discov. p. 116. etc.
M. Barrow. We have gotten the Lords baptism by coming to the Lord in true
faith and repentance, who Mat. 3.11 1. Cor. 12.13. 1. Pet. 3, 21.
baptiseth us with the wholly Ghost and with fire. As for the outward washing
which we had, it need not be repeted; as before is showed: and we may as
lawfully eat the Lords supper without a new washing, as the Idolatrous
Israelites turning to the Lord, might eat the passover with out a new cutting
or circumcising. 2. Chron. 30.1.5.11.18.19.20.21.25. Ezra. 6.21. So whereas they
charge us with profaning the Lords table, it is turned upon their own heads:
for they have these many years professed the Romish baptism to be not a true
but a Apol p. 110 -- 113.
false Sacrament, whiles yet without a new washing they did partake of the
Lords supper. If this be to pollute and profane it, as now they press us, why
do they not first repent themselves of such profanation; why call they not in,
their former writings, and refute them?

3. Again (they dispute) there is but one baptism, Ephesians. 4.5. Baptism in the
church of Rome, either is that one baptism or is not it. Jf it be that one:
then is it true baptism: if not, then they which have no other but it, have not
that one baptism, and therefore must get it etc. I answer, 1. This again is the
same argument with the former, and before answered.

2. This ground from Ephesians. 4.5. was that which Epist. l. 1 epist. 12.
Cyprian builded on, who taught rebaptising of such as had been baptized by
heretics: whose arguments seeing our Adversaries thus urge, we pray them tell us,
whither they be of Cyprians mind for rebaptising; and if they be, wherein they
differ in that point from Anabaptists? If they be not, then it seems they
hold that al such as are baptized by heretics, Antichrists, excommunicates,
schismatiks, and other like, have that one true baptism of God, Ephesians. 4.5. and
so have the seal from God of forgivenes of synns, and are one body with
themselves. And if not, then they reason but for fashion sake, to trouble us
and the world with questions.

4. Furthermore (they argue) such baptism is either a seal of Gods covenant or
not. Jf it be, then sure it is true baptism. Jf not, then 1. they which have
no other baptism, must with the Anabaptists get another, that they may be
assured they have the seal of Gods covenant etc. 2. then that there neither have
been nor shall be in Babylon any of Gods people etc. Rev. 18.4. 3. then, baptism
now had in Apostate churches is not answerable to the circumcision had in the
Apostasy of Jsrael: for that was true circumcision etc. I answer, they may by
a little varying of words make an 100. such reasons, alone and the same; al
begging the question, and prooving nothing. What one scripture or reason from
thence, is here brought to prove Antichrists baptism, true baptism? Let any
man define by the word, true Christian baptism, and then compare therewith the
blasphemous Christening before set out from Bellarmine, and he shall see what
accord is between them. And whereas the burden of these men's song, is, we must
else baptize again: this is no proof at al; for (besides that which is before
answered,) what if it be our error that we baptize not again? where be then all
their proofs, are they not vanished into smoke? Verily I should much rather
incline to Cyprians error (though I am far from it) for a new washing: then
approve the sacrilegious washing used by that man of syn with most high
dishonor to the blood of Christ, to be that one true Christian baptism; the
seal of Gods covenant. For that of Rev. 18.4. because God caleth his people out
of Babylon, therefore Babylons baptism is true baptism, is without all color
of reason. As if one should argue thus, God by Jeremy caled his people out of
Babylon, Ier. 51, 45. therefore Babylons sacrifices, and sacraments, were true.
Who would not rather conclude hereby the contrary: God caleth his people out of
her, therefore she with all her counfeyt service, sacraments and apish
imitation of Gods holy things, are detestable and cursed. Again, a people may
be Gods, though unbaptised: as the uncircumcised Israelites were Gods people,
Deuteronomy. 29.10, -- 13. with Josh. 5, 4, 5. The 3. point of Isreal's circumcision
to be true, is but barely by them affirmed, without proof; and is before
disproved. And if they shall continue thus to say al things, and prove nothing:
I will never trouble my self more to answer their discourses.

5. Finally (they reason) if baptism in Rome be not true baptism, then (as we
also said) it is an idol; bearing show and image of that which it is not in
truth. And jdols ar things of naught etc. and so baptism in Rome, is a thing
of naught; and to be esteemed as nothing in the world, as filth, or doung etc. I
answer, idols are of two sorts; some merely devised by men, as Ieroboams 1.
King. 12 28.
calves: some perverted by men from holy signs to Idols, as 2 King. 18 4.
the brazen Serpent. Both these kinds are in popish baptism. For their crosses,
exorcismes, greasings etc. are Idols of the first sort, worse then Ieroboams
bullocks: their washing with water in nomine patris etc. is of the second sort,
that is, Gods ordinance turned into an Idol as was the brazen Serpent. Thus is
there a mixture in Antichrists Christening, of both sorts of abominations.
Therefore have we renounced that Romish baptism, as an impure idol in their
abuse, standing up in the place of Christ and his precious blood, which it is
not; pretending to give grace, and wash away synns, which it does not; but it
is a lie Isa. 44, 20
in the right hand of all that so receiv it: and the saying of the Apostle is
verified in it, an idol is nothing in the world. 1 Cor. 8.4. Yet, I hope, they
think not that the Apostle is contrary to the Prophet, who says their idols
are silver and gold, the work of men's hands, Psalm. 115.4. an idol then for the
matter and workmanship is something, but for the relation unto God, or divine
grace, it is nothing: and thus The Apostle means as his next words show, 1.
Cor. 8.^.
there is no other God but one. So Popish baptism, as touching the material
thing is somewhat, the salt, the water, the oil, are God creatures: the outward
action is the work of the hands of an idolatrous Priest; and this work
remains as did the work of the Idolaters circumcising in Israel: but as
touching the relation, (which is the mayn thing in a sacrament,) that it should
seal up unto them the forgivnes of synns, and (as they blasphemously say) quite
take away synns, and conferr grace; so it is a vayn idol and nothing: for
neither do the true Sacraments in Christ's church work any such effect to Gods
own people: and as for that Antichristian synagogue, it is not appointed to
salvation, but to condemnation by the just sentence of God. Rev. 17.11. and
18.8.20.21. 2. These. 2.11.12. Therefore it will not help them to say, that
baptism in it self considered, is Christ's ordinance: for the brazen Number.
21.8.9.
Serpent was in it self Gods ordinance at first, and a sacramental sign of
their redemption by Ioh. 3.14 15.
Christ, yet they that burnt incense to it, made it an Idol, and therefore as 2.
King, 18, 4.
Nehushtan, (a piece of brass,) it was destroyed. Yea this is acknowledged of
the popish baptism, by the most learned and conscionable of our own Land. M.
Perkins says, and proves it, Warning against Idolat. p. 33.
The Church of Rome transformeth the sacraments to Jdols, by teaching that they
conferr grace ex opere operato, by the work done etc. To this effect (says he)
the Missal. reformat. de benedict. fontis.
Priest is appointed to pray, that the nature of waters might conceiv the
virtue of sanctification: that God would make the water fruitful by the secret
admixtio^ of his godhead, that having co^ceived sanctification, a new creature
may spring out of the immaculate womb of the divine fountayn, that it may be
living water etc. Yea further he shows that Ibid. p. 18 -- 20.
God himself, and Christ, being worshipped in, at, or before an image, is
presently transformed into an idol. But what need I insist upon other men; even
Mr Johnson himself, has pleaded Answ. to Mr Iakob. p. 120.
the Prelates and Priests (which administer baptism) to be Jdol shepherds,
the Apol. pa. 112.113.
sacraments to be not true but false; and cites against them their own
testimonies to prove that Treat. of the Minist. p. 15.
Christ himself is made an idol among the^. Yet lo how he now inveigheth
against us, for saying that the baptism in Antichrists synagogue is an Idol.

But now as Satan has begun to persuade Antichrists christening to be Christ's
true baptism, (although the scripture plainly says, 2 Cor. 6.15^
what concord has Christ with Belial?) so he will not cease there, but justify
the cursed Mass, by like reason, to be the blessed Supper of our Lord. For it
is the same church that injoyeth these 2. sacramts, the same priests minister
them, both in the same Babylonish unknown language, both of the^ having Christ's
institution abused by the man of syn: and as water is in their baptism, so
bread and wine is in their mass: as in baptism they use the from Mat. 28.19.
name of the Father the Son and the holy Ghost, so in the Mass, they use from
Mat. 26.26.
Take eat this is my body etc. Now why should one of these sacraments be true,
and not an other? All that are not Antichrists bondmen, detest his Mass as a
monstrous idol: let them that list, honor his baptism. Again, excommunication
is Gods ordinance as well as baptism: and these our opposits say, Treat. on
Mat. 18. p. 26.
that by it a man is cut off from communion with all churches of Christ upon
earth, having his synns also bound in heaven; as on the contrary by baptism we
are entered into communion with all churches of Christ in the world. This
Excommunication the church of Rome uses as well as baptism, and has power
from Christ to do it, as well as to baptize: whereupon it will follow, if we be
bound to communion with them that they baptize, we are also bound to avoid the
communion of them that they excommunicate. Now for as much as these our
Opposites themselves (besides al other) that have separated from the church and
doctrines of Rome, have many curses and Anathemaes laid upon them by the
council of Trent and Popes Bulls: what ar they the better for being baptized in
their infancy, now that they are excommunicated in their man's age.

They told us Advert. p. 46.
before, (and said, we have not yet learned it as we should,) that by our
baptism we are bound to communion: and now let them also teach us, whither by
their excommunication, we are not bound to shun their communion. Or if they will
not answer us, let them answer the Papists, who Harding. confut. of the Apol.
part. 2. c. 5.
plead that their Apostate priests being divided and cut of from the church,
and excommunicate, may not lawfully minister the sacraments. And whereas M.
Jewel complained, we have been cast out by these men^, being cursed of them (as
they use to say) with b^l book and candel: Harding answers; Ibidem part. 5.
c. 15.
To be excommunicate, ye have deserved etc. neither were ye by excommunication
put from us, til ye had by contumacie severed your selves from the Church, and
showed your selves desperate and incorrigible. And what will they say to the
Synedrion, the representative church of England, whose Constit. and can.
eccles. 1603.
exco^munications ipso facto, if they be of the Lord, do forbid al Christians
to communicate with these men, that thus plead for Antichrists baptism: yea
they will tell M. Johnson in his own words, that it Treat. of the minist. of
Engl. p. 17.
is a fearful syn, (their Church being a true Church) to contemn their
excommunication. If they answer, their exco^munications are unjust, therefore
they are of no weight: this will not salve the sore. For 1. al excommunicated,
will say they are cast out unjustly: shall their own sayings be accepted? if not,
then neither these men's; til their particular causes be cleared. In the mean
time, men will more regard the church, then him that is cast out of the Church:
and according both to Mat. 18.17.
Christ's doctrine, and the doctrine of the Church Artic. of religion, 33
of England, he should be esteemed an hethen and publican. 2. Again many have
been cast out for contemptuous refusing to come unto the Bishops synedrion, and
they have left those Bishops, Ministers, Consistories and Churches, as being al
false and Antichristian, unto M. John's. his Treat. of the Minist. of Eng. p.
60, 62.
whom no church duty of admonition etc. did belong. And now that these men have
changed their mind, and count it a true Church and Ministry, (though with
corruptions): how will they be able to bear out such as are excommunicated, for
so great contempt and error? 3. Thirdly, as Antichristians do excommunicate
such as they should not: so do they baptize such as they ought not, even open
impenitent Idolaters and their seed, the Mat, 3.7.
generation of Vipers which John Baptist would refuse. Yea Mr Johnson himself
has said of a better estate then Romes, that Treat. of the Minist. p. 91.
Gods covenant is sacrilegiously violated, whiles it is said to the open wicked
(in delivering them the seals of Gods covenant) Thou art righteous. Therefore if
the Popes exco^municatorie bulls, are but bubbles because they are unjustly
executed: his baptism also will be found but a fiction, and no true seal of
salvation to such as receive it of him.

Finally touching circumcision, I think it cannot be manifested that any
peoples fallen from God and his Church, using it colourablie for a religious
action, (as al Antichristians and heretics do baptism at this day,) did or
were bound to cut their foreskin the second time, if they came unto the truth
of God: as for example, the Colchians, Egyptians and Aethiopians, whom
Herodot. in Euterpe.
histories mention to be circumcised; or the Samaritans, whom Mr Johnson In
Answ. to Mr Iakob. p. 68.
acknowledges to have still used circumcision. Hereunto we may add out of the
Jewish records, how they hold, that Maimonie, tract. de circumcis. c. 2.
Al have leav to circumcise, yea though it be an uncircumcised person, or a
servant, or a woman, or a child, circumcising in the place where there is no
man. But an hethen may not circumcise at al: yet if he do circumcise, there is
no need to return and circumcise the second time. If this rule stand, we shall
not need to repeat our outward washing in baptism, though given us by
Antichrist, or any other aliants from the church and covenant of promise.

Of the Church of Rome.
The Church of Rome being acknowledged by all that fear God, to be the throne of
Antichrist, and Mr Johnson himself having professed, In answ. to M. Iakob.
pref. sect. 6.
that the hierachie and Church-constitution of Antichrist, is the most
detestable anarchie of Satan that ever was: yet imitating now M. Gifford, M.
Bernard* and other professed enemies of the truth, he pleads for that Church
after this manner. Advert. p. 58, 59.
The Apostle expressly teaches, that Antichrist should sit in the Temple of
God, 2. These. 2, 4.* And by the Temple understanding the Church of God, it will
follow that Antichrist should sit in the Church of God, and is there to be
sought and found, and not among Jews, Turks, Pagans etc. neither that
Antichrist takes away wholly the church of God, and every truth and ordinance
of the Lord etc. I answer, truth and error are closely couched together in
this their plea: for the discerning whereof, we are to consider, first how
Antichrists church is described in Gods word; secondly what the state of the
church of Rome is at this day. The Antichristian synagogue is by the holy Ghost
caled a Rev. 13, 11.
Beast, which signifies a Dan. 7.23
kingdom: it is named also a Rev. 11.8
great city, which notes the largenes of that polity and kingdom. It comes
up Rev. 13.11.
out of the earth, as being of this world, (which Christ's kingdom that Rev. 21,
2
comes down from heaven is not:) and therefore is caled 2 These. 2.3.
a man of syn, and a Rev. 17, 1.
great whore: whose head is Rev. 9.11
Abaddon or Apollyon, the destroyer of others, and himself the son 2 These. 2.3
of perdition; and they that follow him, are the children of verse 12.
damnation. This wicked generation warreth Rev. 17.14.6. and 13 7.
against the Lamb Christ, and against the saints; verse 6.
blasphemeth Gods name and tabernacle and them that dwell in heaven, that is the
true Church, whose Phil. 3, 20
conversation is heavenly. Yet do they all this mischief under show of
Christian religion: and therefore this beast has horns Rev. 13, 11.
like the Lamb Christ, this whore is Rev-17.4.
arrayed with purple and skarlet, gilded with gold, precious stones and
pearls; as if she were the Psalm. 45, 9 13. Ezekiel. 16 10. -- 13. Song. ^, 5.
Queen and spowse of Christ: she has Prove. 7.14.
peace offerings and Vows, as if she were devowt in psalm. 66.13.
Gods service: Prove. 9.16, 17.
bread and waters, as ready to refresh the weary sowls. Her doctrines Prove. 5.3
1. Tim. 4.2.
sweet and amiable lye^ spoken in hypocrisy: but yet confirmed with 2. These.
2.9. Rev. 13, 13.14.
signs and miracles, as if they came from heaven: her power and efficacy
great, Prove. 7.21.26. Rev. 17, 2. and 18, 23.
prevayling over the many and the mighty, the Kings and Princes of world,
deceiving al nations with her enchantments, and if it were possible, Mat. 24,
24.
Gods very elect: her continuance and outward prosperity Rev. 13, 5. and 1^.7.
and 20, 2, 4.
long: her end Rev. 18.19.21. and 19.20.21. 2. These. 2.8.
miserable, consumed with the spirit of the Lords mouth, and abolished with the
brightness of his coming: and for her destruction the Rev. 18.20. and 19.1.2.
heavens shall rejoice and sing praises to God.

Now for to find the accomplishment of these things, we are directed by the now
Romish religion, to a Catholic or Universal church, one part whereof lives on
earth, an other under the earth, and a third part in heaven. 1. On earth, is
the whole multitude of such as are named Christians through the world, united
as a catholic body under one visible head the Pope, who with his 2 horns Rev.
13.11.
like the Lamb, pretends to be Christ's Vicar in the Kingdom and Preisthood;
and is professed of his vassals, Bellarm. pref. in ll. de summo Pont.
to be that tri^d precious corner stone, that sure foundation in Sion, Jsa.
28.16. and it is Extra. com. l. 1. de major. and obed. c. vna^ sancta^.
declared, defined and pronounced, that it is of necessity to salvation, for all
men to be subject unto him. Under this Captain are three bands of soldiers,
Bell. pref. in ll. de membr. eccles. milit.
the first clergy men, as Bishops, Priests, Deacons, Subdeacons and the rest
of those shavelings; the second Lay men, as Kings, Pinces, Nobles,, Citizens,
and Commons of al sorts and vocations; the third sort is both of the Clergy
and Laity, caled Monks or Regulars. 2. Under the earth, or in Purgatory fire,
are the sowles (they say) of al such Bellarm. de purg. l. 2 c. 1.
as dye with venial synns, whose payns are to be helped by prayers, and masses,
said for them by such as are alive on earth. 3. In heaven, are the sowls of men
departed in the popish faith, and delivered from purgatory: some of which, the
Pope Bell. de Sanct. beat. l. 1. c. 7.8. etc.
canonizeth for Saints, whom the people on earth are religiously to honor and
pray unto, as their mediators with God. This church on earth, Idem d^ eccles.
m^lit. l. 3. c. 14.
cannot err in things which it commands men to beleev o^ do, whither they be
expressed in scripture or not: therefore men must Test. Rhe^. in 1. Tim. 3 s. 9.
beleev in her, and trust her in all things; for the truth of the faith as
touching us, relyeth upon her Bell. ibid.
authority: and she has power Bell. de Ro^. Pont. l. 4. c. 14.
to make laws which do bind and constreyn men's consciences.

These things premissed, I come to our Opposites arguments. Their first reason
from 2. These. 2.4. is unperfectly alleged, for the text there says of the man
of syn, that he does sit as God in the Temple of God: whereupon their
conclusion must be, that Antichrist sits as God in the church of God. And if
they can prove that he is the true God, I will yield that his temple is the true
temple, and his Church the true church. Otherweise, if he be but an Idol and
not God: his Temple church and body, will prove but an Idol like himself, and
his blasphemy is worse then theirs Rev. 2, 9. and 3, 9.
which said they were Jews and were not, but did lie, and were the synagogue
of Satan.

Secondly, they take it for granted, that by the Temple is meant the church:
and so go on in obscurity. Whereas the Temple did primarily figure out Christ,
Joh. 2.19.21. and in the heavenly Jerusalem, (the true church), there was no
other temple seen, but the Lord God almighty and the Lamb (Christ) which are
the Temple of it, Rev. 21.22. If in this sense we understand that speech of
Paul 2. These. 2.4.
touching Antichrist, then must we translate the words, (as Augustine. de civit.
Dei. l. 20. c. 19.
some ancient Doctors have done) eis ton Naon, for the Temple, or, as if he
himself were the Temple: and so in deed Antichrist takes upon him the person
and office of Christ, (under pretense of his Vicarship,) 2 These. 2, 4.
showing himself that he is God, proclayming himself to be the Bellar. de Pont.
l. 2. c. 31.
brydegroom of the Church, which is the office of Ioh. 3, 21.
Christ, yea taking a title above him, for whereas Christ is caled Pontifex
magnus, the Heb. 4, 14
Great high Priest: the Pope is usually entitled Pontifex maximus the Greatest
high-preist; and reason there is for it, because Steph. Patracens. in orat. in
Council. Latera^. sub Leon. 10.
in the Pope there is power above all powers, as well of heaven as of earth, as
in a public Council it was spoken of this Beast. Now that these things should
be true of the man of syn, otherwise then by lies spoken in hypocrisy, none of
grace, I know, will affirm.

Secondarily the Temple figured the Church, but first the catholic or universal
church Ephesians. 2, 21. then every particular church by proportion, 1 Cor. 3, 16,
17. Which of these two, our opposites do intend, they show not. If they mean a
particular church; it will not agree with the prophesies of Antichrist, whose
City or church is so great, as Rev. 11, 8.9.
peoples, kinreds, tongues and nations, do dwell in the streets thereof. Neither
is that answerable to the Temple in Israel, which was not for one synagogue,
but for Deuteronomy. 16.16.
the whole nation of the Jews, and for the 1. King. 8, 41.42, Ioh. 12, 20.
Act. 8, 27.
Gentiles that came to the faith, through the world. If they mean the catholic
or universal church, (which indeed Antichrist claymeth for his Temple,) then
we are to be taught of them, how that whoorish company that Rev. 13, 4
worship the Beast and Dragon; can possibly be the true catholic church and
spowse of Christ, otherweise then by counterfeysance and lying ostentation,
even as the Divil himself is an 2. Cor. 11.14.
Angel of light.

And the very word Temple, leads us to understand Antichrists church to be
but a counterfeyt. For what was the Temple or Tabernacle in Israel? Not the
Church or congregation of Gods people properly, for they were the 1. King. 8,
30.33, 35 etc.
worshipers of God in the Temple: but it was a sacramental sign of Gods
dwelling with his people, as it is written, Exo. 25, 8.
they shall make me a sanctuary, that J may dwell among them. So Solomon built
the Temple that God might 2 Chronicles. 6, 2.
dwell therein:: and for the times under the gospel, God promised, Ezekiel. 37, 26,
27.
J will set my sanctuary among them for ever, and my Tabernacle shall be with
them, and J will be their God, and they shall be my people: and the fulfilling
hereof is set down Rev. 21, 3. behold the tabernacle of God is with men, and he
will dwell with them, and they shall be his people. So in Revelat. 11.1. the Temple
is distinguished from the^ that worship therein, which is the people. The
Temple then, was an outward sign of Gods presence with his people, and of his
inward dwelling in their hearts by Ephesians. 3.17. and 2.22. 1. Cor. 3.16
faith and by his Spirit unto their salvation: so Antichrists Temple is an
outward show of his presence with that seduced people, in whose hearts Rev. 13.4
14. and 16, 14. 1. Tim. 4.1. 2 These. 2.10.11.12.
he dwells by Popish faith and by his Spirit of error carrying them to
damnation. But as Antichrist shall not professedly deny the true God or Christ,
though in deed and truth 2 These. 2.4.
he falsely shows himself that he is God: so shall he not professedly deny the
Temple or church of God, but falsely vaunt his adulterous synagogue to be the
same. Gods true temple and tabernacle is in mount Sion, in Rev. 14.1.17.
heaven, where God sits Rev. 16.17. and 7.15.
on a throne and dwells among his people; where is the Rev. 11.19. Isa. 29.6
ark of his covenant, and from thence lightnings, voices, thundrings,
earthquake and hayl, come forth against the Antichristians his enemies, and
Rev. 16.1 2.10.
vials of his wrath powered out upon the throne of the beast, and on the men
that have his mark. On the contrary, the Beast, which is the kingdom of
Antichrist, ascends from beneath Rev. 17, 8
out of the bottomless pit, and Rev. 13, 6
blasphemeth this heavenly tabernacle, and sits Rev. 16.19.
in Babylon upon the Rev. 13, 2.
Dragons throne, and Rev. 19.19.
fights against the Lamb, and against the Saints, Rev. 11.2
treading under foot the holy City, and Dan. 8.11
casting down the place of Christ's sanctuary. When The Apostle therefore tells
us, that Antichrist sits as God in the Temple of God, it is to be understood
first of their invading and destroying of Gods church and people, as the
hethens of old Psalm. 79. Dan. 8.11.13. and 11.36. Ier. 52, 12.13. etc. Lam. 2,
7, 9^
dealt with Jerusalem and dwellers therein; secondly of their own vayn Ezekiel.
28.2.6. Isa. 14.13.14. 2. These. 2.9.10. Rev 13.11.14. and 17.4. 2. Cor.
11.13.14.15.
ostentatio^, whiles they will have it caled the Christian catholic church, and
the Pope the head of the same.

The next point that Antichrist is to be sought there, and not among the Jews
Turks and Pagans; is a fallacy from an insufficient division; for all out of
the true Church are not Jews, or Turks, or Pagans, there is a fourth to make up
the mease, even popish Antichristians, and among these is the Man of syn to be
found, though with a visar on his face, and a sheepskin on his back. In the
true Church he has sometimes been found raunging as a wolf, but not reigning as
a God, which in his own Temple he does: where he is acknowledged Clement. in
proaem. in glossa. c. In Council. Latera^. sess. 4. sub Leon. 10.
Our Lord God the Pope, and h Thou art an other God on earth; and Extravag. in
Ioh. 22.
To beleev that our Lord God the Pope might not decree as he has decreed, it
were a matter of heresy; and, Paulus Aemyl. lib. 7.
O thou that take away the synns of the world, have mercy upon us; with other
like intolerable blasphemies.

Thirdly they say, Antichrist takes not away wholly the church of God, and
every truth and ordinance of the Lord. I answer, neither did the Divil take
away wholly every truth and ordinance of God from among the hethens: but they
retained many rites of Gods worship received from their fathers, Cum inter, in
glo^.
as before p. 70.
is noted. Yet in very deed, so much as in them lay, and us stood with the
safety of their deceitful kingdom, the Divil of old, and Antichrist his son of
late, have sought wholly to take away the church and truth of God; and to put
lies in the place. But God has nourished the woman (his church) in the
wilderness, from the presence of the Serpent, Rev. 12.14. And for further answer
hereof, let us hear what M. Johnson himself wrote heretofore against M. Iakob,
Answer to M. Iak. p. 137.
J would know of you (says he) who are so deep a clerk, how Antichrists church
and religion should justly be accounted a mystery of iniquity, and truly be
said to speak lies in hypocrisy, also privily to bring in damnable heresies,
and to have a show of Godlynes, if they did so absolutely and wholly depart
from the faith, and not only from some points thereof etc.

Fourthly they allege Rev. 18.4. Go out of her my people etc. which words
(they say) imply the covenant of God continued among them. I answer, these very
words are taken from Jer. 51.45. My people, go out of the midds of her: where
by my people, the Church of Babylon is not meant, but the Israelites, Gods Ier.
50, 6.
lost sheep scattred there upon the mountains and hills, whom Ier. 50.17
first the King of Ashur had devoured, and lastly Nebuchadnezar King of Babel
had broken their bones, having Ier. 52, 13.14.
burned Jerusalem and the Temple with fire, broken down the city walls, verse.
9. etc.
imprisoned their King in Babylon, captived the Princes and people, and carried
the verse. 17. etc.
vessels of the Lords house into Babylon: so that now Israel was without
Temple, without kingdom, without polity or common wealth of their own; (only
the Lord himself was Ezekiel. 11, 16.
a Sanctuary or Temple to the faithful there dispersed,) and their holy
vessels were carried into the Temple and treasury Dan. 1.1.2.
of Nebuchadnezars God. And these Israelites figuring Gods Romans 11.4.5.7.
elect, are caled out of Babylon, which God would utterly Ier. 51.25, 26, 37,
62.
destroy and make desolate for ever. And thus from Antichrists church, which is
Rev. 18, 2. and 11, 8.
Babylon, Egypt, and Sodom, are Gods elect caled out: a most evident proof
that she is none of Gods church, (what soever she pretends,) any more than
the idolatrous hethens, whom she matcheth in filthiness of whordoms, and
multitude of abominations. Gods covenant of grace is not therefore with her at
al, for she is appointed 2 These. 2.8 12. Rev. 18.8. -- 21.
to damnation: but the elect that obey Gods voice caling them out of her, them
he will receiv into covenant, 2. Cor. 6.17.18.
he will be a Father unto them, and they shall be his sonns and daughters; as he
has promised.

Fifthly they add, And so Jsrael is often caled the Lords people, in the time of
their Apostasy: 2. King. 9.6. and 13.23. 2. Chron. 30.6. -- 9. etc^ I answer;
they prove not the Question: for first the Antichristian church is Rev. 16, 19.
and 18, 2.
Babylon, and out of verse. 4.
her, that is Babylon, are Gods people caled. Now to prove her Gods church,
they flee to Israel: whereas the Rev.11, 2.9.18.
Gentiles were her true types as Defense against Mr Smyth, p. 14, 15.
elsewhere I have manifested; though all the wickedness and hypocrisy of Apostate
Israel, is also found in this Romish Babel.

2. Neither yet is their argument for Israel good: to say they are caled the
Lords people, therefore they are his true church; I deny the consequent. For
things are named in scripture sometime as they have been before, though they be
not so still: as 1. Sa^. 30, 5
Abigail is caled the wife of Nabal, though he were then dead, and she married
to David; Mat. 1.6.
Solomon was begotten of Vriahs wife, whereas she was then David's: so Jesus was
Mat. 26, 6.
in the house of Simon the Leper, so named because he had been a leper. Thus
Israel were caled Gods people, for that he had been their Hos. 2.7.
first husband though in their apostasy they were Hos. 1.9. and 2.2.
not his people, nor his wife. Secondly they were so caled, in respect of their
profession, that they would be so esteemed and named; though in deed they were
2. Chro. 15.3.
without the true God. As Mic. 2.7.8
o thou that art named the house of Jaakob etc. but he that was yesterday my
people, is risen up for an enemy. Thirdly they were caled Gods people in
respect of their calling again unto him and his covenant afterward, though for
the present they were none of his: as Hos. 2, 18 19.
In that day, J will marry thee (Israel) unto me for ever, verse. 20.
J will even marry thee unto me in faith, and thou shall know the Lord: and
verse. 23.
J will have pity on her that was not pitied, and will say to them which were
not my people, thou art my people, and they shall say, thou art my God. And thus
the Gentiles were caled Christ's sheep, because they should after be brought
into his fold, Joh. 10, 16. and God had much people in Corinth a heathenish
city, Act. 18.10. 1. Cor. 12, 2. and the Jews to this day are Gods people and
beloved, not for their present state which is cursed, but for the promise that
they shall hereafter be graffed again into Christ. Romans 11, 11, 20.23, 25, 26.
and 9.4. with Jsa. 59, 20, 21. Ezekiel. 34, 23. -- 30. Hos. 3, 5. As for this
false church and state of Israel (which Hos. 11, 12.
compassed the Lord with lies and with deceyt,) it also may show us how to
understand that Temple of God forespoken of, wherein Antichrist should sit as
God. For was there any true Temple any where but in Jerusalem? yet when Israel
forgot his maker, he Hos. 8.14
builded Temples. These howsoever they pretended 1. King. 12.28.
the God that brought them out of Egypt, yet were in deed built for the
worship of 2 Chronicles. 11.15.
Divils, to whom they sacrificed, and Deuteronomy. 32.1^. 2 Chr. 13.8.9.
not to God. Therefore the Lord by names distinguishes these two churches,
caling Samaria Ezekiel. 23.4.
Aholah, that is, Her own Tabernacle, and Jerusalem Aholibah, that is,
My-tabernacle in her: but if Gods tabernacle had been also in Samaria; the
difference had not been such. The Idol temples then which Jeroboam and his
successors builded, were none of Gods temples, otherweise then by lying
pretenses: much less then was Ier. 51.44.
Bells temple in Babylon, Gods temple: and if the figure were not his, neither
can the figured thing be his, I mean this spiritual Babylon, the Rev. 17.5.
mother of whores, the Rev. 18.2.
habitation of Divils. For as Christ surmounteth in grace and holiness, al types
and figures that went before of him: so Antichrist surpasses in wickedness, all the types and figures of him. Therefore the holy Ghost contenteth not himself
with one name, but caleth Antichrists church, Rev. 16.19
Babylon, and Rev. 11.8
Sodom, and Egypt, and where our Lord was crucified, meaning hethenish Rome,
by whose policy Christ was killed, when he was delivered to Mat. 27.2
Pilat the Roman deputy, and to the Mat. 20.19.
Gentiles (the Roman Mat. 27, 27. -- 35.
souldjers) to be mocked scourged and crucified. So that look what idolatry,
fornication, persecution and wickedness has been read of among those hethen
peoples, the same may be proved upon the synagogue of Antichrist, (though mixed
with profession of the name of Christ, the more easily to deceive:) as
whenever any will bring them to be compared, shall soon be manifested.

6. But they proceed, and plead, that this clause partake not in her synns,
Rev. 18, 4. shows what we are to leav and renounce, namely their synns, and
not whatsoever is had or retained by them. I answer, first the text says Go
out of her: meaning this whore, this Babylon, that is, this Church: and so from
the Rev. 17.4
golden cup in her hand, as well as from the filthy potion that is in it; and
from the Beasts counterfeyt Rev. 13, 11 2.
Lambs horns, as well as from his Lions mouth and Bears paws. We may not in the
truest Church in the world 1. Tim. 5.22.
partake with their synns: yet is not every true Church that synneth, Babylon.
Secondly, she being in this forlorn estate, she is but a lump of syn, 2. These.
2.3.
a man of syn, a child of perdition: the Rev. 13, 11
Beast is not one person, but the whole Da^. 7.23
kingdom: and M. Johnson himself has acknowledged more then once, Treat. of
the Minist. against. M. Hilders. p. 7. Apolog. p. 109.
that the man of syn, is the false Church (and religion) of Antichrist,
compared to the body of a man, and consisting of all the parts together. Now to
the defiled and unbeleeving, Tit. 1.15.
nothing is pure; their Prove. 15.8.
sacrifices are abominable, their prayers are turned Ps. 109, 7.
to syn. We acknowledge therefore no good or holy thing in Antichrists synagogue,
as touching her use of it. Thirdly we renounce not any good thing, because that
harlot does challenge and abuse it: but we practice Gods ordinances as he has
commanded, condemning utterly the profanation of them by Antichrist.

7. They further allege, that the Church of Rome was at the first set in the
way of God: since which time she is fallen into great apostasy as Jsrael did:
in which estate she has kept sundry truths and ordinances of God, as Israel
also did. Which causes a twofold consideration of her estate, 1. in respect of
the ordinances of God still retained among them, 2. and of the mixture of their
own abominations. Jn regard of the one to acknowledge the truth and church of
God there; in regard of the other to observe their apostasy, and confusion
against Antichrist: and for this mixture, to separate from them, and to
practice every ordinance of God, which was and is in that church: leaving only
their corruptions least we fall into Anabaptistrie and other evils. I answer,
they do but roll the first stone, saying the same things; comparing
Antichrists church with Israel, whereas the holy Ghost compares it with the
Revel. 11.2.8. and 17.5.
gentiles, even the most vile, the Sodomites, Egyptians, Babylonians, and
hethen Romans, as before I have showed. In all which nations, there were many
truths and ordinances of God retained and abused; which truths made them no
true Church, unless we will say, all the world was Gods true Church. But I will
follow their particulars. The Church of Rome (they say) was at first set in the
way of God: I answer, there was Romans 1.7.
at Rome such a Church in Paul's time; but the Romish Church now, is a Beast
since that time sprung out of Rev. 17.8.18.
the bottomless pit; a Catholic monster, dispersed (as they feign) through
earth, heaven, and purgatory, as before Page 77.
I showed: such a Church Paul never saw, but by the spirit of prophecy 2 These.
2.
foretold of it. That Church then was Romans 1.7. and 12.1.
Saints, and worshipped God: this Church now is an Rev. 18.2
habitation of Divils, and Rev. 9.20.
worshipeth Divils.

Since that time (say they) she is fallen into Apostasy. True, say I, even
soon after Paul's time, for then the 2. These. 2.7.
mystery of iniquity did work, and 1 Ioh. 2.18.19.
many Antichrists were gone out, whiles the Apostles lived. For which their
Apostasy (like Isreal's) when they would not repent, (as Christ Rev. 2.5.16.
threatened some that were new fallen into such synns,) the candlestick (the
Church) was removed, the Church of Rome as Paul Romans 11.20 -- 22.
forewarned, for unbeleef was cut off among others: and for a punishment of
their Apostasy, God delivered the East Churches into the hands of Mahomet, and
the West Churches into the hands of that false-horned Rev. 13.11.
beast Antichrist: even as Israel and Judah of old, for their like synns, were
2 King. 17 and 25. cha.
delivered into the hands of the Assyrians and Babylonians. And this Paul
prophesied, that there should be 2 These. 2.3.
a departing from the faith, before that Man of syn should be disclosed: and
because they received not the ver. 10. etc.
love of the truth that they might be saved, therefore God would send upon them
that Adversary, with Satan's power and strong delusion to beleev lies, that
they might be damned. Thus Mahomet and Antichrist, were Gods 2 plagues, to
bring not only the death of body, but of sowl, upon the^ that loved not the
truth, but departed from it. For when the Rev. 8, 8.
great mountain (which is the kingdom of Ier. 51, 25
Babylon, Antichrists monarchy,) burning with the fire of ambition and strife,
was cast into the sea, that is, among Rev. 17.15 Isa. 17, 12.
peoples and nations: then the living creatures that were in the third part of
the sea so corrupted and bloody, dyed: and Rev. 20, 4 4, 5.
lived not again for a thousand years, as did the godly which worshipped not the
beast. Although therefore we may truly call the state of Mahometisme and
Antichristianisme, apostasy: yet we are taught of God, to understand such
apostasy as was among the hethens, in Sodom, Egypt and Babylon; and so Rome
is caled, not only figuratively, (as sometimes the Jews are caled Isa. 1.10.
people of Gomorrah, but Rev. 11.8
spiritually, that is in deed and effectually: for the spirit and life (so to
speak) of all their abominations, are in her most powrful and apparent. So
their comparison with Israel, falls too short in mesure: though Israel also
when they forsook God and his Church, and builded new Hos. 8.14.
Temples were not Gods true Temple or Church, as before is proved. Their
consideration in respect of Gods ordinances to acknowledge the church of God
there: is a speculatio^ of their own, not of God. For the stealing and abusing
Gods ordinances and mixing the^ with their own inventio^s, makes not a people
Gods people or Ch:, any more the^ a true ma^s money in a theefs purse, makes
the thief an honest man. If it were so, then the hethens when they sacrificed
Horat. l. 2 Satyr. 3.
swine, were to be condemned* but when they sacrificed Nu^. 23.1.
bullocks and sheep, were to be approved as Gods Church, for they kept Genesis
8.20. Levit. 1.
Gods ordinance as well as Rome with their sacrifice of the Mass. When they
worshipped idols, they were to be condemned; but when they worshipped Act. 17.23.
the true God in their ignorant manner, they were to be justified as his
people: so when they kept the feasts Sopho^l. Electr. Tibull. l. 1. cleg. 3.
of new moons, they were to be praised as Gods Church, for it was an ordinance
Nu^. 28, 11
of his: but when they kept their Bacchanalia, to be disclaimed for heretics.
And what will this come unto at the last; but to justify the Divil as he is a
creature of God, and transformed into an 2 Cor. 11.14.
Angel of light; but to condemn him as he is a black Divil, and Apostate from
his original. Their fear least they should fall into Anabaptistrie, is before
defrayed: but as some mariners to avoid Charybdis have falln into Scylla, so
these to shun the shelves of Anabaptistrie, have run their ship upon the rocks
of Popery.

8. Their next double consideration, is about the covenant of God made with his
people. For often, the people on their part break the covenant when the Lord
does not so on his part; but still counts them his people, calls the^ to
repentance, folowes them sometime with judgmt, sometime with mercy, Lev. 26, 15
-- 45. Ezekiel. 16, 59, -- 62. Jud. 2.1 -- 20. Thus in Jsrael they fell to
Jdolatrie and tra^sgressed the covenant on their part, Exo. 32. Jud. 2. and 3.
with Ps. 78.56.58. 1. Sam. 7.3, 4. 1 King. 12, 28, 33. and 14.22, 23, 24. with
2. Chron. 12. and 13. and 1. King. 19, 10. Hos. 6.7. and 8, 1. yet the Lord
breaks it not on his part, but spares and destroys not, nor presently gives
them a byl of divorce, but in his mercy as a loving husband calls them to
repentance, sends Prophets, calls them still his people, helps them and casts
them not off. Adjoining also punishments, both for avenging the quarrel of his
covenant, and procuring their conversio^. Exo. 33, and 34. etc. Lev. 26, 14, 15
-- 25 -- 42, 44, 45. Jud. 2, 1, etc. Ps. 78. 1. Kin. 13, and 16. and 18. 2.
King. 5, 8, 15, 17. Jer. 51.5. Ezekiel. 16, 59.60 etc. Hoseas, Amos etc. Jn these
two diverse respects, Jsrael considered in themselves and their idolatrous
estate are said to be without God, without Priest, without law: to forsake and
break the covenant, not to be the Lords wife but an harlot etc. having children
of whordoms, and that the Lord is not with Jsrael, or with any of Ephraim, 2.
Chro^. 15.3. 1. King. 12, 28.33. and 15, 34. and 16, 13, 26, 31, 33. and 19,
14. Hos. 2, 1, -- 5. and 5, 3, 4. and 8, 1. and 9, 1. with Psalm. 106, 29.39.
Ezekiel. 16. and 23, chapter 2 Chronicles. 25, 7. But again in respect of the Lord and his
covenant into which they were received, and which he breaks not on his part, he
calls them to repentance, is caled their God, and they the people of the Lord,
and their children born to the Lord, and Jsrael not to have been a widow
forsaken of God, but the Lord pitied them, and respected them for his covenant
with Abraham, and would not cast them off as yet. And thus Jsrael continued
long, respected of the Lord notwithstanding her apostasy, Jud. 2, 1. 1. King.
18.36. 2 King. 9, 6. Hos. 4, 6, 12. and 5.4. and 7.10. and 8, 2. and 9, 1. and
14, 1, 2. Amos 7, 15, with Psalm. 89, 30. -- 34. Eze. 16.20.60. Jer. 51, 5. 2.
King. 13, 23. Yet in these times, the Prophets taught the people to plead with
their mother, and separate themselves. etc. Hos. 2, 1 -- 5. and 4, 12, 14, 15.
Amos 4.4, 5. and 5.4.5. Al these are written for our learning, and to be
applied to the the churches estate in Apostasy since Christ, Romans 15, 4. 1.
Cor. 10.11. I answer, these things are very obscurely and confusedly by them
set down: so that the error is couched in darkness. 1. They show not how the
covenant between God and men stood: 2. there is an aequivocation in this word
breaking of the covenant^, which they clear not: thirdly they shuffle together
the estates of Israel when they were one body, and when they were rent in two,
4. so also the churches in Apostasy since Christ, they distinguish not, from
the kingdom of Antichrist: but confound Sion (when she synneth,) with Babylon.

1. The covenant between God and men, was always conditional; by the law, if
they Romans 10.5.
did his commandments, they should live by them; and if they Gal. 3, 10.
continued not in all things written in the book of the law to do them, they
were cursed. By the gospel, Ioh. 3.36.
he that believes in the son [of God] has everlasting life, and he that
obeys not the son shall not see life, but the wrath of God, abides on him.
And all the figurative covenants that Israel had, were also conditional, Levit.
26, Deuteronomy. 28.
blessings promised to the obedient, and curses to the transgressors.

2. The breaking of the covenant on man's part, is always Levit. 26, 15.
by syn: in which sense it cannot be said that God ever breaks covenant at
any time. But in an other sense by punishing, and putting from him the
rebellious people, in just judgment; we may say God Zach. 11, 10. Psalm. 89.39.
breaks or disannulleth the covenant. Whenever a people by syn forsakes
God, and refuses his word caling them to repentance: they cannot have
themselves, neither can other men have concerning them any assurance of their
salvation, or that they abide in the covenant of his grace. For whosoever
abides in him (as says 1. Ioh. 3, 6.
the scripture) he synneth not: whosoever synneth, has not seen him, neither
known him. Be it Deuteronomy. 29, 18, 19, 20.
man or woman, or family or tribe, which turn their heart from the Lord, to
serve other Gods, though they bless themselves in their hearts, saying we shall
have peace etc. the Lord will not be merciful unto them. As for Gods patience,
who presently punishes not, but sometime forbeareth long; and inviteth them to
repentance: this does not assure any that they are under his covenant of
grace, unless by repentance and faith they turn unto the Lord. The long
suffering of God Pet. 3, 20. Genesis 6.
abode in the days of Noah, 120. years, whiles he preached to the old world
which perished in the flood: so his bountifulnes to many other peoples should
have led them to repentance, Romans 2, 4, 5.
when they after their hardness and impenitent hearts, heaped unto themselves
wrath against the day of wrath. And the judgments upon Gods professant people,
come often times more speedily, then upon the open infidels. Let us look upon
the typical estate of Israel, our 1. Cor. 10 6, 11.
ensamples: It was a Exodus 6, 4.5. -- 8.
covenant between God and them, that he would give them the land of Canaan, a
figure Heb. 4.1.2.3. etc.
of the heavenly inheritance: and he led them through the wilderness, to the
borders of the country, and said, Deuteronomy. 1, 20, 21.
Lo the land is before you, go up and possess it: but they ver. 28, 26 32.
were afraid and would not go up, through their unbeleef. Then the Lord
presently verse. 34.35.
was wroth and swore, that not one of those transgressers should see that good
land; yea though they after were sorry, verse 41.
and offered themselves to go up, yet the Lord ver. 42, 44.
forbad them, slew some of them by the sword, and Deuteronomy. 2, 1, etc. Heb. 3 17.
-- 19.
turned all the rest back to wander and perish in the wilderness* Again, it was a
condition of the Exodus 34, 10, 11.
covenant on Gods part, that he would cast out the Amorites, Canaanites etc.
from before the Israelites; and on their parts, verse 12, etc.
that they should make no compact with the inhabitants of the land etc. But
when they brake with him, and rooted not out the people, but agreed with them
Judge. 1.27.28.30.32, 33.
for tribute; the Lord also presently brake with them, saying, Judge. 2.1.2.3.
J said J will never break my covenant with you etc. but ye have not obeyed my
voice, wherefore J say also, J will not cast them out before you; and again
because verse 20, 21.
this people has transgressed my covenant, therefore will I no more cast out
before them any of the nations; and so they were left as Josh. 23, 13.
a whip on their sides, and thorns in their eyes.

The like may be seen by comparing al other particulars, and those threatings
in Levit. 26.15.16. etc. with their histories in the books of the Judges and
Kings of Israel: according to that saying of God to Moses, Deuteronomy. 31.16, 17.
they will forsake me etc. and J will forsake them. And as for that which is
cited from Levit. 26.45. it was a promise of the Gospel, upon their unfeighned
verse 39, 40.
repentance; and perteyneth to the Jews also at this day, as Paul shows us
Romans 11. for this rule is general, Pro. 28, 13.
he that confesses and forsakes his synns, shall have mercy. Although
therefore God uses sometime more forbearance of evil men than at other time,
and often gives Rev. 2, 21
space to repent: yet if they repent not, they shall assuredly Luke 13.3.5. Romans
2..4, 5. Rev. 2.5.
perish, and their boasting of the covenant shall Mat. 7, 22 23.
not save them.

3. Touching their application of things to Israel, not putting difference
between their state when it was one, and when it was rent asunder: therein also
they fayl. Whiles Israel were one, they continued Gods Church: for though they
often sinned, yet by his word and afflictions he soon brought them to
repentance, as is noted, Judge. 2.4, 5. and 3.8, 9.15. and 4.1.2, 3. etc. But
when after many other synns, ten tribes fell from the Lord, and rent themselves
from the Kingdom of David, and Preisthood of Levi, both which were sacramental
types Ier. 33.21 22.
of Christ and his Church; when they left the other testimonies of Gods
presence, the Temple and Altar at Sion, where God had said he would Psalm.
132.13.14.
dwell for ever; and builded them new Hos. 8.14 11.
Temples and Altars to syn, forgetting their maker; when they set up Calves and
2 Chronicles. 11.15.
Divils to worship God by; then presently 1 King. 13.1. etc.
God sent his Prophet to them with a denunciation of judgment, which being
done, he was to avoid them as Hethens and Publicans; ver. 8.9.
not eating or drinking in the city: which because he did (though drawn in by
the lie of another Prophet,) the Lord ver. 26.
slew him with a Lion. And all that feared God, 2 Chronicles. 11.13.16.
both Priests and people, left the country and went to Judah: and the rest were
still Hos. 4.15.17.
caled upon by the Prophets to forsake them, as not being Gods Hos. 2.2.
wife, that is, his Church: and their estate showed to be 2 Chronicles. 15.3.
without the true God, and without Priest, and without law: and they were unto
God Amos 9.7.
as the Aethiopians. Now whereas our Opposites allege, God did not presently
cast them off; it is true, in respect of caling them to repentance, and of
their dwelling in the land, or, as the scripture says, 2 King. 14.27.
of putting out the name of Jsrael from under heaven: for his covenant was to
punish them Lev. 26.16.18.21.24.28.33
by degrees, and at last if they repented not, to scatter them among the
Hethens, til their ver. 41.39.40.
uncircumcised hearts should be humbled, and they rewed their former syn; and
then would he ver. 42.45.
remember his first covenant, and so receiv them again to grace in Christ. And
as for not casting them presently out of the land, the Lord dealt with them, as
he had before dealt with the Hethen Canaanits which were spared therein for a
time, because their wickedness was not yet full, Genesis 15.16. If this patience
toward them, will not prove them a true Church; no more will Gods like patience
toward apostate Israel. And how they in their impenitent estate, 2 King. 17
13.14. etc.
hardening their necks daily more and more, could be said to be the true Church
of God, (though they compassed Hos. 11.12.
him with lies,) and in the covenant of his grace unto salvation; I leave for
them to judge that are wise in heart. As for these men's double respects, they
are not al of them sincere. They would have it said in respect of the
Israelites, (and not of the Lord) that they were without God, without Priest,
without law, none of his wife, having children of whordoms, and the Lord is not
with Jsrael etc. and again in respect of the Lord (and not of themselves) that
he is caled their God, and they his people, and their children borne to him,
and Israel not to have been a widow forsaken etc. I answer, whatsoever was syn,
was wholly their own, and whatsoever was grace, was wholly Gods: and this is
true in the best Churches in the world. But whatsoever was a reproof and
punishment for their syn, respected both Gods justice, and their demerit: and
whatsoever acceptance of grace was in them, respected both Gods mercy in
Christ, and their Romans 3.30.
faith. If therefore they were in any sense a true Church at that time actually,
it must needs be by mutual refere^ce to the covenant on both parts, God
offering, they Romans 5.17.
taking his grace offered; through his holy Spirit working in them: otherwise it
is a mere fiction in religion, to make difference where none is. Now let them
show that they accepted the grace of God, caling them to repentance: we show
the contrary by the Lords own testimony, who for their unbeleef and stubborn
disobedience 2 King. 17.13.14. -- 22.23.
did put them out of his sight in wrath. And if men accept not the grace of
God: his caling upon them to repent, makes them no more his Church, then the
Hethens Act. 14.15. and 17.30.
unto whom he does the like.

Again, it is not sound to say that in respect of themselves only, it was
spoken by the Prophet 2 Chronicles. 25.7.
the Lord is not with Israel, with any of the children of Aephraim. For he
there dissuadeth Amaziah from having the army of Israel to help him: his reason
is, the Lord is not with Jsrael: this most directly respects the Lord and his
Hos. 5.6.
withdrawing of his presence from that people. Even as Moses said, Number. 14.42.
Got not up [to warr] for the Lord is not among you: did not the event show
(when they verse. 44.45.
fled before their enemies) that is was meant in respect of Gods presence and
help now withdrawn from them? Also when it is said in other scriptures Judge.
2.18.
the Lord was with the Judge: and Psalm. 118.6.
the Lord is with me, I will not fear: and Mat. 28.20.
I am with you al days, and many the like: who ever would dream that these
things could be spoken in respect of the men only, and not of God and Christ?
Finally the Prophets speech to the Jews, 2 Chronicles. 15.2.
the Lord is with you, while you be with him, but if ye forsake him, he will
forsake you, does evince manifestly, that it is an evil gloss, when the text
says the Lord is not with Israel, to turn it by respects, as if nothing were
meant but Israel is not with the Lord. So in the other speech 2 Chronicles. 15.3.
Israel has been without the true God; the words following verse. 4.
but had he turned to the Lord God of Israel; and sought him, he would have
been found of them; these manifest, that it was in respect of Gods forsaking
them also, and not only of their forsaking him.

No better (if it be not worse) is their citing of Hos. 2.2. she is not my
wife, that this respected Israel in themselves: be it so, but what follows?
Hos. 2, 2.
neither am J her husband: and if the former branch respected Israel, then this
respects the Lord, especially seeing he testified by Jeremy, Ier. 3, 8.
J cast her away, and gave her a byll of divorcement: unless they will say this
also was not spoken in respect of the Lord. They do not well therefore to cite
one branch of the text, and concele an other, deceiving the reader. How and in
what sense God called them his people, I have shevved p. 81, 82.
before: their former state, their present pretense to be the Lords, and the
future mercy that they should and yet shall receiv, might well and did occasion
such speeches: but in deed and truth it was as God said to them Hos. 1, 9.
you are not my people, therefore will not J be yours. And as for God remembering
his covenant, it is true even to this day, for they are Romans 11.28.
beloved for their fathers sakes, and shall again have the benefit of their
first verse 26, 27. Levit. 26, 45.
covenant, and so may still becaled Gods people, as the Prophets foretelling
their return, do Deuteronomy. 32, 43. Isa. 49.13.
entitle them: yet I hope our opposites will not hereupon conclude, that the
Jews now (whiles they continue unrepentant) are Gods true visible church. That
of Jsrael and Judah being no widow, Jer. 51.5. is a prophecy of their return
out of Babylon, and restoring of their common wealth, as the whole argument
there manifests. They should repent and seek the Lord Ier. 50.4, 5.
with tears, and renew the covenant on their part, and God verse 20.
would forgive them al their synns. This therefore is not spoken in respect of
God only, but of them also turning by repentance to the Lord in their
affliction, and the Lord turning to them; as the first performance of this
prophecy shows, Nehem. 9.1.2. -- 32. -- 38. Moreover, it proves not that
Israel was alvvayes before, Gods wife or Church; for it is plain to the
contrary, Hos. 2.2. and she was divorced, Ier. 3, 8. and dead in syn, Hos.
13.1. but now was to be fulfilled in such as returned, that which was
prophesied, on Isreal's part, Hos. 2, 7.
J will go and return to my first husband; and on Gods part, verse 20.
J will marry the unto me in faith.

Their applying of these things to our times, is not in all points aright. For
though in this, Antichrists synagogue and Isreal's do agree, that neither be
Gods true Church: yet the perfect type of Rome, as God describes it, is Rev.
17, 18
Babylon: and we should not be vviser then God. And if they cannot prove
Babylon then to be Gods church, which was not more deep in syn the^ now
Antichrist is, and which city had Psalm. 87, 4
promise and 1. Pet. 5, 13
performance of mercy in Christ at the end: they shall never prove this
synagogue of Satan to be Gods true Church, which has no promise of recovery or
mercy, but Number. 24 24. Rev. 14 9, 10. and 18 8.21. and 19, 20, 21. 2. Th
2.8.12.
prophesies and threatenings of assured destruction.

They proceed further to a double regard of apostate Churches, in comparison
with other peoples; as Jsrael compared with the Philistims etc, is caled and
counted Gods people, having the only true God for their God: 2 King. 5,
8.15.17. and 9, 6. but being compared with Judah, is an harlot and not Gods
wife. Hos. 2.2.5. and 4.15. etc. So the church of Rome in apostasy, compared
with Jews, Turks and Pagans, ought to be counted Christians, and the Temple of
God, the Church of God brought to the faith of Christ, 2 These. 2.4. with Ezekiel.
43, 7, 8. Zach. 6, 12, 13. Ephesians. 2, 11. -- 13, 19, 21. 2. Cor. 6, 16. Rev.
11.19. but again co^mpared with the ancient church of Rome, and such as now are
faithful churches, she is to be esteemed the great whore, believing and
speaking lies in hypocrisy etc, Rev. 17.1.5. 1. Tim. 4, 1, 2, 3. 2 These. 2, 3,
10, 12. And thus in a double consideration, it may be said of Rome in one
respect, there is a true Church there, and in an other respect there is a false
church there.

I answer; first to the double regard of Israel; if they mean that only in
respect of Judah, and not also of God, Israel was caled none of Gods wife; it
is untrue, and before by me disproved. If they mean, that not only in respect
of God, but of Judah also, Israel was an harlot, and not Gods wife, it is true,
and makes so much the more against their estate, but nothing at al, (no not in
show) for it. And how Judah respected Israel, (besides al former testimonies of
the Prophets alleged,) their continual wars both with word and sword do
manifest, as when after 2. Chron. 13, 4, 5. -- 12
reproof of their faling from God, they killed verse 17.18.
five hundred thousand chosen men of Israel at one battle: besides their
continual combats after, excepting some few Kings which made amity with them,
for which they were reproved: as the Prophet said to K. Iehoshaphat for joining
with the King of Israel against the Aramites, 2 Chronicles. 19, 2.
would thou help the wicked, and love the^ that hate the Lord? therefore for
this thing, wrath from the Lord is upon thee. But had the Israelites been their
brethren in the faith, and covenant of Christ, Judah had 1. Ioh. 3, 10, 11, 12.
sinned greatly in so destroying them. And how the Jews afterward also
esteemed of their faith and godlynes, their Rabbines testimonies in the Talmud
shows, where they say of the ten tribes, Talmud Babyl. in Sanhedrin, c. 11.
Aein lahem chelek leolam haba: that is, they have no part in the world to
come, in life eternal; and that the Lord did put them from upon their land in
this world, and will send them into an other land in the world to come. Did they
now (may we think) esteem them within the holy covenant, and to have true
circumcision, Ro^. 4, 11.
the seal of the righteousness which is by faith? As for comparison with the
Philistims and other hethens, it is true they were caled the people of the
Lord; because they never renounced their God in name and professedly: but
pretended the contrary. Yet seeing they did but compass the Lord with Hos. 11.12
lies and deceyt: this their vayn profession did naught avayl them, with God or
his Saints. And so at this day, the Jews professing the God of Israel, and
praying to him, and reading his law and prophets daily in their synagogues,
may be caled Gods people in comparison of pagans which know not God or his
scriptures at al: but worship the Sun and Moon, and some of them the Divil, by
open profession. Yet none I think vvil say, that the Jews now being vvthout
Christ, are actually in the covenant of grace. Again, the Turks that profess
Alcoran, azoar. 2, 3. etc.
One immutable, living, true, most wise and high God; and do acknovvledge
Christ Azoar. 67
to be sent of God with his gospel, and call him Azo. 31.
Ruchella, that is the Breath (or Spirit) of God: these men in comparison of
Julian the Apostata, and other like vvretches, and Atheists, may be caled the
people of God, and Christians: though in deed, they be far from being either.

Secondly for their double regard of the Church of Rome, I say as before of
Israel, that in comparison with Turks and paynims, they may be caled
Christians, but are in deed false Christians, such as in name and show pretend
to be Christ's; but are Antichrists and worship Rev. 13, 3, 4.
the Dragon, and the Beast, and him that 2 These. 2, 4.
fitteth as God in the Temple of God; so to them the scripture may be applied,
Rev. 2, 9. and 3, 9.
they say they are Jews
Christians and are not, but do lie, and are the synagogue of Satan: and if
this will help them, let them make the most of it. It is sufficient for the
matter in hand, if in respect of Christ and his covenant, and in comparison
with Christ's true Churches, that synagogue be condemned, as the Rev. 17.1.
great whore, the beast that Rev. 17.8 and 19, 20.
came up from, and shall again go down into the bottomless pit. vertheless (but
that comparisons are odious) it might easily be proved, that though Antichrists
Church pretend to be Christ's, and so in name is better than Turks and Pagans:
yet in deed, those miscreants are in some things to be justified, in comparison
of them. For Jews and Turks, are not so gross as to worship Offic. B. Mariae.
ref.
the Queen of heaven, and Images of Wood and of stone, as Bellarm. de imagine.
l. 2. c. 21-
do the Antichristians.

The Jews are not so vayn as to pray to Abraham and the Prophets, though they
be in deed saints in heaven: whereas the popish Church prays daily Offic. B.
Mariae. in Litan.
to S. Nicolas, S. Martin, S. Sylvester. S. Benedict, S. Dommik, S. Antonie,
and all other their own canonized and deified Saints, of whom they know not
but many may be Divils in hell. And Bp. Bale observes, that Engl. Votaries;
first book. Pref.
they have done as their old predecessors the idolatrous priests did by the
ancient Romans, they have set us up a sort of lecherous Gods to be worshipped in
our temples, to be our advocats, and to help us in our needs. Yea the Hethens
would marvel (as Tullie De not. Deor. l. 3.
tells us) that any should be so mad, as to believe that that thing which he
eats is his God: yet Antichristians beleev that they eat their God and maker,
when they eat their blasphemous Sacrament of the altar, which before they eat,
they Council. Trident. sess. 13. c. 5.
worship with divine honor. At Canterbury D. Fulk. answ. to a counterf.
Catholic. art. 6.
were kept the clowts that Thomas Becket did occupy to wipe of his sweat and to
blow his nose on: which were kissed as holy relics, and thought to be wholesome
for sick folks. Was there ever, may we think, more foolish idolatry, among any
paynims? Wherefore they are in many respects worse than the very Hethens: and it
is true which a learned man Ant. Sadeel resp. ad profes. fid. Mon. Buld. art.
ult.
has said, that their Church is like their Transubstantiation, accidents
without the true and proper subject.

Their allegation of 2 These. 2.4. that the Man of syn should sit as God in the
Temple of God, is before answered; and is but the misunderstanding of a phrase,
that if they would contend, they might as well prove, the Divil which appeared
to the Witch of Endor, was Samuel; because the scripture phrase says that
Samuel said to Saul etc. 1 Samuel 28 14.15 etc. Neither is Ezekiel. 43.7.8. fitly
joined with 2 These. 2. they should set the type from Bells Temple in Babylon,
where Dan. 1.2.
the vessels of Gods true Temple were holden captive: or from the Samaritans
Temple Joseph. Antiq. Iud. l. 11. c. 8.
builded by Sanballat on mount Garizim, whither the Apostate and wicked Jews
used to flee. And whereas they cite Zach. 6-12.13. it is direct against them,
for it shows not that the Branch (Christ) should build the Temple of the
Lord, and then leav it for the man of syn to be worshipped there as God; but
that Christ himself should also Zach. 6*13.
carry the glory, and sit and rule upon his throne, and be a Priest upon it;
and this we see accomplished in the Christian Church warring against the Beast:
for Rev. 11.19, and 15, 5.8. and 16, 1, 2 10.
out of the true temple, and from Gods throne there, do come plagues upon the
Beasts throne, and upon al his worshipers; and God contineweth still in Rev. 7,
15.17. and 14, 1, 2, 3, 4.
his temple, which the beast Rev. 13, 6
blasphemeth. And of this temple speaks Paul in Ephesians. 2, 11. where the true
God dwells by his spirit, verse 12. So 2 Cor. 6, 16. confirms this, saying;
what agreement has the temple of God with idols? but these would make
agreement, which will have the 2. These. 2.
Adversary Zach. 11.17.
the idol shepherd, there to sit, where also he is worshipped as God. And in
the words next before, what concord has Christ with Belial? 2 Cor. 6, 15. by
Belial, we may understand Satan or his eldest son Antichrist, the Hebrew word
being taking from 2. Sam. 23.6. where Belial, the company of wicked ones is
opposed to David's house, the father and type of Christ: and Sibylla prophesying
of Antichrist Oracul. Sibyl. l. 3.
calls him Belial, (in the Greek termination Belias). Now that which Paul
does most vehemently deny, these would affirm, in making such concord, that
where Belial sits as God, and is so worshipped; there Christ also sits
and blesses him and his worshipers, with the one true baptism, sealing up
unto them the forgivenes of synns, and life eternal. For so we have heard it
pleaded, that the baptism which the Antichristians have and use in Rome, is
the true, the one baptism spoken of Ephesians. 4, 5. How fitly may we put Mr Johnson
here, in mind of his Treat. of the Minist. p. 25.
own words cited from a Commenter on Dan. 11.34.35. of the wily whelps that
seek how to agree Belial with Christ, Jdols and the true worship in spirit;
thrusting the Pope and Christ both together into one poke.

Whereas they end their diverse respects, with a true church there, and a false
Church there: they conclude not the question, but closely turn it away. They
should prove her, that is the whore, to be Christ's true spowse and Church; if
so they could. For, there there may be a true Church, though she be none of it:
even as God had Ier. 51, 45.
his people in Babylon, and there he was a Ezekiel. 11, 16.
Sanctuary or Temple unto them: but the Babylonians were not the men: neither
was Bells temple, the Lords. But it may be they mean her self, by there: for
presently they prove it Advert. p. 64.
as Paul said of one and the same woman, she is dead and alive in diverse
respects, 1. Tim. 5, 6. A fit comparison: for Paul means that she was alive
in this natural life, but dead as touching spiritual life in God: and this is
very true in Antichrists synagogue: for Rev. 18.7
she lives in pleasure, and says in heart, J sit being a Queen etc. but as
touching life with God, she is Rev. 20.5
dead, and appointed to 2 These. 2.12.
damnation. We acknowledge therefore with them, that things are often in the
scriptures spoken in diverse respects, without observing whereof, men shall err
infinitely: but it is evil for men to make other respects then God makes; the
scriptures may easily be misapplied; as a little after, they bring us the
respect of Abraham unrighteous in himself, but righteous by faith, Romans 4.3.5.
I hope they will not apply this to that son of perdition, in 2 These. 2. for that
were a most wicked comparion. Yet thus they have shuffled together many
scriptures (whereby the simple may be deceived,) for to show things diversely
spoken, which none doubts off: but how soundly they have proved Antichrists
Church to be Christ's, let the judicious Reader give sete^ce. And let all that
fear God mind, whither such doctrines will not beat the path for all
licenciousnes. For although the scripture says, 1. Ioh. 3.8 and 5.18.
he that commits syn is of the Divil: and, we know that whosoever is borne
of God synneth not; but he that is begotten of God, keeps him self, and that
wicked one touches him not: notwithstanding, men may be as profane as Esau,
as filthy in life as Sodom, as idolatrous and synful as the Egyptians and
Babylonians, and yet if they will but call themselves Christians, and be
outwardly baptized, they may be blamed in words, and separated from by men: but
yet justified as Gods true Church, they and their seed in his covenant of
grace, and sealed with baptism, which is to remission of synns: and what need
they care for more? Who will fear his estate, or amend his life, for the
doctrine of such men, as pull down with the left hand, and build up with the
right? Is not this rather to Ezekiel. 13.22.
strengthen the hands of the wicked, that he should not return from his
wickedness, by promising him life? Moreover this acknowledging all that profess
Christ and are baptized, to be true Churches having the true baptism of God:
will necessarily draw unto a general communion with all such societies, where men
think actually no evil is committed, as may fall out often in the sermons of
Friars, Jesuits, and other false Prophets; for with true visible Churches and
members of Christ, who may not communicate, so it be not in evil? And thus
Christians may come to that vanity and co^fusio^ which was among the Hethens,
of whom an ancient Doctor August. de ver. rel. c. 1.
notes, that though they had infinite and contrary opinions about the Gods and
their religion: yet al of them kept communion together in their Temples and
sacrifices.

Whereas Mr. Ioh. Advert. p. 65.
refers us to his first writings, in answer to M. Jacob, page 7. and 13. and
47. as having then written somewhat tending this way, which now he pleads for:
the Reader may see (by comparing them) how far they differ. There, touching
England, Page 7.
he distinguishes between their Church estate, in respect whereof he is
persuaded they cannot be judged true Christians, and the personal estate of
some considered apart from their Church constitution, that they may well be
thought in regard of Gods election to be heyrs of salvation, and in that
respect true Christians: so in page 13. and 47. touching the Church of Rome,
and some Gods elect in it. Although in page 146 he is persuaded, whosoever
lives and dies a Papist and member of that Church of Antichrist, in the
knowledge, profession, and maintenance of that religion in the parts thereof,
can not of us be esteemed to live and dye in the estate of salvation. Now what
is that to his present plea, for the Church and baptism of Rome, but rather
the contrary. And for us, we never disputed with any touching Gods elect, which
we leave unto himself who only 2 Timothy 2.19.
knovveth those that are his. We deny not but there may be of the elect in all
false Churches: even as Satan has his reprobates in the true Churches. I hold
it presumption for any to limit God, by how small means, or mesure of faith and
knowledge he vvil save a man. Who dares deny but God had many elect among the
Hethens, after he had separated Israel from them? Yea God expressly said, wen
he made Israel his peculiar people, that yet Exodus 19.5.
all the earth was his, which are the words of the covenant Ezekiel. 16.8.
generally. Wherefore we leave Gods secret counsels to himself as Deuteronomy. 29.29.
he wills us; and do consider only the visible state of Churches, by the
rules of Gods Law and promises. Finally in that very book which he
mentions, how sharply In the preface, sect. 7.
does M. John's. inveigh against his opposers, and against M. Hooker (that
pleaded for the Church of Rome because of some truths there retained;) and
says, that what by the Prelates and their Proctours on the one hand, and the
Pharis^ical dawbing reformists on the other, all may justly fear, least the end
of that Church will be to look back not only in part, but even wholly to the
Romish Egypt and Sodom, and to wollow again in the same mire, from which they
would seem all this time to have been washed. When the Prelates and Reformists
shall see what the same man now writes himself, for that Romish Egypt: what will
they say, but that even he also is come to dawb with them for company; and fear
a further fall.

Of their judgment of the Church of Rome: translated out of M. Iunius.
To countenance their cause the more, they set it out with the name and
judgment of a learned man, now deceassed. Against who^ themselves wrote Letters
between M. Iun. and the exil. English Chapter at Amsterdam anno 1602.
heretofore; when they would have been loath to stand to his judgment. But what
will not men do, for help in time of need? The thing borrowed from him is in
deed his own judgment, rather then proof of argument: I shall therefore the more
briefly touch it, yet not meddling with the author (who I hope is at rest in the
Lord) but with these his translators.

Advert. page 100.
The Church of Rome (whereof they treat) is properly (they say) the company
which is at Rome, as Paul wrote Romans 1. abusively, it is all the Churches on
earth cleaving to it and the doctrine and constitution thereof. They treat of
the first, but would have men by proportion understand the same of the later. I
answer; A Church there was at Rome in Paul's time, Romans 1 7.8.
beloved of God, caled Saints, whose faith was published through the whole
world. A Church (or piece rather of a Church) there is at Rome now, 2 These.
2.4.8.11.12.
loathed of God, caled Rev. 18.^.3. and 16.14.
Divils: whose whordoms and abominations are famous through all the earth. In
deed and truth there is a great City spiritually caled Sodom, and Egypt and
Babylon, Rev. 11.8. and 16.19. dispersed over the world under the name of a
Christian Catholic Church, whose chief place and throne is Rev. 17.18.
Rome. As for the congregation of Saints that was there in Paul's time, it is
gone long since, and the 2 These. 2.
Man of syn with his worshipers, come in the place. Between these two, there is
no just proportion: for what concord has Christ with Belial? 2 Cor. 6.15.

The Church of Rome considered as a subject, (they say) has 2. parts, Pastors
and the flock of Christ, for which Church The Apostle of old gave thanks to God,
Romans 1, 8. Neither do we deny this subject to be at Rome eve^ at this day,
because we trust there is God caling, persons caled, and the caling it self yet
in her, which together in one, gives being to a Church. I answer, First, I
deny that God is there caling as in his Church, but the man of syn sitts there
as God, calling all to worship him, and his calling is by the working of Satan,
and in all deceivablenes of unrighteousnes among them that perish: and the
persons caled, are deluded to beleev lies. 2 These. 2.9, 10, 11. Al these
together, give being to Antichrists church, but not to Christ's. And we are sure
God caleth out of her, such as shall be saved, Rev. 18, 4. Their Rev. 9, 1, 2 3.
etc.
starr (or Bishop) is long since fallen from heaven: and in sted of Peter's
keys, he received the key of the bottomless pit, which he opened, and brought
up a smoke of heresies, and darkened all truth and means thereof, and sent abroad
his clergy the Locusts to sting and poison men's souls: by calling them from
God, to Rev. 9, 20
worship Divils: And these things Mr Iunius himself, has In annot on Rev. 9.
applied to the popish hierarchy.

Touching the papacy, (say they) or papal hierarchy caled ecclesiastical, we
say not that it is the church properly so caled, but an accident growing to the
church, and which covertly works against the life and health of the church.
For the papacy is an order, humane and naught; the church is an assembly
divine, etc. And after they say, page 105.
The papacy is in the church as the order of apostasy in the house of God 2
These. 2. the man of syn sits in the temple of God, with his whole order or
rank of Apostates: and the Temple of God consists not in that order and
number of Apostates, which is a thing most strange and furthest off. And again,
the papacy is a poison in the Church, which must needs be vomitted out if it
will be preserved, or else the Church will be extinguished by it, if it suffer
that poison to prevayl and possess all the veyns of the body. I answer, true it
is, and I agree with them, that the rank of Apostates, is far from being Gods
temple: whereupon I assume, the whole popish church, priests and people are a
rank of Apostats; because they worship Rev. 13, 4. and 14, 9, 10.
the Beast, who shows himself there for God, where the Pope is acknowledged
to be Council. Lateran. Sess. 6.
the Lion of the tribe of Judah, the root of David, the Savior and deliverer:
they worship Divils and Idols of silver and gold, Rev. 9.20. and their belief
is in lies 2 These. 2.11, 12. therefore the whole popish Church being a rank of
Apostates, is a Temple of Antichrist, but not of Christ. Secondly, (to take
that which they grant,) the papal Hierarchy ecclesiastical, if it be no part
of the body of the Church, but an accident, a poison, a gangrene, an ulcer
eating the body: what shall we think of all the actions of that ecclesiastical
hierarchy, their ministration of sacraments, their making of ministers, and
the whole Church administration, by that rank of Apostates, they cannot
possibly be the actions of the body, of the Church, neither of Christ. Can a
scab or gangrene perform any action of a natural body or member? And now what
is become of their true baptism, and ordination of Ministers before pleaded
for? these will be but as the operation of the poison or fretting of the
gangrene, for they that did them, being the popish ecclesiastical hierarchy,
were no parts of the Church, but accidents, as the gangrene or pocks upon the
whores body, which consume life and grace, but give none at al. Thirdly, seeing
the popish ecclesiastical hierarchy, (which Council. Trid. sess. 23. can. 6.
consists of Bishops, Priests and Ministers,) are the poison and botches in
the body of the Church, and no parts of the same: how does God call in that
Church, as before they reasoned? For his ministry is not among them; as for
his word, the people have it not so much as to read; and the service of their
Gods, is in a tongue that they understand not: what now is the means of their
caling? Fourthly, compare this with their former plea for the Eldership and
Ministry, when they could Treat. on Mat. 18. p. 24.
not find the Church to be caled the body of Christ, house, city, or Kingdom,
unless it had officers etc. Now for Rome they will have it the body of Christ,
house and Temple of God, ministering true baptism, etc. and yet the
ecclesiastical hierarchy are no parts or members, but scabs on the body. But
the truth is, these Egyptian boyles, the hierarchy, ar the chiefest parts of
the body of that Antichrist: which in some respect may be likened to the Image
that Nebuchadnezar saw, Dan. 2.31. etc. The Pope with his triple crown, who is
proclaimed for a Lib. Benedicti de Benedictis, printed at Bononia an. 1608.
Vice-God, the invincible Monarch of the Christian common wealth, and vehement
conserver Pontificiae omnipotentiae.
of the popish omnipotency: he is the ^ead of Gold. The Cardinals and prelates
are next him as breast and arms of silver; the other belly^God Clergy, is the
strong brazen paunch, and the Lay people, are as the legs and feet of iron and
clay, which carry and bear up the bulk: and the Rev. 16.13.14. 2 These. 2.9.
unclean Spirit of Satan gives life and effectual operation to this Beast. For
to be a member of this their body and Church, the papists themselves Bellar. de
eccles. l. 3. c. 2.
profess that there is not any inward virtue required: so then there is no need
of the spirit of God, to join these limms of the Beast together.

But they proceed and say, that Advert. page 106.
On Gods behalf it is altogether a Church, whersoever there is found a company
caled of God with his caling by the spirit and the holy scripture, and the
ministry of persons ordained for holy things and divine actions. And a little
after, page 108.
After this manner do we esteem of the Church in which the papacy is, God
caleth her with his caling by his spirit and word, and publik record of that
holy marriage, the scripture, and the ministry and things and holy actions,
which before we have briefly reckned up. I answer; if men's eyes did not dazel
with looking on Rev. 17, 4.
the beauty of the harlot, I marvel how they could so esteem of that Church,
which has for her hierarchy (as even now they confessed) a rank of Apostates,
no members but ulcers of the body. And are they now with another breath, become
an holy ministry of God? Most strange it is that men should publish their own
esteemings, without any word of God to warrant them. But let us bring them to
the trial. They say, God caleth her by his spirit and word: but Paul says, God
shall send them strong delusion that they should beleev lies, 2 These. 2.11. and
this we see verifyed, by the manifold heresies, idolatries, blasphemies
wherewith the whole body of that Church is poisoned. They say God caleth her
with his spirit: the Apostle says, strong is the Lord God which will condemn
her, Rev. 18, 8. and with the spirit of his mouth, he will consume that lawless
one, 2. These. 2, 8. And whereas they call the scripture, the publik record of
that holy marriage between God and her: the scripture shows no such marriage,
but does defye her as an Rev. 17.1
harlot: where is the record that Christ was ever married to the Rev. 17, 8
Beast that came up from the bottomless pit? If her having the book of holy
scripture in an unknown tongue, wickedly abused to mainteyn her whordoms and
abominations, and subjected to the interpretation of her so caled, Entrav. in
Joan. 22, c. cu^ inter in glossa.
Lord God the Pope, be a record of that holy marriage; the Jews which have
Moses and the Prophets red and expounded in their mother tongue, have better
records; and so they, and all heretical assemblies in the world, among whom the
Bible is, must be judged Gods true Churches. Let us add hereunto the testimony
of men, and touching our own county. D. Fulk answers the Papists thus, Answer
to a counterfeyt catholic. art. 21.
you taught the people nothing else but to pronounce and that full ylfavouredly
like popingeyes, certain Latin words which they understood no more then stocks
or stones. So that the people had no instruction from you, no not of the name
of God in many places, but that they received by uncertain talk of their
parents, as it were from hand to hand. For how many thousand parishes are here
in England, that within these things be printed anno 1577.
these 60. years would declare that they never heard sermon in their life. As
for that they heard of their service, they learned as much of it, as of the
ringing of their bells, which was a sound without understanding. These things
being so, what caling had the poor seduced people more then among the heathens.

page 107.
We will make the matter plain (say they) by a similitude from Ier. 3. A wife
being filthy with adulteries, if her husband will pardon her, and consent to
receiv her, she abides still his wife etc. So a church overflowing with
adulteries etc. I answer, God (if it were granted that he is the husband of
this whore,) has promised her no pardon, but delivered her to Satan, to be
seduced, deluded, damned 2 These. 2.9, 11, 12. Secondly I deny that this harlot
was ever Christ's spouse, otherweise then all the world was, by our first parents
Adam and Noah. For this is not she unto whom Paul wrote Romans 1. but an other of
whom he prophesied, 2 These. 2. She succeeds in the same place, as the night
succeeds the day. The Church in Paul's time, came from heaven, Rev. 21.2. and
is long since gone to God: this came up from the bottomless pit; Rev. 17, 8.
and thither she must return. She is of an other religion, the daughter of a
strange God. But they allege, touching the election (as is said of the Jews,
Romans 11.28.) she is beloved for her fathers sakes. I answer, first then this
proves rather the Jews at this day a church; for still they are loved for
their fathers sakes: and shall be called again, as The Apostle there shows.
Secondly, if the Jews are beloved for their good fathers sakes: then Rome may
well be hated for her evil fathers sakes. For who were her fathers, but the
Gentiles, Sodomites and Egyptians; Rev. 11, 2, 8, 18. not the Romans 1.
saints in Rome; for she is not of their faith and sanctity. But you will
say, she is the natural posterity of them. Nay, there is not so much as
likelihood thereof, much less any certainty. For besides the bloody persecutions
in those times, that did cut off the godly; there were after that, many changes
of the Roman state, and great co^motions, that heavens departed away as a
scrol when it is rolled, every mountayn and i will were moved out of their places,
Kings, Captayns and all sorts of men sled and hid themselves; Rev. 6, 14, 15,
so great were the troubles of those times. And for particulars, Alaricus with
his Goths above a thousand years ago, did Hierony. in epist. ad Princip. de
obit. Marcel.
take, spoil and burn Rome, in the year of Christ 414. After that again within
44. years, Gensericus with his Vandals Blond^ l. 6 decad. 1.
took and spoiled it, and Rome for a time remained without any inhabitant. A
few years after, Chron. Carrion. l. 3.
did Odoacer with an other company, invade Italy and conquer Rome, put the
Emperor to flight, made himself King, and did much spoil. Then Theodoricus and
the Ostrogothes took it; and after him again Bellisarius with his army, wann
it: But above al, Totilas King of the Goths, in the year of our Lord, 546.
after all the former invasions, Blond^ l. 6. decad. 1.
did overthrow Rome quite, cast down the walls, burn the howses, and made it so
desolate, that there remained in it neither man nor woman. These turmoiles in
Rome, within the space of a few years, being observed, and the possessing of
that land by those forreyners the Goths, who Sabellic^ En. 8. l. 5.
mixed them selves with the people, and degenerated into the name of Jtalians,
and other plagues afterward Blond l. 2. d. 2. Fascic. temp. f. 66.
by the Saracens that killed innumerable sowls in Rome and Italy: these and
the like may teach us, how unpossible it is to show that the present church of
Rome, is so much as the natural posterity of the Saints in Paul's time: though
if they were, yet would it help them no more in this estate, then the
Ismaelites and Aedomites which were the natural seed of Abraham. And Adonisedek
with his Amorites and Iebusites in Jerusalem, ( Josh 10, 1. etc,) may as well be
justified to be Gods true Church, because of Melchisedek King and Priest of
God, who with his faithful company dwelled there 5. or 6. hundred years before:
Genesis 14, 18. etc. as the popish Beast with his Jesuits and marked slaves at
this day, may be pleaded for, because of the godly that lived in Rome 15, or
16. hundred years agone. And thus their reasons from Israel, are also
impertinent to this estate: they might well serve for the times wherein John
lived, when the true Rev. 2, and 3. chapters
Churches were many of them apostate: but the Egyptians and Babylonians are
shadows of our Antichristians, among whom their hethenish abominations are
spiritually accomplished. Rev. 11.^.

But they plead still, Advert. p. 108.
Jn that the Church of Rome has all the divine things in the scriptures, it is
of God and a Church: in that it has them al corrupt, that is of it self, and
it is a corrupt Church. The Church is not taken away by corruption, unless it
be total etc. I answer still they take for granted, that which they should
prove; and which I have before again and again disproved. It is not properly
the old Church of Rome corrupted; but a new church arisen out of the bottomless
pit, carrying the show and titles of the old. It is not the woman Rev. 12, 14
fled into the wilderness: but an other woman Rev. 17.1 18.
or city, reigning over the Kings of the earth. The Lamb Christ is not there,
as on mount Sion with his 144. thousand, having his fathers name written on
their forheads: Rev. 14, 1. but the Wolf Antichrist with his Mat. 7, 15. Rev.
13, 11.
sheeps skyn and lambs horns, is there with his army of Canaanites as Rev.
16.16. Judge. 5.19.
on mount Maggedon. At first those Gentiles invaded the courts of Gods temple,
and trod down the holy city, Rev. 11.2. as the Babylonians of old dealt with
Gods sanctuary: Ps. 79.1. etc. Ier. 51.1.3. etc. Lam. 1.10. If that army of
infidels were Gods true Church: so is the synagogue of Antichristians. And the
Hethens in their altars, temples, sacrifices etc. had the divine things of God
among them, as well, if not better, then has the man of syn and his worshipers,
in their sacrifice of the Mass, and other manifold idolatries. The duty of
those that are in the popish Church and see their corruptions, is (they Page
111.
say) such as of those children that dwell with their adulterous mother: that
is, to abhor her syn, with speech and sign to call her back from evil, and
absteyn themselves from it, and in all things cleav to their father, and betake
themselves into his closet etc. I answer, thus it appears, that these our
opposites are returned to acknowledge the whore of Rome to be their mother:
whom they feign to be as woman which Advert. page 105.
lies in a deadly sort swollen with waters of the dropsy, or with poison,
which Page 106.
had long ago given up the ghost, if God by the imposition of his grace etc.
had not nourished and kept her warm. Now to leav their mother thus on her sick
bed, as they have done M. John's. Treat. of the Minist. page 60-62.
(disclayming al Christian duty unto her which is due to a true Church in
corruption,) is but the part of unnatural children. Whiles God does nourish
and keep her warm, will they quite abandon her? let them return and cherish her
also, and al her members, and see if there be any baulm to heal her wounds, and
to comfort her. As for us, we have been taught of God, that in respect of him
she is dead long ago in her syns; (Rev. 20.5. with Ephesians. 2.1.) having been
the Rev. 20.4. and 13.4.
marked whore and worshiper of the Beast, from which death she is not risen to
live and reign with Christ. Although to this world, she lives and reigns in
pleasure, til at one day death otherwise also come upon her, and she be burnt
with fire, Rev. 18.7.8. And then shall we be so far from mourning at her
funeral, as we shall rejoice Rev. 18.20.
with the heavenly multitude, and sing Hallelujah, when God has given Genesis
19.28.
Sodoms judgment on her, and we see her smoke rise up for evermore, Rev. 19,
1.2.3.

Finally, to back M. Iunius judgment, they Advert. Page 113.
cite Amandus Polanus, and Bart. Keckerman, who said that Antichrist shall sit
in the temple of God, not Jewish but Christian, etc. and as a rotten apple is
an apple but corrupt; so that Church is corrupt etc. I answer, they may I
confess cite diverse men, that were mistaken, in judging of that rotten church,
which will help these our opposites nothing, who have seen and acknowledged
better, and now go back. Bernard was a learned man in his time, and is counted
a Saint, and he plainly reproved many Romish abominations, and said, Bern. Ep.
125.
the beast in the Revelation, which has a mouth speaking blasphemies,
occupies Peter's chair: yet himself doted overmuch upon the bewty of that
harlot, when he wrote thus at an other time to her Leman the Pope, Bernard, de
Consid. l. 2.
Thou art the great sacrificer, the chief Priest, thou art Prince of Bishops,
heyr of The Apostles; thou art in primacie Abel, in government Noah, in
patriarchship Abraham, in order Melchisedek, in dignity Aaron, in authority
Moses, in judgship Samuel, in power Peter, in anointing Christ. It is not
therefore to be marveiled at, though wise and godly men be mistaken; for in many
things we syn all. Jam. 3, 2. But I have showed how the scriptures do judge of
this Rev. 18, 23.
sorceress; and could also allege many learned men's judgments; but I will go
no further then our own country. Mr Cartwright speaking of the baptising of
children says, 1. Reply to D. Whitgift, p. 137.
Jf both (parents) be Papists, or condemned heretics etc. their children cannot
be received [to baptisme] because they are not in the covenant etc. And again,
2. Reply p. 146.
Jf the corruption be such as destroys the foundations, as in the Arians
which overthrow the person of Christ, as in the Papists which overthrow the
office of Christ, they being no Church, ought to have no privilege of the
church. Mr Perkins, writes thus, Perk. Expos. of the Creed: tit. Church.
As for th'Assemblies of Papists, understanding companies of men holding the
Pope for their head, and believing the doctrine of the council of Trent; in
name they are caled Churches, but in deed they are no true or sound members of
the catholic church; for both in their doctrine, and in their worship of God,
they raze the very fou^datio^ of religion. And again; Ibid.
It is no more a church in deed, then the carkes^ of a dead man, that wears a
living man's garment, is a living man, though he look never so like him. And
again; he has a treatise and Assertion, that A reprobate may in truth be made
partaker of all that is contained in the religion of the church of Rome, and a
Papist by his religion cannot go beyond a reprobate: and brings 4. arguments
for proof hereof, and ends with this Corolarie, that A man being endued with
no more grace then that which he may obteyn by the religion of the Church of
Rome, is still in the state of damnation. D. Fulk, answering the counterfeit
Catholic says Answer to art. 11.
It is evident that the true Church decayed immediately after the Apostles
times: and tells the Papist Answer to a^t. 20.
you cry the Catholic Church, the Catholic Church, when you have nothing in
deed, but the Synagogue of Satan. Again Ibid. answer to ar. 29.
The Church of Antichrist is founded upon 7 hills, Rev. 17. upon the
traditions, dreams, fantasies and devises of men etc. Therefore (says he) in
no wise may she be called the city of God, but Babylon the mother of
fornication, Sodom, and Egypt, where our Lord is daily crucified in his
members. D. Willet answering Bellarmin says Synopsis Papismi. Contr. 2. of the
Chapter q. 5. part. 2.
We deny utterly that they are a true visible Church of Christ, but an
Antichristian Church, and an assembly of Heretics, and enemies to the Gospel of
Jesus Christ. Again he says Ibid. Co^tr. 4. q. 10.
2. These. 2. he shall sit in the temple of God, that is, the visible Church,
that which sometime was the true visible Church, as the Church of Rome, and
after should be so taken, reputed and challenged, as it is at this day by the
Papists etc. He shall sit in the Temple of God, that is, take upon him the name
and title of the Church, and yet an adversary unto it. And again, Ibid. par. 9.
The Turk is out of the Church, and so in truth is the Pope, but yet he
challenges to him and his, the name of the Church. M. Bale Image of both
churches; in the pref.
compares the Pope and Turk together, thus, So glorious are the pretenses of
Romish Pope and Mahomet, that they seem unto them which regard not these
warnings, the very Angels of light, and their Churches most holy congregations,
being very devils, with the very dregs of darkness. The Pope in his Church has
ceremonies without number, none end is there of their babbling prayers, their
portases, bedes, temples, altars, songs, howrs, bells, images, organs,
ornaments, Jewels. lights, oilings, shavings etc. that a man would think they
were proctours of paradise. On the other side Mahomet in his Church is
plenteous also in holy observations, they wash themselves often, frequent their
temples, pray 5. times in the day, they reverently incline, they lie prostrate
on the ground, they fervently call to God, Dan. 7. O^colampad. in Daniel.
they absteyn from wine, they abhor idols etc. But unto what end this holiness
leads, the sequel declares. Daniel makes these two but one, because they
are both of one wicked spirit etc. The Pope makes his boast, that he is the
High Priest, he is of equal power with Peter, he cannot err, he is head and
spouse of the Church etc. Mahomet braggeth also that he is that great Prophet,
the promised Messiah, the Apostle of both testaments etc. He is well contented
that Christ be an holy Prophet, and a most worthy creature, yea the word of
God, the sowl of God, and the spirit of God, conceived of the Holy Ghost, but
he will in no case grant him to be the Son of God, nor that he dyed here for
man's redemtion. Both these two mainteyners of mischief allow Moses law, the
Psalter, the Prophets, and the Gospel, yea they commend them, advance them,
sing them, read them, honor them etc. yet will they have their own filthy laws
preferred above them, the Pope his execrable decrees, and Mahomet his wicked
Alkoran: else will they murder men without measure. Thus though they outwardly
appear very virtuous, yet are they the malignant Ministers of Satan, denying
the Lord which has redeemed them. By these may we mesure their inferior
Merchants, having their livery and mark. I might allege many more, especially of
the Martyrs in England, which dyed in this testimony against that false whore;
but it is enough that Gods word does condemn her, as before is manifested.

The 6. point of difference: in the letter.
WE had learned Confess. art. 38.
that al particular congregations are by all

With this they join the 9. out of the printed copy, to the effect of the
former.

Against this they except, 1. that though for some reasons they absteyned from
desiring it, or sending for them, or giving their consent so to do: yet they
were content to permit it: which was not a denying of the practice of it, as
the printed copy objecteth etc 1 Cor. 7.6. Deuteronomy. 24.1. I answer; the scriptures
on which we grounded that article, being Act. 15. chap. 1. Cor. 14.33.36. show
an other manner of duty, then a permission. For when dissension had arisen in
the church of Antioch, they Act. 15.2.
ordained that some should go up to Jerusalem, unto the Apostles and Elders
about the question. And the messengers were verse. 3.
sent forth of the Church, and verse. 4.
were received by the Church at Jerusalem, and the Apostles and Elders, who
ver. 25.
came together with one accord, and after discussing and agreement, wrote to
the Church of Antioch, what had verse. 28. etc.
seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to them. And Paul shows a reason of such
mutual intercourse, when he says, Came the word of God out from you either
came it unto you only? 1 Cor. 14.36. Wherefore seeing the word of God, was come
unto the Church of Leyden, as unto us; and considering the practice that was in
the APOSTOLIC Churches heretofore, and our profession to walk according; it is
but a sorry answer to say they would permit of it, if others did it; as Moses
Deuteronomy. 24.1.
permitted the bill of divorse, for Mat. 19.8.
the hardness of men's hearts; and as Paul spoke a thing 1 Cor. 7.6.
by permission, not by commandment. For we think those Apostolical practices,
Act. 15. to be in sted of commandments unto us, Philip. 3.17. And our
Confession notes it as a duty, even by all means convenient. By this al may
see, how weak a defense they make, for their proceedings.

Their reasons follow; 1. that the other Church and we were in peace together:
and if by this occasion the peace should be broken, they should not say, they
sent for the^. I answer, this exception will lie against al Churches in the
world that are at peace: and might have been objected by the contentious at
Antiochia; Act. 15. and will be color to cut off al use of that practice, and
of our former profession. 2. That the Church of Leyden was in the same error
with us who desired their help. I answer; this also might the troublers of the
Church in Antioch, have objected as colourably against the Church of Jerusalem,
Act. 15. and it is a bar to cut of al help from other Churches. Yea if any
heresy be raised by the officers in a Church, contrary to their former faith:
they may thus except against al Churches, unless they will fall into the same
errors with them.

3 Thirdly they allege former experience with others. I answer, we never had
experience of the like: M. Smyth in deed leaving the truth, and broaching his
heresy against the translated scripture, would needs publish it in our Church.
It is one thing to raise up a new error, as did he: an other thing to mainteyn
the ancient faith, as did the Church of Leyden with us. So that which they
fourthly allege, is but a pretense that al will make, be their errors never so
new; and they that urged circumcision Act. 15. could plead the ancient practice
in Israel, far better then these our opposites can do for the power of their
Eldership.

4 Their next exception about a letter written by some to that church, a copy
whereof was desired, but not granted etc. is an occasion taken by that accident.
But they know, that before that letter was written, they signified their
unwillingnes to entreat their help: and now were glad, that they had gotten a
show to hold them off. 2. For the Letter mentioned, I did think it was meet
they should have sent it, and so I wish they had: though they showed reasons of
their not doing it for the present, but have since that time sent the^ a copy.

5. They next object, my own subscribing of those letters to Leyden etc and ask
whether I denied the practice of that article etc. I answer; first I had sundry
times signified in public my mind, that their help should be desired in the
end, if we could not agree, but we would first use al means among our selves:
and so I never was of their mind, who refused absolutely to desire their help;
and this they well know. Secondly, I subscribed those Letters, because I thought
it meet that a copy of the foresaid letter should have been sent, as before I
signified. Thirdly for the last letter (which to my remembrance I consented
to,) they know I refused to subscribe it, til some words which implied an
absolute denial of requesting their help, were put out and changed. Fourthly,
when no means among our selves could end the strife, they know, how I both
entreated them to consent they might be sent for: and when they would not, my
self went and obtained their coming. In deed I was loath to trouble them
without urgent cause; and with my brethren now opposite, I sought to nourish
peace, and it may be more then I should; which now they thus return upon me:
and I therefore shall bear, and make use of it for hereafter.

6. Of their reasoning with them when they came from Leyden, it is not to the
point in hand. Yet how unwilling they were even to admit of it, all present
then did see: and the Elders of the church of Leyden, as occasion is can
testify. But I forbear to insist upon particulars: which are not so profitable
for the readers.

7. Finally they ask why we did not desire the counsel and help of the Dutch
and French churches? I answer, first these our opposites with us, had before
dealt with them against their errors in this and other points, so far as we
could, and ended with them. What reason had we now to call for them to defend
that error which our whole church had condemned? Secondly, they could not
discuss the controversy in our English tongue, to the understanding of our
Congregation now troubled: no nor of al our Elders. Thirdly, these that thus
object, did not (to my remembrance) desire any such thing: if they had, I
should not for my part have refused so absolutely as did they. But thus have
they turned every stone, to see if they could find any color, for
vvithstanding the help of the Church of Leyden: with what weight and
equity, let the prudent judge.

Of the 7. articles which they object unto us; as contrary to our former
profession.
They Advertis. p. 27.
pretend more sound and better observations that they could send and spread out
against us. Let us bring them to the trial.

Co^fess. art. 10.17.19.20. Counterp. p. 175^ 176. Defe^se against Mr Smyth. p.
126.127.128. and in other Treatises.
1. Whereas ( say they) we had learned and professed, that Christ was the only
King and Lord of his Church, and had left unto it among men but a ministerial
government, and that all the multitude of the members the saints, ought to
obey and submit to the Eldership in every Church: Now we have lately been
taught, In their dispute against us: and in Mr Rob. Iustif. p. 217.225. etc.
that the people as Kings have power one over an other: and that the saints
being Kings are superior to their officers, because the order of Kings is the
highest order or estate in the Church, and so an order superior unto, and
above the order of the officers or Eldership. Also that the church may in
relation to the officers, being servants therein, be called a Lord etc.

I answer; first our former profession touching Christ the only King and Lord,
we hold it firm in all points as before; and never had so much as a thought to
reason against it. Secondly for the ministerial government of the Church by the
Officers, we never disputed against it: but do still acknowledge the whole
Church and every member is to submit unto their ministration in the Lord. Our
controversy was about the Churches power, as we have page 10.
before manifested. Thirdly, for the people being Kings, we neither taught nor
do teach otherweise then as we always Confess. art 17.
professed; namely that they are a 1. Pet. 2, 9
royal Preisthood, made by Christ unto God, both Rev. 5, 10.
Kings and Priests, and that reign on the earth: not one over an other, as they
speak, but one with another, in the fellowship of the faith of Christ. That
Refut. of Giffard. p. 75.
every Christian is a Rev. 1, 6. Psalm. 149.
King and Priest unto God, to spy out, censure, and cut down syn as it
arises, with that two edged sword that proceeds out of Christ's mouth. These
things heretofore both we and they professed: which now they would injuriously
turn to be against Christ the only King, and against the ministerial government
of his officers: such collections, as we think our common adversaries (that
make conscience of their words*) would be ashamed for to make. Touching Mr.
Robinsons book which they allege, I have desired himself to answer, which he
was willing to do, and has written as follows.

Mr Robinsons answer.
Because Mr Johnson has in his page 27.
Answer touching the division expressly taxed my book against M. Bernard, I
think it meet to insert a brief answer to his exceptions, as follows. He
there writes thus.

Whereas we had learned, and professed that Christ was the only King, and Lord
of his Church, and had left unto it among men, but a ministerial government,
and that all the multitude of the members, the saints ought to obey, and
submitt to the Eldership in every Church: Now we have lately been taught, that
the people as Kings have power one over another: and that the saints being
Kings are superior to their officers, because the order of Kings is the
highest order in the Church etc. Also that the Church may in relation to the
officers being servants therein, be caled a Lord, etc. And for this he quoteth
my book, p. 217 225. adding that I advance the people one above another as
Kings, entitle them with kingly and lordly power in the outward policy and
affayrs of the church, by which as the Prelates on the one hand, so the people
on the other hand become idols.

Acknowledging the former and latter part of that he says we have formerly
professed, I except against the middle clause of the sentence, in sundry
respects. First, in that he draws the question, which is about the power of
Christ in the Church (common to all) to the government and guydance of the
Church in the use of this power, which is peculiar to the officers: which may
also more clearly appear to him that reads the places he quotes in the
margent, wherein he concludes (though more covertly) a double untruth: the
one, that, because the government of the Officers is only ministerial and not
Kingly, therefore there is no Kingly power left unto the Church, or
communicated with the Saints for the suppressing of sin: the other that,
because the Officers are the only governors of the Church, and so by us
acknowledged, therefore they only have the power of Christ. And thus he would
closely wrap up the Churches power, in the officers government, and not be seen
in it. For the clearing then of the difference between government, and power;
it must be considered, that by government may either be understood the whol^
^^^^ensation of Christ's Kingly office, whither inward, or outward, whither by
himself or up others: and so this power, we speak of, is comprehended under it
as a part thereof. Or it is taken more strictly for the guidance, and ordering
of the Church in her Public affairs, and the administration, and exequution
of them: and so it apperteyneth to the Officers and is clean another thing then
the power in question. For the proving of this difference. The Apostle Paul
wrytes to the whole Church of Corinth to excommunicate the incestuous man, 1.
Cor. 5.4.5.
by the power of the Lord Jesus Christ. This Power he would have the whole
Church to use; but yet would not have the whole Church to become governors,
nor to take upon them government, but the officers only: by which it appears
that government, and power, are diverse things. I do further add, what if the
whole Eldership should be charged by 2. or 3. witnesses, with heresy,
blasphemy, or the like crime, and complaynt thereof be made to the Church? Mr.
Johnson in this his p. 47.
Answer confesses that the Church (he would be asked whither women and
children or no,) may depose al her officers jointly, persisting in
transgression, though in the same place he mince the matter too small, in
saying they may depose, or refuse them, and separate from the^, and again,
refuse them. Whereas to depose, and to separate from, or refuse, are very
diverse, For 1. to separate from the Eldership requires no power, but liberty,
and therefore may be done by one man, or woman, upon just occasion: so cannot
deposition be, upon any occasion, but by the Church: for which deposition of all the officers of the kingdom of Christ, the church; a man would think the power
of Christ were needful, and that by it such a judgment should pass out.
Besides, the Church in deposing her officers, does not separate her self from
them, (to speak properly) but them from her. Well, to take the least liberty he
will give the people. If they may separate from al their officers persisting in
transgression, then they must receive the complaynt of sin, which is orderly
brought, and by sufficient witnesses, against them, and must examine, and judge
the matter. Now if it argue power to receive a complaynt of sin against one
brother, and to examine, and judge it, and so to censure him by
excommunication, if there be cause; does it not also argue power to receav a
complaynt of sin against all the officers, to examine, and judge it, and so to
censure them, as their is cause, by deposition? But what now shall the Elders
do accounting themselves innocent, and wrougfully accused, whilst the Church
thus examineth things, and judges of them? Shall they sur^ease their
government, and fayl the Church in so great a ^eed? and would M. Johnson so
practice? or are they not now to do a special work of their government, not
only in preserving order, but in directing, instructing, and guiding the
Church by the wod of God in her whole procedings. By which it appears, that
judging of sin, and power to suppress it, is one thing, and government for the
right use, and ordering of the same, another thing. The officers which are
judged do govern, and the bod^ of the Church which judges them, is governed by
them. We may yet further see this difference even in the Lordly governments of
this world, and that both in Peace and War.

In the civil government of our own land, (then the which none in the world in
the right use of it is more excellent,) when a malefactor comes to be arraigned
at the Assizes, or Sessions, he is to be tried by his country, (a competent
company, where all cannot possibly pass upon him) which they call the Jury,
whose power and sentence is of such force, as that the Lord Chief justice
himself, and all the Bench with him cannot proceed against it, either for the
quitting or co^demning of the person: and yet the Bench governs the whole
action, and the Jury is by them, according to law, to be governed. I wish the
Elders with who^ we have to do, would allow the body of the church the like
liberty, at their Sitting, as they call it, that is, at their spiritual
Sessions: or rather that they would better consider, that they are as Ministers
to Number. 16, 9 2. 2 Chro^. 35, 3.2. Co. 4, 5.
stand, and serve, and not as Lords to sit, and judge.

Lastly when an army is sent against the Kings and their own enemies, the
government is in the Captains, and Officers, but so is not all the power for
fighting with, and subduing of their, and their kings enemies. Neither is all
the power of the church, which is an army with banners, in the officers alone,
for the the subduing of Christ's, and their enemies, sin, and Satan, though the
government be. Thus may the difference plainly be seen betwixt power, and
government: in the opening of which I have been the longer, See for this,
Iustif. of separation page 134 135.
because 1. I think it a mayn ground of our controversy. 2. Our opposites do
much insult over us, as speaking contradictions, when we yield the officers all
the government, and yet deny the^ all the power.) 3. The weaker sort ar much
misled, and carried away thorough want of discerning this difference.

I proceed to a second thing, and affirm, that Christ has not left to the
church among men only a ministerial power (which he confusedly calls
government) as he says. He has left the word of God, and gospel in the
church, which is lively, and mighty in operation, Heb. 4 12. 2. Cor. 10.4, 5.
peircing even to the dividing asunder of the soul, and spirit etc. ruling, and
reigning in, and over the very hearts, and lives of men; binding their
consciences: and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of
Christ. I know men can only minister this power, whither in doctrine, or
discipline, as they speak. But it is one thing to say the power is only
ministerial, and another thing, that men can only minister it. For men may be
the ministers only of that power, which is kingly, and Lordly in it self, and
so over men, as this is. So the saints can only minister their kingly power by
participatio^ of Christ's a^noynting, as one special grace they have received:
of which more hereafter.

Now in laying down the things, wherewith he charge me, he alters my words,
misinterprets my meaning, and conceals that which I have written, and he read,
in my book, for the explaning of the same.

And first he says I have taught that the people are as Kings one over
another; that I advance them one over another, as Kings, and above their
governors intitling the^ with Kingly, and Lordly power, (that is government, as
he explaines himself) in the outward policy of the Church.

I do not in these places, or any other, advance the people one over another,
much less over their officers, in the outward policy of the Church, that is
(as he explains his meaning) in the government of it. I do every where profess
the Officers the governors, and the people the governed by them.

Neither do I any where affirm, that the people ar Kings, or as kings one over
another, as he charge me. I say in one place, that the saints are not Kings
for themselves alone, page 226.
but for their brethren also, as they are not Priests only for themselves, but
for their brethren. And in another place, p. 133.
that every one of the faithful is a King, not only to him self, but to every
other member, as he is a Priest, and a Prophet etc. Here is a King one for
another, and one to another, but not one over another, (much less over the
officers) for government, in the external policy of the Church. The plain and
simple truth then is; whatsoever men either mistake of ignorance, or suggest of
an evil mind, that we do not call the saints Kings in respe^t of outward order,
and government, as though they were to order, and govern the Church in her
public affairs, which is the work of the Officers: but as they are partakers
of Christ's kingly anointing, by his spirit, common to the head, and the
members, and so Kings by participation, and endowed with kingly power, for the
co^quering and subduing of the power of sin, and Satan, not only in
themselves, but in their brethren also, by the sword of the spirit, the word of
God, which they are to minister unto them, as all other graces in their order.

And this meaning being held, it may safely be taught that they are over one
another, that is, to watch one over another, and so as kings to conquer their
spiritual enemies one in another mutually. But I will rather insist upon mine
own words, for, or to one another, as being most fit to show that communion of
the saints in this grace, as in the rest; which he also in all equity should
have done. And thus I will prove this royal communion of the saints. And for
them that make themselves merry herewith, Job. 21, 3.
let them suffer me to speak, and when I have spoken, let them mock on.

And first it must be observed that the place and scriptures which M. Johnson
notes in our Confession to prove Christ the only King of his Church, prove him
as well, (and that truly) to be the only Priest and Prophet of his Church. And
if notwithstanding his sole prophecy, and preisthood peculiar to him, as the
head, the saints may be Prophets and Priests as members, by communication, they
may also be Kings by communication notwithstanding his peculiar imperial
power. And so the scriptures testify that he has made us kings, and priests
unto God even his Father, and so our Father. Rev. 1.6 and 5.10.


But it will be answered, that Christ has made us Kings to resist, subdue, and
conquer our spiritual enemies, Sin, Satan, this world, and our worldly lusts,
by Ephesians. 6, 11, 17.
the sword of the spirit, the word of God, and the work of the spirit, in and
by the same. I grant it, and thereupon conclude, that since Gods people are also
by the same weapons, and means to resist and subdue the power of sin in their
brethren, II.
they are also kings in the same respec^, unto them.

The saints are Act. 11, 26 Romans 14.4, 5. 1. Cor. 12, 27.
Christians: and that for, and in respect one of another, III.
as members under Christ, one of another: and therefore Kings. For to be a
Christian for another, is nothing else but by participation of Christ's
annoynting, to be a Priest, Prophet, and King for another. Ad unto this, that
whatsoever grace any member of the body has received, it is for the use, and
edification of the rest, and so in order to be administered by him as a good
disposer of the grace of God. 1. Pet. 4.10
And must this royal grace then, which the saints have received, find no time
nor place for the dispensation of it, unto others?

When a brother comes to subdue, IIII.
and ma^e conquest of some spiritual enemy, or sin, appearing in his brother,
either privately, or publicly, in his place and order he does this as a
fellow member, and Christian, and so by one of his three states, and
indowments, of priest, prophet, or king (for he has no office, wherein he
administreth:) but by neither of the two former, therefore by the latter, and as
a king, and so made by Christ.

Lastly, the people are by M. Iohnsons own grant, V.
to choose their officers, as also upon just occasion to depose them. And this,
as the former, they do not as Priests, or Prophets, and therefore by their
kingly indowment from, and under Christ.

And thus much to prove the saints in their communion (as Priests to offer up
the prayers one of another, and Prophets to instruct one another, so also)
partakers of the kingly dignity of Christ, as his members, for the suppressing,
and conquering of sin appearing, one in another, in that order which Christ
has left. And where do I in all this, as is imputed to me, advance the people,
as others do the Prelates, and make them Idols? Do I give them power to
prescribe and appoint other forms of Gods worship, offices of Ministry,
canons, ceremonies, or holy days, then Christ has prescribed, and appointed?
to bind the conscience by urging subscription ex animo, to their own
inventions, or to loose conscience by dispensations to sin, as of pluralities,
non residencies, and the like? or that one man should set up, and pull down
ministers and excommunicate, and absolve both ministers, and people by his sole
authority? If another man should thus have charged Mr Iohnso^ when he
mainteyned the same liberty of the brethren (if nor greater) which I now do,
though it may be not under the same terms, he would have pronounced it
blasphemy in him. B passing by his terms of provocatio^, and reproach, I come
to another exception: which is, that I make the order of saints superior unto
the order of officers; to wit, in it self, as I there explayne my meaning* and
not in respect of government, as he traduceth me. I know that he which guides,
orders, and directs another, is in that his art, and work, superior unto
him that is so guided, ordered, and directed. So is the Pilote in guiding the
ship, superior, and above all the passengers in it, though the King, and his
Council: so is the Physician in ordering the kings body; as is also the
meanest guide in leading, and directing him, and his army Royal in unknown
places. So are the officers superior to the Church in their art, Iustific. p.
^18, 219.
or work of government* which is the opening and applying of the scriptures to
the use, and direction of the Church: but as this is done by them, in an order
of service, and not of Lordship, so I judge, and call them inferior. And so in
my book, I make them equal in their persons, as saints: superior in the word
they minister, and in the place of God: not so in their order of servants,
wherein they minister, but inferior.

page 217.
My reasons there brought to prove mine affirmation, because he here medles not
with, I also forbear in this place to confirm; only a few words of one of
them, upon which the next, and last exception depends. Which is, that the
order of Church Officers is inferior to the order of the saints, because their
order is an order of 2. Chron. 35.3. Number. 16.9. Eze. 44.11. 2 Cor. 4, 5.
service, and servants unto the saints the Church. I know Kings may be said to
serve their people, and so to become their servants, but this is only in
respect of their love toward them, and care for them; but not in respect of
their order, which is a Lordship, and Kingship, by which they reign over their
people, as their servants, and subjects. The like may be said of Christ
himself, as that he served his disciples, and became as a servant, etc. And for
that it must be considered, that as in the things wherein he did thus serve, and
become as a servant, he did in his love make himself inferior to his
disciples, and preferred the^ before himself: as in Math. 20, 28.
giving his life a ransom for many: in being Luke 22, 27
as he that serves at the table whereat his disciples sat, (in which respect
he expressly teaches the^ to be greater the^ himself:) and in washing their
feet as they sat at supper; so was not his order an ord of service in it self,
but of headship, Ioh. 13, 4, 5.
and kingship: which if our Ch:^officers could prove their order to be, we
would then acknowledge it in deed superior to the order of saints. But their
order being merely an order of servants, me thinks common sense should serve to
judge the same inferior to the order of the Church, whose servants under
Christ they are.

I ad in my book, page 225. that, the officers being by their order, servants,
the Church may in that relation be called a Lord: not for the governing of
them, in the outward policy, and affairs in the church, as he injuriously
collects: but as they are for the Churches use, and service; which he conceals:
though I expressly so note in the same place; as also that the same
Church-servants are Church Governors: the gogernment of the Church being a
mere service. And for the thing If the officers be to be called servants to the
Church, what is the Church to be called to the officers? A servant is a
relative, and must have a correlative: and I would know by what name he would
call it, if not by the name of Lord, Master, Mistress, or the like. And if he
deny this, he takes away from men the use of common reason, and understa^ding.
Let the servants know, yea though stewards, as are the Church Officers, add so
betrusted with the government in a special manner, that the wife of their Lord,
and Master, is a degree above the^, and so to be acknowledged by them: least
they not only wrong her, but provoke him to wrath.

Lastly, because he imputes new doctrine to me, I will note down the doctrine of
some few others, both more ancient, and more worthy of respect then my self.

Musculus in his Commentaries upon 1. Cor. 3, 22, 23, 24. Let no man glory in
men, for all are yours etc. says thus. Is it not absurd that the Major in
minore.
greater (to wit the Church) should glory in the less, (to wit the officers)
the Dominus.
Lord or master in the servant? And in this sense (says he further) the
perverseness of the false Apostles is noted, who when they were servants of the
Church, did make of a Domina.
Mistress, or dame, a servant, and of servants, Lords. And again the foolishnes
of the Church is taxed, who when they were Domini.
Lords of their Ministers, gloried in their servants.

Bullinger upon the same place, verse. 21. says thus. So great is the dignity
of them that beleev, that God has subjected all things unto the^. It is
therefore great folly if the Dominus.
Lord of things subject himself to the things etc.

Pareus professor of Heidelberg in his Commentaries, upon the same scripture,
reproving the churches glorying in Paul, C^phas, etc. and quoting 2 Cor. 4.5.
we preach not our selves, but Christ Jesus the Lord, and our selves your
servants, for Jesus sake, says thus. Non convenit Dominu^ gloriari in servo
suo. etc.
It is not meet that the Lord should glory in his servant: we are your
servants, Therefore etc.

All these, and many more, call the Church expressly a Lord, in the very same
relation with me: and yet I suppose, never man challenged them for making an
Idol of it, or setting up a Lordly government: neither would Mr. Johnson me,
had he not been immoderately jealous for the officers dignity.

John Robinson.


The 2 Article objected.
Confess. art. 24.
We professed heretofore, that Christ gave the power of receiving in and cutting
off, to the whole body together of every Christian congregation, and not to any
one or more members sequestered from the whole etc. Now we have been taught that
in cases of question and controversy, the greater part of the people are the
Church; though all the Elders and other brethren be against them, etc. and so
have the power to receiv in and cut off etc.

I answer, there is no contradiction in these things; we hold still in all points
according to the article alleged: neither ever taught we the people only to be
the Church sequestered from their officers; but the officers governing, and the
people governed, to be the Church which has the power, to use in holy order.
But if these officers fall into heresy or wickedness themselves, or to abett
wickedness in others, and will not be reclaymed by any holy means the Church can
use, then may they by the Church which chose them, be deposed, as unworthy of
their places, yea and excommunicated, and so al other impenitent sinners. and
this by the voices of the most of the congregation, if al consent not; as well as
members or officers are received in by the voices of the most, if some do
dissent: for there is one power for them both. And these our opposites must
either manifest, that if one or 2 officers or members do dissent in a
controversy, there is a sequestration of them from the whole, and the Church
then has not the power of Christ to receav in and cut off: or else al may see,
that this is a colorable accusation of theirs, and no contradiction of ours.
For if the consent of al and every one, be not necessaryly to be had, they
dissenting through their ignorance, frowardnes, or the like: the^ the most
voices must prevayl. But how far their new doctrine (that the Elders are the
Church,) is, both from our former profession and from equity, I have before
showed.

The 3 Article.
Cou^terp. page 177.
We wrote heretofore, that the Elders have the reyns of government committed to
them: now we are taught that the government of the church is not
Aristocratical, yea the people as Kings have the power etc.

I answer; we differ not from our former profession, but they deceiv the
reader, by turning government into power, which we in our publik profession
heretofore distinguished, and so do still: giving the government of the whole
Church, and all the actions of it, unto the officers: the power to the whole
body; and so to the officers with the people, as jointly Kings and Priests: of
which things we have spoken before. We never held the Church to be a mere
Aristocratie, as they speak, intending that the cratos or power should be in
the hands of a few: neither shall these men ever prove it. And in the book which
they cite, Cou^terp. page 177.
in the very same place (though they dissemble it,) we show the Church (not the
Elders only) to have Christ's 1. Cor. 5.4 12, 13.
power to judge al within the same; and that the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven
are committed to the whole Church, as the Protestants have heretofore testified
against the Papists. That these men do but feign contradiction, and would
blind the reader, by confounding the Churches power and government, as one.

The 4. article.
We professed hertofore, that no sacraments should be ministered, Confess. art.
34, etc.
until the Pastors or Teachers were chose^ and ordained into their office: now
it is held by some, that seeing all the holy things of God are the churches, and
people without officers are a church, therefore they may without officers have
the use of the sacraments and all the holy things of God, and consequently may
receive in by baptism, confirm by the Lords supper, cast out by
excommunication etc. And in this writing sent unto you, it may be observed, how
they infer that people without officers may cast out, and therefore may receiv
in, there being one power for both.

I answer; they wrong us, and abuse their readers. 1. There is not to my
knowledge (as before I page 66.
testified) any one man among us, that held or holds that people without
officers may have the use of the sacraments; but we all continue in the same
profession that we made before. 2. It is frawd, and abuse of the reader, and
injury to me, when they first speak of receiving in by baptism, and then
allege from my letter, that the people without officers may receiv in: as if
they would bear the world in hand, I therefore hold, they may baptize. Whereas
first the scripture shows that persons uncircu^cised (and consequently
unbaptised), may pass into the Church Covenant of the Lord, Deuteronomy.
29.10.11.12.13. compared with Jos. 5.2.5.

Secondly the children of the faithful, are born members of the Church, and are
in the covenant before they are baptized. Thirdly a man excommunicated, may be
received into the Church, yet not by baptising of him. And 4. we heretofore in
our Confession when we Confess. art. 34.
denied the sacraments in a Church without officers, yet Conf. art. 24. Apol.
p. 45.62.
professed they had then power to receiv in members. Wherein now are we contrary
to our former faith? Do not these things rather show, how they seek to make
strife, where none is.

The 5. article
Confess. art. 21. etc.
We had learned, that none may usurp or execute a ministry, but such as are
rightly caled by the Church whereof they stand ministers, unto such offices, and
in such manner as God has prescribed in his word: now it is held by some that
people out of office may execute all the works and duties of the ministry, for
baptism, Lords supper, censures etc. And these men in their second exception
here write, there is one power for receiving in and casting out, and that
people without officers may do both, as is observed before.

I answer; their frawd and wrongful dealing is also observed before; and here
to make their syn the more remarkable, they proclaym it the second time. Of
ministering the sacraments, and of receiving in and casting out of members, and
against usurping or executing a ministry without due caling, we hold as
always heretofore: they repete the same things, but to their own further
blame; for our professed enemies, do not ordinarily more wrest our words.

The 6. article
Co^fess. art. 1.10.17.18. etc. throughout.
6. We learned and used heretofore to apply to our estate and use, the things
that the scriptures teach concerning the governors and people in Israel. Now
we are excepted and opposed against, if we do so, with these exceptions and the
like, that they had civil authority and government, which the church has not;
that they could not in Israel forgive one an others syn, as we can now: that
the people now have more power then in Israel, because now we follow Christ into
heaven, whereas the people might not follow the high Priest into the most holy
place etc.

I answer; the right applying of our estate to Israel, we always have and still
do approve: but these men's wrested proportions, and making the Church in Mat.
18. to be the same with the Jews Synedrion or Sessions of civil Magistrates,
we do reprove, and so have done in our more ancient writings, Refut. of M.
Giff. page 76. etc. so that no new thing is done by us.

2. That private men forgave not synns in Israel, so absolutely touching the
Church order or polity, as Christians do now, is evident by the Law, which
bound the offender not only unto repentance and faith Act. 15, 9, 11.
in Christ, as also to Lev. 5.5.
confess his syn and satisfy his Lev. 6, 5.
neighbor offended; but withal to bring a trespass offering to the Priest, (the
minister of the Church,) that so the Priest making an atonement for him before
the Lord, it should be forgiven him, Levit. 6.2.5.6.7. Now under the Gospel,
the Law is, if thy brother trespass against thee rebuke him, and if he repent
forgive him: Luke 17.3. neither is such a man bound to go to a minister that
he may pray for, or forgive him; as the Papists by proportion Bellar. de
Poenit. l. 2. c. 3.
do gather. 3. That The Apostle also shows a difference of our Church estate
from the Jews polity, Heb. 9.7.8.9. etc. and 10.19.20. compared with Gal.
4.1.2.3. etc, is manifest: neither can our opposites deny it; only they cast
stombling blocks in the readers way: saying thus, 1. what if any other would
say, that Elders and Kings now should have more power then they had in Jsrael,
because they now follow Christ into Heaven etc. To omit their ill framing of the
reason, for their most advantage, I answer, they that would so say, should show
their ignorance, or a worse humor, Because Christ's Kingdom is not Ioh. 18, 36
of this world, neither meddled he with Magistrates power, but left it Romans 13.1
etc.
as it was, authorized of God his Father, and not subordinate to his
Mediatorship; as page 55.
before is showed: and therefore Magistracy has neither more nor less by him
now, then in Israel and former ages. But his Church, and so the Magistrates
therein as they are Christians, are advanced to a further degree of grace, then
they were in, under the rudiments of the Law, Gal. 4.3.4. etc.

2. The Second block is a marginal note, that yet the people were typically
carried in by the high Priest, in the precious stones on his shoulders and
breast, as the most holy place it self was a type of Heaven. I answer, this is
true, and confirms that which I said: for if into the earthly sanctuary the
people could not freely enter, in their own persons, at any time, but
figuratively, although they had so much as by faith in Christ did save them:
then is our estate now, as touching the outward Church order and polity,
better then theirs, which are not restreyned from any place whither the
ministers of the Gospel may them selves enter, but we are Rev. 20, 6.
the Priests of God and of Christ, and Heb. 10, 19.
may be bold to enter into the holy place, into the type whereof only Lev. 16,
2.17. Luke 1.10
the high Priest under the Law might enter sometimes and the people not at al
personally. And in every place we may offer incense unto the name of God, and a
pure oblation, Mal. 1.11. and are freed from those legal prohibitions, Col.
2.20 21.
touch not, taste not, handle not, and other worldly rudiments under which
Israel in their child's estate were in bondage, Gal 4.3. Therefore the Apostle,
which shows their estate and ours to be one in substance concerning faith in
Christ unto salvation, H^b. 11. shows also great differences between their
condition and ours touching the clear manifestation of Gods grace, and the
outward polity of the Church; Heb. 9. and 10. and 12. Gal. 4.

Finally these things we never intended or extended to any further rights or
liberties of the people now, then we find evidently taught us by the doctrine
and practice Mat. 18, 17 -- 20. and 28.20. Act. 11, 2 -- 18. and 15, 22 -- 28.
and 21, 18 -- 22. 1. Cor. 5, 1. -- 13. Rev. 2, 29. and 5, 10.
of The Apostles: that if in any thing we miss (as easily we may,) in the
application of those legal types, yet the doctrine confirmed by other plain
scriptures, remains sound and good. And such differences between Israel and
us, we also have put, in our more ancient writings: Discover. page 40. and 60.

Their last note is in effect one with the first: showing how Christ and
The Apostles reasoned well, from the civil state of Israel, which we grant. Yet I
hope they will not deny, but it is possible for other men to reason amyss, and
to make ill proportions from the common wealth of Israel, as do the S^^
before, page 16.
Papists, and as before is manifested that these our opposites have done.

The 7. article
Plea for infants p. 166 167.1^8. Treat. against Anabaptists p. 16. etc. Apol.
p. 108. etc. Answ. to Mr Iak. p 17. and ^^.
7. We held that the baptism of Rome, was as true baptism, as circumcision in
the Apostasy of Israel was true circumcision, and needed not to be renounced
and repeted: Now we were taught that the baptism aforesaid is an Idol; and we
know al Idols etc, are to be renounced and rejected, Isa. 30.22. and an Idol is
nothing in the world, 1. Cor. 8.4. so then such baptism is nothing.

I answer; our former profession and writing has been, that circumcision in
the Apostasy of Israel, Dis^ov. page 116.
could be no true sacrament, no true seal of the covenant of Gods favor unto
them: also that baptism delivered in the false church is no true seal of Gods
covenant, or true sacrament. Mr. Johnson himself has defended this very same,
that Apol. p. 109. etc.
in that estate of their Apostasy it could not be a true Sacrament, and so for
the baptism in Rome; not a true but a false sacrament. So the contrariety must
be thus, heretofore we held it to be a false sacrament, but now we were taught
it is an Jdol. Between these I hope al men of judgment, which know what an Jdol
means, will think there is no contradiction. But is not this good conveyance,
for them to say; as true baptism, as circumcision in the Apostasy of Jsrael
was true circumcision: whereas we professed of that baptism (as also of that
circumcision) that it could not be a true sacrament unto them, but a false? Will
not the judicious reader see, that they cast a mist before men's eyes, to
disgrace the truth which themselves formerly professed? As for the
consequences, I have before page 69. etc.
answered them; and showed how though the Idol be put away, there need no
repeting again of the outward washing: and have proved that Antichrist has
turned the Lords baptism into an Idol, as the Jews did the brazen serpent, 2.
King. 18, 4.
by burning incense to it: and that the most conscionable in our own nation
have so professed, and the University of Cambridge printed, M. Perk. Wa^ning
against Idol. p. 23.
that the church of Rome transformeth the sacraments (yea even Christ, and God
himself) into Jdols. But these our opposites are gone from the truth and from
themselves herein, into the tents of our common adversaries, M. Gifford and
others, who would have concluded hereupon a new outward washing: but were
refuted Refut. of Giff. p. 65, etc.
by Mr Barrow. And Mr Johnson once professed that Answ. to M. Iakob. in pref.
p. 1
he thought he should never have seen any more absurd writing then M. Giffards;
though now he reasons like him. He also told the Oxford Doctors, that Apolog.
p. 113.
to hold the popish church to be a true church, having a true ministry and
true sacraments, or else that they are unbaptised, and must admit of the
Anabaptists rebaptisation, are naught else, but gross errors and notorious
absurdities. Yet lo how he now presses us with the same things: and passes
over our reasons rendered heretofore, without answering them as is meet.

Of the conditions of peace, by our Opposites refused, and broken.
HItherto we have heard the particulars wherein they are gone from their former
profession; and again the articles which they have insinuated against us. Now
follows, the peace which notwithstanding the former things, we desired to
reteyn with them.

The first.

1. Before our parting, we offered, that notwithstanding our differences of
judgment, we would continue together, if our former practice might be retained:
but this was refused.

Their answer hereto is.

Which is, as if they should say, they would have continued with us, if we
would have continued in error and evil, so found and acknowledged by us:
suffering the ordinance of God, touching the Eldership to be trodden under foot;
the Elders to be despised and abused by the people, and the whole Church to be
continually subject to contentions and scandals.

Our reply.

Here first observe, how they can not deny, but thus we offered them: and yet
they would bear the world in hand, we left them for their understanding and
exposition of Mat. 18, 17. They might have kept their understanding both of
that, and other scriptures, if the Churches practice had not been altered.
Secondly, how do their people yet bear themselves and others in hand, that
their practice is not changed; but all things continue with them in that
respect as before. Either their Elders dissemble with them, or they with
others; according to the Philosophers doctrine, that, in such changes, Aristot.
polit. l. 5. c. 9.
it behooveth men to feighn and counterfeyt the contrary. Thirdly, the answer
is evil and injurious to the truth and people of God: for his ordinance
touching the Eldership is not trodden under foot, the Elders despised, etc. by
the holy order of the Church judging sinners as the Apostle 1. Cor. 5.
teaches, and governed in all actions, by 1. Tim. 5. 17. Heb. 13 17.
the officers, which was our former practice. These are but contumelies, such
as Papists and lovers of Prelacie, have laid upon the saints heretofore: and
upon such pretenses have excluded the people from choosing their ministers, D.
Bilson, perpet. governm. chapter 15.
for avoiding such tumults and uprores, as the primitive Church (they say) was
afflicted with. Fourthly what if some persons have miscarried themseves, as can
not be denied: have not some of the Elders also done the like? And shall the
Church, because of the abuses, tyrannies, heresies which their Elders have in
all ages brought in: refuse to have any more Elders? no more may the Elders
refuse to have the people to hear and judge causes of public syn with them,
because of the disorder and unrulynes of some; whom the people have been as
willing to reprove and censure as the Elders themselves. As for the Church
subject continually to contentions and scandals etc. it is most true by the
Elders means: for (to let pass what we have seen among our selves,) let all
histories be looked, and it will appear the Church has never more abounded with
contentions and scandals, then when al power was in the Ministers hands, and
the people excluded. Yea even in the Elders most solemn assemblies and
Councils; as Gr. Nazianzen in his time complained, being himself an Elder or
Bishop. Nazianz. epist. 42. ad Procop.
I am minded (says he) to shun all assemblies of Bishops, because I never saw
a good event in any Council, that did not rather increase then diminish our
evils. Their contention and ambition, passes my speech.

Secondly, they speak of their offer to bear with us in our difference of
judgment, if we would be content to walk peaceably with the Church in that our
difference: but this was refused. I answer; they might also (if they had
pleased) have showed the reasons of our refusal, which more the^ once we gave
them: as, 1. Because we are willed to observe all things whatsoever Christ
commanded his disciples, Math. 28.20. and therefore his ordinances must not be
left in practice, and holden in judgment only.

2. Because touching the ministry it is said, a man can receiv nothing except
it be given him from heaven, Ioh. 3, 27. now to the Ministers it is given to
Act. 20.28 Ro^. 12.7.8. 1. Pet. 5.
feed guide and govern the Church, but not themselves to be the Church, and to
challenge the power of the same in things perteyning to the kingdom of Christ.

3. Because touching the people it is said Stand fast in the liberty wherewith
Christ has made us free, and be not entangled again with the yoke of bondage,
Gal. 5.1. but this was a part of the peoples Christian liberty, recovered out
of Antichristian bondage, viz. to judge sinners that are within, 1. Cor. 5. and
to decide publik causes with their ministers, Act. 15.23. -- 28. as parts of
the same Church and body, 1. Cor. 12.27.28. therefore to be held fast, not only
in judgment but in practice.

4. Because such giving place to the usurpation of the ministers, was the mean
of Antichrists beginning and climing to his preeminence; which had the people
resisted at first, and practiced the Gospel in the order set by Christ, he
could not so have prevayled. And now also we should look, that Antichrist being
expelled, do not again set in his foot.

5. Because if we holding otherweise in judgment, should let the true practice
of the Gospel go; posterity after us, being brought into bondage, might
justly blame and curse us, that would not stand for the right of the people, in
that which we acknowledged to be their due. These things considered, we desired
them then, and still do, to show us how we could let go our ancient practice,
until our judgment were by the word of God changed.

The 2. thing by us offered.

2. We desired, that then we might have a peaceable parting; and to be two
distinct congregations, each practicing as they were persuaded, yet nourishing
brotherly love and unity. This also they would not agree to, unless we would
leav this city.

Their answer is;

A peaceable parting we grant they desired in word, but in deed stayed not with
us, but departed whiles we were considering whither it could lawfully be
effected or not. etc.

Our reply.

We desired it in word and deed instantly: alleging the parting of Paul and
Barnabas, Act. 15.39. the doctrine of the Apostle, Phil. 3.15.16. the practice
of Abram and Lot (though in a civil case) parting to avoid strife, Genesis 13.8.9.
the avoiding of public reproach in the world etc. But whatsoever we could say,
persuaded them not, but they withstood us. We stayed long, and had we followed
their delays, we might have tarried to this day, and have had no other answer
at their hands. How long have they been considering about their Teachers
ordination, and still it depends.

We are not ignorant of their pretenses, to put off the thing they like not,
with a consideration. But in deed we had their refusals often, before we
parted. Which was much in them that had changed their former profession, and
innovated the practice, that they should so refuse. Had we been the men that
had made such innovation, and they continued as before: we had surely been
excommunicated long ere that time of our departing. Of our busynes with the
Church of Leyden, it fell out after; and is now to be spoken of, in the third
place.

The third thing.

3. We procured, though without their consent, the help of the English church
at Leyden, who labored our peace: a way of peace by these themselves
propounded, and by the Church of Leyden and us agreed to, these after reversed,
and stood not unto, unless we would go dwell out of this city. And al^hough in
the treaty of the agreement, it was testified by the Elders of that Church,
that unless it were to the apparent undoing of us and of our families, we
should not be dismissed again to dwell here: yet because we would not
absolutely promise to leave this city, they would not stand to the agreement
which themseves had made.

Their answers, and our replies.

Here they seek to wind out themselves from blame, by sundry pretexts, and long
narrations. I will briefly touch the principal, being sorry to weary the reader
with our strifes.

1. First for the thing by them propounded, (of men's going from the one Church
and Pastor to the other) and by us agreed unto; it was not because we desired
or liked such a course: but earnestly desiring peace upon any tolerable
conditions, and seeing for the present no unlawful thing in it, we assented;
though the thing would have been much to our detriment. For all of us must have
made a journey to Leyden and back again, with charge and trouble, it being then
midwinter: and such as could have had means of livelihood there, must there
have remained; which perhaps would have been the one half of us, and so our
congregation had been greatly diminished, which was one mayn thing that our
adverse brethren plotted, as the events did manifest. The Church at Leyden
also, as we, must have suffered continually their and our members, to go when
they would, into the practice of those errors with our opposite brethren: a
thing which we will carefully take heed of, how ever we yield to the like again.

2. That the officers of the Church of Leyden did at the first co^ceive that we
all must remayn with them: we cannot say. Sure we are, we did not so conceiv;
but M. Johnson so propounded it, as we al even by his words understood it
otherweise, and himself being after pressed, could not deny it.

3. That the thing was agreed of, and the second time by them absolutely
concluded, and that three were sent with the message after the brethren of
Leyden to signify it, as they write: is true, and past denial.

4. That after they made new motion of an other course, is true also; but they
omit the publik breaking of the former agreement: when they signifying that
forasmuch as they perceived our purpose was to return and live again in this
city, they did plainly reverse it.

5. The motion which they made of a double practice, as it was disliked by the
Church of Leyden (as they signify:) so we also showed like reason of our
dislike, it being both unlawful for us to practice syn as it were with the
right hand, and righteousness with the left; and no likelihood of our peace, but
of grief and daily dissentions.

6. Touching the motion made by the Church of Leyden, for coming first to the
Elders as Church governors etc. and for admonition being carried according to
the alteration practiced and agreed upon; whereupon these our opposites now
observe against us, for not yiedling thereto, how greatly we oppugned the
ordinance of God touching the Elders hearing and judging of causes etc. this
rightly weighed, will show how greatly we are by them abused. For first, it was
such a course as neither the Church at Leyden would bind themselves to walk in,
neither did these our opposites, or we, think it to be according to the order
of God. Secondly they tell us not, (wherefore we desire them in their next to tell
us,) whither themselves would sincerely have practiced these things according
to the true intendement of the Church of Leyden that motioned them. Thirdly,
for the carriage of admonition spoken of; it was found out, and by M. Johnson
himself publikly acknowledged that the controversy between us, was therein
closely implied and yielded unto them, when upon dispising the admonition of
the Elders, the parties were to be excommunicated. This being thus manifested,
with what conscience could we yield to practice error privily brought in under
hand: and deny to practice the same thing publicly professed? Would not al
men, and even they themselves have blamed us for such dissimulation? Fourthly
for coming to the Elders first as governors, we did then and do now yield
it the brethrens duty, in doubts so to come for counsel and advise: but for to
bind all men in most manifest synns which the Church should judge, to come
first to the Elders only, and so to lay it on the brethren as for not doing
it, they should be excommunicated; and yet both sides acknovvledge it is not
the order of God: we told them this would be to deal worse then the
Pharisees, when none of us vvalked in that which we professed to be the
right way, but leaving that, would stablish our own traditions and cast out
men for not observing them. These weighty reasons they overpass, and bear the
world in hand how greatly we oppugned Gods ordinance touching the Elders:
when we but oppugned the Elders traditions, least they should be advanced
above the ordinance of God.

Next follow their reasons why they would not stand to their former agreement
with us, nor have spiritual fellowship (as they write) with us in such estate
and walking. 1. Because they could not find warrant for it in the word of God.
I answer, if they acknowledge no warrant found for our peaceable parting here,
nor dismissing to an other Church: what remained, but either we must yield to
their errors, which for the reasons foreshewed we might not; or else part from
them as we did; the causes of the division being in them, both by broaching
error, and refusing peace.

2. Their second reason is, because we refused (as they say,) disobeyed and
spoke evil of the truth and way of God. I answer; first this is to take that
for granted, which is the question betvveen us. Secondly if this reason be
good, and the truth be with us, (as we doubt not of it:) then they grant us
that we had just cause to leave spiritual fellowship with them, which
departed from, and spoke evil of, and persecuted the truth and way of God,
vvherin themselves once walked with us. Howbeit, if we would have lived at
Leyden, all had been peace: is it more lawful, trow we, to speak evil of, and
disobey the truth there, then at Amsterdam?

3. Their third reason is, because we refused to continue communion with them,
though we might be suffered to walk in peace with protestation in our difference
of judgment. I answer, this having been first offered by us to them, and they
refusing it, as before they grant; it comes upon their own heads, if any
weight be in it. Secondly, we have showed sundry reasons from scripture, why we
might not so walk: and have never yet heard from them, any like reasons to
warant us, to protest against a synful practice, and yet to practice it daily.
If our own hearts and mouths condemn us, 1 Ioh. 3.20.
God is greater.

4. Their 4. reason is, because some of us professed we would not deal in
causes by way of protestation, neither when we were with them nor from them. I
answer; first the different mind of some few, is not of weight to break the
agreement with us al. Secondly, this might have fallen out also occasionally,
if we had lived at Leyden; where they would have had peace with us. So it is
our living in this city, that was in deed the only true cause why they stood
not to their agreement, the other are but pretenses.

5. Their 5. reason is, because we went not from one Church and Pastor to
another, so to live and remayn, but purposed when we had joined unto them,
presently to return and live here in this town apart from them. I answer; this
was in deed that which troubled them; they could not endure us in the same city
by the^. Yet they cannot deny but it was promised, we all should live and
remayn there, unless it were to the apparent undoing of us and our families.
And were not these loving brethren, that had rather we and our families should
be undoon, then they would want of their wills* For what reason (much less
necessity) can they show why we must go from one church and pastor to an
other, and may not continue in the place and state wherein God had called us,
with as many officers already among our selves, as the Church of Leyden had;
and one a Teacher of the word. They tell us afterward, Advert. p. 87.
that the very naming of going to another Church and Pastor, caryeth weight of
reason with it: belike because he is a Pastor that says it: for word of God
show they none, that binds men to go to another Church where there is a Pastor
and no Teacher; but forbids them to remain in their own communion and church,
where there is a Teacher and no Pastor. Especially when without the apparent
undoing of men and their families, they can not remove their habitation.

6. Their 6. reason is, because by such walking of ours, great reproach would
come upon us all, with much dishonur to God etc. I answer, it Luke 17.1
can not be avoided but offenses will come, but woe unto them by who^ they come.
Yet greater reproach (as we always feared) is come by their refusing peace with
us, (unless it were upon unlawful and unreasonable conditions,) then would
have been by our peaceable parting, which we often and instantly desired.

7. Their last reason is, because they thought there should always be somewhat
in such cases used, as whereby the Lord might work upon our consciences, to
consider our estate, and to repent and yield to the truth and way of God which
we had refused and oppugned. I answer, first this manifests their minds to
be far from peace with us, whatsoever they pretended; unless we would
yield to their innovation and prelacie. Secondly this reason, if it be good,
serves as well for them that should live at Leyden, as at Amsterdam: unless
they would permit us there to oppugn the truth and way of God, as they
entitle their errors.

Thirdly, this evil being found in themselves, that they do not only refuse
and oppugn the truth offered; but forsake, speak evil of, and persecute the
truth and way of God which they had long embraced and vvalked in: the
judgment which they give upon us, is most just upon their own heads; by the
sentence Mat. 7, 2, 12.
of our Savior. And we could do no less with these our merciless brethren,
that would nourish no peace with us, unless either we made shipvvrack of a
good conscience, or would consent to the undoing of our estates and families;
but leave them as we did, by the Apostles warrant, for causing division and
offenses, contrary to the doctrine which we had learned Romans 16.17. If their
new doctrines be good, I shall acknowledge we have greatly sinned: but if they
be the high way to Antichristian promotion, and a bereaving of the Church of
her right and power, as we are verily persuaded, and do trust we have so
proved it; then have they given sentence against themselves, and except they
repent, their condemnation shall be just.

Notwithstanding al their former reasons, they after allege, that they reversed
not their agreement concerning such as would go and live with the Church at
Leyden, but only about such as purposed to return and live here etc. I answer,
by this al may judge whither the fear of God, or fleshly policy did more
prevayl in them. For such of us as would have lived at Leyden, they pretend
they could find warrant for it in Gods word, but show none: they would let them
there, refuse and speak evil of their pretended way of God, without leaving any
thing to work upon their consciences, etc. and yet have peace with them as
Christian brethren. Only at Amsterdam these things might not be suffered. The
Pope himself permits Jews which never received his religion, to live in the
same city with him, where he is Prince: but these our adverse brethren, would
not endure that we, (though we never received their innovations,) should live
in one city with them, where they were but strangers. What should we have
found, if they had been Princes of the State? Secondly, they plainly reversed
the agreement, as before was showed, and when some of our brethren desired
their testimonial, for to go to Leyden, they refused to give it. And we could
not tell before we came thither and tried, whether there would be means found
for our living there or no. But strange and unheard of cruelty was in these
men, that would bind us there to remain, though we and our families should be
undoon; and being but strangers themselves in this city with us, would take
upon them so imperiously to banish us the town, which the Lords of the city
never offered. I wish they may find more mercy with the Lord at the day of
Christ, then they have showed unto us.

And whereas they object, that when we left them, we went not to Leyden, to ioyn
our selves to that Church according to the agreement etc. I answer, there never
was such agreement, that of our selves we should go, but that by them we
should be dismissed, and this they refused to do, yea and publikly reversed
the covenant that themselves had devised and twice confirmed: besides, that we
of our own mind did never desire, but only for peace sake consented to that
agreement, as before I showed. Neither was it ever agreed, that such only as
would remayn there, should go: but it was general for us al. But these their
cariages show, what dominion such Elders would exercise over Gods heritage; and
how unpossible it was for us to have peace with them, that would thus turn and
wind, say and unsay, agree of a thing to day, and break it to morrow. Our sowles
were wearied, with their turnings of devises.

Finally for our not remaining with them, til there was an answer of their
Letter from Leyden, I answer, we tarried with them a good while after their
foresaid letter, whereas we might upon their breaking of their own solemn
agreement, added to al their former evils, justly have forsaken them. Neither
could the Church of Leyden (as it seems) tell what to advise us, and therefore
gave no answer to their Letters, or to ours: and because they would have no
hand in the breach between us, thought better to be silent; seeing unto what
extremity things were brought. And the agreement between the Churches being
disanulled, articles of war and discord being proclaimed to us, and written of
to them; delays only sought to work our dissipation: we know no word of God,
that binds us to suffer our selves to come into such bondage, with men that
daily in their public doctrines and prayers, inveighed aginst the truth they
formerly professed, vvounded the consciences of the brethren, and sought al
occasions to dravv men from the right way and practice of the Gospel. What
should we do, but shake off the dust of our f^et against such authors of
errors, and peace breakers? Albeit in these our great troubles and strayts, we
doubt not but many things through our ignorance and frayltie might be done
amyss; for which we have, and do alvvayes humbly ask mercy of God, that even
our secret synns may be forgiven us. And touching the Church of Leyden, whose
help they refused to desire, or consent to have d^sired, though now for their
advantage (as they think) they speak of them, and have printed some of the
passages betvveen them: I have desired their Elders testimony upon this
occasion, that the ages present and to come, may have true information of these
matters; which is as follows.

The testimony of the Elders of the Church at Leyden.
THough we much rather desired to have been mediators of the peace of our
brethren, then witnesses of their strife: yet may we not, because that which we
desired, could not not be effected by us, with draw from that, which both may,
and ought by us to be done. We therefore being desired thereunto by Mr.
Ainsworth, and occasioned by that which both Mr Johnson and he have written,
and taking the evils which have befallen others, as matter both of humbling,
and warning to our selves, do signify, what we know, and have found in our
dealings thereabout.

And first, Our special ^alling to intermedle in this uncomfortable busynes,
was a letter sent unto us by some 30. of the brethren there. In which,
mentioning in the beginning of it, their long, and greevous co^troversy, they
signified how they had often desired of the Church to request our help therein,
and that the Elders would no way aporove thereof: but would only permit our
coming, either of our selves, or at their request. Wherein they also certifyed
us, how some of them had charged the exposition of these words Tell the Church,
Mat. 18, 17. Tell the Elders, with some other particulars thereupon depending,
to be error: and so were to prove their charge: and therefore earnestly
requested us to help in that great busynes, that the truth might be mainteyned,
and not by their weakness injuried, and the innocent condemned: and that we
would help the Lord against the mighty etc.

And the reason why they thus earnestly requested our help was, because M.
Ainsworth was so sparing in opposing of Mr Iohnsons new doctrine (though
always misliking it) as they scarce knew how he was minded in the things: so
loath was he to come to any professed, and public opposition with him, whom
he rather hoped to pacify by moderation, then by opposition to stop in his
intended course. Besides he was careful not to give any encouragement to the
too violent oppositions of some brethren, though minded as they were, in the
things themselves.

This their letter, and earnest request in it notwithstanding, we went not, but
wrote to the Church and showed them what the substance of the letter was;
desiring by the^ to be informed how things stood with them: and signifying
withal, our unwillingness to interpose, but upon a dew, and necessary calling;
and that also as much as might be, under the conditions of best hope of good
issue.

They, as before, denied to approve of our coming, and would only permit it,
and that under the terms of jealousy, and advantage, as appears by that which
themselves have published: and did often, and earnestly require of us a copy of
the letter before mentioned, with the names of the persons subscribed unto it.
Which though we judged, and still do, an hard, and extreme impositio^ in it
self, considering they themselves had permitted them to send unto us, and knew
from us whereabout they wrote, and had not laid it upon them to show them their
letter before they sent it; yet had we given way to their desires herein, had
it not been for one phrase in the end of the letter, which being borrowed from
Deborahs speech against Sisera, Judge. 5, 23. and applied as it was, might give
offense, and minister occasion of further strife, which phrase also we reproved
in the writers of the letter, and they acknowledged amiss; professing
notwithstanding they had no evil meaning in it, but only a desire to provoke
us the more effectually to supply their inability against those with whom they
had to deal. Now for our withholding the copy of the letter (though since that
time, for their importunity we sent it them) as also for our purpose of coming
unto them, and the ends thereof, we will here insert what we wrote unto them in
two several letters thereabout, For the former thus. If the letter whereof you
desire a copy, might further your common peace, or procure good to any, we
should easily answer your desire: but if, on the contrary, there were the least
evil in it, we should hold it our duties to deal with the parties offending,
our selves, and not to discover their sin. And loath would we be either to
minister matter of further scanning amongst you, or that any register of
unkindnes should come unto you from our hands. And the fear of this was in
truth the only cause, why we refused to send this letter, as they required.
Wherein if we failed, (as we see no cause so to think) yet was it the error of
our love, and great desire of their peace.

About our coming we thus wrote. Our purpose therefore is, according to the
request of the brethren which have moved us, and our duty; to send, or come
unto you; not to oppose any person, or to mainteyn any charge of error, but by
all other brotherly means to help forward your holy peace (if so the Lords
will be:) which how precious it is unto us, we hope to manifest to the
consciences of all men: then which we know nothing in this world we have more
cause to endeavor, both with God, and your selves. Of which our coming we
pray you to accept, and to appoint us some such time, as seems to you most
convenient. Wherealso we shall satisfy you to the utmost, both touching the
letter, and other particulars in all equity, yea so far as we can without
apparent sin.

These things notwithstanding, they would not approve, but only permit of our
coming, as men use to permit of that which is evil, and which in deed they
could not hinder. And so we came unto them: first of our selves, and afterward
at the request of M. Ainsworth, and them with him, being sent by the Church,
whereof we are: and so infor^m^ our selves upon them for the delivering of the
Churches message, did reprove what we judged evil in them, and that we
confess with some vehemence. And in that regard it was, that (upon the motion
made by Mr. Johnson for the free dismission of such members with them, unto us,
as could not there walk with peace of conscience,, there lying no other cause
against them; which should also be mutually performed on our part) we signified
(as he writes) that we little thought they had been so inclinable to peace;
and that if we had so thought, we would have carried our selves otherweise
toward them, then we did. And good cause had we so to speak. For neither is
the same carriage to be used toward men, prosecuting their purposes and
persuasions, with all violence and extremity; and toward them, which manifest
Christian moderation in the same: neither had we before, or have we since found
the like peaceable inclination in them, to that which they then manifested.
Which how great grief it has been unto us, and how it has even wounded our
very hearts, he only knows, which sees the sorrows of the hearts of his
servants, and puts their tears in his bottel.

But to pass by these things, and to proceed. The motion made by Mr Johnson
for a peaceable dismission, was by the Church there received with general
assent; unto which the Church also at Leyden condiscended: and so sent back the
Officers for the further ratification of it, and for some other purposes
tending to the establishing of peace amongst them. Whereupon it was also the
second time by the^ confirmed: always in deed with submissio^ to the word of
God, as was meet: and that if either they, or we minded otherwise, we should so
signify. Which notwithstanding they did not: but reversed the agreement of
themselves, without acquainting us with the change of their mind or reasons
thereof.

Afterward indeed, they gave us knowledge of their purpose, as appears in
their former letter by themselves published, desiring the continuance of our
consideration about it, as if the thing which was fully agreed upon, as is
aforesaid, and that oftener then once had been only in consideration: and in
their second letter (as also appears) they gave us certain Reasons of their
dislike.

Unto which reasons of theirs we gave no answer (as they both write) before
their parting. And the causes were. 1. For that they continued not long
together after they came to our hands. 2. We had upon occasion of the motion
made for a double practice, propounded another course (both more fit, and
warrantable, as we thought, then that) for the bringing of things first to the
Elders, as appears in our letter. Unto which course though we do not bind our
brethren, yet may we safely say (so far as we remember) that there never came
complaynt of sin to the Church, since we were officers, but we took knowledge
of it before: either by mutual consent on both sides, or at least by the party
accused: with whose christian modesty, and wisdom we think it well sorteth, that
being condemned by two, or three brethren, he should not trouble the Church, or
hazard a public rebuke upon himself; without counselling with them who ar
set over him, and who either are, or should be best able to advise him.

Thirdly, and which was the chief cause, we were without all hope of doing
good, when they once misliked the motion, which made it. Whilst they liked it,
we had hope, though it were with hard measure to the other, and so did further
it, to the utmost of our power: but when they laid it down, we knew all our
labor would be lost in endeavoring their second listing of it.

Lastly where Mr Johnson affirms, that at the first treating of the matter,
we conceived that those by them dismissed should remayn at Leyde^ with us,
notwithstanding their want of means of living, it may well be as he says,
though we well remember it not. And therein all men may see, how we were even
overcaryed with a vehement desire of peace with them, and amongst themselves,
and how far we were from being partial toward them with whom we agreed in
the things in controversy. Yea the truth is, we were boldest with the^, both
because we would prevent all jealousy in the other, and preserve in them all
the interest we could for the common peace: and also because we were well
assured of Mr Ainsworths great moderation, upon whom the rest did much depend.

But howsoever we conceived at the first, it is certain that both they, and we
conceived otherwise in the agreement. And therefore when one amongst them made
exception, I. O.
that we should not dismiss the^ back, which came unto us, to live a distinct
congregation in the same city with them, it was presently answered both by Mr
Johnson, and Mr Studley, that that concerned not them, but that they would
leave it unto us: though that appeared afterward to be the only thing for
which they broke off their purpose, and promise. And here the work of Gods
providence is to be observed, that they who would have no peace with their
brethren abiding in the same city with them, are about to leave it themselves,
and to settle their abode else where. Which thing, that it might well come to
pass in short time, they were by us put in mind of before hand, if God gave
them not again to reunite, which by a peaceable parting, might have been
furthered. Which how much better had it been they had admitted of, (all things
considered) then, thorough extreme streytnes in themselves (not to meddle with
the mayn cause) thus to have made their brethren their adversaries, and
themselves, yea and us all, a byword to the whole world?

John Robinson. William Brewster.





This is the record of our brethren of Leyden, touching our troubles. Whereas
our opposites object unto us, that we refused to try if by writing among our
selves, we could have come to better accord etc. I answer, first we had by a
twelv months dispute tried if we could have come to accord; but were further
off in the end, then at the beginning Secondly things were brought to that
pass, that the practice of their errors was established; the truth in publik
doctrines inveighed against; the opposers of their errors, compared to Korah
Dathan and Abiram; the Lords supper of a long time not administered among us;
occasions sought against sundry persons to cast them out of the Church; peace
by us offered, by them refused; peace by them selves propounded and confirmed,
and by them again broken; open war proclaimed against us, as against men that
refused disobeyed and spoke evil of the way and truth of God etc. was this an
estate for us to continue in together, and go to writing, which would prove we
knew not how many months or years work? For lo to a letter of mine of 3.
pages, they have given an answer of 70. and if they continue thus to multiply,
what volumes shall we have in the end: and when shall we have an end? It is
rather to be feared that we suffered things to depend too long: for when the
Apostles found Christians liberty to be endangered, and bondage to be brought
upon them, though privily, they gave not place by subjection for an howr, that
the truth of the Gospel might continue with them, Gal. 2.4.5. Thirdly it was a
way which they alvvayes mislyked: and in our former troubles, when
heretofore M. Smyth and others, having debated their causes in conference,
proffered vvritings: then M. Johnson himself, with the rest, withstood and
refused that course. But now, that which they blamed in others, they commend
in themselves: so partial are they in all things. When they like of a thing, it
must be good: when they mislike, it must be evil. We vvish they would show
more sincerity. And now, as we desire the Christian reader, not to be
offended at the truth, because of our infirmities who cannot walk in it as we
ought; nor to stumble for the troubles and dissentions which Satan rayseth
among Gods people: so we desire these our opposite brethren, to return into
the right way, from which they are estrayed, and putting away al love of
preeminence, and of their own aberrations, to receiv again the love of the
truth, and of brotherly concord: that the name of God, be no more evil spoken
of by the wicked, and that the hearts which are wounded by these dissentions, may
be healed and refreshed. The Lord look upon the afflictions of Sion, wipe away
her tears, forgive her iniquities, take away her reproach; restore her joy, and
comfort her, according to the days that she has seen evil. Amen.

Finis.
Faults escaped in the printing.
Page 6. line 11. for that, read, than.

page 46. two lines before the end, for uncirsed, read, uncircumcised.

page 70. line 23. for wholly, read, holy.

page 112. line 42. for wod, read, word.


