A Treatise containing two parts.

1 An Exhortation to true love, loyalty, and fidelity to her Majesty.

2 A Treatise against Treasons, Rebellions, and such disloyalties.

Written by Michael Renniger.

Psalm. 36. How precious is thy mercy O God, and the Children of men shall put
their trust under the shadow of thy wings.

Jmprinted at London at the three Cranes in the Vintree by Thomas Dawson, and
are there to be sold. 1587.

To the most Excellent, mighty, and gracious Queen, ELIZABETH by the grace of
God Queen of England, France, and Ireland, defender of the true Christian
faith, grace and mercy from God our Faher, and from our Lord Jesus Christ.
MOST Humbly I beseech your gracious Majesty, to vouchsafe the accepting of
this small treatise, of one of your Majesty's old sworn servants of
houshoulde, and (althouge of the least and most vnworthyest) of the
association. The great occasion of the late occurentes, has induced me to
sound the trumpet of exhortation out of the word of God, in a good and
acceptable season (I trust) to do good to all subjects of your Majesty,
which shall read or hear the same. Most hartelie I pray God the father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, to vouchsafe by it (as the ordinary means of his blessed
will) with his spirit to work good in th hears of all subjects to your
Majesty, t^ whose hands or ears it shall come. And that his tender mercy in
Christ, will continually set the watch and guard of his providence, about the
royal person and estate of your Majesty, and keep you as the apple of an
eye, (as David prays) and under the covert of his own wings, from all
conspiracies, treasons, and plattes of practices, at home or abroad, of al
enemies whatsoever: And bless your Majesty, with long life, prosperous
reign, and victory over all your enemies.

Your Majesty's Most humble and faithful subject, and servant Mihael Renniger.

The Contents, principal points, and chief matters of the exhortation.
1 A Commendation of the godly and loving affections of faithful subjects to
her Majesty, and how such godly affections are of God, and are accepted of
him. 2 How we should frame our affections and obedience to Princes and higher
powers, according to the rules of Gods word. 3 How according to the rules of
Gods word, Christians in the primitive and ancient Church, framed their
affections and obedience to princes and higher powers, being then heathen, and
many of them persecuters of the faith of Christ. 4 What an acceptable thing it
is to God, when the people join their hearts to Godly Princes, in true faith
to God, and hearty fidelity to their Princes. 5 The Example of David his
loyalty and fidelity to the royal person of King Saul, notwithstanding
continually he sought his life. 6 The example of the famous fidelity of one
Lilla a Britton and an heathen man, in the defense of the royal person of his
Prince. 7 How the late occasions and dangers, should increase and inflame true
love, loyalty, and unfeigned fidelity, in the hearts of al good subjects to
her Majesty. 8 How directed in wisdom from God w^ may take the right way,
long to obtain her of the mercy of God, by making hearty prayers and
supplications to God for her: That he will set the watch of his providence
about her, and send the garrison of his Angels to guard her, that the evil
spirits, and those by whom they work, and that work and practice by them, may
have no power against her: With what minds we should pray to God for her, that
he may accept our prayers. 9 Of the inner wall of England, which is true faith
to God, unfeigned fidelity to our Prince, and mutual love and concord amongst
our selves: And of the outward wall by Sea, which is the shipping, navigations,
and furniture thereof, wherewith her Majesty has fortified our country, and
what a comfort and blessing it is to our whole country. 10 Of those that make
breaches in these walls, by lingering and looking after invasions and foreign
forces. 11 What has been the case of this realm in invasions of foreign
forces and strangers heretofore, and of other countries in like cases. And
what should be our refuge and stay against all invasions. 12 A general
warning to all subjects, to shun such vices, as hinder true faith to God,
and true loyalty to their Prince, which are hypocrisy and a hollow heart to
God, and hypocrisy and a hollow heart to the Prince and estate: with
perverseness, frowardness, and vncontentment of malcontentes, misslikers and
murmurers against the Prince and estate.
The fitness of the season for this kind of exhortation.
IF we look into the state of this present time, and the wonderful work of
God in the late discovery of traiterous attemptes against the royal person of
her Majesty, and our Country, it ministers very fit occasion and matter of
this manner of exhortation unto us. For if the people of God, be his heavenly
husbandry (as Saint Paul calls them) and we his workmen, 1. Cor. 3.
we must also take fit times and seasons for it. And when the good season is,
and the ground in temper, it is then good sowing the seed. Now by the
wonderful work of God of late, the season serves, and the very ground of the
hearts of faithful subjects is so tempered and prepared of God, that this
kind of exhortation is very welcome to them. The shewers are then most in
season, when the dry ground thirsts after them. The Prophet David says,
Psalm. 14^.
that his soul gaspeth after God, like as a thirsty land. And God in the
Prophet Esai, resembles himself to a cloud, Esai. 18.
coming with dew in the heat of harvest. And in the same Prophet he says,
that he knows how to speak in time and sea with the weary soul. Esai. 50.
And as God does sen good seasons to those that are feign of heavenly things,
so by his word and exhortation, thereof he works secretly in conciences of
Christians as pleases him. It is good to take the seasons which God offers.
Paul exhorts us to serve the season and opportunity, Romans 12.
which he calls (...). All things have their appointed time as Solomon
says. Eccle. 3.
God has made the way to this exhortation by his marvelous work of late, by
kindling the fire of fidelity in the hearts of al good subjects. Now is the
time to blow it up by exhortation out of the word of God. This season so well
serving (by Gods grace) it will be more effectuous. Thus of the fitnes of the
season for this kind of exhortation.

The order of the exhortation.
FOr the better ordering of my exhortation I have laid down the contents,
principal points and the chief matters thereof, in the beginning, as a
brief vewe of the whole discourse, and as in order I mean to treat of them:
To which order I refer my self.

THE FIRST OF THE chief matters.
THE first is, a commendation of Godly and loving affections of faithful
subjects, to her Majesty, and how such Godly affections are of God, and are
accepted of him.

In the very beginning of my discourse, the loving and dutiful affections of
faithful subjects, in the discovery of traitors against the royal person of
her Majesty and our Country, does offer themselves to my remembrance, and
deserves good memory and commendation of all that bear true hearts to her
Majesty. When did ever the hearts of faithful subjects more melte at the
tender mercy of God in the deliverance of their Prince? 2. Tim. 4.
As if they had seen her plucked out of the Lions mouth, as Paul says of
himself: Psalm. 18.
or drawn out of the gulf of many waters, as David of himself says: Dan. 3.
Or saved out of Nabuchadnezzers furnace, which he had prepared for the three
servants of God. God sent his Angel to save his servants in the midst of
it: Dan. 6.
as also to stop the mouths of ramping Lions in the den, Hester 7.
where Daniel was in the midst of them. God delivered Hester the Godly
Queen with her kindred and people, from the cruel conspiracy of Haman: And
godly Judith from the rage of Olophernes: Iud. 13.
2. Sam. 18.
And King David from the treasons of Absalon, and out of their blody hands
which would have eaten up his flesh, Psalm. 27.
according to his own words. And his most tender mercy also, woonderfully
has delivered Elizabeth our gracious Queen, as most joyfully we have seen of
late. Therefore her loving subjects, so well in London, as otherwhere, have
showed signs of thankeful joy, by singing of Psalms to God, making of
Bonefires in streets, ringing of Belles, and such like usual signs of public
joy and triumph of people. But one thing passes all that we have seen: the
loving affections of faithful subjects to her Majesty, which as a fire burned
inwardly in their hearts and bowels, as outwardly the fires did in the
streets. And these in true valewe and estimation pass all triumphs. It is in
common practice by Beacons and marks of fires, to give warning to countries of
invasion of enemies. And the council of the learned is in common infections
and plauges, Io. Palmari^s de febri pestili. lib. 1. cap. 11.
for purging of the infected air from pestilent vapors, not only to make open
fires, but arromaticall sweet and fragrant fires, with sweet Woods,
Hipocrates.
Herbs, Oils, and such like. As they write that Hippocrates did, when by
making of such sweet fires (God so disposing and working by him) he turned
away the great plague mentioned of Thucidides which out of Ethiopia was by the
air infected coming into Grecia. And that Empedocles before him gave the like
council. Empedocles.
But there is no fire more effectuous to wake and warn the hearts of people
against the coming of common enemies, then the fire of true love and fidelity
in their hearts and bowels to their Prince: and which more is feared of their
enemies. and more purges the country of infectio^s and practice of treasons,
and is like an arromatical and fragra^t fire of sweet sacrifice in the sight
of God. For by this late danger, (which the mercy of God has turned away) he
has stirred up the minds and the very bowels of tender affections in
faithful subjects.

Gods goodness does dispose of evils to the good of his Church and servants.
Gods providence disposes evils to the benefit of the faithful.

Origin hom. 14. in cap. 13 lib. Nume.


His providence orders all occurrentes in the world, to the benefit of the
faithful. Origin says: Omnia in hoc mundo sic sunt disposita, vt nihil
prorsus ociosum sit apud deum, etiamsi malum illud sit, etiamsi bonum. All
things (says he) in this world, are so disposed, that with God nothing at all
is idle, whether the same be evil or good. For God is the perfect workman of
all things (as Augustine says: August. lib. 1 de naturae boni. citatur ab
Hugone car. in cap 13. Epist. ad Romans Origin hom. 14. cap. 23. in lib. Number.
) And with good things he intermedleth the evils, by disposing the evil to
good. Origin says Maliciam deus non fecit, sed cum ipsis a quibus habetur,
vtitur ea ad necessarias causas: God (says he) has not made malice, but he
uses it with those in whom it is to necessary causes. In the noble antidote
or preservative against poisons called Theriaca, vipers are put, and thereof
commonly it is called Medicamentum ex viperis. Gale. lib. 1. de antido.
And Galen shows how of vipers flesh and grated bread are made balls, which
are called Trochischi de vipera. Orige. Hom. 19. in cap. 24 lib. Number.
Origin says, Serpentium venena depelli medicame^tis confectis ex serpentibus
perhibent: They say (says he) that poisons of serpents are driven away with
medisons made of serpents. What marvel then though God turns the poisons
of traiterous plattes, into preservatives of godly Princes and faithful
subjects. The late occau^ons by Gods providence has wrought this good
effect, that they have stirred up the minds and bowels of tender affections
in faithful subjects to their Prince, and in the Prince to her subjects: As
if heroical nature and virtues did strive who should have the prize; in the
subject of loyalty and tender compassion to the Prince, in the Prince of
piety and tender compassion to her subjects. The subject powers out his
heart and bowels of tender compassion to his Prince, and in the faith of a
subject voweth himself to his Prince; The Prince powers out her piety and
bowels of motherly affection to her subjects, and from the very root of
heroical nature, tender compassion issues out unto them. What heart can hear
of this heroical emulation, contention, (I should rather say) compassion, and
not melte? We yield the prize of heroical piety and motherly compassion unto
our Prince. Ye let us strive still in piety, in loyalty, in bowels of tender
affection to our Prince, even to win the prize also if we may: and to show
our selves herein to strive for such maisteries is true piety. The heroical
minds of godly Princes, are greatly pleased with such strife. I will carry us
to higher contemplation: God the fountain of all piety, is highly pleased
with such emulation: And to strive for the garland of this piety, is high
piety it self in the sight of God. God continue this strife, increase it, and
inflame this emulation in the hearts of tender affections of subjects to the
Prince, and in the bowels of motherly piety and compassion of the Prince to
her subjects. Thus of the good effect that of the prepensed evils God has
wrought.

By corrupt nature we are given to security, and if not to be weary, yet to
be full of Gods blessings, and by continual custom to make less account of
them. Heb. 5.
Paul says to the Hebrews, that they were dull of hearing, notwithstanding
the jewels of Gods word are most precious. 1. Cor. 4.
And to the Corinthians, that they were full, and reigned without him. But this
late wonderful work of God, has awaked us out of slumber, and whetted dull
affections in us, and has set an edge on us, to be more mindful and
thankful for Gods blessings. Act. 20.
After Paul had said to the elders of the Church of Ephesus (for whom he sent
to Miletum to take his last farewell of them) that henceforth they should see
his face no more, they wept all abundantly, and fell on his neck, and kissed
him. The last farewell and departing from a dear friend is doleful, much more
from a dear mother, and most of all from the most dear mother of our
country, and the good nurse of the Church of God. The very remembrance
thereof, would raze the bowels of good natures, and the mention of it does in
manner wound tender hearts of faithful subjects. As for the ungodly, they
are without good affections of nature: Paul calls them (...), that is,
without natural affection, trucebreakers, traitors.

The fidelity of king David's servants (...) the trea^
Let us hear of the true fidelity and loving affections of king David his
servants, when he was assailed with the treasons of Absalon When king David
began to decline, 2. Sam. 15.
and Absalon had blown the blast of his treason abroad, and gathered great
strengthes about him, the hearts of the men of Israel turned after him (as the
Scripture witnesses:) and king David his father was feign to fly. And as he
went up the mount of Olives, he wept and had his head covered, and went
barefooted. Then did the true hearts of faithful subjects show themselves in
the right vain to the reskewe and comfort of their Prince. The Scripture
tells how the people that were with him, had every man his head covered, and
as they went up, 2. Sam. 15. Ioab. Abishai. Ittai. Zadok. Abiathar. The
Leuite. Ahimaaz. Jonathan.
they wept Then flocked his faithful subjects about him, Ioab, and Abishai
his brother, and Ittai the Gittit, as captains of special trust were at hand
with him. Zadok and Abiathar the Priests, cleaued unto him, and the Levites
bearing the Ark of the Lord. Ahimaaz, Zadok the Pristes son, and Jonathan,
the son of Abiathar the Priest, were as running posts, to bring tidinges
from Herusalem and Absolons Camp to King David. They abode in En-Rogel,
because they might not be seen to come into the City. But they were descried.
2. Sam. 17.
And when Absalons servants searched after them, they went down into a well in
Bahurim, and a faithful woman that bare true heart to David, spread a covering
over the wels mouth with ground corn thereon: and so by her fidelity they
escaped and brought intelligence to David what council Architophel had given
against him. 2. Sam. 15.
The Cherethites and all ye Pelethites and the Gittites which were of his chief
garrison and guard, or as some note of his principal bands, even six hundredth
men, issued out of Gath after the king, and marched before him. Ittai the
Gittit a stranger.
Ittai the Gittit a stranger followed his Sovereign, and in no hand could be
parted from him: for when king David willed him to provide for himself, because
he was a stranger and late come, he answered and said: the Lord lives, and as
the Lord the king lives, in what place my Lord the king shall be, whether it be
in death or life, even there surely will thy servant be. Then David upon trial
of such trust, made him leader of the third part of his Army. And when David
was come to Mahanaim, Shobi of Rabbath of the children of Ammon (whom Lyra and
the Interlinearis note for the son of the king of Ammon) and Machir out of
Lodebart, Shobi. Machir. Barzelai.
and Barzelai the Giliadite brought Beds, and Basins, and earthen vessels, and
Wheat, and Barlie, and Flower, and parched Corn, and Beans, and Lentils, and
Honey, and Butter, and sheep, and cheese of Kine for David and for the people:
for they said, the people are hungry, and weary, and thirsty in the
wilderness. But let me not forget Hushai the Archit, Hushai the Archit.
which came against David with his coat torn, and having earth on his head:
Whom David sent back after ^o the City, where by his counsel (God so
disposing it) he was the mean to dash the counsel of Architophel, and thereby
to overthrow Absalon, and to deliver David. Thus of the fidelity that king
David found in his friends and faithful subjects, when he was distressed with
treason. And in the late dangers, which Gods providence from heaven turned
away, would it not rejoice good hearts to see how the faithful Hushaies,
Shobees, Berzillaies, and Ittaies showed themselves in true loyalty and
fidelity to their Prince? The most honorable, and persons of nobility and
honor, has by their provident counsel, care, and true loialtie, got great
honor and good will, of al ye bear good hearts to her Majesty. The faithful
subjects have had their deserved praise: The whole estate of the Ministry,
like Zadok, Abiathar, and the Levites, entirely cleaving to their David and
Sovereign, and under God depending of her, in forward fidelity and true
loyalty have showed themselves. Finally all faithful subjects flocked about
the royal person of their Prince, with their hearts and with tender affection
guarded her, and would have gaged their bodies and bowels also for the safety
of her Royal person and estate, if such occasion had required it. Many Ittaies
would have been found in England to have said to their David and Sovereign:
Whersoeuer our Sovereign Lady and Mistress the Queen be, whether it be to
life or death, there her servant will be also. For if she should fail (whom
the tender mercy of God long continue among us) then might the faith full
Hushai, and true hearted subject of England, go with earth on his head, and in
steed of renting his clothes, rent his heart, and wail in woe. But whither
does my pen wade in sorrow? The tender affections of faithful subjects has
carried me on this far. God vouchsafe long to bless such Hushaies, Shobies,
Berzillaies, Ittaies, and all of the right raze of true hearted subjects to her
Majesty, of what state or name soever they be. Thus of the commendation of
loving affections in faithful subjects to their Princes.

From whence such affections are
Now from whence such affections and good will are: They are inspired of God,
who as he boweth and bends the hearts of Princes as pleases him (according
to Salomons saying) so by his grace he works and frames good affections,
Pro. 21.
and good will in subjects to their princes also. 1. Sam. 10.
After that Saul from God by Samuel was appointed king, and he went home to
Gibeah, there followed him the band of men of chivalry or strength, whose
hearts (as the Scripture says) God had touched. So it is God which touches
the hearts of faithful subjects, to bear unfeigned good will and true
loyalty to their Princes. Psalm. 18.
The Prophet David says: It is God that gives me power to avenge me, and
subdueth the people under me. And before in the same Psalm: Thou deliuerest me
from the contentions of the people. And as good affections of true loyalty are
from God, so they yt are void of the^, are in scripture called the children of
Belial. After that God by Samuel had placed Saul in the royal seat, they that
refused their alleageaunce to him, are so termed: The sons of Belial (says
the scripture) said (of Saul) how shall he save us? 1. Sam. 10.
So they despised him, and brought him no presents. So far the scripture. The
Devil is called Belial, as much to say, Pagni. in thesauro.
as without yooke ( Pagnin noting it.) And Nicho. de Lyra expounds the word:
Absque iugo legis diuinae and disciplinae: Nicho. de Lyra in 1. Sam. 10.
Without yoke of gods law etc. Fitly therefore they yt wilfully are
disobedient to Princes, and cast off the yook of gods ordinance from them, are
called the children of Belial. In this example of the disobedience to king
Saul, we may see the very state of the minds of disobedient and disloial
persons. As they despised Saul, so they despise principalities and states
ordained of god. Iudaes Apost. in Epist. Catholica.
Jude the Apostle says of such, they despise governments, and speak evil of
them that are (...) authority. The word (...) signifies souerainties and high
states, because of the glory and honor of them. By their despising, we may note
their presumption against the ordinance of God: By their evil speking or
blaspheming (which word the Apostle there uses) we note how they be wray their
evil disposition against them. And hereby we see that such evil dispositions
and presumptions against Princes placed of God, are of Belial, who privily
poisoneth first their minds with evil affections, and after eggeth them by
retchlesse and reproachful speech to discover themselves. The godly affections
of true loyalty are of God
But godly affections of true loyalty, good will, and dutiful subjection
according to Gods ordinance, are of God, and he accepts the good will and
good affections of the heart, though occasion serves not to show them in
effect and work. Chrysostom in Gods behalf does say, Ego voluntatem coronare
soleo, Chrysostom. ho. 41. in ca. 22. Gene.
and propter mentem praemia prestare. I am wont to crown the good will (says
he) and to reward the good mind. He speaks of Abraham's offering up Isaak,
whose good will God did accept for Sacrifice, though by his Angel he stayed
the work. Saint Paul says, that it is God that works in us the will and the
work even of his good pleasure. Phi. 2.
August. and Alipius Paulino Episco. Epist. 106.
Our will is but the handemaide (as S. Augustine says) Pedissequa non praeuia
voluntate, the will being the handemaid and not the leader. The Fathers in the
council holden at Arausica about ye year of our Lord 441. determined thus:
In council. Arausi. cap. 18.
Gratia quae non debetur praecedit vt siant. Grace (say they) that is not due,
goes before that (good works) be done: for our works and deserts are his
gifts. As Augustine says: Aug. de verbis Apost. ser. 2.
Discute bona merita tua, and videbis quod dona sunt mea: Examine thy good
deserts, and thou shall see that they are my gifts. And the same Augustine
says, Dona sua coronat, non merita tua: Aug. in Ioh. tract. 3.
He crowns his own gifts, and not thy deserts. Chry. in illud Psalm. 9.
pati. pau.
It is given of him (as Chrysostom says) that it may be crowned in us:
donatur vt coronetur. For no man does offer any thing of his own to God (as
Origin says) but that he does offer is the Lords. Orig. ho. 23. in lib. Number.
Nemo suum aliquid (says he) offert Deo, sed quod offert Domini est: He
needs nothing (as Athanasius says) Sibi sufficit (says he) ac seipso
plenus, Athana. lib. cont. Gentile^
in quo vniuersa consistunt, quique ipse omnibus tribuit: He suffices (says
he) to himself, and of himself is full, in whom all things does consist,
and he gives to all: and the good inclinations and affections that are in us
he gives: In Council. Arausi. cap. 6
As the Fathers in the Council of Arausica (for condign honor to be given to
the grace of God) did set down: vt credamus velimus, pulsemus, laboremus, etc.
per infusionem and inspirationem spiritus sancti in nobis fieri: That we
believe (say they) will, knock, labor, etc. by the infusion and inspiration of
the holy Ghost it is wrought in us: So far their words. Thus how good will and
good affections to princes according to Gods ordinance, are of God.

Now how he does also accept them. He that works them, god accepts the
good affections which he has wrought. Genesis ca. 22
vouchsafes also to accept them as sacrifices in his sight: As in Abraham he
did, when in good will he offered Isaak his son, though God by his Angel
stayed the work. S. Paul calls the good will and good affections of the
Philippians to him, Phil. 4.
with the sign thereof by Epaphroditus sent, an odor smelling sweet, and a
sacrifice acceptable to God. God more accepts of godly affection, then he
does of Sacrifice, as by the Prophet Hosea he says, Hose 6. Mat. 9
our Savior confirming it: I would have mercy and not sacrifice. The Prophet
Samuel said to king Saul, Obedience is better then Sacrifice. 2. Re. 15.
Solomon calls it the Sacrifice of fools, Eccle. 4.
when in the house of God they direct not rightly their prayers to God. And in
the Prophet Esaias, Esa. 1
God rejects sacrifices with ungodly and wicked affections offered unto him.
But godly affections and obedience to God according to his word, and true good
will, loyalty, and obedience to Princes according to his ordinance, are as a
sweet sacrifice unto him. And without this he accepts not of outward
sacrifices and prays: no more then he did of the sacrifice of Dathan, Corach,
Number 16.
and Abiram, whom for their rebellion against Moses, with their families,
housholdes, and goods, the earth swallowed up quick: And no more then he did
the sacrifice of Nahab and Abin the sons of Aaron, Leui. 10.
which offered strange fire before the Lord, not commanded of him: and fire
went out from the Lord and devoured them: And no more then he did the
Sacrifice of king Saul, 2. Sam. 15.
which he offered in Gilgal contrary to the commandment of God. S. Sam. 13.
And no more then he did the sacrifice of Absalon, when he was entering into
his rebellion against king David. Ignatius Epist. 2. ad Trallian.
Ignatius the ancient Father, with the examples of Dathan and Abiram, and Saul,
rehearses the example of Absalon, of whom he says: Absalon parricida existens
diuino iudicio arbori appensus, sed and cor eius quod male cogitauerat, sagitta
transfixum est: Absalon (says he) a parricide (who co^spired the death of his
father) by gods judgment was hanged at a tree, and his heart that evil had
thought, was shot through with an arrow: So far Ignatius. What auailed his
sacrifices out of a disloyal and rebellious heart offered to God before?
Ignatius notes the dreadful judgment of God on the very heart, which bred
and brought forth the treasons: It was pearsed (says he) with an arrow. A
fearful example of the vengeance of God on the very heart that conceived the
treasons, and on the wretched body that executed them, and was for them
executed by the almighty hand of God. Let this example warn all subieccs to
keep their hearts true to their Liege Sovereign according to Gods ordinance,
that the vengeance of God pearse not the very hearts of them that breed
treasons, as it did the heart of Absalon: 2. Sam. 18.
whose heart as it had a time of pride and presumption, so it had also a time of
woeful panting, when hanging at the thick bough, Ioab thrust darts into it.
This example is as a spectacle set up of God, to warn all to keep their
hearts from such presumption, treason, and rebellion, least they pluck the
judgments of God on their hearts which contriue it, and on their bodies
which practice it. Let the^ purge therefore their hearts from such presumptuous
and wicked affections, and cleanse and purify them by true faith (whose true
effect it is as Peter says) and by unfeigned repentance and obedience to the
word of God, Act. 15.
and to princes according to the ordinance of God. Such godly affections are
wrought by the spirit of God, by cleansing our hearts, and renewing right
spirits in us, Psalm. 51.
as David by his own experience felt in himself: and such godly affections,
are as sweet sacrifices accepted of God. Thus of the commendation of godly
affections in faithful subjects to her Majesty, and how such godly affections
are of God, and of what value they are in the sight of God: and of presumptuous
and contrary affections, which provoke the wrath and judgments of God.

The 2. is, The second chief matter.
how we should frame our affections and obedience to the rules of the word of
God.

Our Savior in his own person has given us example of subjection and
obedience to the higher powers, in paying tribute for himself and Peter. Mat.
17.
And when the Pristes and Scribes sent spies to tempte him and to trappe him in
his speech, and to deliver him unto the power and authority of the Governor
(as Luke says) he made them resolute answer: Luke 20.
Give unto Caesar the things which are Caesar's, and to God those which are
Gods. And Saint Paul warns Titus as a watchman to warn others: Tim. 3.
Put them in remembrance (says he) that they be subject to the principalities
and powers, and that they be obedient and ready to every good work. And the
Apostle S. Peter touching the great ordinance of God in this behalf, says
thus: 1. Pet. 2^.
Submit your selves unto al manner ordinance of man (meaning public
gouernmentes) for the Lords sake, whether it be to the king, as having ye
preeminence, or unto governors as unto them that are sent of him for the
punishment of evil doers, Romans 13.
and for the praise of them that do well. And after, fear God, honor the
king. Thus the Apostle Peter. S. Paul the Apostle, preacher and crier (as he
calls himself (...)) of the Gospel of Christ, makes general proclamation
of the great ordinance of God, touching subjection and obedience to Princes and
higher powers: Let every soul (says he) be subject to the higher powers, for
there is no power but of God. The powers that be, are ordained of God.
Whosoever therefore resists the power, resists the ordinance of God, and
they that resist, shall receive judgment (or damnation) to themselves. For
Princes are not to be feared for good works, but for evil. Will thou then be
without fear of the power? Do well, so shall thou have praise of the same:
for he is the minister of God for thy wealth. But if thou do evil, fear,
for he bears not the sword for naught: for he is the minister of God to take
vengeance on him that does evil. Wherefore we must be subject, not because of
wrath only, but for conscience sake. And for this cause pay you tribute also:
for they are Gods ministers serving for the same purpose. Give to all men
therefore their duty: Tribute to whom tribute (is due, Power notes in the
words of S. Paul touching subjection and obedience.
) custom to whom custom, fear to whom fear, honor to who^ honor
(belongs.) Hitherto S. Paul. In this treatise of the Apostle, I note chiefly
four principal points, first, the generaltie of the charge: Secondly, to
who^ this subjection and obedience is due, whereof he gives in charge;
Thirdly, how and in what sort: fourthly, the outward sign thereof by which
it is showed. Touching the first.

In the generaltie of the charge thereof, 1. The generaltie of the charge.
there is no exception, unless one can plead exception out of the number of
souls comprised in the generaltie of the charge. Chrisostom specifieth the
generaltie hereof in particular vocations and estates, even in the highest
degree of such as under pretense of Religion and holiness, might seem to
plead exception and freedom from it. Whether thou be (says he) an Apostle, or
whether thou be an Evangelist, or a prophet or whatsoever thou be (...),
Chrisosto. in cap. 13. Epist. ad To.
for says he, this same subjection does not over throw piety and godliness.
Thus Chrisostom. Is there any yt in the earth might challenge more pre-eminence
and exception, then our Savior for his own person while he lived on earth?
Who vouchsafed for his own person as man, to pay tribute to Caesar. Luke. 20.
His example and doctrine added to it, commanding to give to Caesar the
things that are Caesar's, and to God, those things which are Gods, concludes
all. Who can plead pre-eminence, exception, or exemption herin, seeing our
Savior in sign of subjection as man, Mat. 17.
caused tribute to be paid for himself and Peter? This doctrine and answer of
our Savior, the soldiers of Henry the fifth Emperor of that name (when he
came to Rome to receive the imperial Crown) carried from him, Albertus Kranz.
Sax lib. 5. cap. 33.
and as it were thrust it in the teeth of Pope Paschal the second of yt name:
saying that his demaundes were not to be yielded to of the Emperor, because it
is written: Give to Caesar, the things that are Caesar's, and to God, those that
are gods. And the next day when the Pope sat in his pomp in the Church, his
soldiers rushed in again, and took the Pope in his Pontificalibus, and the
Cardinals in their pompous array, and many of the Nobility of Rome prisoners,
and the rest of the inferior Clergy, they so rifled, that they stripped them
out of their clothes. And for the ground of subjection, the Emperor used the
saying of our Savior against the presumption of the Pope and Cardinals, which
plead pre-eminence and exemptions, and are puffed up in pride and pomp above
the principalities and powers of the earth. Origin the ancient father says,
that all they that have money, Orige. in Epist. ad Romans lib. 9. cap. 13.
possessions, or any thing of this world, must hear: Let every soul be
subject to the higher powers: Thus of the generaltie of the charge.

The second note to whom subjection and obedience is due. Ambro. in commenta.
in Epist. ad Romans cap 13.
The second note is, to whom this subjection and obedience commanded here is
due: To the higher powers, principates, and maiestrates. He calls the^ Gods
ministers to the praise of the good, and to ye punishment of the evil, for they
carry not the sword for naught. As he calls them Gods ministers, so Ambros
calls them Gods deputies and his vicegerentes, as Daniel (says he) says ye
kingdom is gods, and he gives it to whom it pleases him. In the book of
wisdom, Sap. 6.
they are called the officers of gods kingdom. Psalm. 82.
The Prophet David calls the^ Elohim, yt is Gods, in respect they are Gods
leiuetenauntes, and have his power committed to them in earth, and the
ministration of justice in Gods behalf. 1. Pet. 2.
Therefore S. Peter wills us to submit our selves to them for the Lords sake,
because of gods ordinance, and that they are his ministers and deputies. Nicho.
de Lyra postilae in 1. Pet, 2.
And Nich. de Lyra says, in as much as gods image shines in them, in respect
of their souerainty: and as Ambros notes ye cause, Ambro. in commen. in Epist.
ad Romans cap. 13. Orige. in commen. in Eist. ad Romans cap. 13.
they have (says he) ye image of God, yt under one others be. And if godly
they carry themselves in their governments (as Origin says) they shall have in
the day of judgment praise of God, even for the good administration of these
laws here, when it shall be said to them: O good and faithful servant, thou
have been faithful over few things: I will make thee ruler over much. And if
they misuse their estates, then as the said Origin says there, the just
judgment of God shall be on them, because the soueraintie which they received,
they have according to their own ungodliness tempered, and not according to
the laws of God. Thus Origin. And though they be evil, yet are they Gods
ministers to do thee good, and to try what mettle of true godliness is in
thee. For as Augustine says, the very terror of temporal powers, August. ad
Valentinum Epist. 48.
even when they sight against truth, is a glorious trial to the just and
strong. And as the Gloss ordinary says, God many times suffers an evil man
to tyrannyse, that the evil may be confounded; and for the better trial of the
good. Thus the Gloss. Were they not evil in the time of our Savior when they
were heathen, and when S. Paul made general proclamamation of subjection to be
yielded to them? When Nero played the tyrant and persecuted the Christians to
death; Paul sealed with his blood the Gospel of our savior under him. And yet
his tyranny then was turned into the triumph of ye Church of God: and Paul with
other faithful Christians by sheeding of their blood for Christ, were invested
in the robes of martyrdom, and had crowns of glory set on their heads. To
such Princes, though persecuters and heathen, subjection and obedience is to be
yielded according to Gods ordinance: But in things against God, and when the
persecution is against the faith, (as Origin says) we must say with the
Apostles, that god is rather to be obeyed then men. Thus to whom this
subjection and obedience here commanded is due.

My third note is, The 3. note how and in what sort subjection and obedience
is due.
how and in what sort we should be subject and obedient to them. Wherefore
(says Paul) you must be subject, not because of wrath only, but for
conscience sake; because it is the ordinance of God, and in wilful despising
thereof, conscience is wounded, non only wrath and punishment provoked: When
as Origin says one has that within him, Origin. in commen. in Epist. ad Romans
cap. 1^
that of his own conscience may be accused. Augustine thus expounds these
words of the Apostle, not because of wrath only, but for conscience sake: vt
non simulate quasi ad oculos hominum faciamus, August. sup^^ Epist. ad Gal.
cap. 3.
sed pura delectionis conscientia propter deum: That we do it not (says he)
with glosing as to the eyes of men, but of a pure conscience of love for Gods
sake. And in an other place, August in Expositionae qua^ und. prepositionu^ Ex
Epist. ad Romans propo. 74.
ye same ancient father does thus open these same words of Paul: Not only
(says he) for avoiding wrath, which thing may be done faynedly, but that in
thy conscience thou may be assured, that thou do it of love to him to
whom thou art subject, at the commandment of the Lord who would have all to
be saved. Thus how Augustine expounds these words of Paul. The Gloss
called interlinearis following Augustine says, Glosa inter linearis in cap.
13. Epist. ad Romans Ambro. in commen. in Epist. ad Romans cap. 13.
that in loving the maiestrate, thy mind may be clean. Ambrose refers the
words to the judgment to come, where conscience accuses also, besides the
punishment in this world. And thus how and in what sort we should be subject
to them.

The 4. note is the outward sign of subjection and obedience.
My fourth and last note is, towching the outward sign of this subjection, and
in what affairs it is showed. For this cause says Paul ye pay also tribute:
for they are Gods ministers serving for the same purpose. Give to all men
therefore their duty: Tribute to whom tribute (belongs:) custom to whom
custom, Ambro. in Epist. ad Romans cap. 13.
fear to whom fear, honor to who^ honor. Thus far S. Paul. Ambrose
says, they pay tribute to show their subjection, that they are not free but
under a Sovereignty and power that is ordained of God. And Origin voucheth the
person of our Savior for example: Orige. in Epist. ad Romans cap. 13.
Even our Lord Jesus Christ (says he) paid tribute when he lived in this
flesh, who said that he paid not as a debtor, but lest he should offend them.
And Nicholaus de Lyra the famous friar and writer of postiles upon the text,
speaking of those that under pretense of Religion, would claim freedom and
exemption for not paying tribute, Nico. de Lyra in Postilla in 1. Pet. 2
says: Retinendo illud quod debebatur, dominis temporalibus committebant
furtum. By retaining or withholding that (says he) that to temporal Lords was
due, they committed theft. Thus much of my fourth and last note also.

Hereby appears how we should frame our affections and obedienee to the
higher powers according to the rules of the word of God. And if our Savior
and his Apostles thus gave in charge to Christians living under Heathen
Princes, as Tiberius, Caligula, Tiberius, Caligulae, Claudius, Nero.
Claudius, and Nero the Emperors, (amongst whom Nero was the first persecutor
of the faith of Christ as Tertullian says) Orientem fidem primus Nero
cruentauit: Tertul. lib. cont. Gnosti^.
Nero (says he) first embrued with blood the faith of Christ in the first
springing up thereof) how much more should Christians yield dutiful
subjection and obedience to Christian and godly Princes, which are
Fosterfathers and Nurses to the church of God, Esai. 49.
as the Prophet Esaias calls them. Ignatius the ancient Father and Martyr,
about the time of the Apostles, Ignatius. Epist. 8. ad Antiochense.
renewed this charge of our Savior and his Apostles: Be subject (says he) to
Caesar in all things in which your subjection is without peril. He means
the peril of their soul, faith, and bounden duty to God, because Princes at
that time were Heathen. And thus how according to the rules of gods word, we
should frame our affections and obedience to higher powers.

The 3. chief matter.
The third principal point or chief matter is, how according to the rules of
Gods word, the Christians in the primitive Church framed their affections and
obedience to Princes and higher powers, being then heathen. Tertul. a very
ancient father, Tertul. in Apolog. cap. 4.
about the time of Seuerus the Emperor (as by his own words appears) who was
after Christ about the year 196. opens the very hearts, affections, and
prayers of christians, for Emperors and Princes then being Heathen, and their
fidelity, obedience, and subjection to them according to the laws of God.
Tertul. in Apolog. cap. 30
We (says he) for the health and wealth of the Emperor, call on the everlasting
God, the true God, and the living God, whom the Emperors themselves, though
Heathen, wish to be gracious unto them above others. And in an other place
speaking of the prayers of the ancient christians in their congregations: We
pray (says he) for Emperors and their ministers and potentates, Tertul. in
Apolog. cap. 39
for the state of the world, for quietness of all things, for the stay of the
end. Thus Tertul. Though the Emperors before and after Tertul. time were
Heathen, Tiberius, Caligula, Claudius, Nero, Domitian, Traia^, Marcus Aurelius,
Seuerus.
as Tiberius, Calig. Claudius, Nero, Domitia^, Traian, Marcus Aurelius, Seuerus
in Tertullia^s time, and sundry of the^ persecutors of christians to death,
yet such were their affections, prayers, fidelity and subjection to the^
according to Gods ordinance, that in their congregations they prayed for their
health, wealth, and prosperous state. Hiere. 29.
And God by Hiere. wills the Jews which were captive in Babylon, to seek
the prosperity of the City: where I (says God) have caused you to be carried
away captive, and pray unto the Lord for it, for in the peace thereof, shall you
have peace. Thus far Jeremy. According to this, Tertull. the aforesaid
witnesses, how the ancient christians (in whose times so many blessed martyrs
by life and death glorified God) were wont in public prayers to co^me^d to god
the prosperous estate of their Emperors, though they were Panims, and many of
them persecutors. Precantes sumus (says he) omnes pro omnibus Imperatoribus
vitam illis pro lixam, Imperium securum, domum tutam, Tertul. in Apolog. cap. 30
exercitus fortes, senatum fidelem, populum probum, orbem quietum, and
quaecunque Caesaris and hominis vota sunt. We all pray (says he) for all
Emperors for long life unto them, security of their Empire, safety in their
house, puisant hoasts, a faithful Council, a good people, a quiet world, and
whatsoever Caesar or man would wish. Thus far Tertullian. And further the same
Tertullian in commendation of the subjection and fidelity of the ancient
Christians to their Princes, does show, how though by the great blessing of God
they were so ouerspread and multiplied on earth, that their Cities, Countries,
and Islands were full of them, as he says: Vestra omnia implemus Vrbes,
Tertul. in Apolog. cap. 37.
Insulas, etc: And if they should reuoult from them, they should leave the
Cities of their Empire so desolate, that themselves would wonder at them: and
if they should conspire and ioin their forces together, they might soon
ouerrun them: yet notwithstanding according to Gods ordinance, with such humble
subjection, fidelity, and allegiance they bare themselves, even to them that
rigorously reigned over them, and eftsoons persecuted them. And see the great
blessing of God on them therefore more and more. The more they multiplied, the
more they were persecuted: as Tertullian to Scapula says: Tertul. ad Scapulam.
The sect of christians, the more it is builded up, the more it is cut and
hewn down. And in an other place he says: Tertul. in Apolog. cap. 45
Plures efficimur quoties metimur a vobis. Semen est sanguis Christianoru^. The
more (says he) we grow, the more you mow us. The seed is the blood of
Christians: Thus Tertullian. Though Panim Princes and Emperors in the
primitive and ancient Church watered it with the blood of Christians, yet God
so blessed it, that by that seed it sprange and spread over the face of the
earth. And notwithstanding to Princes, though Panims then, these ancient
Christians yielded their subjection fidelity according to the ordinance of
God. It is good thus to look into the examples of the Primitive Church, on
which God powered out so abundantly his spitit, and out of the which issued such
numbers of blessed Martyrs, whose memory is blessed, and whose state is
glorious in the kingdom of God. Plinius Secundus of the ancient christians to
Traianus the Emperor.
Plinius Secundus an Heathen and Noble man, writes unto Traian the Emperor a
Panim prince, of the conversation and behavior of the ancient christians: by
occasion yt in the government of his province, he saw such multitudes of the^
so meekly to endure persecutions, some condemned to death, some disauthorised
and priued of their estates: whereat being amazed as wonderful, not only
strange, he makes relation to the Emperor thereof, and of their assemblies and
conversation: and thus he writes his intelligence of the^, Tertullian the
foresaid ancient father reporting it: Tertul. in Apolog. cap. 2.
Se nihil aliud de sacris eoru^ co^perisse, quam caetus antelucanos ad canendum
Christo and Deo, and ad confirmanda^ disciplina^, homicidiu^, adulteriu^,
fraude^, perfidia^, ac caetera scelera prohibentes: That (says he) of their
religion and service he could boult out no other thing, but their asse^blies
before day were to sing to Christ and God: and that for co^federating their
discipline, they forbade murder, adultery, fraud, treachery, and other heinous
offenses. Thus much Pliny of the conversation and manners of the ancient
Christians. A worthy glass to be set before Christians of our time, to whet
their dull devotion to God, and for reformation of such heinous offenses
amongst them. And if thus the ancient Christians showed themselves in
subjection and fidelity to their Princes, though they were Panims, and so
forbade and loathed treachery, homicide, and shedding of blood, that as the
same Tertul. says of them: Tertul. in Apolog. cap 37
In our profession (says he) more lawful it is to be slain, then to flea: how
would they have abhorred treachery and the shedding of blood of Christian
Princes, whose principates and powers serve as handmaids to the Gospel of
Christ, and whose blood will cry to God against treacheries only intended
against the^, and not only before the execution of the^ but after, as the blood
of Abel cried to God from the ground after it was shed? They write that
Renelphus the young king of Mercia, was by treason of Quendred his Sister
slain, and after the murder cast into a thick wood, Fabian in his Cronicle
of England (...) 6. part ^^p. 158.
and that by a pillar of divine light, shining from the corpse (as Fabian in the
English Chronicle tells it) the corpse was first discovered, after entered: and
Quendred by gods vengeance apparentlie stricken. For the truth of the
circumstance of the story I leave to the author. But surely by divine light
from heaven, treasons against princes, and plats of murders, Treasons and
murders wonderfully are discovered by lights from heaven and marvelous mean
on earth.
even before the attempt and practice of them, wonderfully are discovered: as
of late marueilously we have seen. By what means soever they are descried,
gods providence appoints the means on earth: And by divine light from heaven
the inferior means are directed on earth, as wonderfully we have seen. O let
us magnify always the mercies of the glorious God for it. Tha^kfully we
recognize his wonderful work. Only the fear is, ye worldly security do not
swallow it up, and by forgetfulness it fade away. For security comes stealing
on, Against security and forgetfulness.
and unthankfulness is ready continually to assail us, and forgetfulness to
ouerflow us, unless we hold fast and lock up in tha^kfull memory, the blessed
and wonderful work of God. Therefore that it perish not in the gulf of
unthankfulness, let us renew and keep it fresh in remembrance, and what our
portion had been if Gods providence had not prevented. and provided for us. All
England should have rued, and faithful servants to god, and true hearted
subjects to her M. might with Hieremy have written new lame^tations: Hier. lament.
and the roll of the book delivered to Ezech. ye prophet, Ezech. 2.
written with lamentatio^s within and without had been fit for our doleful state.
Hiere. 9.
We might have said with Hier. Who will give us eyes as fountains of waters to
bewail ye wrackes of Gods Church and of our Country, Herem 9.
if that doleful day had commen on us. But God has wiped the tears feom our
eyes, Reave. 7.
as he does wipe the trares from the eyes of the Saints, as S. John says: and
he has put of our sackcloth, Psalm. 30.
and girded as with joy, as the Prophet David says, and has turned the
doleful day to joy, and the book of lamentations, into the book of praising
of God: and has opened the good affections of faithful subjects to her
Majesty, to the great comfort and rejoicing both of her Majesty, and of all
that bear true hearts to her. Thus how the ancient Christians framed their
affections and obedience to their Princes, though they were panims: and how
they abhorred trecheries, homicides, and shedding of blood and such other
heinous offenses: And how Gods providence maruelously works in the
discovery of such offenses.

The 4. principal point and chief matter.
The fourth is, what an acceptable thing to God it is, when ye people join
their hearts to Godly Princes, in true faith to God, and hearty fidelity to
their Princes. Let us lay down examples hereof out of the holy Scriptures. How
acceptable a thing was it to God, when under Iehosaphat ye godly king, his
people assembled together, Iehosaphat and his people.
and joined their hearts and hearty prayers with their Prince to God, at what
time the ru^bling rumor was up of great multitudes of enemies of ye children of
Moab, Ammon, 2. Chro. 20.
and of mount Seir coming on them. And presentlye they received comfort of
God. Iehaziel.
The spirit of God came upon Iehaziel a Leuite, who delivered sweet comfort to
them from God: and their enemies swords were turned on themselves. Likewise
when under the godly king Asa, Asa and his people.
the people and commons with such hearty affection and fidelity were joined to
God and their prince, that they made a covenant (as the scripture says) to
seek the Lord God of their fathers, with all their heart, 2. Chro. 15.
and with all their soul: and whosoever will not seek the Lord God of Israel,
shall be slain, whether he be small or great, man or woman. And they swore unto
the Lord with a loud voice, and with showting, and with trumpets, and with
corners. And all Judah reioysed at the oath, for they had sworn to the Lord with all their heart, and sought him with a whole desire, and he was found of the^:
And ye Lord gave them rest round about. Hitherto the words of the scripture.
So likewise under Hezechiah the gracious prince, Hezechiah and his people
when Rabshakeh sent from Sancherib king of Assure began to roar out
blasphemies against God: Esai. 37.
and minaces against the prince and people: and Eliakim and other the servants
of king Hesechiah sent with him, rent their clothes: And Hesechiah put on
sackcloth, and went to the house of the Lord to make his moan to God in prayer:
and his people were joined in true fidelity to their Prince: and God sent them
comfort by the Prophet Esai, and sent his Angel to distroy the huge host of
Sancherib, an hundred fourscore and five thousand. And when they arose up
early in the morning, behold (says the Prophet) they were slain, and all was
full of dead bodies. Josiah and his people.
So under Josiah the religious Prince, when the book of the law of God was
found of Helkiah the Priest, and Shaphan the Chaunceller red it before the
king, he rent his clothes, his heart melted, and he humbled himself before God,
and he cleansed the temple of God from idolatry, and he^ gathered all his
people from the greatest to the smalest (as the Scripture says: 2. Chro. 34.
) and he red in their ears all the words of the book of the covenant that
was found in the house of the Lord. And the king stood by the Pillar and made a
covenant before the Lord to walk after the Lord, and to keep his
co^maundeme^ts, and his testimonies, and his statutes, with all his heart, and
with all his soul: and yt he would accomplish the words of the covenant
written in the same book. And he caused all that were found in Jerusalem and
Benjamin, to stand to it. And ye inhabita^tes of Jerusalem, did according to ye
covenant of God, even the God of their fathers. Hitherto the words of ye
Scripture. What a blessed state was in Judah and Benjamin then, when the hearts
of the Prince and people melted at the word of God, and were knit in one, to
serve God according to his law, and their Sovereign in true fidelity
according to it? How good and comely a thing is it (as the Prophet David says)
for brethren to dwell together in unity? Psalm. 133
It is like the precious ointment upon the head that ran down upon the beard,
even unto Aarons beard, and unto ye skirtes of his clothing etc. So far David.
And if this we join our hearts together, to serve God in true faith, and our
Prince in true loyalty and fidelity, we shall find comfort and help from God.
God will bless the prince for ye people, and the people for ye Prince: foreign
enemies will fear, traitors will tremble, rebels will be ready to run into caves
and dens, and seditious persons will shrink in their own secret imaginatious:
Psalm. 58.
and the wicked ones like snayles shall be ready to melt away in their own
wicked ways, as the prophet prays they may. Thus how acceptable a thing it
is to God, when the people join their hearts together in the true faith to
God, and hearty fidelity to their Prince.

The 5. is of David his loyalty and fidelity to the royal person of king
Saul, The 5. chief matter.
notwithstanding he sought his life.

While David was yet a subject to king Saul, The Example of David his loyalty
to the person of king Saul. 2. Sam. 24.
by the evil spirit sent of God on him, he was so incensed against David, that
he chased him as abird from covert to covert to devour him. His spies hunted
him, and they told him: behold David is in the wilderness of Engaddi: and the
men of Ziph brought him tidings that David lurked in the hill of Hachilah by
them. Psalm. 11.
And how say ye says he, (as some lay down the words in the Psalm) to my
soul, that she should fly as a bird to the hill. Yet notwithstanding he was
thus chased for life, and driven out to ye uttermost, and put on his guard for
safety of life, yet he bare such love, loyalty, and fidelity to the royal
person of his Prince, that when God eftsoons had put him into his hands, he
would suffer none of his retinue or garrison to offer violence unto him. 2.
Sam. 24.
For he said, the Lord keep me from doing that thing unto the Lords
anointed, to lay my hands upon him, for he is the anointed of the Lord. And
with these words he quailed his own servants which said unto him: See, the
day is come which the Lord said unto thee, Behold I will deliver thy enemies
into thy hand, and thou shall do to them as seems good to thee. But David
would suffer none of his men to lay hands on him even when he came as it were
into his mouth, into the cave to ease himself, David saved king Saules life in
the cave.
where David and his men were hid in the inward parts thereof. And his men
said, now is the day etc. And they were sharp set, even to have torn him with
their teeth. And if David in ye plung had not pacified his men, and guarded the
person of his Prince (which notwithstanding persecuted him to death) king Saul
had been dispatched of them. And an other time, God put king Saul into his
hands, David saved king Saules life being asleep in the camp. 1. Sam. 26.
when David came upon him as he was a sleep, and the people lay round about
him. And Abishai said to David, God has closed thy enemy in thy hand this
day: I pray thee let me smite him once with a spear to the earth, and I will
not smite him again. And David said to Abishai, distroy him not, for who can
lay his hand on the Lords anointed and be giltlesse. And he took the kings
spear, and the pot of water from Saul's head, and from the top of a hill he
cried to Abner the captain of Saul's host, and to the people: This is not well
done of thee, as the Lord lives ye are worthy to die, because you have not
kept your master the Lords anointed: and now see where the kings spear is,
and the pot of water that was at his head. And Saules heart rued, and he said: I
have sinned, come again my son David, for I will do thee no more harm,
because my soul was precious to thy eyes this day. Behold I have done
foolishly, and have erred exceedingly. So far the Scripture. Thus king Saul's
life was precious to David though he did persecute him to death, because he
was his Sovereign Lord, placed of God in the royal seat. His private causes
and oppressions he committed to God, abiding his pleasure and leisure, and as
his providence should dispose of him and them. But he cold not frame his heart,
either himself, or to suffer any other under his regiment, to offer any
violence to the person of his Prince, notwithstanding they were in arms, and
had him at their devotions. And his conscience was so tender touching his
loyalty to the person of his Prince, that when in the cave mentioned before,
he had cut off but a lappet of Saul's garment, in sign that God had put his
life into his hands, he was touched in his heart after (as the Scripture
says) because he thought he had been to bold with his Prince. 1. Sam. 24.
David resolute loyalty
Though he were cast out of his protection, yet so he abhorred treasons and
violence against the person of his Prince, that he was resolute whatsoever
should become of him, not for the winning of his kingdom, to the person of his
Prince 2. Sam. 26.
or saving his own life, to do or suffer violence to be done to his person. For
this was his resolution touching the person of his Prince: As the Lord lives
(says he) either the Lord shall smite him, or his day shall come to die, or
he shall go down to battle and perish. The Lord keep me from laying my hand
upon the Lords anointed. So far the Scripture. David honored king Saul in the
field, though he pursued him to death 1. Sam. 24.
And humbly he honored the person of his Prince, even in the field, and
amides the forces and furniture of wars. For after he came out of the cave,
(where he had so much ado to qualify the rage of his soldiers, and restrain
them from running upon king Saul) he cried after Saul, saying: O my Lord the
king. And when Saul looked behind him, David inclined himself to the earth, and
bowed him (as the Scripture says) and after spoke to him. Notwithstanding that
king Saul continually sought his blood, and in armor lay in the field
against him, yet he honored the person of his Prince in the midst of the
wars. And his person was so precious in his sight, that he could suffer no
bodily harm or violence to be done to him: insomuch he had remorse for
cutting off the lappet of his garment. What hearts then, or rather what
addamantes in steed of hearts, Zacha. 7.
have they (as the prophet Zachary says of the Jews) which living under the
peace and protection of so merciful a Prince, can find in their hearts, so
much as to think any treachery or violence to her royal person: who has been
so good a mother of her country, and so pitiful a nurse of the Church of God,
Epist. ad Philemone.
and by whom the bowels of Gods saints have been refreshed, as of Philemon,
Paul says: and who has fostered her faithful subjects in the blessings and
benifites of God, which so abundantly under her government so many years God
has bestowed upon us. If therefore there be any remorse of conscience to God
and his ordinance, if there be any bowels of good nature in us to our natural
and liege Sovereign, if there be any value of true worthiness in us, let us
show our love, loyalty, and hearty fidelity to her: and honor her royal
person, as David did the person of his Prince, and guard her from al violence,
in respect of Gods ordinance, and the manifold blessings which under her so
many years we have received: and that God may bless us for our loyalty and
honoring the person of our Prince, as he did bless his faithful servant David.
Though his loyalty seemed to be lost touching king Saul, yet it was not lost
with God: for Gods blessngs more abundantly followed and fell on him. Beside,
David's loyalty to king Saul was a comfort to him in his troubles. 1. Sam. 26.
he found such comfort of conscience by it in his troubles, that he said to
king Saul: Behold like as thy life was much set by this day in my eyes (when
he came on him as he lay fast a sleep) so let my life be set by in the eyes of
the Lord, that he may deliver me out of al tribulations. So ye loyalty that
he showed to his Prince, in respect of God, he found abundantly again with
comfort of conscience in his greatest troubles: and his own life was precious
is the sight of God. Abigael.
As Abigael the virtuous woman said to him: The soul (says she) of my Lord
shall be bound in a bundel of life with the Lord thy God, 1. Sam. 25.
and the soul of thy enemies shall God cast out as out of the middle of a
slinge. What comfort and encouragement may this be to the hearts of true
subjects to their Prince, since God blesses loyalty, and it is a comfort to
the conscience in troubles: and as their Prince is precious in their sight, so
for their loyalty their own life is more precious in the sight of God.
Besides this, David's comfort in the righteousness of his cause. 2. Sam. 25.
David took comfort of the uprightness and innocence of his cause, and
thereof he said: The Lord reward every man according to his righteousness:
for the Lord has delivered thee into my hands, and I would not lay my hands
upon the Lords anointed. So far the Scripture. And before he said to Saul
when he saved his life in the cave, 1. Sam. 24.
understand and see, that there is neither evil nor wickedness in me, yet
thou huntest after my soul to take it. The Lord be judge between thee and
me, and avenge thee of me, and let not my hand be upon thee. So far the
Scripture. God took the judgment into his hands, and delivered David, and
avenged his cause of Saul. So God has taken of late the judgment of the cause
into his hands and has delivered our gracious Prince, and revenged her cause
of her enemies: and the uprightness and innocence of her cause, is great
comfort to her in the sight of God. God vouchsafe long (as Abigael said to
David) to bind her soul in a bundle of life, and long to lock up her life
from all her enemies, as a jewel of comfort to his Church and our Country.
Thus of the example of David his loyalty and fidelity, to the person of king
Saul, notwithstanding he persecuted him to death, and how God blessed him for
it.

The Sixth is, the example of the famous fidelity of one Lylla a Briton and
heathen man, The 6. chief matter.
in the defense of the royal person of his Prince.

As I have laid out at large the example of the loyalty and fidelity of
David to the person of king Saul, so I will set down breefely the example and
fidelity of one Lylla a Briton, in the defense of the royal person of his
Prince. Fabian in his Cronicle of England the 5. part cap. 130.
When Edwin king of Northumberland, at a City beside the water of Darwent in
Darbishire, being smallie accompanied, was suddenly assailed of a murderer and
swordman (as Fabian calls him) by Quincelinus king of the West Saxons hired
to it, Lylla a Briton his famous fidelity in the defense of the person of his
Prince.
who ran on him with a sword that was enuenimed, one Lylla the kings trusty
servant, unarmed and disgarnished of weapon, thrust his body between the
traitors sword and the king, and saved the king his life, with loss of his
own: And yet through the body of Lylla with the thruste of the sword, the
king was wounded also: and because the wound was poisoned, it was more hardly
cured. A worthy example of famous fidelity in defense of the royal person of
the Prince, worthy to live in the memory of al faithful subjects: and as a
glass to be set before their eyes to encourage and emboul^e^ them, as a wall
to set their bodies and bowels in defense of the royal person of their Prince,
against the swords of al traitors and enemies, Though Lylla be dead in person
many hu^derd years since, yet his loyalty lives still in the bowels of
faithful subjects, ready to thrust their bodies against the swords of all
traitors and enemies to the royal person of their Prince. And if Lylla did so
for king Edwin a Prince as then heathen, and but over a corner of this land,
much more will faithful subjects with their bodies and bowels, defend the
sacred person of so Christian and gracious a Prince, and good mother of all
England, against the swords of all traitors and enemies unto her. England is
the mother of many Lyllas in these days, and has fostered and bred many such
faithful subjects for life to their Prince. God send many such, and long
continue them, and bless us with the long life and prosperous continuance of
our Prince. Thus of the example of Lylla his famous fidelity in defense of the
royal person of his Prince.

The 7. chief matter.
The seventh is, how the late occasions and dangers, should increase true
love, loyalty, and unfeigned fidelity, in the hearts of all good subjects to
her Majesty.

The late dangers should inflame love and loyalty in true subjects. John 16.
The fear and danger to depart from a person most dear to us, does increase
and inflame more love in us. When our Savior had resolutely told his
disciples, yt he must depart from them, their hearts were filled with sorrow.
And they fell on the neck of Paul, and wept on him, Act. 20.
after he had told them of Ephesus, that they should see his face no more.
When Sixtus the ancient bishop of Rome, Sixtus. Laurentius. Platina in vita
Sixti 2.
was going to martyrdom for the faith of Christ, Laurence his Archdeacon cried
out after him: Whither go thou father without thy son? He so loved him in
life, that in death he was loath to be parted from him: and three days after he
followed him in martyrdom also. Ex passione Cypriani a Pontio eius diacono
edita.
When Cyprian the Archbishop of Carthage, was brought to the place of his
martyrdom, and stood up in lynnen, ready for the executioner, the peoples
hearts so rued on him, that they cried, let us dye with our holy Bishop. The
people of Constantinople, Chrisostoms first banishment.
so entyrely loved Chrisostom their Archbishop, that the first time by Eudoxia,
the Empress her means he departed into banishment, they made a mutenie in
the City. After at the Emperor his commandment being recalled home again,
the people ran on heaps to meet him, and shouted about him, and as ravished
with joy of his return, they would needs perforce have him to the great
Church, there out of his old place to hear his voice again. And after his
second banishment, Chrisostoms second banishment.
many ye could not temper their zeal and affection to him, sequestered and
banded themselves in a faction, and were called Iohannitae after his name, and
great stir eftsoons was made for him. And if so grievous their departing was
from their Bishop dear to them, how doleful would the departing have been from
such a gracious Prince and natural mother of our whole Country? And therefore
the late fear and danger thereof, should increase and inflame the fire of
true love, loyalty, and unfeigned fidelity, in the hearts of all true and
natural subjects to her Majesty.

The 8 chief matter.
The eight is, how directed in wisdom from God, we may take the right way,
long to obtain her of the mercy of God, by making hearty prayers and
supplications to God for her: That he will set the watch of his providence about
her, and send the garrison of his Angels to guard her: That the evil spirits,
and those by whom they work, and that work and practice by them, may have no
power against her: With what minds we should pray to God for her that he may
accept our prayers.

That we may long obtain and enjoy the blessing of her royal person and
soueraignetie amongst us, the right way in the direction of godly wisdom,
is to have continual recourse to God, by making hartye prayers and
supplications to him for her: These be the safest munitions of Princes on
earth, and and as it were Castles in heaven, to keep her on earth from al
treacheries and practices of enemies and evil spirits whatsoever. The safest
munitions of Princes are hearty prayers of the faithful unto God for them.
Let us build for her, bulwarks on earth in the bowels of hearty affections of
faithful subjects, and Castles in heaven, with hearty prayers and
supplications unto God for her: That God will vouchsafe to be a continual
Castle to her on earth, as he was to his servant David, Psalm. 18.
(whose glory was, that the Lord was his rock, strength, and defense. Psalm.
61.
) And that he will be a Tower of strength to her against all her enemies: and
that he will prepare his mercy and faithfulness to preserve her. This is the
impregnable Castle and Tower of defense, as Solomon says: The Tower of
strength, Prou. 18.
is the name of the Lord. That ye mercy of God will vouchsafe continually to
keep her for his poor Church and our Country, let us join our selves (as
Tertullian speaks) as in an army to God, and as if by violent force of
fervent prayers we would win it of God: Ad deum (says he) quasi manu facta
praecationibus a^biamus. Tertul. in Apolog. cap. 39
And let us with heavenly affections beat at heaven gates, and touch God in
our prayers, as Tertullian says in an other place: Coelum tudimus (says he)
deum tangemus. Tertul. in Apolog. cap. 40
Such violence and force of faith is acceptable to God as the same Tertullian
says: Tertul. in Apolog. cap 39
Haec vis deo grata est: This violence is acceptable to God. As he that knocked
at his neighbors door at midnight, and would not give up till he opened and
gave him that he came for: Luke. 11.
And as the widow that hanged about the judge till he granted her suite:
Luke. 18.
And as the woman of Canaan that followed our Savior with open mouth, Mat. 15.
til she obtained that she came for of him: Mark. 10. Bartimaeus.
And as blind Bartimaeus the beggar (the son of Timaeus) begging by the high
way, when Christ passed by he left not begging and crying after him, till he
commanded him to be brought unto him: then off went the beggars cloak, that
lighter and without let he might run to him: and his running and casting of his
cloak, was not in vain; for of a dark man he was made to see, and he
glorified ye mercy of our Savior to him. If we awake but a little out of ye
dreams of worldly vanities (for mortal creatures in respect of their worldly
states, Psalm. 90.
as David says, are like a sleep or dream) what are worldly states, ports,
and countenances, but as Bartimaeus his beggars cloak in the sight of God. If
we behold them in the glass of true valewe and of the wisdom of God by his
blessed word, Eccle. 1. Psalm. 62.
all is but most vain vanity (as Solomon says) and ye children of men are
deceitful upon ye weightes, they are altogether lighter then vanity it self.
This is the glass of true value for us to see our selves in the right shape of
our frail nature, and in the right estate of worldly vanities. Let us make
never so much of the painted sheath, it is in the sight of God but as
Bartimaeus his beggars cloak. Iaco. 2.
They that are rich in faith (as James says) and enriched with heavenly gifts
(as Paul says) are rich and honorable in his sight. 1. Co. 1.
When we come to the throne of his grace (as Paul calls it) to pray to him,
He. 4.
we must lay from us worldly ports and pompes (as Bartimaeus did his cloak:
for they are no other in the sight of God: and show our selves as right
beggars to our Savior, to beg gifts of grace and continual help of him. And
we must plie him as Bartimaeus did, and the woman of Canaan, and not ^s give
him up till he vouchsafe his mercy on us: As Augustine said, that he plied him
with begging prayers continually, Augustinus Audaci
to have some portion of heavenly wisdom of him. Ego (says he) ex illo
thesauro mendicabunda prece quotidianam stipem rogo. Let us come therefore in
the right shape of Christians and beggars, with godly importunacie to beg of
the mercy of God, the prosperous and long preservation of our Prince, against
all traitorous practices and attemptes of enemies. And that as David prays,
Psalm. 22.
he will prevent her with bountiful blessings, and make her glad with the
joy of his countenance: that her glory may be great in his salvation, Psalm. 20.
and that dignity and honor he will lay upon her. And as in the Psalm before he
prays, that he will help her out of his sanctuary, and strengthen her out of
Sion: that she may rejoice in his salvation, and triumph in the name of the
Lord: and that the Lord will perform all her petitions. Thus upon David his
prayers, as upon the wings of the spirit, we may be carried up into heaven in
our prayers for her. The Struthio camel.
For as the Struthio-camel has a heavy body and weak wings, yet his weak
wings are an help to his heavy body: so by corrupt nature we have heavy
bodies in prayer, and the wings of our souls are weak also, but upon David
prayers in his Psalms, as on wings of the spirit, we are supported in our
prayers to God for her. Thus how we should make our prayers and supplications
to God for her, showing our selves in the right shape of Christians, as
continual crauers and beggars before the throne of the mercy of God for her.

The second branch of this part is, that we should pray to God to set the
watch of his providence about her, and to send the garrison of his Angels to
guard her, that the evil spirits and the workers by them, may have no power
against her.

The safety of Princes, Estates, The watch of Gods providence, and garrisons
of Angels.
and countries, is by the continual watch of Gods providence over them, and the
defense and garrison of his Angels about them. As the watch and guard of
Princes are joined together, so where the watch of gods providence is, there
also is the guard of his Angels: As they were about Elisha in Dothan, 2. Reg. 6.
when God opened the eyes of his servant (according to Elisha his prayer) and
he saw horses and chariots of fire round about Elisha. The Angel of the Lord
encampeth round about them that fear God as David says, and delivers them:
Psalm, 34. Psalm. 91.
and in another Psalm, he has given his Angels charge over thee to keep thee
in all thy ways. The watch of Gods providence, and the guard of his Angels was
about Abraham where ever he became, Genesis 16.
and about those that belonged to him: as Agar and Ismael her son, Genesis 23.
when they were like to have perished in the wilderness: and when he sent his
eldest servant to take a wife for Isaak his son, he said: The Lord God of
heaven he shall send his Angel before thee. So Gods providence appoints them
to resort and attend about his servants at home and abroad. Reave. 19.
And they call themselves felloweseruaunts to those that have the witness of
our Lord Jesus in them: and Paul calls them ministering spirits, for their
sakes that shall be heirs of salvation. Seeing then in the wisdom of God
revealed by his word, the right way for the safety of the persons and estates
of princes on earth, is by prayer to god for them, to commit them to the watch
of Gods providence, and to the guard of his Angels; let us heartily pray, that
God will set the watch of his providence, and the garrison of his Angels, to
keep the Royal person and estate of our Prince, his Church, and our Country,
from all her and our enemies. By Gods providence the Angels are appointed to
special ministrations and services over Princes, governments, Da. 10.
and countries, as out of Daniel the Prophet is alleged. Epipha. li. 2. cont
haeres. to. 1. ex sententia Procli cont. Origin.
Proclus against Origin says ( Epiphanius rehearsing it) that the Angels were
made, Ob prouidentiam eorum quae constructa sunt: For providence (by their
ministrations) of those things which of God were made. After he saith^y as god
has universal and perfect providence, so Angels have particular, to say their
ministratio^s and services particularly allotted to the^ of God, in Countries
government, estates, public and private persons. Though Augustine does
plainly confess, August. ad Orosima co^^. Priscillian.
that he knows not the difference between the Angels, and what the thrones,
or dominations, or principalities, or powers are (by which name their dignities
are noted in Paul) and that he cannot distinguishe their dignities and
ministrations to which they are assigned of God; yet plainly he says, that by
their nature they are spirits, and when they are employed in their
ministrations and works of God, they are called Angels. For Angelus (says he)
nomen officij ect, non naturae. Agust. super Psalm. 103.
An Angel (says he) is a name of office and not of nature. Ex eo quod est
(says he) spiritus est, ex eo quod agit, Angelus est: touching his being
(says he) he is a spirit, in respect of his work and ministration, he is an
Angel. Seeing then by Gods providence they are appointed their ministrations
and services, over gouernmentes and countries, over the Church of God, over
the Fosterfathers and Nurses thereof, Esaias. 49.
(as Esaias calls them) and publicly and privately give their attendance as is
appointed them of God: Let us heartily pray to God that for continual
safegarde of our Prince and Country will vouchsafe to appoint the watch of his
providence, and the ministration of his holy Angels, against all her and our
enemies, and against all evil spirits and their instruments by whom they
work, and all that practice by them. Of the evil spirits, and those that are
set on by them.


The end of the second branch of this matter is, that the evil spirits and
those that are set on by evil spirits, and work and practice by them, may
have no power against her. Arnobius the ancient father witnesses, that
apostasy and falling from God and true faith, idolatry, blaspheming,
slandering gods truth, and such like wickedness, are the works of evil
spirits: as likewise mischiefs, outrages, treasons, and such like heinous
offenses are. For the wicked are set on by evil spirits to such outrages,
and the evil spirits do work by them as by their engines and instruments, and
they work and practice by evil spirits. King Saul consulted with the Witch
that wrought by the evil spirit, 1. Sam. 22.
and the next morrow he was slain. 2. Reg. 21.
Manasse king of Judah in the highest of his great idolatry and wickedness, gave
himself over to witchcraft and sorcerie, and after great tribulations sent of
god on him, he humbled him self to God, 2. Chro. 33.
and by repentance was reclaimed. Ahaziah king of Israel, when he lay on his
sick bed, 2. Reg. 1.
sent to Baalzebub the idol of Ekron for counsel and help, 2. Reg. 1.
but God by the Prophet Elias sent him answer, yt he should not come down off
the bed on which he was gone up, but should die the death. Julian the Apostate.
After Julian the Emperor became an Apostate, and revolted from the faith of
Christ, he gave himself to monstrous sorseries, and was roused with evil
spirits continually against the faith of Christ, and carried headlong to his
own destruction. Licinius the wicked and Heathen Emperor in his wars against
Constantin the christian Emperor surnamed the Great, Licinius the Emperor.
sought after sorseries Witches, Incha^ters, and those yt wrought with evil
spirits, and they sang al one song to him, Eusebius de vita Constan. lib. 2.
(as Eusebius. witnesses) yt he should carry the victory away, but Licinius lost
the field, and after lost his life. Panim Emperors and sorcerers against
Constantine the Emperor.
The Panim Tyrants and Emperors which warred upon Constable. aforesaid, bare
themselves greatly bold of their inchauntments and nigroma^cies (as Eusebi.
reports) and because those things were exercised of the Tyrants, as Eusebius
says, Eusebius de vita Consta^tini. lib. 1.
Constantinus deu^ quaesiuit adiu tore^, sought for help of God, and gave
himself deuoutlye to prayer, and by the help and power of God, he triumphed
over all the Tyrants, and over all the evil spirits and the workers by them.
So likewise heartily let us pray to god, for his continual protection, and
safecondit of the royal person and estate of Elizabeth our Queen, and that by
the ministratio^s of holy Angels and blessed spirits at his appointment
continually attending her, she may triu^ph over all evil spirits, and those yt
are set on and whet on by them, and work and practice by them. And the more
heartily and earnestly let us pray for the continual watch of gods providence,
and the attendance of holy Angels about her, because in the kingdom of
Antichrist, darkness, idolatry and error, the evil spirits do most prevail,
have power in their minds by error, and in their affections to set them a fire
to mischiefs and outrages against the Church of God, and against Princes,
whom God has raised as pillars in his Church, to comfort and support her by
the authority they have received of God against her enemies: and who (as John
says in his Revelation) bring their glory and honor unto the city of God:
Reave. 21.
and whose principates on earth, do serve to the setting forth of the
glorious Gospel of our Savior. Against such Princes, the evil spirits are
mad, and continually touse the minds of the wicked, and inflame their evil
affections and dispositions against them: but by the providence of God, and
ministration of holy Angels appointed to them of God, the wicked ones are drawn
into the destruction themselves that they devised for them. Beware therefore
that we give not our selves over to darkness in steed of light, to error in
steed of truth, to infidelity in steed of true faith, to wilful contempt of
the word of God, the state and government, the ministry and godly laws for
true religion by public authority established. For where error, idolatry,
infidelity, hate of Gods word, blaspheming of his truth is rooted, there the
evil spirits delight to dwell. As Paul calls them the spirits of error, 1.
Tim. 4.
so they employ all their forces to hold men in gross errors. Arnobius Afer.
lib. 6. and 8. cont. Gentes.
Arnobius the ancient father shows how they were wont to work in the idols
of Heathen, and in dead images as assistants to them, lying signs and wonders
(so far as God permits) by them. And join themselves also as assistants
to the^, which are instruments of error, idolatry, unbelief, and disobedience.
The Valentinians. Iraen. lib. 2. cap. 57.
The Valentinians (against whose blasphemous heresies Iraeneus the ancient
father and Martyr has written) took on them as workers of miracles: but their
miracles he calls magical illusions, and magic mockeries, and fantastical
shows and gases, to the seducing and destruction of men. Marcus the sorcerer.
Iraene. lib. 1. cap. 9.
Marcus the seducer and sorcerer (as Iraeneus witnesses of him) had Diabolu^
paredru^, id est, assessorem, a familiar or assistant Devil, and by magic and
nigromancie, took on him to prophecy and to enspire others to do the same:
and chiefly seduced and abused women of great wealth: and in the ministration
of the Sacrament he laid snares by magic as delutions and mockeries to seduce
souls. Tertullian tells, Socrates.
that Socrates the famous Philosopher, among the Heathen was wont to say, Si
daemonium permittat: Tertul. in Apolog. cap. 4^
If his Devil or familiar would permit him: and yet he could not save him from
sentence of condemnation and execution in Athens, Simon Magus.
Simon Magus the great nigromancer under Claudius the Emperor at Rome (as
Iraen. says) was Statua honoratus propter magiam: Iraen. lib. 1. cap. 20
Honored with an image set up to him for his magic and nigromancie. Menander.
Menander his Disciple likewise greatly vaunted and vaunced himself to such as
would become his Disciples, Iraen. lib. 1. cap. 21.
and with his heresy learn sorcerie and magic of him. May we not see the
right successors of Simon Magus the great Sorcerer at Rome in the Sea of Rome?
Syluester. 2.
In Syluester Bishop of Rome the second of that name, the great Nigromancer and
Sorcerer, Plati. in vi. in Syluest. 2.
who by sorcerie and help of the Devil (as Platina the Italian writer of the
lives of Popes, and an officer to them witnesses) came to be Pope, and at his
sudden death unlooked for, the Devil deceived him, and then at that instant he
bewailed and confessed his wickedness, as Platina aforesaid tells. Besides
many Sorcerers and Nigroma^cers followed in that Sea ( Beno the Cardinal
confessing it) as disciples of Syluester, and right successors of Simon Magus.
What marvel though evil spirits have so prevailed in that Sea, and wrought
by them and those that have been bewitched by them, such monstrous mischiefs,
unnatural treasons, and blooddie butcheries and outrages against the Church of
God, and against Christian Princes, People, and Countries? Therefore seeing the
Church of God, and our Prince and our country has such enemies confedered with
evil spirits, by whom they work and be continually set on by them, what
should be the refuge of godly and faithful subjects to her Majesty, but with
Constantine the Emperor in the like case in his wars, against such sorcerers
and workers by wicked means, with hearty and fervent prayers, to commend and
commit the Royal person of our Prince, her estate and reign, and the estate
of Gods Church and our country, to the Almighty providence and protection of
God: that so with Constantine she also may have victory over all her enemies,
maugre all evil spirits whatsoever. Then fear the^ not. The blessed banner of
the fatherly providence of God is displaied over us. God is the protector of
our life (as David says) who^ then shall we fear? Psalm. 27.
Though an host of men were laid against us, yet shall not our heart be afraid:
though there rose up war against us, yet will we trust in him. Thus let our
hearts take hold of David's comfort: Romans 15.
for the holy Scripture is written for our comfort and instruction. These are
examples for us. What is a cordial comfort and sovereign salve if it be not
used? Enlarge therefore our own hearts in David's co^forts, Psalm. 46.
saying with him: God is our strength and hope, a very present help in
trouble. And in his prayer growing into comfort and courage, he says: The Lord
of hoasts is with us, the god of Jacob is our refuge. And in another place,
Psalm. 44.
it is not (says he) their own arm that helped them, but thy right hand, and
thy arm, and the light of thy countenance, because thou had a favor to them.
Thou art my king O God, send help to Jacob. Thus David. Let us arm our selves
in his spirit and with his prayers, against all forces of evil spirits and
enemies, and they will fly. Iaco. 4.
Resist the Devil (says James) and he will fly from you. What though Balaam
does invoke and call on devils against the people of God (as Origin says.
Orige. ho. 13. in ca. 22. lib. Nu.
) Inuocet licet Daemones Balaam, non potest Deus a daemonibus defendere? Cannot
God (says he) defend us from Devils? He reigns over the Devils and evil
spirits also, as the same Origin in annother place says: Non solum bonis and
sanctis mentibus ac spiritibus dominatur, Origin. in Epist ad Romans ca. 4. lib.
9.
verum and nequam and refugis, his quos Scriptura malignos Angelos appellat:
He rules not only over good and holy minds and spirits, but over the evil
and revolted spirits, and whom the scripture calls the evil angels. And
therefore fear them not. Fear comes of want of faith. Neither must we fear
the^ nor fawn upon the^. To. Gerson ser. 1. de. 5. Antonio veritate. 3.
Gerso^ a writer of great name in their own schools, and sometime Chanceller of
Parris, gives godly counsel herein, that we should not fear the evil
spirits, nor fawn on them, to seek to them by sorcerie and unlawful means
to have help or any good of them or by them. What friendship (says he) can a
man have of a deadly enemy? What truth of the father of lies? If he tells
any true thing, it is to deceive and by color of truth to betray thee. He is a
Traitor to thy Lord, and will thou look for help of him? And God threatens to
destroy thee if thou deal with him and seek to him, and those that work by
him. Against God and against the faith is to seek health of the enemy of God.
Thus Gerson imboldneth us against the fear of evil spirits, and fears us
against fawning and seeking for help or any good thing by them. Let us not
therefore that are invested in the name and faith of Christ, fawn on them or
fear them, or those that work and practice by them: But let us fear the
living God, and power our hearty prayers and supplications to him for the
continual protection and long preservation of the Royal person of our Prince,
and her prosperous estate, and for the ministration and garrison of holy
Angels about her, aganist all evil spirits and workers by them: Then the evil
spirits themselves will fear, and the instruments in whom and by whom they
work, will quake at their very heart roots, and we shall see the great
salvation of our God, and shall magnify his marvelous mercies and wondrous
works, for the continual preservation of his Church, the Royal person and
estate of our Queen and Country. Thus of the end of the second branch of
this matter, yt we should pray for her, that the evil spirits and those that
are set on by evil spirits and work by them, may have no power against her.

The last branch. With what minds we should pray to God for her.
The last branch of this matter is, with what minds we should pray to God for
her that he may accept our prayers. We must not only lift up our hands in
prayer, which (as Athanasius says) God has given us: Vt in oratione supplices
tendamus addominum: That humbly in prayer we should lift them up to the Lord:
but we must lift up our hearts with our hands to heaven (as the Prophet
Jeremy says) and with our hearts we must cry to God for her. For hearty
prayer is the cry of the heart and bending of the thoughts (as Augustine
says) August. in Psalm. 18. Aug. de ver. Apost. ser. 13.
and not the clamor of the mouth and jaws (as in another place Augustine
says) but the clamor of the heart which sounds in the ears of God. And thus
with heart and hands we must take with us also the warning of S. Paul, 1.
Tim. 2.
that we lift up pure hands in prayer to God, not polluted and defiled with
gross and grievous sins, and with unrepentant hearts. For sinners
(continuing in their sins) God does not hear, as the blind man whom our
Savior healed witnesses in S. John. John. 9.
And if I incline to wickedness in my heart, Psalm. 66.
the Lord will not hear me says David. He that sins (with unrepentant heart
dwelling and abiding in sin) is of the Devil says John. God abhors the
wicked, 1. John. 3.
and will destroy them as David says. Psalm. 5. Psalm. 109. Pro. 15. and ^1
Let his prayer (says he in annother Psalm) be turned into sin. The
sacrifices of the wicked (as Solomon says) are abominable to God. If therefore
we lift up such hearts and hands as the wicked do, with unrepentant hearts in
their sins, then we harbor the common enemies in our own bosoms. We pray
for the Prince and bear good hearts unto her, but look into our own bosoms,
and there lurk the Ghostly and common enemies, even gross and grievous sins
which break out, carry all before them, and ouerflow all. Osee. 4.
One sin (as Osee says) touches an other and ouertaketh an other, Esai 5.
and they are linked together as if they were drawn with Wainropes (as Esai
says:) and they are heaped up to heaven as S. John says of the sins of
Babylon. Reave. 18.
And they are in the ears of the Lord of Hoasts as Esai says. Esai. 5.
Alack for the grievous sins of England: our sins are the common enemies,
our sins arm our enemies against us, Chrysostom. ho. 1. de ver. Esai vide Dom.
as Chrysostom says. Ones heart may bleed to think it, and cannot but rue
in the speaking and hearing of it. The great and grievous sins of England are
ready to conspire, to pluck out our gracious and dear mother out of the
Royal chrone. Because for the sins of the people, God takes away a godly
Prince, and gives them a Prince in his wrath, Osee. 13.
as the Prophet Osee says: and sends oppressors and effeminate persons to
rule over them, as God by the prophet Esai shows. Esaias. 3. Job. 34.
And as Elin says in the book of Job, for the sins of the people, he
causes an hypocrite or wicked man to reign over the^. For the word Chancph
does signify both, because commonly they are concurrent. So Josiah the godly
Prince was taken away, Josiah.
Hier. lament.
for whom Hieremie the Prophet wrote Lamentations: and all singing men and
singing women (as the Scripture says) mourned for Josiah in their Lamentations
to this day, 2. Chro. 25.
and made the same Lamentations an ordinance in Israel: and there succeeded
him Iehohas a Prince of three Months: Iehohas.
and after him Ichoakim an ungodly king. Ieoachim. 2. Chro. 26. Hesechiah. 2.
Chro. 32.
So after the godly and gracious King, Hesechiah by Gods visitation ended his
life (whom all Judah and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem did honor at his
death, Mannasse. 2. Chro. 33.
as the Scripture says.) Manasse his son succeeded him, an ungodly and
idolatrous Prince, Iehosaphat. Iehoram. 2. Chro. 21.
till by repentance after he was reclaimed. Likewise after Iehosaphat the
religious and virtuous Prince, Iehoram his son followed, who embrued himself
in the blood of his brethren, and walked in the wicked ways of Ahab. Abiah.
Absha. etc.
And for Abiah and Ashah, and other godly kings, eftsoons followed wicked
and idolatrous Princes, which were snares and stumbling blocks to the people
of God. This is the course of Gods judgment, for the continual multiplying of
grievous sins in Countries, he withdraws the blessing of gracious and godly
Princes from them. If therefore our hearts melte over the Prince by occasion of
the late dangers, (as the hearts of all faithful subjects do,) let us put
from us those great and grievous sins, which continually provoke his
displeasure against us. Let us cast our sins from us (as by Ezechiel God
warns) that they bring us not to ruin. Ezech. 18.
I have no pleasure in the death of a sinner, says the Lord God: shall he not
live if he return from his ways? Now is the Are put to the root of the tree
(as S. John the baptist says. Luke. 3.
) God by his late wonderful work has given general warning to all, and
summoneth all to repentance. Let us fall to hearty repentance, and turn to God
from grievous sins and wicked life, with an unfeigned purpose to leave them,
and a gracious purpose henceforth to lead a godly life. And in this purpose
let us lift up pure hands to God, as Paul exhorts, for the long and
prosperous preservation of the royal person and estate of our Prince: that the
goodness of God in the tender mercy of Christ, will vouchsafe to accept our
prayers. Thus of the last clause of this matter, with what minds we should
make our prayers for her, that the goodness of God may vouchsafe to accept
them.

The 9 chief matter.
The ninth is, of ye inner wall of England, which is true faith to God, unfeigned
fidelity to our Prince, and mutual love and concord amongst our selves. And
of the outward wall, which is the shipping navigations, and the furniture
thereof, wherewith her Majesty has fortified our Country, and what a
comfort and blessing it is to our whole Country.

The inner wall of Engnland is made of lively stones (as Peter calls
Christians) closely couched to Christ the corner stone, The inner wall of
England. 1. Pet. 2. Ephe. 2. Col. 2. Act. 15. Ephe. 3.
as Paul calls him, by true and lively faith, which is the gift of God, and
his effectuous work, to purify and cleanse the heart, and by which he
dwells in the hearts of the faithful (as Paul says,) And in the body
politic and civil building, of the same lively stones are laid and linked
together with hearty fidelity to their Prince, as the Principal stone of that
building: and in the rest of the building the same, lively stones are joined
and coped together in mutual love and Christian concord and charity together.
Thus the inner wall of the Realm is built and arreared up, by true faith to
God, hearty fidelity to the Prince, and mutual love and concord amongst our
selves. David speaking of the walls, towers, and munitions of Herusalem,
wills us to walk about Syon, Psalm. 47.
to tell her Towers, to mark well her Bulwarks, and withal and without the
which all the rest is nothing says he, for this God is our God for ever and
ever, he shall be our guide unto death. And if we will truly consider of the
inward wall of England, these be the Towers, Bulwarks, and munitions thereof,
true faith to God, loyalty to our Prince, and mutual love amongst our selves,
and with all and without the which, all worldly munitions and fortifications
are nothing, if in the spirit and faith of David, we say: This God is our God,
for ever and ever, he shall be our guide unto death. Therefore let al good
subjects of England, earnestly endeavor to lay themselves close and firm in ye
building of ye inner wall of England, by true faith to God, unfeigned fidelity
to our Prince, and mutual love amongst our selves.

Beware there be none like loose and sagging stones which lie in the midst of
the wall, and deceive and weaken the building of it, and make riftes and rentes
in it, by infidelity to God, disloyalty to the Prince, and malicious hate of
true subjects to her Majesty. Heb. 12.
Beware that no root of bitterness spring up to trouble us (as S. Paul says)
and many be defiled by it. Isaeus ex Philastration Sophistis.
Isaeus the Zophist being demanded of the walls of Sparta, aunsweared that
the walls of Sparta were man to man, and sheilde to shield. Even so the inner
wall of England next to the blessed providence of God, which is as a wall of
defense round about her Majesty and our Country, is man to man, and shield to
shield. Let all true subjects of her, Majesty, fortify that inner wall of
England, with heart to heart, man to man, and shield to shield, and then taking
God to be our foreman and guide, we shall not need to f^^^e the invasions of
foreign enemies. Only let us fear God, and be heartily thankful to him for
his great blessings, and for his wonderful work of late, and using all good
and ordinary means as his gifts, earnestly pray^^^ to him that his fatherly
providence will be the continual protection of the royal person of our
Queen, her estate and our Country. Thus of the inner wall of England, and the
true fortification thereof.

Now of the outward wall of Engnland and fortification of it, which is the
shipping, The outward wall of England, the shipping and navigations.
navigations, and the furniture thereof.

One not experienced in public affairs, cannot well esteem the great
blessing, benefit, strength and fortification, that comes to the realm, by
the shipping, navigations and furniture thereof. For because we are environed
with Seas, it is the outward wall by Sea, against invasions by land. And
without it, we cannot creep out of our Country, but we shall be cut off, and
there will be an open way by Sea upon us to be invaded by land: and the ports
as the gates of our Country, will be naked and open to our enemies. But this
outward wall of the shipping, navigations and funiture thereof, by the good
mother of England our gracious Queen, is so made up and fortified, as under
no Prince the like. Many employ themselves in building and furnishing of
sumptuous houses: but she as the great mother of many children, has builte;
fortified, and furnished the great and outward wall of England, to the great
comfort of our Country, and safety of the land. What want we for the
defense of the land, if we want not the fear and favor of God? for without
the fear and favor of GOD all walls, Arnobius in Psalm. 146.
munitions, and fortifications are nothing. Arnobius the ancient father, about
the year of our Savior 329. says: my ship may sail, but it is God (says
he) which strengthens both the master and mariners of the ship, which
sends prosperous winds and gales, and conducteth the ship in her course,
that she may fetch the right haven: and before: let my horse run furnished for
the wars, yet say thou it is the God of strength, which gives strength to my
horse to run. Thus Arnobius. What then are worldly forces, fortifications,
and munitions, without the fear and favor of God? Naham. 3.
As the Prophet Naham says: strong Cities shall be like Figgtrees, if they be
shaken the fall into the mouth of the eater. Let us earnestly pray for the
grace of God, that we may fear him, and for his continual favor in the
preservation of the long life and prosperous reign of our Queen and our
Country.

Now I will show you the experience of our own Country in time past, King
Edgar^ shipping.
^ouching this outward wall of the shipping and navigations, and the fortifying
and furnishing thereof. King Edgar a valiant Prince, so fortifyed and furnished
this outward and woden wall of the shipping and navigations, that though there
were great multituds of Danes under him, Fabian in his Chro. of England the 6.
part. cap. 193. King Egelredus.
yet they were quailed and kept under in his time: And yearly ( Fabian
reporting it) he scoured the Seas, and brought great quietness to the land.
After him Egelredus his soon by Estrild or Alfride (who succeeded Edward
called the martyr, slain by treason of Estrild his steppemother, to bring the
Crown to Egelred her son) was so hunted and chafed of the Danes, The Danes
shippings.
partly by treasons within the land, and partly by means of their shipping,
navigations, and furniture thereof, that he was feign to forsake the land, and
to fly into Normandy: And in process greatly they did prevail over the land:
and by means of their shipping, when they were provided to be encountered in
one cost, then they would take their ships and woden horses and land in an
other place: and so by their shipping and navigations, they wearied the land and
at last won the land. King Edmond surnamed Ironside. King Canutus.
And first king Edmond surnamed Ironside, was feign to divide the land with
Canutus king of Danske: and after the death of Edmond, Canutus reigned over the
land. Thus by experience of our own Country heretofore, we see what a
blessing and benifite it is, when the outward wall of shipping and navigations
is fortified and furnished. God bless and long preserve the good mother of our
Country, which has fortified and furnished this wall, to the great benefit
and comfort of our Country. Thus of the outward wall of England, the shipping
and navigations thereof, and of the fortifying and furnishing thereof by Elizabeth
our gracious Queen. The tenth chief matter.

Of those that make breaches in these walls.




The tenth is, of those that make breaches in these walls, by a lingering hope
and looking after invasions of forrayne forces.

Those ye have such evil dispositions in the^, do not only make breaches in
these walls, but seek to betray (as much as in them is) their own Country
to foreign enemies. Of those that make breaches in these walls.
And such are monsters not only in nature, but also in the body politic of
realms and Countries. The very heathen men abhor such. Cicero.
Cicero one of the consulls and great governors of the estate of Rome when it
was heathen, Cateline.
against Cateline and other conspirarours against the state, brings out ye
great mother of their own Country, rebuking and charging them to depart out
of her: Wherefore (says she) should I thus be in continual fear for you? Thus
Cicero in the behalf of their common Country, as their universal mother, and
out of the bowels of nature it self in heathen people deals, in charging the
conspirators and traitors against ye state of Rome. Vipers.
The vipers eat through the womb of the dam that breeds them, or through
the coat and skin in which they lie, as is written of them: Such are of the
generation of vipers (as S. John the baptist called the Pharisees and Scribes)
and so grown out of kind, that they are monsters in nature. Mat. 3.
They were wont in old time to carry monsters of nature into far Countries,
Monsters.
that the fame of them should not be hard to wound the tender sent of nature,
and that near them there might be no speech of the^. Would God such monsters
in nature yt are ready to betray their own Countries, were so far from us, that
we might not hear the fame of them, much less yt we should need to fear
them. But the greatest danger is, when they are in the bossome and bowels of
our Country, which secretly gnawe in them, and are ready to eat through
them. They may be compared to Sobna. (of whom the Prophet Esai makes mention)
who was greatly aduau^ced of the godly king Hesechiah, Sobna. Esai. 22.
and outwardly bare his countenance yt he would live and die with him, and made
for himself a sepulcher in Herusalem, as if he would lay his bones there: But
he had a false heart, and a lingering in his heart after the Assyrians the
enemies to his Prince and Country, which made invasion on them. And his false
heart deceived him, for he was carried away captive into a far Country
(according to Gods threatening by ye Prophet) and there he ended his life in
confusion. God deliver us from such Sobnaes that have lingering hearts after the
enemies of our Prince and Country, whatsoever countenance outwardly they make,
and lay open their traiterous hearts and practices against the sacred person of
our prince her royal estate and our Country. Thus of those yt have lingering
in their hearts after invasions of foreign forces.

The 11. chief matter.
The 11. is, what has been the case of this Realm in invasions of foreign
forces and strangers heretofore, and of other Countries in like case, and what
should be our refuge and stay against such invasions.

Our own Country does minister to us sufficient experience in ye case. Of
invasion of strangers and foreign force.
The fou^taines are small that feed great rivers. Of small occasions at first,
as out of fountains, issue, grow, and flow out great floods and gulfes that
ouerflow whole Countries. We may see the experience in king Vortigerne his
time: King Vortigerne. Aurelius and Vter.
Who being distressed by troubles at home, and fearing civil wars and inuasio^
by Aurelius and Vter the sons of king Constantine, whose death by treason he
had procured and practiced before, sent for foreign forces Panims and Saxons
for his aid. The invasion of the Sax^^. Horsus. Hengist. Fabian in his Cron.
the 5. part. cap. ^3.
Then came in Horsus and Hengist the Saxons first into this land: for
Vortigerne distrusting his own subjects, affied himself in strangers and
foreign forces, and in the end he was himself unhorsed and disco^fited by
Aurelius and Vter who^ he feared: and the whole land was made a booty and pray
for ye Saxons. They ca^e in first stealing in by troops after troops,
companies after companies. The Caspian Sea.

Plinius not. ra. Histo. (...). 6. cap. 3.


Like the Caspian Sea steals in and breaks in at streightes at first (as
Pliny writes) but after mou^teth into a great Sea, and ouerfloweth in the
maine land. First Horsus and Hengist came in with their companies, and after ye
fame spra^g of ye fat of the land, Fabia^ the 5. part cap. 83. Ella. Porch.
Fabian the 5 part. cap. 94. Vffa. Fabian the 5. part cap. 96.
(as Fabian says) one Ella a Saxon came in with his 3. sons, and landed in the
south part of Brito^. And after came in a Soxon named Porch with his two sons, of
who^ the haven Porchmouth is called as Fabia^ notes: And one Vffa a Saxon with
his troops intruded himself into Norfolk and Suffolk, and other Saxons in
other places. Finally as Catterpillers they devoured the fat and fruit of the
land, they reigned, and the Britons served. This may be a president and mirror
for Englishmen to look into, to see what has been the case of their Country,
when strangers and foreign forces have come upon them. Let us perticulerlie
look into ye story of Hengist, Hengists story.
it is notable and worthy to be renewed in remembrance of Englishmen. When
Hengist so liked the land, Ronouen Hengists daughter. Fabian the 5 part. cap.
82.
that he thought to plant himself here, he sent for Ronouen his daughter, who
came in with 16. sail. After he had got footing in the land, first he contained
himself in certain bounds, but after at a Sea he brake over the banks, and
ouerflowed the maine land. He obtained of king Votigerne first so much land as
he could lay out with a Bulls hide, which he cut out into thonges, and he
compassed a great circuit of ground with it, Thongcastle. Fabian the 5 part.
cap. 83.
and built him a Castle thereon, and he called it thonge Castle. And after, he
left cutting out of thonges out of the Bulls hide, and be fell to cutting out
Provinces and Countries out of the maine land in the East part of Briton. Then
in steed of Thongcastle, Fabian the 5 part cap. 89. Hengist. king of Kent.
Fabian the 5 part, cap. 95. Ella his kingdom. Fabian the 5 part cap. 94. Vffa
his kingdom. Fabian the 5 part cap. 96.
he made himself king of Kent, and reigned there 24. years, and after him
Ochra his son ruled other 24. years. This kingdom endured above 300. years
as Fabian rehearses out of Polichronicon. Ella another Saxon, set up his
kingdom over the South Saxons, Aurelius being then king of Briton. And Vffa an
other Saxon reigned over the Eastangles now called Norfolk and Suffolk. Thus
they fell a dividing ye land amongst the^; first they came in for aid of king
Vortigerne when division was in the land: and after they fell to dividing the
land and making shares to themselves, till they got land and al. Will not such
examples of our own experience in our own Country heretofore, make
Englishmen wise against al practices of invasions and foreign forces? What
hearts or bowels of nature have they, which can have any lingering hope after
foreign forces? Do they look to advance themselves in the ruins of their
Country? Either they know not or have forgotten the saying of Caesar: Caesar.
I love treason, but I hate the traitor. The very heathens abhorred them,
notwithstanding they reaped benifite by them. Let all true hearted subjects of
England beware of them, which by the door of division at home, would let in
foreign forces, to make their shares out of the body and bowels of our
Country.

The invasion of the Danes.
Let us look into the invasions of the Danes also, which is an other glass of
like experience for all true Englishmen to look into. In the first invasion of
the Danes, when they descried division in the land, they joined themselves with
one part, and made themselves a party with the West Britons, against Egbert king
of west Saxons. Fabian the 6 part. cap. 158
And after they had made themselves a party in the land, and so had their
confederates in the land, they could never be gotten out again: But as Fabian
says, they were continually abiding in one place or other, till the time of
Hardikinitus the last king of the Danes blood, as the English Chronicle calls
him, Fabian the 6 part. cap. 198
who is called also Canutus of other. And they did so ouerspread and ouerflow
the land, The Danes called Lord Danes in Englishmens howses.
that (as Fabian tells) the Danes were as Lords in private men's houses, and
they called them Lord Danes. They employed the husbandmen to care and sow the
ground, and to works of al druggery, and (as Fabia^ says) the Dane held his
wife at his pleasure, his daughter and servant. And when the husbandman came
home, he should scarsly have of his own as servants had, as Fabian reports
it. Yet for fear and dread, in every such house where they had rule, they
called them Lord Dane. But after ye Danes were voyded, the land in despite and
derision of them, it was turned into a word of reproach, and when one would
rebuke an other, he would (as Fabian says) for the most part call him Lurdane.
Lurdaine a word of reproach.
Is not this a notable glass of experience in our own Country also, to warn
all true Englishmen to be warned and armed against all invasions and foreign
forces, if they will be masters and owners of their own houses, of their wives,
children and goods, as by experience in their own Country heretofore they may
see in such cases. As we have looked into ye leaders and Captains of the
Saxons, so let us hear of the Captains and leaders of the Danes into this
land. The leaders of the Danes Fabian the 6 part. Hubba. Hunguoar or Hungar
Guttran or Garmund. Fabian the 6 part cap. 172
Under king Etheldredus the 3. son of king Adaulphus, Hubba and Hunguoar or
Hungar were Captains and leaders of the Danes into the land. Under king
Aluredus, one Guttran or Gothian, or Garmund, (as ye English Chro. calls him)
was the great leader and ruler of ye Danes: with who^ king Alured made
co^positio^, yt he should be christened: and 20. of the chief and principal
persons of them were Christened with him. And he allotted to him East Anglia,
containing Norfolk and Suffolk and part of Cambridgeshire to abide in. But
greedy Guttru^ could not be satisfied with these countries: for while he lived
he continued a tyrant by the space of eleven years. An other Captain called
Ciyto landed in East England under Edward surnamed the Elder. Clyto.
And at last under Egelredus king of this land (driven to fly first into ye
Wight, Swanus. Fabian the 6 part. cap. 198 Canutus. Fabian the 6 part cap. 24.
Edmund Ironside.
after into Normandy:) they advanced their kingdom under Swanus king of
Denmark, and after him under Canutus his son: with who^ king Edmund surnamed
Ironside first divided the land, and after his death by treason of Edricus,
Canutus alone reigned over the whole land. Thus of the leaders of the Danes and
their dividing of the land, and how at the last the whole land fell to their
share. Now though Hubba and Hungar their Captains were slain (as Fabian
reports out of Polichronicon: Fabian the 6 part. cap. 170
) yet Captain Hungar still remains, Captain Hu^gar the Dane
who hungreth after the fat of this land, and fain would be bringing in of
foreign forces, to have dealings in the land, and in division to make
themselves a party as the Saxons and Danes did, and that they may fall a
sharing the land as Saxons and Danes did before, and at length get the land
and all as they did. And by whatsoever name they be called, if we look into
the right quality and disposition of such, though they are not captain
Hu^gar in name, yet in true meaning and intent they are of his right raze, for
they hunger after the land, and would fain have division amongst us, that they
may make themselves a party, and so have their confederates in the land, to
wind themselves in, and at last to win the land. Though captain Guttrum or
Gurmond be dead, Captain Guitrum or Gurmond.
who could not be satisfied with a share of great Countries in England, but
played the Tyrant and cutthroate still, yet such greedy guttrans or gurmands
remain, who gape over the Realm ready for occasions, and would feign
satisfy their greedy guts with the raven and ransacking of it. And is there
any that has true English blood in him, that can betray his own Country and
cast it as a pray into the ravening jaws and greedy guts of such Guttrons or
Hungars? God keep our Prince and Realm from such Hungars and Guttrons that
continually gape over her and us to devour us: and give true wisdom to all
natural subjects of England, by such experience and examples of our Country
heretofore, to be warned against all such as practice by confederating
themselves with foreign forces, to bring such Captain Hungars or Guttrons
upon us, whose hunger cannot be quenched, but out of the body and bowels of
this land. Thus of the invasion of the Danes and their leaders.

The invasion of the Normans. Fabian the 6 part ca. 217.
After the Normans invaded this land under William the Conqueror, and king
Harold being slain in the field, they subdued it: The Normans had the
preheminences of honors and offices in both estates: The Englishmen were under
them, Fabian the 6 part, ca. 222.
and great tributes were laid on them: and after sundry attempts by sundry
persons made in vain, the Englishmen learned to serve strangers, into whose
hands God had put the^. The Romans
The Romans ruled in this land, and had so good liking thereof, that Seuerus
the Emperor after his great victories of the Parthians and Arabians, Seuerus
the Emperor.
employed himself here, Fabian the 4 part cap. 61.
and for the defense of the Country against the invasion of the Pictes, he
caused a wall of Turues to be made of the length of 122. miles (as
Polichronicon witnesses) and at length in a battle himself against
Fulgenius Leader of the Pictes (who invaded the land) he was slain and
buried at York. Fulgenius leader of the Picts.


The Trojans
The Trojans under Brute first entered the land, and well liking the
fruitfulness thereof, determined here to pitch their dwelling: and by the
River of Thames they built a City, which in remembrance of their own Country
they called Troy-nouant: London.
and which after was enlarged by King Lud, and was called Luds Town, and which
now is called London (as Fabian reports.) Thus of the experience, examples,
and case of our Country, touching foreign forces and invasion of strangers.
If any warning will serve, seeing God has set up so many warninges and
spectacles in the experience of our own cases in our own Country, we should
now receive warning, and be wise in such cases, unless we will be still
strangers in our own stories and affairs.

Let us now look into the case of other Countries also: The experience of
other countries in like cases.

The Sarace^s. Heraclis the Emperor.

Ioh. Cuspini. de Caesaribus in vita Haraclii.


The Saracens after they had brought their forces into Asia, could never be
gotten out till they got Asia themselves. They served first Heraclius the
Emperor in his wars (as Cuspini. tells) and being denied their pay with
reproach at the officers hand that was master of the pay, they conveyed them
selves into Syria, and seized Damascus, Egypt, and the Countries about, and
they subued Arabia and all Persia. And where at first they came to the aid of
the Empire, after they bereft the Empire of all Asia.

Heraclius fonded after prophesies, and misco^stured a prophecy of the
ciu^rccised, fearing the Jews, but it fell out in the Saracens: and so (as the
Abbat of Vrspergen tells) he was deluded by vain Astrology, Abbas Vrsperg.
in hist. Heraclii.
and by the Eulichian heretics seduced,

The Goths. Valens the Emperor.
The foreign forces of the Goths, were first received into the Empire of
Valens the Emperor to serve him in his wars, and he made great reckoning of
them, Socrates Eccle. hist. lib. 4. cap. 34.
as to be defenders and keepers of the Roman Empire against invasions, and to
that intent he placed them in Thracia. After they that for service and aid of
the Empire were taken in, to be a wall of defense against invasions, Socrates
Eccle. hist. lib. 4. cap. 35.
they made hauock of the lands of ye Empire in Thracia. And when they were
waxen warm in their place, Thracia would not hold them, but they made war
upon Valens the Emperor that placed them in the Empire, Otto. Frisin. Ep.
analiam lib. 4. cap. 16.
and won the battle of him, and they fired him in a Cottage, where (after
the loss of the field) he hid himself. Thus they that offered their service
to the Empire, and to be at the Emperors commandment, ransacked the Empire,
and in the end destroyed the Emperor himself. After (as Otto writes) they
grew to two mighty kingdoms, Otto Frifin. Epist. lib. 4. cap. 16.
ye one called the Ostrogothes, the other the Wisigothes. Thus of the forreners
that the Emperor brought in for defense, he was destroyed himself, and the
Empire spoiled.

The Hunnes brake out of Europa (as Albertus affirms) under the conduct of
Attila into many countries, The Hunnes. Alber. Kran. in proaemio Wand. Attila.
and as a raging Sea ouerflowed them. Attila after the solemnizing of his
marriage, going drowsy to bed, bleeding at the nose, was stifled in his own
blood (as Otto reports. Otto Frisin. Epist. li. 4. ca. 28.
) The Hunnes after the sacking of so many Countries resiant in Pannonia, were
after ward ransacked themselves of Carolus surnamed the Great in his wars,
Carolus magnus.
which by the space of eight years he made upon the^. And (as Albertus says)
the Hunnes enriched with the spoil of so many Countries, Alber. Kra^z. Saxo.
lib. 2. cap. 6.
became poor, and the Frenchmen (as he says) which to that time seemed in
manner pore, were made very rich.

The Wandals tumbled up and down in the world: The Wandals. Alber. Kra^z.
Wand. lib. 1. ca. 31.
and after they came into Spain to rest, they removed from thence into Africa
thereby. It is very pertinent to this matter we have in hand, to hear how
they came into Africa. There was division in Africa between County Bonifacius
the old governor there, and Valentinian the Emperor, County Bonifacius
Governor of Africa.
who would there place a new Bonifacius sent for the Wandales out of Spain for
his aid, and assigned them to the Sea coasts for defense against inuasio^s.
Gensericus king of Wa^dales.
But Gensericus their king set to keep the Sea coasts, became himself like a
raging Sea that ouerflowed Africa and after Scicelie, Alber. Kra^z. Wand. lib.
1. ca. 32.
he invaded Italy and the very seat of the Empire it self: But by means of
rescue sent from Leo the Emperor of Constantinople, he was driven to retire
into Africa again. Thus in the division of Africa the Wandals were sent for
aid, and joined themselves with one of the parts, and had a part of Africa
allotted to them by the Sea coaste: but it was not a part or share that would
serve them, but they would have the whole. Neither the whole Africa would
serve them, but they brake into Scicelie. Nor Scicelie would satisfy them, but
they bent their forces upon Italy, and would have devoured the Empire and all.
Alber. Kra^z. Wand lib. 1. cap. 31.
Bonifacius that thought to have made his part strong by them, first set bounds
to them in Africa. But what bounds will contain a raging Sea, or wild waves
if once they break in? Valentinian the Emperor made a league with them, and
set limits to them: but neither league nor limits could hold them, nor Africa
nor Scicelie, but they gaped after Italy and the whole Empire. So we see in
divisions, how foreign forces of fained friends that have come for aid of
the one part, have (occasion serving them) made invasions in Countries: and not
content with their confederates to take a share, have ouerrunne the whole, as
we see in the examples of the Saxons and Danes in England, of the Wandales in
Africa, the Saracens in Asia, the Goths, Hunnes, and such other. Thus of the
case of our Country in invasions of strangers and foreign forces heretofore,
and of other Countries in like case.

Now what our refuge and stay should be against such invasions. Our comfort,
What our refuge and stay should be against invasions.
maine stay, and holy anchor against all storms and tempests of such invasions
of foreign forces and strangers, should be in the everlasting providence of
God, who rules over the kingdoms of the earth, and has set the bounds of the
habitations and dwellinges of people on earth (which Paul calls (...)) and
sets limits to nations, and marks to the roaring Seas, which they cannot
pass. Who sits above the water flooddes, Psalm. 29.
(as David says) and remains king for ever: whose providence as with a
bridle plucketh back the fury and forces of Princes and nations. Psalm. 76
At thy rebuke (as the Prophet David says) O God of Jacob, both the Chariot
and horse is fallen. And after, the fierceness of man shall turn to thy
praise, and the fierceness of them shall thou refrain. And in an other place:
Psalm. 46.
O come hither (says he) and behold the works of the Lord, what destructio^s
he has brought upon the earth. He makes wars to cease in all the world, he
breaks the bow, and knappeth the spear in sunder, and burns the Chariots
in the fire. Be still then and know that I am God, I will be exalted among the
heathen, and I will be exalted in the earth. The Lord of hostas is with us, the
God of Jacob is our defense. Thus far David. His providence does check and
control foreign forces and invasions, which like floods are ready to rage
over al. And when the plats are laid he says, it shall not go forth, neither
so come to pass, Esai. 7. Ahaz king of Judah.
as he said in the Prophet Esai of the invasions of the two kings Razin of
Siria, and Pechach of Israel, against Ahaz king of Judah: Where his providence
is the watch and wall, the floddes of foreign forces cannot prevail, no more
then they did against Asha the godly king of Judah, Zarah king of Ethiopia. 2.
Chro 14.
when Sarach ye king of Ethiopia came out against him with an host of ten
hundred thousand, and three hundred Chariots. And when Asha joined battle in
the valley of Zephota with him, Ashaking of Judah.
he cried unto the Lord his God: Help us O Lord our God, for we trust in thee,
and in thy name we go against this multitude. Thou art the Lord our God, and
no man shall prevail against thee. And the Lord smote the Ethiopians before
Asha and Judah, and they were overthrown (as the Scripture says) that there
was none of them left, but were destroyed before the Lord and before his
host. Thus the scripture of the invasion of the Ethiopians upon Asa king of
Judah. And no more then the great multitudes of the Moabitas, and Ammonites,
Iehosophas. The Moabites, Ammonits, and of mount Seir.
and mount Seir could prevail against Iehosophat the religious and faithful
king, when they joined their forces together, to make invasion upon him: and
before the battle stroke up, he stood up and said: Hear me O Judah, and ye
inhabitants of Jerusalem. Put your trust in the Lord your God that you may be
found faithful. Give credit to the Prophets, 2. Chro. 20.
and so shall ye prosper. And their enemies were overthrown with strokes among
themselves (as the Scripture says) and with their own forces consumed
themselves. And no more then Sancherib king of Assure, Hezechiab Sancherib.
Esaias. 37.
who with an huge host of an hundred eighty and five thousand (as the Prophet
Esaias sets down) could prevail, when he made invasion upon Hezechiah king
of Judah: who put on sackcloth and went up to the temple to pray to God: and he
sent Heliakim and others to the Prophet Esai, that he should lift up prayer to
God for them. And God sent out his Angel that slew the Assyrians host. And
after that Sancherib himself also was slain in the temple of Nesrah his God
by his own sons Adramalach and Saraser. So notwithstanding the rabbles and
multitudes of Sancheribs host, and the great hurliburly of his invasion, and
the roaring out of blasphemous Rabsakeh his Captain against Jerusalem, Esai.
36.
as if it were but a morsel in Sancherib his mouth. Gods determination was
concerning the execution of his exploite and invasion (as the Prophet says:)
He shall not come into this City, and shall shoot no arrow into it, there
shall no shield hurt it, neither shall they cast ditches about it. The same way
that he came he shall return, and not come at this City says the Lord. And
I will keep and save the City (says he) for my own and for my servant David's
sake. So far the Prophet. We may see what our refuge and stay should be
against foreign forces and invasions, to trust in the merciful providence of
God, and heartily to humble our selves in prayer to God, King Hezechiah.
as king Hezechiah and the Prophet Esaias did against the roarings of Rabsakeh,
and the invasions of Sancherib: And with the godly king Ashah to cry unto God,
King Asha.
reposing our trust and affiaunce in his tender mercy and almighty power, when
the raging Seas of foreign forces and invasions are ready to break in: As
Ashah did when the Ethiopians came mounting as the Ocean Seas to swallow up his
land. King Iehosophat.
And as Iehosophat the zealous and religious Prince did: for before he marched
with his forces against the Moabites and Ammonites, and them of mount Seir,
which came with running camps, like roaring Seas and Gulfes of many wa^ers to
ouerflow and devour his land: first he ^^ustred his people in public prayer
and supplication before God, and begged comfort and conduct of God, against the
fearful invasion, and committed himself, his estate, affairs, and exploites
to the mercy of God, and cried to his people to believe the prophets, and all
things should be prosperous to them. God send us such hearts to commit our selves
to the providence and tender mercy of God in such cases, and to humble our
selves in hearty prayers before God, with assured persuasion, trust, and
confidence in his help and protection against all forces and invasions of
enemies: And that under ye covert of the wings of his merciful providence, our
Prince and Country may have continual safety, defense, and protection
against all invasions and enemies whatsoever. Thus what has been the state of
this Realm in invasions of strangers heretofore, and of other Countries
likewise: and what our refuge and stay should be against all foreign forces
and invasions.

The 12. chief matter.
The last is a general warning to all subjects, to shun such vices as hinder
true faith to God, and true loyalty to the Prince, which are hypocrisy and a
hollow heart to God, and hypocrisy and a hollow heart to the Prince and
estate: and perverseness, frowardness, and vncontentment of malcontents,
mislikers and murmurers, against the Prince and state.

A general warning to all subjects.
Touching the first, hypocrisy and a hollow heart to God hinder true loialty to
the Prince: for they yt are faithful to God, are also faithful to their
Prince. Take example of the Prophet David: Psalm. 42.
Who was more faithful to God then he? whose soul longed after God, as the
Heart desires the water brooks: and he was so faithful to the person of his
Prince, that he was pricked in conscience for cutting off but a piece of the
vesture of king Saul, when in the Cave God put him in his hands. How far
would he have been from offering any hurt or violence to the person of his
Prince? Eliakim. Esai. 22.
Eliakim in the Prophet Esaias, is called a father of the house of Judah, and the
key of the house of David. He was a faithful servant to god, and he was
faithful to his Prince for life. And God said of him, I will fasten him as a
nail in a sure place, and he shall be the glorious seat of his fathers
house. A worthy glass of faithfulness to look in. The faithful to God and
their Prince shall find it at his hand. True faithfulness shall wear the
garland: hypocrisy shall be under the hatch. Sobna.
See the example of Sobna in the same Court of Hezechiah the godly king, and
mentioned in the same place of the Prophet: He had a hollow heart to God,
and had a hollow heart to his Prince. Will we see him under the hatches? I
will drive thee (says God by the prophet) out of thy place: and before: O thou
man, the Lord shall carrye thee away into captivity, and shall surely cover
thee with confusion. God in Sobna his cause speaks to all hypocrites like to
him of what state soever. God has a day for the^, as he had for Sobna. Be not
deceived, God is not mocked says Paul. Ga. 6.
Hypocrisy is mockery in the sight of God: Psalm. 2.
he that dwells in heaven will laugh them to scorn, and give them their
portion with hypocrites. There may no hypocrite come before him, as Job says.
Of what value is salt when it has lost his savor and saltness? whereto
serves it, Mat. 5.
but to be cast out of doors and to be trodden under the feet af men? Beware
therefore we be not ye unsavory salt, or like painted graves, as our Savior
calls the Pharisees: parieted walls, as Paul calls Ananias, Mat. 23. Act.
23. 3. Reg. 18. Reave. 3.
or such as halt on both sides, whom the spirit of God sharply rebukes by the
Prophet Elie: or such as are neither hot nor cold, but luke warm as the
Laodiceans were, whom God threatens to spue out of his mouth. Though he
suffers such to play their parts as painted pageants for a while, yet if they
repent not suddenly he will have a time for them. Ekibolius the Zophist of
Constantinople before Julian was Emperor, Ekibolius the Zophist.
carried himself as an earnest Christian: under Julian he became a cruel
Apostata and Panim (as Socrates reports) and after Julian he would be a
Christian again. Socrates eccle. hist. lib. 3. ca. 13.
And his own conscience accusing him to be unsavory salt, he cast him self
flat on the ground before the Church gate as the people should pass, and
cried: Calcate me salem insipidu^: Tread on me that am unsavory salt. Adeo
leuis and mobilis (says Socrates) ante and post Iulianum fuit: So light and
fickle (says he) both before and after Julian he was. If this fickle and
flitting we wax in religion, there will be a time for conscience to cry. If
we be not utterly cut off from God, and as a dead thing void of life, and if
we begin once to feel the spur of conscience, though we cast not our
selves down at the Church door (as he did) for the people to tread on, yet
it is high time to cast our selves down in the inner temple of our conscience
before God, with hearty repentance and humble confession unto him, least if
we make no account of conscience and reconciling our selves to him, suddenly
he cast us out as the unsavory salt. For as he has a time of mercy and
sufferance, so he has a time also of casting out. Valens, Vrsacius.
Valens and Vrsacius Bishops and Captains of the Arrian heresy, followed the
sway of the time (as Socrates notes,) and that part that had the masterie. And
after that, by the great council of Sardica, (where 300. Bishops of the West
Church were assembled) and by virtue of letters sent from Constantius the
Emperor, Athanasius the Bishop of Alexandria (removed from his Sea before by
practice of the Arrians) was restored to his former estate and place: Valens
and Vrsacius not only reca^ted and offered their recantation to Julius the
bishop of Rome, Socrates eccle. hist. lib. 2. cap. 24.
but wrote to Athanasius also yt they would ioin themselves in communion with
him. But with relapsing and cloaking their heresy, they have left their memory
in reproach in the church of God. Eusebius. ye bishop of Nicomedia, Eusebius.
Nicomediensis.
and after of Constantinople, gave cou^tena^ce to Arrius heresies so far as he
dared, and secretly wrought underhand, but cloaked outwardly and would not be
accounted to be of Arrius sect: as in ye epistle of ye counsel of Antioch,
Socrates eccle. hist. lib. 2. ca. 10.
he with other his consorts wrote: Nos neque Arrii assectatores sumus: Neither we
(say they) are folowers of Arrius: for how being Bishops should we be led of
a priest? And after he with others had wrought his will on Athanasius, he wrote
to Julius Bishop of Rome to be judge in Athanasius his cause. Thus though he
used cunning cloaking with men, (as hypocrites have many colors) yet God
judges the cause. For shortly after the Council of Antioch (where Eusebius
then Bishop of Constantinople was chief) this Eusebius died: Socrates eccle.
hist. lib. ^. cap. 10.
And the City of Antioch (where the Council was holden) was shaken and torn
with earthquakes by the space of one year. Eudoxius.
Eudoxius Bishop of Germanicia, and after of Constantinople being of the Arria^
sect, likewise carried himself in clouds of hypocrisy to keep the
countenance of his estate. Theodoritus eccle. hist. lib. ^. ca. 17.
And when by Constantius the Emperor he was pressed, he renounced certain
Arrian terms as grounds of that heresy, when he saw that he was like to be
set on ground touching his estate. But after by his and other his consorts
Arria^s of Co^stantius, the aforesaid, Syluanus and other faithful Bishops were
priued of their estates, and he and his accomplices were a floate. Julian the
Apostata.
Julian the Emperor called the Apostata for his reuolting from the faith of
Christ, was mo^trous in hypocrisy. Before he was Emperor, he would seem to
betake himself to an extraordinary and strait kind of life. He took on him
as a monk and was shaven to the skin (as Socrates witnesses) and was made a
reader in the Church of Nicomedia. Socrat. Eccle. Hist. lib. 3. cap. 1.
And though he had sucked up the poison of Panims, yet with such maskes he
deluded the world, that after he was Emperor he played his pagentes of
Hipocrise still. He called home from exile faithful Bishops which under
Constantius the Emperor his predecesser, by practice of Arrians had been
banished. Neither yet meant he good faith to the^: only he used it as a gase to
serve his turn, for he betrayed the Churches of Christ to Panims. But Christ
with whom he had cloaked and counterfeited long, suddenly met with him. When
he thought of great victory and triumph in his wars against the Persians,
Socrat. Eccle. Hist. lib. 3. cap. 21.
suddenly he came to his deaths wound, he wist not from whence or whom: and
even then with his blasphemous mouth he yielded victory to Christ, and said:
Thou man of Galeb (so he called Christ in reproach) thou have the victory. And
as Christ showed his dreadful judgment on the person of this Emperor, who out
of the clouds of hypocrisy brake out to be a persecuting Panim; So likewise
he executed dreadful judgment on the bodies and the very bowels of two graund
Captains of hypocrisy: Arrius of whom the Arrian heresy has name, and Judas
yt betrayed him, and on both in manner much of one sort. When Arrius vau^cing
himself in the streets of Constantinople, Arrius.
accompanied with Eusebius Bishop of Nicomedia and his retinue, was going to
the great Church to be restored into the communion and fellowship of the
congregation, and came with countenance from the Emperor, Socrat. Eccle. Hist.
lib. 1. cap. 38.
as if he had gotten a fair day of the faithful fathers and Bishops,
professing the true faith of Christ, suddenly he felt a griping in his
conscience and belly, and was forced to withdraw himself, and at his
withdrawght to ease himself, he voyded with blood his liver, spleen, and
entrails and all, as Socrates witnesses: Who says that the place of his
wonderful withdrawght where he voyded his bowels, was extant and showed in
Constantinople in his time: who was about the year of our Savior 430. The
other Captain of hypocrites and traitors Judas that betrayed our Savior,
Judas the traitor.
after he had the gripinges of hell in conscience, he hanged himself, and
burst a sunder in the midest, and all his bowels gushed out, as Peter reports
his death in ye Acts. Act. 1.
And these 2. be the grau^d Captains of hypocrites, which under ye ba^ner of
hypocrisy displaid, may lead al sects and sorts of hypocrites. Their
examples are spectatles of the wonderful judgments of Christ executed upon
hypocrites. Cleanse your hearts ye sinners, as James exhorteh. James. 4.
Purge your hearts you wavering minded. Let all hypocrites heartily repent and
truly turn from their hypocrisy to God in singleness and sincerity of true
faith, and as newborn babes, as Peter exhorts: 1. Pe-. 2. 2. Co. 6.
desire the spiritual milk of the soul, which is without deceit. Now in an
acceptable time the mercy of God calls them to repentance. God give them
grace in the riches of his mercy according to his blessed will, from
hypocricie to turn to God in true simplicity and sincerity of faith, John.
17.
and to be sanctified in the truth, as our Savior prays for his disciples,
and to be sealed up of God, as S, 2. Co. 1.
Paul says to the Corinthians. Thus of hypocrisy and an hollow heart to God,
his word, and heavenly truth, which hinders true loyalty to Princes by Gods
providence placed over Countries and people.

The Other vice is hypocrisy and an hollow heart to the Prince and estate,
Hypocrisy and a holowe heart to the Prince and estate.
with frowardness, perverseness and vncontentment, such as is in
malecontentes, mislikers and murmurers against the Prince and estate.

This vice either grows out of the root of the other vice, by coffeehouse
in religion, and carries it self in clouds of hypocrisy aforesaid: or
comes of coffeehouse otherwise, and engenders frowardness and
perverseness against the Prince and estate, and eftsoons shows it self with
waywardness, wrangling, murmuring and mutening against the Prince and estate,
the public gouernmentes and affairs: and when they grow in rankenesse of
speech, they bewray themselves, for their usual time is lydium querulum,
whining and repyning against the Prince and public estate. As the base birds
of the Eagles nest are descried by the continual yelping they make, so they
that are not of the right raze of true loyalty, are decerned by the continual
yelping they make against the Prince and public state, the gouernmentes,
ministry, and the public affairs. Of the abundance of ye heart the mouth
speaks, as our Savior says. Speech bewrays the mind, and man. Though it
be blanched over eftsoons, yet it will break out in the right vain again.
As the heart is bent, so words will shoot out. This perverseness in eger
malecontentes, though it be kept in close prison of the heart for fear to be
bewrayed, 4. Reg. 9.
yet like Jewish Iezabel which showed her self out at a window when Iehu came
to Iezrael, she will show her self as out of a window, in her words,
behavior, and practice, and cannot so hem the^ in, or hide her self, but she
will out again. They that have the sickness called Voluulus, Volu^tus.
find themselves very unquiet, and cannot rest for inward pain, as one
expounds the word: And because their entrails are streached, strayned and
turned out of course, it is called Strophos Heos. Strophos. Heos.
The like sickness this is in mind, their inward affections are not straight,
but are wrested and wrenched with perverseness, frowardness and
coffeehouse, that they find themselves very unquiet and tossed up and
down in their minds, and outwardly in their behavior and conversation also.
No public government or private government or behavior, can content the^,
churlish frowardness will always be wrangling. The froward Jews were not
satisfied with the great familiarity and courtesy of our Savior, for they
said of him: Ma. 11. Luke 7.
Behold a glutton and a great bibber of wine, and a friend unto publicans and
sinners. And of Ihon the Baptist, because of his straight life they said: He
has the Devil. And wisdom (says our Savior) is justified of her children.
Dios. lib. 2. cap. 2. Histrix. Mattheod. in Dios. lib. 2. cap. 2. Anagyris.
Euphorbium Mathe. in Dios. lib. 3. cap. 8. Comerina.
The perverse and froward are full of quarrels. There is no dealing with the
Erinaceus armed with sharp prickels round about. Histrix if it be moved
bends the body, and shoots out his sharp pens like darts. Anagyris if
it be a little chafed, grievously smells. Euphorbiu^ if it be beaten, casts
out hot vapors which stri^ into the head of him that beats it. If Cam^^rin be
reued in a little, it will overcome o^^ with foul stench. They that always
are churling against the state bend themselves to shoot out some quarrel or
other against it: and they that are sharp set and beset with manifold
quarrels and wranglings against the state, if they be but touched, are ready
to kindle: if they be reuen in, they cast out the foul stench of their evil
affection and disposition. Good blessings are disgraced by evil humors: And
evil humors grow into a settled habit and state called Cachexia, which very
hardly is cured. Trimcauellus, de ratio curam lib. 8. cap. 8.
Where the gall is overflowed, the humors are bitter, as in the sickness
called Icteritia, either of the bird of that name, either of the humor of that
sort. And where ye humors are bitter, sweet things seem bitter and sower to
them. So when by perverseness and vncontentment bitter affections ouerflowe, the
sweet blessings and benefits of God seem sower to such. Beware of such
bitter affections, perverseness and coffeehouse against the Prince, state,
and government, least it open a door to greater inconvenience, as daily
experience shows, and in examples of holy Scripture we may see. Was not
Absalon long a malecontent before he brake out to open treason? Absalon.
He feigned him self to be populer, and would say to men of the vulgar sort,
Thy matter is good, 2. Sam. 18.
but there is none appointed of the king to hear thee. O that I were made
judge in the land, that every man that has matter might come to me that I may
do him justice. Thus as a malecontent himself, he eggeth the people to
coffeehouse and mutening against the state and government of king David his
father. And after from coffeehouse he fell to flat treason. So likewise
Dathan, Coreh, Dathan, Coreh, and Abyram. Nu. 16.
and Abira^, first began with coffeehouse and mislyking, after they fell to
murmuring and mutening and at last to open rebellion. Sheba blewe up his
trumpe and said: Sheba.
we have noe part in the son of Isai, so in disdain he called David. 2.
Reg. 20.
He was a murmuring malecontent at first, and a rank rebel after. Beware we be
not touched with the first, lest happily we be tised on to the later. Where
affections are framed, persuasion is half made. The fire flies to the tow.
The match and powder are soon met. Evil affections open a gap to others, to
make an entrance into us, to assail us and to lay snares for us, and so they
become stumbing blocks to us and bring us to ruin. Take heed therefore they
do not carry us on, and be occasions to pluck us into the gulf of great
dangers: by custom they grow into an habit as into an other nature, then
there is no sense, feeling, or remorse of them: as in the sickness called
Hectica Febris when it is grown into an habit and nature, Hectica. Iowbertus
de curan. sc. lib. 2. cap. 1.
and settled in the substance of the body, though they be in dangerous state,
yet they lack sense and feeling of grievous pain. Beware that our minds be
not possessed with like sickness, whereof though we have not feeling and
remorse, by reason it is so rooted and settled, yet it may plunge us into
dangerous state. It is good therefore to hearken to the council of the holy
Ghost by S. Paul, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 2 Thessalonians. 3.
how we should carry our selves in outward dealings and affairs: That we
endeavor ourselves to be quiet and to employ our own business, and not to
stake our own, and to be curious in the affairs of others: and as busy
bodies (whom likewise the Apostle S. Peter reproves) to spy and pry in
other men's dealings, 1. Pet. ^.
and to be as controulers of other men's causes, to put our sickle into other
men's corn, to have an oar in other men's matters, to be climing above our
calling, and to put our selves in great and dangerous actions not appertaining
to us. But let every one as he is called so content himself, as Paul
exhorts, using better if God gives: 1. Cor. 7.
and beware that by vncontentment he grow not into bitter affections or eager
humors against the Prince and estate, and become unquiet and troublesome in
public and private dealings, mingling his speech with gall, and his actions
with bitterness: but that he with a quiet mind, keep himself within the
precinct of his vocation, and within the limits of affairs and actions
belonging to him: least by aspyring with Adonias, and by venturing, hazarding,
and ouerreaching, he loose himself, and by lifting at burdens too heavy for
him, he be crushed of them. God give grace to all Subjects to carry
themselves in true faith to God, and true fidelity to their Prince, and to
nourish loving and loyal affections in dutiful hearts to their Prince: and to
power out hearty prayers and supplications to God for her long life, and the
long preservation of her Royal person and prosperous reign over us, to the
glory of God, the singular comfort of his Church, and the great blessing of our
whole Country.

THE Second part, Against Treasons, Rebellions, and such like disloyalties.

PSALM VII. Behold he trauaileth with mischief (or iniquity) he has
conceived sorrow, and brought forth a lie (or vain thing.) He has graven
and dug up a pit, and is fallen himself into the pit (or destruction) that
he has made: for his travail shall come upon his own head, and his wickedness
shall fall upon his own pate. I will give thanks (or praise) unto the Lord
according to his righteousness, and will sing praise to the name of the Lord
the most highest. ^ DEXTRA ^ TVA ^ SVSTENTAVIT ^ ME ^ Psalm. 63 ^ MR ^ IN ^
IVGIS ^ AD ^ RHENVM ^ FLV ^


The Contents, principal points, and chief matters of this Treatise.
1 THE Bishop of Rome is the great Patron and practiser of treasons,
rebellions, and such like disloyalties against Christian Princes and Countries,
with his adherents, followers, and practisers for him, and by color of
authority from him.

In the treatise of this matter I follow this order.

1 What engine he has used and continually uses in the practice of such
things by excommunicating, cursing and banning of princes, and cursing and
interditing of countries.

2 What time chiefly he began to use this engine of cursing and banning Princes
and lands, and practicing of treasons, rebellions, and such disloyalties
against them.

3 By what means the Bishop of Rome and his followers, do manage and carry
on their practices of treasons, rebellions, and such disloialties against
christian Princes and Realms.

4 Of the judgments of God upon the cursing and banning Popes.

2 Of the conceiving of treasons, rebellions, and such like disloyalties, by
occasion of these words of David in the seventh Psalm, Psalm. 7.
He has conceived sorrow.

3 How they travail with their treasons, rebellions, and such like
disloyalties and wickedness, by occasion of the words of David in the same
Psalm: He trauaileth with iniquity (or mischief.)

4 What fruits Traitors, Rebels, and such like bring forth, by occasion of
these words of David in the same Psalm: He brings forth a vain thing (or a
lie.)

5 Of the end of Traitors, Rebels, and such like, by occasion of the words of
David in the same Psalm: He has graven and dug up a pit, and is fallen
himself into the pit (or destruction) that he has made: for his travail
shall fall upon his own head, and his wickedness shall fall upon his own
pate.

6 Of giving of thanks and praise to God for his righteousness and our
deliverance, by occasion of the words of David in the end of the same Psalm:
I will give thanks (or praise) to the Lord according to his righteousness,
and will sing praise to the name of the Lord the most high.

Against Treasons, Rebellions, and such like disloyalties.
NOw I will bring forth the ugly monster of treason, rebellion, and such
disloialties, into the view and sight of all. As the Lacedaemonians were wont
to bring forth their slaves and underlings when they were drunken to the open
gase and sight of the people, that all by seeing of them, might abhor the
vice that so disfigured man: So I will bring forth the ugly vice, that all
may see it, and see into it, that they may shun and loath it.

And first I will bring forth and lay open the great Patron and practiser of
treasons, The first principal matter.
rebellions, and such like disloialties against Christian Princes and
Countries: which is the Bishop of Rome his adherents, followers, and practisers
for him, and by color of authority from him.

And entreating hereof I will follow this order.

1 First I will show what engine the Bishop of Rome has used and continually
uses, in the practice of such things, by excommunicating, cursing and banning
of Princes, and cursing and interditing of Countries.

What time chiefly he began to use this engine of cursing and banning Princes
and countries, and practicing of treasons, rebellions, and such like
disloyalties against them.

By what means the Bishop of Rome and his fellows, do manage and carry on
their practices of treasons, rebellions, and such like disloyalties, against
Princes and Realms.

Of the judgments of God upon the cursing and banning Popes.

Thus the order of my proceeding in this part.

The first is, what engine commonly he used and still uses in such practices.
The usual engine of Bishops of Rome in managing plats of treasons.
THE usual engine which the Bishop of Rome commonly used and uses still in the
managing and carrying on of plats and practices of treasons and rebellions
against Christian Princes, is the excommunicating, cursing, and banning of
them, wherein they take on them as if their sentences came from Peter and Paul
out of heaven: but they open as it were Hell mouth on earth, by cursing and
banning Christian Princes and Realms, and by procuring and practicing treasons
against the royal persons of Princes, and conspiracies and rebellions against
their estates and gouernmentes, and periuries of people against the oaths of
their allegiance, and shedding of innocent blood, and such other outrages as
we have seen in their plattes, but that God has prevented their practices.
Though we have a glass of present memory, and especially in our own Country
set before our eyes of such practices, yet by looking into stories of ancient
record, we shall see how with this usual engine of excommunicating, cursing and
banning, he has afflicted Christian Princes and Countries heretofore.

Henry the fourth Emperor of that name, Henry the 4. Emperor. Io. Cuspin. in
vita Henr. 4.
of John Cuspinian is praised for a godly Prince, and of such renown in
wars, that he fought more battles in his own person, then either Julius
Caesar, or Marcus Marcellus did, who carried the prize of that praise in the
world. Yet he was excommunicated and cursed of three Popes, Gregory the 7.
Gregorius. 7. Vrbanus 2. Paschalis. 2.
Vrbanus the 2. and Paschalis the 2. And notwithstanding he reigned about
fiftye years lacking one, and saw the Corses of two of ye foresaid Popes,
notwithstanding their curses.

Henry the fifth of that name, Henry the 5. Emper.
rebelled against his own father, and deposed him. And Pope Paschal the
second, as it were blewe up the trumpet to that unnatural and parricidial
war, as their own writers, Abbas Vrspergensis. in an. 1105.
and the Abbat of Vrsperg. himself terms it. Yet after, because he would not
yield to the Popes demands and commandments against his prerogative and
right, he was excominged and cursed of 3. Popes as his father before him was:
Paschal. 2. Gelatius. 2. Calixtus. 2.
of Paschal the second, Gelatius the second Calixtus the second.
Notwithstanding he reigned as king 20. years, as Emperor 14. years, and saw
2. of the foresaid Popes raked on earth before him while he reigned.

Fridericus 1. Imp.
Frederick the 1. Emperor of that name, was so valiant and victorious a
Prince, that his death in the Country of Armenia in his exploit against the
Soulden and the infidels, as the the Abbat of Vrsperg. Abbas Vrspergensis. in
an. 1187. Io. Cusp. in vita Frid. 2.
says, was an in estimable loss to Christians: and besides his valiantness
in wars, John Cuspinian greatly praised him for a peacemaker at home, and
that he began his reign with making peace and reconciling al rancors and
reuenges: aunswering to his name therein, which signifies (as Vrspergensis and
Cuspinian notes) as much as rich of peace. Abbas Vrsperg. in an. 1152.
And yet notwithstanding he was such a peacemaker at home, and so valiant a
Prince abroad, and ventured and ended his life in the country of infidels, and
is so highly commended of the Popes own writers: he was excominged and cursed
of three Popes also, Hadrian 4. Alexand. 3. Vrbanus. 3.
Hadrian the fourth, Alexander the third, and Vrbanus the 3. and the 4. Pope
named Lucius the 3. Lucius 3.
predecessor to Vrbanus the third, last named of the foresaid three cursing
Popes, began brawles also against Frederick the aforesaid: Abbas Vrsperg. in
an. 1176.
for pacifying whereof a diet was appointed at Verona, and there in the
consultation the Pope died. So this noble Emperor thus commended of the Popes
own writers, as the Abbot of Vrspergensis, Otto Bishop of Frising, John
Cuspinian, notwithstanding of 3. Popes was cursed down right: The fourth was
entered into: circumstance of cursing but he died and notwithstanding the
cursing, conspiracies, and bloody broils of the Popes against him, four of
them turned up their heels before him. Io. Cusp. in vit. Fride. 1. Abbas
Vrsperg. in Chro.
And he maugre of their curses, reigned 37. years. The Abbot of Vrsperge.
writing of the end of this noble Emperor, cannot contain himself (though he
were a pillar of the Popes side) from giving condign commendations to him. He
calls him a most Christian Prince, triumphant in wars, courageous,
courteous, and he commends his clemency in vicorie to all sorts. Thus the
Abbot himself powers out praises on him, though the Popes powered out the
poison of their curses on him Otto Bishop of Frising so admired and honored
this noble Emp. yt he wrat 2. Otto Fris. Epis. de rebus gestis Fride 1
books of the acts of his chivalry, Radeuini praepositi, vel canonici
supplementum. Merula the mouthi.
and being prevented by death that he could not end his story, Radeuinus a
Canon of his Church, put too a supply of two other books to them. As for
mouthie Merula, who in his storye of the vicountes calls this noble Emperor
a barberous Prince, regard is not to be had, for he says the like of other
kings of Germany, Io. Cusp. in vit. Fride. 1.
which exelled in piety and clemency, as Cuspinian notes, and he follows
his common vain which he shows in carping and biting the learned men of his
time, as Philelf Petrarch, Dantes, Valla, Politiam, Beroald and others. His
judgment is partial in reporting the stories between the Emperors and the
Popes. Merula partial to Pops.
And (as Cuspinian notes) being ignorant of the acts of Frederick, he
follows Plattina and Blondus the Italian writers of stories, and fowly faleth
eftsoon. Such not only are partial to Popes in writing their stories, but
sometimes parties with them: Platina.
As Platina was officer to Sixtus the 4. Blondus was belonging and great about
Eugenius the fourth, Blondus. in prefatione ad Eugen. in lib. Romans in stau.
to whom he dedicateth his books of Rome restored. But other writers of their
own side, as the Abbat of Vrsperg. Otto the Bishop of Frising, Albert Deane
of Hauburg, Naucler and others, notwithstanding they are partial on the Popes
side touching Romish religion, and parties with them therein: Yet as inforsed
by truth, and compelled by conscience to give witness to the noble fame,
excellent virtues, and great praises of this Emperor, whom notwtstanding the
Popes persecuted with cursing and banning one after the other, as if the more
excellent and Princely qualities were in him, the more the furies of Popes were
inflamed against him. Thus of Friderike the first, and how the writers of
stories that are partial, and mingle the poison of their partiality with
their stories, are to be red with judgment, to discern the story from their
partiality. What marvel though we see the Popes to continue their wonted
course of cursing and banning of Christian Princes, qualified with excellent
gifts and Princely virtues? But God has encountered their cursings, and turned
them to blessings, and two of the cursing Popes already have had their
pasportes, Pius 5. Gregor. 13.
and her Majesty lives and reigns: And God grant she may long live and
prosperously reign, and see the pasportes of many such practicing Popes
against her.

Fridericke the second Emperor of that name, Fridericus 2. Imp.
of Cuspinian is commended for learning and learned writing when his leisure
served, Io. Cusp. in vita Frid. 2.
and for his skill in diverse languages as Latin, Greek, Saracen, French,
Duch: And that he caused sundry translatio^s out of the Greek and Hebrewe to
be made. Beside he was valiant and victorious in the wars not only in
Christendom, but among the heathen. He recovered Jerusalem, Nazareth, Ioppe,
with the confines, of the Soulden of Babylon, as Cuspinian reports. And that
year he kept his Easter at Herusalem in sumptuouse and royal manner (as
Vrspergensis tells.) And with his Crown on his head and in Princely array he
showed himself to the people. Abbas Vrsperg. in an. 1229.
After he wrote to the Pope of his good success and the joy of Christians: But
he cast his letters away, and had no edge to hear of the good news, because
of an old grudge he bare to the Emperor. And notwithstanding the employing of
his own person in the wars against infidels, the recovery of Jerusalem and
the country adjoining, and that he was a wise learned valiant and victorious
Prince, yet he was also excominged and cursed of 3. Honorius. 3. Gregorius. 9.
Innocent. 4.
Popes: Honorius the 3. Gregory the 9. and Innocent the 4. Pope Celestin that
was before Innocent the 4. was a Pope but of.18. days. Thus the more excellent
virtues were heaped on him, with victorious success against the infidels, so
the more the cursings and rage of Popes was heaped against him. Io. Cuspin. in
vita Fride. 2.
And notwtstanding their cursinges and bannings, God blessed him with great
success and victories against ye infidels, and against his other enemies, and
against al ye practices of Popes. He reigned 32. years. as Cusp. accounts,
and ouerliued 3. Popes: And Innocent the 4. Io. Cusp. in vita Frid 2.
that followed them was feign to pack him into France far from the Emperors
forces. And there being out of his reach. at Lions in a sermon to the people
(as Albert. Kranz. tells) he cried on the Emperor, Alber. Kra^z. Saxoniae
lib. 8. cap. 12.
sited him to make his appara^ce at Lions before him, and after in process
excomminged, cursed, and priued him of the Empire, absolved subjects from
their oaths of alleagiance, gave power to the electors to choose a new Emp.
Thus he set on the Emp. with his usual engine of cursing and banning: Alb.
Cranz. Saxo. lib. 8. cap. 13.
but he was sure to have the Alps between the Emperor and him, then he
banneth and barketh freely. And the Emperor prepared to make his appearance at
Lions, and carried with him such a retinue of men of arms, and men in gounes
to furnish his appearance in the Council at Lions, that (as Albertus says) no
Emperor since the Roman Empire began either at home or abroad carried the
like. But as he was passing the Alps, hearing evil tidings of Henry his son
at Parma, he was feign to return fearing the revolt of Italy, else he would
have made his aunsweare to the Popes curse and banning in France, if he would
abide his coming. Of this Pope Innocent the Emperor as soon as he heard of his
election said, Alber. Kra^z. lib. 8. cap. 11.
that he had changed a Cardinal friend, for a Pope, a bitter enemy. For
being Cardinal he was the Emperors friend, but after he was Pope he fell to
banning and cursing of him like an incarnate Devil. The Emperor did
prognosticate so much of him before, that a Cardinal friend would be turned
into a enemy being Pope. And even in that time, God sent a light into his
Church against the usurped tyranny and practices of Popes against Princes.
Petrus de Vineis.
Petrus de Vineis a man of great honor and learning, and near about the
Emperor, not only publicly treated the Emperors cause against Pope Gegory
the ninth in a great assembly, Io. Cusp. in Vita. Fri. 2.
and on the great feast and day of the resurrection of our Savior, but also
wrote books in ye defense of ye Emperors cause against the outrage of the
Popes. And Pope Innocent the fourth, Platina in vita. Innoc. 4
was feign for answer, to write books of defense in his own cause against
him. But God defended the Emperor against the cursing and raging Popes, and. 2
of the Popes faded with their curses before him, sone died the 3. the fourth
fled into France and there fell a cursing afresh: notwithstanding the Emperor
reigned about 32. years, Io. Cuspin. in vita Fride. 2.
and dyed by treason of Manfred his base borne son, after he was poisoned at
Florenzola and upon his recovery, as Cuspinian notes, and some say that he
dyed at Panorme.

Ludouick of Bauar succeeded Frederick surnamed the fair in the Empire.
Lodouicuae Bauatus.
Cuspinian commends him for a courteous Prince, amiable, affable in speech,
and gentle in behavior, and not puffed up with any prosperity: provident and
prudent, valiant in wars, Io. Cusp. in vita Ludou. Bauar^.
and that would not be daunted in dangers. Thus Cuspinian prayseth his
Princely qualites, but notwithstanding he was cursed and banned of three Popes
also, Ihon the 22. John. 22. Benedict. 12. Clemens. 6.
Benedict the twelfth, and Clemens the sixth. Platina does name the first John
ye 23. others account John the 22. to concur in time with Ludouick the
Emperor. Benedict the 12. was pricked in conscience of cursing him, In
paralipo. rer. memora. additis Ab. Vrsperg.
and said for his excuse, that he did, he did provoked of us before, and he
would have revoked the curse but that he was coped and kept in against his
own liking. Clemens. 6.
Clemens the 6. blowed up the fire which Benedict his predecessor would have
quenched: And even at the Lords supper he cursed the Emperor as Cuspinian
writes: Io. Cusp. in vita Ludou.
As Judas was at the Lords supper that betrayed his master. But
notwithstanding the curses of Popes, Ludouick reigned about 37. years as
Cuspinian accounts, Alber. Cranz Saxo. Lib. 8. cap. 22.
and he ouerliued two of the Popes that cursed him, and he dyed not without
suspicion of poison, as Albert. reports.

Philip the Emperor.
Philippe the Emperor about the year of our Lord God 1198. (as Vrspergensis
accounts) is praised of him for a mild and gentle Prince, valiant in wars,
at chiof him with good success: yet because he was not current in the favor
of Pope Innocent the third, Ab. Vrsperg. in gest. Phil.
first he urged an excommunication of Pope Celestine against him: And after by
his practice, and other Emperor called Otto was set up against him: but
Philippe by treason ended his life in the end. Then Pope Innocent fell a
cursing of Otto also, Otto the Emperor.
whom as his darling he had Crowned before. Thus a common practice it is with
Popes, to make quarrels to curse Princes, if they stand not in their grace, and
be not at their devotions, and if they make not their composition with them.
Philip the Emperor.
As Philippe the Emperor was (...) come to composition with Pope Innocent the
third, Abbas Vrsperg. in titulo de bellis Philippi.
by Ambassadors sent for that purpose, who promised a marriage between the
kings daughter and the Popes brothers son, for reconcilement of Phillippe to
the Popes grace, as Vrspergensis vowcheth of the report of credible men.

Frederick the first Emperor of that name, Frider. the 1.
was feign to put a mass of gould into Pope Hadrian his mouth, to make his
composition with him by his solliciters, for the recalling of his curse against
him, Ab. Vrsperg. ex cremone^s.
and for reconcilement to him: As the Abbat of Vrsperg out of the Cremonensis
called John the Priest rehearses. Otherwise if suit be not made for
reconcilement and composition with them, the common enginne and practice of
Popes against Princes is, to draw out the banning blade upon them. As Hornets
have their stinges, and Scorpians their tails, so the common enginne of Popes
revenge upon Princes, is their excomminging and cursing of them. Saxo Cra^
Hist. Dan^s. lib. 14.
Saxo the writer of the Danes story says: the Bishops revenge is his
curse. And the same Pope Innocent the third before rehearsed, did draw his
banning blade upon king John of England: King John of England. Fabian the 7
part in anno 1212. Phil. le Bewa king of Fran.
Who was feign (...) make his composition with Pandolph his Legate, to pay a
yearly fee to the Pope of a thousand marks for the Realms of England and
Ireland, and as his Feodarie to houlde the Crown of him. Boniface the eight,
did proceed in like sort to cursing and banning of Philippe surnamed the
fair, To. Gag. in annalibus regum Fran. lib. 7.
king of France, but he in the steed of composition, suborned Sarra the
Italian, and sent Nogaretus a French man to his aid: and at Anagnia suddenly
they surprised the Pope by force of arms, and brought him to Rome where with
chafe and grief he died. Gagwine general of the order of the holy Trinity in
France, Bonifacius 8
in his story says of Pope Boniface, yt being too proud, he priued Philip of
his kingdom, and gave it to Albert Duke of Ostrige, together with the Empire
of Germany. And after ye same Gagwine had told of the taking of the Pope and
of his death, he says: Such an end of his life had Bonifacius the despiser of
all men, who without remembering the commandments of Christ, went about to
take away and to give kingdoms at his pleasure: Rob. Gagwins judgment of
Bonifacius 8.
when he was not ignorant that he occupied his place on earth, whose kingdom
was not of this world and of earthly things, but heavenly. Thus far father
Gagwin as they call him, the general of his order. We see the Pope is sent
into Christ's school of his own devout disciple, as father Gagwin was: and the
birds of his own nest are ready to scratch out his eyes. What treason was
this against the Popes person and power, to say that he remembered not the
commandments of Christ, while he went about to take away and to give
kingdoms at his pleasure: And yet he calls him self Christ's Vicar. His
kingdom was not not of wordly things but heavenly. Thus father Gagwin who was
in the Popes own bosom for his Religion, yet is a witness against his usurped
power, pride, and tyranny in deposing of Princes, and disposing of kingdoms:
And turns them into Christ's school, whose Vicars they profess themselves
to be, to learn an other lesson of him, whose kingdom was not of earthly,
but heavenly things.

Thus of banning Bonifacius his end, and father Gagwines witness against the
usurped power of Popes, in taking away and giuinge the kingdoms of the earth.
Paulus 2. Clemens. 5.
Paulus the second excomminged and cursed George king of Beme: and Clemens the
fifte the Venetians, the Florentines, and them (...) Luke: and diverse other
Popes have cursed and banned many other Princes and people. And even yet they
blush not in the light of the Gospel to do the like, as they were wont to do
in darkness and in the night of gross idolatry and ignorance: they cannot
hold themselves, but if Princes revolt from their vi^due obedience, and he
reclaymed from their idolatrous errors, then they fall to managings their
cursings and bannings in the names of Peter and Paul, by whose doctrine their
usurped power and tyranny is condemned. Thus of the usual enginne of the
Bishop of Rome, commonly used of them, in contriuing and managing of
practices of treason and rebellion, against Christian Princes and Realms,
which is their excomminging and cursing of them.

The 2. chief point of the first matter.
The second point and matter of my first part is, at what time chiefly the
Bishop of Rome began to use this engine, of excommunicating and cursing of
Princes and Realms, and practicing of such treasons, and rebellions against
them.
OTto Bishop of Frising a famous writer of Cronicles, Otto Bishop of Frising.
and of great account in the Church of Rome in his story writes, that before
Henry the fourth Emperor of that name, he could never find Roman Emperor or
king to have been excomminged and cursed of any Bishop of Rome. This Otto by
parentage was of the blood imperial by his mothers side: before he was a
bishop, Aeneas Syl. in Hist. Austral.
he was a Monk by profession, of the superstitious order of Cistertians, and
died amongst the Monks of that order in the abbate of Moromond: so that no
exception can be taken against his religion, of those that are of the Bishop
of Romes side to disclaim against him. Touching his great skill and experience
in stories, he was of great fame and renown for it: and wrote a story from the
beginning of the world to his own time. He lived about the time of Frederick
the first Emperor of that name, to whom he was near in blood, and he began to
write his story, but before his death he could not finishe it. Thus of the
nobility, authority, religion, and geeat skill in stories of Otto Bishop of
Frising. Now let us hear his own words touching the matter we have in
hand. Otto Fris. Epis. anna. lib. 5. cap. 35.
Lego and relego (says he) Romanorum regum and imperatorum gesta, and nusquam
inuenio quenquam eorum ante hunc, a Romano Pontifice excommunicatum vel regno
priuatum: nisi for^e quis pro anathemate habendum ducat, quod Philippus ad
breue tempus a Romano Epipscopo inter poenitentes collocatus, and Theodosius a
beato Ambrosio propter cruentam caedem a liminibus ecclesiae sequestratus sit.
I read (says he) and read over again the acts of the Roman Kings and
Emperors, and no where I find any of them before (Henry the fourth) to have
been excommunicated of the Roman Bishop or priued of his kingdom: except
parhappes one say it to be deemed for a curse, Philip. Theodosius.
that Philippe of the Roman Bishop was set for a small time in the number of
the penitentes, and that Theodosius for a bloody slaughter was of blessed
Ambrose sequestered from the ingresse of the Church. Thus far Bishop Otto
his words. He makes his auow upon his skill and experience of stories (being a
famous writer of them:) that before Henry the fourth he never cold find any
Romans Emperor of king exco^minged and cursed of any Bishop of Rome, though he
had red and red over again their stories. Thus of his authority touching this
case. Now let us look into that time, when the bishops of Rome began to
adventure such practices against christian Emperors and Princes. Reave. 20.
It was about the time that Satan was let loose out of his chain, as in the
Revelations we read, that Satan was bound of the Angel 1000. years in the
bottomless pit, and after that he must be loosed for a little season. Grego.
7.
Gregory the seventh Pope of that name, which cursed first Henry the 4.
Emperor of that name, was about the year of our Lord. 1072. as Platina ye
writer of the popes lives makes computatio^, Platina in vita Greg. 7.
he was called Hildebrand the monk before. And in the Council of Brixia of
30. Bishops assembled there, Council. Brixi.
he was charged to be Manifestus necromanticus phitonico spiritu laborans, Ab.
Vrsperg. in an. 1080.
and idcirco a vera fide exorbitans: that is, an open Necromancer, and one that
wrought by a Familiar or evil spirit, and therefore is straid from the true
faith. Worm a council. an. 1076
And in the Council of Worms of the Bishops assemble there, he is charged
with heinous crimes, with periuries, with abuse of novelty, with infamy: Ab.
Vrsperg. in an. 1074.
and at his death at Salern (whether for fear of Henry the 4. whom he had
cursed before he was feign to fly) he confessed to a Cirdinall that was
familiar with him, that he was set on by the Devil to rear up discord and
wars it. Christendom. Io. de Heraul. lib. de statu. eccle. ex Ante.
And taking remorse and sorrow for it, commanded him to pray forgiveness of
Henry the fourth for him, and that he should release him of the
excommunication against him. It is marvel though after a thousand years, the
Devil as it were turned loose in the world, began thus to rage in the Roman
Bishops, and to curse and banne Christian Emperors and Princes, which so
highly were praised for princely qualities and virtues of famous writers of
their own side, as before I have rehearsed, about that time, Gregory the 7.
called Hildebrand, did as a brand of hell set Christendom a fire, with
division, discord, civil and mortal wars. And as Bishop Otto voucheth, in
his travel of stories of the Roman kings and Emperors, he could never find
any of them excomminged or cursed of a Roman Bishop, before Henry the fourth of
this Gregory the seventh was excomminged and cursed as we have hard before.
Henr. 4. Grego. 7.
Was he not a fit instrument of the Devil to give the on set of such devilish
discord, civil wars, rebellions and bloodshed in Christendom: And if we
look nearer to the thousand years mentioned before out of the Reuelatio^s,
after which Satan should be loosed out of his chain, Syluester. 2.
Syluester the 2. Pope of that name, the great Necromancer, Sorcerer, Platina
in vita Syl. 2.
and that wrought by the Devil in the Sea of Rome, was then Pope about the
year of our Lord 1000. or 1002. as Platina, Charanza, Charanza in summa con.
and others set down the account. As if as soon as Satan was let loose out of
the bottomless pit and of his chain, to go about to deceive the people which
are in the four quarters of the earth (as in the Revelation S. John writes,
Reave. 20.
) he did take up his place on earth in the Roman Sea in Siluester the second,
who was about the 1000. year after Christ, or two above, as commonly they
account. He (as Platina the writer of Popes lives, and officer to them as
Abbat Tritenhemius of him witnesses, Platina in vita Syl. 2.
) came to be Pope by the help of the Devil: and on this condition, that
after death wholly he should be his. After Platina tells, how at his death the
Devil deceived him, by mistaking the word Jerusalem: supposing that he
should not die till he came to Jerusalem, but suddenly he was overtaken in a
place called Jerusalem, in the Church of S. Cross at Rome. And he tells
also out of one Martinus, that by the clattering of bones and sweat of his
grave, Syluester the 2. his grave.
they prognosticate ye death of the Pope as the common opinion was. There
followed him sundry sorcerers, and necromancers, and wicked Popes in the Sea of
Rome, as B^dict the 9, Benedict. 9.
who as Platina reports, appeared in a monstrous shape after his death,
Platina in vita Been. 9.
because of his monstrous life. And in Syluester the third, Platina in vita
Syl. 3.
the same Platina says: the Popedom was come to that state, that he got it
that with briberie and ambition could carry it. Beno the Cardinal.
Beno the Cardinal reports, that from Syluester the second, to Gregory the
seventh, famous sorcerers and inchaunters were Bishops of Rome, and that there
was striefe between Syluester the second disciples in the devilish art, who
should succeed in the place. This Gregory the 7. was reputed also in the
Brixian Council, Brixian counsel.
to be a Negromancer, and to work by a Familiar: And before him (as Otto the
aforesaid Bishop said) he never could read that any Roman Bishop did
exco^minge and curse the Roman Emperor and King. Otto Frisin. Episc.
So that this practice of Popes against christian Emperors and Princes
(according to his vouching) began much about that time, when Satan was
loosed from his chain out of the bottomless pit, to go about to deceive the
people in the four quarters of the earth: and he took possession about that
time in Bishops of Rome in the Sea of Rome, which were Negromancers and
Sorcerers, as Syluester the second, and other his successors: amongst them
and about those times was Gregory the seventh, Grego. 7.
who was the first (as Otto pronounces of his experience in the Roman
stories) that exco^minged and cursed a Roman Emperor and king, and priued him
of his kingdom. Yet notwithstanding Henry the 4. thus excominged and cursed
af Gregory the 7. reigned about 50. years, and saw Greg. the aforesaid cut
off with his curses, and Urban the second likewise that followed him. Thus
about that time the Devil let loose, raged in the Roman Sea and Bishops,
against Christian Emperors and Princes, with cursing and banning of them, and
priuing the^ of their Empires: forgetting that they call themselves his Vicars
whose kingdom (as Gagwin the devout father and writer of their own side said)
was not of worldly things but heavenly things. Then followed such division and
discord in Christendom, and such outrage of rebellion, wars and bloodshed, as
Bishop Otto greeuing at the very rehearsal thereof says, Otto Frisin. Episc.
ana. li. 6. cap. 36.
yt a certain Ecclesiastical writer compares those times to the most ugly
darkness of Egypt. And ye Abbat of Vrsperg says, that under Hildebrand the
Monk, called Gregory the 7. Ab. Vrsperg. in Chron. in an. 1072.
(who excomminged and cursed first Henry the 4.) Romana respulbica and omnis
ecclesia nouis and inauditis scismatum erroribus periclitari caepit: The common
wealth of Rome and the whole Church began to be plu^ged in perils and errors of
new scismes, and such as were never heard of before. And the bishops that
were present in the Council of Worms, The council of Worms.
charge him with abuse of novelty. What marvel when he was the first in
Bishop Otto his judgment, which took on him to excomminge and curse a Roman
Emperor, and to prive him of his kingdom? And whereas it belonged to the right
of the Emperors to confirm the Roman Bishop after he was elected, and before
the Emperors confirmation and ratifiyng the election, he was not counted right
Bishop of Rome: as Cusp. says, speaking of Grego, Io. Cuspin. in vita Henr. 4.
the 7. his time: Mos enim tu^ erat Po^tifices ab Imperatoribus confirmari vt
superius saepe annotauimus: For the custom then was, that Bishops (of Rome)
should etc: yet this Gregory ye 7. The Imperial right to confirm the Bishop
of Rome elected
contrary to custom and right of ye Emperors, rushed into the Roman sea without
confirmation of the Emperor: but as soon as he was warm in the sea, he began
to curse and ban the Emperor, whose confirmation he should have had, to have
been the right bishop of ye sea. Thereof began to spring and spread great
scismes and divisions in Christendom, when not only the right of the Emperors
was violently encroched of the Bishop of Rome, but also he fell a cursing and
banning the Emperor, whose confirmation he should have had. What did the Devil
about ye time (loosed out of the bottomless pit) more desire, The Devil raged
by disobedience in the Bishops of Rome.
then to tread under feet the ordinance of God, by wilful disobedience and
outrage against Christian Princes, by cursing the^ for whom they should pray,
by stirring rebellions and civil wars against them, and setting their own
subjects to be contrary to them, and to take a contrary course to the
ordinance of God. Thus after 1000. years the Devil did rage in the Roman
Bishops against the supreme soueraignties and states in christe^dom, and
showed himself directly contrary in them, to the great ordinance of God. If it
were the ordinary right of the Empire to confirm the bishops of Rome (as the
continual course and continuance thereof in such a number of his predicessors
bishops of Rome, and the witness of their own writers is plain evidence thereof)
wherefore should Hildebrand called Gregory the 7. Gregory the 7. an intruder
without confirmation of the Emperor.
of a Monk and Archdeaco^ before, intrude himself into ye sea of Rome, without
confirmation of Hen. the 4. Emperor, and not only rent away ye usual right of
the Empire, but also rent the Empire and Christendom with rebellions, civil
wars, bloodshed, treasons, and such like outrages: and rent the Emperor
himself from his Empire and life also, by cursing and banning him, and
stirring up his own subjects to rebel against him, and of his life and Empire
to bereave him. Thus the Roman Bishop, or rather the Devil raging in the
Roman Bishop, turns the regiment and state of Christendom vpside down, and
began a contrary course to the right of the Imperial regiment and custom of
confirmations heretofore. For to Henry the 4. by his imperial right, the
confirmation of Gregory the 7. to be Bishop of Rome, did appertain. Gregory
the 7. so far is from recognizing that right, to which so many his predecessors
stouped, Gregory the 7. summoneth Henry the 4. to appearance and answer.
that as Lucifer mounting about all estates, not only he shakes his neck out
of the collor, but imperiously cites, and by presumptuous process calls
for the Emperor to make his appearance before him, to put in answer to causes
to be objected to him, else unless he stoop to his commands, to whose
confirmation he should have stouped himself, he should be cursed and priued of
the Empire. This was so vnquoth and strange attempt, that Otto freely
confesses, he never read the like by any Roman Bishop done to the Roman
Emperor and king before. Ab. Vrsperg. in an. 1072.
The Abbat of Vrsperg. says, that because without consent of the king he
pressed to be Pope by favor of the Romans, some held that he was not
lawfully placed, but that like a tyrant he usurped. Thus the Abbat himself
mentions the great gall of Gregory the 7. his proud Popedom: which began
with presumption, proceeded to cursing, ended with great bloodshed in
christendom. Cuspinian also reports the same: Plerique (says he) illum
sine regis consensu non agnouerunt legittime electum: Io. Cusp. in vita Hen. 4.
after he had noted how the Pope by sundry letters and process had called for
the Emperor, he says: but many did not acknowledge him lawfully chosen
without the Emperors consent. And yet this is he (in the judgment of Otto
Bishop of Frising) who first of any Roman Bishop did exco^minge and curse the
Roman Emperor or King. Bishops of Rome in the primitive Church. In the time of
general councels. And before Gregory the 7.
The Roman Bishops in the primitive Church most of them were Martyrs, after in
the time of the ancient and general counsels, the Catholic faith in the
blessed Trinity was constantly confessed and maintained of them against the
Arrians and other heretics: and of those that succeeded them, and were
predecessors to Gregory the 7. none took on them (according to Bishop Otto
his protestation) to exco^minge and curse the Roman Emperor before. And were
there not Emperors of notorious notes and deserts before: some spotted with
heresies, and some with other grievous enormities? As for the examples of the
Emperors Philip and Theodotius mentioned of Otto, both touching the causes,
proceedings, actions, and in the judgment of Otto himself, cannot be objected
for instances against his former protestation. The Abbat of Vrsperg discoursing
the stories of ye time, Ab. Vrsperg. judgment of Otto his protestation.
stalleth at the protestation of Otto, and first lays down his words: after
where Bishop Otto touched the sore, he lays to playsters, as a Leach laying
to his hand to cure the papal sores, being an Abbat and well willer to the
Papal power. Ab. Vrsperg. in chro. tit aenacephaleosis Impe. Conradi. etc.
First he says that Emperors and Princes of certain nations, have been
deposed before that time for causes, though not by authority of the bishop of
Rome, as Emperors in Constantinople have been. This touches not the case of
Otto his protestation. The second is, An instance of Grego. 3.
an instance concerning the case of Gregory the 3. which caused all Italy to
revolt from the Emperor of Constantinople, and excomminged him, and priued him
of his kingdom. Touching this instaunce of Gregory the 3. who was about the
year of Christ 731 Platina the writer of popes lives says, Platina in vita
Greg. 3.
that he excominged and priued the Emperor. Cuspinian says, that he priued
him of the communion and fellowship of the faithful: Io. Cusp. in vita Greg. 3.
and that he revolted from him, and caused the tributes payable to the
Emperor to be yielded to the French: and yielded himself to the obedience of
the French, Carrolus Martellus.
Carolus Martellus carrying then the Regiment of France, and called Mayor Domus
as Platina witnesses. Platina. in vita Zacha. 1
Wherefore did he revolt from the Emperor of Constantinople, and caused the
tributes of the Empire in Italy to be turned to the French: because the
Emperor of Constantinople Leo the third of that name had made Proclamations,
Leo the third Emperor his proclamatio^s against images.
that images should be voided out of Churches and burned, thereof they called
him (...). Therefore Gregory the third preferring dead images before the
Emperor (who was touching his Imperial sovereignty the lively image of God)
revolted from his obeisaunce, turned the tributes of the Empire to the French,
put himself at their devotion, excomminged the Emperor and priued him, says
Platina, ye officer to Popes, Abbreuiator Apostolicus (as Abbat Tritenhemius
terms him. Ab. Triten. de eccle. scrip.
) But it was a poor priuing of the Emperor, when he reigned 24. years, till
of Gods visitation he ended his life. Till God deprived him of his life, he
was not priued of his Empire: yet Platina the writer of the story of Popes,
says, he excomminged him and priued him of his Empire: thus they utter great
words, and perform small actions.

Io. Cusp. in vit. Leonis 3.
Cuspinian tells out of John the Monk (of whom he borrowed the story) that
the bishop priued the Emperor of the fellowship of the faithful. But Bishop
Otto far auncienter then Platina or Cuspinian late writers in comparison of
him, and who was before the Abbat of Vrsper. Otto Frisin. Episc. lib. 6. cap.
35.
also, confesses that notwithstanding he has read and read over again the
stories of the Roman Emperors and kings, yet he never could find any Roman
Emperor and king exco^minged of a Roman Bishop, before Henry the 4. of
Gregory the seventh. Bar. Platina. Io. Cuspini.
Platina was more then four hundred years after Bishop Otto. Cuspinian far
later under Maximilian the Emperor. John the Monk out of who^ Cuspini. Io.
the Monk
takes his report, Otto Frising. Episc.
belike is a late writer also. But Otto had read the stories of ancient
memories, and out of his reading affirms never Emperor to have been
excominged of a Roman Bishop before. What manner of exco^minging did Gregory
the 3. use against Leo the third Emperor of Constantinople: As he exco^minged
him, so he priued him. He priued him, and yet he kept his Empire during life:
he exco^minged him, and yet still the faithful not only kept communion with
him, but their allegiance to him. So his exco^minging, was a putting him out of
his communion and company, and of those that were of his obedience therein,
because they would not keep company with dead images, the quick with the
dead. Therefore he made such stir for the dead among the living in Italy,
and revolted from the Empire (which had advanced and fostered the Bishop of
Rome in that state) to the French: and bereaved the Empire of the tributes and
manage of Italy: and in process so weakened the Empire of Constantinople, The
Bishop of Rome weakened and betrayed the Empire.
that it became a pray to Turks and Infidels. The Bishop of Rome first pulled
it down on his knees, after came the Turks and ouerranne it: when one is down,
he is soon overcome. The Bishop of Rome in defense of dead images, displaying
the banner of his revolt in Italy from the Empire of Constontinople, and by
that means impouerishing it, by taking away of tributes due to it, and
weakening the force of it by the revolt of the men, did open as it were the
door to the Turk to ouerrunne the Empire. If we look who betrayed the City
of Constantinople, Ioh, Io. Justinian betrayed the city of Constantinople to
Mahomet the 2.
Justinian of Gen bears that infamy. If we look who betrayed the Empire of
Constantinople, it was the bishop of Rome in effect, by carrying Italy to
revolt after him, by dispoyling the Empire of tributes, and disfurnishing it of
me^, by plucking it as it were on ground, by feathering his nest out of the
Empire, and by the fall thereof mou^ting himself in Italy. Thus for answer to
the Abbat of Vrsperg to his instance of Gre. the 3. his excomminging and
priuing Leo the 3 of his Empire. Ab. Vrsper. anacephaleosis Imperat. etc,
After that, the Abbat of Vrsperg proceeds in his answer to Bishop Otto.
Such things also (says he) otherwhere and in our times have bin seen to be
done, yet though the Roman Bishops do ascribe and take to themselves the doing
thereof, we find (says he) these things to be done by divine judgment, the
sins of Emperors so requiring, and Princes and people uniting themselves to
resist them. Here he rippeth up the root, out of which such actions grow:
the divine judgment for sins of the Emperors stirryng up Princes and people
against them, and that the Bishop of Rome does but take it on, as if he by
cursinges did cut of Emperors and Princes from their estates, and carved out
kingdoms at his pleasure. The Abbat to his former saying puts two examples,
the one of Frederick the first Emperor of that name, Frederick the first.
who was excomminged and cursed of the popes Hadrian and Alexander and other
there successors, and yet never lost the Empire. So Philip the son of the
same Frederick, Philip the Emperor.
notwithstanding the cursings of Celestin the 3. about our time says the Abbat
never lost the Empire. Thus the Abbat voucheth these examples, to show that
Emperors and Princes though excomminged of Popes, yet notwithstanding kept
their soueraignties, estates, and kingdoms, Emperors exco^minged of popes keep
their empires
as Frederick, Philip, and many other. And hereof we have a mirror of the
great mercy of God, in the heavenly happy light of his word, Queen Elizabeth.
in Elizabeth our Sovereign sent of God, who by divine providence,
notwithstanding the cursings of proud Popes, not only keeps her royal
right and seat, but for their cruel curses, has received bou^tiful blessings
of God, not only showed on her Royal person, but on the whole Realm: Even
right as the Prophet David says: Though they curse, Psalm. 109.
yet thou shall bless, they shall arise and be confounded, but thy Servant
shall rejoice. God give all subjects grace with true hearts to pray to God,
that he will turn their cruel curses, into abundance of blessings on her
Royal person and estate, and his Church, and our whole Country. Thus what
time chiefly the Roman Bishops began to practice such things against
Christian Emperors and princes: of Bishop Otto his protestation: of ye Abbat of
Vrsperg his answer: and how by divine providence, notwithstanding the cursing
of popes, christian Emperors have kept their soueraignties, estates, and
Realms heretofore.

The 3. chief point of the first matter.
The third chief matter of my first part is, by what means the Bishops of Rome
do manage and carry on their practices.
THE usual means of their practices is, after their cursing to set on
Subjects against their Princes: Greg. 7. Rodol. Duke of Sueuia.
as Gregory the 7. did set on Duke Rodolph of Sueuia, or as Platina notes, of
Saxony, or as Vincentius of Burgundy, or as Cuspinian Cou^tie of Reinfield, to
rebel against Henry the 4. Emperor his Sovereign: and not only subjects, but
the son to rebel against his own father, as Henry ye 5. Henricus. 5.
against Henry the 4. Emperor of ye name his own father. In these two examples
as glasses set before us, we may see the treachery and practice of the
Bishops of Rome against Christian Emperors and Princes. Briefly I will set
down the first, touching the rebellion of Duke Rodolph against Henry the 4.
The examples of Duke Rodolph and Henry the 5.
and his repentance for it. The latter example I will lay forth at large,
because it is a notable story to set forth the horrible treasons, unnatural
wars, and raging rebellio^s, not only of subjects, but of the son against
his own father and Sovereign Lord, upon pretense of the Popes exco^minging and
cursing the father, and for executing of the popes curse. And therefore in the
Popes cause it is counted piety, though it be joined with treason, rebellion
and unnatural outrage against his own father.

Touching the first example of Rodulph against Henry the fourth, I will note
his setting on, his rebellion, Duke Rodolph his setting on to rebellion.
and after his repentance. He was set on to falsify his faith, and to rebel
against Henry the fourth, by Pope Gregory the 7. (called Hildebrand ye monk
before) and to pull him on to this troublesome action with all he sent him a
Crown or diadem with this posie or word, Alb. Cranz. Saxo. lib. 5. cap. 7.
( Albertus reporting it) Petra dedit Romain Petro, tibi Papa coronam: The
rock (that is Christ) gave Rome to Peter, the Pope has given the Crown to
thee. Thus he allured him to traiterous rebellion against his Prince, to whom
he had sworn fidelity.

Now of his rebellion: Evil chiued the Crown that Pope Gregory had sent him.
Henry the fourth whom the Pope had cursed, notwithstanding wore and bare the
Crown by Gods providence given to him. Rodolph yt of the Pope received the
Crown, could not escape notwithstanding the curse, wrath, and judgment of God
in this world, for his perjury, treason, and rebellion against his Prince,
but that he repented in the end. So whom the Pope cursed, God blessed:
Rodolphos Rebellion. The sequel of the rebellion.
Whom the Pope blessed, God cursed. Touching the sequel of the action in this
world, Rodolph with the Popes blessings spedde evil: Henry the Emperor with
the Popes curse wan the field. Ab. Vrsperg. in Chro.
Rodolph discomfited and having his right hand cut off (as the Abbat of Vrsperg
reports it) was carried out of the battle to Morisburg, and straight after
died. Alber. Kra^z. Saxoniae lib. 5. cap. 5.
Albert tells, that he was carried out of the field to Herbipolis wounded in
the right hand, whereof he dyed. Thus of Duke Rodolph his rebellion.

Duke Rodolph his repentance.
Now let us hear of his repentance. When Duke Rodolph saw the stump of his
hand, he said to them that set him on there present: This same is the right
hand with which I have sworn fidelity to my Lord. Abbas Vrspergensis. in chro.
Behold now I leave my life with his reign. See you to it which made me clime
to this place, and should have led me the right way following your
aduertisementes. Thus woefully he moved himself to the Bishops that set him on.
Alb. Cranz. Saxo. lib. 5. cap. 7.
Albert thus reports it, yt he sent for the nobles and Bishops of his side to
Herbipolis, and elata dextra in astantes, and lifting up his hand (says he) to
those that stood by: Duke Rodolph his doleful moan for his rebellion.
this is the right hand, with the which I swear to Henry my Lord, but by your
urging so often, with such evil hap I have fought against him, go, fulfill your
fidelity to your king, for I shall go ye way of my fathers, so he died. Thus
the rufull words of Duke Rodolph repenting his rebellion before the nobles and
Bishops of his side. His conscience, not only his right hand was wounded for
his perjury, A warning to all.
treason and rebellion against his Prince. This may be example to all estates
and persons, to keep their hearts and hands true to their Prince according to
Gods ordinance, least Gods vengeance fall on their hearts, and heads, as it did
upon Absolon the traitors heart, and upon their hand which they lift up
against their Prince, as it did upon the right hand of Duke Rodolph, rufully
repenting for it. Thus the example of Duke Rodolph, by whom and how he was set
on, of his rebellion and evil success, last of his rufull repentance.

Now will I discourse the story of Henry the 5. Henry the 5. his rebellion
against Henry the 4. his father. The Order.
the treason and rebellion against Henry the 4. his own father. And for the
more orderly treating of it, I will refer my self to these chief points:
First of his cause and pretense and setting on to this treason and Henry the
fourth: Fourthly Henry the 5. in the end. Thus the order of my discourse^ this
story. The first. The cause and pretense of rebellion of Henry the 5. against
his father.


The first is his cause and pretense and setting on to that horrible treason
and rebellion against his own father. The cause and pretense of his treason
and rebellion against his own father, was Pope Gregory the seventh, Pope
Vrbane the second, and Pope Paschal the second, their curses on Henry the
fourth his father; and withal their priuing him of his Empire. What the cause
and his desert was, that the Popes thus cursed and priued him, let us hear out
of their own writers. The Abbat of Vrsperg. very parciall on the Popes side
against the Emperor, notes this to be the cause: Abbas Vrspergensis. in
chro. in an. 1075.
Because two Popes of Rome solemnly cited the Emperor to make his appearance at
Rome before them, and he came not, and for contempt against them, and because
he would not submitt himself to them, he was of Gregory the seventh
excomminged and cursed, then of Vrbanus the second, after of Paschal the
second. Another cause, by Albertus report is aleaged, out of the aunsweres of
the Bishop of Men's and Worms to the Emperor, when they came to depose him:
for Simonie in collating Bishoprics and Abbacies, which they call the
inuesting of Bishops and Abbates, Alber. Kra^z. Saxoniae lib. 5. cap. 20.
by the hand of Princes into their royalties they hold of them. Thus as in
the right of their imperial prerogatives, The imperial right in inuesting of
Bishops, Abbates etc
Emperors have held and continued from the time of Charles the Emperor
surnamed the great, and under 63. Bishops of Rome, above 300. years as
Cuspinian notes. And after the thousand year that the Devil was let lose out
of the bottomless pit, Reave. 20.
(as out of the Revelation I have noted) he raged in the Bishops of Rome
against the principates of the earth, making a quarrel for inuesting Bishops
and Abbates by ley hand to the royalties of their dignities, which they termed
simenicall heresy.

I will lay down the words of John Cuspinian concerning the cause, Io. Cusp.
in vita Hen. 5.
who was a man of great authority and a counceller to Maximilian the Emperor,
and though he were of their Religion, yet without partiality lays down the
cause. Discordiae somes erat (says he) talis: The cause that bread the discord
was such. Now 380. years and more from Charles the great, under 63. The case of
inuestiture. for which Popes cursed Emperors.
Bishops of Rome, it was lawful for the king to collate Episcopal dignities
and Abbatices, by a ring, a rod, which now by authority, custom, and most
ancient preuileges, by the space of so many years was established. But after
Popes ordained, that eccelsiasticall dignities or inuestiture might not of any
ley parson be collated, and they were excomminged that were invested in that
sort. Hitherto John Cuspinian his words in the story of Henry the fifth.
Albertus Cranz Deane of Hanburg, Alb. Cranz. Sax. lib. 5. cap. 37.
and a writer of their own side, does thus (speaking of Henry the 5.) lay
down his judgment of the case. If (says he) the Emperor (meaning Henry ye 5.
who after was cursed of the Pope likewise, for the same cause yt he rebelled
against his own father) did ask nothing but only ye inuestiture of ye lands
called the grant of the royalties (the free elections to Churches and Abbaies
reserved in the vacation) he seems to demand right. Thus Albert his words
touching the cause of inuestiture, only he does not like yt the provision for
the person shall go with it, for the which he says the controversy was
between the kingdom and the priesthood. The Abbat of Vrsperg also speaking of
the reconciling of Henry the fifth to Pope Calixtus says, Ab. Vrsp. in an.
1122.
he did relinquishe the inuestiling of Churches, which the German kings so
long had exercised, and which he purposed never during life to have left,
least thereby he should prejudice the honor of his kingdom. Thus
Vrspergensis. And yet otherwhere he raueth against Henry the fourth, Abbas
Vrsperg. in an. 1106.
for resisting the Popes censures, and calls him Nabuchodonezer, and Julian,
and shows his evil affected mind to him, and his partiality in writing his
story, which of Cuspinian also is noted, Io. Cusp. in vita. Henr. 4.
though in religion he be concurring with him. Thus the bishops of Rome,
about that time that Satan was loosed out of his chain, made schisms and
hurleburlees in Christendom, by encroching the ancient right of the mperiall
prerogative touching the case of inuesting aforesaid, which continued in the
body of the Empire from Charles the great the first Emperor of the West after
the division of the Empire, and under 63 Bishops of Rome, and more then 300.
years, as Cuspinian notes. And because Henry the fourth would not yield up
this imperial prerogative and the ancient right of the Empire, he was cursed
of Gregory the seventh and other Popes, and priued of his Empire: though he
continued Emperor about 50 years lacking one, as the Abbat confesses. And
after that ancient right and imperial prerogative thus confirmed by
authority, Abbas Vrsperg. in an. 1102.
custom and most ancient privileges (as Cuspinian witnesses) was called
Simonicall heresy. In the Lateran council under Paschal the 2. Paschal. 2. in
Lateran council.
who cursed Henry the fourth the father, and Henry the fifth the son, for the
case of inuesting, and for their mainteyning the Emperial prerogative therein,
and who himself had released ye inuesting of Churches according to the right
imperial before to Henry the 5. Gerhardus Bishop of Engelesme and Legate in
Aquitania said: Ab. Vrsperg. in Chro. anno 1112.
that this inuesting (by Emperors and Princes) was against the holy Ghost and
canonical institution, the Council there consenting to it: At what time Pope
Paschal there did recant, and retract the release that he had made thereof to
Henry the fifth before, and he prayed pardon for it, and prayed them to pray
for him. Such conscience he made for releasing of the imperial right to the
Emperor. But where was this conscence in their predecessors time under 36.
Bishops, from the time of Charles the great? Was it then counted against the
holy Ghost and simonicall heresy? Wherefore is now the case thus altered?
Because (as Cusp. touches the quick) post vero pontifices sanxerunt. Io.
Cusp. in vita Henr. 5.
But after the Bishops of Rome have decreede so, that it is not lawful for any
to be invested of any lay man, and they were excomminged that were invested of
the^. So, as Popes rule cases, herisies are made. That under so many Bishops of
Rome was yielded as the lawful imperial right, now is said to be against the
holy Ghost and flat heresy. Henriciana haeresis Wig bertina. Abbas
Vrspergensis. in chro. in an 1106. Wigbert. Archbishop of Rauenna.
And because they would bring the Emperors name into public hate, they call it
haeresis Henriciana, Henry's heresy, they call it also haeresis Wigbertina,
Wigbertes heresy: Because Wigbert Archbishop of Rauenna (after Gregory the
7. was hunted out of Rome by the Emperor for his cursing of him) at the
request of the Romans was made Bishop of Rome for him, and by the name of
Clemens with great solemnity of many Bishops inthronised: But because he was
placed by the Emperor, they have devised an heresy after his name, Ab.
Vrsperg. in Chro. in an. 1080.
to bring his name also in hate, which they call Wigbertina. So that makes not
on their side, for maintayning their kingdom is called heresy. What
intolerable tyranny and monstrous presumption is this of Bishops of Rome, as
Lucifer mounted in pride, Princes praerogatiues made heresy of Popes.
to take on them to curse and prive Emperors for keeping their ancient right
and imperial prerogative, and to make heresy as pleases them, where as they
swallowe up such a number of Idolatrous heresies of theirowne, and they call
the doctrine delivered to us out of the lively word of God heresy, and light
darkness, and darkness light, and are therefore under ye curse of God, Esai
5.
as the Prophet Esaias witnesses. But though they call light darkness, truth
error, prerogatives of Princes heresies, their followers dance after their
pipe: as those that are bitten of the venomous spider of Italy called
Tarantula (because by Tarentu^ there is store of the^) so soon as they hear
the pipe or minstrel, Tarantula
they fall a dau^sing, and cannot leave till they have by daunsing digested the
poison (which vaporeth out by sweetes as Matheolus thinks: Mathe. in Com. in
Dios. lib. 2. cap. 57.
) so they that are bitten with the venomous Spider of Italy, the Tarantula of
Rome cannot but dau^ce after the Popes pipe, and cannot give up and digest the
poison of Popery, until God renew them by special grace, and as it were new
make and alter them. Thus for what cause Gregory the 7. and other Popes after,
exco^minged and cursed Henry the 4. Because the Pope of such pretenced quarrel
cursed the father, therefore should ye son rise in armor and rebel against his
own father? God has made the son himself judge in ye cause, for eue^ for the
same cause yt the father was cursed, and on pretense whereof he took on him the
treason and rebellion against his father, he also was cursed of 3. popes after.

And touching ye setting on of ye son against his father, The setting on of the
son against the father.
the trumpet of piety was blown up before the son, because he undertook the
treason in the Popes cause, and for executing the Popes curse on his own
father. Therefore as such impiety and outrage against his own father and
against ye ordinance of God, is blazed out as piety to the Pope and mother
church of Rome: So under the pretense and visard of piety and religion, the
treason and rebellion of the son is disguised. Alber. Kra^z. Saxoniae lib. 5.
cap. 16.
Albert Kranz says of him Multis persuasit filius, sola se pietate in deu^
terreni patris ad tempus oblitum esse. The son (says he) persuaded many, yt
only in respect of piety to god, he had forgotten for a season his father on
earth. Otto Frisin. Epis. lib. 7. cap. 8.
Otto Bishop of Fris. says. Rebellione^ sub specie religionis, eo quod pater
eius a Romans pontificibus exco^municatus esset aggreditur: Under color of
religion he attempteth rebellion, because his father was excomminged of the
Roman Bishops. The Abbat of Vrsperg says under color of religion: Patrem
exco^municatu^ priuauit regno He priued his father of the Empire being
exco^minged before. Ab. Vrsperg. in chro. in an. 1124.


Let us hear how of the Popes clergy, he is magnified and set a gog to this
unnatural treason and rebellion under pretense of piety and religion. After
yt he shrunk from his fathers side (as Vrspergensis tells) and raised
rebellion against him, Abbas Vrsperg. in chro. in an. 1105.
there he professed (says he) obedience to the sea of Rome, though with
treason he rent the Empire and the bowels of nature in his own father that
begat him, it is not treason or rebellion any more, but Religion and piety. He
conde^neth the heresy before mentioned which they forged against his father,
for the which he after the death of his father, was cursed of Popes also. He
withdrawed himself into Saxony, which then was a fit place for mutenie and
rebellion against his father. Alb. Cranz. Saxo. lib. 5. cap. 17.
And at Northuson in Saxony was a meeting appointed of the nobles and people
(as Albert tells) and the Clergy kept a Synod there. Then after he had
displaied his banner of treason and rebellion against his father, the Popes
Clergy flocked unto him and hanged about him: and rebellious Ruckard
Archbishop of Men's, Ruchard Archbishop. of Men's.
and Geberhardus Bishop of Constans, held a great council of Clergy at
Northuson, a fit council for such a practice. This Ruckard (as Otto calls
him) sometime Archchbishop of Men's, was ba^nished of Henry the fourth for his
disloyalties, and in Saxony he had made mutenies and conspiracies against
him, and being an Archrebell and traitor, is now become president of this
council: whom Henry the 5. by force would have restored to his sea again (as
Bishop Otto tells) but that his father was got within the town with his
garrison. Otto. an a. lib. 7, cap. 8.
In this council to inflame the son against his father, they admired,
extolled, and crowned him with great commendation, as if he had gotten the
garland of Religion and piety, by treason and rebellion against his father.
They commend him for that he did not intermedle in their dealing in council,
but referred himself to their decrees. And therein, Albertus commends his
modesty, and Vrspergensis his humility and prudencie. So they may have their
own scope in councels, and their doctrines and decrees without check and
controlement of Princes, they will extol and magnify them. Alber. Cranz Saxo.
Lib. 5. cap. 17.
Albert commends him for his gravity and prudencie above his years, in
making answer to demands of subjects made unto him. And to take all
advantages of commendations for him, they praise him for his apparel, for his
countenance and the protestation of his speech. He was brought forth (says
the Abbat) in abiectes apparel: Ab. Vrsperg. in chro. in an. 1105.
(abiecto productus habitu) as doleful for his fathers case, and with his
countenance (as Albert tells) set to the ground, with gravity he delivered
his answers: His protestation he made with tears standing or trickling by his
cheeks. The sum of all was this, Henry the 5. his protestation.
if his father will be subject to Peter and Pope of Rome, he will yield
humble obeisance and allegiance unto him: if not, then rebellion and treason
though against his own father, was turned into religion and piety for Peter
and the Pope of Rome. This was the sum of his protestation. So in this
council, treason and rebellion against his his father was piety to the pope of
Rome and in respect of the execution of his curse upon his father. No marvel
where Ruckard the rebel was president of the council, though rebellion be
good religion in respect of the Popes curse. If one should rake hell for
councels, Treason and rebellion counted piety to the Pope.
decrees, and doctrines of Devils, could he bring more seditious and
pernicious doctrine against public states, gouernmentes, and the ordinance of
God? Where there is such a Clergy that clappeth their hands to the son ye
rebelleth against his own father, how monstrous is the head that by cursing of
Princes, sets the son upon the father, the subject upon the Prince. If there
be good nature in us, good disposition to public estates and gouernme^ts, and
true loyalty to our Sovereign, let us shun ye solicitors of such deuilish
suggestions, councels, and attemptes, and abhor the practisers of them. Thus
for what cause the Popes cursed Henry the 4. and on what pretense Henry the 5.
rebelled against his own father, how he was set on, and what commendations of
the Clergy were cast upon him.

The second chief matter of the discourse of this story is, The 2. The
paricicidial war.
of the unnatural and parricidiall war of the son against the father. Their own
writers call it a parricidial war, in the which the son rebelleth and took
armor against his own father. So the Abbat of Vrsperg (notwithstanding his
bitter affection against the father) calls it a parricidiall war. Albertus
Kranz entering into the story, Alb. Kranz. Saxo. lib. 5. cap. 16.
and stopping at the strau^gnes thereof says: The novelty of the thing would
cause the reader to be astonished? Quis enim patri rebellantem filium tanto
ardore audiuit? For who has heard (says he) the son with such broyle to
rebel against his father. Quis iura naturae intercidisse tam penitus
commeminit, vt omni existimatione, omni honor, exuatur pater a filio. Who has
remembered the laws of nature so clear to be abollished, that the father of
his own son should thus be turned out of all estimation, all honor, and
his kingedome. Thus Albert his very bowels are ready to turn in him, when he
looks first into this unnatural rebellion of the son against the father,
though otherwise in religion he was current with the Church of Rome. Otto
Bishop of Frising, who was a monk of the order of Cistert. before he was
Bishop, and lacked not blind affection to Romish religion, reaueth deeper in
the outrage of this parricidiall war, Videres (says he) lachrimabiles and
miserabiles apparatus, Otto Frisin. lib. 7. cap. 9.
cerneres mundum contemptum sui luce clarius prodentem, quod videlicet contra
legem naturae, filius in patrem assurgeret: Thou might see (says he) the
lamentable and miserable preparation: thou might see the world by his
effects bewraying his own contempt, because against the law of nature, the son
did rise against his father: and contrary to the rule of justice, the soldier
did assault the king, the servant his master, and brother stood up against
brother, and cousin against cousin, and intended the shedding of his blood, that
was near to him in blood. Will not this unnatural and vnquoth fact of the
world provoke us to the contempt of it? Thus far Bishop Otto of this
parricidiall war. Bishop Otto his lesson of the contempt of the world.
He teaches us a lesson of contempt of the world, by such monstrous effects
and wicked works thereof: he makes it a School of contempt of the world to
us: since the great states and pillars thereof are so out of course, and such
unnatural outrage is in it, if we can put on godly affection to learn his
godly lesson. This is the fruit of stories, to make them schools of godly
lessons, not by words, but by actions and practice set before us. And at the
encounter like to have been at Men's between the father and the son, the
father keeping the City, Ab. Vrsp. in chro. in an. 1105.
the son coming with force to assail it, the hearts of the noble men did
begin to melt: and they consulted how to stay the outrage of the paricidiall
war, in which both nature and civil government warred upon it self. Likewise
in the confines of Beme by the river of Danubius, where both the father and the
son had pitched, and bickering begane, nature began to work in the nobles
again, that (as Albert says) Rem impiam execrati ibant and redibant,
detesting the impious work, Alb. Cranz. Sax. lib. 5. cap. 17.
they went to and fro to stay the bloody battle. And when the son had
passed the river, and the battle ready to strike, as if he felt nature in
his own bowels fighting a battle within him, he turns on his own
battle, and cries: what do we, Pater est, Dominus est, Imperator est, qui
tendit ex aduerso. The battle of nature in the bo^^ls of the son.
Impietate plena est si venit victoria tanto miserabilor exitus si vincamur.
Nolim parricida esse, si de totius mundi dominio quis pacisceretur. It is
(says he) my father, my Lord, and Emperor, which comes against us. The
victory though it fall to us, is full of impiety, and if we be overthrown,
so much more miserable is the end. I would not be a parricide to gain the
sovereignty of the whole world. After he wills them to put swords in
sheaths, and let us fight with Counsel (says he) and not with armor. Thus
Albert, how nature fought a battle in the very bowels of the son, when he
was ready to join battle with his father. Though nature thus began to
bleed in him, when the battle began to join against his father, yet he
leaves not persecuting of him with parricidiall war and traitorous attempts
so long as life lasted in him: he sacked his fathers treasures, he threw his
faithful Subjects out of their livings, he betrayed him in his nearest friends,
by whose fidelity and force he was most supported. A^h. Kranz. Saxo. lib. 5.
cap. 18.
At Spires he ransacked his fathers treasures: at Ratispon, at Herbipolis, he
drove out the faithful Bishops to his father, and set others of his own crew,
conspirators in their place.

And when his father began to vade, he brought Ruckard the rank Rebel of
Men's home to his Sea again. Otto Frisin. Episc. li. 7. cap. 8.
So the faithful friends of the father went to wrack: as if the course of
nature being changed in the rebellion of the son against the father, the
civil government followed the same course also. Thus how he betrayed him in
his treasures, and in his faithful friends. Now how he betrayed him even in
his nearest friends, by whose force chiefly he was guarded and furnished, as
Henry Duke of Beme, Henry Duke of Beme. Leopold Marquis of Austria. Otto
Frisin. Episc, lib. 7. cap. 9.
and Leopold Marquis of Ostrige, whose sister Duke Henry had wedded. And he
lured Marquis Leopold to his side, by promising him the marriage of his sister
Agnes the widdowe of Frederick Duke of Sueuia. So he betrayed his father in his
nearest and dearest friends, and of greatest account: Agnes Duchess of Sueuia.
and he made his sister and daughter to Henry the fourth the instrument of his
practice to betray the father. Thus of his parricidiall war and continual
persecuting of his father, and the betraying of him in his treasures in his
faithful friends and principal peers by whom he was supported.

The 3. The 3.
chief matter in the discourse of this story is, of the taking and deposing
of the father. Let us hear how by treason of the son the father was taken as
he was coming to the Council and diet of Princes at Men's, The taking and
deposing of Hen. the 4.
there to have audience of his cause. Thus the father himself tells it in
his letters from Ledes, directed to the states of the Empire, Ab. Vrsper. in
chro. in an. 1106.
as the Abbat of Vrsperg lays there down. Because (says the Emperor in his
letters) at the counsel and request of our son, upon faith and security
both of my life and honor first received from him, I addressed my self
(having a desire thereto) to come to Men's into the presence of the Roman Legates
and Princes there, Henry the 4. letter to the states.
and further to do as they should take order there, so well concerning the
state of the Church and honor of the Realm, as for our souls health also.
And thus coming with this obedience, he sticked not contrary to his faith
and safe-conduit to take us, and even to the brinke of death in manner to bring
us: And we dare not so to put our selves into his hands, to be evil
entreated by injuries and reproach of him at his pleasure, as heretofore we
have been. Thus far out of the letter of Henry the fourth written to the
states of the Empire, how he was entrapped by treason of his son, as he was
coming to the Council of Men's, to have audience and order for his cause. The
Abbat of Vrsperg tells it more smothlie in the behalf of the son, Ab.
Vrsperg. in Chro. ^n anno. 1106.
as if the Princes fearing the Emperors coming into open presence, least the
people should fall to him, and make tumult for him, by general consent and
council persuaded him to resign and send to his son the imperial robes and
ornaments, the Cross, the Spear, the scepter, the globe and crown. Bishop
Otto who was of the Imperial house himself, Otto Frisin. Episc. lib. 7. cap.
11.
and near about those times, more indifferently reports it: How he was
committed to a certain castle, and requiring audience, ye Princes met him at
Inglehelme, and that there by their many words he was advertised, or (says
he) iuxta alios circumuentus ac coactus insigniareg ni resignare and filio
mittere, Or (says Otto) as others say, circumuented and compelled to resign
the ornaments of estate, and to send them to his son. Thus Bishop Otto. But
the father in his letters tells the flat truth: how he was taken by treason
of his son, as he was coming to the counsel of Men's to have audience. Thus
we may see when treason is a foot, how one treason is on the back of an
other, and there is no hoe of treasons.

Let us hear now how likewise he was deposed. The deposing of Henry the 4.
Alb. Kra^^. Saxo. lib. 5. cap. 1^.
Albert tells it thus out of the Chronicle of Germany: Some say (says he)
that being absent he was deprived and deposed from all Imperial honor: and
that mandate was given to the Bishops of Men's, Colon, and Worms, to go and
take from him the Imperial ensigns and ornaments perforce. And when they came
into the sight of the elder at Inglehelme (where Charles the great had made a
Palace) the bishops showed the ma^date of the Council, The order of the
deposing of Hen. the 4 out of the Chronicle of Germany.
requiring ye voluntary he would r^signe the Imperial ensigns. When he
demaded the cause of so rigorous a sentence prono^ced of the Counsel against
him without audience of his cause, they did object against him (as report goes
of the^) Simonie, in collating of bishoprics and Abbaries. The^ said the
Emperor, tell me Bishop of Men's and you of Colon in the name of the eternal
God, what I have taken of you? Henry the 4. clears himself of Simonie in
collating of Bishoprics.
They said nothing. Then said ye Emperor: Glory be to God on high, yt even in
this matter we have been found faithful: surely your great dignities would
have yielded great gain to our cofers if we had been of ye mind. My Lord of
Worms does know, whether for gain, or of our grace inducing it, we have
admitted him. Do not O fathers violate your faith and allegiance: suffer a
while, and do not end our glory with confusion. We crave a general court of
audience. If we must yield, with our own hands we will yield the ensigns
to our son. Thus the Emperors words to the Bishops that came to depose him.
The executions and dealings after, Albert tells in this sort. And when the
Bishops withstoode and offered violence, the Emperor withdrawing himself a
while, The Bishops of Men's, Colon and Worms, with violence deposed their
sovereign Lord Henry the 4.
invested himself in the Imperial robes, and returning: These (says he) ^^e
the Imperial ornaments of estate, these by the goodness of the everlasting
king, and election of Princes have bin bestowed on me. God is able also in
these to continue us, and to hold your hands from the work you intend,
although we be now disgarnished of our forces and armies: for supposing our
selves to be in safety, we made no preparation against such violence. But
let the fear of God stay you whom piety does not reclaim: and if you
reverence neither, behold we are in presence, we cannot resist your force. The
Bishops staggered, The Bishops pluck the crown from the Emperors head.
but after they encouraged one the other to set on the Emperor, and to pluck ye
crown from his head: and when they had plucked him out of his seat, they turned
him out of his Imperial robes and ornaments. The Emperor fetting deep sighs
says thus unto the^: God the Lord of revenge see it, and take revenge of the
wickedness you commit. I sustain ignominy and dishonor, yt never the like was
heard before: for the sins of my youth, of the just judge I am punished: you
nevertheless shall not be free from sin, because you have falsified your oaths
of loyalty: The Emperor co^pareth his Bishops to Judas the Traitor.
you shall not escape the vengeance of yt just judge, your honor never prosper,
your portion be with him yt betrayed Christ. But they stopping their ears go
back, carrying ye imperial robes and ornaments to his son. Thus far ye report
of the story of the deposing of Henry the 4. out of Alber^ who tells it out
of the Chronicle of Germany: for he says: Haec est narratio nostrorum
a^naliu^: Who that has bowels of good nature in him, would he not rue to hear
the pitiful plaint of so valiant a Prince to his sworn subjects, that had
been advanced to so high dignity of him? He gave ghostly counsel to them,
which should have given it to him. But their ears were stopped like the deaf
Aspes. Psalm. 48.
They wilfully brake the oath of their allegiance, they laid violent hands on
the Royal person of the Prince, they undertook the execution of treason and the
Popes curse upon the sacred person of their prince, by whom they were mounted
up in high estate of honor. Thus in the treason and rebellion of the son
against Henry the 4. his father, and in the deposing of him in the end, the
bishops (which chiefly should have been faithful and loyal to him) were the
principal actors and instruments against him, and took on them the execution
of the Popes curse, and the violent deposing of the Emperor from his Imperial
estate.

King John of England. Fabian 2. vo. part 7. in anno. 1205,
So in king John of England his time, the execution of the Popes curse upon him
and the realm, was committed to the Bishops of London, Ely, Winchester, and
Herford, who after they had denounced it against the king and the land, were
fain to fly the land. And in that blind time, when the Pope sat in the
consciences of simple people to bind and loose, the king by practice of the
Pope and popish Prelates was so encountered and wrapped in troubles, that at
length he yielded himself to Randolph the Popes Legate by oath, Fabian 2. vo.
part 7. in anno. 1212,
to stand to the Popes order. Finally, he was driven on his knees, to take the
crown from his head (as Fabian reports it) and to resign it with solemn
words into the Popes hands, and after to resume it as Feodarie to the Pope
(as Fabian tells) upon a yearly fee of a thousand marks to be paid unto
him. So when there is variance in the land, and the Pope is vmpire, by cursing
of Princes and lands, he fingreth and filcheth gain, and sets a sale his
cursings and blessings again. Popish Prelates are the Popes hands and bowels
in Countries.
To whom chiefly does he commit the trust of the execution of such things? to
popish Prelates. They are as the Popes hands in countries, they are as the
bowels of his own body, and as if their conscience lived of him, they are made
actors and instruments eftsoons against their own Princes for him, as in the
practice of stories we see. Running to Rome.
And if there grow quarrel between the Prince and them, they go round to
Rome. The Pope is ye vmpire: they keep that string for their bow, whatsoever
fails at home. Tho. Becket packed him to Rome against Hen. the 2. Thomas
Becket.
and returned with authority from the Pope against the Prince. Anselme
Archbishop of Canter.
Anselme Archbishop of Canterb. sped him to Rome against Henry the first, and
at his return held a convocation at London by the authority of ye Pope against
the Prince. Lanfrank Archbishop of Canterbury.
Lanfrank likewise Archbishop of Canterbury, and Thomas of York, pleated the
libel of their preemine^ce at Rome under William the conqueror. Abbat Benet
Abbat Benet had 5. times been at Rome. Rome was their paradise on earth, to
run in pilgrimage to it. The Pope as a God sat in dark consciences, as having
Peter's key to bind and lose. The Abbat of Vrsperg who himself had bin at Rome
and runs in Romish religion with them, and raileth upon Hen. the 4. for
resistance against Popes of Rome, yet he cries out on Rome for sucking the
gain of the world, and says: Gaude matter nostra Roma, Ab. Vrsperg. in Chro.
quia aperiuntur catarractae the sauroru^ in terra, vt ad te confluant riui and
aggeres nummorum in magna copia: our mother Rome rejoice (says he) because the
sluices and Gulfes of gain are opened on earth, Mother Rome sacketh the
treasure of the earth.
that streams and heaps of money may come flowing in to thee in great
abundance. Thus the Abbat though he were her dear son, yet cries out on
his mother Rome for sucking the treasures of ye earth. And now because his
mother Rome has been kept so long fasting from England, and the gulf of her
great gain stopped there, not only she is hungered, but with ravening jaws
gapeth co^tinuallie over it, by practice of monstrous treasons and rebellio^s
to pluck it in again. Thus of the taking and deposing of Henry the 4. and of
the Bishops that were chief instruments and actors in it.

The fourth chief point of the discourse of this story, The 4. The death of
Henry the 4. and the cruelty on his corpse.
is of the death of Henry the fourth and the cruelty showed on his corse.
After that Henry the Emperor was of the bishops aforesaid thus deposed and
dispoyled of the robes of estate and the Imperial ensigns, he fled to
Limburg, and lighting on a prince a hunting, Alb. Saxo. li. 5. cap. 20.
he told him the process of their proceedings: who pitying his case, conducted
him to Colon with 800. soldiers. After this being toyled and persecuted of
his son, and brought as it were to the pits brinke, (as in his letters
written to the estates of the Empire from Ledes he pitifully complained) he
dies at Ledes. The cruelty showed on the corpse of Henry the 4.
Now let us hear the cruelty that was showed upon his corpse: whom they thus
persecuted alive, they persecuted also in his grave. The Abbat of Vrsperg
tells, how that the Bishop of Ledes and others that took the Emperors part,
were reconciled to the Pope, Ab. Vrsperg. in an. 1106.
and received into the communion of the Church, upon this condition among
others, that they should dig up the corpse of the Emperor buried of them
before, The corpse dug up.
and without all honor of funeral lay it in an unhallowed place, which decree
(he says) was made with the consent of the Archbishops and Bishops that were
there. Alb. Saxo. li. 5. cap. 24.
Albert reports that the corpse stood in a desert chapel at Ledes, unburied
by the space of five years, and after was buried at Spires. Ab. Vrsp. in an.
1106.
The Abbat of Vrsperg tells, how that the Corpse was transported to Spires with
consent of the king his son, and there remained without the church unburied
by the space of five years. Thus whom they would not suffer to rest while he
lived, they would not suffer to rest in his grave also. The Popes curse
ransacketh the graves of the dead: The graves cannot hide their corses for his
cruelty. Wigberts the Archbishop of Rauenna his corpse dug up.
Wigbertes the Archbishop of Rauenna his corpse (because he was set up of Henry
the 4. to be Bishop of Rome, for Grego. the 7.) was also turned out of his
grave: and the corses of other Bishops also, which were made of Wigbert,
Bishops corpse cast out of Churches.
were cast out of the Churches (as the Abbat reports.) This was the
persecution of corses. Death quenches not the malice of Rome, but she runs
to graves to turn up corses as if she were mad. Hiaena.
As the mad Hiaena turns up graves ( Pliny witnessing it) and rages in
corses. Mantichorae. Plini. natu. hist. li. 8. cap. 30. Pli. not. hist. lib. 8.
cap. 21.
And as the monstrous Mantichora (mentioned of Pliny also) is greedy of man's
flesh, even to pluck it out of the graves. But it is zeal (says
Vrspergensis) not malice or cruelty, for speaking of the ra^sacking of corses
of false Bishops (as he terms them) out of their graves, he brayeth out In
tantum diuinae legis subito zelus efferbuit: So greatly (says he) the zeal
of Gods law suddenly boiled up. Ab. Vrsperg. in an. 1106.
Is it marvel though he call Henry the fourth, Julian, Aman, Nabuchodonezer,
who calls the turning of corses of Princes and Bishops out of their graves,
the zeal of Gods Law? It is zeal but not acording to knowledge (as the
Apostle Paul calls it. Romans 10. Blind zeal. 1. Cor. 2.
) Blind zeal crucified Christ. If they had known the Lord of glory, they
would not have crucified him. Blind zeal continually persecuteth ye members
of Christ, ransacketh their very graves, and triumphs over corses. The Abbat
of Vrsperg brings in the Church of Rome triumphing with horns on her head
to run upon her enemies, and to make the living aghast when they see corses of
the dead turned out of their graves: Ab. Vrsperg. in Chro.
Iam enim (says he) exaltatus diuinitus ecclesia Romana cornibus, ad
incutiendum timorem cunstis vsque quaque scismatum membris, etc. Now (says
he) the Church of Rome having her horns by divine power exalted, The horns
of the church of Rome set on by the Abbat of Vrsperg.
to make all the members of schisms to quake: caused ye bones of Wigbert their
head (by Henry the 4. placed pope and Archbishop of Raven. before) to be cast
out of his grave. Thus the Abbat brings forth the Church of Rome in her
triumph, castyng out bodies of the dead out of their graves, to make the
living to be afraid of her. As Zedekia the false Prophet made horns of iron,
Zedekiah.
and said to Ahab the wicked and idolatrous king, 2. Re. 22.
with these horns shall thou pushe the Syrians until thou have made an end
of them. And the false Prophets prophesied: even so, go up to Ramoth in
Gilead and prosper, for the Lord shall deliver it into the kings hands. But
king Ahab was brought home dead in his Chariot. So the Abbat has made iron
horns for the Church of Rome, to push down all her enemies, and to cast them
out of their graves, and they come unto her, as they did to Ahab: go and
poosper. The Lord shall deliver all into thy hands: If any Church may wear
iron horns and triumph with them, the Chuche of Rome may: as for turning
corses out of graves, none ever might compare with her. Thus of the death of
the Emperor Henry the fourth, and the cruelty showed on his corse.

The fifth chief point of the discourse of this story is, The 5.
The judgment of their own writers.
the judgment of their own writers of the case. Otto Bishop of Frising of the
Imperial line touching his parentage, and in superstition not (behind for he
took Monkerie on him, Otto B. of Frising.
and among the Monks of Morimond he) died and touching his story for his
indifferency in laying it down, he is commended of Aeneas Syluius: Aeneas
Syluius in hist. Aust.
Historiae (says he) legem seruauit, vt neque cognatio veritati, neque
cognationi officeret veritas: He kept (says he) the law of story, that
neerenesse of blood should not hinder truth, (because he was near of the
Imperial blood) nor truth neerenesse of blood.

This rebellion and outrage of Henry the fifth against Henry the fourth his
father, Otto Frising. Episc. anna. lib. 7. cap. ^.
upon pretense of the Popes curse, he calls: Tam inauditum and inhumanum
hoc mundi factum: So vnquoth and never the like hard of, and unnatural a fact
of this world: which may provoke us to the contempt of the world (as he
says) to see such outrage in it. Alb. Kranz. Sax. lib. 5. cap. 16.
Albert Deane of Haumburg makes a wonder of it in the world, and says:
Brethren have made war one against another, and most near friends have
fought togeither: Sed filium (says he) insurgere patrires est sine exemplo:
But the son (says he) to rise against the father is a thing without example.
Thus Albert, as if nature it self were wounded, wondereth at so monstrous a
fact, procured and practiced under pretense of the Popes curse, the execution
whereof they count piety, though it be treason and rebellion of the son
against his own father. The Abbat of Vrsperg with too much partiality and
bitterness against Henry the 4. Io. Cusp. in vita Henr. 4.
corrupts the story, and therefore of Cuspinian one of their own religion
is reproved: as also Herma^nus Contract. Herma^nus. Blondus. Platina. Merula.
Mouthie Merula and such others. The Italian writers of stories, as Blond.
Plat. and such others, are 2. great pleasers of Popes, and deliver not the
story with such indifferency between Emperors and Popes as they should do,
because of the partiality of religion and of their Country, and their
intertainment and following after Popes. The fresh fountain Arethusa of
Sicilie by the salt Sea is counted a strange thing in nature: Italian writers
of stories. Arethusa the fountain.
And in writing of stories, it strange for an Italian writer of stories to be
free from partiality of Popes, being so near them and eftsoons appertayning
to them, as Platina and Blondus and such others. Therefore with good judgment
they must be red, to sifte the corn from the chafe, the story from the
partiality of Popes. But the Abbat of Vrsperg though he be not of the Country
of Popes, yet because he has a Pope in his conscience, as rolled on the
grounds of Popery, runs thick with dregs of partiality to Popes, Abbas
Vrsperg. in chr. in an. 1106.
and so corrupts the clerenesse of the story. No marvel though he call
Henry the 4. thus cursed of the Popes, an Arch-pirate, and Arch-heritike.
Nabucodonezer and Julian. John Cuspinian, who was of Maximilians council, and
of their own religion, Io. Cusp. in. vita Hen. 4.
prayseth Henry the fourth for an eloquent, liberal, and godly Prince, sharp
of wit, and warlike, and luckie in the wars, and that fought more battles in
his own person, then either M. Marcellus or Julius Caesar the famous warriers
in the stories. Thus Cuspinians praises of him. Otto Frisin. Episc. ann. lib.
7. cap. 11.
Bishop Otto reports the opinions of others touching his alms deeds, and
many works of mercy done by him: in respect whereof they think he merited
of God (as out of the humors of the darkness of that time they speak) to
have the wanton conversation of his youth (wholly he was alive) to be punished
with such afflictions in this present world. Thus Bishop Otto delivers the
judgments of others of him. Albert Deane of Hanburg and devout of their side,
Alber. Kranz Saxo. Lib. 5. cap. 24.
yet can not bury in silence his condign praises: he says he was a noble, a
learned, a valiant Prince, of goodly personage fit for a king, and that by the
space of 50. years kept the sovereignty of the public state, yet he
inspergeth him with great vices and pride that would not stoop. Thus Alberts
report of him. Touching Pope Gregory the 7. that first cursed him, Abbas
Vrsperg. in chr. in an. 1800. Brixiense Con.
he is charged in the council of Brixia with heinous crimes, and that he is a
Necromansier and that deals with a familiar. And the Bishops in the
council of Brixia refer themselves to the authority of a council at Men's
holden against him before. Ab. Vrsperg. in an. 1076. Worma. council.
And in the council of Worms, he is likewise charged with great infamies.
Otto. Fris. Epis. lib. 6. cap. 35.
Bishop Otto says, that he was the first of his knowledge in the Roman
stories, that took upon him to excommunicate and curse a Roman Emperor or
king. The Abbat of Vrsperg says, Ab. Vrsperg. in an. 74.
that under him the whole Church began to be turmoild with new errors of
schisms that never were hard before. In the counsel of Worms likewise, he is
charged that the Church of God through the abuse of his novelties is
indaungered with so sore a tempest. Abbas Vrspergensis. in an. 1076.
Thus the Bishop of his own religion, and writers of his own side report of
him, and of the strange evils of schisms and divisions never heard of before,
and of the abuse of his novelties. No marvel then though he were the first
that undertook the exco^municating and cursing of a Roman Emperor (as Otto
voucheth) and rent the whole Church with schisms, and the civil and public
state with divisions and rebellions. Bishop Otto when he comes to the
point of the cause, touching the deposing of Henry the fourth from his
Imperial state upon the Popes curse, Bishop Otto suspendeth his judgment
passes it over without interlasing his own judgment and opinion of the
proceedings thereof, and says: all which things whether they were lawfullye
or unlawfully done, we do not determine. Thus Bishop Otto kept his
judgment in suspense, Otto Frising Episc. lib. 7. cap. 11.
touching the proceedinges against Henry the fourth, by laying down the
story, with profession that he will not lay down any judgment of it. May
we not as it were at a loupe and hole see the day? So we may sound his
judgment by his profession, that he will give noe judgment in the cause. If
he had liked the Popes curse and the proceedinges against the Emperor, he
needed not to be dainty of his judgment, whereof no danger ensued to him,
which was so plausible on the Popes side, and at which the Popes Clergy (as it
were) clapped their hands: But because it was a bone in his conscience to have
such outrage done to Princes upon the Popes curse, he keeps his conscience
clear for giving judgment in the case: though otherwise for his religion right
on the Popes side, the Monks of Morimond Abbey (among whom he dyed) and the
order of the Cistertian Monks (which he professed) might witness. Aeneas Syl.
in Hist Austral.
If he should lay down his judgment against the Pope in favor of Henry the
fourth, he should pluck the Pope and his Clergy upon him. Then Otto one of
their own Bishops and a professed Monk of the Cistertians order, Heretics
against the Pope. Henry the 4. Wigbert Archbishop of Rauenna. Wekil Archbishop
of Men's. Abbas Vrspergensis. in chro. in. an 1085.
should be an heretic against the Pope also, as Henry the fourth was made an
heretke, for opposing himself against the Pope, and Wigbert Archbishop of
Rauenna was made an heretic, because of Henry the fourth he was promoted to be
bishop of Rome in the place of Gregory the seventh: and as Wekil the
Archbishop of Men's was called an Arch-heretike in the council of
Quintiligoburg (as Vrspergensis calls it) because in holding disputation
against Geberherdus Archbishop of Salzburg for Henry the 4. his sovereign
Lord, he laid down his reasons of the preiudicing his Sovereign by the Pope,
and other Princes: and that he being dispoyled of his dominion in Saxoni before
Duke Rodolphs rebellion, was not lawfully to be called, We kill his
disputations for Henry the 4.
judged, and condemned. They were so netled with the disputation of VVekill the
Archbishop of Men's for his Sovereign, that they called an other council at
Quintilingoburg: where Otto Bishop of Ostia the Popes Legate was, Ab.
Vrsperg. in chro. in an. 1086.
and there VVekill was made an heretic, and called an Arch-heretike. This Otto
president of this Council, was after the death of Gregory the 7. (who died at
Salern) made Pope in his place: and then he fell a cursing of Henry the 4. as
his predecessor had done. No marvel though he were so apt to coin heresies,
and to challenge them to be Arch-heretikes, which held disputations for the
Emperor against the Pope. Trow you what should Otto Bishop of Frising have bin
in their mouths, Wherefore Bishop Otto leaves his judgment in suspense.
if he had intermedled his judgment for Henry the 4. against the popes
proceedings? Would they not have forgotten his religion, and his monkerie of
Morimond, and the order of Cistertians whereof he was professed, and he should
have been an Arch-heretike as Wigbert and Wekil were. Therefore Bishop Otto
seeing the danger (though he were of the Imperial house himself) lappeth it
up in his own conscience, and says he will not deal in determining the cause,
but lays down ye story. Yet has he left a loupe-hole to look into his
judgment. Thus he qualifieth it with soft words, videntur tame^) says he)
culpandi sacerdotes per omnia qui regnum suo gladio quem ipsi ex regum habent
gratia ferire conantur. Otto Frisin. Episc. lib. 7. in Prolog. Popes have
received their swords of Princes, which they turn on the^.
Yet (says he) the Priests algates seem culpable, which take in hand to
strike the kingdom with their sword, which of the grace of Princes they have
received. Thus Otto. And least he should seem to have launched to deep, by
and by he lays to a plaster: except parhaps (says he) they think to follow
David, which first by Gods might overthrew the Philistine, and after killed him
with his own sword. He dare not bide by it, least he able for it as the
Emperor did. Therefore he frames an excuse for them out of David's example,
who killed the Philistine with his own sword. So they are David's in this
construction, and Princes Philistines, which are killed with their own sword,
that they gave to them. But howsoever Otto seems to houer, and not to give
direct judgment in the Emperors cause, for drawing himself in suspicion and
danger also. And howsoever he gloseth this example for them, they are
Philistines in the right intendment, which contrary to Gods ordinances
strike David's and Princes elected of God, with the sword that of the grace of
Princes they have received. Otto points at the sore, but fears to lanche it
too deep, in saying: that Popes strike Princes with the sword which they have
received of them. The Primitive Church was stricken with the sword of Princes
for the faith of Christ: the Popes Church strikes Princes against the
ordinance of Christ with the sword which they have received of Princes. Pope
Paschal the second who cursed both the father and the son, Henry the fourth
first, Pope Pasc. cursed the father and the son.
and Henry the fifth after the death of his father, in the council of Rome
says: the Primitive Church flourished with the blood of martirs before God,
but not before men. After in the end kings, and Emperors, The council of
Rome.
and Roman Princes were converted. Qui matrem suam ecclesiam sicut boni filij
honestauerunt: Who to their mother the Church did honesty and honor in
aduauncing her: Abbas Vrsperg. in a^, 1112.
And bestowed lands, revenues, and royalties on her, as Constantine the
Emperor and other the faithful: and the Church began to flourish then so well
before God as ^^fore men. So far the words of Pope Pachal. He confesses
from whom they ha^^ their principalities, and royalties, and the sword, of
which Otto speaks, which they have turned upon Princes, of whom they first
received it. Further at the same time Pope Paschal said as Albertus Kranz and
the Abbat of Vrsperg reports his words much like in effect) Habeat (says
he) matter ecclesiae dona principum, Let mother Church (says he) have the
gifts of Princes, dispense, dispose, and give them to whom lawfully she may
and will. Thus far Pope Paschals words. It is apparent by their own confession
from whe^c they have revenues, royalties, principalities, and their worldly
countenance, and the sword mentioned of Otto before. If the donation of
Constan. (as they call it) were true (as Laurence Valla a noble Roman with long
discourse proves it to be forged) yet from the Roman Emperor they claim it.
Laurence Valla against the donation of Constant.
But Gregory the 7. (who cursed Henry the fourth before Paschal the second)
sets Pope Paschal to school, and fetteth his conuayance of Rome from
Christ, Grego. 7. Alb Kranz. Saxo. lib. 5. cap. 7.
as Alb. reports the verse which with a Crown he sent to Duke Rodolph, that
by rebellion against Henry ye ^^^th he should win the Crown and wear (...) A
fit Champion to give first onset on Emperors (as Otto his opinion is) to curse
them, and to strike the^ with the sword which they have received of the^: as an
unkind Impe persecuting and plaging the Empire out of which it sprang. Hederae
Anaplexicaulis. Mathe. in lib. 2. Dios. cap. 75.
Theophrast writes of Hedera ye Iui, that is called Amplexicaulis (Matheolus
citing it) because it grows about trees and girdeth them in: so ouergroweth
them in the end, that the trees decay, and it florisheth in the decays of the
trees, and as he says Necat and exiccat ablato alimento, it kills and
starueth (trees) by sucking away their nurrishment from them: So Popedom has
been to Thempire: it growed first out of Thempire, and after it has so
ouergrowen, girded in, and continually sucked the Empire, that it has starued
in manner Thempire, The Church of Rome mounted in the decaies of the Empire.
Otto. Fris. Epis. lib. 7. in prologo.
in respect of the former estate thereof, and florisheth it self in the decays
of it, and by the fall of the ancient Empire, and Emperors it is mounted
aloft. Bishop Otto says, by the decay of The^pire the Church is grown to a
great mountain, and began to grow in great state and authority. And before he
me^tioneth the opinions of some: Non desunt (says he) qui dicunt deum ad hoc
regnum immini volitisse vt ecclesia exaltetur: There lack not (says he) that
say, that therefore God would have the kingdom to de^ that the Church should be
exalted: thus O^to. They glory of the exaltation of their Church by the
decays of the Empire and ruins of Emperors, who^ by treasons, rebellions, and
outrage of subjects against their Princes, and of the son against his own
father, they have overthrown. How does Antichrist exalt himself, and lift up
his horns? (as Vrspergensis spoke of lifting up the horns of the Church of
Rome, Ab. Vrsperg. in Chro.
by plucking Henry the fourth and faithful Bishops to him out of their
graves) does he not exalt himself by the oppression of the lively word of God,
and of Princes and civil governments, and such horrible and monstrous outrages
in the world? But Otto lamenteth the great outrages of the world in this
exaltation of the Church of Rome. Rome it self was not free from them as the
mother of the mischeifes. Otto Frising Episc. lib. 6. cap. 35.
For as Otto says: Roma obsessa, capta, vastata, Papa super Papam etc. Rome it
self (says he) was besieged, taken, ransacked: Pope upon Pope, and king upon
king. etc. And because of the number of ye great and unnatural outrages of
those times of Hen. the 4. and Henry the 5. of which he writes, he says:
these our times (for of his own experience not only of report, he writes the
story of those times, as very near them himself: for he wrote the story of
Friderick the first, under whom he lived and dyed in great honor) which are
thought to be ye last times, drawing former sins to their end by the outrage
of sins threatening the end of the world. If this he spoke of his time about
4. Outrages of sins a signa of the world drawing to an end.
hundred years agone and more, what shall we say of the outrage of grievous
sins and practices, and unnatural and monstrous treasons in these latter
times, in which the Devil finding his time to be but short, (as S. John says
in the Revelations) strives to win the mastery of himself, Reave. 12.
and to exceed himself in contriuing and practicing bloody treasons and
outrages against the Church of God, and Princes set up of God, to be nurses
thereof? But our comfort is, 1. Cor. 1.
faithful is the Lord, as Paul says, by whom we are called into ye fellowship
of his son Jesus Christ. And thus he comfort the These. faithful is he which
called you, who will also do it. 1. These. 5.
And feeling experience of this comfort and courage in himself, to Tim. he
says: 2. Tim. 4.
ye Lord will deliver me from every evil work, and will preserve me to his
heavenly kingdom. The hairs of our head are told: our states ever are in his
sight, this providence preue^teth immine^t dangers. There is a monument or
memorial book written before him, as Malachi calls it Zepherziccharon,
Mala. 3.
for them that fear the Lord, and for the^ that think on his name. God give
us grace with hearty prayer to sue to him, that (...) memorial book may
continually be before him, for the long and prosperous preservation of
Elizabeth our Queen, against al immine^t dangers, conspiracies, and treasons
at home and abroad whatsoever.

The 6. The Judgment of God on Henry the 5. for his rebellion and treasons
against his father.
The sixte of the chief points of my discorse of this story is, the judgment
of God on Henry the 5. for his treason and rebellion against his father. Wherein
I will note the judgment of God on him touching the cause, touching the
cursing of Popes, touching the treason and rebellion of his own subjects,
touching his wars, touching his treasure, touching lack of fruit, and
touching his own body.

First note touching the cause.
First touching the cause wherefore his father was cursed of the popes. It was
objected to him of the Bishops that deposed him, ( Albert reporting it out of
the Chronicles of Germany,) for that he would not yield to Popes the ancient
right and prerogative of the Empire, from Charles the great 1. Emperor of the
West, continued by the space of 300. years, and under 63 Bishops of Rome,
Cuspinian witnessing it.) Touching the inuesting of Churches, which they called
Symony or ye Symonical heresy, and excomminged those that received such
inuesting of Princes by lay hand as they term it. Henry the 5. Henry the 5.
his son after he came to the Empire, maintained the same right and ancient
prerogative of the Empire against Popes, and was purposed never during life to
leave it, Ab. Vrsper. in chro. in an. 1122.
as Vrspergensis notes, least he should prejudice the honor of his kingdom.
While it was his fathers case, he took part with Popes against him: While his
father opposed himself against Popes in the defense of the ancient right and
prerogative of the Empire, he by practice of Popes, and upon pretense of
religion, opposed himself against his father, professed obedience to the Sea of
Rome, Ab. Vrsperg. in chro. in an. 1105.
condemned the heresy before said, betrayed his own father, and took arms
upon him, and rebelled in the Empire against him. But after by persecution he
had worn out his own father by the practice and backing of Popes and their
Clergy, and that he was Emperor himself, and it was now his own case, then
was the case clean altered. It was heresy no more: it was unlawful obedience
to the Sea of Rome, to yield up the ancient right and priueleges of the Empire.
Then could he send aunsweare by his soldiers to Pope Paschal, that such
demaundes were not to be granted, because it was written, ^^ue to Caesar those
things that are Caesar's and to God those that are Gods. Then the case
remaining on his conscience, was clean changed. Then he made not conscience to
lay violent hands upon Pope Paschal by his soldiers in the Church, and to
carry him prisoner into his camp, there to put him in sure guard, ^il by
solemn instrument he had yielded up ye claim, Alb. Kranz. Saxo. lib. 5. cap.
33.
as Albert writes it. But while it was his fathers case, it was heresy in
him, and religion in himself to rebel against his father, Otto Frisin. Episc.
lib. 7. cap. 8.
as Bishop Otto said: Rebellionem sub specie religionis, eo quod pater eius a
Romany Pont. exco^municatus esset molitur. Rebellion under color of religion
he attemteth, because his father was excomminged of the Roman Bishops. Religion
was the pretense, but ambition of sovereignty, appears to be practice as
the same Otto says. Otto Frising. Epis. lib. 7. cap. 9. The 2. note.
The Roman kingdom for ambition to reign, was divided not only ciuilly, but
parricidially. Thus Otto touching the cause wherefore he rebelled against his
own father.

The second note is, of the judgment of God touching the cursings of Popes on
him also.

Pope Pasc. the 2. which cursed the father, and tyced Henry the 5. the son to
treason and rebellion against him, and who to the counsel of men's (where his
father required audience) sent his Legates to renew and confirm his old curses
against him, after that Henry the 5. Ab. Vrsper. in chro. in an. 1106. Paschal.
2 Gelatius. 1. Calixtus 2.
was Emperor, for the same cause and claim, fell a cursing him also, and 3.
Popes in a row Paschal the 2. Gelasius the 2. and Calixtus the 2. did set on
him with cursing and banning for the same cause. They set their axes to the
tree to hew it down, as they did to Henry the 4. before, and others. Their
curses were their axes, with which they were wont to hew down Princes. But now
they are but blind blasts in the which they do but spend their breath. After
Paschal, Gelasius made a fresh assalt on him. He was driven to his fathers
practice. As he set up Wigbert Archbishop of Rauenna to be Pope for Gregory
the 7. Abbas Vrsperg. in chro. in an. 1118. Ab. Vrsperg. in an. 1119.
so the son set up one Burdinus a Spaniard against Gelatius the 2. who
withdrewe himself: after whose death Calix. the 2. prosecuted the cause and
curse: and Burdinus daily decayed, who^ they termed the Idol, because he was
set up of Hen. the 5. So as his father was cursed (...). Popes, so for ye same
cause he yt for Popes rebelled against his father, was cursed of 3. also.

The 3. The 3. note.
note is the judgment of God touching ye treason and rebellion of his own
subjects against him. Ab. Vrsp. in an. 1115.
In Saxony where rebellion began first against his father, there also began
treason and rebellion against him. And there they fought a battle with him,
the bishop of Halbarstat being cheef co^ductor of it. Abbas Vrspergensis. ^n.
an. 1116.
And as the Archbishop of Men's was ringleader of the rebellion against his
father, so likewise ye Archbishop of Men's stirs the coals and kindles
matters against him. At Colo^ they were ha^mering of a practice against him, and
when he saw ye fire of rebellion thus blown up against him, he struck his
sails and vealed his bo^net, and sent Ambassadors to Rome for reconciliation.
And being then cumbred with rebellion of the Archbishop of Men's and the Saxons,
in process he submitted himself to the bishop of Ostia for the Pope, and
resigned ye inuesting of churches by ring and rod, the which German kings so
long had exercised as Vrsp. says, ^b. Vrsp. in 2^. 1122.
and with he thought never to depart withal during his life: reserving this, that
the person chosen should by scepter receive his royalties of him. And Bishop
Otto says, Otto Frisin. Episc. li. 7. cap. 16.
that the Romans say this to have been granted to him but in fauo^ of peace
and not to his successors. Thus of the judgment of God touching treasons and
rebellion of his subjects against him

The 4. note
The 4. note is of Gods judgment touching his wars. God blessed him not in his
wars with good success (as Vrsp. does witness: Ab. Vrsperg. in an 1124.
) where as his father was lucky in wars: and al his life he was drawn in
wars. Io. Cusp. in vita Henr. 5.
Thus of Gods judgment showed in his wars.

The 5. The 5. note.
note is the judgment of God touching his treasure. As he ransacked his fathers
treasure in his rebellion at Spires, so he left his treasures he knew not to
whom (as Vrspergensis says: Ab. Vrsperg. in an. 1124.
) he heaped vpinfinit treasure he knew not for whom, as the scripture says,
dying without issue himself. Thus of Gods judgment touching his treasure.

The sixth note is, The 6. note.
of Gods judgment touching lack of fruit: God blessed him not with fruit,
because ^ee rebelled against the bowels out of which he came.

The seventh note is the judgment of god in his body. The.7. note.
He had a strange disease that hanged upon him called Dracunculi, Alb. Kranz.
Saxo. lib. 5. cap. 45.
of which he died at Traiect: and at his death he discovered it to the Queen
and those that were near to him. Thus of the judgment of God upon Henry the
5. who rebelled against his own father because he was cursed of Popes.

The last of the chief matters of the first part is, The last of the chief
matters.
the judgment of God upon the cursing Popes.
Gregory the 7. Greg. 7.
that first cursed Henry the 4. was chased out of Rome by him, fled to Salern,
and there miserably dyed. Bonifacius. 8
Boniface the eight, who cursed Philip king of France, surnamed the Fair, was
by a sudden rush of Sarra and others made on him at Anagnia, taken prisoner and
carried to Rome, where in sorrow he died. Hadrian 4.
After Pope Hadrian at Anagnia, Abbas Vrsperg in chr. De scismate sub^rto.
as Vrspergensis testifies, had denounced the excommunication and curse
against Frederik the first Emperor of yt name: after a few days he walked
forth to take the air, with such of his servants which were about him: and
when he came to a certain fountain he drank thereof, and by and by (as it is
said) a Flee chopped into his mouth, and stuck in his throat, and by no art of
Physic could be rid away, till he gave up the ghost. Thus Vrsperg tells
the cursing Pope his end. Our Savior said of the Pharisees, that they
swallowed Cammels and strained gnats. They Popes are the great Pharisees in the
church of God now. Mat. 23.
They draw Christian Princes through their throats, and as gulfs they gape to
swallow them up: but suddenly God stops up their pipes, as he sent a Flee
to choke up Pope Hadrian in the end. Vrbanus 3.
Vrbanus the third Pope of yt name being a Millainer, in hate of the Emperor
Frede. the first, as Vrsperg. witnesses, did excommunicate and curse him,
because he had plagued and brought under his country for their rebellion
against him. Therefore (as the Abbat says) they called him Turbanum, Abbas
Vrsperg. in chr. in an. 1185.
because he reared new turmoyles and troubles in christendom, in revenge of
his country, which for their sundry rebellions was ouerrun of the Emperor. And
ye Abbat of Vrsperg touching his end says, Sed Nutu dei percussus interijt:
But (says he) being stricken of Gods hand he died: the was a Pope but of one
year. Two of the Popes yt cursed Hen. the 4. Henry. 4. Hen. 5.
died before him. Two of ye popes yt cursed Hen. the 5. died likewise before
him. Three popes that cursed Frede. ye first Emperor of that name, Frederick 1.
departed this life before him, and the 4. likewise that was but entering into
matters against him. Two of the popes yt cursed Fred. the 2. Fred. 2.
Emperor of ye name, peaked out of the world before him. Two of the popes yt
cursed Ludo. Ludouick of Bauare.
The^peror surnamed of Bauare, left their curses and corses behind them before
him. And 2. of ye popes continuing their cursed vain against Q. Elizabeth our
gracious soueraign, Queen Elizabeth.
have bin so^moned out of this life before ye everlasting judge. We humbly
beseech ye tender mercy of God for their curses to power numbers of blessings
on her royal person and estate, and that long she may live and prosperously
reign over us, to the utter ruin of Popery, and to the perpetual
establishing of Gods word and true religion amongst us.

The 2. principal matter of this treatise.
Of the conceiving of treasons, rebellions, and^ such like disloyalties and
wickedness, by occasion of the words of David: He conceiueth sorrow.
Of co^ceiuing treasons, etc.
FIrst, of the conceiving of them, then what they conceive, sorrow, travail,
and wretchedness. By conceiving is signified the secret contriuing and
compassing their treasons, rebellions, and such like wickedness, because of
the secret working of them, as conceiving is the secret work of nature, when
the fruit is framed in the womb. Psalm. 139.
David says, that he was made secretly and fashioned in the earth: And of the
wicked he says, Psalm. 64.
they imagine wickedness and practice it, which they keep secret among
themselves, every one in the depth of his heart. Psalm. 36.
And in another place: He imagines mischief on his bed. And of this
imagining, meditating, and prepensing of such wicked factes, their facts are
called Zimma, or Mezimmoth, of the word Zaman, that signifies to meditate or
muse. And because out of the root of pride commonly they spring, and of
presumption are contrived, Psalm. 19.
David calls such wicked facts Zedim, superbias, pride and presumptions, and
prays to God to keep him from presumptions. Thy judgments (says he) are
far out of his sight: Psalm. 10
he says in his heart, tush God has forgotten it, he hydeth his face, and
he will never see it. But suddenly his hand is in their powle, as the word
that Paul uses fitly signifies, 1. Cor. 3.
(...) as some translate it carpit, he catches the wily in their wiliness.
This is the state of their mind in the conceiving and hammering of their
wicked plats, and framing them as in a forge to fashion them to their purpose.
Pli. hist. not. lib. 8. cap. 36.
Pliny writes that the Bear conceiueth and brings forth a lump, and after
Lambendo figurat with licking it continually, she fashioneth it like her self.
So they conceive their wicked plats and lumps at first, but after they lay them
out in particular practices and by degrees fashion them: As Esaias says: Esaias 59.
They hatch Cockatrices eggs, which brings forth their own bane, and their
works as Spiders webbes are contrived with cunning, and soon are swept away.
Though the hunting Spider which Dioscorides calls Lupus, Diosco. lib. 2. cap.
57.
cunningly spinneth his webs, and hangs the^ out like nets for his pray,
yet soon they are gone. So the wicked make cunning gins for other, and warp
wily webbes, but soon they are gone, Esaias 30.
and eftsoons they are caught in the^ their selves. God by the Prophet Esaias
cries, Woe to them that take counsel without him, and that take secret
advice but not of his spirit, and therefore add sin to sin. Thus God
proclaymeth woe to them ye contriue secret Councels to seek help in foreign
forces of Egypt, and trust in the shadow of Egypt, as the Prophet says, and
seek not to God for help. Therefore he says, the trust in the shadow of Egypt
shall be your shame. Such are Councels which are contrived without the spirit of
God, without which councels be they never so cunningly contrived and carried,
cannot prosper. The Prophet notes how secretly they convey them, and as some
expound the words, they cover them with a covering: because the word massecha,
some expounds a covering: for that their council for help of foreign
forces, they think shall be a covering and succor for them. Some note that the
word massecha, signifies both a covering and council, Massecha, a covering
and council.
because council is covered in secrecy, and thereof it is called. The
Septuagint express it by the word (...), which signifies pacts or contracts:
because in contriuing their councels for foreign forces, they make pacts and
contracts about them. This may be a fit glass for all that contriue such
wicked councels to look into. First the spirit of God is sequestered from them:
then they contriue them and cover them with great secrecy, and their councels
are as couerings, but that by divine providence suddenly they are discovered.
And for ^^e managing and practicing of them they make pacts and compacts,
conspiracies, and confederacies of foreign forces. They bend and bind
themselves in wicked vows, diuelishe oaths, and coniurations for the
atchieuing of them: as they that bound themselves with an oath that they
would not eat or drink till they had killed Paul. Act. 23. Nouatus.
Nouatus the ancient heretic, used to bind them by oath that received the
holy Communion of him, while they were receiving it, Eusebius. hist. eccle. in li.
6. cap. 42.
that they should never relinquishe and leave his part, and return to
Cornelius again: who being the Bishop of Rome then, and after a Martyr for the
faith of Christ, maintained the truth against Nouatus heresy and schism.
Priscillian his sect.
Priscillian the Spanishe heretic his sect that is called after his name, for
concealing their wicked secrets, have this devilish decree among them, August.
ad Quod vul. cap. 70.
as Augustine witnesses: Iura, periura, secretum prodere noli: Swear,
forswear, bewray not secrets. They that are conceived with wicked and
diuelishe things, would hyde and cover them deep, as if they would bury
them in the bowels of the earth, to hyde them from the Almighty God. When they
begin once to hyde themselves from God, as Adam did when he had sinned they
think that their wicked works are hid from God, becau^ they go about to
hyde and cover them f^^^ men. Wherefore do thou Jacob say, (as god by the
Prophet Esaias says) and Israel thus speak: Esaias. 40.
My way is hid from the Lord, and ^y judgment is passed away from my God.
Return (says God) by the Prophet Esaias from your departing or falling away,
Esaias 31.
into which so deeply you are fallen. In the conceiving of wicked thoughts,
and when they begin to draw deep in them, the more they decline from God by
them, the more the devil has power over their minds, councels, actions, and
the whole course of their life. Then he casts mistes before their eyes, and
shuts them up in their own Councels as in dungeons of darkness, that they
see no light of heaven, and glimce of the grace of God: as when Naball that is
the foolish or mad man says in his heart, there is no God. And in another
Psalm: My heart (says David) shows me the wickedness of the ungodly, Psalm.
14. Psalm. 36.
that there is no fear of God before his eyes. Thus of the conceiving of
treasons, rebellions, and such wickedness, how the spirit of God is sequestered
from them, and they cover them deep, and decline and fall away from God.

The 2. point of this part.
The second point of this part is, that in true judgment they do conceive
sorrow, travail, wretchedness. What they do conceive.
The vulgar text terms it sorrow: ye Septuagint (...), that is, labor or
trauail: other molestia^, trouble or disquietnesse: and the word amal that the
Prophet uses, signifies wretchedness, grief, sorrow, labor, weariness.
So the word imports the true nature and quality of such things, as in
themselves and in sequel and true judgment they are: for even in the
conceiving and contriuing of their wicked Councels and plats, they shall feel
gripings of sorrow, boiling of conscience, and gnawing of unquiet minds: when
they would rest, they shall find themselves in many strange moodes. As they
that in conceiving by reason of a sickness commonly called Pica, Pica.
have strange appetites and longings after things, because of the
distemperature of their stomachs: Trinka. de rati. curan. lib. 7. cap. 2.
so because the state of their minds wholly is distempered, such as are
conceived with such wicked intentions have monstrous appetites, longings,
aspirings, and find themselves in many strange moodes: and because of their
conceiving and contriuing their wicked Councels, such fruits ensue, they are
called by the name of trouble, trauail, sorrow, wretchedness, weariness. Thus
in true judgment they are, and the word that the Prophet uses gives us
notice of the true nature of the things. God endue us with true judgment to
shun such things. Because judgment is corrupt in them that conceive such
things, therefore they seem not so to them: for the Devil sings sweet
songues and tunes unto them, till he has made them sure in his snares. The
Fowler has pleasant calls to bring the foul to his Nets. Hiena the cruel
beast, has a familiar call to call out shepheardes by name, Pli. hist. not.
lib. 8. cap. 30.
as Pliny tells, and when they come, she falls upon them to devour them:
So the Devil has a familiar call in the very bosoms of the wicked, by evil
suggestions and councels, to bring them into his ginnes to destroy them: he
shows them sweet hanging hopes and lyngering expectations in one hand, and
in the other he brings snares, halters, shame and pain. Therefore if with
the eye of true judgment we look into such things, they are rightly (as the
holy Ghost calls them) wretchedness, toil, travail, trouble, sorrow,
unquietness, as the nature of the word does induce. That they seem pleasant
and plausible to those that are conceived with them, it is longing of the
suggestions of Satan, which are like sweet songs to them, but they turn to
sorrow. He transfigureth himself into an angel of light, 2. Cor. 11.
as S. Paul says: And in the humors of the wicked he transfigureth himelfe
as he lists: and by secret suggestions turns himself into such shapes as
he will. But in right judgment the conceiving of such wicked intentions and
councels in them, is like the running of soranses, and spreading of Malanders
that cannot stay, Am. Pareu^. li. 12. ca. 10.
which they call (...): and because they grow into ill qualities and habit,
they are called Cacoethe that will not yield to cure: and these are like to
fretting cankers and eating Gangrenes, 2. Tim. 2.
to which S. Paul compares the speech of Himenaeus and Philetus. There is no
remedy for eating cankers and resolute treasons. Psalm. 55.
David says of the churles of Coila that would have betrayed him for the good
he had done to them: there is no change with them, or they will not turn and
fear God. Can the Ethiopian or man of India (as Hieremie says of the Jews
hardened in their wickedness) change his hew, Hier. 13.
or can the Leopard change his spots? No more can they leave to do evil that
are taught, trained and given up unto it. The holy ghost give them grace to be
reclaimed from such wicked ways, and direct them with the light of true
judgment to fly and shun them. Thus what in true judgment they do
conceive, sorrow, trouble, travail, toil, wretchedness, and weariness.

The 3. principal part.
Of the travailing with treasons, rebellions and such like disloyalties, upon
the words of David: He trauaileth with iniquity or mischief.
Of traueling with treasons
WIth a general word is noted and employed all wickedness. The Septuagint
translate the word auen (...), unrighteousness: some expound it a vain thing:
others mischiefs. Such is the travail of the wicked, when they employ
themselves to bring forth their wicked intentions and purposes. In this
treatise I will note first what travailing is, The order of this part.
then who sets them on to travail, after how they watch for oportunities
and occasions.

The first of this part.
First, what travailing is: It is a bending of all their wits, abilities, and
forces to the uttermost, to put in execution their wicked intentions, What
travailing is.
and to bring them to pass. As we see when a woman is in travail, she does
all that possibly she can to be delivered of her fruit. And here we may
note that the wicked when they are conceived and resolute in their wicked
plats, employ their whole minds and maine mights to the uttermost, to put the^
in execution, and to accomplish them. After that Adonias had conceived in his
aspyring mind to sit on David's seat after him, Adonias. 1. Reg. 1.
he gate him horses and chariots, horsemen and fifty men to run before him,
with other confederates and men of arms, and he thought by such means to carry
it, and to be his own car^er, but he missed the garland: Absalon.
for gods providence had appointed it to Solomon. Absalon ye Traitor to king
David his own father, 2. Sam. 15.
was long in travail with his treasons: he wood the people with fawning
flattery, as the scripture sets him forth. At last he sounded his trumpet,
that Absolon was king, and David was down: but Gods providence suddenly
turned Absolon down, and David continued in the royal seat. Sheba the rebel,
Sheba.
had gotten a walled town over his head: as soon as Ioab with the kings host
came thither, his head was trilled over the wall, by the counsel of a wise
woman ye persuaded them. Dathan, Dathan. Coraah, and Abiram.
Coraah, and Abiram made a great mutenie against Moses, and began to make
themselves strong against him: but while they were in travail of their treason
and rebellion against him, suddenly the earth opened, and swallowed them up
quick. Judas had conference with the Pharisees and Priests for the betraying of
his master to the^: Judas.
Mat. 26.
after he travailed with his treasons and came with forces hy night, with
lanterns and weapons, but as soon as they came they reeled back and fell on
ground. Ioh. 18.
Before his hand was in the dish with our Savior at his last supper, Luke 22
and after he had received the sop at our Savior his hand (as S. John says)
ye devil entered into him, Ioh. 13.
and by and by he was in travail with the treason^ which he had conceived
before. Thus what travailing is.

The 2. of this part. Who sets them on travail.
The 2. point of this part is, who sets the^ on to travail. After the Devil
is entered them as he did into Judas, and that they are resolute in their
treasons and wicked intents, he mightily and effectually works in children
of disobedience, as the word (...) imports, which S. Paul uses. Ephe. 2.
Then they fall in travail with them: and if they stay, he will set spurs to
the^ by secret suggestio^s, affections, and passions: For of mad moodes and
raging passions, the wicked in the scriptures are called Reshaim: and because
they are unstable and cannot stay in one state, as Pagnin voucheth out of R.
Abraham. The prophet Esai co^pareth the^ to troublesome Seas yt cannot rest.
Esaias 57.
The devil rides in their humors as horses, and he never leueth spurring of
the^ with inward suggestions and outward occasions and occurrents, till he set
the^ in travail. They must needs go (as commonly they say) who^ the Devil
drives: and he drives them on in their own humors and passions like horses
and mules without understanding, Psalm. 31.
as David says, till he bring them to their travail to work his will. When
the good spirit was departed from king Saul, 1. Sam. 16.
the evil spirit did towse and trouble him (as the scripture says:) Turbauit
cum spiritus malus a domino: the evil spirit sent of God did trouble him: so
the evil spirit will be continually troubling and tesing of them on to their
trauail. Thus of the second note, who sets them on to travail.

The 3. note is, The third of this part. How they watch for oportunities. 1.
Sam. 18.
how after they begin to trauail, they watch for oportunities and occasions.
After they fall in travail, they bend themselves to take all occasions and
oportunities, as king Saul did against David: he devised to have him slain in
the wars of the Philistines, and at home he sought to dispatch him. When David
played before him as he sat in his house, the evil spirit being on him, 1.
Sam. 19.
suddenly in a rage he would have nailed him to the wall with his spear, if
David had not shunned the blow and fled from him. He sent murderers to his
house to kill him in his bed, but by Michol his wives help, he escaped out at
a window. He chased him from wilderness to wilderness, he hu^ted him from covert
to covert as a bird: as some translate ye beginning of David's Psalm: Psalm. 11.
In the Lord put I my trust, how say ye then to my soul yt she should fly as
a bird unto the hill. For lo, the ungodly bend their bow, and make ready their
arrows wtin their quiuers, yt they may privily shoot at them which are true of
heart. Thus how his enemies bended their forces to do him mischief, 2. Sam. 31.
and watch all occasions. And in another Psalm he says, Psalm. 56.
They hold altogether, and keep themselves close, and mark my steps, while
they lay wayt for my soul. And likewise in another Psalm, Psalm. 10.
He sits lurking in theeuish corners of the streets, and privily in his
lurking dens does he murder the innocent: his eyes are set against the pore,
for he lies waiting secretly (even as a Lion lurketh in his den) that he
may ravish the poor. He rauisheth the poor when he gets him into his net.
Thus far his words. After Saul fell in travail with mischief against him,
he sought for occasions to take him at a sudden lift, and to rid him: and he
never gave him up, 1. Sam. 31.
till in the wars against the Philistines (to whose swords he thought to
have betraide him) he was himself wounded: and after being distressed with
diuelishe despair, furiously he fell on his own sword and killed himself.
So his wicked travail turned on himself. It is a notable example to show,
how after the wicked fall in travail with their devilish intents, they are
ready to take all occasions and occurrentes, within, without, in bed,
abroad, to accomplish their prepensed plats. Cicero.
When Catilin and the Conspiratours against the state of Rome (while it was as
yet heathen) trauayled with their treasons and conspiracies, Cicero being then
one of their consuls and great governors of the state, complained, that nether
his house nor his bed, could be free and safe from their traiterous
attemptes, and that they would have given him a bloody breakefast in his bed
but yt they were prevented by a watch and guard provided against them. Isboseth.
2. Sam. 4.
Isboseth the son af Saul as he rested on his bed in the heat of the day, Duke
Hum. Fabian the 2 part in anno 1447. Cron. Fruct. temp. part 7. Edward 2.
was slain of Rechab and Baanah. Humfrey Duke of Gloucester and uncle to Henry
the 6. and in his minority protector of the land, was found suddenly and
strangly dead on his bed. Edward the 2. surnamed of Carnaruen (because he was
there borne) as he was fast a sleep in his bed in the Castle of Corf. (as
the Chronicle called Fructus Tenpots notes,) but in the Castle of Barkley as
Fabian says (where he was prisoner) suddenly had a great Table cast on him,
therewith to press him to death: Fabian in an 1326. Valentinian the Emp.
and by traiterous and cruel means was made away. Valentinian the Emperor was
slain by the practice of Eugenius, and treason of those that were of his
Chamber. Frederick the second Emperor of that name, as he lay on his sick bed,
was stifled with a pillow (as Albert by report of some notes it) of Manfrid
his base son. Peter of Besinguen K. of Cyprus a victorious Prince upon Turks
and Souldans (as John Froysarth writes) who took Alexandria in Egypt, Sir
John Froysart the 3. and 4. book the 40. chap.
Triple in Surry, Laias in Armeni, Scitalie in Turkey, with diverse others, was
traitorously killed in his bed of his own brother called Iaquet, by practice
of the infidels, who so greatly feared his forces. Albert the Emp. Alber.
Kra^z. Wan. lib. 7. cap. 32.
Albert the Emperor, as he passed by the bank of the river of Rein slenderly
accompanied, was suddenly set on, and slain of his near kinsman John his own
brothers son. Aurelius the Emperor as he was on his way, Alber. Kranz Saxo.
Lib. 3. cap. 3. To. Gag. in an. Re. Fran. lib. 2.
was of his own train suddenly slain (as Albertus writes.) Chilperich king of
Soisons in France as he came from hunting slenderly garnished with retinue,
was of one Lau^dri. a noble man of his court, and by counsel of Queen
Fredegund his wife at a soddaine slain, as he drew homeward near his Palace,
Fabian the 5 part cap. 117
as Fabian tells, but within the court of his Palace according to the French
Chronicle, and as he light from his horse. Edward the son of Edgar king of
England, after he had lost his retinue in hunting, withdrew him self to the
Castle of Corf where Queen Elfride or Estrild his stepmother with Egelredus
her young son kept house: Fab. in chro. 6. par ca. 117
where being courteously invited to lodge that night, (...) courteouse manner
excusing himself, as he sat on his horse drinking, and the cup at his mouth,
of a traitor and murderer suddenly set on by his stepmother, he was stabbed:
and when he felt himself stricken, suddenly he set spurs to his horse, King
Edward surnamed the martyr. Fabian. in Tab. 6. part.
and by ryding and much bleeding fainting fell, and his foot hanging fast in
the stirrup, was trailed of his horse to a place named Corinsgate, where he
was found dead. This Edward was surnamed the martyr: and being induced of a
curteouse nature to visit his friends (as he supposed) and not suspecting any
treason, fell into the mouth of his enemies. Charles of France.
Charles king of France surnamed the simple, returning out of civil war
with victory on Duke Robert that rebelled against him, To. Gag. in an. Re.
Fran. lib. 6.
was by Hebert Earl of Vermendois in the way of gratulation for his victory,
humbly invited to lodge at his Castle of Peron. The king of simplicity not
forecasting treason, and ouercom with courtesy humbly offered, yielded to his
request: and after he was lodged there, and his strength gone from him, then
Hebert set on by his wife took the king prisoner, Earl Hebert his treason.
Fabian in Chro. 5. part cap. 89.
and made him away, that he never came abroad to reign any more. Hengist the
Saxon, invited Vortigern king of Britain with his Lords to his Castle called
Thongcastle, whither the king with his Lords came, Hengist. Fabian in Chro. 5.
part cap. 89.
(...) the midst of the feast and mirth, a feigned fray began: the Saxons fell
on the Lords, and slew them all, and took the king prisoner. A dangerous
thing it is for Princes to adventure their royal persons with them of whom
they have not undoubted assurance, and in places where they are not guarded with
their strengthes. The same Hengist fearing the great host of Britons appointed
in readiness, made means for a parley and treaty of peace: a day was prefixed
on a May day on the plain of Salisburie, and so many Britons for so many
Saxons should meet. Thither king Vortigerne came with a certain of Britons in
peaceable manner. In midest of the parley, Hengist gave the watch Nempnith your
sexes (as Fabian tells it) that every one should draw his long knife out of
his hose, and the Britons were slain like sheep among Woolues; as Fabian
says. The Devil never more raueneth, then under the visard of friendly
parles, meetings, entertainments, courtesies, and such like devices, which he
uses as occasions of advantages and opportunities to put placs of high treason
in practice. Traiterous and hypocritical hearts are like a deep hell on earth:
Queen Ethelburg.
always gaping after opportunities to devour the^ whose destruction they
seek. Fab. in chro. 6. par ca. 157 To. Gag. in an. Reg. Fra^ lib. 2.
Brightricus the first (...) of the west Saxons, was by Ethelburge (...) wif^e
after sundry attempts of treason for making him away, poisoned with many other
of his meany. Fredegund Queen of Soisous in France before mentioned, hired
and sent two murderers into the camp of Sigisbert king of the Country of
Mees or Austracie, (as Fabian terms it) her brother in law, who awayted for
opportunity and advantage, and they slew the king. Queen Fredigond.
The same Fredigond that by treason procured the death of king Chilperick her
own husband, and of king Sigisbert her husbands brother, inflamed with envy
against Queen Brunchild, because she was set up in more favor and honor then
she (as Gagwin reports it) was conceived with new treasons against her, Ra.
Gag. in an. reg. Fran. lib. 2.
and fell in travel for the execution of them in this sort: There was an old
executioner of murders called Holderick, Holderick the traitor.
a fit instrument to undertake her treason, him she sent into Queen
Brunchilds Court: he according to the method of maisteries in the Devils art of
practicing treasons, first began with flattering and fawning about in the
court, as the Scorpion does fawn with his tail ere he strike: but there he
met with as cunning in that art as himself. By his great flattery he grew in
suspicion: and being committed (...) ^^ture, confessed ye whole plat. One might
(...) that Queen Fred. in plats of treasons (...) peer: Queen Brunchild.
but Queen Bru^child king Sigisberts wife the aforsaid far surpasses her, and
has won ye prize of such plats and practices from her. She was charged at her
death to have been ye death of ten Princes. Continually she was traueyling with
some plat or other: as soon as she was delivered, she conceived and fell in
taruaile again about the execution and practice of her plats. Notwithstanding
outwardly, who was counted so devout as Brunchild, To. Gag. in an. Reg. Fran
lib. 2.
the foundresse of many Colleges of Priests and Monks in Burgu^dy, as father
Gag. writes of her? Thus the Devil under mists of hypocrisy, works
maisteries of murders and treasons against Princes, and under pretense of
religion commits such outrages in the world. And in the taruaile and
execution of their plattes, the chief point of practice of masteries in the
Devils art concerning the execution of such things, is fawning flaterie for
life and double devilish diligence, servile at all assaies to creep into
credit and favor, and to win opportunity of the place for execution. Gagwin
the general of his order in France, says, that Holderick mentioned before,
Holderick the traitors boldness.
was Audax, and assuetus caedibus, bold and draween through many murders. He
kept his course aforesaid for the execution of his plat upon Queen Brunchild:
but that his cunning was soon incountered there. Cum multis iam diebus (says
Gagwin) consuetudinem familiaritatis apud Reginam Brunchildem assentatiunculis
blanditijsque comparasset When (says he) by the space of many days by
flattery and fawning he grew to be familiar and conversant with Queen
Brunchild: His fawning flateries and familiarities
at last he began to be blasted with suspicion, when in flattering and
currying he went beyond himself, and began to be too broad in it (as Gagwin
says: Blandior indies visus in suspicionem venit. This is the monstrous method
of the Devils art, and chiefly in these latter days. The serpent. The Aspe.
The Serpent will craule into the very bosom, the Aspe will be familier and play.
Plutarch writes, and Volateran reports it out of him, that in Egypt they
have familiar Aspes at their Tables, Rapha. Vela. lib. 25. Plin. na^. Hist.
lib. 10. cap. 74.
and they bring them up with their children to eat with them, and to play with
them. Pliny reports that Plut. tells of a familiar Aspe, bred and fed at a
table in Egypt, which had young ones in ye house, and that of one of the young,
the good ma^s son of the house was killed. It is not good having and trusting a
familiar serpent. Though his poison seem qualified, it is always ready and at
sometimes more rank. The Scorpion has a fawning tail, but a deadly sting:
and his tail always waueth waiting all occurrentes and occasions, as Pliny
says, Plin. not. Hist. lib. 11. cap. 25.
Semper cauda in ictu est, ne quando desit occasioni. So the wicked though they
fawn never so finely, and gloss never so pleasantly, yet continually they wait
for their occasions and opportunities. The murderers that were sent into king
Sigisbert his camp of Queen Fredigond to kill him (as Gagwin says) In
familiam regis Sigisberti se insinua^t, To. Gag. in an. Re. Fran. lib. 2.
did wind themselves into the family of king Sigisbert. This is ye first point
of their practice in the Devils art, by glosing hypocrysie, first to come in
place, and after to wait for opportunity. Sobna the hollow hypocrite to king
Hezechiah and the state, Esaias. 22.
was gotten under the wings of the godly king. 2. Sam. 15.
Achitophel the traitor was near and a great person about king David. 1. Reg. 1
Absalon the rebel and traitor, came out of of his own bowels. Adonias his
son ouerreached by aspiring to that was not allotted to him. If the Arrian
heretics had not wound themselves into the Court of Constantine the Emperor
surnamed the great, Arrians got into courts of Emperors and ^e^r^ about them.
and into the Court of Constantius his son the Emperor after him, and in to
the Court of Valentinian the Emperor and Iustina the Empress and wife to
Valentinian ye Emp. the elder of that name, and into the court of Valentinian
the younger the son of Iustina aforesaid and Emperor, they could never have
spread their heresies over so many Countries, and so oppress with persecutions
the Church of God. Ruff. Hist. Eccle. lib. 1. cap. 11.
An Arrian Priest that was a privy practiser of the Arrians heresy, got
himself in house and near about Constantia sister to Constantine the
Emperor, as Ruffius witnesses: Vbi multa familiaritas (says, he) copiam
tribuit, paulatim sermonem caepit inspergere, inuidiam dicens Arrio generatam:
When (says he) great familiarity offered him opportunity, he began first by
little and little, to insperg and sprincle her with words of his humor, saying,
that envy was procured against Arrius. Thus far Ruffinus. We see ye first
point in ye execution of devilish plats so well against the state of religion,
as against the royal persons and estates of Princes, is to wind themselves
into familiarity, favor, and credit, and after to attend their purpose. The
serpent will first be cruiling and when there is any hole open, he will wind
himself in. If those cunning cumpassers should go plain to work as ramping
Lions and ravening Woolues on their pray, by and by they would be betrayed.
Therefore they do it by circumstance and by crooks. Socrat. Eccle. Hist. lib.
1. cap. 25.
This Arrian Priest Chaplain to Constantia aforsaid, was grown into such
credit with her, that at her death with special reco^mendation of him, she put
him to Constantine her brother the Emperor. Then the sly Serpent began to
craule into Constantine his bosom also, and was entered so deep into favor
and credit with him, that he was the man with Constantine the Emperor in such
singular credit and trust, that at his death he put him in trust to convey his
testament sealed to Constantius his son and Emperor after him. Socrat. Eccle.
Hist. lib. 1. cap. 39.
And by that occasion so he won the heart of Constantius, and so wound himself
(having opportunity and access at will) into his heart and humors, Ruff. Hist.
Eccle. lib. 1. cap. 11.
that as Ruffinus says, he suffered himself to be ruled of him whose desire
was to rule al. The^ he so plied him after he had gotten the pan by the stele,
yt he poisoned him with his heresy and many yt were near about him. So the
Arrian Priest got more by his creeping in the Court and by insperging his
humors and heresy there by reason of opportunity and advantages of favor and
access, the^ the whole brood of blasphemous Arrians abroad. Eusebius. Socra.
Hist. eccle. lib. 1. cap. 37.
Eusebius. Bishop of Nicomedia a practiser of yt side, had such countenance from
ye court, that he minaced Alexander Archbishop of Constantinople to procure
him to be deposed, unless he would admit Arrians (whose name ye horrible
heresy does keep) into the Church, Communion, and fellowship of ye faithful.
Eudoxius. Theod. Hist. eccle. lib. 2. cap. 26.
Eudoxius the Bishop of Germanicia an Arrian, supported by those that were
near to Constantius the Emperor, intruded himself to be Bishop of Antioch,
with mislike of the Emperor at first, but he salued it by those that were of his
side about him: and after tyrannously he thrust himself in to be Archbishop of
Constantinople with coffeehouse of the Emperor. But what dared he not by the
support of those that were his accomplices in the Court? Auxentius the Arrian got
to be Bishop of Mil. in the west, Theod. Hist. eccle. lib. 2. cap. 27.
by whose practice ye princes of ye Goths were infected with the Arrian heresy.
And never could the Arrians have so hoised up their sails, and so spread
themselves in the world, but for practice of those that crept into the Court,
Sozo. Eccle. Hist. lib. 6. cap. 23.
and credit, and favor of Princes, who by reason of their opportunities and
importunities and continual access, were in their eyes and ears to procure
assistance and countenance to their sect, and to disgrace and discou^tenance
the zealous professors of true faith. So the travail of ye wicked when once
they are resolute in errors and plats of treason, is first for ye place and
opportunity, after for their purpose: and if they may win the fouour of ye
place, never Roscius could more cu^ningly play his parts on the Roman Stage
where he did excel, the^ they can manage their plats of treasons if they may
have their course, but that suddenly they are checked from heaven. They can bow
to the bent, yield to humors as wax, and frame themselves to all advantages.
That the Chamelion has in nature by chau^ging of so many colors, Volat. li.
25.
the wicked have in continual practice by changing all colors of hypocrisy
and infidelity. The ravening fish Polipus changes himself to the color of
the ground where he lies for his pray. Plin. lib. 9. cap. 19. Ovid met. lib.
11.
Morpheus mutabilities and chau^ges, as Poets describe him, may signify the
monstrous mutabilities, chaunges, and vnstabilities of the minds of the
wicked, after once they are conceived and fall in travail with their wicked
plattes. Plin lib. 8. cap. 17.
Panthers and Pardes have spots by nature without in their bodies, but they
have spots of hypocrisy, infidelity, and treason in their souls. Serpents
have many wreathes, Mathe. de L^b. in obser.
hypocrites and traitors have many wyles. Conuoluulus according to the name,
windeth and binds it self about plants, and plucketh them down. The shuts
and springs of the herb called Impia Plinii, Plin. lib. 24. cap. 19. Math. in
lib. 4. Dios. cap. 572.
does ouergrow the principal stump or stock. Cassutha has no roots of it
self, but lives on other herbs and lodeth them. When the winding Beathwine
is rid from plants, they prosper the better. They are daungerouse shoutes
that ouergrowe the stock that norisheth them: That lack roots of fidelity
themselves, will live of them and lade them whom they would bring down. Is is
good cheifely for Princes and persons of high estate, to look into their
households, and to those that are near to them and about them, to rid from them
wicked and unfaithful imphes dangerous to their persons and estate, which
would like the shuts of the herb Impia ouerclime them, or like Cassutha
ouerlay and ouerlade them, lacking the roots of true fidelity in them. The
example of David in looking into his household.
The example of the Prophetical king David, may be a mirror principally for
all Princes and estates of honor and high callings, in the wisdom of God out
of his word, to look unto their estates and households, and those that are
near them, and use to be about the^, and into their governments: as he lays
down example in himself his own estate, Psalm. ^01.
household, government. First he looks into his own estate touching God, by
whose wisdom unless he be directed, all will run on wheels headlong. He
prays therefore to God for understanding: let me have (says he)
understanding in the way of godliness: when will thou come unto me. I will walk
in my house with a perfect heart: I will take no wicked thing in hand. I hate the
sin of unfaithfulness, there shall no such cleeue unto me: A froward heart shall
depart from me. Thus how he looks into his own estate, and prays for the
conduicte of understanding from God to lead a godly life, and makes profession
of the uprightness and soundness of his heart, and that he will cleanse his
heart from unfaithfulness and frowardness. Then he shows from whom he will
withdraw his heart and countenance, and whom by his princely power he will
suppress. Who so privily (says he) slaundereth his neighbor him will I
destroy: who has also a proud look and high stomach, I will not suffer him.
And after he shows who^ he will have in his household. There shall none that
work deceit or with a deceitful hand or deceitful person (as some expound the
sense) dwell in my house. The word Remiia is expounded of some by the
substantive, of some by ye adjective. Such are they that contriue crafts,
warpe wiles, and work by sleight conuaiance and legerdemaine, to beguile and
deceive others. He ioineth an other fit mate unto him: he ye tells lies
(says he) shall not tarry in my sight. He detesteth such as pernicious persons
in court ye are deceitful and liers, (...). not. Hist. lib. 9. c^^. 36.
who with lies and slanders pray on others with their evil tongs. As Purpura the
fish with his sharp tongue perseth the shelles of other fishes and so prays on
them, so there is no armor of proof of sufficient defense against the lying
tongues of such which perse through al defenses of truth. They hoise up ye
sails of their tongues and say (as the Prophet David describes them) with our
tongues (say they) shall we prevail, Psalm. 12.
we are they yt ought to speak, who is Lord over us. And as Purpura the fish
aforesaid has in his mouth the humor which is the mother of the right orient
purple color, so though they pearse with their tongues as Purpura does, yet
they carry in their mouths such orient colors, with which they so paint out
their lies, Plin. lib. 9. cap. 36. Carneades. Plin. not. lib. 7. cap. 30.
as though there were none other truth. Cato said it was hard to find truth
when Carneades spoke, because he painted out his own purposes and left truth
dim, hardly to be discerned. So hard it is to discern truth, when they speak
whose tongues are embrued with lies. Of such liers the Prophet says, they
shall not tarry in his sight. After he has showed whom he will abandon from his
court, he shows likewise who^ he will place and plant: mine eyes (says he)
ar to ye faithful of ye earth yt they may dwell with me. Who so leads a godly
life he shall be my servant. Thus by the direction of Gods spirit, he makes
choice of his household who^ he will have nere and about him. Valerian the
Emperor his Court, ^useb. eccle. hist. lib 7. cap. 10.
of Eusebius is commended as a Church of God, because of the godly and
faithful that were in it, till after he relapsed to be an open enemy and
persecutor of the Church of God. Epist. ad Phile. Romans 16. 1. Cor. 16. Joshua.
24.
The houses of Philemon, Priscilla, and Aquila, are commended of S. Paul as
little Churches. Joshua the noble Prince, and the chosen captain of Gods people
after the death of Moses, setting himself and his household as example to the
people, said: I and my house will serve the Lord. And the people provoked and
encouraged by his example, said: we will serve the Lord also. Abraham, Isaac,
Jacob, Joseph, and the Patriarchs, had the like godly care of their
housholdes, to have the godly and faithful dwelling with them. God blesses
Countries and kingdoms, for the godly and faithful yt are found in the^. Egypt
had the great blessing of God under king Pharao by the government of Joseph,
Joseph. Genesis 41. Jacob. Genesis 46. Daniel 1.
and for the receite of Jacob the Patriarche and the faithful people of God.
God blessed Darius and his kingdom in the chief government of Daniel, and for
the faithful servants of God. Dan. 6. Nehemiah. ^. ^^d. 2.
Nehemiah as he waited at the cup of Athaxerxes was heavy of heart and cheer
for the breaches and ruins of Jerusalem the City of God: and God gave him
favor thereuppon in his suite to his Prince for the people of God: and God
blessed king Athaxerxes for him, and the favorable support of his people.
Eliakim
Eliakim in the court of the godly king Hezekiah, is called a father of such
as dwell in Jerusalem, Esaias. 22.
and in the house of Judah. Such are the blessings of God in Courts of Princes
and gouernmentes of Countries. God bless the Prince, Court and Country, with
such godly and faithful Eliakims, Daniels, Nehemies, Joseph's: and bless our
Prince with long and prosperous reign over us, to the singular comfort of his
Church, and our country. We have heard how when the wicked fall to travail
with plats of treasons, rebellions, and such like, they bend themselves to take
all occasions, and press into Courts, and wind themselves into favor, and
creep into credit to have oportunities and adua^tages for their devilish
intents: and how Princes following the example of David in the wisdom of God.
should make their resolutions for choice of faithful and godly persons to
be near unto them and about them, and whom they should avoid out of their
households. Thus much of the third principal matter, what travailing is, who
sets and whetteth them continually on to travail, and how they bend
themselves to take all occasions and advantages for the execution of their
wicked plats.

The 4. principal matter
After travailing, what fruit such wicked persons bring forth.
HE shall bring forth, says David, a lie or vain thing: Sheker.
the word Sheker signifies a lie: Some expound it, Rem inanem: A vain
matter, in respect of the sequel and effect which will deceive them. The
Septuagint translate it (...), (...).
in respect of the tra^sgression, unrighteousness, excess, and outrage
against Gods law and man's law, of which sense the Septuagint give occasiion:
And in respect of the sequel and success not aunswering their plats, but
coming to an afterdeale, and disappointing them, they are called lies and
vain matters, which sense does grow out of the Hebrewe word.

The 1. sense out of the Septuagint.
Touching the first sense, if the Devil himself should travail to bring
fruit on earth, would he not bring ye like iniquity, impiety, transgressions
and outrages against the law of God and man? Where such wicked are, there is as
it were an hell on earth, Verres hell on earth.
as Cicero said of Verres regiment in Scicilie: that whether he came because of
the troops of wicked that hanged about him, thither came another hell on
earth. God bless us from them that bring such troops, and from all troops of
traitors, rebels, conspirators, and confedrates against the Prince, estate,
gods church, and our country.

The second sense springing out of the root of the Hebrew word, The 2. sense
out of the Hebrew word
and the aptest in that respect and to which I refer my tract or treatise
touching it, is, they shall bring forth a lie and a vain matter that will not
take effect: but they shall stick in the gappe and perish in the breach that
themselves have made. Though king Saul had never such deadly food against
David, King Saul.
and like a wood Lion or wild Panther ran into the woods and wilderness to
kill him, yet will it not come to effect: but he had his travail for his
pain, and wretchedness was his reward. In the title of this Psalm, in ye word
Chush the son of Iemini, Psalm. 7.
the Hebrews note Saul to be signified, who is called Chush, Chush.
as much to say as an Ethiopian or a man of Ind, Ob immutabilem animi
malitiam contra Dauide^: as Monster expounds it: Monster in scho. in ti.
Psalm. 7.
because of his immutable or unremovable malice against David. As the man of
Ind cannot change his natural blacknes of hew, so he and such other like to
him are called by ye name because of the blacknes of their malice within, which
never can be washed out, unless god power out ye clean waters of his spirit (as
Ezechiel calls the^) to wash and whiten them. Ezech. 36.
But though Saul's malice was never so rooted in nature, and that he put
himself in arms, and made vprores against David, 2. Sam. 23.
and threatened to search him out through all the thousands of Judah, yet for
all his travail he brought forth but a lie and a vain thing. For David, and
faithful and godly Princes, under the protection of God, are guarded and as it
were mured and walled in the high and heavenly castle of Gods providence, where
the Councels and traiterous travels of the wicked cannot reach them. Car
therefore the Saulites and Chushites, The Saulits and Chushits.
and men of Ind of England (for they are dege^dred out of the true kind of
their own Country that are such) pluck the crown from Q. Elizabeth her
head, Psalm. 21.
which God has set on it? As David said of himself, thou shall set a crown of
pure gold upon his head. Psalm. 15.
Can they undertake the wonderful works of God, to fly on the wings of the
wind, Psalm. 18.
as David says of God, or move mountains out of their places? Then let them
undertake to pluck Princes out of their thrones also. For it is God as Job
says, Job. 12.
that loses the collar of kings, and leads away Princes as a pray, and
overthrows the mighty. As easy it is to move mountains out of their
places, as to remove the estates of Princes maintained by the providence of
God. Psalm. 30.
David says, Thou have made my mountain so strong, he means his estate
maintained and established by the providence of God. He questioneth with the
high and traggie hills in an other Psalm. wherefore they so skippe and leap
against Gods mountain: Psalm. 68. Craggie hills against Gods mountains.
so calls he the state of Gods Church stayed and established in God. So
likewise the stayed estate of godly Princes is called, as ye Prophet calls
his own Princely estate established of God, which of craggie hills though
they vance themselves never so high, Traitors like blind moles are taken in
their own trenches.
cannot be removed. As blind moles cast hills and make trenches under earth
and are taken themselves in them, so they that travail with treasons, are like
the blind moles which walk in trenches under the earth, and yet at certain
ventes and breaches of their own making, they are descried and taken. Though
in their treasons they moile and mine as in work under ground, because of the
priuitie of them (as they conceive of them,) yet as they work trenches under
ground, so they cast hills a-aboue, and in the veutes and breaches of their
own works they are bewrayed, and in sted of fruit, they bring forth a lie or
a vain thing. Is it not a vain thing for molehilles to rise against
mountains? Such is ye state of godly Princes in respect of the travail of
traitors, rebels, and enemies, that undermine the same. Let the^ hear therefore
the great proclamation of God by the Prophet David: Be still then and know that
I am God, I will be exalted among the Heathen, I will be exalted in the earth.
The proclamation of the spirit of God to traitors and all that encounter the
works of God.
The spirit of God warns al Saulites, Chushites, craggie hills, and mole
hills against the mountains of God, to be still and quiet, and to desist from
wicked attempts of treasons against God, and the encountering of his works. For
know they ye God will be exalted on earth, in the kingdoms and great nations on
earth. He dispenses and disposes the Principates and kingdoms of the earth
at his pleasure, as Solomon, Pro. 8. Dan. 7. Job. 12. Psalm. 76.
Daniel, Job, and David witness. Therefore al are warned not to intermedle the^
selves in the great works of God in Princes and kingdoms, to encounter his
work in them, for they shall bring forth, but a vain thing. Leave off
therefore (says the prophet) your enterprises against God, and the great
actions on earth, directed, governed, and disposed of him. They expound the
word Harphu, dimittite, (conatus) let go your attempts and plats. The
Septuagint expresses it by the word (...), the vulgar by the word vacate,
whereof ensues this sense, yt they shall keep themselves quiet, and rid and
free themselves from such business and stirs: For the fruit will but defraud
them as a vile lie or vain thing. Therefore according to the great warning of
God, let all contain themselves wtin the limits of their callings and be quiet
and follow their own business, 2. These. ^
as Paul exhorts the Thessa. and not make themselves controullers of cases
and actions not incident and pertinent to the^, 2. These. 3.
that they fall not into the note of those busy bodies by Peter reproved. 1.
Pet. 4.
Thus of the great proclamation of general warning to all, that they oppose
not themselves against Gods providence and the great actions thereof,
considering if they do, there is a God that will ouerreach and overtake them.
Now as we have hard gods proclamation, so let us hear the protestation of the
godly and faithful Prince against all enemies to his estate, to which Gods
providence has preferred him. Know ye (says he) ye God has chosen to himself
the good or godly man: The Lord will hear me when I call upon him. Vatablus
notes the word Hasid, Vatablus e^ anno. S^^.
to be understood passiuelie, for the man on who^ the goodness and mercy is
showed: as most tha^kfullie he does always recognize the goodness and mercy of
God touching himself: and taking his comfort out of Gods providence, he
lays out his persuasio^ and assurance yt God has chosen, and from others
disseuered him to this state, and by marvelous means maintained him in it.
Both which things are employed in one word Hiphla of the Prophet there used,
which signifies to segregate and disseuer, and also to make marvelous before
others, as Pagnin notes. Pagnin (...) Thesan.
This sense the Septua, following expound the word (...), mirabilem reddidit,
and t^^ vulgar, mirificauit: has made marueilo^ and by marvelous works has
maintaine^ him. Thus of the comfortable protestation of his estate proceeding
of the providence of God, and made marvelous in the judgment of men. Therefore
in the same Psalm he warns his enemies to fall to remorse in their
consciences, and closets, and to offer the Sacrifice of righteousness, and to
look for good things of God. Psalm. 3
And in the Psalm before, the Prophet moning himself to God, David his comfort
and stay in his state out of the providence of God.
when he looks into the world, wondreth at the number of his enemies: Lord
says he, how are they increased that trouble me, many there are that rise
up against me. And by and by he rises in comfort of Gods providence to him.
But thou O Lord, says he, art my defender, a buckler about me, my glory, and
the lifter up of my head. I called unto the Lord with my voice, and he heard
me out of his holy hill: Selah, which is an exclamation or shoute, noting what
an acceptable thing it is to God in distress to call to him for defense. Then
as enarmed in heavenly co^forts of Gods providence, and mounted in courage and
resolution against his enemies: David his resolution against his enemies.
I will not be afraid (says he) though ten thousand of people beset me round
about. Up Lord (says he) and help ^e O my god. Thou smitest al mine enemies
(...) the cheek bone, thou have broken the teeth of the ungodly. Then the
foot and end of the Psalm is, Salvation belongs unto the Lord, and thy
blessing is on thy people: Noting hereby what a blessed thing it is to
recognize this, and to have their comfort and security in God. God hear the
doleful move of faithful subjects for Elizabeth our Queen against all the
enemies of her royal person and estate, and strike them on the cheek bone,
and make frustrate all their forces, and disappoint all their plats that they
may bring forth but a vain thing. Thus how in respect of Gods providence the
wicked travailing with treasons in steed of fruit bring forth a lie and a
vain thing: And how the comfort, courage, and resolution of the security of
Princes, is out of the providence and mercy of God.

Now how daily experience confirms the marvelous works of Gods providence in
the preservation of the royal persons and estates of Princes placed in their
estate by his providence: and how the fruit that Traitors, Daily experience
of the marvelous works of Gods providence.
Rebels, and such like bring forth, is but a lie and a vain thing. Common
experience is sufficient evidence hereof, how after the travail of traitors,
rebels, and such like, when they look for fruit, Caro Ste. in dictio. hist.
and poe.
it is but a lie and vain thin in the end. They are cut down before they
ripe, before they can fly they fall.

For as Poets contriuing grave lessons under feigned devises feign of Icarus,
to whom Dedalus his Father made wings seared and set on with wax, Icarus
Dedalus.
warning him that neither he should fly too low, nor mount too near the
Sun, least the wax melt and so he fall. But he notwithstanding could not
content himself to fly, but would mount and so fell into the Sea, Not to
mount above possibility allotted by Gods providence.
called of his name the Icarian Sea. Under a fained devise they carry us to a
fruitful and wise warning, to content our selves with our states and callinges,
and with that moderate course that Gods providence has appointed us, neither
making our selves more abject, neither mou^ting above the possibilities by Gods
providence allotted to us. They that get the^ wings and fall a mounting,
leaving their set course, and forgetting their weakness, as they follow
Icarus in folly, so they shall follow him in his fall. Dedalus of Rome makes
wings for Icarus his son.
Dedalus of Rome makes wings for Icarus his son, and he begins with them
to mount out of the compass of his course, and his plats and practices are
like wings set on with wax, which will melt before the Sun of Gods
providence, and suddenly he is plunged and overwhelmed in the troublesome
Seas of this world. R. Saadia^. Oecolam. in ca. 40. Esa. Prophe.
R. Saadias reports the Eagle once in ten years to mount so near the globe
of the Sun, that he syngeth his old feathers, and that after they come up
new. But dangerous mounting it is, where not only they sing their feathers
and consume their worldly goods, but consume their lives and bodies also. It is
safe going on foot, as God has given to man. But if he will needs fly or
mount above the possibility of his estate, The Devil prepares wings for
those that will mount.
soon comes he to fall. The Devil as Dedalus will make him wings, but they
will melt before the Sun of the eternal providence of God. Diuelishe Dedalus
of Rome has provided wings for many, but in mounting suddenly they are
fallen. They fail always in the vp-shoote, and their fruit is but a vain
thing.

Cicero says to Catelin the Captain of the conspiracy against the state of
Rome: Fuisti apud Leccam, Thou wast (says he) at Lecca his house: Catelin
and his Co^sorts night haunts.
noting his and other his consorts night haunt and desciphering their plats and
discovering all their practices with their mounting and aspiring minds: but
their weak wings fastened on as it were with wax suddenly melted, and the
fruit of all their practices was but a lie or vain thing. The secrets of
traitors are written in their foreheads. Dan. 15. Balthazar.
And all the secrets of their plats and pacts was by Gods providence so laid
open, as if they had been written in their foreheads. For he that caused the
hand from heaven to write on the wall when king Balthazar was at his banquet,
by marvelous means also does lay open the secret plats of treasons as if
they were set on their foreheads. It is a wonder to see, how when they come
before Magistrates and the seat of Gods judgment on earth, by their words,
gestures, looks, and other signs, they are desciphered. A guilty conscience
will show it self. ^. Reg. 9.
As Iezabell when she had painted her self, showed her self out at a window
when Iehu ye Magistrate set up of God to execute his judgments, came unto
Iezrael: so guilty conscience though outwardlye it be painted with pretense of
excuses, yet in countenance, words, and other circumstances, as at a window
will show it self, and before Magistrates bewray it self. Cicero of traitors
accusing themselves by looks, gestures, etc.
Therefore Cicero said of the conspiratours against the estate when they came
to examination, that they needed none others to accuse them, for by their
hanging looks, words, and gestures, they did accuse one another, and betrayed
themselves. It is like to grievous sicknesses rooted in the very bones and
marrowes, which yet by venomous vapors (whose nature is to ascend) show
themselves in the faces, foreheads, and highest parts of the infected persons:
so the sickness Eliphantiasis, Elephantiasis.
because it shows it self in the forehead like the Lions rough wrinkled hide
or pelt, is called Leontiasis, Leontiasis. Satyriasis.
it is called Satyriasis because it shows it self in the face like the
ouglie face of Satyrs: So the ougly sickness of treasons though it be rooted
in the marrowes and bones, yet it shows it self in their very face and
foreheads. Psalm. 13^.
There is no hiding of them though they could hide them as deep as hell, for
even there is the power of God: As David says: whither shall I go (says he)
from thy spirit, and whither shall I go from thy presence. By marvelous means
God brings such things to light. Eccle. 10
The birds of the air will bewray them (as Solomon says) and carry the
voice that shall accuse the^. Curse not the Prince (says he) no not in thy
thought, nether curse the rich in thy bed chamber: for the foul of the air
shall carry thy voice, and that with half wings shall declare it. So far
Solomon. By extraordinary and merueylous means, even as though the fowls of
the air should carry the voice, Gods providence discovers such things
before the facts, and turns the fruit of them to lies and vain matters.
Thus how common experience shows how the fruit that traitors and such
bring forth, is but a lie or a vain thing.

The 5. principal matter
What is the end of treasons, rebellions, and such like wickedness.
David expresses the end of such wicked persons in these words: He has made
a pit and dug it, and is fallen into the pit that he made: his mischief
shall return upon his own head, and his wickedness shall fall upon his own
pate. Hitherto the Prophet David. He resembles the end of such wicked
persons, to one that graueth a pit and falls into it, whose mischief
returns on his own pate. If they would way their wicked plats in the
wisdom of God by his word, they would not dig such pittes: for their ownd
plats are like pits to swallow them up, as the practice of stories in all ages
does confirm. ^. Sam. 31.
Did it not so fall out with the malicious travail of king Saul which drawed
his sword on guiltless king David, and by the just judgment of God he died
on his own sword and with his own hand? 2. Sam. 18.
The Philistines (says he) according to his first plats, shall devour him
in the wars, and my hand shall not be on him: and after in the Philistines
wars, he was so distressed himself, that fearing to be deuored of them, he
devoured himself: so he fell into the pit that oee made for other. So Absalon
the traitor and rebel against his own father, 2. Sam. 18.
without the hand of man was hanged at a tree: the judgment was from heaven,
the execution on earth: Ioab as he hanged, thrust darts into his heart, and
his body was cast into a great pit in the wood, and they laid a mighty great
heap of stones upon him: So he dug a pit for David, and was cast into it
himself. Achitophell the traitor to David likewise had no other hangman but
his own hand to hang himself: 2. Sam. 18.
his heart was false to his sovereign, his hand was not true to himself.
Shebah the traitorous rebel had his head flung over the wall, 2. Sam. 20.
and as he divided the head from the members in the civil body, so his head
was divided from his own members in his own body, and his wickedness was
turned on his head. Act. 1.
Judas betrayed Jesus Christ our master, his body brake, and his bowels ran
out. Dathan, Coraah, and Abiram rebelled against Moses, the earth opened and
swallowed the^ up alive. Moses cried before, Depart from the tents of these
wicked men, Number. 16
and touch nothing of theirs, least you perish in all their sins. God grant
that Moses cry may be in the hearts and ears of all subjects to her Majesty,
that they depart from all Traitors, Rebels, and such like, that they touch
nothing of their plats and practices, Traitors reward. To. Gagwin ^n anna.
Reg. Franc. lib 2. Holderich the traitor i^^reward.
and seeing Gods judgment on them, utterly they may shun and detest them. The
wickedness of traitors comes on their own heads, and their mischief on
their own pates. What was Holderich the old and rank traitor and murderer
his reward, who of Fredegonde Queen of Soisons in France, was hired to
murder Queen Brunchild in her Court? He was put to torture and the
bastinado. And after he came to Queen Fredegond for her reward: she charging
him with cowardice, caused his hands and feet (which in treasons and murders
long he had abused) to be cut off, and that was the traitors reward. The two
Traitors that of the same Fredegond were set and sent to kill Sigisbert king
of Mees or Austracia (according to Fabian) in his camp, To. Cagw. in annali.
Fran. ^ib. 2.
and awaiting their time, and committing the murder, were hewn of the
soldiers in pieces. Edricus the traitor.
Edricus surnamed of Stratto^ was a rank traitor, first to Egelred, after to
king Edmond surnamed Ironside, after him to king Canutus the first king of
Danes yt after Edmond reigned over ye land, and to his own country in ye
invasion of Danes. How ever the Prince changed, Edricus did not chang but was a
traitor to his Prince, and a traitor to his Country. He was grown in great
estate of honor under king Egelredus and under others after. But he could
not contain himself in his estate. He turned truth into treason. With many
treasons he travailed, and he reaped the reward of his treasons in the end.
Because it is a notable example of our own Country, and worthy as a spectacle
to be set up to warn all, I will open it more at large. Edricus was from a low
state and birth (as Fabian says) by king Egelredus first advanced to be Duke
of Mercia, Fab. in chro. 6. par ca. 199
and he co^mited the conduct and regiment of soldiers unto him. And when upon
the kings commandment he had assembled the west Saxons to withstand the
entry of the Danes under Swanus their king, and the hoastes should join,
Edricus sick when he should fight.
Edricus feigned himself sick, and fled from his people, to the great
advantage and comfort of the enemies. Thus when it comes to a dead lift,
Fabian in Chro. the 6. part cap. 198 Edricus treason in the battle.
treason betrayeth al. And under king Edmond called Ironsid, in a battle in
Worcestershire (as Fabian tells it) when ye Danes were like to be
discomfited, Edricus ye traitor pight a dead man's head on a spears head and
cried to the English host, Fabian in Chro. the 6. part cap. 240
that it was the head of king Edmond to daunt the courages of English men, and
to set the Danes agog upon them. But king Edmond sped him to that part of the
field, and so encouraged his soldiers, that he had rather the better then the
worse. After Edricus fearing the great courage and good success of king
Edmond, and to save his land (as Fabian says) humbly shued to be received into
his grace and favor, Fab. in chro. 6. par ca. 204
and swore to be true subject to him. But old treachery would not suffer new
sworn truth to take place in him, for after when the hoasts of king Edmond and
Canutus met at Ashdown Edricus after long sight fled to the comfort of the
Danes. Thus fighting and flying it was all one with Edricus: for when he
should fight, he would flee or be sick, and have some excuse, and with smooth
words set forth matters of small importance. Edricus the traitors excuses.
His flying out of the battle at Ashdowne, he did so excuse (as Fabian says)
that no man might charge him with any defaulte. He would turn himself unto
many excuses: as Poets feign that Proteus king of Egypt would turn himself
into many forms, Proteus king of Egypt.
because the manner was of the Egyptian kings, to wear on their heads the
forms and forepartes of a Lion, Bull, Dragon, Caro Ste. in dictio Hist. and
Poe.
or arms of their estate, and sometimes a tree, or fire, or fragrant
ointmentes, and thereof Poets feigned of Proteus that he changed himself into
many forms. So Edricus could change himself into many forms of excuses: He
was eloquent of speech (as Fabian says) and false of heart, Fabian in Chro. 6.
part cap. 199.
and with fair words would blanch out foul treasons. He was only constant
in his inconstance, warbling with a wayward mind, and doubling in dealings of
great importance. He practiced treason against his own Country for the Danes,
under king Egeldredus and under king Edmond after him. Fabian tells the
report of Guido, King Edmond killed at the withdraught
how by his and Edricus his son their treasons, Edmond came to his death. As
he satte at the withdraught, Edridus his son awayting him, strocke him with
a spear into the fundament, whereof shortly after he died. Then Edricus the
father with great haste sped him to king Canutus, Edricus the traitors head
exalted on the highest gate.
who then with king Edmond reigned over half the land (for by composition for
ending of civil wars the land was divided between them,) and he thought
for his tidinges greatly to have been exalted. But king Canutus (according to
Guido his report) cammaunded his head to be stricken of and pight on a spear,
and exalted upon one of the highest gates of London. Chronica Fructus temp the
6. part.
Thus according to that story, Edricus was exalted for his treasons which
returned to his own head. Though it seem fabulous to Polidore, that Chronica
Fructus temporum tells of king Edmonds death and Edricus treason, yet because
of the stra^gnes of the devise I will note it. This Edrick of Stratton invited
king Edmond to lodge at his house, and at night as the king should go to his
lodging, in the way was set up a beautiful Image, with a bow bent and an
arrowe in it: and when the king approached to see it, anon it discharged the
arrowe and shot the king through the body, for it was an engine made for that
purpose, to lure the king to the gase and to slay him. And after that Edricke
his report to king Knoght thereof (for Canutus so is called) he abhorred him
for his treason, and as a traitor commanded him to be bound and cast into the
river of Thames. Thus Chronica Fructus temporum rehearses the story or the
devise in steed of the story as it seems to Polidor. Fabian notes out of
Marian the Scot another variety of the story, that king Edmond dyed at London
of natural sickness: for there out of the same Marian he tells, that after
the death of king Edmond, Edricus flattery. Fabian in Chro. 6. part cap. 205.
this Edrick grew in such deep favor with king Knoght or Canut by his sugared
words (as Fabian terms it) and fawning flattery, and glauering glosing (of
the which hollow hypocrites make an art in Palaces of Princes and houses of
estate) that he advanced him to one of the four regimentes of England called
Mercia. Notwithstanding he could not keep himself true to his Prince, that
had been drawn through so many treasons: for that is rooted in the marrow
and bones will not out. He was taken tardie in treason again, and being
accused and convicted, judgment was given, and immediately executed: his head
cut off, and his body cast into a foul and filthy place. Ranulph says,
Edricus the traitors death.
that he was slain by the kings agreement within his Palace at London, and his
body with the head thrown after into the town ditch. Whether for his
treasons against king Edmond before he dyed (as some write) or for his treason
against king Knoght after (as others tell) all agree that he dyed for his
treasons, whether his head were exalted on the highest gate of London for king
Edmonds death, or whether his head and body were cast into the town ditch for
treason against king Knoght. Pol. Verg. Hist. Au. li. ^.
So his treasons turned on his own head. Polidor tells how king Knoght after
the death of king Edmon^ greatly endeavored himself to banishe th^^ sons of
king Edmond, who (as he says) departed into Pannonia, and there were well
entreated and ended their lives in exile. Chronica Fructus temp. the 6. part.
And Chronica Fructus temporum tells, how that after the death of king
Edmond, Edrick aforesaid surprised the sons of king Edmond, and presented
the^ to king Knought to put himself in great favor with him: and that of the
king they were sent after to Denmark, from whence by a Dane called Walgar
(that pitied them) they were conuaied to the king of Hungary. Saxo Gram.
Hist. Danicae lib. 10.
Saxo Gra^maticus the ancient and famous writer of the story of the Danes,
tells that king Kanutus was very careful not to be touched with suspicion of
the death of king Edmond, who^ he called Edward. And that some report ye king
Edmond (who^ he calls Edward) by Kanutus commaundment and practice came to
his death: and that by his co^maundment likewise, more grievous execution was
don on the traitors, to clear him self of the suspision thereof: yet
notwithstanding (says he) the same thing did greatly, rack the kings favor
in his household and those that were near him. Thus out of Saxo. Fabian
reports of him, Fab. in Chro. the 6. part cap. 205.
that he did so abhor the unnatural treason of the English men that had
sworn to be true to the blood of king Edmond, that though by their treasons
the Crown wholly was deuolued to him and his posterity, yet he had the
workers against king Edmond his sons in continual mistrust, whereas they
thought they should have been in high favor with him: And as Fabian tells,
he dispatched the more part of them, some by banishment, some were slain, some
by Gods punishment soddenly died. Canutus lo^thed traitors though he gained by
them.
Thus traitors are loathed of them that gain by them, and their treasons turn
on the heads of the workers of them. Touching the end of king Edmond his
sons, Fabian thus reports it out of the opinion of some, that king Canut
sent Edmond and Edward king Edmond his sons, to Swanus his brother king of
Denmark to be made away. And that he abhorring the deed sent them to
Solomon king of Hungary, where Edmond died, and Edward suruiuing was surnamed
the outlaw, because he never returned into England again. Caesar.
Caesar was wont of treasons and traitors to say, yt he loved treasons but he
loved not traitors: he loved treasons to serve his turn, Plutarchus in vita
Romans
but he shunned traitors as mo^sters in the civil body, and ye would be ready to
practice on him yt they have proved in others. Plutarch tells, Plutarcus in
Apoth Romans
that the king of Thraci vpbraied him at the table, that from Anthony he had
revolted to him. He rouned (...) other king that satte by him in the ear, an^
says, that he loved treason, but not traitors In like sort king Philip said,
Philip.
that he love not traitors, but those that would betray meaning though he had
his turn served by them he would not trust them. Io. Stub.
There was in the time of this Edrick of Sratton, Elfricus.
under king Egelred, and when the Danes pressed the land in diverse places, an
other traitor of great countenance and estate called Elfricus master or
Admiral of the kings Navy, Fab. in Chro. the 6. part cap. 197.
(as Fabian calls him) who was bought and sold of Danes against his Prince
and Country. When with the kings navy furnished he lay for the Danes to
encounter them, he was blinded with bribes, and the Danes had their chase and
rechase by sea and land notwithstanding him. Fabian the 6. part. cap. 199.
He was by sea like to the scharcrow by land, which stands with bow bent and
the arrow set in the bow, and yet is blind and cannot discharge. Such a watch
was Elfrick by sea: the Ports and passages were open to the Danes. Polidore
(says he) was a hot and fierce man, Polidor. Hist. Angl. lib. 7.
but the Danes so cooled his courage with corruption, that there was no value
in him for his Prince and Country. When he should fight a battle with the
Danes by sea, and try for the maine chance, then Elfrik fled to the Danes,
Pol. Angl. Hist. li. 7.
the Navy was dispersed, some taken, some drowned. Thus Elfrick by sea and
Edrick by land played their parts in flying when they should fight, and when
they were most trusted, betraying their Prince and Country.

This Elfrick after his first fight was reconciled to ye king again. After he
fled the 2. time.

Then the king (as Fabian says) in wreak of the father, commanded the eyes of
the son Algarus to be plucked out of his head. Fab. the 6. part cap. 197
Polidor reports that when the Danes came not of with their rewards to
Elfrick his contentment, he put himself to the mercy of king Eldred or
Egelred, to whom (says he) the king Effossis oculis vitam condonauit: After
his eyes were plucked out of his head, pardoned his life. Thus traitors come
short of their reckning, and Gods judgments suddenly overtake them, as they
did Elfrick and Edrick. Polidor. Hist. Angl. lib. 7.
Because Elfrick was blind, when he should see the kings enemies, therefore the
king plucked out his eyes that he should not see his own freindes. It was the
just judgment of God: revenge suddenly ouerreacheth the wicked: in the parts
they offend, eftsoons they are punished. What marvel, when there were 2. such
as Elfrick and Edric^ were, though king Eldred or Egildred was feign to flee
the land, the Council of the land was bewrayed, the services and provisions
betrayed to the Danes, the king driven to forsake the land, and the Danes in
peaceable possession reigned over it. Canutus the elder first, Pol. Angl. Hist.
li. 7.
and Canutus the son after in the English Chronicle (as Polidor says) falsely
called Hardy-Canutus. Polidor names before them Stueno called Swanus in the
English Chronicle. Saxo Gram. Hist. Danic. lib. 10.
Saxo Grammaticus who wrote the story of the Danes 300. years since, tells
how Harald Earl Godwines son rid the Danes of the land, by feastinge them
with sumptuous entertainment first, and after by setting on them unawares by
night: So that way they came in, that way they went out: by treasons they
prevailed, and by treasons they were dispatched, as Saxo the writer of their
stories notes. Nothing could satisfy the Danes but the whole land. No honors
could satisfy Elfrick and Edrick, that by sea and land king Eldred first
laid on them. The Country wolud not contain them, the estates of honor
would not houlde them. They are like to those that have the hungry sickness
called (...) or Appetentia canina (as Galen calls it) which is a devouring
and insatiable hunger. Galenus de Symp. causis lib. 1.
And as greedy stomachs surcharged with surfets, are overcome and quail and
bring the whole body to decay: so their greedy appetits surcharged above
strength, brings their whole state to decay. The greediness of traitors is
like to the sickness Appetentia canina compared to ravening of Dogs, for
they would devour Princes and raven Countries if they were powerable, as their
greedy stomachs serve them. But look on the ends of them, whom the regiment
by sea would not content as Elfrick, nor Dukedom of Mertia by land as Edrick,
(Fabian reporting it) the first was made blind by land that would not see by
sea, the other was cast into a stinking ditche (as some note) or his head was
exalted on the highest gate of London (as others tell of him) who was not
satisfied to have his head exalted in the highest estate of honor under his
Prince above all subjects in the land. Fabian the 7 part. ca. 260.
Eight foot of land houldeth him (as in the funeral verse of Henry the
second is mentioned) whom beside England, great climates and Countries would
not contain. When the gates of England were committed to Elfrick and Edrick,
two such cappitall traitors so corrupted with treasons, no marvel though the
Danes not only rushed in, but at length overcame (...) land. If they had not
fought with gold by traitors in the land, they could not with their iron so
have made their way to have won the land. It is an old policy and practice
of Danes. Saxo Grammaticus writes, Saxo Gram. Hist. Danicae lib. 2.
when that Frotho the first king of Danes of that name invaded Scotland, and
the Englishmen came down to ye reskew, he seeing himself like to be ouerset
that there was no trying of it with the iron blade, devised with glittering
gold to fight against them. He causes all the gold that was in his host, and
stuff of price, to be strowed over the fildes as they should come. And when
they fell on their pray and were laden, he fell on them (as Saxo says) and
the Britons with their blood bought their pray. So it has been the ancient
practice of Danes with gold to make their way for their iron: And having 2.
such gulfes of gold, as Edrick and Elfrick were, what marvel though the gates
of England were set open to them. As they got themselves in by gold, and the
infection of treason in the land, so they were (as Saxo their own Countreeman
reports) at last put out by the pot, Saxo Gram. Hist. Dani. lib. 5.
when after great feasting they were ouerladen. And Saxo confesses it to be
the infection of his Country: Dani (vt patria pace loquar) siccandis certatim
calicibus assuescunt: The Danes (says he) by my own Countries leave be it
spoken, are wont to try maisteries in making dry cups. Fabian the 6. part.
cap. 200.
King Edgar brought the Danes to obeisans, and he bridled that vice in them, by
making a law against quaffing and appointing cups with nails and marks to
restrain that excess, which by example and provoking of Danes began commonly
to grow. Thus of Elfrick master or Admiral of king Eldred his Navy, and
Edrick the two Capital traitors of the land who betrayed their Prince and
Country. And beside them one Almaricus a Deacon of Canterbury (the City of
Swanus being besieged 20. Fab. the 6. part ca. 200. Almaricus.
days) betrayed it to the Danes. This Almaricus had his life saved before by
Elphegus Archbishop there, and for recompense he betrayed him and the City
also. There is no more ungrateful monster in the world then treason: It will
be ready to tear out their throtes that have saved their lives. As for
benefits they pass through them and wash over them as the seas our the
sands and shoares, and they nothing the better. One Hugh a Norman of Queen
Emma advanced to be Earl of Devonshire, for requital of so great an honor,
betrayed Exeter to Swanus king of Danes (as Fabian in his Chronicle tells)
who beat down the walls and brake into the land. Fab. the 6. part ca. 198.


Sir Andrew of Harkeles. Fab. the 7. part in anno 1321
Sir Andrew of Harkeley for service done to king Edward the second in the
Barrons wars in taking Thomas Earl of Lancaster and other Barrons, was
aduaunsed to be Earl of Carlisle. After that he was sent to levy a great power
to bring to the king into the North against the Scotes: But he had devoured
so much gold of Sir James Douglas of Scotland, Chronica Fructus temp. the 7.
part. Fabian the 7. part in an. 1223.
(as Chronica Fructus temporum notes) that he could not come in time to the
kings aid at the battle of Beigland Abbay. So the king was like to have
been taken at dinner, his host was discomfited, his treasure and great
ordinance taken. Then fame began to blow her trumpet, that this was long of Sir
Andrew of Harkley his treason. In process the Earl by the kings commission,
was arreasted of Sir Anthony Lucie, Fabian in an 1224.
and ( Fabian reporting it out of Gefferie of Mommuth) was arrayned at Cordoile
in Wales, Fabian noted before that he was of Edward the second made Earl of
Carlisle or Cardoile: Polidor. Hist. Angl. lib. 18.
Polidor calls him Comitem Carleolensem) and there convicted for taking money
of the Scotes to betray ye king, for which treason he was there, or after other
at Westchester or Shrewlburie drawn and hanged, and his head sent to London
and set on the Bridge. Chro. Fruct. temp. 7. part.
Chronica Fructus Temporum tells, how he was for his treason first
disgraded, his spurs hewed from his heels, his sword broken over him, and
then disgarnished of the robes of his estate, Polid. Hist. Angl. lib. 18.
and after put in execution. Polidor tells of a pacte or platte of treason
made with Robert king of Scotes by him with his own opinion in the end. Thus
Sir Andrew Herkelies treason turned on his own head in the end.

Sir Roger Mortimer surnamed of Wigmor, may for his aduaunceme^t first, Sir
Roger Mortimer. Fabian the 7 part in an. 1324.
corruption and treasons after, well be joined to him. Under Edward the second
being committed to the Tower he made escape, by giving a sleeping drink to
his keepers, as Fabian witnesses. Then he got him into France to Queen
Isabell daughter to Philippe Lebew and wedded to king Edward, Polidor Hist.
lib. 18.
whom king Edward with her son had sent into France to entreat a concord
and peace between Charles the French king and him. After the return of Queen
Isabell and Prince Edward her son with force of arms, and after the deposing
of Edward ye 2. in the Parliament holden at London, Fabian in an 1328. Fabian
the 7 part in an. 1326.
Sir Roger Mortimer (who returned likewise in their retinue) was by the
singular favor of Queen Isabell (in wthose Court he bare the sway) advanced
in the Parliament of Salisburie under Edward the third to be Earl of March:
as Sir Andrew the aforesaid was under Edward the second his father preferred to
be Earl of Carlisle or Cardoile as is mentioned before. And in the end this
Sir Roger of Wigmor was executed for treason against his Prince and Country,
as the same Sir Andrew was. But this Sir Roger was mounted far higher in
favor in the Court and in the regiment and dealings of estate, and cause of
profit that did accrue to the Crown. And he had great troops and routes
hanging on him, Chronica Fructus temp. the 7. part.
as Chronica Fructus temporum tells, what a number of knights were retained
to him when he was taken. The regiment of the land and affairs of profitte,
passed through the Queens hands and his: And the Lords before assigned to
have the guiding of the young king, were sequestered, so that alone the rule of
the land (as Fabian says) rested in the Queen and the said Sir Roger:
Fabian the 7. part in an. 1328.
And great things of the realm (says he) were out of order. But Sir Roger
bare himself so high, that at length he plucked both the king and his Council
upon him: So that in time by the king his assent, and the means of Sir
William Montague, and sir Rafe Stafford, and sir John Neuel and others, he was
by a compassed mean (as Fabian terms it) arrested and taken in the castle of
Nottingham, Fabian the 7 part in anno. 1329.
where the king and Queen then lay. The keys of the castle were daily and
nightly under the ward and keeping of the said sir Roger, as Fabian says.
Chronica Fructus Temporum tells, Chro. Fruct. temp. 7. part.
that the Constable of the Tower led sir William Montague and his company a
privy way under earth, even into the Tower where sir Roger was lodged. From
thence with sir Simon of Bedford and others he was sent to the Tower of London:
And in the end for his priuitie to the death of king Edward the second the king
his father, Fabian the 7 part. in anno. 1330.
and for other treasons charged and proved against him in the Parliament at
London, he was by authority of the same Parliament ( Fabian witnessing it)
judged to death. And upon S. Andrews even next ensuing, at London he was
drawn and hanged. He was charged not only with treason against Edward the
second the kings father, to have been the means of his most traitorous death,
fearing least nature would work in the young king to set him at liberty
again, Polidor. hist. Ang. lib. 18.
(as Polidore notes) and because Queen Isabel had written likewise letters of
kindness unto him: but also he was charged with treason against king Edward
the 3. his son, and against his country, to have been the mean yt the Scots
escaped from the king at Stanhop park, where they had fallen into ye kings
danger, ne had been the favor of the said sir Roger then showed to them: and
further that an unprofitable and dishonorable peace (as Fabian terms it) was
by his mean concluded between the king and the Scots. For first (as Fabian
writing of the Parliament of Northampton says) the king released to the Scots
their fealty and homage: Fabian the 6 part. in anno. 1327.
And he delivered to them old ancient writings, sealed with the seals of
the kings of Scots and Lords of the land both spiritual and temporal, with many
other Charters and Patentes, by the which the kings of Scots obliged the^ to
be ^eodaries to the crown of England. At which season also were delivered
certain jewels, which beforetimes had been won from the Scots, The black
cross of Scotland. Chro. Fruct. temp. in Edward ^qe 3.
among the which the black Cross of Scotland is specially named. Chronica
Fructus Temporu^, according to the black darkness of the superstitious time
says, that this black Cross was a full precious relike, which good king Edward
conquered in Scotland, and brought it out of the Abbey of Stone. And makes
mention also of the famous Indenture called Ragman, Ragman the Indenture of the
homages and fealties of Scotland.
which the Scots made to king Edward and king Henry his son, in which were
contained all the homages and fealties first of of the king of Scotland, and
all the Prelates, Earls, and Barons of the Realm of Scotland with their seals
set there under, and other charters and remembrances that king Edward and his
Barons had of their right in the aforesaid realm of Scotland. Fabian the 7 part
in anno. 1327.
Of this Indenture Ragman, mention is made also in the article objected to this
sir Roger at his arraignment before the judges of the Parliament in London.
Thus the said sir Roger for sundry treasons against his Prince and Country,
was openly arraigned, condemned, and executed as is aforesaid. And thus of the
treasons of Edric of Stratton of Eltrick the Admiral, sir Andrew Hardikel, sir
Roger Mortimer of Wigmor, and the execution done on the^. To these I will add
the notable example of Hebert Earl of Vermandois in France of his treason
against Charles king of France surnamed ye Simple, Hebert.
and his execution under Jews the 5. of ye name. And the example of Q.
Brunchild in France, Brunchild.
and for her treasons the strange execution done on her. Metius Suffetius.
And likewise on ye murderers of Charles Earl of Flaunders: and on Metius
Suffetius, and on two Traitors of the chamber of Frotho king of Danes. Polido
And these abundantly may suffice for the ending of this treatise.

First touching Hebert his treasons against Charles the Simple, To. Gag. in an
Reg. Fran lib. 5.
then of his judgment and after his execution. This Hebert County of
Vermendoies, humbly invited Charles surnamed the simple king of France, to
lodge at his castle of Peron, as he returned out of civil wars against
Robert the son of Eudo: who contrary to his allegiance had seized certain
Cities and holds of the kings inheritance, whom the king had slain in the
field. The king surnamed the Simple, casting no perils (though Earl Heberts
wife were sister to Duke Robert late slain of the king in the field)
vouchsafes his courteous inuiting, and came to lodge with him. After great
feasting when the king was lodged, and his strength sequestered from him, Hebert
by the setting on of his wife, in revenge of her brother Roberts death, takes
the king prisoner, and makes him away, that never he was enlarged and reigned
again. Thus of Heberts treason against his Prince under color of inuiting him
to his castle and lodging him.

Now of his judgment under Jews the 5. After the making away of king Charles
by treason of Hebert, Jews the 5. his son reigned in his place. He in revenge
of Heberts treason, deuiseth this manner of judgment, that Hebert out of his
own mouth unawares and in a pretensed case should pronounce sentence of death
upon himself. To. Gag. in an. Re. Fran. lib. 5.
This devise and plat was furnished in this sort. As he sat in council with
his Lords in the City of Laon, whither this Hebert was also warned and
procured to be present (as Robert Gagwin a famous writer of the French story
reports it) a suborned Poast came thither in English man's array with a
letter of have, praying the kings presence: and being brought to presence he
delivered the letter. And at the secret reading thereof by the king his
Secretary to him, the king smiled. The Lords, as if his smiling boded good,
said: they trusted there was good news out of England. Then he says that
one Herman, as Gagwin tells it, Fabian the ^ part. ca. 186.
but as Fabian says, one of his own cosins and especial friends (of England)
moved him of a case in his letter, asking his judgment and resolution in it.
He proponeth the case among the^, to hear their opinions and judgments of the
case. The case was of a country or husbandman that invited his Lord to his
house, and there murdered him. Say my Lords (says he) as Gagwin vttreth his
speech, what death you deem and judge him worthy of. Theobald of Blois a sage
Counceller first gave sentence: Theobald of Blois his judgment.
yt though he was worthy of sundry tortures, yet it seemed good to him that
the hangman should trusse him at the gallows and strangle him with a rope. And
after his verdit, all assented to it: and Earl Hebert also accorded to it,
Earl Heberts judgment out of his own mouth on himself.
and his own sentence was as it were the cord to trusse him up. Judgment out
of his own mouth was given on himself: there remained no more but execution.
The Fox was taken in his own case. Thus judgment was contrived in a devised
case, and Heberts mouth pronounced judgment of death upon himself. Now of the
execution: Suddenly rushed in the crew appointed of the king before, and they
caught guilty Hebert, Earl Heberts execution.
and according to his own sentence, carried him to a hill without the city of
Laon, and hoised him to the Gibbet or gallows: and before the hangman
stra^gled him, To. Gag. in an. Re. Fran. lib. 5.
the king turned to him (as Gag. reports) and said: Thou Hebert art the same
countrieman that madst away my Lord and father, and thy Soueraign in prison
and bonds, now according to thy desert, suffer thy deserved death. Thus Heberts
judgment was deuolued on himself, and his treason against his Prince returned
on his own head. May it not be a mirror of gods judgment touching the end
and execution of traitors, which entrap others with treasons, and suddenly are
trussed up themselves? Little thought Hebert to hang at the gallows at Laon
when he came to the kings presence, and to sit with the Lords in counsel.
Little know traitors what suddenly will befall the^. Gods revenge runs after
the^ and will suddenly overtake the^. He was too subtle for ye simple king. As
a guest the king came to his house, but as a lamb he fell into the butchers
hands. God sees not this: Hebert says in his heart, there is no God to
revenge, Psalm. 14.
as David says of yt Nabal, ye is, the foolish and wicked man. His wife will
have her revenge of her brothers death. Hebert is the executioner of revenge.
See how gods judgment meateth him his own measure. He comes to Laon as a
guest, invited to sit in counsel: his own mouth unawares gives judgment on
himself: The crew appointed carries him away to make him away. As by treason he
made away his Soueraign unawares, so by gods justice he is taken unawares, and
for his secret treason has open execution. The hill on which Hebert was
hanged, Heberts hill.
was after called Heberts hill. Edric.
Edric the traitor had his head exalted on a high gate, or his head and body
cast into a stinking ditch (as some say.) Elfric had his eyes plucked out.
Elfric. Sir Andrew Hardikell. Sir Roger Mortimer.
Sir Andrew Hardikell, and sir Roger Mortimer were drawn as traitors to death.
God give al grace to be warned by the example of Hebert of France, Edric and
Elfric of England, and such like traitors against their Sovereigns, set up by
Gods providence to reign over countries. Thus of the treason, judgment, and
execution of Hebert Earl of Vermandois in France.

Now let us briefly tell of the strange execution of Queen Brunchild wife
sometime to Sigisbert king of Mees or Austracia (according to Fabia^) for her
manifold treasons and murders of Princes of her own blood. Queen Brunchild.
She is noted in the story to have been the death of ten Princes of royal
blood beside others. She set her own sons and brethren Theodobert and
Theodorich on blooddie war together, and one to tear out an others throat.
And after king Theodobert was slain in the wars by treason, and Theodorich by
poison made away, she set up a base of Theodorich called Sigisbert against
king Clotare: who discomfited him, and took Brunchild in the field, on who^ all
the host cried a shameful death (as Gagwin tells: To. Gag. in an. Re. Fran.
lib. 2.
) and after she was beaten with a cudgel four times, king Clotare commanded
her to be set on a horse and to be carried about all the host, and then by
the hair of the head and arms to be tied to the tail of a wild horse, and
so to be trailed and drawn to death. And this was the (...) judgment and
execution of Burnchild king Clotare.

Let (...) hear likewise of the strange judgment and execution done on the
traitors and murderers of Charles Earl of Flaunders at the commandment of
Jews surnamed the gross king of France. Charles Earl of Flaunders by treason
slain in the Church.
This Charles was by treason slain in the Church of S. Donatus in Bruges as
he was in his devotions, of one Bocardus brother to the Provost of the same
Church. Fabian calls him the Provost of Bruges that was the principal of
this treason and murder: To. Gag. in an. Reg. Fran. lib. 6.
I follow Gagwin the writer of the French story, in reporting of it. Jews
king of France aforesaid (because Charles was near of blood to him) entered
Flaunders, and besieged the Church which ye traitors kept as their castle.
Bocardus the traitor his death.
Bocardus fering the sequel, stole out for fear, and was taken and put in
execution. His eyes were stricken out with a reed, his face was shot in with
arrows, and after he was dead he was put on ye wheel. To this strange and
grievous death was Bocardus the traitor and murderer put to of Jews the king of
France, in revenge of Charles Earl of Flaunders death his sisters son.
Bertopus a traitor and murdererh strange dea^^
And one Berropus his consort and mate in the execution of the murder, was by
ye foresaid king Jews his order put to a strange and grievous death. He was
hange^ (...) ^^lowes, and by him a mastie or (...) whom when the hangman
smote^^ (...) Bertopus body hanging by, and rent and tore his flesh, and so
Bertopus was baited to death. Thus the most strange and grievous execution of
Bertopus for treason and murder, as Gag. master of his order in France, and
writer of the French story reports it. The other their co^plices yt were
taken in the Tower, The execution of other craitors.
were thrown headlong from the top of the Tower: and one Isaak which took on
him the vow of monkery hoping to escape, was stra^gled with a rope. Thus of their
treason and strange executions. Frotho king of Denmark.
Frotho king of Denmark the first of ye name, caused two of his chamber
convicted of treason against him, to be tied to two great maine stones, and to
be thrown into the Sea, as Saxo the writer of the story of the Danes, Saxo
Gram. hist. Dane lib. 2.
says: Animi crimen annex corporibus mole mulctando. With weight put on their
bodies (says he) he punished the weighty sin of their souls.

Tullus Hostilius the 3. Heathen king of the Romans, caused a very strange and
grievous execution to be done on one Metius Suffetius for his treason practiced
in the field against him. Metius Suf. his treason.
This Tullus Hostilius fought a battle with certain people in the confines
of Rome called Fideriates, Veientes, and Volsci. Metius Suffetus being of his
obedience and subjection, was sent for with certain ensigns and ^orces out of
Alba, and was present at the battle. And before the battle did join, he
warbling with a double heart, got him aloof to the hills, and busied himself
among his bands till the battle was fought. And when victory fell to Tullus
Hostilius, then he comes in with fresh bands to gratulate victory to the
king. At first the king showed good countenance to him, but after he had
assembled his host and environed Metius with his bands, and had made him safe
from mutening and resisting, he gave order for the excution of him: which was
thus: because he distracted his forces from him, and in the battle betrayed
him, his body also should be distracted and dismembered. Titus Liuius Deca. de
1. lib. 1.
The^ (as Titus Liuius tells the story) he caused him to be laid and bound
between two Charets, and by horses set to and driven on diverse ways, his body
was dismembered and his lims plucked asu^der. From so grievous a sight (says
Liuius) they turned their eyes. No nation (as he says) may glory more of
milder pains and executions. Thus of the end of Metius Suffetius for his
treason against his Prince in the field: as we have hard of K. Frotho also his
execution on 2. of his chamber for treason against him. Thus I have opened the
examples before mentioned of me for the ending of his part: (...) Earl Hebert,
Queen Brunchild, Bocardus, Bertopus and others, and two of king Frotho his
chamber, and Metius Suffetius the last, which are very pertinent examples to
this purpose concerning the end of treasons and traitors in other countries. I
joined the^ to notable examples out of our own country of Edric and Elfric,
sir Andrew Hardikel, and sir Roger Mortimer, which after certain examples out
of holy scripture and other beside, I have laid down at large. Would God (as
Polid. in writing the English story witnesses) these verses of the Prophet
David were as a table always hanging before the eyes of such. Whither then
shall I go from thy spirit, Psalm. 139.
or whither shall I go then from thy presence? If I clime up into heaven thou
art there, if I go down to hell thou art there also. And after: If I say
peradventure darkness shall cover me, then shall my night be turned to day:
yea the darkness is no darkness with thee, but the night is as clear as the
day, the darkness and light be both alike. Thus far the Prophet. But while the
wicked are contriuing their diuelishe plats, they clean forget the power and
providence of God, till his providence overthrow their plats, and his power
confound the wicked practisers of them, and the saying of the Prophet David be
verified in them: He has graven and dug up a pit, and is fallen himself
into the destruction that he made for others. For his travail shall come upon
his own head, and his wickedness shall fall on his own pate. Thus of the end
of treasons, rebellions, and such like wickedness.

Now of the last, The last of the principal parts of this treatise.
concerning thanksgiving and praising of God, by occasion of the words of
David: I will praise and give thanks unto the Lord according to his
righteousness, and will sing praise to the name of the Lord the most high.
AS he ends his Psalm with this, Of thanksgiving and praising of God.
so with exhortation to praise and thanksgiving to God, I will end my treatise.
And herein I will refer my self to these special points. First, The order.
how by David his example we should stir up our selves to thanksgiving and
praising hearts her people should bear to her again: and pray that the mercy
of God will long maintain and magnify her, as he did his servant Moses.

The first.
Touching the first, how by David his example we should be stirred up to
thanksgiving and praising of God. After the Prophet had mentioned the
judgments of god on his enemies, and the wretched end of their wickedness
(wherein the great mercy of God in his delivery is employed) by and by he
makes profession of praising and giving thanks to God for his righteousness in
his judgments to the^, and in them of his mercy to him. One word signifies to
give thanks and praise.
Because one word does signify to give thanks and praise, therefore some
expound the word Iada to give thanks, some to praise, and both are interlaced
the one with the other, and one follows of the other. No sooner thankfulness is
in the heart, but praise is in the mouth. Both flow out of one fountain. A
godly heart is the fountain: thanksgiving and praise spring first in it, and
issue out of it with outward giving of thanks and praising God. As David gives
us here example, that he will give thanks or praise to god for his
righteousness, Psalm. 145.
and sing to the name of the Lord the most high. The Lord (says he) is loving
to every man, and his mercy is over all his works. His work (says he) is
worthy to be praised and had in honor, Psalm. 111.
and his righteousness endures for ever. The merciful and gracious Lord (says
he) has so done his marvelous works, that they ought to be had in
remembrance. Psalm. 145.
The memorial (says he) of thy abundant kindness shall be showed, and me^
shall sing of thy righteousness. Psalm. 62
O congregation or people (says he) power out your hearts before him, for god
is our hope. He calls upon al estates, high and low to praise God for his
benefits. Psalm. 148.
Kings of the earth (says he) and all people, Princes and all judges of the
world: young men and maids, men and children praise the name of the Lord: for
his name only is excellent, and praised above heaven and earth. He shall exalt
the horn of his people, al his saints shall praise him, even the children of
Israel, even the people that serves him. Psalm. 150.
And in ye last Psalm and knitting up of the Psalms, he wills every thing
that has breath to praise the Lord* Thus ye prophet out of his tha^kful heart
powers out outward tha^ksgiuing and praising of God: and calls to the
congregation and people of God, and to all of all estates, and to all that has
breath to praise God for his benefits. And he associateth to him those yt have
thankful hearts to praise God for his benefits, and as a foreman encourages
them. Psalm. 34
O praise the Lord (says he) with me, and let us magnify his name together.
And in another Psalm, O come hither and behold the works of God, Psalm. 66.
how wonderful he is in his doing toward ye children of men. And after in the
same Psalm: O praise our God ye people, and make the voice of his praise to
be heard. Which holds our soul in life, and suffers not our feet to flip.
And after at the view of Gods blessings privately be stowed on him, he says: O
come hither and hearken ye that fear God, and I will tell you what he has done
for my soul. Thus publicly and privately he calls upon the congregations of
God, and all estates, and all that has breath to praise God^ and he calls on
his own soul and al his inward parts, to yield thankful praise to God and not
to forget his benefits. God give us grace by the example of this Prophet, both
publikly for the public and great benefits of God, and especially for his
wonderful works in the late deliueries of our gracious Sovereign, his Church,
and our country, with ^^^nkfull hearts to praise and glorify his blessed name.
Thus how by the example of ye Prophet, we should be stirred up to thanksgiving
and praising of God for his great benefits.

The second note is, what abundant matter of thanksgiving and praise, the
bountiful goodness of God has given to us.

The matter abou^dantly ministered to us of God is yet but fresh in our
remembrance. But nothing sooner slippeth out of our minds then the great
benefits of God: Of an unsavory, forgetful, and churlish clay we come. Are
we not of the same mettle by corrupt kind that they were of, of whom the
Prophet said: But they forget what he had done, Psalm. 78.
and his wonderful work that he had showed for them. And in an other Psalm:
Psalm. 106.
But within a while they forgotte his works and would not abide his counsel.
Of such frail mould we are. Nothing is more to be feared, then least that
frail forgetfulness and carnal security swallow up these wonderful
works of God. Carnal security like the Charib of Scicilie.
As the Charib of Scicilie swalloweth all that come on it, so carnal security
is as a Charib in us, and swalloweth up all the wonderful works and blessed
benefits of God: for without true thankfulness they are all lost, they
perish if we heartily praise not God for them, they are cast away if carnal
security overcome them. As the Charib hurleth about first that it swalloweth,
and after it has swallowed it, it casts it out again, so we toss and
hurl about in our minds the wonderful works and great blessings of God while
they are nue and fresh, but after carnal security and frail forgetfulness
swalloweth the^ up and casts the^ clean out of our minds again. Thus fares
it with our frail nature and churlish clay of old Adam, if we be not waked up
to hearty thankfulness by the spirit of God. Therefore ye spirit of God cries
out by ye Prophet to us: Come hither and behold the works of God how wonderful
he is in his doing toward the Children of men. Psalm. 66.
If we look into the late works of God in ye wonderful deliueries of our
gracious Sovereign and his Church and people, how wonderful has he showed
himself in his doings, to us: What abou^dant matter of thanksgiving and praise
has his mercy ministered to us? One wonderful work comes in the neck of an
other, and one delivery is doubled on the other, that we have daily matter of
new songs of thanksgiving and praising of God, Psalm. 98.
as the Prophet David exhorts us: O sing unto ye Lord a new song for he has
done marvelous things. With his own right hand and with his holy arm has he
gotten himself the victory. And in another Psalm: O sing unto the Lord a new
song, sing unto the Lord all the whole earth. Psalm. 96.
Sing unto the Lord and praise his name, be telling of his salvation from day
to day. And after: For the Lord is great and cannot worthelie be praised. Thus
by delivery upon delivery, and blessing upon blessing, the bountiful goodness
of God daily does minister to us matter of new songs of thansgiuing and
praising of his name. It is not Moses that stood up for us in the gapp (as the
Prophet David says that Moses stood up in the gappe else he would have
destroyed them) nor Phinees that stood in the breach to turn away his wrath
from us: Psalm. 106.
and Abraham (as the Prophet Esaias says) knew it not: Esaias 63.
but it was the blessed advocate of the Church of God (whom S. Steven at his
death saw standing at the right hand of his father) and our only mediator
Christ Jesus, Act. 7.
which stood up in the gappe and breach before the mercy of God for us. Except
that mediator had showed himself at the dead lift and at the very door of
death, the deep waters of the proud had even gone over our foul (as the
Prophet David says) And as in the beginning of the same Psalm he says:
Psalm. 124.
If the Lord himself had not been on our side, now may Israel say, if ye Lord
himself had not been on our side when men rose up against us, they had
swallowed us quick, when they were so wrathfully disposed at us: yea ye water
had drowned us, and ye stream had gone over our soul. And after: But praised
be the Lord which has not given us over for a pray unto their teeth. Our soul
is escaped as a bird out of the snare of the hunter: the snare is broken and we
are delivered. Our help stands in the name of the Lord which has made
heaven and earth. Thus the whole Psalm portrayeth out our case, the rage of
our enemies, and our delivery by the tender mercy of God. Psalm. 44.
We were as sheep appointed to the slaughter (as David says,) and the
butcherie and massacre was appointed, and the sword that should have been
bathed in our blood. And our gracious Sovereign as the Prophet Hieremie
(speaking of the murderers of Anathot which conspired his death says in his
own case) as a lamb should have been brought to the slaughter, Hier.
and I knew not (says Heremie) that they had devised thus against me. And
before he says, that God did show and reveal to him their practices. And in
an other place: The Lord (says he) is with me like a mighty Giant, Hier. 2^.
therefore my persecutors shall be overthrown and shall not prevail. And after
he breaks out in praising and glorifying of God: Sing (says he) unto the
Lord, for he has delivered the soul of the poor from the hand of the
wicked. Thus in the Propthets case, and the conspirators of Anathot against
him, the case of our gracious Sovereign is set forth before our eyes. Let
us with the Prophet break out in praising of God for the wonderful works of
his manifold deliueries. For we have heard of deliueries upon deliueries, and
the latter are linked to ye first. Psalm. 121.
Behold he that keeps Israel does neither slumber nor sleep (as the Prophet
David says.) The Devil as a ramping Lion gaddeth about and trauaileth in his
members with treasons upon treasons. 1. Pet. 5.
But the fatherly providence of God has been the watch and guard of the royal
person and estate of our Prince, and has wrought wonderful works of
deliueries upon deliueries for her and us. Treason the very imph of the
Devil, with which the Devil thus trauaileth in this latter age, is like to
Hydra the serpent of many heads, Caro See. (...) dictio Hist. and P^e.
which being cut off spring again. Let us pray that the sword of Gods
providence may not only cut them off, but so fear them up that they never
spring again. Plin. not. Hist. lib. 8. cap. 55.
Plini writes that the Hare as son as she brings forth breadeth again,
and before she bring forth she conceiueth again with one under another, and
bears in her belly at once, one with lawne and heir, an other all naked,
and he terms it Superfaetat. So treason in these latter days before it
brings forth is ready to breed again, and to conceive one upon the other,
and would fill Countries with treasons, but that Gods providence encountreth
them when they are conceived, and frustrateth them and turns them to a lie
and vain thing (as David terms it.) Though they redoble thick on us, yet
we have seen the wonderful works of God in the discoueries and our deliueries
redoubled also upon us. Psalm. 68.
Let us say with David, praised be the Lord daily even the Lord God which
helps us and powers out his benefits upon us. He is our God, even the God
of whom comes salvation. God is the Lord by whom we escape death. God shall
wound the head of his enemies, and the hearie scaspe of such a one as goes on
still in his wickedness. So far the Prophet David. What abundance of matter
of praise and thanksgiving has the infinite mercy of God ministered unto us in
these wonderful works of discoueries of treasons, and deliueries of our
gracious Sovereign from them, and his Church, and our Country. He has sent
her help (as David prays) from his Sanctuary, Psalm. 20.
and strenghned her out of Sion. Where are now yt thankful hearts in Sion, Psalm.
88.
whereof David says: al my fresh springs shall be in thee. We are ye true Sion
sanctified to god by his word, sprinkled with the blood of Christ in our hearts
by faith and sanctification of the spirit of God, through obedience and
sprinckling of the blood of Christ, according to Peter his words. We are the
Israel of God (as Paul calls us) and the true Jews by circumcision of our
hearts, 1. Pet. 1.
that is in the spirit not in the letter, whose praise is of god and not of
me^ (as Paul says) Jerusalem that is above, Rom 2. Gal. 4.
is free (as Paul says (and is the mother of us al. We are those true Iehudei
and Jews which have their name of confessing and praising of God. For from the
root of the word Iada which signifies to confess, praise, and give thanks to
God, Pagnin in Thesau. Heb. 13.
Iehuda (which is the tribe of their kingdom) has name, and thereof Iehudaei
ye Jews have theirs. By him (that is Christ) we offer up (as Paul says) the
sacrifice of praise, yt is ye fruit of our lips ye praise his name. Where
therefore is Moses with his song, and the Children of Israel which so thankfully
praised God for their delivery from Pharao and the overthrow of his host in
the red Sea? Exodus 15.
Where is Miriam the prophetisse and sister of Aaron with troops of women
following her with timbrells, daunses, and praising of God? Psalm. 134
And Aaron with the Levites lifting up their hands in the sanctuary? And
Phinees with his zeal? 2. Chro. 20.
And the people that praised God for the wonderful work of their deliverance
under the godly king Iehoshaphat: when the singers went before the host
praising God with the Psalm: Psalm. 136.
Praise the Lord, for his mercy endures for ever. And after the recital of
the great works of God, in the end the Prophet says: Which remembered us when
we were in trouble. And if the tender mercy of God had not remembered us in the
late dangers and troubles, Psalm. 28
we had been like to them that go down to the pit, as David speaks. Let us
now remember heartily to thank and praise him for his wonderful works of the
late deliueries of Elizabeth our gracious sovereign, and his Church, and our
Country. Let us awake our dullspirits and frail affections, as David awaketh
himself to praise God: Awake my glory (says he, so he calls his soul as
they note) awake my Lute and Harp, I my self will awake right early. Psalm. 57.
I will give thanks (says he) to thee O Lord among the people, I will sing to
thee among the nations. For the greatness of thy mercy reaches to the
heavens, and thy truth to the clouds. Thus far the Prophet David. Let us
thus awake our souls (if we be the true Syon and sanctuary of the Lord
sanctified to him by his blessed word in Christ) to extol, praise, and
glorify him for the wonderful works of his great mercies thus magnified and
multiplied amongst us. Let Moses bring his song of praises, and Miriam and all
godly women their thanks. Let Phinees show his zeal, and the Levites lift up
their hearts and hands in thankful praising of God. And al godly people and
true subjects, follow the example of the godly and thankful people that under
Moses and Iehoshaphat extolled and magnified the mercies of God for the
wonderful work of their deliverances. We have seen of late deliverance upon
deliverance, and the wonderful works of God multiplied upon us. Our hearts
are heavy, our mettle dull, our spirits slow to show forth our thankfulness
and praising of God. Let us stir up our spirits and souls, as the Prophet
David calls to his soul: Psalm. 103.
Praise the Lord O my soul and all my inward parts praise his holy name.
Praise the Lord O my soul and forget not all his benefits. Which forgiueth
all thy sin and heals all thy infirmities. Which saves thy life from
destruction, and crowns thee with mercy and loving kindness. God give us
grace thus to call to our souls, and to stir up our inward parts to praise
God for his great and manifold mercies, and namely and especially for the
wonderful works of the late discoueries and deliueries of our gracious
Sovereign, and the poor Church of God and our Country. Thus what matter of
thanksgiving and praise the mercy of God has ministered to us.

The third.
What thankfulness our gracious Sovereign and good mother of our Country has
showed to her faithful subjects, and what compassion to her poor people: and
what hearts her people should bear to her again, and pra^ that the mercy of
God will long maintain^ and magnify her as he did his servant Moses.

Touching the thankfulness of so gracious a Sovereign to her faithful
subjects carefully trayueling for the preservation and safety of her sacred
person long amongst us, I refer my self to her Majesty's aunsweares extant
in public memory and vewe, to the great comfort and encouragement of all true
hearted subjects to her Majesty. Touching her compassion to her poor people,
she has heard their cry, and her motherly heart has melted with compassion
over them. She has caused exhortation to be published for fraining feastings,
and has sent and appointed that good means and orders be taken and used for
the releeuing of her poor people in this time of dearth. She has opened the
bowels of motherly compassion unto them, as if she would pluck them out of
the mouth of famine, and the gulf of death. If ever any people opened their
very hearts and tender bowels of nature to receive their Prince into their
very hearts and bowels of tender love, she most justly has deserved it of us.
For she traueyleth in continual dangers for us. Her sacred person, sweet
life, and royal estate, is continually subject to such imminent dangers and
perils for us. In her they seek the spoil and massacre of us, the raven and
ruin of our Country, to make it a pray and booty for strangers and enemies.
Queen Elizabeth as a mark among Princes set up of God.
She is the mark they shoot at. But this is our comfort, that God has set
her as a mark among Princes and in the world, and by his divine providence and
power continually magnifieth and mainteyneth the mark that he set, maugre all
enemies of it. And they that shoot at this mark to strike it down, shoot in
a casting bow which laid to the mark does miss it and shoots wide from
it. Psalm. 78. Traitors like to the casting bow.
The Prophet David compares the Jews to a casting or deceitful bow, for the
word Remiia, signifies deceitful: And al traitors to ye sacred person and
royal estate of our Prince, may well be compared to the casting bow which
shoot at the mark but their bow, will deceive the^. Would God that all
traitors, rebels, and seditious persons to her royal person and estate, might
not only hear that I say, but take it to heart: when they shoot at this
mark which Gods providence has set up and thus magnified, and which in the
sight of God is precious by the continual prayer of his Saints: their bow
will deceive them, and their own string will strangle them. And it may be said
of them (as David said of the Jews) they are like a casting or deceitful bow.
Esaias 77.
Would to God they could effectuously remember the qualities and properties of
this casting bow: The qualities of the casting bow.
for whether they be likened themselves to it (as David likneth the disobedient
Jews to it) or whether they shoot themselves in the casting bow, and when
they aim at the mark they miss and are wide: or whether they are shot
themselves out of that casting bow, whose string does strangle them, and which
first does cast them, and after sets them up in a contrary kind to be marks
and public spectacles and examples to warn al others: either they may well
be called the casting bow in respect of themselves, either may be compared
to it in respect of their actions, either in respect of ye event and
consequence may fitly be referred to it. God grant that all may be warned by
the examples of such, for they are set up of Gods justice as marks and
spectacles for the warning of al. God strengthen the princely heart of our
gracious Sovereign with heavenly comforts and with an heroical, principal,
and n^ ^rincely spirit, establish her (as king David ^^ayed) that God will
establish him with a principal, Psa. 51. The heroical spirit.
or princely spirit) as the vulgar translateth the word Nediba because the
word Nadib signifies a Prince, or as some expound it with a free spirit,
because the word signifies both. God strengthen her Majesty with such an
heroical, and free spirit. When king David looked into the transitory
troubles of the world which came swelling like a Sea on him, and gaping like a
gulf to devour him, he cried to God: Psalm. 3.
Lord how are they increased that trouble me: many are they that rise against
me. Thus as if he were floating in the raging Seas, and wallowing among the
wild waves he cries to God. And by and by as though he had got him under the
lie shore by casting his eyes on Gods providence, he found such cordial
comfort that he said: But thou O Lord art a shield about me, my glory and the
lifter up of my head. Then with an heroical spirit he says: I will not be
afraid for ten thousand of people that have set themselves against me round
about. And in the same heroical spirit he prays: Up Lord and help me O
my God, for thou smitest mine enemies upon the cheek bone, thou shall break
the teeth of the ungodly. In which heroical confidence in God thus he ends
his prayer: Salvation belongs to (...) Lord, and thy blessing is upon thy
people. Thus how David out of blustering winds and stormy Seas, hoiseth his
seals into the haven of Gods providence, and puts on an heroical spirit
with courage and magnanimity against all his enemies. Was not David a Prince
and Prophet most dear to God, David. Godly Princes deer unto God have bee^
assaulted with traitors and rebels.
chosen according to his own heart as the Scripture speaks? Yet had he not
Sheba the rebel, Architophel the traitor, and Absalon his son out of his
own bowels that betray- him and openly rebelled against him? Moses may be a
mirror to al magestrates and Princes, Moses.
who was so high in the love and favor of God: Yet had he Dathan, Corach, and
Abyram that rebelled against him. And because we have mentioned Moses, if we
look into ye wonderful works of God, has not God sent our good mother and
Prince Elizabeth as a Moses to us, to bring us first out of ye spiritual Egypt
and slavery of our souls, and to conduct us through the wilderness of this
wayward world, full of fiery serpents continually stinging us in their kind, as
the fiery serpents did sting the Children of Israel in the wilderness? And as
God conducted them by Moses through the great and terrible wilderness, Deuteronomy. 8.
where (as he says) were fiery serpents and scorpions, so what were our
case if God had not blessed us with our Moses to conduct us through the weary
wilderness of these troublesome and perilous times, in which so many fiery
serpents, stinging scorpions, venomous vermin, and malicious enemies are, whose
outrage and fury is like to the rank and hot poison of serpents, as the word
Chema which David uses does signify. Thus how God has made her our Moses to
bring us out of the house of bondage, and conduct us through the wilderness of
this dangerous world, swarming with so many fiery serpents and stinging
scorpions against us. Now how God has prepared and preserved her to this
Princely conduct as he did his servant Moses. Moses had his name because he
was drawn out of the waters: for of the word Mosha signifying Extraxit or
eduxit, he has plucked or drawn out he was called Moshe of Pharao his
daughter, because (says she) I have drawn him out of the waters. His mother
hid him 3. months, and then because of Pharao his co^mandme^t for ye making
away of ye Hebrews male children as soon as they were borne, she she fearing
danger put him in an Ark of reed daubed with slime and pitch, and laid it
among the Bulrushes by the rivers brinke. Exodus 2.
Now his sister stood a far off to wait what would come of him. Then ye daughter
of Pharao came down to wash her in the river, and her maids walked by the
river side, and when they saw the Arc among ye Bulrushes, she sent her maid to
fetch it: and (briefly to conclude that the scriptu^^ rehearses more at
large) the child wept, and Pharao his daughter pitied him (Gods providence so
providing for him) his sister ran for his mother to be his nurse, and when he
grew, his mother brought him to Pharao his daughter, and she brought him up as
her own, and she called his name Moses, because (says she) I drew him out of
the water. Gods wonderful providence in preserving Q. Elizabeth unto and in
the royal estate.
And has not our Moses before God set the crown on her head, been at the very
brinke to perish, and God has pluked her out of the gulfes of many waters, and
out of the month of cruel enemies, and has made (though not in name, yet in
the wo^deafull works of his providence) a right Moses of her, by bringing her
from the very brinke, and wonderfully preserving her to this Princely estate.
And since how often has he made a Moses of her, by plucking her out of so many
greedy gulfes of treasons and conspiracies at home and abroad against her,
and of late bringing her from the brinke of such imminent dangers and
perilous plats and plunges, by such wonderful works of discoueries and
deliueries which we have seen. So that in Moses plucked out of the waters and
from the brinke to conduct the people of God out of Egypt, we may see a right
mirror of our Moses by the wonderful works of God, so often saved from the
brinke, and plucked out of the gulfes to conduct his people through ye
wilderness of this perilous world, amidst the fiery serpents sharp set to
sting the people of God at al advantages and occasions. God long vouchsafe her
to be his Moses, and continually pluck her out of the gulfs and plunges of
all plats of treasons, conspiracies, and confederacies at home or abroad
whatsoever, and whersoeuer against her. And as he did magnify his servant
Moses in the world, and with wonderful works backed him from heaven in the
conduct of his people on earth: So let us heartily pray that with wonderful
works of his providence and divine power he will magnify our Moses in the
sight of al Princes and people, and show forth the magnificence of his
glorious Gospel in her, and back from heaven her princely conduct of Gods
people on earth, against al enemies, traitors, and conspirators against her
Princely person and royal estate whatsoever, and whenever, that the world
may see he has set her up for a mark, and raised her up for a Moses for the
conduct and comfort of the people of God.

The fourth.
How God requires and looks for thankfulness of us.

As God commands us to call on him in our troubles, and has annexed a sweet
promise to it, so he adds to it what on our behalfes he requires of us.
The commandment is: Psalm. 50.
Call on me in ye day of thy trouble (so God by the Prophet David commands
us) and the sweet promise annexed to it is: And I will hear thee. And that
he requires on our behalfes is, thou shall praise (or glorify) me. Thus the
commandment, promise, God rrquireth thankfulness of us.
and what he requires of us. And now for his great benefits and the
wonderful works of these late discoueries and deliueries, he requires and
looks for thankfulness, and praising, and gloryfiyng his name for them.
When our blessed Savior had cured and cleansed the ten Lepers, but one of
them, and he being a stranger and a Samaritan returned (when he saw himself
cleansed) and with a loud voice praised God: and (as S. Luke says) he fell
down on his face at his feet and gave him thanks: Luke 17.
and the same was a Samaritan, And Jesus answered and said, were there not
ten cleansed? But where are those nine? There are not found that return
again to give God praise save only this stranger. And he said unto him, Rise
and go, thy faith has saved thee. Thus S. Luke. As he accepts the
thankfulness of the Samaritan and stranger, so he asks after the other nine
unthankful: Where are those nine? And as we have received the great benefits
of God in the wonderful works of these late discoueries and deliueries, so
let us be assured he requires thankfulness of us, and he looks for us, and
calls after us as by name. Let us return with this poor Samaritane with
thankful hearts to praise and glorify his name. He may be a myrrour of
thankfulness to us, He thought he could not do too much: He fell on his face
at his feet, and with a loud voice praised God. His thankfulness was not hid
in his heart, but it brake out also in most humble behavior, and in his loud
voice praising God. This Samaritan may set us to school for thankfulness, of
whom we may learn with most humble and thankful affections to prostrate our
selves in our hearts before the Majesty of God, and outwardly also to show
forth our thankfulness in praising and glorifiyng of God. The woman that had
an issue of blood.


The woman that had a grievous issue of blood twelve years, and had bestowed
all her living upon the Physicians, and could not be healed of any (as Luke
says) and of many Phisitio^s had endured many things and spent all that she
had, Luke 8.
and was nothing amended but rather the worse (as Mark says) came in the
prease behind him, Mat. 5.
and touched his garment or the hem of his garment (as Matthew and Luke say:
Mat. 9.
) for she said, If I touch but his garment I shall be healed. And by and by
the fountain or course of her blood was dried up, Mark. 5.
and she felt in her body (as Mark says) that she was healed of the
plague. And immediately Jesus did know in himself the virtue that went out of
him, and he turned himself round about in the prease, and said: Luke 8.
who has touched my garments. And when all denied (as Luke says) Peter and
they that were with him, said: Master the multitude thrust thee and tread on
thee, and thou say, Who is it that has touched me. And Jesus said, Some one
has touched me, for I have felt virtue to have issued from me. Mark says,
Mar. 5.
that he looked about to see her that had done this: but the woman knowing
what was done in her, came fearing and tremblyng, and fell at his feet, and
told him all the truth. Luke 8.
And Luke says, yt the woman when she saw that she could not be hid,
came tremblyng and fell at his feet, and told him before all the people for
what cause she had touched him, and how immediately she was healed. But he
said to her, Daughter be of good comfort, thy faith has made thee whole:
Go in peace. Thus out of the Evangelists I have laid down the story. She
thought to have carried it close, and to have stolen it away without open
recognizing and publishing of it: But she is called for, and (as Mark says)
he looked about to see her. Mark. 5.
Then she came trembling and told all the truth. So virtue is gone out from
him in the wonderful works of his heavenly helps and deliueraunces. And if
we do not heartily and thankefullie recognize and publishe them, he will
call for us, as he did for her, and look about for us, if we come not in to
make thankful declaration of his great, manifold, and marvelous benefits.
Then seeing for his exceeding benefits he looks for dutiful thankfulness
of us, Ephe. 5. Col. 5.
let us (as Saint Paul exhorts) show our selves heartily thankful unto
him for them, and lay them up and lock them up in thankful memory, that
carnal security do not swallow them up and by frailty they do not vade
away. Thus how God requires and looks for thankfulness of us.

The fifth.
The fifth and last is, what a comfort it is t^^ conscience, and a good witness
and fruit of faith, to show our hearty thankfulness to God, and to praise
and glorify him for his wonderful works and exceeding benefits bestowed on
us.

The thankfulness of the faithful is a comfort of conscience and good fruit of
faith. Psalm. 116.
The thankfulness of the faithful, and their praising and glorifiyng of God for
his manifold and great benefits, is a great comfort to the consciences of the
godly, and a good witness and fruit of their faith. The Prophet David
searching into his own thankfulness to God, says: What reward shall I give to
the Lord for all the benefits that he has done unto me? I will receive the cup
of salvation and call upon the name of the Lord. And out of his thankful
heart he calls others to the consideration and view of Gods benefits
bestowed on him: Psalm. 66
O come hither (says he) and hearken all ye that fear God, and I will tell
you what he has done for my soul. And he takes such comfort in his
faithful praising and glorifiyng of God, Psalm. 63.
that he says: My soul shall be satisfied as it were with marrow and fatnes,
when my mouth with joyful lips prayseth thee. Because of the joy and comfort
of his heart in praising of God, he calls his lips joyful in showing forth
his joy and showting as with joy and iubile, the word Renauoth comes of the
root of the word that signifies to shout for joy, and they translate the words
labiis iubilationum, With lips of iubile and joy, and shouting for inward joy.
And in the same Psalm before, he says: Thy loving kindness is better then life
it self, my lips shall praise thee. As long as I live I will magnify thee in
this manner, and lift up my hands in thy name. And touching his thankful
remembrance in the same Psalm, after he says: Have I not remembered thee in my
bed, and thought upon thee when I was waking? Because thou have been my helper,
therefore under the shadow of thy wings will I rejoice. My soul hangs upon
thee, and thy right hand has vpholden me. Those also that seek the hurt of
my soul they shall go under the earth. Thus of his comfort in thankfulness
and joyful praising the mercy of God to him, of his thankful remembrance of
God, and confidence in his help and mercy. And of the good comfort of
conscience, and witness and fruit of the faith of saints David says: Psalm.
149.
that the saints rejoice in their beds, and that the praises of God are in
their mouths. What manner of praises they are, The praises of the saints.
the nature of the word Romemoth does import, which ye vulgar for expressing
the sense, tra^slateth Exaltationes, ye exaltatio^s, by which are meant the
praise with which they exalt and extol the magnificences of the h^rc^ies of
God to them. And these praises are in their mouths or throats. So they make
no dainty of their lips in praising God: but the praises by which they exalt
and magnify the mercies of God, are in their throats, which as trumpets sound
out in praising of God. Let such praises of God be in our hearts and thrtotes
sounding as trumpets with thankful praising of the mercy and benefitts of God
to us. We are the lively Organes and instruments of praise and the true
trumpets of thanksgiving. Sound out ye tru^pets of thanksgiving, blow up the
Cornets of praise, strike up the heavenly harpes and Lutes with thankful melody
in our hearts and mouths, praising and glorifying of God. Ephe. 5.
And as Paul exhorts the Ephesians: In Psalms (says he) Hymns, and
spiritual songs, singing and making melody to the Lord in your hearts. And as he
says to the Colossians, Col. 3.
in Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual songs singing with grace in your hearts
to God. Nicol. de Lyra in cap. 3. ad Colos. Amb. in cap. 3. ad Ephe.
Nicolaus de Lyra expounds the word in grace, in consideration of the
benefits of God. Ambrose says, he has commanded singing in our hearts to him,
lest in favor and regard of men it be done, and so the fruit be lost. This is
the true melody of the heart, and the heavenly harmony of thanksgiving and
praising God, with Psalms, Himnes and spiritual songs making melody in our
hearts to God. And this is the good fruit and witness of faith which the Saints
and faithful servants of God do show: the thankfulness and joyful melody
of their hearts and mouths in praising of God with Psalms, Himnes, and
spiritual songs, and with rejoicing lips in praising of God as David says.
So Moses and the children of Israel praised God for their deliverance from
Pharao. Exodus 15. Moses. Miriam.
So likewise Miriam did with the godly woman that praised God with her for the
same delivery. And Deborah the Prophetess, Judges. 5. Deborah. Barah.
and Barah song praise and thanksgiving to God for the overthrow of Sisera,
and their delivery from Iabin king of Canaan. 2. Chro. 14. Asa.
So Asa the godly king with his people assembled, praised God for their
delivery from Zerah king of Ethyopia, which came with such numbers to ouerrun
him. So likewise Iehoshaphat the religious and godly Prince with his host, 2.
Chro. 20. Iehoshaphat.
praised and glorified God for their marvelous deliverance from their enemies
without stroke of man's hand, whose swords God turned upon themselves.
Therefore after the gathering of the pray, the fourth day Iehoshaphat and his
host assembled themselves in the valley of Berachah, where they gave thanks
and blessed the Lord: for Berachah signifies blessing and giui^^ of thanks.
(...) ^alley of ^achah. ^. Chro. 20.
And the place is called the valle^ of Berachah unto this day, as the Scripture
says. As Iehoshaphat and his people by then thankful praising and blessing of
God in the valley of Berachah, and by the renown and name of that place have
left a monument o^ their thankfulness, blessing and praising of God for their
wonderful deliverance: so what better monument can we present to God for the
wonderful deliverances of our gracious Sovereign, his Church, and our
Country, then the lively monument of thankful hearts blessing and praising
God for them. Howsoever our bodies be disseuered by distance of dwelling and
place, yet if in our mind we in e^^ and assemble our thankful affections
together to pray and glorify God for his wonderful deliverances, it will be as
a valley of Berachah of blessing and praising God in his sight. God give all
subjects of her Majesty grace, with meeting of thankful minds and assembling
of their thankful affections to the praising and blessing of God for these
wonderful works of the late deliverances, to arreare up as it were an
acceptable monument of their thankfulness unto God, which may be as a valley of
Berachah in the sight of God: Luke 2.1.
and our blessed Savior which in the temple beheld those that (...) gifts
(...) ^he treasu^^, and vouchsafed ^^^^^^hly the w^^^es mite offered with so
(...) will, vou^^^afe to look down upon (...) ^mall monument of thanksgiving
and ^^ysing his name, and as the widows mite ^^accepte the same. The glorious
majesty (...) our God through the tender mercy of our Savior, vouchsafe
mercifully to look ^^nne from heaven upon the good nurse of (...) Church, and
the mother of our Country, ^ur ^ige and natural Sovereign Queen Eli^abeth
his handmaid, and under the wings (...) his fatherly providence always to
shrewd and preserve her from all her enemies, and from all traitors and
conspirators, and from all their plats and attempts at home and abroad,
wheresoever, whatsoever, and of whomsoever, Amen.

1 The Lord hear thee in the day of trouble, Psalm. 20.
the name of the God of Jacob defend thee.

2 Send thee help from the Sanctuary, and strengthen thee out of Sion.

3 Remember all thy offerings, and accept thy burnt sacrifices.

4 Grant thee thy hearts desire, and fulfill all thy mind.

5 We will rejoice in thy Salvation, and triumph in the name of the Lord our
God. The Lord perform all thy petitions.

FINIS.

