A TREATISE OF THE PASSIONS AND FACVLTIES of the Soul of Man. With the
several Dignities and Corruptions thereunto belonging.

By EDWARD REYNOLDES, late Preacher to the Honorable Society of Lincoln's
Inn: And now Rector of the Church of Braunston in Northamptonshire.

Iuvenal Sat. 1. Quicquid agunt Homines, Votum, Timor, Ita, Voluptas, Gaudia,
Discursus, nostri est farrago Libelli.

LONDON, Printed by R. H. for Robert Bostock, dwelling in Saint Paul's
Churchyard at the Sign of the Kings Head. 1640.

TO HER HIGHNESS THE PRINCESS ELIZABETH, PRINCESS PALATINE OF THE RHINE,
DVTCHES OF BAVARIA, etc. AND ELDEST Daughter to Her Majesty the Queen of
BOHEMIA.
May it please your Highness;
WHat the Great Philosopher Aristot. polit. lib. 7, cap. 16.
has observed of Men's Bodies, is, upon so much stronger Reasons, true of their
Minds, by how much our Intellectual Maturity is more lingering, and sluggish
than our Natural, That the too Early Conceptions and Issues of them do
usually prove but weak and unusefull. And we shall seldom find, but that
those venturous Blossoms, whose over-hastie obedience to the Early Spring does
anticipate their proper season, and put forth too soon, do afterward for
their former boldness suffer from the injury of severer weather, except at
least some happy shelter, or more benign influence redeem them from danger.
The like Infelicity I find my self obnoxious unto at this time. For I know
not out of what disposition of mind, whether out of love of Learning (for Amo^
dixit (...). (...) ^l. R^dig. l. 16. (...). 15.
Love is venturous, and conceives difficult things easier then they are) or
whether out of a Resolution to take some account from my self of those few
years wherein I had then been planted in the happiest of all Soyles, the
Schools of Learning; whether upon these, or any other Inducements, so it has
happened, that I long since have taken boldness in the Minority of my Studies
to write this ensuing Treatise: That before I adventured on the endeavor of
knowing other things, I might first try whether I knew my self. Least I should
justly incur the Censure, which that (...) (...) (...) ^. 6.
sour Philosopher past upon Grammarians. That they were better acquainted with
the evils of Ulysses then with their own. This hasty resolution having
produced so untimely an issue, It happened by some accident to be like Moses in
his Infancy exposed to the Seas. Where I made no other account, but that its
own weakness would there have revenged my former boldness, and betrayed it
unto perishing. But as he then, so this now, has had the mavelous felicity
to light on the view, and fall under the compassion of a very Gracious
Princess. For so far has your Highness vouchsafed (having happened on the
sight of this Tractate) to express favor thereunto, as not only to spend
hours in it, and require a Transcript of it, but further to recommend it by
your Gracious judgment unto public view. In which particular I was not to
advice with mine own Opinion, being to express my humblest acknowledgement to
your Highness.

This only Petition I shall accompany it withal unto your Highness feet,
That since it is a Blossom which put forth so much too soon, It may therefore
obtain the Gracious Influence of your Highness favor, to protect it from that
severity abroad which it otherwise justly fears.

God Almighty make your Highness as great a Mirror of his continual Mercies,
as he has both of his Graces and of Learning.

Your Highness most Humble Servant, EDWARD REYNOLDES.

A PREFACE TO THE READER.
HAving been moved to give way unto the Publication of this Phylosophicall
Miscellany, the Fruit of my younger Studies, I conceive it needful to prevent
one obvious prejudice under which I may labor. For it may happily seem undecent
in me, having adventured to publish some few, though weak Discourses in
Arguments Divine, that I should now suffer the Blossoms of my youth to look
abroad and run the ha^rd of Public Censure. Whereunto when I shall have ^ven
a short answer, I shall rest something the more confident of a C^ndid
construction.

And here I might first allege the ^our which God himself has been pleased
to give. Unto Ins^ur, and Natural knowledge. In the first Creation when he
gave unto man the Do^nion over other Creatures for his use, he gave him
likewise the (...), and knowledge of them, for his Makers Glory, and his own
Delight. (For God bro^ght them unto him to give them Names.) And as the Holy
Scriptures are all over full of the Mysteries of Gods wisdom in Natural
Things, so are there some special Passages thereof written Job c^p. 38, 39,
40, 41. Psa. 1^4, 147.
as it were purposely on that Argument. And we find that Moses and Solomon
have therein Testimony given unto them, not only of their Divine, but of their
Humane, and natural Knowledge likewise.

And if we look into the Ancient Christian Churches, or into these of later
times, we shall find that very many Ecclesiastical persons have not denied
unto the world, their Philosophical and Poetical labors, either whole and
alone, or mixed, and directed to Theological Ends, as we find in the writings
of Clemens Alexandrinus, Tertullian, Eusebius Caesariensis, Saint Austins
Books, De Civitate Dei, and others, Venerable Bede, Isidore Hispalensis,
Synesius Sidonius Apollinaris, Honorius Augustodunensis, etc. In the Hexam^rons
of Saint Basil, Nyssen, Ambrose, and the Books of those who have written more
directly upon some parts of the Argument of this present Treatise, as Gregory
Nyssen, Lactantius, Nemesius, Procopius, Gaz^us, Damascen, and others. And in
later times, besides the Schoolmen, and those vast labors of many of that
side, in Dialecticall, Physical and Metaphysicall writings we might in stance
in very many of the R^formed Churches abroad, some of whose younger labors have
seen the Light* as also in the Oratory* Logical, Moral, Historical, Mathe
maticall, Miscell^nious writings of many learned Di vines of our own Church,
under the Protection of which great Examples I shall use the Apology which
Quintilian (...). 1. cap. 6.
dictateth unto me, Vel Error honestus est Magnos Duces sequentibus. That it is
no uncomely, but a pardonable Error, which has great Examples to excuse it.
In which respect I find my self chiefly subject to this Infelicity, that I
am constrained to follow such Examples, as little children do their Fathers,
Non aequis passibus, at a very great Distance.

And truly, when I again, consider the Excellent Et q^em de communibus
sensibus ^re in (...), sed in (...) ^um (...), non i^ (...) falsi. Tertul. de
Resur. carn^s. cap. 3. (...). ^iam Apol. cap. 47. and (...). Alex. Screm. l^.
p. 203. ^. 207. A.E. 214.
Use and subordination, of humane learning unto learning Divine (It being
hardly possible, without it, to understand sundry passages of holy Scripture,
depending upon the propriety of Words and Idiomes, or upon the customs. Rites,
Proverbes, Forms, Vsages, Laws* Offices, Antiquities of the Assyrian,
Persian, Greek, and Roman Monarchies, as might be showed in sundry
particulars, and were a labor most worthy the industry of some able and
learned pen:) when I consider that the ^, 218. 219 223* 227 233. 234 and lib.
6. p. 4^5. 467. 499 500. Justin. Martyr. Apol. 1. Aug. Confess l. 1. c. 15.
Christianu Domini sus esse intelligit, ubicunque invenerit vt ritatem. Aug. de
D^ctri. Chri. l. 2. c. 18, 39. 40. (...) Justin. Apol. 1. V^d. Aug. de ci^.
De^. l. 18. c. 52. Greg. Nezian. Orat. ^. ^ Ex^cl. 12. 35.
spoils of Egypt were by God allowed to enrich Israel, and 1 Chronicles. 29.
the spoils of the Gentiles reserved by David for the building of the Temple:
That a Deuteronomy. 21. 12.
Gentile by legal Purification and Marriage, might become an Israelite, That
the 2 Samuel 12. 30 Vid. Pet. (...) no^. decret. l. 1. Tit. 8. ^. 4.
Crown of Rabbah was put upon the head of David, and the 1 Samuel 17. 21.
Sword of Goliath used to stay himself: That the Mat. 2 11.
Gold and Myr^h, and Frankincense of the Wise men of the East, was offered unto
Christ* when I find the Act. 18* 4 17. 23*. 29
Apostle convincing the Jews, out of their Law, and the Philosophers out of
their Maxims. And that Iac. 1. 17* 1 Timothy 4 4.
every gift, as well as every Creature of God is good, and may be sanctified
for the use and delight of Man; I then conclude with my self, That this Moral
and Philosophical Glass of the humane Soul may be of some service even unto
the Tabernacle, as the Ex. 38. 8.
Looking glasses of the Israelitish women were unto the Altar.

N^r (...) I (...) a little wonder at the melancholy fancy of Saint De (...).
(...) (...) (...).
Hierom, who conc^iving himself in a v^on beaten by an Angel for being a
Ciceronian, did for ever after promise to abjure the Reading of secular (...).
(...) (...) (...)
himself both justifying the (...) at use of that kind of Learning, and
acknowledg^ (...) conce^d vision of his to have been but a Drea^.

It is true indeed that in regard of the bewitching danger from humane
learning, and the too great aptness in the minds of man to surfeit and be
intemperate, in the use of it; Some of the Ancients have sometimes interdicted
the Reading Vi^. Notas Conradi Rit^sij i^ Isid. Pelus. Ep. 56. l. 1.
of such Authors unto Christian men; But this calls upon us for
watchfulness, in our studies, not for negligence, for the Apostle will tell
us. That to the pure all things are pure. And even Tertul. (...) script. c. 7.
(...) (...). c. 10. (...), Marc. l. 2. c. (...).
of harmefull things when they are prepared, and their malignancy by Art
corrected, does the skillful Physician make an excellent use. If then we be
careful to Moderate and Regulate our affections, to take heed of the pride and
inslation of secular learning, not to admire Philosophy, to the prejudice of
Evangelicall knowledge, as if without the revealed light of the Gospel,
salvation might be found, in the way of Paganism; if we suffer not these lean
K^ne to devour the sat ones, nor the River Jordan to be lost in the dead Sea;
I mean Piety to be swallowed up of profane Studies, and the knowledge of the
Scriptures (which alone would make any man conversant in all other kind of
Learning with much greater Felicity, and success:) to be under-valued, and not
rather, the more admired, is a Rich Jewel compared with Glass. In this case,
and with such care as this, there is no doubt, but secular Studies prepared and
corrected from Pride and Profaneness, may be to the Church as the Gt^eonites
were to the Congregation of Israel, for H^wers of Word, and Drawers of Water,
otherwise we may say of them as Cato Major to his (...), of the Grecian Art^
and Learning. (...) (...) (...) (...) (...). ^. 13.
Quandocunqu^ ista Gens suas literas dabit, omnia Cor^umpet.

Nor have I upon these Considerations only adven tured on the publication of
this Tract, but because withal, in the reviewing of it, I found very many
Touches upon Theological Arguments, and some Passages wholly of that Nature.
Yea, all the Material parts of the Treatise do so nearely concern the
knowledge of our selves, and the Direction of our lives, as that they may be
all esteemed Borderers upon that Profession.

In the perusing and fashioning of it for the Press, I have found that true in
writing, which I had formerly found true in Building; That it is almost as
chargeable to repair, and set right an Old house, as to Erect a New one. For I
was willing in the most material parts of it, so to lop off Luxuriances of
Style, and to supply the Defects of Matter, as that with Candid, favorable,
and ingenuous Judgments, it might receive some toleralle acceptance. In hope
whereof I rest,

Thine in all Christian service, EDWARD REYNOLDS.

Perlegi Tractatum hunc, cui Titulus (A Treatise of the Passions and Faculties
of the Soul, etc) in quo nihil reperio orthodoxae fidei, aut bonis moribus
adversum, quo minus cum summa utilitate imprimatur.

M^ 14. 1640. Tho. Wykes. R. P. Episc. Land. Capell. domest.

A Summary of the several Chapters contained in this Book.
Chap. 1. OF the dependence of the Soul in her operations upon the body. Page
1. Chap. 2. In what cases the dependence of the Soul on the body, is lessened
by faith, custom, education, occasion. p. 8. Chap* 3. Of the Memory, and some
few causes of the weakness thereof. p. 13. Chap. 4. Of the Fancy it is offices
to the will and reason, vol^bility of thoughts fictions, errors, lev^ty
fixednesse. p. 18. Chap. 5. Of Passions, their Nature and distribution, of the
motions of natural creatures, guided by a knowledge without them: and of
rational creatures guided by a knowledge within them: of Passions mental
sensitive, and rational. p. 31. Chap. 6. Of humane Passions in general, their
use, natural, moral, civil: their subordination (...), or rebel on against
right rea^n. p* ^1. Chap. 7. Of the exercise of Passion (...) (...) Apathy: of
(...), (...), (...), (...) (...) Cure thereof p. 4^. Chap. 8. Of (...) ^ls of
Passions, (...) they (...) virtue: of (...) (...) (...), of (...) (...) (...),
diverti^ (...) (...) (...) (...) of (...), and of their (...) (...) (...). p.
57. Chap. 9. Of the affection of Love, of Love natural, of general Communion,
of Love rational, the object and general cause thereof. p. 74. Chap. 10. Of
the rule of true Love: the Love of God and our selves: similitude to these, the
cause of Love in other things: of Love of Concup^ence: how love begets Love:
and how pr^sence with, and absence from the Object, does upon different
reflects exercise and increase Love, p. 81. Chap. 11. Of the effects of Love,
union to the Object, stay and immoration of the mind upon it, rest in it,
zeal^, strength, and tend^rnesse toward it, condescension unto it, lique^ion
and languishing for it. p. 98. Chap. 12. Of the Passion of ^atred, the
fundamental cause or object thereof, evil: How far forth evils willed by
God, may be declined by men, of Gods sent and revealed will. p. 111. Chap. 13.
Of the other causes of Hatred secret Antipathy* Difficulty of procuring a Good
commanded, (...), base sears, disparity of Desires, a fixed jealous (...). p.
119. Chap. 14. Of the Quality and Quantity of Hatred* and how (...) either
respects it is to be regulated. p. 131. Chap. 15. Of the (...) and evil
Effects of Hatred, (...) (...) Wisdom to profit by that we hate, with
Confidence, Victory* Reformation. Hatred, in general against the whole kind,
cunning ^ss (...), cruelty, running ^ver to persons Innocent, vielating
Religion. Envy, Rejoy^ing at evil. Creeked suspicion, contempt, contumely. p.
137. Chap. 16. Of the affection of Desire, what it is. The several kinds of
it, natural, rational, spiritual, intemperate, unnatural morbid Desires.
The Object of the^, good, pleasant, as possible, as absent, either in whole, or
in degrees of perfection, or continuance. The most general internal cause
vacuity, indigence other causes, admiration* greatness of mind, curio*sity.
p. 161. Chap. 17. Of other causes of Desire, Infirmity, Temerity, Mutability of
Mind, Knowledge, Repentance, Hope, of the effects of it in general labor,
languor. In special, of rational Desires, bounty, grief, weariness,
indignation against that which withstands it. Of vicious Desires, deception,
ingratitude, envy, greediness, baseness of Resolution. p. 177. Chap. 18.
Rules touching our Desires. Desires of lower Objects, must not be either Hasty,
or unbounded, such are unnatural, turbid, unfruitful, unthankful. Desires of
heavenly objects fixed, permanent, industrious, connection of virtues, sluggish
desires. p. 190. Chap, 19. Of the affection of joy or delight, the several
objects thereof, corporal, moral, intellectual, Divine. p. 197. Chap. 20. Of
the causes of Joy. The union of the Object to the Faculty, by Contemplation,
Hope, Fruition, changes by accident a cause of Delight. p. 203. Chap. 21. Of
other causes of Delight, Unexpectedness of a good, strength of Desire.
Imagination, Imitation. Fitness and accommodation. Of the effects of this
Passion: Reparation of Nature, Dilatation. Thirst in noble Objects, satiety in
baser. Whetting of Industry. Atmorous unbelief. p. 211 Chap* 22. Of the
affection of sorrow the object of it, evil* sensitive, intellectual as
present in it self, or to the mind, by memory, or suspicion, particular
causes, effects of it, Fear, Care, Experience, Erudition, Irresolution,
Despair, Execration, Distempers of body, p. 221. Chap. 23. Of the affection of
Hope, the Object of it, Good, Future, Possible, Difficult. Of Regular and
inordinate Despair. p. 233. Chap. 24. Of the causes of Hope, Want, and
Weakness together, Experience and Knowledge. In what sense Ignorance may be
said to strengthen, and know ledge to weaken Hope: Examples quicken more then
Precept, provision of aides: the uncertainty of outward means to establish
Hope, goodness of Nature, Faith, and Cred^lity* wise Confidence. p. 240. Chap.
25. Of the effects of Hope: Stability of mind* wearines, arising not out of
weakness, but out of want, Contention, and forthputting of the Mind. Patience
under the want, Distance, and Difficulty of Good desired, waiting upon aid
expected. p. 254. Chap. 26. Of the affection of Boldness, what it is, the
causes of it, strong Desires, strong Hopes, Aids, Supplies, Real or in
Opinion. Despair and extremities, experience, ignorance, Religion, immunity
from danger, Dext^rity of Wit, Strength of Love, Pride or Greatness of Mind
and Abilities. The effects of it, Executi^n of things advised, Temerity, etc.
p. 258. Chap. 27. Of the Passion of Fear: the causes of it, Impotency,
Obno^ousnesse, Suddenness, Neerenesse, Newness, Conscience, Ignerance of an
evil. p. 274. Chap. 28. Of the effects of Fear, Suspicion, Circumspection,
Superstition, betraying the succors of Reason, Fear generative, rest^cting
inward wea^ning the Faculties of the mind, base Susp^tion, wise Caution. p.
210. Chap. 29. Of that particular affection of Fear* which is called shame,
what it is. Whom we thus fear. The ground of it evil of Turpitude. Injustice,
Intemperance, Sordidnesse, So^nesse, Pusillanimity, Flattery, Vainglory,
Misfortun^, Ignorance Pragmaticalnesse, Deformity, Greatness of Mind,
unworthy Correspondencies, etc. Shame, v^ous, and virtuous. p. 300. Chap. 30.
Of the affection of Anger, the distinctions of it, The fundamental cause
thereof contempt. Three kinds of Contempt, dis^estimation disappointment,
Calumny. p. 31^. Chap. 31. Of other causes of Anger: first in regard of him
that suffers wrong: Excellency, weakness, strong d^sires, sus^ition, Next
^regard of him who does it; Rasenesse, Impudence, Neerenesse, Freedom of
speech, Contention, Ability, the effects of Anger, the immutation of the Body*
Impulsion of Reason, Exp^dition, Precipitance. Rules for the moderating of this
Passion. p. 322. Chap. 32, Of the original of the Reasonable Soul whither it
be immediately created and i^sused, (...) derived by seminall Traduction from
the Parents. Of the derivation of original sin. p. 391. Chap. 33. Of the
Image of God in the Reasonable Soul in regard of it is simplicity, and
spirituality. p. 400. Chap. 34. Of the Souls Immortality proved by it is
simplicity, independance, agreement. Of Nations in acknowledging a God and
duties due to him, dignity above other creatures, power of understanding things
immortal, unsatisfiablenesse by Objects mortal, freeness from all causes of
corruption. p. 407. Chap. 35. Of the honor of humane bodies by creation, by
resurrection, of the endowments of glorified bodies. p. 420. Chap. 36. Of that
part of Gods image in the Soul, which answers to his Power, Wisdom,
Knowledge, Holiness. Of man's dominion over other Creatures. Of his love to
Knowledge, what remainders we retain of original Justice. p. 429. Chap. 37.
Of the Faculty of understanding, it is operation outward upon the object. Inward
upon the will. Of Knowledge, what it is. The natural desire and love of it.
Apprehension, Judgment, Retention requisite unto right Knowledge. Several
kinds of Knowledge. The original Knowledge given unto man in his Creation.
The benefits of Knowledge, of Ignorance natural, voluntary, Poenal, of
Curiosity, of Opinion, the causes of it, Disproportion between the Object and
the Faculty, and an acute versutilo^snesse of conceits, the benefits of modest
Hesitancy. p. 444. Chap. 38. Of Errors: the causes thereof. The abuses of
Principles, falsifying them: or transferring the truth of them out of their
own bounds. Affectations of singularity, and novell courses. Credulity and
thraldom of judgment unto others. How Antiquity is to be honored. Affection
to particular objects corrupts judgment. Curiosity in searching things
secret. p. 483 Chap* 39. The actions of the understanding, inventition, Wit,
Judgment: of Invention, Distrust, Prejudice, Immaturity: Of Tradition by
speech, Writing: Of the Dignities and Corruption of speech. p. 500. Chap. 40.
Of the Actions of the understanding upon the Will, with respect to the End and
Means. The power of the understanding over the Will, not Commanding, but
directing the Objects of the Will to be good and convenient. Corrupt Will
looks only at Good present. Two Acts of the Understanding, Knowledge and
Consideration. It must also be possible, and with respect to happiness
Immortal. Ignorance and Weakness in the Understanding, in proposing the right
means to the last End. p. 517. Chap. 41. Of the Conscience; it is Offices of
Direction, Conviction, Comfort, Watchfulness, Memory, Impartiality. Of
Consciences Ignorant, Superstitious, Sleeping* Frightfull, Tempestuous. p. 531.
Chap. 42. Of the Will: it is Appetite: with the proper and chief Objects
thereof, God. Of Superstition and Idolatry. Of it is Liberty in the Electing of
Means to an End. Of it is Dominion Coactive and persuasive. Of Fate, Astrology.
Satanicall Suggestions. Of the manner of the Wills Operaation, Motives to it.
Acts of it. The Conclusion. p. 537.
A TREATISE of the Passions and Faculties of the SOUL of MAN.
CHAP. I. Of the dependence of the Soul, in her operations upon the Body.
IT has been a just Complaint of Learned Men, that usually we are more
curious in our inquiries Cic. de Div. lib. 2.
after things New than excellent; Plin. lib. 2. ep. 20.
and that the very neerenesse of worthy Objects, has at once made them both
despised and unknown. Thus like Children, with an idle diligence, and
fruitless Curiosity, we turn over this great Book of Nature, without
perusing those ordinary Characters, wherein is expressed the greatest power of
the Worker, and excellency of the Work; fixing our Admiration only on those
Pictures and unusual Novelties, which though for their rareness they are more
strange, yet for their na ture are less worthy. Every Comet or burning Meteor
strikes more wonder into the beholder, Cic. d^ Not. Deor. lib. 2.
than those glorious Lamps of Nature, with their admirable Motions and Order,
in which the Heathen have acknowledged a Divinenesse. Let a Child be borne but
with six fingers, or have a part more than usual, we rather wonder at One
supers^uous, than at All natural. Sol spectatorem nisi cum desicit non habet,
nemo observat Lunam Sen. qu. Not. lib. 7. c. 1.
nisi laborantem, adeo natural est magis nova, quam magna mirari: None looks
with wonde^ on the Sun, but in an Eclipse; no eye gazeth on the Moon, but in
her Travel: so natural it is with men, to admire rather things N^w than
Common. Whereas indeed things are fit for study and observation, though never
so common, in regard of the perfection of their nature, and usefulness of
their knowledge. In which respect, the plain Counsel of the Oracle was one of
the wi^est which was ever given to man, To study and to know himself;
because, by reason of his own neerenesse to himself, he is usually of
himself most unknown and neglected. And yet if we consider, how in him it
has pleased God to stamp a more notable Character of his own Image, and to
make him, amongst all his Sen. de (...). lib. 6. c. 23.
Works, one of the most perfect Models of created excellency, we cannot but
acknowledge him to be one, though of the least, yet of the fittest Volumes, in
this great variety of Nature to be acquainted withal. Intending therefore,
according to my weakness, to take some view of the inside, and more noble
Characters of this Book, it will not be needful for me to gaze upon the
Cover, to insist on the materials or sensitive conditions of the humane nature,
or to commend him in his Anatomy; though even in that respect the Psalmist
tells us, that he is fearfully and wonderfully made: for we commonly see,
that as most kind of Plants or Trees exceed us in vegetation and fertility;
so, many sorts of Sen. Ep. 76.
beasts have a greater activitie and exquisiteness in their senses than we.
And the reason hereof is, because Nature aiming at a superior and more
excellent end, is in those lower faculties less intent and elaborate. It shall
suffice therefore, only to lay a groundwork in these lower faculties, for
the better notice of man's greater perfections, which have ever some connection
and dependence on them. For whereas the principal acts of man's Soul are
either of Reason and Discourse, proceeding from his Understanding; or of Action
and Morality, from his Will; both these, in the present condition of man's
estate, have their dependence on the Organs and faculties of the Body, which in
the one precede, in the other follow: To the one, they are as Porters, to let
in and convey; to the other as Messengers, to perform and execute: To the one,
the whole Body is as an Eye, through which it sees; to the other a Hand, by
which it works.

Concerning the ministry therefore of the Body unto the Soul, we shall thus
resolve; That the Reasonable part of Man, in that condition of subsistence
which now it has, depends in all its ordinary and natural operations, upon
Solirus de (...) ^esert quid accepto (...) in ^ccipitio ad tantam devenit
ignorantiam ut ^esciret se ha^isse nomen. Honori^ (...). de Philosoph. M^di,
lib. 4. c. 24.
the happy or disordered temperature of those vital Qualities, out of whose
apt and regular commixion the good estate of the Body is framed and composed.
For though these Ministerial parts have not any overruling, yet they have a
disturbing power, to hurt and hinder the operations of the Soul* Whence we
find, that sundry diseases of the Body do oftentimes weaken, yea, sometimes
quite extirpate the deepest impression and most fixed habits of the mind. For,
as wheresoever there is a locomotive faculty, though there be the principal
cause of all motion and activitie; yet if the subordinate instruments, the
bones and sinews be dis-jointed, shrunk, or any other ways indisposed for
the exercise of that power, there can be no actual motion; Or as in the Body
Politic* the Prince (whom Seneca calls the Soul of the Commonwealth) Sen.
de Clem. lib. 1. cap* 4.
receives either true or false intelligence from abroad, according as is the
fidelity or negligence of those instruments* whom Xenophon terms the Eyes
and Ears of Kings: In Xenop* Cyrop. lib. 8. and Arist. Polit. lib. 3. c. 12.
like manner, the Soul of man being not an absolute independent worker, but
receiving all her objects by conveyance from these bodily instruments, which
Cicero calls the Messengers to the Soul, if they out of any indisposition
shall be weakened, the Soul must continue like a Rasa Tabula, without any
acquired or introduced habits. The Soul has not immediately from it self
that strange weakness, which is observed in many men, but only *as it is
disabled by Earthie and sluggish Organs; which being out of order, are more
burdensome than serviceable thereunto.

There are observable in the Souls of men, considered in themselves, and in
reference one to another, two defects; an imperfection, and an inequality of
operation: the former of these I do not so ascribe to that bodily weakness,
whereby the Soul is any way oppressed, as if I conceived no internal darkness
in the faculties themselves; since the fall of man working in him a general
corruption, did amongst the rest infatuate the Mind, and as it were smother the
Soul with ignorance; so that the outward ineptitude of bodily instruments, is
only a furtherance and improvement of that Native imperfection. But for the
inequality and difference of men's understandings in their several operations,
notwithstanding it be questioned in the Schools, Whether the Souls of men
have not originally, in their Nature, degrees of perfection and weakness,
whence these several degrees of operation may proceed; yet nevertheless that
being granted, I suppose, that principally it proceeds from the variety,
tempers, and dispositions in the isntrumental faculties of the Body* by the
help whereof, the Soul in this estate works: for I cannot perceive it
possible, that there should have been, if man had continued in his Innocence,
(wherein our Bodies should have had an exact constitution, free from those
distempers to which now by sin they are liable) such remarkable differences
between men's apprehensions, as we now see there are: for there should have
been in all men a great facility to apprehend the mysteries of Nature, and to
acquire knowledge (as we see in Adam) which now we find in a large measure
granted to some, and to others quite denied. And yet in that perfect estate
(according to the opinion of those who now maintain it) there would have been
found a substantial and internal inequality amongst the Souls of men: and
therefore principally this variety comes from the sundry constitutions of men's
bodies; in some, yielding enablement, for quickness of Apprehension; in
others, pr^ssing down and intangling the Understanding; in some, disposing the
Mind unto one object; in some, unto another; according as the impetus and
force of their natural affections carries them. And therefore Aristotle in
his Politiques ascribes the inequality Arist. Polit. lib. 7.
which he observes between the Asiatique and European Wits, unto the several
Climates and temperature of the Regions in which they lived; according
whereunto, the Complexions and Constitutions of their Bodies only Arist. de
Anim^* lib. 3.
could be altered; the Soul being in it self, according to the same
Philosopher, impassible from any corporeal Agent. And to the same purpose
again he says, That if an old man had a young man's eye, his sight would be as
sharp and as distinct as a young man's is; implying (...) diversity of
Perception to be grounded only on the diversity of bodily instruments, by
which it is exercised. And therefore he elsewhere observes De Anima, lib. 2.
(I shall not trouble my self to examine upon what ground) that men of soft
and tender skins have greatest quickness of wit; and on the contrary, Duri
Carne, inepti^mente: thereby intimating, that there is no more significant and
lively expression of a vigorous or heavy Soul, than a happy or ill-ordered
Body; wherein we may sundry times read the abilities of the Mind, and the
inclinations of the Will: So then it is manifest, that this weakness of
apprehension in the Souls of men, does not come from any immediate and proper
darkness belonging unto them; but only from the coexistence which they have
with a Body illdisposed for assistance and information. For he who is carried
in a Coach (as the Body is vehiculum animae) though he be of himself more
nimble and active, must yet receive such motion as that affoords; and Water,
which is conveyed through Pipes and Aqueducts, though its motion by it self
would have been otherwise, must yet then be limited by the posture and
proportion of the Vessels through which it passes.

CHAP. II. In what Cases the dependence of the Soul on the Body, is lessened
by Faith, Custom, Education, Occasion.
But yet this dependence on the Body is not so necessary and immutable, but
that it may admit of variation, and the Soul be in some cases vindicated from
the impression of the Body: And this first, in extraordinary; and next, in
more common actions. In actions extraordinary, as those pious and religious
operations of the Soul, Assent, Faith, Invocation, and many others* wherein
the Soul is carried beyond the Sphere of Sense, and transported unto more
raised operations: For to believe and know, that there are laid up for pious
and holy endeavors those joys which eye has not seen, nor care heard, and
to have some glimpses and fore-taste of them, which Saint Paul calls the
Earnest, and first fruits of the Spirit; What is this, but to leave sense
behind us, and to outrun our Bodies? And therefore it is, that Religion, I
mean chiefly, the Principles, Foundations, Articles, and Mysteries
Evangelicall, were always not to be urged by Disputes of Secular Learning, but
to be sacredly and secretly infused; not so much persuading to the knowledge I
v^ngel. non in deget Sylle^
of apparent Truths* as drawing to the beleese of true Mysteries. Divine Truths
do as much transcend the Reason* as Divine Goodness does the Will of Man.
That One Nature should be in Three Persons, and Two Natures in One Person: That
the invisible God should be manifested in the flesh, and a pure Virgin bring
forth a Son; That Death should be conquered by dying, and not be able to
digest and consume the Body which it had devoured: That dead bones should live,
and they who dwell in the dust awake and sing: These are Mysteries, not only
above the reach of Humane, but even of Evangelicall disquisition; in so much,
that even unto Principalities and Powers they were not otherwise made known,
but by Divine Revelation delivered unto the Church. Sarah laughed, when Abraham
believed; and the Philosophers mocked, when Paul disputed; and Reason expected,
that the Apostle should have fallen down dead, when contrarily, Faith shook
the Viper into the fire. There is a great difference between the manner of
yielding our assent unto God and Nature: For in Philosophy, we never resign
our beleese, nor suffer our judgments to be wholly carried to any Conclusion,
till there be a demonstrative Argument grounded on Induction from the Sense,
for the enforcement thereof. But Divinity, on the other side, when God speaks
unto us, works Science by Faith* making us so much the more assured of thos^
Truths which it averreth, than of any Natural^ Conclusions, (notwithstanding
they may seem^ sometimes to bear opposition to humane Reason) by how much
Divine Authority is more absolute and certain, than any Natural
demonstration. And this freedom from bodily restraint, have (according to the
Schoolmen) those Raptures and Ecstasies, which raise and ravish the Soul,
with the sweetness of extraordinary Contemplations. And yet even Religion it
self has so much condiscended to the senses of men, as to give them manner of
room and service in this great Mystery. And therefore generally, the Doctrine
of Christ is set forth in Parables and Similitudes, and the Faith in Christ
confirmed by Sacraments; things most agreeable to the perception and capacity
of the Senses.

Now, for the exemption of the more ordinary actions of the Soul from any
predominancie of the Body, it is chiefly wrought by these three means,
Education, Custom, and Occasion. For the Rule of Aristotle, though in Agents
purely Vid. Arist. ^ic. lib. 10. c. 9. ^ic. l. 2. c. 1.
Natural and peremptory (which are not directed by any degree of knowledge
inherent) it held true; yet in Man it is not universal, That any thing which
comes from Nature, is unalterable by Custom: For we commonly observe, that the
Culture of the Mind, as of the Earth, does many times deliver it from the
barrenness of its own Nature.

Exercetque frequens tellurem atque imperat arvis;
As frequent Husbandry commands
The emptiest and most barren Lands.
Education then, and Custom, do as it were revenge Nature; insomuch, that
though the outward Humors and Complexions do work the Mind unto an unhappie
temper, yet by a continual grapling with these difficulties, it gets at the
last some victory, though not without much reluctancie.

And for Occasion; that alters the natural inclination of the Will and
Affections, rather than of the Understanding: for so we see, that the byas and
force of men's desires are oftentimes turned, by reason of some sudden emergent
occurrences, contrary to the standing temper and complexion of the Body. Thus
we read some times of men in War; who notwithstanding of themselves
timorous and sluggish, yet when the disadvantage of the place had taken away
all possibility of flight, and the cruelty of the Adversary all hope of
mercy, if they should be conquered, have strangely gained by their own
despaires, and gotten great and prosperous Victories, by a forced and
unnatural fortitude.

Vna salus victis, nullam sperare salutem. The only weapon which did win the
day,
Was their despair, that they were cast away.
An example whereof, we have in the Philistims: 1 Sa^. 4 6, 7, 8
When the Israelites brought forth the Ark of the Lord in the Camp, they were
sore afraid, and cried out, Woe unto us, woe unto us; who shall deliver us out
of the hands of these mighty Gods? And thereupon resolved to quit themselves
like men, and fight. And Caesar in his Commentaries tells us of a people* who
when Caesar Com. ^1.
they went out to War, would burn their Houses; that having no Home of their
own, to fly unto, they might by that despair, be urged to gain one by the
Sword. The Historian reports of a Band of Scythians, who though they Justin.
were of themselves bondslaves, did notwithstanding, upon occasion of their
Masters absence, endeavor to shake off their inbred Civilitie; usurping to
themselves a Freedom, of which the baseness of their condition was incapable:
Nor could they be removed from this Insolency, till the sight of Rods and
Staves, and other the like instruments of fear, had driven them back into
their Nature again.

CHAP. III. Of the Memory, and some few causes of the weakness thereof.
NOw for these inward Senses, which are commonly accounted three, (though
extending themselves unto sundry operations of differing qualities) ^ take the
two later, to wit, Memory, and Fancy, or Imagination, to have a more
excellent degree of perfection in man; as being indeed the principal
Storehouses and Treasuries of the o^ ^ons of the Soul. Where* by Memory, I
under stand not the faculty, as it is common to beas^s with men, and imports
nothing but the simple retention, and conservation of some species, formerly
treasured up by the conveyance of the outward sense: but as it is Consors and
co-operatrix Rationis, ^s Hugo speaks, a joynt-worker in the Lib. de spirit.
and anima.
operations of Reason; which the Latins call Reminiscentia, or Recordatio;
including some acts of the Understanding* Which is a reviewing, or (as we
speak) a calling to mind of former objects, by discourse, or rational
searching for them; which is made by Aristotle to be the remote ground of all
Arts: For (says he) Memory is the Ground of Experience, and Experience
Metaph. lib. 1.
the Mother of Art: The dignity hereof in man, is seen, both by perfecting
the Understanding* in matter of Learning and Discourse, (wherein some men have
attained unto almost a miraculous felicity; as Seneca the elder confess Sen.
Contr^. l^b. 1. ^n (...).
seth of himself, who could immediately recite two thousand words, in the same
order as they had been spoken before to him; and Cyrus, of (...). lib. 7. c.
24.
whom Zenophon testifies, that he could salute all the Soldiers in his Army
by their Names* and Mithridates, who being King over twenty Quintil. lib. 1^.
c. 2.
two Countries* did speak so many Languages without an Interpreter; and
Politian in his Epis^les tells of Fabius Vrsinus, a Child but of a Pol^. Ep.
l. 12. ad ^ic. Mi^d.
eleven years of age, in whom there was so rare a mixture of Invention and
Memory, that ^ee could unto five or six several persons, at the same time,
dictate the matter and words of so many several Epistles, some serious, some
jocular, all of different arguments, returning after every short period, from
the last to the first, and so in order; and in the conclusion, every Epistle
should be so close* proper, and coherent within i^ self, as if it alone had
been intended:) As also by affording special assistance for the direction and
discreet managing of our actions, conforming them either unto Precepts and
Rules in Morality, or unto Principles of Wisdom and public Prudence*
gathered from Historical observations; while the Mind, by the help of
Memory, being as it were conversant with Ages past, and furnished with
Examples for any service and employment, does by mature application, weighing
particulars, comparing times, circumstances, and passages of affairs together,
enable it self with the more hope and resolution, to pass successefully
through any enterprise or difficulty: for qui credit sp^rat, he that
believes, and is acquainted with the happy issue of other men's resolutions,
will with the less anxietie or discouragement go on in his own.

The principal Corruptions which I conceive of the Memory, are first, too
much slightness and shallowness of observation; when out of an impatiencie of
staying long, or making any pro^ound inquiry into one object, and out of a
gluttonous curiosity to seed on many, the greediness of the appetite
weakeneth the digestion, (for so some have called the Memory, the Belly of the
Soul) and an eagerness to take in, makes uncarefull to retain. And this is
the reason, why many men wander over all Arts and Sciences, without gaining
real improvement, or soliditie in any: They make not any solemn Journey to a
particular Coast, and Head of Learning, but view all as it were in Transitu;
having no sooner begun to settle on one, but they are in haste to visit
another. But such men as these (except endowed with an incredible and usual
felicity of dispatch) are no more able to find the use, or search the bottom
of any Learning, than he who rides Poast, is to make a description and Map of
his Iourneyes: who, though by much employment, he may toil and sweat more in
traveling from place to place; yet is he far less able to discover the
nature of the Countries, temperature of the Air, Character of the people,
Commodities of the Earth, than he, who though not so violent in the motion, is
yet more constant in his abode: and though his haste be less eager, yet his
observations are more serious. Omnis festinatio coeca est, says Seneca;
Precipitancie and unstablenesse, as well in the motions of the Wit as of the
Body, dazeleth and disableth the eyes: And it is true in the Mind, as in the
Stomach; too quick digestion does always more distemper than nourish, and
breeds nothing but Crudities in Learning. Nor can I call that so much Study,
as agitation and restlesnesse of the Mind; which is as impatient of true
settled labor, as it is of quiet. Now, the reason why such a temper of Mind as
this, is corruptive to the Memory, is first, because Memory is always joined
with some measure of Love; and we most of all remember that, which we most
respect: Omnia quae ^urant meminerunt; There where the Treasure is, the Mind
will be also: There therefore, where our Love is most constant, our Memories
will be most faithful. So, that sudden vanishing, and broken desires, which
like the appetite of sick men, are for the time violent, but give presently
over; as they argue an eager Love for the present, of what we Arill. Rhet.
lib. 2. c. 12.
pursue, and by consequence, ^ fastidium and disesteeme of that which we soon
forsake* so do they necessarily infer weakness on the Memory, by how much
they make our hopes the stronger. For, as Seneca speaks, Cad^ca memoria De
Benef. lib. 3 c. 3.
futura iminentium; Men strongly bent upon things future, have but weak
memories of things past.

Secondly, the body of any one Homogeneall Learning, has this excellent
property in it, that all the parts of it do by a mutual service relate to,
and communicate strength and luster each to other: so that he who goes through
with any Science, does from every new Branch and Conclusion which he meets
with, receive a greater clearenesse and more strong impression of his former
degrees of Knowledge. Now then, that man who out of impatiencie of that
Restraint, cannot endure to go through an Art, to search into the Root, to
observe the knittings and dependencies of the parts amongst themselves, to see
by what passages Truth is derived from the Principles, to this or to other
Branches; must needs be so much the more forgetful of what he knows, by how
much he is ignorant of those other parts whereunto it refers.

Other causes there are of weakness in the Qui^til. lib. 11. c. 2.
Memory; as namely, a distrust, and from thence an unexercise of it. Whereupon
Plato tells us, that the use of Letters, in gathering Adversaria and
Collections, is a hinderance to the Memory; because those things which we
have deposited to our Desks, we are the more secure and careless to retain
in our Minds. And on the other Extreme, a too great Confidence in it, and
thereupon an over-burthening it with multitude of Notions; whereby as it sheds
much over, so it is withal indisposed for the ready use of what it retains;
it falling out in a huddle and tumultuarie heap of thoughts, as in any other
throng, that we can never so easily find out, or order and dispose what we
desire to use* but are consounded in our own store. But I forbear to insist
on these, because I hasten to the higher and more noble part of Man.

CHAP. IV. Of the Fancy: Its offices to the Will and Reason, Uolubilitie of
Thoughts, Fictions, Errors, Levitie, Fixednesse.
NOw for the Imagination, the dignity thereof consists, either in the office,
or in the latitude of it: Its office, is to be assistant both to the
Understanding and the Will; its assistance to the Understanding, is principally
in matter of Invention, readily to supply it with variety of objects whereon
to work, as also to quicken and raise the Mind with a kind of heat and
rapterie proportionable in the inferior part of the Soul, to that which in the
superior, Philosophers call Ext^sie; whereby it is possessed with such a strong
delight in its prope^ obje^, as makes the motions thereof toward it, to be
restless and impatient: And of this, is that of the Poet;

Est Deus in nobis agitante ealescimus ipso: (...). Ar^st. Prob^. c. 30.
By Divine Raptures we aspire,
And are inflamed with noble fire.
The office of the Imagination to the Will, is to quicken, allure, and sharpen
its desire toward some convenient object: for it often comes to pass, that
some plausible Fancy does more prevail with tender Wills, than a severe and
sullen Argument, and has more powerful insi^uations to persuade, than the
peremptorinesse of Reason has to command. And the reason ^ereof is, because
liberty being natural unto man's Will, that course must needs most of all
gain upon it, which does offer least force unto its liberty: Which is done
rather by an Argument of delight, than of constraint; and best of all, when a
rational and convincing Argument is so sweetened and tempered, to the delight
of the hearer, that he shall be content to entertain Truth, for the very
beauty and attire of it; so that you shall not know, whether it were the
weight of the Reason that overruled, or the elegancie that enticed him. A man
can be well pleased, to look with delight on the picture of his enemy, when
it is drawn with a skillful and curious hand. And therefore, in that great
work of men's conversion unto God, he is said to allure them, and to speak
comfortably unto them, to beseech, Hosea ^. 14. a Cor. 5. 17. ^ant. 5. 10, 16.
Hag. 2. 7. Romans 11. 1^. Ephesians. 38. 1 Timothy 1. 15.
and to persuade them; to set forth Christ to the Soul, as altogether lovely,
as the fairest (...) ten thousand, as the desire of the Nations, as the Riches
of the World, that men might be inflame^ to love the beauty of Holiness. That
which must persuade the Will, must not only have (...) truth, but a
worthiness in it: in which respect, the Principles of Knowledge are called
(...) worthy or honorable speeches: and the Gospe^ is not only called (...),
a true saying; but (...), a worthy saying; and in that respect* fitted for
acceptance. It is true of the Will, which Seneca has observed of Princes; Ap^
Reges etiam quae prosunt ita tamen ^t delectent su^denda sunt: That unto them
even things profitable must be represented with the face rathe^ of delight than
of necessity; even as Physicians, when they minister a very wholesome Potion:

-- Prius or as pocula circum Let. lib. 4. Plut. de edu^ call. liberorum.
Contingunt d^lci mellis flavoque liquore: That they their Patients may both
please and cure,
With mixed-sweets their pallats they allure.
And hence is that observation, that the first reformers and drawers of men
into Civil society* and the practice of Virtue, wrought upon the Will by the
ministry rather of the Fancy, than of rigid Reason; not driving them
thereunto by punctual Arguments, but alluring them by the sweetness of
Eloquence; not pressing the necessi^ie of Morality, by naked inserences, but
rather secretly instilling it into the Will, that it might at last find it
self reformed, and yet hardly perceive how it came to be so. And this was done
by those Musical, Poetical, and Mythologicall persuasions; whereby men in
their discourses, did as it were paint Virtues and Vices; giving unto
spiritual things Bodies and Beauties, such as might best affect the
Imagination: Yea, God himself has been pleased to honor this way of setting
out higher Notions, in that we find some room in the holy Scriptures for
Mythologies; as that of the Vine, the Fig Tree, and the Bramble, for Riddles,
for Parables, Similitudes, and Poetical Numbers and Judge. 18. 14. 12. Hos. 12.
10.
Raptures, whereby heavenly Doctrines are shadowed forth, and do condescend
unto humane frailties. And another reason hereof is, because the desires of men
are fixed as well on pleasant as on profitable objects; so that those
inducements must needs have most Authority, which have that happy mixture of
(...) and dulce together; not only pressing necessity upon the Understanding,
but pointing as it were and deciphering delight to the Fancy. And this reason
Scaliger S^. sub^il. 307. 11.
gives in his Inquiry, how false Things, such as Plato his Elysium, Homers
Fictions, Orph^us his Music, should delight wise men: Propterea quod exuperant
vulgares limits veritatis, says he; because they are not exacted to the
rigor and strictness of Reason, nor grounded on the severitie of Truth, but
are (as I may so speak) the Creation of the Fancy, having a kind of
delightful liberty in them, wherewith they refresh and do is it were open
and unbind the Thoughts, which otherwise, by a continual pressure in exacter
and more massy reasonings, would easily tire and despair.

Concerning the Latitude of this Faculty, it has there in a double
prerogative above others* one, in the multiplicitie of Operations; another, in
the framing of Objects. To the former of these, I reduce the Thoughts; which,
by reason of their quickness and volubilitie, and withal, their continual
interchanges and successions, are the most numberless operations of the Soul
of man: where, by Thoughts, I understand those springings and glances of the
heart, grounded on the sudden representation of sundry different objects; for
when the Mind begins once to be fixed, and standing, I call that rather
Meditation than Thought. This multiplicitie of Thoughts is grounded first upon
the abundance of their Objects; and next, upon the quickness and activitie of
Apprehension; that is the matter, this the form of those Thoughts which I now
speak of. The abundance of Objects is seen in this, that it includes all the
varieties of species belonging to other faculties; as that knowledge which the
Schools call Philosophia prima, does within its own limits draw in, in some
sort, all the several Objects of particular Sciences. There are Thoughts
belonging unto the Will, flying and pursuing Thoughts, Wishings, and Loathings;
and there are Thoughts belonging to the Understanding, assenting and dissenting
Thoughts, Belief and dis-opinion: There are Thoughts likewise proceeding from
Anger, fiery and revengefull Thoughts; from Envy, knowing and repining
Thoughts; from Joy, sweet and refreshing Thoughts; from Conscience, comforting
and affrightfull Thoughts; and so in all other faculties. And for the
quickness of Working, the motions of the Thoughts show it, in the concu^rence
of these two things, suddenness of journey, and vastness of way; while like
Lightning they are able to reach from one end of Heaven unto another, and in
one light and imperceptible excursion, leave almost no part of the Universe
untravelled. Now, of these two grounds of multiplicitie in Thoughts, the
former, namely, the abundance of Objects, is ab extrinsec^, and dispersed over
things, (though they are not otherwise the Objects of Thought, than as the Mind
reflecteth on the Phan^asmata or images of them in this faculty) but the
latter, which is the quickness of Apprehension, though it may seem to be the
most peculiar work of Reason, yet the Imagination has indeed the greatest
interest in it: For, though the Act of Apprehending be the proper work of the
Understanding, yet the form and quality of that Act (which properly makes it
a Thought in Vid. A. Gell. lib. 9. c. 1. Aug. de Civ. Dei, lib. 9. c. 4.
that strict sense, wherein here I take it) namely, the lightness,
volubilitie, and suddenness thereof, proceeds from the immediate restlesnesse
of the Imagination; as is plain, by the continual variety of Dreams and
other Fancies, wherein the Faculty is the principal worker. The next thing,
is the Latitude of Imagination, in framing of Objects, wherein it has a
property of boldness beyond other faculties: For Reason, and all other
powers, have their fixed and determined limits in Nature; and therefore they
always frame themselves to the truth of things, yielding assent to nothing but
what they find: But the Imagination is a Faculty boundless, and impatient of
any imposed limits, save those which it self makes. And hence it is, that in
matter of persuasion and insinuation, Poetry, Mythologie, and Eloquence (the
Arts of rational Fancy) have ever (as was observed) been more forcible than
those which have been rigorously grounded on Nature and Reason; it being (as
Scaliger observes) the natural infiniteness of man's Soul. Aspernari c^rtorum
sinium praescriptionem, to disdain any bounds and confines in her operations.

Now, the liberty of the Imagination in this particular, is three-sold;
Creation, as I may so speak, and n^w making of Objects; Composition, or new
mixing them; and Translation, or new placing them: unto some of which three,
will be reduced all Poetical Fictions, fabulous Transmutations, high
Metaphors, and Rhetorical Allegories; things of excellent use, and ornament in
speech.

Now, for the Corruptions and Diseases of this Faculty, I conceive the
principal to be Aug. Epist. 72. ad N^brid.
these three, Error, Levitie, and dull fixednesse: The Error of the Imagination
may be taken both actively, and passively; the Error which it produces, and
the Error which it suffers: That the Fancy is fruitful in producing Error,
is as manifest, as it is difficult to show the manner how it does it. Hence,
those strange and yet strong delusions, whereby the Mind of melancholy men (in
whom this Faculty has the most deep and piercing operation) have been
peremptorily possessed: Hence, those vanishing and sh^dowie Assurances, Hopes,
Fears, Joys, Visions, which the Dreams of men (the immediate issues of this
Faculty) do produce: Hence those ghastly Apparitions, dreadful Sounds, black
Thoughts, Tremblings, and Horrors, which the strong working of Imagination does
present unto, or produce in men; disquieted either with the ugliness of their
Sins, or heaviness of their Natures, making them to fear, where no fear
is: which, whether it be done by affecting only the Fancy, or by the
impression of such forms and shapes upon the Spirits, which go unto the
outward senses, as may thereby affect them with the same Images (not by
reception from without, but by impression and transfusion from within) it is
manifest, not only by various relations, but by continual experience, what
strong and strange effects those distempers have produced.

Neither are we to conceive this impossible when we see as admirable effects
in another kind A^l ^ rob. Sect. 10. ^. 12, (...). ^b. 7. c. 1^.
wrought by the same faculty, and, as is probable, by the same means; I
mean, the impression o^ likelinesse of an Infant in the Womb, unto the
Parents, or some other, who shall work a stronger conceit in the Fancy: Or if
this be not ascribed (...) d^ (...). co^a.
unto the working of this power, but rather to a secret real virtue
intrinsecall unto the Seed of the Parents (as many do affirm) yet that other
effect of stamping on the Body the Images and Colors of some things, which had
made any strong and violent immutation on the Fancy, must needs be hereunto
ascribed, As we see comes often to pass, in the longing of Women; and in
her, who having the picture of an Ethioplan in her Chamber, brought forth a
black Aug. in Genesis (...) 93.
Child; and in the course which Jacob took, (...) putting speckled Rods before
the Cattle, when they were to conceive, that the sancie of them might make
their Lambs to be ring-straked and speckled.

The Errors which are in the Fancy, are usually Vid. (...), ^n (...). E^th.
l^b. 7. c. 5. and w^tn. de P^* Q. g. D^m. l. 2. c. 24, 25, 26. and l. 3. ^. 21.
of the same nature with those that are wrought by it: Such was the Error of
that man, which would not be persuaded, but that he had on his head a great
pair of Horns, and for that reason would not moove sorth nor uncover his face
to any. And the causes of these Errors are Fran. Mi^nd. ^. de I^g. c. 8. Aug.
de Civ. De^, ^ 18. c. 18 de divi^. Demon. c. 5, 6.
by Francis Mirandula ascribed first to the variety of tempers in the Body,
with the predominancie of those humors which give complexion thereunto:
secondly, to the imposture of the Senses: thirdly, to the government of the
Will, (though that, as is granted, has least power over this Faculty) and
lastly, to the ministry of evil Angels, who can easily cast into the Fancy
strange and false species, with such subtletie, as shall easily gain them
plausible credit and admittance. And of this, we find an express example (as
I conceive) in that evil spirit* who promised to be a lying spirit in the
mouth of Ahabs Prophets. For the vision: of such men being for the most part
imaginary, the impression of that lying and deceitful persuasion was, in all
probability, made upon the Imagination. For, notwithstanding I confess, that
Prophets had events by diverse means revealed unto them, as by true Voices, by
real access of Angels, and by immediate illapse of Truth into the
Understanding; yet because those two ways, by Visions and by Numb. 12. 6. Joel
^. 28.
Dreams, were (for ought can be observed) the most usual means of
Revelation; it is not unlikely, that the Devil (who in such things strives, for
the better advancement of his own ends, to imitate Gods manner of working) did
by this manner of imposture on the Imagination, seek to possess the false
Prophets, and to delude the King.

And here, by the way from the three former, we may take occasion to observe
the misery of man's corrupted Nature; wherein those Faculties which were
originally ordained for mutual assistance, do now exercise a mutual
imposture: and as man did join with a fellow creature to dishonor, and if it
had been possible, to deceive his Maker; so in the Faculties of man, we may
discover a joint conspiracy in the working of their own overthrow and
reproach, and a secret joy, in one to be deluded by another.

The next Corruption which I observed, is the Levitie and too much Volubilitie
of this Power, proceeding from the over-hastie obtrusion of the species. For,
notwithstanding I grant the quickness of its operations to be one principal
part of the excellency thereof; yet I thereby understand the Power, not the
Infirmity; the Nature, not the Disease of that Faculty; the ability of
having speedy recourse unto variety of Objects, treasured up in the Memory;
or of apprehending new, with dexterity; not that floating and inconstant
humor, whereby it makes many needless excursions upon impertinent things, and
thereby interrupteth the course of the more needful and present operations of
the Soul. For, since it may fall out, that unto the same Faculty, from
diversity of occasions, contrary operations may prove arguments of worth; a
restraint unto one manner of working, is an argument of weakness and defect,
in that it straitneth and defraudeth the power of those advantages which it
might receive, by a timely application of the other: There may be a time, when
the Fancy may have liberty to expatiate; but again, some objects will
require a more fixed and permanent act. And therefore, to have a vanishing and
lightning Fancy, that knows not how to stay and fasten upon any particular,
but as an Hanging of diverse Colors, shall in one view present unto the
Understanding an heap of species, and so distract its intention; argues not
sufficiency, but weakness and distemper in this Faculty.

The last Corruption observed, is in the other Arist. Pro^. Sect. 29.
extreme; I mean, that heaviness and sluggish fixednesse, whereby it is
disabled from being serviceable to the Understanding, in those actions which
require dispatch, variety, and suddenness of execution: from which
peremptory adhesion and too violent intension of the Fancy on some particular
objects, does many times arise not only a dullness of Mind, a Syncope, and
kind of benumnednesse of the Soul, but oftentimes madness, distraction, and
torment: Many examples Lu^ian. in ^uciosive Asin^. Apul. in Asin^. ^ lin. lib.
7. c* 2^. Ola^. Magnus de Region. (...). l. 18. c* 45* 46, 47. (...) de ^
(...). l. 3. c. 21. (...) (...) ad littus ^ (...) (...) (...) (...), credidit
ap^d (...).
of which kind of depravation of the Fantasy in melancholy men, we every
where meet withal; some, thinking themselves turned into Wolves, Horses, or
other Beasts; others, pleasing themselves with Conceits of great Wealth and
Principalities; some, framing to themselves Fears, and other Hopes; being all
but the delusions and waking Dreams of a dist^mpered Fancy.

His ego saepe Lupum fieri and se condere Sylvis Virg. Eclog. 8.

Moerim, saepe animas imis exire sepul^ris,
Atque salas alio vidi traducere messes:
Here o^en I have seen this Moeris work
Himself into a Wolf, and into Woods lurk;
O^ have I seen him raise up ghosts from Hell,
And growing Corn translate by Magic Spell.
And upon this over-strong working and stay of the Fancy on some one or other
object, it has of^entimes come to pass, that some men, out of depth of
contemplation on some difficulties of Learning, (as is reported of Aristotle,
in his meditation on the cause of the ebbing and flowing of the Sea) others,
out of some strong and predominant passion, as Love, Fear, Despair, drawing
all the intention of the Mind unto them, have attempted such strange practices
on themselves, and others, as could not proceed but from a smothered and
entangled Reason. And thus much briefly shall suffice, touching the honor of
man's common and inferior Faculties.

CHAP. V. Of Passions, their nature, and distribution; of the Motions of
Natural Creatures, guided by a knowledge without them; and of Rational
Croatures, guided by a knowledge within them: of Passions Mental, Sensitive,
and Rational.
INow proceed unto the Soul of Man: of which, I must speak in a double
reference; either according to its motions and impressions which it makes on
the Body, and receives from it; or according to those more immanent
perfections which it has within it self: under the former of these, come to
be considered the Passions of Man's Mind, with the more notable perfections and
corruptions (as far as my weakness can discover) which the Soul and Body
contracted from them.

Passions are nothing else, but those natural, perfective, and unstrained
motions of the Creatures unto that advancement of their Natures, which they are
by the Wisdom, Power, and Providence of their Creator, in their own several
Spheres, and according to the proportion of their Capacities, ordained to
receive, by a regular inclination to those objects, whose goodness bears a
natural conveniencie or virtue of satisfaction unto them; or by an antipathie
and aversation from those, which bearing a contrariety to the good they
desire, must needs be noxious and destructive, and by consequent, odious to
their natures. This being the prop^rtie of all unconstrained self* motions, it
follows, that the root and ground of all Passions, is principally the good;
and secondarily, or by consequent, the evil of things: as one bears with it
rationem convenientiae, a quieting and satisfacto rye; the other, rationem
disconvenienti^, a disturbing and destroying nature.

This being premised touching the nature and general essence of Passions, the
division of them must be then grounded; because (as Philosophy teaches us)
Faculties and Operations receive their essential distinctions from their
objects, and those several respects wherewith they in order to the Faculty
are qualified. Now, since all appetite (being a blind Power) is dependant upon
the direction of some Knowledge; from the diversity of Knowledge in, or
annexed unto things, may be gathered the prime distinction of Passions.

Knowledge, in respect of created Agents, may be considered, either as
dis-joyn'd, and extrinsecall to the things moved, or (...) intrinsecall and
united thereunto; both which serve as a Law and Rule, to regulate the
inclinations of each nature, that they might not swerve into disordered and
confused, or into idle and vain motions, ^ut might ever work toward that
fixed end, which God has appointed them to moove unto.

Passions which proceed from Knowledge severed and extrinsecall, are those
motions of merely natural Agents; which are guided to their general or
particular ends, by the Wisdom and Power of Him that made them. And this it is
which causes that peremptory and uniforme order, observed by these kind of
Agents in their natural course, never either swarving or desisting therefrom,
so far as the condition of the matter and subject whereon they work
permits them; because they are all governed by an immutable, most wise, and
most constant Law, proceeding from a Will with which there is no variableness
nor shadow of changing. And therefore we find those aberrations and
irregularities of Nature, wherein it swerveth from this Law only, or at least
principally in these inferior things; wherein partly from the deficiencie and
languishing of secondarie Agents, and partly from the excesses, defects,
mutabilitie, and the like exigences of matter, we find sundry times error and
enormitie in their several works and ends: Which, whether it be to set forth
the beauty of regular operations (which by deformity and confusion will
appear more beautiful; or whether the original thereof be divine
mal^diction, which for the sin of man he pleases to lay upon his fellow
creatures, which were all created for his comfort and service, (which Saint
Paul calls the vanity of the Creature) it proceeds certainly from the
Will an^ Power of that Lawgiver, who is only able, s^ Reasons best known to
his own Wisdom, t^ dispense sometimes with that otherwise unalterable Law,
which he gave all his creatures to observe: So that all the Miracles which ever
God has been pleased to work, for the conversion of men unto the Faith, or
confirmation in it, were but so many exceptions and dispensations from that
general Law.

But, as I said, those irregularities and deviations before spoken of, are
seen principally in inferior things. The Earth, being the principal Creature
that did bear the Curse of Man^ Fall, which made (if we will believe that
relation, though I rather suppose it to be fictitious) the Heathen Philosopher,
upon observation o^ that wonderful Eclipse of the Sun at the Passion of our
Savior, to cry out, Aut Deus Nature patitur, aut Mundi machina dissolvetur;
either the God of Nature suffers, or the Frame of Nature dissolveth: Either
something hinders that universal Power, which sustaineth and animateth all
the Creatures, or he does at least willingly detain that virtue and the vigor
of that Law; without execution whereof, there cannot but follow a laxation of
the whole Frame: which particular I have the rather observed, to note, that the
more raised and heavenly a Nature is, the more stable and constant likewise it
is, to every Divine Law imposed on it.

Now, this natural Passion which I speak of, is called by sundry Names
amongst Philosophers, the Law, the Equity, the Weight, the Instinct, the Bond,
the Love, the Covenant and League of natural things in order, to the
conservation of themselves, propagation of their kind, perfection, and order of
the Universe, service of Man, and glory of the Creator; which are the alone
ends of all natural Agents.

By all which we are given to understand, that when at any time the ordinary
course of Nature is intermitted, when any creature forsakes its native motion,
and falls into confusion and disorder, there is then admitted a breach of a
Law; or, as Aristotle calls it, (...), an error, (which Saint James tells us,
is (...), an iniquity of Nature) also a certain levitie, unusefulnesse, and
emptiness of true worth, which I call in Saint Paul's phrase, the vanity of
the Creature: thirdly, looseness, decay, and dissolution; and thereupon,
discord and unserviceablenesse toward the other parts, with which it should
jointly conspire for the glory of the whole.

These are the inconveniences that follow Natures; how much greater are those,
which follow Reasons disobedience: for all this, touching the Passions of
Nature, I have observed only to give light unto those of Reason, there being
the same proportion of government in them all; saving that, what in things
destitute of all knowledge, is guided by the Lawgiver himself, is in the rest
performed by a knowledge conjoined, and intrinsecall to the Worker* and this is
either Mental, or Sensitive, or Rational* from all which, arise sundry
degrees of Motions, or Passions: Mental Passions, are those high, pure, and
abstracted delights, or other the like agitations of the supreme part of the
Understanding, which Aristotle calls (...), the Latins, Men's, or Apex animi;
which are the most simple actions of the Mind, wherein is the least
intermixtion or commerce with inferior and earthy saculties. Which Motions are
grounded first on an extraordinary Knowledge, either of Vision and Revelation,
or of an exquisite natural Apprehension* both which are beyond the compass of
usual Industry, here to attain unto: The former of these, I call with the
Schoolmen, Ecstasy and Rapture; such as Saint Paul's was (for so himself
calls it) Novi hominem 2 Cor. 12. 2.
raptum; and such as was the Passions of the Mind, in the Prophets and holy men
of God; when they were inspired with such heavenly Revelations, as did slide
into the Soul with that luster and abundance of Light, that they could not but
ravish it with ineffable and glorious delight. And such, no doubt, is that joy
unspeakable, and Peace past understanding, which the Apostle makes to be the
fruits of the Spirit of God, in those hearts wherein he lodges; whereby the
purest and most abstracted part of the Soul, the Mind, is lifted up to some
glimpses and apprehensions of that future Glory, which in Heaven does fill the
spirits of men with ineffable Light.

And for the later Branch, Aristotle has placed his greatest felicity in the
contemplation of the highest and divinest Truths; which he makes to be the
object of that supreme part of the Soul. And it was the speech of the
Philosopher Heracl^tus to the same purpose, that Animae sicca est Plutarch, de
o^, a^llu, and de Esu ca^nium, Orat. 1. Ar^. Problem.. 30. qu. 1.
sapientissima, (which touches something upon that of Aristotle, That
Melancholy complexions are usually the wisest, for that Temper is the dryest of
all the rest) That a Mind not steeped in the humors of carnal and gross
affections, nor drenched in the waves of a disquiet Fancy, but more raised and
soaring to its originally, by divine contemplations, is always endued with the
greater wisdom.

Another Knowledge from whence the Passions of this Faculty are raised in Man,
is that light of Natural Principles, which the Schools call Aquin. part. 1.
qu. ^9. art. 12.
Synteresis; unto which, the custody of all practical Truths being committed,
they there-hence work in the Conscience motions of Joy, Love, Peace, Fear,
Horror, Despair, and the like spiritual Passions, according as the Soul, out
of those general Principles, shall gather unto its own particulars, any
either delightful or disquieting Conclusions.

Sensitive Passions, are those motions of prosecution Arist. de Hist. Animal.
lib. 1. ca^. 1. l. 9. p^r ^otum Diogen. L^rt. lib. 7. in Zenon.
or flight, which are grounded on the Fancy, Mentorie, and Apprehensions of
the common Sense: which we see in brute beasts; as, in the fear of Hares or
Sheep, the fierceness of Wolves, the anger or slatterie of Dogs, and the
like: So Homer describes the joy of Ulysses his Dog, which after his so long
absence, remembered him at his return.

(...). Odyss. s.
For wanton joy to see his Master near,
He waved his flattering tail, and tossed each ear.
Now these motions in brute creatures, if we will believe Seneca, are not
affections, but certain characters Ser. de I^, ^ib. 1. c. 3.
and impressions ad similitudinem passionum* like unto Passions in men* which
he calls Impetus, the risings, forces, and impulsions of Nature, upon the
view of such objects as are apt to strike any impressions upon it.

I come therefore to those middle Passions, which I called Rational; not
formally, as if they were in themselves Acts of Reason, or barely immateriall
Vid. Aristot. ^ic. l. 2. ^. 6. Mag. M^r. l. 1. ^. 7.
motions of the Soul; but by way of participation and dependence, by reason of
their immediate subordination in man unto the government Eadem, l, 2. c. 2. and
Ethic. lib. 6. cap. 3.
of the Will and Understanding, and not barely of the Fancy, as in other
creatures. And for calling Passion thus governed, Reasonable, I have the
warrant of Aristotle: who, though the sensitive Appetite in man be of it self
unreasonable, (and therefore by him contradivided to the Rational powers of
the Soul) yet by (...). l. 1. c. 10.
reason of that obedience which it owes to the Dictates of the Understanding,
whereunto Nature Aquin. part. 1. q. 81. art. 3.
has ordained it to be subject and conformable (though Corruption have much
slackned and unknit that Bond) he justly affirms it to be in some sort a
Reasonable Faculty, not intrinsecally in it self, but by way of participation
and influence from Reason.

Now Passion thus considered, is divided according to the several references
it has unto its object; which is principally, the Good; and secondarily, the
Evil of things; and either considered after a sundry manner: for they may be
taken either barely and alone, or under the consideration of some difficulty
and danger accompanying them. And both these again are to be determined with
some particular condition of union or distance to the subject; for all objects
offend or delight the Faculty, in virtue of their union thereunto; and
therefore, according as things are united or distant, so do they occasion
Passions of a different nature in the Mind. The object then may be considered
simply in its own nature, as it precisely abstracteth from all other
circumstances, including only the natural conveniencie or disconveniencie
which it bears to the Faculty: and so the Passions are, in respect of Good,
Love; in respect of Evil, Hatred* which are the two radical, fundamental,
and most transcendent Passions of all the rest; and therefore well called
Pondera and Impetus animi, the weight and force, and (as I may so speak) the
first springings and out goings of the Soul. Secondly, the object may be
considered, as absent from the subject, in regard of real union (though never
without that which the Schools call vnio objectiva, union of Apprehension in
the Understanding) without which there can be no Passion: and the object thus
considered, works, if it be Good, Desire; if Evil, ^light, and Abomination.
Thirdly, it may be considered as present, by a real contract or union with the
Faculty; and so it works, if Good, Delight, and Pleasure; if Evil, Grief
and Sorrow. Again, as the object bears with it the circumstances of
difficulty and danger, it may be considered, either as exceeding the natural
strength of the power; which implies, in respect of Good, an Impossibility to
be attained, and so it works Despair; and in respect of Evil, an
Improbabilitie of being avoided, and so it works Fear: or secondly, as not
exceeding the strength of the power, or at least, those aides which it calls
in; in which regard, Good is presented as Attainable, and so it works Hope;
and Evil is presented, either as Avoidable, if it be future, and it works
Boldness to break through it; or as Requitable, if it be past, and so it
works Anger, to revenge it. Thus have we the nature and distribution of
those several Passions which we are to enquire after; of all which, or at
least, those which are most natural, and least coincident with one another, I
shall in the proceeding of my Discourse, observe some things, wherein they
conduce to the honor and prejudice of Man's Nature: But first, I shall speak
something of the generality of Passions; and what dignities are therein most
notable, and the most notable defects.

CHAP. VI. Of Humane Passions in general: their use, Natural, Moral, Civil:
their subordination unto, or rebellion against right Reason.
NOW Passions may be the subject of a threefold discourse; Natural, Moral,
and Civil. In their Natural consideration, we should observe in them, their
essential Properties, their Ebbes and Flows, their Springings and Decays,
the manner of their several Impressions, the Physical Effects which are
wrought by them, and the like.

In their Moral consideration, we might likewise search, how the indifferency
of them is altered into Good or Evil, by virtue of the Dominion of right
Reason, or of the violence of their own motions; what their Ministry is in
Virtuous, and what their Power and Independance in Irregular actions; how they
are raised, suppressed, slackned, and governed, according to the particular
nature of those things, which require their motion.

In their Civil respects, we should also observe how they may be severally
wrought upon and impressed; and how, and on what occasions, it is fit to gather
and fortify, or to slack and remit them; how to discover, or suppress, or
nourish, o^ alter, or mix them, as may be most advantageous; what use may be
made of each man's particular Age, Nature, P^opension; how to advance and
promote our just ends, upon the observation of the Character and dispositions
of these, whom we are to deal withal.

And this Civil use of Passion, is copiously handled in a learned and
excellent discourse of Aristotle, in the second Book of his Rhetoricks; unto
which profession, in this respect, it properly belongs: because in matter of
Action, and of I^dicature, Affection in some sort is an Auditor, or Judge, as
he speaks. But it seems strange, that a man of so vast sufficiency and
judgment; and who had, as we may well conjecture, an Ambition to knit every
Science into an entire Body, which in other men's Labors lay broken and
seattered; should yet in his Books De Anima over-passe the discovery of their
Nature, Essence, Operation and Properties; and in his Books of Moral
Philosophy, should not remember to acquaint us with the Indifferency,
Irregularitie, Subordination* Rebellion, Conspiracy, Discords, Causes,
Effects; consequences of each particular of them, being circumstances of
obvious and daily use in our Life, and of necessary and singular benefit, to
give light unto the government of right Reason.

Touching Passions in order unto Civil or Iudiciarie affairs, I shall not make
any observation; either of the other, I shall in part touch upon, though not
distinctly and asunder, but in a brief and confused collection of some few
particulars.

The Order which I shall observe, in setting down the Honor and Corruption of
them in General (which Method shall in part be kept in their Particulars)
shall be this; first, according to the Antecedents of their Motion and Acts;
secondly, according to the Acts themselves; and thirdly, according to the
Consequents of them.

First, touching the Antecedents to the Act of Passion, they are either the
Outward Motives thereunto, as namely, the Objects, unto which it is carried;
and the Causes, whereby it is produced: or the Inward Root and Principles of
the Act, whereby it is wrought and governed.

For the two former, Passion is then said commendable, when it is direct and
natural. And the Corruption is, when it is carried to an undue Object, or
proceeds from an indirect Cause: but these are more observable in the
particulars, and therefore thither I refer their distinct handling.

For the third, the Dignity of Passion chiefly consists in a Consonancie and
Obedience to the Prescription of Reason: for there is in man's Faculties a
natural subordination, whereby the actions of the inferior receive their
motion and direction from the influence of the higher. Now Appetite was in
Beasts only made to be governed by a sensitive Knowledge: But in Man, Sense
ought not t^ have any commanding or moving Power, but only Isntrumental,
Ministerial, and Conveying, in respect of the Object. The Action of Sense, was
no^ from the first Institution, ordained to touch the Affection, but to present
it self primarily to the Understanding; upon whose determination and conduct,
the Passions were to depend, to submit all (...)* Theador. ser. ^. denatur. Hom.
their inclinations thereunto, and to be its Ministers, in the execution of all
such Duties, as it should deem any way expedient for the benefit of Man's
Nature: so that herein consists a great part of Man's infelicitie, by the Fall;
that albeit his Understanding it self be blinded, and therefore not able to
reach forth any perfect Good to the inferior parts; yet that small portion of
Light, which it yet retains for the government of our Actions, is become
uneffectuall, as being able only to convince, but not to reform.

The Corruption then of Passion in this respect, is the independance thereof
upon its true Principle: when it stays not to look for, but anticipates and
prevents the Discourses of Reason; relying only on the judgment of Sense,
wherewith it retains an undue correspondence. So that herein is mainly
verified that complaint of the Prophet; ^sal. 49. ^*
Man, being in Honor, has no understanding, and is become as the (...), etc.
Clem. Alex. Stro^. l. 4. (...) in (...)* and Ta^* orat. ad Great. Libic. l. 1.
c. ^3.
Beasts that perish. For, as in the Body, (to use the similitude of Aristotle)
if any parts thereof be out of joint, it cannot yield obedience unto the
government of the Motive Faculty; but when it would carry it one way, it falls
another: So it is in the Mind of Man, when that Natural continuitie and Union
of Faculties, whereby one was made in operation dependant on another, Vid.
Plutarch.
lib. devir^ute Morali.
is once dissolved; when Affections are dis-joynted from Reason, and cast off
the reins whereby they should be guided, there cannot be that sweet harmony
in the motion thereof, which is required to the weal of Man's Nature.

It is prodigious to see an Instrument (such as all Appetite should be) to be
the first and selfe-mover in its own actions; whence cannot in the Mind of Man
but follow great danger: it being all one, as if a Waggoner should commit
himself to the wild and unswayed fancy of his Horses; or, as if a blind man,
who has not the power of directing his own feet, should be permitted to run
headlong, without wit or moderation, having no Guide to direct him. For as Fire
(though it be of all other creatures, one of the most comfortable and useful,
while it abides in the place ordained for it;) yet, when it once exceeds those
limits, and gets to the housetop, it is most merciless and overrunning: So
Passion (though of excellent service in Man, for the heating and enlivening of
Virtue, for adding spirit and edge to all good undertakings, and blessing them
with an happier issue, than they could alone have attained unto) yet if once
they fly out beyond their bounds, and become subject only to their own
Laws, and encroach upon Reasons right, there is nothing more tumultuous and
tyrannical. As Bias said of the Tongue, that it was the best and the Plutarch.
de Audit.
worst part of the Sacrifice, so may we of the Affections; Nec meliores unquam
Servos nec Dominos sent it Natura ^eteriores; They are the best Servants, but
the worst Masters, which our Nature can have. Like the Winds, which being
moderate, carry the Ship; but drown it, being tempestuous. And it is true as
well in Man's little Commonwealth, as in greater States, That there are no more
pestilent and pernicious disturbers of the Public Good, than those who are
best qualified for service and employment; if once they grow turbulent and
mutinous, neglecting the common end, for their own private respects, and
desirous to raise themselves upon public Ruins. And indeed it is universally
true, Things most useful and excellent in their Regularitie, are most
dangerous in their Abuse.

CHAP. VII. Of the Exercise of Passion: of Stoicall Apathie: of Permanencie,
Defect, Excess, with the Cure thereof.
THe next consideration of Passions, was according to the Exercise of their
Act: which we may consider, either according to the general Substance, or
according to some particular Accidents, in the manner of its being. For the
first, it is altogether Good, as being nothing else but natural motion,
ordained for the perfection or conservation of the Creature. For,
notwithstanding natural Motion may happily argue some kind of imperfection in
the state of the thing moving; as supposing it some way deprived of that,
wherein it should rest it self (which makes Aristotle conclude, that the
noblest Act of the Understanding, Knowledge and clear Vision, is rather the
Intellectio qui^s intellectu^. Arist. Phy^it. l. 7. c. 4. ^bic. l. 10. c. 7.
(...)* etc.
Rest, than the Motion of that Faculty) yet I say, it always implies more
natural Perfection in those things whereunto it belongs: for as Fire, the
perfectest of Elements; and Heaven, the perfectest of Bodies; Clem. Alex.
Stro^. lib. 4. (...) Arist. Problem.. 30. qu. 14.
so the Soul of Man, the perfectest of forms, has the most vehement motion.

And in this consideration (so it be always Motion Natural, governed and
dependant on right Reason) I find not any Corruption, though I find an Error
and abuse; that I mean, which makes Passion in general to be Aegritudo
Animi, a Sickness Ani^ commo^lo aversa ^ recta Ratione, and contra Naturam,
Cit. (...). (...). ap^d Lacr^ium.
and Perturbation, and would therefore reduce the Mind to a senseless Apathie,
condemning all Life of Passion, as Waves, which serve only to toss and
trouble Reason. An Opinion, which, while it goes about to give unto Man an
absolute government over himself, leaves scarce any thing in him, which he
may command and govern.

For, although there be in the Will over the Body an Imperium; yet in rigor,
this is not so much to be termed Command, as Employment; the Body being rather
the Instrument, than the Servant of the Soul, and the power which the Will
has over it, is not so much the command of a Master over his Workmen, as of
the Workman over his Tools: The chief subjects to the Will, are the
Affections, in the right governing whereof, is manifested its greatest power.

The strength of every thing, is exercised by Opposition: We see not the
violence of a River, till it meet with a Bridge; and the force of the Wind
shows it self most, when it is most resisted: So the power of the Will is
most seen, in repairing the breaches, and settling the mutinies, wherewith
untamed Affections disquiet the peace of man's nature; since excess and
disorder in things otherwise of so great use, requires amendment, not
extirpation; and we make straight a crooked thing, we do not break it. And
therefore, as he in Tacitus spoke well to Otho, when he was about Hist. lib. 2.
to kill himself, Majore animo t^lerari adversaquam relinqui; That it was more
valor to bear, than put off afflictions with courage: so there is more
honor, in the having Affections subdued, than in having none at all; the
business of a wise man, is not to be without them, but to be above them. And
therefore our Heb. 2. 17. Heb. 4. 15. 5. 2. Mark. 10. 21. Luke 10. 21. Io^. 11.
35. Luke 22. 15. Mark. 3. 5. Mat. 26, 37, 38.
Savior himself sometimes loved, sometimes rejoiced, sometimes wept,
sometimes desired, sometimes mourned and grieved; but these were not Passions
that violently and immoderately troubled him; but he, as he saw fit, did with
them trouble himself. His Reason excited, directed, moderated, repressed them,
according to the rule of perfect, clear, and undisturbed judgment. In which
respect, the Passions of Christ are by Divines Hieron. in Math. 26. Magist.
Sent. lib. 3. did. 15. Aquin. part. 3. q. 15. art. 4.
called rather Propassions, that is to say, Beginnings of Passions, than
Passions themselves; in as much as they never proceeded beyond their due
measure, nor transported the Mind to undecencie or excess; but had both their
rising and original from Reason, and also their measure, bounds, continuance
limited by Reason. The Passions of sinful men are many times like the tossings
of the Sea, which brings up mire and dirt; but the Isa. 57. 20.
Passions of Christ were like the shaking of pure Water in a clean Vessel,
which though it be thereby troubled, yet is it not fouled at all.

The Stoics themselves confessed, that wise men might be affected with
Lactant. l. 6. c. 14. Aug. de Clv. Dei, l. 9. c. 4. l. 14. c. 9: Aul. Gell. l.
19. c. 1. Cic. Tusc. qu. lib. 4. Sen. ^p. 85. and de Ira. l. 2. c: 3.
sudden perturbations of Fear or Sorrow, but did not like weak men yield unto
them, nor sink under them; but were still unshaken in their resolutions and
judgments, like Aeneas in Virgil:

Men's immotaman^t, lacryma volvuntur inanes. He wept indeed, but in his stable
mind
You could no shakings or distempers find.
Aquin. 12. q. 24. art. 2, 3. Cic. de sin. l. 4.
And therefore indeed, this Controversy between the Peripateticks and
Stoics, was rather a strife of Words, than a difference of Judgments, because
they did not agree in the Subject of the Question; the one, making Passions to
be Natural; the other, (...) Clem. Alex. Strom. lib. 2. and vid. in P^g. lib.
2. cap. 13. Vid. Sen. ^p. 57, 85. and 116. Diog. Laert. in Zenon. l. 7.
Praeternaturall, and disorderly motions. For the Peripateticks confessed, That
wise men ought to be fixed and immovable in their virtuous resolutions, and not
to be at all by hopes or fears Carist. Ethic. lib. ^. cap. 1.
deterred or diverted from them: but as a Dye, to be (...). Ethic. l. 1. c. 10.
and Cl^. Alex. Strom. lib. 6.
foure-square; and which way ever they be cast, to fall upon a sure and firm
bottom. Which is the same with that severe and unmovable constancy of Mind in
Virtue, in defense whereof the Stoics banished Affections from wise men: not
intending thereby to make men like Plutarch. contr. Stolc^t.
Caeneus in the Poet, such as could not be violated with any sorce, (for they
acknowledge subjection to the first motions of Passion) but only to show, that
they wisdom of Virtue should so compose and consolidate the Mind, and settle
it in such stabilitie, that it should not all be bended from the Right, by any
sensitive perturbations or impulsions. As they then who pull down houses
adjoining unto Temples, Plutarch. lib. d^ vi^loso p^dort.
do yet suffer that part of them to stand still, which are continued to the
Temple: so in the demolishing of inordinate Passions, we must take heed, that
we offer not violence to so much of them, as is contiguous unto Right Reason;
whereunto so long as they are conformable, they are the most vigorous
instruments, both for the expression, and improvement, and derivation of Virtue
on others, of any in Man's Nature.

Now concerning the Accidents or manner of these Acts which are from Passion,
it may be considered either in regard of the Quantity and Extension, or of the
Quality and Intention of the Act. And both these may be considered two manner
of ways: for the Quantity of Passions, we may consider that, as the Quantity
of Bodies, which is either Continued or Severed; by Quantity Continued, I
understand the manner of a Passions permanencie and durance* by Severed, I
mean the manner of its multiplicitie and reiteration; from both which, it has
the denomination of good or bad, as the object whereunto it is carried, has a
greater or less relation to the Faculty. For some objects are simply, and
without any limitation, convenient or noxious; and toward these, may be
allowed both a more durable and a more multiplied Passion: others are good or
evil only, with some circumstances of Time, Place, Person, Occasion, or the
like; which therefore require both fewer and less habitual motions. The same
maybe said of the Quality of them; wherein they are sometimes too remiss,
sometimes again too excessive and exorbitant, according to variety of
conditions.

Concerning all these, I shall observe this one general Rule; the permanencie
or vanishing, the multiplicitie or rareness, the excess or defect of any
Passion, is to be grounded on and regulated by the nature only of its object,
as it bears reference to such or such a person; but never by the private
humor, prejudice, complexion, habit, custom, or other like qualifications of
the Mind it self. To see a man of a soft and gentle nature over-passe some
small indignity, without notice or feeling; or to see a man of an hot and
eager temper transported with an extreamer and more during Passion, upon the
sense of some greater injury, more notably touching him in his honesty or
good Name; is not in either of these, any great matter of commendation:
because, though the nature of the object did in both warrant the quality of
the Passion; yet in those persons they both proceeded out of humor and
complexion, and not out of serious consideration of the injuries themselves, by
which only the Passion is to be regulated.

Of these two extremes, the defect is not so commonly seen, as that which is
in the excess: And therefore we will here a little observe, what course may be
taken for the allaying of this vehemency of our Affections, whereby they
disturb the quiet, and darken the serenitie of man's Mind. And this is done,
either by opposing contrary Passions to contrary; ^ble. l. 2. c. 9. lib. 10. c.
1.
which is Aristotle's rule, who advises, in the bringing of Passions from an
extreme to a mediocritie, to incline and bend them toward the other extreme,
as Husbandmen use to do those Trees which are crooked; or as dim and weak eyes
do see the light best, when it is broken in a shadow: or else it is done, by
scattering and distracting of them; and that not only by the power of Reason,
but sometimes also by a cautelous admixture of Passions amongst themselves,
thereby interrupting their free current: For, as usually the Affections of the
Mind are bred one of another, (as the Powder in the Pan of a Gun will quickly
set on fire that in the Barrel) as Grief by Anger, (Circumspexit (...) cum
(...) a condolescens, Mar^. 3 3.
He looked on them with Anger, being grieved) and Fear by Love;

Res est, solliciti, plena Timori^, Amor: The things to which our heart Love
bears,
Are objects of our careful Fears.
and Desire by Fear; as in him of whom Tacitus Hist. lib. 1.
speaks, ^ingebat and m^m, quo mag is concupisceret* That to justify his
Desires, he pretended his Fears: So likewise are some Passions stopped, or at
least bridled and moderated by others; Amor soras mittit timorem, (...). 4. 18.
Perfect Love casts out Fear. It ^aring in this, as Plutarch has noted in
the hunting of Beasts, that Plut. ^rat. 1. de (...). Alexandri.
they are then easiest taken, when they who hunt them, put on the skins of
Beasts. As we see, the light and heat of the Sun shining upon fire, is apt to
discourage it, and to put it out. And this was that which made Saul, when he
was possessed with those strong sits of Melancholy, working in him Fury,
Grief, and Horror, to have recourse unto such a Remedy, as is most forcible
for the producing of other Passions of a lighter nature; and so by consequence,
for expelling those. Thus, as we see in the Body Military, (as Tacitus has
observed) Vnus tumultus est alterius remedium, ^st. lib. ^.
That one tumult is the cure of another; and in the Body Natural, some
Diseases are expelled by others: so likewise in the Mind, Passions, as they
mutually generate, so they mutually weaken each other. It often falls out,
that the voluntary admission of one loss, is the prevention of a greater: as
when a Merchant casts out his ware, to prevent a shipwreck; and in a public
Fire, men pull down some houses untoucht, to prevent the spreading of the
flame: Thus is it in the Passions of the Mind; when any of them are excessive,
the way to remit them, is by admitting of some further perturbation from
others, and so distracting the forces of the former: Whether the Passions we
admit, be contrary; as when a dead Palsy is cured with a burning Fever, and
Soldiers suppress the fear of Death, by the shame of Baseness;

-- (...). Iliad. ^. 121.
O fearful Grecians, in your minds recount,
To what great shame this baseness will amount:
and the hatred of their General, by the love of their Country; as Ulysses
persuaded Achilles:

(...), Iliad. ^. 300.

(...)
(...)
Though Agamemnon and his gifts you hate,
Yet look with pity on the doleful state
Of all the other Grecians in the Camp,
Who on your Name will divine honor stamp,
When you this glory shall to them afford,
To save them from the rage of Hectors Sword.
Or whether they be Passions of a different, but not of a repugnant nature; and
then the effect is wrought, by revoking some of the spirits, which were
otherwise all employed in the service of one Passion, to attend on them; and by
that means also, by diverting the intention of the Mind from one deep Channel
into many cross and broken Streams; as men are wont to C^ cal^ribus o^erando
deprimimus, and sanguinis (...) (...) v^ (...), Tertull.
stop one flux of blood, by making of another; and Cl^. Alex. Padag. l. 2. c. 8.
to use frictions to the feet, to call away and divert the humors which pain
the head.

Which dissipation and scattering of Passion, as it is wrought principally by
this mutual confounding of them amongst themselves, so in some particular
cases likewise, two other ways; namely, by communion in diverse subjects, and
extension on diverse objects. For the first, we see in matter of Grief, the
Mind does receive (as it were) some lightness and comfort, when it finds it
self generative unto others, and produces sympathy in them: For hereby it is
(as it were) disburthened, and cannot but find that easier, to the sustaining
whereof, it has the assistance of another shoulders. And therefore they were
good (though common) observations:

Cur^ leves loqu^ntur, ingentes stupent: And,
Ille dolet vere, qui sine test dolet.
Our tongues can lighter Cares repeat,
When silence swallows up the great:
He grieves indeed, who on his friend
Vntestified tears does spend.
That Grief commonly is the most heavy, which has fewest vents, by which to
diffuse it self: which, I take it, will be one occasion of the heaviness of
infernal torment; because there, Grief shall not be any whit transient, to
work commiseration in any spectator, but altogether immanent and reflexive upon
it self.

Thus likewise we see (to instance in that other particular branch, of
diffusing the Passions upon diverse objects) how the multitude of these, if
they be Hererogeneall and unsubordinate, does oftentimes remit a Passion: for
example, in Love; I take it, that that man who has a more general Love, has
a less vehement Love; and the spreading of Affection, is the weakening of it,
(I mean still in things not absolute subordinate; for, a man may love a Wife
more with Children, than without them, because they are the Seals and Pledges
of that Love) as a River, when it is cut into many lesser streams, runs weaker
and shallower. And this, I conceive, is the reason, why Solomon, when he
commends a strong Love, gives it but a single object* There is a friend
nearer than a Brother; one, in whom the rays of this affection, like the
Sunbeams in a glass, being more united, might withal be the more servent. I
remember not, that I ever read of wonderful (...). P^. d^ A^ic. multitud.
An^charsis apud Latr^. l 1.
Love amongst men, which went beyond Couples; which also Aristotle and Plutarch
have observed. And therefore we see, in that state there is or should be
greater affection, wherein is the least community: Conjugall Love, as it is
most single, so it is usually the strongest; and in the Issues and Blessings
thereof, there is scarce any more powerful Epithet to win Love, than
Vnigenitus, an only Son.

(...) Illad. 1. 479. Plutarch. de multie. A^ic.

(...)
He loved me as one loves the only Son
Of's old age, borne to great Possession.
Insomuch, that even in God himself (to whom these Passions are but by an
Anthropopathy attributed) that more general Love of his Providence and
Preservation, (which is common to all his Creatures) is (if I may so speak) of
a lower degree, (though not in respect of any intention or remission in his
Will, but only the effects thereof toward the things themselves) than that
more special Love of Adoption, which he extends only to those, whom he
vouchsafes to make One in him, who was Vnigenitus and Dilectus from
everlasting.

I do not then (by the way) condemn all strong and united Passions; but only
I observe how those, which hereby grow exorbitant, and work prejudice to the
Soul, may by a seasonable distracting of them, be reduced unto a wholesome
temper: for as it is noted, that amongst men, those who have bodies most
obnoxious to daily maladies, are commonly more secure from any mortal danger,
than those who though free from any general distempers, do yet find the
surprise of one more violent; so is it with men's Passions: Those who have a
nature ready, upon sundry occasions to break forth into them, do commonly
find them less virulent and morose, than those who have not their Passions so
voluble, and ready to spread themselves on diverse objects, but exercising
their intentions more earnestly upon one.

CHAP. VIII. Of the effects of Passions, how they sharpen Virtue: Of vicious
Concupiscence; of their blinding, diverting, distracting, and precipitating of
Reason, and of their distempering the Body.
THe last consideration of Passions, was according to the Consequents of their
Act, which are the ends and effects thereof, both which I include in one;
because the natural end of all operative qualities, is the effects which they
are appointed by their own, or a superior Virtue to produce. Now, though in
the particulars there be several perfections conferred both on the operations
o^ the Will, and of the Understanding, from Passions; yet I cannot think on
any other general effect which belongs equally unto them all, but that only
which Tully has observed out of Acad. quest. lib. ^. (...). q^. li. 4.
the Peripateticks of Anger, that they are the sharpners (and to keep his
phrase) the Whetstone^ of Virtue, which make it more operative and fruitful:
for Passion stirring up the Spirits, and quickening the Fancy, has thereby a
direct influence Plutarch. lib. de vir. mo^.
upon the Habits and Manners of the Mind; which being in this estate
constrained to fetch all her Motions from Imagination, produces them with the
same clearenesse and vigor as they are there represented. And therefore
Aristotle speaking of these two Elements and Ethic: lib. 2. cap. 3.
Principles of all Passion, Pleasure and Griese, (one of which, all others
whatsoever partake of) makes them the Rules of all our Actions, by which they
are all governed, and according to the measure whereof, they retain their
several portions of Goodness. Thus Anger, Zeal Shame, Griese, Love, are in
their several order^ the Whetstones, whereon true Fortitude sharpneth its
Sword: for men are never more neglect* full and prodigal of their blood, than
when they are thoroughly pierced with a sense of injuries, or grieved with a
loss of their own, or their Countries honor: So the Poet says of
Mezentius, when Aenea^ had slain Lausus his son;

-- Aestuat ingens Aeneid. l^b. 10.

Imo in cord pudor mix^oque insania luctu,
Et furiis agitatus Amor, and conscia virtus.
A noble shame boiled in his lowest breast,
Rage mixed with grief suffered him not to rest;
Love and a conscious Valor s^t him on,
And kindled furious Resolution.
So, Love and Compassion are the inciters of Bounty; Hope, the stay and anchor
of Patience; keeping the Mind, amidst perils and casualties, from floating and
sinking; Fear, the sharpener of Industry; and Caution an antidote in all our
actions, against Violence, Rashness, and Indiscretion: as Latinus said unto
Turnus, when in rage he hastened to a combat with Aeneas;

-- quantum ipse feroc^ Aeneid. lib. 12.

Virtute exuper as, tanto me impensius ^quum est
Consulere, atque omnes me^uentem expendere casus.
The more undaunted Courage does you move,
It Is fit my serious Fears show the more Love;
In mature counsels, and in weighing all
The various dangers and events may fall.
Those imputations therefore which Tully and Seneca, and other Stoicall
Philosophers make against Passions, are but light and empty, when they call
them diseases and perturbations of the Mind; which requires in all its actions
both health and serenitie, a strong and a clear judgment; both which
properties, they say, are impaired by the distempers of Passion: For it is
absurd to think, that all manner of rest is either healthful or clear; or on
the other side, all motion diseased and troublesome: for what water more sweet
than that of a Spring, or what more thick or loathsome, than that which stands
in a puddle, corrupting it self. As in the Wind o^ Seas, (to which two,
Passions are commonly compared) a middle temper between a quiet Calm and a
violent Tempest, is most serviceable for the passage between Countries; so
the agitations of Passion, as long as they serve only to drive forward, but
not to drown Virtue; as long as they keep their dependence on Reason, and run
only in that Channel wherewith they are thereby bounded, are of excellent
service, in all the travail of man's life, and such as without which, the
growth, success, and dispatch of Virtue would be much impaired.

For the corrupt effects of Passion in general, they are many more, because
there may be a multiplicitie as well of Evil as of Error, when there is but a
unity of Goodness or of Truth. And those effects may be either in respect to
themselves, one amongst another, or in reference to the Understanding, Will, or
Body. The effects of them amongst themselves, is in their mutual generating
and nourishing of each other; as Fear is wrought by Love, and Anger by Grief,
Dol^ excitat iras; as a Lion when wounded, is most raging.

-- fixumque latronis Aeneid. lib. 12.
Impavidus frangit telum, and fremit ore cruento. With bloody mouth, and an
undaunted heart,
Breaks and tears from his wound the fastened dart.
Which effect of Passions, I have before touched upon; neither is it always a
corrupt effect, but only then, when there is in the Passion generative some
distemper. In which respect of the Understanding and Will, (both which I
comprise under one Name of Reason) I conceive the corruption to be principally
these four; Imposture, or seduction; Alienation, or withdrawing; Distraction,
or consounding; and Precipitancie, or a headlong transporting of Reason.

Now concerning these, we are first to remember, that there is in every man a
native and original struggling between Apperite and Reason; which yet
proceeds from Corruption, and the Fall of Man, not from Nature entire, as the
Papists contend; who affirm, That the strife and reluctancie between Sense
and Understanding, arises from Physical and created constitution; and that
therefore, that sweet harmony which was between all the Faculties of Man,
Animal and Rational, in his Creation, proceeded from the government of a
super-naturall Grace added thereunto: because it being natural for Sense to
desire sensible, and Spirit spiritual good things, and things sensitive and
spiritual being amongst themselves opposite; those desites which are carried
unto them, must needs be opposite likewise.

An Argument as weak, as the Opinion which it defends, is dangerous and
prejudicial to the honor of Man's Creation; as tending to prove, that the
first risings and rebellions of Appetite against Reason, and all inordinate
desires of inferior Faculties, till they taint the Will, are not formally
sins, as having been natural to Adam himself in Innocence, though by
infused and supernatural Grace bridled and suspended. An Opinion, which
retains that odious scandal which they fasten upon us, more justly and truly
on their own heads, touching making God the Author of Sin; in that they
affirm, that Concupiscence, whereby Sense is carried to its object
inordinately, that is, without the government and assent of Reason, to have
been natural to Adam; which yet Saint Paul has so many Romans 7.
times called by the express name of Sin, in one Chapter.

And for the Argument which they bring, we answer, That naturally, and from the
Law of Creation, there was no formal opposition, but a subordination between
Spirit and Sense. And therefore, notwithstanding the operations of Appetite are
common unto Men and Beasts; yet we may not grant, that they have the same
manner of being educed and governed in both these. For, as the operations of
the vegetative Soul, though common to Beasts, Men, and Plants, are yet in
either of these severally so restrained, as that they are truly said to be the
proper and peculiar works of that specificall form, unto which they are
annexed: So likewise, the sensitive Appetite, though generally it be common to
Men and Beasts; yet in Men, it was ordained to proceed naturally from the
government of Reason, and therefore may properly be called a humane Appetite,
as being determined, restrained, and made conformable unto Man's Nature: so that
as long as Man continued entire and incorrupt, there was a sweet harmony
between all his Faculties, and such an happy subordination of them each to
other, as that every motion of the inferior powers was directed and governed,
and therefore might truly and properly be attributed to the superior; but when
once Man had tasted of that murdering Fruit, which poisoned him and all his
posterity, then began those swellings, rebellions, and unjoynting of
Faculties, which made him as lame in his Nature, as it did dead in Grace;
whence Passions are become now, in the state of corruption, beastly and
sensual, which were before, by Creation, reasonable and humane: For man being
in honor was without understanding, and is become as the beasts that perish.

But to return, we are, as I said, to remember, that there is in Man, by
reason of his general corruption, such a distemper wrought, as that there is
not only crookedness in, but dissension also, and fighting between his parts.
And though the Light of our Reason be by Man's Fall much dimmed and decayed, yet
the remainders thereof are so adverse to our unruly Appetite, as that it
labors against us, as the Philistims against Samson, (or rather indeed as
Dalilah, for Samsons eyes were truly put out, before ever the Philistims were
upon him) it labors, I say, to deprive us of those Relics of Sight, which
we yet retain.

And this is that first corrupt effect, which I Aris^. Rbe^. l. 1 c. 3.
call Imposture, or occaecation, whereby Passion Quin^l. lib. 6. cap. 2.
reigning in the lower parts, and being impatient altogether of resistance or
control, labors to mask Reason, and to obliterate those Principles and
original Truths, whereby their unrulinesse might be restrained, or at least
convinced. And hence it is, that every man, when he has given place to the
violence of Appetite, labors next to incline and prepare his Mind for
assent, and to get Reason on the same side with Passion. Disobedience is ever
cavilling, and contentious; and he who will not work the righteousness of
God, will be sure to dispute against it, and to stumble at it. And therefore
the Apostles tell us, that Repentance, and putting away of Romans 2. ^. Prove. 10.
8. ^ccles. 5. 2. ^ Tim. 2. 25. I^m. 1. 19, 20, 21. 1 Pet. 2. 8. Io^n 3. 20
Lusts, is the only preparation to acknowledge the Truth: for so long as any
man resolves to hold fast his sin, he will ever re^ct the Truth that opposes
it, and bribe Reason to say something for it.

He made himself a Lion, and anon
Became a Boar, a Panther, a Dragon.
So likewise, the Understanding being once Aegrotantes Medici al^s Medicos ad
se (...), and Mag^ p^ (...) (...) (...), (...). Ar^. (...). lib. 3. cap. 16.
invaded by Passion, is brought to change into diverse shapes, and to judge of
things, not according to their naked and natural truth, but according as it
finds them bear in the Fancy those impressions of Pleasure, which are most
agreeable to corrupted Nature.

And another Reason, why we seek to warrant and to maintain a Passion, when
we have given way unto it, is the love of our Ease: For every man, though he
can be content to delight in the pleasure of a Corrupt Passion; yet that part
of it, which has the sting in it, is unpleasant: and therefore there is
required the hand of Reason, by Apologies, Pleadings, and Blandishments, either
to mollify the Passion, that it shall not then pierce, or to harden and arm
the subject, that it may not be sensible of it.

And, that this Deceit and Ex^ation is a proper work of Passion, (besides our
own daily experience) this one Argument might sufficiently prove; namely, the
Practice of Tertull. contr. Valen^. cap. 4.
Heretics: who proposing to themselves either Gain, or any other Carnal and
corrupt End; did thereupon presently (as the Apostle notes) vent the perverse
Disputes of their own corrupt Minds, and make all Truth an Handmaid and
Lacquey to their own Lusts* ^ Tim. 6. 5.
And proportionably thereunto, their custom has been, Prius persuadere quam
docere, to Tertu^. de (...). Isid. Pelut. l. 1. cp. 102.
creep upon the Affections of Men, and get footing there, before ever they
would adventure the entertainment of their false Doctrines* And as it is said
of God, that he first accepted Abel, and then his Sacrifice; so do they
labor first, to work an approbation of their Persons in the hearts of Men;
whence in the second place, their perverse Conceits do find the easier
access to their Understandings.

For, when silly and unstable Minds shall once be brought to such a Prejudice,
as to have the Persons of Men in Admiration; when they shall see an Impostor
come unto them, as a man that had wholly renounced the World; like Zopyrus or
Synon, clothed H^rod* Th^lia. Ae^cid. lib. 2.
and deformed with seeming Poverty and Repentance; drawing in and out his
breath with no other motions, than sighs; pretending to bring nothing but the
plentiful Promises of Salvation, Tears in his Eyes, Oil and Honey in his
Mouth, and the most exquisite Picture of true Holiness, which it is possible
for the Art or Hypocrisy of Man's Invention to dr^w out: How can the
Understanding of weak and simple people choose (especially being before framed
unto belief, by those two Credulous Qualities, of Ignorance and Fear) but be
made inclinable to receive, not only willingly, but with greediness also,
whatsoever poisonous Doctrine, under pretense of wholesome and saving Physique,
such a subtle Impostor shall administer unto them? Such a great force there is
in Voluntary Humility, neglecting of the Body, and other the like pretended
pious Frauds, to insinuate and take possession of weak and credulous Natures;
with whom happily, more Real, Serious, and Spiritual Arguments, coming with
less pomp and ostentation, would not prevail.

-- Captique dolis, lacrymisque coactis
Quos neque Tydides nec Larissaeus Achilles
Non anni domuere december, non mill carinae.
They are surpised by frauds and forced tears,
In whom their greatest foes could work no fears;
Whom ten years war not won, nor thousand ships,
Are snared and conquered by perjurious lips.
The second manner of Corruption, which 2.
Passion uses on the Understanding and Will, was Alienating or withdrawing of
Reason from the serious examination of those Pleasures, wherewith it desires
to possess the Mind, without control; that when it cannot so far prevail,
as to blind and seduce Reason, getting the allowance and Affirmative Consent
thereof, it may yet at least so far inveagle it, as to withold it from any
Negative Determination, and to keep off the Mind from a serious and impartial
consideration of what Appetite desires; for fear lest it should be convinced
of sin, and so find the less sweetness in it.

And this is the Reason of that affected and Voluntary Ignorance, which Saint
Pet^ 2 Pet. 3. 5.
speaks of; whereby Minds prepossessed with a love of inordinate courses, do
withold and divert Reason, and forbear to examine that Truth, which indeed
they know; as fearing, lest thereby they should be deterred from those Vices,
which they resolve to follow. Which is the same, with that excellent Metaphore
in Saint Paul; who says* That the wrath of God was revealed from Heaven, on
all Ungodliness and Unrighteousness of Men, (...), which Romans 1. 18.
hold or detain the Truth in Unrighteousness: that is, which imprison and
keep in that (...), as the Apostle interprets himself, in the next Verse;
all those Notions of Divine Truth, touching the Omnipotency and Justice of
God, which were by the singer of Nature written within them, to deter them
from, or (if not) to make them inexcusable, in those unnatural pollutions
wherein they wallowed. Thus Medea in the Poet:

(...). Eurip. Medea. Vid. Clem. Alex. St^m. l. 2. p. 284. Edi^. He^.
(...). I know it is wicked that I go about,
But Passion has put all my Reason out.
And therefore, that Maxim of the Stoicall A^ria. (...). lib. 1. cap. 28.
Aristot. E^hic. l. l. 3. ^1*
Philosopher, out of Plato, is false; (...), That all men are unwillingly
Malunt nescire quta ^am oderunt. Tertull. Ap^l. c. 1.
deprived of Truth; since, as Aristotle has observed, directly agreeable to
the phrase of Saint Peter, there is (...), (...). Iusti^. ^ib. qu. and ^sp. q.
140. (...). Clem. Alex.
an elected or Voluntary Ignorance, which for their Securities sake, men
nourish themselves in.

And that there should be such an Alienation of the Mind from Truth, when the
Fancy and Heart are hot with Passion, cannot be any great wonder: For, the
Soul is of a limited and determined Activitie in the Body; insomuch, that it
cannot with perspi^uitie and diligence give attendance unto diverse Objects.
And therefore, when a Passion in its fullness, both of a violence and delight,
does take it up, the more clear and naked brightness of Truth is suspended
and changed: So that, as the Sun and Moon, at their rising and setting,
seem far greater than at other times, by reason of thick Vapors, which are
then interposed; so, the Mind looking upon things through the Mists and
Troubles of Passion, cannot possibly judge of them, in their own proper and
immediate Truth, but according to that magnitude or color, which they are
framed into, by prejudice and distemper.

But then, thirdly, if Reason will neither be 3.
deluded nor won over to the patronage of Evil, nor diverted from the
knowledge and notice of Good; then does Passion strive to confound and distract
the Apprehensions thereof, that they may not with any firmness or efficacy
of Discourse, interrupt the Current of such irregular and headstrong Motions.
And this is a most inward and proper Effect of Passion: For, as things
presented to the Mind, in the nakedness and simplicity of their own Truth,
do gain a more firm Assent unto them, and a more fixed intuition on them;
so, on the contrary side, those things which come mixed and troubled, dividing
the intention of the Mind between Truth and Passion, cannot obtain any settled
or satisfactorie Resolution from the Discourses of Reason.

And this is the Cause of that Reluctancie between the Knowledge and Desires
of Incontinent Men, and others of the like Nature: For, as Aristotle observes
of them, they are Ethic. l. 7. c. 10. In consinio concupiscenti^ and
poenitentia as^ra and (...) gand^. P^tarch. lib. Philosophand. cum princip.
but (...), Halfe-Evill, as not sinning with that full and plenarie Consent of
Will, but Prat^r Electionem, as he speaks; so I may more truly say of them,
that they have but an Halfe-Knowledge, not any distinct and applicative
Apprehension of Truth, but a confused and broken Conceit of things in their
Generality: Not much unlike unto Nighttalkers, who cannot be said to be
thoroughly asleep, nor perfectly awaked, but to be in a middle kind of
inordinate temper between both; or (as Aristotle himself gives the
similitude) Ethic. lib. 7. cap. 3.
it is like a Stage Player, whose Knowledge is express and clear enough, but
the things which it is conversant about, are not personal and particular to
those men, but belonging unto others, whom they personate: So, the Principles
of such men are in the general, Good and True; but they are never brought
down so low, as if they did concern a man's own particular Weal or Woe, nor
thoroughly weighed, with an assuming, applying, concluding Conscience; but, like
the notion of a Drunken or sleeping man, are choked and smothered with the
Mists of Passion.

And this third Corruption is that, which Aristotle, in the particular of
Incontinencie, Ethic. lib. 7. cap. 7.
calls (...), the weakness and disabilitie of Reason, to keep close to her
own Principles and Resolutions: Whereunto exactly agrees that of the Prophet;
How weak is Ezech. 16. 30.
thy heart, seeing thou do all things, the works of an imperious Whorish
Woman? And elsewhere, Whoredom and Wine are said to take Hos. 4. 11.
away the Heart. So Hector describes lascivious Paris:

-- -- (...), Iliad. ^. 45.
(...). Thy face has beauty in it, but in thy breast
There does no strength nor resolution rest.
The last Effect (which I shall but name) is 4.
that which Aristotle calls (...), Rashness or Precipitancie; which is the
most Tyrannical Violence which Passion uses; when, in spite of all the
Dictates of Reason, it furiously over-ruleth the Will, to determine and allow
of any thing, which it pleases to put in practice; and like a Torrent,
carries all before it; or, as the Prophet speaks, rusheth Ier. 50. 38. Psalm.
102. 8. Eccles. 9. 3. Luke 6. 11.
like an Horse into the Battle: So Lust and Anger are sometimes, in the
Scripture, called Madness; because it transporteth the Soul beyond all bounds
of Wisdom or Counsel, and by the Dictates of Reason takes occasion to become
more outrageous, Ipsaque praesidia occupat, feeds like Wildfire upon those
Remedies, which should remove it: As she said in the Poet;

Levis est dolor, qui capere consilium potest, Senec. Medaea.
Lib^ ire contra. That Is but light grief, which counsel can abate; Mine
swells, and all advice resolves to hate.

The corrupt effects which Passion works in the last place on the Body, are
diverse, according to the particular nature of the Passions; sometimes too
sudden and violent, sometimes too heavy oppression of the heart; the other,
sudden perturbation of the spirits. Thus old Ely dyed, with sudden grief;
Diodorsu, with shame; Sophocles, Chilo the Lacedemonian, and others, with joy;
Nature being not able to bear that great and sudden immutation, which these
Passions made in the Body. The causes and manner of which cogitation, I reserre
(as being inquiries not so directly pertinent to the present purpose) unto
Natural Philosophers and Physicians. And from the generality of Passions, I
proceed unto the consideration of some particulars, according to the order of
their former division: In all which, I shall forbear this long Method of the
Antecedents, Concomitants, and Consequents of their Acts, (many particulars
whereof, being of the same nature in all Passions, will require to be observed
only in one or two, and so proportionally conceived in the rest) and shall
insist principally in those particulars which I handle on the causes and
effects of them; as being Considerations, wherein commonly they are most
serviceable or prejudicial to our Nature.

CHAP. IX. Of the affection of Love, of Love natural, of general communion,
of Love rational, the object and general cause thereof.
NOw the two first and fundamental Passions of all the rest, are Love and
Hatred. Concerning the Passion of Love, we will therein consider first its
object, and its causes; both which being of a like nature, (for every moral
object is a cause, thoug^ not every cause an object) will fall into one.

Love then consists in a kind of expansion o^ egresse of the heat and spirits
to the object loved, or to that whereby it is drawn and attracted whatsoever
therefore has such an attractive power, is in that respect the object and
general^ cause of Love. Now, as in Nature, so in the Affections likewise, we
may observe from their objects a double attraction: The first, is tha^ natural
or impressed sympathy of things, where by one does inwardly incline an union
with the other, by reason of some secret virtues and occ^ qualities disposing
either subject to that (...) all friendship, as between Iron and the Loa^
stone: The other, is that common and mo^ discernable attraction which every
thing receiv^ from those natures, or places, whereon they (...) ordained and
directed by the Wisdom an^ Providence of the first Cause, to depend both in
respect of the perfection and conservation of their being. For, as God in his
Temple, the Church, so is He in his Palace, (if I may so call it) the World, a
God of Order, disposing every thing in Number, Weight, and Measure, so sweetly,
as that all is harmonious, (from which harmony, the Philosophers have
concluded a Arrian. Epist. lib. 1. c. 6.
Divine Providence) and so powerfully, as that all things depend on his
Government, without violence, breach, or variation.

And this Order and Wisdom is seen chiefly in that sweet subordination of
things each to other, and happy inclination of all to their particular ends,
till all be reduced finally unto Him who is the Fountain, whence issue all
their streams of their limited being, and the fullness of which, all his
creatures have received. Which the Poet, though something too Poetically,
seems to have expressed:

Principio Coelum ac Terras camposque liquentes Aeneid. lib. 6. P^. Crini^.
lib. 6. c. 12.

Lucentemque globum Lunae Titaniaque Astra
Spiritus intus al^, ^otamque infusa per Artus
Men's agitat molem, and magno se corpore miscet.
Heaven, Earth, and Seas, with all those glorious Lights,
Which beautify the Day, and rule the Nights,
A Divine inward Vigor, like a Soul,
Diffused through every joint of this great Graeci eni^ (...) vocant.
Whole,
Does vegetate, and with a constant force
Guides each Nature through its fixed course.
And such is the natural motion of each thing to its own Sphere and Center;
where is both the most proper place of its consisting, and withal, the
greatest freedom from sorraine injury or violence.

But we must here withal, take notice of the general care of the Creator;
whereby he has fastened on all creatures, not only his private desire to
satisfy the demands of their own nature, but has also stamped upon them a
general charity and feeling of Communion, as they are sociable parts of the
Universe or common Body; wherein cannot possible be admitted (by reason of that
necessary mutual connection between^ the parts thereof) any confusion or
divulsion, without immediate danger to all the members. And therefore God has
inclined the nature of these necessary agents, so to work of their discords
the perfect harmony of the whole, that i^ by any casualtie it fall out, that
the Body of Nature be like to suffer any rupture, deformity, o^ any other
contumely, though happily occasioned by the uniforme and natural motions of the
particulars; they then must prevent such damag^ and reproach, by a
relinquishing and forgetting of their own natures, and by acquainting
themselves with motions, whereunto considered i^ their own determinate
qualities, they have a^ essential reluctancie. Which property and sense of
Nature in common, the Apostle has excellently set down in 1 Cor. 12. where he
renders this reason of all, that there might be (...) Schism in the Body:
which likewise he divinely applies in the mystical sense, that all the
several gifts of the Spirit to the Church, should drive 1 Cor. 8. 1. Ephesians. 4.
12.
to one common end, as they were all derived from one common Fountain; and
should never be used, without that knitting quality of Love, to which he
elsewhere properly ascribes the building, continuation, and perfecting of the
Saints.

Now, as it has pleased the infinite Wisdom of God to guide and moderate, by
his own immediate direction, the motions of necessary agents, after the
manner declared to their particular, or to the general end, (which motion may
therefore, as I before observed, be called the natural Passion of things) so
has it given unto Man a reasonable Soul, to be as it were his Vicegerent in
all the motions of Man's little World.

To apply then these proportions in Nature to the affection of Love in Man, we
shall find first a Secret, which I will call Natural; and next, a Manifest,
which I call a Moral and more discursive attraction. The first of these, is
that natural sympathy wrought between the affection and the obj^ct, in the
first meeting of them, without any suspension of the person, ^ll farther
inquiry after the disposition of the object; which comes immediately from the
outward, natural, and sensitive Virtues thereof, whether in shape, feature,
beauty, motion, (...), behavior; all which coming under the sphere of
Sense, I include under the name of Iudiciarie Physiognomie: Which is not a bare
delight in the outward qualities, but a farther presumption of the Judgment;
concluding thence, a lovely disposition of that Soul, which animateth and
quickneth those outward Graces.

And indeed, if it be true which Aristotle in Ethic. li^. 8.
his Ethics tells us, That similitude is the ground of Love; and if there be no
natural Love stronger than that which is between the Body and the Soul, we
may well ground some good presumption of similitude in the qualities of the
Soul with those lovely impressions of Nature which we find in the Body, and
may by the same reason collect a mutual discovery, by which we acknowledge a
mutual sympathy between them. And therefore it was no ill counsel (though
not always to be heeded) Cave tibi ab iis quos natura signavit, to take heed
of such, who like Cain have any mark of notorious deformity set upon them by
Nature. And therefore Homer speaking of the garrulous, impudent, envious, and
reviling qualities of Thersites, fits him with a Body answerable to such a Mind.

(...) Iliad. ^. ^17.

The most ill-shapen man that to Troy came,
With eye distorted, and in each foot lain,
His shoulders crooked, to his breast shrunk down,
A sharp wrye head, here and there patcht with down.
But yet herein, though it be injurious for a man out of too much austeritie of
Mind, to reject the judgment of sense, and to quarrel with this natural
instinct; yet it is fit, that in this case, considering the deceitfulness of
things, and what a diverse habit, Education or Hypocrisy has wrought in many,
between the out and inside of their Natures; that we should, I say, bring a
fearful judgment, like love of B^as the Philosopher, which may easily, upon
good warrant and assurance, alter it self: otherwise, when a thing is
thoroughly known to be lovely, our hearts may boldly quiet and repose
themselves in it.

But here likewise we must observe that proportion of Nature, That if our
affection cannot stand in private toward one particular, without damage and
inconvenience to the public Body, Politic or Ecclesiastical, whereof we
are members, the general must ever be esteemed more dear and precious. A
scandal to the Body, and a Schism from the whole, is more dangerous and
unnatural, than any private Divisions: for, if there be a wound or swelling in
one part of the Body, the parts adjoining will be content to submit themselves
unto pain, for the recoverie of that; and rather than it shall perish, (...)
any ^ble which may conduce to the (...) (...). And this is the Love of
fellow members, amongst themselves. But then, if any part be so far
corrupted, as that it does more easier derive its contagion upon others, than
admit of any succor from them, so that by the continuance thereof in the Body,
the whole is endangered; or, if the whole Body be ready to perish by Famine;
then does the Sense of Community so swallow up that other more private
respect, as that the members will be even cruel amongst themselves, to the
cutting and devouring each of other, that thereby the safety of the whole may
be procured. And therefore, the Fable of the Faction between the Belly and the
Members, was wisely applied by Menenius Agrippa, in a Rebellion amongst the
people of Rome; to show how unnatural a thing it is, and how pernicious to the
parts themselves, to nourish their own private Discontents, when the Weal
public is together therewithal endangered.

CHAP. X. Of the Rule of true Love: the Love of God and our selves: similitude
to these, the cause of Love in other things: of Love of Concupiscence: how Love
begets Love; and how presence with, and absence from the object, does upon
different respects exercise and increase Love.
FRom this general and fundamental cause of Love, proceed some others,
special and particular; whereof, the first and principal is a similitude and
resemblance between the thing loved, and that which is the Natural Rule of
Love.

Now, the Rule of all Love, is by Divine Truth prescribed to be God, and a Man's
self; so that, what bears similitude to these, is the proper Arist. Probl.
sell. 10. sect. 51.
and right Object of our Affection. To speak therefore a word or two of these.

The Master-Wheele, or first Mover in all the Regular Motions of this Passion,
is the Love of God, grounded on the right knowledge of Him; whereby the Soul
being ravished with the apprehension of his infinite Goodness, is earnestly
drawn and (...)
called out, as it were, to desire an Union, Vision, and participation of his
Glory and Presence; yielding up it self unto Him, (for by Amor non nisi donum
(...) in Ama^um. Guil^el. Paris. de Legibus, c. 19.
Love a man gives himself to the thing which he loves) and conforming all its
Affections and Actions to his Will.

And this Love is then Regular, when it takes up all the kinds of Love, and all
the degrees of Love. For we love God, Amore amicitiae, for the Goodness and
Excellency which is in himself, as being most lovely; and Amore desiderii,
with a desire of being united unto him, as the Fountain of all our
blessedness; and Amore complacentiae, with a love of joy and delight in him;
when the Soul goes to God, like Noah's Dove to the Arc, and with infinite
sweetness and security reposeth it self in him; and lastly, Amore
Benevolentiae, with an endeavor (so far as a poor Creature can to an
infinite Creator; for our Good extends not unto him) to bring all praise,
service, and honor unto him.

And thus we are to love him above all things; first, Appretiative, setting an
higher price upon his Glory and Command, than upon any other thing besides; all
Dung, in comparison. Secondly, Intensive, with the greatest force and intention
of our Spirit, setting no bounds or measure to our Love of him: thirdly,
Adaequate, as the complete, perfect, and adaequate object of all our Love, in
whom it must begin, and in whom it must end. And therefore, the Wiseman
speaking of the Love and Fear of God, tells us, that it is Totum Hominis, the
Whole of Man. Other Objects are severally fitted, unto several Faculties;
Beauty to the Eye, Music to the Ear, Meat to the Palate, Learning to the
Mind; none of these can satisfy the Faculty, unto which it belongs not. And
even to their proper Faculties, they bring Vanity and Vexation with them:
Vanity, because they are empty, and do deceive; and because they are
mortal, and will decay: Vexation, in the Getting; for that is with Labor; in
the Keeping, for that is with Fear; in the Multiplying, for that is with Care;
in the enjoying, for if we but taste, we are vexed with desiring it; if we
surfeit, we are vexed with loathing it. God only is Totum Hominis, fitted to
all the wants of an immortal Soul: Fullness, to make us perfectly happy;
Immortality, to make us perpetually happy; after whom we hunger with desire,
and are not griped; on whom we feast with delight, and are not cloyed. He
therefore is to be loved, not with a divided, Matthew. 22. 37.
but a whole Heart. To love any Creature, either without God, or above God, is
Cupiditas, Lust: Vid. August. de Doct. Christ. l. 1. c. 22. and l. 3. c. 10.
and de Tr^uitat. l. 8. c. 3. and l. 9. c. 8.
(which is the formale of every sin, whereby we turn from God to other
things) but to love the Creatures under God, in their right order; and for God,
to their right end, (for he made all things for himself) this is Charitas,
true and regular Love.

Now, the Image and likeness of God, (not to speak of that Eternal and
Essential Character of his Fathers brightness) is in his Word, and in his
Works; the one, being the Manifestation of his Will; and the other, of his
Power and Wisdom. Our love to his Word, is our search of it; as being the
only Glass, wherein we see the Wonders and deep things of God: our Belief
of it, All, and Only; acknowledging in it, the fullness of its Truth, and of
its sufficiency: and our Obedience to it, submitting our selves, with purpose
of heart, unto the rule and guidance of it.

Touching the Works of God, there are two chief things, whereunto the
affection of Man is by the Creatures attracted, and wherewith it desires an
Union, namely, the Truth and Goodness of them; for by these only, may all the
diverse Faculties of Man's Soul be exercised and delighted: The love of both
which, is then only Regular, when it is limited, in regard of the quantity
and quality of the act; Humble, in the manner of pursuance, without swelling
and curiosity: and lastly, subordinate unto that great Love of God, whose
Image we can no further truly love in the Creature, than as we are thereby
directed to a farther love of Him.

I come now unto that other Rule of Love, wherein Aristotle has placed the
Nature thereof, A Man's self, or that unity and proportion which the thing
loved bears unto the party loving; (...) Arist. lib. 9 cap. 9. Ethic. lib.
8. cap. 9. 12. Lib. 9. cap. 3. 9.
which in one place, he calls (...), Equality; in another, (...)* Identitie;
in another, (...), Similitude; in another, (...), Communion; all Relative
terms, which refer unto the party loving.

The Root of every man's love unto himself, is that unity and identitie which
he has with himself; it being natural to every thing, to take delight in the
simplicity of it own being: because the more simple and One it is, the more
it is like the Fountain of its being; and therefore has the more perfection
in it. And this love of Man unto himself, if subordinate unto the love of God,
and governed thereby, is Debitum Natura, a necessary Aristot. Ethic. lib. 9.
c. 4. 8.
Debt; and such, as the neglect whereof, is a trespass against Nature.

Now then, as we love our selves, for the unity which we have in our selves;
so, wheresoever we find any similitude to our selves, or character of our
selves, either in Nature or Habits, upon that also do the beams of this
Affection extend. Now, a thing may represent our selves, first, in Substance;
as the Husband and Wife are said to be one flesh, Arist. Mag^r. Mo^al. lib. 1.
c. 34.
and Children are branches and portions of their Parents * Secondly, in
Qualities or Accidents; as one man resembles another in Natural, and one
friend another in Habitual Qualities; as Face answers to Face in Water, so
the heart of Man to Man.

With respect unto this double Similitude, there is a double Love; the one,
Natural; the other, acquired, or Habitual: the former is common with Men unto
other Creatures: Thus in Aelian, Plutarch, and others, we read of the Natural
Aelian. lib. de Anim. 2. c. 40. Lib. 2. c. 25. Lib. 6. c. 9. Lib. 9. c. 8. Lib.
1^. ^. 38. Plu^ch. de (...). Anim^l. and de Amore. Aristat. Hist. (...). lib.
9. c. 4. ^.
affection of Elephants; which seeing their young fallen into a deep Pit, will
leap down after them, though it be present death; and of the mavelous
cunning and valor which many other Birds and Beasts use to provide for the
safety of their B^ood, exposing and offering themselves to danger, that they
may be delivered: Yea, the Pelican (if we believe the story) does Sophocles in
Electra, and ibl Sc^oltast. p. 1 27
feed her young ones, when they have been bitten with Serpents, with her own
blood to recover them again: which Emblem John the second, Th^loss. de Repub.
lib. 8. c. 1. Sect. 19.
king of Portugal is said to have chosen, whereby to express his Love to his
Subjects: And Homer elegantly expresses the care of a Bird seeding her young
ones.

-- (...). Iliad. 1. 324.
She brings her young ones what mea^ she can find,
When she her self with hunger's almost pined.
And the like affection, another Poet has expressed in the most cruel of all
the Beasts, the Tiger:

-- -- Sic Aspera Tygris Statius. Theb. Lib. 10.

Foetibus abreptis Scythico deserta sub Antro
Accubat, and lepidi lambit vestigia lecti.
-- The Tiger (which most thirsts for blood)
Seeing her self robbed of her tender brood,
Lies down lamenting in her Scythian Den,
And licks the prints where her lost wholps had lion.
And this kind of Piety we find Reciprocal, Aelian. l. de animal. ^. cap.
40. and lib.
returning from the young ones upward* so the young Lions are said to feed and
provide for their old ones; which is also observed of Eagles, Sto^kes and other
creatures. And hence we read of (...), Laws, which receive their Aelian. lib.
de Anim. 2. cap. 40 and lib. 3. cap. 23 and lib. 9. c. 1. and lib. 10. c. 16.
Plutarch. de solert. animal. Aristoph. in Avibus. Plin. lib. 10. c. 23. and
lib. 8. cap. 57.
demomination from the Stork, providing that children should nourish and take
care of their Parents in their distress. And for men, so great is the power of
natural affection, that Parents desire nothing more, than to be excelled by
their children; even vicious men (as Seneca somewhere speaks) desire that
their sons may be virtuous, and virtuous men that they may be more worthy
and happy than themselves, as Hector prayed for his son.

(...). Iliad. ^. 480.
Let it be said, here is a brave Son indeed,
Who does his noble Father far exceed.
And Aeneas to Ascanius.

Disce puer virtutem ex me, verosque labores, Aenead. lib. 12.
Fortunam ex aliis, -- Virtue and Patience learn my son of me,
But may thy fortunes better Patterns see.
And therefore unnaturallnesse of Affection is 2 Timothy 3. 3.
reckoned up by the Apostle amongst the soulest of sins, when like Ismael the
nature of men grows wild and brutish, as the Philosopher calls such men
(...), men of savage and fierce dispositions. And therefore in the Scripture an
unnatural man is called Onager homo, a wilde-asse man, Genesis 16. 1^. Job 11.
12. but a meek and tender*spirited man is called Ovi^ homo, a Sheep man, or a
man of a sociable and calm disposition, Ezekiel 36. 37* 38. And amongst the
Thebans there was a Law made, which appointed ^lian. v^r. hist. l. 2. c. 7.
a Capital penalty upon those unnatural men, who should cast out and expose
their children unto ruin.

And as this kind of Love arises from Propinquitie of Nature, so another there
is growing out of Similitude of Manners. All flesh, as Syracides Eccles. 13. 17.
speaks, will resort to their like, and every man will keep company with
such, as he is himself; as we see learned men hold correspondency with those
(...)* (...)* Thirsit is viti^, (...) al^ter indicat Ho^ qu^m quod esle^ viris
praestantissim is Achilli and Vl^ssi invis^* I^iad 2. Vid. Aristot. Prob.. 10.
q. (...). (...), etc. (...). Id^. 9. (...). S^ apud D^og. Lat^i. in Zenon. l.
7. M^im* Tyriu^ (...). 4.
that are learned, and good with those that are good: no man that excels in
any quality, shall ever want Friends; because every man, that either has or
likes that Quality, will love it in any other man, and him for it. For by the
same reason that a man by the study or practice of any good things labors to
commend himself to his own judgment, and to the love of others; he is
engaged (unless he will be false to his own grounds) to love any other whom
he observes to study and practice the same thing: For how can I expect, that
that in me should reap Love from other^, which in others reapeth nothing but
Envy from me? And upon this reason it is, that a man can hardly permit another
to love that, which he himself hates; because we are too apt to make our
Judgments or Passions the rule of another man's, and to dislik^ that in him,
which we do not allow in our selves: Which unruly affection, the Poet has
excellently described in Achilles, when his friend mediated a reconciliation
between him and Agamemnon:

-- -- (...). Iliad. 1. 610.
It is not courteous, that where I hate, you
Should love, except you would have me hate you too:
But take this rule, if you will be thought my friend;
The man that offends me, do you offend.
So much naturally are men in love with their own likeness, that many times
they can be content to have their very deformities imitated: Plutarch. de
Adulat. and A^icis.
and therefore, the chief art of flatterers, is to commend and imitate every
thing of him, of whom they would make a prey.

It is true, that in some cases, similitude is the cause of Envy; but this is
only then, when first the quality wherein men agree, is a litigating and
contentious quality: in which case, the meeting of such men in one
disposition, is but like the meeting of two rough Streams, which makes them
run with the more noise ^ Therefore, a wise and a meek-tempered man shall
sooner win and hold the love of an angry man, than he, who is like unto him
in that distemper; because such a man (though indeed he be Conqueror, in
regard of his Wisdom) yet by his Patience he seems to yield: and there is
nothing which a man's Passion loves so much as victory. Whereas between Anger
and Anger there must needs be fighting of affections, which is the remotest
temper from Love.

Secondly, when by accident, the quality, wherein men agree, does any other way
inconvenience them* either in point of credit, usefulness* or pro fit. For as
the Sta^res, though they agree in light, yet Validiorum exortu exilia
obscurantur, Pl^ ^gyr.
those that are small suffer loss by the brightness of others. So amongst
men, agreeing in the same abilities, one many times proves ^ prejudice and
disadvantage unto the other, as the Poet said,

(...). Hesiod.
The Potter's often angry with his mates,
One ne^ghbour* Architect the other hates.
And therefore as the Sun and Moon agree best in their light when they are
fa^hest asunder, so in these Arts, which maintain life or credit, men usually
agree best at a distance, because thereby the one does the less damage or
darken the other.

Now this Natural and Habitual Love is then regular, when Subordinate to that
greater, our (...)* (...). A. ^ (...). ^. b. ^. c. 3.
Love of God, and when governed by the dictates of a rightly informed Reason,
which amongst many others are these three.

First, That our Love carry its right respect, and no sinister, or by-^nd with
it; That we love a friend for himself, and not with indirect ends, only upon
our own benefit: For, as Rbe^. l. ^. c. 4
the Philosopher speaks, true Love is a benevolent Affection, willing good
unto another for his own sake. Hominum charitas, says Cicero, gratuita est. c
De Not* d^or. lib. 1.
True love is free, and without self respects: whereas to shroud our own
private aims under the name of friendship. Non est amicitia sed mercatura, S^.
Epi^ 9.
is only to make a Trade and Merchandise of one another.

Secondly, that our love be s^rene, not mudded with error, and prejudice:
(...). (...). (...). 106.
in the most able men that are, God is pleased to leave some wants and
weaknesses, that they may the better know themselves, be acquainted with
divine bounty in what they have, and their necessary use of others in what they
want. And therefore it was a seasonable increpation of Polydamas to Hector.

(...) ^iad. r. 720. vid. Plutarch. de Animi ^ranquil. Ci^r* ad A^icum* lib.
14. ^p. (...).

Because thou can in War all men out do,
Will thou presume thou can in Counsel to*
One breast's too narrow to contain all Arts,
God distributes his gifts in several parts.
In this case therefore our care must be to discern between the abilities
and infirmities of men, that our Honor and Love of the Person render not his
weaknesses beautiful us, nor work in us an unhappy diligence in the
imitation of them. Vix enim dici potest, quanto libentius imitamur Quintil.
lib. 2. cap. 2. and li. 10. c. ^.
eos, quibus favemus; Love is very apt to trans port us so far as to make us
imitate the errors of whom we love. Like unskillfull Painters, who Plutarch.
de Adulat.
not being able to reach the beauty of the face, express only the wrinkles
and blemishes of it.

Thirdly, that our love keep in all the kinds thereof its due proportion, both
for the nature of them, being toward some a love of Reverence, toward others
of friendship, toward others of Compassion, toward others of counsel and
bounty; as also for their several degrees of intension, which are to be more
or less according to the Natural, Moral, or Divine obligations which we
find in the persons loved. For though we must love All men as Our selves, yet
that inferres not an Equality, but a Fidelity and Sincerity of love; Since even
within Our selves, there is no man but loves his Head and his Heart and other
vital parts with a closer Affection than those which are but fleshly and
integrall, and more easily repayrable. And therefore the Apostle limiteth the
(...), the greatest degree of our love upon two objects, those of our own
house, and those of 1 Timothy 5. 8. Gal. 6. 10.
the household of faith; not excluding others, but preferring these.

I shall end this particular with naming one Species of Love more (for all this
hitherto has been Amor Amiciti^, a Love of a Person for himself) and it is
that which the Schools call Amor Concupiscenti^, a love of Concupiscence, or a
Circular love, that which begins and ends in a Man's self, when his Affections
having gone forth to some object, does again return home, and loves it not
directly for any absolute goodness which it has in it self, but as it is
conducible and bears a relation of Convenience to him that loves it. For
though all affection of love (as Aristotle observed) be Circular, in as much
as the Object first moves the Appetite, and then the Appetite moves to the
Object, and so the motion cease where it began (which is a circle;) (which
also by the way shows us in an Emblem the firmness and strength which love
works amongst men; because of all Forms and Fabriques, those which are
Circular are the strongest; as we see in Arches, wherein every part does
mutually touch and claspe in that which is next it:) Yet in this love which I
here speak of, there is a greater circle; in that, after all this, there is
another Regresse from the Object to the Appetite, applying the goodness
thereof unto the same, and loving it only for the commodity and benefit, which
the mind is likely to receive from it.

Another subordinate and less principal cause of love, may be love it self;
I mean in another Ethic. l. 8. cap. ^ and Lib. 9. cap. 1
man: for as it is natural, according to Aristotle, to praise, so sure it is
to love, (...)* Men of loving and good natures: and so he makes just,
beneficient and pleasant (...) men that are true lovers of their own friends
to be the proper objects of Love. And herein is that partly verified, that Love
is strong as Death. For as that grave which buries a dead man, does likewise
bury all his enemies (it being unnatural to hate the dead, whom we cannot
hurt: for the utmost harm, that malice can do, is to kill. And therefore it
is noted as a prodigious hatred between the two emulous brothers of Thebes,
Aetcocles and Polynices;

Nec furiis post fata modus slammaeque rebels Statius The b^id.
Seditione rogi. -- Their furies were not bounded by their fate,
Ones funeral flame the others flame did hate.)
Even so likewise a man's love has a power to bury his enemies, and to draw
unto it self the most backward and differing affections; for being of a
transient nature, and carrying forth it self into the person beloved, it
usually (according to the condition of other natural Agents) works semblable
and alike affections unto it self. For besides that, hereby an Adversary is
convinced of nourishing an injurious and undeserved (...) causam meam hodie^
p^tas s^it* prorsus ^cens, quicunque visus tam b^no seatrie^ nocens. Senc^. i^
(...).
enmity; he is moreover mollified and shamed by his own witness, his
conscience telling him that it is odious and inhumane to repay love with
hatred. Insomuch that upon this inducement, Saul the pattern of raging and
unreasonable envy, was sometimes brought to relent and accuse himself. And
this is the occasion (as I take it) of that speech of Solomon; If (...). 25. 21.
thine enemy hunger, give him bread to eat; if he thirst, give him water to
drink; for thou shall heap coals of fire upon his head. Which, though
perhaps, (...) (...) ^st (...), (...) (...) (...), si (...) imp^ndere, (...)
re^endere. Aug. de C^te. b. ^dib. c. 4.
with earthie and base minds, it has a property of hardening and confirming
them in their hatred; yet, with minds ingenuous and noble, it has a clean
contrary effect, to melt and purge them. And so the Apostle tells us, that
we love God, because he loved us first; and Mary Magdalene 1 ^ol. 4. 19. Luke
7. 47.
having had much forgiven her, did therefore love Christ much. And therefore
the Poets counsel is good:

(...). Theocri^.
If for thy love thy self would loved be, (...) ameris? am^. Martial.

Show love to those that do show love to thee.
The next two Causes, which I conceive, of Love, I will join in one; namely,
the absence from, and contrarily, the presence with the thing loved; both
which, in a different respect, do exercise Love. And therefore, first, I like
not that speech of Aristotle, that though distance of place (...). lib. 8. cap.
5.
do not dissolve the root and habit yet it does the exercise and acts of Love;
except he meant it (as I suppose he does) of the transient acts thereof,
whereby each friend does the office of Love and ^eneficence to another. For, as
in natural bodies there is not only a Compl^encie or Delight in their proper
place, when they enjoy it; but an innate propension and motion thereunto, when
they * An^mus (...) (...), sicu^ corpus ponde^c. (...). de Civi^. (...). lib.
11. c. 2^. Pond^um A^or ^eus, co (...) quocu^. (...) (...). Confe^. lib. 13.
cap* 9. and Epist. 89.
are absent from it; so in the mind of man (whose a Love in his Weight) there
is not only a Love of Delight in the fru^tion, but a Love likewise of Desire,
in the privation of a Good; which, the more it wants, the more it fixes it
self upon it: b as some things do naturally attract fire at a distance. Thus
the Poet expresses the Love of Dido to Aeneas: * (...). sympos. l. 5. q. 7.
Aen^id. l. 4.


Illum absens absentem anditque videtque. When night had severed them apart,
She heard and saw him in her heart.
And it is the wonder of Love (as Saint Chrysostom (...), in 1 Cor. 10. 30.
speaks) to collect and knit together in one, things fair separated from
each other: Wherein stands the Mystery of the Communion of the Church on
Earth, both with it self, in all the dispersed members of it, and with Christ
the Head; and that other part of it, which triumphs in Heaven. So that
herein, Divine Love has the same kind of Virtue with Divine Faith; that as
this is the being and subsisting of things to come, and distant in Time; so
that is the Union and knitting of things absent, and distant in place.

But then, much more does Presence to the goodness of an object loved,
increase and exercise our Love; because it gives us a more complete sight of
it, and Union unto it. And therefore Saint John speaks of a Perfection, and
Saint 1 Ioh. 4. 18.
Paul of a Perpetuity of our Love unto God, grounded 1 Cor. 13. 8.
on the fullness of the Beatificall Vision, when we shall be for ever with the
Lord; whereas now, seeing only in a Glass darkely, as we know, so likewise we
love but in part only. And Aristotle makes E^hic. lib. 8. c. 5
Mutual Conversation and Society one of the greatest bonds of Love; because
thereby is a more immediate exercise; and from thence, a greater increase of
the Affection.

As living Plutareb. l. de Invidia and Od. Aristot. po^it. lib. 1. c. 7.
Creatures, so Affections are nourished, after the same manner as they are
produced: Now it is necessary, for the first working of Love, that the Object
have some manner of Presence with the Affection, either by a Knowledge of
Vision, or of Faith. And therefore Saint Paul says, If they had known, they
would not have crucified 1 Cor. 2. 8.
the Lord of Glory; their Ignorance and Hatred of Him, went both together:
Simul ut desin^nt ignorare, Apolog. l. c. 1.
cessant and odisse; as soon, says Tertullian, as they ceased to be ignorant
of Christ, they ceased to hate Him: And usually, in the phrase of the
Scripture, Knowledge and Love are identicall. So 2 Timothy ^. 19. Matthew. 7. 23*
Ioh. 9. 21. Psa. 1. 6. 3^. ^8. Romans 8. 29.
then, all Love proceeding from Knowledge, and all Knowledge presupposing some
Presence of the thing known, it appears, that the Presence of the Object
begets, and therefore, by proportion, it nourishes this Affection.

The last Cause or inducement to this Passion, (which I will but name) is an
Aggregate of diverse Beautiful and Amiable Qualities in the Object; as namely,
Sympathy, Justice, Industry, Temperance, Ingenuitie, Facility, Pleasantness
and Innocence of Wit, Me^knesse, Yeeldingnesse, Patience, Sweetness of
behavior and disposition, without Closeness, Suspicion, Intermedling,
Inquisitivenesse, Morositie, Contempt, Dissension; in all which, men are either
Injusti or Pugnaces, Rhe^or. l. 1. c. 4.
do either wrong us, or cross us: Which two, the Philosopher makes the
general Opposites of Love: On which I shall forbear to insist, as also on the
Circumstances of the Act of this Passion it self, in the Quantity and
Quality thereof, and shall proceed in brief to the Consequents or Effects of
this Passion.

CHAP. XI. Of the Effects of Love, Union to the Object, Stay and Immoration of
the Mind upon it, Rest in it, Zeal, Strength, and Tenderness toward it,
Condescension unto it, Liquefaction and Languishing for it.
THe first which I shall observe, is Union, occasioned both by the Love which
we have to a thing, for it^ own sake, and likewise, for the Love of our
selves, that there may be a greater mutual interest each in other. Wherever
Love is, it stirs up an endeavor, to carry the heart unto the thing which
it loves* Where the Treasure is, there the heart will be. Hence, none are said
to love God, but those that are some way united unto him. And therefore, as
Gods first love to man, was in making man like himself; so his second great
love, was in making himself like man. Hence, we read so often of that
mystical inhabitation of Christ in his Church, of that more peculiar Union and
presence with his people, of a Spiritual Implantation unto him by Faith, of
those near relations of Filiation and Fraternity, of mutual interest each in
other, I am my beloveds, and my beloved is mine; importing an inseparable Union
of the Church to Christ. And this may be the reason of that order in Saint
Paul's solemn Benediction, The Grace of Christ, the Love of God, and the
Communion of the Spirit: for, as the Grace of Christ only takes away that
enmity which was between sinners and God, and is the only means of our
reconciliation unto him; so the Love of God is the only Bond of that
Communion, which we have with him and his holy Spirit.

Union is of diverse sorts. One, such whereby diverse things are made simply
one, either by the conversion of one into the other, or by the composition, or
constitution of a third out of the things united, as of mixed bodies out of
united Elements, or of the whole substance*out of the essential parts:
Another, such whereby things united are made one after a sort, either by an
accidental aggregation, as diverse stones make one heap, or by an orderly and
artificial distribution, as diverse materials make one house. Or by either a
natural or moral inclination and sympathy which one thing bears Arist.
Rh^r. lib. 2. cap. 4. Di^ger. La^t. in Zenon. ^7.
unto another. And of this sort is that union which arises out of love,
tending first unto a mutual similitude and conformity in the same desires; and
next unto a mutual possession, fruition, and propriety, whereby the mind
loving, longs to be seized of the thing which it loves, and cannot endu^e to
be deprived of it. So Moses prayed, I beseech thee show me thy glory; for the
vision of God is the possession of him; and so David, My soul thirsts for
God, when shall I come and appear before him? And this is the foundation of
all sorrow, when the soul is dispossessed of that which it loved, and wherein
it rested. And this desire of Possession is so great that Love contenteth it
self not with the Presence, but even then puts out its endeavors unto a
nearer, and more real union, as if it would become really One with the thing
which it loves; which is seen in embracings, Amor Hedera Plutarch. de And.
Scalig. de subtititate. Arist. Polit. lib. 2. c. 4. Vel pr^sentem desid^mus.
Pli^. Pantg.
kisses, in the exiliency and egresse of the spirits, in the expansion of the
heart, in the simplicity and natur^lnesse of all mutual carriages, as if a
present friend were not yet present enough. Which kind of expressions of love
are thus elegantly described by Homer, when Eumaeus saw Telemachus safely
returned home from Sea.

(...). Odyss. II. 14.

Eumaeus all amazed sprung to the door.
The pots of wine which his hands mixed before
Did both fall from them: he ran on to meet,
And with full wellcomes his young master greet.
He kissed his head, hands, eyes; and his tears kept
Time with his kisses, as he kissed he wept.
The like elegant description we have of the love of Penelope, when Ulysses
after his return was perfectly known unto her.

(...) Odyss. x. 208.
She wept and ran straight on, her hands she spread
And claps'd about his neck, and kissed his head.
Love has in moral and divine things the same effect which fire has in
natural, to congregate homogeneall, or things of the same kind, and to
separate heterogeneall, or things differing: as we see in the Love of God, the
deeper that is, the more is the spiritual part of man collected together, and
raised from the earth. And therefore in heaven, where love shall be perfect,
all things shall be harmonious and homogeneal, not in regard of natural
properties, but in a pure and unmixed spiritualnesse of affections in a perfect
unity of minds and motions.

From the union of love proceeds another secret effect, namely, a resting of
the mind in the thing loved. In which respect the Philosopher calls knowledge
the rest of the understanding. And this can only be total and perfect in the
Union of the Soul with God, the chiefest good thereof. Whence some have made
the threefold Appetite G^ (...) Theol.
in man, Concupiscible, Rational and Irascible, to have their final
perfection and quiet by a distinct union to the Three Persons in the Trinity:
for the Concupiscible power is carried ad bonum to good, which they say is the
Attribute of the holy Spirit; the Rational adverum, to that which is true,
which is the Attribute of the Son; and the Irascible ad Ard^um, to Power,
which is the Attribute of the Father. But to let that pass for a spiders web
(curious, but thin) certain it is that God only is that end, who can fully
accomplish the perfection and terminate the desires of those creatures, whom
he made after a peculiar manner to know and enjoy him. But proportionably,
there arises from the Union unto any other Object of Love, a satiating and
quieting of the Faculty; which, in a word, is then only, in Objects of
inferior order and goodness, regular, when the Object is natural, and the
Action limited. Disproportion and Enormitie are the two Corruptions in this
particular.

A third Effect, which I shall observe of Love, is Stay, and immoration of the
Mind upon the Object loved, and a diverting of it from all others: as we
observed in Eumaeus, when he saw Telemachus, he threw away the Business which
he was about before: And the Woman of Samaria, being transported with the love
of Christ, left her Pitcher, which she had brought to the Well, that she might
go and call others unto his Doctrine: And Mary left the thoughts of
entertaining Christ at the Table, out of an extraordinary desire to entertain
him in her heart. And this effect the Poet has excellently expressed in Dido;
who having showed before a mavelous Princely wisdom and sedulitie, in
fortifying her new Kingdom, and viewing the Works her self, (as he had
before described) as soon as she was once transported by the love of Aeneas,
then all stood still on a sudden.

Non capta assurgunt turres, non arma juventu^
Exercet; portusve, aut propugnacula bello Aenead. l. 4.

Tuta parant; pendent opera interrupta --
The Towers long since begun, rose up no more,
And Arms did rust, which ere* while brave youth wore.
No Ports, no Sconces, no defense went on,
But all their works hung broken, and half done.
Thus, as Plutarch has observed, the Images of things in the fancies of other
men are like words written in water, which suddenly vanish; but the Impressions
which love makes, ar^ as it were, written with an hot iron, which leaves fixed
and abiding prints in the memory.

Love and Knowledge have mutual sharpening and causality each on other: for as
Knowledge does generate Love, so Love does nourish and exercise! Knowledge. The
reason whereof is that unseparable union, which is in all things between the
Truth and Good of them: for it being the property of Truth to unite and apply
Goodness (nothing being apprehended as Good, unless that Goodness be
apprehended as true) the more Appetite enjoys of this, the deeper inquiry
does it make, and the more complete union does it seek with that: the Heart
and the Treasure can seldom be severed; the Eagles will always resort to the
body; David's Love gave length and perpetuity to his meditation, even all the
day.

And herein, methinkes, may consist another proportion between the strength of
Love and Death; for as in Death nature does collect and draw in those spirits,
which before lay scattered in the outward parts, to guard and arm the heart in
its greatest conflict; uniting all those languishing forces which are left, to
testify the natural love which each living creature bears to its own
conservation: so does Love draw and unite those Spirits which administer either
to the Fancy or Appetite, to serve only for the nourishing of that Affection,
and for gazing upon that treasure whereunto the Heart is wholly attracted.
Which Spirits, being of a limited power and influence, do therefore with the
same force, whereby they carry the mind to the consideration of one thing,
withdraw it from all other that are heterogeneall; no determined power of the
Soul being able to impart a sufficient activity unto diverse independing
operations, when the force of it is exhausted by one so strong; and there being
a sympathy, and as it were, a league between the faculties of the Soul, all
covenanting not to obscure or hinder the Predominant Impressions of one
another. And therefore as in Rome when a Plutarch. in Amatori^.
Dictatour was created, all other Authority was or that time suspended; so when
any strong Love has taken possession of the Soul, it gives a Supersedeas and
stop unto all other employments. It is therefore prescribed as a Remedy against
inordinate Love.

-- -- Pabula Amoris ^ucret. apud P^tr. (...). lib. 16. cap. 4.
Absterrere sibi, atque alio convertere mentem. To draw away the ^ewell from
this fire,
And turn the mind upon some new desire.
For Love is Otiosorum Negotium, as Diogenes (...) Diogenes apud Laert. lib. 6
spoke, the business oftentimes of men that want employments.

Another effect of Love is Jealousy or Zeal. Laert. lib. 6.
Whereby is not meant that suspicious, inquisitive, quick-sighted quality of
finding out the ^lemishes, and discovering the imperfections of one another
(for it is the property of true Love ^o think none evil) but only a
provident and solicitous fear, least some or other evil should either
disturb the peace, or violate the purity of what we love: like that of Job
toward his sons; Job 1. 5.
and of the Apostle toward his Corinthians, I am jealous over you with a godly
jealousy: So Pen^ ^ C^r. 11. 2.
lope in the Poet was jealous of the safety of Ulysses.

In t^ singebam violentos Troas ituros,
Nomine in Hectoreo pallida semper eram. O^d. (...).

How often my decre Ulysses did I see
In my sad thoughts proud Trojans rush on thee*
And when great Hectors name but touched mineears
My cheeks drew palenes from my paler fears.
Zeal is a compounded affection, or a mixture of Love and Anger; so that it
ever puts forth it self to remove any thing which is contrary to the thing
we love; as we see in Christ, whose zeal ^b. 2. 17.
or holy anger whipped away the buyers and sellers out of the Temple. In which
respect it i^ said that the zeal of Gods house did consume him. (...) (...)
(...)*
As water when it boyleth (from which metapho^ the word zeal is borrowed) does
in the boiling consume, or as the candle wastes It self with burning. In
which respect likewise it is said, that (...) ^.
much water cannot quench Love. It is like Lime, the more water you cast upon
it, the hotter it grows. And therefore the sin of Laodiee^ which was
contrary unto zeal is compared unto (...) 3. (...).
luk^warme water, which does not boil, and so cannot work out the scumme or
corruption which is in it.

And from hence it is that Love makes Weak things strong, and turns
Cowardice into Valou^ (...).
and Meekness into Anger, and Shame into Boldness, and will not conceive any
thing too hard to undertake. The fearful He^, which has nothing but flight
to defend her self from the Dog, or the Serpent, will venture with courage
against the strongest creatures to defend her little chickens* Thus Zeal and
Love of God Nam. 12 11. Exodus 3^ 19.
made Moses forget his meekness; and his Anger was so strong* that it brake
the Tables o^ the Law, and made the people drink the Idol which they had made.
And this is wi^lly expressed by Seneca, that Magnus dolor iratus amor est, a
great S^nec. in Here O^.
grief is nothing else but Love displeased, and made angry. It transporteth
Nature beyond its bounds or abilities, puts such a force and vigor into it,
as that it will adventure on any difficulties; as Mary Magdalen would in the
strength Vid. Pluta^. (...).
of her Love undertake to carry away the dead body of Christ (as she conceived
of him) not considering the weight of that, or her own weakness. It has a
constraining virtue in it, and makes a man do that which is beyond his power;
as the Corinthians, when they were poor in estate, were yet rich in
Liberality. It makes a man impatient to be unacquainted with the estate of an
absent friend, whom we therefore suspect not sufficiently guarded from danger,
because destitute of the help which our presence might afford him. In one
word, it makes the wounds and stains of the thing loved to redound to the
grief No^ ^atiar me (...) sc^re de eo quem imem. Pl^n. Epist.
and trouble of him that loves it. He that is not jealous for the credit,
security, and honor of what he pretends affection to, loves nothing but
himself in those pretenses. (...) Eur^pid. Helen.


Another Effect of Love is Condescension to things below us, that we may
please or profit those whom we love. It teaches a man to deny his own
judgment, and to do that which a looker on might happily esteem Weakness o^
Indecencie; out of a fervent desire to express affection to the thing beloved.
Thus David's great Love to the Arc of Gods presence did transport him to
leaping and dancing, and other such familiar expressions of joy (for which
Michall out of pride despised him in her heart) and was contented by that,
which she esteemed baseness, to honor God: herein expressing the love of him
unto Mankind, who was both his Lord and his Son; who emptied, and humbled,
and denied himself for our sakes, not considering his own worthiness, but
our want; nor what was honorable for him to do, but what was necessary for us
to be done. Quicquid Deo indignum, mihi expedit, what ever was unworthy of him,
was expedient for us. Thus Parents out of Love to their children do lispe, and
play, and fit their speeches and dalliances to the Age and Infirmities of their
children. Therefore Themistocles being Plutarch. Apothegus. L^con.
found playing and riding on a reed with his little boy, desired his friend not
to censure him for it, till he himself was a father of children.

The last Effect which I shall observe of this Vid. Plutarch. symposiac. l. 5.
^. 7.
Passion is that which we call Liquefaction or Laugnor, a melting, as it were,
of the heart to receive the more easy impressions from the thing which (...)
etc. (...). (...). 2.
it loves, and a decay of the Spirits, by reason of that intensive fixing of
them thereon, and of the painful and lingering expectation of the heart to
enjoy it. Love is of all other the inmost and most viscerall affection. And
therefore called by the Genesis 43. 1 ^g. 3. 26.
Apostle, Bowels of Love. And we read of the yearning of Joseph's bowels over
Benjamin his mothers son, and of the true Mother over her child. Incaluerunt
viscera, they felt a fervor and agitation of their bowels, which the more
vehement it is, does work the more sudden and sensible decay and languishing
of Spirits. So Ammon out of wanton and incestuous Love is said to grow lean 2 Samuel 13.
from day to day, and to have been sick with vexation for his sister Thamar.

And in spiritual love we find the like expression of the Spouse; Stay me with
flagons, comfort Cant. 2. 5.
me with apples, for I am sick of love: Wine to exhilerate, apples to refresh
those Spirits, which were, as it were, melted away, and wasted by an extreme
outlet of Love. And for this reason the Object of our Love is said to Overcome
us, and to Burn the Heart, as with Coals of Iumper; and Can. 6. 5. 8. 6.
the like expressions of wounding and burning the Poet uses.

-- Est mollis slamma medullas Aenead. 4.
Interea and tac^um vivit sub pectore vulnus. A welcome soft flame in her
bones did rest,
And a close wound lived in her bleeding breast.
Now the cause of this Languor, which love works, is in Sensitive Objects, an
earnest desire to enjoy them; in Spiritual Objects, an earnest desire to
increase them. In the former, want kindles love, but Fruition works
weariness and satiety: In the other fruition increases love, and makes us the
more greedy for those things which when we wanted, we did not desire. In
earthly things the desire at a distance promises much pleasure, but taste and
experience disappointeth expectation. In heavenly things, eating and drinking
does renew the Appetite, and the greater the experience, the stronger the
desire: as the more acquaintance Moses had with God, the more he did desire to
see his glory. And so much may suffice for the first of the Passions, Love,
which is the fountain and foundation of all the rest.

CHAP. XII. Of the Passion of Hatred, the Fundamental Cause or Object thereof
Evil, how far forth Evils are willed by God may be declined by men, of
Gods secret and revealed Will.
THe next in order is Hatred: of which the Schoolmen make two kinds; an
Hatr^d of Abomination or loathing; which consists in a pure aversion or flight
of the Appetite from something apprehended as Evil, arising from a dissonancy
and repugnancy between their natures: and an Hatred of Enmity, which is not a
flying, but rather a pursuing Hatred, and has ever some Love joined with it,
namely a Love of any Evil which we desire may befall the person or thing which
we hate.

I shall not distinctly handle these asunder, but shall observe the Dignities
and Corruptions of the Passion in general, as it implies a common
disconvenience, and natural Vnconformitie between the Object and the Appetite.

The Object then of all Hatred is Evil; and all evil implying an opposition
to Good admits of so many several respects as there are kinds of opposition.

And there is first an Evil of Contraricty, such as is in the qualities of
Water unto Fire, or a Wolf unto a Sheep, occasioned by that Destructive
Efficiency, which one has upon the other.

Secondly, an Evil of Privation, which we hate formally and for it self, as
implying nothing but a Defect and Absence of Good.

Thirdly, an Evil of Contradiction in the not being of any creature, opposed
to its being. For Being and Immortality is that which Aristotle makes one of
the principle objects of Love; Annihilation then, or Not being is the chiefest
Evil of things, and that which Nature most abhors.

Lastly, an Evil of Relation; for as things in their own simple natures
Evil, may have in them a Relative Goodness, and so to be desired; as the
killing of beasts for the service, and the death of malefactors for the
security of men: so things in their absolute being Good may have in them a
Relative, or Comparative Evil, and in that sense be by consequence hated; as
our Savior intimates He that hates not father and mother, and his own life
for me, is not worthy of me: when they prove snares and temptations to draw us
from the Love of Christ, they are then to be undervalued in comparison of him.
And therefore we find in the Law if a man's dearest brother or child, or wife,
or friend should entice him from God unto Idolatry, he was not to conceal,
pity, or spare him, but his own hand was to be first upon him. And thus the
Poet has elegantly expressed the behavior of Aeneas toward Dido, who being
inflamed with Love of him, would have kept him from the expedition, unto which
by divine guidance he supposed himself to be directed.

-- Quanquam lenire dolorem
Soland^ cupi^, and dictis avertere curas,
(Multag^ens magnoque animum labefactus amore)
Iussa tamen Div^m exequitur. --
Though he desired with solace to appease,
And on her pensive soul to breathe some ease,
(Himself with mutual love made saint) yet still
His purposes were fixed to obey Gods will.
So then we see what qualification is required in the Object of a just Hatred,
that it be Evil, and some way or other offensive, either by defiling or
destroying nature: and the Passion is ever then irregular when it declineth
from this rule.

But here, in as much as it is evident that the being of some evil comes under
the Will of God; ( Is there any Evil in a City, and the Lord has not done
(...)) and our will is to be conformable unto his; it may seem that it ought
to fall under our Will too, and by consequence to be rather loved than hated
by us, since we pray for the fulfilling of Gods Will.

For resolution of this, we must first consider, that God does not love those
Evils which he thus wills, as formally, and precisely considered in
themselves. And next we will observe how far the Will of God is to be the
rule of our will; whence will arise the clear apprehension of that truth which
is now set down, that the unalterable Object of man's Hatred is all manner of
Evil, not only that of deformity and sin, but that also of destruction and
misery.

First then for the Will of God, we may boldly say what himself has sworn,
that he will not the death or destruction of a sinner: and by consequence
neither any other evil of his Creature, as being a thing infinitely remote
from his mercy; he is not delighted in the ruin, neither does he find
pleasure or harmony in the groans of any thing which himself created: But he
is said to will those Evils as good and just, for the manifestation of his
glorious Power over all the Creatures, and of his glorious Justice on those,
who are voluntarily fallen from him. But now because it is left only to the
Wisdom of God himself to know and ordain the best means for glorifying of
himself in and by his creatures, we are not here hence to assume any warrant
for willing evil unto our selves or others, but then only when the honor of
the Creator is therein advanced. And so the Apostle did conditionally wish
evil unto himself, if thereby the glory of Gods mercy toward his
Contrymen the Jews might be the more advanced.

Secondly, it is no good Argument, God wills the inflicting of such an evil,
therefore it is unlawful for my will to decline it: for first the Will of God,
whereby he determines to work this or that evil on particular Subjects, is
a part of his secret Counsel. Now the Revealed, and not the Hidden Will of God
is the rule of our Wills and Actions: whence it comes to pass, that it is
made a part of our necessary obedience unto God in our wishes or aversations to
go a cross way to his unrevealed purpose. Peradventure in my sick bed it is
the purpose of God to cast my body into the earth, from whence it was taken;
yet for me herein to second the Will of God by an execution thereof upon my
self, or by a neglect of those Ordinary means of recovery which he affords,
were to despise his mercy, that I might fulfill his Will. Peradventure in my
flight a sword will overtake me, yet I have the warrant of my Saviors example
and precept to turn my back rather than my conscience in persecution: always
reserved, that though I will that, which God wills, yet my will be ever
subordinated unto his. We owe submission to the will of Gods purpose and
Counsel, and we owe conformity to the will of his Precept and Command; we
must submit to the will, whereby God is pleased to work himself, and we must
conform to the will, whereby he is pleased to command us to work. And
therefore

Secondly, though the Will of God were in this case known, yet is not our will
constrained to a necessary inclination, though it be to an humble submission
and patience in bearing that which the Wisdom and purpose of God has made
inevitable; for as the promises and decrees of Good things from God do not
warrant our slacknesse in neglecting, or our profaneness in turning from them;
so neither does the certainty and unavoidablenesse of a future evil (as death
intended upon us by God) put any necessity on our nature to deny it self, or
to love its own distresses.

Of which that we may be the more sure, we may observe it in him, who as he
was wholly like us in nature, and therefore had the same natural inclinations
and aversations with us; so was he of the same infinite essence with his
Father, and therefore did will the same things with him, yet even in him we may
observe (in regard of that, which the Scripture says, was by the hand and
Counsel of God before determined) a seeming Reluctance and withdrawing from
the Divine Decree. He knew it was not his Fathers Will; and yet, Father, if
thou be willing, let this cup pass from me: he was not ignorant that he was
to suffer, and that there was an Oporte^, a necessity upon it, and yet a second
and a third time again, Father, if it be possible, let this Cup pass from me.
Consider it as the Destruction of his Temple, and Anguish of nature, which he
could not (being in all things like unto us) but love; and then Transeat, Let
it pass: but consider it as the necessary means of procuring precious
blessings for mankind, and of fulfilling the eternal Decree of his Fathers
Love, and then, Not as I, but as thou will.

The same may be applied in any manner of humane evils, notwithstanding we are
with an armed patience to sustain them, or with an obedient submission unto
Divine pleasure to wait for them; yet in regard of that pressure of nature,
which they bring with them (on which the God of Nature has imprinted a
natural desire of its own quiet and integrity) so far forth all Evil, not
only may, but must be Hated by every Regular will, upon pain of violating
the Law of its Creation.

And indeed in all this there is not any deviation from the Will of God,
intending that which we abhor: for as it stands not with the nature of man to
hate himself, or any good thing of his own making; so neither does it stand
with the goodness of God to hate his Creature, or to delight barely in the
misery or afflictions thereof; but only in that end of manifesting his glory
and righteousness, whereunto he in the dispensation of his Wisdom and
Justice has wonderfully directed them. And therefore, as to murmr at the
Wisdom of God in thus ordering evils unto a good end, were a presumptuous
repining; so on the other side, not to entertain those natural desires of a
straightned mind after deliverance from those evils, were to be in Solomon's*
phrase too Righteous, and out of a purpose to answer the ends of Gods
Wisdom, to cross the Law of his Creation.

So then it is evident that the Object and fundamental cause of Hatred, is all
and only Evil: which (however in respect of the Existence of it, it be in
some cases Good; for as it is in the power of God to educe out of confusion
order, light out of darkness, his own honor out of man's shame; so is it his
providence likewise to turn unto the great good of many men those things which
in themselves do only hurt them) Yet I say this notwithstanding, as it
works the deformity and disquiet of nature, it is against the created law and
inbred love, which each thing bears to its own perfection; and therefore
cannot but be necessarily hated.

As on the other side, those ordinary and commong goods, which we call, in
respect of God, blessings, as health, peace, prosperity, good success, and the
like; notwithstanding they commonly prove unto men, unfurnished with those
habits of wisdom and sobriety, whereby they should be moderated, occasions
of much evil and dangers; so that their Table is become their snare (as the
experience of those latter Roman Ages proves, wherein their victories over
men has made them in luxury and vileness so prodigious, as if they meant to
attempt war with God.) Notwithstanding I say all this; yet for as much as
these things are such as do quiet, satisfy, and bear convenience unto man's
nature, they are therefore justly with thankfulness by our selves received,
and out of love desired unto our friends.

I now proceed from the object or General fundamental cause of hatred, unto
some few which are more particular, and which do arise from it.

CHAP. XIII. Of the other Causes of Hatred, Secret Antipathy, Difficulty of
procuring a Good commanded, Injury, Base Fears, Disparity of Desires, a Fixed
Jealous Fancy.
THe first which I shall note is Arist. Hist. Anim. l 9. c. 44. See Plan. Not.
Hist. l. 8. c. 4. 9. 10. lib. 9. c 6^. l 10. c. 37. 74. lib. 16. c. 13. l. 20.
^n pro^m. lib. 2^. c 20. lib. 24 c. 1. Aelian. de Animal l. 3. c. 7. l. 4. c ^.
l. 5. ^. 48. 50. l. 6. c. 22. 45, 4^. Plutarch S^mpos. lib. 2. 47.
a secret and hidden Antipathy which is in the natures of some things one
against another. As Vultures are killed with sweet smells, and Horse-flies with
ointments; the Locust will die at the sight of the Polypus, and the Serpent will
rather fly into the fire, than come near the boughs of a wild Ash: some
plants will not grow, nor the blood of some Creatures mingle together; the
feathers of the Eagle will not mix with the feathers of other fowls. So Homer
notes of the Lion, that he fears fire, and the Elephant nauseates his meat,
if a Mouse have touched it. A world more of particulars there are which
Naturalists have observed of this kind: from which natural Antipathy it
comes, that things which never before saw that which is contrary to them, do
yet at the very first sight fly from it, as from an enemy to Plutarch. de Odio
and ^vid.
their nature, nor will they ever be brought by discipline to trust one another.

-- (...) Iliad. ^. 22.

(...)
(...)
Lions with men will never make faithful truce,
Nor can you any way the Wolf induce
To Love the Lamb: they study with fixed hate,
The one the other how to violate.
And the like kind of strange Hatred we may sometimes find amongst men; one
man's disposition so much disagreeing from another, that though there never
passed any injuries or occasions of difference between them, yet they cannot
but have minds averse from one another; which the Epigrammatist has wittily
expressed.

Non amo te Sabidi, nec possum dicere quare; Martial.

Hoc tantum possum dicere, Non amo te.
I love thee not, yet cannot say for what;
This only I can say, I love thee not.
Another cause working Hatred of a thing in the minds of men, is the difficulty
and conceited impossibility of obtaining it, if it be a good thing which we
either do or ought to desire, which the Casuists call Acedia, being a griese
of the appetite looking on a Difficult Good, as if it were evil because
difficult; from whence arises a Torpor and Supine neglect of all the means,
which might help us to it. Thus wicked and resolved sinners, conceiving
happiness as unacquirable by them, do grow to the Hating of it, to entertain
rancorous affections against those, which persuade them to seek it, to envy
and malign all such they find careful to obtain it; to proceed unto
licentious resolutions of rejecting all hopes of thoughts of it, and to divert
their minds toward such more obvious and easy delight, as Vid. Arist. Ethic.
lib. 9. c. 4.
will be gotten with less labor; thus Difficulty rendereth Good things
Hateful; as Israel in the wilderness despised the pleasant Land, because there
were sons of Anak in it.

And this is one great cause of the different affections of men toward
several courses of life; one man being of dull and sluggish apprehensions,
hates Learning: another by nature quick and of noble intellectualls wholly
applies himself unto it, the difficulty persuading the one to despise the
Goodness, and the Goodness inducing the other to conquer the difficulties of
it: so one man looking unto the pain of a virtuous life, contemnes the reward;
and another looking unto the Reward, endures the pain. And we shall usually
find it true, that either Laziness, fearing disappointment, or Love being
disappointed and meeting with difficulties which it cannot conquer, does both
beget a kind of Hatred and dislike of that which did either deter them from
seeking it, or deceive them when they sought it. As she, who while there was
any Hope, did solicit Aeneas with her tears and importunities; when he
Aenead. 4.
was quite gone did follow him with her imprecations.

There is no Malice grows ranker than that which arises out of the corruption
of Love; as no darkness is more formidable, than that of an Arist. Politic.
lib. 7. c. 7. Frat^rno pri mi maduerunt sanguine muris L^an. lib. 1.
Eclipse, which assaults the very vessels of Light; nor any taste more unsavory
than of sweet things when they are corrupted. The more natural the Union, the
more impossible the Reunion. Things joined with glue, being broken asunder may
be glewd again; but if a man's Arm be broken off, it can never be joined on
again: So those Hatreds Plutarch. de amore frat.
are most incureable, which arise out of the greatest and most natural Love.

(...) Eurip. Medea.

(...):
When Love of friends is turned to Wrath, besure
That Wrath is deep, and scarce admits a Cure.
Another very usual, but most evil cause of Hatred, is Injury, when a man
because he has done wrong, does from thence resolve to Hate him. Too many
examples whereof there are in Writings both sacred and profane: Ioseph^
Mistress first wronged him in assaulting his chastity, and then Hated him and
caused him to be cast into prison. Ammon first abused his sister Tamar, and
then Hated her worse than before he loved her. Phadra having solicited
Hippolitus her husbands son unto incest; being denied, did after accuse him
to his father, and procure his ruin. And Aristotle proposes it as a Problem,
Probl. Sect. 4. Sect. 11.
Why they, who corrupt and violate the chastity of any, do after hate them?
and gives this reason of it, because they ever after look on them, as guilty
of that shame and sadness, which in the sin they contracted. This cause of
Hatred Seneca and Tacitus have both observed as a thing Proprium humani inge^ii
odisse quos laser^. ^acit. vit. Agri. and Senec. de Ird l. 2. c. 33.
usual with proud and insolent men, first to Hurt then to Hate.

And the reason is first, because injury is the way to make a man, who is
wronged, an enemy; and the proper affection, which respects an enemy is
Hatred. Again, he who is wronged, if equal or above him that has done the
wrong, is then feared: and Oderunt quos metuunt, it is usual to hate those
whom we fear: if inferior, yet the memory and sight of him does upbraid with
guilt, and affect with an unwilling and unwelcome review of the sin, whereby
he was wronged; and Pride scorns reproof, and loves not to be under him in
Guilt, whom it overtops in Power: for Innocence does always give a kind of
superiority unto the person that is wronged; besides, Hatred is a kind of
Apology for wrong: For if a man can persuade himself to hate him whom he has
injured, he will begin to believe that he deserved the injury which was
offered unto him; every man being naturally willing to find the first
inducement unto his sin, rather in another than himself.

The next cause (which I shall observe) is Fear, I mean slavish Fear: for as
Love excludes Fear; so Fear begets Hatred; and it is ever seen: Qui
terribiles sunt, timent: they that terrify others do fear them, as well
knowing that they are themselves hated: for as Aristotle speaks, Nemoquem
metuit, amat; no man loves him whom he fears: which is the same with that of
Saint John, Love casts out Fear: not a Reverend, submissive, awsull fear;
not a cautelous, vigilant and obedient fear; not a fear of Admiration, nor a
fear of Subjection; but a fear of slavery and of Rebellion, all flashes of
Horror, all the tossings and shipwracks of a torn mind, all the tremblings of
a tormented spirit; briefly all evil and hurtful fear. And this I believe
is one principal reason of that malice and contempt of godliness, which
shows it self in the lives of Atheistical and desperately wicked men, which
as it arises out of the corruption of nature, so is it marveilously enraged by
the fearful expectation of that siery vengeance, which their pale and guilty
consciences do already preoccupate; for as their conscience dictates, that
they deserve to be hated by God; so their stubbornness and malice concludes
that they will hate him again; Let us eat and drink, for toomorrow we shall
dye.

There may be a double root of this Fear outward and inward. The outward is
the cruelty and oppression which we suffer from the potent, and thereupon the
less avoidable malice of the person hated (as it was the speech of Caligula,
Oderint dum metuant) And here in our Aversation (if it observe that general
rule of goodness in passions, Subordination to Reason and Piety) is, not only
allowable, but natural, while it extends it self no further than the Evil
which we wrongfully suffer. For I cannot but think that the spittle and
scourges, the thorns and buffets, the reed and knees of those mocking and
blasphemous Jews were so many drops of that full Cup, which He, who knew no
sin, was so deeply desirous to have pass from him.

But then next, the inward root of Fear is the guilt and burden of an
unclean and uncovered Conscience, for Pollution and weakness is naked, must
needs be fearful. And therefore that inference of Adam had truth in it, I was
afraid, because I was naked: for having disrobed himself of Original
righteousness, he was thereupon afraid of the curse and summons of an
offended justice. Now from this fear may arise a double hatred; an hatred of a
man's own Conscience: for an evil man (...) as the Ethic. lib. 9. cap. 4.
(...). Scholiast. in ^ophecl. ^ dip. Ty^.
Philosopher speaks, is not a friend unto himself, but flies and labors to
run away from himself, and is never in so bad company, as when he is alone,
because then he keeps company with his own Conscience.

Which is the reason why some men's hatred of themselves has proceeded so far,
as to make themselves the Instruments of that small measure of Annihilation,
which they are capable of. Wherein notwithstanding they discover, how far
their sury should extend against themselves if they were as omnipotent to
effect, as they are ready to desire it: for he that hates a thing, would if he
were able, pursue it even unto not being. There is no man but has a natural
hatred of Toads, Serpents, Vipers, and the like venomous Creatures. And yet
that man which hates them most, if his Conscience be naked and let loose to
fly upon him, if that worm that never dies (unless killed with our Saviors
blood) begin thoroughly to sting and gnaw him, would think himself a wise
Merchant, if he could exchange beeings with the worst of these. The Worm* and
Viper of Conscience is of all the Creatures the most ugly and hateful. A
wicked man, when he does distinctly know himself, does love every thing, save
God, better than himself.

-- Diri conscia facti Iuvenal.

Men's habet attonitos and surdo verbere cadit
Occultum quatiente animo tortore slagellum.
The mind being conscious of some dire offense,
Fills them with fears; a Torturer from thence
Shakes, and with redoubled blows does urge
The unheard lashes of an hidden scourge.
Nor can I esteem this a corrupt, though it be a miserable passion; for as a
bad man is to himself the worst, so is he by consequence the hatefullest of
all Creatures.

The second Hatred, which may arise from that Fear which is caused by a secret
guilt of mind, is of all others most corrupt and rancorous, namely an hatred
of the Authors or Executioners of Justice; of the equity and justness of whose
proceedings, we are from within convinced; such as is the malice and blasphemy
of malefactors against the Judge, and of Devils and damned men against God and
his righteous judgments, which yet they cannot but acknowledge that they most
worthily do endure: for it is the nature of proud and stubborn creatures (as
was before observed) Odisse quos laserint, first to wrong God, and then to hate
him.

Another particular cause of this passion may be a Disparity of Affections and
Desires: for notwithstanding there be many times Hatred where there is
Similitude (as those beasts and birds commonly hate one another, which feed
upon the same common meat, as the Philosopher observes) Hist. Animal.
and sundry men hate their own vices in others, as if they had not the trade
of sin enough to themselves, except they got a Monopoly, and might ingrosse
it; yet this ever proceeds from an apprehension of some ensuing inconveniences
which are likely to follow therefrom, as has been formerly noted: So that in
that very similitude of Natures, there is a disagreement of ends, each one
respecting his own private benefit.

Now the Corruptions herein are to be attended according to the Nature of that
disparity whereon the passion is grounded; which sometimes is Moral, wherein
it is laudable to hate the viti ous courses, in which any man differres from
us, or we our selves from the right rule of Life; so that the passion redound
not from the quality to the person, nor break out into an endeavor of his
disgrace and ruin, except it be in such a case, when our own dignity or
safety, which we are bound more to regard, being assaulted, is in danger to be
betrayed, unless prevented by such a speedy Remedy. Sometimes this Disparity
may be in actions Civil, and with respect to society: and then as the
opposition, which hatred discovers, may be principally seen in two things;
Opposition of a man's Hopes, and of his Parts and abilities, by crossing the
one, and undervalewing the other: So corruption may easily proceed from two
violent and unreasonable grounds, Ambition and Self-love; the one pursuing its
hopes, the other reflecting upon its worth. And to this particular may be
reduced, that Hatred, whichariseth out of a Parity of Desire, as amongst
Competitors for the same Dignity, or Corrivalls for the same Love, or
Professors of the same Art, either by reason of Covetousness, or Envy, or
ambition, a greedy desire of their own, or a discontented sight of another
good. Mallem bic primus esse, quam Rom^ secundu^. Caesar de (...) quodam dum
Alps transi^t Pluiarc^.


Nec quenquam jam far potest Caserve priorem
Pompeiusve, parem --
Thus two great Rulers do each other hate,
Casar no Better brooks, Pompey no mate.
And these are very unfit affections for society, when private love of men to
themselves shall devour the love which they owe unto their Country. Plutarch.
de g^rund: Rep.
More noble was the behavior of Themistocles, and Aristides, who when they
were ever employed in the public service of State, left all their private
enmities in the borders of their own Country, and did not resume them til they
returned, and became private menagaine.

The last cause which I shall observe of Hatred may be a settled and permament
Intuition of the object, a penetrating, jealous, and interpreting fancy:
because by this means a redoubled search and review does generate a kind of
habitual detestation; it being the nature of Evil commonly to show worse at
the second or third view. And that first, because the former Act does work a
prejudice, and thereby the after apprehension comes not naked, but with a
fore-stalled resolution of finding Evil therein: and next, because from a
serious and fastoned search into the Object the faculty gains a greater
acquaintance with it, and by consequence a more vehement dislike of it, the
former knowledge being a master and light unto the latter. But light and
wandering fancies (though they may be more sudden in the apprehensive of Evil,
and by consequence liable to an oftener Anger, yet by reason of the volubility
of the mind joined with an infirmity and unexercise of memory, they are for
this cause the less subject to deep and rooted hatred.

Unto this Head may be referred that Hatred which arises from excessive
Melancholy, which makes men sullen morose, solitary, averse from all society,
and Haters of the light, delighting only like the Zeph. 2. 14. If. 34. 11 14,
15
Shrieke* Owl or the Bitterne in desolate places, and Matt^ 8. 28.
monuments of the dead* This is that which is called (...) de Neur^ in M^
(...)* Pl^. lib. 8 c. 2^. (...) Eclog 8. (...). M^la de situ orb^ l. 2 ^erus de
prae^g. d^mon. l. 3. c. 2^. (...). de Civ. Dei. l. 18. c. 17. Olaus (...) de
Reg. Septen^r. lib. 18. c. 45. 46. 47. Lu^. in Asine.
(...), when men fancy themselves transformed into Wolves and Dogs, and
accordingly hate all Humane society. Which seems to have bin the distemper of
Dan. 5. 21.
N^buchadnezar, when he was ^hrust out from men, and did eat grass with the
beasts. Ci^r. de Ami^. and lib. 4. Tuscul. quaest. Suidas in Timon. ^ lutarch
(...) in Al^ibiade and A^tonie. La^t. in Timone. (...). Adve^. l. 24. cap. 33.
Timon the Athenian was upon this ground branded with the name of (...), The
Man. Hater, because he kept company with no man, but only with Alcibiades,
whereof he gave this only account, because he thought that man was borne to
do a great deal of mischief. And we read even in the So^. l. 4. c. 18.
(...). l* 4. cap. 26. (...). lib. 5. c. 29.
Histories of the Church, of men so marvelously averse from all converse or
correspondence with men; that they have for their whole lives long, some of
sixty, others of ninety years, immured themselves in Cells and silence, not
affording to look on the faces of their nearest kindred, when they traveled
far to visit them. So far can the opinion of the mind, actuated and
furthered by the melancholy of the body, transport men even ou^ of humane
disposi^on, which the (...). polit. lib. 1. cap. 2.
Philosopher tells us is naturally a lover of Society, and therefore he says
that such men are usually given to contention, the sign and the fruit of
hatred.

CHAP. XIIII. Of the Quality and Quantity of Hatred, and how in either respects
it is to be regulated.
I Proceed now unto the consideration of this Passion in the Quantity and
Quality of its Acts: which must be observed according to the Evil of the
Object: for if that be unchangeable, there is required a continual Permanency
of the Passion in regard of the disposition of the Mind: or if it be
Importuna^e and Affaulting, there is required a more frequent repetition of the
Act. The same likewise is to be said of the Quality of it; for if the Evil be
of an Intense and more Invincible nature, our Hatred must arm us the more: if
more Low and remiss, the Passion may be the more negligent.

Hero then is a fourefould direction of the Quantities and Qualities of our
Hatred, and it will hold proportion in the other passions. First the
unalterablenesse of the Evil, warrants the continuance of our hatred.
Secondly, the importunity and insinuation of it warrants the Reiteration of our
hatred. Thirdly, and fourthly, the greatness and the Remission of it requires
a proportionable intention and moderation of hatred. We may instance for the
three former in sin, so much the worst of Evils, by how much it is a remotion
from the best of Goods.

First then Sin is in its own formal and abstracted nature, Unchangeable,
though not in respect of the subject, in whom it dwells; for a Creature now
bad, may by the mercy of God be repaired and restored again; but this is not
by a changing, but by a forsaking of Evil, by a removing of it, not by a new
molding it into another frame. Sin then remains in its own Nature
unchangeable and always evil, and the reason is because it is a Transgression
of a perpetual Law, and a Remotion from an unalterable Will: Sin then is to
be hated with a continual and peremptory hatred. But in other things there is
according to the nature of their evils required a conditional and more
flexible dislike, they being evils that have, either some good annexed unto
them; or such as are of a mutable nature. And therefore we see that in most
things the variety of Circumstances does alter the good or evil of them, and
so makes the passions thereabout conversant, alterable likewise. Otherwise men
may naturally deprive themselves of those contents and advantages, which they
might receive by reasonable use of such indifferent things as they formerly for
inconveniences now removed, did dislike. And in Morality likewise much damage
might be inferred, both to private persons and to the public by nourishing
such private enmities and being peremptory in continuing those former
differences, which, though happily then entertained upon reasonable grounds,
may yet afterward prove so much the more harmefull, by how much the more
danger is to be feared from the distemper of a grown and strong, than of a
vanishing and lighter passion.

Secondly, Again as no evil altogether so unchangeable as Sin, so is there
nothing so much to be opposed with a Multiplicity and Reiteration of our hatred
in regard of its importunity and insinuation, that as there is an impudence in
the assault, so there may be a proportionable resolution in the withstanding of
it: Some Evils there may be, which require only a present and not a customary
exercise of this passion. Present I say when the Object is offensive and not
customary; because as the Object, so the Passion likewise may be unusual.
Sin only is of all other evils the most urging and active, furnished with an
infinite number of st^atagems and plausible impostures to insinuate into
natures (though best armed against such assaults; and therefore here only are
necessary such reiterated acts, as may keep us ever on our guard, that we be
not unprepared for a surprise.

Thirdly, Then for the Quantity of an Evil, because that is not in any thing
so intense as in Sin whither we consider it in its own Nature, as a
Rebellion against the highest good, or in its effects; either in regard of the
diffusion of it, it being an overspreading pollution, or of the vastness of
it, both in Guilt and Punishment: In these respects our Hatred of it cannot be
too deep or rooted: whereas other evils are not so intense in their nature, nor
so diffusive in their Extension, nor so Destructive in their Consequents; and
therefore do not require an unlimited Passion, but one governed according to
the Exigence of Circumstances.

And here I shall take notice of one or two particulars touching the manner of
corruption in this particular. As first when a man shall apply his Hatred of
Prosequution, or ill willing against that Evil, which is the proper object
only of Aversation: for some things there are only of conditional evils,
which hurt not by their own absolute being, but by their particular use or
presence, which being offensive only in their application requires a
particular forbearance, not any further violence to their natures.

Secondly, a Corruption in regard of Intension (...) Sophoc. A^ax.
is either when the passion admits not of any admixtion of Love, when yet the
object admits of an admixtion of good; or when the hatred is absolute against
only relative Evils. There is not any man betwixt whose natural faculties
and some particular courses or objects, there is not some manner of antipathy
and disproportion (it being the Providence of divine dispensation so variously
to frame and order men's fancies, as that no man shall have an Independance or
self sufficiency, no^ say unto the other members I have no need of you; but
there should be such a mutual Ministry and assistance amongst men, as whereby
might be ever upheld those essential virtues of humane society, Unity and
Charity, no mann being able to live without the aid of others; nor to upbraid
others with his own service. Now in this case, if any man, who either out of
the narrowness and incapacity, or out of the reluctance and antipathy of his
own mind, is indisposed for some courses of life or study, shall presently
fall to a professed vilifying of them, or to an undervalewing of Persons, who
with a more particular affection delight in them, or to a desire of the not
being of them, as things utterly unusefull, because he sees not what use
himself can have of them, he does herein discover as much absurdity in so
peremptory a dislike as a blind man should do in wishing the Sun put out,
not considering that he himself receives benefit at the second hand from
that very light, the beauty whereof he has no immediate acquaintance withal.

For as too excessively to doat on the fancy of any particular thing may
prove harmefull, as appears in the Poetical fable of Midas, whose unsatiable
desire to have every thing that he touched turned to gold, starved him with
hunger; and so what he out of too excessive love made his Idol, became his
ruin; (as many men need none other enemy to undo them than their own
desires.) So on the other side, the extreme Hatred of any thing may be equally
inconvenient; as we see intimated in that other fable of the servants, who when
they had, out of an extreme malice against the poor Cock, at whose early crow,
their covetous master every day roused them unto their labor, killed him, and
so (as they thought) gotten a good advantage to their laziness, were every day
by the vigilance of their master, whose Covetousness now began to crow earlier
than his Cock, called from their sleep sooner than they are before; till at
length they began to wish for that, which the rashness and indiscretion of
their hatred had made away. And therefore when we go about any thing out of
the dictates of Passion, it is a great point of Wisdom, first to consider
whither we our selves may not afterward be the first men, who shall wish it
undone again.

CHAP. XV. Of the Good and Evil Effects of Hatred. Cautelousnesse and Wisdom
to profit by that we hate, with Confidence, Victory, Reformation. Hatred is
General against the whole kind, Cunning, Dissimulation, Cruelty, running over
to Persons Innocent, violating Religion. Envy, Rejoicing at Evil. Crooked
Suspicion. Contempt. Contumely.
I Now proceed to the Consequents or Effects of this Passion: And first for the
useful and profitable Effects thereof, which may be these.

First, a Cautelousnesse and fruit full Wisdom for our own welfare to prevent
danger, and to reap benefit from that, which is at enmity with us. For we
shall observe in many evils that no man is brought within the danger, who ^s
not first drawn into the love of them. All inordinate corruptions then most
desperately wound the Soul, when they beguile and entangle it. But the
greatest use of this Caution is to Quod de (...) obs ^vavit. Plutar^ lib. de
sera nu minis* (...) (...) aliq^n lo pro remedi ^uit. Sen de Bene^. l. 2. c. 18.
learn how to benefit by the Hatred of others, and ^s learned Physicians do,
to make an Antidote of Poison. For as many venomous creatures are by Art used
to cure the wounds, and repair the injuries, which themselves had made
(Natural Attraction, as it were, calling home that poison which injury and
violence had misplaced:) So the malice and venom of an Enemy may by wisdom be
converted into a Medicine, and by managing become a benefit, which was by him
intended for an injury. Or to use the excellent similitude Plutarch. de
Capiend. ex hostibus ut^ lit. Coel. Khodigin. Antiq. lect. l. 5. cap. 17.
of Plutarch, As healthy and strong beasts do eat and concoct Serpents,
whereas weak stomachs do nauseate at delicates: so wise men do exceedingly
profit by the hatred of their enemies, whereas fools are corrupted with the
love of their friends; and an injury does one man more good, then a courtesy
does another. As Wind and Thunder when they trouble the Air, do withal purge
it; whereas a long calm does dispose it to putrefaction: or as the same
Whetstone that takes away from a weapon, does likewise sharpen it; so a Wise
man can make use of the detraction of an enemy to grow the brighter and the
better by it. And therefore when (...) advised that Carthage should be utterly
destroyed, Scipio Nascica persuaded the contrary upon these reasons, that it
was needful for Rome to have always some enemies, which by a kind of antipe
Florus. lib. 2.
ristasis might strengthen and keep alive its virtue, which otherwise by
security might be in dange^ of languishing and degenerate into luxury. For 1 Samuel 13. ^0.
as the Israelites, when there was no Smith amongst them did sharpen their
instruments with the Philistines; so indeed an enemy does serve to quicken and
put an edge upon those virtues, which by lying unexercised might contract rust
and dullness, and many times when the reasons of the thing it self will not
persuade, the Fear of giving advantage to an Enemy, or of gratifying him, will
overruled a man, lest hereby he give his soes matter of Insultation.

Hoc Ithacus velit and magno mercentur Atridae. This makes our foes rejoice,
they would have bought
With a great price those crimes we do for naught.
Thus as a Sink by an house makes all the house the cleaner, because the Sordes
are cast into that: Or as they observe that Roses and Violets are sweetest,
which grow near unto Garlic and other strong sented Herbs, because these
draw away unto them any fetid or noxious nourishment: so the eye and nearenesse
of an enemy serves by exciting Caution and diligence to make a man's life more
fruitful and orderly, then otherwise it would have been, that we may take
away occasion from them that would speak reproachfully. And thus Hector
sharply reproving the Cowardice of his brother Paris (who had been the only
cause of the War and calamity) when he fled from Menelaus, draws his rebuke
from hence, and tells him that he was,

(...) Iliad. (...). 51.

(...) etc.
To Father, City, People, loss and blame;
Joy to his foes, and to himself a shame.
Secondly, Hatred works Confidence and some Presumption and good assurance of
our own, or some assisting strength against evils. Which arises first out of
the former: for Cau^lousnesse or Furniture against the onset of evil cannot but
make the mind more resolute in its own defense, than if it were left naked
without Assistance. Again, of all others, this is one of the most confident
Passions, because it moves not out of sudden perturbations, but is usually
seconded and backed with Reason, as the Philosopher observes; Rb^r. l. 2. c. 4.
and ever the more Counsel, the more Confidence. Besides, being a deep and
severe Passion, it proportionably calls out the more strength to execute its
purposes. There is no Passion, that intends so much evil to another, as
Hatred; An-ger would only bring Trouble; but Hatred, Mischief; Anger would
only Punish and Retaliate, but Hatred would Destroy; for as the Philosophe^
notes, it seeks the not being of what it Hates. A man may be Angry with his
friend, but he hates none but an enemy; and no man can will so much hurt to
his friend, as to his enemy. Now the more hurt a passion does intend, the more
strength it must call out to execute that intention; and ever the more strength
the more Confidence.

Thirdly it works some manner of Victory over the evil hated: for Odium
semper sequitur (...) animi elatione, as Scaliger out of Aristotle has
observed, It ever arises out of pride and height of mind (...). Injury ever
comes from some strength, and is a kind of Victory. For so far forth as one
is able to hurt another, he is above him. And this effect holds principally
true in moral and practick courses; wherein I think it is a general Rule: He
in some measure loves an evil, who is overcome by it: for conquest in this
nature is on the Will, which never chooses an object till it love it. There
only we can have perfect conquest of sin, where will be a perfect hatred of
it. Here, in the best, there is but an incomplete restoration of Gods Image:
the body of nature and the body of finne are borne, and must die together.

Fourthly, it has a good effect in regard of the evil hated in reasonable
Creatures, namely the Reformation of the person, in whom that evil was. For as
countenance and encouragement is the fosterer; so Hatred and contempt serves
sometimes as Physic to purge out an evil. And the reason is because a great
part of that goodness, which is apprehended to be in sin, by those that
pursue it, is other men's approbation. Opinion puts value upon many uncurrent
Coins, which pass rather because they are received, than because they are
warrantable. And therefore if a man naturally desirous of credit see his
courses generally disliked, he can hardly so unnature himself, as still to to
feed on those vanities, which he sees do provoke others unto loathing,
though I confess, it is not a persuasions of men's, but of Gods hatred of
sin, which does work a genuine and through Resormation.

I now proceed to observe those Effects, which are corrupt and hurtful: and
here we may observe,

First, the rule of Aristotle, whose maxim it is, that Hatred is always (...)
against the whole kind of its object* so then all the actions and effects of
this Passion are corrupt, which are not General, but admit of private
Reservations and Indulgences. For since tho nature and extent of the passion is
ever considered with reference to its object, there must needs be irregularity
in that affection, when it is conversant about an uniforme nature with a
various and differing motion. And this is manifestly true in that, which I made
the principal object of a right hatred, Sin. In which, though there is no man,
which finds not himself more obnoxious and open to one kind than another (it
being the long experienced policy of the Devil to observe the diverse
conditions of men's natures, constitutions, callings, and employments; and from
them to proportion the quality of his insinuations upon the will;) insomuch
that a man may here in happily deceive himself with an opinion of loathing
some evils, with which, either his other occasions suffer him not to take
acquaintance, or the difficulty in compassing, disgrace in practicing, or other
prejudices persuade to a casual dislike thereof, yet I say it is certain,
that if a man's Hatred of Sin be not (...) an Universal and transcendent
Hatred against all sin, even those which his personal relations make more
proper unto him, if he does still retain some privy exceptions, some reserved
and covered delights, be his pretenses to others, or his persuasions to
himself what they will, this is rather a personated than a true hatred a
meteor of the brain, than an affection of the Soul. For as in the good, so in
the ill of things; notwithstanding there seem to be many contrarieties and
dissimilitudes (as Seneca says) Scelera dissident, that sins do disagree;
yet indeed there is in that very contrariety such an agreement against God (as
in Herod and Pilate against Christ) as admits not of any, in order unto God,
but a gathered and united passion. And hence is that of Saint James, He that
offends in one is guilty of all; because in that one he contemns that
Original Authority which forbad all. There are no terms of consistence
between love and hatred divided upon the same uniforme Object. It is not the
material and blind performance of some good work, or a servile and
constrained obedience to the more bright and convicting parts of the Law, that
can any more argue, either our true love to the Precept, or our hatred to the
Sin, than a voluntary patience under the hand of a Surgeon can prove,
either that we delight in our own pain, o^ Abhor our own flesh. It is not
Gods Witness within us, but his Word without us; not the Tyranny of
Conscience, but the goodness of the Law that does kindly and genuinely
restrain the violence, and stop the Eruptions of our defiled nature. Or though
perhaps Fear may prevent the exercise and sproutings, nothing but Love can
pluck up the root of sin. A Lacedemonian endeavoring to make a Plutarch.
(...). La^on.
dead carcass stand upright as formerly it had done while it was alive, and
not effecting it, concluded that outward means would avail little except
there were something Within to support it. It is certainly so in actions as it
is in bodies. Fear as an outward prop may help a while to keep them up, but
Love is the inward form and life of them, without which they will quickly
faint and fall again.

Secondly, Another evil effect of hatred is a close and cunning Dissimulation
in suppressing of it, Vide Sen^. Epist. 103.
and palliating it with pretenses of fairness and plausibility, till it have
a full advantage to put forth it self. For by this means is the passion
strengthened, and the Person, whom it respects, weakened: this by
incautelousnesse and Credulity; (for common Charity, when it sees no signs of
malice, will not easily suspect it) that by Restraint and Suppression; for any
thing the more united, the more weighty it is: and as Wind, so Passions, the
closer it is pent, the more strength it gathers* Plutarch compares it unto
fire raked under ashes, and reserved until another day, when we have some use
of it. Which disposition the Historian has often observed in Tiberius (whose
principal virtue was Dissimulation) who being offended in the Senate with some
words spoken by Hatevius and Scaurus; the Historians observation upon it is
this. In Hat^vium statim invectus; Scaurum, cui implacabilius irascebatur,
Tacit. A^al. lib. 1.
silentio tramisit. The one he rebuked; but the other whom he more implacably
hated, he passed by with silence. And elsewhere upon occasion, Quae in
praesens civiliter habuit, sed in animo revolvente ir as, etiamsi impetus
affectionis langu^rat* memoria val^bat. Though he seemed to Anal. lib. 4.
Sta^it (...) odium donet impetus (...) ^ savor (...) langueret d^ Do^n* in
vita. Agric.
take what was spoken courteously, yet he laid it up in his mind, and though
the heat of Passion, by being suppressed, did languish, the memory and grudge
remained strong still. In which words the Historian has expressed that
excellent description of the same quality in Homer.

(...) Iliad x. 81. Dieg. La^. l. 7 (...) ^ripid. Med^a. 119.

(...)
(...)
(...)
L^w men with a Kings wrath are quite oppressed,
For though he seem the same day to digest
The ^eate of's Passion, yet he still reserves
Close Anger in his breast, till fit time serves.
Whereunto agrees that of the Tragedian,

Ira quaetegitur, n^ Senec. Traged. Med^.

Professa perdunt odia vindictae locum.
Anger that's hid gives surer blows. A^erta Odia pal^ de pell^, (...) and do^um
Obscu^, ^eque in^vita bi^ia. Tacit. Hist. lib. 4. Plutarch. A. pop^ib. and in
Fabi^.

But professed hate does revenge lose.
And therefore Hanniball was wont to say that he was more afraid of Fabius
when he did nothing, than of Marcellus when he did fight, of the one man's
closeness, than of the others boldness*

And the reason why of all the Passions this o^ hatred can thus smother and
suppress it self is, because it does not affect the heart with troubl^ or
sadness (which affection the soul loves no^ Aristotle, and ^venal. V^ndicta
mal^m quo non (...) ull^.
long to hold fast) but with a perverse joy and delight in pondring the
contrivances of Revenge (which the Philosopher and the Poet have place^ among
the Objects of Delight.)

Now of all the ways whereby this passion i^ suppressed, the most hateful to
God and man i^ when men do palliare and shroud their mali^ under pretenses of
Love, and praise men unto ^ine. Aelian. de A^imal (...) 40.
Like the Panther which with his swe^ breath allureth other Creatures to come
un^ him, and when they are come, devoureth the^ Pessimum inimicoru^ genus
la^dantes, of all kind (...) (...) Sophoc. in Aiai.
of enemies those are the worst, which as the Pr^phet speaks, do break^ men's
heads with oil, a^ make a poison of their own merits to kill the^ with
praises, as Achilles spoke in the Poet.

(...) Iliad. ^. 313. Salust. in ^il.

(...).
That man's as odious to me as hell gates,
Who with his mouth speaks fair, with his heart hates.
And it was wicked counsel which Theog nis gave to his Cyrnus, amongst so many
sage and moral precepts, like a dead fly in a pot of ointment.

(...)
(...)
Fawn on thy Foe, till he be in thy will,
Then, without Reasons give revenge her fill.
It is a quality of all others most distant from (...). Soph^. ^bid.
nobleness and ingenuitie of mind, for generous spirits will acknowledge with
honor and love the virtues of their enemies; as Fabritius Lucinus, A. Gilli^.
lib. 4 cap. 8.
when many were competitours for the Consulship gave his suffrage to Cornelius
Ruff^nus, the worthiest of the Company, though he were his bitter enemy: and
Caesar caused the demollished statues of Pompey to be erected again, not
suffe^ing Plutarch, de capium ex h^st* bu^ (...). Hom^ ^ a. 48. (...) T^ogn.
the honor of so brave a Commander (though his enemy) to bleed and languish
under his eye. Whereupon Cicero told him that in restoring the Statues of
Pompey* he had fastened and made sure his own. And Publius Scipio made none
other use of his Enmity with Tiberius Gracchus, than to dispose his daughter
unto him in marriage, because Au^ G^ll. l. 12. c. 8. Live. li^. 38.
at that time when he was sure to judge with least favor and partiality, he
found him to be a virtuous and deserving man. And the Emperor Adrian, to show
that he esteemed Hatred retained a base and un-princely disposition, as soon
as he came to the Empire, he laid aside all his former enmities, in so much as
then meeting one, who had been his capital enemy, he said unto him, (...)
(...). in Hadrian.
Evasisti, thou art now escaped from my displeasure.

Thirdly, Another evil effect of Hatred is cruelty; for it (...).
seeks (as I noted out of the Philosopher) the Not-being of that which it
hates* and therefore among the Egyptians, a D^g. (...). lib. 7. Clem. Alex.
Padag. l. 1. c. 8. Cle^. Alex. Strom. lib. 5. and lib. 1.
Fish was the Hieroglyphick of Hatred, because of all Creatures they do most
devour one another. And thus Achilles in the Poet expresses his hatred of
Hector, when he befought him to bestow upon his dead body an honorable burial.

(...) Iliad (...) 345.

(...)
I would my mind would give me leave to gnaw
Thy Flesh in morsells and to eat it raw.
And the like like expressions we find of the cruelty of Tiberius, a man full
of rancour.

Fastidit vinum, quia jam sitit iste Cruore, (...) Tiber. c. 19.

Tam bibit hunc avide, quam bibit ante merum.
He loathes all Wine for Blood, and now with mo^
Greedy delight drinks this than that before.
Hatred contenteth not it self with the death of an Enemy, but is many times
prodigious in the manner of it, and after out-lives that which it hates,
insulting with pride and indignities over the dead body which cannot
complain, nor otherwise, but by its own loath somnesse revenge (...)* de Ca
lig. and in (...). ^. ^1.
it self. Caligula, that monster of men, when he commanded any to be slain,
gave this charge with it, It a feri ut se m^ri sentiat, that he should perish
with such lingering blows, as that he might feel himself to dye. And he often
commanded Ib. in Calig.
aged men to stand by and look upon the slaughter of their children, and after
would force them Senec. de Ir^. lib. 2. c. 33.
unto mirth and feasting, for fear of their others which were left alive; for
to have mourned for one, would have forfeited the others. And for indignities
(...). (...). Ajax. Taci^. hist. lib. 1
offered unto dead bodies, there is nothing, which more frequently occurreth.
The Philistines cut off the head of Saul and sent it in Triumph up and down
their Country. And the Historian notes of Otho that he never looked with Capita
hostiu^ in (...) (...) (...), Apud I^st. lib. 14. Vir^. (...)* (...)* and.
(...). (...) (...).
more insatiable delight upon any spectacle, than the head of Piso his enemy.
So when the Grecians saw the dead body of Hector, every man (as the Poet
describes it) did bestow a stab, and a contempt upon it. But above all most
hateful was the cruelty of Marc. Antonius and his wife Fulvia, showed on the
dead body of Cicero the glory of the Roman eloquence, they cut off his head
and his hands, setting them in contempt, where he was wont to deliver those
excellent Orations; from whence they took it to their Table, and Fulvia
cursing it and spitting upon it, pulled out Pe^. Cri^it. lib. 1. cap. 8.
Pl^tarch. (...) (...).
the tongue (which all ages have admired) out of the mouth, and pricked it full
of holes with her needle or bodkin; to show that malice would ever do
mischief to a man in his noblest and highest treasure* as we see in that
desperate Italian, who having his enemy in his mercy, first made him (in hope
to escape) to renounce his religion and salvation, and then presently slew him*
that as far, as was in his power, he might kill his soul, as well as his
body.

But yet further Hatred does not content it self Sent. Titi^s quod habuit (...)
(...)* (...) d^mi s^a* (...). ci^. pro Rabini^.
to be Cruel to the person hated, but runs over from him unto others, that
have any relation to him, though never so innocent: As we see in Haman, who
though only displeased with the neglect of Mordecai, thought scorn to lay
hands on him alone, and therefore plotted the ruin of all the Jews. And it is
noted by Historians, that when Sejanus fell, the storm lighted on his Family
Tacit. Ana^. lib. 5. 6. Su^* Tib ^. ^1. Anal. lib. 15. Plutarc^. de cap. ex
^st. (...). Q. Curt. lib. 7.
and friends as well as on himself: as is also observed in the punishment of
the conspiracy against Nero detected by Millichus. And Themist^cles (though
innocent) was like to have suffered in a crimination of Treason, only for
being a friend unto Pausanias. Yea so over flowing is this Quality, that it
will sometimes strike a friend rather than not reach an enemy. It was a wicked
I (...) de Adul^t. and Ami^. (...). In (...).
pro^ession of Darius, Pereat cum inimico (...), Let my friend rather perish
with mine Enemy, than mine Enemy escape by my friend. And hence it is observed
of Aristides, that he was wont to propose such advices as he knew did conduce
unto public weal by some other men and not from himself, least Themistocles
out of hatred of his person, should have withstood and impedimented a general
good. But Ajax in the Poet went yet higher.

(...) -- Sop^oc. in Aiac.

(...)
So I may slay mine Enemy,
Let the same ruin swallow me.
And the principal reasons of this over flowing Forsan ^uturus (...) (...)
patris. Senec. (...).
of hatred are Fear and Cowardice; for he, who hates the Father, and shows
cruelty unto him, does usually fear the Son, lest he rise up in his fathers
quarrel: and hence is that maxim of cruel policy,

(...). S^asinus apud Clem. Alex. Str^m. 6. Hom. Odyss. (...). 307. Odium etiam
Ti^or sp. rat. Tertul. Ap^l. cap. 26. Vlc^ (...) ^x (...) (...) consu^um. Am.
Marc. l. 27. and A^ist. (...)* lib. 2.
That man's unwise who does the father slay,
And leaves the Sons his quarrel to repay.
For we know Orestes revenged his fathers quarrel and blood upon Aegisthus.

And besides cruelty does usually proceed from cowardice, as Amianus
Marcellinus has observed, and fearful men, when they have any advantage to
be cruel, do seldom hold any measure therein, as being ever in doubt, if
they leave any fire unquenched, that themselves shall be burned with it. And
therefore we never read of any Emperors, which were more cruel, than those
who were most fearful and effeminate, as (...). de I^a lib. 1. c. 13.
Tiberius, Caligula, Nero, Commodus, etc. As they say that wounded beasts, when
they die, bite hardest; Maxim (...) esse sotent morsus (...) (...). Flor^ lib.
2. c. 15.
their fear and despair making them furious: So there is no wrath or Cruelty
to that which proceeds from weakness, when it has either jealousy, or
advantage, or despair to set it on. Yea, so violent it is, that it has
transported men unto profanesse, and made them violate Nature and Religion. As
we see in the cruelty of Tiberius toward the family of Sejanus, who, because
Su^t. Tiber c. 6^
it was an unheard and prodigious thing for Tacit. Anal. i. 5
a little tender virgin to be strangled, gave command that the daughter of that
late Favorite, should first be defloured, that so she might be the fitter to
be slain. And Boniface the eighth Pet. C^init. lib. 7. c. 13.
Pope of that name being, according to the Ceremony of that Church, on
Ash Wednesday to sprinkle ashes on the heads of such Bishops, as kneeled at his
feet, and in some serious manner to mind them of their mortalities; when
Prochetus Bishop of Genua, whom he bitterly hated, tendered himself at his
fees to receive this Ceremony, he threw the Ashes in his eyes, with this
benediction, A Gebelline thou art, and as a Gibelline thou shall die: so
powerful was his malice to profane the rites of his religion! Yea, so far
will hatred proceed in this desperate contempt of God, that, if we may believe
so prodigious a villainy, it has sometimes turned the very cup of the Lord into
a Cup of poison: as it is reported of Pope Victor the third, that he was
poisoned in the Martin. apud (...). in vit. P^nt. 3.
Chalice at the Communion. Nether have there been wanting Examples of desperate
men, who have made the most holy parts of Religion, Vows, and Sacraments, the
Seals and Pledges of their conspiracies in Malice: as once Catiline Salust. in
Cat. Florus lib. 4. Dion. lib. 37. Plut. in lice^. and in Poplico ^d.
and his associates did animate themselves in their bloody purposes, with
drinking the blood of a slain Child.

Now of all Hatreds, there are none more furious and unnatural than those
which arise out of contrarieties in Religion; because as a Stone, the higher
the place is from whence it falls, does give the more dangerous blow: no wound's
so mortal, as that of a Thunderbolt: so of all other those Hatreds which make
pretenses unto Heaven, and which arise from motives of the highest Nature, are
ever most desperate and mortal. And therefore our Savior tells us, that in
this case men would forget all the bonds of natural Obligation; insomuch that
the Father would deliver his own Child, and the Children their Parents unto
death. As we find that the bloody Hatred of Cain against Abel arose from the
different acceptance of their Sacrifices. Neither is it any wonder if that
enmity grow excessive, which has Zeal to kindle it, and pretense of Religion
to warrant it: For when that which should restrain and set limits to a
Passion, is made a party to engage it, and sewell to foment it, no wonder if a
Passion which has no bounds from Religion, do impose (...) t^nere in ^o
dissi^ile est quod b^num esse (...). (...). Ep. 23. Plut. de Isi^. and O^od.
(...).
none upon it self. And this occasion of mutual Hatred, we find observed
even in the ridiculous superstitions of Egypt, when one Town would kill and
eat the flesh of another in zeal to the Sheep, or Calves, or Dragons, which
they did severally worship.

-- Summus utrinque
Inde furor vulgo quod Numina vicinorum,
Odit uterque locus.
This caused their rage, this made their great debate:
One Town did worship what the next did hate*
Another dangerous effect of Hatred is Envy and Malignitie at the sight of
another happiness; A^ist. Rbe^or. lib. 2. cap. 10. Plut. de Odi^ and I^vidia.
and therefore Envy is called an Evil Eye, because all the diseases of the Eye
make it offended with any thing that is light and shines; as Vermin do ever
devour the purest Corn, and Moaths eat into the finest Cloth, and the
Cantharides blast the sweetest Flowers. So does Envy ever gnaw that which is
most beautiful in another whom it hates; and as the Vulture, draws Aelian.
de Animal. lib. 3 c. 7. lib. 4 c. 18.
sickness from a perfume. For such is the condition of a rankorous Nature; as
of a raw and angry wound, which feels as great pain in the good of a
Chirurgions, as in the ill offices of an Enemies hand, it can equally draw
nourishment unto this Passion from the good and ill of whom it hates; yea and
commonly greater too from the good than from the ill: For, Odiorum (...) causa
quand^ iniquae: When Hatred is built upon a bad foundation, it commonly raises
it self the higher. And the reason is, because in Passions of this Nature, the
less we have from the Object, the more we have from our selves, and what is
defective to make up our malice in the demerit of him whom we hate, is
supplied by the rising of our own stomach: as we see in the body that thin
and empty nourishment will more often swell it than that which is substantial.

And therefore I think there are not any Examples of more implacable Hatred,
than those that are by Envy grounded on Merit. As Tacitus Tacitus.
observes between the passages of Domitian and Agricola, that nothing did so
much* strengthen the Emperors hatred against that worthy Man, as the general
report of his honorable behavior and actions in those military services,
wherein he had been employed. And the same likewise he intimates in the
affections of Tiberius and Piso toward Germanicus. Plutar. lib. de R^p.
Gerenda.


It is wisely therefore observed by the Historian, That men of vast and various
employments, have usually the unhappiness of Envy attending them, which
therefore they have sometimes declined by retyring and withdrawing themselves
from continual addresses, as a wise mariner, who (as he spoke) does
aliquantulum remittere Clavum (...) magnam fluctus vim. And thus we find the
honor which David's merits procured him, which was the foundation of that
implacable Hatred of Saul toward him. For as in natural motions, that which
comes from the faithest extreme, is most swift and violentiso in the motions of
the Mind, the further off we fetch the reason of our Hatred, the more
venomous and implacable it is.

And here we may observe the mutual and interchangable services, which corrupt
affections exercise amongst themselves: For as Philosophy observes in the
generation of those cold Meteors which are drawn to the middle region of the
Air, they are first by the coldness of the place congealed, and afterward do
by the like impressions fortify and intend the same quality in the Region: so
here Hatred first generates Envy; and this again does reciprocally increase
Hatred, and both join in mischief. So much the more hurtful to the Soul,
wherein they are, than to the Enemy whom they respect, by how much they are
more near and inward thereunto: for certainly a malignant humor does most hurt
where it harbors.

From this follows another evil Effect, (...) L^er. l^ Zen. lib. 7.
Plutarch. de C^riosit. Arist. Ethic. lib. 2. cap. 7. Mag. Mor. cap. 2^. Prove.
17. 5. ^4. 17.
which I will but name, being of the same Nature with Envy; and it is that
which Philosophers call (...) a rejoicing at the calamity of him whom we hate,
a quality like that of those who are reported to have Culi^ Rhod. Antiq. lect.
lib. 6. cap. 35.
been nourished with poison. For as in Love there is a mutual partaking of the
same loyes and Sorrows (for where the will and affections are one, the senses
are in some sort likewise) so Hatred ever works contrariety of affections:
That which works Grief unto the one, does work Joy unto the Di^g. L^rt. l.^.
other. And therefore Thales being asked how a Man might be cheerful and
bear up in afflictions, answered: If he can see his enemies in worse case
than himself. The Poet has given us the Character of such kind of Men:

Pectora selle virent, Lingua est suff^sa ve^eno:
Risus abest, nisi quem visi fecere Dol^res.
Their breasts with gall, their tongues with venom flow:
They laugh not, till they see men brought to woe.
And therefore they are elegantly compared by the Philosopher unto Cupping
Glasses, which draw only the vicious humors of the body unto them, and unto
Flies that are overcome with the spirits of Wine, but nourished with the froth.
Like those Worms which receive their Life from the corruption of the Dead. And
surely, the Prince of Devils may well have his Name given him from Ecclz^.
Math. 12. 24. (...) v^rtunt 70. 2. Reg. 1. 3. (...) and Pa^san. lib. 5. and
Clem. Alex. in Protreps. Myiode^ v^cat Plin. l. 29. cap. 6.
Flies, because he takes most pleasure in the ulcers and wounds of Men, as
Flies ever resort unto Sores.

Another corrupt Effect of Hatred is a sinister and crooked suspicion, whereby
with an envious and critical Eye we search into the actions and purposes of
another; and according as is the sharpness of our own wits, or the course of
our own behavior and practices, we attribute unto them such ends as were
happily never framed but in the forge of our own brains: Evil men being herein
like Vultures, which can receive none but a foul Sent. It is attributed
amongst one of the noble Attributes of Love, that it Thinks none Evil: and
certainly, there is not a fouler quality against Brotherly Love, than that
which (for the satisfying of it self in (but the Imaginary Evil of him whom
it disliketh) will venture to find out in every action some close impiety, and
pierce into the reserved and hidden passages of the heart: like him in the
Philosopher, who thought where ever he went, that he saw his own Picture
walk before him. And there fore we see how Agrippina when she would not
discover any show of Fear or Hatred toward her Son Ner^, who had at the
first plotted her death on the Sea; and that failing, sent the second time
Anicaetus the Centurion to make sure work, did in both these practices decline
all show of suspicion, and not acknowledge either the Engine or the Murder to
be directed by him. Solum Insidiar^m remedium aspiciens, si non
intelligerentur. Tacit. A^al. lib ^4.
Supposing the only remedies of these plots to be, if she seemed not to
understand them. For ill meanings do not love to be found out. As the same
Historian tells us of Tiberius, Acrius accepit recludi quae premeret: He
hated that man who would venture to dive into his thoughts. And certainly there
is not any crooked Suspicion which is not rooted in Hatred. For as to think
the worst of our own Actions, is a sign of Hatred to our sins (for I think
no man loves his sins who dares search them:) so contr^riwise to have an
humor of casting the worst glosses upon the Actions of another Man, where
there is not palpable dissimulation, argues as great a want of Love. We seach
for Evil in our selves to expel it; but we search for evil in another to
find it. There is scarce a more hateful quality in the eyes of God or Man,
than that of the Herodians, to lie in wait to catch an innocent man, and then
to accuse him.

Another Effect which proceeds from corrupt Hatred, is proud and insolent
carriage, whereby we contemn the quality, or undervalue and villifie the
Merit of a person. For though the Apostle has in this respect of Pride and
Swelling, opposed Knowledge unto Love: Knowledge puffs up, but charity
edifieth; yet the opposition holds not there only: For there is Tumor
Cordis, as well as Tumor Cerebri; as well a stubborn as a learned Pride, a
Pride against the Person, as against the weakness of our Brother, a Pride
whereby we will not stoop to a yielding and reconciliation with him, as
whereby we will not stoop to the Capacity and Edification of him; that is,
the swelling of Malice, and this of Knowledge. And hence it is that Hatred (as
Aristotle has excellently observed) Rbet. l^. 2. ^. 4.
when it is simple and alone (though that seldom fall out) is without the
admixtion of any Grief. And the reason I take it is, because Grief is either
for the Evil of another, and so it is ever the Effect of Love; or for the
Evil which lies upon our selves, and so is the cause of Humility; neither of
which are agreeable with Hatred, whose property ever it is to conceive in it
self some worth and excellency, by which it is drawn to a Contempt and
Insolence toward another Man. And therefore as it was Pride in Men and Angels,
which wrought the first Hatred between God and them; so the most proper and
unseparable Effect of this hatred ever since is Pride.

The last Corruption of this Passion is Impatience, Contention and Fury, as the
wise Man tells us, Hatred stirs up strife. And therefore Prove. 10. 12.
that worthy Effect of Love, which is contrary to this of Hatred, is called
(...). and Longanimitas. Long suffering to signify some length, distance, and
remotion between a Man's Mind and his Passion. But Hatred, being of a fierce
Nature, is so far from admitting any Peace, or yielding to conditions of
parley, that as has been observed out of Aristotle) it rests not satisfied
with the Misery, but desires (if it be possible) the utter overthrow of an
Enemy.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Affection of Desire. What it is. The several kinds of it,
Natural, Rational, Spiritual. Intemperate, Unnatural, Morbid Desires. The
Object of them Good, pleasant, as possible, as absent either in whole, or in
degrees of perfection or continu^ance. The most General Internal cause
Vacuity, Indigence. Other Causes, Admiration, Greatness of mind, Curiosity.
THe next Passions in order of Nature to these two are Desire and Abomination,
which because they differ not much otherwise from Love and hatred, than the Act
from the Habit, or then a man sitting from himself walking, Desire being but
the motion, and exercise, as delight is the Quiet and Repose of our Love, I
shall therefore the more briefly pass it over. Desire is the wing of the soul
whereby it moves, and is carried to the thing which it loves, as the Eagle to
the Car^ise I^b 39. 30. Math. 24. 28. ^abac. 1. 8.
in the Scripture proves, to feed it self upon it, and to be satisfied with
it. For as the Appetite of the Eagle is attended with sharpness of fight to
discover its prey, with swiftness of wing to hasten unto it, and with strength
to seize upon it: So according to the proportion of the Soule^ love unto its
object does it command and call together both the Wisdom and Powers of the
whole man to direct unto, and to promote the procuring of it. And the very best
characters and truest lineaments which can be drawn of the minds of men, are
to be taken from their Desires, (...). Not. Qu^st. ^p. 26.
rather than from their Practices. As Physitia^ often judge of the Diseases of
sick men by their Appetites. Ill men dare not do so much evil as they
desire, for fear of shame or punishment* Good men cannot do so much good as
they desire for want of Power and Provisions of virtue. Besides Practices may
be overruled by ends, but Desires are always genuine and natural, for no man
can be constrained to will that which ^ee does not love; And therefore in the
Scriptu^ good men have had most confidence in approving themselves unto God by
their affections and the inward longings of their souls after him as being the
purest and most unfaigned issues of Love* and such as have least Proximity and
Danger of infection from foreign and secular ends. Sai^ Romans 7. 18, 19. I^.
21. 17.
Paul himself was much better at willing than (...) performing; and Saint
Peter who failed in his promise of D^ing, dares appeal to Christ's ow^
Omniscience for the truth of his Loving. Wha^ ever other defects may attend our
actions, this is an inseparable character of a pious soul, that ^ (...). 1.
11. Is^. 26. 8. Phil. 3. 20.
desires to fear Gods name, and according to the prevalency of that affection,
has its conversation in heaven too. In which regard Christ is called the
Desire of all Nations, both because where H^g. 2. 6. John ^2 32. Psalm. 1^7. 9.
he is he draws all the hearts and desires of his people unto him, and also
does by his grace most fully answer and satisfy all the desires that are
presented before him: as it is said of one of the Roman Emperors Neminem
unquam dimisit Tristem, he never sends any discontented out of his presence.

The desires of the Soul are of three sorts, according to the three degrees of
perfection which belong unto man, Natural, Rational, Spiritual.

Natural desires respect (...) things of Arist. (...). lib. 7. cap. 6.
simple Necessity to the Being, Preservation, and integrity of Nature, as the
desires which things have to their proper nourishment and place ad
conservationem individui, for preserving themselves and to propagation, and
increase ad conservationem speciei, for preserving of their kind.

Rational Desires are such as respect (...) such things as are Elegible in
themselves, and the proper objects of right Reason, such as Felic^y the common
End of all rational Appetitions, Virtue the way, and external good things, as
Health, Strength, Credit, Dignity, Prosperity, the Ornaments of humane life.

Spiritual Desires respect (...) Heb. 9. ^3. 1. Cor. 3. 13. Col. 3. 1.
Heavenly, and spiritual things, the things of God, Things which are above,
The knowledge whereof we have not by Philosophical, but by Apostolical
discovery, by the Spirit of God who ^ely searches the deep things of God.

The Cor^pt Desires contrary unto these are either Vicious or Morbid. Vicious
are again of two sorts: First, Intemperate and incontinent Desires, which err
not in the substance or nature of the thing desired; but only (...), as the
Philosopher speaks in the measure and manner of desiring Prove. 31. 6. 1. Tim.
^. 23. Ps^. 1^4. 15.
them. It is lawful to drink Wine, and a Man may err (as Timothy did) in an
over Vid. Soc^at. lib 4. cap. 1^. Eusebius. lib. 4. c. 38. l. 5. c. 17. ^ren. l.
1. c. 34. Tertul. adv. Psy^ c. c. 15. Epiph. T^. 2. l. ^. Vid. G^l. St^. A^iq.
Comm. lib. ^. cap. 7, 8. Clem. Al. pad. lib. 2. cap. 1, 2. (...). lib. ^. adv.
(...)
rigorous severity to Nature, when health or needful refreshment requires it:
For our flesh is to be subdued to reason, not to infirmities, that it may be a
servant to the Soul, but not a burden. But if we let Wine be (...), as the
Heathen called it, to take a freedom against us, like Cham to mock us, and
discover our nakedness, and make us servants unto it. If we do not only eat
Honey, but surfeit on it; If we must have meat like* Israel in the Wilderness,
not only for our Need, but for our Lust; If we eat and drink so long that we
are good for nothing, but either to lie down and sleep, or to rise up and
play, to live to day and to dye tomorrow* If we make our belly the grave of our
Soul, and the dungeon of our Reason, and let our Intestina as Megarens^
obsonan^, quasi crasti^d die ^rituri. Tert. Apol. cap. 39.
well morally as naturally far exceed the length of the whole Man besides.
This is in the Apostles phrase to be lovers of pleasure rather then lovers of
God, and it is an intemperate excess against natural desires which will ever
end in pain. It was a witty speech of A^acharsis the Philosopher, Diog. L^ert.
l. 1.
that the Vine bears three sorts of Grapes: The first of Delight: The second
of Excess: The third of Sorrow. If we let our Delight steal us into Excess,
and become a mocker, our Excess will quickly betray us unto Sorrow (as Dalilah
did Sampson to the Philistines) and let us know that Prove 20. 1. Pl^. de
Audi^one.
after Wine has mocked it can rage too. Like the head of the Polypus, which is
sweet to the Palate, but after causes troublesome sleeps and frightfull
dreams.

Secondly there are brutish and unnatural Desires, which the Philosopher
calls (...), ferine (...). l. 7. c. 6.
and inhumane, instancing in those barbarous Countries, where they use to eat
men's flesh and raw meat; and in the Woman who ^ipped up Women with child that
she might eat their young ones: Unto which head I refer those which the
Apostle calls (...) and (...)* Romans 1. 26. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 5. ^de ve^. 7. Vid.
Eus^. de pr^p. Evang. lib. 1. cap. 4. Hierom. lib. 2. Contr. Iov^.
vile and dishonorable, Affections and Passions of Lust wherein forsaking the
guidance of Nature, they dishonored their bodies amongst themselves, and gave
themselves over, as S. Jude speaks unto strange flesh; also incestuous and
promiscuous Lusts, going with naked and painted Bodies, as the ancient
Brit^aines offering of men and children in sacrifices, eating of the bodies of
Friends that dyed, burning of the living with the dead, and other like savage
and barbarous practices, The^d. Sermon. 9. de l^b. C^l Rodingin. Antiq. lib. 10.
cap. 21. 28. P^n. lib. 5. cap. 17. 30. and lib. 7. cap. 2.
wherein we find how far natural corruption improved with ignorance and
want of Education or Religion, can embrace the Manners of Men.

Lastly, there are morbid Desires, growing out of some distemper of Mind or
Body, called by the Philosopher (...), as those of children, which eat co^les
or dirt, and the strange and depraved Ethic. l. 7. c. 6.
longings of women with child, called (...) or Pi^a from the Bird of that name,
because the inconstant C^l. R^dig. lib. 3. cap. 15. Uid. Stephan. and (...) ^n
voce (...).
and various appetences of nature, so misguided by vicious humors, is well
resembled by the strange mixture of white and black feathers in that Bird.

Having considered the several kinds both of Regular and corrupt Desires. I
shall content my self with a very brief inquiry into the causes, and effects
of this Passion.

The causes moving it are External ex part objecti, in the object, or
^ternall ex part subjecti in Deb^ and Iucund^ vid. Philosoph. R^e. cor. lib. 1.
the mind. The Object is any thing apprehended sub ratione Boni and Iucundi,
as good and pleasant. For upon those inducements did Satan first stir the
desire of Eve toward the forbidden fruit. Ge^. 3. 6. (...) Dam ^seen de (...).
s^d. l. 2. ^. 22.
She saw that it was good for food, and pleasant to the eye.

Now the Qualification of these to distinguish the formal reason of their
being objects to our desires, from that wherein they are Objects of our love,
is first that they be Possible: For Desire being the motion and endeavor of
the Soul toward that good which it loves, and wherein it seeks to delight,
take away the possibility of such delight, and this would be motus in Vac^,
like that of Noah's Dove that found no place for her feet to rest on. Hope is
the whetstone, and wheel of industry, if that sail, how ever a man may waste
and pine away his thoughts in empty Velleities and imaginary wishes, he ca^
ever put forth nor address his endeavors toward an impossible (...) etiam
and qu^ non poss^ Sen. de l. a* lib. 1. c. 3. (...) Arist. Ethic. lib. 3. c. 4.
Vid. de volitione and (...) (...) Aquin. 1. 2. qv. 13. (...) 5. and Valen^. To.
2. disp. 2. q^st. 8 p. 2
good. Though an old man may wish himself young again, yet no man was ever so
besotted as to endeavor it. And this distinction between vanishing wishes and
serious desires is of great consequence to be attended in all the motions of
the Soul moral or sacred, in as much as those Desires only which are Active
and Industrious, purposely addressing themselves to the prosecution of that
which they apprehend as acquirable, do commend the Soul from whence they
issue for virtuous and pious.

Secondly, the object of the Desires quatale is apprehended as Absent and
distant, in as much as presence works delight rather than desire. The things
we have, we enjoy, we do not covet, we rest in them we do not move toward
them. Yet not always Absent quoad t^m, but quoad gradus, not in the whole, but
in the parts and degrees of it: for the presence of a good thing does in some
sort quicken the Desires toward the same thing Crescit A^or nu^i quantum ipsa
pecu nia cresc^. (...) (...) (...) (...) qui (...) ^abet (...). S^. 14.
Aristot. lib 1. Politic. c. ^* Plutarch. lib. de Cupidi^. diviti^. Se (...).
^p. 73. M^. 9. ^4.
so far forth as it is capable of improvement and augmentation.

As we see in external riches of the body, none desire them more eagerly than
those that possess them; and the more virtuous the Soul of man is, the more
is the heart enlarged in the Appetition of a greater measure* as the putting in
of some water into a Pump, does draw forth more. No man is so importunate in
praying, Lord help mine unbelief, as he that can say Lord I believe. Thus
even present things may be desired in order to improvement, and further degrees
of them: as many times a man has a better stomach to his meat after he has
begun to eat, than when he first sat down unto it. Again, things present may
be the Object of our Desires unto continuance, as he that delights in a good
which he has, desires the continuance of that Delight. And therefore Life,
even while it is possessed it is desired, because the possession of it does not
cause the Appetite to nauseate or surfeit upon it. Few men there are who desire
not old Age, not as it is old Age, and imports decay, decrepidnesse, and
defects of Nature: For a young man does not desire to be old now; but as it
implies the longer and fuller possession of Life: For a man being conscious to
himself, first of his own insufficiency to make himself happy, from and
within himself; and next of the immortality of his Nature: as upon the former
reason, he is busied in sending abroad his Desires (as the Purveyors and
Caterers of the Soul) to bring in such things as may promote perfection: so
those very Desires having succeeded, do farther endeavor the satisfaction of
Nature, Arist. Ethic. lib. 3. cap. 13. Eadem lib. 3. c. 3. problem. 28. quast.
7. sujd^s in (...). Aelian. var. Hist. l. 10. 6. 9. (...) Diog. Latri. in
(...): l. 6.
by moving toward the Perpetuity of what they have procured. It was a fordid
and brutish wish of Philoenus in the Philosopher, who wished that he had the
throat of a Crane or Vulture that the pleasure of his taste might last the
longer (it being the Wisdom of Nature, intending the chief Perfections of
Man to his Soul, to make his Bodily Pleasures the shorter.) But surely the
Soul of Man having a reach as far as Immortality, may justly desire as well
the Perpetuity as the Presence of those good things wherein stands her proper
perfection. And therefore it was excellent counsel of Antisthenes the
Philosopher, That a man should lay up such provisions, as in a Shipwreck might
swim out with him such treasure as will pass and be current in another
World, and will follow us thither, which as the Apostle speaks, is to lay up a
good foundation against the time to come

The Internal Causes moving Desire, in regard of the subject or mind of man,
may be different according to the different kinds of Desires spoken of before.
The most general which respects (...) Arist. Ethic. lib. 3. cap 11. (...)
Cl^m. Alex. Str. l. 7.
them all is a Vacuity, Indigence, and selfe-insufficiency of the Soul: For
having not within it self enough either to preserve it or to content it, it is
forced to go out of it self for supplies; for wheresoever God has implanted
sensitive and rational affections, he has bin pleased to carry them from
themselves, and to direct them abroad for their satisfaction: by that means
preserving the Soul in humility, and leading it as by Degrees up unto
himself. Every creature though it have its life in its own possession; yet the
preservation of it, it fetches from some things without. The excellentest
creatures are beholding to the meaner, both for their nourishment, and for
their knowledge. And therefore of all Graces, God has chosen Faith and
Repentance, as the chief means of carrying us to him, because these two do most
carry us out of our selves, and most acquaint us with our insufficiencies,
Repentance teaching a man to abhor himself, and Faith to deny himself.

Now because Emptiness is the cause of Appetence, Si q^id deterit ida nobis
petierimus. Sen. Epist. 119. Vid. Plutarch. de Curiosit. Cae ius ^oodig. lib.
14. cap. 7.
we shall hereupon find, that the fullest and most contented men, are ever
freest from vaste desires. The more the mind of any man is in weight, the more
it is in rest too. As they say that in Rivers, ships go slower in the Winter,
but withal they carry the greater burdens: So many times men of less urgent
and importunate Appetitions, and motions of mind, are more furnished and better
balanced within. In Iothams Judge. 9 9. 15.
Parable the Bramble was more ambitious than the Vine, or the Olive. And the
Vine we see which is of all other Arbor Desiderii, the Tree of Desire, is
weakest and cannot stand without another to support it. Therefore we shall
find that men's Desires are strongest when their constitutions are weakest, and
their condition lowest; as we see in servants that labor, women that breed,
and sick men that long, whose whole life in that time is but a change and
miscellany of Desires. Thus we see little children will reach at every I^ 7 1,
2 3.
thing which is before them, being wholly destitute of internal furniture.
Vacuity is ever sucking and attractive, and will make even dull and heavy
things rise upward. Eager and greedy, various and swarming Appetitions are
usually the (...) Arist. de G^netatio An ma, lib. 4. cap 4.
signs either of a childish or a sick Temper of mind; as the Naturallists
observe that the least creatures are the greatest breeders, a Mouse brings
more young ones than an Elephant. Vivunt, non quomodo volunt; sed quomodo
Cap^runt. Sen. de Tran. cap. 2. Plut. Sympos. lib. 5. quast. 9.


Only here we must distinguish both of contentment and of Desires. There may
be a double Contentment, the one arising out of sluggishnesse and narrowness
of mind; when men out of an unwillingnesse to put themselves to the pains of
gaining more, rest satisfied with what they have, and had rather have a poor
quiet, than a Treasure with labor. As they say of the Fig Tree, though it be
least beautiful of other Trees (for it alone bears no flowers) yet withal
it is free from Thunder. And as the Historian said of some men that they are
sola socordia Innocents. Tacit.
do men no hurt only because it would cost them pains to do it: so may we
of these, that they are beholding to their torpid and sluggish constitution,
for the contentment which they profess to have. And this does not regulate
inordinate desires, but only lay them asleep, as even an hungry man when he
sleeps, has his hunger sleep with him.

Another contentment there is arising out of Phil. 4. 11, 12. Heb. 13. 9.
Namque lab^nt cur^ (...) sint ponder^ navet. Perq, mare instab les nimi^
levitate seruntur. Ov. Met. lib. 2. I^ven. Sat 14. Pli^. l 7. c. 56. Stuck. l.
2. c. 8 ^ol 165.
Wisdom and practical learning (as the Apostle tells us, that it is a matter
of learning to be contented) when the heart being established and made steady
with grace, and solid materials within, as a ship with ballast* is the less
tossed with lower affections, as Saul cared not for his Asses when he heard of
a Kingdom.

-- Grata post munus arista
Contingunt homines veteris fastidia quercus.
When men had once discovered better corn,
They loathed their mast and oaken bread did scorn
And this kind of contentment does not stupisie loose Desires, but change
them, as the Cats Vnum magnum was more worth to her than all the ^ Plat. de
Solart. (...).
variety of shifts which the Fox did boast of, and one Sun does more comfort
us in the day than many thousand stars in the night.

Again, Desires are either of things excellent, Sapien^ est divi^iarum
naturalium qu^sitor acerri^ Sen Epist. 119
as the virtuous and spiritual desires of the soul whereby men move toward
God; and these do neither load the heart, nor cloy it, but much rather open
and enlarge it for more. No man was so well acquainted with God as Moses, who
yet was the more importunate to know him better, I beseech thee show me thy
glory, nor any man more Exodus 33. 18.
acquainted with Christ than Saint Paul, who yet desired to be dissolved and to
be with Christ nearer. Phil. 1. 23.


Other Desires are of middle things (...) Arist. Ethic. lib. 7. cap. 6.
the Philosopher calls them; such as Wealth, Profit, Victory, Honor, which are
not good in themselves, but as they are managed. And these Desires though not
extinguished, yet are very much assuaged, and moderated by the weight and
wisdom, of solid contentment. He was the wisest man then alive, and who knew
all the quintessence, and what ever was desirable in the Creature, who said Da
mihi panem Statutim^ ^rv. 30. 8.
Give me the Bread of my Allowance; (...) ^heophylact.
so much as the quality of my place and state requires, which is that which
our Savior (...) (...). Luke 12 42. I^me 12. 15. Job 23. 12. ^. Reg. 4. 22.
Vide (...). d^ mensuri^, lib. 2. cap. 3. and A^g ^ ^ani ^ium de pane quot^d. ad
(...) I^stit. ^yria* S^uck. Convival. lib. 1. cap. 22.
limiteth our desires unto, (...) our portion and dimensum, (...) in Saint
James, daily food, and was pleased to answer that wise King in that his
request, and to give us a record and Catalogue of his daily bread.

Another cause of Desire may be Admiration; A strange thing though monstrous
and deformed calls the eyes of every man unto it. Rarity is a marveilous
Lenocinium, and inticer of Desire, ^. stiv^ nives, hybern^ rosae as the
Panegyrist spoke, Snow in the Summer and Roses in Winter; the Birds of this
Country, and the Roots of anothor; dai^ties hardly procured without the
shipwracks of men, to feed the gluttony rather of the eye than of the belly;
these are the delights of the curiosities of men. The same fruits when they are
worse but rarer, have a far greater value set upon them, then when exposed by
their commones unto every man's purchase And it was Pl^t. Apop^.
a wise complaint of old Cato; That it went ill with the City when a Fish was
sold for more then an Ox. We see Desires do not put forth themselves more
freely in any then in children, I think the chief Reason of it is the same
which the Philosopher gives of their memories, because Rbet lib. 2.
every thing to them is new and strange* for st^ange things as they make
stronger impressions upon the Retentive, so they do upon the Appeti^ive
saculties. And therefore we find Herod who Luk^ 23 8.
cared nothing at all ^or the Doctrine of Christ, because it was holy and
divine, had yet a great Desire to have seen his miracles, because they (...)
Acbin^ (...) (...) invis^rus Plut de Curio^it. 1. Reg. 10. Plat^ Aegypt^
Italia^, (...) pe^jt Philosophiae c^sd* Vid. Throd. Oral. 1: De ^ide. Zeph. 1.
8. Greci^ (...) Arist^. Tom. 2. (...) de pace p^ster.. Graciae, Graecia.
^hycidides Uide Coel. ^bod. l. 10. c. 25. Acts 17. 21.
were wonderful. And Men have traveled far to see those persons and things,
the fame whereof they have before admired, strange Learning, strange Birds and
Beasts, strange Flowers and Roots, strange Fashions; yea, strange Sins too
(which is the curiosity and corruption of Nature) are mavelous attractive,
and beget emulation amongst Men. Nero gave rewards to the inventors of strange
Lusts. Even Solomon's Ships, besides substantial Treasure, did bring home Apes
and Peacockes. Athens which was the eye, the flower, and Epitome of Greece (to
show that this curiosity is the disease as well of Wits, as of Childehood)
spent all their time and study in inquiring after new things. And for this
cause it is (as I conceive) That wise Men have made Laws to interdict the
transporting of their country fruits into other places, lest the sight of them
should kindle in strangers a Desire to be Masters of the Countries where they
grew, as we see the Grapes and Figs of Canaan were used as Incentives unto
the expedition of Israel^ and hence Plutarch tells us that the Word Sycophant
Plut. in Solon, and de Curiosit. and lib. 1. Cod. quares export^ri non debeant.
is derived to note originally such as detected those who surreptitiously
transported Figge^ into other Countries. As on the other side we read that the
Athenians set up a Pillar* wherein they published him to be an Enemy of the
City, who should bring Gold out of Aristid. To. 3. Ora^. 2. Aelius Spart. in
Piscen. N g.
Media, as an Instrument to corrupt them* And the Roman Governor commanded
hi^ soldiers that they should not carry any Gold or Silver into the Field with
them, lest there* by they should be looked on by the Adv^rsary, as the
Persians by Alexander, rather as a prey than a foe.

A third cause which I shall touch on of exciting Desires, is height and
greatness of mind* which cannot well set bounds of measure unto it self, as
Seneca said in another sense, Magnitud^ non Epist. 43.
habet certum modum. Great minds have great ends, and those can never be
advanced but with vast and various Desires. A great Ship will not be carried
with the Sail of a Lyter. Nor can an Eagle fly with the wings of a Sparrow.
Alexander was (...) infaelix angust^i mite mundi. Vt Gy^ae inclusus sco^ulu,
and ^. ^uv. (...). 10. Sen. de ^ n^fic. l. 7. c 2. p. 54. and 119. Ecclet. 6 9.
P^ov 17. 24.
not so great in his Victories as in his Desires, whom one World could not
satisfy: nor Pompey in his Triumphs, as in his Ambition, to whom it was not
enough to be Great, except he might be the Greatest.

Another cause of Desires may be Curiosity, which is nothing else but a desire
of prying into, and listening after the businesses of other Men, which is
*called by Solomon, Ambulatio Anim^: The walking up and down of the Soul, as
he elsewhere tells us, that the Eyes of a Fool are in the Ends of the Earth:
Such a Man being like the witches which Plutarch ^ let. de Cu^.
speaks of, that wear Eyes when they went abroad, but put them in a box when
they came home ^ Or like the Falckoners Hawks that are (...) qu^q, m^o semper
sugi^. Luc^t. ^pud S^a. de* trauq l. c. 2.
hooded in the House, and never suffered to use their Eyes but to the hurt of
other Birds: like a man in a Dungeon, that sees nothing Non horam ^ecum esse
potes, ^ non etia re^ (...), etc. (...).
where he is; but can see a great deal of light abroad at a little passage.
So these kind of Men have vast desires of foreign Knowledge, but wonderfully
shun the acquaintance of themselves. As they say of a Swine, that he looks
every way but upward: so we may of Pragma tists, that their eyes look always
save only inward. Whereas the Minds of prudent Men are like the Windows of
Solomon's Temple, broader inward than outward. As the Pillar 1. Reg. 6. 4.
that went before Israel in the Sea, whose light side was toward Israel, but
the dark toward Pharaoh: Or as the Sun in an Eclipse, whose light is
perfect inwards, though toward us it be darkened. A wise Man's eyes are in his
head, whereas a Fool has (...) as it is in the Proverbs, his mind in his
heels only to wander and g^d abroad.

CHAP. XVII. Of other causes of Desire, Infirmity, Temerity, Mutability of
Mind, Knowledge, Repentance, Hope. Of the effects of it in General, Labor,
Languor. In special, of Rational Desires, Bounty, Grief, Weariness,
Indignation against that which withstands it. Of Vicious Desires, Deception,
Ingratitude, Envy, Greediness, Baseness of Resolution.
Other causes of Desires are Infirmity, Rashness, and Mutability of Mind,
Which three (...). Arist. E^hic lib. 7. c. 8.
I put in one, as having a near Relation and dependence within themselves. For
commonly impotent Appetions as those of Children, of sick, of incontinent
Persons, are both Temerarious in ^recipitating the Mind, and anticipating the
^ictates of Reason which should regulate or re^raine them: as also mutable and
wandering like ^e Be from one Flower unto another; Infirmity (...) suffering a
man to hold fast his Decrees, and ^rity not suffering him to resolve on any;
and ^stly* Mutabilitie making him weary of those ^ings which weakness and
rashness had unadvisedly transported him unto. Omnium Imperitorum Maximum in
dicium est m^ la mentis fluct^atio. Sen. Ep. 120. vid. ep. 10. and de Tranq.
cap. 2. (...). Aristid. Tom. 2 O^at. 1. Vid. etiam Plutarch* de (...). Iliad* -*
animus in lubric^ est: Weak minds have ever wavering and unfixed resolutions.
Like fickle and nauseating stomachs, which long for many things and can eat
none. Like sick bodies, qu^ mutationi ^us ut remedys utuntur, as Seneca
speaks, which toss from side to side, and think by changing of their place
they can leave their pain behind them. Like Achilles in the Poet:

(...) Now he leans on his side, now supine lies,
Then grov'leth on his face, and strait does rise.
This Sickness and Inconstancy of Desires is thus elegantly described by the
old Poet L^cretius: Lucret. lib. 3. lactor, Crucior, agitor, ^lor, versor in
amoris (...) animi habe^. Ibi sum, ibi non sum, ^b non sum ibi est Animus. I^a
mihi ingenia sunt, quod lubet non lubet iam id continuo, etc. Plaut. Cistellar.


-- Vt nunc plerumque videmus,
Quid sibi quisque velit nescire and quarere semper.
Commutare locum, quasi onus deponere possit.
Exit sape for as magnis ex adibus ille,
Esse domi quam pertasum est subit^, rever^.
Currit agens mann^s advillam praci^itanter
Auxilium tectis quasi far ardentibus instet.
Oscitat extemplo tetigit cum limina Villae,
Aut abit in somnum gravis, atque oblivia quarit:
Aut etiam properans Vrbem petit, atque ^evisit*
Hoc se quisque modo fugit. At, quod scilicet ut (...)*
Effugere haud potis est, ingratis haret and ange^.
We see how troubled Mortals still enquire, Nihil tam occupatum ^am multiforme
t^t ac tam variis motibus concisum ac la^ratum, quam mala meant. Quin^il. lib.
12. c. 1. Non horam ^cum esse potes, non ^tia recte Pon^re ^que ipsum (...)
fugitivus and err^. Horat. Uid. Plutarch. de Tranquillit.

Yet nee're can find what it is which they desire.
One changes place, as if he could unload
And leave his weights behind him. Runs abroad,
Weary of a great Palace; strait turns back,
And has not found the thing which he did lack.
Wearied both here and there, he mounts his steed,
And runs to the neighbor town with swister speed
Than if he went to quench a fire. Being set,
He gapes and sleeps, and studies to forget
Why he came thither, happily turn his rain,
And to the City po^teth back again.
Thus guilty Man does study how to shun,
And escape himself, but nee're can get it done.
He bears the thing he flies. What he would leave
Unwelcome self unto it self does cleave,
And cleaving does torment. --
The more simple, One, and perfect Nature is (...). Arist. ^bic. lib. 7. c. ult.
(as the Philosopher divinely notes) the more it delights in one and the
same uniforme operation. Mutability is not pleasant in it self; but ^he
delight of it arises out of the pr^vitie and ^efect of Nature.

I might here insist on other more obvious causes of desire: As,

1 Knowledge and experience of the goodness of that which we desire: as the
Apostle also ^elleth us, That Experience works Hope: And ^e use to say,
Ignoti n^lla Cupido. A man cannot ^esire that of which he has no Apprehension.
^nowledge is Appetites Taster.

2 (...) and Repentance for the Evils we (...).
feel, the contrary whereunto we are the more induced to desire. We never
desire Health so eagerly as when Sickness teaches us to value Q^m q^ in p^
estate ba^u. it me^t ^a a (...). Plant. cop. iv. c. 7. 1. ^
it: For as in Colors, so in Actions or Affections, contraries do set sorth
and sharpe^ one another. And as Labor Natural makes a Man earnestly desire
the Shadow, as Job speak^ so Sorrow which is Labor Mental, does make a Man
earnestly. thirst after that which can remove the thing which (...) that sonow.
The Apostle tells us, That Desire and Zeal are the 2 Cor. 7. 11.
fruits of godly Sorrow. David never panted so earnestly after Gods favor and
presence, as when he felt what a Grief it was to be without it^ For in this
case there is an Apprehension of (...) double goodness in the thing we desire,
both as perfective unto Nature Indigent, and as medicinal unto Naturewronged.

Lastly Hope of speeding in our Desires: For the stronger any man's persuasions
are, the more cheerful and vigorous will be his endeavors to succeed. But I
shall content my self with the intimation of these things. And in the next,
very briefly to run over some Effects and Consequents of this Affection:
Which are,

1 In regard of Desires at large, Labor and Pains: For they are only
Velleities and not Volitions: half and broken wishes, not whole desires, which
are not industrious; but (...) away in sluggish and empty speculations. (...).
(...). apud (...). lib. 2.
The Fisherman that will take the Fish, must be contented to be dashed with the
Water. (...). E^ectra. Plata^ch. Iustit. l. ^con. (...), etc. (...). Rb^s.
And he that will expect to have his desires answered, must put as well his
hands as his prayers unto them:

(...) Who takes God in his mouth, but takes no pain,
By devout sloth shall never gather gain.
It was the just reproose of him in the Poet c Homer. (...). (...) 341. 348.
(...). (...). 325
who was upbraided with coming to the feasts, but withdrew himself from the
labor of other Men. Nature has often made the roots of those d Aristot. apud
La^rt. lib. 5.
Plants bitter, whose fruits are sweet, to reach us that Delight is the fruit
of Labor. And therefore the Philosopher tells us, that Desire is usually
accompanied with Sorrow.

Again, Desires do commonly work a Lang^or c Arist. E^demi lib. 2 cap. 10. ^
Prou 13. 12.
and sainting toward the thing desired, if they be either strong or hasty: For
Reg. 21. 4. (...). 119. 20. 8^ Vsqu^ ad agri^m deside (...). El. Lam. p^id. in
Co^. Romans 8. 22. 2 Cor. 5 ^
Hope deferred makes the heart sick. As Ahabs eager desire of Naboths
Vineyard, cast him upon his bed. And David expresses his longings toward Gods
Law, by the breaking and fainting of his Soul. Cum expectatio longior est
consenescit animus, and debilitatur men's.: Delaied expectation weakneth and
withers the minds of Men. And therefore the Apostle expresses strength of
Desire by groaning, which is the Language of Sickness.

2 In regard of Reasonable and Spiritual Desires. The effects of this
affection are:

1 Large. heartedness and Liberality. That which a man earnestly desires he
will give much for, Pb^l. 3. 8. 9. 10. Matthew. 13. 45. Mag. 2. 6. 7. Matthew. 2.
11. Isa. 60. 5. 17. Psalm. 68. 29.
and bestow much upon. As when Christ became the desire of all Nations, they
did dedicate all their desirable things unto him, as the (...) and trophies of
his merciful triumph over them. One man adornes the Gospel with his power,
another with his wit, another with his wealth, another with his wisdom.

Those Abilities of Nature, Art, or Industry, which were before the armor of
sin, are then become the spoils of Christ. Antonius out of Pl^tarch. in
Anton.
the strength of his desires toward Cleop^ra, bestowed many countries upon her.

2 Griese for any loss or hazard of the thing desired. As the Sea-mans needle
which is jogged and troubled, never leaves moving till it find the North point
again. Flagrantia sunt Nazar. Orat. Pan^gyr.
animorum desideria cum solatia perdiderun^, as the Orator spoke. Desires burn
hottest when they are in danger of disappointment.

3 Weariness and Indignation against any thing which stands between Desire
and the fruition Senec. Epist. 75. Abo^ice savi^r ib^. Plutarc^. Sympos. l. 4.
^. Gr^l. l 3. c. 6.
of that which is desired. Vehementior per me^us and pericula exibit: That
which resists increases it. As a River goes with more strength where it is
hindered and withstood. The Church did venture blows when she sought her Love,
and like the Palm Tree rose up above her pressures: Tertul. Ap^log. cap. (...).
plures efficimur quoties metimur a vobis, as Tertullian speaks to the
Heathen. The more you mow us down, the thicker we grow; the more we suffer
for him, the more we love and desire him. Saint Paul cares not for a
dissolution* that he may go to Christ, as a stone is contented to be broken in
pieces, that it may move to its place.

Thirdly, For Corrupt and v^tious Desires; their (...) 1. 14. (...). (...). l
7. c. 2. (...). ib cap. 7 u^. Hos. 4. 11. (...) c. 3. vid. c. 5. 9. Vid. Plaut.
Asinar. Act 1. ^cen. 3. Cicer. de Senectut.
Effects are first, Deception, and haling of Reason as it were captive from
determining, advising, or duly weighing the pravity and obliquity of them. So
that the things which a man knows in thesi, and at large, in hypothesi; and as
to his own parti cular interest or inconvenience he does not at all attend. He
can say them, he cannot apply them. As he who acts a part on a Stage, knows
the things which he speaks, but is not a whit affected with them. And the
Philosopher gives the reason of it, the very same with S. James, (...), (...).
1. ^1. Heb. 4. 2. (...)
That Reason which overcomes Lust must be (...), Reason ingrafted; or to use
the phrase of another Apostle, (...), immixed and contempered with the soul,
and not only extrinsically irradiating it. And these kind of men are (...).
lib. 3. cap. 7.
elegantly called by Julius Pollux, (...) men willingly slavish, and (...)
subdued and brought under by their own affections. As Pl^tarch says of
Agiselaus, that he was ruled by Lysander his servant, Pl^tarch. in Lysander.
he having only the name, but the other the execution of his power. This
slavery of men's minds under the tyranny of lustful desires is thus described
by the Satyrist.

Mane piger stertis? surge, inquit Avaritia, eja Persi^ Sat. 5. vid. Arria^.
Epict. l. 3. ^. 24.

Surge* negas? Instat, surge inquit, non queo surge.
Ecquid agam rogitas? En saperdam adv^ho ponto,
Castoreum, stupas, h^benum, thus, lubrica Co^.
What sluggard snore so long? says lust, up rise,
Awake, get out. Dare thou say nay? it cries
The same again, up, rise; I cannot. No?
Rise though you cannot, when I Will have it so.
What must I do? what do? up, wipe your eyes
See, here is a goodly Ship of merchandise;
Shell* fish, Castoreum, Flax, black Indian woods,
Frankincense, Wines of Coos and other goods.
Thus sordidly do vain men sell themselves, and as it were render up their
Reason into the hands of vicious and greedy Affections, giving leave to their
souls to suffer a ship wrack in that vessel which brings goods into their
Cellars, and traffiquing their own judgment in exchange for a ship of wares.

Secondly, These kind of Desires make men Se^* de Benef. lib. 3. c^p. 3 and l.
2. c. 27.
ungrateful and forgetful of any kindness which has already been done them.
Memoria minimum tribuit, quisquis spei plurimum. As in bucket^ at a well, the
longer the line of the one is which moves downward, the shorter is the line of
the other which rises upward; so the larger our Desires are toward the
future, the narrower our memories are of things past. And usually men's
valuations of things are more in the performance, then when they are performed.
And the reason, Na^ serae maxuma part movem hunc homines babent, quod sibi
volunt, Dum id impetran^ Boni sunt, sedid ubi jam p^es sese habeant, ex bonis
pessumis and (...) Pl^ut. Captiv. nihil ^que est gratum adeptis and
concupiscentibus Plix. lib. 2. Ep. 15.
is because as nature has set our eyes forward, and not behind us: so the
appetites of men, for which the eyes are the principal factors, look
naturally before them, not to what they Have, but to what they Hope. The eye
whereby we look backward into our lives is the eye of Repentance, we there
either see our selves bad, or little. And a man is an unwelcome object unto
himself in both these Relations. But the eye whereby we look forward, is an
eye of Hope, and Desire, and by that we are represented to our selves better
and greater then we are already. Iron moves not upward except the Loadstone be
very near it; But it mooveth downward, though the Center be never so remote.
So much stronger are the motions of Desire, then those of acknowledgement and
retribution.

Besides the apprehensions of Goodness in a thing are much other in the Desire
then in the Review: as usually the Sun and the Moon look bigger at their
rising, then when they are come over our heads. Desire looks on nothing in
them but that which pleases, Review finds that in them which displeases.
When we desire Wine we think only on the sweetness, when we review it, we
remember the headache. Besides what we desire is apprehended as the matter of
our life, what is past, men apprehend as in the hand of death. Quickquid retro
est mors tenet. As Senec* de Brevi^, vi^ae and Ep. 120.
^n our life, so in our delights, so much of them ^s dead as is over and gone.
We love our food when it is meat, we loathe it when it is excrement. When it
goes into us we desire it, when it passes through us we despise it. And the
secret work of concoction, (which is as it were the Review of ou^ meat) does
distinguish that in them which the first Appetite took in ^ lump, and
together.

And in truth in all secular and sublunary desires we shall ever find that
they are like the Apples of Sodom, Qu^ contacta cin^rescunt, (...). Apol. cap.
40.
which have ashes hidden within their beauty, and doath l^king under them. All
the matter of ou^ secular or sensitive Desires are just like the meats we
^ate, which go much more into excrement, then into nonrishment and substance.
Like the Cyptus tree which they say is very (...) cp^d Plutarch. A-Apopth.
Cl^m. Alex. Paed. lib. 3. cap. 3.
fair, but bears no fruit. Like the Egyptian Temples which are beautiful in
frontispicio, b^ ridiculous in penetrali. And if we look well on them, we
shall find, that as they are mortal themselves, so they come to us through
mortality. it was a bold, but true (...) of Seneca. (...) vivinous. We live by
the deaths of other things. Our fullest Tables furnished with death nothing but
feretra, the biers of birds and (...)* Our richest garments the bowels and
skins ^ other creatures, which work out their own (...) to preserve ours.
Silk is a grave to the (...) that weaves it, before it is a garment for us. O^
Offices and Honors seldom come to us but b^ the mortality of those that
prepossessed them* And our mortality makes them the ^itter obje^ of other men's
Desires.

3 These Desires as they are forgetful, so they Vid Senec. de tra. lib. 3. c.
31. Allen is gem^tibus liben^er ^olumenta conquir^* Ammian: Marcell. lib. 31.
Egreeium Ex^mplum in vidi^ etiam Ecclestas^icae ex cupidi^atibus (...) apud
^un. them Marcell^ number inter Damasum, and Vrcisiaum. lib. 27.
are envious, and look with an evil eye upon others competion, accounting
their success our own damage. If a man should draw the genealogy of all the
injuries and emulations of the world, we should find the Root of that great
Tree to be nothing but lust. It was Desire and inordinate appetite by which the
devil persuaded our first parents to pick a quarrel with their Maker. Whence
come Wars and fightings, says Saint James, but from lusts which war in
your members? When a man has war within, no wonder* if he have no peace
without. He that cannot agree with himself, will disagree with all the world
besides. The sea tosseth every thing which comes into it, not because it is
wronged, but because it is unquiet. And a lustful man will contend with every
innocent man that prospers, not because this man does him injury, but because
he grudgeth this man's prosperity. As the sea represents every strait thing
that is put into it crooked, so lust every harmless thing perverse, and as
Seneca speaks, has ^pist. 105.
Odium sine inimico, hatred without an enemy. Greedy Desires are like a
swollen and envious spleen, which sucks away substance from all the rest of
the body.

4 These Desires are Hidropticall, and like a Caelius Phodig. lib. c, 39. lib.
14. cap. 1.
(...) in the stomach which is not quenched, but enraged with that which feeds
it. Unnatural Desires being herein very like unto natural ^ions, the further
they proceed, the stronger and swifter they are. Like wind in a bladder they
never fill the heart, but enlarge it. The Grecians (...). in Anacharsi. lib. 1.
(...) de Ben. lib. 2. c. ^7. Ni^il (...) ma^i. uris, Imo ^bus ^p. cap. 120.
P^n. lib. ^5. c. 22.
began their drinkings in little Cups, but proceeded unto Flagons: and many
times those Appetitions which begin in modesty go on unto impudence, and the
more our lives hastens to leave the world, the more our lust hastens to
possess it. As it is noted of the Parthians, that the more they drink, the
more they thirst. And, which is a mavelous illogicall stupidity, the more
continual experience men have of the vanity of the world, the more greedy
experiments they make to find out solidity in it. Like your melancholy
searchers after the Philosophes Stone, that never dote so much upon their
project as then when it has deluded them, and never flatter themselves with
stronger hopes to be enriched by their Art, then when it has brought them unto
beggary.

Lastly, from hence it comes to pass that these kinds of Desires are Base,
and diject the mind unto ^ordid and ignoble Resolutions. For (...) nihil
satis, nihil ^urpe. He that has never enough will count nothing base whereby
he may ge^ more. As the Historian says of Otho, that he di^ Adorare vulgus,
jacere oscula, and omnia serviliter (...) (...). Hist. l. 1.
Imperio. Adore the people, dispense and scatte^ abroad his courtesies, crouch
unto any servil^ expressions, to advance his Ambitious designs Like Antaus in
the Poets, fall to the earth, (...) Hor^dot. Th^lia. Plutarch. in Solon^.
he may grow the stronger by it. As (...) and Pisistratus who wounded,
mangled, deformed themselves, that they might thereby insinuate, (...). Marcel*
lib. 25.
and gain their ends. As the Scripture notes of Absalom, and the Historian of
Julian, that out of affectation of popularity, they stouped and delighted to
converse with the lowest of the people. Which cunning humility, or rather
sordidnesse of Ambition, Me^elous in the Tragedian, has thus elegantly
objected in a contentious debate unto Agame^non.

(...) Eurip. (...).

(...)
(...).
(...)
(...)
(...).
You know how you the Rule over Grecians got,
In show declining what in truth you sough^:
How low, how plausible you apprehended
The hands of meanest men: How then you bended
To all you met: How your gates open flew,
And spoke large welcome to the pop'lar Crew:
What sweetened words you gave even unto those
Who did decline, and hate to see you gloze.
Ho^ thus with Serpentine and guilefull Arts
You screwed and wound your self into the hearts
O'th'vulgar: And thus bought the power, which now
Makes you forget how then you used to bow.
CHAP. XVIII. Rules touching our Desires. Desires of lower Objects must not be
either hasty, or unbounded; such are unnatural, turbid, unfruitful,
unthankful: Desires of heavenly Objects fixed, permanent, industrious:
Connection of virtues, sluggish Desires.
Unto the things already delivered touching this affection, I shall here add
two or three Rules pertaining to the moral use, and managing of it. And they
are, First, concerning Objects of an Inferior and Transitory nature, that our
Desires be neither Hasty and precipitate, nor Vaste, and unlimited. And in
matters more High and Noble, that they be not either wavering and interrupted
Desires, or Lazy and negligent Desires.

1 For the first of these, we have a rule in Solomon, concerning Riches, which
will hold in all other Objects of an immoderate desire: He that Prove. 28. 20.
20. 21.
makes haste to be rich, shall not be without sin; I may add, Not without
cares neither: for we know the nature of all Earthly things, they have
something of the Serpent in them, to Deceive. The way of riches and profit, is
a thorny way; the way of Honor and Ambition, a slippery and giddy way; the way
of carnal Pleasures, a deep and a foul way, the way of learning it self (the
noblest of all sublunary things) an involved and intricate way. And certainly
he had need have better eyes then a blind Passion, who in so ill ground will
make good haste and good speed together. In (...). C^ilo ^pud (...). lib. 1.
labyrintho properantes ipsa velocitas implicat. He is the likeliest man to get
first out of a Maze, who runs fastest. An over nimble Desire is like the
stomach of a sick man newly recovered, more greedy, then strong, and fuller
of Appetit^ then Digestion. Whence arise immature and unconcocted counsels,
blind and ungoverned Resolutions: like those monstrous people, which Pliny
speaks of, whose feet go backward, and behind their eyes. For when the
mind of man is once possessed with conceit of Contentment to be found in
worldly glories, when the insinuations and sweet enchantments of Honor,
Profit, Pleasure, Power, and Satan's Hac omnia, has once crept upon the
affection, and lulled reason asleep; it is then sufficient that we know the
end, which we desire; we have not the patience to inquire after the right way
unto it: because it is the suspicion of our greedy Desires, that the true means
are commonly the most tedious, and that honesty for the most part goes the
fa^thest way about. And hence withal it usually comes to pass that these
hasty and preproperous Appetitions do hinder ends, and intercept Advantages
which slownesse with maturity might have made use of. As the Roman Soldiers
by their greediness Plutarch. in Lacull^.
on their prey, missed of taking Mithridates, who otherwise could not have
escaped them. And therefore it was wise counsel of Nest^r in the Poet.

(...) ^ liad. ^. 70.

(...)
(...)
(...)
Let none go lingering after spoil, and stay
To load himself with a too hasty prey.
But first let us kill: We Are sure after such fight*
Carcasses being risled cannot bite.
2 The next Rule to keep this Passion in Senec. de Tranq. l. ^. Arian. Epict.
lib. 1. ^. 26.
order with reference unto inferior Objects is, that it be not an infinite and
unlimited Desire. Appetite should answer our power to procure, and our
strength to bear and to digest. We should not go about to swallow a Camel,
when a G^at does make us strain, Immoderate Desires can neither be satisfied,
nor concocted. And this unboundednesse of Desires we are to take heed off* for
these reasons.

1 First, for the unnaturalness of it: for all Arist. Po^it. lib. c. cap. 6.
(...). Ep. 16. 39. de ben^fit. lib. 2. c. 27.
unnatural and unnecessary Desires are infinite, as the Philosopher has
observed* As he that is out of his way may wander infinitely. An unlimited
Desire is only there requisite, where the Object thereof is Infinite, and
ordained to perfect Man's Nature; but not where it is only a means appointed
for his benefit and comfort. Wherein Extrani^ non augent bonum, sed condi^nt.
Senec. Epi^. 66.
he ought therefore then to enjoy his Contentment, when it is sufficient not to
fill his Mind which is immortal; and therefore not able to be replenished
with any perishing happiness) nor to outreach the vastness of his opinion,
which which being Erroneous is likewise Infinite (For Omnis Error immensus, as
Seneca speaks* but then Nurquam (...) invenit ^ibide. Cic^r. ^usc. Malum
^nitum. Arist. ^thi* lib. 2. cap. 6. P^it. l. 2. c. 5. Exig^um natu^ opinio
imm^nsarium ^pic. apud Sen.
only when it affords such conveniences, as wherewithal the seasonable and
virtuous imploiments of Nature may with content be exercised. It is then a
corrupt Desire which proceeds not from our Want, but from our Vice. As that is
not a natural thirst, but a disease and distemper of the Body, which can never
be satisfied.

Now the miseries of unnatural Desires are first, 1.
that they corrupt and expel those which are Plutarch. in Gry^* and de (...).
(...)*
Natural: as multitudes of strangers in a City do eat out the Natives; thus
in luxurious Men, strange Love does extinguish that which is Conjugall.

Secondly, they ever bring vexation to the 2.
mind with them. As immoderate laughter, so immoderate Lusts are never without
pain and (...)*
convulsions of Nature. Morbid desires of the Mind are like an Itch or Vicer in
the Body, (...).
which is with the same nails both angered and delighted, and has no pleasure
but with vexation.

Thirdly, they are ever attended with Repentance, 3.
both because in promises they disappoint, (...).
and in performances they deceive; and when they make offers of pleasure, do
expire in pains; as those delicates which are sweet in the mouth, are many
times heavy in the stomach; and after they have pleased the Palate do torment
the bowels. The Mind surfets on nothing sooner than on unnatural Desires.

Fourthly, for this reason they are ever changing 4.
and making new experiments; as weak S^n de (...) ^. ^. 1. 3. c. 3.
and wanton stomachs which are presently cloyed with an uniforme diet, and must
have not only a painful but a witty Cook, whose inventions Quod Ministe^
suera^, Ars haberi Capt^. (...) l. 39 (...) Ethi. ^. 3. c. 12.
may be able with new varieties to gratify and humor the niceness of their
appetite. As Nero had an officer who was called Elegantiae Arbiter, the
inventor of new Lusts for him.

Lastly, unlimited Desires are for the most part 5.
Envious and Malignant: For he who desires every ^. Annal. (...). 16.
thing, cannot choose but repine to see another have that which himself
wants. And therefore Dionysius the Tyrant did punish Philoxenus the Musician,
Plut. de Tranq
because he could sing, and Plato the Philosopher, because he could dispute
better than himself. In which respect he did wisely, who (...).
was contented not to be esteemed a better Orator than he who could command
thirty legions.

Secondly, unbounded Desires do work Anxiety and Perturbation of Mind; and
by that means disappoint Nature of that proper end which this Passion was
ordained unto; namely, to be a means of obtaining some further good; whereas
those Desires which are in their executions Turbid, or in their continuance
Permanent, are no more likely to lead unto some farther end, than either a
misty and dark, or a winding and circular way is to bring a Man at last unto
his journeyes end; whereof the one is dangerous, the other vain. And together
with this they do distract our noble Cares, and quite avert our thoughts from
more high and holy desires. Martha her Many things, and Mary's One thing will
very hardly consist together.

Lastly, there is one Corruption more in these unlimited Desires, they make a
man unthankful for Sen. de Bene^. lib. 3.
former benefits: as first, because Caduca memoria f^turo imminentium. It is a
strong presumption that he seldom looks back upon what is past, who is
earnest in pursuing some thing to come. It is S. Paul's Profession and Argument
in a matter of greater consequence, I forget those things which are behind, and
reach forth unto those things which are before. And secondly, though a man
should look back; yet the thoughts of such a benefit would be but slight and
vanishing, because the Mind finding present content in the liberty of a roving
Desire, is mavelous unwilling to give permanent entertainment unto thoughts
of another Nature, which likewise (were they entertained) would be rather
thoughts of murmuring than of thankful* fullness: every such man being willing
rather to conceive the benefit small, than to acknowledge the vice and
vastness of his own Desires.

The next rule which I observed for the government of these Passions, do
respect those Higher and more glorious Objects of Man's Felicity: And herein,

1 Our Desires are not to be Wavering and In constant, but Resolute and full of
Quickness and Perseverance: First, because though we be poor and shallow
vessels; yet so narrow and almost shut* up are those passages, by which we
should give admittance unto the matter of our true happiness* yea so full are we
already of contrary qualities, as that our greatest vehemence will not be
enough, either to empty our selves of the one, or to fill our selves with the
other. And therefore the true Desires of this Nature are in the Scripture set
forth by the most patheticall and strong similitudes of Hunger and Thirst; and
those not common neither; but by the pant^ng of a tired* Heart after the rivers
of water, and the gaping of the dry ground after a seasonable shower. Secondly,
overy desirable Object the higher it goes, is ever the more united within it
self, and drives the faster unto an unity: It is the property of Errors to be
at variance; whereas Truth is One, and all the parts thereof do mutually
strengthen and give light unto each other: So likewise in things Good* the more
noble, the more knit they are* Scelera disi^dent: It is for sins to be at
variance amongst themselves. And (...) (...). l. 7. c. 14.
those lower Goods of Riches, Pleasure, Nobility, Beauty, though they are not
Incomparable; yet they have no natural Connection to each other; and have
therefore the less power to draw a consla^ and continued Desire. But for nobler
and immateriall goods we see how the Philosopher has (...). l. 6. c. 12.
observed a connextion between all his moral virtues, whereby a man that has
one, is naturally drawn to a desire of all the rest: for the mind being once
acquainted with the sweetness of one, does not only apprehend the same
sweetness in the others, but besides finds it self not sufficiently possessed
of that which it has, unless it be thereby drawn to procure the rest: all
whose properties it is by an excellent mutual service to give light and
luster, strength and validity, and in some sort greater Unity unto each other.

And lastly for the highest and divinest good; the truth of Religion, that is
in it self most of all other One, as being a Beam of that Light and
Revelation of that Will, which is Unity it self. And therefore though we
distinguish the Creed into twelve Articles, yet Saint Paul calls them all but
(...) one Faith, as having but one Lord Ephesians. 4. 5.
for the Object and End of them. Now then where the parts of good are so
united, as that the one draws on the other, there is manifestly required
united desire to carry the soul thereunto.

II. The last Rule which I observed was that our Desires ought not to be faint
and sluggish, but industrious and painful, both for the arming us to avoid
and withstand all oppositions and difficulties, which we are every where likely
to meet withal in the pursuit of our happiness; and also for the wise and
discreet applying of the several furtherances requisite thereunto. And indeed
that is no True, which is not an Operative Desire: a Velleity it may be, but a
Will it is not. For what ever a man will have, he will seek in the use of such
means, as are proper to procure it. Children may wish for Mountains of gold,
and Balaam may wish for an happy death, and an A theist may wish for a soul as
earthly in substance as in Affection; but these are all the ejaculations rather
of a Speculative fancy, than of an industrious affection. True desires as they
are right in regard of their object, so are they laborious in respect of their
motion. And therefore those which are idle and impatient of any pains, which
stand like the Carman in the Fable, crying to Hercules when his Wuine fluck in
the mud to help it out, without stretching out his own hands to touch it, are
first unnatural desires, it being the formal property of this Passion to put
the Soul upon some motion or other. And therefore we see wheresoever Nature
has given it, she has given likewise some manner of motion or other to serve
it. And secondly they are by consequence undutifull and disobedient Desires, in
that they submit not themselves unto that Law, which requires that we
manifest the life and strength of our Love by the quickness and operation of
it in our Desires. And lastly, such Desires are unusefull and fruitless: for
how can an object* which stands in a fixed distance from the Nature, which it
should perfect, be procured by idle and standing affections? The desires of the
sluggard (says Solomon) slay him, because his Pro. 21. 25: 13. 4.
hands refuse to labor. These affections must have life in them, which bring
life after them: Dead desires are deadly desires.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Affection of ^y Delight. The several Objects thereof,
Corporal, Moral, Intellectual, Divine.
THe next Passions in order belonging to the Concupiscible Faculty, are those
two, which are wrought by the Presence of, and Union to an Object; and that is,
when either we by our desires have reached the Object, which works Joy and
Delight: or when in our flight the Object has overtaken (...) E^hic. l. 2. c.
3.
us, which works Grief and Sorrow. And these two do bear the most inward
relation unto and influence upon all our actions. Whereupon Aristotle in his
Ethics has made them the foundation of our virtues, and rules of our working.
And the reason is natural, because the end of our motion is to attain rest,
and avoid perturbation. Cicer. Tusc. l. 4. (...). Zeno apud Lae^. l. 7. Cum.
Alex. strom. lib* 2. (...) Rbe^o. l. 1. c. 11*
Now Delight is nothing else but the Sabbath of our thoughts, and that sweet
tranquillity of mind, which we receive from the Presence and Fruition of that
good, whereunto our Desires have carried us. And therefore the Philosopher in
one place call it a motion of the Soul with a sensible and felt instauration
of Nature, yet elsewhere he as truly tells us that it stands rather in
(...) Ei^* l. 7. c. ul^.
rest than motion; as on the other side Grief is the streightning and anguish
of our minds wrought out of the sense and burden of some present Evil
oppressing our Nature. Now Gaudere in Sinu. Ci^. (...). Iliad. ^.
these Passions are diverse, according to the diversity of the Objects: which
are either Sensitive and Bodily; and then Delight is called Voluptas Qui sapit
in tactio gaudeat ille Sin^. Tibul. Vid. (...) de Orthodox. side lib 2. cap.
13. and Nemes. de Anima. c. 18
Pleasure, being a medicine and supply against bodily indigence and defects: or
Intellectual and Divine, and then it is called Gaudium Joy, being a sweet and
delightful tranquillity of mind, resting in the fruition and possession of a
good. So also is the other Passion of Sadness considered; which in respect of
the Body is called a Sense of Pain; in respect of the Soul, a Sense of Grief.

First then for the Object of our Delight; it is only that which can yield
some manner of satisfaction unto our nature, not as it is a corrupt and erring,
but as it is an Empty and perfectible nature. Whatsoever then is either
Medicinal for the Repairing, or Natural for the Conserving, or any way
helpefull for the advancing of a Creature, is the only true and allowable
object of its Delight. Other pleasures which eat out and undermine Nature, as
water which by little and little insensibly consumes the bank against which it
beats, or as A^bores uecat omnem (...) (...). lo, etc. (...) l. 16. c 34.
^vie which seems to adorn the Tree unto which it cleaves, but indeed
sucketh out and steals away the sap thereof, may happily yield some measure of
vanishing content to minds, which taste every thing with a corrupted palate;
but certainly such sophistical premises can never infer in the conclusion
any other than a perfunctory and tottering content. And therefore Epist. 59.
Aug. de Civlt. De^, l. 14. c. 8.
Seneca is bold to find an impropriety in Virgils Epithet, Mala Gaudia, Joys
which issue from a polluted fountain; as not having in them that inseparable
attribute of absolute Delight; which is to be unvariable. For how can a mind
(unless blinded with its own impostures, and entangled in the errors of a
mis led affection) receive any nourishing and solid content in that, which is
in it self vanishing, and unto its Subject destructive? Whatsoever then may
be delighted in, must have some one of the forenamed conditions, tending
either to the Restitution of decayed nature, (...). Nemes. c. 18.
to the preservation of entire nature, or to the Perfection of Empty nature.
And to the former and ^mperfecter sort of t^ese, Aristotle refers all
^orporeall and sensitive Pleasures (unto which he Ethic l. 7. c. 14. (...).
therefore grants a secondary and accidental goodness) which he calls
(...) the Medi^ines of an indigent nature; whereby the defects ^hereof are made
up, and it self disburdened of those cares, which for the most part use to
follow ^he want of them.

Herein then I observe a double corruption; an ^nnaturall and unlimited
Delight. Unnatural, I ^eane those accursed pleasures, which were exer^ised by
men given over to vile affections and (...) in the pursuing of lusts, whose
very names abhor the light. Unlimited Delights are those, which exceed the
bounds of Nature, and the prime Institution of lawful and indifferent things.
For such is the condition of those, that if they repair not, and strengthen
nature, Undes^ctum ut qu^ ad funera per^erent in Templ^ ventris venderentur.
vid. Plutarch. qu^ Romans q. 23.
they weaken and disinable it; as in the body Luxury breeds diseases, and in
the mind Curiosity breeds Errors.

Other Objects there are of a wider nature than those, which concern the Body;
and they are both the Moral and Contemplative Actions of the Mind; To both
which Aristotle has attributed Ethic. l. 10. c. 7.
principally this passion; but more specially to the latter, whose object is
more pure and whose Acts less laborious, as residing in that part of the
Soul, which is most elevate from sense: and therefore most of all capable of
the purest simplest and unmixed Delights. Now every thing is the more free,
clear, independent; spiritual, by how much it is the more unmixed. And these
are the choicest perfections, whereby the Soul may be filled with joy. It is
true indeed, that oftentimes the contemplations of the mind have annexed unto
them both Grief and Anxiety; but this is never natural to the act of
Knowledge, which is always in its own virtue an impression of Pleasure: But it
arises either out of the sublimity of the Object, which dazleth the power; or
out of the weakness and doubtings of the Understanding, which has not a
clear light thereof; or out of the admixtion and sleeping them in the Humors
of the Affections, whereby men minister unto themselves desperate thoughts or
weak fears, or guilty griefs, or unlimited Desires, according as is the
property of the Object joined with their own private distempers: Thus we see
the Intuition of Divine Truth in minds of defiled affections, works not that
sweet effect which is natural unto it, to produce, but Doubtings, Ioh. 3. 20.
Job 21. 14. Isa. 30. 11. 2 Pet. 3. 5.
Terrors and Disquietings of Conscience; it being the property of the works
of Darkness to be afraid of the word of Light. But of all these former objects
of man's Delight (because they are amongst Salomons Catalogue of things under
the Eccles. 2. 2. (...)
Sun) none are here without vexation and vanities: For to let pass the
lightning of an idle mirth, which indeed is madness and not Joy. For Soph^c
Alex. Senec. Epist. ^ 3
Seneca tells us that true Joy is a serious and severe thing: and not to
meddle with riches and other secular Delights, which have wings to fly from us
and thorns to prick us, even that highest natural Delight of the Mind,
Knowledge, and the heavenly eloquence of the Tongues of Angels (which a man
would think were above the Sun, and therefore not obnoxious to Salomons
vanity) would be in man, without the right corrective thereof, but a tinkling
noise, yielding rather a windy Pleasure than a true Delight. The properties
whereof is not to puff up, but to replenish. And therefore it is the prayer of
Saint Paul, The God of Peace fill (...). 15. 13.
you with all Joy. True heavenly Joy is a filling, a satiating Joy: a Joy
unspeakeable, with Saint Peter; a Peace past understanding, with Saint Paul.
Nor does this property of overflowing and swallowing the Mind add any degrees
of offense or anxiety thereunto: for it is not the weakness of the soul, as it
is of the body to receive hurt from the excellency of that which it delights
in, nor does the mind desire to subdue or conquer, but only to be united with
its object.

And here the only corruption of our Delight is, the deficiency and
imperfections of it. For though this blessed Light leaves not any man in the
shadow of death, yet it takes him not quite out of the shadow of sin, by the
darkness whereof he is without much of that luster and glory, which he shall
then have, when the righteous shall shine like the Sun in the Firmament. Yet
at the least our endeavors must be, that though our Joys cannot be here a
Repl^nishing Joy, yet it may be an Operative Joy, and so work out the measure
of its own fulness. I have done with the several Objects of man's delight,
Corporal, Moral, Intellectual and Divine.

CHAP. XX. Of the Causes of Joy. The union of the Object to the Faculty, by
Contemplation, Hope, Fruition, Changes by accident a cause of Delight.
I Now proceed to speak of the more particular causes and Arist. Ethic. lib. 7.
cap. 6.
effects of this Passion. Touching the former, not to meddle with those which
are unnatural, belluine, and morbid (which the Philosopher has given some
instances of) The general cause is the natural goodness of the Object, and
the particulars under that. Any thing which has a power to unite and make
present the Object with the Faculty. And that is done (to speak only of
intellectual Powers) Arist. (...). lib. 1. cap. 1.
three manner of ways; by Contemplation, by Confidence, and by Fruition, by
thinking of it in the Mind, by expecting of it in the Heart, and by enjoying
it in the whole Man.

Contemplation adds unto the Soul a double Delight: First, from it is own
property, it being the proper and natural agitation of man's mind, insomuch
that those things which we abhor to know experimentally, our curlous and
contemplative nature desires to know speculatively. And therefore the Devils
first temptation was drawn from the knowledge as well of evil as good, for he
knew that the mind of Man would receive content in the understanding of that,
which in it is own nature had no perfection in it.

But then secondly, in the Object of true Delight, Contemplation ministers a
farther Joy, in that it does in some sort pre-unite our Souls and our
Blessedness together: and this is partly the reason why Aristotle so much
advances his Contemplative before his practique Felicity: For though this in
regard of it is immediate reference unto Communion, be of a more spreading and
diffusive Nature; yet certainly, in that sweetness of content, that serenity
of Soul, that exaltation of thoughts which we receive from those noble motions
of the higher Mind, the other does far in pleasure and satisfaction surpass
all active happiness. And hence we see in the parts of Man's Body, those which
are (if I may so speak) more contemplative, have precedence to those that are
more practique. The parts of Vision are before the parts of Action; the right
eye is preferred before the right hand. Thus we may observe in God himself
(notwithstanding in him there can be neither accession nor intermission of
Delight) yet by way of expression to us ward, he did not in the creation of the
World so much joy in his fiat, as in his vidit; not so much when he gave his
creatures their Nature, as when he saw their Goodness: Nature being the Object
of Power; but Goodness the Object of Delight; and therefore the day of his rest
was more holy than the days of his working, that being appointed for the
Contemplation, as these were for the production of his creatures.

And as Contemplation by way of Prescience, when it looks forward on good
things hoped: So also by way of Memory, when it looks backward and receives
evil things escaped, does minister matter of renewed Joy. No Man looks
Arist. Rbet. l. 1. c. 10.
on the Sea with more comfort, than he who has escaped a shipwreck. And
therefore when Israel saw the Egyptians dead on the Sea shore, the fear of
whom had so much affrighted them before, they then sang a Song of Triumph. Past
troubles do season, and as it were ballace present Comforts, as the Snow in
Winter increases the beauty of the Spring.

But in this particular of Contemplation, notwithstanding the excellency of it,
there may be Corruption in the Excess (For in those matters of Delight, except
they be such as are disproportioned to our corrupt Nature, I mean divine
things, we seldom err in the other extreme.) And that is, when we do not
divide our selves between our parts, and let every one execute his proper
function, so to attend upon mere mental notions, as to neglect the practical
part of our Life, and withdraw our selves from the fellowship and regard of
humane society, is as wicked in Religion, as it would be in Nature monstrous to
see a fire burn without light, or shine without heat (aberrations from the
supreme Law being in divine things impious as they are in natural prodigious.)

And therefore that vowed sequestration and voluntary banishment of Hermits and
Votaries from humane society, under pretense of devoting themselves to
Contemplation, and a fore-enjoying of the Light of God, is toward him as un^
pleasing, as it is in it self uncomfortable, for their very pattern which
they pretend in such cases to imitate, was not only a burning lamp by the heat
of his own Contemplations; but a shining lamp too, by the diffusing of his
own Comforts to the refreshing of others.

A second cause of Delight is the sure Confidence of the Mind. Whereby upon
strong and un^ring grounds, it waits for the accomplishment of it is desires:
so that what ever does encourage our Hope, does therewithal strengthen* and
enlarge our Delight* Spe gaudent faith S. Paul, and Romans 12. 12.
Sperantes gaudent says the Philosopher, Hope and Ar^. (...). ^. ^. ^* (...),
(...).
Joy go both together: For where Hope is strong* it does first divert and take
off the Mind from poring upon our present wants, and withal ministers
tranquillity unto it from the evidence of a future better estate.

But here we must take heed of a deep Corruption: For though I incline not to
that opinion which denies Hope, all asswaging and mitigating sorce, in respect
of evils, or any power to settle a floating Mind; yet to have an ungrounded
Confisidence, and either out of Presumption or Security to resolve upon
uncertain and casual events, there-hence to deduce Arguments of Comfort'
works but an empty and imaginary Delight, like his in the Poet:

-- Petit ille dapes sub imagini somni, Ovid. Met. (...). (...). 8. (...)
(...). (...). 21.
Oraque vana movet, dentemque indente fatigat. Who dreaming that he was a Guest
At his Imaginary Feast,
Did vainly glut upon a Thought,
Tyring each Iaw and Tooth for naught:
And when he fancied dainty meat,
Had nothing but a Dream to eat:
Or like the Musician in Plutarch, who having Plut de Audit.
pleased Dionysius with a little vanishing Music, was rewarded with a short
and deceived Hope of a great Reward. A presumptuous Delight though it seem for
the time to minister as good content as that which is raised on a sounder
bottom; yet in the end will work such inconveniences as shall altogether
countervaile and overweigh the de^ipt of its former Joys *. For the Mind being
mollified and puffed up with a windy and unnourishing comfort, is quite
disabled to bear the (...) of some sudden evil, as having its forces
scattered by Security, which caution and ^eare would have collected. For we
know in Bodies, Union strengthens natural motion, and weakneth violent; and in
the Mind the collecting and uniting of it does both enable it for prosecution
of its own ends, and for resisting all opposite force. It is therefore no
comforting but a weakening Confidence, which is not provident and ope^ative.

The third and most effectual cause of Delight is the Fruition of Good, and
the real Union thereof unto the Mind^ for all other things work delight no
farther, than either as they look toward, or work toward this. And
therefore if we mark it in all matter of Pleasure and Joy, the more the Union
is, the more is the Delight (And Union is the highest degree of Fruition that
can be) thus we see the presence of a Friend, yields more content than the
absence, and the embraces, more than the presence: so in other outward
Delights, those of Incorporation, are greater than those of Adhesion. As it is
more natural to delight in our meats than in our garments; the one being for
an union inward to increase our strength; the other outward only to protect it.
In the understanding likewise, those assents which are most clear, are most
pleasant, and perspecuity argues the perfecter union of the Object to the
Faculty. And therefore we have Speculum and (...) put together by S. Paul, We
see as in aglasse darkly, where the weakness of our knowledge of God is
attributed to this, that we see him not face to face with an immediate union
unto his glory, but at a distance in the creature and in the word, the glass
of Nature and of Faith (both which are in their kind evidences of things not
seen) we shall only there have a perfection of Joy, where we shall have a
consummate union, in his presence only is the fullness of Joy.

Now three things there are which belong unto (...). (...). (...) (...). (...).
P^l. l. ^. ^. 3. (...). l. ^. c. (...).
a perfect fruition of a good thing: First, Propriety unto it, for a sick man
does not feel the joy of a sound man's health, nor a poor man of a rich man's
money. Propriety is that which makes all the emulation and contention amongst
men, one man being agreeved to see another to have that which he either
claims or coveteth. Secondly, Possession: For a man can reap little comfort
from that which is his own, if it be any way detained and withheld from him,
which was the cause of that great contention between Agamemnon and Achilles,
Arrian. Epict. l. 1. ^. 2^.
and between the Greeks and Trojans, because the one took away and detained
that which was the others. Thirdly, Accommodation, to the end for which a thing
was appointed* For a man may have any thing in his custody, and yet receive no
comfort nor real delight from it, except he apply it unto those purposes for
which it was instituted. It is not then the having of a good but the using of
it which makes it beneficial.

Now besides those natural causes of Delight, there is by accident one more;
to wit, the Change Ethic. lib. 7. ^. vl. l. 10* ^. 4.
and Variety of good things, which the diversity of our natures and
inclinations, and the emptiness of such things as we seek Delight from, does
occasion, where Nature is simple and uncompounded, there one, and the same
operation is always pleasant; but where there is a mixed and various Nature,
and diversity of Faculties, unto which do belong diversity of inclinations,
there changes do minister Delight: as amongst learned men, variety of studies;
and with luxurious men, variety of pleasures.

And this the rather, because there are no sublunary contentments, which bring
not a * Satiety Gustata magis quam Potata (...). Cic. (...) ^. 2. (...) ^ll. 5.
quaest. 1. Vid. Senec. de Tranq. c. 2, 3.
along with them, as has been before observed. And therefore the same
resolution which the Philosopher gives for the walking of the Body, when he
enquireth the reason why in a journey the inequality of the ways do less
weary a man than when they are all plain and alike. We may give for the
walking and wandering of the Desire (as Solomon calls it) to wit, that change and
variety do refresh Nature, and are in stead of a rest unto it. Quod etiam de
Tibe^io notavit Su^ton. cap. 43.
And therefore as I have before observed of Nero, the same has Tully observed
of Xerxes, that he propounded rewards to the inventors of new Qu^ hoc officio
s^ngtbantur dicti (ut videtur) ab Aelio l-amp^idio Volup^arij in Alex. Sever.
and changeable pleasures.

Hereunto may be added as a further cause of Pleasure. Whatsoever serves to
let out and to lessen Grief, as Words, (...) Xenoph. ^nic lib. 7.
Tears, Anger, Revenge, because all these are a kind of victory, then which
nothing brings greater pleasure. And therefore Homer says of Revenge, that
it is sweeter than the dropping honey. Est quadam etiam vol^ndi voluptas. Plin.
and Cic. de sint, l. 1. Arist. Rbet. l. 1. ^. 1^.


CHAP. XXI. Of other Causes of Delight. Unexpectedness of a God. Strength of
Desire. Immagination. Imitation. Fitness and Accommodation. Of the effects of
this Passion. Reparation of Nature. Dilatation. Thirst in noble Objects,
satiety in Baser. Whetting of industry. Atimorous unbelief.
Unto these more principal Vix sum apud me ita animu^ commotus est m^tu spe,
^audio, m^rando hoc tanto tanque repentin^ ^ono Ter^ent. Andr. Act. 5. 4. (...)
bar^lam, animo m^o (...) repenti^um ^amque magnum non concipien^e Gaudium Apul.
A^n. Aur. lib. 11.
Causes of this Affection I shall briefly add these few which follow.

1 The suddenness and unexpectedness of a good thing causes the greater
Delight in it. For Expectation of a thing makes the Mind feed upon it before
hand, as young Gallants who spend upon their estates before they come to them,
and by that means make them the less when they come. As sometimes it
happens with choice and delicate stomachs. That the sight and smell of their
meat does half cloy and satiate them before they have at all tasted any of
it: so the long gazing upon that which we Desire by Expectation does as it were
deflowre the Delight of it before fruition. Whereas on the other side, as the
Poet expresses it.

(...) Sophocl. A^tig.
No joy in greatness can compare with that,
Which does our Hopes and thoughts anticipate.
So strong and violent has been the immutation which sudden joy has wrought
in the Body, Multis mortem attulit gaudium ingens, Insperatum interclu^d animd,
and vim magni novis que mo^ non (...). A. G^ll. lib. 3. c. 1. lib. 3. c. 1. and
cap. 15.
that many (as I have formerly noted) have been quite overwhelmed by it, and
been made pertakers of Augustus his wish to enjoy an (...) in Aug. cap. 99.
(...) and to dye pleasantly. And for this Reason it is that Arist. Etbect.
1004.
new things, and such as we Del^ct at quicquid est Admirabile Cic. partic. Orat.
admire, and were Proximorum incuriosi longinq^ ^mur and (...). lib ^. Epist.
20.
not before acquainted withal do usually Delight us, because they surprise
us, representing a kind of strangeness unto the mind, whereby it is enlarged
and enriched. For strange and New things have ever the greatest price set upon
them. As I noted before of the Roman Luxury, That it gloryed in no Delicates
but those which were brought out of Vid. Clem. Alex. ^aedag. ^. 2. c. 1. Plin.
l. 9. c. 34. and lib. 2206. 2. Plutarcb. De (...) sanita^e.
strange Countries, and did first pose Nature, before either feed or adorn it.

2 Strength of Desire, does on the other side enlarge the pleasure of fruition,
because Nature ever delights most in those things which cost us dearest, and
strong desires are ever painful. When Vid. Citeron. Tusc. qu. l. 5.
Darius in his flight drank muddy water, and Ptolomie did eat dry bread, they
both professed that they never felt greater pleasure: strength of Appetite
marveilously increasing the Delight in that which satisfied it. For want and
Difficulty are great Preparations to a more feeling fruition, Plutarch. de
Tranquil.
as Bees gather excellent Honey out of the bitterest Herbs. And as we say,
Nulla sunt firmiora quam quae ex dubijs facta sunt c Quintil. lib. 11. cap. 2,
Si mibi tranquilla and placa^ omnia suisseun, incredibili qua nunc (...)
latitia voluptat^ Caruissem Cic. Orat post Reditum. Mix. Tyrius Dissert. 33.
Plutarch. de pro^ct. viri^tem.
certa. Those evidences are surest which were made clear out of doubtful. So
those pleasures are sweetest, Qu^suaves fiunt ex tristibus, which have had
wants and fears and Difficulties to provide a welcome for them. And therefore
Quintil. lib. 5. cap. 12.
Wrestlers and Fencers, and such like Masters of Game, were wont to use their
hands unto heavy weights, that when in their Games they were to use them empty
and naked, they might do it with the more expeditenesse and pleasure.

3 Imagination and fancy, either in our selves or other Men, is many times, the
foundation of Delight. Diogines his sullen and Melancholy fancy took as much
pleasure in his Tubbe and Staff, and water, as other men in their Palaces, and
ampliest provisions, And he in the Poet.

Qui se credebat miros a^dire Tragados
In vacuo latus sessor Plausorque Theatr^. -- Horat. Epist. lib. 2. Ep.

Cum redit adsese pol. me occidist is Amici
Non servastis ait, cui sic extorta voluptas,
Et demptus per vim mentis gratissimus error.
Who thought he heard rare Tragedies of wit,
And in an empty Theater did sit
And give Applauses: but being healed complains
Friends I Am not saved by this your love, but slain,
Robbed of that sweet Delight I then did find,
In the so grateful error of my Mind.
Hence likewise it is that Men are delighted Ficta^ sabulas cum volup. a^em
^gimus Cl^. de si^. lib. 5.
with Mythologies and Po^icall Fables, with Elegancies, Jests, Vrbanity, and
Flowers of wit, with Pageants pompes, Triumphs, and public Celebrities,
because all these and other the like, are either the fruit or food of the
Imagination.

4 Upon the same Reason we are marveilously Delighted with lively Imitation, as
with those Vid. Plutar^. de And. P^et* and Quintil. lib. 2. ap. 13.
Arts which do curiously express the works and lineaments of Nature.
Insomuch that the similitudes of those things do wonderfully content us whose
natural Deformities we abhor. We are well pleased with Homers Description
Hinc ^coml stu^tia. pedic^li, feb^um, etc.
of Thirsites, and with Sophocles his expression of the Ulcer of Philoctetes*
with Parmeno his Imitation of the grunting of a Hog, and Theodor^u Plaut in
Au^. Hora^. l. 1. Sa^. 9.
his of the rattling of wheels, with Plautus his description of a chargeable
Wise, and Horace his of a garrulous companion, though the things themselves we
should willingly decline.

5 Those things Delight every man which (...)* lib. 10. cap. 7.
are (...)* as the Philosopher speaks, Suitable Plutarch. de And. Poc^.
fitted* and accommodated to his Genius and frame* of Nature, as in the same
Plant, the Be seedeth on the flower, the Bird on the Seed, the Sheep on the
Blade, the Swine on the Root. So in the same Author one man observes the
Rational* another the Historical, a third the Elegant and more Rhetorical
passages, with special Delight, according as they are best accommodated unto
the Complexion of each Mind. And I C^l. Rhod^g. lib. 5. cap. 34. (...)
find it observed out of Hipocrates, that even in the Body many times that
kind of meat which Nature receives with Complacency, and with a Names. ex
Arist. c. 18.
more particular Delight, though in it self it may be ^orse* yet proves
better nourishment unto that Body than such, as though better in it self,
finds yet a reluctance and backwardness of Nature to close or correspond
with it. The same seeds are not proper for the sand and for the clay* nor the
same imploiments of Mind for Men of various and different Constitutions. Nor
is there I believe any thing which would more conduce to the general
advancement of Arts and Learning, than if every Man's Abilities were fixed and
limited to that proper course, which his natural sufficiences did more
particularly lead him unto. For hereupon would grow a double Delight, and by
consequence improvement (for every thing grows most when it is best pleased)
The one from Nature, the other from Custom and acquaintance, which conquereth
and digesteth the difficulties Ethic. l. 10. ^. 9.
of every thing we set about, and makes them yet more natural unto us. And
therefore (...) ^. l. 1. c. 11.
the Philosopher reckoning up many things that are pleasant to the mind,
puts these two in the first place. Those things that are Natural, and those
that we are accustomed unto, wherein there is least violence offered unto the
inclinations and impressions of Nature.

Touching the Effects of this Passion, I shall name but these few: First, the
effects of Corporal Delights are only (as I observed o^t of Aristotle)
medicinal; for repayring the breaches and ruins of our decayed Natures; for
animating and refreshing our languishing spirits; for preserving our selves in
a good ability to execute Offices of a higher Nature; for furnishing the World
with a succession of men, which otherwise the greedines of mortality would in
short time devour. These are true and intended ends of those Delights, and
when they once transgress these bounds, they begin to (...)*
oppress Nature, weaken and distempe^ the Body, clog the mind, and fill the
whole man with satiety and loathing, which is the reason (as was even now
noted) why men too violently carried Sophoc. (...).
away with them, are presently over^loyed with one kind, and must have variety
to keep out loathing: which Tacitus observes in that monster of ^lut. in
Gryllo. Annal. l. 11.
women Messalina, facilitate adulterorum in fastidiu^ versa ad incognit as
libidin^s pr^stuebat, that loathing more easy and common sins, she betook
h^ self to unnatural lusts, and I verily think is particularly intended by S.
Paul, Romans 1. 26.

A second effect of Joy is Opening and Dil^tion of the heart and countenance,
expressing the serenity of the mind, whence it has the name (...) Latitia, as
it were a broad and spreading Passion* Latitia (...) latitudin^.
Now the reason of* this motion occasioned (...) Joy, is the natural desire,
which man has to (...) united to the thing wherein he delights to make way and
passage for its entrance into him. And hence we find in this Passion an
exultation and egresse of the spirits, discovering a kind of looseness of
Nature in her security, doing many things not out of resolution, but instinct
and power transporting both mind and body to sudden and unpremeditated
expressions of its own content: For of all Passions, Joy can be the least
dissembled or suppressed, nam ga^dio Cogendi vis inest, Pa^igir. ad Tr^jan.
says Pliny* it exercises a kind of welcome violence and tyranny upon a man,
as we see in David's dancing before the Arc* and the lame Man's walking, and
leaping, and praising God, after he had been cured of his lamenesse. And this
diffusion of the spirits shows both the haste and forwardness of Nature, in
striving as it were to meet her Object, and make large room for its
entertainment, as also to dispell and scatter all adverse humors that would
hinder the ingresse of it, and lastly to send forth news as it were through
the whole province of nature, that all the parts might bear a share in the
common Comfort.

Thirdly, those noble Delights which arise from heavenly causes, do withal
cause a sweet thirst and longing in the Soul after more, as some colors ^
Plu^ in P^ric.
do both delight the sight and strengthen it: For while God is the Object,
there cannot be either the satiety to cloy the Soul, nor such a full
comprehension as will leave no room for more.

Thus they who delight in the fruition of God by Grace, do desire a more
plentiful fruition of him in glory; and they that delight in the sight of
Gods* Glory* do still desire to be forever so delighted. So that their Desire
is without Anxiety* because they are s^tiated with the thing which they do^
desire, ^ and their (...) is without lo^* thing; because still they desire the
thing wherewith they are s^tiated; they desire without Grief, because they are
replenished; and they are replenished without weariness, because they desire
still; they see God and still they desire to see him: they enjoy God, and still
they desire for ever to enjoy him: they love and praise God, and make it their
immortal business still to love and praise him:

Et quem semper habent, semper haberevolunt. Whom they for ever have, with love
yet higher
To have for ever, they do still desire.
Aristid. Tom. 1. Orat. in Pute^. Aesc^l.
Divine Joy is like the water of Aesculapius his Well, which they say is
notcapable of put^ifaction.

Fourthly, Delight whettoth and intends the actions of the Soul toward the
thing wherein it delights; it puts forth more force, and more exactness
in the doing of them, because it (...) the mind of all those dulling
Indisposition^ Arist. Ethic. l. 10. c. 5. Poli^. l. 8. c. 5.
which unfitted it for Action. And for this reason h^ppily it i^, that the
(...) used Pl^t. de ^om. A. G^ll. l. 1. c. 11.
Music in their Wars to refresh and delight Nature: For Joy is in stead of
recreation to the Soul, it wonderfully disposes for business. And those
Actions which Nature has made ne^, it has put pleasure in them, that thereby
Men might be quickened and excited unto them; (...). lib. ^. Clem. A^ex. ^trom.
l. 2. Pla^t. Casi^. Act. 2. 5^ 4. (...). lib. 5. c^p. 14.
and therefore Wisemen have told us that pleasure is, Sal and (...) vit^. The
Sauce which seasoneth the Actions of men.

Lastly, because the Nature of man is usually more acquainted with sorrows,
then with pleasures, therefore whither out of Conscience of guilt, which
deserves no joy, or out of experience, which uses to find but little joy in
the world, or out of fear of our own aptness to mistake, or out of a
provident care, not to close or feed upon a Delight, till we are fully assured
of our Possession of it, and because usually the Mind after shaking is more
settled, whether for these or any other reasons, we see it usually come to
pass, that vehement joy does breed a kind of jealousy and unbelief, that
sure ^he thing we have is too good to be true (...) and that then when our eyes
tell us, that they see it, they do but (...) and deceive us, as Quod nimi^
volumu^ ^aud facile credimus:

The things which we desire should be,
We scarce believe when we do see.
So I^cob when he heard that his son Joseph Genesis 45, 26. Psalm. 126, 1.
was alive, fainted* being astonished at so good news, and could not believe
it. And when God restored the Jews out of captivity, they could think no
otherwise of it then a^ a dream. And Act. 129. Luke 24. 41.
Peter when he was by the Angel delivered out of prison, took it for a vision
only, and an apparition, and not for a truth.

And lastly, of the Disciples after Christ's resurrection, when he manifested
himself to them, it is said, That for very joy they believed not, their fears
keeping back, as it were, and questioning the truth of their joys, Omnia tuta
timens, not suffering them too hastily to believe what their eyes did see.

As in the Sea when a storm is over, there remains still an inward working
and volutation, which the Poet thus expresses,

Vt si quando ruit, debell at asque reliquit
Eurus aquas, pax ipsa tumet, pontumque jacentem,
Exanimis jam voluit hyem^. --
As when a mighty tempest does now cease,
To toss the roaring Billows, even that peace
Does swell and murmurre, and the dying Wind
On the calmed Sea leaves his own prints behind.
Even so in the Mind of man, when it is fears are blown over, and there is a
calme*upon it, there is still a motus trepidationis, and a kind of sollicitous
jealousy of what it enjoyes. Aenead. 4. (...) (...) (...) quod ^sum homines
(...)* ^ix satis credere se quisque andiss^ (...) somni uanam (...), Live. lib.
33. (...). ^. 213.


And this unbeleefe of joy is admirably s^t forth in the Carriages of Penelope,
when her Nurse and her son endeavored to assure her of the truth of Ulysses
his return after so many years absence by the Poet, in which doubting she
still persisted, till by certain signs Ulysses himself made it appear unto
her, whereupon she ex^used it after this manner.

(...) My dear Ulysses let it not offend,
That when I saw you first, I did suspend
My love with my belief, since my faint breast
When first with those glad tidings it was blessed,
Trembled with doubts, lest by such forged lies
Some crafty, false pretender might devise
To have ensna^'d me, and with these false sounds,
Defiel'd my love, and multiplied my wounds.
CHAP. XXII. Of the Affection of Sorrow, the Object of it evil, sensitive,
Intellectual, as present in it self, or to the mind, by memory, or suspicion,
particular causes, effects of it. Fear, Care, Experience, Erudition*
Irresolution, Despair, Execration, Distempers of Body.
THe opposite Passion to this of Delight, is Grief and Sorrow, which is
nothing but a perturbation and nnquietnesse wrought by the pr^ssure of some
present ^vill, which the mind in vain strugleth with, as finding it self
alone too impotent for the conflict. Evil I say either formally, as in sin,
or pain, present, or feared: or privatively, such as is any good thing which
we have lost, or whereof we do despair, or have been disappointed. And this
is in respect of its object as the former Passion, either Sensitive or
Intellectual. Sensitive is that anguish and distress of Nature which lyet^
upon the body. A Passion in this sense little conducing to the advancement of
Nature, being allwaies joined with some measure of its decay, but only as it
serves sometimes for the better fortifying it against the same or greater
evils, it being the condition as of corporeal delights, by custom to grow
burdensome and distastefull, so of pains to become easy and familiar.

The other and greater Grief is Intellectual, which in Solom^us phraise is, A
wounded spirit; so much certainly the more quick and piercing, by how much a
spirit is more vital then a body, besides the anguish of the soul, finds
always, or works the same sympathy in the body, but outward sorrows reach
not ever so far, as the spiritual and higher part of the soul. And
therefore we see many men out of a mistake, that the distress of their souls
has been wrought by a union to their bodies, have voluntarily spoiled this,
to deliver and quiet that.

The causes of this Passion, are as in the former, whatsoever has in it power
to disturb the mind by it is union thereunto. There are then two Conditions in
respect of the Object, that it be Evil and Present. Evil first, and that not
only formally in it self; but apprehensively to the understanding. And
therefore we see that many things which are in their Nature Evil; yet out of
the particular distemper of the Mind, and deceitfulness in them, may prove
pleasant thereunto. And this is the chief Corruption of this Passion, I mean
the misplacing, or the undue suspending of it: For although strictly in its
own property, it be not an advancement of Nature, nor adds any perfection;
but rather weakens it; yet in regard of the reference which it bears either to
a superior Law, as testifying our Love unto the Obedience, by our grief for
the breach thereof: or to our consequent Carriage and Actions, as governing
them with greater Wisdom and Providence, it may be said to add much
perfection to the mind of man, because it serves as an inducement to more
cautelous living.

The next Condition in respect of the Object, is, that it be Present, which may
fall out either by Memory, and then our Grief is called Repentance: or Fancy
and Suspicion, and so it may be called Anx^ of Mind: or by Sense and present
union, which is the principal kind, and so I call it Anguish.

For the first, nothing can properly and truly work Grief, by ministry of
Memory, when the Object or Evil is long since past; but those things which do
withal stain our Nature, and work impressions of permanent deformity. For as
it falls out, that many things in their exercise pleasant, prove after in
their operations offensive and burden some: so on the other side many things
which for the time of their continuance are irksome and heavy, prove yet after
occasions of greater H^b. 12. 11.
Joy. Whether they be means used for the procuring of further good.

Per varios casus, per tot discrimina rerum
(...) in Latium, seeds ubi; etc.
Through various great mishaps and dangers store, Antad. l. 1. Iliad. ^4.

We hasten to our home and wished (...)*
Where fates do promise rest, where Troy revives,
Only reserve your selves for better lives.
Or whether they b^ Evils which by our Wisdom we have broken through and
avoided;

-- sed and (...) olim (...) i^vabit. When we are arrived at ease,
Remembrance of a strome does please.
The Objects then of Repentance are not our passive, but our active Evils: not
the Evils of suffering, but the Evils of doing* for the memory of afflictions
past, represent^ unto us Nature loosed and delivered, and should so much the
more increase our Joy, by how much redemption is for the most part a more felt
blessing than Immunity* but the memory of sins past represents Nature
obliged, guilty, and imprisoned. And so leaves a double ground for Grief, ^he
stain or pollution, and the guilt or malediction a deformity to the Law, and a
curse from it. It would be improper here to wander into a digression touching
Repentance, only in a word it is then a Godly Sorrow, when it proceeds from the
memory of Evil; not so much in respect of the punishment as of the stain.
When we grieve more because our sin has made us unholy, then because it has
made us unhappy; and not only because we are run into the danger of the Law,
but because we are run out of the way of the Law. When it teaches us to cry,
not only with Pharaoh, take away this Plague; but with Israel in the Prophet,
take away Iniquity.

Concerning Grief of Preoccupation, arising out of a suspicious Fear and
expectation of Evil, I know not what worth it can have in it, unless happily
thus, that by fore-accustoming the Mind Pracogliati m^li m^llis ictus. (...)*
Epist. 77. Uid. Cic. Tusc. qu. l. 3.
to Evil, it is the better strengthened to stand under it: For Evils by
praemeditation, are either prevented or mitigated, the Mind gathering strength
and wisdom together to meet it. And therefore it is prudent advise of
Plutarch, that we should Pl^t. de (...).
have a prepared Mind, which when any Evil falls out, might not be
surprised by it. To say as Anaxagoras did when he heard of the death of his
Son, sciome genuisse mortalem, I know that I be* gat a mortal Son. I know
that my riches had wings, and that my comforts were mutable. Preparedness
composeth the Mind to patience. Ulysses wept when he saw his Dog, which he
did not when he saw his Wife: he came prepared for the one, but was surprised
by the other.

Hunc ego si potui tantum sperare dolorem,
Et perferre soror potero.
Had I foreseen this Grief, or could but fear it,
I then should have composed my self to bear it.
Which is the reason why Philosophers prescribe the whole course of a Man's
Life, to be only a meditation upon Death; because that being so great an Evil
in it self, and so sure to us, it ought to be so expected, as that it may not
come sudden, and find us unprepared to meet the King of Terror. For it is in
the property of custom and acquaintance, not only to alleviate and assuage
evils (to which purpose Seneca speaks, perdidisti tot Consolatio ad Helviam.
mala si nondum misera esse didicisti, thou have lost thy afflictions if they
have not yet taught thee to be miserable) but further as Aristotle notes, to
work some manner of delight in things, at first troublesome and tedious; and
therefore he reckons (...) (...). l. 1.
mourning amongst pleasant things, and tears are by Nature made the witnesses
as well of Joy as of Grief.

(...) Odiss. l* ^. 2.
He kissed the shore, fast tears ran from his eyes,
When he his native Country first espyes.
And Seneca (whither Philosophically or Rhetorically) observes, that obstinacy
and resolvednesse in grief, does so alter the nature of it, ut fiat tandem
infelicis animi prava voluptas dolor. That at Et quadam etiam dolend, volup^.
Plin. l. 8. ep. c. 6.
length it turns into a kind of pleasant pain, sure I am the Apostle bids
us count it Joy, when we fall into temptations.

The last presence of Grief was Real, when some ponderous evil either of
Affliction or of Sin, the loss of some good wherein we delighted, the
disappointment of some hope whereon we relied meeting with impotency in our
selves, to remove what we suffer, to recover what we lose, to supply what we
want, does bruise and lie with a heavy weight upon the tenderest part of Man,
his Soul and Spirit. And in this I cannot find considered merely in it self
any worth at all (it being nothing else but the violation and wounding of
Nature) but in order to the effects which it produces, it may have sundry
denominations, either of a serviceable, or of a corrupt affection. I shall but
briefly name them, and pass over to the next.

The profitable effects are principally these: First, as it is an instrument of
public administration and discipline. It is as it were both a Schoolmaster
Clem. Alex. Paedag. l. 1. c. 8.
and a Physician, to teach and to cure: so the Philosopher tells us, that by
pleasure and pain, Ethic. l. 10. c. 1. Calamitates remedia. Sen de Tranq. l. 1
c. 9. Psalm. 94. 12. Psalm. 119. 71. Ier. 22. 21.
Children are trained up unto Arts and Sciences, the Rod being unto the Mind,
as a Rudder unto a Ship: so the Prophet David puts chastisement and
instruction together: Blessed is the man whom thou chastenest, and teaches out
of thy law, and again, ^t is good for me that I have been afflicted, that I
might learn thy Commandments. Therefore God the Law in the Wilderness, where
the people were Grande (...) ^genium mis^r sq, ve^it soler^ reb^.
in want and under discipline: to note that Grief is a good instrument unto
learning; for after in their prosperity they would not hear.

And as it is a means to teach, so it is a means to cure too; for therefore
pain is usually made the matter of punishment, that as Men offend by sinful
Ethic. l. 2. c. 3.
pleasure, so they may be amended by wholesome sorrow. (...) Cures are usually
wrought by contraries.

Again, it does by Experience strengthen and Sen. de ^tio, Sapient. c. 4.
harden, making both wise and able, for enduring further calamities, quos Deus
a^at, indurat and exercet. Epist. 67.
God exercises and traineth those whom he loves, bringing them up non in
delicijs sed in castris, not in Paradise, but in a Wilderness. Now as the
Philosopher speaks, (...). Ethic. l 3. c. 8.
Experience is a kind of fortitude and armor, whereby a man contemns, (...)
many things which are indeed, but terriculamenta, skar-crowes to ignorant and
weak minds. Whereas when pains have wrought patience, and patience experience
of an issue and escape, that experience arms the Soul unto more patience in
new assaults. For if Gold were a rational creature, (...)* etc. (...). Hec.
Vid. Plut. l. de Adul^. and (...) Co^sol. ad Apo^onium Plut. de And.
having past through the fire and kept its own Nature unviolate, it would never
after be the less afraid of the fire. And as Plutarch excellently speaks, A
wise Man should be like gold, to keep his Nature in the fire. Strangers dislike
many things in a place, which those, that are home-born, and used unto, do
easily digest: thus the Apostle argues, God has delivered, and does deliver;
2 Cor. 1. 9. 10.
therefore he will deliver. So Ulysses in Homer.

(...). Odyss. ^ 222.
I Will bear with a firm mind, what ere comes more,
Having endured so many Griefs before.
And elsewhere on the same manner he encouraged his companions on the Sea.

(...), etc. Odyss. (...) 208.
Sirs, w' are not now to learn what sorrows are,
Having felt so many; and this now by far
Comes short of that which we endured then,
When the proud Cyclops shut us in his den:
Yet that we escaped, he of his prey did miss,
Hereafter we shall joy to think of this.
Plut. de Ad. and A^ic. and de Sa^it. (...). V^ Crudum adhuc vul^s medentium
manu^ reformidat, deinde patitur, a^que ultro requirit. Sic Recens animi Dolor
Consolatione^ rejici^ atque refugit, mox (...) and clementer admoti^
acquiescit. Plin. Ep. l 5 c. 16. Vid Plut. Cons. ad Apoll.
Thus as Iron which has passed through the fire, being quenched, is harder
than it was before: so the Mind having passed through troubles, is the more
hardened to endure them again. And therefore it is wise advice which learned
Men give, to let Griefs have a time to breath, and not to endeavor the
stopping of them, while they are in Impetu, and in their first rising. As
Physicians suffer humors to ripen, and gather to some head, before they apply
medicines unto them. When time has a little concoted Grief, and experience
hardened and instructed Nature to under it. It does then willingly admit of
those remedies, which being unseasonably applied it rejects and resists.
Ovid de Remed. Amor. l 1.


Quis matrem nisi mentis inops in funere nati
Flere vetat? non hoc illa monenda loco est. (...) Sophoc. ^dip. Ty^.

Cum dederit lachrymas animumque expleverit aegrum,
Ille dolor verbis emoderandus erit.
Who would forbid a Mother then to mourn,
When her Sons ashes are warm in his urne?
But when she is cloyd with tears, and sorrow's rage
Is over, Counsel then may Grief assuage.
Whereas before it does rather exasperate than allay it. For of all Passions,
this of Grief does lest admit of a simple cure from the dictates of Reason,
except it have a time given it too, wherein it may like unto (...). etc. Alexis.
new Wine, defervescere, slack, and come to its just temper again.

The last profitable effect is fear and suspicion, care or sollicitousnesse to
avoid those evils which oppress our Nature; a cautelous discourse and
consultation of reason, how it may either escape or prevent the evils which
Experience has taught it to decline, as a burnt child the fire. For all
Passions so long as they collect reason, and set that on work, are of good use
in the minds of Men; and indeed, the counsels and communion Of this medicine we
read in Homer.
of right reason alone, grounded on and guided by Religion, are only that
Nepenthes and medicine against Grief, which who so mixeth and applies aright,
shall not spend not load (...). (...) 211. Plin. l. 21. c. 21. (...). Sympos.
l. ^. c. 1. Macr^. l. 7. c. 1 Clem. Ale^. in (...). Nazion. Car^in. (...)
patris ad ^ium.
himself with unusefull sorrow. Thuy as Bee^ do poise themselves with little
gravel stones, that they may not be carried away with the wind, which the Poet
has elegantly expressed:

-- -- saepe Lapillos,
Vt Cyr^ba instabiles fluctu jactante saburra^ Geo^g. ^ 4. (...). lib. de
sol^t. (...).

Tollunt, his ses^per inania ^bila librant.
As Ships with ballace, so the little Be
With gravel's poised, that he may steady flee.
So patience and wisdom in the bearing of one sorrow, does keep the mind in a
stable condition against any other. A man does never overgrieve, Iliud ^ 65.
that keeps his (...) open to counsel, and his reason to judgment above his
Passion.

The evil effects of grief commonly follows (...), etc. Eurip. H^cub.
the excess of it, and they respect the Reason, the Will, and the Body, in the
Reason, it works distractions, irresolution, and weakness (...) by drawing
the maine strain of it, rather to a fearful contemplation of it is own
misery, then to a fruitful Discourse how to avoid it, for as the motions of a
wounded Body, so the Discourses of a wounded Mind are faint, uncertain and
tottering.

Secondly, in the Will, it wo^keth first Despair, for it being the propertic
of grief to condensate and as it were on all sides besiege the Mind, the more
violent the Passion is, the less apparent are the Passages out of it. So that
in an extremity of anguish where the Passages are in themselves narrow, and the
reason also blind and weak to find them out, the Mind is const^ ned having
no Object but it is own pai^e to re flect upon, to fall into a dark and
fearful contemplation of it is own sad estate, and mavelous high and
patheticall aggravations of it, as if it were the greatest which any man felt.
Not considering that it feels it is own sorrow, but knows not the weight of
other men's. Whereas if all the calamities of mortal men were heaped into one
Storehouse, and from thence every man were to take an equal portion. S^crates
was wont to say that each man would rather choose to go away with his own
pain.

And from hence it proceeds to many other effects, fury, sinful wishes and
ex^rations both against it self and any thing, that concurred to it is being in
misery, as we see in Israel in the Wilderness and that mirror of Patience Job
himself; (...). 14. 2. Job 3. 1. and Ier. 20. 14. Is^i. 8. 21.
and thus Homer brings in Ulysses in des pair under a sore tempest bewailing
himself.

(...). O^iss. ^ 306.
Thrice four times happy Grecians who did fall
To gratify their friends under Troy wall.
Oh that I there had rendered my last breath,
When Trojan darts made me a mark for Death,
Then glorious Rites my Funerals had attended,
But now my life will be ignobly ended.
Another evil effect is to indispose and disable for Duty, both because
Grief does refrigerate Arist. Prob. Se^. 11. Quest. 13. (...) ^ 130. (...)
(as the Pilosopher tells us) and that is the worst temper for action; and
also diverts the Mind, from any thing, but that which feeds it, and therefore
David in his sorrow forgot to eat his bread, because eating and refreshing of
Nature is a mittigating of Grief, as Pliny tells us. And lastly, because it
weakneth, distracteth and discourageth the Mind, making it soft and timorous,
apt to bode evils unto it self.

-- Crudelis ubique luctus ubique pa^or. Dolor Cib^. (...) Pl^n. l. 22. c. 14.
Grief and fear go usually together. And therefore when Aeneas was to
encourage his friends unto Patience and action, he was forced to dissemble his
own sorrow.

-- Curisque ingentibus ager (...). 2.
Spem vultu simulat, premit altum cord dolorem. Although with heavy cares and
doubts distressed,
His looks feigned hopes and his heart griefs suppressed.
And it is an excellent description in Homer of the fidelity of Antilochus when
he was commanded to relate unto Achilles, the sad news of Patroclus death.
(...). 1. C^nfilium (...) ^egit and (...) (...) (...).


-- (...) etc. When Menelaus gave him this command,
Antilochus astonished did stand. Aen^ad. 4.

Smitten with dumbness through his grief and fears, (...).

His voice was stopped, and his eyes swamme inteares.
Yet none of all this grief did duty stay,
He left his Arms whose weight might cause delay.
And went, and wept and ran, with doleful word,
That great Patroelus fell by Hectors sword.
(...). (...)
In a tempest says Seneca, that Pilot is to be (...).
commended, whom the shipwreck swalloweth up at the Stern, with the Rudd^r in
his hand.

And it was the greatest honor of Mary Mag. dalene, that when above all other,
she wept for the loss of Christ, yet then of all other she was most diligent
to seek him.

Lastly, in the body there is no other Passion that does produce stronger, or
more lasting inconveniences by pressure of heart, obstruction of spirit,
wasting of strength, dryness of bones, exhausting of Nature. Grief in the
heart, is like a Moath in a garment, which biteth asunder, as it were the
strings and the strength thereof, stops the voice, loses the joints,
withers the flesh, shrivelleth the skin, dimmeth the eyes, cloudeth the
countenance, defloureth the beauty, troubles the bowels, in one word,
disordereth the whole frame.

Now this Passion of grief is distributed into many inferior kinds, as
Grief of Sympathy for the evils and calamities of other men, * as if they were
our own, considering that they may likewise be fall us or ours which is called
mercy, grief of (...).
repining at the good of another man, as if his happiness were our misery: As
that Pillar which was light unto Israel to guide them, was darkness unto the
Egyptians, to trouble and amaze them, which is called Envy. Grief of (...).
Fretfulnesse at the prosperity of evil and unworthy men, which is called
Indignation, grief of Indigence when we find our selves want those good
things which others enjoy, which we envy not unto them, but desire to enjoy
them our selves too, which is called Emulation, grief of Guilt for evil
committed, which is called Repentance, and grief of Fear for evil expected,
which is called Despair, of which to discourse would be over-tedious, and many
of them are most learnedly handled by Aristotle in his Rhetoricks. And
therefore I wall here put an end to this Passion.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the affection of Hope, the Object of it, Good Future,
Possible, Difficult, of Regular and Inordinate Despair.
THe next Ranks and Series, is of Irascible Passions, namely those which
respect their Object, as annexed unto some degree of Difficulty, in the
obtaining, o^ avoiding of it, the first of which is Hope, whereby I understand
an earnest and strong inclination and expectation of some great good
apprehended as possible to be obtained, though not by our own strength, nor
without some intervenient Difficulties. I shall not collect those Iliad. ^ 794.
(...) Suida^. (...) (...).
praises which are commonly bestowed upon it, nor examine the contrary
extremes of those who declaime against it, making it a means either of
augmenting an unexpected evil, before not sufficiently prevented, or of
deflowring a future good too hastily pre-occupated, but shall only touch that
dignity and corruption which I shall observe to arise from it, with reference
to it is Objects, Causes, and Effects.

Concerning the Object or fundamental cause of Hope, It has these three
conditions in it, That it be a Future, a Possible, a Difficult Good.

First, Future, for good present is the Object of (...).
our sense, but Hope is of things not seen, for herein is one principal
difference between divine Faith, and divine Hope, that Faith being (...). The
substance of things hoped f^r, (...) ever respect to it is Object, as in some
manner present and subsisting in the promises and first fruits which we have of
it, so that the first effect of Faith is a present Interest and Title; but the
Hebr. 11.
operation of Hope is waiting and expectation, but yet it will not from hence
follow, that the more a man has of the presence of an Object, the less he
has of Hope toward it, for though Hope be swallowed up in the complete
presence of it is Object, yet it is not at all diminished but increased rather
by a partial presence, and as in Massy bodies though violent motions be in
the weakest, as being furthest from the strength that impelled them, yet
natural are ever swiftest toward the Center, as nearest approaching unto the
place that draws them: so in the Hope^ of men, though such as are violent and
groundle^sse prove weaker and weaker, and so break out at last into
emptiness and vapor. In which respect (...). (...) 2 Pet. 3. 12.
* Philosophers have called Hope the dreams of waking men; like that of the
Musician whom Dionissiu^ deceived with an empty promise, of which I spoke
before: yet those that are stayed and natural, are evermore strong, when they
have procured a larger measure of presence and union to their Object, Qu^
propius accedimus ad spem fruendi eo impatientius caremus. The nearer we come
to the fruition of a good, the more impatient we are to want it.

And the reason is because Goodness is better known, when it is in an nearer
view of the understanding, and more unite thereunto. And the more we have of
the knowledge of goodness, the more we have of the Desire of it, if any part
be absent. Besides all greediness is attractive, and therefore the more we
know of it, the faster we hasten to it. And it is the nature of good to
increase the sense of the remainders of evil. So that, though the number of
our defects be lessened by the degrees of that good we have obtained unto, yet
the burden and molestation of them is increased, and therefore the more
possession we have of good, the greater is our wearine^ of evil, and the more
Nature sceleth her defects, the more does she desire her restoration.

The next condition in the Object of our Hope is possibility, for though the
will sometimes being inordinate may be tickled with a desire of
impossibilities, under an implicit^ condition, if they were not so, yet no hope
whither regular or corrupt can respect it is object under that apprehension. It
works two passions most repugnant to this, hatred and despair, the one being
a proud opposition, the other a dreadful flight, from that good, in which the
mind perceives an impossibility of attaining it. Now the apprehension of
possibility is nothing else but a conceit of the convenience and proportion,
between the true means unto an end hoped, and the strength of those powers
which are to work or bestow them; or if they be such ends as are wrought
without any such means, by the bare and immediate hand of the worker', it is
an apprehension of convenience, betwixt the will and power of him that
bestows it.

Here then because I find not any arguments of large discourse in the opposite
passion, (unless we would pass sro natural or moral unto Theological
handling thereof) we may observe what manner of despair is only regular and
allowable, I mean that which in matters of importance drives us out of our
selves, or any presumption and opinion of our own sufficiency. But that
despair which rises out of a groundless unbelief of the Power, or distrust
of the Goodness of a superior Agent (especially in those things which depend
upon the Will and Omnipotency of God) has a double corruption in it, both in
that it defiles, and in that it ruins Nature: defiles, in that it conceives
basely of God himself, in making our guilt more omnipotent than his Power, and
sin more hurtful than he is good: ruins, in that the mind is thereby
driven to a flight and damnable contempt of all the proper means of recovery.

Of this kind of Despair, there are three sorts: The one Sensual, arising out
of an excessive love of Good, Carnal, and Present; and out of a secure contempt
of Good, Spiritual, and Future. Like that of the Epicures, Let us eat and drink
while we 1 Co. 15.
may, To morrow we shall die: The other Sluggish, Desperatione^ (...), experiri
nolunt quod se ass^qui possed ffidunt. Cic. in Oral. ad B^utum.
which dis-hearteneth and indisposeth for Action, causing men to refuse to make
experiments about that wherein they conclude before hand that they shall not
succeed: The third Sorrowful, arising from deep and strong apprehensions of
Fear, which betrayeth and hides the succors upon which Hope should be
sustained: as in the great Tempest wherein Saint Paul suffered shipwreck; when
the Sun and Stars were hid, and nothing but Terror to be scene: All Hope
that they Act. 27. 20.
should be saved, was taken away.

The last condition in the object of Hope, was Difficulty, I mean in respect of
our own abilities, for the procuring of the Good we hope for; and therefore
Hope has not only an eye to Bonu^, Spe* (...), si vi^es, pecu^, con^lum, se
entia, apparatio. Cic. de Invent. ad H^an.
the good desired; but to Auxilium too, the help which conferres it. No man
waits for that which is absolutely in his own power to bestow upon himself;
Omnis expectati^ est ab extrinseco, all Hope is an attendant Passion, and does
ever rely upon the Will and Power of some superior causes, by dependence
whereupon it has some good warrant to attain its desires.

And thus in Divine Hope, God is in both respects the Object of it, both per
modum Boni, as the Good Desired, and per modum Auxilii, as the Aid whereby we
enjoy him. So that herein all those Hopes are corrupt and foolish, which are
grounded either on an error concerning the Power to help in some assistants; or
concerning the Will in others (as indeed generally a blind and misled
judgment does nourish Passion;) Of the former sort, are the Hopes of base and
degenerous minds in their depe^dance upon second and subordinate means, without
Job 31. 24. ^r. 17. 5. Psalm. 62. 9. Romans 3. 4. Job 6. 15, 16.
having recourse to the first supreme Cause; which is to trust in lying vanities;
for every man is a liar, either by Impotency, whereby he may fail us; or by
Imposture, whereby he may delude us.

Of the other sort, are the Hopes of those who presume on the helps and wills of
others, without ground and warrant of such a confidence; whence arises a
sluggish and careless security, blindly reposing it self upon such helps,
without endeavoring to procure them unto our selves.

And this is the difference between Despair and Presumption: Hope looks on
a good future, a^ possible indeed in it self; but with all as difficult to us,
and not to be procured but by Industry and labor. Now Despair leaves out the
apprehension of possibility, and looks only on the hardness: on the other
side, Presumption never regards the hardness, but builds only upon the
possibility. And this is spes m^rtua, that dead Hope, which by the rule of
opposition, we may gather from the life of Hope, spoken of by S. Peter: For a
lifely Hope works such a tranquillity of mind; as is grounded on some
certainty and knowledge; it is (...) Luminosa, a Peace springing out of Light;
but dead Hope works a rest grounded only on ignorance, such as is the
security of a dreaming prisoner, which is rather sencelesnesse than Peace^ and
this is Ten^brosa ^ax, a Peace springing out of Darkness; for a true Peace is
quiet ex fide, a believing rest; but counterfeit is only quies ex somno, a
sleeping or dreaming rest. The Peace which comes from a living Hope must have
these two properties in it, tranquillity and serennity: otherwise it is but
like the rest of mare mortuum, whose unmovablenesse is not Nature, but a curse.

CHAP. XXIV. Of the causes of Hope, Want, and Weakness together, Experience
and Knowledge. In what sense Ignorance may be said to strengthen, and Knowledge
to weaken Hope: Examples quicken more than Precept. Provision of Ayds: the
uncertainty of outward means to establish Hope, Goodness of Nature, Faith and
Credulity, wise Confidence.
THe next things to be confidered, are the causes of this Passion: the first
impulsive cause of Hope is our Want, and our Weakness put together, the one
driving us ad Bonum, to the Object; the other ad Auxilium, to the Aid (and
wheresoever there is Indigence, there is Impotence likewise.) Now in what man
soever we find these two unsupplyed, there is the root and fundamental ground
of Hope; notwithstanding for the defects of other conditions, the creature may
be carried to the quite opposite Passion* out of an apprehension of an
inevitable subjection unto evil, and utter banishment from the fountain of
good. So then of those three estates of man; the estate of Fruition, which is
their Sabbath and rest; the estate of Travel, which is the day of work, and
the estate of damnation, which is the night of despair: In the first we have
the accomplishment; in the third the final overthrow; in the second the
exercise of our Hopes:) because in that alone our Indigence may by Gods
fullness be filled, and our Impotence by his Will and Power supplied. In which
respect, all men have room for Hope to enjoy God their last Good; though not a
hope of Confidence, assurance, and Expectation, which is peculiar only unto the
godly (who alone have a present interest in his promises;) yet such a general
Hope as may well suffice to s^op the mouth of any temptation, whereby we are
solicited to undervalue the Power, or to conclude the unwillingnesse of God to
help us.

The next cause of Hope is Experience and knowledge, both in the nature of the
thing hoped for, and of the means conducing to the attain meant thereof. For
notwithstanding it may often fall out, that ignorance of things, and the not
trial of our strength or others opposition, or of the difficulties of the
Object, may with hot and eager minds, work presumptions of success, and an
empty and ungrounded Hope (which is the reason why young men and drunken men
are both observed by Aristotle to be (...), men of strong (...). l. 2 c. 12. E.
bi^. l. 3. c. 8.
Hopes) being naturally or by distemper bold and opinionative: even as on the
other side, strength and acuteness of understanding; because it sees so far
into the Object, works often diffidence, Li^. 4. ep. 7. (...). l. 2. c. 13.
slownesse and irresolution in our Hopes: as Pliny out of Thucydides observes;
and the Philosopher likewise of old m^n, that they are (...) men slow in their
Hopes; because of great experience;) yet for all this, if we do observe it,
both the former of these proceeds from some opinion of knowledge, as the later
does from some opinion of ignorance: For of drunken men, and those whom in the
same place he compares unto them, Aristotle says, they are therefore
confident* quia seputant superiores, because they believe much in their own
strength. And of young men he faith in the same place of his Rhetoricks, (...)
they are peremptory in the opinion of their own knowledge; whereas, on the
other side, as a ^ame man placed upon some high Tower, can overview with his
eye more ground, than he has hope to overrun with his feet in a whole day* so
men that have attained unto some good pitch of knowledge, and are withal not
insensible of their own weakness, out of the vastnes of distance which they
discover between themselves and their end, do easily frame unto themselves as
narrow Hopes, as they do large desires; but then thi^ proceeds not from that
knowledge which we have properly* but only as it serves to discover unto us,
how much knowledge we want.

So then properly knowledge and experience is the cause of Hope; experience I
say, either of the conquerablenesse of the Object by our own means: or of the
sufficiency of the Power, and readiness of the Will of him from whom we
expect further assistance: For a^ there is less casualty, and by consequence,
more presumption to be had of an event of art th^n of fortune (the one
proceeding (...). Chilo apud La^. l. 1.
from a governed, the other from a blind and contingent cause) so consequently
there is greater hope and confidence to be given to the success of an
enterprise, grounded on experience, than of one ignorantly and rashly
adventured on. Experience (...) as the Philosopher observes, the Root Me^. l.
1. c. 1.
of Art* (...) unexperience (...) of sort (...).

Now this Experience may be such, either as our selves have had, or such as we
have observed other (...) to have* (...) which we have from our selves is the
most forcible to (...) this affection, because every man is the best (...) of
his own abilities. And it is that which (...) forth influence and force into
all our actions; nothing could more assure the hopes of David in his encounter
with G^liah, than an experience formerly had against creatures every way as
formidable, a Lion and a Bear, wherein notwithstanding they were the sheep of
Iesse, and not of God that were endangered. Thus the eye of Faith and Hope
looks both backward upon the memory of actions past, and forward with courage
and resolution on second enterprises: For though in some cases it be requisite
with Saint Paul to forget that which is past, when the remembrance of it may be
an occasion of sloth, weariness, and distrust; yet there may a happy use be
made of a seasonable memory in matters of difficulty, wherein happily our former
successful resolutions and patience may upbraid our present fears, and
sharpen our languishing and sluggish Hopes. O passi graviora, was the best
Argument which he could have used to put his fellows in confidence of that
which he added:

-- Dabit De^ his quoque ^inem. Since other greater griefs you have found ease,
Doubt not, but God will put an end to these,
And in that great battle between Scipio and Hannibal, ad a^nem Ticinam;
though the victory by reason of the excellency of the General, fell to the
adverse part; yet the Roman General could not have used a more effectual
persuasion unto Hope, than when he told his soldiers that they were to enter
on a war with those men who were as much their slaves as their enemies, as
being such whom they had formerly themselves overcome, Cum ijs est vobis
pugnandum quos priore bell^ terra* marique vicistis. You are to join battle
with those whom in the former war you conquered both by Land and Sea. A
strong inducement; though that in such a case, the fear of a second overthrow
would more necessitate the one, than the hope of a second victory persuade the
other to courage and resolution* As we see in the hot battle between the
Greeks and the Trojans, when Hector had driven the Grecians into their ships,
and set some of them on fire, which is thus elegantly described by Homer:

(...) ^liad: ^04.

(...)
(...).
These were the mutual motions did engage (...).

The minds of Greeks and Trojans on this rage.
The Grecians all despaired to escape the blow,
Deeming themselves near to an overthrow.
But former victory in those of Troy, (...).

Kindled a Hope another to enjoy.
They boldly promised to themselves the day,
The Grecians ships to burn, and then to slay,
Thus hope of victory inflamed the one,
The other were more inflamed, 'cause they had none.
That Experience from others, which may enliven and perfect our Hope, in the
applying their examples and successes to our own encouragements. For since the
nature of most men is like that of flocks, to tread in one another steps
(Precidents having the same precedence to reason in vulgar judgments, which a
living and accompanying guide has to a Mercuryes finger in a Travelers
conceit; the one only pointing too, but the other leading in the way. And as I
find it observed, that running metal will sooner melt other of its own
kind, than fire alone: So the examples of virtue will sooner allure and
prevail with the minds of men, to frame them to the like resolutions, than a
naked and empty speculation of Precepts. It has pleased Nature to make man,
not only a moral, but a sociable creature, that so when his Hopes toward
good should languish and grow slack by any conceived prejudices against the
reason of Precepts, they may again be strengthened by the common and more
obvious and common sense of examples.

Segnius irritant animos demissa per aures, Horace.
(...).
Quam quae sunt oculis Commissa fidelibus -- Those things more sluggishly our
minds excite,
Which enter at the ears, than at the sight.
Sight which is the sense of Example, is oftener employed in the government of
our Passions, than Hearing, which is the sense of Precept. And therefore when
the Poet would sit an advise for the person of Ascanius, he does not bring any
tedious, thorny, moral discourse; but he works upon that affection which is
most predominant in ingenuous and noble Natures.

-- Te animo repetentem exempla tuorum, Et Pater Aen^, and Avanculus excitet
Hector. Recont the brave examples of thy blood,
And what thou have in them seen great and good,
Let be thy Pattern, that the World may see
Father and Uncle both alive in thee.
For though an Argument from Example, to prop a sainting Hope be weakest in
respect of convincing demonstration; yet it is strongest, in respect of moral
and persuasive insinuation, as inferring greater descredit upon a sluggish and
unnecessary despair. And therefore they were (...).
brave instructions which Agamemnon gave unto Menelaus, when he commanded him
to go into the Army of the Grecians, and animate them unto the battle.

(...)
(...)
(...).
Run through the Army, cry, encourage all,
Mind them of their Progenitors, and call
Each by his Name, praise them, and let us too
What we command to others, our selves do.
It is true indeed that some men are blessed with a greater e^cellency of gifts
than others; yet we are not to think that any man was ever made, as Seneca
speaks of Cato, In convitium humani generis, for a reproach of men's weakness,
rather than for an example and encouragement of their actions: or for
astonishment rather than emulation unto others. This being one end of Nature,
in framing men of great virtues, not only that we might wonder and believe,
and know that the same things which for the greatness of them, are the objects
of our admiration, may as well for their possibility be the objects of our
Hope; and the encouragements of our industry.

The third cause of Hope, may be large furniture with, or strong dependence
upon the assistant mean^ of what is hoped for Helps in any enterprise are in
stead of head and hands, to advance a man^ design, which likewise is elegantly
expressed by Diomedes and S^rpedon in Homer:

-- (...)
(...)
(...) (...). Iliad* 222, etc.

If any second would accompany, (...) 410.

My hopes and courage would the greater^e:
For when two join, the one may happily note
What the other everpass'd* or if he kn^w it,
His counsel would be weak, and his mind slow,
When he should execute what he does kn^w.
And according as these means, which we rely upon, have more or less power or
certainty in them; they are foundations of a more Regular o^ Corrupt Hope such
are wealth* friends, wit, policy, power, or the like. All which can be causes
only of a hope of probability, but not of certainty; because they are all
means which are subject to (...) age, and are also subject to the Providence of
God, who only can establish and give final security to our hopes, as being
such an Assistant, in whom there is neither weakness nor mutability, which
should move him to disappoint us.

All other ayds have two ill qualities in them; they have wings, and therefore
can easily forsake us* and they have thorns, and therefore if we lean 2.
Chron. 28. ^0. 21. (...). 29. 6, 7.
too hard on them, they may chance in stead of helping, to hurt us. The best
promises which earthly Aids can make, are bounded by adouble condition.

(...). Iliad. * 391.
If the thing ly^ within my power to do,
And divine Providence permits it too.
Here then we may discover Corruption in this Passion, when the mind ready upon
every present approhension to play the Proph^t in forecasting future events,
shall out of weak grounds, and too high a conceit of those means which it
has, so build unto it self peremptory imaginations for the future, as that
thereby it is made in it self light and opinionative, and upon occasion of
disappointment, is to seek of that patience to sustain it, which by a wise
intermixtion of fear and caution might have been retained.

And as there is an error in the ^rust and affiance, so there may be in the
use of those means: For though divine Hope has but one Anchor to rest upon,
and therefore has but one manner of being produced; yet these lower Hopes, of
which I speak, do always depend upon the concurrence of diverse means, and
those likewise have their reference unto diverse circumstances. And therefore
those which have not the wisdom of combining their Ayd^s, and of fitting them
unto casual occurrences, may to no end nourish in themselves imaginary and
empty presumptions. And this is that which makes all worldly hopes so full of
lightness and uncertainties, Leves spes and cer^aminas, Hora^.
as the Poet calls them; because it may fall out, that the neglect of but
some one circumstance; the not timeing or placing our actions right; the not
accommodating our means to the variety of of occasions; the miscarrying in some
one complement or ceremony; the having of our minds, either too light and
voluble; or too fixed and constant* or too spread and wandering; or too narrow
and contracted; or too credulous and facile; or too diffident and suspicious;
or too peremptory, resolute, or hasty; or too slow, anxious, and discursive; or
too witty and facetious* or too serious and morose, with infinite other the
like weaknesses (some whereof there is not any man quite freed from) may often
notwithstanding the good store of other ayds, endanger and shipwreck the
success of our endeavors: so that in the prosecution of a hope, there is
something alike industry, to be used as in the trial of Mathematical
conclusions, the Mediums whereunto are so touched and dependant upon one
another, that not diligently to observe every one of them, is to labor in
vain, and have all to do again.

A fourth cause of Hope, may be Goodness and facility (...). (...). Alex.
(...). l. 2.
of Nature, whereby we find a disposition in our selves of readiness, to
further any man's purposes and desires, and to expect the like from others; for
it is the observation of Aristotle, touching young men, sud ipsorum innocentia
cateros (...). l. 2. ^. 1^.
metiuntur. Their own goodness makes them credulous of the like in others. For
as every man's prejudice loves to find his own will and opinion* so does his
charity to find his own goodness in another man. They therefore who are soft
and facile to yield, are likewise to believe, and dare trust them whom they are
willing to pleasure. And this indeed is the Rule of Nature, which makes a man's
self the Pattern of what it makes his Neighbor the Object.

Now from this facility of Nature proceeds a further cause of Hope; to wit,
Faith and Credulity, in relying on the promises which are made for the
furtherance thereof: For promises are obligations, and men use to reckon their
obligations in the Inventory of their estate: so that the promises of an able
friend, I esteem as part of my substance. And this is an immediate Antecedent
of Hope, which according as the Authority whereon it relles, is more or less
sufficient and constant, is likewise more or less evident and certain.

And in these two, the Corruption chiefly is not to let Judgment come between
them and our Hopes.

For as he said of Lovers, we may of Hopes too, that oftentimes sibi somnia
fing^nt, they build more upon Imagination than Reality. And then if what
Tacitus speaks in another sense, fingunt, creduntque if our facility feign
assistances, and our credulity rely upon them, there will issue no other than
Ixious Hope, a Cloud for Inno. And therefore (...). l. 2.
Aristotle out of an easiness to Hope, collects in young men, an easiness to
be deceived, credulity very often m^ets with Impostures. And he elsewhere
places credulous, modest, quiet and Rhet. l. 1.
friendly men amongst those who are obnoxious to injuries and abuses. Proud and
abusive men making it one of their pleasures to delude and mislead the
ingenuity of others: and as once Apelles, to deceive the expectation of another
with a Curtain for a Picture.

The last cause (which I shall but name) of Hope, is wise confidence, or a
happy mixture of boldness, Constancy, and Prudence together; the one to put on
upon an enterprise; the other, to keep on when difficulties unexpected do
occur; and the third, to guide and manage our selves amidst those
difficulties: For as he said in studies, so we may in actions likewise (when
thus swayed and balanced) Altius ^unt, qui ad sum^a ^ituntur. The Quintil. l.
1. in Pr^am. Mag^a indoli^ signum est sperare semper. ^lor. l. 4.
further we set our aims, the more ground we shall get, and then,

-- Possunt quia posse videntur* When a man thinks, this I can do,
By thinking, he gets power too.
And unto this does the Historian attribute all the success of Alexanders
great victories, Nihil aliud qua^ been ausu^ vana contemnere, his confidence
Live. l 19.
judging them feacible, did by that means get through them. And though it was
vehterous; yet as the case might be, it was wise counsel which we find in the
same Historian, Live. l. 25. (...) Eur. p Hec.
Audeamus quod credi, non potest ausuros nos, eo ipso quod difficillimum
videtur, facillimum erit. Let us show our courage in Difficiliora debent ess^
quae exercent, quo sit levius ips^ illud in quod exercent, Quintil. l. 11. cap.
2. Arist. Ethic. l. 3. c. 7. Ae^ad. 10.
adventuring on some difficult enterprise, which it might have been thought we
would not have attempted, and then the very difficulty of it will make it the
more easy: For our enemies will conclude that our strength is more than they
discover when they see our attempts greater than they could suspect. Thus men
teach children to dunce in heavy shoes, that they may begin to conquer the
difficult in the learning of the Art. And therefore the Philosopher tells us,
that (...) bold men, are men of Hope; for boldness suffers not a man to be
wanting to himself: and there are two Principles which encourage such men upon
adventures; the one, audentes fortuna invat. That resolution is usually
favored with success; or if it miss of that Ovid. Met. l. 2 Tutius certe per
plana, sed humilius and depressius itur, (...) currentibus, quam reptansibus
(...), sed his non labentibus nulla laves, illis nonnulla laves etia^si laba^.
^r. Plin. l. 9. ep. 26.
Magnis tamen exidit ausis; yet the honor of attempting a difficulty, is more
than discredit of miscarriage in it.

CHAP. XXV. Of the Effects of Hope: Stability of Mind: Weariness, arising not
out of Weakness, Impatience, Suspicion, Curiosity; but out of Want,
Contention, and forth-putting of the Mind. Patience under the Want, Distance,
and Difficulty of Good desires, Waiting upon Aid expected.
THe Effects of Hope follow, which I will but name: The first is to free the
Mind from all such Anxieties as arise out of the Floating, Instability, and
Fearfulness thereof: For as the Philosopher tells us, Philosophi quidom
erant, qui a sp^ di^* sunt, Elp^icisti qui nihil sse pronunciarunt quod vitam
Sympos. l. 4 q. 4 mag^ (...) atque (...), Vid. Plut.
Fearful men are (...), hard of Hope: and in this property, Hope is well
compared unto an Anchor; because it keeps the Mind in a firm and constant
temper, without tottering and instability: for though there be but one Hope
joined with Certainty as depending upon an immutable promise all other having
ground of Fear in them; yet this should be only a Fear of Caution, not of
Jealousy and Distrust; because where there is Distrust in the means, there is
for the most part Weakness in the use of them; and he who suspects the Aid
which he relyes on, gives it just reason to fail and to neglect him. And
therefore Aristotle has set Hope and Confidence together, as was before noted,
(...), a Good Hope is grounded on a Belief, and always works some measure
of Affiance in the means unto it.

A second Effect of Hope, is to work some kind of Distaste and Weariness in
our present condition, which according as it is good or evil, does qualify
the Hope from whence it arises: for there is a distaste that arises out of
Weakness; like Job 10. ^. c. 7. 20
that of Job, My Soul is weary of my life; I am a burden unto my self.
Another that arises out of Want, That which arises upon Weakness is a fickle
and unconstant mutability of the Mind, whereby it desires a continual change
of condition: which affection is wrought either out of Impatiency of
opposition; whence the Mind upon the first difficulty which it meets with, is
affrighted and discouraged; or out of a Sharpness of Apprehension, discovering
Insufficiency in that wherein it desired content; or out of an Error, and too
high Spe^ inane^ quae in medio spa^io ^rangu^tur and cor^u^t and an^e in ipso
curs^ obr^tur quam po^tum conspi^e possu^. (...)* d^ Orat. l. 3.
Estimation fore conceived, which in the trial disappointing our Hopes, and
not answering that Opinion, begins to be neglected as weak and deceitful: or
lastly, out of Curiosity and Search, when we suppose that those things which
cannot in their nature, may at least in their varieties, number, yield some
content: and as Sands, which are the smallest things asunder; yet being united,
grow great and heavy: so these pleasures, which are alone light and worthless,
may by their multitude bring weight and satisfaction with them. Although herein
the Mind is likely most of all to find Solomon's Vanity; the Union of things
subordinate, and which have no Cognation each to other (which is the property
of worldly delights) working rather Distraction than Tranquillity in the Mind;
this Weariness then which springs from the Vnstaydnesse and Impotency of our
affections, is not that which I make the Effect of a proper Hope (as being an
opposite rather to true contentment of Mind, a virtue established, and not
overthrown by Hope) the Weariness then, which is wrought by the forecast and
providence of a Mind possessed with Hope, is that which is grounded upon the
knowledge and feeling of our emptiness and wants, which therefore we long to
Psalm. 120. 5.
have removed: like that of David, W^ is me that I am constrained to dwell in
Mese^h; whereupon follows, (...) (...) (...). Max. Tyr. disser^. 33.


The third Effect of Hope, which is an earnest contention of the Mind, in the
pursuit of that Good, which should perfect our Natures, and supply our Wants.
And this desire Saint Paul calls Gemitus Creatura, the Groaning of the
Creature: which is set down as a Consequence of the Earnest Expectation of the
Creature: and indeed there is not any Passion, which does so much employ, and
so little violate Reason, as this of Hope does, it being an exciting Passion,
which moves every Principle to its proper and speedy operation for gaining
that perfection which the Mind so earnestly breathes after; and the want whereof
does work such weakness in it.

The last Effect of Hope, is a Contented Repose and Patience of the Mind,
resting it self in a quiet Expectation of the things hoped for, and yet not
exhibited. And this Patience is threefold; a Patience under the Want; a
Patience under the Distance; and a Patience under the difficulties of our
desired Good; which holds especially in these Hopes (and those are almost all)
which depend upon the will and disposition of another, whose pleasure it
behooveth us in matters which are not of debt and necessity, rather to attend,
than by murmuring and discontent to provoke him, and disappoint our selves.
Hasty therefore and running Hopes are as improper in their Nature, as they are
commonly vain and empty in their success. He that Believes, and must by
Faith depend upon External help, must not make haste, but be content to have
his Expectations regulated, not by his own greediness, but by another will.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the Affection of Boldness. What it is. The Causes of it,
strong Desires, strong Hopes, Aids, Supplies, Real, or in Opinion. Despair
and Extremities, Experience, Ignorance, Religion, Innocence, Impudenc^, Shame,
Immunity from danger, Dexterity of Wit, strength of Love, Pride or greatness
of Mind and Abilities. The Effects of it, Execution of things advised,
Temerity, etc.
SO little in love have I ever bin with this affection of (...) (as I find it
managed by many, who make no other use of it, then children do of straw, with
which they stuff empty clothes, that they may look like men) as that when
first I writ this Tractate, I passed it over rather as a Vice, than an
Affection of the Soul, and said nothing of it. And being no more friends with
it now then I was then, I should be contented to have left it out still. But
that I would not have the Treatise defective in such a member, whereof Plut. in
Ni^ia. (...) Homer.
there may be so good and so ill use made, as experience shows us there is of
this. For as * Plutarch notes of Egypt, that it brings forth multa vene^a,
and multa salubria, many Good things, and many Bad: like those Creatures, some
parts whereof are poison, and others restorative: so may we say of the Men in
whom this Affection is predominant, that they are usually Instruments either of
much Good, or of much Evil to the places Plut. in Themistoc. In Honnibale
plurimum au^ ad capess^da pericula plurim (...) Consi^ inter ipsa pericula
erat. Live. l. 21.
that nourish them: as once Thomistocles his Tutor said of him. The best
mixture that I can call to mind of this Passion, was in Hannibal, of whom the
Historian tells us, That he was mavelous (...) to put upon Dangers; and yet
mavelous Wise in managing of them: His courage not working Temerity, nor
precipitating his resolutions: And his counsel not working slownesse, nor
retarding his courage.

Boldness then or Confidence, is (as the Philosopher describes it) a Hope
joined with fancy and (...). l. 2. c. 5.
opinion, that those things which are safe for us, are near at hand; and those
which are hurtful, either are not at all, or are a far off, and cannot
suddenly reach us: Or it is an Affection whereby we neglect Danger for the
procuring of some difficult and Good thing, which we earnestly desire and hope
for, in Confidence to overcome and break through that danger: For Confidence
of Victory is that which makes a man boldy to prosecute the Danger which
opposes him in his Hopes of Good. So that two things belong unto Vid. Aque. 12
^ quast, 45. art. 3
the formality of this Passion. 1. Vehemence of Hope, whatsoever strengthens
that, causes this, as Power, Experience, Friends, neerenes of Ayds, and the
like. 2. Exclusion of Fear, whatsoever removes that, increases this: As
Distance from Danger, Freeness from Enemies, Cleernes from Injuries, etc.

The Object of this Passion is twofold. The Primary and Principal Object is
some difficult work under the Relation of a needful Medium, to the obtaining
of a Good vehemently Desired and hoped for. The secondary Object, is some Evil
and Danger, which standing between our Hope, and the Good for which we Hope, is
by the v^hemency of our Hope, as it were removed and despised in our Eyes, Good
earnestly desired, and Evil confidently despised, are the things about which
this Affection is conversant.

The Causes of this Affection are so many the more, because it is apt to be
excited by clean contrary Reasons.

The fundamental and principal Cause of it, is strength of Desire, working
vehemence of Hope, and impatiency of Resistance, or Restraint from I^. 1. 14,
15.
the thing desired: For Lust when it has once conceived, will at last bring
forth and finish, and rush forward to that after which it longs, Arist. Eib.
l. 7. c. ^. 1. Pet. 4. 4. See my treatise on the Sin^ulnesse of Sin. p. 167.
Hos. 4 2. Ier. 6. 7. 8. 6. Eth. l. 3. c. 11.
which the Philosopher calls (...), and Saint Peter (...), a pouring out of
Passion, and the Prophet a Breaking forth and violent Eruption, a rash and
Head. strong praecipitancy, which like a Torrent venters upon any thing that
withstands it. The Philosopher instanceth for this particular in adulterers,
(...). Who adventure on many bold Attempts for the satisfaction of their Lust.

But because where there are strong Desires, there may be weak Hopes, and
great Fears, The one Discouraging, the other Deterring from the Prosecution of
them, therefore to the emboldening of those Desires, other particular Causes
do usually concur. Some whereof I shall enquire after.

1 Then strong Hopes, and Ready, Present Aids and supplies proper to the End,
which we would advance are Excellent means to generate Aux (...) mag^a. (...).
vi^ina.

Boldness. Great Aids as the Catts Vnum magnum, or many Aids, that if one
fail another may Hold. As greatness of wealth, friends, power, strength. And
these in a Readiness and ^re at hand. * (...)* as the Philosoper expresses
(...). l. ^. ^. 5.
it, as the Trojans being besieged when (...) with his Army drew near,
gathered cou^ge above their fears.

-- Clam^re^m ad sydera tollunt, A^cid. 10.

Darda^idae muris; spes addita suscitat Iras
Tela man Iaciunt.
They all climbed up the walls, thence filled with* joys,
Shouted as loud, as if they meant the noise
Should wake the Stars, hopes added stirred up Ire
And their Dar^s flew as swift as any fire.
And in Scriptures we are often quickened unto 1 Io^. 4. 4. (...). 10, 36, 37.
^am. 5. 8. ^ve. 22. 12.
courage against the Difficulties of our Christian Warfare by the Greatness
and the nearenesse of the Aids, and the Reward which we Hope for. Yea, so
strong a power has Hope over the (...) (...). l. 3. c. 11. ^ r^v. 23. 34.
Resolutions of men that even the froth, and dream, and fancy of it in drunken
men, makes them as the Philosopher notes mavelous ventrous upon dangers,
which Reason and sobriety would have taught them to fear. Solomon tells us of a
Drunkard lying on the Top of a Mast, and I have my self seen a Drunken man
climb to the Top of a Steeple. Which boldness proceeds in such men from
weakness and wilfulness of self-conceit, and Opinion, for com monly (...).
(...). l. 7. ^. 10.
that strength, which a Drunken man loses in his Reason, he gathers in his
fancy, and as his judgment weakens, his Opinion increases. And we shall never
find men more confident in their affirming, then when they know not what they
affirm.

Now upon this Ground, that Hope is the great Quickner unto Courage, It was,
that Alexander used it as an Argument to his Soldiers against the Persian,
when he saw them come into the field clothed so richly, that their Arms were
Prad^ (...) quam (...) (...) (...). Live. lib. 9. Iliad. ^ 873. Plutarch lib. de
Homero. Quam minimum (...) incorpore (...) spoliorum (...) (...) quam operunt.
(...). Epist. 14.
much rather a Prey to the Greeks, then a Defense unto themselves, in which
respect Homer thus derides Amphimachus.

(...) In glitering Gold, like a fair Damsel, clad
He came to fight: Vain man why art so mad
To think that Iron is kept back by gold?
Thou bring'st the price, for which thy self art sold. Sue^on. in Iuli^ 67.

And yet upon a contrary Reason, I find one of the greatest and wisest
Commanders of the world Julius Casar, requiring of his Soldiers to carry Gold
about them that the fear of loosing that, might make them the more constant to
their Resolutions.

Contrary unto this we shall often observe, that Despair and Extramities do
put men upon bold adventures. As no men fight more desperately then Cowards
when they cannot fly, as the Historian notes Summ^ Audaci^ (...), factlosus
que^ adperturband^m remp. In opia, a^ mali (...) (...). (...).
of Cu. Pis^ a Confederate of (...)* that by poverty he became desperate, and
thereby emboldened unto that attempt, wherein he might either rise by the ruin
of others (having neither merit nor Hope to rise by their favors) or at least
not be ruined without company. (...). i^ Num^.
As that which shakes a Tree, does often serve to settle and fasten it: So many
times dangers and Saepe (...) h^st is (...) (...). ^didit. Live. lib. 21. Spe^
desperati* one quaesita (...). lib. 1. Ig^aviam necessi^as acuit, and spei
saepe desp^ratio causa est Q. (...). l. 5.

D^nt animun^ ad loque^dum libere ul^imae miseriae Live. lib. ^9.


extremities do excite strength, as in the height of a Fever or Frenzy, men
show more strength and agility of body, then in their per^ectest Health. And as
they say of Maxim (...) esse solent (...) (...) Animalium. Flor^ Iul^ Capitol.
in Max imino.
Beasts, they bite with more venom and indignation when they are wounded, and
ready to die. And therefore Homer expresses the Dying of wounded Enemies by
biting of the Ground; so utmost extremities of miseries make men put out the
more boldness in either Revenge o^ new Attempts, because they may be better,
but they cannot be worse. Impunit^ ge^ est non ^bere p^ locu^ St^.
And it is a kind of Impunity to be so low as that a man has not a condition
to fall from.

(...).
M^riensque recepit. Quas n^llet victur^s aqu^s. In a famine a man will eat and
drink that which in plenty he could not have the courage to look on. And this
cause of boldness is thus expressed by the Poet when he shows how the Youth
of Troy, seeing their City burnt and sacked, grow unto a Desperate Resolution.

Si^ Animi^ Iuvenum fur^r addit^* ^de (...)
R^ptores atra in Nebula qu^s impr^ba ventris
Exeg^ (...) rabies, cat^que (...)
Faucib^ e^pectant siccis, per Telaper hosts
Vad^mus hand dubi^ in (...) --
Thus youth did rage despairing of their lives,
Like Wolves of Prey whom extreme hunger drives
From their young thirsty whelps, through darkest sterms; ^ide v^grt de ^
mili^ar. l. 3. c. 21.

Through darts and foes we rush an our own harms
And being sure to die dare that, which fear
With Hope of Life would force us to forbe^e.
Another cause of Boldness is Experience, when (...) E. ^s. t. 3. ^. 11.
(...). Eur^p. R^s*
a man has often done a thing with success, often seen Dangers and escaped
them. As Mariners at sea, found other men, upon as small hopes as he himself
has* to go through the like matters without doubt or hesitation. For examples
do put Life, Hope, and Emulation into men, as we noted before, and we are
encouraged sometimes rather to Vel err^r honestus est magnos duces sequentibus
Qui^t. lib 1. cap. 6.
err in good company, then to go right alone, and this Argument Aentas used
in the Poet.

V^s and scylla^m rabie^, penitusque sonantes
accestis sc^pulos, V^s and Cyclopea saxa,
Exper^: revocate A^mos, mastumque tim^rem
M^tite --
You by Charibdis, and by S^ylla say^'d,
Where waves through r^ks did sound, nor has prevailed.
'Gatust you, that w^rser Rock the Cyclops den,
Then cast off fears, and show your selves brave men.
And a^ Experience, so on the contrary side Ignorance (...). L^ ^t i^ (...).
Ethic. l. 3. 6. 8* and 10. P^. l. 4. Ep. 7. Q^ m^sture (...), ^ajoraque v^ribus
a^? (...) ^ inca^tum (...) ^a ^. 10. ^e (...) (...) vi^. Va^. M^. l. 3. c 1.
is as usual ^ cause of Confidence, as we see Children will put their finger
in the fire, and play with Serpents, as not acquainted with any hurt they can
do for them. We may too often meet with men like waters or vessels, which the
shallower and emptier they be, do make the louder noise, and make use of other
men's Ignorance to gain Boldness and Credit to their own. To which purpose it
is a grave expression of the Poet.

-- (...). E^rip. My^pol.
Th^se whom wise men know for D^ll
With vulgar ^ares are wondrous Musical.
And as Flies are esteemed very Bold Creatures, (...) 638.
because they often return to the same place: so the boldness of these kind
of Speakers is usually discovered in vain and empty Tautologies, which is the
reason why (as the Orator notes) they are usually more copious then far
Learnedner men, Quia doct is est Electi^ and modus, Qui^til.
because able Speakers use choice and Judgment in what they produce.

Another Cause of Boldness in attempts may R^et. l. ^. c. 5.
be Religion, and a Confidence of Divine Direction unto what we do. Ithu his
pretense unto zeal, was that which caused him to walk furiously. And in this
case as the Historian speaks, Q. curt. lib. 4. De I^tu Animorum divin^us
excitat^ vid Plutare^. in Co^. I^dg. 6. 36. Isai. 7. 11. 12* 2 Reg. 19. 29. ^
Sam. 5. 24. Psalm. 74. 9. Exodus 17. 11. 1 Samuel 4. 7, 8.
Melius vatibus quam Ducibus parent. Men are ap^er to be led by their Prophets
then by their Captains. And we find when God would encourage his People in
their wars, he gave them signs and assurances for their faith to rely upon
above their fears that where Reason saw cause of Doubting, Faith might see all
Defects supplied in God, so to Gideon* to Ahaz, to Hezekiah, and others, and
the Church complains of the want of them in their times of Calamity. We see
not our signs, neither is there amongst us any Prophet, or any one that
knows how long. When I^suah did fight, Moses did pray, and Israel was more
encouraged by the intercession of the one, then by the valor of the other. And
the Philistines were never more affrighted, then when Israel brought forth the
Ark of God against them, for as Ajax said in the Poet,

-- (...). Sopho^l. Aj^x vid. Ez^k. 21. 21. 21.
-- If God will fight, He can make weak men put the strong to flight. And
therefore Tolumnius the Soothsayer having received happy Auguria, does
thereupon grow to Resolutions of courage.

Hoc erat, Hoc votis, inquit, quod saepe petivi, Aencid. 1^. -- Priscum de more
Lati^is Auspi^um; (...) bell^ parant mentesqu^ deorum Explorant super Eventu,
etc. Sil* Ital. lib. 5.

Accipio, agnocosque Deos; me, me duce, ferrum
Corripite o Rutili.
This, This is that which in my chiefest thought
I still desired, and now find what I sought;
The Divine Tokens ^embrace and see*
Come Soldiers, Take your swords and follow me. Prove. ^1. 1. Isai. 31 4. Vid.
Iliad. ^ 23. Rhet. l. 2. c. 5.

Unto this Head of Religion belongs Innocence, as a most excellent cause of
Boldness; for the Righteous is bold as a Lion, which cares not though a
multitude of Shepherds come out against him. And the Philosopher tells us that
they who have done no wrong unto others, are confident of success in their
Attempts, believing that they shall find no Enemies, because they have
provoked none. A notable Example, Val. Max. l. 3. c. 7. vid. haud dissimile
Exemplum (...). Plutarch. de ^il. ex Hosti^. capi^nd.
whereof we have in M. Publius Furius the Roman Consul, who was so confident
of his own Integrity in public Administration, that being deputed by lot to
govern the Province of Spain, he chose the two bitterest Enemies that he had
in the City to be Coadjutors with him in that Dispensation. Whereunto may be
added the Answer which Drusus gave to him who would have contrived his house
for secrecy, when he told him that he could wish his house were pervious and
transparent that his privatest Actions might be seen in public.

And as Religion and Innocence, so on the (...) apud H^merum sape. Ier. 3. 3.
Isai. (...). 4. Ezekiel. 16. 30. O^ ferreum. Cic. in (...). Iul. (...). l. 3. c.
28. (...). (...) Alcib. vid. (...). (...) Arist. Ethic. l. 3. cap. 9.
other side Deboishnesse and Desperateness of living does implant a mavelous
Boldness in the Minds and faces of men, when they have no Modesty or shame to
restrain them. As we see in Gypsies, Parasites, Jugglers, (...), neurospastae,
and such like. And therefore such kind of men both in Scripture and in other
writings, are said to have faces of brass and necks of Iron, whorish and
impudent foreheads that cannot blush or be ashamed; and these words, (...), we
shall find for synonymies and of equal signification, whereof the former
signify Despair, Impudence, and the other Boldness.

Again, as Impudence, so Shame and fear of (...). Silentium illud obstinatum,
^ixi in terram oculi -- and pudor (...) i^dicia (...) ingentem (...) (...) ex
al^o (...) (...) (...) (...) ^iv. lib. 9.
Disgrace is a great Cause of Boldness, in virtuous and honorable Attempts;
for there is no Man of generous principles, but will much rather choose an
honorable danger than a sordid safety, and adventure his Person before he
will shipwreck his honesty or good name, choosing ever to regulate his
Behavior rather by a moral than a natural fear, to give an account of
himself rather to those that love his virtues, than to those who love his
fortunes. In one word standing more in awe of men's Hearts than of their Hands,
and shunning more a Just Reprehension than an Unjust Injury. And to this
purpose it is gravely observed by the Historian, that the dishonor which the
Romans suffered, ad furcas Ca^dinas, was that which procured their adversaries
a bloody overthrow afterward, quia Ignominia nec Amicos parat, nec Inimicos
t^llit. Their saving of the lives of the Romans to bring Ignominy upon them,
being esteemed not a benefit, but a scorn: a very like example 2. Sam. 10.
Mixtus dolor and pudor armat in Hosts. Aenead. 10. Tunc ^ide mal^, sed contra
(...) it^. Aenead. l. 5. Arist. ^ib. l. 3. c* ^ 1.
we have hereunto in the servants of David, abused and put to shame by Ha^un
the son of Ammon. And thus the Poet expresses the courage of Dares revived
by the fall which he had from Entellus:

At non tardatus casu, nec territus heroes,
Acrior ad pugnam redit, and vim suscitat ira,
Tum pudor incendit vires and Conscia Virtus.
Dares no whit dismayed, renewe^ the fight
With a more eager force, wrath does excite
The stouter courage, Shame with Valor met,
Inflamed his mind, and did his weapon whet.
Another cause of Boldness, is Immunity from Qui ad (...) callidi sunt, ^
tantum audent quantum excogitant. Cic. pro (...).
Danger, or at least a Versatilousnesse and Dexterity of wit to evade it, or
shift through it. And therefore though cunning men dare not always second
their contrivances with Execution, nor let their hand go in Equipage with
their wit; yet commonly men of vigorous fancies are so far in love with their
own conceptions, that they will many times venture upon some hazards, to bring
them into act, trusting the same (...) to bring them Plut. Apopb.
out of Danger, which has at first made them to adventure on it: as Dariu^ was
wont to say of himself, that in a pinch and extremity of peril, he (...)
ever wisest: and Sylla gave the same judgment Pl^t in Sylla. ^nsilium in (...)
S^n ca. (...). Soph. Autig.
of himself, that he came off best in those businesses, which he was the most
suddenly put upon, which also I find observed in the Character of our Henry
the seventh (who has had the felicity above all his Praedecessor^, to have his
^ineamenti drawn by the ablest pen that has employed it self in our Story)
that his wit was ever sharpened by Danger, and that he had a greater Denterity
to evade, than Providence to prevent them.

Another cause of Boldness (as I have formerly (...) facichat A^or. Ovid Met.
4.
noted on that Passion) is strength of Love, as we see weak Creatures,
indefence of their young ones, will set upon those that are strong, and the
Tribune in A. Gellius, out of Love either of his Country, A. Gell. l 3. c. 7.
or of Glory, did not only advice, but himself undertake the executing of a
service, where in he was beforehand certain to perish. And the same Author
tells us of Euclide, a Desciple of Socrates, A. Gell. 6. c. ^. Vile est
corpus (...) qui (...) gloriam qua^. ^iv. l. 2.
who ventured in a disguise upon the evident danger of his Life to enjoy the
Discourses and Counsels of his Master.

Lastly Pride, greatness of Mind or Parts, and opinion of Merit; especially
if it meet with discontentednesse and conceits of being neglected, does very
often embolden men to great and now Attempts: For it is a very hard thing when
great Abilities and vast Hopes meet together, to govern them with moderation.
Private Ends being in that case very apt to engage a man's parts, and to take
them off from public service unto particular advantage. And therefore I take
it, there is no temper of Mind that will with that evennesse and uniformity of
proceeding, or felicity of success, promote public and honorable Ends, as
Height of Abilities, with moderation of Desires; because in that case a man can
never stand in his own light, no^ have any mist or obstacle between his Eye and
his End.

Now from this ground I believe did arise that Cic. Tusc. q. l. 5. Arist.
Polit. l. 3. c. 13. Plut. in Alcib. and Arist id. ex Nicia. Eande virtute^ and
oderant and mirabantur. Live. l. 5.
Maxim of some of the States of Greece noted by Tully, and at large debated by
the Philosopher, Nem^ de nobis unui excellat, that they would not have any one
man to be notoriously eminent in abilities above the rest, and thereupon
instituted Ostracisme, or an honorable Bannishment, as a restraint either to
abate the excessive worth of eminent men: or to satisfy and assuage the Envy
which others might conceive against them, who are apt to hate the virtues which
they can only admire: or lastly, to prevent the dangers which greatness of
parts taking advantage of popularity and vulgar applause, might happily venture
to bring upon things. Upon this ground the Ephe sians expelled Hermodorus; and
the Athenians, Aristides, because he was too just for the rest of the people.
As one Voice in a Consort, which is loud above the proportion of the rest, does
not adorn, but disturb the Harmony; and therefore usually m^n of great parts,
have lien either under Envy or Jealousy. Men's minds out of I know not what
malignity, being apt to suspect that that will not be used unto Good, which
might be abused unto Evil, which Tacitus notes to have been the quality (...).
of Domitian, and Ammianus Marcellinus of Constantius toward men of the
greatest worth.

Now according to the difference of this Affection in different men, so it
works two different (...) (...) (...). 170. (...). (...).
Effects.

1 There is a Happy and Discree^ boldness, which does not anticipate, but
second and attend the mature counsels of the mind, and does first call out and
stir up it self by wisdom, before it proceed unto Action* or Execution*
like the Boldness of the Lion, which is Slow, but at last prospers in what it
undertakes. For after Counsel has ripened Resolutions, Boldness is then the
best Instrument to accomplish them, and in that case, quo minus timoris, minus
ferme perituli, as the Historian speaks. The less fears are, the less also
are their dangers, and the greater their Confidence, the surer their success:

-- (...). The Greeks by venturing did enjoy
Their ten years wish, and gained Troy,
2 There is a (...).
hasty and rash Boldness, which beginning too speedily without Counsel does
usually end too Cowardly, without Courage; for rash men whom the Philosopher
calls (...) men made up of confidence and fear, are bold and boasting before a
Danger; but in it very timorous* or at least inconstant. Lions in peace, but
Hearts in war, as Tertullians Proverb has it. (...).
Like those of whom Livy and Florus tell us, That they were more than men in
the onset, and less than women in the issue, melting away from their
Resolutions like Snow.

And another ill property of the Rashness of this Passion is, That it will
expose a man to more danger than the success which it aims at can
compensate^as he that fishes for a Gudgeon with a golden hook: or as Ulysses
who went back to the Cyclop^ his den to fetch his cap and girdle which he
had left behind him.

Another is, that it makes men Overvalue themselves, and so undertake things
too hard for them to endure or hold out in. Like (...).
Menelaus in the Poet, who would venture to fight with Hector or Ari^ioxenus in
Tully, who being a Musician, would needs determine in questions of Philosophy.

Lastly it has a property as we say, to break the Ice, and to give the first
onset upon dangerous Attempts, which is a thing of very perilous consequence,
not only to the Author, but many times (...).
to the public Peace too, c forward, exulcerated, and seditious spirits, being
too ready to follow what they dare not begin.

CHAP. XXI. Of the Passion of Fear: the Causes of it; Impotency,
Obnoxiousnesse, Suddenness, Neerenesse, Newness, Conscience, Ignorance of an
Evil.
THe opposite Passion to this of Vide Laert. in (...). l. 7.
of Hope is Fear: which being an Equivocall Passion, and admitting of many
different kinds, can sca^se have any whole and simple definition to explain
it. There is a Virtuous Fear; a Fear of Sin and Shame; an Intellectual
Fear of Admiration, when the excellency of the Object dazleth our Eye; a Fear
of Reverence; an Astonishing Fear, by reason of the Newness; and an
Oppressing Fear, by reason of the Neerenesse and Inavoydablenesse of the Evil
sea red. It is a Grief, Trouble, Flight, Aversation of some approaching Evil
apprehended, either as destructive, or as burdensome to our nature, and not
easily resistable by our strength: For the qualification of the Object thereof,
because it is in all circumstances like that of Hope (save in the Evil of it)
I shall therefore forbear to touch it, and shall only in brief consider the
Dignities and Defects thereof in its Causes and Effects.

Fear is an humbling and debasing Passion, which always imports some manner
of servitude and subjection in whom it resideth; So then as in the former
Passion of Hope I noted the fundamental cause thereof to be Weakness and
W^nt: so likewise in this of Fear, the Root and first Principle is Weakness^
and Subjection; whereof the one implies a disability in us to resist, the other
a necessity to undergo an evil.

Hence it is that we fear the displeasure of Great men; or the Power of
Unjust men; or the Competition of Popular and Plausible men; or ^bet. l. 2. 6.
5.
the Cunning of Close and Malicious men; or the Revenge of Provoked men; or the
Guilt of Injurious men that have wronged us already: because in all these cases
there is some notice of Weakness and Subjection in us: so that Fear is of
all other a naked Passion: For as Nakedness has three evil properties; to
disable for Defense; to expose to Injury; and from both to work shame in the
consciousnesse of our dejected condition: So likewise Fear has three
properties; to make us Impotent and Obnoxious; and from both these to beget
Shame. For though his speech was true, Diogenes apud l. a^rt. l. 6. (...).
Menander.
Rubor est virtutis color, that Shame and Virtue have the same color (which
makes it seem a companion rather of Perfection than of Weakness; yet indeed
it is rather a sign of a mind virtuously disposed in restifying the quick
apprehensivenesse of its own defects, than any Adjunct of Virtue it self.

So then the Roots of this Passion are Weakness and Subjection both together;
so that where either condition is wanting, there is not any proper ground of
Fear, and therefore we see sundry times strength takes off the yoke of
Obedience, not only in the civil government of men, but in the natural
government of creatures by men, to whom by the law of Creation they were all
made subject; yet the strength of many of them has taught them to ferget their
original Subjection, and in stead of Fearing, to terrify man their lord; and
when ever we tame any of them, and reduce them to their first condition: this
is not so much an act of our Dominion, whereby we awe them, as of our Reason,
whereby we deceive them; and we are beholding more therein to the working of
our Wit, than to the prerogative of our Nature; and usually every thing which
has knowledge enough to measure its own abilities; the more it has of
Strength, the less it has of Fear; that which Solomon makes the strongest,
the Apostle makes the fittest to expel Pear, to wit, Love.

So likewise on the other side, Immunity from Subjection in the midst of
Weakness removes Fear. Of this we may give an instance in guilty persons, who
notwithstanding their Weakness; yet when once by the privilege of their
Sanctuary or mercy of their Judge they are freed from the obligation of the
Law, though not from the Offense; their former Fears do presently turn into
Joy and Gratulations: and that is the reason why Good men have such Boldness,
Confidence, and Courage, that they can bid defiance unto Death; because though
they be not quite delivered from the Corruption; yet they are from the Curse
and Condemnation of Sin, though by reason of their Weakness they are not
delivered from the mouth; yet they are from the teeth and stings of Death;
though not from the Earth of the Grave; yet from the Hell of the Grave; though
not from Sin; ye^ from the Strength and Malediction of Sin* the Law ou^
Adversary must be strong, as well as our selves weak, if he look for Fear.

The Corruption then of this Passion, as it depen^eth upon these Causes is,
when it arises out of too base a conceit of our own, or too high of another
strength; the one proceeding from an error of Humility, in undervaluing our
selves; the other from an error of Judgment or Suspicion in mistaking of
others. There are some men who as the Or^our speaks of despairing Wits, De
(...) (...) ^rentur, who are too unthankful unto Nature in a sl^ight esteem
of the abilities she ^ath given them, and deserve that Weakness which they
unjustly complain of: The sight of whose Judgment is not unlike that of
Perspective Glasses* the two ends whereof have a double representation; the one
fuller and nearer the truth; the other smaller and at a far greater distance:
So it is with men of this temper, they look on themselves and others with a
double prejudice; on themselves with a Distrusting and Despairing Judgment,
which presents every thing remote and small; on Others with on Overvaluing and
Admiring Judgment, which contrariwise presents all perfections too perfect.
And by this means between a selfe-dislike, and a too high estimation of others,
truth ever falls to the ground, and for revenge of her self, leaves the party
thus (...) (...) Timorous. For as Error has a property to produce and nourish
any Passion, according to the nature of the subject matter which it is
conversant about: so principally this present Passion; because Error it self
is a kind of Formido Intellectus, a Fear of the Understanding: and it is no
great wonder for one Fear to beget another. And* therefore when Christ would
take away the Fear of his Disciples, he first removes their prejudice: Fear
not those that can kill the Body only, and can do no more. Where the
overflowing of their Fears seems to have been grounded on the overiudging of
an adverse power. Thus much for the Root and Essential cause of Fear: these
which follow, are more casual and upon occasion.

Whereof the first may be the Suddenness of a^ Evil, when it ceiseth upon (as
it were) in the Dark: Prae c^ris Hostibu^ ^imentur R^e^ ^iui. Ammian. Ma^c. l.
28.
for all Darkness is comfortless; and therefore the last terrible Judgment
is described unto us by the Blackness and Unexpectedness of it, by the
Darkness of Night, and the Suddenness of Lightning. All Vnacquaintaince then
and Igno* rance of an approaching Evil, must needs work Mala praeviso siunt
(...). Ci^ Tusc. q. l. 3. Annal. l* 1.
Amazement and Terror: as contrarily a foresight the^ of works Patience to
undergo, and Boldness to encounter it: as Tacitus speaks of Caecina,
Ambiguarum rerum sciens eoque intrepidus, that he was acquainted with
difficulties, and therefore not fearful of them. And there is good reason for
this, because in a sudden daunt and onset of an unexpected evil, the spirits
which were before orderly carried by their several due motions unto their
natural works, are upon this strange appearance and instant Oppression of
danger so disordered, mixed, and sti^lled, that there is no power left either
in the Soul for Counsel, or in the Body for Execution: For as it is in the
wars of men, so of Passions, those are more terrible, which are by way of
Invasion, then of Battle, which set upon men unarmed and uncomposed; then
those which find them prepared for resistance: and so the Poet describes a
lamentable overthrow by the Suddennes of the one side, and the Ignorance of the
other:

Invadunt urbe^ somno vin^que sepultam. Dum ed part qua mu^us dir^tus (...)
stationes arma^as opponunt: Quintiu^ (...) ab edpar^e, quae minime ^uspecta
er^* ^mpetu ^cto scal^ cepi^ ^ L^v. l. 32.
They do invade a City all at rest,
Which riot had with sleep and Wine oppressed.
And this is one reason why men inclinable to this Passion, are commonly more
fearful in the Night than at other times; because then the Imagination is
presenting of Objects not formerly thought on, when the spirits which should
strengthen, are more retired, and Reason less guarded.

And yet there are Evils too, which on the other side more affright with their
long expectation and train, than if they were more contracted and speedy. Some
set upon us by sleath, affrighting us like lightning with a sudden blaze others
S^n. Ep. 14.
with a train and pomp like a Comet, which is ushered in with a stream of
fire, and like Thunder, which hurts not only with its danger, but with its
noise: and therefore Aristotle reckons (...). the signs of an approaching
evil amongst the Objects of Fear.

Another cause of Fear may be the Neernesse of an Evil, when we perceive it
to be within the reach of us, and now ready to set upon us: For a^ it is with
Objects of Sense in a distance of place* so it is with the Objects of Passion,
in a Distance of Time; Remotion in either, the greater it is, the less present
it makes the Object; and by consequence, the weaker is the impression
therefrom upon the faculty: and this reason Aristotle gives why Death, which
else where he makes the most terrible evil unto Nature, does not yet with the
conceit thereof, by reason that it is apprehended at an indefinite and remote
distance, work such terror and amazement: nor so stiff Reason and the
Spirits, as Objects far less in themselves injurious to Nature; but yet
presented with a determined Neerenesse. And the reason is plain, because no
Evil h^ts us by a simple apprehension of its Nature, but of its Union: and all
Propinquity is a degr^e of Union. For although Futurition be a necessary
condition required in the Object, which must infer Fear; yet all Evil, the
less it has d^ Future, the more it has de Terribili: which is the reason,
why that Carnal Security, which is opposed to the Fear of God, is described
in the Scripture, by putting the Evil Day far from us, viewing as in a
Landscape and at a great distance the terror of that Day. And if here the
Atheists Argument be objected, Let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we shall
die: Where the propinquity of Ruin is made an Inducement unto Riot. We must
answer, that an Atheist is here in both right and vain, in that he conceives
Annihilation, or never more to be the best close of a wicked life; and
therefore most earnestly (though most vainly) desires that it may be the issue
of his Epicur^sme and Sensuality. And here briefly the Corruption of Fear in
this particular is, when it takes advantage by the approach of Evil, to swell
so high as to sink Reason, and to grow bigger than the Evil which it is
afraid of.

-- -- propiusque pericl^ Aenead. 8. I^ (...) and pe^iculo plura and man viden^
me^e^ ^s cum (...) (...), ^um sin^r (...) C^c. d^ Divi^. 1. 2
It Timor, and major Martis jam apparet imago* Their Fear gets closer than the
thing it fears,
Wars Image bigger than it self appears.
For as it is a sign of distemper in the Body, when the unequal distribution
of nourishment and humors causes some parts to exceed their due proportion of
greatness: so is it likewise in the saculties of the Mind, when the Inferior
grow high and strong; if Reason raise not it self to such a proportion, as
still to maintain and manage its authority and government over them. But this
is to be observed only of the Rising and Strength, not of the Humility and
Descent of Reason: For though it be fit for the power of Reason to keep it
self up above rebellion; yet is it not necessary that it should stoup and
sink according to the lowness or sordidnesse of any Passion. As in the Body,
though we would have all parts increase alike; yet if one part by distemper
grow weak, we require in the rest a fellow-feeling, not a fellow-languishing*
yea indeed in both cases, where the inferior part is weaker, it is the course
of Nature and Art to fortify the higher; because in a Superior there is
required as well a power to quicken and raise that which droopeth, as to
suppress and keep under that which rebelleth.

Another cause of Fear may be Ne fam^ aut rem in maju^ (...) aut (...) animo^
rer^ novitate (...). Justin. l. 14. (...). Clem. Alex. Cl^m. l. 2. (...). l. 3.
c. 7. Arrian Epict. l. 2. c. 1. N^m velu^ (...), atque omnia Caecu in tenebr^
(...): ita n^s i^ luce time^us. L^r.
Newness of Evil: When it is such, wherewith neither the Mind it self has
had any preceding encounter, whereby to judge of its own Strength; nor any
example of some other man's prosperous issue to confirm its hopes in the like
success: For as before I noted out of the Philosopher, Experience is in stead
of Armor, and is a kind of Fortitude, enabling both to judge and to bear
troubles: for there are some things which he elegantly calls them, (...).
Empty Dangers: Epictetus calls them, (...). Scar-crowes, and Vizors, which
children fear only out of Ignorance: as soon as they are known, they cease
to be terrible. As the log of timber which was cast into the pond, did with the
first noise exceedingly affright the Frogs, which afterward when it lay
quietly, they securely swam about. And this Ignorance and Inexperience is the
cause that a man can set no bounds to his Fear. I grieve for so much Evil as
has befallen me; but I fear so much as may befall me; and the Pli^. l. 8 ep.
18. Ver^or omnia, imagin^ omnia quaeque natura (...) est, ^a maxim mitui quae
maxim abomi^or, fingo,. Plin l. 6. ep 4. Vid. Sen. ep. 13. Prob. 14. ^. 15.
more strong and working my Fancy, the greater my Fear; because what I cannot
measure by Knowledge, I measure by Imagination* the figments of Fancy do
usually exceed Truth.

And from this Ignorance likewise it is, that Timorous men are usually
Inquisitive, as the Philosopher notes; and so the Prophet expresses the Fear
of the Idumeans in the War, Watchman! What of the Night? Watchman! What of
the Night? Fear usually doubleth the same questions, as Grief does the same
Complaints. Therefore men in a fright and amazement, look one another in the
face; one man's countenance, as it were asking counsel of another* and once
more Is^. 13. 8. 21. 11. (...). 51 31. Genesis 42. 1. (...)* Schol* ^n S^. Deuteronomy.
28. 25. In mag^ (...) s^ per (...) (...) tanquam maxim (...). Pl^. (...)
Mario* Deuteronomy. 28. 28. 95.
from hence grow the Irresolutions of Timorous men, because they know not what
to do, no^ which way to fly the things they fear: in which respect they are
said to fly from an Enemy seven ways, as ever suspecting they are in the
worst. Pavidei semper Consilia in incer^o, they never can have fixed and
composed Counsels: and it is the usual voice of Men in their Fears, I know
not what to do, I know not which way to turn my self; Trembling of Heart, and
Failing of Eyes, Blindness and Astonishment: Ignorance and Fear, do thus
usually accompany each other. And therefore the Stoics make (...) and (...) a
Laert. in Ze^. l. 7.
sluggish Affection of Mind, whereby a man shrinketh back, and declineth
business, because of difficulty of danger which he observes in it; and a
Tumultuary and distracted frame of Mind, not knowing which way to take, to be
amongst the kinds of this Passion of Fear. The Poet speaking of the Sabine
Virgins, whom the Roman youth snatched away, and took to them for Wives, has
thus elegantly described this distraction of Fear.

Vt fugiunt aquilat timidissima turba Columbae, Ovid. de Art Amandi. l. 1.

Vtque fugit visos agna novella lupos:
Sic illa simuere viros sine lege mentes,
Constitit in nulla qui fuit ante Color.
Nam Timor unus erat, facies non una timoris
Pars laniat Crines, pars fine mente sedet.
Altera maesta filet, frustra vocat altera matrem,
Haec queritur, stupet hac, hac fugit, illa manet.
As weak and fearful Doves the Eagle fly,
And tender Lambs when they the Woolfe epsy:
So the affrighted Sabine Virgins run
Pale and discolored, Roman youth to shun.
Their Fear was One, but Fear had not One look,
Part here sit reav'd of sense, part there does pluck,
And tear their hairs, One silent mourns, another
With a successelesse Outcry calls her Mother.
One moanes, the fright another does amaze:
One flies for Fear, for Fear another stays.
Now the reasons why newness of evil does thus work fear, may be many. For
first, all Admiration is ^ kind of fear: it being the property of man, not
only to fear that which is Against, but that also which is above our Nature,
either in regard of natural and civil dignity, which works a fear of
Reverence; as to parents, governors, masters; or in regard of Moral
Excellency and Excesses above the strength of the faculty, which works a
Fear of Advancement of Learning.
Admiration. Now then it is the property of every thing, that brings novelty
with it to work more (...). Laert. in Zenon. l. 7. Pl^tarch. de And. (...).
(...). ph. l. 1. ^. 2
or less, some manner of admiration, which, (as the Honor of this ages
learning calls it) is a broken knowledge, and commonly the first step, which we
make in each particular Science: and therefore children are most given to
wonder, because every thing appears New unto the^. Now then when any evil
shall at onc^ fright our nature, and pose our understanding, the more our
Ignorance does weaken our Reason, the more does it str^ngthen our Passion.

Again, though such evils may happily be in Not. Qu^st. l. 7. c, 1.
themselves but slight, yet the very strangeness of them will work an
opinion of their greatness: for as that of Seneca is true, Magnitudinem rerum
(...) sub duci^: that use makes small esteem of great things: so it will follow
on the contrary side, that Novelty makes evil appear greater, as the way
which a man is least acquainted with s^emes the longest. I^l. Capit^l. in Max
m^ and (...). Vid. (...) S^turn.
And therefore the Romans did use themselves unto their gladiatory fights and
bloody spectacles that acquaintance with wounds and blood might make the^ the
less fear it in the wars.

And lastly, such is the imbred cautelousnesse of Nature in declining all
noxious things, and such is the common suspicion of the Mind, whereby out of a
tendering of it is own safety, it is willing to know every thing before it make
ex periment of any, and thereby it is made naturally fearful even of harmless
and inoffenssive things ( Omniatutatimens, much more then of those which bring
with them the noise and face of evil.

Now the coruption of this passion herein i^, when it falls too soon upon
the Object, and snatcheth it from the understanding before that it has duly
weighed the nature of it; when ^s Aristotle speaks of Anger) that it runs away
from reason with an half message, so the Object shall be plucked away from the
understanding with an half judgemen^. For when a man has but an half and
broken sight, like him in the Gospel, he will be easily apt to judge men as big
as trees, and to pass a false sentence upon any thing which he fears.

Another cause of Fear may be Conscience of evil and guiltiness of mind,
which like mud in water, the more it is stirred, does the more soul ^isd. 17.
11.
and thicken: For wickedness, when it is condemed of it is own witness is
exceeding timorous, and being (...). Anal. lib. 6.
pressed with conscience, always forecasteth terrible things; and as the
Historian speaks of Tyrants, so may we of any other wicked men, Si
recludantur mentes, posse aspici laniatus and ictus, their minds with lust,
cruelly and unclean resolution, being no less torn and made raw, then the
body flight with scourges: Every vicious man has a double flight from God, a
flight from the Holiness, and a flight from the Justice of his will. Adam
first eats, and next he hides: as soon as he has transgressed the Covenant,
he expects the Curse, and therefore we shall still observe that men are afraid
of those whom they have injured. Aelian. Var. Hist. l. 13. c. 38.
Al biciades having provoked the Athenians, was afraid to trust them, saying,
It is a foolish thing for a man when he may fly, to betray himself into their
hands from whom he cannot fly. And therefore they who would have us fear
them, desire nothing more then to be privy to our guilts, and to know such
crimes of us, as by detecting of which, they have it in their power to bring
either infamy or loss upon us. Inven. S^tyr. (...) erit verri qui verrem
tempore qu^ valt. Accusare p^ test, etc.


Scire volunt secreta domus, atque inde Timeri. Into our secret crimes they
pry, that so
We may fear them, when they our vices know.
And therefore innocence is the best Armor that any man can put or against
other men's malice Prove. 28. 1.
or his own fears: For the righteous are bold as a Lion. Minus time^ant
Epaminondem. (...) (...). Pl^tarch. de (...).


Other causes of Fear might here be observed which I shall but intimate. As we
fear active and busy men, because if they be provoked, they will stir and
look about to revenge themselves.

We fear likewise Delators, because they are inquisitive and pry into the
secrets of others. Plutarch compares them unto cupping glasses which draw ever
the worst humors of the body unto them, and to those gates through which none
passed but condemned and piacular per sons. We may liken them unto flies, which
resort only to the raw and corrupt parts of the body, or if they light on a
sound part, never leave blowing on it, till they dispose it to putrefaction.
For this is all the comfort of malevolent persons, to make others appear worse
then they are, that they themselves, though they be the worst of men, may not
appear so.

We fear also abusive and Satyricall wits, which make use of other men's names,
as of Whetstones to sharpen themselves upon.

Omnes hi metuunt versus, odere poetas,
Fanum habet in corn^, long suge; dummodo risum ^orac. ^. 1. S^. 4.

Excut^at sibi, non hic cuiquam parcet amico.
Et, quodcunque semel Chart is illeverit, omnes
Gestiet a furno redeuntes scire, lacuque,
Et pueros, and anu^ -- --
These all hate Poets, fear to suffer seorne
From those cursed wits, which carry hay in horn.
Shun them, they will not spare their dearest friend
to make themselves sport. The^ what they have pend
They Are big with, till old wives and boys that go
From Ovens and from washpooles know it too.
Lasty, we fear, close, cunning; and suppressed (...) A^tst. Rb^. l. 2.
malice, which like a skinn'd wound does wrankle inwardly: Crafty, insinuative,
plausible men, that can shroud and palliate their revengefull purposes, under
pretexts of love. I formerly noted it of Tiberius, and (...).
Aelius Spartianu^ observes it of Antoninus Geta, that men were more afraid of
his kindness then of his anger, because his use was to show much courtesy
there where he intended mischief.

And (...).
Caesar was wont to say that he was not afraid of Antony and Dolabella, bold
adversaries, but of Brutus and Cassius, his pale and lean enemies, who were
able to smoother there passion, till they had fit opportunity to act it. The
Italians (they say) have a Proverb wherein they promise to take heed themselves
of their enemy, but pray to God to deliver them from their friend. And this as
it is of all other the most dangerous and the most unchristian, so is it the
most unworthy and sordid disposition of mind, (I cannot find words bad
enough to character it (...).
by) which at the same time can both flatter and hate, and with the same breath
praise a man, and undo him. And therefore the Arist. ^th c. lib. 4. cap. 8.
(...)
Philosopher tells us that a magnanimous man is (...) and (...). Such an one
as does boldly profess as well his displeasure as his love, esteeming it
timorousness to stifle and conceal his affections.

Of all Christ's enemies, Judas when he kissed him, the Herodians when they
praised him, and the Devil when he confessed him were the worst and
ill-favouredest. A leprosy was ever uncleanest when it was whitest, and Satan
is never more wicked or more ugly then when he puts on Samuels Mantle. Hatred
when it flatters, is the most misshapen monster. Like those poisons which kill
men with laughing; or like the Philistines trespasse-offering, Mice, and
Emerauds made of gold.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of the Effects of Fear, suspicion, Circumspection,
Superstition, 'Betraying the succors of Reason, Fear Generative, Reflecting,
Inward, weakening the faculties of the Mind, Base Supition, wise Caution.
I Proced to consider some of the Effects of this Passion, whereof the first
may be Suspicion and Credulity, which either other men's rumors, or our own
working Imagination frames untoit self. Which effect of Fear the Historian
has wisely observed, Retineri comeatus Tac^. lib. 4.
dum Timet, Credit, what he feared that he believed. And in another place
speaking of the strange relations, which had been made of Monsters, his
Judgment on the report is, Visa, sive ex metu credita. A^al. lib. 2*
It was uncertain whether they had been really seen or believed out of Fear.
For as timorous men are by their own suspicion ready to frame unto themselves
new terrors, and to fear where no fear is, which the Poet has observed.

Quae finxere Timent. (...) M^and.
-- they are afraid, Of fancies which themselves have made. So are they ready
likewise to believe the apparition of their own brain for real terrors: For
Tacitus his speech is here likewise true: Fingunt Creduntque, first they
feign, and then they believe.

Now the Reason hereof may be, First, the general Quorum in al^orius m^nu vita
posita est, saepius ill^d cogitant quid p^ssit is cujus in diliou: sunt qua^
q^id de (...) facere. Cic. pro q^inctio.
Impression of Nature, which being subject unto Infinite dangers, has
therefore given it a wisdom of providence, and circumspection to foresee
those evils, which cannot by dexterity be so easily shifted off, as they may at
a distance be prevented; so that we find even in the most clear and
undisturbed order of our operations toward any new thing (though not
apprehended as noxious and offensive to our Nature) until it be better
understood, a secret drawing back and fear least it should prove hurtful unto
us; how much more then when it is once prepossessed with passion: For as cloth
once died from it is natural white, will take no other but a darker color: So
minds once steeped in the bitter De Timore is ^o me (...) (...) de q^ae d^m
apud al* ^odig.. 9. cap. 26.
humors of this melancholique passion, will seldom admit of any, but more
black and fearful conceits. Quod de (...) observani^ Ammian Marcell. lib.
16. (...) (...) l'lutar^bus de Medea R^ipid. in Medea. De Domitian^ (...)
quidam (...) magu quam cum (...) sunt Timend^ sunt. Sen^. Ep. 11.
And from this suspicion of fear it is that timorous men are usually cruel
when they gain any advantage. Their jealousy teaching them to do that unto
others which they fear from them.

A second Reason may be, because in fear the mind of man is drawn to a
nearer sense of it is weakness, and to a more prejudicate apprehension of the
adverse power: and therefore it is a true observation, Tacit. Annal. lib. ^.
Vid. Plutarch. de superstitione Et lib. contra Epicur. Max. Tyrius (...). 4.
Clem. Alex. Strom. lib. 7. p. 51^. Nist. lib. 2.
Prona ad Religionem p^rculsa semel mentes, etc. Minds once possessed with
fearful conceits, are most forward in sacrifices, and Religious Ceremonies,
to avert the evils, which they expect. So that as Tacitus on another occasion
speaks, Inclinatis ad credendum. So I may say, Inclinatis ad timendum animis
loco omnium, etiam Fortuna, When the mind is once drooping, things which
before passed away as matters of course and casualty, are now drawn within the
compass of presages and Emphaticall evils.

But here by the way we are to remember that this credulity of fear is to be
understood with respect to it is own suspicion, otherwise in regard of those
strengthening helps which are given against it, it is ever Incredulous: O thou
of little faith! why do thou fear?

Now this effect of Fear is generally in it self a corruption of it: For
though I would have a man's dangers make him provident and solicitous in the
forecasting future evils out of a sound and sober conjecture, according as are
the likelihoods of their event, and not have him flatter himself in a
careless security, nor divert his Mind from such unwelcome and pensive
thoughts, like Vitellius in Tacitus, who in the near approach of his fatal
^ine, was Trepidus dein Temulentus, one hour Fearful, and the next Drunken,
smothering in himself every thought of ensuing danger, and enduring nothing
but I^cundum and L^surum; that which was pleasing, though harmefull to him; yet
I would not have the mind tormented with ungrounded Fancies, and preoccupate
Evils to be no further effected than in our brain, because hereby it is made
soft and irresolute, tumultuary and confused, and both ways much indisposed
and disabled for Action.

Another ill Effect of Fear, is a Dislike of whatever means Reason presents
for the freeing of us, whence issue Inconstancy and continual Change of
Resolutions, hating all Counsels when they are present, and recalling them when
they are too far past* which Effect is elegantly described by the Author of
the Book of Wisdom, who says that Fear is a betraying of the Succors
which Reason offers: a submitting of them to the false interpretations of a
crooked and prejudicate suspicion, which overcuriously discovering Weakness in
all means, and making use of none, does thereby betray Nature into the hands of
Danger. Themistocles apud l'lut. Apo (...).
They say of a certain Fish, that it has a Sword, but it has not a Heart: a
perfect Emblem of Fear, which though you put into Armor, yet you cannot give
it Courage. And C^abrias ib. and O^t. a de (...). (...). Alex. Arist. (...)
etc. ^. (...). ^dip. ^yr. ^ac. A^. ^. 3. (...). Omnia tuta imens. Non (...)
(...) (...) suum qua^ boste^m tu crun^ (...) tanto. Live. l 1. (...). l. 3.
therefore as he said, an army of Lions led by a Heart, would do less service
than an army of Hearts led by a Lion, because in that case Fear would betray
her own succors. And this I find a frequent observation, that Pavidis
consiliain incerto. Fear ever dazleth the Eye, and blinds the Mind in all
her Counsels: and Timor etiam auxilia reformidat. It is afraid of the very
succors that are offered. And therefore it is noted as a great mastery of
Ulysses over his Fears, that he could think and wisely advise what to do.

-- Nec talia passus Ulysses, Oblitusq, sui est Ithacus discrimine tanto.
Although with Fears oppressed* yet he had not
The Cares and thoughts of his own peace forgot.
Now the reason of this may be first, because Fear is a Multiplying and
Generative Passion, ever producing motions of its own Nature. He^ which fears
danger from another power, will easily (...). In q^m sed usu receptum, quod
honesta confilia, ^ei (...), (...) mala aut pros. pere (...) ita velp b^n tur,
vil^* pre^. (...). l. 5. ep. 21. (...). Epict. l. 2. c. 1.
fear Errors or Impotency in his own ayds* and it is * common with men to
think themselves Unwise, when they feel themselves Unhappy* and this very
thought that they are so, does I know not by what Fascination make them so. So
that as a chased Buck, when he flies from the Dogs, does many times fly into
the Net which was spread for him: so when our Fears drive us from one
mischief, the often hamper and entangle us in another.

Again it is the property of Fear, to make us ever reflect upon our own
Weakness, and (as I said) not only to present it, but to work it: as the Sun
when it discloseth unto us the Glorious Lights of the one part, is commonly it
self hid in the other part of the Heavens: as contrarily, when it shines on
the Earth, it hides the Stars: so it is in those two Offices of Reason* the
Transient and Reflexive act, that whereby we look Outward on others; or Inward
on our selves, specially where there is Passion to withdraw and pervert it; as
the one is stronger, so commonly the other is weaker: which is true most of all
in this Passion of Fear, wherein the more we see of dangers from outward
oppositions, the less we see of inward strength for resistance. Insomuch that
great minds, when they meet with great dangers, are oftentimes staggered, as
the Po^t intimates, when Ajax came forth to battle:

(...) Illad. ^ ^62.
Fear had the other Trojans all oppressed;
Yea Hectors heart panted within his breast.
A third Effect may be a Weakness of the Fa culties of the Mind, and the
Spirits in the Body; whereby the one is made unfit for Search or Counsel; the
other for Service or Execution. And hence (as Plutarch notes) it imports in
the Plut. de ^up.
Greek, a Binding or Shutting up, and so withdrawing and indisposing the Soul
for Action. And such Actions, as Fear forces a man upon, are presumed to be
so weak and unnatural, that it is a Maxim in the Law, Per metumgesta, pr^
non ratis habentur: Those things which we do in Fear, are void and invalide
to bind, when the Fear which forces them is removed. And as it is in the
Civil State, so it is in the Moral Commonwealth of the Soul, there are
three principal ways to infer Weakness, Foreign Incursions, Intestine
Tumults, and an Emptying of the Parts, all which are to be seen in an Extremity
of Fear. Where first two things are to be granted, one concerning the Body,
and the other the Mind. The first is, that the Spirits being of the most
strong, subtle, and quick motion, are the principal Instruments of
Intercourse, either in Negotiation to, or Service from Reason: the other, that
the Mind being of a Spiritual and Elevating Nature, retains then the
perfectest power of Operation, when it least of all suffers the Incursion of
grosser Passions, which yet I understand not of all manner of Ministry and
Admixtion of Appetite, with Reason (as if the Regular motions of inferior
powers did not serve to sharpen the Counsels of the higher) but only of
Invasion and Tyranny.

Which granted, we may observe all the three former causes of Weaknesses in an
Extremity of Fear. For first there is a Confused and Unserviceable mixture of
Passion and Reason: The Passion with too much outrage and assault breaking in,
and distracting the advices of Reason, which is Foreign Incursion: For,
though these two are not parts of a different Regiment; yet they are of a
different Nation (if I may so speak) the one belonging to the higher, the
other to the lower parts or region of the Soul. Secondly, there is Tumult and
Disorder amongst the Spirits, which is Civil Dissension. Thirdly, there is a
Retyring of them to the principal Castle or Fort, the Heart, whereby the
Outward Quarters are left Naked and Vngarrison'd; which though it be a
strengthening of the Better, yet it is a Weakening of the Major part, and this
answers unto Emptying or Vacuity. By all which, both Reason is made unfit for
Counsel (all the Conceits thereof being choked and stifled with a disorderly
throng of Spirits and Passions) and the Body likewise is so benumbed, that
though our discourse were entire, yet it could not be there seconded with any
successful service. And hence are those (...).
many ill Effects of Fear upon the Body, whiteness of Hair, Trembling,
Silence, Thirst, Palenesse. Horror, Gnashing of Teeth, Emission of Excrements.
The Outward parts being overcooled, and the Inward melted by the strength of
the Spirits retyring thither. Which Homer has thus described, speaking of a
Coward.

His Color comes and goes, nor does he set (...).

Long in one place; he croucheth to his feet;
His Heart pants strong, and intercepts his breath,
His Teeth do gnash with, but the thoughts of Death.
Brave men are still the same, not much aghast,
When the first brunt of their Attempts is past.
Where by the way we may observe what Seneca also tells us, that Fear does
usually attend the (...).
beginnings of great enterprises, even in the worthiest men. Which minds me
of one more, (and that an useful and profitable) Effect of this Passion, I
mean (...). (...) (...). (...).
Care, Wisdom, and Caution, which ever proceeds from a Moderate Fear, which
is a Dictate of Nature. And therefore the weakest Fishes swim together in
shoales, and the weakest Birds build in the smallest and outermost boughs,
which are hardest to come unto. And we may observe that Nature has made the
weakest Creatures swiftest: as the Dove, the Hare, the Heart: and the (...).
say that the Hare is very quick at hearing, and sleeps with his Eyes open,
every way sitted to discover danger before it surprise him. For as in Religion,
a Fear that is governed by the Word of God, so proportionably in Morality: a
Fear grounded by the Word of Reason, is the Principle of Wisdom. As Security
and Supinenesse is the Root of Folly, which Tiberius replied to the petition of
Hortulu^, wherein he requested of the Senate a Contribution from the public
Treasury to recover the honor of his Family, which now was sunk and began to
wither. Industry says he will languish, Idleness will increase, if no man
have Fear or Hope in himself: but all will securely expect a supply from
others; in themselves l^zy and burdensome unto us: and it is the judgment of
Tacitus upon one of the wisest Policies, which ever that Emperor practiced, I
mean his writing to the Legions abroad, Tanquam adepto principatu, as if he
were already Emperor, when at home in the Senate he used only Modesty and
Refusals, That he did it out of Fear, so wise a Counselor was his (...).
Passion unto him. And we find that some * great Commanders have caused their
Skout-watches to be unarmed, that Fear might make them the more vigilant. And
therefore this Passion is the (...).
Instrument of Discipline, seasoning the Mind, as ground Colors do a Table,
to receive those beauties and perfections, which are to be superinduced.

CHAP. XXIX. Of that particular Affection of Fear, which is called Shame. What
it is. Whom we thus fear. The ground of it, Evil of Turpitude, Injustice,
Intemperance, Sordidnesse, Softness, Pufillanimity, Flattery, Vainglory,
Misfortune, Ignorance, Pragmaticalnesse, Deformity, Greatness of Mind,
Unworthy Correspondencies, etc. Shame, Vicious and Virtuous.
BEsides this general Consideration (...) Arist. Eth. l. ^. c. 1^. (...), etc.
Arist. R^et. l. 2. c. 6. (...). Dama^ce* de Orthod. sid. l, 2. c. 15. A. Gell.
l. 9 c. 6 (...) Iliad. ^ 214.
of the Passion of Fear, there is one particular thereof, which calls for
some little observation; namely, Shame, which is a Fear of just Disgrace, and
Reproof in the Minds of those, whose good opinion we do or ought to value, as
he said in the Poet, (...).

Now those whom we thus fear, are wise men, (for so Polydamas is said to look
behind and before him.) Aged men, and all whose presence we reverence as
Parents, Rulers, Counselors, Friends: Any whom we our selves Admire, or who
Admire us. We fear disgrace with those whom we Admire, because their judgment
of us, is in our own Apprehension, a kind of Touchstone, which is we cannot
suffer the Trial off, argues us to be but corrupt and uncurrant Mettail. And
we fear it with those who Admire us, because as every man it willing to see
his face when it is clean, in that Glass which represents it fairest: so when
it is soul, of all others he shunneth that most. In the former case we are in
danger to miss of what we desired; in the other, we are in danger to
shipwreck what we before inioyed.

We are apt to be ashamed with our Friends, because their opinion we value,
and with our Enemies, because theirs we fear; with our Friends, because they
are Grieved; with our Enemies, because they are delighted with that which
shames us.

Again we fear in this Regard, Rigid and Severe Men, who are not ready to
forgive, not to put Candide and Charitable Constructions upon what we do.
Therefore when Cat^ was present (who was virrigida Innocentia, a stern and
severe Live. l. 3^. val. Max. lib. 2. ^. 10 Vid. e^am lib. 4 cap. 5.
Censor of the manners of Men) none durst call for the obscoene spectacles of
their Floralia, being more awed by the Authority of the man, than al lured by
the pleasure of the Plays.

Likewise Busy and Garrulous men, because they enquire into our Crimes, and
having disclosed, do divulge them. For which cause we fear in this case the
Multitude, because an ill name is like an (...) (...) ^dosed (...) ^. ^p (...).
l 7. c. 1.
ill face, the broader it is drawn, and the more light it has about it, it
appears the more deformed. As a little Gold beaten into thin Leaves: a little
Water drawn into a thin steeme and vapor, seems wider than it was at first: so
even lesser Crimes being multiplied through the mouths of many, do grow into a
spreading cloud, and obscure a man's name. For he is presumed to be void either
of wisdom or modesty, that does not fear many Eyes. We fear Innocent and
Virtuous Men, their presence aweth us from Liberty of Sinning, and makes us
blush if they deprehend us in it, because Examples have a proportionable
Authority over the Heart of Man, as Laws have, which we do not trespass
without Fear. And therefore the Philosopher advises to live always so, as if
some grave, and serious and severe person were ever before us, to behave our
selves sub Custode, and Sev. ^p. 11. and 25. Cydias ^rator Atheniensi^ and
Aristotele^. R^et. l. 2. cap. 6. Et Persae adu^co (...) praeai^. (...) ^bent
quod Cy^ (...) ^sset Pl^tarch. Apoth. Aristid. ^rat. de (...)
Paedagoge, as under the Eye of a Keeper, because such a man's conversation will
either regulate ours, or disgrace it. Vicious men do the less fear one
another, by how much they stand in need of mutual pardon, as we find
Stertorius (if I forget nor) giving those soldiers of the Enemies army their
lives, who had but one Eye, he being himself Mon^phthalmos.

Again we fear Envious and malevolent persons, because such look upon our
Actions with prejudice; and as Momu^ when he could not find fault with the
face in the Picture of Venus, picked a quarrel at her Slipper: so these men
will ever have something either in Substance or Circumstances of our Actions, to
misreport and expose to scandal.

Lastly we fear those in this respect, whose Company we shall most be used
unto; because that leaves us not time wherein to forget our Errors, or to
fortify our selves against them. It makes a man live ever under the sense of
his Guilt. In which respect Cat^major was wont to say, That a man should most
of all reverence himself, because Plutarch Apoph.
he is ever in his own sight and Company.

The Fundamental Ground of this Affection, (...).
is any Evil that has either Guilt, or any kind of Turpitude in it, or any
signs and suspicions thereof, reflecting either on our selves, or any of ours,
whose reputation we are tender of. And thus the Apostle tells us, that all
Sin is the matter of Shame, when it is revived with a right judgment. What
fruit had you then in those things whereof you are now ashamed. That which has
Emptiness in the Beginning, and Death in the End, must needs have Shame in the
middle. But though all Sin with respect to Gods Eye and Judgment does cause
Shame yet in the Eye of men, those cause it most which have any notable and
more odious Turpitude adhering unto them. As either obscene or subdolous, and
dishonest Actions when they are detected, forging of Deeds defacing Records,
counterfeiting of names or seals, suborning of Wit nesses, making use of
ingenious Professions, as Cloakes to palliate, and instruments to provoke
Abusive and Illiberall practices.

Such are all kind of Sordid Actions or Behaviors, as Gain raised out of
despicable Com modities, (as (...) (...) in Ve^p. c. 23 v^d. (...) apud (...)
lib. (...)
Vespatian set a vectigal or excise upon Piss) and the Philosopher tells us of
some that made a oo^r. (...) V^d. (...). (...). pu^ (...). (...). 2. (...) V^d.
de ca Theophrast.
gain of the dead. Such are also the Livings which by sordid ministers,
Panders, Bawdes, Curtezans, Vid. Desid. Herald. digres. l 1 c. 21.
Parasites, Iuglers, Vid. l Ti^. ^aneg. Taci* Annal. l. 4.
Dela tors, Cheaters, Sharkes, and shifting Companions make unto themselves,
such the Poets miser^.

-- Hera^. l. 1. Sat. 1. Vid. Pl^ut. Aut. l. ^ll. 2, (...). (...)
Populus me sibilat at mihi plaudo Ipse do, si mul ac nummos contemplor in
arca. The people hiss me all abroad,
But I at home my self applaud.
When in my Coffers I behold,
That which none hiss at, heaps of Gold.
Many particular Causes there are which are apt to excite this affection, some
whereof I shall briefly name as.

First Sloth, and shrinking from such labor, which those that are better,
older, weaker, more delicate then our selves do willingly undergo. (...)
Thus Menelaus in the Poet seeing the Grecians as fearful to undertake a
single combat with Hector, as they were ashamed to deny it, did thus upbraid
their Cowardice.

(...). Illl^d*. 97.
What Grecian soldiers turned to Grecian dames? O vere (...)* eui^ (...) (...).
9.

That can digest so great, so many shames?
What not a man of Greece (O foul disgrace)
Dare meet or look proud Hector in the face?
Well, sit you down Inglorious, Heartlesse men,
Turned to your first water and earth: yet then:
I Will take up Arms; for Victories last End,
Does not on Our, But Divine will depend.
In like manner Hector rebukes the baseness of Paris in flying from Menalaus.

(...). Trim Warrior, tell me what thy Lute can do, ^iad. ^. 55. (...) Vocal
lapides quibus ^dul. (...) ex Anti^ more (...) (...). (...). Quam ^nique (...)
(...) ij qui minu^ habent, (...) s^mper (...) ^ (...) (...). (...). lho^m.

What Venus Graces, comely heir, sweet hew,
When thou shall wallow in the dust? Thou Art far,
Fitter to wear Stone-coat, then Coat of War.
Again, any thing which argues pusillanimity or littleness of mind is a
just ground of shame, as to recount courtesies and upbraid them, and therefore
he said in Seneca, Non tanti est vixisse. That his life was less worth, then
to be so valued to him, in daily Exprobrations, and that his blood with less
trouble to him might have been let out at his veins, then to be every day
disordered, and called up into his face. To receive continual Gifts, and be
ever craving from our inseriours, burden some to those who can less bear it.

Hereunto refer all Light ludicrous and ridiculous behavior, wherein if a
Grave or serious Plutarch. A. ^opi l. ^con. (...) (...) Plutarch. and (...).
(...). Eun ^. (...) Act 2. (...). 2. A^l. 1. (...) 7. and ^ la^ti Ar^ in mil.
1, Glor.
man be deprehended, it renders him suspected of a mind that can flag and
lessen, and therefore Agesilaus being so taken playing with his child made his
Apology for it, and desired his friend not to think light of him, till he had
children of his own, for love will teach Greatness of Mind to descend.

Also all sordid Arts of a Flattery, which praises, imitateth, creeps,
changes, complieth, transformeth it self to all shapes to get a living, and
like Crows pulls out men's eyes, with praises that it may after more securely
make a prey of them, Fadum crimen servitutis, as the Historian well calls it, A
servile and filthy Crime.

Any thing which argues vanity, and windiness of mind, as Vid. Theoph. (...)
Pla^ti mil^ Glor Arist. Eth c. l 4. c. 13. Val. Max. ^. 9. c. 15.
Arrogance, and vain glorious Ostentation, ascribing to our selves things
which belong not unto us, intruding into the learning Lands, ^cheiements of
other men, as he who called all the ships in the harbor at Athens Plutarch.
l. De (...) (...)
his own. Labor alien^ magnam partam gloriam verbis sape in se trans^ovet.
Whereunto belong Absurd, and unusual Affectations in words or fashions,
mimicall and fantastical gesticulations srothy and superficial Complements,
Strange and exoticke Habits, which are usually the seum of Light, and unsettled
minds, and ever expose them to contempt. In so much that Alexander himself
escaped not the Imputation of Lenity, when he followed the fashions of those
Countries which he had subdued.

Misfortune and decay in the outward Ornaments of Life, for it is not in men's
fortunes, as in their monuments wherein Carios jam (...) ^asumq* minorem (...)
and (...) (...) viculu, (...). q (...) Invenal.
Ruin does many times conciliate Reverence.

Nil habet Infelix Paupertas durius inse Quam quod ridiculos homines facit --
Unhappy Poverty has nothing worse,
Then that it makes men ridiculous.
And therefore men of sunk and broken estates are ashamed to live there, where
they have been formerly in Credit and Estimation, as Hecuba complaining in the
Tragaedie.

(...) Eu^ipid. in Hec.
M^gnum do^oren habet unde cum hono^e dec^sseris codem (...) ignominia reverti.
Cic. pro l. Muran^. (...), Iliad. ^.
In this my broken and dejected case,
Pardon me, if I shame to show my face.
To Polymestor, whose Eyes once have seen,
Me, a now spoiled Captive, then a Queen.
Again, Ignorance and Ineptitude in our own proper functions and miscarriage
in our own Arts and professions, is an Exprobration, either Ar^ium peccata
artificibus pu^ori sunt etc. -- Sen. Ep. 97.
of indiligence, or of weakness. As want of proficiancy in a Student, of
Elocution in an Orator, of Military wisdom in a Soldier, etc. And therefore
a Physician will seldom stay to see his Patient buried, he usually departs
before the sick man, because Funerals are Convicia Medi little. Yet all
Ignorance is not matter of disgrace, for some things there are below the
inquiry, or Studies of some men. And therefore though Tully tells us that when
Themistocles declined Cic. Tusc. qu. lib. 1.
the Lute* he was esteemed more Ignorant then became a person of quality, yet
it was a brave Apology which he made for himself, That though he knew not to
handle a Lute, yet (...).
he knew to conquer a City. And Gel^ when others after a Feast sang to an
Instrument, called for his great Horse, and did excellently manage that. And as
it was a cautelous Answer which Favorinus gave touching Adrian the Emperor,
who had censured him in his own profession of Spa^tian in Adrian^.
Grammar. That he durst not be learnedner then he who commanded thirty
legions; so it was a ruer answer which another Artificer gave in the like case
unto a Prince. God forbid Sir that you Plutarch.
should know things of so mean a quality, better then I who owe my subsistence
unto them. (...).


And as Ignorance in our own, so Intrusion and Usurpation of other men's
offices, is a ground of shame, especially if they be such as wherein we descend
the below the Dignity of our places or (...) (...) (...), ^rnamentum in (...)
Sal^ la^. de (...). lib. 4.
professions, as when men of liberal condition apply themselves unto the
business of fordid persons. For every man is entrusted with the Dignity of his
place, he is to be not only the possessor, but the Protector of it, which when
he betraies, it does justly Revenge it self upon him with contempt and
disgrace.

Again, any notorious external Deformities, Siden. (...). l. 3 (...). 13.
(...). ^. Vid. Vo^* (...). part. 1. p. 78. 79 O (...)* (...) (...) lib 3. c.
17. ^9.
and Dehonestament a corporis, especially if there be any thing of our own,
either guilt or servility in them. The Grecians taking notice of the ill shape
and worse conditions of Thirsiti^, are said to look on him with derision and
laughter, then when they had other occasions of sadness. And when Ulysses his
Companions were by Circe transformed into shape of Swine, they wept and were
ashamed of their own deformities. And the Poet describes Delophebus whom
Menelaus had dismembered,

-- Pavitantem and dira tegentem Supplicia. Aen^id. 6.
Afraid of being known, careful to hide
His mangled wounds, that they might not be spide.
And we find how careful men were to cover Vid. ^um lib. 6. Val. Max. l. 6.
c. ^.. 7.
any of these notes and prints of Infamy, or servility, which persons either
extremely vicious, or in (...). Calig. c. 27.
bondage were marked withal, for infamous or servile persons were wont so to
be branded. Lips. l. 2. Elect. c. 15.


Many times Greatness of Mind is a cause of Shame, either for something which
such a man suffers in himself, or in those that are near unto him, such was
that of the Romans, Ad fur^ Caudinas, of which the Historian gives this
observation. (...) ob (...) fixi in terram oculi (...) ad omnia (...) a^res and
p^dor (...) lu^, ingentem (...) ^rarum ex alto anim^ (...) j^dicia tran^. Live.
l. 9. Capitol. in M^x.


Their obstinate silence, Eyes fastened to the Earth, Ears refusing all
comfort, Faces ashamed to behold the light, were certain Evidences of a mind
deeply resolved upon Revenge. And of Maximinus, of whom the Historian tells
us, that out of a Desire to conceal his Ignoble birth, he slew all, even the
best of his friends, which were Conscious unto it. So poverty meeting with
Pride does often suffer conflicts with this Passion of shame, when penury
denies that which Luxury and Pride demands.

-- Quid enim majore Cachi^no. Iuvenal.
Excipitur vulgi quam pauper Apicius? Who without much irrision can endure,
To see a Beggar a proud Epicure?
Again, Acqual^tance and Intimacy with Infamous Pet. Victor in Ar^ic. Rhet. l.
2.
persons is noted by the Philosopher amongst the Grounds of shame, and
therefore it was upbraided unto Plato that Calippus, the Murderer of his host
had been bred in his School. Plutarch. l. de capiend. ex (...). utilitate.
And to Secrates, that he was resorted unto by Alcib^ades, a factious and
turbulent Citizen, and to Themist^cles that he held correspondence, and
intelligence with Pausanius a Traitor; and we Taci^. (...). l. 5. c. 6.
find how fatal the favor of (...) after his fall, was to many of his
friends, that no wonder if every man not only out of Indignation, but out of
fear too cried out.

-- Nunquam si quid mihi credis amavi Iuvenal. (...). 1^.
Hunc hominem. Such being the impotent and immoderate Passions of many men to
trample on the sam^ persons in their calamity, whom in their great nesse they
almost adored, as he said,

(...). When the Oak is fallen that stood, Torent. A. delph.

Then every man will gather wood.
Lastly, not only things shameful to themselves, but such as are signs, and
Intimations of them do usually beget this Affection. As Aeschinus in the
Comaedian, blushed when he saw his Father knock at the door of an infamous
woman, because it was a token of a vicious intension. (...). lu Casar.
And therefore Casar was wont to say. That he would have those that belonged
unto him free, as well from Suspicion, as from Crime, for we shall never find
that a man who is tender of his Conscience will be Prodigal of his Credit, and
he who is truly fearful of incurring Censure from himself by the Guilt of a
Crime, will in some proportion be fearful of incurring censure from others by
the show and suspicion of it; for as a Good Conscience is a Feast to give a man
a cheerful heart; so a good name is an ointment to give him a cheerful
Countenance.

There is a Twofold shame, The one Virtuous, (...) (...). in Diogene.
as Diogenes was wont to say, That Blushing was the color of Virtue, The other
Vicious, and that (...) ille vul^ and rubo^ quost contra p^dorem mu^. (...). in
Agric.
either out of Cruelty, as Tacitus and Seneca observe of Domitian, that he was
never more to be feared then when he blushed. Or else out of Cowardice, when a
man has not strength enough of Countenance, to outface and withstand a
Vicious solicitation, as it was said of the men of Asia, that they had out of
tenderness of face, exposed themselves to much inconvenience, because they
Quidam nua^ magis (...) ^uri eru^ Timendi sint. quasi omnem v. recundiem essude
int. Sylla tu^e erat violentissimu^ ^uen faciem ejus sanguis o^ viser^t. Sen^e
Epist.
could not pronounce that one Syllable, Noe. It was a better Resolution, that
of Zenophanes, who being provoked unto some vicious practice, confessed
himself a Coward at such a Challenge, as not daring to do dishonestly.

I will conclude this matter with that Excellent Similitude wherewith Plutarch
begins it, in that golden book of his touching the same Argu meant. That as
Thistles, though noxious things in themselves, are usually signs of an
Excellent 11. Plutarch. de vil. Puda^e
Ground wherein they Grow, so shamefastness thought many times a weakness,
and betrayer of the Mind, is yet generally an Argument of a soul, ingenuously
and verttuously disposed.

CHAP. XXX. Of the Affection of Anger. The Distinctions of it. The Fundamental
Cause thereof, Contempt. Three kinds of Contempt, Dis-estimation,
Disappointment, Calumny.
I Now proceed to the last of the Passions, Anger, whereof, in it self a
subject of large Discourse, yet being every where obuious, I shall not speak
much. I intend not therefore distinctly to handle the several kinds of this
Passion, which Aristotle in his Ethics has given us, Ethic. lib. 4. cap. 11.
which are a sharp Anger, and an Hard or Knotty Anger. And Saint Paul who
likewise gives us Three kinds of it. Whereof the first I may call a (...). Vid
Domas^ de O^thod. fid. lib. 2. ^. 16. ^ale Rhodes. lib. 12. ^. 57. (...) (...)
(...) (...) Inveterata plun. bea, alta mente reposta vindictae occasimem (...)
expec^ (...)
close and buried anger, which he names bitterness, the other a violent No^
tulin (...) non verbis common tion, adeo Ivam condiderat. Yacit. de libe. Annol.
l. 2.
burning Anger, which he calls Wrath, and the last a Desiring and pursuing
Anger, which seems to have it is (...)
derivation from a word which signifies to Desire, and therefore is defined by
Aristotle to a be (...). and by the b Stoics (...), words of prosecution and
pursuit. For these differ not Essentially or formerly amongst themselves, but
only in diversity of Degrees, and in order to the diverse constitutions of the
Subject wherein they lodge, and of the habits Iliad. ^. 259. unde Crabr^net
irritare apud Plaut. Ampbit. Nunc in Fermento to^a est, ita t^rget mib^. Plant.
Casi^.
wherewith they are joined.

In which respects we might observe several other shapes of this Affection.
For there is the a Anger of a Waspe, which is an Hasty, Pettish, and Fretfull
Anger, proceeding from a nature b Leavened and habituated with Choler, which is
presently stirred and provoked. And there is the Anger of a Pectora qui (...)
ple vumque gementes nec copere I^arum fluctus in pectore possunt. ^ uer. l. 3.
(...). ^. 167.
Lion, which is slow, but strong and severe, thus Elegantly described by d
Homer.

-- (...) He first walks by with sk^rne, but when swift youth,
Urge him with Darts, then with devouring mo^th
He turns again, and at his lips is seen
A boiling f^ame, while his stout heart within
Rouseth itself with Dolor (...) (...). ^. Immani^ ^lot insecerat Ivd Claud.
Multa in Ira (...) and Ridicula. Pl^t.
groans: and round about
His Tail, beating his sides and loins, calls out
And wakeneth proud Revenge. Thus stirred he flies
Right on with red and fiery sparkling eyes
To kill or to be killed --
There is further a Cowardly verbal and ridiculous Anger, like that of Whelps,
which bark aloud, but run away from the thing which Angers them. Which
spends it self only in storms of empty Expressions, rather pleasing then
punishing those whom they light on, and rendering the person that uses it a
very (...), or Skarre*Crow, formidable to children, but to men ridiculous, like
Geta in the Comedian.

Ruerem, agerem, raperem, tunderem, prosternerem. Terent. Adelph. Act. 3. Scen.
2.
There is a grave and serious Anger, like that of Agamemnon. An insolent and
boasting Anger, Iliad. ^.
like that of Achilles. A sullen and stubborn Anger like that of the Romanc
Army disgracefully used by the Samnitians. A cruel and raging ^lv. lib 9 Val.
Max. l. 9. cap 3. Act. 9. 1. 26. 11.
Anger, like that of Scylla, who in an excess of fury, vomited up blood, and
died. And thus Saul is said to Herodot. Tholi^. Val. (...). l. 9.
have breathed out threatenings, and bin (...) spirat sa^guinem Sener. Thyest.
(...). Hom. v. (...) Theocrit. Idyl. ^. Ira Cadat naso vugosque Sanna Perse
(...). 5.
exceeding mad against the Church. A Revengefull and impatient Anger, as that
of 3. 3 Plin lib. 33. cop. 1. Horay. Epo. l. O^. 4.
Cambyses, who being reprooved by Prexaspes for his Drunkenness, con^uted the
reproof with this act of Cruelty, he shot the son of his Reproover through
the heart, to prove the steaddinesse of his hand. An Anger of Indignation at
the honor and prosperity of unworthy persons, as that of the Roman Nobility,
who seeing Cu. Flavius, a man of mean Condition, advanced to the Praetorship,
threw away their golden Rings, (the signs of their honor) to testify their
just Indignation. The Poet thus Elegantly expresses the like against Menas,
made of a Slave a Freeman by Pompey.

Videsne Sacram metiente te via^
Cum bis ter ^lnarum tog a
Vt or a vertal ^uc and huc euntium
Liberrima Indignatio?
Sectus flagellis hic trium viralibus
Praconis ad fastidium,
Arat falernimille fundi jugera
Et appiam mannis terit.
When thou pacest up and down
In thy long Gown,
See thou how the people fret
To see thee Iet?
How with Indignation bold,
They cannot hold
To see a man, so lately plowed
With scourges lowed,
Until at length the weary Crier,
Began to Tire,
Dressing a thousand Acres now
With Horse and Plow?
Lastly, an Anger of Emulation, or a displeasure against our selves for coming
short by our negligence of the perfections of other men whom happily by industry
we might have equalled. As Themistocles professed that the Trophie Plutarch.
(...).
of Miltiades would not suffer him to sleep. And Caesar wept wh^ he read the
atchiements of Alexander, as having not at his age done any memorable Plutarch.
in caesare.
thing. And Thucydides hearing Herodotus recite a History which he had written,
brake forth into a strange passion of weeping which the Historian espying thus
comforted his Father you are a happy man to be the Father of such a Son, (...).
Who is carried Suidas in (...).
with such a vehement affection unto Learning.

But to pass over these particulars, I shall in the general content my self
with a brief Consideration of the Causes and Effects of this Passion.

The Fundamental and Essential Cause of Despect^ (...) sum, (...) qu^ s^m
qu^ru Alexi. A^ Ego qu^ D^t um (...) Regina, Iovuque E^ S^ and Conjux und
^umgente (...) annot. Bellagero, and quisquam nu men Iunonu adore^. Praeterea
Aentad. 1.
Anger, is Contempt from others meeting with the love of our selves. Whether it
be disestimation and undervaluing of a man's person, or disappointment of his
purposes, or slandering his good name, or any other way of casting injury on
him. or any of these particulars being impaired (if by such on whom we may hope
to receive revenge) do work not only Anxiety and Grief (which is a motion of
slight) but hope also and desire to ease it self, if not in the recovery of
its own loss, yet in the comfort of another man's: For Calamity Q. Curt. (...)
So^. Ajex, (...) (...) (...).
(as the Historian speaks) is ever either querulous or malignant, Cum suo malo
torquetur, quiescit dien^. When it feels it self wrung and pinched, it quickly
proceeds either by justice or revenge to please it self in retaliation.

For the former of these, as it is the common property of Man with all other
Creatures to love himself: so it is his particular desire also, being Animal
Sociale and Politicum, to be Loved by others; because hereby that Love of
himself, which proceeds from Judgment and Reason, is confirmed. For every
man does more willingly believe that, whereunto he has farther authority to
persuade him. And therefore though Love be not sinisterly suspicious, nor too
envious in interpreting a man's own, or a friends actions and beha^iour; yet
that Love, which is not blind and furious, will be ever ready to submit it
self unto the opinion of stayed and indifferent judgments, because it is
conscious to it self, how easily it may miscarry, if it r^ly upon its own
censure, wherein Reason, Affection, and Prejudice are mixed together.

Now then when a man already strongly possessed with a love of his own or his
friends person or parts, shall find either of them by others slighted and
despised; from whose joynt-respect he hoped for a confirmation of his
judgment* there hence arises not only a (...)* I^ d^ dolor ossibu^ a^.
Aeu^ad. 9. Affectus nunquam sine torment^ sul violentm, qui^ dolorem cum
infer (...), pa^, etc. Val. Max. l 9. c. 3. Dolor addidi^ Iram. Ovid. Met. 12.
Grief to see his Expectation deceived, and his Opinion undervalued* but
withal a ^pes addita suscitat Iras. Aenead. 10.
Desire to make known unto the persons, who thus contemn him by some manner
of face or tongue, or hand, or heart, or head, Revenge, (for all these may be
the instruments of our Anger) that there is in him more courage, power and
worth than deserves so to be neglected. Which Passion in a word, so long as it
submits it self to the government of Reason, is then always allowable and
right, when it is grounded on the Pride and Insolency of others, who unjustly
contemn us. And then Irregular and Corrupt, when it proceeds from the root of
Pride and Ambition in our selves, which makes us greedy of more honor from
others, than their judgments or our own worth suffers them to afford us.

To this branch of Contempt may be referred Forget fullness of friends and
acquaintance, whereby we upbraid them with obscurity and distance, as well from
true worth, as from our affection: For Omnia quae curant, meminerunt, says
Tully: and Aristotle to the same purpose. Those things which we do respect,
do not lie hid and out of our sight.

Next hither may be referred all Ungrateful persons, who slight those favors
which they have Ejectu^, li^tore ^gentem. Except, and regni dem^us in par^e
lecavi. Amissam classem (...) a morte ^duxi. Heu su^ ^ncensaseror, etc. Ae^ad.
4.
received from other men's bounties, and out of a swelling and height of
stomach, cannot endure to acknowledge any obligations; but desire to receive
benefits, as Corrupt men take Bribes in the dark, and behind their backs, that
so neither others, nor (if it were possible) their own eyes might be witnesses
unto it: For as Tacitus speaks, Gratia oneri habetur,: such is the pride of
some men, that they disdain not to be overcome in any thing* though it be in
kindness. And therefore Vbi multum beneficia antevenere, pro gratia odium
redditur, says the same Author: When they find themselves overloaden with
Love, the best requi^all which their high minds can afford, is hatred: which
cannot but work a double Anger; an Anger against our selves and our own
weakness in the choice of so unfit a subject for the placing of our benefits;
and an Anger at that contemptuous Pride, which so basely entertained them.

Hither also we may refer those Locked and Close men, who even to their
friends are so referred, and keep every thing so secret, as if none were
worthy, to whose Judgment or Trust they might commit themselves.

Hitherto likewise are referred Acceptance of persons in equallity of merit
with unequal respect, negligence of outward ceremony and beha viour* and
generally what ever else may work an opinion that we are undervalued.

The second branch of this first Fundamental Cause was an Hindering of the
projects and purposes of another, which is not only a Privative (as the former)
but a Positive and Real Injury, which includes that other, and adds unto it,
as being not only a sleighting, but an assault upon us; no^ an Opinion only,
but an Expression of our weakness; a course so much the more likely to insenc^
nature, and make it swell, by how much violent and opposition, is more sensible
in motion than in rest. So that these two former Injuries, I think I may well
compare to a Bank, and to a Bridge, or some other stops to a River in his
course: Whereof the former does Confine the River, and not Op pose it, as not
hindering it in its direct and natural motion (which it rather helps by more
uniting the parts) but only in a motion Laterall and indirect, which nature
intended not; and therefore herein we see not any manifest fretting and noise,
but only a secret swelling and rising of the water, which breaks not into
outrage and violence: But the Latter resisting the natural course of the
stream in its own Channel, and standing directly cross, where the Nature
should pass, makes it, not only in time to overswell on all sides, but in the
mean time works in it great tumult and noise.

Sp^mens, and fervens, and ab Obice Savior ibit. It foames and boyles, and with
a raging force,
Fights with all Obstacles, that stop its course.
So of these two Degrees of Contempt in Anger* the former as being only a
Confining and Limiting Contempt, which shuts up a man's worth within too narrow
and strait a judgment, works indeed a secret swelling of the Heart with
Indignation at the conceit of such disesteem; but this breaks not out into
that clamor (as S. Paul calls it) that noise of Anger, as the other does, which
a^iseth out of a direct opposition against our counsels or actions.

Unto which opposition may be reduced all manner of injurious proceeding, which
tends to the prejudice and disappointing of any man's Quem ego credo manibus.
pedibu^q, (...) omnia (...) ma^is i^ ad^o nisi ut inc^mmodet quam, etc. (...).
And. Act. 1 S^. 1.
ends; whether it be by closenes and undermining, as cheats and couzenages in
the preventing of lawful, or by other politic wisdom in hindering
unlawful ends; or whether by open and prosessed Opposition, as in matters of
Emulation, Competition, Commodity, and the like; or lastly, whether it be such
as takes notice, and discovers ends which desired to be undiscerned. And
therefore Tacitus reckoning the ambiguous and close Annal l. 1.
speeches of the Emperor Tiberius, says that it was Vnicus Patrum metus si
intelligere viderentar, the Senate seared nothing more than to discover that
they understood him; which is the same with his judgment after: Eo acrius
accepit recludi quae premeret, nothing did more exasperate him than to see
those things taken notice of, which he desired to suppress and dissemble. Both
which were true in Scaur^s; one of the Senators, who adventuring to collect
Tiberius his willingness of accepting the Empire, in that he did not sorbid by
his Tribunitiall Authority the relation thereof by the Consuls, did thereby
procure his utter and jmplacable hatred.

But of all Contempts, the last of the three is greatest; that I mean, which
immediately violates our Reputation and Good name; because it is a derivative
and spreading injury; not only dishonouring a man in private and reserved
opinion, but in the eyes and Ears of the World; nor only making him odious in
his life, but in his memory. As there is in a man a double Desire* the one of
Perfecting; the other of Perpetuating himself: which two answer to that double
honor of our creation, which we lost in our first Father; the honor of
Integrity in Goodness; and the honor of Immunity from Corruption: So there
may be from the violation of these sundry degrees of Anger, or any other
burdensome Passion wrought in us. But when in injury we find them both
assaulted, and not only our parts and persons (which belong to our perfection)
privily undervalued; but our name and memory (which belong to our
prepreservation) tainted likewise, we cannot but be so much the more insenced,
by how much perpetuity accumelates, either to weakness or perfection: But of
this Fundamental cause of anger enough.

CHAP. XXXI. Of other Causes of Anger: first in regard of him that suffers
wrong: Excellency, Weakness, strong Desires, Suspicion. Next in regard of him
who does it; Baseness, Impudence, Neerenesse, Freedom of Speech, Contention,
Ability. The Effects of Anger, the Immutation of the Body, impulsion of Reason,
Expedition, Precipitance. Rules for the moderating of this Passion.
THose which follow, are more Accidental: whereof some may be considered ex
part Patientis, on the part of him that suffers; and some ex part Inferentis
Injuriam, on the part of him that does the Injury. Touching the patient or
subject of an Injury, there are three Qualifications, which may make him more
inclinable to Anger, upon supposition of the Fundamental Cause, Contempt: and
the (...)
first of these is Excellency, whether Inward from Nature, or Accidental from
Fortune: For hereby men are made more jealous of their Credit, and impatient of
Abuse, as well perceiving that all Injury implies some degree both of Impotency
in the Patient, and of Excellency (at least conceited) in the Agent. As
Aristotle speaks, (...), Rhet. l. 2, ^. ^*
that Injurious men are commonly highly conceited of their own Excellency,
which cannot well stand with the height and distance of that mind which is
possessed with his own good opinion * and this cause the Poet intimates in
those words*

-- Manet alta mente repostum, Anead. 1.
Iudicium Paridis, Spretaeque injuria formae. A deep and lasting Discontent is
bred
To see their Beauties undervalued
By a weak wanton Judgment.
It wrought a deep Indignation in the Minds of Power and Wisdom to see a
weak and wanton Judgment give Beauty the precedence in their Emulation. Which
undervaluing of worth, how much it is able to possess a man with Grief and
Fury: the one example of Achitophel alone may discover, who upon the rejection
of his counsel, when he was too low to revenge himself on Absalon, executed
his Anger on his own neck.

The second Qualification of the subject is Weakness and De^ect, when the mind
finds it self assaulted in those things, wherein it is most of all Deficient:
which Aristotle has observed, when he tells us, that (...). R^. l 2. ^ (...)
(...). (...). (...) l 22. c 14. (...). D^ (...). (...). Idyll. 1.
Sick men, Poor men and Lovers are commonly most subject to this Passion: It
being as great a pain, and a greater contempt to ^ub and provoke an old wound,
than to make a new. That injury which proceeds against men of Omnes quibus res
lunt, minus secundae, magis (...), ne^cio quo modo (...) ad (...) omnia accipi^
(...) prop^ s^ (...) impo^ (...) se s^per credunt n^gligi. T^r* Adolph. Act. 4.
S^. 3. (...) inter se quam pro levibus noxij^ i^a (...)? qua propt^r? quia caim
qui cos guberuat (...) insirmum (...). I Would. Hecyr. Act. 3 5 c. 1. --. Minuti
semper, and in^ est animi exiguique voluptas ultio. Inv. n. Sat. 13.
Iracundiores sunt Incolumibus languidi saemina maribus, etc. A^m. Mar. lib. 27.
Vi^. Causia. de (...). l. 8. (...) 29. (...). (...). Sophoc. Ajax. Sen de
(...). l. 2. c. 21.
high and eminent quality, cannot possibly pierce so deep as that which is
exercised upon open and naked weakness: because the former proceeds only from
strife and emulation; but the other from insultation and pride: the one is only
a disesteem; but the other a contumely and exprobation: the one is a conflict
of judgments, but the other a conflict of passions; and therefore likely to be
the greater. For a neglect of worth and good parts (unless, as sometimes it
falls out, it proceeds from Baseness and Ignorance) is an injury from Worth
also: but a Neglect, and despising men already down, is an injury from
stomach and height of mind; wherein the party offended cannot labor so much
to clear it self from the Imputation, as to revenge it self for it.

Another reason why Weakness the better disposes a man to Anger, may be,
because such men are most Tender to feel an injury, most Suspicious to fear
it, and most Interpreting to over-judge it. All which being circumstances of
aggravation to increase a wrong, are likewise good means to add degrees and
heat unto our Passion.

Lastly, to give a reason of both these two former causes together, it may be a
Disappointment and Frustrating of Expectation: For men of eminency and worth,
expect rather Approbation and Imitation than Contempt. And men weak and
defective, expect Compassion to cover, and not Pride to mock, and so double
their wounds: and both these are in some sort debts of Nature, it being the Law
of Reason to honor Merit, as it is the Law of Mercy to cover Nakedness: and
for both I am sure it is the Law of Charity, as not to vaunt or be puffed up in
our selves: so neither to rejoice or think evil of another: and we may well
conceive Anger will be strong, when it thinks it self lawful.

Unto this particular of Weakness we may also reduce that which the
Grammatian has observed on Virgil, Plus Irarum advenit, cum in manus non
potest venire, cui irascimur. Anger is increased when it cannot reach the thing
with which it is angry. And therefore the chaining up of Woolves and Mastives
enrageth them, because it restrains them; which the Poet has excellently
described. (...). (...).


Ac veluti pleno Lupus iusidiatis evili,
Cum fremit ad caulos, ventos perpessus and imbres
Nocte super media: tuti sub matribus agni
Balatum exercent. Ille asper and improbus ira
Savit in absentes, collecta fatig at edendi
Ex longo rabies, and siccae sanguine fauces.
Haud aliter Rutilo muros and castra tuenti
Ignescunt Ira, and durus dolor ossibus ardet.
As a fierce woolfe with winds, storms, midnight, whet
When in close solds the secure lambs do bleat,
Barks at his absent prey with the more Ire:
When raged and deceived Hunger does him tire.
So Rutilus seeing his foes all safe,
Does vex and boil with the more burning chase.
For it is a great torment to an Enemy, when he Vid. Pl^t. d^ capiend. ex host.
utilitat.
can find no inlet nor advantage against him, whom he hates.

Another cause of Anger may be strong Desires: (...). Lucian.
For always vaster and more exact our desires are, it is so much the harder
for them to be pleased or satisfied. And therefore as the Philosopher notes,
Luxurious men are usually transported with Anger, R^et. l. 10.
because men love not to be stopped in their pleasures: and hence as Plutarch
observes, men are De Ira. lib.
usually most angry there, where their desires are most conversant: as a
Countryman with his Bayliffe; or an Epicure with his Cook; or a Lover with
his Corrivall, because all these cross men in that which they most love. Now
strength when it is opposed, is collected and gathered into the more excess;
as we see in Winds or Rivers, when they meet with any thing which crosses
their full passage.

The last Qualification of the Subject, whereby he is made more Inclinable to
this Passion, is a suspicious, apprehensive, and interpreting fancy, ready to
pick out injury where it cannot be justly found; and (that its Anger may be
employed) to frame occasions unto it self. And therefore it is wise advise of
Seneca, Non vis esse Iracundus? ne sis S^n. de Ir^. l. 3. c. 11.
Curiosus. He which is too wise in his judgment on other men's Errors, will be
easily too foolish in the nourishing of his own Passion: and its commonly seen
in matters of censure and suspicion, the more sight and reason goes out, the
less uses to abide within. Now is it hard for a man, if he be peremptorily
possessed with this opinion; yet he is a common subject of others contempt, to
find out, either in defects of Nature, or rudenes of custom, habit, education,
temper, humor or the like, some probable ground or other for exception; which
yet when it is further inquired into, will prove rather strangeness than
injury.

And this is generally a Corruption of Anger* First, because it is hereby
oftentimes unjust, either in fastening it self there where it was justly
neglected: for we may ever observe that Suspicion proceeds from Guilt, and none
are more jealous of being neglected than those that deserve it: as it is
observed of some reproachful speeches, which a Senator was accused to have
uttered against the honor of Tiberius: Quia ver a erant dicta credebantur. His
suspicious mind was persuaded that they had been spoken, because he was
conscious that they had been acted; and therefore (as was before noted) it was
the custom under such men to avoid all manner of Curiosities, and search into
things done by them, which might easily be subject unto sinister judgment; and
rather to affect Ignorance with Security, than to be ruined with wisdom. And
next it is corrupt, because it is rash and hasly, being led by a half
judgment, the worst guide to a headlong and blind Passion.

The next degree of causes is of those which qualify the Agent, or him that
works the injury, and there may be amongst many other, which cannot be
reckoned, these general ones.

First Baseness, which works a double cause of Anger: One for an injury of
Omission, in neglecting those respects which are required in men of mean and
inferior rank toward their superiors: Another for a positive enquiry in the
evil exercised against them. And many times the former alone is a cause of
Anger, without the later: For this distance of persons does quite alter the
nature of our Actions, insomuch that those demeanors, which are commendable and
plausible toward our equals, are rude and irreverend toward those that are
above us: and this is that which makes the wrath of God in the Scripture to be
set out so terrible unto us: because of the infinite distance between the
Unmeasurable Glory of the Maker of the World, and the baseness of sinners; and
therefore the comparison which uses to be made for the defense of Venial
sins, that it is altogether unlikely that God, infinitely more merciful than
men, should yet be offended at that which a man's neighbor would pardon him
for, as a foolish angry word, or the stealing of a Farthing, or the like, is
without reason: because between man and man there is a Community both in nature
and weakness; and therefore,

Ha^c veniam, petimu^que damusque vicissim. Because we both our Errors have,
We pardon give, and pardon crave.
But it is an Argument of infinite Insolence in a vile Creature for feeding it
own Corruption and self-love in a matter of no value to neglect one command of
him, who by another is able to command him into Hell, or into nothing.

The next Quality in the Injurer, which may raise this Passion is Impudence,
either in words or carriage. And the reasons hereof may be:

First, because as Aristotle observes, all Impudence is joined with some
Contempt, which is the Fundamental and Essential Cause of Anger.

Secondly, because all Impudence is bold, stiff and contentious, which are all
incitements to this Passion. For as Shame being a Degree of Fear works an
acknowledgement of our own weakness; and therefore a submission to the power
(...). l. 2 c. 3. Corpora mag^ satis est prostrare Leo^l. (...) number ^inem, cum
jac^ host is ^al* (...) Ovid. Trist. li^. 3. Eleg. 5.
we have provoked, which as Aristotle observes) procures from beasts
themselves lenity and mercy: So Impudence in all other things being contrary to
it, must likewise produce a contrary Effect.

Thirdly, those things which we Impudently do, we do willingly likewise. And
therefore we shall observe in the Scripture how reigning sins that is, those
which are done with greedine^se of the appetite, and full consent of the will,
are set forth by the names of Stubbornness, Rebellion, whorish Forehead,
Brass, and Iron. Now nothing does more aggravate a wrong then this, that it
proceeded from the will of man. And the reasons are,

First, because a man's Power is in his Will* but Passions and other blind
Agents, when they work ungoverned, are our Imperfections, and not our Power;
and therefore the easier borne withal.

Secondly, to a Plenary, Spontaneous Action, (such as I take most of Impudence
to be) there are required Antecedenter, Deliberation, Approbation, and Assent*
and Consequenter* Resolution, Perseverance, and Constancy. All which, as they
take away the two principal conditions required unto Lenity; Consession and
Repentance: so likewise do they add much to the weight of an injury, because
an actition which is thus exercised, is a work of the whole Man, and imployes
a perfect consent thereunto: so a perfect and complete en mity toward the
person offends thereby. Whereas others are but the wrongs of some part, such
as are of those of the will, led by an ignorant; or those of Passion, led by a
traduced Understanding; and they too not of a part regular, but of an Vnjointed
and Paralyticke part, which follows not the motion of a stayed reason; and
therefore as they proceed from more disorder in our selves, so do they work
less in the party offended.

Another thing which may raise and nourish this Passion, is any degree of near
Relation between the parties; whether it be Natural by Consanguinity; or
Moral, by Society, Liberality, or any (...). de (...). l. 2 c. 31.
other friendship. For as it is prodigious in the Body Natural to see one
member wrong and provoke another: so in Unions Civil or Moral, it is
strangely offensive to make a divulsion. Therefore we are more angry for the
neglect offered us by friends, or those of whom we have well deserved, than by
enemies or Job. 19 19. Z ^b. 13. 6. Psalm. 41. 9. 55. 12.
strangers. No wounds go so deep as those we receive in the house of our friend.

And the reason why this difference between men nearly referring each other
should work a greater Anger between them, is: First, because herein we may
find that which before I observed as a furtherance to this Passion,
Disappointment, and frustrating of Expectation: For in this case, we expect
Sympathy and not Division. Secondly, because all Anger is a kind of dis-joyning
or Divulsion of things before joined: there therefore, where is the greatest
Union, must needs be the strongest and most violent separation; as in the
Body, the Divulsion of Soul is more horrible than of an Arm, or some other
member; because the one is an Essential, the other only an Integrall Union:
and so it is with those who are by blood or friendship made one; as the
dividing of them is more strange and violent, so does it produce a stronger
Passion.

Another cause of this Passion in respect of the Injurer, may be a too great
Freedom and indiscreet use of speech; especially if it be in way of correction
and rebuke: For as Solomon's speech is true, Mollis responsio frangit Iram, a
soft answer pacifies wrath: so on the contrary it is true likewise, Dura
Correptio unit Iram; that an harsh rebuke knits it. Anger is by nothing more
nourished than by much speaking, though not in the par^y that speaks; because
Speech is to Anger, like Tears to Grief, a spending and venting of it, yet
always in another, unto whom we minister farther matter of offense. To which
purpose, is that speech of Syracides. Strive not with a man that is full of
tongue, and heap not wood upon his fire.

Another Cause, which I shall observe is contention and Difference, whether it
be in Opinions or in Inclinations: because this must needs be ever joined with
some undervaluing of another man's choice and judgment; which if it be not
seasoned with much sobriety, will easily induce a man to believe, that it
proceeds not from Zeal to Truth, but from a humor of Opposition. Wherewith
many men are so far possessed, that one must hardly dare to speak the truth
in their company for fear of endangering it and them. Like Chry^ippus in
Laertius, who used to boast that he often wanted Opinions, but those once
gotten, he never wanted Arguments and Sophismes to defend them.

The last cause which I shall note of this Passion is in him, who offends us,
his very Abilities, when we see them neglected: for this provokes to more
displeasure, then naked impotency. Weakness, when it miscarries, is the object
of Pity: but strength, when it miscarries, is the object of Anger.

-- -- (...) Illiad. 117.

(...)
(...)
I should not blame unworthy and base spirits
To sl^g and shrink from Battle: but for merits
So to forget themselves, for you to be
Unlike the men you are, What man can see
Such weakness, and not wonder, chide, debate;
Till you your selves do your own Errors hate.
Unto all these we might add some others which the Philosopher touches, as
neglect of our Calamities, or rejoyeing at them, or divulging (...)* Vid. quae
de hac (...) (...) Nun^ius apud (...). An^g.
them, or bringing readily the report of them unto us, receiving the report of
them with pleasure. Or lastly, representing the Signs which may bring into
mind the memory of any injuries done us. As the Levite sent the parts of his
Abused Concubine up and down unto the Tribes of Israel to move them unto
Indignation. So (...). lib 44.
Antony in the funeral Oration upon Julius Caesar produced his robe stained
with the blood which Brutus and Cassius had shed, to work ad^testation of that
fault in the people.

Now concerning all these causes together (because it would be two tedious to
gather particular circumstances of dignity and corruption from all of them) we
are to conclude that Anger, as it arises from any of them, is then only
Regular and Just, when it keeps these conditions.

I First, that it still observe proportion and conformity to the rules of Love:
otherwise it i^ not Ira in Delictum, but Ira in fratrem not against the Crime
but the person of my brother: (...) kn^w the nature of this passion is to be
Transient to go out from us on our brother and reform him: not Immanent to
work upon our selves and deforme us: I mean by soyling the habit of Charity,
which ought always to remain inviolate.

2 Secondly, that it keep likewise due proportion unto judgment, and that
unto a true judgment, and a whole judgment; otherwise it is not only to be
Angry with our brother, but, which is farther, to be angry with him
unadvisedly. Judgment then must be true first, that is, clear, settled, and
untransported; and that likewise in two actions; in the Act of Interpretation,
which reaches unto the Injury; and in the Act of Direction or Government,
which reaches unto the Passion.

3 And next it must be a whole judgment: and that in both the former. It must
judge fully of the nature and circumstances of the injury, which ever receives
it degrees of Intention or remission, not from the matter of the Act, but from
some particular Qualifications and Circumstances joined thereunto.

Secondly, it must judge fully of the Act of Passion, not only in Informing,
quod sit, that Reparation of our selves is lawful; but (...) too, in the
manner and form how to undertake it. Because as Passion, being without Reason
in Ira de Causa (...) Iracundia de vitio. (...).
it self, wants the tongue of judgment to inform it what to do; So, being
blind, it wants the hand of judgment to lead it in the doing of it: and this
I take to be the proper way of governing this Passion. But that which was once
prescribed by Athenodorus the Philosopher, unto Augustus to repeat D^d m^ ^
(...) Lit. (...) (...) (...) a lu^andi (...) cobibentes p^ius dom^ ex^.
Iubebant, ut esset deliberandi spatium. Vid. ^ lut. qu. Romans q. 28. Vid.
l'lutarch. (...)
over the Alphabet between the Passion and the Revenge, is too boyish and
slight, as diverting the mind from the occasion to some other trifle, which is
only to cozen and not to conquer ou^ distemper; and therefore though it may
for a time allay it, yet this is but as the cures of Empericks, which give
present ease, but search not into the root, nor leave such ^n habit within, as
shall in after occasions limit the unrulinesse of such distempers, like those
odours which use to raise men out of a fit of the falling sickness, but do
not all cure them of the disease.

Now to speak a word or two of the Effects of this Passion: they are such as
are wrought, either in our selves or others. Concerning the former, they are
either outward effects, which ^each to our bodies, or inward, which reflect
upon Reason.

Those on the body are clamor (as Saint Paul calls it) in the Tongue, Tumor
and Inflammation in the Heart* Fire in the Eyes, and Fierceness and Palenesse
in the Countenance, and a sensible alteration in the whole man. The use or
deformity of all which depend upon the subordination of Passion unto Reason, or
Dominion over it. For if it be Governed and obedient, there is an excellent use
of these alterations in the body (which will not then be permitted to be
excessive) namely the testification of our just displeasures at an offense
received, and the inlivening or sharpning of us (if occasion require to the
prosecution of further lawful redress; for Vid. ene^. de ^ra lib. 2. c. 35.
Vos qu^ si ^edia specul^m spectetis in Ira. Cognoscat saciem vix satis (...)
^uam O ^id. de Art Amandl. lib. 3. Vid. Plutarch. Plumbea^ iras (...) Plaut.
Ethic. lib. 7.
though I would not have a man in his passion suffer a Metamorphosis, and turn
his face into a torment punishing himself as much with Deformity, as his
adversary with fear, yet neither can I like that close and dissembled, that
politic and stomach Anger, which cunningly shrowds it self under a calm and
serene countenance; which being unnatural to this passion (whose property it
is, Non insidiari sed palam agere, not to work by way of Ambush and Stratagem,
but visibly) will quickly degenerate into Malice and Rancour.

The Inward Effect of this Passion, is an Excitation of Reason; to judge of the
wrong and means of Redress, which is then Regular, when it is done
Ministereally and by way of service to the whole; but most corrupt and
dangerous, when it is done by prepossession, transporting, confounding, or any
other way tainting of Reason; which is to make it a party rather then a Judge.

(...) Which makes sometimes a Wise man break
Into Distempers wild and weak.
In which ill office there is not any Passion more busy and fruitful then
this of Anger by reason of it is suddenness, and of it is violence: both which
are strong means to smother or divert Reason, as we see in Tiberius himself,
who though a man of a close and sad judgment, and of most reserved Passions
(insomuch as he lived in them and nourished them a long time before either
their working or discovery) yet when he was provoked by Agrippina, to a more
violent Anger then usual, his Passion we see for the time altered his nature.
Et veram occulti pectoris voc^m elicuit, Number ide^ l^deretur, quia non regnaret.
He brake forth into words, strange and unusual from so close a disposition; to
wit, Whether she were wronged because she did not reign? which is Tacitus his
observation upon the Anger of that man.

The last Effect is expedition and Dexterity inexecuting those means which
Reason judges needful for satisfying our selves against the person Vires
inijcit ad pericula (...). (...). lib. 3. ^ 11. (...). Vid. Call. Rh^d. l. 1^.
c. 5 3. l. 7
that has offended us, wherein it is assistance, while it is Regular, is of
excellent use in man's actions, because it makes bold and resolute. But here one
maine corruption is to be avoided, Precipitancy and impatience of Delay or
Attendance on the determination of right reason* which makes it commonly run
away with an half or a broken judgment. In which respect Aristle in his
Ethics very elegantly compares it to a hasty servant, that goes away posting
with half his errand and to Dogs, which, as soon as ever they hear a noise,
bark presently before they know whether it be a stranger at the door, or no^
so Anger attends Reason thus long, till it receive warrant for the justnes of
seeking redress, and then suddenly hastens away without any further listening
to the rules of Decorum and Justice, which it should always observe in the
prosecution thereof: Lest while it is too intent on his own right, it fall in
that extreme which it pretends to revenge, the wronging of another.

There is not any Passion which stands more in need of Moderation then this
does, both because it is one of the frequentest which we are troubled with, and
the most unruly, as that which can over-beare the rest, and, of all other, has
the least recourse to (...). Thucyd. lib. 2.
Reason, being hasty, Impetuous, full of Desires, Grief, Self-love,
Impatience, which spares no Plutarch. (...). Sen. de Ira lib. 3. cap. (...).
and (...).
persons, friends or ^oes, no things, animate or Ip^ (...) qui (...) (...) ^m.
(...) S^t. 10. Pl^. de Ira.
in animate, when they fit not our fancy. And therefore Donat and Coel. Rhod.
l. 12 c. 53.
Grammarians tell us that it has its name Ira from Ire, because a man in his
Anger usually goes away from his Reason, and as his Anger slackens, he is
said, ad se redire, to return again unto himself. And therefore those men in
whom Reason is most predominant, are least transported by this Affection, and
most often displeased with themselves for it. It was a strange commendation
given to So crat. lib. 7. c. 22.
Theodosius Junior, that never any man saw him Angry; And such a power had
Plutarch. in Lyc.
Lycurg^ over himself, that when an insolent young ^n had done him no less
injury then the striking out of one of his Eyes, by lenity and mansu^tude he
convinced and gained him. Plut. ^n Pericle.
And Pericles that great Statesman and Orator of Greece, being all the day
reviled by a^ Impure companion, commanded his servant at night to light him
home unto his house Senec. de Ira lib. 3. c. 12 and 38.

Plut. de serd number: vidi^at.


nothing more obvious then Examples of this kind.

That we may therefore so ma^nage this Passion as to be Angry but not sin, it
will be requisite*

1 To let it have an Eye upward, as Moses did, whonever expressed any other
Anger that we read of but zealous, and Religious, when the injury directly
aimed at God and his honor. It is very improbable that any thing will move too
fast upward.

2 To convert it Inward into a selfe-displicency Sicut aquil^ es (...) inter a^
bulandum ungu^ intro (...).

Vid. Plu. de ^u (...) S^n. de. ^ra, l^b. 2. cap. 2^. (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) Ir^ l. 3. (...) (...).


and severity toward our own Errors, for the more acquainted any man is with
himself, the less matter he will find of Anger with other men, as having so
much both to do, and to blame at home. Anger ever ^riseth from the Value which
we set upon our selves, which will ever then be most modest, when we take of
it the fullest view.

3 Follow it not too Close, join not too soon, not too hastily with it, though
it may be used sometimes, it must never be encouraged, being over-bold and
forward of it self. And therefore as many drugges must be prepared before we
may (...) to use them; so we must take heed of disp^ing this affection without
its due corrective^ Plutarch de And. poe^u.
must first be schooled before it be employed, as men bridle their horses
before they ride them. It is not good drinking in muddy water so soon as it is
stirred, give it time to subside and settle.

4 Keep it not long, it is the Spawne of Malice and Contention, and time will
hatch it. It is a Corroding thing which will fret and stain the Vessel in
which it is kept. Let not the Sun go down upon it, it is ill being in the
dark with so bad a Leader. It may pass through the heart of a wise man, but
it Rests only in the b^some of Fools.

5 Remove the Occasions of it, withdraw Fuel from so catching a Flame. They
say of Turpentine, and some other like things. That they will draw and suck
Fire unto them. Certainly of all Fire there is none so ductile, so sequacious
and obsequious, as this of Wr^th. It was not ill done therefore of Pl^, A^opt.
S^. de ^ra lib. 3. c. 40. C^. ^od. l. 12* ^. 52.
C^tys and Augustus, To cause those curious Vessels to be broken of purpose,
which having been accidentally broken might have made ^ breach likewise upon
the dis^retion of their owners.

6 Give not an easy Ear to Reports* nor (...) d^ I^a (...) ^. 22 23, 2^
an Easy entertainment to suspicio^s, be not greedy to know who or wherein
another has wronged thee. That which we are desirous to know, or apt to
believe, we shall be the more ready to revenge. Curiosity and ^dulity, Plu^.
in Alex. and l. curiosit. ^ Dion. C^ss. l. 41.
are the Handmaides unto Passion. Alexander would not see the woman after whom
he might have Lusted* Nor Casar search Pompeyes Cabinet, l^st he should find
new matters of Revenge. He chose rather to make a Fire of them on his Hearth,
then in his Heart. Inju^ies unknown do many times the less hurt; when I have
found them, I then begin to feel them, and suffer more from mine own
discovery then from mine enemies attempt.

7 Be Candid in Interpreting the things wherein thou suffer. Many times the
glass through which I look, makes that seem formidable, and the wave, that
crooked, which in it self was beautiful and straight. Happily thou art Angry
with that which could not intend to hurt thee, Thy Book, thy Pen, the stone
at which thou stumblest, the wind S^. d^ Ira lib. 2. c, 26.
or rain that beats upon thee: be Angry gain, but with thy self, who art
either so bold as to be Angry with GOD, or so foolish, as to be Angry with
nothing. Thou art displeased at a Childish or an Ignorant miscarriage, Call it
not Injury but Imprudence, and then pity it. Thou art Angry with Counsel,
Reproof, Discipline; why do thou not as well break the Glass in which thy
Physician Ministers a potion unto thee. Be Angry with thy sin, and thou will love him that takes it from thee. Is he that advises thee thy Superior?
Thine Anger is undutifull, is he thy friend, thine Anger is ungrateful.

8 Give Injuries a New Name, and that will work a new Affection. In blind
Agents call it Chance* in weak Persons, Infirmity, In simple, Ignorance, in
wise Counsel, in Superiors, Discipline, In equals, Familiarity' in Inferious,
Confidence, where there is no other construction to be made, do as Joseph and
David did, call it Providence, and see what God says to thee by it. Get a
mind Minimas rerum discordia turbat pac^m su^ ^ ^enent Lucan Vid. Sen. l. 4.
c. 33. S^n. de Ira l. 2. c. 25. 26.
conversant with high and noble things, the more heavenly, the less
Tempestuous.

9 Be not Idle, Sluggish, Luxurious, we are never more apt to be Angry, then
when we are sleepy or greedy. Weak resolutions and strong Desires are sensible
of the least exa^peration, as an empty ship of the smallest Tempest.

Again be not ^ver-busie neither* That man can hardly be master of his
Passion that is not master of his employments. A mind ever burdened, like a
Bow always bent must needs grow impotent, and weary, the fittest preparations
to this distemper. When a man's business does not poise, but press him, there
will ever be something either undone or ill-done, and so still matter of
Vexation. And therefore our Minds as our Vessels Plutarch. (...) (...) Sen^.
l. 3. c. 6. Sen. de Ira l. 3. cap. 16.

-- (...).

Sopb. Autig. Plut. Sympos. ^. 4. q^, 2.


must be unloaded, if they would not have a Tempest hurt them.

Lastly, wrestle not with that which pincheth thee. If it be strong it will
hurt, if cunning, it will hamper and entangle thee. He that strives with his
burden makes it heavier. That Tempest breaks not the stalks of Corn, which
rends asunder the arms of an Oak, the one yields, the other withstands it. An
humble weakness is safer from injury, then a stubborn strength.

I have now done with the Passions of the Mind. And briefly proceed to those
Honors and Dignities of the Soul of Man which belong unto it in a more
abstracted Consideration.

CHAP. XXXII. Of the Original of the Reasonable Soul, whether it be
immediately Created and Infused, or derived by Seminall Traduction from the
Parents. Of the Derivation of Original sin.
THe dignity of Man in respect of his Soul alone, may be gathered from a
consideration either of the whole, or of the par^s thereof. Concerning the
whole, we shall consider two things; Its Original, and its Nature. Concerning
the Original of the Soul, diverse men have diversely thought; for, to let pass
the Opinion of Phila^ri de Haeres. Sel^uci, etc.
Seleucus, who affirmed that it was educed out of the Earth, and that (...)
Tract. ad Menam contra Orig. Hieron. Epist. ad M^cell. and (...) Theophyl.
Alex. Ep. Pasc. ^. Anasta^. (...) Anagog. contemp. lib. 11.
of Origin and the Plato^ists who say that the Souls of men were long ago
created, and after detruded into the Body as into a Prison: There are three
Opinions touching this question. The first of those who affirm the Traduction
of the Soul by genera^, some of which so affirm because they judged (...) a
Corporeal substance, as did Aug. de (...). 86. cp. 157 de Genesis ad lit. l. 10.
c. 25. Tertull. de (...) c. 5. 6. 7. 22. 25. 27.
Tertullian. Others because they believed that one spirit might as easily
proceed from another, as one fire or light be kindled by another: as Hieron.
Epist. ad Marcelli^um. (...) de (...) (...) l. 2. Iuciferian apud Aug. (...).
81.
Apollinarius, Nemesi^, and diverse in the Western Churches, as St. Hierome
witnesses. The second, of those who deby the natural Traduction, and say that
the Soul is (...) ^ion infused into Bodies, organized and praedisposed to
receive them; of which Opinion among the Ancients were Hieron. cp. ^d ^am.
contra Joan* Hi^us.
St. Hierom, Hilar. de Trin. l. 10.
Hilarie, Ambros. de Noah and Arc^. c. 4.
Ambrose, Lactant. de (...). Hom. c. ^.
Lactantius, Theod. de curand ^gr. affect. ser. 4.
Theodoret. Aeneas Gaz. in su^ (...).
Aeneas Gaz^us, and of the modern Writers the major part. The third is of
those who do haesitare, stick between both, and dare affirm nothing certain
on either side, which is the moderation of Aug ^p. 7. 18. 157. and (...). l. 1
c. 1. de Genesis ad li^. 10. and de (...).
St. Augustine and Gregory Greg. l. 7. cp. 53.
the great, who affirm that this is a question incomprehensible, and
unsolvable in this life. Now the only reason which caused St. Austin herein to
haesitate, seems to have been the difficulty of traducing Original sin
from the Parents to the Children. For says he (writing unto St. Hierome
touching the Creation of the Soul) If this Opinion do not oppugn that most
fundamental faith of Original sin, let it then be mine, but if it do
oppugn it, let it not be thine.

Now since that Opinion which denies the Traduction, seems most agreeable to
the spiritual substance of the soul, I shall here produce some few reasons
for the Creation, and solve an argument or two alleged for the Traduction of
the Soul, reserving notwithstanding unto my self, and others, the liberty and
modesty of St. Austins haesitation, which also I find allowed Eccles. 11. 5.
by the Holy Ghost himself.

Two things there are of certainty in this point. 1. That the soul is not any
corporeal Mass or substance measurable by quantity, or capable of
substantial augmentation. 2. That the Traduction of one thing out of another,
does connotate these two things, That the thing traduced does derive Being from
the other, as from its original principle; and that this derivation be not any
other manner of way, but Ratione semi^ali, and per modum decisionis, by a
seminall way, and the decision, separation, or effluxion of substance from the
other: which things being laid, The Arguments against Traduction are these.

First, the testimonies of Holy Scripture, calling God the Father of spirits,
as our natural Parent the Father of our bodies, Job 33. 4. Eccles. 12. 7. Esa
57. 16. Number. 16. 22. 27. 16. Heb. 12. 9. Zach. 12. 1. which though they do not
according to the judgment of St. Aug. conclude the point by infallible
consequence, yet do they much favor the probability of this Opinion.

2. To have Being by Traduction, is, when the soul of the Child is derived
from the soul of the Parent, by the means of Seed: but the Seed of the Parent
cannot reach the Generation of the soul, both because the one is a Corporeal,
the other a Spiritual substance, incapable of Augmentation, or Detriment. Now
that which is spiritual, cannot be produced out of that which is corporeal:
neither can any Seed be discinded or issue out from the soul, being substantia
sim^lex, and impartibilis, a substance simple, and indivisible.

3. That which is separable from the body, and can subsist and work without it,
does not depend in its Being or making upon it; for if by the Generation of the
Body the soul be generated, by the corruption of the Body it would be
corrupted; for every thing that is generable, is corruptible. But the Soul can
subsist and work without the Body; therefore it does not from corporeal
generation derive its Being.

4. If the Soul be seminally traduced, it must he either from the body, or
from the soul of the Parents* not from the Body, for it is impossible for that
which is not a body, to be made out of that which is a Body, no cause being
able to produce an effect out of its own sphere, and more noble than it
self; not from the soul, because that being a spiritual and impartible
substance, can therefore have nothing severed from it by way of substantial
seed unto the constitution of another soul.

5. If there be nothing taken from the Parents, of which the soul is formed,
then it is not traduced by natural generation: but there is nothing taken from
the Parents, by which the soul is formed; for then in all Abortions and
miscarrying Conceptions, the seed of the Soul would perish, and by consequence
the soul it self would be corruptible, as having its Original from
corruptible seed. These and diverse H^eron. ad Pammach. and in l. 32. Eccles.
12. Co^tr. Ruffiaum l. 2. c. 1. 2. and dialog* de Orig^n. Anim* inter ^peracjus
Tom.
other the like arguments are used to confirm the doctrine touching the
Creation of the Reasonable Soul. Unto which may be added the judgment and
testimony of some of the forecited Fathers. St. Hierome tells us that the
Original of the soul in mankind is not as in other living creatures. Since
as our Savior speaks, The Father works hitherto. And the Prophet Esat
tells us, That he forms the spirit of m^n within him, and fram^th the
hearts of all men; as it is in the Psalms. And so Lactamius (whom I do wonder
to find numbered amongst the Authors that affirm the Traduction of the soul,
by Ruffinus, and the Author of the Dialogue amongst the works of Hierome). It
may be questioned (says he) whether the soul be generated out of the Father,
Mother, or both. Neither of all three is true; Because the seed of the Soul is
not put into the Body by either, or both of these. A Body may be borne out of
their Bodies, because something may be out of both contributed; but a Soul
cannot be borne out of their Souls, in as much as from so spiritual and
incomprehensible a substance nothing can issue forth or be severed for that
use. So also St. Hilary, The Soul of Hilar. de T^in. l* 10. and in p. 62*
man is the work of God; the generation of the flesh is always of the flesh.
And again, It is inbred and an impressed Belief in all; that our Souls have
a divine Original: And in like manner Theodoret, God (says he) frames the
Bodies of living creatures out of Bodies subsisting before; but the Souls, not
of all creatures, but of Men only he works (...) out of nothing that had
been before.

Against this Doctrine of the Souls Original, At ^ag. d^ Res^r. G^d. de
Eccles. dog. ^. 23.
The principal argument is drawn from the consideration of Original sin,
and the propagation thereof, which alone was that which troubled and staggerd
S. Augustine in this point. For if the Aug. cp. 28.
Soul be not naturally traduced, how should Original sin be derived from
Adam unto it? And if it were not in the loins of Adam, then neither did it
sin in his loins; whereas the Apostle expressly tells us, that by one Man
sin came into the world, and that in one all have sinned; and that not only
by imputative participation, but by natural Propagation, deriving an inhaerent
habitual pollution, which cleaves inseparably to the soul of every man that
enters into the world, and is the fruit of Adams loins.

Unto which Argument to omit the different resolutions of other men touching
the pollution of the Soul by the immediate contact of the flesh, and the
Parents attinging the ultimate disposition of the Body, upon which naturally
follows the Union of the Soul, (God being pleased to work ordinarily
according to the exigence of second causes, and not suffering any of them to be
in vain for want of that concurrence, which he in the virtue of a first and
supreme cause is to contribute unto them.) I shall set down what I conceive
to be the Truth in this point.

First then, it is most certain that God did not implant Original sin, not
take away Original righteousness from Man, but man by his Praevarication Aug.
de ^ivit. De^. l. 13. ^. 14.
and Fall did cast it away, and contract sin, and so derive a defiled nature to
his posterity. For as Ma^arius excellently speaks, Adam having Ma^ar. Ho. 1^.
transgressed, did lo^ the pure pos^esion of his Nature.

Secondly, Original injustice as it is a sin, by the default and contraction
of Man, so it is also a punishment by the ordination, and disposition of Divine
Justice. It was man's sin to cast away Aug. contr. Iul. l* 5. c* 3.
the Image of God; but it is Gods just judgment (as he has that free
dispensation of his own Gifts) not to restore it again in such manner as at
first he gave it unto that nature which had so rejected and trampled on it.

Thirdly, In this Original sin, there are two things considerable, The
Privation of that Righteousness, which ought to be in us; and the lust or
Habitual concupiscence, which carries Nature unto inordinate motions. The
Privation and want of Original justice is meritoriously from Adam, who did
voluntarily deprave, and reject that Original rectitude which was put into
him, which therefore God out of his most righteous and free disposition is
pleased not to restore unto his Nature in his posterity again. In the
habitual lust are considerable these two things (...) The sinful disorder of
it, And (...) the Punishment of sin by it. Consider it is as a Punishment of
Adams first Praevarication; and so, though it be not efficiently from God, yet
it falls under the Order of his Justice, who did most righteously forsake Adam,
after his wilful fall, and leave him in the Hand of his own Counsel, to
transmit unto us that Seminary of sin which himself had contracted.

But if we consider it as a sin, we then say that the immediate and proper
cause of it, is lapsed nature whole and entire by Generation and Seminall
Traduction derived upon us. But the Re^ter cause is that, from which we
receive and derive this Nature. Nature I say first fallen; for unto Nature
Innocent belonged Original Righteousness, and not Original sin.

2. Nature derived by ordinary generation as the fruit of the loins, and of
the womb. For though Christ had our Nature, yet he had not our sin.

3. Nature whole and entire. For neither part (as some conceive) is the Total
spring and fountain of this sin. For it is improbable that any stain should
be transfused from the Body to the Soul, as from the foul vessel to the
clean water put into it. The Body it self being not Soly and alone in it
self corrupt and sinful; else, all Abortions and miscarrying conceptions
should be subject to damnation. Nothing is the seat of sin which cannot be the
seat of Death the wages of sin.

Original sin therefore most probably seems to arise by Emanation,
partial in the parts, total in the whole; from Man's Nature as guilty,
forsaken, and accursed by God for the sin of Adam. And from the parts not
considered absolutely in themselves, but by virtue of their concurrence and
Union, whereby both make up one compounded Nature. Though then the Soul be a
partial subject or seat of Original sin; yet we have not our sin and our
soul from one Author; because sin follows not the part, but the Nature
whole and entire. And though we have not from our Parents Totum naturae, yet we
have totam naturam, we have our whole nature, though not every part of our
nature. Even as whole Christ was the Son of Mary, who therefore by virtue of
the Communication of properties in Christ, is justly called (...), the Mother
of God, against the Nestorians in the Council of Chalcedon. Though in regard
of his divine Nature, he was without beginning; and the reason is, because the
integrity of Nature arises from the Union of the two parts together, which is
perfected by Generation; so then we say that Adam is the Original, and
meritorious cause. Our next Parents, the isntrumental and immediate cause of
this sin in us, not by way of Physical Emission or Transmigration of sin
from them to us, but by secret contagion, as S. Augustine speaks. Contr.
Julian. l. 5. c. 14.
For having in the Manner aforesaid from Adam by our Parents received a nature,
most justly forsaken by God, and lying under the Guilt and Curse of the first
praevarication, from this Nature thus derived, as guilty and accursed does
immediately and intimately flow Habitual pollution. So then Habitual
Concupiscence is from Adam alone meritoriously by reason of his first
praevarication. From Adam by the mediation of our Parents seminally by natural
generation. And from Nature generated not as Nature, but as in Adam guilty,
forsaken and accursed, by secret and ineffable Resultancy and Emanation. This
is that which I conceive of this Great difficulty, not unmindfull in the mean
time of that speech of Nihil peccato originals ad praedicandum notius, nihil ad
intelligendum secretius. Au^. dc morb. Eccles. cap. 22.
S. Augustine, That there is nothing more certain to be known, and yet
nothing more secret to be understood than Original sin. For other Arguments
to prove the Traduction of the Soul, they are not of such moment; And therefore
I pass them by, and proceed to the consideration of the Soul in its Nature.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of the Image of God in the Reasonable soul, in regard of its
simplicity, and spirituality.
COncerning the dignity of the soul in its nature and essence, Reason has
adventured thus far, to confess that Macrob de s^mno Scip. p 1. c. 14 divine
particula (...), Philo.
the soul of man, is in some sort a spark and beam of divine brightness. And
a greater and more infallible Oracle has warranted that it was breathed into
him by God himself, and was made after his Image and likeness, not
substantially, as if there Vid. contra (...) impietatem d^cretum con^il,
^racar. cap. 5. (...). Da^se. de orth. fid. lib 2. cap. 12.
were a Real Emanation and Traduction of the Soul out of God; which were
blasphemous and impious to conceive: but only by way of Resemblance, and
imitation of God properties in man's original created nature which is more
notable in him, than in the other parts of the world; there is indeed in all
God (...) est ollis vigor etc^lestis Origo.
works some kind of image, and lineaments, an^ footsteps of his glory.

Deum namque ire per omnes Terrasque Tractusque maris Coelumque profundum, etc.
For all the tracts of Earth, of Sea, and Sky,
Are filled with divine immensity.
The whole world is a great (...). Orig. apud Eusebius. de praepar. Evang. lib. 6.
c. 11. F^nxit i^ essigie^ mod^tum c^ncta Deorum. Ovid. Met. 1. In alii^ creatur
(...) est simili^udo dei tantum per m^dum Vest^i; in Sola Rationali Creatura
per modum imaginis. Vid. Aquin. part. 1. qu. 93. art. 6. (...). Philo. apud
Eusebius. de praepar. Eva^g. lib. ^. cap. 18. (...). Gieg. Nyssen. Sermon (...) in
verb^ illa s^amus (...), etc. (...). Arist. Ethic lib. ^0 c 7. Deorum
cognatione ^enetur. (...). de Divin. lib. 1. and lib. de A^icit. Porphyr. apud
Eusebius. de pr^p. Ev^g lib. 11. cap. 28 lib. 1. Clem. Alex. in s^ lib. 4 Strom^.
Ipse etiam C^c. in somnio Scipio.
book, wherein we read the praise, glory, power, and infiniteness of him that
made it, but man is after a more peculiar manner called (...) and (...) the
image and glory of God; the greater world is only Gods workmanship, wherein is
represented the wisdom and power of God, as in a building the Art and cunning
of the workman; but man (in the original purity of nature) is besides that, as
wax, wherein was more notably impressed by that divine spirit (whose work it is
to seal) a spiritual resemblance of his own goodness and sanctity. Again,
the greater world was never other than an Orator to set forth the power and
praises of God; but he made the soul of man, in the beginning as it were his
Oracle, wherein he fastened a perfect knowledge of his law and will, from the
very glimpses and corrupted Relics of which Knowledge of his Law, some have
been bold to call men (...)* the kindred of God, And Senec. Liber Animus and
Diis cognatus; which is the same with that of Aratus cited by S. Paul (...),
for we are his offspring, yea Euripides (as Tully in his * Tusculans
observes,) was bold to call the soul of man, by the name of God; and Seneca
will venture so far too. Quid aliud vocas animum quam deum in humano corpore
S^cc. cp. 31. and 41.
hospitantem. But to forbear such boldness, as (it may be) one of the
Originals of heathen Idolatry: Certain it is, that there are (as Tully many
times divinely observes) sundry similitudes between God and the mind of man.
There are indeed some Attributes of God, not only incommunicable, but
absolutely inimitable, and unshadowable by any excellency in man's soul, as
immensity, infiniteness, omnipotency, omniscience, immutability,
impassibility, and the like; but whatsoever spiritual, and Rational
perfections the power and bounty of God, conferred upon the soul in its first
Creation, are all of them so many shadows and representations Vid. Aug. de
Genesis ad li^. lib. 6. c. 12.
of the like, but most infinite perfections in him.

The Properties then and Attributes of God, A^bros. Hexam. lib. 6. c. 8.
Tertull. lib. ^. contra Marci^. cap, q. 9. 16. Clem. Alex. in Protreptic p. 30.
Basil. Hexam. Hom^. 10.
wherein this Image chiefly consists, are first these three. Spirituality with
the two immediate consequents thereof, Simplicity and Immortality, in which the
soul has partaked without any after corruption or depravation. Concerning the
former, it were vast, and needless, to confute those Vid. Theodored. Sermon. 5.
de Natura Hom and Nemes. cap. ^. S^u, Nyssen. lib. de Ani^i. Platarch de
placitis Philosoph. l. 4. c. 2. Tertul. de Anim. Senec. Not. qu. l. 7. c. ^4
sundry opinions of ancient Philosophers, concerning the substance of the
soul; many where of Tully in the first of his Tusculans has reported; And
Aristotle confuted in his first de Anima. Some conceived it to be blood, others
the brain, some fire, others air; some that it consists in Harmony and
Number; and the Philosopher Dicaearchus, that it was nothing at all but the
body disposed and fitted for the works of life. But to let these pass as
unworthy of refutation, and to proceed to the truth of the first property.

There are sundry natural reasons to prove the Vid. Nem^s. de Anim. cap. 2.
Cl^udi ^n. Mamercum de statu An^me. lib 2. Plotin, and ^u. sib. de praeparat.
Evang. l. 25 c 21 Damisc de Orthod. fi. le. l. 2. c 12 Plutarch. lib. de
placitis Philosoph. lib. ^. c. 2. 3. Aug. lib. de quan^itate Anime.
Spirituality of the soul; as first, the manner of its working, which is
immateriall by conceiving objects, as universal, or otherwise purified from
all grosnesse of matter, by the Abstraction of the Active understanding,
whereby they are made in some sort proportional to the nature of the Intellect
Passive, into which the species are impressed.

Secondly, its in dependence on the body, in that manner of working; for though
the operations of the soul require the concurrence of the commonsense and
imagination, yet that is by way only of conveyance from the object, not by way
of assistance to the elicite and immediate act. They only present the species,
they do not qualify the perception. Phantasmata are only objecta operation
is; the objects they are, not instrumenta operandi, the instruments of the
souls working. The Act of understanding is immediately from the soul, without
any the least concurrences of the body there* unto, although the things whereon
that act is fixed and conversant, require, in this estate, bodily organs to
represent them unto the soul; as light does not at all concur to the act of
seeing, which solely and totally flows from the visive faculty, but only
serves as an extrinsecall assistance for qualification of the Medium and object
that must be seen. And this reason Aristotle lib. 3. de Ani^a. cap. 5.
has used to prove, that the understanding, which is principally true of the
whole soul, is not mixed with any body, but has a nature altogether diverse
therefrom, because it has no bodily organ, as all bodily powers have, by
which it is enabled to the proper acts that belong unto it. And hereon is
grounded another reason of his, to prove the Soul immateriall, because it
depends not on the body in its operations, but educeth them immediately from
within it self, as is more manifest in the Reflection of the soul, upon its
own nature, being an operation (as he expressly Ibid. cap. 6.
speaks) seperable therefrom, the soul being not only actus informans, a
form informing, for the actuating of a body, and constitution of a compound
substance, but actus subsistens too, a form subsisting; And that per se,
without any necessary dependence upon matter. It is an act, which works as
well in the body, as whereby the body works.

Another reason of Aristotle in the same place, is the difference between
Material and Immateriall powers. For (says he) all bodily cognoscitive
faculties do suffer offense and damage from the too great excellency of their
objects, as the eye from the brightness of the Sun, the ear from the
violence of a sound, the touch from extremity of heat or cold, and the lik^.
But the understanding on the contrary side is perfected by the worthiest
contemplations, and the better enabled for lower enquiries. And therefore
Aristotle in his Ethics, places the most complete happiness of man, in those
heavenly intuitions of the mind, which are fastened on the divinest and most
remote objects; which in Religion is nothing else, but a fruition of that
beatificall vision (which, as far as Nature goes, is called the contemplation
of the first cause) and an eternal satiating the soul with beholding the
Nature, Essence, and glory of God.

Another reason may be drawn from the condition of the Understandings Objects,
which have so much the greater conformity to the soul, by how much the more
they are divine and abstracted. Hoc habet animus argumentum suae divinitatis,
(says Seneca) quod illum divina delectam. This argument of its divinenesse
has the mind of man, that it is delighted with divine things; for if the
soul were corporeal, it could not possibly reach to the knowledge of any, but
material substances, and those that were of its own Nature; otherwise we
might as well see Angels with our eyes, as understand any thing of them in our
minds. And the ground of this reason is, that axiom in Philosophy, that all
reception is ad modum recipientis, according to the proportion and capacity of
the receiver. And that the objects which are spiritual and divine, have
greatest proportion to the soul of man, is evident in his Understanding and
his will, both which are in regard of truth or good unsatisfiable, by any
material or worldly objects, the one never resting in enquiry, till it attain
the perfect knowledge, the other never replenished in desire till it be
admitted unto the perfect possession of the most divine and spiritual good: to
wit, of him who is the first of Causes, and the last of Ends.

From this Attribute of Spirituality flows immediately that next of Simplicity,
Unity, or Actuality; Aris^t. d^ Ani^a lib 3. cap. 6.
for Matter is the root of all perfect composition, every Compound consisting
of two Essential parts, matter and form. I exclude not from the Soul all
manner of composition; for it is proper to God only to be absolutely and
perfectly simple: But I exclude all Essential composition, in respect whereof
the Soul is merely Actual; And so I understand that of Tully, Nihil est
Animus admixtum, Tuscul. q l. 1. and lib. de Senectut.
nihil concretum, nihil copulatum, nihil coagmentatum, nihil duplex.

CHAP. XXXIV. Of the Souls immortality proved by its simplicity, independance,
agreement of Nations in acknowledging God and duties due unto him, dignity
above other Creatures, power of understanding things immortal, unsatiablenesse
by objects Mortal, freeness from all causes of corruption.
ANd from this Simplicity follows by a necessary and unavoydable consequence,
the third property spoken of, V^d Plutarch. lib. d^ placit. Philosoph 4 c. 7
quae ex Sen^a (...) u^um co^legit Dionys. Gotho^td. in lo^x ipso (...). Ti^l de
An mo. Cicer. Tusc. qu. lib. 1. Ca^o major, sive de senect. and de Ami^t. ^ ^am
^riam (...) (...). (...) 1. Eusebius. de praepar. Evang. lib. 11. ex P^one
porpher. etc. N^mes Ae^rs Gaz^us in (...). Erast (...). (...).
Immortality, it being absolutely impossible (as Tully excellently observes,
and it is the argument of Iul. Scaliger on this very occasion) for any simple
and uncompounded Nature to be subject to death and corruption; For (says
Tully) Interitus est discessus and secretio ac direptus earum partium quae
conjunctione ^liqua tenebantur. It is a separation (and as it were) a divulsion
of parts, before united each to other, so that where there is Ni^ (...) (...)
esse quod (...) a^um (...) quem est: Iste (...) for^ [v^z. Sim^] n^ possunt
perd^e actum per quem sunt, quia sibi i^ s^ sunt Actus. Nihil au (...) ^otest
se^ perdere. Contarenu^. lib. 1 de Immort. Animae.
no Union, there can be no separation, and by consequence no death nor
mortality.

Another reason may be the same which was alleged for the spirituality of the
soul, namely independance in operation, and therefore consequently in Being
upon the body. And that Independance is manifest, First, because the acts of
the soul are educ'd immediately in it self, without the Intercedence of any
organ whereby sensitive faculties work. Secondly, because the soul can
perceive and have the knowledge of truth of universals, of it self, of Angels,
of God, can assent, discourse, abstract, censure, invent, contrive, and the
like; none of which actions could any ways be produced by the Intrinsecall
concurrence of any material faculty. Thirdly, because in Raptures and
Ecstasies, the soul is (as it were) drawn up above and from the body, though
not from informing it, yet certainly from borrowing from it any assistance to
the produceing of its operation. All which prove, that the soul is separable
from the body in its Nature, and therefore that it is not corrupt and mortal
as the body.

Another reason may be taken from the Universal agreement of all Nations in
the Earth in Cum de Animarum at^ nitate (...), non ^ve momentun apud no^ habet
const^sus H^minum aut timentium infer^* aut colen^ium. (...). c. ^p 117.
Religion and the worship of some Deity, which cannot but be raised out of a
hope and secret Resolution that that God whom they worshipped, would reward
their piety, if not here, yet in another life. Nulla gens adeo extra leges est
project^ ut non aliquos deos credat, says Seneca; whence those fictious of the
Poets touching Elyzium and fields of happiness for men of honest and well
ordered lives; and* places of Torment for those that do any way neglect the
bonds of their Religion.

Ergo exercentur poenis, veterumque malorum Supplicia expendunt. Therefore they
exercised are with pain,
And punishments of former crimes sustain.
For in this life it is many times in all places seen, that those which have
given themselves most liberty in contempt of Gods Laws, and have suffered
themselves to be carried by the swinge of their own rebellious Passions, unto
all injurious, ambitious, unruly Practices, have commonly raised themselves and
their fortunes more than others, who out of tenderness and fear have followed
no courses but those which are allowed them. And yet these men who suffer so
many indignities out of regard to Religion, do still observe their duties, and
in the midst of all contempt and reproach, fly into the bosom of their God:
And as Lucretius himself that Arch-Atheist confesses of them:

-- Multo in rebus acerbis Acri^s advertunt animos ad religionem. Their hearts
in greatest bitterness of mind,
Unto Religion are the more enclinde.
Their very terrors and troubles make them more zealous in acknowledging some
Deity and in the worship of it. Hic Pietatis h^s? would not this easily have
melted their Religion into nothing, and quite diverted their minds from so
fruitless a severity, had they not had a strong and indeleble persuasion
fastened in their souls, that a state would come, where in both their Patience
should be rewarded, and the insolency of their Adversaries repayed with the
just Vengeance they had deserved?

As for that Atheistical conceit, that Religion is only grounded on Policy,
and maintained by Princes for the better Tranquillity and Setlednesse of their
States, making it to be only Imperiorum Vinculum, a Bond of Government, that
the Commonweal might not suffer from the fury of minds secure from all
Religion, it is a fancy no less absurd, than it is impious. For that which
has not only been observed and honored by those who have scarce had any
form of a civil Regiment amongst them, but even generally assented unto by
the opinions and practice of the whole world, is not a Law of Policy and
civil Institution, but an inbred and secret Law of Nature dictated by the
consciences of men, and assented unto, without and above any humane imposition.
Nor else is it possible for Legal institutions, and the closest and most
intricate conveyances of Humane Policy so much to entangle the hearts of men
(of themselves enclinable to liberty) nor to fetter their consciences, as
thereby only to bring them to a regular conformity unto all government for
fear of such a God, to whose Infiniteness, Power and Majesty they Assent by
none but a civil Tradition. It must be a visible character of a Deity
acknowledged in the Soul, an irresistible Principle in Nature, and the secret
witness of the heart of man, that must constrain it unto those sundry
religious ceremonies (observed among all Nations) wherein even in places of
Idolatry, were some so irksome and repugnant to Nature, and others so void of
Reason, as that nothing but a firm and deep Assurance of a Divine Judgment,
and of their own Immortality, could ever have imposed them upon their
consciences. And besides this consent of men unto Religion in general, we
find it also unto this one part hereof touching the Souls immortality. All
the wisest and best reputed Philosophes for Learning and stayednesse of life,
and, besides them, even Barbarians, Infidels, and savage people have discerned
it. Adeo nescio quo mod^ inhaeret in menibus quasi seculorum quoddam augurium
futurorum, says Tully. The Soul has a kind of presage of a future world;
And therefore he says, that it is in man's Body a Tenant, Tus^ qu^l 1.
tanquam in dome al^ena, as in another house: And is only in Heaven as a Lord
tanquam in domo sua, as in its own.

Though in the former of these, the ignorance of the Resurrection made him err
touching the future condition of the Body, wherein indeed consists a maine
dignity of Man above other creatures. And this Opinion it is which he says was
the ground of all that care men had for posterity, to sow and plant
Commonwealths, to ordain Laws, to establish forms of Government, to erect
Foundations and Societies, to hazard their Blood for the good of their Country;
all which could not have been done with such freedom of Spirit, and
prodigality of life, unless there were withal a conceit that the good thereof
would some way or other redound to the contentment of the Authors themselves
after this life: for it was a speech savouring of infinite Atheism.

(...). When I am dead, and in mine V^ne;
What care I though the World burns?
Now although against this present Reason Tull. Tus^. qu. lib 1.
drawn from the consent of men (which yet Heathens Sen^ (...) 117.
themselves have used) It may be alleged that there has been a consent
likewise of some, That the Soul is nothing else but the Eucrasie or good
Temperature of the Body, and that it is therefore subject to those Maladies,
Distempers, Age, Sickness, and at last Death, which the Body is; as amongst
the rest Lucretius takes much pains to prove: yet the Truth is, that is Votum
magic quam Iudicium, never any firm opinion grounded on Judgment and Reason,
but rather a desire of the heart, and a persuasion of the Will enticing the
Understanding so to determine. For the conscience of lewd Epicures and sensual
minds, being sometimes frighted with the flashes and apprehensions of
Immortality, which often times pursues them, and obtrudes it self upon them
against their wills, shining like lightning through the chinks and crevises (as
I may so speak) of their Souls, which are of set purpose closed against all
such light, sets the Reason on work to invent arguments for the contrary side,
that s^ their staggering and fearful impiety may b^ something emboldned, and
the Eye of their conscience blinded, and the Mouth mustled from breathing forth
those secret clamors and shrikes of fear. The Denial then of the Immortality
of the Soul is rather a Wish than an Opinion, a corruption of the Heart and
Will, than any Natural Assertion of the understanding, which cannot but out of
the footsteps and relics of those first sacred Impressions, acknowledge a
spiritual resemblance in the Soul of Man unto some supreme Deity, whom the
conscience in ^acon Essay of Athe^sme.
all its Enormities does displease: And therefore it is observed that the Mind
of an Atheist is continually wavering and unsatisfied, never able so to smother
the inbred consciousnes of its immortality, as not to have continual
suggestions of fear and scruple. Wheresoever there is an impious Heart, there
is always a shivering judgment.

Another Reason of the Souls immortality may be drawn from the dignity and
pre-eminence of Man above other Creatures: for he is made Lord over them, and
they were ordained to be serviceable to him, and Ministers for his
contentments: which dignity cannot possibly stand with the Mortality of the
Soul. For should not many other Creatures far exceed Man in (...) ^ad. ^.
446.
the Durance of their being? And even in their time of living together, how
subject to weaknesses, sickness, languishing, cares, fear, jealousies,
discontents, and all other miseries of Mind and Body, is the whole Nature of
Man, of all which, other creatures feel the least disturbance? Are not Men
here, beyond the rest, the very proper Diogenc^ vocare shl^b it (...). Lac. l.
lib. 6. (...) Solon ad ^oesum. vid. Theodoret. ^om. 5. de n^ura Hom. and Clem.
Alex. Strom. lib. 3. p. 316. 317. Edit. Hi^ns.
subjects and receptacles of misery? Is not our heart made the Natural center
of fears and sorrows? and our Minds, as it were, Hives to entertain
numberless swarms of stinging and thorny Cares? Are we not Vassals and
Slaves to many distempered passions? Have not our very Contents their terror,
and our Peace disturbance? Are not all our Comforts, wherewith we strive to
glut and stuff our selves here, the glorious Vanities, and golden delusions
and cosenages of the world? And how miserable must their miseries be, whose
very happiness is unhappy? And for Reason, what comfort could we find in it,
when it would always be presenting unto us the consideration of an eternal
loss of all our contentments, and still affright us with the dark and hideous
conceit of Annihilation? Mortality and Corruption makes Unreasonablenesse a
Privilege; And in this case the Beasts would be so much the more happy than
Man, by how much the less they know their own wretchedness. An Atheist would
be in this life far happier than he is, if he could bring himself to have as
little Reason as he has Religion.

Another Reason may be taken from the Nature of Man's reasonable Faculties. To
every Power in Man, as God has assigned a peculiar operation, so likewise has
he given it Objects of equal extent thereunto, which are therefore able to
accomplish its natural desires, whereby it fasteneth on them. And for this
cause from the Nature of the Objects, we easily rise to know the Nature both
of the Faculties and Essence; for from the Essence flows naturally the
Faculty, from the Faculty is naturally educed the Operation, which requires
naturally Objects proportional, convenient, satisfactory, and of equal
extent. Where therefore no mortal object bears full convenience, nor is able
to satiate and quiet the Faculty, there it and the Essence, from which it
flows, are both immortal. Now we see sensitive Powers find in this life full
satisfaction, as the Sight from all the Variety of Colors, the Ear of sounds,
and the like: only the Reasonable Parts, the Understanding, and the Will can
never be replenished in this estate of Mortality. Have they as great and wide
contentments, Fecisti no^ ad ^e, and n^equietum est cor nostrum (...)
requiescat in ^e Aug. Conses. l. 1. c. 1. vid. Ibid. lib. 4. cap. 10. 12. de
Trinit. lib. 13. cap 8. Omni^ mihi Copia quae Deu^ me^ no^ est, E^esta est*
Consess. lib. 13. c. 8. Vid. ^iam de Civ. Dei. lib. 8. cap. 8. lib. 11. c. 13.
l 12. c 1.
as the whole frame of Nature can here afford them; still their pursuites are
restless, still they find an absence and want of something, which they cannot
find. Orbis Alexandro angustus; In this case every man is like Alexander. This
world wherein we now converse, is too straight and empty to fill the
vastness, and limit the desires of the Soul of Man. Only the sight and
possession of God, the most infinite good, can satisfy our Understandings and
our Wills. For both these Faculties (as all others in suo Ge^re) aim at
summum. The Understanding is carried ad summam Causam to the first of Truths;
the Will ad summum Bonum to the last of Ends; and therefore he only which is
the First and the Last, can satisfy these two searching and unquiet faculties.
Hi motus Animorum a^que haec certa^ina.

These are the Motions, this the strife
Of Souls, aspiring unto life.
All the Knowledge we heap up here, serves only as a Mirror wherein to view
our ignorance, and we have only light enough to discover that we are in the
dark. And indeed, were there no Estate wherein Knowledge should receive a
Perfection, and be thoroughly proportioned to the Heart of man, The labor of
getting the Knowledge we have, and the vexation for the want of what we have
not, and the grief of parting so soon with it, would render the vexation of
it far greater than the content.

Hoc est quod palles? cur quis non prandeat hoc est? Is this the fruit, for
which we fast?
And by pale studies sooner waste?
Do we toil and sweat, and even melt our selves away for that which we sooner
forsake than find? Do we deny our selves the contentments and satisfactions
most agreeable to our corporeal condition, being without hope of accomplishing
our wishes in another estate? It is natural for gaining of Knowledge to hasten
unto that whereby we loose both it and our selves? and to labor for such a
purchase, which like lightning is at once begun and ended, yea indeed sooner
lost than gotten? Certainly were man not conscious of his own immortality,
there could be no stronger inducement to sottishness, luxury, riot,
sensuality, and all other unbridled practices. It is registered for the impiety
of Atheists; Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall dye.

Another Reason may be framed after the same manner, as was that to prove the
Spirituality of the Soul from the manner of its operation. And it is grounded
on those two ordinary Axioms in Philosophy, That every thing is received
according to the quality of the Receiver, and that every thing has the same
manner of ^ssence, as it has of operation. Now the Soul of Man can easily
receive impressions and conceits of immortality, and discourse thereupon:
therefore also it is in its own Essence and nature immortal. We see even
between things merely corporeal, as the Object and the sensitive Organ, how
small a disproportion works incapacity. Much more must it be found in so great
a difference as would be between immortality of Objects and corruption of the
Soul that works on them. We cannot picture an Angel or Spirit, nor make any
im^ateriall stamp in a piece of wax, since a corporeal substance is capable of
none but corporeal impressions. And therefore we see that even amongst
Bodies, the more pure and subtle they are, the more are they exempted from the
perception of the quickest and most spiritual sense, the sight. Now the mind
of man in Understanding, is but as wax to the seal, or as a Table and Picture
to an Object which it represents: which is the ground of that Paradox in
Aristotle, that in understanding the Soul is (as it were) made the Object that
is understood. Because, as the Wax, after it is stamped, is in some sort the
very Seal it self that stamped it, namely Representative, by way of Image and
resemblance; so the Soul, in receiving the species of any Object, is made the
picture and image of the thing it self. Now the understanding, being able to
apprehend immortality (yea indeed apprehending every corporeal substance, as
if it were immortal, I mean by purging it from all gross material and
corruptible qualities) must therefore needs of it self be of an immortal
Nature. And from the latter of those two Principles, which I spoke of, namely,
that the quality of the Being may be gathered from the Nature of the Operation,
Aristotle inferres the separability and independance of the understanding on
the Body, in the third de Anima aforementioned: For the Soul being able to work
without the concurrence of any bodily Organ to the very act it self (as was
before showed) must needs also be able to subsist by its own nature, without
the concurrence of any matter to sustain it. And therefore he says in the
same place, that the understanding is separable, uncompounded, impassible; all
arguments of immortality. Other reasons are produced for the proof hereof,
taken from the causes of corruption, which is wrought either by Contraries
working and eating out Nature; or by Defect of the Preserving cause, as light
is decayed by absence of the Sun; or thirdly by corruption of the subject
whereon it depends. None whereof can be verified in the Soul. For first, how
can any thing be contrary to the Soul, which receives perfection from all
things? for Intellectus omnia intelligit, says Aristotle, yea wherein all
Contraries are reconciled and put off their Opposition? For (as a great man
excellently speaks) Mornay of Christian Religion. Chap. 14.
those things, which destroy one another in the World, maintain and perfect
one another in the Mind; one being a means for the clearer apprehension of
the other. Secondly, God, who is the only Efficient of the Soul (being else in
it self simple and indivisible, and therefore not capable of death, but only
of Annihilation) does never fail, and has himself promised never to bring it
unto nothing. And lastly, the Soul depends not, as do other Forms, either in
Operation or Being, on the Body, being not only Actus informans, but subsistens
too, by its own absolute virtue.

CHAP. XXXV. Of the Honor of Humane Bodies by Creation, by Resurrection; of
the Endowments of Glorified Bodies.
ANd now, that this particular of immortality may farther redound both Vid.
Call. Rhodig. lib. 2. cap. 9. 10. 11. Aug. de Genesis ad lit. l. 6. c. 12 etc.
Platonic. ^ sententi^ Ca^cer, Apostolic. i Templum. Tertul. de An^m. Tertull.
de Carne Christi. Vid. Aug. lib. 7. de Trinit. cap. 6.
to the Honor and comfort of Man, I must fall upon a short digression touching
man's Body: wherein I intend not to meddle with the Question, How man's Body may
be said to be made after the Image of God (which sure is not any otherwise,
than as it is a sanctified and shall be a Blessed Vessel, but not as some have
conceited, as if it were in Creation Imago Christi futuri, nec Dei opus tantum,
sed and Pignus: As if Christ had been the pattern of our Honor, and not we
of his Infirmity, since the Scripture says, He was made like unto us in all
things, and that he Assumed our Nature, but never that we were, but that we
shall be like unto him) not, I say, to meddle with this, I will only briefly
consider the Dignity thereof in the particular of immortality, both in the
first structure, and in the last Resurrection of it. The Creation of our
Bodies, and the Redemption of our Bodies, as the Apostle calls it. What
Immunity was at first given, and what Honor shall at last be restored to it.
In which latter sense it shall certainly be Secundum Imaginem, after his Image,
who was Primitiae the First fruits of them that rise. That as in his Humility
his Glory was hid in our Mortality, so in our Exaltation our Mortality shall be
swallowed up of his Glory. And for the first estate of Man's Body, we conclude
in a word: that it was partly Mortal, and partly Immortal: Mortal in regard
of possibility of Dying, because it was affected with the mutual Action and
Passion of corruptible elements: for which reason it stood in need of
reparation and recovery of it self by food, as being still Corpus Animale, and
not Spirituale, as St. Paul distinguishes, a Natural, but not a Spiritual
Body. But it was Immortal, that is, Exempted from the Law of Death and
Dissolution of the Elements, in virtue of Gods Covenant with man, upon
condition Aug. de Gen ad lit. lib. 6. cap. 25. de Civ. dei. l. 13. c. 19 Vide
quae fuse and erudite disscrit Georg. Zeem^n* Tract. de I (...). Dei. cap. ^
sect. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5 ^.
of his Obedience. It was Mortal Condition Corporis, by the Condition of a
Body; but immortal Beneficio Conditoris, by the Benefit of its Creation; else
God had planted in the Soul such natural desires of a Body wherein to work as
could not be naturally attained; For the Soul did naturally desire to remain
still in the body. In the natural Body of Adam there was no sin, and therefore
no death, which is the wages of sin.

I come now to the Redemption of our Bodies already performed in Pignore and in
Primi^its, In our Head, and in some few of his Members, Enoch, Ellas, and (as
is probable) in those dead Bodies which arose to testify the Divine power of
our crucified Savior; and shall be totally accomplished at that day of
Redemption, as the same Apostle Ephesians. 4 30.
calls the Last day: that day of a full and final Redemption, when Death, the
last enemy, shall Luke 21. 28.
be overcome. And well may it be called a day of Redemption, not only in regard
of the Creature, which yet groaneth under the Malediction and Tyranny of
sinful Man: nor yet only in respect of Man's Soul, which, though it be before
admitted unto the purchased Possession of the Glorifying Vision, and lives no
more by Faith alone, but by sight, shall yet then receive a more abundant
fullness thereof, as being the day of the Manifestation and plenary discovery
both of the Punishing Glory of God in the Wicked, and of his Merciful and
Admirable Glory in the Saints: but also and (as I think) most especially in
respect of the Body. For there is, by virtue of that Omnipotent Sacrifice, a
double kind of Redemption wrought for us: The one Vindicative, giving us
Immunity from all spiritual dangers, delivering Luke 1. 68.
us from the Tyranny of our Enemies, from Heb. 9. 1^.
the Severity, Justice, and Curse of the Law; Luke 21. 28.
Romans 8. 23.
which is commonly in the New Testament called Ephesians. 1. 7.
simply (...) and (...), a Deliverance from evil; The other Purchasing, or
Munificent, by not only freeing us from our own wretchedness, but farther
conferring upon us a Positive and a Glorious Honor, which St. John calls
(...), a Power, Privilege, Prerogative, and Ioh. 1. 12.
Title unto all the Glorious Promises of Immortality: which like wise St. Paul
calls (...), Ephesians. 1. 14.
the Redemption of a purchased Possession, and a Redemption unto the Adoption
of Sons. Now then the Last day is not Totally and Perfectly a day of
Redemption unto our Souls in either of these senses, since they are in this
life delivered from the Malediction of the Law, from the Wrath of the Judge,
from the Tyranny of the Enemy, from the Reign of Sin, and by Death freed
not only from the Dominion, but from the Possession, or Assault of the Enemy;
not only from the Kingdom, but from the Body of Sin; and is withal in good
part possessed of that Bliss, which it shall more fully enjoy at last. But our
Bodies, though before that Great day they partake much of the benefits of
Redemption, as being here sanctified vessels, freed from the Authority and
Power of the Devil, World, Flesh, and from the Curse of Death too, wherein
they part not only with life, but with sin; yet after all this do they want
some part of either Redemption: as namely to be raised and delivered from that
dishonor and corruption, which the last Enemy has brought upon them: and to
be Admitted into those Mansions, and invested with that Glory, whereby they
shall be Totally possessed of their Redemption. In a word, the Soul is in its
separation fully delivered from all Enemies, which is the first; and in a great
measure enjoys the Vision of God, which is the second part or degree of man's
Redemption. But the Body is not till its Resurrection, either quite freed from
its Enemy, or at all possessed of its Glory. I mean in its self, though it
be in its Head, who is Primitiae and P^gnus Resurrectionis, the first fruits
and earnest of our Conquest over Death.

Touching the Dignity of our Bodies, though there be more comfort to be had in
the Expectation, than Curiosity in the inquiry after it; yet what is usually
granted, I shall briefly set down. And first, it shall be Raised a whole entire
and perfect Body, with all the parts best fitted to be Receptacles of Glory;
freed from all either the Usherers in, or Attendants and followers on the
Grave, Age, Infirmity, Sickness, Corruption, Ignominy, and Dishonor: And
shall rise a true, whole, strong, and honorable Body. For though every part of
the Body shall not have those peculiar uses, which here they have, since they
neither eat, nor drink, marry, nor are given in marriage, but are as the Angels
of God: yet shall not any part be lost: Licet enim officiis liberentur,
judiciis re^inentur: T^ull.
Though they are freed from their Temporal service, for which they were here
ordained, yet must they be reserved for receiving their judgment, whether it be
unto Glory, or unto Dishonor.

The second Dignity is that Change and Alteration Vid. Aug. de C^v. Dei. lib.
13. cap. 20. and 23. and Epist. 146.
of our Body from a Natural to a Spiritual Body, whereby is not meant any
Transubstantiation from a Corporeal to a Spiritual substance: For our Bodies
shall, after the Resurrection, be conformable unto Christ's body, which, though
glorious, was not yet a Spirit, but had flesh and bone, as we have. Nor is it
to be understood of a thin, Aereall, Invisible Body (as some have collected)
since Christ says of his Body, after he was risen, Videte, Palpate.
Wheresoever it is, it has both its quantity, and all sensible qualities of a
Body Glorified with it. It is a strong Argument, that it is not there, where it
is not sensible; And therefore the Doctrines of Vbiquity, and
Transubstantiation, as they give Christ more tha^ he is pleased to own, an
Immensity of Body; so do they spoil him of that, which he has been pleased
for our sakes to assume; Extension, Compacture, Massinesse, Visibility, and
other the like sensible Properties, which cannot stand with that pretended
miracle whereby they make Christ's Body (even now a Creature, and like unto ours
in substance, though not in qualities of Corruptibility, Infirmity, Ignominy,
Animality) to be truly invested with the very immediate properties of the
Deity. True indeed it is, that the Body of Christ has an efficacy and
operation in all parts of the world, it works in Heaven with God the Father
by Intercession; amongst the blessed Angels by Confirmation; in Earth, and that
in all ages, and in all places amongst Men, by Justification, and Comfort; in
Hell amongst the Devils and Damned, by the Tremblings and Fears of a
condemning and convicting Faith. But Operation requires only a presence of
Virtue, not of Substance. For does not the Sun work wonderful effects in the
bowels of the Earth, it self notwithstanding being a fixed Planet in the
Heaven? And why should not the Sun of Righteousness work as much at the like
distance, as the Sun of Nature? Why should he not be as Powerful Absent, as
he was Hoped? Or why should the Not presence of his Body make that uneffectuall
now, which the Not existing could not before his Incarnation? Why should we
mistrust the Eyes of Stephen, that saw him in Heaven, at such a Distance of
place, when Abraham could see him in his own bowels through so great a Distance
of Time?

That Speech then, that the Body shall be a Spiritual Body, is not to be
understood in either of those former senses: but it is to be understood first
of the more immediate Union and full Inhabitation of the virtue and vigor of
Gods Spirit in our Bodies, quickening and for ever sustaining them without any
Assistance of Natural or Animal qualities, for the repairing and augmenting
of them in recompense of that, which by labor and infirmity, and the natural
opposition of the Elements, is daily diminished. Secondly, it shall be so
called in regard of its Obedience and Total Subjection to the Spirit of God,
without any manner of Reluctance and dislike. Thirdly, in respect of those
Spiritual qualities, those Prerogatives of the Flesh, with which it shall be
adorned, which are

First, a Shining and Glorious Light, wherewithal it shall be clothed as with
a Garment: for the Just shall shine as the Sun in the Firmament. Now, this
shall be wrought first by virtue of that Communion, which we have with Christ
our Head, whose Body, even in its Mortality, did shine like the Sun, and had
his clothes white as light. And secondly, by diffusion and Redundancie from De
m^i (...) Anim^ in Corpus, vide C^l Rhodig. lib. 1^. cap. 15. 16.
our Soul upon our Body, which by the Beatificall Vision, filled with a
Spiritual and unconceiveable brightness, shall work upon the Body, as on a
Subject made thoroughly Obedient to its Power unto the Production of alike
qualities.

The second Spiritual Property shall be Impassibility, not in respect of
Perfective, but in respect of annoying, disquieting, or destructive Passion.
There shall not be any War in the members, any fighting and mutual
languishing of the Elements; but they shall all be sustained in their full
strength by virtue of Christ's Communion, of the Inhabitation of the Spirit, of
the Dominion of the Glorified Soul. There shall be no need of rest, or sleep,
or meat, all which are here requisite for the supply of our Infirmities and
daily defects, and are only the Comforts of Pilgrimage, not the Blessedness of
Possession. For although Christ after his Resurrection did eat before his
Disciples, yet this was none otherwise done, than that other, the Retaining of
his wounds, which was only for our sakes; that our Faith touching the Truth of
his Body, might not be without these visible and inferior Witnesses, by which
he was pleased to make his very Glorified flesh a proportioned Object to our
frail sense and faith, that so we might thence learn confidently to rely for
our selves as well on the Benefit of his Exaltation, as of his Humility. Or it
was done (as St. Augustine speaks) Non ex Necessitate, De C^i. Dei. lib. 14.
sed ex Potestate: as the Sun is said to draw and suck up standing waters:
Non Pabuli Egestate, sed Virtutis Magni^adine, Not to Nourish, but to Manifest
its virtue.

Thirdly, the Body shall be a strong and beautiful Body, thoroughly able to
minister unto the Soul any service, wherein it shall employ it, and shall be
no longer, as it is now, the clogge and luggage thereof. It shall likewise be
free from all blemish and deformity (which ever arises out of the distemper
and discord of the Elements) (as it is by good probability conjectured) reduced
Ita (...) p^rum de Corpor^ ut nihil deforme mantal in Corpore. Vid. Aug.
Enchirid. c 91. and de Civ* Dei. lib. 2^. cap. 19* 20. Tertul de Resu^vitia
de^entur, Natura ^rvabitur. Aug. de Civ. Dei. l. 22. cap. 17.
unto a full, comely and convenient stature, even in those, who were in their
Death contemptible, Infants, lame, dismembered, or any other way dishonored
with the miseries of corruption; Naturae, non injuriae reddimur, we shall be
restored to our Nature, but not to our shame; the Dust shall still retain and
bury our dishonor, and it shall be one part of our Glory to be made fit for it.

The last quality of our Bodies, which I shall observe, is a perfect subtilty
and agility, best befitting their service for the Soul in all speedy motion;
which surely shall be there so much the more requisite, than here on earth, by
how much Heaven is a more ample and spacious Country. And thus while the Body
is made an attendant on the Souls glory, it is likewise a partaker of it. Unto
these, add the sweet Harmony of the Affections, the exact and exquisite
Operation of the senses, the Bodily communion and fellowship of the Saints,
and, above all, the Eternal Corporeal vision of that most sacred Body, whence
all ours derive their degrees of Honor, whose presence were truly and without
any Hyperbole able to make Hell it self a Place of Glory: how much more that
Country, and those Mansions, where the Soul likewise shall be swallowed up
with the immediate vision and fruition of Divine Glory. Our Souls are not here
noble enough to conceive what our Bodies shall be there.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of that part of Gods Image in the Soul, which answers to his
Power, Wisdom, Knowledge, Holiness. Of Man's Dominion over other Creatures. Of
his Love to Knowledge. What remainders we retain of Original Justice.
THe other Properties or Attributes of God, of which Man's Soul bears an
Image and dark resemblance, are those, which according to our Apprehension
seem not so Intrinsecall and Essential as the former. And they are such as
may be either generally collected from the Manifestation of his Works, or more
particularly from his Word. These, which refer unto his Works, are his Power
in Making and Ruling them; his Wisdom in Ordering and Preserving them; his
Knowledge in the Contemplation of them: and of these it pleases him at the
first to bestow some few degrees upon man's Soul.

Concerning the Attribute of Power, most certain it is that those great parts
of Gods workmanship, Creation, and Redemption, are incommunicably belonging
unto him as his own Prerogative Royal. Insomuch that it were desperate
blasphemy to assume unto our selves the least resemblance of them. Yet in many
other proceedings of Gods works, there is some Analogy and Resemblance in the
Works of Men. For first, what are all the motions and courses of Nature, but
the Ordinary works of God? All forms and intrinsecall Motive Principles are
indeed but his Instruments; for by him we live, and move, and have our being.
And of all other works, man's only imitate Nature: as Aristotle observes of the
Works of Art, which peculiarly belong unto Man (all other Creatures being
carried by that natural instinct, which is Intrinsecally belonging to their
condition, without any manner of Art or variety.) The Resemblances of Nature in
the Works of Art are chiefly seen in these two Proportions: First, as Nature
does nothing in Vain, but in all her Works aims at some End, the Perfection,
or the Ornament, or the Conservation of the Universe (for those are the three
ends of Nature subordinate to the Maine, which is, the Glory of the Maker) so
likewise are the works of Art all directed by the Understanding to some one of
those ends; either to the perfection of Men, such are all those, which inform
the Understanding, and govern the life: or to his Conservation, as those
directed to the furthering of his welfare, and repairing the decays, or
sheltering the weaknesses of Nature: or lastly to his Ornament, such as are
those Elegancies of Art, and Curiosities of Invention, which, though not
necessary to his Being, yet are special instruments of his delight, either
Sensitive or Intellectual.

The second Resemblance, is between the Manner and Progress of their Works:
for as the Method of nature is to proceed, ab imperfectioribus ad Perfectiora,
and per determinata Media ad (...) Finem; So Art likewise as is plain in those
which are Manual) by certain fixed rules, which alter not, proceeds to the
producing of a more perfect effect, from more tough and unformed beginnings, by
the help of Instruments, appropriated to particular services. But this, because
^t limits Man's dignity, as well as commends it, I for bear to speak of.
Though even herein also we do seem to imitate God, who in his great work of
Creation did proceed both by successi^ of Time, and degrees of Perfection; only
it is Necessity in us which was in him his Will.

To come therefore nearer, it is observable, that in the first Act of Gods
power, in the Making and Framing of the World, there was No thing here below
created properly, immediately, and totally, but the Chaos and Mass, or the
Earth without form, and void, out of the Obedience whereof, his Power did
farther educe and extract those Wonderful, Va^ious, and Beauti* full Forms,
which do evidently set forth unto the Soul of Man, the Glory and Majesty of
him that made them. By a small Resemblance of this manner of Working, Man also
in those Works of Art, peculiar to him from other Creatures, does ex Potentia
Obedientiall (as the Schools call it) out of the Obedience and Subjection ^ V.
d. T^rtul. de (...). c. 26. Ambros. (...) l. 6. c. 6. (...). O a^. 1. (...).
muchminem* etc. Aug. (...) Genesis ad li^. lib. 3. c 20. (...). de O th^d. (...).
^. 2. cap 30. (...) his (...) men (...) (...) (...) (...) alta* De (...) adhuc,
and quod Dimina (...) (...) (...) posse^ (...) (...) es^ Ovid Me^. ^. 1. (...)
(...) (...) (...)* vit eum (...) (...) debuis s^b (...) (...) (...) (...). qu^
esse (...). Aug. (...). (...) 8. in ^ (...).
of any proposed Mass produce, Non per Naturam, sed per Imperium, not out of
the Nature of the Subject, but by the command of Reason sundry forms of Art
full of Decency and Beauty.

And for Government, I mean Subordinate, and by Derivation or Indulgence, it
is manifest that all Creatures inhabiting the World with him were subdued unto
Man; and, next unto the Glory of the great Maker, were ordained for his service
and benefit *. And therefore, when ever we find any of them hurtful and
Rebellious, we cannot but remember that the occasion thereof was our own
disloyalty; they do but Revenge their great Masters wrong, and, out of a
Faithful care and jealousy to Preserve his Honor, Renounce their Fidelity
and Obedience to a Traitom *. And indeed how can we look to have our Dominion
entire over Beasts and inferior Creatures, when by continual Enormities we
make our selves as one of them? (...) Continued by the General Providence of
God, whereby he is pleased to preserve things in that course of Subordination
wherein first he made them, and like a gracious Prince, to continue unto Man
the use of his Creatures, even then when he is a prisoner unto his Justice.
Renewed, by the Promise and Grant made again unto Noah. And there is a Double
Promise under which we may enjoy the Creatures, the one a Moral Promise made
unto Industry, as, The Diligent hand makes Rich; and, he that Ploweth his
Land, shall have Plenty of Corn: the other an Evangelicall Promise made unto
Piety, and Faith in Christ, whereby is given unto Christian men both a freer
use of the Creatures than the Jews had, and a purer use than the wicked have.
For, unto the Clean all things are Clean.

And this Grant of God does sometimes show it self extraordinarily, as in the
Obedience of the Crows to Eliah, the Viper to Paul, the Lions to Daniel, the
Whale to Jonah, the Fire to the three Children, and the trembling and fear of
wild Beasts toward Eus^b. lib. 8. c. 7. Ignis Polycarpum n^u (...). Eus^b. l.
^. c. 14.
many of the Martyrs: Always Ordinarily, in ordering and dispensing the course
of Nature so, as that Humane Society may be preserved, both by power in
subduing the Creatures which he must use, and by wisdom in escaping the
Creatures which he does fear.

Now for the second Attribute, Gen 1. v. ^lt. Eccles. 7. 30.
Wisdom, there is also a remainder of the Image thereof Col. 3. 10.
in Man: for albeit, the fall and corruption Gen 2. 19. 23.
Ioh. 1. 5.
of Nature has darkened his eyes, so that he is inclined to work Confusedly,
or to Ephesians. 4. 17. 18.
Romans 3 13*
walk as in a Maze, without Method or Order Col. 1. 21.
(as in a Storm the Guide of a Vessel Prove. 22. 15.
is oftentimes to seek of his Art, and forced to yield to the winds and waves)
yet certain it is that in the mind of Man there still remains a Pilot, or
Light of Nature; many Principles of Practical prudence, whereby (though for
their faintings a man does often miscarry and walk awry) the course of our
Actions may be directed with success and issue unto Civil and Honest ends.
And this is evident, not only by the continual practice of Grave and Wise men,
in all States, Times, and Nations; but also by those sundry learned and
judicious Precepts, which Historians, Politicians, and Philosophers have by
their natural Reason and Observation framed for the compassing of a Man's just
ends, and also for Prevention and disappointment of such inconveniences as may
hinder them.

Lastly, for the Attribute of Knowledge, It was doubtless after a most eminent
manner at first infused into the Heart of Man, when he was able by Intuition
of the Creatures to give unto them all Names, according to their several
Properties and Natures; and in them to show himself, as well a Philosopher, as
a Lord. He^ filled them, says Siracides, with the Knowledge of Understanding.
And herein, if we will believe Aristotle, the Soul is most nearly like unto
God, whose infinite Delight is the Eternal Knowledge and Contemplation of
himself, and his Works. Hereby, says he, the Soul of man is made most
Beloved of God, Ethic. l. 10
and his mind, which is Allied unto God, is it self Divine, and, of all other
parts of Man, most Divine. And this made the Serpent use that Insinuation only,
as most likely to prevail, for compassing that Cursed and miserable project of
Man's ruin. By means of which Fall, though Man blinded his understanding, and
^obd himself of this, as of all other blessed habits, I mean of those
excellent Degrees thereof, which he then enjoyed: yet still the Desire remains
Vast and impatient, and the pursuit so violent, that it proves often
praejudiciall to the estate both of the Body and Mind. So that it is as true
now, as eyer, that Man is by Nature a Curious and inquiring Creature, of an
Active and restless Spirit, which is never quiet, except in Motion, winding it
self into all the Paths of Nature; and continually traversing the World of
Knowledge. There are two maine Desires naturally stamped in each Creature; a
Desire of Perfecting, and a Desire of Perpetuating himself. Of these Aristotle
attributes in the highest degree, the latter unto each living Creature, when
he says, that of all the works of living Creatures, the most natural is to
Generate the like: and his Lib. 2. de Anim. c. 4.
Reason is (...). Because hereby that Immortality (the Principal end (as he
there supposes) of all natural Agents) which in their own Individuals they
cannot obtain, they procure by deriving their Nature unto a continued
offspring and succession. But (though in regard of life it hold true of all)
Man notwithstanding is to be exempted from the universality of this Assertion.
And of himself that other desire of Perfection, which is principally the
desire of Knowledge (for that is one of the principal advancements of the
Soul) should not only in a Positive sense, as Aristotle has determined in the
Entrance to his Metaphysics, but in a Superlative degree be verified, that He
is by nature desirous of Knowledge. This being the Principal thing (to use
Aristotle his own reason) whereby Man does* (...), Partake of Divinity, as I
observed before out of Aristotle himself. And the reason of the difference
between Man and other Creatures in this particular is: First, Because Man has
not such necessary use of that former desire, as others have, in regard of his
own Immortality, which takes away the Necessity of Propagation to sustain his
Nature. And secondly, because Knowledge, the Perfection of the Soul, is to Man
(as I may so speak) a kind of generation, being of sufficiency to exempt the
Person, endued therewith, from all injury of Time, and making him to survive
and outlive his own Mortality. So that when the Body has surrendered unto
each Region of the World those Elements and Principles, whereof it was
composed, and has not so much as Dust and Cinders left to testify that Being,
which once it had, then does the Name lie wrapped in the Monuments of
Knowledge, beyond the reach of Fate and Corruption.

The Attributes of God, which are manifested more especially in his Word,
though sundry, yet (as far forth as they had ever any Image in Man) may be
comprised in this more General one of Holiness. Whereby I understand that
Absolute and Infinite Goodness of his Nature, which is in him most Perfect,
Pure, and Eternal. Of which, though Man according to that measure, as it was
unto him communicated, was in his great Fall utterly robbed and spoiled, as not
being able in any thing to resemble it, or to retain any the least Prints of
those Pure and Divine Impressions of Original Righteousness* yet still there
remains, even in depraved and Polluted Nature foam shadows thereof: There is
still the Opus Operatum in many Actions of Mortality, though the Obliquity of
the Heart, and Ignorance of the true end, whether it should be directed, take
away the Goodness and the Sanctity thereof. The top and highest pitch of
Nature touches the hemme and lowest of Grace. We have in us the Testimonies,
though not the Goodness of our first estate; the Ruins of a Temple to be
lamented, though not the holy Places thereof to be Inhabited. It is true indeed
those great endowments of the most severe and illightned Heathen, were indeed
but glorious miseries and withered Virtues, in that they proceeded from a
depraved Nature, and aimed at sinister and false ends: yet withal both the
corruption of them proves their praecedent loss (which also the Heathen
themselves espied in their distinction of Ages into Golden and Iron times:) And
likewise the pursuit and practice of them (though weak, imperfect, corrupt)
imply manifestly that there was much more an Original Aspiring of Nature in
her perfection to be like her Maker in an absolute and universal Purity. Now
in this Rectitude and Perfect Regularity of the Soul in this divine Habit of
Original Justice did man most eminently bear the Image and Signature of God
on him. And therefore notwithstanding we continue still Immortal, Spiritual,
Reasonable* yet we are said to have defaced that Image in us by our hereditary
Pollution. And he always recovereth most thereof, who in the greatest measure
repaireth the ruins, and vindicateth the Lapses of his decayed estate, unto
that prime Original Purity, wherein he was Created.

These are the Dignities of the Soul considered wholly in it self. In all
which it far surmounts the greatest perfections, which the Body or any
Faculty thereof are endowed withal* And yet such is the preposterous and
unnatural baseness of many men, that they are content to make their Souls
vassals to their own Servant. How do they force their Understandings, which in
their own worthiest objects, those deep and Divine Contemplations, are as
drowzie as Endymion, to spend and waste themselves in proud, luxurious,
vanishing Inventions? How do they enthrall that Supreme and Architectonicall
Power in Man's little World, his Will, to the Tyranny of slavish appetite, and
sensual desires? as if they served here but as Cooks to dress their own
Bodies for the Worms? Strange is it that Man, conscious to himself of
Immortality and of an Heroical and Heavenly complexion, that has received
such immediate Impressions of God, and is the very Model of all Natures
Perfections, should so much degrade himself, as to dote only on that part,
which is the vassal and slave of Death. If there were no other mischife which
sin did the Soul but to debase it, even that were argument sufficient for
noble spirits to have it in detestation. For man being in honor, and which
understands not, is like the beasts that perish.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of the Faculty of Understanding. Its operations outward upon the
Object, Inward upon the Will. Of Knowledge, What it is. The natural Desire and
Love of it. Apprehension, Judgment, Retention requisite unto right Knowledge.
Several kinds of Knowledge. The Original Knowledge given unto Man in his
Creation. The Benefits of Knowledge. Of Ignorance Natural, Voluntary, Penal.
Of Curiosity. Of Opinion; the Causes of it, Disproportion between the Object
and the Faculty, and an Acute Versatilousnesse of Conceits. The benefit of
Modest Hesitancie.
NOw it follows to speak of the parts or principal powers of the Soul, which
are the Understanding, and the Will. Concerning the Understanding, the Dignity
thereof, though it may partly be perceived in the Latitude and excellent
Variety of its Objects, being the whole world of things (for Ens and
Intelligibile are reciprocal, Arist. de Anim. lib. 3.
and omnia intelligit, says Aristotle of the understanding) yet principally it
proceeds from the Operations of it both Ad extra in respect of the Objects, and
ad intra in respect of the Will. The one is a Contemplative, the other a more
Practique office, whereby the speculations of the former are accommodated unto
any either Moral or Civil Actions. Those which respect the Objects, are
either Passive, or Active Operations. Passive I call those first Perceptions
and apprehensions of the Soul, whereby it receives the simple species of some
Object from immediate Impression thereof by the Ministry of the Soul; as when
I understand one Object to be a Man, another a Tree, by Administration and
Assistance of the Eye, which presents the Species of either.

Another sort of Passive Operations (that is of such as are grounded on
Impressions received from Objects) are mixed Operations of Compounding,
Dividing, Collecting, Concluding, which we call Discourse. Of all which to
speak according to their Logical Nature, would be impertinent. Their
Excellency chiefly stands in the End whereunto they move and serve, which is
Knowledge; of the which, I shall therefore here speak a few things.

Knowledge is the Assimilation of the Understanding Aquin. part. 1. q. 14. a. 2.
unto the things which it understands, by those Intelligible Species which
do Irr^diate it, and put the power of it into Act. For as the beams of the
Sun shining on a glass, do there work the Image of the Sun: so the
species and resemblances of things being convayed on the Understanding, do
there work their own Image. In which respect the Aristot. de Anim. lib. 3.
cap. 4. and 5.
Philosopher says, That the Intellect becomes All things by being capable of
proper impressions from them: As in a Painters Table, we call that a face, a
hand, a foot, a tree, which is the lively Image and Representation of such
things unto the eye.

There is not any Desire more noble, nor more Natural unto a Man (who has not
like Saul hid himself amongst the stuff, and lost himself in the Low and
perishing provisions for Lust) than is this Desire of Knowledge. Nature
dictating to every Creature to be more intent upon its Specificall than upon
its Genericall perfection. And hence it is that though Man be perfectest of all
Creatures, yet many do excel him in sensitive Perfection. Vid. (...). lib. 7.
i^ (...). Et Lact^nt. de Opis^. Dei. c. 2. 3. Et C^l. Rhod^g. lib. ^. cap. ^.
Some in exquisiteness of Sight; others of Hearing; others of Taste, Touch, and
Smell; others of Swiftness and of Strength; Nature thereby teaching us to
imitate her in perfecting, and supplying of our Desires, not to terminate them
there, where when we have made the best Provision we can, many Beasts will
surpass us: but to direct our Diligence most to the improving of our own
specificall and rational perfection, to wit, our Understandings. Other
Faculties are tired, and will be apt to nauseate, and surfeit on their Objects.
But Knowledge as knowledge, does never either burden or cloy the Mind, no more
than a Covetous man is wearied with growing Rich: And therefore the Philosopher
tells us that Knowledge is the (...). Arist* Physit. l. 7. c. 3. Text ^0.
(...) Clem. Alex. Str^m lib. 2. (...). Clem. Alex. prad. lib. 1 c. ^.
Rest of the Understanding, wherein it takes delight as a Thing in its
natural Place.

And so great is this Delight, that Men have ventured on much Trouble to
procure it. Vid. Valor. Max. l. 8* c* 7. Th^odoret. Sermon. de fide. Clem. Alex
Strom. lib. 1. p. 222. 223.
As Pythagoras, Plat^, Democritus, traveled into remote Countries to gather
Knowledge, as Solomon sent to Ophir for Gold. And as it makes adventurous to
undertake Troubles, so it helps men to bear them. A true lover of Knowledge
will hardly be over-borne with any Ordinary distress, if it do not violate,
and restrain that particular appetite. If he may enjoy the Delights of
Learning, he will be very moderately affected with his other restraints.
Archimedes was not sensible of the loss of Syracuse, being wholly intent upon
a Mathematical Demonstration. And Demetrius Cicero de sinibus lib. 5.
Phaler^us deceived the Calamity of his Banishment by the sweetness of his
Studies. A Man is never afflicted to the Quick, but when he is punished in his
most Delightful Affections, of all which the most predominant in Rational men
is this of Knowledge.

And therefore as the first Creature God formed was Light (to show that all his
Works were made in Wisdom, that they might set forth and manifest his Glory)
so the first motion of Adam after his Creation was toward Knowledge. By his
Exercise of Knowledge he showed Gods Image in him, and by the Ambition after
more he l^st it: As no Man sins easier than in the Thing which he best
loves. And for this cause we may observe that Christ's frequentest Miracles
were showed in opening the Eyes of the blind, and the Ears of the Deaf and
Dumb. His Mercies being perfect, extended themselves on those Faculties which
are the chief Instruments of Knowledge in Men which they most love.

And this love of Knowledge is seen evidently (...) homines mente lamentari
qu^m la^ari in Amentia. Aug. Civ. Dei. l 11. c. 27.
in this, that men had rather have sober Calamities, than mad pleasures, and
more freely choose clear Intellectuals with misery, than disturbed with
mirth. Many Men better content themselves with but a crazie body, for the
fruition of their studies, than to purchase a better Health at so great a Price
as the loss of Learning.

But the Principal Excellency of Knowledge is this, That it guides the Soul
to God; and so does all kind of Right Knowledge in diverse respects. For first,
there is scarce any Science properly so called, which has not its Ar^ana to
pose and amaze the Understanding, as well as its more easy Conclusions to
satisfy it. Such as are in Philosophy, those Occult Sympathies and
Antipathies, of which natural Reason can render no Account at all: which
overcomming the utmost Vigor of humane Disquisition, must needs enforce us to
believe that there is an Admirable Wisdom that disposes, and an infinite
Knowledge that comprehends those secrets which we are not able to fathom.

Again, since the Knowledge of Things is either of their Beings, or of their
Properties and Operations: And Nature abhors the Motion of proceeding (...),
Arist* de Generat. Animal. lib. 1. cap* 1. (...). Arist. Physic. lib. 7. cap.
1. Text. 3.
In Infinitum: in either of these, necessary it is, that the Mind of man ^id.
Iussin. Martyr. qu. ad Grac. qu. 3. Tertull. Apol. cap. 17. 18. De Res^arect.
carnis cap. 12. Contra Marcion* lib. 1.
tracing the footsteps of natural things, must by the Act of Logical
Resolution at last arise to him who is the fountain of all Being, the First of
all Causes, the Supreme over all Movers, in whom all the rest have their
Beings and Motions founded. And this the Lord in the Prophet has delivered
unto us p. 17. 18. R^sil* Hexam. Homi^. 1. Aug. Confess. lib. 10. cap. 6.
(...). lib. 2. cap. 9. Theophil. Ad Antel. lib. 1. c Hos. 2. 21. 2^.
. I will hear the Heavens, and the Heavens shall ^eare the Earth, and the
Earth the Corn and Wine, and they Iezreel. Iezreel cannot subsist without
Corn and Wine, she cries to them to help it. These cannot help without the
Earth to produce them, they cry to that to be fruitful. The Earth can bring
forth nothing of it self without Influence, benignity, and comfortable showers
from the Heavens, it cries to them for aid. Ier. 14. 22. Job* 38. ^. - 37.
The Heavens cannot give Rain nor Warmth of themselves, without him who is the
Father of Rain, and the Fountain of Motion. So that here are three notable
Things to be observed, The Connection and Concatenation of All second Causes to
one another; The Cooperation of them together for the good of the Church; and
the Subordination of them all to God, unto whom at length the more accurate
Inquiry into them does manuduct us. And this Subordination stands in four
things: 1. All things are Subordinate unto God in Vid. Plutarch. l^b. de (...)
Exodus 3. 14. Isai. 40. 17. Act. 17. 28. Romans 11. 36. 1 Cor. 8. 6. Col. 1. 16.
17. Heb. 1. ^.
Being. He only has Being per Essentiam, By Absolute, and Original Essence;
all other things per participationem, by derivation and dependence on him. 2.
Nehem. 9. 6. Job 1^. 10. Psalm. 104. 29. Isal. 40. 24.
In Conservation. For God does not make his Creatures as a Carpenter does his
House, which can after stand by it self alone: but having our very Being from
him, that Being cannot Be or Continue without His supportance, as light in the
house depends both in Being and in Continuance upon the Sun. 3. In regard
^at. 10. 29. Prove. 16. 4. Genesis 4^. 28. Act 4. 27. 28.
of Gubernation and providence; for All things are by his Wisdom guided unto
the Ends of his Glory. And even those Creatures which fly out of the Order of
his Precepts, do fall into the Order of his Providence. Lastly, in Regard of
Act 17. 28. Isai. 26. 12. Job 10. 8. Psalm. 139. 15. 16. 1 Cor. 12. 6. Isai. 10.
5.
Operation. For in him we live and move, he works Our works for us; Second
Causes cannot put forth any Causality till he be pleased to concur with them.

Again, since we find that all other Creatures have, answerable to the
Instincts and Appetitions which Nature has Grafted in them, proportionable
Objects of equal Latitude in goodness to the Faculties which are carried unto
them; It must needs be reasonable that that be not wanting to the Excellentest
of Creatures, which all the rest do enjoy. Since then the supreme Appetite of
the Reasonable Soul is Knowledge, and amongst all the Creatures there never
was yet any found able to fill and satisfy this Desire; But that still there
is both room for more Knowledge and Inquiry after it: And besides, all the
Knowledge of them is accompanied with Unquietness, and labor (as the Beast
first stirs the mudd in the water with his feet before he drink it with his
Mouth) from hence it infallibly follows that from these lesser Objects, the
Soul be carried at the last to God, The Adequate and Vid. Aug. Confess. lib.
1. cap. 1. and lib. 4. cap. 10. 1^* and lib. 13. cap. ^ De Trin. lib. 8. cap.
3. Dr. F^ild of the Church. lib. 1. cap. 1. Hooker. Ecclesiastical Pol. l. 1.
sect. 11.
Vltimate End and Object of all our Desires, as Noah's Dove was carried back to
the Ark, when she found no place for the sole of her foot to rest on.

Again, when we see things which have no knowledge, work so regularly toward
an End, as if they knew all the way they were to go, we must needs conclude
they are guided by a Mighty wisdom, and Knowledge without them, as when an
Arrow flies directly to the Mark, I am sure it was the Hand of a skillful
Archer that directed it.

Unto the Perfection of Knowledge, after due and proper Representation of
Objects in themselves, or in their Causes, Effects, Principles, unto the Mind;
There are in the Subject three things requisite.

First, Clearenesse of Apprehension, to receive Representatio reru^. Iudicium
de Rebus Represental ^. Aquin 22^. qu. 173. Art. 21.
the right and distinct Notion of the Things represented, as the clearenesse of
a Glass serves for the Admission of a more exact Image of the face that looks
upon it, whereas if it be soiled or dimmed, it renders either none, or an
imperfect shape.

Secondly, Solidity of Judgment to try and weigh the particulars, which we
apprehend. That out of them we may sever for our use the precious from the
vile; for Knowledge lies in Things as Gold in a Mine, or as Corn in the Straw;
when by diligent inquiry after it, we have dug it up, and thresh'd it out,
we must then bring it to the fire, and fan, to give it us purified from
dross and levity. And this in Speculation answers unto the general virtue
of practical prudence in Morality, whereby we weigh the several Mediums unto
the true Ends of life, and accordingly select and prosecute the Best.

Thirdly, Fidelity of Retention; for he is not Mus^ itaque dicta Io^is and
M^cmosynes filia. C^l. Rhod. l. 11. c. 10.
likely to grow Rich, who puts up his Treasure as the Prophet speaks, into a
Hag. ^. ^.
bag with holes. For as Nature has given to the Bodies of men for the
furtherance of corporeal strength, and nutriment, a Retentive power to clasp
and hold fast that which preserves it, until a through concoction be wrought;
so proportionably is the Faculty of Memory given to Reason, as a means to
consolidate and enrich it. And fluxes, as in the Body, so in the Mind too, are
ever Arguments and Authors of Weakness. Whence it comes to pass that in
matter of Learning many of us are feign to be Day-labourers, and to live from
hand to mouth, being not able to lay up any thing. And therefore in the choice
of fit persons to breed up unto Learning, we should take a like course as wise
Architects do in choice of fit timber for Building. They choose first the
straitest and that which has fewest knots, and flawes in it; which in the mind
answers unto clearenesse, and evennesse of Apprehension. For a clear mind,
like strait and smooth timber, will work easiest. Next, they take the heart and
strongest substance, and cut out the sap: because that is best able to bear
the weight that shall be laid upon it: And this answers unto Maturity and
firmness of Judgment. Lastly, they do not take Sally, or Willow, or Birch,
and such other Materials as are quickly apt to putrify and wear away, but
such Timber as is lasting and Retentive of its Nature, as Oak and Elm, which
may make the Superstruction of the nature of the Foundation, strong and
lasting: and this answers to that excellent Faculty of the Mind, a Rational
memory: from which one particular (I think more than any other) do arise those
vast differences of felicity and infelicity in the minds of men addicted to
the search of Knowledge. Strange was the unhappiness of Calvisius Sabinus Se^.
Ep. 27. Vid. etiam Coel. Rhod. l. 11. c. 10.
in Seneca, who being at vast charges in matter of learning, was not yet able
to retain fast the Names of Achilles, or, Ulysses: But, as his Parasite Vt
Grammatico^ haberet An^lectas.
was wont deridingly to advise him, wanted a Grammatical Attendant to gather
up the fragments which his Memory let fall. And Curio Cicero in B^uto and in
Orator^.
the Orator in Tully, was wont when he had proposed three things in an
Oration, to forget some one or other of them, or to add a fourth; Pl^ l. 7.
cap. 24.
yea Messala Corvinus forgot his own name, as Pliny tells us. And as
wonderful on the other side has been the felicity of some others. M* Senec.
Controvers. lib. 1 ^n Prolog.
Seneca the father could repeat two thousand words together in their Order.
Plin. l. 7. c. 24. Qui^il. lib. 11. cap. 2. Val. Max. lib. 8. cap. 7. sect. 15.
Cyrus and Themistocles could call all their Soldiers by their Names, (by
which one Art of Courtesy Alex. ab Alex. lib 6. cap. 18.
Otho aspired unto the Empire) Ali. Sp^rtian. in (...).
Adrian could read a Book which he never saw before, and after recite it by
memory; and of the Emperor Ammian. Marcell. lib (...).
Julian it is said, that he had drunk Totum memoriae dolium, the whole vessel
of memory. To say nothing of Plin. Supr^. Suidas in Apoll. Voss. Instit. Orat.
16 c 6. sect. 2.
Simonides, and Apollonius Tyanlus, who in their old age, the one at 80, the
other at a 100 years g De quibus mentio apud Plin^um and M. Senecam and
Quintil. ut supra.
old, were very famous for the exquisiteness of their memories; nor of Cyneas,
Charmidas, Portius Latro, and diverse others, who have been admired for this
happy Quality. Now unto this Felicity does conduce, a Methodicall and orderly
Disposition of mind, to digest and lay up things in their proper places. It
was easier for Cyrus to remember men in an Army than in a Throng. And hence
has proceeded the Art of Memory invented as Pliny tells us by Simonides, and
perfected by Me^rodorus Sceptius, consisting in the committing of several
Heads of matter unto distinct places, whereof Quintilian discourses in his
Oratory Institutions.

Of Knowledge there are several sorts, according to several considerations,
with respect to the Ends of it. Some is Speculative for the improving of the
Mind, as Physical, Metaphysicall, and Mathematical Knowledge. Others
Practical for fashioning, and guiding of the manners and conditions of Men, as
Ethicall, Political, Historical, Military Knowledge. Some mixed of both, as
Theological Knowledge, consisting in the speculation of Divine Verities, and
in the direction of Divine Duties. Some Iustrumentall, being only subservient
unto others, as Grammatical, Rhetorical, Dialecticall learning. In regard of
Order, some Superior, others Subalternate, as Music to Arithmetic, Optics
to Geometry. In regard of their Original, some Ingrafted, as the supreme
Principles of Verity, and implanted notions of Morality, which is called the
Law of Nature, and written in the Heart of all men, Romans 2. 14. 15. Other
Acquired, and by search and industry labored out of those Principles, and the
others which are taught us. Other Revealed and Divinely manifested to the Faith
of Men, whereof the supreme Principles are these two. 1. That God in his
Authority is infallible, who neither can be deceived, nor can deceive. 2. That
the things delivered in Holy Scriptures, are the Dictates, and Truths, which
that infallible Authority has delivered unto the Church to be believed, and
therefore that every supernatural Truth there plainly set down in termini^,
is an unquestionable Principle; and every thing by evident consequence and
deduction from thence derived, is therefore an undoubted Conclusion in
Theological and Divine Knowledge. In regard of the manner of Acquiring, some
is Experimental, A Knowledge of Particulars; and some Habitual, a general
knowledge growing out of the reason of Particulars. And those Acquired either
by Invention from a man's Industry, or by A^scultation and Attendance unto those
that teach us. In regard of Objects, some supre^me, as the Knowledge of
Principles and Prime Verities, which have their light in themselves, and are
known by evidence of their own Terms. Others derived and deduced by
argumentation from those Principles, which is the Knowledge of Conclusions. In
regard of Perfection, Intuitive Knowledge, as that of Angels whereby they know
things by the View; and Discursive, as that of Men, whereby we know things by
Ratiocination. In regard of Order and Method, Syntheticall, when we proceed in
Knowledge by a way of Composition from the Causes to the Effects; and
Analyticall, when we rise up from Effects unto their Causes, in a Way of
Resolution.

With this noble Endowment of Knowledge, De ist^ Materi. ^ sufi^is d^sputant
Schol^tici ad l. 2. did. 23. and ad part 1. Tho qu. 94. and Perer. in Genesis 2
19 20. l. 5. disput. 1. de Amplitud. and Excellent. Scicut. Adami.
was the Humane Nature greatly adorned in its first Creation: So far forth as
the Necessity of a happy and honorable life, of the Worship and Communion with
God, of the Dominion and Government over the Creatures, of the Acquaintance
with himself, and of the Instruction of his Posterity, did require Knowledge
in him. For we may not think that God, who made Man in a perfect stature of
Body, did give him but an Infant stature of Mind. God made all things
exceeding Good, and Perfect; and therefore the perfection naturally belonging
unto the Soul of Man, was doubtless given unto it, in its first Creation. He
made Man right and straight; and the Rectitude of the Mind is in Knowledge and
light; and therefore the Apostle tells us, that Our Renovation in Knowledge
is after the Image of him that Created us, Coloss. 3. 10. Without Knowledge he
could not have given fit Names, and suitable to the Natures of all the
Creatures which for that purpose were brought unto him. He could not have awed
and governed so various, and so strong Creatures, to preserve Peace, Order, and
Beauty amongst them. He could not have given such an account of the substance
and Original of Eve. Of the End of her Creation to to be the Mother of all
living men as he did. Experimental Knowledge he had not but by the Exercise
of his Original light upon particular Objects, as they should occur.
Knowledge of future Events he had not, it being not Natural, nor Investigable
by imbred light, but Prophetical, and therefore not seen till Revealed.
Secret Knowledge of the Thoughts of Men, or of the Counsels of God he could
not have, because secret things belong unto the Lord. But so much light of
Divine Knowledge as should fit him to have Communion with God, and to serve
him, and obtain a blessed life; so much of Moral Knowledge as should fit him
to converse in Love as a Neighbor, in Wisdom as a Father, with other men; so
much of Natural Knowledge as should dispose him for the Admiring of Gods
Glory, and for the Governing of other Creatures over which he had received
Dominion; so much we may not without notable injury to the perfection of Gods
Workmanship, and to the Beauty and rectitude of our first Parent, deny to have
been conferred upon our Nature in him. The Benefits of which singular Ornament
of Knowledge, are exceeding Great. Hereby we recover (...).
a largeness of Heart, for which Solomon is commended, 1 Reg. 4. 29: Able to
dispatch many Businesses, to digest and order Multitudes of Motions, to have
minds seasoned with generous and noble resolutions; for that disposition is by
the Philosopher called (...), Greatness of Mind. Hereby we V^d. Aqu. 22 ^.
qu. 188. Art. 6. i^ C.
are brought to a Just Contempt of sordid and wormie Affections. It is
Darkness which makes Men grope, and pore, and look only on the things before
them, as the Apostle intimates, 2 Pet. 1. 9. Illightned minds see a greater
luster in Knowledge than in the fine Gold, Pro. 3. 14. 15. The Excellency of
Evangelicall Knowledge made Saint Paul esteem every thing in the World besides
as D^ng, Phil. 3. 8. As the light of the Sun swallows up all the petty light
of the Stars: so the more noble and spacious the Knowledge of Men's minds is,
the more does it dictate unto them the Contempt of those various and vulgar
Delights which bewitch the fancies of ignorant Men. It disposes Men for
mutual Communion, and helpful Society: for without Knowledge every Man is
ferae Naturae, like Birds of prey, that fly always alone. Neither is it
possible for a man to be sociable, or a member of any public Body, any further
than he has a proportion and measure of Knowledge: Since Humane Society
stands in the communicating of mutual notions unto one another. Two men that
are Deaf, and Dumb, and Blind, destitute of all the Faculties of gaining or
deriving Knowledge, may be together, but they cannot be said to have society
one with another. To conclude, hereby we are brought nearer unto God, to admire
him for his Wisdom, and Power; to Adore him for his Greatness, and Majesty;
to Desire him, and work toward the fruition of him, for his light and Glory;
because in the Vision of Him consists the Beatitude of Man.

This Knowledge is corrupted four manner of ways. First, By the Contempt of
it in Ignorance. Secondly, By the Luxuriousness and Wantonness of it in
Curiosity. Thirdly, By the Defect and uncertainty of it in Opinion. Fourthly,
By Contradiction and Opposition unto it in Error.

There is a threefold Ignorance wherewith the Minds of men may be blinded and
defaced. The one is a Natural Ignorance, which of Divine Deum (...) ^nemo
potest nisi Deo d^ceute. vid. Ir^n l. 4. c. 14. Hilar. de Trin. lib. 1. and 5.
In tantum v debimus in quantum (...) crimu^. Aug. Ep. 6. V^i ad profunditatem
(...) perventum est, (...) Platonicorum caligavit (...)* Cypr. de Sp. Sanct.
Aug. de Pr^dest. cap. 8. and de Doctr. Christian. l. 2 c. 6.
Things, so far forth as those things are Spiritual, is in all men by
Nature; for the Natural Man neither Receives with Acceptance, nor with
Demonstration discerns the things of the Spirit of God; And the Reason the
Apostle gives, because they are spiritually discerned. For as the Eye is fitted
to discern light by the Innate property of light and Cognation which it has
thereunto, without which the Eye could no more perceive Objects of light than
it can of sounds: so the Mind cannot otherwise receive spiritual Objects,
than as it has a similitude to those Objects in a spiritual disposition it
self; whence that Expression of St. John, We shall be like unto him, for we
shall see him as he is. Spiritual Things do exceed the weakness of Reason,
because they are above it, and so cannot be discerned; And they do oppose the
corruption of Reason, because they are against it, and so cannot be Received.

There is likewise in many Men much Natural Vid. Hieron. adve^s. ^ov ^ l. 2.
Ignorance, even in Moral and Natural things. For as in the Fall of Man our
Spirituals were lost, so were our Naturals weakened too, as we find in the
Great Dullness of many men in matters of learning, in so much that some Coel.
R^d l. 11. cap 10.
have not been able to learn the Names of the first Letters or Elements.

Again, there is a Voluntary Ignorance (of which we have before spoken)
whereby Men do wilfully close their Eyes against Knowledge, and refuse it; and
of this there may be a double ground, The one Guile, in Knowledge that
pertains to the Conscience, when a man chooses rather not to know his duty,
than by the Knowledge of it, to have his Conscience disquieted with
Exprobrations of contemning it. The other out of Sluggishnesse and
Apprehensions of Difficulty in the Obtaining of Knowledge. When of two Evils,
Undergoing of labor, or forfeiting of Learning, a man esteems this the
lesser.

Thirdly, there is a Math. 13. 13. Act. 28. 26* 27. Romans 1. 28. 2 Thessalonians. 2* 10*
11* N^ (...) g^rent (...) de* ^ctorum. (...). Apol. cap. 21. contr. Marc. lib.
3. cap. 6. Cyprian. lib. 1. ^p. 3. Percussi sunt Caeci^ate ut n^c (...) Delicta
n^c plangant Indignan^is Dei major ^aecira. (...). de lapsis. Vid. Aug. qu. 14.
Ex Math. and (...) contra Iulion. lib* 5.
Poenall Ignorance of which I shall not speak, because it differs not from
the Voluntary Ignorance of Spiritual things, save only in the relation that
it has to the Justice of God thereby provoked, who sometimes leaves such men
to their Blindness, that the thing which with respect to their own choice of
it, is a pleasure, with respect unto Gods Justice, may be a plague, and
punishment unto them. Thus the Intellectual Faculty is corrupted in many men by
Ignorance.

In others it is abused by Curiosity, which may Clem. Alex. (...). lib. 1.
sta^im ab (...) (...). lib. 5. cap. 28. Vid. quaedam contra (...) scicutiae
(...) apud Ter^ull. de Anim l. cap. 1. contr. Marcion. lib. ^. cap. 1. Aug. Ep.
29 and 56. and 78. and 157. (...). lib. 11. cap. 12* de Genesis ad li^. lib. 2.
cap. 9. and lib. 10. cap. 23. (...).
well be called the Pride, and the Wantonness of Knowledge, because it looks
after high things that are above us, and after hidden things that are denied
us. And I may well put these two together, Pride and Luxury of Learning. For I
believe we shall seldom find the Pride of Knowledge more praedominant than
there where it arises out of the curious and conjectural enquiries of Wit, and
not out of scientificall and demonstrative Grounds. And I find the Apostle
joining them together, when he tells us of some, who intruded themselves
into Things which they had not seen, and were Vainly puffed up by a fleshly
Mind. And he himself complains of Others, who were Proud, and languished
about needless Questions; as it is ever a sign of a sick and ill-affected
stomach to quarrel with usual and wholesome meat, and to long for and linger
after Delicacies which we cannot reach too. When Manna will not go down
without Quails, you may be sure the Stomach is cloyed, and wants Physic to
Purge it. I will not here In my Sermon of the Peace of the Church. page 24. --
26.
add more of this point, having lately touched it on a fitter Occasion.

A third Corruption of this Faculty in regard of Knowledge, is in the
Fluctuation, wavering, and uncertainty of Assents, when the Understanding is
left floating, and as it were in Aequilibrio, that it cannot tell which way to
incline, or what Resolutions to grow unto; and this is that which in Opposition
to Science, is called Opinion: For Science is ever cum certitudine, with
Evidence and Unquestionable Consequence of Conclusions from necessary
Principles: but Opinion is cum Formidine Oppositi, Aqui^. 22 ^. qu. ^. Ar^. 4.
C.
with a fear least the contrary of what we assent unto should be true: And so
it imports a Tender, Doubtful, and Infirm Conclusion.

The Causes of Opinion, I conceive to be principally two: The first is a
Disproportion between the Understanding and the Object, when the Object is
either too bright and excellent, or too dark and base: the one dazles the
Power, the other Affects it not. Things too Divine and Abstracted, are to the
Understanding Tanquam lumen ad Vespertilionem, as light unto a Batt; which
rather astonish than inform; and things too Material and Immerst, are like a
Mist unto the Eyes, which rather hinder, than affect it. And therefore, though
whatsoever has Truth in it, be the Object of the Understanding; yet the
Coexistence of the Soul with the Body, in this present Estate, restraines and
Limits the Latitude of the Object, and requires in it, not only the bare
Nature and Truth, but such a Qualification thereof, as may make it fit for
representation and Impression by the conveyance of the Sense. So that as in the
True perception of the Eye (especially of those Vespertiliones, to which
Aristotle has compared the Understanding in this estate of subsistence with
the Body) there is required a mixture of Contraries in the Air; it must not
be too light, lest it weaken and too much disgregate or spread the sense; nor
yet too dark, lest it contract and lock it up: But there must be a kind of
middle Temper; cleerenesse of the Medium for conveyance, and yet some degrees
of Darkness for qualification of the Object. Even so also the Objects of man's
Understanding must participate of the two contr^ries, Abstraction and
Materiality. Abstraction first, in proportion to the (...) of the
Understanding, which is Spiritual. And Materiality too, in respect of the
Sense, on which the Understanding depends in this estate, as on the Medium of
Conveyance, and that is Corporal. So that where ever there is Difficulty and
Uncertainty of Operation in the Understanding, there is a double defect and
disproportion: first in the Power, whose Operations are restrained and limited
for the most, by the Body: and then in the Object, which has not a sufficient
mixture of those two qualities, which should proportion it to the Power. This
is plain by a familiar similitude; an Aged man is not able to read a small
Print, without the Assistance of Spectacles to make the Letters by a refraction
seem greater. Where first we may descry an Imperfection in the Organ; for if
his Eyes were as clear and well-dispos'd as a young man's, he would be able by
his Natural Power, without Art, to receive the Species of small Letters. And
next, there is an Imperfection and deficiencie in the Letters; for if they had
the same Magnitude and fitness in themselves, which they seem to have by
Refraction through the Glass, the weakness of his power might happily have
sufficient strength to receive them without those Helps. So that always the
Uncertainty of Opinion is grounded on the Insufficiency of the Understanding
to receive an Object, and on the Disproportion of the Object to the Nature of
the Understanding.

The next Cause of Opinion and Uncertainty in Assents, may be Acuteness and
Subtilty of wit, when Men out of Ability, like Null^m unquam in d^sputationibus
re^ de^endit quam non probarit, null^m oppugnavi^ quam non everterit. Cic. de
Oratore. lib 2. Non min^ibus viribu^ contra Iustitiam dicitur disser uisse,
quam pridie pro Iustitia dixe^at* Qui^til. de (...). lib: 12. cap. 1. Plin.
lib. 7. cap. 30.
Carneades, to discourse probably on either side, and poizing their Judgments
between an equal weight of Arguments, are forced to suspend their Assents,
and so either to continue unresolved and equally inclineable unto either part,
or else, if to avoid Neutrality, they make choice of some thing to aver (and
that is properly Opinion) yet it is rather an Inclination, than an Assertion,
as being accompanied with fear, floating and Inconstancy.

And this indeed, although it be in it self a defect of Learning; yet
considering the Estate of man, and strict conditions of perfecting the
Understanding by continual Inquiry (man being ^ound in this also to recover
that measure of his first fullness, which is attainable in this Corrup^ed
Estate, by sweat of brain, by labor and degrees, Paulatim extundere arts) I
say in these considerations, Irresolution in Judgment (so it be not Universal
in all conclusions; for that argues more Vid. qu^ adve. su^ (...) disputat
Aristocles apud E^seb. de p^aepar. Evang. l 14. c 18.
weakness, than choice of conceit; nor Particular in things of Faith and
Salvation, which is not Modesty but Infidelity) is both Commendable, and
Useful. Commendable, because it prevent^ all temper of heresy (whose nature
is to Ad quam cu^que sunt di^ (...), qu^st ^empestate de lapsi ad (...). ^nquam
ad Saxum ad haerescunt. Ci^. Acad* q. l. 4. Pli^. ^. ^. ^p. 22.
be peremptory.) And both argues Learning and Modesty in the softnes of
Judgment, which will not suffer it self to be captivated, either to its own
conceits, or unto such unforcible reasons, in the which it is able to descry
weakness. And this is* that which Pliny commends in his friend Titus Ariston,
whose hesitancy and slownesse of resolution in matter of Learning proceeded not
from any emptines or unfurniture; but ex diversitate Rationu^ qua^ acrimagnoque
Iudicio ab origin Caus^que primis repetit, discernit, expendit: out of a
learned cautelousn^sse of judgment, which made him so long su spend his Assent,
till he had weighed the several repugnancies of reasons, and by that means
found out some truth whereon to settle his conceit. For (as the same Pliny
elsewhere out of Thucydides observes) It is rawnes and deficiency of learning
that makes bold and peremptory: (...) Demurs Lib. 4. ep. 7.
and fearfulnes of Resolution, are commonly the companions of more able wits.
And for the use of Doubtings* First, they lessen, the number of heresies, which
are (as I said) always obstinate. And next it gives occasion of further
enquiry after the Truth, to those who shall find themselves best qualified for
that service. But Heresy coming under the shape of Science, with shows of
Certainty, Evidence, and Resolution (especially if the inducements be quick and
subtle) does rather settle the Understanding, and possess it with false
Assents, than yield occasion of deeper search, unless it meet with a more
piercing Judgment, which can through confidence descry weakness. For
questionless the Errors of Great men generally honored for their Learning,
when they are once wrapped up in the boldness of Assertions, do either by
possessing the judgment with prejudice of the Author, make it also subscribe
to the error; or if a more impartial eye see insufficiency in the ground, the
Authority of the man frights and deterres from the opposing of his conceit.
Whereas when men's assents are proposed with a modest confession of distrust and
uncertainty: the Understanding is incited both to enquire after the reasons of
Diffidence* as also to find out means for a more settled Confirmation and
clearing of the Truth.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of Errors: the Causes thereof: the Abuses of Principles,
Palsifying them: or Transferring the Truth of them out of their own bounds.
Affections of Singularity, and Novell courses. Credulity and Thraldom of
Judgment unto others. How Antiquity is to be honored. Affection to particular
Objects, corrupts Judgment. Curiosity in searching things Secret.
THe other maine Corruption of Knowledge was Error, whereby I understand a
peremptory and habitual assent, firmly and without wavering fixed upon some
falsehood under the show of truth. It is Aristotle's assertion in his Ethics,
that one man may conceive himself as certain of his Error, as another man of
his Knowledge: and this indeed is so much the more dangerous Aberration from
Knowledge, by how much it seems most ^erly to resemble it.

If we enquire after the prime Fundamental Cause, the Gate by which Error
came first into the World. Syracides will tell us in a word, that Error and
Darkness had their beginning together with Sinners: And the reason is, because
sin being a partition wall, and a separation of man from God, who is P^ter
Luminum, the Father and Fountain of all Knowledge; and whose perfections man
did at first one principal way by Knowledge resemble, cannot choose but bring
with it darkness and confusion into the Soul. But I shall enquire rather
after the more Immediate and Secondary Causes; some whereof, amongst sundry
others, I take to be these:

1 A first and most special one is the Abuse of Principles: For the
Understanding must have ever something to rest it self upon: and from the
conformity of other things, thereunto to gather the certainty and evidence of
its Assents. For it is the nature of man's mind, since it had at first it self
a beginning to abhor all manner of Infinity, a Parte-Ante (I mean in
Ascending and Resolution) as well of Sciences and Conclusions, as of Entities
and Natures, as I before noted. And therefore as the Understanding is not
quieted in Philosophical inquiries about created things, till it have
according to their several differences ranged them severally within the
compass of some Finite Line, and subordinated the Inferiors of every kind,
Sub an^ Summ^ Genere, under one Arist. phys. l. 7.
chief; and rests not in the Resolution of Effects into their Causes, till it
come to Aliquid primum, in Time, in Motion, in Place, in Causality, and
Essential Dependence: so likewise it is in Knowledge and Truth,
notwithstanding a Part Post, downward, our pursuits of them seem Infinite and
Unlimited, by reason of our own Infinities, and Aeviternity that way; yet
upward in the resolving of Truth into its Causes and Originals, the
Understanding is altogether Impatient of proceeding in Infinitum, and never
rests till it finds a Non ^ltra, an utmost link in the chain of any Science,
and such a Prime, Universal, Unquestionable, Vnprovable Truth, from whence all
Inferior Collections are fundamentally raised, and this is the Truth of
Principles: which if it be traduced and made crooked by the wrestings of any
private conceit, mishapes all Conclusions that are derived from it: for if the
foundation be weak, the whole edifice totters; if the root and fountain be
bitter, all the branches and streams have their proportionable corruptions.

Now the Abuses of Principles, is either by Falsifying and casting absurd
Glosses upon them within their own limits; as when Philosophical Errors are
falsely grounded upon Philosophical Axioms, which is Error Consequentia, or
Illationis, an Error in the Consequence of one from the other: or else by
transferring the Truth of them beyond their own bounds, into the Territories
(as I may so speak) of another Science, making them to encroach and to uphold
Conclusions contrary to the nature of their Subject; which is Error
Dependentia, or Subordinationis, an Error in the Dependence of one on the
other. For the former, it has been always either the subtilty or modesty of
error to shroud it self under truth; and that it might make its fancies the
more plausible, to fasten them upon undeniable grounds, and by a strange kind
of Chimistry, to extract darkness out of light. Live. l. 28.
Fraus sibi ex parvis, (said Fabius Maximus in Livy upon another occasion.) I
will alter it thus, Error sibi ex principlijs fidem prastruit, ut cum magna
mercede fallat. Ex bis ea^ impugnat, ex quibus constat. Tertull. de Baptis. c.
^. Uid (...) pras^r. c. 36. 39. Sententias per primas com (...) Argumentis
(...)* de (...). c. ^. Inde sumentes prasidia, quo pugnant. c. 50. Omnia
advers^ (...), de ipsa Veritate construct^ sunt. Apolog. c. 47.
Unreasonable and groundless fancies always shelter themselves under a
plausible pretense of truth and ostentation of Reason. (...). Alex. in (...).
As Praxitiles the Painter drew the Picture of Venus by the face of his Minion
Cratina, that so by an honorable pretext he might procure Adoration to a
Harlot. Cic. Orat. l. 1. I^ Ir^idendu Oratoribus O (...) Summu^.
Thus as Plat^ is said, when he inveighed chiefly against Orators, most of all
to have played the Oratou^ (making a Sword of ^loquence to wound it self:) So
they on the contrary, never more wrong Knowledge, than when they promise to
promote it most. It was the custom of that Scipio, honored afterward by the
name of his Punicke Conquest, always before he set upon any business, as Livy
reports of him) to enter the Capitol alone, pretending thereby a consultation
with the gods about the justness, issue, and success of his intended
designs; and then, Apud multitudinem, plerumque Live. l. 26. N^ aliter N^ma
Simul^ns sibi cum dea (...) no^nes congressus esse, apud (...). (...). l. 1.
Vid. V^. Max. l. 1. c. 2. Plut. in Num^.
velut mente divinitus monita agebat: He bore the multitude in hand, that
whatsoever exploits he persuaded them to attempt, had all the Approbation and
Unerring Judgment of their Deities. What were the ends of this man, whither an
Ambitious hope of fastening an Opinion of his own Divinenesse in the midst of
the people, or an happy and politic imposture, the better to press those
people (always more inclinable to the persuasions of Superstitions than
Reason) to a free Execution of his designs, it is not here necessary to
enquire. Sure I am* even in matters of greatest consequence, there have never
been wanting the like Impostors, who boldly pretend unto Truth, when they
cunningly oppose it: as Jacob in Esa^'s Clothes, robbed Esau of the Blessing:
or as the Ivy, which when it embraces the Oak, does withal weaken and
consume it. And this is a very preposterous and perverse method, first to
entertain Corrupt Conceits, and then to Scriptura^li esse volumus quae nostra
(...). Aug. vid. qua advers^ ^nc Curioscitatis (...) p^ssim occ^rrunt apud
Tertull Apol. c. 46* 47. co^tr. Hermog. c. 1. ac praescr. c. 17. 38, 39, 40 De
R^surrect c. 40. De sug. in per^t. c. 6. De ^dic. c. 16. Simplicitatem s^ (...)
Ec (...), ^d v^lunt significare, quod ipsi senti^* Epiph. ad Joan. Hier^sol.
(...) Martyr. (...) (...). (...). Alex. Stro^. l. 7. p. 54^. D. (...). g. c.
(...). (...) ^oe lest. l. 1. c. 42. De Grate Christi.
wrest and hale Principles to the countenancing and protecting of them. It
being in the errors of the mind, as in the distempers of the palate usual with
men to find their own relish in every thing they read.

Concerning the other Abuse, it is an often observation of Aristotle, that
Principles and Con clusions must be within the Sphaere of the same Science; and
that a man of Learning ought al ways to be faithful unto his own Subject,
and make no Excursions from it into another Science. And therefore he says
that it is an equal absurdity for a Mathematician (whose conclusions ought to
be peremptory, and grounded on principles of infallible evidence) only to
ground them on Rhetorical probabilities, as it were for a Rhe^oritian, whose
Arguments should be more plausible and insinuative, to leave all unsaid that
might reasonably be spoken, except it may be proved by demonstrative
principles. This leaping a Genere ad Genus, and confounding the dependancies of
Truth, by transferring Principles unto (...)* Clem. Alex. ^erom. 6.
Sciences, which they belong not unto, has been ever prejudicial to
Knowledge; and Error has easily thereby crept upon the weakest apprehensions,
while men have examined the conclusions of one Science by the Principles of
another. As when Religion which should subdue and captivate, is made to stoop
and bow to Reason* and when those Assents which should be grounded upon Faith,
and not on mere humane disquisition, shall be admitted according to the
conformity which they have with Viderint qui Si^lcum, and Plato^icum, and
dial^cticum (...) (...). (...). de pr^script. c. 7.
Nature, and no farther. And hence it is that so many of the Philosophers
denied those two maine Doctrines, of the Creation and Resurrection ( Cit. lib.
de Univers^. Plat. in Tim^o ^seb. de (...). ^van. l. 11. c. ^9. Theod. ser. 4.
C^m. Alex* Str^m. l. 5. Q^ and Re^ (...) Philosophis (...) (...) ((...) ^e*
(...) doctrine) affirmat. E^b lib. 11. c. 33. 36. Tertull. de Resu^rect. (...).
c. 1. Niscio an bu^ etiam per^ illa. S^n. (...). q^. l. 3. c. 30
although in some of them the very sight of Nature reaches to the
acknowledgement of the former of those) because they repugned those maine
Principles of Nature (which are indeed naturally true, and no farther) that ex
nihilo nihil fit; Nothing can be made of nothing. And a privatione ad habitum
non datur regressus; That there is no regresse from a Total Privation to the
Habit l^st. And this reason was evidently employed in that answer, which was
given by him, who knew the Root of all Error, unto the obstinate Opposers of
the Resurrection: Erratis nescientes Scripturas, neque Potentiam Dei. Where are
intimated two maine Principles of that Mystery of the Resurrection; the Word,
and the Power of God. This later commanding our Assent that it May be: that
other, our Assurance, that it Will be. So that wherever there is an Ignorance
of these two, and we go about to examine this or any other Mystery, rather by
a disputing, than an Obeying Reason, the immediate consequent of such
peremptory and preposterous course, is Error and Depravation of the
Understanding. Pythagoras and his Scholars, out of a Plut. de pl^cit. Philos.
l. 1. c. 3. Laert. in (...). (...). ^stic. l. 10. c. 10.
strong conceit that they had of the Efficacy of Music, or Numbers,
examining all the passages of Nature by the Principles thereof, fell into that
monstrous Error, that Number was the first and most Essential Element in the
Constitution of all Creatures. Thus as men which see through a colored Glass,
have all Objects, how different soever represented in the same color: So they
examining all Conclusions by Principles forestalled for that purpose, thinking
every thing of what nature soever to be dyed in the color of their own
conceits, and to carry some proportion unto those Principles: Like Antiph^ron*
Orites and others in Aristotle, who did confidently affirm (...)* Lib de (...)
and Reminis. c. 1
every thing for Real, which their Imagination faneied to it self. But Tully
has prettily reprehended this abuse in that satyricall reprehension which he
gives to Aristoxenus the Musician, who needs out of the Principles of his Art,
would conceit the Soul of man to consist of Harmony* H^c magistr^ concedat
Aristoteli; canere ipse doceat. Let him leave these things to Aristotle, and
content himself with teaching men how to sing: intimating thereby the
absurdity of drawing any Science beyond its own bounds.

2 Another Cause of Error may be Affectation of Singularity, and a Disdain of
being but an accession unto other men's Inventions* or of Tracing their steps:
when men shall rather desire to walk in ways of their own making, than in
the beaten paths which have been trodden before them; to be guilty of their own
invented Errors, than content with a derived and imputed Learning; and had
rather be accounted the Purchasers of Heresy, than the Heirs of Truth, Quase
nihil fuisse^ rectum, quod primum est; melius existiman^ quicquid est aliud, as
Quintilian spoke elegantly on another occasion: As if nothing had been right,
which had been said before; they esteem every thing therefore better, because
new.

3 Another Cause may be the other Extreme Non tam A^thoritas in disputando,
qua^ rationis momenta quare^da s^t, etc. Ci^. de Not. Deor. l. 1.
(for a man may lose his way, as well by enclining too much to the right hand,
as to the left) I mean a too credulous prejudice and opinion of Authority; when
we bow our judgments not so much to the nature of things, as to the learning
of men. Et credere, quam scire, videtur (...), we rather believe, than know
what we assent unto. It Is indeed a wrong to the labors of Learned men to read
them always with a Cavilling and Skeptical mind; and to doubt of every thing,
is to get resolution in nothing. But yet withal, our Credulity must not be
peremptory, but with reservation. We may not captivate and resign our
judgments into another man's. hand. Belief, without evidence of Reason, must
be only there absolute, where the Authority is Vnquestion^ble, and where it
is impossible to (...), there only it is Impious to Distrust. As for men's
Assertions, Quibus possibile est subesse falsum, what he said of Friendship,
Sic ama tanquam Os^s, Love with that Wisdom as to remember you may be
provoked to the contrary, is more warrantable and advantageous in Knowledge:
Sic* creed tanquam dissensurus, so to believe, as to be ready, when cause
requires, to dissent. It is a too much Vid. Aug. ep. 6. Lib. de Vn^tat. Eccli^.
cap. 19. C^tra Crescon. Gramat. l. 2. c. 32. and (...). 111. Cypr. l. 2. ep. 3.
ad Cacilium.
streightning of a man's own Understanding, to inthrall it unto any: or to
esteem the dissent from some particular Authorities, Presumption and
Self-conceit. Nor indeed is there any thing which has bred more Distempers in
the Body of Learning, than Factions and Sidings. When as Seneca said of Cato,
that he would rather esteem Drunkenness a Virtue, than Cato Vicious: So
Peripateticks and Platonists, Scotists, and Thomists, and the rest (if I may
adventure so to call them, of those learned Idolaters, in deifying the Notions
of Mortal men) shall rather count Error, Truth, than their great Masters
Erroneous. But yet I would not be so understood, as if I left every man to the
unbridled reins of his own fancy: or to a presumptuous dependence only on
his own judgment with contempt or neglect of others. But I consider a double
Estate of the Learned; Inchoation and Progress. And though in this latter
there be requisite a Discerning Judgment, and Liberty of Dissent; yet for the
other, Aristotl's speech is true, Oportet discentem credere, Beginners Vid.
Theodor. sermon. 1. d^ ^ide and Plat^n. apud ^seb. l. 12. c. 1.
must believe. For as in the Generation of man, he receives his first life
and nourishment from one Womb, and after takes only those things, which are
by the Nurse or Mother given to him; but when he is grown unto strength and
years, he then receives nourishment not from Milk only, but from all
variety of meats, and with the freedom of his own choice or dislike: so in the
generation of Knowledge, the first knitting of the Joints and Members of it
into one Body is best effected by the Authority and Learning of some able
Teacher (though even of his Tutors, Gate being a child, was wont to require a
reason) Plut. lib. de Audiend. Po^tit. Vid. Sen. p. 64.
but being grown thereby to some stature and maturity, not to give it the
Liberty of its own Judgment, were to confine it still to its Nurse or Cradle.
I speak not this therefore to the dishonor of Aristotle, or any other, stom
whose Learning, much of ours, as from Fountains, has bin derived. Antiquity
is ever venerable, and justly challenges Honor, Reverence, and Admiration.
And I shall ever acknowledge the worthy commendation Hooke^ lib. 1 ^. 6.
which has been given Aristotle by a learned man, that he has almost
discovered more of Natures Mysteries in the whole Body of Philosophy, than the
whole Series of Ages fince has in any particular member thereof. And therefore
he, and all the rest of those worthy Founders of Learning do well deserve some
credit, as well to their authority, as to their matter. But yetnotwithstanding
(...). (...). Orat. 1. d^ R^.
there is difference between Reverence and Superstition; we may Assent unto
them as Ancients, but not as Oracles: they may have our minds easy and
inclinable; they may not have them captivated and fettered to their Opinions As
I will not distrust all, which without manifest proof they deliver, where I
cannot convince them of Error: So likewise will I suspend my belief upon
probability of their mistakes: and where I find express Reason of Dissenting,
I will ^ather speak Truth with my Mistress Nature, than (...) Arist. Bible.
l. 1. c. 4. Tacit. U^ritas nec mt^ est, (...) illi (...). ^ut illi (...). Aug.
Confess. l. 12. c. 25.
maintain an Error with my Master Aristotle. As there may be Friendship, so
there may be Honor with diversity of Opinions: nor are we bound therefore to
defy men, because we reverence them. Plura s^pe peccantur dum demeremur, quam
dum off endimus; We wrong our Ancestors more by admiring than opposing them
in their Errors; and our Opinion of them is foul and without Honor, if we
think they had rather have us followers of them then of Truth. And we may in
this case justly answer them as the young man in Plutarch did his Father when
he commanded him to do an unjust thing. I will do that which you would have me,
though not that which you bid me. For good men are ever willing to have Truth
preferred above them. Aristotle his Commendation R^. l. 2.
of his middle Aged men, should be a rule of our Assent to him, and all the
rest of those first Planters of Knowledge. We ought neither to overprize all
their Writings by an absolute Credulity; because they being Men, and subject to
Error; may make us thereby liable to Delusion; neither ought we rudely to
undervalue them, because being Great men, and so well deserving of all
Posterity, they may challenge from us an Easines of Assent unto their Authority
alone (if it be only without and not against Reason) as T^lly professed in a
matter so agreeable to the Nature of Man's Soul, as Immortality: Vt ration^m
nullam Plato afferret, ipsa Authoritate me frangeret: Though Plato had given no
reason for it; yet his Authority should have swayed Assent: I say, not slavish,
but with reservation, and with a purpose a l^vaies to be swayed by Truth, more
than by the thousand years of Plato and Aristotle.

4 Another Cause of Error, may be a Fastening (...). (...).
too great an Affection on some particular Objects, which makes the Mind
conceive in them some Excellencies, which Nature never bestowed on them: As if
Truth were the handmaid to Passion: or Camelion like could alter it self to
the temper of our defires. Every thing must be Unquestionable and Authentical,
when we have once affected it. And from this Root, it is probable did spring
those various Opinions about the utmost Good of man's Nature (which amounted
Vid. Aug. de Civ. Dei. l. 19. c. 1.
to the number of two hundred eighty eight, ^s ^as long ago observed by Varro)
which could not ^ut be out of every particular Philosophers con ^ipt, carrying
him to the Approbation of some particular Object, most pleasing and
satisfactory to the Corruption of his own crooked Nature: so that every man
sought Happiness, not where it was to be found, but in himself, measuring it
by the Rule of his own distempered and entangled Judgment; whence could not
possibly but issue many monstrous Errors, according as the Minds of men were
any way transported with the false Delight, either of Pleasure, Profit, Pomp,
Promotion, Fame, Liberty, or any other worldly and sensual Objects. In which
particular of theirs, I observe a preposterous and unnatural course; like that
of the Atheist in his Opinion of the Soul and Deity: For whereas in Nature and
right Method, the Determinations of the Understanding concerning Happiness
should precede the pursuit of the Will: they on the contrary side, first love
their Error, and then they prove it; as the Affection of an Atheist leads him
first to a Desire, and wish that there were no God (because ^e conceives it
would go far better with him in the end, than otherwise it is like to do)
and then this Desire allures the Understanding to dictate Reasons and
Inducements, that may persuade to the Belief thereof; and so what was at first
but a wish, is at last become an Opinion: Qu^d nimis volumus facile credimu^,
we easily believe what we will willingly desire. And the reason is, because
every man (though by Nature he love Sin) yet he is altogether impatient of
any check or conviction thereof; either from others, or himself; and
therefore be his Errors never so palpable, his Affections never so
distempered, his Mind never so depraved and averse from the Rules of Reason,
he will notwithstanding easily persuade himself to think he is in the right
course, and make his Judgment as absurd in defending, as his Will and
Affections are in embracing vicious Suggestions, Viti a nostra, quia amamus,
defendimus. When once our Minds are by the violence and insinuation of
Affection transported into any crooked course, Reason will freely resign it
self to be perverted, and the discourse of the Understanding will quickly
be drawn to the maintaining of either; So easy it is for men to dispute,
when they have once made themselves obey.

And another reason hereof is, because as a Body distempered and affected in
any part, especially those vital ones, which diffuse their virtue into the
whole, the Weakness spreads, and overrunnes all the other, though remotest
from it* So likewise the violent motion of partial and unruly Appetites *which
do any ways miscarry by the delusion of Objects, which they fasten upon,
immediately derive themselves upon the higher pa^s of man's Soul* out of the
natural Harmony and consent which they desire to have amongst themselves; but
especially do they labor to win over the Judgment unto their side, and
there hence to get unto themselves Warrant and Approbation. For as where the
Understanding is regular, the chief Dominion thereof, is over-Affection. And
therefore we see always, that men of the most stayed and even Judgments, have
the most unresisted power in the government of Passions: So on the other side;
when the Affections are strongly inclined to any, either enormous motion in
Morality; or Object in Nature, the first Faculty whereon they strive to
transfer their prejudice in the Reason* since without the Assent and
Approbation thereof, they cannot enjoy it with such freedom from distractions
and fear, as if they were warranted thereto by the Sophistry and Disputes of
that Power. Thus as it is usual with men of deceitful palates (as before I
touched) to conceive in every thing they taste the same disagreeing relish,
wherewith their mouth is at that time distempered: So it is with men's Minds
prepossessed with any particular fancy: Intus Existens prohibet alienum. They
cannot see it in its own proper colors, but according as their Conceits are
any way distempered and transported by the violence of their Affection. And
hence in Natural Philosophy sprang that Opinion of Aristoxenus the Musician
(which I spoke of before) that the Soul of Man consisted in Harmony, and in an
apt Concord, Velut in Cantu and Fidibiu, between the parts; and Tully intimates
the reason I speak of very prettily: Hic ab artificio suo non recessit: this
man knew not how to leave his own Art; and more expressly of the same in
another place: Ita delactatur suis Cantibus, ut etiam ad animum transfer
con^tur. He was so affected with Music, that he transferred it upon the
Soul.

5 Another reason, which I conceive of Corruption of the Understanding by
Error, is Curiosity and Pushing it forward to the Search of things clasped up
and reserved from its Inquiry. It Is the natural disease of Mankind to desire
the Knowledge of nothing more than what is lest attainable. It a Natura
comparatum est (says Pliny) ut proximorum incuriosi Longinqua sectemur; adeo
any (...) rerum Cupid^ Languescit, cum f^ili occasio est. It is the vanity of
man, as well in Knowledge, as in other things* ^o esteem that which is far
fetched (as we say) and dear bought most precious; as if Danger and R^rity
were the only Argument of worth. The enquiry after the Estates of Spirit, and
separated Souls, the Hierarchies of Angels; and (which is more) the secret
Counsels of God, with other the like hidden Mysteries, do so wholly possess
the Minds of some men, that they disappoint themselves of more profitable
Inquiries, and so become not only hurtful, in regard of their own vanity and
fruitlesnesse; but also in that they hinder more wholesome and useful
Learnings. And yet Ignorance is of so opposite a nature unto man's Soul, that
though it be Holy, it pleases not; if there be but Evil (the worst of all
Objects) unknown. The Devil persuades Adam rather to make it by sinning, than
not to know it.

But we are to remember that in many things, our searchings and bold
speculations must be content with those Silencing, more than Satisfying
Reasons. Sic Natura jubet, sic opus est mund^: Thus God will have it, thus
Nature requires. We owe unto Natures works, a^ well our wonder, as our
inquiry; and in many things it be^ooves us more to magnify than to search.
There are as in the countries of the World, so in the Travels of men's wits; as
well Praecipitia* as Via; as well Gulfes and Quicksands, as common Seas. He
that will be climing too high, or sailing to far, is likely in the end to
gain no other Knowledge, but only what it is to have a shipwreck, and to
suffer ruin. Man is of a mixed Nature; partly Heavenly; partly Moral and
Earthly* and therefore as to be of a creeping and wormy* disposition, to crawle
on the ground, to raise the Scule unto no higher Contemplations, than Base and
Worldly is an Argument of a degenerous Nature: So to spurn and disdain these
Lower Inquiries as unworthy our thoughts. To soar after Inscrutable Secrets;
to unlocke and break open the closet of Nature, and to measure by our shallow
apprehensions the deep and impenetrable Counsels of Heaven, Aug. de Genesis ad
li^* l. 11. c. 14. ^t lib. de ve^. Relig. c. 13. De C^v. Dei. l. 12. c. 6.
Hier. Ep. 44. ad Anton. de Modestia, and i^ c. 14. Isai^* Greg. Moral. l. 14.
c. 17. Damas. de Orth^d. sid l. 2. c. 4.
which we should with a holy, fearful, and astonished Ignorance only adore,
is too bold and arrogant sacrilege, and has much of that Pride in it, by
which the Angels fell* For Ero similis Altissimo, I will be like the most high,
was (as i^ believed) the Devils first sin: and Eriti tanquam Dij, ye shall be
like unto God, was I am sure his first Temptation, justly punished both in the
Author and Obey or with Darkness; in the one, with the Darkness of Tophet; in
the other, with the Darkness of Error.

CHAP. XXXIX. The Actions of the Understanding, Invention, Wit, Judgment; of
Invention, Distrust, Prejudice, Immaturity: of Tradition, by Speech, Writing:
of the Dignities and Corruption of Speech.
HItherto of the more Passive Operation of the Understanding, which I called
Reception or Knowledge of Objects. Now follow the more active; which consist
more in the Action of Reason, than in its Apprehension* And they are the
Actions of Invention, of Wit, and of Judgment. The former of these has two
principal parts; the Discovering of Truth; and the Communicating of it. The
former only is properly Invention; the other a Consequent thereof, Tradition:
but both much making to the honor of the Faculty. For the former, I shall
forbear any large discourse touching the particular Dignities thereof, as
being a thing so manifestly seen in Contemplations, Practices, dispatches in
the maintaining of Societies, erecting of Laws, government of Life; and
generally, whatsoever enterprise a man fastens upon, this one Faculty it is,
that has been the Mother of so many Arts; so great Beauty and Ornament amongst
men, which out of one world of things have raised another of Learning.

The Corruptions then which I conceive of this part of Invention, are,

First, a Despair and Distrust of a man's own Abilities: For as Corruption and
Self Opinion is a maine Cause of Error: so Dissidence and Fear is on the
other side a wrong to Nature, in abusing those Faculties which she gave for
enquiry, with Sloth and Dulnes. Multis rebus inest Magnitudo (says Seneca)
non ex natura sua, sed ex debilitate nostra: and so likewise, Multie rebus
inest difficultas; non ex natura sua, sed ex opinione nostra* Many things seem
hard and involved, not because they are so, but because our suspicion so
misconceives them. Thus as in an affected and ill disposed Body, ^very light
Weakness is more felt than a more violent distemper, where the Constitution is
stronger. So with fearful and despairing wits, every Inquiry is estimated, not
according to the nature of the Object, but according to the Disopinion and
slender Conceit which they have of their own Abilities. Non calcant spina^,
sed habent. It were but ridiculous for a Blind man to complain of dark
weather, when the fault is not in the Air, but in the Eye.

Another prejudice to this Faculty, is that which I observed before on another
Occasion, an Over-Reverend Opinion of those who have gone before us. For when
men shall so magnify the Gifts of others, that they slight and neglect their
own; when out of a prejudicate Conceit that the Ancients have sufficiently
perfected the Body of more serious Learnings, they shall exercise their Wits
(capable of greater imploiments) in degenerate and unusefull Studies; Knowledge
must needs be hindered from attaining that Maturity, to which by their own
Inventions it might be raised. Thus as it falls out amongst men of thirstlesse
Minds in their Fortunes: Divitiarum abundantia inter Causa^ paupertat is est.
Their profuseness out of their present store, with a negligence to recover and
new make their Estates, draws them quickly beyond their Fortunes* or as it was
in the like case amongst the Romans in those times of Public Luxury, and
Effeminatenesse, the valor of their Ancestors procuring unto them large
wealth, and securing them from foreign hostility, did also by the means of
that Wealth and Ease soften and melt their valor, so that their Weakness was
principally occasioned by the invincible spirit of their Predecessors: So it is
in the matter of Learning, when we spend our time only in the Legacies that
our Fathers have left us, and never seek to improve it by our own Inventions,
the Large measures of Knowledge which we receive from them, is by our
preposterous use made an occasion of a Large measure of Ignorance in other
inquiries, where in their Labors offer greater Assistance, than
discouragement. There was not I persuade my self amongst the Ancients
themselves, a greater means of disclosing so large a measure of Truth, than the
Freedom of their own Opinions. For notwithstanding this Liberty was often the
occasion of many prodigious Births; yet this disadvantage was coun^vailed with
many fruitful and good ly iss^; all which might happily have been undi scovered,
had men labored only in Traditions, and contented themselves with Learning
upon Trust. And those more Errors being still examined, were less pernicious
than fewer believed. And even of them I make no question but there has been
good use made by those that have enquired into Truth. For first, there are very
few Errors that have not some way or other Truth annexed unto them, which
happily might not otherwise have been observed. It is an Error in that man which
shall presume of Gold hid in his Land, to dig and turn it up for no other end,
but to find his Imaginary treasure; yet that stirring and softning of the
Ground is a means to make it the more fertile. Lastly, this use may be made
even of Errors, when discovered in the In quiry after Truth, that they let us
know what it is not: and it is speedier to come to a Positive Conclusion by a
Negative Knowledge, than a naked Ignorance: as he is sooner likely to find
out a place, who knows which is not the way, than he that only knows not the
way.

The last Cause of Disability in the Invention may be Immaturity and
Vnfurniture for want of acquainting a man's self with the Body of Learning: For
Learning is a Tree or Body, which in one continued Frame, brancheth it self
into sundry members: So that there is not only in the Object of the Will:
which is the Good of things; but in the Object of the Understanding also, which
is their Truth, a certain mutual Concatenation, whereby every part has some
reference unto the other.* insomuch that in the handling of particular
Sciences, there are often such occurrences, as doc necessarily require an
insight into other Learnings: So that of Tully is generally true, Difficile est
pauca esse e^ nota, Cui non sint, Tus^* q. l. 2*
aut pleraque aut omnia. All that address themselves either to the Invention
of Arts not known, or to the polishing of such as are already found out, must
ground their endeavors on the Experiments and Knowledge of sundry kinds of
Learning.

For the other part of Invention, which I call Tradition, Communication, or
Diffusion, I comprehend it within that perfection peculiar to man from all
other Creatures, Oration, or Speech. Wherein I consider a double ministerial
reference; the one to the eye; the other to the ear: that is Vox scripta, a
Visible Voice; this Vox viva, an Audible Voice. To which purpose Scaliger
acutely: Est quidem Recitator Liber Loquens, Liber recitator Mutus. The
Dignities which this particular (...) on man, and wherein it gives him a
pre-eminence above other Creatures, are taken from the Ends or Offices thereof;
for the worth of every service able or Ministerial Instrument is to be
gathered from the Regularity of its function, whereunto it is naturally
instituted.

The end whereunto Living and Organicall Speech was principally ordained, is to
maintain Arist. Polit. l. 1. c. 2.
mutual Society amongst men incorporated into one Body. And therefore Tully
well calls it, Humana Societatis Vinculum, the Ligament and Sinnew, whereby the
Body of Humane Conversation is compacted and knit into One.

It would be a long and large labor to speak of the Honor which God has
bestowed upon our Nature in this noble Gift of Speech, making our Tongue (...),
as the Poet calls it, The (...).
Messenger of Reason, and as it were the Pen of the Mind which cloatheth our
Conceits with Characters, and makes them obvious unto others. I shall not
engage my self on so great an Argument, which has already filled the Volumes
of so many learned men, who have written some Rhetorical, others moral
Institutions and Precepts touching Speech. I shall therefore content my self
with but naming some few particulars, by Consideration whereof we may
acknowledge the Bounty of God, and Excellency of our Nature, which is attended
on by so noble a servant.

^ For the Dignity hereof it appears in this, That whereas in other less
Considerable Perfections, other Creatures have an Exquisiteness above man, yet
in this man excels all other Inferior Creatures, in that he is able to
communicate the Notions of Reason clothed in sensible Characters unto others
of his own kind. For though some melancholy men have believed that (...).
Aug. lib. Qu^ ^. ^x Ve^. (...). ^. 3.
Elephants and Birds, and other Creatures have a Language whereby they
discourse with one another; yet we know that those narrow and poor Voices
which Nature has bestowed on them proceed only from the Impression of Fancy,
and sensitive Appetite to serve themselves, but not to improve one another. And
therefore Speech is called (...), by the Name of Reason, because it attends
only upon Reason. And as by this the Soul of man differs in Excellency from
all other Creatures: so in two things amongst many others (both subservient
unto Reason) does his (...). Arist. de part* (...) l. 4 c. 10. Vi^ (...).
Anatom. ^. 1. c. 2, 4. (...) in G (...) 2. 7. disp. de (...). (...). Corp* q. 1.
Body excel them too. First, in the Uprightness of his Stature, whereby he is
made to look up to Heaven, and from his Countenance to let shine forth, the
Impression of that Light which dwell^th within him. For the Face is the Window
of the Soul*

Pronaque cum spectent Animalia caetera terram,
Os homini sublime dedi^, Caelumque tueri
Iussit* and erectos, ad Sydera tollere Vultus.
Whilst other creatures downward fix their sight,
Bending to Earth an Earthly Appetite:
To man he gave a lofty Face; might look
Up to the Heavens; and in that spacious Book,
So full of shining Characters, descry Quint. Instit. l. 2. c. 16. (...).
^hodig. l. 2. c. 30. l. 16 ^. 1^. (...) Arist. de Interpre^. c. 1. Greg. N^ss.
de Hom opisicio. c. 9.

Why he was made, and whether he should fly.
Next in the Faculty of Speech, which is the Gare of the Soul, through which
she passes, and the Interpreter of the Conceits, and Cogitations of the mind,
as the Philosopher speaks. The uses whereof are to convey and communicate the
Conceptions of the Mind (and by that means to preserve humane Society) to
derive Knowledge to maintain mutual love and supplies; to multiply our
Delights, to mitigate and unload our sorrows; but above all to Honor God, and
to edify one another, in which respect our Tongue is called our Glory. Psalm.
16. 2. Act. 2. 26. (...) Eu. ^pid. Hec. Sutton* ^n C^s. cap. 70. L^c. l ^. ^
(...) S^phocl. Elec. (...). (...) Vid. (...). de Eloq. l. 1. ^. 4. V^l. (...).
l. 8. c. 9. Pluta^. l^b. de Praecept. gerend. Reip.


The force and power of Speech upon the minds of men, is almost beyond its
power to express, How suddenly it can inflame, excite, allay, comfort,
mollify, transport, and carry captive the Affections of men. Caesar with one
word quiets the Commotion of an Army. Menenius Agrippa with one Apologue, the
sedition of a people. Flavianus the Bishop of Antioch with one Oration; the
fury of an Emperor. Anaximenes with one Artifice, the indignation of
Alexander; Abigail with one Supplication, the Revenge of David; Pericles and
Pisistratus even then when they spoke against the peoples liberty, over ruled
them by their Eloquence, to believe and embrace what they spoke, and by their
Tongue effected that willingly, which their Sword could hardly have extorted.
Pericles and Nicias are said to have still pursued the same Ends, and yet with
clean different success. The one in advancing the same business pleased; the
other exasperated the people; and that upon no other Reason but this, the one
had the Art of Persuasion which the other wanted.

(...)
One spoke the Right with a slow Tongue,
Another fluently spoke wrong.
He lost, this stole the Cause, and got
To make you think, what you think not.
And this power of Speech over the Minds of men is by the Poet, in that known
passage of his thus elegantly described:

-- Magn^ in popule cum sape Coorta est Virg. (...).

Seditio, savitque Animus Ignobile vulgus
Ian^que faces and Saxa volant, furor arma ministrat.
Tum pietate gravem, ac merit is si forte viru^quem
Conspexere, silent, arrectisque auribus astant:
Ille regit dictis Anim^s and pectora ^ulcet.
When in a Multitude Seditions grow,
And Vicerated Minds do overflow
With swelling Ire* when stones and firebrands fly,
(As Rage does every where weapons supply)
Then if some Aged man, in Honor held
For Piety, and Prudence, stand to wield,
And moderate this Tumult: strait ways all
Rise up with silent Reverence, and let fall
Their Angry Clamors; His grave words do sway
Their Minds, and all their Discontents allay.
The Virtues of Speech (whereby it works with such force upon the Mind) are
many, which therefore I will but name, some Grammatical, as Property, and
Fitness, and Congruity, without Vid (...) Orat. (...) l. 4. (...) (...) Eliq.
(...). 2. Quint. l. 1. c. 5. and possim alibi. (...). Laer^. (...) Zen. ^. 7.
Solaecismes and Barbarousnesse, some Rhetorical, as choice, Purity, Brevity,
Perspecuity, Gravity, Pleasantness, Vigo^, Moderate Acrimony and Vehemence;
some Logical, as Method, Order, Distribution, Demonstration, Invention,
Definition, Argumentation, Refutation. A right digesting of all the Aids of
Speech; as Wit, Learning, Poverbs, Apologues, Emblemes, Histories, Laws,
Causes, and Effects, and all the Heads or Places which assist us in Invention.
Some Moral, as Gravity, Truth, Seriousness, Integrity, Authority; When words
receive weight from manners, and a man's Speech is better believed for his Life
than for his Learning. When it appears, That they arise esulce pectoris, and
have their foundation v d. A. Gell. l. 1. c. ^. 5.
in Virtue, and not in Fancy. For as a man receives the self same Wine with
pleasure in a pure and clean Vessel, which he lo^ths to put unto his mouth,
from one that is soul and soiled: so the self same Speech adorned with the
Piety of one man, and disgraced with the Pravity of another, will be very apt
accordingly to be received, either with delight or loathing.

-- (...). Eurip. Hecub.
A Speech from Base men, and men of Respect,
Though It be the same, works not the same Effect.
And therefore the Spartan Princes when they Plut. lib. de Audit. A. Gell. l.
18. c. 13.
heard from a man of a disallowed and suspected Life, an Opinion which they
approved, They required another man of reputation to propose it: That the
prejudice of the person might not procure a rejection of his Judgment. For we
are apt to nauseate at very good meat, when we know that an ill Cook did
dress it. And therefore it is a very true Character which Tully and Quintilian
Quint. l. 12. c. 1.
give of a right Orator. That he must be Vir bonus dicendi Peritus, as well a
Good man as a Good speaker. Otherwise though he may speak with admirable wit,
to the fancy of his hearers, he will have but little power over their
Affections. Like a fire made of green wood, which is fed with it as it is
fuel, but quencheed as it is green.

Lastly, some are Civil in Causes Deliberative, or Iuridicall, as Wisdom,
pertinency and fitnes to the Nature and Exigence of the End or -- (...) Sophot.
Aj^x.
Matter whereupon we speak. For in that case we are to ponder and measure what
we say, by the end whereunto we say it, and to fit it to all the Circumstances
incident thereunto. Paul amongst the Philosophers disputed with them from the
Inscription of their Altar, from the Authority of their Poets, and from
confessed Maxims of Reason, by these degrees convincing them of Idolatry, and
lending them to Repentance. But amongst the Jews he disputed out of
Scripture. With Felix that looked for money, he disputed of Righteousness and
Judgment to come, but amongst the Pharisees and Sadduces, of the Resurrection,
that a Dissension amongst themselves might (...) S^phocl. Aj^x.
procure a party for him. It is not wisdom for a man in misery to speak with
a high style: or a man in Dignity with a Creeping. The same speech may be
excellent in an umbratile Exercitation, which would be too pedanticall, and
smelling of the Lamp in a matter of serious and weighty debate; and that may
be dainty meat i^ one place for the fancy, which in another would be too thin
for the Conscience. Nature has guarded and compassed in the Tongue with the
lips, like a folding Gate, and with the Teeth like Petulanti^ verborum co^
(...) esse opposite (...) (...), etc. A. Gell. l. 1. c. 15.
a double Hedge, that we might be admonished to weigh and ponder our words
before we produce them.

These are the principal Virtues. And in Opposition unto these, we may easily
collect the principal Corruptions of this Faculty, which I will content my
self with but the naming.

The Vices in Grammar, are Solaecismes, Barbarismes, Obsoletenesse,
Impropriety, Incongruity of Speech. In Rhetoric, Sordidnesse, Tediousness,
Obscurity, Flatnesse of Conceit, Argutenesse, and Minutiae, Gawdinesse,
Wordinesse, and Empty Ostentation. In Morals, the Vices Vid. Plut. de (...).
and (...). Cl^m. Alex. Padag. l. 2 c. 7 S^uck. Con^iv. l. 4. c. 17. and 19.
Coel. Rhodig. l. 7. c. 26.
may be comprised under these two Generals, Multiloquium and Turpiloquium,
Garrulous and Rotten Communication. Lastly in Civil Respects, Levity and
Impertinency, like the advices of Thersites, (...) Many and to little purpose.

But besides all these, there is one thing which De (...). Cle^. Al^x Padag. l.
2. c. 9. (...) spec^es qu^ plurima extra Iustitu (...) nostrum, (...) (...)
perjuria, (...) dicta, (...), Dicteria, Ob^, etc
seems to be the most proper Corrupter of this Ornament of Speech, and that
is a Lie. For a^ every thing is then most Regular when it retains the purity of
its first office and institution: So on the other side it is most depraved,
when it deviates from that service, whereunto it was principally ordained. Thus
a Picture, though it be never so much in the frame abused, cracked, spotted, or
made any other way unvaluable; yet if the resemblance which it bears, be
express and lively, we still call it a true Picture: whereas if that be a
false and deceitful resemblance (be all other adventitious Ornaments never so
exquisite) we still account it False and Corrupt: So it is with the Speech of
man, which though of never so great Weakness and Insufficiency in other
respects; yet if it retain that one property of shaping it self to the
Conceits of the Mind, and make level and proportionable the words with the
thoughts, it may still be said to be (though not a good) yet in some respect a
Regular Speech, in that it is conformable to the first institution: But be all
other Excellencies never so great; yet if it be a false Image of our
Intentions, Nature is diverted from her prime End, and the Faculty quite
depraved, as for saking its original office: and indeed, other Moral Duties
of the Tongue do necessarily presuppose this adequation and conformity to the
thoughts, which I speak of, without which they are but Hypocrisy, and come
within the compass of the noted Corruption, a Lie: for every Hipocrite is a
Liar. I confess there are Sins of Speech greater than a Lie, in the
intention and degrees of their own Guilt: But herein is the difference: the
Tongue may in it (whether Morally religiously considered) bear a double
Irregularity (wherein it differs from other powers.)

First it may be Uncomfortable to the Law of right Reason, as in all manner of
vicious and unsavory Speeches. And the Corruption which hereby it incurres, is
common to it with other Faculties, as the disproportion between Evil Thoughts
and Reason dictating the contrary, works Corruption in the thoughts.

And then secondly it may be disproportioned to the Conceits of the Mind in
proposing them otherwise than they are inwardly (...), and this is properly a
Lie. Which I therefore call the principal Corruption of Speech, not (as I
said) because I conceive in it a greater measure of heinousness and Guilt,
than in any other Speeches (because all Guilt follows the Incomformity and
Remotion from the Law of God and Reason; and therein other Speeches, as
Blasphemy, and Sedition, may have a greater measure of wickedness) but because
in a Lie I find both the forenamed Irregularities, it being a Speech not only
uneven to the Conceits of the Mind; but repugnant also to the Will of God, and
the Law of Na ture.

The next kind of Active Operations were those of Wit. The use whereof is so
much the more Excellent, by how much the Wrestings and Abuse of it is the more
dangerous* I shall sufficiently declare the worth of it, by showing what it is:
For I take not Wit in that common Acceptance, whereby men understand some
sudden flashes of Conceit, whether in Style or Conference, which like ^otten
wood in the dark, have more Shine than Substance; whose Use and Ornament are
like themselves Swift and Vanishing; at once both Admired and Forgotten: but I
understand a settled, constant, habitual sufficiency of the Understanding,
whereby it is enabled in any kind of Learning, Theory, or Practice, both to
sharpnes in Search, subtilty in Expression, and dispatch in Execution. As for
that other kind seen in Panegyricks, Declamatory Discourses, Epigrams, and
other the like sudden issues of the brain, they are feats only and sleights,
not Duties and Ministeries of the Wit, which serve rather for Ostentation than
Use: and are only the Remission of the Mind and Vnbending of the thoughts from
more severe Knowledge: as walking for recreation is rather Exercise than
Travel, although by the violence of the motion, or length of the way there may
ensue Sweat and Weariness.

Now for the Corrupters of the Wit, though there be diverse; yet none so
immediate and certain as it self, if alone: For Wit, though it be Swift, yet
is often Blind. And therefore the faster it hastens in Error, the more
dangerous it is to it self. And hence it is, that as Learning was never more
bound to any, than those men, who have been emment in this Faculty, if they
swayed it by Moderation and Prudence: So none have been more pernicious and
violent Oppugners of Truth, than men best furnished with Acuteness, when they
turned the use of it to the strengthening of their own Fancies, and not
submitted it to Judgment and Examination. As the fattest Soiles in Greece
caused the greatest troubles; and the Beauty of Helena, the ruin of Troy. Wit
like Wine is a good remedy against the poison of the Mind; but being it self
poisoned, it does kill the sooner. There ought to be^ for the right disposing
of our Inventions, a mutual reference and service between Wit and Judgment.
It is a vexation of Mind to discern what is right and profitable, and have no
inablement to attain it: and that is Judgment without Wit. And to have a
facility of compassing an End, and a working and restless fancy, without
direction to fasten it on a fit Object, is the only course to multiply Error,
and to be still in Motion, not as in a path, but as in a Maze or Circle, where
is continual toil, without any proficience or gain of Way; and this is Wit
without Judgment. They ought therefore, I say, to be mutual Coadjutors each
to other. Wit is the Spur to stir up and quicken the Understanding: and
Judgment is the Bridle to sway and moderate Wit: Wit is the Hand and Foot* for
Execution and Motion; but Judgment is the Eye for Examination and Direction.
Lastly, Wit is the Sail and Oar to further the progress in any Inquiry; but
Judgment is the Ballace to Poise, and the Steer to guide the course to its
intended End.

Now the manner of the Judgments Operation in directing either our Practice or
Contemplation is by a discourse of the Mind, whereby it ^educeth them to
certain Grounds and Principles, whereunto they ought chiefly to be
conformable. And from hence is that Reason which Quintilian observes, why
shallow and floating Wits seem oftentimes more fluent than men of greater
sufficiencies: For, says he, those other admit of every sudden flash or
Conceit, without any Examination; but apud Sapientes est ^lectio and Modus:
They first weigh things before they utter them.

The maine Corruption of Judgment in this Office, is Prejudice and
Prepossession. The Duty of Judgment is to discern between Obliquities and
right Actions, and to reduce all to the Law of Reason. And therefore it is true
in this, as in the course of public Judgments: That respect of persons, or
things, blind the Eyes, and makes the Understanding to determine according to
Affection, and not according to Truth Though indeed some Passions there are,
which rather hood-winke then distemper or hurt the Judgment* so that the false
determination thereof cannot be well called a Mistake, but a Lie: Of which
kind flattery is the principal, when the Affections of Hope and Fear debase a
man, and cause him to dissemble his own opinion.

CHAP. XL. Of the Actions of the Understanding upon the Will, with respect to
the End and Means. The Power of the Understanding over the Will, not
Commanding, but directing the Objects of the Will to be good and convenient.
Corrupt Will looks only at Good present. Two Acts of the Understanding,
Knowledge and Consideration. It must also be possible, and with respect to
happiness Immortal. Ignorance and Weakness in the Understanding, in
proposing the right means to the last End.
HItherto of the Actions of the Understanding, Ad extra, in regard of an
Object. Those Ad Intra, in regard of the Will: Wherein the Understanding is a
Minister o^ Counselor to it, are either to furnish it with an End, whereon to
fasten its desires: or to direct it in the means conducible to that end. For
the Will alone is a blind Faculty; and therefore as it cannot see the right
Good it ought to affect without the Assistance of an Informing Power. So
neither can it see the right way it ought to take for procuring that Good
without the direction of a Conducting power. As it has not Judgment to
discover an End: So neither has it Discourse to judge of the right Means,
whereby that may be attained. So that all the Acts of the Will necessarily
presuppose some precedent guiding Acts in the Understanding, whereby they are
pro portioned to the Rules of right Reason. This Operation of the Understanding
is usually by the Schoolmen called Imperium, or Mandatum, a Mandate or
Command; because it is a Precept, to which the will ought to be obedient. For
the Rules of Living and Doing well, are the Statutes (as it were) and Dictates
of right Reason. But yet it may not hence be concluded that the Understanding
has any Superiority, in regard of Dominion over the Will; though it have
Priority in regard of Operation. The Power of the Understanding over the Will,
is only a Regulating and Directing, it is no Constraining or Compulsive Power.
For the Will always is Domina s^orum actuum: The Mistress of her own
Operation: For Intellectus non imperat, sed solumm^do significat voluntatem
imperantis. It does only intimate unto the Will, the Pleasure and Law of God:
some seeds whereof remain in the Nature of man. The Precepts then of right
Reason are not therefore Commands, because they are proposed by way of Man
date; but therefore they are in that manner proposed, because they are by Reason
apprehended to be the Commands of a Divine Superior Power. And therefore in the
breach of any such Dictates we are not said properly to offend our
Understanding; but to sin against our Law giver. As in Civil Policy, the
offenses of men are not against inferior Officers; but against that sovereign
Power, which is the Fountain of Law, and under whose Authority all subordinate
Magistrates have their proportion of government. Besides, Ejus est imperare,
Cujus est punire: For Law and Punishment being Relatives, and mutually
connotating each the other, it must necessarily follow, that from that power
only canbe an imposition of law, from which may be an Infliction of Punishment.

Now the Condition under which the Understanding is both to apprehend and
propose any either end, or means convenient to the Nature of the Will, and of
Sufficiency to move it, are that they have in them Goodness, Possibility; and
in the end (if we speak of an utmost one) Immortality too. Every true Object of
any Power, is that which bears such a perfect Relation of convenience and
fitnes thereunto, that it is able to accomplish all its desires. Now since Malum
is Destruct^vum all Evil is Destructive. It is impossible that by it self,
without a counterfeit and adulterate face, it should ever have any Attractive
Power over the Desires of the Will. And on the other side, since Omne bonum, is
Perfectivum; since Good is perfective, and apt to bring real satisfaction
along with it, most certainly would it be desired by the Will, were it not that
our Understandings are clouded and carried away with some crooked
misapprehensions; and the Will it self corrupted in its own Inelinations.

But yet though all man's Faculties are so depraved, that he is not able as he
ought, to will any Divine and Perfect Good* yet so much he retains of his
Perfection, as that he cannot possibly desire any thing, which he apprehends as
absolutely disagreeable and destructive to his Nature; since all Natural
Agents aim still at their own Perfection. And therefore impossible it is,
that either Good should be refused, without any apprehension of Disconvenience;
or Evil pursued, without any appearance of Congruity or Satisfaction. That it
may appear therefore how the Understanding does always propose those Objects,
as Good to the Will, which are notwithstanding, not only in their own Nature,
but in the Apprehension of the Understanding it self known to be evil. And
on the contrary, why it does propose good Objects, contrary to its own
Knowledge, as Evil. We may distinguish two opposite conditions in Good and
Evil: For first, all Evil of Sin, (though it have Disconvenience to man's
Nature, as it is Destructive; yet) on the other side, it has agreement
thereunto, as it is crooked and corrupt. As continual drinking is most
convenient to the distemper of an Hydropticke Body, though most disconvenient
to its present welfare. Now then as no man possessed with that disease, desires
drink for this end, because he would dye, though he know that this is the next
way to bring him to his Death; but only to give satisfaction to his present
Appetite: So neither does man follow exorbitant and crooked courses, only that
he may thereby come to Destruction (though he is not ignorant of that issue)
but only to give way to the propension of his depraved Nature. In the same
manner likewise Goodness, though it have the most absolute Convenience to man,
as it is Perseclive, and in respect of his final advancement thereby; yet
(...) has as great a disconvenience toward men's corrupt Faculties, as it is a
strait rule to s^uare them by, and in respect of its R^ctitude. As light,
thou^h it be in its own property, the perfection of the Eyes; yet to
distempered Eyes, it works more trouble than delight, (...). A^st ^thic. l. 3.
^. 7.
because as in Philosophy* Quicquid recipitur, recipitur ad modum recipientis
so, Quicquid appetitur, appetitur ad modum appetenti^. So that if the (...) it
self be by inherent pollution depraved and evil, it cannot but desire every
thing that bears proportion and conformity to its own distempers. And this I
take to be the maine reason, why men of corrupt and irregular desires,
oftentimes fasten Delight on those Objects which they know to be Evil, and are
quite averse from those which yet they assent unto as Good.

To which I may add another, namely, the Resolution of a Corrupt Will to yield
unto it self all Present Satisfaction, and not to suffer it self to be swayed
with the Preoccupation of a Future Estate: Insomuch that the small content
which man's Nature receives from the Actual fru^ion of some instant-conceited
Good, prevails more to draw on Appetite, then the fearful Expectation of
ensuing Misery, can to deter from it. And the present irksomeness of Pious
Duties, have more power to divert the corrupt Mind from them; then the
Fore-conceipt of Eternal bliss can have to allure the Mind unto a Delight in
them. Hence then it appears, what I understand by that first condition,
wherewith Reason is to propose any End or Means to the Will, that it may be
desired; namely, Sub Ratione Boni, under the Condition of Good, not always
True and Moral; but sometimes as it is so apprehended by a depraved
Understanding, Sub conceptu Convenientia: as it bears Conformity to the
present Crooked Estate of man's Will: a Depraved Understanding I say, and not
always properly and precisely a Darkened Understanding; Depraved by Neglect
and Inconsiderablenesse; not darkened by Ignorance and Blindness. For there may
be an Irregular Will with a Judgment rightly informed by Truth. Otherwise
there could not be any offense of Presumption and Knowledge. We are therefore
to consider that there is in a Well-stayed Reason, a double Act in the
directing of the Will. The one respects the Nature and Quality of the Object:
the other, more peculiarly the Circumstance of Time: the one is properly
Knowledge; the other Circumspection, arising out of Meditation, and more close
pressing of the Object, which is known as Good to the Will, against
Insinuations of Sensitive Desires, which aim only a^ the Fruition of pleasure
present. First, the Understanding proposes to the Will Felicity, as an
Absolute and Eternal Good, which cannot but be desired. Next, it proposes
means for the attaining of it; namely, the practice of these Precepts, which
are revealed unto us as necessary for purchasing the End desired. The Will
being, besides its own Corruption, transported by the Sensitive Appetite, finds
great Irksomeness in those means. A re^raint of al those present Joys,
Delights, Satisfactions, which it instantly pursues: it perceives that great
trouble is to be expected, many Prejudices and Difficulties to be grapled with;
a severe hand to be held over Passions; a narrow Restraint to be observed
toward Mutinous and Rebellious Eruptions of the Mind, fewer inablements for
advancing our Fortunes, and infinite other the like bars of present
contentment; which withdraw the Will, and make it renounce courses so severe
and disagreeable to the Liberty it desires. Hereupon comes the second Act of
the Understanding, Efficacy and Weight of Consideration, whereby it compares
the Circumstances of that Difficulty of Good to the Will in regard of the small
time, they shall continue; with the consequent and unspeakable Good, that will
in the end ensue there from, and also with the unsufferable Torments that
follow the vileness of present Pleasures. Whence the Will is made more
inclinable (by the Assistance of greater Power than its own) to go along
rather through Thorns with Virtue, than with adulterate and painted pleasures
to dance toward ruin.

Now of these two, the defect of the former works properly a Blinded
Understanding; but the Defect of the Latter, namely, an Insufficiency and
Inefficacy of pondering the Circumstances, and pressing the endless
Consequence of Good or Evil, works properly a Depraved Understanding, in
regard of Practical or Applicative Direction. As a man walking in some deep
Contemplation by a Ditch; though his Eyes be open to see a present danger
before him, yet may happly fall into it; not out of Blindness, but out of
Inconsiderateness, as not fixing his conceit thereon; but being wholly
possessed with other thoughts. In like manner, the Understanding being taken up
by the Imposture of the Affections, with the conceit of present Good, or
present Ill in any Object, and thereby being diverted from a serious Inquiry,
after the true Rectitude and Obliquity thereof, suffers the Will fearfully to
plunge it self in danger and misery.

Another Condition, under which and End or Means are to be proposed by the
Will, is Sub rationo Eossibilis, as a good Possible. For if once the
Understanding discover Impossibility in any Object, the Will cannot fasten any
desire upon it: Since all Appetite is only terminated by that which can
replennish and satiate the Power. Now all Satisfaction is by Fruition; all
Fruition necessarily presupposes a Possibility of Acquiring: So that where
this is taken away, the Will is left Hopeless, and therefore Desirelesse; and
therefore we see that the nearer any things comes to Impossibility, the more
averse is the Will of most men from it: as is plain in these things that are
perplexed and difficult to ateaine. And if here the wish of him in the Poet be
objected:

O mihi praeteritos refer at fi Jupiter ann^s? O that Jove would me restore,
The years that I have lived before.
It may be answered that this was a Wish only, and not a Will. Since that which
a man wills, he does really endeavor to obtain.

The last Condition (which is restrained only to the utmost end of man's
desire) is that it be proposed, Sub ratione Immortalis, as an Immortal Good.
The Endlesnesse of Happiness is that only which makes it a perfect End. For
the Mind of man naturally is carried to an Immortality of Being; and therefore
also consequently to an Immortality of Happinesss; it being a necessary Desire
of all Natural Agents, to attain a Perfection proportionate to the measure of
their Continuance. So then man's End must not be only Good, but for ever Good,
Totally and Eternally: not only a Fullness of Joy in the nature of it; but a
Fullness of Perpetuity in the Continuance. Most perfect in proportion in the
Spirituality; most infinite in proportion to the Immortality of man's Soul. The
Frailty and Languishing of any Good, and a Foresight of the loss thereof, with
the ablest Mi^ds does much weaken the Desire of it. And the reason is, because
Providence and Forecast is a certain companion of the humane Nature; and he
which is most a man, is most careful to contrive the advancement of his Future
Estate. It is beastiall to fasten only upon Present Good; this being a maine
difference between the Understanding, and the Sensual Appetite, that this
respects only the present Joy that is at hand; but that being secretly
conscious of its own Immortality, fastens it self upon the remotest times,
yea outrunnes all time, and suffers it self to be ever swallowed up with the
Meditation and Providence of an Endless Happiness. And therefore Ethic. l. 1.
the reason that Aristotle brings against his Masters Ideas, argues an
Understanding less Divine in this particular than Plato's was, when he says
that Eternity does no more perfect the Nature of Good, than Continuance does
the Nature of White. For though it be true, that it is not any Essential part
of Goodness in it self; yet it is a necessary and principal condition to
make Goodness, Happiness; that is, an Adequate Object to man's Desires; there is
not then the same proportion between Eternity and Good, as there is between
Continuance and White: For Continuance is altogether Extrinsicall and
Irrelative in respect of White; but the Happiness of man has an Intrinsicall
Connection with Immortality, because man's Utmost and Adequate Good must be
proportioned to the Nature of his Mind (for that is no perfect Good that does
not every way replennish and leave nothing behind it that may be desired) So
that man himself being Endless, can have none End able to limit his desires,
but an Infinite and Immortal Good; which he may enjoy without any anxiety for
After-Provision. I dare say there is not an A theist in the world, who has in
his Life be-beasted himself by setting his Desires only on Transitory and
Perishable goods, that would not on his deathbed count it the best bargain he
ever made to change Souls, with one of those whose Diligence in providing for a
Future Happiness, he has often in his beastly Sensuality impiously derided.

Now of these two Directions of the Understanding to the Will, in desiring the
End or Means, the Corruption is for the most part more gross and palpable in
Assistance to the Means, than in the Discovery of the End; and far oftener
fayles the Will herein than in proposing an Object to fix its Desires upon. For
we may continually observe, how a world of men agree all in opinions and wishes
about the same Supreme and Immortal Happiness, the Beatificall Vision; Every
Balaam fastens on that; and yet their means unto it are so jarring and
opposite, that a looker on would conceive it impossible that there should be
any Agreement in an End, where is such notable Discord in the ways to it. The
reason which I conceive of this difference, is the several Proportion, which
the true End and the true Means thereunto bear unto the Will of man. For it is
observable, that there is but one General Hinderance or Error about the right
End, namely the Ignorance thereof. For being once truly delivered to the
Understanding, it carries such a proportion to the nature of the Will (being a
most perfect fulfilling of all its wishes) that it is impossible not to desire
it; but the disproportion between man and the right means of a true End is
far Greater. For there is not only Error in the Speculation of them, but
reluctance in other practique Faculties, proceeding from their general
Corruption in this Estate, and nayling the Affection on the present Delight of
Sensual Objects. First, for the Understanding, I observe therein a double
Hinderance concerning these Means: Ignorance Ignorantia and Difficultas. Aug.
and Weakness; the one respects the Examination of them; the other, their
Presentation or Inforcement upon the Will. For the former of these, there seems
to be an equal difficulty between the End and the Means, as proceeding in
both from the same Root. But in this very convenience there is a great
difference; for the Ignorance of the End is far more preventable (considering
the Helps we have to know it) than of the Means. Not but that there are as
powerful Directions for the Knowledge of the Means, as of the End; but because
they are in their Number many, and in their Nature repugnant to man's Corrupt
Minds. There is therefore more Weariness, and by consequence* more Difficulty
in the Inquiry after them, than after the End, because that is in it self but
One; and besides, bears with it (under the general Notion of Happiness) such
an absolute Conformity to man's Nature, as admits of no Refusal or Opposition:
Insomuch that many that know Heaven to be the End of their Desires, know yet
scarce one foot of the way thither.

Now besides this Ignorance, when the Knowledge of the means is gotten, there
are many prejudices to be expected before a free Exercise of them. For (as
Aristotle observes) amongst all the Conditions required to Moral Practice,
Knowledge has the least sway. It has the lowest place in Virtue, though the
highest in Learning.

There is secondly in the Understanding Weakness, whereby it oftentimes
connives at the Irregular Motion of the Will, and with draws it from Examining
with a piercing and fixed Eye, with an Impartial and Bribelesse Judgment,
with Efficacy and weight of Meditation, the several Passages of all our
Actions, with all the present and consequent Inconveniences of crooked courses.
It were a vaste labor to run over all the Oppositions, which virtuous means,
leading to an Happy End, do always find in the several Faculties of man:
how the Will it self is stubborn and froward; the Passions Rebellious, and
Impatient of Suppression; the Senses and Sensitive Appetite thwart and wayward,
creeping always like those under-Coelestiall Orbs into another motion, quite
contrary to that which the Primum Mobile: Illightened Reason should confer
upon them. Sufficient it is, that there is a Disproportion between the means of
Happiness, and the general Nature of Corrupt man. For all Goodness is
necessarily adjoined with Rectitude and Straightness (in that it is a Rule to
direct our Life) and therefore a Good man, is called an Upright man; one that
is every where Even and Strait. To which Aristotle perhaps had one Eye, when
he called his Happyman, a Foure-square man, which is every where smooth,
stable, and like himself. But now on the other side, man's Nature in this
Estate of Corruption, is a Distorted and Crooked Nature; and therefore
altogether unconformable to the Goodness which should as a Cannon, direct it
to the true and principal End it aymeth at. And this is the reason, why so
many men are Impatient of the close and narrow passage of Honesty. For crooked
and reeling Movers necessarily require more Liberty of way, more broad courses
to exerise themselves in: as we see in natural Bodies, a crooked thing will
not be held within so narrow bounds as that, which is strait.

CHAP. XLI. Of the Conscience; its Offices of Direction, Conviction, Comfort,
Watchfulness, Memory, Impartiality. Of Consciences Ignorant, Superstitious,
Licentious, Sleeping, Frightfull, Tempestuous.
THere remains yet one higher and diviner Act of the Practical Understanding,
of most absolute power in man, and that is Conscience. Which is not any
distinct Faculty of the Soul, but only a Compounded Act of Reason, consisting
in Argumentation: or a practique Syllogism, inferring always some Applicative
and Personal Conclusion, Accusing or Excusing.

The Dignities whereof are to be gathered from the Offices of it, and from the
Properties of it.

The maine Offices are three; Direction, Conviction, Consolation, whereof the
two last always presuppose the first with a contrary Qualification of Breach
and Observance.

The Direction of Conscience consists in a Simple Discourse: or (as I may so
speak) in a Direct Ray of Understanding, gathering Moral or Divine
Conclusions from a presupposed habit of Principles, either from the relics of
our Original Knowledge naturally impressed, or by concurrence of Religion and
Theological Precepts spiritually iuspired into the Practique Judgment or
hearts of men. The observance of which Conclusions it imposes upon all those
Executive Powers, which each particular Conclusion does most immediately
concern upon pain of hazarding our own Inward Peace, with that sweet repose
and security of Mind which follows it; and also (as the Heathen^ themselves
have observed) upon fear of i^curring the displeasure of that God, concerning
whom the very light of Nature has revealed thus much, that as his Penetrating
and S^arching Eye is able to read our most retired Thoughts: so his impartial
and unpreventable Justice has thunder and fire in store for the Rebellions
against this Faculty, which he has made to be, as it were, his Officer and
Herald in all men's hearts.

The two latter of those Offices consist in a Reflection of that former
discourse upon men's Actions, and according as is discovered in them, either an
observance or neglect of those imposed Duties: the heat of that Reflection is
either Comfortable or Scorching. Now of these two; that of Conviction is
nothing else but a performance of that Equivocall killing promise made by the
Serpent to our seduced Parents; I mean an Opening of their Eyes, to know with
desperate Sorrow the Good they had irrecoverably foregone; and with fear,
shame and horror, the Evil which they plunged themselves and their whole
posterity into. This one Act it is which has so often confuted that Opinion of
Aristotl^ touching Death, that it is of all things most Terrible; in that it
has it pursued many so far, as that it has forced them to leap out of them
selve, and to prefer the Terror of Death and Darkness of the Grave, before
the grisly Face of a Convicting Conscience.

The chief Dignity hereof consists in Consolation, whereby it diffuseth into
the whole man, from a secret assurance of divine favor (for nothing can
thoroughly calm the Conscience, but (...)) a sweet Tranquillity, silent Peace,
settled Stayednesse, and (which is highest of all, a ravishing Contemplation,
and (as it were) Pre-fruition of Bliss and Immortality.

The prop^rties of the Conscience (whereby I understand the Ministeries, which
it never fayles to execute in man) are as I conceive, principally three;
Watchfulness, Memory, Impartiality. It keeps always Centin^ll in a man's
Soule^and like a Register, records all our good and ill actions. Though the
Darkness of the Night may hide us from others, and the Darkness of the Mind
seem to hide us from our selves; yet still has Conscience an Eye to look in
secret on whatsoever we^ do, whether in regard of Ignorance or Hardness.
Though in many men it sleep in regard of Motion; yet it never sleeps in regard
of Observation and Notice: it may be Hard and Seared, it can never be Blind.
That writing in it which seems Invisible and Illegible, like letters written
with the juice of Lemmon, when it is brought to the fire of Gods Judgment,
will be most clear. And for the next (if we observe it) there is nothing so
much fastened in the Memory, as that which Conscience writes: all her Censures
are written with Indelible Charact^rs, never to be blotted out. All or most of
our Knowledge forsakes us in our Deaths; Wit, Acuteness, variety of Language,
habits of Sciences; our Arts, Policies, Inventions, all have their period and
fate: only those things which Conscience imprinteth, shall be so far from
finding any thing in death to obliterate and raze them out, that they shall be
thereby much more manifest; whether they be impressions of Peace or Horror.
The Testimoni^s of Comfort (if true) are fastened in the Heart with such an
Hand as will never suffer them finally to be taken out: and if they be
Accusatory and Condemning, the Heart is so Hard, and they so Deep, that there
is no way to get them out, but by breaking or m^lting the Table they are
written in; that only course can be taken to make Conscience forget.

Then thirdly it is a most Bribelesse Worker, it never knows how to make a
false report of any of our w^yes. It is (if I may so speak) Gods Historion,
that writes not Annals, but Iournals; the Words, Deeds, Cogitations of Hours
and Moments* never was there so absolute a Compiler of Lives, as Conscience. It
never comes with any prejudice or acceptance of persons, but dares speak
truth as well of a Monarch, as of a Slave. Nero the Emperor shall feel as
great a fire burning in his breast, as he dare wrap the poor Christians in to
light him to his Lust. There is scarce one part in man, but may be seduced,
save his Conscience. Sense oftentimes conceives things which are not; Appetite
and Imagination can transport the Will, and themselves both may be drawn by
persuasion contrary to their own propensions; this only deals faithfully
with him, whose witness it is, though it be to the confusion of it self and
him, in whom it lodges. It may I know err sometimes and mistake; but it can
never by any Insinuation be bribed to contradict its own Judgment, and
register White for Black.

The Corruption of Conscience arises principally from two Extremes; the one
occasioned by Ignorance; the other by Sin (for I oppose these two here, as
concurring to the Corruption of Conscience after a different manner) The o^e is
when the want of due Knowledge draws the Conscience, to sinister
determinations, either in Practice or Forbearance. The other when evil Habits
and Actions defile the Conscience. Now both these contain under them sundry
Degrees of Corruption.

From Ignorance* First, comes a ^ettered and Restrained Conscience, fearfully
binding it self to some particular Acts, without sufficient grounds. Next a
Licentious and Indulging Conscience, giving Freedom to it is self in such
course, as whereunto it has no warrant upon unacquainting it self from either.

Then from the other Root there comes: First, a Dead, Secure and Sleeping
Conscience by Common and Customary Sins. A Pale, Sweating, and Affrighted
Conscience by Atheistical and Unnatural Sins:

-- Tum frigida men's est Criminibus; tacita s^dant prac^rdia culpa. The Guilt
which from unseen pollution springs,
Cold-sweating Horror on their bosom brings.
A Desperate, Tempestuous and Ravening Conscience from Blasphemous and Open
Sins. Not but that any of these may come from any Sin; but that the Quality
of some Sins does for the most part carry with it some particular
dispositions and kinds of a distempered Conscience. But because all these, as
also this whole discourse pertaines to a highe^ Science, I shall here forbear
to speak more of it.

CHAP. XLII. Of the Will: it is Appetite: with the proper and chief Objects
thereof, God. Of Superstition and Idolatry. Of its Liberty in the Electing of
Means to an End. Of its Dominion Coactive and Persuasive. Of Fate, Astrology.
Satanicall Suggestions. Of the manner of the Wills Operation. Motives to it.
Acts of it. The Conclusion.
I Proceed to the last Faculty of men's Soul, his Will. Which does alone
govern, moderate, and overruled all his Actions. The Dignity whereof
consists in three peculiar Perfections; Appetite, Liberty, Domination. The
former respects an End; the two Latter, the Means thereunto conducing. Arist.
(...). l. 1. c. 1. Lib. 8. cap. 5.
The Desires are fixed on some Good thoroughly proportion to the wideness of
the Heart: then the Liberty of the Will grounded on the Direction of the
Judgment, makes choice of such Means, as are most proper for attaining of that
Good: and lastly, the Dominion imployes all inferior Faculties for the speedy
Execution of those Means.

Sundry Ends there are, which may be desired upon particular and conditional
occasions: but the true Vltimate, utmost and Absolute Good is God. All other
Ends are Ministering and Subordinate; Ethic. l. 1. c. 2.
he only is (...) and (...). as Aristotle calls his Felicity, the Supreme and
overruling End; the Fountain of all other Goods: from the remote participation
of whose perfections all other receive that soantling of satisfaction and
proportion, which they bear unto man's Will. And therefore some Philosophers
have simply called him Bonum and Bonum Superessentiale the only Self.
Sustaining, and Self. Depending Good, that is only able thoroughly to satiate
and replenish the unlimited Desires of the Soul of man.

The Corruptions of the Desires fastened on him, are the two Extremes of
Excess and Defect. The Extremes of Excess are Supers^itlon and Idolatry; a
worshipping of false gods, or a false worshipping of the True. Both proceeds
from the confused mixture of Original Blindness, with the relics of
natural Knowledge. This latter gives us a sight in the Thesis and General,
that a God there is to be desired: but touching the Hypothesis, who that God
is, with the Circumstances and manner of his Worship, Nature leaves the Soul
by occasion of the latter in a maze of of Darkness and unavoydable Doubting
and Uncertainty. So that Nature gives light enough to discover the Necessity of
a Duty; but not to clear the Means of Execution. Light enough to enjoyne a
walking; but the way being a narrow way, is on every side hedged up from her
view. The other Extreme of Desect, is either Atheism, in not acknowledging, or
Ignorance in not seeing, that God whom we ought to serve and desire. Both
which (if Affected and Voluntary, as usually they are) proceed either from
Guilt; or a Consciousnesse of fearful Crimes, which make men study to flatter
their distracted Spirits in the persuasion that no Judge sees them; or else
from a Sensuality and a Desire and purpose to give Indulgence to themselves in
their evil courses; thinking like that foolish Bird, that there is no Fowler
to catch, no snare to entrap them, if their Eyes be but seiled up, and their
heads thrust into the hedge of their own darkness: Though herein both the
Atheists discovers Divinity, and the Ignorant person Knowledge enough to
convince their own Consciences, and condemn themselves.

The Dignity of man's Will in regard of Liberty, (...). Zeno* apud (...). l. 6.
Vnde Stolel Sapientes; Reges appellahant.
consists in the Freedom, which it has to choose or reject Means ordained
for the Compassing some proposed End, according as the Understanding shall
find them more or less Conducible Ibid.
for the attainment of it. It is, I say, a choosing Ethic. l. 3. c. 1.
of the Means: For Election (as Aristotle determines) is never of the End. We
do not Choose, but necessarily Desire to be Happy. The matter of our Happiness
being proposed without appearance of present inconvenience: because every thing
is naturally prone to its own Perfection, where there are no intervenient
discommodities to affright it. And yet neither is the Freedom of the Will any
whit impaired by such a necessity. For as we say in Divine Attributes, that
God has perfect Power, though he cannot sin: So we may conclude of the
Will, it shall in the State of Glory (for then only shall our utmost Good be
chosen without any shadow of disconvenience) have perfect Liberty*
Notwithstanding it shall never be able to Will an Absence from the Vision of
God; since the Liberty of such a Desire would be no Liberty, but Imperfection
and V^naturalnesse. Now of all other Perfections, this has, in respect of the
utmost End, bin quite Depraved, being now in Corruption, without the Assistance
of Spiritual or new Infused Grace, thoroughly disinabled from seeking means,
which may truly lead to the fruition of God, and utterly cap^ivated and
inthr^lled to the Tyranny of Sin. So that this Liberty is left inviolated,
only in Natural, Moral and in Civil Actions* Concerning which, there is a
Law in Nature, even the relics and indeleble Foot prints of man's first
Innocence, which moderates the Elections of the Will for its own and others
Temporal Good.

The Dominion and Supreme Command of the Will is only over those Powers to the
Production of whose Operations, it does by its (...)* Authority concur as an
Absolut^ Efficient, or a least, as a Moving Agent. It reaches not therefore so
far as to the Command of the Vegetative Power: For we cannot command our
Stomachs to digest, or our Bodies to grow, because the vegetative faculties,
which were instituted not for the proper service of Reason, but of Nature;
neither reaches it to an Universal Command of the Senses; but only by the
Mediation of another Faculty, over which it has more Sovereign Power: As it
can hinder Seeing, not immediately, but by the Locomotive Power, by closing the
Eyes. And the same is true of the Inward Senses; for the Memory and Imagination
often fasten upon Objects, which the Desire of the Will is, should not be any
way represented unto those Powers: So likewise in the Sensitive Appetite, when
once Objects belonging thereunto, creep upon the Fancy* Irregular motions
oftentimes violently resist the Will and the Law of the Members, carries men
captive from the Law of the Mind. Lastly, the Will has no Dominion Absolute
and Sovereign over those Apprehensions of the Understanding, which depend on
necessary and demonstrative Principles: It can require it not to discourse
about such Objects, and divert it; but it cannot make it assent unto them
contrary to the Evidence of Truth demonstrated. Briefly then, the Dominion of
the Will is partly Mandatory, and partly Persuasive. The one is Absolute,
working on mere Passive and Obedient Faculties; the other more Conditional,
and upon Supposition of Regularity or Subjection in the Inferior Powers. For
the Will has both an Oeconomicall Government in respect of the Body, (...).
(...). l. ^. c. ^.
and the Moving Organs thereof, as over Servants: and it has a Politic or
Civil Government toward the Understanding, Affections, and Sensitive
Appetite, as Subjects, with which by reason of their often Rebellions, it
happens to have sundry conflicts and troubles: as Princes from their seditiou^
and rebellious Subjects. So that the Corruption of this Power in the Will, is
either Tyranny in it self, or Usurpation in another; an Abuse of it, and a
Restraint of it. The Abuse, when the Will absolutely gainsayes the Counsels,
Laws, and Directions of the Understanding, which is wrought by the Allection,
Enticing and Insinuation of the Sensitive Appetite, secretly winning over the
Will to the Approbation of those courses, which are most delightful to sense:
for since the Fall, the sweet Harmony and Subordination of Sense to Reason, and
of Reason to God is broken; and the highest Faculties of the Soul become
themselves Sensual and Carnal. And the Restraint when the Will is desirous to
obey the Dictates of Reason, or of Grace; and Lust by her tyranny overbeares
the Soul, and leads it captive to the Law of Sin, so that a man cannot do
the things which he would. As a Bird whose wings are besmeared and entangled
with some viscous slime, though he offer to fly, yet falls down again.

Now touching the Corruption of the Will in regard of Desire, Liberty and
Dominion* there have been heretofore some who ascribed them to Natural and
Divine Causes, and so make the Will to be corrupted only, ab Extrinseco, and
that Necessarily. The Stoics, they framed a supreme swaying Power, inevitably
binding it, as all other Agents to such particular Actions by an eternal
secret connection and flux of causes, which they call Fate. Astrologers
understanding by Fate nothing L^ert. i^ Zen. Pi^t. de placit. (...). l. ^. c.
27, 28. Sen. Ep. 96. A. G^ll. l. 6. c. 2.
but the Uniform and Vncha^gable working of those beautiful Bodies, the
Heavenly Orbs, and their Influencies upon Inferiors, annexed unto them a
Binding Power Necessarily, though Secretly overruling the Practices of men.
Inquire the reason, why one man lives conformably to the Law of God and Nature,
another breaks out into Exorbitant courses?

Anne aliud, quam -- -- (...), and occulti miranda potentia Fati? What is it
else, but Stars Malignity,
And wondrous power of secret Destiny.
It is not to be denied, but that the Heavens Vid. ^useb. C^sariens. de
pr^parat (...). lib. 6. and Max. Tyrium dis^. 3. Plut. advers. (...). Tertul.
Apol. ^. 1. and ^bi no^ Herald. Aug. de ^iv. (...). l. 5. c. 1, 7, 8.
having strong and powerful Operations on all Sublunary Corporal Substances
may in altering the humors of the Body, have by the mediation thereof, some
kind of Influence (if it may be so called, upon the manners; but to ascribe
unto them any Dominion, is as much repugnant to Philosophy, as it is to Piety.
For by Binding, the Actions of man's Will to such a Law of Destiny, and making
them inevitably to depend upon Planets, Houses, Constellations, Conjunctions,
etc. We do not only impiously take away the Guilt of Sin, in that we make
all men's Lapses to be wrought without free Principle in himself (and so
d^rogate from the Justice of God, in punishing that, whereunto we were by
other of his Creatures unavoydably determined) nor only rob God of his Mercy,
in Ascribing those virtuous dispositions of the Mind (which are his immediate
Breathings into man) unto the Happy Aspect of the Heavens) but withal we deny
to the Soul both Natural Motion and Spirituality. Natural Motion first;
since that always flows from an Inward Principle, that is Essential to the
Mover (which in the Will must needs be free and voluntary) and not from
violence or impression made by some Extrinsicall Worker. And then Spirituality
likewise; since the Heavens, being Corporal Agents, can therefore extend the
Dominion of their Influence no farther than over Bodily Substances. (...).
Hom^r. Odyss. ^.


Others there have been yet more Impious, which seek to fasten all the
Corruptions of their Wills on something above the Heavens, even the Eternal
Foreknowledge and the Providence of God: As if my Foreknowledge, that on the
morrow the Sun will rise; or that such men as these shall one day be brought
to a severe Doom, were the Cause working Necessity of the next Day, or the last
Judgment. It is true indeed, Gods Prescience imployes a Necessity of our
working after that manner, as he foreknowes: but this is Necessitas only
Infallibilitatis, in regard of his Vndeceivable Knowledge, which ever foresees
things as they will certainly come to pass by the free or natural workings of
the Agents, whence they proceed. It is not Necessitas Coactionis, or
Determinationis, whereby the Will of man is without any other disposition or
propension in it self, enforced or unspontaneously determined to the producing
of such Effects. The Actions of our Will are not therefore necessarily
executed, because they were foreknowne, but therefore they were foreknowne,
because our Will would certainly execute them, though not without Freedom and
Election. And for Providence notwithstanding there be Providentia Permissiva,
whereby Aug. de ^iv. (...). l. 11. c. 17, 18 l. 14. c. ^6*
God has determined to suffer and permit men to sin; and moreover a
Disposing Providence in Ordering ^ab. de (...). c. 6. de Co^rept. and G^at. c.
10. Epist. 120.
all things in the World unto his own Glorious Ends, yet we may not presume to
think that God does determine, or actuate, impell, and Cap. 2. de Genesis Co^tr.
Mani^l* l. 2. c 28.
overrule the wills of men to Evil. It is true indeed that nothing is done
which God in all respects De (...). ad (...). l. 11. c. 4.
dothwill, shall not be done with the secret Will De Trin. l. 3. c. 4 Octoginta
criumque. q. 2^.
of his good pleasure (for who can withstand his Will) and that his purposes
are advanced by all the operations of the Creature: but yet he does not so
work his Will out of men's, as thereby to constrain and take away theirs (for
indeed the constraint of a liberal and free Faculty, is (as it were) the
extinction thereof) This were an Argument of Weakness, as if he were not able
to bring his own Ends about, but by chaining and (...) his Oppugners from
exercising the Freedom which he first gave them; nor do his own Uid. E^seb.
de praepara^.
Will, but by taking away his own Gifts. But Evang. l. 6. c. ^.
herein is rather magnified the Power of his Providence, (...). Alex. contra
Iul. l. ^.
and the great Wisdom of his Power, that notwithstanding every man works
according Hin^ et^am quod saci^nt contra voluntat^m D^i, non (...), visi
voluntas De^. Aug. de Prad. Sanct. l. ^. c 16.
to the inclination of his own heart, and that even Rebelliously against him;
yet out of so many different, so repugnant, so contrary intents, he is able to
raise his own Glory (the* End whether we will or no, of all our Actions) and
even when his Will is most resisted, most powerful to fulfill it. For as
sundry times Gods Revealed Will is broken, even by those, whose greatest
desires and endeavors are to keep it: so always his Secret Will is performed.
Eve^ by the free and Selfe-moving Operations of those who set themselves
stubbo^nly to oppose it. There is not* then any Supreme Destiny, Extri^sically
moving, or Necessarily binding any Inferiors to particular Actions; but there
is only a Divine Providence, which can, as out of the Concurrence of differing
and casual Causes (which we call Fortune) so likewise out of the Intrinsicall
Operation of all Inferior Agents (which we call Nature) produce one maine and
Supreme End, without strayning or violating the proper Motions of any.

Lastly, many men are apt in this case to father their sins upon the motions
of Satan, as if he brought the necessity of sinning upon them; and Romans 7. 17.
as Saint Paul said in Faith, Not I, but Sin in me: So they in Hipocresie,
Not I* but evil motions cast into Math 4. 3.
me; and because the Devil is in a special manner called the Tempter, such
men therefore* think to persuade themselves, that their Evil comes not from
any Willingness in themselves, but from the violence of the Enemies Power,
Malice, and Policy. It is true indeed, that the Devil has a strong Operation
on the Wills of Corrupt men

1 First, because of the Subtilty of his Substance whereby he can wind
himself and his suggestions most Inwardly on the Affections and Understanding.

2 Secondly, because of the Height of his Natural Understanding and Policy,
whereby he is able to transfigure himself into an Angel of Light, and so to
method and contrive his devices, that they shall not miss of the best
advantage to make them speed.

3 Thirdly, because of the vastness of his Experience, whereby he is the
better enabled to use such plots as have formerly had the best success.

4 Fourthly, because of his manner of Working, Luke 11. 21. 1. Peter 5. 8. Rev.
12. 3. ^ (...). 27. Heb. 3. 13. Romans 7. 11.
grounded on all these, which is Violent and Furious for the Strength; and
therefore he is called a Strong Man, a Roaring Lion, a Red Dragon. And Deep for
the subtilty of it; and therefore his working is called a Mystery of Iniquity,
and Deceivablenesse of Iniquity. Which is seen: First in his Accommodating
himself to our particular Humors and Natures, and so following the tide of
our own Affections. Secondly, by fitting his Temptations according to our
Vocations and Personal Imploiments, by changing, or mixing, or suspending, or
pressing, or any other the like qualifying of his Suggestions, according as he
shall find agreeable to all other Circumstances. But yet we do not find in
any of these any violation of man's Will, nor restraint of his Obedience; but
rather the Arts that are used to the inveagling of it. The Ep^. ^. 11. Eph^s.
7. 2. 2. (...). 2. 26. Ep^* 6. 11. 2. Co^. 2. 11. 2. Tim. 2* 26.
working then of Evil Angels, are all by Imposture and Deceit toward Good
men; and in respect of Evil men, they are but as those of a Prince over his
Subjects; or of a Lord over his Slaves and Captives; which may w^ll stand with
the Freedom of man's Will, And therefore his temptations are in some place
called the Methods, in others, the Devices; in others, the S^ares of S^tan:
(...) (...) (...).
All words of Circum^ention, and presu^pose the working of our own* Wi^s:
Though then Satan have in a notable manner the name of Tempt^r* belonging to
him; yet we are told in another place, that * Every man is tempted when he
Vi^ij A^thor (...) decipientis Callidita^ and Homini^ Consentient is (...).
Au^. de p^ccat. Orig. l. 2. ^. (...).
is drawn away of his own Conc^piscence, and intic^d* So that the Devil has
never an (...) Temptation (such an one as carries and overcomes the Will) but
it is always joined with an Inward Temptation of our own, proceeding from the
decei^fulnesse of our own lusts. So that in this Li^. de (...). (...) vin.
(...).
case every man may say to himself as Apollodoru^ in Plutarch dreamed of
himself, when he thought he was boiled alive in a vessel, and his heart cried
out unto him, I am the cause of all this misery to my self.

Many more things might be here added touching this Faculty, which I will but
name. As first for the manner of its Operations. In some cases it works
Naturally and Necessarily, as in its Inclination unto Good in the whole
latitude, and general apprehension thereof. For it cannot will any thing under
the gener^ll and formal notion of Evil In others Voluntarily, from it self,
and with (...)* l. 3. c. 1.
a distinct view and knowledge of an End whe^unto it work^th. In others freely,
with a Liberty to one thing or another, with a power to elicite, or to suspend
and suppress its own Operation. In all Spontaneously, without violence or
compulsion. For though in some respects the Will be not free from Necessity,
yet it is in all free from Coacl^on. And therefore though Ignorance and Eeare
may take away the complete (...) of an Action proceeding from the Will (because
without such Feate or Ignorance it would not have been done. A^ when a man
casts his goods into the Sea to escape a sh^pwracke. And when Oedipus slew
Laius his Father, nor knowing him so to be) yet they can never force the Will
to do that out of violence, which is not represented under some notion of Good
thereunto.

Secondly for the Motives of the Will. They are first Natural and Internal.
Amongst which, the Understanding is the principal, which does pass Judgment
upon the Goodness and Convenience of the Object of the Will, and according to
the greater or lesser excellency ther^of, represent it to the Will, with either
a Mandatory, or a Monitory, or a permissive Sentence. The Will likewise does
move it self. For by an Antecedent willing of the E^d, she sets her self
on work to will the Means requisite unto the obtaining of that End.

And the Sensitive (...) does Indirectly move it too. By suppressing or
bewitching and enticing the Judgment to put some color and appearance of Good
upon sensual things. And then, as the Sun seems red through a red glass:
so such a^ a man's own Affection is, such will the End seem unto him to be, as
the Philosopher speaks.

Next Supernaturally God moves the Will of men. Not only in regard of the
Matter of the Motion* For in him we live, and move, and have our being; but in
regard of the Rectitude and Goodness of it in Actions Supernatural, both by
the Manifestation of Heavenly Light. They shall be ^ll taught of God; and by
the Infusion and Impression of Spiritual Grace, preventing, assisting,
enabling us both to Will and to Do of his own good pleasure.

Lastly, for the Acts of the Will, They are such as respect either the End, or
the Means for att^ining of it. The Acts respecting the End are these three. 1.
A Loving and Desiring of it in regard of its Beauty and Goodness. 2. A serious
Intention and purpose to prosecute it in regard of its distance from us. 3. A
Fr^ition or Enjoying of it, which stands in two things. In Assec^tion or
possession, whereby we are Actually joined unto it: and in Delectation or Rest,
whereby we take special pleasure in it.

The Acts of the Will respecting the Means, are these: 1. An Act of Using or
Employing the Practical Judgment. An Application and Exercising of it to
consult and debate the proper means conducible unto that End. Which
Consultation having passed, and by the practical Iudgem^nt, a Representation
being made of the Means discovered, there next follows an ^mbracing of those
means, and inclining toward them with a double Act. The one an Act of Consent,
whereby we approve the means dictated, as proper and possible: the other, an
Act of Election, whereby, according to the different weight of Reasons, we
adhere unto one Medium more than unto another, either as more proper, or as
more seasible. Thirdly, because the Means do not bring us unto the End by being
Chosen, but by being Executed. Hereupon follows another Act of Mandate to all
the Faculties interested in the Execution of those Means, to apply and put
forth their forces with vigor and constancy, till the End be at the last by the
due Execution of those Means attained and enjoyed.

Now whereas the Philosopher does often distribute (...). l. 2 c. 6. (...) l.
2. c. 2.
the things belonging unto the Soul, into Affections, Faculties and Habits.
For the Faculties are moved by the Passions, and the Passions are regulated and
managed by the Habits. The Habits procured for Facility and Constancy of
Action, and the Actions directed to the obtaining of an End. This Method of the
Philosopher would now lead us to speak further.

First of the Habits of the Reasonable Soul, and they are either Rational
only, and in the Mind, as the Habits of Wisdom, of Principles, of
Conclusions, of Art and Prudence; or besides that Virtuous and Vicious,
conversant about Good or Evil Moral. Which are first the Habits of Practical
Principles, called Synteresis; and next the Habits of particular Virtues,
whereby the Will is inclined and facilitated unto well doing. Unto the felicity
of all which are required these four conditions.

1 Justice and Rectitude disposing the Will to render unto God, unto our
selves, and unto all others that which is theirs, and which of right we owe
unto them.

2 Prudence, discovering that which is in this manner Right, Judging of it, and
directing unto it.

3 Fortitude, enabling the Will firmly to persist in her virtuous purposes,
according to the Instructions of Practical Prudence, notwithstanding the
labor it must undergo, the delays it must sustain before it can obtain the
End, and the difficulties, impediments, discouragements it shall meet withal.

4 Temperance, suppressing and subduing those Sensual Appetites, which would
stagger, inter rupt, divert us from these constant Resolutions.

Next, because all Habits, as I said, are directed to the facility and
determining of Actions, we should thereby be led on to the consideration of
Humane Actions, Fortuitous, Violent, Natural, Voluntary, Involuntary, Mixed.
As also, to the grounds of the Goodness or Illness of Actions, taken first
from the Rule of them unto which they are to conform. Secondly, from the
Principles of them, from whence they are to proceed, to wit, Knowledge and
Faith to see, Will to purpose, Love to do, subjection, to obey strength, to
finish and fulfill what virtue leads us unto. Thirdly, from the manner and
measure of their perfection. And lastly, from the ends unto which they should
be directed.

By which consideration, we should be led to take a view of the right end, and
ultimate felicity, unto which all these actions should lead and carry us; not
as the causes of it, but as the way, and Antecedents unto it.

But these pertaining to a nobler science, and being without the limits of the
subject which I proposed to speak of, I shall follow Plinies counsel, and
look back to the title of my Book: Which having (as well as my weakness was
able) endeavored to go through, It now calls upon me to go no further.

FINIS.
Faults escaped by reason of the Authors absence.
Page 17. l 1. read, sut^ro imminentium, p. 23. l. 6. r. g^wing, ^. 24. l. 4 r.
this, ^. 26. l. 5. r. likeness, p. 29. l. 19. r. dep^avation, l. 29. r. (...)
re, p. 30. l. 2. r. in, ^. 31. l. 19. r. contracteth, p. 32. l. 16. r. the con,
^. ^4. (...) r. lucation, p. 40. l. 6. r. contact, p. 56. l 15. r. (...)? 65.
l. 19. (...) the^, p. 71. l. 28 r. all these things, p. 73. l. 5. r, or other,
l. 12 r, concita^ion, p. 74. l. 13. r, heart, l. 21. r, to an union, p. 75 l.
16. ^, the, ^. 76. l. 8. r, this, l. 18. r. work out of, p. 77. l. 8. r,
con^innation, l. ^7. r, passion, p 96. l 3. ^ in, r, is, p. 100. l. 29. r,
(...). p. 103. l. 14. r, (...), p. 112. l. 12. r, principal, (...) 18. l. 21.
r. had, p. 122. l. 22. r, done another wrong, 9. 125 l. 14. r, wh^ it is naked,
p. 129. l. 27. r. apprehension, p. 132. l. 26. r. seasonable p. 136, l. 8. r,
were, p. 145. l. 1, 2, Ha^rius, l. 6. r, alike occasion, p. 147. l. 8. r,
(...). 148. l. 24. ^. (...), p. 15 5. ^. l. 30. dele which, p. 158. l 2, r,
numbered, l. 6. r. with but, p. ^61. l. 21. r, proverb, ^. 165. l. 28. r, (...).
p. 16 8. l. 26. r. Philozen^, p. 172. l. 32. r. (...)* ^. 178. l. 10. r. (...)
p. 179. l. 2. 14 r, never, p* 181. l. 6. r. (...)* p. 191. l. 9. ^. i^, ^. is
not, p. 197. l. vl^. r, though the Philospher, p. 199. l. 23. r, (...). p. 2 ^
5. l. 8. r, revieweth, p. 222. l. 26. r. diformity, p. 2^4. l. 11 (...) in, p.
216. l. 27. ^. never, r, ever, p. 229. l. ^. r. (...). l. 20. r. (...), p. 233
l. 16. r, will, p. 234. l. 21. r. (...), l. 25 dele, (...), p. 235. l. 2. r.
the end. p. 242. l. 12. r. (...), p. 244. l. 5. ^, other, r, after, l. 8. r.
Ti^inum. p 245. l. 15. ^, in, is. p. 246. l. 5. dele and common, p. 247. l. 8.
r, (...) l. 2. ^. and, r, but, p 248. l. 7. r. (...)* p. 249. l 3. r, (...), p.
250. l. 1. r, ^na, l. 21. r, couched, l 17. ex^idit, p. 255. l. 28. r, and
number, p. ^56. l. 3, 4. r, unsubordinate. p. 261. l. 16. r, (...), p. ^62. l.
26 r, (...), p. 2^4. 2. 4 aquas, p. 265. l. 18. del^ for, p. ^68. r. desperate,
272. l. 23. r, the ^, p. l. 73. l. 27. r, frowa^d, l. 8. end the pe^od at the
word, Law, p. 2^2. l. ^ ^ dele them, p. 283. l. 27, r. (...), p. 284. l. 5. r,
(...) danger, ^. 286. ^ 6. ^. and, r, as, p. 292 l 17, ^, ominum, p. 295. l.
20. r, (...) p 296. l. 19 r, ^vated, p. 300. l. 18. r, (...) p. 302. l. 19 r,
(...), ^. 303 l. (...), reviewed, p. 304. l. 1. M^nisteries, p. 306. l. 22.
(...), p. 308. l. (...), (...) l. 17 dele the, p. 310. l. v^. r, (...), p. 311.
^. 3. ^, to r, in,. 313. l ^. ^. th^ugh l. 15. after sharp Anger, put in these
words, A bitte^ Anger, l. 25. r, formally, 317. l. 10. ^, or, r, for, p. 319.
l. 15 dele no^, p. 320. l 27. ^, wa^ p. 326. l. 16. ^, insidia^, l. 17. r,
(...)* p. 327. l. 5. r, the va^, ^. (...). ^. now, r, no^. p. 328. l. 2. ^,
yet, r, that 329. l. 5 ^, inquiry, r, inju^y. p. 3^2 l. 6. r, each to other, p.
339. l. ^. r, into p. 397. l. 6. ^. the p. 4 16. l. 24. (...) is, r. ^s it, p,
441. r, morality p. 483. l. 4. A^ectation. p. 493. l. 1^. ^. de^ie, r. deifie
p. 495. l. 21. dele will p. 498. l. 1, 2 ^ (...), ^, (...) p 49^. l. 5. r,
mortal p. 501. l. 6. ^ corruption, r confidence p. ^02. l. 7. ^lesse l. 23 r
measu^. p. 537. l 2^. r. proportionate.

Errata in the Margin.
^


