A CHROnicle of all the noble Emperors of the Romans, from Julius Caesar,
orderly to this most victorious Emperor Maximilian, that now governs, with
the great wars of Julius Caesar, and Pompeius Magnus: Setting forth the great
power, and divine providence of almighty God, in preserving the godly Princes
and common wealths.

Set forth by Richard Reynoldes, Doctor in Physic. Anno. 1571.

Imprinted at London by Thomas Marshe.



HONORANDO DOMIno, domino Gulihelmo Cicello, domino Baroni de Burgley, Senatori
Regiae Maiestatis prudentissimo, domino suo colendo.
PErpetuam laudem prudentiae, ac gloriam summae nobilitatis florere in senatu
pacis inclita studia oste^dunt. Nihil magis arduu^ in republica optime
co^stituta existit, qua^ conciliorum optimorum cursum sic in republica tenere,
vt respublica ipsa prae caeteris regum externorum imperijs, pacis ornamentis
excellere, and in summo ocio cum dignitate rerum age^darum florere possit. Qui
reipublicae praeesse volu^t, in medium maximarum rerum certame^, ac in
difficilima^ orbis totius prouincia^ deueniunt. Respublica sacra dei summi
theatrum est, legibus quasi sacrato dei dono, disciplina prudentum fulta,
principum, ac nobilissimorum consulum studiis, ac maiestate tanti numinis
altius fundata est. Beatae igitur respublicae quae norint sapientes viros, ac
probos esse sua munimenta, non muros aut turres. Si in florentissimo Imperio
vnquam pacis inclita studia viguere, aut fructus summorum ingeniorum ad
egraegia^ foelicitate^ in senatu regio vllo te^pore innotuere: quocunque te
verteris animo ac cogitatione, haec nostra respublica beata est, tanta
claritudine imperii, tam rara literatae principis maiestate, prude^tia, ac
co^siliorum magnitudine cole^da. Quod in causis regni maximis celsa reginae
maiestas, ad vniuersi status foelicitate^ dominationem tuam, fama maximaru^
virtutum, co^ciliorum, ac literarum celebrem elegit: eosque rare nobilitatis,
prudentiaeque fructus, tam egregiae Reipublicae fabrica in omnes reipublicae
parts, et ad exteras nationes, and apud potentissimos reges diffudit* Haec
splendida tantae reipublicae moles maximis de causis, te tanti honoris tantum
senatorem, literaru^ decus eximium, academiarum patronum, tam fortunata
republica ac principe tam potente dignum consulem admiretur: qnod intra
domesticas regni istius parietes, literaru^ ac pacis diuina studia, pura
sinceraque religio, prae cu^ctis regum externorum imperijs in omni foelicitate,
claritudinis fructus in regnum Anglicanu^, populumque sese dispergunt. Maximis
de causis dominationi tuae me deuinctissimu^ esse sateor, q^od ab ineunte
aetate in optimis literarum studiis, maximis tuis sumptibus, ac regalibus
colleg^i stipendiis promotus s^m. Tuoque singulari beneficio regiae
munifice^tiae literatos fructus hausi, tu^ egregio opere Domini Iohannis Checi
equitis torquati, qui aurea naturae fabrica extitit, Illustrissimo principi
Eduardo Sexto dum vixerat ad omnem gloria^ literarum, and virtutis summum
decus, patriae splendour, Philonis ac Platonis nobilia studia literis aequabat,
Princeps ingenii fuit ac doctrinae, Anglis vniuersis rarus maximarum virtutum
phoenix. Nulla gens prudentiores habet viros, ac magis literatos qua^ Anglia
habet, quae pars orbis, belloru^ in omni genere clariores, aut Hectoreo
Achilleoque animo pro^ptiores ad fortia pericula Anglis habet. Gentis ac regum
Anglorum gloria prima est, exteroru^ principum nobilitas hiis secunda. Haec
splendidissima ge^tis ac regum ornamenta* doctis literarum monume^tis
posteritati, ad sempiternam and non flaccescentem vllo tempore famam
reconduntur. Nihil intentatu^ Reipublicae ac patriae studiosis esse debet, quod
ad Reipublicae dignitatem, regnique incliti gloriam, aut quod ad posteros
iuuandos cum vtilitate ac singulari virtute profluere possit* Sunt plurimi
singulares doctrina viri, qui excellentia diuini ingenij bona orname^taque
abscondu^t, and supprimu^t, quibus cum ad maxima^ gloria^ prae caeteris,
Reipublicae ac posteris inseruire valiant. Quasi non prodesse tantis ingenij
ornamentis Reipublicae, in autoritatem scientiae sit, eruditis illis ac
excellentibus doctrina viris. Labes maxima tantis ingenijs existit, cum in
excogita^dis bonis, promouenda que vita per doctrinae studia posteris tradenda
torpedi, and omni quasi mascula virtute eneruati vitam transigunt, quasi hoc
summi ingenij opus sit intra se tam egregia spiritus sancti, doctrinaeque dona,
sine vlla re nobili gesta quasi in homu^culo aliquo plebeio ac rudi morte
perire. Si monumenta doctorum virorum ad illoru^ perpetuam gloriam nobis
posteris redundarunt, profluat a nobis si quae sit claritudinis sparta
co^sequenti nepotum aetati profutura. In quanta nobilitate literarum, virtutis,
ingenij, ac maximorum conciliorum pondere, singularis ille vir Dominus Antonius
Cookus, eques torquatus, socer tuus in Reipublicae oculis viuit, rarum decus
huius aetatis, qui tam praestanti liberorum suorum educatione tantos gloriae
fructus hausit: vt reliquis Anglis ille solus docti patris viua effigies,
amoris, virtutis, ac verae nobilitatis exe^plar vnicu^ suis domi quasi in
celeberima academia fulget. Vtina^ in omnibus nobilibus familijs literarum
sple^dor tam altas verae nobilitatis radices propagasset, qui valeat suoru^
familia^, genus, ac maiorum stirpem inclita^ tanto literarum splendore, generis
fama, ac genuina claritudinis gloria suos ornare. In hac maxima nobilitatis
gloria, ac singulari laud, reponendus est dominus Gualterus Mildmaius, eques
torquatus, quatuor Anglorum principibus potentissimis cum summo splendore
inseruiens qui licet adhuc longaeui Nestoris annos no^ attigerit, ac tantis
virtutibus and magnitudine conciliorum in principu^ negotijs, Methuselah aetate
dignus est, vt Reipub. tam florenti viuat, valeat, floreatque tantus ac ta^tus
senator. Magnitudine tantorum beneficio^um obrutus, ac excellentis dominationis
tuae status sple^dore adductus, has Moscouiticas meas lucubrationes in lucem
edidi, quae de actis Caesarum omnium ab ipso Iulio Caesare ad hunc
illustrissimu^ orbis Monarcham Maxim^lianum, longa orationis serie, per
singulorum regum familias, ac regias stirpes pertractat, easque dominationi
tuae offero animi mei gratissimi munusculum. Has lucubrationes meas
Moscouiticas appello, quia du^ magno Moscouiae Duci, potentissimo Russiae,
Casani, ac Astrachani Imperatori in art medica inseruieba^, eas ocio dato
co^posui* Sed no^ deero Dominationis tuae volu^tati ac petitioni, de omni statu
Reipub. Moscouiticae describendo, deque Imperio Casanico, and Astracanico mare
Caspiu^ attinge^te, magno Russiae Imperatori subiecto. Nihil homini priuato
conducibilius, nihil magistratui, nihil regi, aut Imperatori quicquam vtilius
esse potest, quam antiquitatem Rerumpublicarum, and omnium Imperiorum formas,
exitu^ bellorum tam externorum quam ciuilium, in quiet and summo ocio cum
sumina animi delectatio^e, ac voluptate, intueri ac reuoluere. Est enim
historia speculum principis, imago virtutis, theatrum doctissimum vniuersi
orbis, veritatis certissimus index, te^porum testis, post mortem vita, memoriae
sempiternum monumentum viua Respublica, lex viua, morum doctissima magistra, ad
optima, and prudentissima concilia firma pedissequa, prude^tiae fons, regum ac
pote^tissimorum monarcharum schola literata, omnium seculorum ac imperiorum
sapientissimu^ studiu^. Quod in Reru^ pub. antiquitatibus, and in diuersis
Imperiorum formis, long caeteris Graecis praestitit Ulysses, rarum illud
Graeciae propter prude^tiam and sacrata concilia lume^ habitus est. Quod Nestor
orationis maiestate, eloquentia, ac in regio senatu maximorum conciliorum
po^dere, reliquos patricios viros, generis principatuque celsos anteibat,
senatus graecorum pater, populi robur, Imperii vniuersi neruus graecis and
omnibus barbaris habitus est. Quod graecia ipsa sensit, hiis duobus luminibus
extinctis Epaminunda Duce mortuo, dolendam Reipublicae iacturam senserunt
Thebae, mortuo pericle Athenae, mortuo Archidamo Lacedemonia luctus dedere.
Robur imperii Anglicani firmissimum, ac neruus tutissimus principis nostrae
rara maiestas est, omnium maiorum regum splendour, vnicum huius aetatis, ac
consequentum nepotum dulcissimum decus, cuius celsitudini praecaeteris orbis
monarchis, cum summa tranquillitate in hiis turbulentissimis imperiorum
te^pestatibus, senatorum tanta prudentia, vultus nobilis, sacratoque numine
fulta co^cilia inseruiunt. Rarum patriae nostrae lume^ in regio senatu existit
dominatio tua, dum summae eruditionis, verae nobilitatis, ac maximorum
conciliorum Nestor, patriae florentique Reipublicae fulges. Viuit ad perpetuam
Reipublicae Anglicanae gloriam Dominus Thomas Smithus aeques torquatus, regiae
maiestatis nobilis Secretarius, iuris ciuilis, ac omnium prestantissimarum
scientiarum. Doctor summus, abstrusae abditaeque, cognitionis vberimu^ penu,
academiae Cantabrigiensis rarum decus, qui Demosthenem eloque^tia, grauitate
Platonem, concilio Periclem, ac Senatoria prudentia Epaminundam aequare possit.
Non sine causa floret Respublica nostra, reliquorum senatorum prude^tia, ac
summis ingenijs fortunata, quoru^ si in Republica egregia^ conciliorum fabricam
digne pertractarem, nullus externorum principum senatus cum regio senatu
co^ferendus, Deo enim Rempublica^ edificante co^cilijs ta^ti numinis singula
agunt. Habet regnu^ Anglicanu^ Regina^ illustrissima^, dominam nostram
Elisabetham, principem rarae maiestatis, prudentia Nestorea imbuta^, ac
Nestoris annis dignissimam, regalibus virtutibus, literataque praestantissmarum
artium cognitione illustrem, pacis ac concordiae nutricem, regni sui
exoptatissimam spem foelicitatis, regni Anglicani vnicum solatium, imperij
robur, populi sui vnicam co^solationem, maiorum regum, aeuique huius vnicu^
Decus. Faxit deus, vt nos tata pietate tam celso numini inseruiamus, vt aureu^
tam illustris principis, imperiique seculum diu teneamus.

Dominationi tuae deuinctissimus Richardus Raignoldus.

AN EPISTLE TO THE Reader.
SCIPIO that noble captain, and valeante conqueror, continually delighting
in seking wisdom, and assaying profitable enterpryses for the common wealth
of the Romans, and also for the glory and advancement of his country, in
noble feats of arms, striving to be above the rest singular, did continually
occupy him self in histories, and in monumentes of great antiquity. Whose
commendable studies, Marcus Tullius Cicero, in a certain epistle to his
brother Quintus, commends in these words, Cyrus ille a Zenophonte non ad
historiae fidem scriptus, sed ad effigiem iusti imperij, cuius summa grauitas
ab illo Philosopho cum singulari comitate coniungitur, quos quidem libros non
sine causa noster ille Africanus de manibus ponere non solebat; nullum est enim
praetermissum in hijs officium diligentis and moderati imperij. Cyrus that
noble prince of Persia, who is set out in ye history of Zenophon, although ye
history written of him, be above that which Cyrus attained to, yet the very
lively image of a prince, what he ought to be, and of his state is in those
books declared, the gravity and majesty of. Cyrus, with a singular courteous
humanity is joined together of that Philosopher, the which books of
Zenophon, not without great cause or dope consideration, our noble Africanus
would never lay out of his hands: For in those books is fully set out the
state and royal office of a careful prince and te^perate. The example of so
worthy a prince of so great wisdom, of so victorious and valeante a
conqueror, is of great force to show what great knowledge, wisdom, and
profitable learning, what glory is contained in histories to the students
thereof. This noble Scipio, being a rare prince for all excellency. The stay
of the Romayne Empire, a light to all princes, daily occupied him self in
reading of histories. Octauius Emperor of Rome, did greatly delight in
histories, and in all antiquities of learning, who was in love so much rapted
and inflamed with the Aeneados of the famous Poet Virgil, as that noble Scipio
Africanus, was delighted with Zenophons works. Alexander the great, whose
commendation is above all princes, who as the book of the Machabes sheeweth,
having great wars in hand, he wan many strong cities, and slew many kings
of the earth, going throughout the ends of the world, in so much that the
whole world stood in awe of him. This Alexander the great, being brought up
of that great and most wise Philosopher Aristotle, did chiefly place his
delight in histories, who gave great and princely gifts to all such as by any
means profited the common wealth thereby. This mighty prince Alexander, did so
much delighte in histories and in the books of Homere the Greek Poet, that
he would rest his study and mind therein. Which books of Homere he named his
pillowe, because he would never sleep without them: saying always give me my
pyllowe (meaning those books.) Out of those books he learned many notable
virtues, mete for ye office of princes, many rare virtues and great knowledge,
for all such as shall be governors in the common wealth, great wisdom for
captains with the felicity of ye mind and rare magnaminitie, the noble
virtue patience, is there fully set out, mete for all states, with all the
calamities of war. Lucius Lucullus, by his great knowledge in histories,
brought to the Romans felicity of estate, and perpetual renown in his
wars fought against Mithidrates. Thus Marcus Tullius Cicero writes of him.
Lucius Lucullus, percontandis peritioribus, rebus gestis legendis, ta^tus in
omni genere belli extitit vt omnibus quoru^cunque seculoru^ principibus
anteferretur. Lucius Lucullus, by diligent inquisition of the best learned,
and by reading of histories, was so famous and noble in all points of chiualry,
that he ought to be placed before the princes of all ages. Alexander Seuerus,
an Emperor of great glory, and of most noble fame, inferior to no prince in
wisdom and learning, by whom the Romans enjoyed a flourishing state and
most peaceable gouernemente, the fruits of all good gouermente. This Alexander
Seuerus, would never enterprice any thing of any great weight or importance,
either in war or peace, but he would send for such as were known to be
excellent in histories, to consulte and debate with the^ of such matters:
wherein he found a chief treasure of all deep and sage council, a register
of all famous acts. Alexander the great, at what time as he overcame Darius
king of Persia, in a place called Arbellis, he demanded of his noble men the
nerest and safyst way out of Persia into Aegipte, but none could tell him. A
certain merchant man the history says, Homo multarum rerum peritus, a man
very cunning in many things, it seemed by his answer he was a traueyler in
those places and in many other countries. This merchant was by country a
Sidonian, who being brought to him, the history makes no mention of his name,
but Lucianus writes the story. O king (says the merchant) I am able to
promise thee that the way from this part of Persia into Aegipte, is but three
days journey through the mountains, and so it was proved. Alexander ignorant
of the situation of the country, and fearing the merchant to have dissembled
with him, of long time believed it not, but in the end the merchants tale was
found true, it seemed the merchant knew more by his travail then those
Persians did, of so great force is the worthy knowledge of histories. The
knowledge of the situation of countries, regio^s, and cities, Ptolomeus
Euergetes^ that worthy prince of Aegipte, of whom Galene that noble physician
writes of in the third book De morbis popularibus. This Ptolomeus greatly
deliting in histories, and in all kind of learning, commanded as many as
arrived at his coasts or countries, to bring to him al such books as were to
be found with them of any worthy memory. Those books this king Ptolomeus
caused truly to be written out, and the new copies to be delivered to the
first possessours, all such books in this sort brought, the king commanded
them to be placed in goodly and sumptuous libraries, there perpetually to
remain as worthy monumentes to be reserved of the posterity. And also this
king Ptolomeus, commanded that upon all those books thus brought to him from
far countries, to have this title upon them, Ex nauibus acceptorum, as who
should say, all such books were brought by ship from far places to him.
How great was the care of this Ptolomeus toward learning, when he b^rgayned
with the Athenians to pay to them. 15. talentes of silver for the books of
Sophocles, of Euripides, and of Esculus the poet. He caused a copy to be
written out of the^, the old books he kept, and restored to them the new
last written copies. Thus writes Galene, Orabat vt quindecim talenta tenerent
acciperentque nouos pro veteribus quos ipsi dederant, sic Athenienses and
argento potiti sunt, and libris. Ptolomeus prayed the Athenians that they would
receive of him the. 15. talentes, and the new written copies for the old
copies which they gave to him, so the Athenians received at ye kings hands
much silver and their books again. The rare love of this Prince toward
learning, his great care to obtain works, to reserve them to all
posterities, and geeue so great rewards for so small books, shows a rare
and most royal heart to learning. Those tragedies of Sophocles and Euripides,
do contain notable histories, wherein king Ptolomeus delighted, a continual
study mete for all princes. Great be the comme^dations of that noble Empress
Zenobia, the Empress of the East, she was the wife of valiant Odoacer, for
her great wisdom and excellent learning, both in histories, and also in all
matters of council. This learned Empress Zenobia, by her wisdom, and great
knowledge in histories, excelled in those days and in many ages before, ye
mighty Monarchs of the world. This Zenobia made a Chronicle of all ye wars
fought in Alexandria. Also she gathered a collection of all the notable wars
fought in the East parts. The reading of histories is a study right
profitable for all men, for magistrates, for princes a most pleasant and
comfortable travel. The knowledge of histories is a spur to virtue, a bridle
to repress vice in all that fear God. An history is the glass of Princes,
the image most lively both of virtue and vice, the learned theater or
spectacle of all the world, the council house of Princes, the trier of all
truths, a witness of all times and ages. After death a perpetual memory of
the noble acts of those that here deserved fame, a lively register of ye
common wealths of al ages, the worthiest scholemaister of manners, the
fountain of all knowledge to know God thorowely and thy self, a bytte and
snaffle to the proud and ambitious, the learned schole of princes, the book
of princes, and their quiet and soft pillowe to sleep on, the perfect
description of the marvelous works of God, in the preserving of princes and
common welthes, a pattern of all common wealths laid before our eyes. King
Asueueuerus that mighty king, who reigned from India unto Ethiopia over 127.
provinces, so much delighted in histories, that for a perpetual memory of
things done. He commanded to be put in a chronicle all things that happened
to him. And also that treason which Mardocheus the Jew uttered of the kings
cha^berlaynes wrought against this Asuerus, of the which treason the king
commanded inquisitio^ to be made, the king Asueuerus commanded it to be
written in ye Chronicles before his own sight and the name of him that
uttered the treason. This worthy register of fame, being preserved and kept. A
certain time this king Asueuerus, (not able to take sleep in ye night season,
through his great cares of mind) commanded the Chronicles and Histories to
be brought before him, and the Chronicles were read. In that place of the
histories read to ye king, Mardocheus the Jew was found chronicled, who
uttered the great treason wrought against the king, by Bigthana and There Is the
kings chamberlaynes, who sought to have laid hands on the king, but they were
as all traitors deserved, in like sort hanged up, but Mardocheus who
uttered this treason, was extolled to great honor. It was a worthy act of
the king to exalte and reward the well doer, and to hang up the traitors
disobeying so mischieuously God and their prince, seeking to establysh their
deuelishe purpose by the subversion of the prince. Proud Haman was brought to
confusion, that sought the death of many: who, being above all the
subjects of the king advanced, not knowing him self fell into the
destruction that he prepared for other. Malum consilium consultori pessimum,
The deuyce and counsel of a wicked man to hurt other, turns to his own
destruction. The story says king Asueuerus not able to take rest, commanded
the Chronicle to be brought to him, and to be read, it seems that Chronicles
be pleasant, they put away tediousnes, they bring great wisdom to princes,
they give knowledge to forsee mischieues and treasons, and to subuerte the
wilye policies of forayne nations. This noble king Asueuerus calls
histories an everlasting remembrance. The acts of wise men are a rule and
square for other to direct their council and doings by. This noble Scipio
Africanus, shows to all wise men the deep knowledge in histories, and the
great profit of them. Octauius Augustus, Alexander the great, Lucius Lucullus,
Alexander Seuerus, Ptolomeus Euergetes, who were the great princes of the
world, by learned histories, in florishyng estate governed, and thereby
attained to great wisdom. The worthy Zenobia is to be followed in the great
knowledge of histories, and in her great wisdom obtained therein. That wise
Salomo^ Henry the seventh was very studious of histories, and that victorious
prince Henry the eight, who was a terror to all princes that had any quarrel
against him. The Emperor Charles the fifte sovght his amity, and Fraunces the
French king afraid to displease him, he was more valiant then Hector, of more
noble courage then Achilles, an other Scipio Africanus, or rather if he had
minded to enlarge his dominion, an other Alexander, in wisdom and grave
council Solomon. These noble princes do show what it is for princes to be
learned, and especially for grave council and wisdom in histories. He
knows nothing that knows not histories, and it is the life of beasts to
know nothing, the more a man knows, the more he excels from men and
differs from beasts. If the Empire of the East might in those days glory
and rejoice of their Empress Zenobia. What may this our noble island of
Britain, and how much rejoice, that almighty God, for the glory and
aduau^cement of his church, for the flourishing state of this noble kingdom,
has raised up this our noble queen to sit in the throne and seat of her
ancestors, kings from long descent, of most ancient time victorious
princes, in the queens majesty's virtuous government, the fruits of godly
peace do show it self, whose majesty of princly state, the great power of
God vpholdeth, in all respects the most fortunates country, God grant that
all we English men may acknowledge in what blessed state God has set us, to
be under the government of so virtuous a princess, and most royal queen
chosen by God, preserved with his mighty hand, and to his glory vpholded to
advance his holy name: God grant that we English men may bear in mind in
what blessed state God has set us, all such as are vnmyndefull of this
blessed government, are unmeet burdenes to tread on earth, meet to draw in
yoke and miserable servitude with the barbarous Scithians, or in slavery with
the bloudye Turks. Marcus Tullius Cicero writes a notable sentence, meet to
be put in golden letters, to be read of all good subjects against rebels,
or mainteyners of rebellion.

Sic sentit senatus, sic populus Romanus nullos vnqua^ hosts digniores omni
supplicio fuisse quam eos, qui hoc bello contra patriam arma ceperu^t, quos
quidem ego omnibus sententijs vlciscor and persequor omnibus bonis
approba^tibus. So the Senate of Rome judges, and so also the people of Rome at
any time yt no enemies have been more worthy al kind of punishment or
torments, then those who in this wars taken in hand against their own
country are become rebellious, making war against the same, upon which
workers with the consent of all good me^, I do take reuengement of, and pursue
to the vttermoste this talk he had with Brutus a man of great authority: Also
the said Tullye made answer to a certain epistle of this Brutus, which was
written to Tullie. Vehementer a te dissentio Brute neque clementiae tuae
concedo, sed salubris seueritas vincit inanem speciem clementiae, quod si
clementes esse voluerimus, nunqua^ deerunt bella ciuilia. O Brutus says he, I
do greatly disagree from thee, neither do I allow thy pitiful clemency, for
wholesome severity does pass and excelle this vain kind of clemency: for if
we will be pytifull in such cases, civil war will never cease to the
Romans. God always overthrows the wicked attemptes of such domestical
vipars, to whom their own devices are their own snares and pit of
destruction to fall into.

As conserning the order of my Book, I do begin with the life of Julius
Caesar, setting forth with it the great wars between him and noble Pompeie,
called Pompeius Magnus: from thence I proceed through the lives of all the
Emperors, even to Maximilian this noble Emperor which presentlye rayneth,
making a full discourse of the great glory, nobilitye and perpetual fame of
the godly Princes, the miserable and doulefull fall of the wicked. In this
historye I note perticulerly the acts of every one, I do set forth the great
providence of God in preserving common wealths, in raising and exalting to
government godly princes, in thrawing down tyrauntes, rebels, and all
mainteiners of rebellion, how God by his mighty hand overthrows the
persecutors of his church, and all deuelishe practices, the devil has his
limits and bonds appointed which he shall not pass. In histories, it is set
forth of the great alterations from time to time of kingdoms, the chaunges of
Empires, the partition of the Romayne Empire for the East, the first being of
the beggarly Scithians, ye beastly Goths, of the runnagate Vandales, and to
what power they grew in Europe, and in the end their overthrow by the mighty
power of God, the state of the Turks and Saracenes, and of their beginning, of
the often taking of Rome, and sacking of it, of the great wars against Millaine
by the French king, of the great wars in Germany, of the taking of the
French king, of the great wars of the Emperor Charles and noble Ferdinando
against the Turks, and of the great overthrow of the Turks. I have in the
histories setforth the images of the Emperors as they were in the coigne of
them, with their tittles. I doubt not but the reader shall find it profitable,
with many plentiful histories for knowledge necessary, the noble man, the
captain, the gentleman, shall find knowledge therein very profitable. God
grant us al to fear God, and to obey our noble prince, whom God in most
happy time has to the advancement of his church, and most happy kingdom,
raised to govern over this noble and beutifull Island and country of England.

FINIS.
A Table contayninge the principal matters in this Book.
A.
AChillas seruinge Ptolomeus the king, a murderer of Pompeie. Fo. 12. Arthur
king of Brytaine, and his noble acts against ye Romans. Folio. 47.
Alexander Magnus dead. Folio. 14. Antipater a friend to Caesar. Folio. 14.
Ambition Folio. 14. Antonius kills himself. Fol. 15. Antonius a reue^ger of
Caesar's death. 16. Adrianus his life. 55. Alexander Magnus. 43. Aurelia Caesar's
mother. 1. Antonius a revenger of Julius Caesar's death. Fo. 1. Apollonius Molo.
2. Ambition his force. 2. Albinus his end. 67. A godly admonition to al
Englishemen, to avoid discord and treason. 4. Aurelia dead. 5. Ambition has
no regard of God and nature. 5. Antistius Caesar's Phisitio^. Fol. 6. A
fearful admonition to learn men to beware of treason. 9. Alexander Magnus.
43. Amazones and of their doings. Folio. 43. Artabanus his acts. 20.
Antoninus Emperor, sought counsel at spirits for his estate. 72. Augustinus
de diuinatione demoniorum. 72. Artabanus king of Persia joins league with
the Romans. 72. Artabanus death. 83. Artaxarxes his embassage. 83. Altarcus
king of Scots. 83. The auctoritye of the bishop of Rome not Apostolic. 94.
Athanasius bishop. 108. Ambrose bishop of Millen. 16. Attalas his doings.
125. Angli Saxoni. 130.
B.
BRitanie, and of ye acts of Caesar there. 3. 4. Britayne called sometime
Olbion, after Albion. Fol. 3. Britayne brought to subjection by discord. Fol.
4. Brutus made second heir to Julius Caesar, yet a traitor to Caesar. 8.
Brutus his conspiracy. 14. Brutus commands Strato his man to murder Brutus
himself. 15. Blasinge stars what they signifye. 38. Babilus an Astronomer
prophesying upon Nero. 38. Belisar of his noble acts 142
C.
Caius Julius Caesar. 1. Caius Marius. 1. Caesar's education. 1. Cossutia
Caesar's wife. 1. Cornelia. ibidem. Caesar for fear of Silla hydeth himself.
2. Caesar questor. 2. Caesar's dream. 2. Calphurnia Caesar's wyfes dream. 2
Caesar's conquering of ye Germaynes and of the French men. 3. Caesar's
consideration before he would enter on ye Britaynes. 3. Caesar's talk with
marchantes. 3. Caius yolusenus Ambassador to the Britaynes. 4. Comas Atrabas
second Ambassador to ye Britaynes and put in prison. 4. Cassibelan king of
London. 4. Caesar's entringe into Britain by treason. 4. Caesar's conquering of
ye Britaynes, commended at Rome above al his acts. Fol, 4. Caesar's means to
honor. 5. Caesar's taunt to Spurina. 8. Civil war worst of al wars. 8.
Cauetousnes the overthrow of common wealths. 85. Carolus Caluus and his life.
87. Courageous warriors. 8. Chiualrye the best precept of it. 90. Cyprian his
conversion 94. Charles the great 104. Counsel of Nice. 105. Coil Duke of
Colchester father to Queen Helena. 100. Constantine the great his life. 104.
Christian doctrine with their foundation. 109. Cosroe slain of his own son.
106. Carolus Martellus his acts 175. Commodus his life. 62. Caesar after his
death honored as a God. 8. Cyrus charge of his funeral. 9 Caesar's opinion what
death was best 9. Caesar's proposition with Caesar's conclusion to it. 9.
Caesar's Image why it is pictured with a star. 9. Caesar's answer to the
Senates decree. 10. Cratippus answer to Po^peius proposition. 12. Cornelia
Pompeius wife, and her calamitye. 13. Cato his death. 14. Cassus the first
author of Caesar's death. 14. Cicero his death. 15. Cleopatra her death. 19.
Common wealths compared to a Garden. 47. Coccius Narua his government. 54. The
cause and first original of nobilitye. 24. Covetous officers compared to
flesh flees. 28. Caius Caligula his government. 31. Claudius Tiberius his
beastlye life. 33.
D.
Dwina a flood in Russia that is. 1^000. miles long. 83. Desperate soldiers.
90. The death of one wise counselor, is a plague to a whole realm 91.
Discord of Christians is a strength to infidels. 108. Death of many tyrants.
117 Dolobella an ennemy to Caesar. 2. Discord a plague to the stro^gest fortes
and kingdoms 4. Dover builded of Caesar 6. A decree of ye Senate against
Caesar. 10. Domitius Nero his life. 36. Darius killed by Bessus 43. Domitian
his beastlye life. 53. Didius Iulianus his beastlye life, and end. 65. Digest
and Code volume brought into a brief by Justinian. 155. Dukes and their
beginning 157. Devils, tyrants and wicked men, have their limittes appointed.
163.
E.
Ambassadors ought curteouslye to be used. 84. Embassages why they were
ordained. 84. Eloquence of great force. 132. Example most rare of a son
toward his father. 138. Elius Cinna murdered for Cornelius Cinna. 9. Example
of ingratitude. 12.
F.
Foelix a noble man with Claudius Tiberius* 34. Forgetfulness of Tiberius after
his murders. 35.
G.
The gouernmente of Rome left to Lepidus, in Caesar's absence. 10. The great
deliberatio^ of cou^cellers, and care, in princes affairs. 19. The godly
princes blessed of God. 39. Galba the death of Nero by vsurpinge. 39. Galba of
a noble house. Galba killed of Otho. 39. Godly princes with their gouernmente.
45. Gods secret counsel in kingdoms. 72. Gawishe apparel. 76. The government
of women maruelouslye vpholded of God. 80. Galerius Armentarius. 103. Gods
wrath against heritikes. 109. Goths from whence they came 116. Gensericke his
acts. 134 Gensericke his death. 137.
H.
Heliogabalus a king, a man, a priest and a God. 76. Heliogabalus his beastly
life 78. Helena queen of England 100. Heraclius his life, and of ye Turks
their original. 167. Honorable estate a most happy state to godly
maiestrates. 3. Herodes dissimulation with Cleopatra. 17. Henrye the v. of his
nobility and royal state 42. Henrye the vi. of his calamitye. Henrye the vii.
viii. ibidem of their worthiness and royal estate.
I.
Iulia Caesar's aunte. Fol. 1. Iulia Caesar's daughter. 2. Iulia dead. 5.
Justinian of his worthiness. 145. Ignatius commendation of Caesar. 7. James
king of Scotts brought to London dead. 41 James king of Scotts, his posye
and sentence written in gould and found about his neck he being dead. 41.
James king of Scotts his Prophesye of his return home deceived him. 41. The
I Will of Wight subdued by Vespasian 51. Ignorance the mother of superstitious
devotion. 111. Iouian his life, 114. Irene her beastly life. 176.
K.
Kings and wisemen why they be ordained. 505. A kingdom small well governed.
6. King Zerxes cowardly retyreth. 80. Kings fostered up of God vpholded,
defended, and created 5. Kings in the secret counsel of God, geeue^ to lands
and kingdoms 53. Kings raised from poor cotages to rule. 33.
L.
Lodouicus and his acts. 172. Lotharius his life and acts. 176. Lucius
Caesar. 1. Lucane ye Poet upon ye wars of Pompeie. 5. The long life of a
stage to the which Caesar gave a collor. 6. A letter delivered to Caesar of the
conspiracye. 8. Lucretia. 16. Liuia Octanius wife 22. Lactantius Firmianus
says that an Epistle was wrote to S. Paul by Seneca. 56.
M.
Macrinus his beastly life 72. Men of low degree promoted are contemned of ye
base multitude, though they be never so godly and wise. 72. Macrinus death 76.
Mesa her commendatio^ worthy perpetual memory, for the gouernmente of a
woman. 80. Marriages allowed in Priests 105. Mauritius his end 164. Mahomet
his Proclamation to his people, with ye doctrine and original of the Turks.
168. Moscouites their Sabbath day and fond ceremonies. 177.
N.
Naera and Car mion, Cleopatra her maids 23. Noble houses and their descente.
36. Numa Pompilius his acts. Fol 1. Nobilitye and warlicke stomachs of the
Britaynes. 4.
O.
Octauia Caesar's sisters daughter. 3. Octauius Emperor at the birth of Christ.
10. Octauius married. 16. Octauius aunsweare to Ptolomeus picture. 18. Octauius
saying of Rome 20. Octauius wives. 21. Octauius mother dead. 21. Otho killed
himself 44 Offices bought with money do show an ill maiestrate to follow.
64. Odenatus his noble acts. 96. Orimasda his acts and lamentable end. 160.
The Oration of a Roman full of perswatio^s to beat down the pride of a
tyrant or any proud person, that knows not himself nor God. 161. Oicomenicos
in double signification. 163.
P.
Pompeia Caesar's wife. 2. Plato his saying of traitors. 3. Pompeius death, and
Caesar's. 10. Pompeie in misery flying to a false friend. 5. Pompeie
traitorously slain. 5. Plutarcke his commendatio^ of Caesar's and description.
7. Prophesyes doubtful, prove true many times. 8. Pompeie flies into Egipte,
12. Ptolomie king of Egypt false to Pompeie 12. Pothinus an Eunuke, a murderer
of Pompeie 40 Po^peie took Jerusalem 12. Ptolomeus dead. 13. Proclamation for
the murderers of Caesar. 17. Prophesye of Octauius birth 21. Pilate accused of
the Jews and sent to Rome. 28, Phalaris with many other tirants, and their
end. 44. Persecutions of the Christians the third time in Traianus days. 55.
Q.
Quintilius Emperor slain of his soldiers. 97. Quintus Ligarius one of the
murderer of Caesar. 10.
R.
The race of kings from mean cotages first73. Riches not in admiration with the
wise. 73. A remedy to avoid plagues 91. Rochester builded by Julius Caesar,
and other fortes as I have declared: read Lidgate thereof, in his book of
division. 6.
S.
Succession of kingdoms in the secret counsel of God. 20. Sin the fall of
kingdoms. Silla why he resisted Caesar. 2 Silla dead. 2. The stay of a whole
realm vpholded sometime by one wise man. 97. The strong fortes of a prince is
the love of his subjects 14. Spurina his prophesy of Caesar with his taunt* 8.
Seneca put to death of Nero. 37.
T.
Titus Vespatianus his life. Fol. 50. Troynouantes traitors to Britain to let
in Caesar 4. Thyes^es and Atreus with many other cruel tyrants 5. The tower of
London builded of Caesar. 6. Tiberius follye. 26. Tyrants have an ill end, 32
VV.
Wars of Caesar and Pompeie 10. Wars of Charles the fifte with king
Frauncis, against Millen and other Cittyes. Wars of the Germaynes. Wars of
the Turks, and their overthrow by Charles and Ferdinand, and so through the
life of Charles. Wars most co^ragiouslye fought of the noblest Princes in the
life of Charles. Why wars are to be moved, when, and upon what occasion. 19.
War has always two companions, pestilence and hunger joined with him. 19.
V.
Vespasian his acts. 45. Vitellus his life and end. 44.
X.
Xenophon his works a continual study to Scipio. Folio. 1. in Epist.
Immandrubalus, read for it Theomantius. Folio. 4.

The end of the Table.
Faults escaped in the Printing.
In the latin Epistle Egergiam, read Egregiam. In the latin Epistle Aeques,
read eques. In the English Epistle quindecim. read quindecem. Asueuerus,
read Ahasuerus. magnaminitye, read magnanimitye. Odoacer, read Odenatus.
Cussulia, read Cossutia. Folio. 1. calling, read to that calling. Folio. 1.
Immandrubalus, read Theomantius. Fol. 1. Caesar non patitur, read Caesar ve
priorem non patitur. Folio. 5. Tolomeus, read Ptolomeus. Fol. 5. Mecum, read
Moechum. Fol. 7. sumpisti, read sumsisti. Fol 7. mutium, read mutuum Fol. 7.
repentinun in opinatunque, read repentinum in opinatumque. Fol. 10, Periodo,
read periodos. Fol. 12. Plyas, read Ptyas. 17. Deatherica, read de theriaca.
Fol. 17. Apolinis, read apollinis. Fol. 20. Cani, read Caij, 20. Potentia,
read potentiam. 29. Chronicarum, read Chronicorum. 183. Caspar, read Gaspar
183. Henrye the second, read Henrye the third. 192. wape, read way. 228.
CAIUS JULIUS CAESAR.


CAIUS JULIUS CAESAR the son of Lucius Caesar, and Aurelia was borne at Rome,
in the Consulshippe of Caius Marius, and Lucius Valerius Flaccus, in the Ides
of the fifte month, the which month at those days was called Quintilis,
Antonius.
but after the death of Julius Caesar, it was called July, by the commandment
of Antonius, The educatio^ of Julius Caesar.
who was a revenger of ye death of Julius Caesar. As concerning the educatio^
of Caesar, he was brought up under the government of his mother Aurelia, she
being ye daughter of Caius Cotta, he wanted not also to be well trained up
according to the council of Iulia his Aunte by the father side, his great
virtues manifestly showed, that his education was singular, his gifts of
nature rare, worthy to be compared with any other, his excellency in all
respects was such that in Rome the like was never. Lucius.
In the.xvi. year of his age, Lucius his father died, Flamen Dialis.
the year followynge he was chosen Flamen Dialis, which is an office of
priesthode, of it the Chronicles of ancient times do show, that Numa
Pompilius, was the first that ordained that office of Flamines, Numa Pompilius.
the cause that moved Numa Pompilius thereunto was this, yt kings not long
before the days of Numa did take upon them the office both of kings and
priests, Priamus Agamemnon.
as it is noted of Priamus king of Troie, of Agamemnon king of Micene, and of
many Princes, as Homer, Euripides and Sophocles, do show. The which two
offices kingdom and priesthode, many princes after those days enjoyed
together. The Greeks, the Egiptians, Numa.
and the Persians, used that manner. Numa ordained four chief Flamines, who
continually addicted them selves calling, and kings unburdened them selves
of that superstitious priesthode. An ancient religion.
All this was to want nothing that should apperteine to the most holee
veneration of their fond ceremonies, and glorious superstition of their
Gods. This was their religion, Flamines.
as they had diverse Gods, so every God had a diverse Flamine. Jupiter their
chief God, had but one Flamine to serve him. Romulus, after his death being
the first king of the Romans, had also but one. These Flamines differed much
in vesture one from an other: Cossulia.
Thus much as concerning Caesar in that office of Flamines. At this time Julius
Caesar married Cossulia, Cornelia.
but Cossulia no long time remained with him, Cinna.
being deuorced from him, whether by deserte or otherwise, no Chronicle
shows. After her deuorce, Caesar married Cornelia the daughter of Cinna, Iulia.
this Cinna had been in Rome four times Consul: of Cornelia he begat Iulia his
daughter: Silla Dictator, resisted that marriage, yet the ennemitie of Silla
could not withdraw Caesar's love from Cornelia: Caesar loved his Cornelia so
well, that by marieng of her, Marius.
he was deprived of his office of the Flamines. Also he lost her dowry and
heritage, which of right by her fell to him. The ennemitie of Silla made
Caesar to favor Marius. Envy of noble peers.
This Marius was such an ennemy to Silla, as Silla and Rome, in all calamities
felt, such is the envy of noble Princes, that they join them selves in
amity, kindred and alliau^ce, rather where they may assure them selves of
stay and strength then for any good affection they bear one to an other. The
trouble of Caesar.
At this time Silla bore such authority and swaye, that by the marriage of
Cornelia, Caesar was compelled to fly from his sight, a quartain ague the^
maistring him, often times for fear he was enforced to change his abiding
places, and many times to brybe ye privy serchers. The heavy displeasure of
Silla was mitigated by the humble intercession of the virgins of Vesta. Marcus
Emilius, and Caius Aurelius Cotta his kinsfolk, did all so appease the wrath
of Silla, long it was ere that cankered ennemitie ceased. It should seem that
Silla feared Caesar much, as his talk to those that made suit for him
shows, where he says. The cause why Silla resisted Caesar.
He whose sauegarde ye seek so entierly, intime to come will be an overthrow and
destruction to the nobility of Rome, the which estate of nobility was by
Silla supported against Marius. At in Caesare vno, multos videbat inesse
marios, Caesar.
but in Caesar alone he saw many, Maria^s to be contained. As yet fortune
frowned upon Caesar, The envy of the mighty.
great authority, and the lofty countenance of his better friends kept his
virtues couched, wisdom nothing preuayleth where the enemitie of mighty
princes contrarily affects, and where will rules and fantasy only leads.
Authority kept under Caesar, who for sack of living went into Asia, and there
he served Marcus Thermus Praetor, Caesar driven to seek adventures.
with whom Caesar was of long time brought up, this was the first time that
Caesar inured him self to warlike enterprices. Marcus Thermus knowing the
wisdom of Caesar, and his subtle politic head, sent him into Bithinia, to
prepare a navy of ships. After this he bare office under Seruilius Isauricus
in Cicilia, but that continued a short season, for immediately after ye death of
Silla was bruted through out all parts, and was certainly known unto Caesar
to be true, The death of Silla.
he returned spedely to Rome. This Silla while he lived, was a cruel enemy to
Caesar. Now conceived Caesar a certain assurance of aspiring unto some
great preferremente through a new division begone at Rome by Marcus Lepidus,
Caesar.
which division pacified, Dolobella*
Caesar and Dolabella fell at variaunce, but Caesar not able to match with the
partakers and confederates of Dolabella, departed to Rhodes, where he became a
dilligent hearer of that great learned man Apolonius Molo* an Orator most
famous, Apolonius Molo.
through whose instructions Caesar became excellently learned, and during his
life, favored the learned. But Caesar not contented to live a studious life,
made war against Mithridates, Mithridates.
whose forces he vanquished, and settled the state of those countries in quiet,
After this he was chosen at Rome a Tribune, in the which office Caesar bore
him self very wisely, the^ he enjoyed the Questorship, Cornelia.
in his Questorship Cornelia died, and his Aunte Iulia, who in a funeral
oration were greatly commended, and their progeny highly extolled, not long
after the death of Cornelia he married Pompeia, Pompeia.
this Pompeia was the daughter of Quintus Pompeius, and nece to Lucius Silla,.
In that Caesar was Questor, the one part of Spain called Bethica, was under
his jurisdiction. Where Caesar making his abode came upon a certain time to
Gades in the end of this Province, called Bethica, where there was a temple of
Hercules most sumptuously builded, in which temple Caesar espied the image of
Alexander the great, The ambitious mind of Caesar.
which he very welvewed, and mourned in heart, as though he had conceived some
inward grief, for that his acts as yet were nothing like to the doings of
Alexander, Alexander.
or rather because no famous thing had been achieved of him at those days in
the which Alexander had subdued a whole world. After this Caesar inflamed
with ambition purposed in his heart to attempt great things. In the same
city Caesar dreamed on a night as he slepte in his bed, A strange dream
of Caesar.
that he enforced unto incest lust his own mother, which dream he opened to
the interpretours, who interpreted, that Caesar by this dream should be a
conqueror over many countries, for by his mother (they said) was signified
the earth, which is the mother of all things. Artemidorus.
Artemidorus writes at large of the interpretation of dreams, both Galen and
Hippocrates in their books do declare their grounded arguments upon the same,
Galen.
saying, Hyppocrates.
when the body does rest, the mind moves, and purifying the parts of the
body governs the whole house, and the mind makes perfect all the actions
of the body. For the body sleping has no understanding, fealeth not, cares
not, perceives not: to be brief, al such things as the body sleping cannot
do, the mind waking executes, and sees visible things, or hears things
that are to be heard, she goes, she touches, she is sad, she perceives,
and understands: finally, what thing soever is like to happen unto the body,
that is understood in sleep of the mind, with many mo arguments, showing the
secret divination of the^. But as concerning Julius Caesar daily more and more
he was incensed to clyme to dignity, Ambition.
he made very great suit and labor to have the government of the provinces
of Egypt, but that suit prevailed not, then he sent unto the high priest no
small gifts for the obteinement of his suit, of such force is money, to lead
affection, for that which honor oftentimes cannot get, money and gifts procure,
and that which virtue meriteth, is decided by friendship. Although Caesar stood
in choice against two mighty persons for this government, yet money and
large gifts made him superior. Thus Caesar by process of time, ascended from
honor to honor, from dignity to dignity, and was chosen Praetor, Praetor.
but from that office he was upon certain causes removed, and at the last
restored thereto again, not long after this, Consul.
he was made Consul with Bibulus, but Caesar ruled all things. At that time
Caesar married Calphurnia, the daughter of Lucius Piso. This Piso succeeded
Caesar in ye co^sulship. In this season Iulia, Caesar's daughter, whom he begat
of Cornelia, did marie Gneius Pompeius, for Seruilius Scipio her first
husband, was put from her, now Caesar made him self strong by marriages,
their friendship covered many friends, their linked amity caught at a beck
great and mighty supporters, Strength in marriage.
by united friendship rose the magnificent estate of Caesar, honor now changed
Caesar, many noble acts were done of him in his consulship, much contention
and great debate, arose on every side, fortune favoring Caesar, Friendship
ple^tifull in prosperity.
he lightely purchased many friends, but yet there were no small number of those
outward fre^des, cloked enemies, as ye end showed. Honorable estate is a most
happy thing to those magistrates that fear God, and in that fear know the^
selves, Honorable estate.
for in that estate what noble virtues may they exercise, what compassion, how
great wisdom, what justice, what clemency may they minister? as they may be
the vpholders of virtue, so many they be the destroyers of vice, the swaye of a
whole Realm depends sometime on ye head of one wise magistrate. A good
magistrate.
As Caesar grew in power and strength through friends, so outwardly he assaied
by martial atte^ptes to possess ye seignorie over many regions, he subdued
the Germans that inhabited beyond the River Rhene, and made a bridge over
it, he conquered the French me^, then he set on this our Ila^de of Brytaine, a
people very warrelike and fearce, who through discord and division among them
selves, fell at length into the hands of Caesar, Division in Britayne brought
servitude.
and for a certain time paid tribute unto the Empire of Rome, and gave them
hostages. The whole manner of Caesar's entering was thus. When Julius Caesar had
ended his mighty and perilous battayles, The coming of Caesar into this
Island.
about the floudde Rhene, he marched into the Realm of France: at the same
time repairing with a French multitude, his legio^s, but the chief cause of
his war in France was, The time.
that of long time, he was moved in mind, to see this noble Islande of
Brytane, whose fame for nobility was known and bruted, The person.
not only in Rome, but also in the vttermoste parts of the world. Julius
Caesar was wroth with them, The cause.
because in his war which he kept in France, The fame and glory of
Brytaine.
the fearce Britains aided the Frenchmen, and did mightily encounter battle
with the Romans: whose prowes and valiant fight, slaked the proud and
lofty stomakes of the Romans, and drove the^ to diverse hasardes of
battle. But Caesar as a noble warrier, preferring nobility and worthiness of
fame, The prowes of Julius Caesar.
before money or cowardly quietness: ceased not to enter on the fearce
Britains, and thereto prepared his ships, the winter time followyng, that
as soon as opportunity of ye year served, he might pass with all power against
the^. The manner how.
In the mean time, Caesar inquired of the merchants, who with marchaundise
had access to the Islande: as concerning the quantity and bigness of it, the
fashion and manner of the people, Cesars communication with the merchants, as
concerning ye land of Britain.
their laws, their order, and kind of government. As these things were in
all points unknown to Caesar, so also the merchants knew no more then the
places bordering on the sea side. For, the Brytaines fearinge the traiterous
and dissembling hearts of aliauntes, politikely repelled them by this means:
The war and pollitike government of the Britayns Aliauntes in time
traiterous.
For no stranger was suffered to enter from his ship on the land, but their
marchau^dise were sold at the seaside. All nations sought to this land, the
felicity of it was so great, that the Greeks knowing and tasting the
commodity of this Islande, called it by a Greek name Olbion. Britayn some
time called of the Greeks Olbion.
which signified a happy and fortunate country, though of some after it was
called Albion, time so changed the first letter, as at this day Ebrancke
now called York London is called for ye town of king Lud. Caesar thereupon
before he would march with his army against the people of Brytaine, Caius
Volusenus, Ambassador to Britayne.
sent Caius Volusenus a noble man of Rome, a valiant and hardy Captain, as
Ambassador to the Britains, who as he thought by his Embassage, should know
the fashion of the Islande, the manner of the people, and their government.
But as it seems, the Ambassador was not welcome: for, he durst not enter from
his ship to do his masters Embassage, so that Caesar could know nothing by
him. Yet Caesar not so contented, sent an other Ambassador, a man of more
power, stomach, and more hardy, Comas Atrebas by name, Comas Atrebas, second
Embassadous from Caesar.
who would enter as an Ambassador, to accomplish the will and expectation of
Caesar, Comas Atrebas was so welcome, that the Britains cast him in prison:
Embassages were not common among them, nor the courteous usage of Ambassadors
known at those days. All these things, made Caesar more wroth, and desirous
to assaie the discourteous Britains. Cassibelan king of London, at the arrive
of Caesar Cassibelane a worthy prince
In those days Cassibelan was king of London, this Cassibelon was a prince of
high wisdom, of manly stomach, and valiant in fight: and for power and
valiauntnes, was chosen of the Brytaines, chief governor and king. Dissension
and cruel war was among them, through the disagreing of diverse kings in
the land. The Troynouauntes, envied the state of Cassibelan. The son of
Imma^drubalus, hearing of the coming of Caesar, The Troinouantes by treason
let in Caesar.
did fly traitorously to Caesar: The Troynouauntes favored Immandrubalus
part, and thereupon promised, as most vile traitors to their country, an
entering to Caesar, and to do him service and homage, who through a self will,
and private favor of one, sought the ruin of their country, Domestical
treason.
and in the end, their own destruction. But Cassibelan gave many overthrows
to Caesar, and mightily encountered with him, so invincible was the part of
Cassibelan: that by treason of the Troynouauntes, not by manhood of Caesar's
power, entering was given. What house can stand, wherein discord does broyle?
Treason a confusion to the mightiest dominions.
What small power is not able to enter the mightiest dominions or regions: yea,
to overcome the strongest fortress, treason opening the grate, treason geuinge
passage. Although Caesar by treason entered, (so Caesar writes): Treason.
Yet the fame of Caesar was more commended, for his enterprise into Brytaine,
and victory there gotten: then for all his co^queste, either against Pompeie,
or any other nation. For in a pillar at Rome, A sentence graven of Britayne, in
the commendatio^ of Caesar.
this sentence was engraven: Of all the dominions, cities, and regions,
subdued by Caesar, his war attempted against the fearce Brytaines, passes
all other. After this sort as you have heard, Caesar entered our Island of
Britayne by treason. But let all good English hearts beware of division and
foresee the plague yt falls even upon the diuisers consider the nobility of
this our goodly Island, ye noble princes in their government, the great
felicity of this land and people above all other nations, and now presently
the fruits of most godly government which we reap of this present state of so
noble a prince, of so great wisdom, of so singular learning, of so manifold
and rare virtues, by whose blessed government we have lived in peace only of
all other nations, from her majesty's first government: if Marcia that noble
queen sometime of this Islande gouerner, be cronacled for wisdom and noble
acts. if queen Helena of this land gouerner, sometime the mother of
Constantine ye great Emperor of Rome, be commended in histories yet in no part
for learning and nobility she can be equal with this our noble gouerner, who
with all lenity proceadeth in law and with justice holds over her people
the Scepture. Though of late certain vipers, not contented with so blessed
state, have sediciously sought by marciall attempt in open armor to subvert so
worthy government: But as all rebels have the fruits of their enterprise to
be their own shame, destruction, and perpetual ignomini, so God who creates
princes, and keeps them in government, has heaped due plagues upon their
treaterous attemptes, and subverted their purposes of whom this saying of
Plato in his books of government may be verified, Quipatrie hostis est sibi
pessimus as who should say, who so seeks a mischief to his own country, on
him self chiefly the ruin falls, that state in no part declining, and
therefore both Homere and Plato, considring the great majesty of princes,
intituleth them with these names Agos Andron Diotrepheas Poimenas that is
governors of men, fostered up by the tuition of God the shepeheards of his
people, and as the wise Philosophers write, Reges and sapientes fiunt a
potentibus causis ideo talium vt potentes sunt, necessario valide sunt cause:
kings and wise men are placed in government to do some great enterprise and
marvelous factes, and therefore the causes must be great and marvelous, why
those should be mighty, as who should say, God has created princes and wise
men to some marvelous purpose, and the end whereunto God has appointed them
shall never be frustrate: let traitors surmyse what they will, and give what
attempt they dare for the prince is Gods anointed. Immediately after the same
time yt he warred in Brytaine his mother Aurelia died, Auraelia.
then Iulia his daughter died, and not long after, his nece begotten of his
daughter Iulia and Pompeia, Iulia.
As Caesar gat honor upon honor, so he spared no princely liberality, for of
him were commonly given great offices, large fees, by which means he purchased
more to his aduaunceme^t, the^ by any other way. For his liberality and the
continual preferrement of those that deserved well, wanne him greatter nombers
of most valiant soldiers, with invincible courages, that remained loyal and
faithful unto him, as long as they lived, then did his legions. Cesars way to
honor.
Caesar then by all means sought the favor of all people, and most of all
his study was to link him self in mighty kindredes and honorable alliances,
whose estates were most dreaded, and whose frendshippes harbored most friends,
as with Marius and Pompeie. The strength of noble peers
And thereupon to keep the kyndred which was between Pompeie and him, though
his daughter Iulia was dead, Iulia.
whom Pompeie had married, he procured Octauia his sisters daughter to be
married to Pompeie, and that he on the other side condicionally shoold marry
Po^peies daughter, and so it came to pass, that where as Pompeies daughter
should have married Faustus Silla, Condicionall marriages.
now Caesar marieth her, so honor makes marriages, and hope of strength and
authority, by friends lynketh in noble houses cross marriages, and many
times that are unlawful, all this yet notwithstanding, wars fell at last
between Pompeie and Caesar, marriage was made of friendship, now ambition of
Pompeie and Caesar, regards neither friendship nor marriage. Ambition.
Quia Pompeius parem, Caesar non patitur. For now Pompeie will have no mate,
Pompeie no mate.
nor Caesar cannot suffer a superior. Lucan the Poet writes at large of the
wars between Pompeie and Caesar, Caesar no superior.
which were to long to write of, but in the end Pompeie had the overthrow,
and desire of glory, or the possession of kingdoms in ambitious persons,
knows neither God, nor obeieth nature, it makes enemies friends, and friends
enemies, the father hu^teth for the death of the son, the son likewise for
the fathers death, desire of kingdom in ambitious persons, neither regards
God, nor nature, ye most cruel factes of Atreus and Thyestes, for kingdoms
sake are not vnchronicled, ye cruel hatred of Eteocles and Polinises, and the
slaughter committed by them, is well known to those which read Euripides,
Honor dissolueth marriages.
Seneca, and Sophocles, for in them they shall see the bloody and mischievous
acts committed by noble pears: so you se in Pompeie and Caesar thoroughly on
every side, that where as marriage was made to the great increase of honor and
friendship between them, now they are become enemies and mortal foes, that
has honor caused. Where is the marriage become now that was between Pompeie
and Caesar, Iulia is dead whom Pompeie married, yea, the friendship died also,
Caesar had then Pompeies daughter to wife, Honor knows no kindred in tyrants
Pompeie driven to flight.
honor bids Caesar not care for that, now there is no kindred, for honor
knows no kindred. Po^peie being dreue^ to flight, set unto Tolomie king of
Egypt, requesting him of aid and succor in this his extremity and need (in
recompense of the great friendship and courtesy which his father had received
before time of him) ye king sent him word that willingly he would do for him,
as much as he desired, (but unto the miserable that are fallen from high
dignities into adversity, rarely is faith observed, and littell helps old
friendship) for as Pompeie was passing in a small boat toward the shore to
find the king Tolomey, he was by his commandment slain before he came to
land, of Septemius and Achilla, who hoping by killing of him to purchase the
friendship of Caesar. Who now being come unto the shore, and entering
Alexandria, had suddenly presented unto him the head of Pompeie the great,
which he in no wise would behold: but loking upon the ryng of Pompeie, he
wept for compassion of him, unto whom the same once appertayned, considering
the end of the felicity and greatness of Pompeie, who with honor and fame had
thrice triumphed, and had been as often Consul in Rome, and had so many years
had the government of the common weal, and had been the greatest cittezen
that ever was, and had also obtained so many victories and dignities, Caesar
thereuppon as Euripides says, had this saying in his mouth, law and right is
to be broken for dominions sake, for Caesar being accustomed to command,
could not sustain to be without an host.

If law and right be made for naught, Cesars sayings mete for a tyrant.

Let kingdom the inflame,
Else right and law be in their force,
And lust to dread the same.
Large are the bonds of small kingdoms, A small kingdom.
which thoroughly do maintain justice, with a true and godly religion, which
breadeth obedience and love in the hearts of subjects, for neither the strong
walls, nor the infinite number of people, nor huge troops of horses, neither
the large and mighty dominions, do make the prince invincible, Love makes a
prince invincible.
but the love of the subjects indissolublie knitte and of a pure zeal vowed
unto the princes service, for what saufegarde was the infinite host of Xerzes
which he brought into Greece? Xerxes.
was he not feign to fly away alone, he was neglected abroad, contemned at
home, and died in the end sorowfully. Caesar made him strong not only by
marriage, but by all other means, he made the most part of the Senate to be
his friends, other some by gifts he allured thereto, Cesars ^^^nes to honor.
some of their own will and affection were drawn thereto, all manner of
persoues of what estate and condition so ever they were, persons guilty of
great crimes, prodigal and youthful persons were aided and supported by him,
none he excluded, but such as well he durst not or wear to beggarly, for
those he would say. Ciuell war had neade of such as they war, whom either
spoils might help from their miseries, or present death shorten their
calamimities. As at Rome Caesar sought frendshippe and amity so with foraine
Princes, on all sides he ceased not to procure favor. Caesar was now grown
to that dignity, and so dreaded, that without the knowledge of the Senate, or
consent of the multitude of the Romans, he would aid foreign Princes with
men of war, The subversion of Caesar.
at their calling and his appointment a meruailoos matter to behold the doing
of Caesar in all provinces and countries, Many princely monumentes erected by
Caesar.
where he came, who ever erected some famous monument, which remains at
this day not only in Italy, France, Spain, but also in ye mighty cities
of Asia and Greece, and in this our Island of Britain, diverse holds and
fortes were made by him, as Dover, Canterbury, Rochester, the Tower of London,
Chichester, the castle of Excestor, and Salisburye. Ricius Patricius notes in
his book, entitled de Regibus Galliae, of ye kings of France. That Caesar
being about ye Forest of Arden, Caesar gave a collar to a Stagge.
took a Stagge, and caused a collar to be put about his neck, with these words,
Caesar hoc me donauit, Caesar gave me this. That Stagge was not killed three
hundredth year ago, it should seem that this was done of Caesar in no other
respect but that the long continuing age of that beast might be known, which
before that time none or very few hearing of it, Rodericius Patricius.
would believe to be true. All men now became astonished at Caesar's acts, they
were so princely, and all his doings so famous, and so prosperously success
fell to him, Curio.
for in all foreign wars he felt no sinister fortune, Caius Antonius.
but by his deputies of the which Caius Curio, died in Africa, Caius Antonius
in Illiria, fell into the hands of his enemies, and so Caesar triumphed with
praise among the Romans. Scipio.
He had to do against Scipio, whom be over came with Pompeie, Pompeie.
and his sons. France felt his victories, Alexandria, Pontus, Africa,
Spain, Sueuia, Germany, Cesars victories.
Pannonia, Heluetia, Allobroges, with many mo, which were tedious and ouerlong
to recite, so much in all places and regions his fame rose. In matters
appertaininge to the civil law, he was a man of profounde knowledge, in
judgment severe, but in all things he proceaded according to truth and
equity, the mighty volumes of the civil law were brought into a certain
order of brevity by him, The civil law corrected by Caesar.
who explicated the most necessary points and causes of the same, and as the
manner is, every Emperor by augmenting decrees and statutes have much enlarged
it again. Justinian long after Caesar's days brought the Code, Justinian.
the Digest, and the Pandecte into a more brevity by the help of Tribunianus,
Doritheus and other, Caesar did so much favor learning, that he augme^ted
ple^tious store of many goodly antiquities both in Greek and Latyne: for
Marcus Varro had chardge of Caesar, Varro.
to get in all places the most goodlye monumentes that were to be found in the
commendation of learning. Ignatius that famous learned man writes in this
manner of Julius Caesar saying, Ignatius commended Caesar
in him no excellent quality lacked that was meet and requisite for any
noble personage, in him there was counsel, eloquence, great and profounde
wisdom, valiant strength of body, a constant head, expert in knowledge of
Marshiall attemptes, and also in the most excellent arts and sciences very
noble, he was endued with a most liberal heart, where with he purchased to
him the hearts of the people, Cesars commendations.
by the which virtue he stepped from a mean estate, to bear the chief
stroke and regement in the world. Plutarche upon Caesar.
Plutarcus intreatynge of the life of famous Princes and governors, notes
this Julius Caesar to be a man of a goodly parsonage, of stature taule, in
color white, whose body no delicatenes of pryncelye fare could make groose
or fat, Cesars personage.
his eyes in color black, his head was so distempered that often he was payned
with the head ache, in his life time twice or thrice the falling sickness
tormented him, Caesar taken with the falling sickness.
his hears of his head so thynne, that baldnes continuallye increased more
and more, although by medicine he spared no cost to remedy that imbecillitie
of nature, Cesars co^cubines.
diversely he was spotted with adultrie as with Posthuma the wife of Seruius
Sulpitius, with Loliae the wife of Manlius Gabinius, with Tartalin the wife of
Marcus Crassus, Lolia.
with Musia the wife of Gneius Pompeius, above all with Saruillia the mother
of Marcus Brutus, in foreign Countries where he came, the like crime of
adultrie followed him, for of his men of war he was openly taunted for those
vices, Tertalm.
in these words. Vrbani seruate vxores, Musia.
quia Mecum caluum adduximus auro in Gallia stuprum emisti, hic sumpisti
mutium. Full happy had Caesar been if ye Chroniclers of ages and time could not
but speak well of him in all points, Seruilia.
the secret doings of Caesar as they were not unknown to God, so they passed
not in oblivion to the world, that which for fear men than speak not in ye
life of Caesar, The secret doing of princes unknown to the posteritye.
fame afterward everlastingly blows abroad, and he as he was remains
chronicled. A marvelous and hyd secret providence of God, that in no age it
has been seen, but godly Princes have always been commended, The
providence of God in Princes.
the wicked as they were Chronicled, therefore Princes have need to be very
ware and circu^spect in their government that the subject may rejoice of the
acts of the Prince, the ennemy not to laughe at it, nor the Chronicles of the
posterities in wrytinge or monumentes of antiquityes to note their follies
lest that may be said which Homere notes of the Greeks. Why Princes ought
to be ware in government.


The ancient time may well record,
most filthye to behold,
Their works which vgglye showd in shape,
whose state desert enrolde.
For all this Caesar was of diete temperate insomuch that his ennemies would
report of him, and ye which also Marcus Cato would say, of all Princes Caesar
alone came to destroy the common wealth sober. Hereuppon the Senate sought
Caesar's death, The cause of Caesar's death
because he sought to aspier to a soole regiment, their Counsels were taken
now by two and three, and so by many heads, through which means pryuilye
they wrought their foul consultacio^, which ended a most detestable
conspiracy, their treason had the more speedy success because the commons for
the most part grudged at the soole estate of tyranny which Caesar sought
for, Tyranny.
the commons openly spoke ill of that estate, and desired instantly patrones
and defendours of their aunciente libertyes, diverse bills were cast up in the
place of the Senate assembled, against yt estate, which Caesar hu^ted at, many
means were sought to declare the full mind and purpose of the Romans:
Certain me^ under the Image of Brutus a famous Senator and Consul of Rome
cast these words: Brutus.
Vtinam viueret Brutus quia reges eiecit, and Consul primus factus est, I
would Brutus were a live because he banished Tyrauntes who was made the
first Consul. Under the Image of Caesar this verse was tituled, Hic quia
Consules eiecit Rex Postremus factus est. Caesar.
Caesar because he put down the state of Consuls was made the last king.
The number of the conspiratours that were against him were 60. Tyrant.
and more, the chief of the treason were Caius Cassius, The number of the
conspiratours.
Marcus Brutus, Quintus Ligarius, Decius, Marcus Spurius, Attilius Cimber:
these chief conspyratours were long in co^sultacion in what place they might
have best oportunitye and slight conueighances to murder him, some sought
means that in Campo Martis a multitude being gathered he might be cast
down the bridge suddenly, other devised other practices. When the Senate
should be gathered in the Ides of March in ye court of Pompeie, What marvelous
things happened before the death of Caesar.
a little before Caesar's death many strange things apeared and wonderful. At
Capua certain monuments were cast down through covetousness which were
erected unto the honor of the dead with certain pooses written upon them
among which there was in one monument a table of brass found whereon were
graven these Letters.

When the bones of Capis should be cast up and uncovered, A prophecy of
Cesars death.
it would follow that he which should be of the progeny and line of
Julius, should be murdered by the hands of his nere kinsfolk, and forthwith
Italye should be plagued with many calamities This Capis was the father of
Anchises, and graundfather to Eneas this was not unknown in Rome nor hid from
Caesar, this was the first foreshowe of Caesar's death. This one thing is
written for a troth of Cornelius Balbus a very familiar friend of Caesar yt
sone after the same time, Cornelius Balbus.
a little before Caesar's death, a goodly race of horses which Caesar had
consecrated holy to Mars, in passinge over the fludde Rubicon were seen to go
without a keeper, Another forshowe of his death.
which horses he did know certainly afterward never eat meat, but wept
much. Spurina a southsayer warned Caesar by a strange sight which he saw in
a sacrifyce that Caesar should beware of one danger which would not be
finished or the Ides of March were past. The warning of Spurina to Caesar
The day before the same Ides, The Ides of March.
a certain bird named Regalis, a kings bird, having a baye bough in the
mouth, flying into the court of Pompeie, was torn a sunder of many other
fowls pursewyng the same foul from the next wood. Regalis.
The night before Caesar was murdered: Cesars dream.
He dreamed that some time he was carried above the clouds flying, and some
time to be hand in hand with Jupiter, Calphurnia Caesar's wife dreamed that she
saw in a vision the top of her house to fall down, Cesars wives dream.
and her husband to be wounded through his body being in her bosom, and
suddenly the doors of the chambers opened of them selves. What with these
things and his crased health, Caesar was long in doubt whether he might at
home tarry and so put of and delay all such things as he was before
determined to consult upon with the Senate. Now mark how his death was
procured and furthered, Decius Brutus
Decius Brutus the chief traitor and means of that conspiracy, exhorted
Caesar that he would not break of, or make frustrate so goodly and great
assemble now loking for him. Se what misfortune hong over Caesar, a certain
man of good will meating Caesar gave into his hands a little scrole which
uttered the whole treason, but Caesar not perusing ye conte^tes thereof, held
it in his left hand mingling it with other wrytinges, Caesar at the same time
entering the place where he was murdered, perceived many sacrifices to be
offered of Spurina, but Caesar setting light by that religion, Man purposes
and God disposes.
and accompting Spurina as false of his prophecies, because the Ides of March
were come without harm (as he thought,) he said to Spurina: the Ides are come;
but Spurina answered, Spurina.
but they are not yet past, not doubtinge any mishappe placed himself in his
seat, the conspiratours gathered about him by and by, And one who was of the
conspiracy approached near, as to demand some thing at his hands, unto
which demand Caesar geuinge ear, all the conspiratours compassed him very
straightlye on every side. Cesars saying.
Then Caesar forseeing what would happen to himself made an exclamation and
said this is violence. Then Cassius wounded him beneath the neck, Appianus
says that Cassius wounded Caesar on the face, other some in one place, and
some in another, Caesar being so wounded and on every side seeing many more
weapons drawn to wound him with, took part of his gown in his right hand,
and covered his head therewith, and with his left hand he drew down the
skirt thereof, even unto his slippers, and so with all seemelines fell down
dead, all parts of his body decently covered, and so having received three
and twenty wounds yielded up his ghost, Xxiii. Wounds
none of his wounds was mortal as the Physician Antistius judged, but a
thrust which he had in his breast. Antistius.
At the first stroke he gave a sighe without any word, but when Brutus whom he
had substituted his second heir began to set upon him, Caesar then spoke
this last word, what thou my son? Beastly ingratitude.
As who should say if thou whom I loved, do seek this villainy, If thou whom
my desartes moved to bear intier affection toward me, have so ill rewarded
my benefits bestowed upon the, what may I look for at other men's hands, whom
neither benefit has moved, nor desert constrained? Ceasar dead.
When Caesar was murdered every one that murdered him fled away, their ill
conscience wounded them, and their good desartes caused them to retire into
startinge holes, Now he lies alone vndreaded, whom many feared, and obeyed,
he lies without honor, that all people, Princes and Regions for virtue
dreaded, and for worthiness honored.

Three of his servants carried him home being dead of all these wounds. The
mind of the conspiratours was to cast the body of Caesar dead into the fludde
Tiber, and to do many

The wars of Pompeie and Caesar, both Romans.
THe thirtye year after the death of Silla, bloody and cyuill wars was moved
between Pompeie, and Caius Julius Caesar, the which rose upon this occasion,
Caius Julius Caesar sought to have himself made Consul he being absente from
Rome before he would depart out of France, for Caesar led with this
consideration, thought that if he should return to Rome a private man
without the dignitye of the Consulshippe, that his enemies would accuse him,
and also seek to overthrow him, so fearful is the state of the mighty and
ambitious persons, to fear their state and continuance, wherein Caesar should
not only seem to fear many, but also to offend many, and the commonalty of
the Romans at the demand of ye Tribunus Pompeie being Consul agreinge to
it, commanded a consideration to be had of Caius Julius Caesar in this
peticion, after that the enemies of Julius Caesar were exhortinge thereto,
that in no case they should suffer any such thing, whereupon Lentulus, and
Marcus Marcellus being Consulles, a decree of the Senate was made, The decree
of the Senate.
yt Caesar must dismiss his whole power before a certain day appointed of yt
Senate, if Caesar would not, then should it be manifest to the Romans, that
he pretended mischeues against the common wealth, whereupon the enemies of
Caesar lincked themselves to noble Pompeie, such as were the friends of Caesar
were against this decree of yt Senate, certain Tribunes, Marcus Antonius,
Quintus Cassius, Curio, they sought earnestly that the benefit before promised
should not be taken from Caesar, forthwith the Senate made this decree, that
the Consuls should foresee and other Magistrates, that the common wealth of
the Romans take no hurt, thereby, this form of words the Senate used as
often as they gave commandment to the Consuls as against seditious persons
to move war, herevppon the Tribunes departed out of the City to Caesar,
forthwithe France, their province is appointed to Lucius Domicius, and a
general muster is had throughoute all Italye by the Cousuls and by Pompeie.
Caesar sheeweth that he is contented to refer the judgment of this his
state to the people, and Marcus Tullius Cicero did propounde equal conditions
of peace and quietness for them both, that both Caesar and Pompeie should
dismiss and lay down their army, Cicero,
and that Pompeie should for quietness sake go into Spain his province, and
Caesar on the other side should be made Consul at Rome. Caesar would receive
these conditions, but the friends of Pompeie were against it. Caesar.
When Caesar saw the crueltye of the Senate against him on Pompeies side, and
also did certainlye know the general taking up and mustringe for men of
war against him, then he thought yt cause to be just to defend himself from
violence by force of arms, and with all have he brought his army near to
the Cittye of Rome, the coming of Caesar being known, the Consulles and
Pompeie fled out of Italye and passed into Epirus to the Cittye Dirrhachium,
Consuls.
where they did gather out of Greece and Asia as great a power as they were
able. Pompeie.
This was the beginning of that war between Pompeie and Caesar, by these
cyuill wars, the aunciente form of regimente among the Romans was
changed, which slode by Consuls of long time, after this among the Romans
they had the government of one, as in a sole kingdom. Caesar before he came to
Rome made have to take Pompeie. who at that time was at Brundusium, Caesar did
besiege the same Cittye but Pompeie went away by night priuilye, the
inhabitants of Bruudusium gave up themselves to Caesar, after this Caesar went
to the City of Rome, and in the Senate declared that of necessitye he was
compelled to make this defense. He promised the Romans that he would not
follow the cruelty of Sylla and Marius, The dissimulation of Caesar.
he exhorted yt whole Senate, that they would govern the common wealth with
him, and willed them to send Ambassadors to Pompeie. Caesar did innouate
nothing at Rome or made any new alteration, but hasted himself to ye army
of Po^peie which was in Spain, He commended the gouernmente of Rome to
Lepidus in his absence, and Italye to Marcus Antonius. Caesar a few days
after went into Spain, and in Spain he forced the host of Po^peie through
lack of victuels and for famine to yield, and so he joined to him the
Spaniardes, after this he took Massilia, Massalia.
a most renowned City and commendable by force of arms, an old ancient
habitation of the Jews: this Massilia was a friend to the Romans. In the
mean time Lepidus had obtained at Rome that Caesar might be made Dictator:
Lepidus.
After this Caesar returned to Rome and gathered together an assemblye of the
Consuls and Senators, in the which assemble, he did ordain many Laws and
decrees profitable for the common wealth, and took order for corn and grain
to be brought to the Cittye of Rome as the Dictator geeueth order, he made
himself Consul, and Saruillius Isauricus with him, and after the eleuenthe
day, he left his Dictatorshippe, being content with the ordinary name of the
Consul, and then he commanded the City of Rome to be governed by Saruilius
being Consul at that time. Saruilius.


Whereas many troubleous and seditious Citizens through hope of new laws to be
made, had gotten great treasure of other men's, and he ordained laws Do
omytionibus and vsuris, he made that the value of things should remain all
one as they were before the wars, and many other notable things he devised
for the common wealth, and Saruillius being Consul, defended those things
of judgment. Afterward this Saruillius banished out of the City Celius the
Praetor, which Celius styrred up the people with a certain hope of new laws
and change of gouernmente against Caesar to raise a seditious tumulte. Celius.
Celius lincked himself with Milo, Milo.
Milo gathered a great company of ronagates to come to Rome, but both Celius
and Milo were killed in their enterprice in the 700. year of the building of
Rome, v. months Caesar being Consul, sailed into Epirus against Pompeie,
and when Pompeie was at Dirrhachiu^, Caesar marched with his power to him, and
there made diverse Castles and holds to enclose Pompeie, although in often
skirmishes Caesar's men of war had the upper hand, yet in one great battle
Caesar, Cesars soil.
was overcome in the which Caesar lost 900. men of war, from thence Caesar
departed into Thesalia, by reason of famyne and scarsitye of vittuels, was
compelled to seek a more plentious country for his provision. Pompeie.
Pompeie pursued Caesar being puffed up with hope of victory for his success
at Dirrhachiu^, Pompeie coming into Pharsalia, and being but a German mile
from Caesar, in that part of Thessalia overcame Pompeie, and there were killed
in that battle 1500. men, and took prisonners 2400. the cause that so many
prisoners were taken, was Caesar himself, for Caesar (the enemies scattered
and retyringe) cried out miles parce ciuibus, thou man of war favor
Cytizens, by this means they yealded themselves voluntarilye: mercy is a
singular virtue in such extremity of battle to geeue life to many, Mercy a
singular virtue.
it wins the enemy, and honor perpetual to the Captain. Pompeie flyinge
came to Larissa, from thence he sailed to Mitelenie, where Cornelia his wife
did make her abode, Pompeie turned to ye lodginge of Cratippus the Philosopher,
not enteringe the Cittye, with whom when he had made his complaint of fortune
and disputed with him to know whether the world were governed by counsel
and providence, Caesar.
which be doubted of, because he was overcome of Caesar, Pompeie.
his part being the iuster. For Pompeie defended Rome and the libertyes of
Rome, Caesar usurped to a sole state to change the state of Rome, Cratippus.
Cratippus made answer: Fatales esse Imperiorum periodo and iam conuerti
Romana^ rempublicam in monarchiam. The course of kingdoms and continuance is
fatal, and now the common wealth of the Romans is to be turned into a
Monarchye. Pompeie thinckinge with himself that he might have in Egipte
faithful harbor, Man purposes and God disposes.
and that there he might gather a new power, repaired thither. In Egipte
because Ptholomeus the young king being vurype of years to govern himself,
was stayed with the connsayle of others, neither any thing passed without the
sufferaunce of his counselors, herevppon Pothinus his eunuche, and Theodotus
Chius the Scholemaister of the young king Ptolomeus, and Achillas who was
liefetenau^t of his army, did long consulte whether Pompeie were to be
received or no, and this question being thorowlye disputed and debated on
every side, Theodotus won them to his persuasion, Theodotus, Achillas.
that Pompeie should be killed, vrginge them with this saying: a dead man
cannot byte, then Pothinus uttered a sentence out of Lucan the Poet. Exeat
aula qui vult esle pius, nulla fides vnquam miseros elegit amicos, and he
accused Pompeie, who when the Senate of Rome would have Egipte to be quiet,
Pompeie by his retire thither does bring in fire brandes of debate and war.
Upon this they being parswaded unto so evil a purpose: took order that
Achillas the liefetenaunte of the kings army, False friends.
and Septimius a trybune of the people, were sent out to murder Pompeie,
this Septimius was sometime a Centurion in the army of Pompeie, Septimius
saluted first Pompeie in ye lattaine tongue, and then Achillas greeted him in
the Greek tongue, and willed him to come forth of his own ship where he
was, with his wife and his children, and to enter into the kings ship,
Pompeie fearinge no evil toward him, went into the kings ship with one
trustye manne: and goinge out he spoke these Verses of Sophocles: Who so
traueleth to any Prince, although he himself be a Prince of hye estate, yet is
he at the will and commandment of y^ other Prince, though he entered a free
man of his own will and pleasure. Pompeie knew Septimius and spoke unto him,
and readinge a great Oration in the which he did welcome Ptolomeie, Septimius
at unawares thriste Pompeie through the body with his sword, and then Achillas
and other thrust their weapons in him falling, The death of Pompeie.
noble Pompeie in this lamentable end sheewed no deformity of countenance,
but geuinge a great sighe, wrapped his head in his garment which he wore on,
immediatlye Pompeie being thruste through and killed, Septimius cut of his
head, these things were done with great speed betwixt Caesar and Pompeie,
for Caesar being Consul came into Epirus in the monthe of January, the
battle fought in Pharsalia was ended the same yerre in September or a little
before. Pompeie was killed the first day of October, being of age nine and
fiftye years, he was borne the last day of September, this was the end of
noble Pompeie who atchiued many goodly enterprises, profitable to his countreye
before the cyuill war began and unto this lamentable end, fortunate for
worldly glory, for his virtues a myrror to many Princes, beloved of all men,
this was that noble Pompeie that took Jerusalem that famous Cittye at the
feast of Easter, 15. years before the cyuill wars began between him and
Caesar, Pompeie.
this was that Pompeie that restored the dignitye of the hieghe priests to
Hircanus, and brought Arestobulus with his ii. sons Antigonus and Alexander,
to Rome captives: what beastly ingratitude was this, Pompeie to be murdered of
the young king Ptolomy by a false train and gyle, whom he had restored
before into his kingdom. Beastlye ingratitude.
Of all examples this is most notable which places before all men, to fly
beastlye ingratitude, it gives admonition to all men, to noble men and
Princes, to ponder the mutabilitye of fortune, and to beware, but also to know
that the like calamityes falls to wise men and Princes, as to meaner
persons, as God disposes so pollicye and counsel geeueth place in all
estates, Man purposes and God disposes.
as the secret counsel of God determines, man only purposes and God
disposes. No man is so wise that he can be able to forsee what will happen:
neither does it lie in man's power to prevent and put of any calamitye or
mishappe that may fall, all that Caesar could object against Pompeie was
this, that Pompeie was not of necessity moved to make that battle, he does
rather accuse other the^ himself. Immediately God showed vengeance upon those
murderers of Pompeie, as soon as Caesar came into Egipte, Caesar.
in the monthe of October he commanded all the murderers of Pompeie to be
killed, so God punished by his heavy wrath bloodshed. The end of ye murderers
of Pompeie.
Some Historyes do record, that the murderers of Pompeie hopinge to receive
some great reward at Caesar's hand, brought the head of Pompeie to Caesar,
Caesar consideringe their false hold and wilye train in murtheringe of so
noble a parsonage hanged them up. Other Historyes record that they went
about to murder Caesar as they did Pompeie, but how soever their pretense
and purpose was, death was their reward. The end of king Ptolome who was
priuye to the murder of Pompeie was lamentable, Ptolomeie.
for he was drowned in the Sea, at what time as Caesar drove the army of the
Egiptians to retire to Alexandria. Theodotus scholemaister to king Ptolome,
escaped not the vengeance of murder, for a few years after, Brutus caused him
to be hanged upon a gibbet, Brutus.
at what time as Brutus possessed Sardes. After the death of Caesar lamentable
was the state of Cornelia the wife of Pompeie, who with great grief of mind,
Cornelia.
saw the murder of her husband with her children being in the same ship
that Pompeie was before, immediatlye she was constrained to fly with her
children into Cyprus, from thence she sent her two sons to Scipio and Cato
her friends, being constrained by her great calamity to seek friends. Her
eldest son Cneius Pompeius in Spain.iiii. year after the wars of Caesar
and Pompeie, was overcome in a great main battle, and retyringe was taken
of Caesar's soldiers and murdered, her other son Sextus Po^peius lived
after, who made great wars against Augustus and Antonius, Sextus Pompeius.
after the death of Caesar he held Dominion in Sicilia, he was Lord of
those seas, he brought his power into Bythenia, and held Dominion in Nisia
and Nicomedia, but afterward being deceived of Ticius a chief Captain of
Antonius to whom he yielded himself, was killed of him traytrouslye against
the law of arms, thus was the end of the noble sons of Pompeie, the father
dyed in Egipte, the elder son in Spain, and the younger in Asia: These
lamentable examples geeueth warninge to the ambitious to fear God, to beware
and circumspecte in the loftye state and high dignitye of fortune, Ambition.
for honor and glory are not perpetual, the wyseste Princes, the noblest and
valiantes Conquerours, have been deceived of their state at a sudden, whose
lamentable falls, no counsel could put of, neither strength of arms could
defend, Alexander.
or uphold. Alexander the great fell he knew not how, Cato.
noble Scipio and wise Cato dyed a lamentable death, Scipio.
Pompeie was deceived of his hope, Pompeie.
and Caesar thereof by ambition frustrate, Caesar.
the best lesson for Princes is to fear God, for all kingdoms says Plato and
most florishynge, are like unto young age, which in time will grow feeble and
weak, which no wisdom, Plato.
no art, no counsel can put of from the^. Caesar after his wars fought in
Pharsalia being Co^sull the same year, in the monthe of October he came to
Alexandria, where he being vacant from all marshall affairs, did hear the
readinge of the learned Philosophers, at the same time, certain that were the
cause of Pompeies death, raised a new power against Caesar, but Caesar put them
al to flight, and vanquished them. In the same war Caesar was much aided by
the counsel and faith of Antipater, Antipater.
who was the father of Herod: Wherefore Caesar gave unto him all Indie to be in
his Dominion and possession. In the mean time at Rome Calenus and Vatineus
succeeded Caesar in the Consulshippe, Calenus.
in the year of the first buildinge of Rome 706. and that Caesar might have the
name and title of a lawful maiestrate, Vatineus
he was made Dictator of Marcus Antonius being absente, Dictator.
and returninge to Rome the same year he remained there a five months. The
next year after which was in the 707. year of the buildinge of Rome, Caesar
was made the third time Consul with Lepidus, Consul. 3.
the same year in Aphrica he had great wars against the friends of Pompeie
that remained, but he overcame them at the length, there Petreius killed
king Iuba and himself, Petreius.
Scipio and Cato killed themselves, Scipio.
Aphranius as he came into the power of Caesar was killed: Cato
After this Caesar returned to Rome, in the.708. year of the buildinge of
Rome, and was created Dictator the third time, for 10. year and made Consul
yt fourth time without a companion, all laws lay now in his power to be
governed, his word was the voice of the whole Senate, he appointed all offices
and their continuance. In yE 709. year of Rome in the monthe of April, he
fought at Munda with the sons of Pompeie, with great peril of his life,
The peril of Caesar.
when he did make the first assult upon his enemies, 200. darts were cast
against him, and late in the eueninge he won the field, and murdered of his
enemies 30000. Spain being in his possession, and all provinces being
quieted, he returned to Rome in the monthe of October, where new honors were
geeuen to him, he was made Dictator and Emperor for ever, Dictator.
Et sacro sanctus: and that all Maiestrates should swear to his doing what he
did, so a sole Monarche was geeuen to him of universal gouernmente, Cesars
ambition.
at the same time he made laws which he called Leges Iulias of his own name:
And he did ordain the year by art of Astronomye, sheewinge the course and
motion of the Planetes which the posteritye observes: this rule did Caesar
learn of that great learned man Sosigenes, whom Caesar brought from Alexandria
to Rome, of whom he learned great knowledge in that art, by this knowledge
many notable things be observed in the common wealth, not only by the order
of the year and course of Planettes times and seasons, but also for Judicial
matters, The use of a Astronomye.
Histories, and contractes, for plantinge, plowinge, sowinge, saylinge, and for
geeuinge of medicine, these notable fruits of Astronomye from ancient times,
the Egiptianes, the Chaldeis and the Greeks, the Romayues have from ancient
times to the posterity observed the end of Pompere, the Historye has set
forth, and now the like change of fortune has caughte Caesar, whose reward
for ambition was death. Ambition.
Ambition in the loftye minds of those that neither fear God, nor know
themselves, creeps as a cankar and filthye leprosye, destroyinge all parts,
and corruptinge the same: For Caesar seeked a sole regemente not content with
his lofty state, but such as liked him: Whereby Cassius seekinge to be Preator
and not obtayninge the same, Cassius.
was the first aucthor and cause of Cesars death. This Cassius took counsel
with Brutus and with other to attempt this murder, Brutus
and the aucthority and favor of Brutus which was great in the common wealth
of Rome, lincked to him many other conspirators, the conspiracy was wrought in
the Ides of March Julius Caesar in the court of Pompeie, was killed of Brutus
and Cassius, Cesars death
and many other that were conspirators to that murder, being stickte in with
xxiii. wounds: the end of this great Prince and Emperor, is among all
examples a rare glass for all men to look upon, consider his dignitye of
state, his great wisdom, his pollicyes and grounded knowledge in all points
of chiualrye, forget not the mutabilitye and fall of him, the ungrateful
hearts of them that murdered him, for ye most part of them that murdered him
rose by Julius Caesar unto honor and power.

Caesar being dead, peace and quietness could not be maintained, although
Cicero and other Senators went about to make peace, for immediately the next day
after Cesars death, a decree was propounded of the Senate, A decree.
that all offenses past should be remitted, and the death of Caesar to be
forgotten utterly, because otherwise the state of the common wealth would be
altered and new fire brandes of war kindled, but nothing what they purposed
came to pass, For immediatlye the Senate to over throw Antonye, they joined
to them Octauius Caesar who succeaded afterward. Octauius Caesar, Antonius, and
Lepidus, were in leage together the same year, that Caesar was murdered in the
monthe of Dece^ber, great was the wrath of God against all ye murderers of
Caesar. Mar. Tullius Cicero, who was an vmpere between Pompeie and Caesar was
murdered in the monthe of January being 64. years of age, Cicero,
his head being cut of, with his right hand, and put upon the place of
pleadinge which was called Rostrum. Antonius and Octauius, pursued Brutus and
Cassius, Cassius.
Cassius killed himself, Brutus
Brutus afterward commanded himself to be murdered of Straton, at the
length discention arose between these.iii. Octauius Caesar, Octauius.
Antonius, and Lepidus, for Antonye hopinge to obtain a sole Empire, brought
out of Egipte a great host to Rome, Antonius.
Octauius met him with another power and chased him to Alexandria, and there
being compassed in of Octauius, Lepidus.
and having many foyles in battle, and hearing a false rumor that Cleopatra
had killed herself, he forth with murdered himself, this was done in the.56.
year of his age, in the 2. year after the death of Julius Caesar. Cleopatra.
How Cleopatra killed herself who was queen of Egipte and concubyne of
Antonius, shall be declared in the life of Octauius.

It is worthy consideration to ponder these loftye and ambitious Princes, how
echone, hoped by the fall of the other to aspyre, to a sole Regiment, and
proud loftye state, but ambition in some one, always broyleth, to aspyre the
like, so the state of usurpers is never quiet neither steadfast, without
co^tinuaunce many feigned friends, as it appeared in Po^peie, and Caesar,
Antonius, Silla, Marius, each one trusted and they were deceived, so ponder you
ye state of these two mighty persons Pompeie and Caesar: each one feared the
other, and each one hoped to aspyre above ye other, Pompeie caught his end
unlooked for, and Caesar for all his wisdom and pollicye, sodainlye fell he
knew not how.

Thus ye see the state and end of these two loftye persons what they
purposed, God otherwise determined, all power is of God, the state of mighty
Princes, their continuance, their end, rests, only in the secret
counsel of GOO. ()

OCTAVIUS.


AFter Julius Caesar was thus murdered, whose death the most part of the
nobility rejoiced at, The cause of Cesars death
because such an one was taken away whom for his ambicious mind to dominion
they did cut of, for they feared greatly his cruel and tyrannical regiment,
and many of them envied his success, and fortunate estate, other some his
virtues, so that their diverse affections in one were linked, to pluck Caesar
from his throne. No trust in a kingdom for a tyrant.
Nobility deceived Caesar who by death sought to extinguishe that hope
which Caesar hunted at. All his adversaries appeared as they were, open
enemies, nobility beguiled Caesar, Caesar.
and all friendship left him. Now Caesar is dead, and his enemies live, and
whom they would not they after obey, and of whom by Antonius procurement
the violent end of Caesar was so revenged, that none of them saw any quiet
time of rest, Murder not unpunished.
for God had raised such an one, as boulted out the murderers, for as the
fact was horrible to destroy so noble a governor, even so their end was
most lamentable, Man may purpose, but God disposes.
and whereas they thought to cut of all hope and practice of sole regiment: the
Romans never after saw but a sole regiment, certain it is that before the
time of Tarquinius Superbus, Tarquinius.
kings held a sole regiment, which Tarquinius ravished the most beautiful
Lucretia Collatinus wife. Lucretia.
After Tarquinius was banished and his stock, the name of kings was banished,
and that form of regiment changed, not that, that estate of government was
ill, but because their Princes placed in that sole and excellent estate,
Princes tyrauntes.
after their will and lust rulinge, of reason and all moderation neglected,
tyrannical and outrageous factes were committed by them. This was the cause
that, that estate of government was dissolved, and changed through the evil
manners of Princes, of such force is sin to throw down a Prince from his
seat, Sin ye fall of kingdoms.
to expel him from his kingdom, and thereby to alter the quiet and fortunate
estate wherein yt Romans stood wholly, and because their Princes ungodly
governed, and in all their enterprices tyrannically proceaded. After kings, two
Consuls succeaded, Consuls.
which yearly were chosen, they were of Majesty like unto kings, but of no
continuance, because if their government should not be with equitye, or at the
least not tolerable, the office sone ceased, which brideled many in their
affections, and cut of from many their bloody cogitacious in diverse purposes.
Cesars ambition.
Caesar by ambition moved to establishe in him a sole regimente, dyed in his
ambitious enterprise as it is before declared. After Julius Cesars death,
Octauius succeaded in a sole regimente, Octauius Emperor at the birth of
Christ.
who reigned at the birth of our Savior Christ. Then there was an universal
peace over all the world. Octauius caughte the imperial seat in the 722.
years after the buildinge of Rome, Rome. 722. years builded before Octauius
reigned.
which was the year after the banishment of kings 480. this was a strange
manner of government in the eyes of the Romans that whereas they detested the
sole Regiment of a king now they have a sole Regiment of an Emperor, Consuis
continued. 480. years.
Octauius was the son of Octauius, this Octauius being a Senator, his
mothers progenye came by lyniall dissente from Eneas, by the noble house of
Julius, who by adoption of Caius Julius Caesar his great uncle succeaded.
Octauius by his famous acts and large victoryes was tituled Augustus, some
refer the original beginning of Octauius to rise at Velitre a famous town
in Italye, Emperors has continued a 571.
which descended from Tarquinius priscus, a king of the Romans, whose
progenye was always in honorable estate. Octauius father from his young
years was had in great estimation, a man of great substance and wealth, and
enjoyed an honorable estate, whose doings were always directed to justice
and upright dealing, namely to assaye that which he enterprised, Octauius his
father.
he dyed sodeinly as he came from Macedonia, this his son Octauius being
but four years of age, Octauia mayor.
he left behind him two daughters Octauia mayor and Octauia minor. As
concerning the time that Octauius was borne, Octauia minor.
it was in the Consulshippe of Marcus Tullius Cicero, and Antonius, in the ix.
Kalendes of October somewhat before the son rysinge. Four times cyuill
wars was fought of him. The first was against Marcus Antonius at Mutina,
Brutus
the second was against Brutus and Cassius at Philippos a City in Macedonia,
Cassius.
the third against Lucius Antonius who was famished to death of Octauius,
Lucius.
so hard he was besieged at Prusia: the fourth war was fought against
Sextus Pompeius which Pompeius he overcame about Cicile in war by Seas, S.
Pompeius.
after that he overcame the son of Gneius Pompeius. G. Pompeius
As concerning the multitude of those which conspired Cesars death,
proclamation was made, that who so could bring the head of any one of them
that conspired Cesars death, A Promaclation for the murderers of Caesar.
should receive great sums of money, there was not one left almost but money
brought his head, so faithful were all these Promoters and priuye searchers
to plye their business, for money made them true searchers some were hid in
filthye priues, some conueighed in feether beds, The state of the
conspiratours.
some killed themselves, many faithful seruanntes clothed in their masters
apparel were murdered for them, but all had one end, and that in three
years space: neither their former dignitye saved them, nor the power whereon
they stayed themselves. Murder.
Octauius never ceased till he had rooted out the whole race of the
conspiratours: Cicile.
Cicile felt his wars, Alexandria.
Alexandria was long besieged, Antonye
where unto Antony and Cleopatra fled for fear, Cleopatra.
who was in the end apprehended and there put to death. Antony sought to get
the conditions of peace at Octauius hands, but Octauius did not thence depart
until he saw the dead body of Antony, Antonye.
with whom Cleopatra was buried, Cleopatra.
Antonius harlotte in a sumptuous Tomb, which was begone long before of Antony
to be his Sepulcher. But Cleopatra sought means in her life time to aspyre to
Herodes kingdom very desirous to have some accusations against him, for she
knew Antony would be moved upon a light occasion to believe her. Cleopatra
bare feigned frendshippe to Herod, Herod.
and Herod reco^pensed her with the same, for Herod sought means to kill
her because by subtle means, she sought to spoil him of his kingdom, but by
counsel of his friends he was prohibited they knowinge what horrible murders
she had done of many Princes and noble men of all cou^treyes where she came,
but Herod was compelled with great treasures to pacifye the bloody purpose of
Cleopatra and dissembled her myscheues. Herod.
In the end Antonius and Cleopatra came to a violent end, as concerning the
death of Cleopatra how she wrought her own death, Gallen.
Gallen sheeweth very excelle^tly in his book Dea therica ad pisonem the eight
Chapter: when Octauius the Emperor overcame Antony, he was purposed to take
Cleopatra alive, and to bring so royal a person to Rome in tryumphe, when
Cleopatra understood the mind of Octauius the Emperor, she thought it more
honor and renown to her to dye a queen though she killed her self, then to
go to Rome in triumph at the will of other, a captive, a spectacle, a
laughinge stock to all yt world, whereupon she sought the way to murder
herself, Cleopatra.
she called to her the.ii. faithful maids she had, Naera and Carmion was
their names, who always served to the adorninge and deckinge of her body, the
one of them foulded her hears, the other to pare her nails: she commanded
that they should bring unto her a certain Serpente called Plyas covered with
fig leaves and vine leaves whereby she thought to deceive the keepers and
watch men, and she made a proof of poison of her two gentle women Naera and
Carmion they not knowing of the poison as soon as she saw the poison to take
effect suddenly upon them, she applied y^ same unto her self, some write
that she applied ii. Serpe^tes unto her breasts and so dyed of them, some write
that she made a long and deep wound upon her arm first with her teeth,
and then the poison taken of ye Serpent, she put it in a cup, and so the
poison with his infected qualitye, destroyed her suddenly: Cleopatra was found
with her right hand to hold upon her head a princelye Crown, Cleopatra,
her death.
that in her death she might appear a Queen to all that beheld her, her
death being known to Octauius ye Emperor he wondered at the love of the
gentle women that dyed with her, and her stout courage in preferringe death
before a servile life. The.ii. sons of Fuluia
At the same season he put to death the.ii. sons of Antony begotten of
Fuluia, also Cesarion who^ Cleopatra did vaunt to have borne of Julius Caesar,
diverse he spared. Octauius being in the countreye of Egipte and by good
occasion offered, Alexanders picture reverenced of Octauius.
saw in a certain place the picture of Alexander the great, as conninglye as
art coule devise pictured, whose body seen with a Crown on his head, ye
place decked with pleasant flowers, Octauius made obeisance to it, this being
done: Octauius was demanded if he would see the picture of Ptolome? Ptolomes
picture neglected.
Octauius made answer my mind was to see a king and not the dead, meaning
that Ptolome in comparison of Alexander the great for his mighty conquest was
as the dead to the lyuinge. Octauius answer upon Ptolomes picture.
Ptolome although his picture was in comparison contemned to Alexander, yet
he is not swalowed up in oblivion. Josephus.
Josephus a famous Historiographer and Eusebius also do Chronicle with much
commendatio^ this Ptolome, Eusebius.
Princes famous are not buried in oblivion, Godly Princes.
the wicked are with the godly to all posterities Chronicled, the good Princes
are never forgotten nor the wicked out of memory, the one for fame yt other
for ignomini, Wicked Princes.
as Octauius grew in magnificence in glory, and more large Dominions, even so
the malice of many men puffed up with envy, wrought treasones against him, such
is the estate of Princes though they have Dominion over many, Princes live to
all posterityes.
they are enuyed of many, which oftentimes seeks the decay to the estate of
Princes, factious heads never contented with any estate, Ambition of factious
heads.
cause innouations, ambitious heads ymagine new devises to augment their
proper estate, ambitious heads surmise treasonnes, ambitious heads always
being vain glorious do apply and settle themselves to al vanities, with
ambitious heads the care of private luker, honor and wealth is their only
study, and their pretenced purpose, with ambitious heads, Lightness.
the common wealth is least thought of, well willinge hearts never desire
innouacions, Constancye.
constant heads, in mind and state quiet do always continue, in a most
goodlye harmonye directing their deeds and acts to the advancement and
honor of the common wealth: And therefore Alcibiades whom Thucidides sets
forth with great commendations, notes these two singular points to be placed
in all men, who do embrace with earnest love and sincere affection the
prosperity of the common wealth: that he be of force and power to tame and
subdue pleasure: over money to be Lord and master: to make money to serve
him, and not that his treasures, secret, and unknown mines of flotinge
wealth, should make him captive, and bondslaue to insatiable affection, Two
properties meet for magistrates.
he serves, and obeys, who follows affection: He only rules whose acts
in well doing tempere and bridle affection. Many treasons by these means were
conspired against Octauius, which were for the most part detected and opened
before they caught their purpose: Lepidus.
as of Lepidus, of Varro, Varro.
of Murena, of Scipio with many other, yea and sometime of mean persons,
Murena.
who thought to have destroyed Octauius and the whole Senate. Scipio.
As concerning his martial enterprises in foreign Regions, two fields were
fought of him in his own person, Dalmacia.
as concerning his wars in Dalmacia he was but of tender years at that
instant, and in that same he was stricken with many wounds: he caughte a
stroke upon the knee: in another battle he was wounded upon the thigh, and
both his arms were hurt by the fall of a bridge, many other wars he took
in hand by his deputies or ambassadors, also he was not far from the wars
fought in Pa^nonia, The victories of Octauius.
Germany and Cantabria were brought under his subjection: Aquitania and
Dalmacia with all Illiria, what Nation did he not bring under his subjection?
to note orderlye by Historyes what Nationes he over came, and what mighty
Kings he vanquished, to show also how far the fame of his virtues reached
whereby the stout and proud heart of his enemies the lofty and hautye
stomachs of the mighty Monarchs yielded themselves, being ravished with his
virtuous success which fell unto him on every side, and how the Romans loved
him, and foreign Regions dreaded him, and were in admiration of him, how he
removed ye Germaynes that inhabited behind the river Albine of ye which number
were the Sueuianes, and Sicambri who had yielded themselves, and how he
brought them into France and caused them to inhabit near the borders of
Rhene, and how many Nations besides being full of disturbance he made at his
beck to obey as my skill at full to describe them is not able, or a great
volume is not sufficient to contain them. Arare prince.
How happy had the Roman Empire been if so quiet a Prince, or if the rare
virtues of so virtuous a governor had continued among them, then so infinite
hosts and multitudes of men had not been devoured of so many ambitious heads
in the cyuill wars, what Prince is there not? except he be a rare Prince in
disposition from other, Arare prince.
but that a sleighte device or toye makes a just quarrel to war as the
Prince affects or as counsel persuades, all matters in the common wealth
take effect, The fortunat kingdom.
the quiet and fortunate kingdom enjoys the quiet and happy Prince, Rash
heads.
for rash heads to prove adventures feels the smarte of their devises,
Many calamities of wars.
long consultation brought happy success and steadfast estate. Wars have
devoured many, whom if affection to live at home had brideled them, they
might have enjoyed lyuinge, the fatherless, the fathers slaye, the widow her
comfort, many rich houses not spoiled, many a Cittye and town in their
former and ancient estate should have continued, which thereby are decayed. As
God permitted the earth which gave from her so many shapes of bodies of life
and conditions so contrary, being carried into all wickedness, to be meet
burdens to render yt to earth which earth once gave and yielded up so wars
bring death, War, oblivion grave.
and death in the grave oblivion, the people are gone, the grave unknown the
wars Chronicled, and their calamities not out of memory, great ought the
deliberation to be of them which tendereth the affairs of the Prince for that
which one deuiseth, many feels and tastes be it good or badde, Why great
deliberation ought to be had in the affairs of the Prince.
else that comes to pass which the Greek svttered of their Princes.

Quicquid delinquunt Reges plectuntur achiui:
What Prince does lust to frame at will by counsel, or decre:
the seely soul the subject mean shall feel like state to be.
But where wars are iustlye to be moved, Why wars are to be moved.
as to repress forrayne enemies or cyuill commotions, there the Prince
iustlye resists wars, and the subject aydeth the Prince, for so Bellum
suscipiendum est vt in pace viuatur, wars are therefore to be enterprised and
taken in hand, to make peace, and quietness, but who so without a consideration
to repel great injuries, not to defend their country, nor to save the
prosperous estate both of the Prince and the universal multitude do move
wars, those seek not peace but make as it were Seminarium multorum bellorum
et calamitatu^, a sowinge of seed of infinite wars, War.
and no lack of calamities: for war is always lincked with these two
companions Loimos kai Limos pestilence and hunger, yt which war cannot do,
famine and pestilence will do, so it may be said truly, that which was spoken
of the Greeks.

Not Mars alone in furye great,
with bloody hands does spill:
But death and famine work distress,
that Mars might have his fill.
Octauius therevppon consideringe the great calamities that happened by
wars, sheewed his mind to be so far from that desire, that he caused
certain Princes to take an oath in the Temple of Mars that none of them should
break the oath which they had made: that this was his accustomed saying,
desire of wars was a token of a boastinge and crakinge head, and of a light
brain, by unknown adventures, and hazard of battle to throw headlonge down
the quiet estate of Cittye and country, for an ambitious glory of a Laurel
crown, as a man would say, for a few unprofitable leaves who so without just
cause moves battle, War without just cause
is like unto one that fisheth with a great golden houke, which being broken
the pray gotten is nothing. Some do think that this Emperor Octauius had
so great care to his common wealth, The great care of Octauius toward the
common wealth.
and that so great was his study and travail in well doing, in plantinge
justice, in upholding virtue, and repressinge vice, whereby his cares of mind
grew so great, his dangers of life so many, that he was diverse times minded
to render up that dignitye of hye estate, but he altered his mind in
consideringe more deepelye, that in leadinge a private estate, he should not be
with out danger, and also he saw that at that present leauinge that state
of government, it would be ruled by many governors, Ambition.
whereby Octauius a most godly Prince foresawe what factiones might arise,
what division by parts taking, what tumultes might follow and vprores, no
man bearinge with an others estate, but each one clyminge, who may be best
and of highest power to command, to rule, not to be ruled, to rule the will
of other at commandment: wherein it seems that Octauius preferred for
worthynes and happynes of continuinge estate, A Monarcke the best state.
a Monarche according to the saying of Ulysses the wise Grecian.

Multorum principatus mala res est, Homers Verse.
Rex vnicus esto.
Where many pears as right do hold*
one land to rule at will:
There feeble state does smart their lore, One governor best in a kingdom.

and deadly Mars that kingdoms spill.
This Octauius desiered that it might be said of him, the common wealth of
the Romans to be preserved from all peril of dangerous estate by him, and
this to be the fruits of his travail, yt I may (quoth he) be called the
Aucthor of the best estate, The request of Octauius and of al good Princes.
and at my death to carye with me ye hope, that ye common wealth to many ages
may remain in that good estate wherein I left it, such was the great care of
the good Prince Octauius as it ought to be of all good Princes, for as
husbandmen, they plant for their posteritye, and as the saying is of law
makers: Laws.
Leges posteritatem spectant, laws be made for the posteritye, though they
were decreed presentlye: Government.
And according to godly laws, Princes ought to frame their government, that
the posterity may speak well thereof, Rome.
and take advancement thereby. The Cittye of Rome before Octauius days, was
but of mean and slender buildinge, without the beutye of goodly houses,
sumptuous Palaces, and gorgious Temples, but he with all ornature and beutye
builded the same, and made it fenced from the ouerflowinge of the fludde Tyber,
and from all casualties of fire. Octauius used this saying of Rome, The
saying of Octauius upon Rome.
that is: he might worthily glory of Rome, since that he had left it builded
of Marble stone, which he received but builded of tyle, and mudde walls,
many famous monumentes he builded as Forum et Edem, Martis Vltoris, Templum
Apolinis in Palatio edem tonantis in Capitolio, Sumpteons buildinges.
he made also a great and sumptuous librarye plenteous with all manner of
excellent books of Greek and lattine and other languages, Monuments of
Octauius.
many other worthy monumentes he erected of fame, as Porticus Basilij,
Lucij, and caui Porticus, Liuij and Octaui, Thaeatrum diui Marcelli, with many
other goodly monumentes of fame. Octauius did not erecte these monumentes of
fame only for his commendation, but also to move many other noble pears and
Princes, that every one according to his abillitye would endeavor himself
to beutifye and adorn the Cittye of Rome either with new monumentes, or to
repair monumentes which are in decay, or other famous works which in time are
weakened and made feebell from the foundation, The monumentes at Rome.
for many goodly works were then erected whereof Rome daily shows some
fallen, many broken down, some from ye foundation lifted and carried away: as
the house of Homer, the house of Diana which Asinius Pollo builded, the house
of Saturn, the notable monument of Agrippa: Many goodly laws Octauius did
decree and make as the Digest and the Pandect: Laws.
and the Code does show, certain laws he did amend and correct. On all
sides, both Rome and all provinces, yea the whole Jurisdiction of the Roman
Empire was so excellently governed, Pater patrie, ye title of virtuous Princes.
that they gave unto him this title and name Pater patrie, that is, the father
of the cou^trye. Octauius being but a young man, had the daughter of Publius
Saruilius Isauricus to be espoused to him, but yt brake of, and then married
Claudia ye daughter of Fuluia, begotten of Publius Claudius, Claudia.
he was married but a while to her, such was ye disagreemente between Fuluia
his mother in law and him, he left her daughter vndeflowered and untouched,
after that he married Scribonia who was married before to two Consuls, Scribonia.
but Scribonia was deuorced from him, her manners were odious, and being
wearyed with her conditions left her, and sone after gat to his love Liuia
Drusilla, her he loved and yt continually the whole time of his government
Octauius had by Scribonia, Liuia.
Iulia his daughter, but of Lyuia he had never a child, of whom earnestly he
wyshed to have some fruit of her body, she was with child but untimely it
perished: Octauius caused Iulia his daughter to be married to Marcellus his
sisters son being but passed a little the limmettes of childhoode, Iulia.
he being but newly married dyed, Marcellus.
after whose death he married her unto his friend Agrippa, Agrippa.
who also dyed before her, but left behind him v. children.iii. sons,
and.ii. daughters of the which sons the.ii. eldest dyed, then to establishe a
quietness in the Empire, he adopted the third son, who was named Agrippa, but
his manners and conditions were so wicked and odious unto Augustus that he
revoked the adoption, Tiberius
and for his child did adopt Tiberius his son in law, as concerning his
daughters they were so wicked, that he uttered of them the Verse of Homer: I
would they had never been got or yt they had dyed unmarried. As concerning
Octauius how he governed and to show what worthy victoryes he had got, what
mighty kings became tributory to him it were a worthy matter to speak of,
but to make a full discourse how, when, where, how happily he governed the most
eloquent shall want means to utter, and set forth so worthy a Prince, Octauius.
so fortunate a Captain, so wise a counselor, and so victorious an Emperor,
not for lack of matter but his worthiness shall subvert the order, argument and
disposition of the most eloquente, for even before he was borne many things
were foreshewed of him to succeade, Suetonius.
for Suetonius Tranquillus in his Historye sheeweth: Quod prodigium Rome factum
est, Prodigium,
Quo denuntiabatur naturam parturire Regem Romanorum, a wonder happened at
Rome, whereby was sheewed Octauius being borne, that nature did bring forth
the king of the Romans, many other things happened which were to tedious,
and to long to resite, and as concerning his mothers dream before he was
borne this it was, The dream of Accia.
she dreamed that her bowelles were carried up to the stars, and spread over
all the earth, and up to ye clymate of ye Heaven, The dream of Octauius father.
his father dreamed yt the beams of the son rose upon the womb of his
wife. The same day that Octauius was borne, the Senators of Rome sat upon the
treason of Catelin whervppon Octauius mother at that time trauelinge, Cateline.
his father did somewhat absent himself from the Senate house, Vigidius.
the cause being known, Vigidius consideringe the instante of his natiuitye,
he being a famous man in the Mathematical sciences said: Dominum terrarum
orbinatum, a governor of the earth to be borne, many probable conjectures,
do arise in calculatinge and domifyinge, but so many foolish errors as that
they which seem to tell other, of their fortune and state to come, are most
ignorant of their own, and none more feel the vanitye thereof, then the
vain calculator. The death of Octauius.
He dyed the fourtenthe day of the Kalendes of September, the nynthe hour of
the day, in the fourtye and six years of his age, The lame^tation for the
death of Octauius.
Octauius being dead great lamentacion was made for him of all the Roman
kingdoms and nations far of, the mighty Princes mourned for his funeral,
The death of noble Princes.
all that knew him mourned, and those that never saw him full bitterly
lamented, such was the worthynes of his so noble gouernmente. Tyberius who
succeeded in the Empire after him was advanced by this Emperor, Tiberius.
his government was called Aureum seculum Augusti, Aureum seculum.
the golden world of Augustus: Drusus the son of Tiberius commended with
eloquent Oration this Emperor: this done his corpse was carried on the
shoulders of the Senators in an appointed place, Octauius.
and there consumed to ashes, great was the pomp, and no small lamentacio^ in
the funeral of so victorious a Prince, who in time governed many Nations, now
he geeueth place to duste. How many rejoiced of him lyuinge so many lamented
his departinge, Fame after death preserves Princes in memory.
his fame so remained, as neither death vglye, nor time ancient, or envy
malicious might ever let fame abolish, such is the fame of the worthy, and
virtuous: and of the Godly Princes, The fruit of good life.
this only is the fruit, else vain is their glory, Noble fame the fruit of
kingdom.
their acts base and mean, whom no worthiness can save from oblivion, neither
whom a perpetuitye of noble acts cannot bless, he dyed in the Consulshippe
of Gneius Pompeius, and Sextus Apuleius: He left his Realm in great
quietness, and also in great felicitye, great were his victories, and his large
Dominions, his peopeople not to be nombred, What loss the Romans had by the
death of Augustus.
they lost fortunate Augustus when he dyed, Rome lost her father, the golden
world, and of Augustus a victorious Prince.

TIBERIUS.


Diverse opinions were spread of Octauius death, Tiberius.
some thought one way, other some another, much it was to be lamented, so
good an Emperor to fall into the hands of so unnatural a wife. After
Octauius death Claudius Tiberius the son of Liuia succeeded, Liuia.
being the step son of Caesar Octauius: the means whereby he succeeded
was subtillye compassed by many sleightes, and wilye policies of his mother
Liuia, but the chief cause that he succeeded was this his famous acts and
nobillity in the late Emperors affairs, caused both the Senate and the
universal multitude of the Romans, with earnest affection, and most
willinge hearts to create him Emperor: Tiberius manners changed.
but as soon as Tiberius was in the dignitye placed, both the Senate and the
universal multitude of the Romans felt him a chaungelinge in all his doings.
Whereas before virtue and nobilitye in him sprede great glory and renown to
the common wealth of the Romans, now vglye vices, his monsterous life in
government. over whelmeth that fortunate estate, The fortunat Region.
his virtues did not so much good as his vices hurt, most fortunate is that
Region wherein by long continuance, and by long descente Godly Princes
remain successors famous. The godly Prince.
For, what the godly Prince procures in his gouernmente, the wicked Prince
dissolueth, marreth, and pulls down, so brittle is the estate of kingdoms,
The wicked Prince.
so vnsted fast the form of common wealth, because at the manners of the
Prince, the kingdom either ryseth or falls, One Prince many Dominions.
so much the life of one, the manners and conditions of one, frames many
mighty Dominions: As this Tiberius who if he had continued in his former
doing, had been nombred among the most excellent Princes, but now high
estate of dignity sets out Tiberius in his proper conditions, Tiberius in
his coullours
in his natural disposition, that which he seemed, is now changed to another
hew with his estate, his manners, and conditions be also altered: now cruel
and bloody factes, most beastly life, braste out in him to utter what he was:
for certain it is the Romans never looked for these things at Tiberius
hands, so difficult a matter it was to judge thoroughly what he will prove in
government, because that free state in him being commonly after will and
lust, Why it is a hard thing to judge of the Prince.
did utter in doing secret and hid cogitations of his tyra^nicall mind, with
the perfect dispositions and natural inclynations of a tyrante: as it
appears by many Princes, which in like sort governed as this Tiberius, Nero.
Nero, Co^modus, Bassianus, that this Emperor Tiberius might thoroughly be
known: Domitianus.
I will orderlye proceed to show what he was, Commodus.
his stock had beginning at a certain town of the Sabynes called Regilis,
Bassianus.
from the which his ancestors fled to Rome: The beginning of Tiberius stock.
Rome then being but new builded, so is referred the beginning of his stock
to Appius Claudius, and that he was of that descent: which time was in the sixth
year after the banishment of kings they that dyscended of this race or
progenye were called Nerones. Appius Claudius.
Quia lingua Sabinorum Nero strenuus appellatur: Nerones.
Because in the Sabyne tongue Nero by the true Etimologie and interpretation is
named strong or stout, there were two houses: vna plebeia, Plebeia.
but yet very worthy: the other pulchrorum, which were of the order of the
Senators, Pulcrorum*
of those which dyscended of the families called Claudij, many famous acts
remain, and contrarywyse acts not registered with noble fame, sometime endueeth
to noble houses and long auncientrie, not like discente of worthiness nor
equal desarte, but for their evil government, ignominye and reproach, though
the wicked, want that true renown of honor, True nobilitye.
which for virtues sake was attributed unto their ancestors, yet they
account them selves of the same with discente of equal worthynes of blood,
and title of long auncientrye, but it is neither the blood, nor the bones of
their ancestors, long tytles from many discentes, Noble arms
nor noble arms which from most aunciente time have been in price that can
make any one, wanting the like renown of his noble house, or the virtues of
his predecessors to claim like honor, True nobilitye.
or to enjoy like title and arms: For the unworthy gentleman most of all
neglects that, which his noble progenitors attained unto, who were made
worthy by virtue, Virtue first creates nobilitye.
and fame: fame gave it them to claim, where is then the title? what can be
their claim? when there is no spark of desarte yt respects the renowned
merits of their auncientrye. Descent of noble houses.
If descente of nobilitye should fall out, as merit and singular virtue did
crave, then were rare all the true and perfect nobilitye, only prudente
nobilitye, Learned nobility.
learned, full of counsel, grauitye, modestye, temperaunce, abundance in all
knowledge, meet to administer and execute the laws, yea for as fame first
taught nobility by merit, Fame.
so lack of like worthynes, does abase and make them unworthy to enjoy like
claim of nobilitye. True claim of nobilitye.


Read the Oration of Marius as concerning nobilitye in Salust, entreatinge
upon the wars of Iugurtha, and as concerning Appius Cecus, Appius Cecus.
Appius the blind, whom Tulli makes mention of, in his Book de senectute:
Appius Cecus made ye league which should be concluded with Pirrhus, Pirrhum
most shameful to ye Romans to be finished. Claudius Caudex was the first
among the Romans that passed the seas with a great nauye, Ciaudius Caudex.
and expelled the Carthagimanes from Cicile, Claudius Nero.
Claudius Nero overcame Hasdruball marchinge out of Spain with a great power,
before he joined his power with his brother Hanniball, with many other famous
acts of that ancient house, Hanniball.
which were to long to entreat. Tiberius came of this house and progenye by
the mothers side, for his mother came from Appius the fair, Appius pulcher.
his fathers progeny came from Nero the father of Tiberius, who was sometime
treasuror to Julius Caesar in his wars fought in Alexandria, he was besides
the chief of his Navy, his excellencye in his Princes affairs was such, yt
the great renown of his victoryes was much furthered by him, his secret
pollicyes in the Emperors affairs, his wisdom, his faithful service
merited much estimation with Julius Caesar. Tiberius.
Tiberius being well lyked of Octauius the Emperor, was given unto him of his
father in adoption. Immediatlye after yt Tiberius father dyed, Drusus.
leauinge behind him two sons, this Tiberius and Drusus, this Tiberius was
borne at Rome, at such time as Marcus Emilius Lepidus, and Mucius Plauca were
Consuls, he had then to wife Agrippa, the daughter of Marcus Agrippa the nyce
of Pomponius Atticus, sometime a king of the Romans. Agrippa.
Agrippa did not long time continue with her husband Tiberius, for she was
at the length put away great with child. Forced marriage.
Tiberius at those days being enforced thereto to take Iulia the daughter of
Augustus to wife. So matrimonye was made by policies, lincked and relincked,
Marriages for honor.
not as godly affection did lead, but as hope of honor moved, so maryages
were made, often under pretense of amitye, and adulation of poisoned hearts,
deep and cloked emnities lie lurkinge, which time utters afterward. This was
the pollicye of Liuia that wicked Empress, she having further fetch to bring
thereby ye estate of the Empire, to her sons hands. Iulia.
Iulia was hated of Tiberius for her conditions, she was proud, loftye,
disdaynfull, wrathful, geeuen to all voluptuousnes, light of countenance,
light of chastity, and fruitless of good manners, abou^dant in bloody
imaginacio^s, cruel in her purposes, sone turned to folly, constant and
steadfast to wickedness. Agrippa.
Agrippa pleased the eye of Tiberius, she in manners contented him, she was
beutifull, sober, discrete, of goodly personage, chastitye possessed her whole
body and an humble look, not proud, gentle, full of courtesye, pitiful, so
adorned with virtue, The fruits of honest life in women.
that her breast was a pure fountain of virtues, of years tender, a matrone
in manners, excellinge in all goodly qualities, Her virtues sheewed what she
was, and time uttered her chastitye. Iulia leadinge a wanton life, in the end
uttered her follye, which being known a deuorce ensued thereof. Tiberius as
he vnwillinglye caughte her, so willinglye he left her* The fruits of forced
marriages.
friends, aucthoritye, and money made the marriage, her vices did undo that
which Tiberius in heart well wisshinge could not do, until such time as her
naughtye life could merit no pardon, nor frendshippe make any excuse. Octauius
was much plagued with his daughters of whom he was so ashamed through their
follye and wicked life, that he would title them by many monstrous names, and
would wish that they had never been gotten, or dyed unmarried. Now as
concerning Tiberius, diverse strange things happened which foresheewed yt the
estate of the Empire should come to his hands, Scribonius.
for Scribonius a famous man in the Mathematical sciences, groundinge his
knowledge upon his calculation in the Judgment of Astrologye, said: that
Tiberius should succeade next in the Empire, but without a Diadem: and so
it came to pass an Astronomer, otherwise called Thrasibulus, Thrasibolus.
excellent in the like faculty but every thing not happeninge in all
points to Tiberius as he prophesyed. In a rage Tiberius was like to break
his neck suddenly: which mishappe toward him if Thrasibulus had foreseen
by his own calculation, he would not have been present in that peril, The
vncertentye of Astrologye.
but they uncertain of their own estate do make a certain calculation of
other men's, and not able in deed to withstand perilles, do yet boast of their
faculty and science as though it preserved them, The estate of all those which
cast natiuities.
wherein every one of them is deceived and do fall to many vndoinges: and
they which ca^ domify to all felicity for other a bare and nedye estate, their
own devises have wrapped them with many myseries, such is their vain glorious
calculation, so deceiptful is their art, and so vain is their knowledge,
replenished with illusions, and such is their vain study, The castinge of
Natiuities.
deceitful inventions, subtle illusions, coniecturall practices: which
Theodoretus a most famous writer in his book of questions upon Genesis,
condemns as vain, Theodoretus in questione 1^. Genesis.
most wicked and detestable in these words: As concerning the vain
contention upon a calculation, cast upon the nativity of any man, Pithagoras.
neither Pithagoras nor Plato, Plato.
nor the Stoikes have received any such kind of science: Stoikes.
Who then having their faith in the holy Scriptures: will not receive these
things not only as wicked but as vain and folishe. Thus much as concerning
that part of Astrologye, or the calculation upon the natiuitye of any man, how
wicked, folishe, and impious it is. As concerning the things which did
foreshewe Tiberius success in attayninge to the Empire, this was one, A
foreshew of Tiberius to succeed in the Empire.
at his return to Rome Tiberius being at Roodes, an Egle never seen before
in that coast, fate upon the place where Tiberius lodged, with many other
tokens: whereupon a conjecture was taken, the Empire to fall to Tiberius
hands. At that instant when Octauius the Emperor was at the point of death, A
manner of foreshewe among the Romans.
but of perfect remembrance: he caused Tiberius to be called for to common
with him, many do think that Octauius never minded to create Tiberius
Emperor, but being ruled by Liuia the Empress: Liuia.
For Octauius could better rule the large Dominion of the Roman Empire, yea
the mighty Region of Greece was more in fear of him, then the froward and
dissolute mind of Liuid, so hard and difficulte a matter it is to rule a
creature with whom will, lust, and apetite was as a law, and especially where
such a one has aucthoritye and stroke to affecte and dispose as nature and
will lysteth to rule above the Prince. Othersome do say that the nobilitye of
heart and courage of Tiberius, his noble acts in the affairs of ye Emperor
Octauius, moved him thereto, many are the comme^dations of Tiberius in
certain Epistles written by Octauius, in his affairs and business, The
comme^dations of Tiberius.
if other Chronicles be serched you shall find the comme^dations of Tiberius
before he came to be Emperor to be very great. This is one of many: Nihil
interest valeam nec ne, si tu non valebis: if thou Tiberius do not well, I my
self cannot do well: with many words of commendations. Diverse suspicions were
surmised of Tiberius in attayninge to the Empire, for the death of Augustus was
not known before Agrippa Agrippa.
being adopted of Octauius was murdered, which thing comprehended in it a
full suspicion, Devises for kingdoms sake.
that both Tiberius and Liuia had used their subtilities, such are the devices
many times for kingdoms sake, for true it is, no cruel beast seeks so
egerlye for his preye, as bloody hearts puffed up with ambition, do devise
purposes to establishe in some securitye their estate, there is no regard of
right, law, nor kindred, noble parentage, the fool and the wise, the cowarde
with the politic person are a like, Ambition a bloody beast.
where ambition with strong hands armed does get mastrie, nature, descent,
right and law is overwhelmed by ambition in tyrants. The Chronicles are full
of such testimonies of ambitious examples, Iugurtha.
as of Iugurtha toward ye children of Misipsa, Romulus.
of Romulus and Remus, Polinices.
brethren of Polinices, Eteocles.
and Eteocles brethren, Clitemnestra
of Clitemnestra and Egistus, Egistus.
and those that succeaded Alexander the great, of Bessus Bessus.
toward king Darius, Herod.
of Herod against his own son, Antonins.
of Antonius Caracalla, Henrye the fourth.
against his own father Seuerus Emperor of Rome: Our Chronicles want not the
like devises, call to mind the late days of Henrye the fourth toward
Richard the second, and of his nobilitye: Of Owen Glendoure vsurpinge in
Wales against Henrye the fourth, Owen Gle^doure.
Richard the third against Edward the fourth children, Richard the third.
for both they were murdered by Richard the third, Ambition.
so strong is ambition to inflame the hearts of the ambitious, to seek
innovation against the state of the Princes, to raise from mean to greater,
and so with all excess of insatiable desire from better do mind as Just in
them kindles to enjoy the highest throne alone to command, Ambition.
not of one Cittye or cou^trye, but of large Dominions, and of infinite Regions.

At such time as Tiberius should take upon him the state of the Empire by the
consent of the Senate, The dissimulation of Tiberius.
he seemed to refuse it for many dangers hanginge over his head, and also
because be would be thought free from all suspicion before time surmised: and
that he might know his friends from his foes. Diverse wrought conspiracies
against him as Clemens the servant of Agrippa in his masters quarrel had
gathered no small strength and power to revenge the murder of his master.
Scribonius.
Also Scribonius a noble peer began a sedicious tumulte, besides that his men
of war which were in Illiria were at discord, and those in Germanye were
moved to sedition in that their stipende of wages was not equal to the others
long he was in that fear, but by little and little he crept out of all
mistrust: At the first he detested flatterye and flatterers, insomuch that he
would not suffer any to call him Lord, though was by estate an Emperor, so
great was his dissimulation, The dissimulation of wicked men.
for the wicked will seem that they least desire to be, the covetous many
times will show themselves liberal, yea more then liberal, princely in
gifts, full of many deceites, Adulation.
the voluptuous temperate, Couetousuespunc;
ye prodigal sparinge, the irreligious full of holiness, by process of time
his conditions sheewed fourth his hid cogitacions, his dissimulation gave an
open truth to utter what he was truly: where upon the Romans saying so
great alteration in the life of the Prince, The estate of wicked Princes.
his manners so beastlye, and his purposes in all respects so wicked, that
many spoke freelye, more rashlye, then wiselye, more boldlye, then
circumspectlye, against the beastly life of their gouernoure, the most part
thought more then they spoke, the godly and welwilling hearts held their
peace, because they feared the law and displeasure of the Prince, other some
there were, whom neither law nor displeasure restrained. Read the whole
Chronicles of every age, the good and godly Princes were ever for fame and
worthyues of Acts commended in their present age, aduau^ced through deserte
of worthiness reserved from oblivion to all ages, and to all posterityes: the
wicked Princes as they lived so they remain Chronicled to all ages. The like
remains of Tiberius, for as he deserved by worthynes, so afterward contrary
desert purchased just commendation. This thing was much to be commended of
Tiberius before he changed his manners in gouernmente, when as he was willed
of diverse who bare great aucthoritye in many of his provinces, that he should
lay on his people great and heavy tributes, He wrote again unto them in these
words: Boni Pastoris est to^d ere pecus, no^ deglubere. A good sheep heard
ought to sheare his sheep, The godly prince.
but not to swallow them: Good Princes may do to their behoufe and commoditye
take of the subject to the furtheraunce of his estate, The tyrante.
with the common wealth: for therein the good Prince and the tyrant differ,
the one regards the common wealth, The good Prince.
the other his private commoditye: for the tyraunte lives to himself, the good
Prince to many, and therefore he is loved of many. As concerning the
external ceremonies of the Jews he prohibited the use of them in all his
provinces and all such as addicted themselves to their Religion and
ceremonies, and who so therein obeyed not his commandment was in the peril
of perpetual bondage. He banished out of the Cittye all such as by gasinge of
the Stars foreshewed things to come, after these things, Germanicus.
his two sons Germanicus and Drusus dyed: Germanicus dyed in Syria, Drusus.
Drusus died at Rome for whose death he took so great pensiuenes and thought
of mind, that he left the City of Rome with all his pleasures, for that all
his joy, his delight, and comfort was taken from him, not long after that
mishappe, an other great misfortune fell unto him: Tiberius being at ye Cittye
of Anxur otherwise called Terrachina, being in the place of the Praetor not
having as yet supped, many mighty great stones fell down from the upper
part of that place, by which mishappe many of those which were at that
bancket and of their servants were crushed to death, and he alone beyond
all exspectation escaped. At the same time he made a progress through
Campania: Capua.
he made at Capua a goodlye and sumptuous Temple or Capitol, Nola.
at Nola he crected a Temple in a perpetual memory, of the Emperor Augustus
his predecessor: which was thought to be done for this cause that Octauius
dyed there. After that he went to the Island Capreas a pleasant Islande:
which was on the one side closed with his rocks, on the other side, the sea
closed it in. The absence of ye Prince was much desyered, by reason of a
certain great calamitye and misfortune which fell at Fi^enas an old ancient
town builded of the Albanes, for in that place above twentye thousand men
perished by the fall of the Amphitheatrum, he gave over by reason of his
foresaid pensiuenes for the death of his two sons, the care of his common
wealth, he had no consideration of the estate of Spain, and Syria, which
was then in the jurisdiction of the Romayne Empire, it was without Ambassadors,
Armenia was possessed of the Parthians, which Armenia obeyed the Romans
until such time as they careless neglected the same. Mesia was spoiled of the
Dacians and Sarmatians, France was also over run of ye Germaynes, with no
small infamy, not only to this careless Emperor Tiberius but to the whole
Empire. The great care of Princes^
Great ought the cares of a Prince to be, who bears Scepter over ma^y, for
the great care and ware deliberation, preserves in fortunate estate his
Dominion: whereas the careless life of a Prince, his wanton and dissolute
manners pulls down and destroys. It was not without consideration that
Homer ye famous Poet, settinge forth the full and absolute manner of government
wrote these words.

Nequaquam oportet virum co^sularem, totas noctes somno indulgere, cui populus
curae est and tanta reipublicae negotia: A good Prince most not lie all the
whole night drowsye who has a charge over people and kingdoms.

Tiberius thus geeuinge over the care of the common wealth appeared then as
nature inclyned him to all beastlines, and follye, vndecente for that estate:
First he gave himself to excessive riote and quaffinge, whereupon through
follye a dronken name was geeuen unto him, being called for Tyberius,
Biberius, Biberius.
as one delightinge in drink, a banketinge Prince, Caldius.
a quaffer, he was called also for Claudius, Caldius, for Nero, Mero. Mero.
He gave himself to such company as yt delighted in the like follye with whom
day by day he accompanied himself in banketinge, such were his friends and
his delight, and for their great excellencye therein he would bestow upon
them great offices of great authority, for to Pomponus Flaccus he gave the
government of Syria, Pomponius
being one of them who procured these kind of follies, he gave also to Lucius
Piso, Lucius Piso.
the chief office over the City of Rome, he was also in love with Sextus
Claudius, who was banished from the Emperor Octauius for his beastly life,
Sextus Claudius.
such now are his friends and hye counsaylours. The Prince cannot lack his
mates, for as he inureth himself, so many follow and fashion themselves to
the doing of the Prince. This Sextus Claudius was an old man, vnthriftye,
geeuen to all beastly pleasures, with Tiberius on a time he made a couenaunte
to give him a sumptuous bancket, if he would suppe with him: where many fair
maidens served him at the board naked, many other there were in whom he
delighted, such especially as could find out new and fond pleasures,
strange devises, The follye of Tiberius.
beastly pastymes, and such were most esteemed with him as passed other in
follye, he made a new office which was called a voluptatibus, rewardinge all
such as invented delights for the Princes tothe, A voluptatibus.
who furthered therein his estate and heaped by invention, store of such
pleasures. The beastlynes of this Prince was in all respects such, as that
nature abhors to utter his conditions: besides this as he suffered filthye
life commonly, so openly he both used and allowed it, It may be thought that
no follye could be greater, but who so reads the Chronicles, and wayeth
thoroughly his life, shame fastnes will prohibit him to bestow his time in
readinge so filthye matter. After this he behaved himself with all tyranny,
not only against Caius Lentulus Augur, but also against Lepida: Tyranny.
with all tyranny he used the Princes of Greece, Syria and France, he caused
the king of the Parthians, who was expelled from his own country, and flyinge
to the trustye hands of the Romans to be murdered and spoiled of all his
riches, Faith to be observed in Princes.
he was at defyance with Liuia his mother, by whom he purchased that
aucthoritye, he was much grieved with the Senate, in that in acts and
decrees, he was called the son of Octauius and Liuia, yea such was his hatred
toward her, that she being dead, he cruelly handled all those to whom Liuia
gave charge over her funeral: Liuia.
his wicked life was such that many wrote against him, and not unworthily,
his tyranny passed all other, no day passed without bloudsheddinge, A
tyrante.
many women and children killed themselves, fearinge to fall into the hands
of such a tyrante, his crueltye was such that Artabanus the king of the
Parthians reviled him in lettters, Artabanus.
placing before his eyes, his filthye life, his murders, and living not to be
named, of which he was ashamed. This is that Tiberius by whom Valerius
Gractius was made gouerner over the Jews, the successor of Annius Rufus.
Pilate.
Pilate was accused of the Jews, and sent by Vitellius to Rome, but Tiberius
was dead before Pilate came to Rome. Isis.
The famous Temple of Isis was destroyed at the commandment of Tiberius, and
the Images of Isis throne in the Tiber at Rome, because of the great
mischievous act committed in the Temple of Isis, Munda.
against Paulina a chaste woman, by one Munda a young man, to the which fact,
the priests of the Temple were priuye baudes, the beastlye practice unknown
to the good woman Paulina: Josephus tells the whole storye at large. Tiberius
made Vitellius chief governor underneath him, as the vice Roye in Jerusalem:
Vitellius.
who wrote letters to Vitellius, to make a leage of amity with Artabanus the
king of the Parthians, because he feared him, but upon that condition a leage
to be made, so that the sons of the Emperor of the Parthans be delivered as
pledges to Vitellius. Vitellius forthwith persuades two Princes with great
gifts without all delay to enter battle against Artabanus, king of the
Parthians, but they would not move battle against him, but they suffered the
Scithians to enter, geuinge them passage and entrye by straites of the Cuspians
sea, to invade the country, by whose invasion the whole country of the
Armenians was spoiled and wasted, and the land filled with the slaughter of
the Parthians, his chief nobles being at that battle fled, the Emperors
son of the Parthians was slain there. With this mean Vitellius by great
gifts, had won to him all the Princes borderinge upon those parts, to
betraye Artabanus the Emperor, but as soon as Artabanus understood his
falsehode, be fled with a few faithful people, to other Princes a far
of, who of themselves prepared a great power and defended his own Dominion, as soon as Tiberius understood that Artabanus* was of force to join wars with
the Romans, he willinglye made peace with him, the league was made at the
floude Euphrates, between Artabanus and Vitellius, each of them with a few
meetinge, Herod made a sumptuous bancket to Vitellius, and Artabanus king of
the Parthians: and Artabanus to the full confirmation of this league, gave to
the hands of Vitellius his.ii. sons, Darius and Artaxerxes, with whom he
sent many ritche gifts and princely, with whom he sent a man of high
stature, vii. cubits high, his name was Lazarus, who for his high stature was
called a Gyante, the league confirmed, Vitellius departed to Antioche,
Artabanus to Babylon returned. Herod false in all his doings to prevent
Vitellius, Herod.
by letters sent to Tiberius the Emperor as concerning ye league confirmed,
for unto Vitellius letters, Tiberius makes aunsweare that he knew long
before of those news, by the letters of Herod: where upon great envy and
grudge rose between Herod and Vitellius, secret pollicye of destructin
against one another, Vitellius.
Vitellius never uttered his malicious intent, but keepinge close his
malicious purpose and kindled Ire, until such time as oportunitye served to
subvert Herod, and that was in the government of the next Emperor. Caius
succedinge this Tiberius: this was he that put to death that holyman John
Baptiste, and because Herod saw the people to be parswaded by him (his
beastly life reproved of the Prophet) he thought it befte to put him to death,
for no man durst rebuke Herod, great plagues fell upon Herod and his power.
Tiberius used to give offices for term of life not without great cause removing
any officers: Who being demanded why he did so? he made this answer by a
fable: There was a certain man wounded, unto whose wound many hu^gery flesh
flees in great number flew and sucked his wound, this being seen of another
man yt passed by, who lamented the mischaunce of the wounded person, moved with
pity and compassion came unto him, both with helpinge hand and counsel to ease
him, thincking yt through weakness, he was not able to drive them from him:
but the wounded man answered greater harm and pain will ensue to me if
fresh and greedye flies do come to my wound, for these filled with my blood
are not so grievous, having their fill of it, but if hungrye flies do gather to
my wound, Covetous officers.
they will with such hungrye desire suck my wound, that they will increase a
new pain to me, so officers where they be often removed, having no assurance
of office nor perpetuitye fearinge of removing, they do for their time more
gredily hunte for gain, and search more narrowlye, the hid and inward
bowels of gain^. Tiberius returninge to Caprias, fell sick of an ague whereof
in the end he dyed, who having but two sons and those only by adoption, for
Drusus his own son was dead at that instante time, whose son Tiberius had
made his adoptiue son, and he made Caius the son of his brother Cermanicus
his other adoptiue son: this Caius was brought up in all excellencye of
learning, interelye beloved of the people, both for his own virtues, and for
his fathers noble acts: these iii. excellent virtues promoted his father
Germanicu^, to high dignity: Moru^ mansuetudo Affabilitas, Humilitas, that is
to say, of conditions gentle and meek, easy to be talked with, and humble or
lowlye, by these virtues, he was in great estimation and honor, both with
the Senate and the common multitude, great lamentation was made for the death
of Germanicus. Tiberius the Emperor commanded Enodus to bring earlye to him
those two young children Caius and Tiberius, praying to God that he might see
some manifest sign, who should succeed him in the Empire, of these two
desirous to leave to his nephewe his Empire, but the purpose of man is
nothing, the providence of GOD to dispose all things at his will and
counsel, yea the mightiest state of Dominions, kings and kingdoms are in
his hands, to be created as he sees cause and time. This was showed to him,
the sway of the Roman Empire to fall to him who should come first to him, the
next day followinge, Tiberius knowinge this, sent unto the Scholemaister of his
nephewe Tiberius, commanding him very earnestly to bring Tiberius his young
nephewe to him, Nephewe.
thinking thereby to satisfye the sentence of the oracle which he had uttered,
but God contrarywyse disposed for the succession of the king. The next day
following, Tiberius ye Emperor commanded Enodus to bring to him which of
these.ii. young children came first, Enodus departed from yt Emperor, Tiberius
and found Caius before his tente, Josephus.
for Tiberius was not as it present being more desirous of his breakefaste,
Enodus not knowinge the secret cogitation and hid purpose of the Emperor
Tiberius, come hither Caius says he, the Emperor thy father calls thee,
and forthwith Caius with Enodus entered in to the Emperor, as soon as the
Emperor Tiberius saw Caius (says Josephus:) Tunc primu^ intellixit
maiestatis diuinae potentia, et quod non ^it in hominu^ potestate de imperij
co^stitutione decernere: Then the Emperor Tiberius saw the power of almighty
God, and that it is not in man's power to dispose the seat of gouernmente, as
we may see in all Histories how contrarilye to all expectation, those that
have been dead in all considerations and respects of hope to the world of
enioyinge kingdom, Succession of Princes in ye counsel of God.
have obtained kingdom and triumphed. Tiberius much lamented himself because
his counsel, his will and determination was frustrate, which be long
purposed, and that in his life time, he was not of power to establishe in trone
whom he wyshed, again be saw what peril would happen to Tiberius being
put from the succession of the Empire, and the envy against many noble pears
against Tiberius the Emperor, Tiberius much blamed himself in that he made
such request and peticio^ to God, Josephus.
for the succession at his own will, for with great grief of mind he
departed his life, yet Tiberius vsinge dissimulation to appease the wrath and
envy that might rise between Caius and Tiberius, spoke these words: O my
son Caius, although Tiberius my kinsman be nearer to me then you be, yet
the secret counsel of God, his ordinance and my decree does resign and give
over to the: this our Imperial seat, I do request of the that thou bear in
mind no evil against any man, that has been seruisable to me or loved me,
neither hurt any man for my sake. I have advanced the only to this state of
royal trone, be not unfriendly to Tiberius, somewhat kindred moves you to that
love, and I especially ought to persuade you thereto, in that I have been ye
chief patron and aucthor of this Imperial seat, and that for my sake you
show love to those whom I have loved, and also to have a ^are of Tiberius in
that he is your kinsma^, and in honoring Tiberius you shall make your self
strong. Nam solitarius quisque amplius periculis patet maxim, cum in tanta
reru^ celsitudine fuerit co^stitutus, ad haec quoque quia nec dij impunitum
quidquam relinquunt, quod contra faedus naturae fuerit perpetratum. For what
Prince soever be without some one assured stay or strong arm near unto him,
Josephus.
he is always in peril being in such loftye estate, neither does God let go
unpunished any thing committed against the law of nature. Tiberius the
Emperor spoke this to make a concord between Caius and Tiberius his kinsman,
fearinge after his death this subuertion of Tiberius, Caius for that time made
answer to the Emperor Tiberius very courteously, and promised to do all
things that the Emperor Tiberius exhorted him unto, all the Emperor
Tiberius spoke with dessimulation to Caius, so Caius with dissimulation
requited the talk of the Emperor Tiberius. For as soon as Caius was created
Emperor, Murder.
Caius killed Tiberius, and Caius not long after was also murdered. Tiberius
reigned 22. years. 6. months and three days. The Romans hearing of the
death of Tiberius, they were very joyful, but openly they durst not show
their joyful hearts, till it was manifest to all men, for much would be given
to hear of that tyrants death, the cause why the Romans rejoice of
Tiberius death was great, for he had murdered many of the great Pears and
nobles of Rome without cause. His euilles were so great, they were not to be
borne, no counsel could withdraw his wrath, neither any means pacifye his
Ire, as he listed so was he without discretion led to all evil, without reason
inuenting the occasion of evil, Tiberius.
beastly and barbarous in all his doings, these were the causes that made
Kenas glad of his death, Machias the free man of Agrippa, bringinge ye first
news to Agrippa of Tiberius death, he declared the death of the Emperor
Tiberius, speakinge this in the Hebrew tongue: Mortuus est inquit Leo, the Lion
is dead. For Agrippa was put in prison of Tiberius, Caius enioyinge the
kingdom extolled to great honor Agrippa. Before his death diverse things
happened, as an earthquake which swallowed up the Tower of Pharus, with many
other like things: As concerning his death some think that Caius poisoned
him, some say one way, some another, he dyed in villa Luciana, in the
seventy and eight year of his age, ye whole time of his gouernmente was three
and twentye years, he dyed in the seuentene of the kalendes of April: Caius
Aseronius proculus, and Caius portius niger being Consulles.

In the xvii. year of his reign Christ our Savior was crucified of ye Jews.
His death showed what good hearts ye people bare to him, some cried throw him
into the floude Tiber, many thought the earth unmeet to receive his body, in
such sort are wicked Princes loved, their life ceassinge, the^ spoke they
freely which before his crueltye had couched in silence, Evil life.
his end was as his life beastly in all infamye, the earth unmeet to receive
a nature and body so monsterous. Unto Rome was he brought, and there ended
the funeral Exequies with joy, whose crueltye all men had felt, and whose
beastly life al honest natures abhorred. This was the end of Tiberius. ()

Caius Caligula.


Caius Caligula reigned four years, this Caligula was the son of noble
Germanicus, Germanicus.
the father was not so vertuouslye inclined as his son Caligula to al wicked
rapted: great be the commendations of his father Germanicus, whose death was
procured by the Emperor, and by Cneius Piso, which Piso had the government of
Syria under Tiberius, Piso.
this Germanicus was made by the will of Octauius, to succeed in the Empire as
Tiberius did. In fortunate estate had Rome been in, if Germanicus after the
death of Octauius had prevented Tiberius, so it came to pass that Caligula
succeaded Germanicus, his father being dead, this name Caligula was given him
of the me^ of war, the mother of Caligula to allure the love of the people
would sometime show him to the army, this Caligula followinge the like
steps of Tiberius was entirely beloved of all men before he was Emperor, but
in the government he was so wicked, that not without desarte the fame of him
went, that in Rome there came never such a tyrant. A sudden change.
Caligula was borne the day before the kalendes of September, his father
Germanicus, and Caius fonteius Capito being Consulles.

When he came to age he married Iunia Claudilla the daughter of Marcus Sillanus
a noble man, Iunia Claudilla.
this Iunia Claudilla dyinge in childbed, he did allure to unlawful lust Enia
Neuia ye wife of Macron promisinge her marriage, if he obtained the Empire
which after he came to enjoy, Pride.
pride gate such maistrye over him, that one title or name of dignitye
contented him not, but he would be called Pius Caesar, Castrorum filius, pater
excercituu^ and optimus maximus Caesar. Now he began to challenge honor,
Lack of knowledge.
not as a man but as a God, for the which cause he commanded certain of his
Gods to be brought out of Greece as Jupiter and Olimpicus, whose crown being
taken from the head, he put it on his, and would place himself between his
Gods to be honored as a God, he caused a Temple proper to his Godheade, Pride.
to be erected and Priests to honor him, and also meet sacrifices to be
offered, the Image was apparelled in ye Temple as he went himself, he would
seem also to talk with Jupiter ye God, be defamed his mother, and cruelly
used himself and beastlye, this Caligula deflowred three of his own sisters,
followinge therein the like fashions in apparel of Jupiter, Jupiter.
whom he followed in apparel, Bacchus.
and sometime he went like dronken Baccus, vsinge Baccus dronken and beastlye
dance. This Caligula was so wicked his beastlye life in all points
considered, that the Historiographers have been in doubt whether it were best
to leave any memory of him. But saying it is profitable to the posterity of
all ages followinge, Why wicked Princes ought to be Chronicled.
yt they by Chronicles might know the life, manners, and conditions of Princes
and governors. For wicked Princes knowinge their wicked life to be in
perpetual memory, after what sort soever it be, they will thereby be afraid
and lead their life more vprightlye and virtuously, least their filthy body
dead in grave, should leave like fame to brute their worthiness. This Caligula
was the first Emperor that put on his head a Crown or Diadem, The Crown
first used.
and commanded himself to be called Lord, to entreat at large his beastly
life, it were not only ^ediouse to scyte, but a matter to filthye for any, to
think that any Prince had spente his days in such beastlynes, Beastlines.
not unlike to unreasonable creatures, who as they be led by nature, so they
obey unto nature, Murder.
besides this, horrible was his murders as the Chronicles do show at large:
As Suetonius Tranquillus records, such was his crueltye that he would
compel the parents to be present at the torments of their children, he
burned the Poet Attalina, for a Verse which he supposed priuilye did not his
follye. Attalina.
A certain knighte of Rome at his commandment being cast to cruel beasts
to be devoured, (who in his tormente cryinge out to dye an innocente) he
caused him to be brought to his presence, whose tongue being cut out
commanded him again to be thrown to the beasts.

A certain man being called home from banishmente was demanded of Caligula
how he passed his time in exile? (he aunsweared with flatterye,) my prayer
was always to the Gods, Adulatio^ rewarded with death.
(that as it happened in deed) Tiberius your predecessor might dye, and you
to reign after him, Caligula ponderinge that his banished men might wish
in their prayers the like end to him, sent therefore into all the Islands
where unto they were banished, that every one of them might be murdered, of
infinite murders, these are a few to show his cruelty, as he herefte them of
their lives, so he spoiled other of goods and lands. This was one thing
that might show his crueltye, that to his mother or aunte he would commonly
say: Tam bona cernix simul ac iussero demetur. Crueltye.
Your necks are at my pleasure be they never so fair. As he passed in beastly
crueltye, so also he labored and endeavored to extinguishe learning, for the
works of Homer were by him quighte abolished, defendinge himself by the
Books of Plato intreatinge of a perfitte common wealth, Tyrants hate
learning.
who expelled Poets, Virgill the famous Poet, and Titus Liuius a notable
Historiographer, were through the contempt of the wicked Emperor almost
thrown out of all Liberaries, Virgil.
Virgill he regard not, saying that he was of no wit and less learning,
Liuie.
and Liuie because he was tedious and not circumspecte in his Histories. This
Caligula also under an outward pretense of right sought to abolishe all laws
and monumentes thereof saying: Se effectu^ ne quid repondere possunt leges
preter equum, that he would redress laws and that they should pronounce
nothing but right, yet he sought by all means to extinguishe learning,
these things are but a part to show out of infinite, his abomination,
crueltye, dispisinge of God, and contempt of man, many wonderful tokens went
before his death, to show his end, a certain expert man in the
Mathematical sciences did foreshewe unto him his violente death to be
procured, he was warned of one who would slay him: whom for fear he put to
death, but by another Caligula his death was wrought, The dream of Caligula.
the day before he dyed Caligula dreamed, that he stood in Heaven before the
throne of Jupiter, and with Jupiters right toe was thrown down to the earth,
Caligula was but xxiii. years of age when he dyed, Caligula.
his gouer^emente continued but three years and ten mouethes, some
write.iiii. years, he was killed by one Kyria and Sabinus with other more, who
struck him with thirtye wounds, some thrust their weapons through his privy
members: In the house where he dyed no night passed without terrible sighs,
until such time as fire had consumed it. ()

Claudius Tiberius the son of Drusus.


Claudius Tiberius the son of Drusus, was borne in the Kalendes of Auguste at
Lugdunum a Cittye in France, in the country of Aquitania, ye same day there
was an Altar (as their old manner of superstition was) erected to Augustus: at
which time Julius Antonius, and Fabius Africanus were Consulles, he was called
Tiberius Claudius Drusus, this Claudius was brother to Tiberius the Emperor
before Caligula, this Claudius was also uncle to Caligula by the fathers side,
he reigned fouretene years, Claudius Tiberius.
by nature he was vexed with many infirmityes, always disseased of body, and
ill affected in mind, and as it should seem, the disposition of his mind
following ye frame of his diseased body, his wit was such that he was more
meet in field to be a sheepehearde, then in place to govern: certain it is
as Histories do note, that when this Claudius Tiberius was bruted to be placed
in the seat of the Empire, his sister said: Detestata sum tam iniquam populi
Romani sortem. I detest (says she) such abominable and wicked state to fall
on Rome, Claudius Tiberius.
his mother was also wont to call him: Portentum hominis, nec absolutum, a
natura tantu^ inchoatum: That is, a wonder and monsterous thing in respect of
a man, whom nature had not finished perfectly, but left imperfect: who if at
any time she had reproved any for follye, Claudius.
she would say he was as folishe as Claudius her son.

Octauius also wrytinge diverse Epistles to Liuia his wife, noted much his
follye, none there were that hoped any goodness of him, and yet he was brought
up in learning, but neither any education, fear, nor the teacher, could
enter into such a monsterous nature, and so untoward a parson, to plant in him
virtue, knowledge or excellencye, a maruaylous matter that such a one in whom
neither virtue nor any excellent quallitye, whom nature had framed with
conditions monsterous, whom his own kin (for untowardness and wicked
disposition) dispysed and contempned to enjoy such dignitye, Man purposes,
God only disposes.
but such is oftentimes the estate of kingdoms and Empyres that they discende
as other possessions and lands do to fortunate fools. Rome.
Rome has smarted by folishe Princes, and by such also as after good education
have applied themselves to practice mischeues, The estate of kingdoms.
by such the frailty of kingdoms and mutable estate is known, he raises the
fool to bear Scepter, not always the wise, he huffeth to the like estate. Ab
armento, a gregario milite, a compedibus, ab horto, that is, from the drove, as
Galerius Armentarius, from a base and mean soldier, as Mauricius and Phocas,
from a Gardeners son, as Probus, so the estate of kingdoms in time to come
is unknown, The estate of kingdoms in succession.
when persons so unlikely, so base for dignitye, are advanced to bear
Scepter, and to have Dominion, over kingdoms. The secret providence of God
reserueth many times unknown persons, and such as in respect of other, the
world contemns to do mighty things, this mighty Empire of Rome, The
providence of God in kingdoms
caughte to rule them a Prince vnmanlye, without courage or wisdom, who was
placed to govern in the Empire being fiftye years of age, and for xiiii.
years space bare Dominion: who for fear at the first hidinge himself was
brought forth by certain of the soldiers and saluted Emperor, for in those
days the Senators were by force compelled to stand to their election and
choice, such a broyle their warrelike stomachs raised, and their stout
courages moved, Forced election.
not by reason led, not by counsel, not by good persuasions, but rashly
placinge whom they wilfullye allowed, as it does appear by many Emperors,
who were in the like sort chosen, who many times as they were by their
wilful heads created to such estate and dignitye, so likewise suddenly
displaced, many treasons also were wrought against this Emperor Claudius. For
Gallus, Asininus, Stati^ius, Coruinus with other moved seditiouslye against
him. Rome also was infected with civil war by Furius Camillus, and
Scribonius an Ambassador of Dalmacia: but within the space of five days they
were repressed, this Emperor being very young was espoused to Emilia Lepida:
Emilia Lepida.
He was also betrothed to Liuia Medullina, he made a deuorce from Emilia
Lepida, Liuia Medullina.
Liuia Medullina dyed on the marriage day: After this he married Plausia
Herculanilla, and being weery of her, Plausia Herculanilla.
he married Elia Petina, none of these two liked him, for both were deuorced
from him, Elia petina.
Petina upon light occasion was deuorced, but Herculanilla for her spotted
life toward him who was suspected to work the destruction of his life, was
put from him, after all these he married with like unfortunate estate Valeria
Messalina, Messalina.
by her in miserable estate was the Roman Empire. In the days of this
Messalina, although so folishe a Prince, such a meacocke, such a coward of
stomach, for want of wit so folishe, for knowledge, so ignorantlye governed,
yet wanted he not crueltye, moved thereto by Messalina and other, Messalina.
who ruled him: all abomination, whoredom, bloudsheding, iniuryes, took place
by his follye: The Court of Tiberius.
his wife Messalina made his court and Palace a place of baudrye, of all
uncleanness, the wife and servants, ruled to their pleasure, profit, and
advancement: no time has sheewed the like beastlye behavior, as in the days
of this Emperor: his evil officers were not without cause glad that their
chief Prince, and governor wanted stout courage to bear the stroke and
swaye in gouernmente, he wanted wisdom, learning and knowledge: for in a
Prince, stoutnes* and valiant stomach are necessary to command in, else the
multitude lacks obedience, and the life, manners, and conditions are dissolute
of them, a Prince must be both feared and loved, Fear.
workinge with equitye and judgment: It was right well to be thought, Love.
that this Emperor Tiberius folishe and having no regard of the common
wealth: that his officers whom he put in office under him would ill govern
the Roman Empire with virtue and godlynes, but rarely, or never it happens
in a Region, Country, or common wealth to be sincerely governed where ye
Prince is not worthily instructed of himself, nor inclined by nature or
study, to wisdom, godly policies, and counsel. Their subjects will be as
Princes to raise unto themselves peculiar profit, private advancement,
segniorye, and increase of revenues, they wyshe a continuance of such estate,
wherein they with all securitye may enriche themselves, such were the officers
under Claudius Drusus: Felix.
as Polibus, Felix, Possideus, and Pallas, Felix who was made liefetenaunte and
chief Captain over his Legions. Possideus.
Possideus his eunuche was in hye reputacion with him, as one that was chief
partaker of his victoris: Polubus.
Polubus was placed in the midst of his Consulles, but Narcissus passed them
all, Narcissus.
who was this Emperors Secretorye, for he was master over his Lord. Pallas.
Pallas puffed with pride, by sumptuous apparel which he woare by his office
being Praetor, was made so rich that he made his Lord a pore Emperor,
whervppon a rumor commonly went on him, and as it were a nippinge taunte that
Claudius Tiberius could not want treasure, if he might be received into the
societye of his officers.

And now as concerning Messalina, Messalina.
who was so beastlye that she used her adulterous lust openly, for the which
abominable fact many good men withdrewe themselves, from thence and therefore
they were murdered. Messalina kindeled with greater crueltye did allure by
force noble women of Rome, that were married, and maidens who by her will and
commandment were apparelled and tired as harlots, and were constrained to do
that which nature abhors, and shamefastnes closes in silence to utter, if
it so happen that any good man or well affected matrone did abhor and detest
that villanye, The beastlye life of Messalina.
a crime was forged and crueltye was sheewed without mercy upon their
familye, wife and goods.

Messalina rulinge Tiberius thought that she might so continue rulinge him:
but Tiberius knowinge her follye murdered her, he made a promise, upon
protestation (because so great was his misfortune by marriage) to remain in
single life, who if he should mary at any time would not refuse to dye at
their hands, but that continued not, for he was immediatlye allured with the
love of Petina. Petina.
Lollia Paulina won also his love, Lollia Paulina.
but with these he married not. Agrippina won his favor to marrye with him,
though against the consent of the Senate, incest marryages were permitted by
him, because he might the more quietlye enjoy her whom many denied, these
were his children which he had by his three wives: Drusus.
Of Herculanilla he begat Drusus and Claudia, Claudia.
of Petina he begat Anthonia, Anthonia.
of Messalina he begat Octauia, which Octauia was after married to Nero son
to Agrippina his stepsonne. Octauia.
In the end of his life by reason of his vexatio^ in sickness he was minded
many times to slay him self. The qualites of Tiberius.
He was riotous and given to all excess in banke^inge, little sleep sufficed
him, very studious in dyceplayinge, and so excellinge in the same, that he
made a Book of that art, which dyceplaye came first from the invention of the
idle Lydians. Dyce play.
This Tiberius was cruel by nature, bloudye in all his doings, so fearful
that he would assaye to go to no place but he would send forth spies to
search and view the place, Mistrust in tyrants.
they also which waited on him were as soldiers in the field armed, such
was his fear, light of credit, whereby many were murdered by him, full of
forgetfulness, even toward those that he murdered, forgettinge what he had
commanded to be done of them, as of Messalina being slain through
forgetfulness after death he asked for her, Forgetfulness.
as he did the like of many other.

This Tiberius was well brought up in learning, who in no part framed
himself to do what good education did nurter him in, he repented him at the
last of the marriage of Agrippina having no son by her, he repented that he
made Nero his adopted son, long after as it should seem having a
foreshewe of death, Repentance.
he made his Testamente: before he finished other things which he
determined, for Agrippina his wife prevented him with poison, but his death was
not known until such time as Nero the son of Agrippina was known to
succeed, he dyed in the third Ides of October, Afinius Marcellus, Aulius
Auiola being Consulles, when he was threescore and four years of age, the
fouretene year of his reign. A blasinge star appeared before his death, and
diverse other things happened, and of all estates at that time many dyed
as well of noble pears, as of other. ()

Domitius Nero.


DOmitius Nero was the son of Domitius Enobarbus, Agrippina was his mothers
name, Agrippina.
which Agrippina was the wife of Claudius Tiberius Drusus the Emperor before
whom she poisoned, and murdered his children, to make this Nero Emperor.
This Nero was borne ix. months before Tiberius dyed, in the xviii. of the
kalendes of Ianuarye, even at the son rysinge. As concerning his birth
strange it was, that whereas Nero being borne, many with friendly gretinges
reioysed and saluted his father, but Enobarbus said: Neque quidquam ex se and
Agrippina nasci potuisse nisi detestabile, and malo publico. Nothing surely
cold be borne of him and of Agrippina, A prophesye* upon Nero
but that which is detestable, and a decay of a public wealth, an ill
Prophesye of ye father upon his own son, but afterward Rome felt him,
Detestabile, and malo publico, both detestable and a destroyer of the common
wealth. Strange things happen of Princes both in their birth and death, Why
strange things happen in the birth and death of Princes.
and not without cause saying that on them mighty Regions depend, and as they
govern, so the frame sometime of a whole world is ruled, God not without cause
in them alone by strange signs and by diverse wonders, foresheweth either
maruailous success or monsterous enterprises, and therefore by good reason the
good Prince above all other, The good Prince.
is beheld and looked at, as a perfect myrrour and similitude of God, as by
manners so by estate, on the earth as a God rulinge. The wicked Prince though
in like estate gouerninge, The wicked prince.
yet his manners the contrary do work, and contrary success pulls down his
estate, ouerwhelmeth his kingdom, good things always foreshew of good
Princes, of their race, of their government and of an happy continuinge
estate, monstrous are those which are foresheewed of monstrous Princes, A
foreshew for Princes.
as the Chronicles do show at large of many. This Claudius Nero the eleventh
year of his age, was made adoptiue son to Claudius, and at the same instante
geeuen over to Annius Seneca, Annius Seneca.
who was a Senator both wise and grave, singularlye learned, whose excellent
Tragedies for worthy argument, and sentence, do excel. It is said of
Lactantius Firmianus, that Paul the holy Apostle wrote to learned Seneca as
concerning Nero, Paul.
the first night that he was geeuen over to the tuicion of Seneca. Seneca ye
sa^^e night by a vysion in a dream saw that Nero did seem in words to
command the Emperor: Nero.
wherein he noted his beastly behauior in time to come. Seneca bestowed much
care and diligence to frame so monsterous a nature into an excellent parso^
worthy to rule, Seneca.
but educatio^ took small effect in him, when opportunitye was given that his
nature might show frelye what he was, for a kingdom being a free estate,
gives many occasions unto ye wanton and dissolute natures to follow their
inclynation, though otherwise ye godly, by their tutors education do alter and
turn their lewd affection. Certain Chroniclers do write that as concerning
the gouermente of Nero for five years space, he excelled in all virtues.
Traianus.
Traianus a godly Emperor after Nero, was wont to say: that there was no
Prince like in government to Nero for five years space, a lamentable case yt a
Prince for gouernmente famous, Nero.
for life virtuous, and well learned, that so sone in five years space, both
virtue and godly life should cease in him, and horrible vices to reign in
their places, and whereas before he was a light to all Princes for his
government, now a life most beastlye changes him from a worthy man, Why
Princes ought to live warelye.
to a brutishe beast, from a Prince and chief governor, to a bondslaue,
dangerous is that estate and full of peril wherein dignitye shall so exalte
that, except the governor daily do live warely and circumspectly, oblivion
will sone cast him down from knowledge of himself: Such is ye brittle estate
of kingdoms. All kinds of villanye and crueltye he exercised, Nero.
Tauernes and quaffinge houses was his delighte to haunte, and also to use
light company, murtheringe as many as happened to meet him, being armed
with his beastly follye, and being thereby in peril of his life daily, his
follye so increased, and his beastlye life, that he ravished Ruberia a certain
maid professing chastitye to Vesta. Ruberia.
He would have married Acten who was made of a bond woman a free, Acten.
and also would have forced certain Senators by oath to foreswere them selves,
and to say that she was descended of a kings blood, but that would not be.
Against nature he would have framed Sporus his eunuche out of kind to be a
woman, Sporus.
and would have married him, whereupon this rumor went, It had been better with
the estate of Rome, if his father Domitius had had such a wife, meaning that
then this wicked and beastly Noro had never been borne, be deflied his own
mother having no consideration of his own kindred neither respect of any
other, Nero.
in continuance he grew so full of follye, that he himself as Sardanapalus
was wont to do that voluptuous Prince of Thassirians, was tired as Virgins are
when they marrye, and for that cause he called the assemble of ye Senate, who
as it seemed durst do no other, but geeue ear unto his follye, and to seem
content therewith, by holdinge their peace, for therein they thought more
wisdom to keep secret and as to seem not to know the great follye of so
beastly a Prince with whom, godly counsel and profitable persuasions could
nothing avail: Tyrants.
Besides this he added more beastlines, he used to cladde himself with the
skin of a beast, and beastly did use that, Nero.
which nature remoueth from sight, and as he defiled himself with his mother
Agrippina, so he killed her immediatlye, and even as Clytemnestra murtheringe
her husband, was murdered by her son Orestes, even so Agrippina murdering
Claudius her husband, Bloody end.
was at the length at the hands of Nero in like sort murdered, The secret
counsel of God.
so by one means or other God permits away and rayseth up those which
are least thought of to scourge ye wicked, he rewarded very virtuously his
Scholemaster Seneca being a Senator not for any desarte in transgressinge the
Laws of the Roman Empire, but because with chastisemente and correction
while age and time suffered he did force him to learning and virtuous life,
Nero.
but now he sheeweth what a cruel heart, what beastlye conditions his childishe
body harbored, that which the fear of the rod, the awe of Scholemaster
repressed, now the free state of life sets out in him at large and
pictureth him in his own nature and proper conditions, Seneca.
ye reward of Seneca must be death, because he taught him virtue, and he loved
vice: whereupon Seneca finding so cruel a judge, desyered his own death, who
dyed in a bathe, his veins being cut: his death was easy though the
judgment cruel, no doubt but that Seneca made long protestation, of his
travail and diligence bestowed in the education of him: for the which rather
there was cause of advancement to honor in Seneca, Nero.
then so cruel a sentence to proceed from so bloody a tyrante. No estate of
life is so necessary, no state for worthynes so profitable, The state of the
Scholemaster.
to all parts of the common wealth as the state of the Scholemaster is, he
being of good life and well learned, for even as good education was the first
cause that made brutishe people cyuill, the fierce, meek, the foolish wise,
the ignorante learned. Education.
Even so continually the same education preserves men in that good estate to
know God, to learn wisdom, and to excel in all excellencye of art, where
otherwise it could not but follow, that the posteritye would be as brutishe
in time to come, as that these ornaments and gifts of God had never been:
Learning.
For by learning, the Prince himself, his nobles and pieres do know God, and
in their estate are taught to rule ye populous, rash, and heedelesse multitude
to obey, only by learning pollitike laws, Learning.
godly gouernmente, wise and sage counsaylours are made: and yet of all
estates most thanckelesse is that office, least accepted and commonly
iniuriouslye rewarded. There was no vice to be named that he wanted, as he was
lasciuiou^s so he was prodigal, having no mediocritie in his expenses, Caius.
he praised therefore his uncle Caius in that he had riotouslye spent the
innumerable treasures of Tiberius the Emperor in so short space. As he was
strange and sumptuous in his apparel, for he never used to wear one garment
twyse, Prodigalite.
so many other things also be received of his prodigalitye: More things of
his murders, and also of his beastlye pleasures, which to recite would be to
tedious, some also of his manners, it is better to cover with silence, the^ to
make manifest to all men by wrytinge. Nero.
Domitius Nero married two wives besides Octauia, one was called Poppea Sabina,
and also Statilia Messalina who had murdered their husbands, Murder.
and them also at length he murdered, and such as were of his kindred he also
slew, his insolencye was such, that no mean observed, no estate spared, but
whom beastlye Just affected, Tyranny.
them he spoiled of life: He burned also (through follye with his own hands)
many houses and streates of the City of Rome, saying the fashion of the
houses and the by lanes lyked him not, many things were written in lattine and
Greek, and openly set forth of him in these words:

Nero alter orestes, Nero.
matricida, nouus sponsus. Nero propriam matrem occidit. With many other
things. At the same time a Comette or blasinge star appeared, the which Nero
being not ignorante of, what it commonly did foreshew, feared his own estate
mistrusted his own life, A Comete.
for as Pontanus writes. Ventorum quoque certa dabunt tibi signa, cometae,
illae etiam belli motus feraque arma minantur, magnorum and clades populorum,
and funera regum, aquaru^ significa^t penuriam. Comets (says he) do give
certain signs of stormye wyndes, cruel and bloudye wars, a slaughter of
people, death of kings, and scarsitye of water.

Lucan writing of the wars of Pompeie and Caesar, Comets.
sheeweth in Verse that Comets, Sunt magnorum Regum fatalia signa: Comets
(says he) be the deadlye signs of Kings, for immediatlye after they were
seen, Pompeie dyed, and Caesar dyed, and the most of the nobility of Rome, as
the Historyes of those times do note. Of late days after ye death of Edward
the sixte, in the first year of the reign of Queen Marye, a blasinge star
appeared, but what terrible things has followed, what change of kingdoms,
and what death of Princes? Comets.
two Emperors have dyed since, France lost two kings, many other Regions
had by death lack of their Princes, what plagues besides has happened in
other Regions, what bloodshed by deadlye hatred of ambitious Princes? As
concerning the blasinge star, Nero seekinge to put the mischief from
himself, as soon as he learned of one Babilus (being expert in Astrologye)
that these Comets did signifye the lamentable estate of some Princes, Babilus.
he therevppon put to death the mightiest and the most noblest in the Roman
Empire, Man purposes and God disposes.
but his pollicyes prevented not death, for immediatlye after, his lamentable
life caught a lamentable death. After that Nero had reigned xiiii. years
through his ill government he was neglected, the favor of people declyned from
him, Virtue.
as virtue kindeleth l^ue, so vice moves hatred, Vice.
the province of France fell from him, and many other Regions: it was also
foreshewed by the Astronomers, that Nero should cease shortly from his estate.
Immediatlye upon that Spain shranke from him and their Captain Galba was
vsurpinge: Galba.
Which thing as soon as Nero heard of, as a mad man deprived of wit and
senses, rentinge his clothes, beatinge himself said: that he was undone, whose
lamentable estate many did seek to ease by comfortable persuasions: saying,
this was no new and strange thing, for ye like happens dailye to all
Princes: but Nero answered the like happened to no Prince, for he lyuinge
should lease his kingdom. For all this his bloudye heart ceased not to work
his pretenced mischief, he went about to poison all ye Senate in bankets, Nero.
to destroy by fire the City, and by cruel beasts to devour them. Night by
night, he was troubled with terrible dreams, A dream.
in a vision it seemed to him that he gouerninge a ship, the tacle of it was
taken from him by violence, and himself drawn of Octauia his wife whom he
murdered before into a darcke dungion, another time he dreamed that he was
covered with an infinite number of antes: and many other things besides
happened unto him terrible both in vision and dreams, his estate afterward
declined, his power decayed, there was no friend to defend him, his beastly
life, The fear of tyrants.
his bloudye slaughters vexed his conscience, which put him from all hope,
often times he had in mind to flea himself, Galb^*
and hyde him for fear of Galba, who sought to displace him, what with fear
and myserye and hunger this new unaccustomed life pearsed him, Myserye.
so that he was compelled for thyrst to drink the filthye puddle water, and
said with lamentable voice: An haec Neronis decocta, what is Nero come to this
to eat of such brothe, he wa^ted his Princelye bed, his cloak was his
pallet, and straw his pillowe. The Senate of Rome did determine that Nero
should be whipped to death with rods, according to the old usage of their
ancestors, his neck yoaked with a forke. Nero saying himself forsaken of
all his friends, at midnighte departed out of the City, Ephannius and
Epaphroditus waytinge on him, with Neophitus and Sporus. This was the end of
Nero, tremblinge he thrust himself through with his own sword, his wicked
man Sporus did thruste for ward his shakinge hand, and being not all dead a
chief Captain of Galba coming to him fayninge by words to have come to
help him said: The saying of Nero.
Sero, and haec est fides: to late (says Nero) who should a man trust?
meaning by Galba who having the chief government under him did shrincke from
him, and so he dyed having his funeral without any pomp: when he was but a
child, he was excellentlye trained up in all learning, a good Poet but
euillye he used the same, being a wicked Prince was desirous of fame in
tytlinge his name to many things. Neronius.
He called the month of April Neronius: Rome also he would have called
Neropolis, that is, the City of Nero, as at this day Constantinople is
called by the name of Constantine Emperor, which is as much to say in
Greek as the cittye of Constantyne. He was without all Religion and fear of
God, The first parsecution of ye Christians.
tormentinge cruellye the Christians, puttinge there to death Peter and Paul.
He dyed the xxxii. year of his age the same day that he murdered sometime
his wife Octauia, but Vologesus the king of the Parthians as it seems,
Vologesus.
loved him in his life, when as in death he had more care of him then the
Romans, with who^ he governed: He sent Ambassadors desyringe lysence to
erecte to him a monumente, but all countries and provinces that were in the
jurisdiction of the Roman Empire, did so much rejoice of this wicked Nero his
death, that they all did put on their toppinge tanke hattes, The death of Nero.
(which bond men do use to wear when they be set at liberty) and so they
triumphed of his death being delivered from so wicked a tyraunte. ()



THis Sergius Galba descended from the noble house of the Sulpitians, who
reigned but seven months and seven days, Ambition.
being of no aliance or kindred unto Nero, but commonly as courageous
stomachs ambitiously minded, do always by diverse persuasions move, and
procure to subvert the estate of the lawful Prince: Even so the wicked Galba
not content with his estate, not by virtue, or good consideration, was moved to
seek innovation and change of this estate in Nero, but was wickedlye also in
heart disposed, of life also beastly, and sought as wicked men do, to catch to
himself an estate more mighty, to a name more glorious, and to have a title
of greater worthynes, but sone his estate and title fell who so unjustly for
ambition sake and degree of honor displaced his master and Emperor Nero:
Ambition.
Ambitious heads are beaten with stormye blastes, they live and dye
vngloriouslye that subuerte the estate of any Prince, yea though it be of the
most wicked, neither have they securitye of estate, The end of ambitious
heads.
or continuance that by false means and bloody factes do ascend to honor:
who so reads the whole Chronicles, even from the beginning of Thassyrian
Empire, let him note the Persian kingdoms, and read of the Greeks, and so
end with the Romans: way also the Chronicles of other Princes and estates of
time: And this shall be found a truth, a historye most certain: Way the
Chronicles of France from Faramundus the first king, Carolus Caluus.
to Carolus Caluus, from Carolus Caluus to Pipinus, from Pipinus to these
days: Brutus.
Consider also our noble Island of Britain, from Brutus to Cadwallader, note
the estate of the Saxon Princes eue^ to these days, Ambition.
and you shall find ye like success of kingdom, the like estate of Princes,
and fall of ambitious heads.

Sergius Galba in like sort framed the kingdom to himself, and so in like
wise ended it: Galba succeeded Nero descendinge of a noble house and was borne,
Marcus Valerius Messala, and Gneius Lentulus being Consulles, in the ix.
kalendes of January near to Terrachina, he was made the adoptiue son to his
stepmother, and was called by the name of Liuius, which name he kept until he
became Emperor, and he was called Lucius for Sergius, Lucius.
it is said that Augustus the Emperor, ( Sergius being but a child, in the
company of other children) saluted him, Augustus taking him by the cheek
said: Et tu fili imperio nostro cresce, A Prophesy.
And thou son grow up to rule this kingdom, the which thing Augustus
knew by this means: The graunde father of Sergius in a great tempest of
lightninge, as his office was in sacrifice, making expiation: an Eagle flewe
unto him and caughte the sacrafice from his hands, and carried it to an oak.
Talk then went: Summum sed serum imperium portendi familiae sue: That is, the
Empire should fall to some one yt shall discende of his familye or noble house
though long after: his graund father smylinge said: Mules.
Cum mula pepererit: That is, when a Mule shall have a foale: meaning thereby
never: As Aristotle and Plinne, both show causes that by natural course,
barrennes is found to be in them: but the Chronicles do show diverse times
the contrary, but in manner of a wonder. For Herodotus shows that at the same
time, Cyrus.
when Cyrus the king of the Persians did win the mighty Cittye Babylon, a
mule brought forth a foale: At such times as wonders be foreshewed, beasts
have brought forth creatures of contrary kind, as at the destruction of
Jerusalem many like strange things appeared, a sheep to bring forth a
calfe, not so strange then a Mule a foale, though commonly nature denies it.
Arcadia.
Yet Theophrastus affyrmeth that in Arcadia Mules commonly have their foales.
Galba bearing in mind the Eagles flight, Fond Prophesyes among the Romans.
and the answer of his graundfather, did the more bodlye assaye that
enterprise, because he doubted not of the enterpretation of that wonder. In
the end it happened that Galba aspyred to the Empire, his education was
singular, in all liberal arts and sciences very studious, especially in the
civil law. As soon as he came to age and ripe to marriage, Lepida.
he took to him Lepida, which Lepida dyinge and leauinge to Galba two children,
he remained the rest of his life without marriage, as concerning what degree
and estate he passed in Rome by office it were tedious to site: but nothing
was done of him before he came to be Emperor, but ye equity, Ambition roteth
out virtue.
justice, cleme^cy, upright dealing maistered his affections: He ruled Africa
and Aquitania, Germany also by his office obeyed him, and noble fame by
worthiness then bruted him: but afterward these things ceased in him: for
wisdom follye, for virtue vice, for famous acts, ignomye, long he ruled
not, and many things happened which foreshewed his death. This Galba was
accounted in life a glotton, geeuen over wholly to bellye cheer, to immoderate
excess of eating and drincking, to beastly life so excessiuelye to serve the
bellye, as beasts, whom nature has framed, to the earth only living to eat,
seruinge the bellye, obeyinge with lust and pleasure altogether the same. The
Emperor Galba was ruled always in all things by the counsel of three whom
he entyrelye beloved Julius, Julius Cornelius.
Cornelius, and Celius, in so much yt in his Palace and all places else,
Celius.
these three were called ( Galba his scholemaisters) because as it seems he
would attempt nothing without the counsel and procuremente of them: No
doubt but that the Empyye of Rome was in miserable estate when the Emperor was
ignorante, The happy government in a wise Prince.
how to bear Dominion and regimente: Sildome times they had fortunate
success in their enterprises, when the wit, pollicye, counsel, and sure
affiance of the Emperor did depend upon the witty conueyance, and policy of
his counselors, who in his princelye affairs, ought to be inferior to no
cou^sellour, in virtue, learning, pollicye and counsel. In our English
Chronicles it is most manifest in Henry the fifth his days, Henrye the fifte.
what fortunate success he had in his kingdom, with what conquest of other
Realms, how in glory and felicitye, he triumphed against his enemies? the
Scotts and the French men were overthrown by him: their Realms and Dominions
spoiled: The wise Prince.
he being Crowned in Paris. This Henry had counsel, wisdom and pollicye in
himself to atcheiue any enterprise, he was a king over his people, and both
dreaded and beloved, and also a counselor to his counsailours, of a Princelye
heart, feared without bloodshed, wittelye and with a dreaded majesty he
answered their Embassages, they more desirous of his absence then couetinge
his presence, but then afterward in his sons days (which was Henry the
sixte) who was a Prince of no courage, Henry the vi.
of small pollicye, in counsel to work and conueye, his great enterprises
wanted stomach to command: his domestical government was maimed at home, and
for lack of courage put out of his kingdom, thrown into the Tower and there
ended his life. Henrye ye vii.
Henry the seventh a Prince of great wisdom, in how great felicitye was his
kingdom, the Prince himself endued with all counsel, whose breaste was full
of knowledge: singularlye learned, grave, constant in his doings, that his
enemies feared him for his virtues, his subjects loved him at home, in all
Regions he was commended, and of al famous Princes well liked. Henry ye viii.
Henry the viii. deserving perpetual fame of memory to whom neither
Achilles, Galba, Epaminondas, neither Sarpedon the mighty, neither Caesar, nor
Pompeie, for such matters as he for the estate of his kingdom achieved,
France.
might be compared: For as France records his martial enterprises,
Scotland.
so Scotland has not forgot his victoryes: he in all parts directed his
princely heart to virtuous usage, and clemencye, with all bounteousnes rewarded
their nobilitye, bestowing upon them Princely gifts, Scotts.
and large pentions, but they falsely misused so royal a heart, like perjured
truse breakers, as witnesses their king Iemye, whose bones lies here, King
Iemy.
a perpetual memory of the same: but since yt time many like sleightes and
false conueyances have been wroughte of the Scotts toward the Princes of
this land.

King Iemye might well have be content with his own land, rather then
perjured of his sacrede oath and promise of a Prince, The oath of a Prince.
which ought to be inviolable, in the absence of our noble governor to seek
innouatio^, to make an uproar and move sedition, the Prince being absente: he
sought to win all, but he lost his life, he purchased hatred, perpetual
ignominye to himself and to his Realm, not thought worthy of burial, A
Scotishe Prophesye.
his false Prophesye deceived him, Ibis, redibis, non sed in bello peribis: His
body being found dead, a fair Agathe of gold was found about his neck
with these words in lattine: Nulli seruire cupiat, qui sui dominus esse
possit. He that may be his own man, and live at his own will, let him be a
servant to no man: A sentence meet for a Prince. And he that will live of his
own, let him not ^eeke unlawful means to spoil from other. Galba.
Galba likewise unjustly seekinge, (being a subject) to put down his master
Nero was at the length (rulinge but seven months and seven days) murdered,
great was his commendation for warfare, if he had well used himself, great was
his praise in government before he was Emperor, whereupon he could not so
sone enter his pauilion or tente, but immediately a voice was heard commonly:
Disce militare miles, hic est Galba, non Getulicus, learn to be a warrior,
for this is valiante Galba not Getulicus which name was given to the last
Tiberius, Galba.
who was a foolish man without stomach.

Galba had valiantnes and strength of body, but strength of body without
wisdom, is as armor to a mad man, as Isocrates writes thereof to king
Demonicus sildome times also valiantnes and wisdom are possessed in one
body, for both Ajax and Hector wanted the wisdom of Ulysses, Wisdom.
and the grave counsel of Nestor: and so did Diomedes also, Sarpedon the
mighty, Valiantnes.
Paris the beautiful, and lustye Troilus. Galba although by nature he was
framed to all excellencye in feats of war, wisdom and policy, yet lacked
he the discretion to govern, Galba.
he was murdered at ye length at a certain lake called Curcius, of his men of
war, who when they ran upon him violently, he said: Ego vester sum, vos
mei, I am your governor, and you my people, but nothing persuaded them,
certain Germaynes full willinglye would have helped him, but they came to
late, to whom as it seems he showed himself a merciful Prince. Galba being
dead a certain mean soldier cut of his head and brought it Otho who
usurped upon Galba, and dyed afterward violentlye as Galba did, Of ambition
the fruits.
for he killed himself. Well, the head of Galba being brought to Otho, he
gave it to his black guarde, who taking it on a spear, carried it about the
Tents with mockinge and spiteful words, making an exclamacion or shoute:
Galba cupide fruaris etate tua. Galba well have you wished long life and well
might you fare, which scoff and tauntinge words rose herevppon, that he
being praised of a certain man for his body being in well lykinge, and of
goodly complexion, and though aged, yet lustye and full of strength: Galba made
answer, though I be well stricken in age, yet strength fails me not. This
he would speak in his life time. This Galba was of a goodlye stature, bauld,
his eyes somewhat grene of color, houke nosed, his hands and feet crooked by
a long ioynte sickness, he was seuentye and three years of age when he dyed,
rulinge seven months and seven days. ()



SIluius Otho, a man descended of noble blood, and from the Princes of
Hetruria, his graundfathers name was Marcus Siluius Otho, a knight of Rome, his
mother was but of mean parents, his fathers name was Lucius Otho, whose
mother did lyneallye discende from ancestors of hye nobilitye, this Lucius
Otho was not unlike to Tiberius the Emperor, for many by Phisiognomye and
stature of body, affyrmed him to be ye son of Tiberius. Siluius Otho.
This Siluius Otho, whom now I entreat of as Emperor succeaded Sergius
Galba, not by right succession or by merit, whereby he could challenge any
such thing, neither yet through any famous enterprise that might inflame the
hearts of the wise, and grave Senators toward him, but by the rash and
brutishe favor of ye men of war, who more by will, then by counsel, more
by rash and unadvised means, then by wittye persuasions, disposed that
estate, not being meet for every parson, nor for every one that is by blood
noble, since only the worthy in life, the parson renowned by desarte of
worthy fame meritethe to possess and enjoy, the Scepter, power, and
aucthoritye of so high an office. The seat of Princes.
So thestate of kingdoms is tossed from the worthy to the unworthy, from
noble to base, from base to mean, and from mean returns again to noble:
The child enjoys sometime not being ripe of years, the throne and Scepter
of the hoar heared Prince, and great and mighty things God suffers to be
compassed and wrought in such weak bodies of wit, not ripe for counsel
through their tender years, and where as kingdoms have fallen from mighty
Princes, unto women, God has so wrought for them, yt the puisante kings in
their government have dreaded them, yea large and mighty have been their
victoryes, Women.
their tytles famous, their name in perpetual memory, so it is that where
strength is not looked for, nor stomach by force to command, yet by the
providence of God, always the most mighty have given place to the weak, and
the furious and courageous Princes have been at a beck, Alexander.
ready to serve them, (except Alexder.) Who ever entered so far into India?
who did more valiantlye in Ethiopia? Who with greater felicity has assayed so
great things? and for success obtained like victories? as Semiramis the wife
of Ninus the first? Semiramis.
who ruled xlii. years after Ninus, being a woman, in the apparel of a man,
causinge one kind of attire commonly to be used among all Thassyrians: and as
it appears by many Histories of great antiquitye, no counsailour of Assyria
passed her in pollicye, no means wa^ted in her to inuente, to assaye great and
mighty things, and so great, as that the posteritye followinge, did wonder
of the same, and this present age as things most maruailous do behold them.
Kingdom.
What be kingdoms? of what force be the mighty Princes, where God geeueth not
success to their enterprises? Alexander.
Alexander was far inferior for wisdom, for pollicye, for grave and
profounde knowledge unto Julius Caesar, Julius Caesar.
to Augustus, to Hanniball, and Scipio: yet how inferior were their acts,
Augustus.
the success of their enterprises, Hanniball.
and title of conquest to Alexander? Darius the wise Prince of Persia to whom
God had given wisdom and valiantnes, Scipio.
contemninge the young age of Alexander, Darius.
by an Epistle admonished him to leave of his bragging toys and childish
boastinges: thinking it a thing impossible Alexander to overcome him, he made
no account of Alexander, but in the end he was content to give a great part of
his? Dominion eue^ unto the floude Euphrates, and his daughter to wife: but
Alexander refused the offer, seekinge to have Darius second to him: in the
end Darius was put to flighte, his kingdom possessed of Alexander, his wife
and children taken, and in flight he was murdered, Bessus.
not of Alexander, but of Bessus, who was chief under him: finallye his estate
wholye thus did decline. As concerning the Amazones, The Amaz^nes.
how far stretched their kingdom? what mighty Cities builded they? and
what great conflictes had they with Princes? and what overthrows did they give
them? And as they with diverse others maruailouslye beyond all expectacion have
risen sodainlye unto great fame, Man purposes, God disposes.
Dominion and power, through the fall and ruin of other, whom God would not
permit longer to govern, even so contrary to the expectation of all men
succeaded this Otho Siluius, a man far unmeet, and not thought of ye Romans
worthy to possess that estate. To make a full discourse of him, Otho.
Otho was borne the.iiii. kalendes of May in the Consulshippe of Camillus
Aruntius, and Domitius Enobarbus, even from his first childhode vices had deep
root in him, whose wicked and lewd disposition was oftentimes by his father
recompensed with sharp correction, who followinge voluptuousnes, led his
life with a fine strumpet of Neroes Court, which was aged, in face old
wythered, and with unpleasant and crooked limbs maistered, by whose favor,
acquaintance, and friendly entertainment, he was so acceptable and in such high
reputacion with the wicked Emperor Nero, as both his manners, his nature, and
whole disposition, seemed to be framed as Nero himself was inured. Nero.
Nero so well lyked the behavior of Otho, that he made him privy of his
secret villanyes and counsayles, and of the destruction of his mother
Agrippina. Otho growing to lustye age bore great envy and deadlye hatred
against Galba, by whom Nero loss his kingdom and dispayred of his life: but
Otho Siluius wanted courage and hardye stomach to assaye Galba, he hated
Galba, Galba.
but he dreaded him. Seleucus also a famous man in the Mathematical sciences
by a coniecturall natiuitye, comforted Otho Siluius, and procured forward his
cowardlye heart perswadinge him not to fear Galba. Quippe audaces fortuna
Iuuat timidosque repellit Aude, potenti esto animo. hoc fretus Galba Neronem
deuicit. For (says he) fortune exalts the boulde venturour, and repelleth a
cowarde: Galba being courageous, destroyed Nero: and thou procedinge
prosperouslye shall Galba subdue, Be bold therefore and assaye greater
things, your natiuitye also geeueth fortunate success: This one thing moved
Otho Siluius against Galba, for whereas he hoped to succeed his heir by
adoption, Piso was preferred before him, and therevppon immediatlye he
thought in his mind to kill Galba, Ambition.
but Galba was well defended, and so waited on, as that cowardlye Siluius
durst not enterprise or make any attempt, not long after the soldiers of
Germanye conspired on Vitellius side, Murder recompensed ^ murder.
and daily diverse conspiracyes were wroughte by them to bring down Otho: It
was not for the Senators of Rome to make election, where so many legions of
wilful heads armed should geeue the choice, the soldiers fell in contempt
of Otho because he was an vnmanlye Prince, for the Historye does note, that if
Otho should hear at any time terrible news, of the dalefull and lamentable
end of Princes, or of Captains, or mean soldiers, as the lamentable end
of Caslius and Brutus and of other, his faynte heart sou^ded, and would be in
an agonye: He never durst attempt any enterprise against Galba, Cowardlines.
but when he perceived him to be as it were vanquished. Vitellius whom they in
mind preferred was more childishe then Otho, inferior in manlye courage.
Vitellius.
But Otho saying the whole end of their conspiracye, for fear in the end
killed himself: For earlye in the morninge he did strike himself with a
dagger under the left pappe, and being half alive as the soldiers rushed
into him, immediatlye dyed, who had his funeral at Veleterna, and dyed in the
xxxviii. year of his age being a man of mean stature, Otho.
baulde, weak legged, his face without hear, wanton in look and effeminate:
and he enjoyed the seat but.iiii. months. This Otho had diverse conflictes
in battle with the conspiratours of Vitellius who next succeeded him: first
at Placentia a City in Liguria, afterward he was overcome at a certain
town in Italye lyinge between Cremona and Verona, and in the same place, he
ran himself through with his own sword. Thus some write that some of his
men of war did so entyrelye love him, as that many of them murdered
themselves when they saw his dead body. () ^ ()

Aulus Vitellius.


IVlius Caesar dyed by violent hand, Julius Caesar.
Octauius succeeded Caesar, Octauius.
with all royaltye governing, and his funeral likewise solemnised: Tiberius
succeaded Octauius, Tiberius.
a wicked Prince. Caligula killed Tiberius, Caligula.
Caligula was slain by the hands of Tiberius Drusus, Tiberius Drusus.
who in his place governed. Nero by the means of Agrippina his mother, who was
wife to Tiberius Drusus (whom she poisoned) obtained the Empire. Nero.
Galba displaced Nero, who therefore desperately dyed: Galba.
Galba gouerninge, Otho gave him his deaths wound. Otho succedinge: Vitellius
in likewise used him, Otho.
who usurped but a short space, for his souldioures threw him into ye floude
Tiber. This Aulus Vitellius came from a noble lynage, Vitellius.
his government was short, co^tynuinge but viii. months, some say that his
progenye came from Faunus king of the Aborigines and Vitellia who was esteemed
for a Gods in many places, of this is his progenye said to come, Cassius
Seuerus.
either as Cassius Seuerus says yt he was a cobblers son, and he by art a
shomaker: This Vitellius was borne the viii. kalendes of October, or as some do
say: the vii. Ides of September, in the Consulshippe of Drusus Caesar, A vain
inquisition.
and Norbanus Flaccus. His father Lucius Vitellius, desired to know by
calculation of his nauitye, the proof, the manner of life, the disposition,
end and nature of his son, ye judgment thereof sheewed a nature monstrous,
a parsonne beastlye, and given to all wickedness, a scourge to Rome, a calamitye
to his parents, Petronius.
he married one Petronia a noble man's daughter, by who^ he begat Petronius who
was blind of one of his eyes, Vitellius murdered his son.
which Petronius after he murdered. Petronia his wife dyinge, he married
Galeria Fundana, by who^ he had two children, a son and a daughter: his son
by nature stutted and sta^mered. As concerning his gouernmente cruel it was,
Cruelty.
and so cruel as that he delighted not only in ye bloudsheddinge and cruel
handelinge of his enemy, but also of his own subjects whom he tormented and
miserably used, whereupon this cruel sentence was always used of him: Optime
olere occisum hostem, and melius Ciuem, The savor (says he) of an enemy
slain, A bloody sentence.
sauereth best, but of a Citizen better: What could be more cruelly spoken?
or what thing can show and utter the heart of a tyrante more manifestlye? then
that which in this sentence he uttered: whose heart passed in all crueltye,
whose life for bloudye tyranny God shortened: his reign was but viii.
months, unto whom if time, if success, and oportunitye had been of long
reign left, he would have made full slender the multitude of the Citizens of
Rome, and of those in all other places where he by aucthoritye held tyrannical
gouernmente, Evil Princes.
such be those Princes, who neither fear God, nor know themselves, Phalaris.
the like was cruel Phalaris, Dionisius the tyrante, Thiestes, Dionisius.
and Atreus, Antiochus, Iulianus who was ye great Apostata. Nero with Comodus,
Decius and Domitianus. Godly Princes who are endued with virtue, who also do
bear a tender zeal to their kingdom, country, and common wealth: Godly
Princes.
do with all gentleness, with all clemencye and merciful dealinge, entreat
their subjects. For cruelty in a Prince is contrary to law, contrary to
justice, it makes him to be hated of his commons, Crueltye.
weak against his enemy, and contemned at home. The louinge and zealous
subject as he loves heartily, so he defends valiantly and stoutelye his
governor: What be walls? of what force be towers and fortresses, Love of
subjects.
where lack of heart in the subject works faintlye? he neglects the
Prince, an outward friend, but a secret ennemy, for surely where love
affects not the subject, there the Prince and the kingdom is weak, his
estate maimed, his common wealth in ruin, his throne and Scepter fallinge: A
weak kingdom.
Such was the estate of Vitellius and also his end, both Claudius Tiberius,
Caligula, Tiberius Drusus, Nero, Galba, and Otho with tyranny exercising their
government, were hated and detested, and dyed not only violently, but also
lamentablye: where contrarilye godly Princes dye with perpetual fame of
glory and renown, Godly Princes.
time forgets not their memory, and the posterity commends it to allages.
This Aulus Vittellius addinge no mean to crueltye, had so great delight in
tyranny, as that the murders of them was said to delight his eyes, Tyranny.
and please his fantasy: as he would, so he commanded, his will stood in all
respects for a law: As concerning his adulterous lust with women, it was so
beastly and so common, as yt shame forbids to write thereof as for that
which he did against nature, it is not to be put in Chronicle. nor commonly to
be read, his violente death was prophesyed of, whereupon he banished all
those that professed the science of Astrologye. After he had ruled viii.
months, this wickes Prince began to be contemned, his name and power
weakened, his men of war that came from Mesia, and Pa^nonia, and they also
that came by sea from Iurye and Syria, co^spired with Vespasianus who after
succeeded. Short was the reign of Vitellius more dreaded, then loved, so God at
a sudden displaceth tyrants and changes their seat. Tyrants.


Now Vitellius for all his beastlye government, his cursed tyranny, and
discente from a noble house, geeueth place to Vespatianus, Vespatianus.
who from a low and mean estate, ascended with all honor and famous acts
unto government, beyond all expectation both in himself, Titus.
and his son Titus Vespatianus, who gave the overthrow to the great and
mighty Cittye Jerusalem, Jerusalem.
their famous and sumptuous Temple he destroyed, as afterward in their lives
shall be delcared. Vespasianus by this means (aided with his men of war)
vanquished Vitellius. Vitellius was drawn out by them from his Palace and
Court, his hands bound behind him, and now feels tyranny, Vitellius.
being before time inferior to none in tyranny, whose high dignitye now
ceased and name vndreaded, is mocked with the meaneste, and of abiecte persons
not regarded: so God leaves tyrauntes (who know not him) and they feel the
stroke and power of him who geeueth aucthority to the mightiest: for by God
only stands ye kingdom of the Prince, his seat thereby florisheth, and his
people through him prosper, he is only the means that kingdoms most
brickle, continue not their estate, name or title, and that their progenye
endure not, and that is sin the cause. Vitellius without all shame, in this
extremity was nothing dismayed, but in the end desperately sought to kill
himself, his clothes were rent from his body, so that he was left half
naked, no filthe wanted that was not cast upon him, they drew him unto the
place from whence the bodies of parsons condemned, were thrown down at Rome,
and in that place where he commanded Sabinus the brother of Vespasian to be
put to death, Sabinus.
so it came to pass that in the same place Vitellius a murderer of other,
Vitellius death.
was thrust through with many wounds, at the same time his brother and son
dyed, he being fiftye and seven years of age, received his end, The end of
a tyrante.
who tyranniouslye had governed, and shed in that short time much blood.

Vespasianus.


THe Empire of Rome being full of mutabilitye, having no permanent succession:
Permanent succession, or kingdom of heritage.
as kingdoms which descend by heritage, but many times according to the
election of seditious heads and unmeet parsons, unto some one the possession
of that place and room was given, Kingdom.
which only virtue and worthiness in acts merited. Nam virtus nobilitati
locum, Virtue.
and regibus solium distribuit: Virtue first gave the title and place to
nobilitye, True nobilitye.
and to kings their seats: For God of whom all excellencye is given, from
whom all goodness, all pure and sincere holiness flows and proceeds, only
ordained that Princes should govern the earth, and being as chief under
him, might rule the people: and also that they being highest in aucthority, Why
kings be most honored.
in all virtues most excellinge, directinge their estates and government unto
justice and equitye, should therefore be accounted as Gods upon the earth,
and above all other creatures most honored, wherefore godly Princes the more
that they excel in all integretye, the greater their wisdom is, and
moderation of life, the nearer they aspyre unto God: The wicked Prince
injuriously possesses that estate of majesty, The wicked Prince.
where virtue does not adorn the seat of the Prince. From Octauius, what
beastlye governors have held in possession this Empire? how has the Empire
been tossed by the governors? every one of them through ambition and desire
to reign, procucured one an others death, not regardinge how unjustly and
wickedly they obtained the same: Ambition.
For rebellion placed Galba, Rebellion.
by rebellion Otho obtained, by rebellion Vitellius succeeded, Tyr^^^ye.
as their wicked enterprises are known, so their miserable ends remain, as
brydles unto all that desire by tyranny to usurp. Vespasianus descendinge
from no nobilitye of blood, nor from any noble progenye, for the estate of his
parents were but mean, yet all Chronicles record the high commendations and
great worthiness of this Vespasian, honor and worship followed him in all his
enterprises, a zealous heart incensed him to seek the aduauncemente of the
Roman Empire, Vespasianus.
unto all those things virtue allured him. This Vespasian was borne the
Kalendes of December, in Samis beyond Reatin a small village, which otherwise
is called Phalacryne, in the eueninge, at what time as Quintus Sulpitius
Camarinus, and Caius Pompeius Sabinus were Consuls, this Vespasian was but five
year old at the death of Augustus, his education and bringinge up, was under
his grandmother by the fathers side, Tertulla.
Tertulla was her name. Vespasianus growinge to man's estate, joined to him in
marriage Flauia Domicilla, Flauia Domicilla.
of her he begatte two sons, Ti^^s and Domitianus, and a daughter called
Domicilla: His wife Flauia Domicilla dyinge, he enjoyed the company of
another, (not by marriage) but otherwise: He greatly affected a gentlewoman
named Cenides. This was one detestable vice in Vespasian a governor, otherwise
for acts famous, and among the best Emperors for worthiness Chronicled, to
serve herein an adulterous mind, which in a Prince is so much the more heinous,
as he by estate is most highest in degree and aucthoritye. In the days of
Claudius Tiberius Drusus, Narcissus.
Vespasian being in high favor with Narcissus, chief secretarye to this
Claudius, was sent Ambassador in great and waightye matters from the
Emperor Claudius to Germany: Claudius.
His charge and office there finished, he was sent into Britain this our
Islande called England, who had there mighty conflictes with the Britaynes,
for as it seems the Romans by an old conquest which Julius Caesar had of
the Britaynes, as he records himself, and let in by the Troy nouantes
fauouringe Mandubracius, Ma^dubratius Cassibelan.
whose father Cassibelan put to death, Caesar thereby enteringe, and chiefly
through division and treason obtained a conquest, Cesars conquest by treason.
as I have declared before in the life of Julius Caesar, since those days,
the Romans making claim and title to this our noble Islande, from Julius
Caesar, have not ceased many times to war on the Britaynes, to enjoy their
old claim and title, as it appears in all Emperors from Julius Caesar's
time, for in all their time mention is made of this our Islande of Britayne, by
whom many times the Romans were aided: but at the length the Britaynes
content with a Prince and gouernoure of their own, would no longer be under
the jurisdiction of the proud Romans, neither the Romans themselves had
great encouragemente to war on the Britaynes, who resisted them in the days
of king Arthur they demanding tribute of this our Islande, Arthur.
but Arthur valiantlye with his courageous men of war in the parts of
France, so discomfited the Romans, being a great number of me^ of war,
conducted by Lucius a chief Consul, Lucius.
that Lucius was put to flighte, and great hauoke and bloudye slaughters were
made on the Romans: Sythens those days neither with force of hand, neither
by claim or title, have the Romans challenged any tribute of this Island. As
concerning Vespasian whom I spoke of, who had three great conflictes with the
Britaynes, Suetonius.
Suetonius Tranquillus records, who lived in those days that Vespasian
brought into his subjection two mighty Nations, and above twentye great
towns, and also subdued the Isle of Wight, The Isle of wyghte.
which lies near unto this our Island of Britain, which Isle of Wight is now
under the jurisdiction of the governors of this land. Vespasianus obtained
great renown in many Dominions: Achaia obeyed him, Licia, Rhodes, Vespasianus.
Bizantium, Samos, Thracia, Silicia, and other countries, many things were
done by him famouslye in the government of the Roman Empire: who though he
were clothed and endued with virtues, most excellent and singular good
qualities, yet this one virtue was in him worthy chief commendation, that was
to forgive iniuryes and displeasures wrought against him, A rare virtue.
and not to revenge him of them, for although Vitellius the Emperor before
him, was a most wicked and cruel enemy to Vespasian, and had unjustly put
to death Sabyne, Vespasianus brother, yet notwithstanding that cruel fact.
Vespasian after ye death of Vitellius caused his daughter (enrychinge her with
great dowryes) to be married to one of high estate and dignitye. Certainlye a
rare virtue in a Prince in not reuenginge, the death of his brother so
unjustly procured: He was as it seems Lord over affections, and a king over
rash, cruel, and malicious perturbations, what other in the world placed in
such estate, whom the people and laws do obey, having the sword, the law
and aucthoritye on his side, and under his government would not most cruellye
have handeled such as were lyuinge of his enemies ofspringe? A rare virtue
This Vespasian also with all facilitye of mind and patience, did bear with
the unquietness of his friends, and would reprove their contumelyes,
Vespasianus.
with the quippes and pleasante aunsweres, for he was of his own nature framed
to all pleasantnes of mind and patience. There was a certain man whose name
was Licinius Martianus, by this Licinius Martianus, Vespasian was furthered and
promoted to the seat imperial: For which frendlye desarte Licinius Martianus,
was become insolente and pro^de: but Vespasian mollifyed his arrogante and
lofyte mind, in the presence of his most frendlye saying, Ingratiiude.
you are not ignorante that ingratitude in a man, betokens great beastlynes:
for to commit the benefit of any man unto oblivion, Xenophon.
amongst the Persians, (as Xenophon says) was the most heinous crime that
might be imagined, so much was ingratitude abhorred, Ingratitude most beastly.
because nothing more betokens brutishnes and beastly behavior, then to
extingnishe societye, Ingratitude.
frendshippe, and amitye. Ingratitude neglects frendshippe, frendshippe
neglected, society of life must presentlye be dissolved, and where the societye
is dissolved, there the conversation of people is cruel, without order and
reason, brutishe, wild and beastlye: but he did not forget his befite, neither
ye same perished unrecompensed: but what marvel is it if Vespatian did bear
that in his friend when as he little wayed and less regarded the perverse
sayings of those which pleaded judicial causes, and the stout liberty of
the arrogant Philosophers. This Emperor Vespasian in that short time which
he governed, brought from decay and ruin the universal world: His
mercifulnes was such, that by all gentle parswasions, he sought to withdraw
all archetyrantes from their cruel and beastlye doings, with exhortinge them
to embrace mercy and pittye, those only he would torment and greuouslye
punish, whose crueltye by no means he might molifye: for he thought it a
point of singular wisdom to use this lenitye, Lenitye.
where he parceiued any hope of amendment, as he judged it rightful to
mynister ye law upon such as were past amendment, Rigor.
obstinate, and rebellious against his majesty: for such, as rotten,
hurtful, and venomous herbs, Rebels.
be extirpated and rooted out from the common wealth: The common wealth is
like unto a garden, wherein nature has planted goodly herbs and seeds,
pleasante, necessary, and profitable, in the which also are many weeds,
unsavory, neither necessary, nor profitable which for lack of virtue are
cast out when they grow up: even so such members as are the decay ruin and
destruction of a common wealth, Evil men.
are not to be tolerated, but the law, sword, and aucthority of the magistrate
must cut them of, else a good common wealth, a perfect estate cannot be
established: Laws.
His laws were with all equitye and justice ordained, with the which he
greatly profited his common wealth: but chieflye his life was so virtuous, so
godly, that many vices were expelled, and every man practiced daily to
follow in virtue and vprightnes of life their Emperor, for in a commonwealth
the virtuous life of the Prince chieflye makes countries of strength and
force, Laws.
for laws are of their force and strength maimed, except the Prince in
godly life, yield to law and aucthoritye: Aucthoritye.
Laws can do nothing without aucthoritye, but aucthoritye may do much
without laws, as diverse Princes followinge their own will, affection, and
headdye aucthoritye have commanded things without law, who in so doing
have dishonored laws, when they and their aucthoritye ought to be under the
law.

This Emperor Vespasian builded up again the Capitolle of Rome, the house of
peace, the monumentes of Claudius, ye like he did in all parts of his
Dominions, where the laws of Rome were of force. Also many famous Cities
were newly adorned with sumptuous and gorgious buildinges: Also the high ways
and common passages, were made in his time of gouernmente, for in his time a
passage was made through the hills and mountains, Tyranny.
by a high way which leads from the Cittye which is called Areminum. The
tyranny of Princes which before this Emperor governed, was so cruel, that
of many Nations he scarcely found two hundredth remayninge alive. Vologesus.
Vologesus the king of the Parthians was for fear of his Majesty, driven to
make peace with him: Syria otherwise called Palestina, also Cylicia a countreye
in Asia, and Thrachite Comagene being a part of Syria, which at these days
is called Augusta Phratensis, all these places and Realms were provinces under
his Dominion: Iewrye in like sort was under his Dominion. On a certain time it
happened his friends to give him counsel and admonition, to beware of one
Mutius Pomposianus, of who^ a rumor was raised that he would usurp ye
Imperial seat: forth with he exalted this Mutius Pomposianus unto great
honor, for he made him a Consul, and herein says Vespasianus: he will be
mindful of receyuinge at my hands so great a benefit, by the wisdom of
Vespasian all the whole Empire of Rome was governed one fashion. This Emperor
Vespasian did use much to watch by night in accomplishment of the affairs
of his Empire: which ended oportunitye was given to talk with him in the
morninge, while he arrayed and adorned himself with his Princelye roobes. The
greatest part of his affairs ended, he did accustom him self to the exercise
of his body, and as soon as he had washed, with much quietness of mind he
took his repaste. Vespasianns.
Very love of this Emperors virtues, compels me to speak much of him who
luckely chanced to ye Roman Empire, Vespasianus.
the lvi. year after the death of Augustus ye Emperor. The cruelty and
tyrannical dealinge of tyrauntes, was brought to ruin by this good Emperor,
who by the providence of almighty God was given to govern. This Emperor
Vespasia^ being 70. years of age dyed, who a little before his death talkinge
of grave matters of the common wealth according to his pleasant nature, did
also merilye geste. At the time of his death, there appeared a blasinge star
in Heaven, A comete.
which was like unto long locks of heare^. Vespasian the Emperor hearing
of that merelye said, the appearinge of this blasinge star does signifye
nothing of me, but of the king of ye Persians who wears a long hear,
immediatelye being grieved with the pain of his body, The death of Vespasian.
rose up and merelye said: it shall become an Emperor, to dye standinge on
his feet, and so this good Emperor departed his life. ()

Titus Vespasianus.


TITUS who also was called Vespasian, Domicilla was his mothers name, she was
made of a bond woman a free. This Titus was borne the third kalendes of
January, Caligula*
the same year that Caligula was slain, his education in all singularitye, for
the knowledge of all Arts and sciences was exceadinge, the gifts of body, and
of the mind, nature had so exactlye framed them in him, as that he was
inferior to none, favor, beuty, personage, lacked not in him, his memory in
things to apprehende and remember was so rare, that few attained unto the
like, for wisdom for grave counsel, Titus.
and for feats of war, he was passinge in the lattine and Greek tongues,
with all eloquence he excelled, nothing wanted in him that was to any
excellencye, A wise counsaylour.
he was both a wise counsaylour, and a valiant warrior, (which two things do
seldom times happen in one parson. Valiant captain.
This Titus Vespasian in the time of Claudius Tiberius Drusus, (the^ Emperor
of Rome, came to this Islande with his father Vespasian of whom I made mention
of before, whose acts there, deserved for worthynes great commendation and
reward among the Romans: to read from the beginning of the low progenye,
and mean estate of their auncesters, and of their great and mighty
enterprises, The secret counsel of God.
of their large and mighty Dominions, of their victoryes and conquestes it
would seem so strange a wonder that few would believe it: So God rayseth
(contrary to the expectation of all men) from a mean and low estate a chief
governor, The power of God.
to whom so happy success is given, that the noblest have given place. Who so
reads the whole Historye of Josephus, shall find what things were wrought by
this Titus and his father Vespasian. Jerusalem.
Iewrye and all parts there aboutes felt their power, Vespasianus.
Titus was at the destruction of Jerusalem, in the second year of the reign
of Vespasian: Titus.
Vespasian being there himself and Domitian his brother: Domitian.
by them was wrought ye doleful end and lamentable overthrow of the Jews
foresheewed of long time by the Prophets, and by Christ himself. A mad man
who in the eyes of all men seemed bestraught of wit and senses, seven year
before the siege, cried in the open streates: Ve tibi Jerusalem, A mad man.
oftentimes repeated, whereat the whole City was much disquieted, sin so
abounded in it, and all iniquitye even among the clergy and Seniors, The
temple.
the Temple of God was now become a Tabernacle of unclean spirits, a den
and lurkinge place of thieves, the good therefore looked for justly a plain
desolation, the wicked for sinful life, and wicked conscience dreaded the
same: This poor sillye man ceased not day by day, cryinge many times: Ve
tibi Jerusalem. The maiestrates full of all security, rewarded him as a mad
man, oftentimes scurging him, thereby thinckinge his frantic head to cease
this exclamation, but no threatninge, neither the rod, nor cruel scourginge,
neither imprisonment, could cause that to cease in him which afterward
dolefully did faule upon Jerusalem, Jerusalem.
as ye have read, before the lamentable cry of terrible cries he ceased not,
until such time as the army of Titus was near ye wall: this mad man last
of all cried, Ve tibi Jerusalem and mihi ve, Woe to the Jerusalem and to me
likewise woe, and immediately he being stricken, there he dyed on the wall.
Sibilla in a furye, seeminge mad, prophesyed long before of the estate of
all kingdoms, and from the beginning of their fall also, and the end of the
world even from Adam: making a full discourse of Rome what should be fall unto
it. Sybilla.
This Sibilla did close in dark and obscure Verses the destruction of Troy,
long before it fell. Of few the pore man's words were regarded, God
reuealeth oftentimes to ye abiects of the world secret things, The secret
counsel of God.
which lie hid from the wysest, the world regards not threatninges
prophesyed, as they live in all securitye, so they hope and look for like
estate. The Prophets therefore were not regarded because they foreshewed
things unpleasant, and troublesome news: The world loves securitye,
Securitye.
and they like them best that tell them of the like things meet for
wordlinges. In Sodom and Gomorra, and in the other Cities about them, Sodom.
their worldly felicitye was so abundant, Gomorra.
their soil so fat, and store so plentiful, such securitye of estate, so
contented minds therein, as that the wholesome counsel of the good man Lotte
was not regarded, their wise heads could not foreshewe their dangers and
destruction. Lotte as one most abiecte and vile in the eyes of the Sodomytes,
(yet in favor with God) warned and exhorted them to repentance, foreshewed
them their plagues, all was lightlye regarded, but immediatlye fire and
brimstone consumed the place, with five other Cities, and all the
inhabitauntes, the child perished, and the infant but then borne: In a moment
the old and the young fell, the mighty and great personages, the Princes
also, the elders and counselors, five kings tasted with their peers the
like destruction, sin so abounded in the place and in all the inhabitors,
Sin.
the child that never spoke, was in that destruction partaker, So vglye a
thing sin is in the sight of God, that thereby no kingdom is spared, no
estate vnscourged, no City free of punishment, where God takes heavy
displeasure to punish. The wrath of God.
Mighty Empyres thereby are fallen, and wealthye Cities made a plain soil,
their kings and their people turned into duste are forgotten, forgetfulness for
lack of worthynes, rooteth them from memory of fame, Virtue.
their virtues are dead, their vices live in perpetual memory. Vice.


As concerning this Titus whom I make mention of, did marrye Artisidia, who
dyinge, he took to wife Martia Ful^ia, from whom he was deuorced: great
things were done by this Titus not only in Jerusalem, but also in all ye
East parts, his virtues were not so excellent, but his vices for a time were
so odious: As that openly Alium Neronem opinabantur and predicabant, for his
wickedness they called him another Nero, but afterward so great was his
change as that nothing of vice remained in him, his fame by good desarte gate
great commendation, his government (though short) was with all equity toward
his commons executed, laws by judgment rightlye ordered, a father he was
and a great patron to the Romans. This Titus dyed in the xli. year of his
age in the Ides of September, his government continued but two years.ii.
months and xx. days, the death of Titus was with great sorrow and
lamentacion received, for all countries and provinces bewailed his funeral,
Titus.
in his life time they called him the delight and joy of their common wealth:
their lamentacion was so great that it seemed they lost the chief patron,
aid, succoure and safegarde of the whole world. Josephus writes that
Vespasian being in ye East parts at the death of Vitellius, the good fame of
his worthynes bruted him Emperor so he wanne the hearts of all people, al
cities made festiual days and as their manner of joy was, did solemnise
sacrifices, as tokens of great joy the Legions of soldiers which remained
in Metia and Pannonia were sworn with great joy to him: Vespasian went from
thence to Cesarea, Vespasianus.
and came to Betritum where many Ambassadors met him out of Syria and out
of other provinces, offeringe to him Crowns and things of great gratulation.
Musianus the great governor of that province by all means furthered him,
when Vespasian saw all things so luckelye happen unto him, he considered
that this Empire could not fall to him, without the great providence of God,
and as it were by fatal destenye brought to him, then also he remembered
Josephus, Iosophus.
who at that present was captive, a godly man and a priest of the Temple,
what wonderful things he had foresheewed of him which things in him taking
effect, Titus Vespasianus son, being present with Vespasian his father,
said. Iustum est inquit pater vna cum ferro, etiam probum Iosephum solui: And
so it followed Josephus was delivered, his fetters being bruste went at
liberty with Vespasian. After Vespasian had answered the Embassages, he went
to Antioche, from thence to Alexandria, he sent into Italye Lucianus, with a
great company of horsemen and footmen, and passed by Cappadocia and Phrigea,
in those parts Anthonius first of all having his third Legion of soldiers,
came to him which did remain about Mesia, for he did govern that province
and with that power he made have to make war upon Vitellius. Vitellius sent
with a great army Cicinna to meet Anthonye, but at last Cicinna Cicinna.
with his men of war, fled to Anthonye fauouringe Vespasians part, in the
end the souldidiours of Cicinna repentinge their fact, would have slain
Cicinna, but being otherwise advised, they ^^t him bound to Vitellius, but
Anthonye pursuinge upon them, caused them to retire to Cremona, the which
Cremona was spoiled, and all the army of Vitellius, to the number of.xxx.
thousand and two hundredth were slain: Cicinna.
Cicinna was delivered and brought to Vespasian, not only commended but highly
rewarded. Sabinus.
Sabinus the brother of Vespasianus, hearing Anthonye to draw near to Rome,
by night took the Capitol: but in the end Sabinus being taken, was brought
to Vitellius and slain by him. The next day followinge, Anthonye coming to
Rome, fought with the soldiers of Vitellius in three parts of the City:
Vitellius.
Vitellius then in this extremity came for the druncke, who was cruellye
handeled and slain in the midst of the City. Mutianus.
The next day Musianus enteringe Rome with a great army, and all things
there set in quietness, did make Domitianus chief governor of the City,
until such time as Vespasian his father came, whom they proclaimed Emperor.
As soon as Vespasian came to Alexandria, the estate of all things at Rome was
declared unto him, Ambassadors came to him from all parts of the world
reioysinge of his estate. As soon as all things were quietlye settled at Rome,
Vespasian did mean to war on the Jews, who as soon as winter was done,
sent Titus his son with a great power of chosen souldioures, to destroy
Jerusalem. Titus.
Titus making his passage both by Nicopolis and other places (as good
oportunitye served him for his soldiers) passed to Cesarea, and there set
in order his men of war, he caused the Legions of soldiers to be dispersed
in diverse parts, whereby with more fortunate success he might set upon the
Jews. To resighte the whole Historye how Jerusalem was taken, the Temple
spoiled, and then by fire destroyed, it would rise to a volume: Josephus
writes of it at large, and also this is his which is written thereof in a
brief. In this manner Jerusalem was taken, in the second year of the reign
of Vespasian, the viii. day of the month of September, which had been taken
five times before and then spoiled. Asocheus.
Asocheus king of the Egiptians first took it, Antiochus.
after him Antiochus, then Pompeie, after those Socius with Herod took it,
Socius.
the king of Babylon first of all by strong hand possessed and destroyed it,
in the thousand three hundredth and threescore year after the buildinge
thereof, the eight month and sixth day. The first founder of the same was
Cananiorum Vinasta, who in their moother tongue is called the just king, he
called it the City Jerusalem, the Temple first was builded there, the Cittye
before was called Solyma. Solyma.
After this David being king of the Jews, having expelled the Cananites,
gave the same to the inhabited of his people, which City Jerusalem in ye
four hundredth threscore and four year and three months, from king David
was destroyed of the Babilonians, whose king being a Jew, first reigned in
the same, unto that time that Titus destroyed it, which was a thousand, a
hundredth seuentye and nine years after. From the first buildinge of the same,
unto the last destruction was two Thousand years a hundredth seuentye and
seven. Josephus resyteth that neither the antiquitye of the City, neither the
great treasures and riches, neither the fame of it spredde in all places of
the world, neither the great glory of their Religion cold save it. Thus far
Josephus writes of it in a brief, though otherwise he sets it furthe at
large, sheewinge the lamentable estate of the inhabiters, the great famyne fell
on them, that for lack of victuels women eat their own children, (filthye
things not to be eaten) then in this necessitye was their fare, the bloudye
spoils and slaughter the lamentable cry most pitious, The faule of
Jerusalem.
the terrible things that happened both then and before, will make in readinge
the st^uteste courages for pittye to lamente, such is the estate in time, not
only of mighty Cities, but of mighty kingdoms and Princes: The wrath of
God.
where the almightye God takes his displeasure, both City, kingdom and
Prince feels his stroke, they decay where God terriblye frowneth.

Domitianus.


DOmitian ye brother of Titus, was after his death created Emperor, who in the
beginning of his government, counterfaytinge a virtuous person, was gentle,
pitiful, and virtuous: With good success he ended all ye wars yt were
begone, and finished many goodlye Palaces in Rome, and builded many even from
their foundations, in such sort that in the beginning of his Empire, he
purchased a very good fame, and credit of a singular and virtuous person. But
after chaunginge his conditions, he became so cruel, so unjust, and so
greedye, that he would put to death men for ridiculous or tryflinge matters, to
the end they being dead, he might enjoy their goods: saying, he was their
heir. He persecuted the Jews, and especially those of the stock of David,
because that he had understood that of that stock should be borne a man which
should govern the whole world. Also he was a great persecutor of the Christian
Religion, The second persecution of the Christians.
in such sort that in his ryme there were martyred many godly men. He vexed
all things, not so much as flies could escape him, where upon one of the
Court being demanded, who was with the Emperor: he said, there was not so
much as one flee. He was a great professor of Astrologye, and a great friend
unto those which professed that science, although he entreated one Astrologian
very cruellye, which told him that within short space he should dye. He
lived xl. year, and governed the Empire xv. year: And in the end by the
conspiracye of Stephen the steward of his house, and of certain other among
whom his own wife was one, he was slain in his Palace, of whose death the
common people were neither heavy nor joyful, but the gentlewome^ and Senators
took such contentation thereat, that in the very same day they caused all his
Images which were of gold, to be cast down. ()

Cocceius Narua.


COcceius Narua succeaded Domitianus being 66. years of age, he governed but
one year 4. months and 9. days. This Narua was a just Prince and
bounteous, he restored all such as were unjustly condemned of Domitian, he
seaced the crueltye which was exercised against the Christians, he was very
bounteous to the poor and merciful, he made Vlpius Traianus being borne in
Spain, his adoptiue son: and made him his successor before the assemble of
the Senate, and sent to him being in Germanye, the ornaments of the Empire
to Coullen, Narua dyed sone after of an Ague: Diverse do write that in the time
of this Narua, John the Apostle returned from Pathmose to Ephesus, this John
lived after the death of Narua 4. years. This wise Emperor was borne in the
City of Narni, neither is it certainly known whether he was an Italian or
no, but all aucthors agree, that he was descended of a noble progenye, he was
created Emperor when he was very old, who in the beginning of his reign
had news brought him that Domitian was not dead, (but that was an untrue
report, and caused much unquietness. He revoked from exile the Christians, he
unburdened the Romans of their taxes, and caused the children of the dead,
and of such as were very poor to be nourished, and brought up at his
proper costs and charges, to be short he did makye virtuous acts. There was
only one conspiracye wroughte against him, The end of treason.
which gave unto the conspirators a most unfortunate end. In his time were
most cruellye slain all those that murdered Domitianus (although he consented
not thereto) he adopted for his adoptiue son Traian, Murder.
because he had no children of his own, unto whom he might commit the Empire.
He governed the Empire but xiii. months, and dyed of choler which he took
for the love he bare unto a Senator named Regulus, which choler caused him so
extremelye to sweat that it killed him, Eclipse.
and the very same day that he passed out of this life, there was a great
Eclipse of the Sun. ()

Vlpius Traianus.


VLpius Traianus ye adoptiue son to Cocceius Narua, caughte ye Imperial
seat after the discease of him. Traianus.
This Vlpius Traianus was borne (as some write) in Spain, in a Cittye
adjoining unto Ciuilla. This Emperor was called Vlpius by his graunde fathers
name by one Traius, his other name was called Traianus, who was was the first
aucthor of his fathers progenye, or else it may be he was called Traianus by his
father who was called Traianus, the time of his reign was twentye years. The
government of this Emperor Vlpius Traianus was so singular and famous, for his
wisdom, politic government and virtues, that the most famous monumentes of
writers, can not well and sufficiently set forth the worthy praise
comme^dation and glory of him: A rare commendation of a Prince.
this Emperor Vlpius Traianus, took upon him ye seat of the Empire at
Agrippina: Agrippina.
In feats of war, and in all things partayninge to chiualrye he was
industrious: In judicial matters and controuersis of ye law with all equitye
and justice, he tendered the estate of every man's cause, in repayringe of his
Cities bounteous and liberal. In a Prince or governor two things are most
requisite and necessary, in peace godlynes, in battle and time of war
strength and valiantnes, Things requisite in a Prince.
and both in peace and war prudence and wisdom. The modestye of him was so
singular, and such the temperature of his most excellent gifts and virtues,
that he seemed to have mingled one with an other, only this fault was in him,
The third persecution o^ the Christians
he gave himself to bellye cheer and to persecute the Christians, to the
excessive drinckinge of delicious wynes: in the conversation of his life, and
in the societye thereof most fellowlye toward his friends, Traianus manners.
and very liberal. This Emperor Traianus in the honor and memory of
Licinius (by whose furtherance he came to be Emperor) builded a place of whot
bathes, necessary for the curinge of sundry diseases. If the praise of this
Emperor should in all parts be resighted, it would be a long volume to
speak of him: but thus much in few words may be rehearsed, In labor he was
invincible and pacient, very studious to prefer the best men, and all such as
were warrelike, he loved the simple natures, and the professors of learning:
He was of no great learning, a keeper of Justice, an inuentor of laws
partayninge to Religion, of the old laws a dilligent obseruer, all these
virtues and good quallities were somuche the greater, because the estate of the
common wealth in the Roman Empire before time, had been brought to ruin
by many cruel tyrants, and who for the remedy of so great evils, in good
time seemed to be given of God. For at what time as Traianus came to the
Imperial seat, Good Princes.
many maruaylous things happened in most wonderful wise, amongst many this
one thing was chief: From the top of the Capitol, Thus some write.
a crow spoke in Greek words Kailos esta^: That is, full happy and
fornunate shall Rome be, Traianus being Emperor: Traianus dyed, and when the
body of him was burned, (as the manner of ye Romans was at that time his
ashes were brought to Rome, and laid in the same place where the ashes were
buried of the father of this Traianus, and under the same mighty pillar the
Images of him were set up (and as in triumphs they are wont to do) ye same
day his picture was brought to Rome, the noble order of all Senators goinge
before him, The burial of ^raianus.
and his legions of soldiers: At the death of this Emperor Traianus, the
great floudde Tyber of Rome did ouerflowe his banckes, more aboundantlye then
it did in the time of Narua, with greater destruction and damage: also at the
same time a great calamitye chanced unto the Cities, Strange things happen
at the (...) of Princes.
an earthquake most terrible happened in many of his Regions, and in his
provinces a sore infectiue plague or pestilence did reign. Also in the same
Regions arose a famine, and casualtyes by fire. This Emperor Vlpius Traianus,
in his life time had politikelye provided, and wiselye for the sudden
casualties of fire, whereby he eased much the forces and dangers thereof:
this was his order, yt the height of every house should be but lx. feet and
not above, because the pluckinge down of them should be easy, and the charges
after such casualties might be the less. For the prosperous estate and
felicitye of his gouernmente he was called the father of the counsel, his
whole life was threscore and four years. ()

Aelius Adrianus.


AElius Adrianus (as Eutropius and Eusebius affirm) was by birth, and progenye
very noble, he was also borne in Spain and was cosyn to Traianus the Emperor.
But as other affirm, this Emperor Aelus Adrianus was borne at Adria a City
in Italye, which bordereth upon Marca Ancona, the sea near adjoining, is
called by ye name of the place Mare adriaticu^. Aelius Adrianus ware ye
Emperial Crown xii. years: Adria^nus.
this Emperor Aelius so much did employ his study in ye knowledge of the
Greek tongue, and in the copious and abundant eloquence thereof so much
excelled, that of many he was named for his exquisite knowledge therein: this
is our Gretian. Aelius Adrianus did set forth always the noble arts and
studies of the famous Athenians, their laws and manners, not only in
versifyinge, but also in all other arts and sciences, as in music, in
playinge and singinge to the instrumente, in Physic, and in all kind of
harmonye: Besides in Geometrye, in painting conninglye, in grauinge, and in all
other singular inventions, and artificial doings, he passed in mettel, and
working in Marbell like to the famous Polucletus and Euphranoras who were most
cunninge. A rare thing, an Emperor to be so singular and famous in all kind
of learning, The rare virtues of Adrianus,
upon whom no private government, but the protection of all men, of many
Regions, Cities and towns did depend. Every Prince therefore ought to have
judgment, knowledge, faculty, and experience in all things that are requisite
in a maiestrate, but especially such a one, which under God is a chief
maiestrate of all maiestrates, a ruler of rulers, a high judge over Judges.
Ad^ianus.
This Emperor Adrianus was so excellently framed of nature, that nature could
never in any one man show a greater perfection, neither at any time has been
found a man that was with so singular qualities, and virtues endued. The
memory of Adrianus was so great and famous, that no man might comprehend
the manifold virtues in him contained, more over diverse places, infinite
Regions and countries, desired to behold his picture and stature, his high
and weightye affairs could never be extinguished with oblivion: the whole
power of his army was known unto him, and furthermore he could recite the
names of all being absent, Memory.
which was a difficult matter, he was in labor so painful that he in proper
person visited all parts of his provinces. In iourneying he always marched
one foot before his army, and as he restored his towns and Cities, and
brought them to a good estate, so he set in every one of them good orders,
and sundry occupations, for as he did in the disposinge and ordering of his
legions in time of war, Order.
so in peace some companyes he appointed to be Smythes, other Masons and
Carpenters that wrought by live, other to be chief masters and overseers over
their works, and also ordained all manner of artificers meet for their
science, as to make the walls and fortresses, or such devises as served to
the buildinge or settinge out of any thing, all these practices he divided
into certain sorts and companyes. This Emperor Aelius Adrianus was a man of
a strange nature and condition, of a subtle and wise head, toward virtue
and vice diuerselye affected and enclyned, with reason geuinge arbitrament or
judgment, in matters of controversy: for with wisdom and temperance, he
would bridle and keep under the violent mocions, and sudden perturbations of
the mind, and of his own nature he was enuiouse, pensine and sad, at other
times, in pleasure lascivious, in the aduaunceme^t of himself, in extollinge
his own fame, Adrianus.
glory, and commendation insolente: yet with all closenes he shadowed the
same: He would appear continent, cyuill and gentle, louinge and courteous,
also he would not seem that he was to be, for being inflamed with the whot and
burninge desire of honor and ambitious glory, yet he would dissemble the
same, he was stout to provoke, and redye to shape an aunsweare in weighty and
grave matters, in sport and pleasant talk ready and prompte, in nippinge
talk no verse wanted for verse, Adrian^s.
no sentence for sentence, nor theme for theme, or word for word, whose wit
or nature was so singular and pregnant that in all these things it would seem
that with deliberation and invention he had devised therevppon. Sabina.
Sabina the wife of Aelius Adrian^s, being without all reason or modestye, was
cruellye entreated, and with extremity driven to desperation, and to murder
herself. For she openly did report and affirm, that Aelius Adrianus her
husband, was of mind and manners cruel, ferce and beastly: Furthermore she
said she did refrain from procreation and issue of children from him, least
that ofspringe which might discende from him, should be the destruction of
mankind.

At the last Adrianus was diseased of a dropseye gout, the which disease of
long time he bare quietlye, ye grief thereof encreasinge, and with the pain
being made furious he wrekked his anger on the Senate, for he murdered many
of them. Many kings and Princes from far of, sought for peace with
Adrianus, so much they feared his name, and dreaded his majesty, they sent
unto him great and infinite sommes of money, whereupon this Adrianus did
openly boast that whilst the common wealth was in quiet estate, he gate more
then all other Princes, in war and destruction of Realms and Countries. In
the common wealth of Rome ^e ordained diverse offices and dignityes, and
likewise in his royal Palace, and Princelye Court. In war also he did
appointe officers, the which after of long time did remain, some of them
were changed by Constantius.

Adrianus lived 62. years and at the last he dyed, being payned and tormented
in all parts of his body, this grief was so great, that he prayed those
that were faithful to kill him, alluringe some thereunto by gentle persuasions,
and threatninge other if they would not do it, Sickness.
but there was none that would obey him therein, neither was he of force
himself to do it, in the end for his best remedy, through the counsel of
the Physicians, he abstayned from meat, and drink, and became so weak
thorrow fasting, yt he dyed.

Antonius Pius.


AFter the death of Adrianus ye Roman Empire came to the government of
Antonius Fuluius, Antonius Pius.
his virtues and godly life caused him to be called Antonye the godly Prince.
The glory of the Empire continued with him xx. years: Adrianus the Emperor
made this Antonius by adoption his son to inherit after him, for the which
he was greatly commended. This Antonius was his wives son by her first
husband: In the administration and government of the Roman Empire, his fame
for his worthiness flourished so, that many which were under his government
did compare him to Numa, Numa.
the second king of the Romans. Antonius for the space of xxii. years with
high aucthority governed all his Realms, by him all wars turned into peace
and tranquilitye, A fortunate estate of king do^^s.
all kings feared him, and with fear they loved him, all Nations, people, and
provinces dreaded him, for his virtues they called him the father and patron
of the Roman Empire, but rather a patron then Lord or Emperor, and all
with one consent and voice as a God they honored him: Such was his goodness, as
he was so ought all kings, Princes, and Emperors to be: for by virtuous
gouernmente and godly life, Godly life in a Prince.
they shall not only win the hearts of their subjects to love and
obedience, but also they shall vanquishe and overthrow (with the majesty of
the same virtues) their stout and obstinate enemies. As Soon as Antonius began
his government, he made presentlye a declaration of his proper and natural
goodness, for he changed not one maiestrate unto whom Adrianus had given any
office, but did establishe them in the same. He gave so much of his own
substance before he was Emperor, that he was reproved for ye same of his wife
Annia Faustina, the daughter of Annius Verus: unto whom he answered, thou must
understand, that after I was chosen Emperor, I lost all those goods which
being a private person I possessed.

He never determined to go out of Rome into any country, for he would say that
the countries, and people which did follow the Emperor, were grievous and
hurtefull unto the provinces and countries where they passed. By this
circumspecte abode, he appeased many rebellious and seditious vprores, both in
England, Dacie and Germanye, whereby he obtained great reputation, that in all
controuersyes and debates that happened between Princes, with mutiall assente
they always referred the whole determination and agreeinge thereof, unto his
noble discretion. This Antonius was of stature taule, valiante, and strong. In
the morning this Emperor Antonius before he would accupye himself in any
public matter of his common wealth, or be in company of his nobles to be
saluted, his custom and usage of diet was to comfort his heart with bread,
least with overmuch abstinence from meat his blood should wax could about
his heart, and thereby his strength consumed he should be feeble and fainte:
through which he should not be able to travail and wade, in his public
affairs of his common weal, few would take the pains that he did, with so
great labor and careful diligence to provide for his house kepinge, glory
dignitye, and high renown followed him, he being void of all ambition, he
was nothing spotted with any spyce of ostentation, so gentle and merciful he
was, that when certain had conspired a treason against him, the Senators moved
him to apprehende them, Antonius pacifyed their instigations and withdrewe
their intentes, for he said it was not good nor necessary to make any
inquirye, to take any such as were desirous to work destruction against his
majesty, for so it might happen (said he) a greater number of traitors
inhabiting all parts of the world, might understand of how many he was
hated and of what noble men, when the age of this Emperor was complete to
lxxi. years, The death of Antonius Pius.
he dyed at a village of his own xii. miles from Rome of an ague, withinge
three days after it took him. When he had governed the Imperial seat 29.
years, (with a perpetual fame, and all memory of honor that might be)
Temples were builded, and priests appointed to sign for him, As their
religion taught them.
and many other solemnities were decreed and ordained: Of gentle nature he so
much excelled, yt when the mean commonaltye of Rome did unjustly and without
cause suspect him to be the cause of a dearthe and scarcitye of corn in the
City, and was cast at with stones of the people, he in that case rather
pitied them, then procured their uproar tumulte, and sedition to be punished.
And when in contempt of him the valiaunte acts of Julius Caesar, and of
Hanniball were rehearsed, A wittye sentence.
he would answer with Scipio, that he did more dearelye account the defense
of one of his friends, then the death of an hundredth enemies.

Marcus Antonius.


MArcus Antonius called Marcus Aurelius, succeeded Antonius Pius in ye Empire
without any contradiction, he elected for companion and equal governor in ye
Empire Lucius Commodus, who was adopted with him by Antonius. This Emperor was
of nature and disposition right godly, the universal calamitye of Rome found
him a singular succoure and defendor: In good time the City of Rome may say
that he was borne to be Emperor, else at a sudden the estate of Rome had for
ever perished and been prostrate, A good Prince.
in all the time of his government battle and mortal war never ceased,
for in all the East parts and in Britannye, in Italye and France, wars were
very fierce, and upon the countries of Italye at the same time earthquakes
happened, with the which many a Cittye was overthrown, great and mighty
flouddes ouerflowed their banckes, and drowned both Town and country, few
places escaped ye rotten and infectiue plague, their lands and fruits were
destroyed with locustes, Plagues.
there was no plague or calamitye which happened amongst men at any other
time, or any kind of miserye that ever was hard of, but in the time of his
government the like was felt: So God in the days of the Godly and virtuous
Emperor sent his plagues, for their offenses which long before had
transgressed, and neglected his laws. God oftentimes punishes the posteritye
and ofspringe, not only by plaguinge them with wicked governors and Princes,
but also under the virtuous and most godly, for the abominable life passed
and wickedness before committed, God sends diverse plagues and punishments:
Good Princes in evil times.
yet he in these myseries and calamityes, does ordain virtuous, grave and
pollitike heads to be over his people, as in these troubleous times the godly
and wise Prince Antonius was reserved to bear regimente over the Romans,
whereupon many will judge that God by his eternal providence foreseinge the
plagues and calamities, that in time to some shall happen and fall upon any
City, has ordained as one by whose power, laws and ordinances, the whole
world is governed, to leave such heads and rulers as that by their wisdom,
their virtues and politic administration, the grievous plagues of his
displeasure might be mittigated and healed, as by remedies for the same
ordained. This Emperor in the third year of his reign, had very dangerous
war with the Parthians, (a kind of people always very much feared of the
Romans) against whom was sent Lucius Verus his companion, who through his
surfetinge and other disordered lyuinge, Lucius Verus.
fell sick by the way, whose slackenes caused the Romayne legions to receive
much damage of the Parthians, with the death of their captain: But after
Verus was come with his populous army and valiante captains, the Romans
recovered their damages, and gave unto the Parthians and other kings which
aided them, many great overthrows. Marcus Aurelius remayninge all this while
at Rome, did with great diligence and pollicye govern the same, and very
carefullye provided all things necessary for the wars: At which time as
Eusebius and Osorius do write, The fourth persecution of the Christians
this Emperor caused ye Christians to be persecuted, for ye which it may be
supposed, that God so plagued his subjects and whole Empire, with earthquake,
pestilence, famine and wars. After Lucius Verus had ended the wars in Asia,
he returned unto Rome, where with all joy he and Marcus Aurelius, triumphed
together for their great victories. Aurelius never did any thing without the
consent of ye whole Senate, for he would say that it was more requisite that
he being but one, should* be ruled by the counsel of so many wise men, The
counsel of many heads.
then that so many wise counsaylours should obey unto the will of one alone.
This Emperor sustained not plagues only by famyne, pestilence, wars and
earthquakes, but he had a continual plague, which he nourished in his own
Palace, which was his wife Faustina, Fuastina.
who was (as all aucthours affirm) dishonest, and above all measure dissolute.
After the barbarous Nations had intelligence of the great mortalities which
grew dailye more and more in Italye, (as it were with one consent) all the
North regions rebelled against the Romans, against who^ with all speed
marched Marcus Antonius, and his companion Lucius Verus, who being in the way
was taken with an Apoplexi and suddenly dyed, Lucius Verus.
ix. or x, years before they had ruled ye Empire together. Cassius.
In this Marcus Antonius days Cassius seekinge to usurp to the Empire was
slain. This Emperor had two sons, Verissimus and Comodus: Verissimus dyed
very young, but Comodus was brought up with great care and travail of the
noblist teachers in learning and virtue: his daughters he married to Senators,
who was as well endued with virtue, as titled with nobilitye: learning
increased excedinglye in all parts of the Roman Dominions having so wise a
Prince, the example of this governor moved with great force, infinite people
to follow his virtues. Galene.
This was that Emperor whom Galene the famous Physician in those days notes
to have delighted in the use of triacle, to preserve him from all poison, to
whom Demetrius was a Physician while he lived, after whose death Galene made
unto him that compositio^ of triacle: To be brief of his wars and great
victoryes, happy success always fell to him in the same. Marcus Antonius
being aged and remayninge in Pannonia, being grieved with sickness and having
present death before his eyes, called ye Senators and wise cou^sailers, The
wisdom of this Prince.
being moved with the estate of the Roman Empire, and also with the brittle
and the dissolute youth of Comodus his son: in the presence of those he gave
godly counsel to his son Co^modus, exhorting him that the counsel of so
godly and grave parsons might rule him saying that thereby both the
governor and the kingdom should be advanced to most fortunate estate: he
placed before his eyes the example of godly Princes, willinge him to follow
their steps and virtues, he told him also of the beastly gouernmente of
other Princes that were wicked, as of Dionisius, Ptolomeus, Antigonus, Nero,
Domitianus etc. He showed their lives, The godly admonition of Marcus
Aurelius to his son.
he resighted also their ends, mouinge by these examples the grene youth and
unconstant head of Co^modus to godly government. This exhortacion ceassinge
he made a witty oration and a godly, meet for a governor leauinge his
estate, he exhorted them to be fathers to his youthful son Co^modus, and to
add by their wisdom a perfect frame of gouernmente, to him that was of age
to be governed, being as one that was but new borne to counsel.

Immediately after this Marcus dyed, when he had ruled the Empire.xviii.
years, lyuinge but a day and a night after, for his virtues in government,
they called him Parentem probum, other Bonum Imperatorem, and some fortissimum
ducem, many called him Continentem moderatumque principem, great lamentacion
was in all parts of the Roman Dominion, so virtuous a governor to be taken
from them. ()

Aurelius Commodus.


TWo hundredth years were almost passed from Augustus to this Emperor. From
Augustus who succeaded Julius Caesar his great uncle, the government of one in
a Monarche prevailed: Monarchia*
though in those.ii. hundredth years there had been many wicked governors,
yet from the time of this wicked Emperor Co^modus, Comodus.
to Gordianus who was the xxviii. Emperor, greater were the troubles and
stormy seasons of the Roman Empire in these Emperors followinge then before:
for then was the brittle estate of kingdoms seen, The troublesome state of
Emperors followinge.
bloudye conspiracies to usurp ambitiouslye, so many calamityes, such
slaughters of noble pears, a soldier to day, to morrow and Emperor, a
Prince fallen from throne yt yester day enjoyed: rashness made choice of
Emperors, Troublous times.
and money brybed the electors, by the often faule of tyrants, the overthrow
of the Empire of Rome many times was like to follow, great were the
calamityes of those days, the people and kingdom in miserable estate, when
such broyle and stormy seasons followed. As the manner was this young Emperor
(his father Marcus being dead) was brought unto the army to be seen of
them, at whose sight they greatly reioysed, hopinge in him the like estate of
kingdom and felicitye, being so vertuouslye brought up: to whom he made an
oration alluringe by all means their love and steadfast faith, by the which
Princes have their strongest hold, The stro^gest hold of Princes.
at this present the godly exhortacion of Marcus his father was laid up in his
breast, ye grave counsel of those who^ Marcus left fathers to him as yet
brideled him, and ruled his doings, dissolute liberty and wanton pleasures
were as yet banished from the Court of this Prince, great was the hope of the
godly, to have and enjoy a wise and godly governor, the wicked feared that
godlynes harboring the Prince, their practices (enemies to virtue) would shut
them out by little and little, whereupon there crept in even those who sought
by pleasant invention and courtly toys to delight the young Prince, Flatterye.
flatterye saluted the king, and pleasure followed to banquet with him:
Pleasure.
at a sudden these two diversely moved and incensed this young Prince from
godly exercises, placinge before his eyes the noble liberty of Princes, the
free life, the voluptuous estate, by aucthoritye to command as will lysteth
to bear aucthoritye, their pleasant counsel, toys and fantasyes, drew the
head of this young Prince to dissolute liberty, his own mind gave him
counsel to fansye what liked him: Adulation.
grave counsel gave place to adulation, and pleasure was chief gallant to
the king, Pleasure.
so much flattery and lust draweeth from virtue godly Princes, that very few
are found which yield not thereunto, The destruction of kingdoms.
so hard a thing it is to put of ye plague which pulls down kingdoms and
destroys Princes. Co^modus pricked forward with these instigations, was
desirous to leave the roughe and barren country of Pannonia, and to see the
pleasures of Rome and delights thereof: whose coming to Rome, was with all
joy and princelye entertaynment received. This Co^modus descended from an
ancient race of Senators by birth, his mother was called Faustina the daughter
of Antonius Pius, nyce to Adrian the Emperor, Traian the Emperor was her
great graundfather: nothing wanted in Co^modus that nature could geeue, for
he was adorned with a most beutifull personage, a manlye countenance,
grauetye, learning and wisdom: years only wanted in him, for affectinge
to be at liberty, his young head began to rule the counsel of the grave:
pleasure sheewed wherein he delighted, and then pleasure chosed him mates: the
care which he ought in government to have was neglected, Pleasure.
how happy had it been for him if he had submitted himself to the tuition of
those grave and fatherly Senators, whom his father Marcus had chosen him?
Co^modus now enduced by evil persuasion, Perennius.
made Perennius an Italian chief over his soldiers, who perceyuinge Co^modus
wholye inclined toward him, suffered the Emperor as lust led him to
dispose his life, his counsel ruled the Prince and suffered him to exceade in all wanton pleasures, ryote, whoredom and all abomination: This evil
counselor Perennius, Ambition.
moved with ambitious desire neglected the Prince, seekinge his private
aduauncemente: the sage and grave Senators are now put out of place, only
Perennius bears sway to rule the dissolute mind, by whose conueyance
ambition so broyled in his breast, that he wroughte treasons against Co^modus,
for his ambition not content with lofty estate, sought to murder this
Emperor Co^modus: Perennius.
but his conspiracye came to light, whereupon he was beheaded of Co^modus.
Many treasons also were wrought against him, as of Maternus, Maternus.
and Cleander Cleander.
who in like manner by ambition moved, sought to usurp above the Prince, but
their sudden ambition brought them unlooked for a sudden death. At this time a
great pestilence fell in Rome which devoured infinite people by infection,
great fyers also destroyinge houses continued many days, and because this
Emperor abhorringe virtuous life gave himself to all abomination, each one
cried out these plagues to faule for ye iniquitye of their Prince. What greater
pride could be then to refuse his name Co^modus, commanding himself to be
called Hercules the son of Jupiter, Pride:
and leauinge of his princelye robe to clothe himself with a Lions skin:
great was the follye of this Prince if it were in all points at large
resighted. In the quallity of shotinge Comodus excelled all men, whom in that
gift neither the most worthy archers of the Parthians, neither of the
practiced Numidians could in any respect be equal, Herodian resighteth at
large his excellencye therein. Co^modus leauinge the care of gouernmente, gave
himself to all dissolutenes, who being counseled of his friends to avoid
the infamye and evil fame that his wicked life did procure him, those privily
not only he expelled from him, but also sought to murder them: Letus.
as Letus and Electus his chamberlaynes, Electus.
with Martia his harlotte: Co^modus (as his manner was) did use oftentimes the
bathinge house, whom at a certain time returninge from the same Martia by
drink poisoned him, which poison whether it were by force of nature, (or as
the manner of Emperors was) by using a preservative against poison, at that
instance he was preserved and began to recover, but they that were priuye of
this treason, (saying the Emperor beyond their expectation to escape the
poison) brybed with great rewards one Narcissus a hardye and stout man to
strangle him, Narcissus.
who for money accomplished their desire: This end Co^modus had for the
leadinge of a filthye and abominable life, after he had ruled thirtene years,
whose nobilitye and goodlye gifts of nature, by adulation and pleasure were
destroyed, and he by folly subverted. ()

Pertinax.


COmmodus being dead in this sort as you have hard, the conspiratours took
counsel how they might conceal the murder: whervppon by night they
conueighed his body in a chest as if it had been some other thing necessary
to be carried forth by two whom they trusted. The murder as yet unknown, and
least of all suspected, neither search or vewe was made to know what thing
was carried out: but the body of the slain Emperor was carried upon a carte
into the field. Martia the harlotte of Commodus, with Letus and Electus
poletikelye devised for their safegarde, Commodus.
considering that Commodus excessiuelye pampered his body with surfetinge,
obseruinge no mean but as a most be astlye glotton was destitute of all
reason, sobrietye never tempered the Prince, but as Sardanapalus or Epicurus,
placed all his joy and felicity in that excessiuenes, therefore because his
disordered life was known to all people, Pollicye.
his continual surfetinge reserved in memory, they bruted abroad that he died
suddenly of a disease called Apoplexia: Apoplexia.
the which fame was sone believed, The death of tyrants.
because each one knew this Prince to be given to all beastlines, the plagues
also that fell before time were thought to happen on them for the wicked life
of the Prince: the multitude not regardinge the sudden end of Commodus life,
was most glad thereat, the godly wished for a better estate through a more
godly and virtuous governor: the wicked were very glad of a change, each one
rather desyrouse to hear and carrye news, then to regard the manner of his
death: After this consultation was had amongst the conspirators, no heir
being left to succeed in government, a long pause taken, they thought it good
to choose out some one whom wisdom, and horeheaded age had caught, thereby
hopinge for full securitye of estate, and a deliverance from tyrannical
government, amongst many grave and sage pears: Pertinax.
Pertinax a noble Senator above the rest appeared, whom Marcus Antonius before
used familiarly for his grave counsel, making also great price of him, this
also was a great proof of his worthiness, that being a sage, grave and wise
man, obtayninge great dignities in Marcus Antonius days, a noble warrior a
valiant captain, a fatherlye Senator preferred unto many high dignityes by
offices, and being become possessor of great and ritche revenues which had
fallen to him: Pertinax his life.
yet he was in goods and substance poor, well he used the same when virtue
dispended his revenues: whereupon he was thought most worthy to bear
chief stroke of gouernmente, Covetousness in maiestrates, is the overthrow of
a common wealth.
being not covetous and by neglectinge his own estate to prefer ye state of
the common wealth. In the night they went to Pertinax, who fearinge to be
murdered because of so sudden a coming, the death of Commodus not known:
who before had sodainlye murdered many Senators, but their coming being
thorowlye understood and the writing of Commodus seen, what murders he
pretended: The act of ^^rantes.
he gave credit unto them, and was content to obey unto their choice: each one
was glad that so virtuous a Prince should succeed, great were the numbers of
soldiers at these days in the Roman Empire, for continuallye having
wars, they were enforced to maintain garrisons of soldiers to content whose
minds, Letus made an Oration to them in this wise: Commodus your Emperor
daily surfetinge dyed sodainlye, his disordered life hasted his death, (and as
ye know) every one has some or one impediment to untwine the brittle threade
of life, you know his living, ye see his end, Commodus. (...)*
his wilful head obeyed no counsel, he was a banketing Prince, ryote was
his mate, and ryote has killed him: who by bellye cheer choked, the earth
prese^tlye has swallowed up: thus much he said unto them, commendinge with
longer talk Pertinax, whom all men loved, whose virtues they embraced.
Pertinax.
Pertinax also made an Oration unto them, whereby he might pacifye their
minds, and win them to obedience. Foreign Princes knowinge of the election
of so virtuous a Prince sent their Embassages, rejoicing thereat. This Pertinax
was an Italian borne, and valiantly showed himself against the Germaynes, and
unto many other Regions in time of his government, he behaved himself as a
virtuous Prince and merciful. Beastlye soldiers.
But the number of soldiers prohibited of their old liberties, which they
before enjoyed under Commodus, who then lived voluptuouslye as he did, in
workinge iniuryes, robbinge and spoiling from other like rash heads and
warlike stomachs, not bearinge the government of so virtuous a Prince, they
disobeyed him, and contempned his government, ponderinge more the restraint of
their folishe liberty and voluptuous life, then his godly and virtuous
rulinge: happy had the Roman Empire been if he had long continued in
government, being repleat with justice, A godly maiestrate.
void of ambition, careful of the common wealth, louinge learning:
oftentimes frequentinge the Scoles and disputations of the learned, the base
multitude of soldiers void of counsel, full of beastly manners in a tumulte
rose against Pertinax and slew him in the end, and cut of his head: those that
conspired his death enclosed themselves in holds for fear of revenge of
their wickedness. This thing pacifyed, they made Proclamation the Empire to be
his, that would give most money for it, Iulianus hearing at his banquet and
feast, that money would bye the Empire, Iulianus.
his wife and daughter with many other perswadinge him with money to purchase
that most noble dignitye, for that Iulianus in heaped riches passinge all
other might the better obtain it: Money.
Thus was the Empire, which by virtue and merit only was to be given to
Princes, was now boughte with money, but no office or dignitye purchased with
money, Bought offices.
can show any hope of a good maiestrate: for dignity boughte, sheeweth an
ambitious mind, a corrupt conscience, a purpose grounded upon private gain:
Private gain.
private gain without mediocrity is the mark and end at the which all they
shote at, which procure ye same with money, as did this Iulianus: The good and
fatherly Senators bewailed yt estate, and all other good men lamented to see so
noble an Empire brought to the election of money. The death of Pertinax was
much bewailed of the godly, who were not able to bear sway amongst those
barbarous Legio^s of rash and bloody soldiers, whose crueltye was extreme
toward so grave and fatherlye a Prince, for his head cut of, was carried about
as a laughinge stock: but the godly Pertinax being dead, the people uttered
these words with great lamentation, as long as Pertinax lived we lived in all
securitye, Pertinax.
we feared no man, Pertinax was a godly Prince, a father amongst Senators, a
defender of good men. The Romans thought themselves fortunate he rulinge,
Sin.
but suddenly they lost that Jewel, so God for the iniquitye of sin, takes
from the earth godly Princes, and in the end he scourges wicked governors,
The power of God.
treads down the mighty, and pulls down the proud, he rayseth out of
prison to command the puisaunte, such is the estate of kingdoms, the cause,
the time, the person, the continuance of succession unknown, except only to
God. ()

Didius Iuliauus, and Seuerus.


DIdius Iulianus was borne at Milane, who bought the Empire with money as it is
sheewed before, he continued seven months, who in all the time of his
gouernmente gave himself to all beastlynes and wicked life he descended of a
noble birth, having great cunninge and knowledge in the civil law, who
because he could not pay those great sommes that he promised in byinge of
the Empire, the men of war murdered him, for he was beheaded in his
Palace, Iulianus.
his head set up before the court of Hostilius, and there as an open spectcle
and laughinge stock was derided: this was his end, but the Romans being in
this estate fansyed an other gonernour called Niger, Niger.
at the same time being the liefetenaunt in Syria, for all Phenitia and all
the Region to the floudde Euphrates was under his government: Niger was greatly
commended in those whom he governed, Ambassadors also came to Antioche, kings
and noble Pears resorted from beyond Euphrates reioysinge of Niger his
success. Niger therevppon fully hopinge to enjoy without resistaunce the
honor of that dignitye which he looked for, Delay.
somewhat delayed the time: Furthwith the glory of that Empire, Seuerus.
moved a valiante Captain Seuerus by name, who was not only valiaunte in
strength, but also wise and expert to assaye and finishe that which he
enterprised, his dream also which he dreamed at the choice of Pertinax made
him egar to assaye his enterprise, Seuerus with all pollecye persuaded ye whole
multitude that he went to revenge ye death of Pertinax, Seuerus was a great
dissembler, circumspectlye groundinge his policies, Usurpers.
as those are, who by unjust means seek to usurp: preparation was made on
every side, forth went Seuerus, who at a sudden enteringe into Italye
dismayde them so, that therevppon they yielded them selves. Iulianus hearing of
this, Iulianus.
(void of all preparation) dispayred of himself, the Romans seeinge Seuerus
so valiantlye to have success, and all things to go forward with him,
accounted Iulianus a cowarde, they neglected Niger because he delayed the
oportunitye given. Iulianus drawinge near to Rome, Iulianus death.
was commanded to be beheaded of one of the Trybunes, which thing as soon as
Seuerus heard, he drew toward Rome with more have, where he sought out the
murderers of Pertinax, by commandment expellinge them. This end Iulianus
had, Money.
his kingdom bought with money continued not, ye men of war disceaued of
their pray murdered him. Niger saying a mightier to rise, who^ also many
victories followed with felicitye of estate, and having received letters in
the which was declared unto him, that Rome was enjoyed of Seuerus, and that ye
whole Senate saluted him as Emperor, these things being known to Niger,
which before were unlooked for: Such is the favor and strength of brittle
kingdoms, so uncertain is the stay of ambitious governors and seats sone
removed, now sodainlye fortune which laughed upon Niger, Prosperitye
deceitful.
frowneth on him, the mighty armies and garrisons of warrelike soldiers
fostered in Illiria both by sea and land buskled themselves to bring down
Niger, Niger being amassed at this great and sudden blast, seeks friends,
and warns the Presidentes and chief governors of those provinces to see
unto his ports, to fortifye all those places where the enemy might have best
opportunitye to enter in, Niger his practices.
he sent unto the kings of Parthia, of Armenia, Byzance.
and other Princes for aid, he made Bizansium his forte, a City most
wealthy and great, fortifyed as well with men as money. Seuerus by all means
slackinge no time as Niger did, forthwith approached to the City of Bizance,
because he knew it a Cittye for strength passinge other: to withstand his
passage Niger sent Emilianus, who fought diverse battles with the soldiers
of Seuerus, Emilianus.
but in the end Emilianus was by him vanquished, so all things went against
Niger, great was the slaughter of Niger his soldiers, none escaped but such
as fled: Many battayles were also fought between Niger and Seuerus, but
Seuerus for success prevailed, Niger for lack of men and money, Niger.
fled to Antioche for aid, but all this prevailed not, for neither munitio^,
neither valiant soldiers which he had plentye of, did any thing prevail,
so hard a thing it is to trust unto loftye estate, or the favor, power, and
aucthoritye of the mighty, where God rayseth a kingdom, the weak shall chase
away the mighty, and the nedye rob the wealthye, Kingdom.
folishe heads shall subvert ye sage and prudente counsels of the grave and
wise: The secret counsel of God.
no counsel stays victory, nor pollicye puts of the enterprises of
abiecte parsons where God refuses ye estate. Well so vnluckelye all things
went on Nigers side, that neither the favor of the Romans which first chose
him, neither strength of men or money prevailed, but the great calamitye
which happens unto the miserable, for he in the end was forced to fly
back to Antioche: Calamities of war.
great lamentacion was made and pitiful showtes for the death of so many
soldiers, the child for his father cried alas, the father for his son, the
wife for her husband, brother for brother, the friend for friend. Niger then
sought an out corner to hide himself in, he that lived in the face of many
now hydeth himself for fear, one ye ruled many, The faule of a mighty
Prince.
now fears to be murdered of one, but Niger pursued of Seuerus horsemen was
taken and beheaded of them. These things set in quietness, Seuerus had but one
enemy to assaye, Albinus by name, whom also by deceit he murdered: Albinus.
then Seuerus was only, but as concerning Albinus as soon as he heard yt
Seuerus did stop the narrow straightes and passage of the Alps, he as yet
in all voluptuousnes leadinge his life, was sodainlye stricken with fear and
forthwith he removed his army out of Britayne into France, sendinge letters
to the Princes that dwelled by him, Albinus.
for aid of men and money, many refused to aid Albinus fearinge the
success of Seuerus. When Seuerus came into France diverse skirmishes were
made, but in ye end Seuerus pitched his tente near to Lugdunu^ a City in
France in ye parts of Aquitania, a Cittye of great wealth of people
populous, wherein Albinus closed himself for his safeguard, and sent forth a
sufficient multitude to fight for him, valiant was the courage of every
soldier, their fight manlye, none gave place to other a long season, this
doubtful estate of battaille continued, at the length Seuerus (though most
manlye) was unhorsed, and castinge his Princely cloak from him was thereby
unknown, as soon as Albinus heard that Seuerus was in that extremity, he came
out of the houlde, not as a manly Prince but as a cowarde the field won, but
unlooked for, reskue was made of fresh soldiers to aid Seuerus: Albinus and
his soldiers at a sudden retired being chased of Seuerus men to the Cittye
of Lugdunum the which Cittye they burned, The death of Albinus.
and beheaded Albinus and brought the head unto Seuerus. This Seuerus most
victoriously has put down three Emperors, Iulianus, Niger and Albinus: who
may be compared with Caesar against Pompeie, who were valiante captains,
either with Augustus against Antonye, and the noble sons of Pompeie, either
with Silla and Marius in pollicye or counsel, for he excelled them: And
because Albinus had many friends at Rome he sent the head of Albinus thither:
co^maundinge it to be hanged up in the sight of all men, and in the same letter
wherein he certifyed the Romans of his success, he wrote in the end thereof
these words: Ideo caput Albini publicae in patibulo spectandum mitto, vt
exemplum capiant eius amici, quid ipsis patiendum foret. Therefore I do send
the head of Albinus in sight to be hanged up, A terror.
that his friends may look for the like: Immediatlye all things set in quiet
estate, he marched toward Rome with a terrible host, and with all have taking
his voyage followinge therein Caesar. Seuerus enteringe Rome, all the Romans
outwardly reioysed and the Senate, forthwith he put to death all the favorers
of Albinus. Seuerus was a cruel Emperor, Crueltye.
nothing regardinge the life of any whom his cruel heart did fansye to
murder, in travail and pains he was inferior to no soldier in sufferinge
of cold, heat, honger, Covetousness
thirste, he passed all other in these extremityes, in covetousness he went
beyond all Emperors, whereupon not content with his estate, ambitiouslye he
sought larger kingdoms, and under pretense to work his heavy displeasure
against certain which favored Niger, he entered against Barsemius, he
led his army into the East, he passed also into Armenia subduinge Augarus
and his kingdom, Augarus.
and carried his children with him for hostages, Seuerus was aided by him with a
great number of mighty Archers, he passed from thence to Felix Arabia,
Arabia.
burninge and spoylinge the countries, Arras.
he laid siege to the City Arras where the Romans were myserablye
afflicted, and Seuerus with the great slaughter of his soldiers discomfited
left the siege: the me^ of Arras were noble Archers, whereby Seuerus nothing
prevailed, the men of Arras also used diverse policies whereby they poisoned
his men, he passed from thence to Parthia to king Artabanus, Artabanus.
whom against the law of Arms he entered upon, being in league with him, he
spoiled his country, destroyed his people and led them captives away, only
the king Artabanus with a few horsemen escaped, The law of arms to be kept.
but his treasure and riches fell to the pray and spoil of Seuerus
soldiers, then from thence he passed home to Rome, who caused the whole
manner and estate of his conquestes, to be set forth in Mappes and cards to be
seen of all men, Seuerus being received with all solemnitye, quietly settled
himself to make his abode there, geuinge sentence in all controuersyes of the
law, careful in the education and bringinge up of his two sons Marcus
Antoninus and Geta, Mareus Antoninus. Geta.
these two in the absence of their father with all liberty having free
passage, to fansye that liked them, their natures were corrupted: Delicijs,
victu vrbano, spectaculis, studio saltationis. That is, with delicious fare,
riot, sightes, and daunsing, and surely where these things be in use, beastly
life follows, because pleasure which destroys virtue incenseth them, and
where pleasure harboreth, Pleasure.
virtue with all sobrietye, temperancye and prudente counsel is expelled.
Constantinus the great reforminge his Court and purginge it, expelled from
the same Aliatores, The rattes of Princes Courts.
saltatores, and adulteros, quia inquit hij sunt Sorices Pallacij. That is,
dysers, daunsers, and adulterous parsons, saying these be ye rattes of my
Palace: the like also said Priamus, Priamus.
Hector, Nestor, and worthy Troilus being slain, these valiaunte parsonages
(says he) cruel Mars has slain, but I have left me reproachful children,
dross, and refuce full of filthye spots, detestable liars, dauncers, and
robbers of other. The like we read of Henrye the fifth king of England,
Henrye ye v.
who conquered all France, this Prince (as the Histories do note) banished all
dissolute parsons from his Court, being sometime a wanto^ Prince himself, yet
receiving charge of kingdom, he gave himself to all wisdom, grauety, and
temperancy, his kingdom prospered, The wise Prince.
and people flowrished, large were his victories in France, virtuous life
ruled his commons, and quailed his enemies: A voluptuous Prince is never
dreaded of his enemies, The voluptuous Prince
he is hated and accounted of little force, the weak Prince being godly
wins by virtue, and procures thereby the love of his enemy, small are the
holds, and weak are the fortresses of the voluptuous Princes, as the
Chronicles testifye, concerning Antoninus and Geta the two sons of Seuerus
by disposition and nature contrary, continuallye were at discention in all
games and pastymes, not as children sone ceassing displeasure, but maliciously
each one hatinge deadlye the other. The destruction of a kingdom.
Seuerus feared their natural dispositions, least at any time their malicious
hearts should work on themselves mischief. Antoninus Antoninus.
was by nature wicked, cruel, beastly, Geta gentle, lowly, and courteous, this
Antoninus afterward in his own life shall be Chronicled what he was. Geta.
At yt time Seuerus married Antoninus to the daughter of Plausianus against his
will, whereupon Antoninus threatened as soon as Seuerus his father dyed, to slay
his wife and her father Plausianus, Plausianus.
which thing Plausianus hearing of, fearinge ye cruel head of Antoninus,
determined in mind to slay both the sons of Seuerus, his conspiracye came to
light Seuerus yet living: Plausiauus.
This Plausianus had been exalted from poor and needye estate, to great
dignitye, who not content with his estate sought by ambition, to be above his
Lord and masters children, Ambition.
the age of Seuerus moved him thereto partlye, and the great and infynite
treasures gathered by the spoil of many Regions, and captiuitye of kings
moved him also, but this conspiracye being known to Seuerus and uttered by
Saturninus a Tribune, Saturninus.
who should have done yt wicked fact, thereunto being hired, Plausianus was
apprehended as the Historye notes at large, Plausianus his death.
and forthwith was beheaded.

Seuerus by all means sought to join amitye and concord with his two sons,
fearinge the peril that would follow, and the great calamitye on the
Romans, these two Princes being at discord, Discord.
living with all liberty, flowed in all wanton pleasures and fond pastimes,
all which things with their wicked behavior made Seuerus a careful Prince,
he persuaded them to love, geeuinge them admonitions and fatherlye counsel,
The ruin of kingdoms.
he called to mind before them the great ruin of kingdoms, the faule of
Princes, the destruction of noble houses which happened by discord, he badde
them beware by them, he showed to them the glory and fame of good kings and
Princes, the ignominye and spotted life of ye wicked: Discord.
discord he said pulls down in a momente more then concord in many
years purchases, and aduaunceth. His great victoryes and large conquestes he
said, would sone faule in the hands of other Princes, his two sons being
at discord, Division.
their division making them weak, would raise strength in other, to pull them
down, to spoil them of their riches, Stre^gthe armed with co^corde.
and to dissolve their kingdoms: strength armed with concord prevails
mightily, but great armies divided are chased away and loase oftentimes their
honor in the field: so much discord preuayleth being in force to dissolve
unity, but all this counsel of Seuerus was in vain: for dailye, for lyuinge
sake, Flatterye.
there crepte in those that moved by flatterye, division and discord between
the two brethren, diverse of them Seuerus put to death, that thus gave
counsel to move that broyle of discord. Britain.
Seuerus though he were very aged hearing that the Britaynes denied obedience
to the Romans, forthwith marched from Rome to war on them, but the
Britaynes sought peace, and sent Ambassadors to Seuerus to purge themselves,
but Seuerus entered on them, they taking the marish ground resisted him, but
Seuerus politickelye devised means to fight with them, Geta^.
and in the end conquered them, all things set in quiet estate, he left Geta
his younger son chief governor there, with a number of wise counsailours to
instruct Geta, and to order the Island: The people of the Island knew no use
of apparel, The manners of the Britaynes.
but they had a hoope of Iron about their neck and middle, which was counted
an ornament with them, and a token of great riches: their bodies were pictured
and painted with diverse shapes of beasts, As Caesar does note in his
Commentaryes upon the people of this our Island, a nation very warrelike,
cruel and bloudye. In this Emperors days the Christians were persecuted. The
fifte persecution of ye Christians.
Crooked age coming upon Seuerus, and also the gout troublinge him, he drew
to Rome, age forbidding him any more to war, he sent his son Antoninus as
liefetenaunte and chief governor to foreign wars, Antoninus.
now Antoninus (mindinge that he always coueted) sought to be honored as
Emperor of all men, sorye he was that Seuerus his father lived so long,
diverse ways he sought by the Emperors servants and Physicians to slay him,
but none obeyed his counsel: Seuerus hearing of his sons wicked purposes
dyed more upon thought then sickness, after he had reigned xviii. years. This
was the death of that valiante Emperor Seuerus: Seuerus.
but Charion writes that Seuerus coming to this Island, dyed hear and was
buried at York. ()

Marcus Seuerus Antoninus.


ROme lost a wise governor Seuerus being dead, the enemy also and foreign
Princes had such an one taken away as they dreaded, who for pollecye,
counsel and all qualityes meet for such a parsonage was inferior to no
Prince, The comme^dation of Seuerus.
great was his fame for his noble victoryes, all Italye, France, yea all
Europe, Affricke and Asia, either dreaded his name or obeyed his government.
At the time of Seuerus death, Antoninus and Geta were in Britayne this our
Island, immediatlye they made preparation to Rome to solemnise the funeral of
Seuerus their father: Now began that discord to broyle, which long time was
in the hearts of these two brethren, for in all their passage to Rome, each one
feared other, having together no mutual society, such was ye fear of the
brother with the brother, both feared treason, the one dreaded to be poisoned
of the other, Discord.
whereupon severally they took their repaste and banquetes, they feared in
drinckes and meats poisoning, fear suspected the hearts of these that served
them, as soon as they came to Rome their lodginges were seuerallye appointed,
Discord.
each own feared yt the great discord of these two Princes, would work great
calamities to all the Romans, and destruction to themselves. As concerning
the funeral of Seuerus, the Romans did celebrate it with all due honor,
(meet for so worthy an Emperor) layinge his corpse in the place of the
Roman Emperors, this funeral once ended, then Geta and Antoninus openly
uttered their discord, each one making traynes and craftye conueyance to
entangle the other. Antoninus.
Antoninus being the elder brother, feared Geta his younger brother, Geta
(though younger) ambitiouslye sought by many policies, to occupye the place
and kingdom of his elder brother, Nature.
nature made them brethren, reason would that concord should have obeyed
unto nature: Lofte estate.
loftye estate depriueth nature of right, kingdoms many times obeys not
nature, ambition in loftye governors casts of kindred and grudgeth to have
his mate, Ambition.
even as Pompeie broked not his like, and as full evil Caesar could bear his
superior, so ambition in these two brethren seeks a sole regiment alone
without the other, though discord possessed these two Princes, yet they had
subtle heads and flatteringe tongues, which frequented them, counsel
lacked not on both their sides to work mischiefs, Adulations
but yet ye love and favor of the greater part of the Romans was well
affected to Geta, because Geta gave a good opinion of godly behavior, Geta.
in talk and gesture civil, gentle, and courteous, his delectacion was in
things worthy commendation, the company of the sage and wise delighted him,
his virtues gate him love and his gentle behavior with all men purchased him
favor, but Antoninus Antoninus.
by nature cruel, excercised crueltye, with tyranny commendinge: warrelike in
all his conditions, Irefull, mightily threateninge, with fear not with love
seekinge obedience, eue^ as violent kingdoms lack love of subjects to
obedience, so violente governors are more dreaded then loved, Violent
governors.
miserable is the estate of those Princes, yea the kingdom unfortunate, where
discord prepares mischief, where cloked hearts ground pollecies to deminishe
ye estate or deprive the honor the one of the other: Discord.
that that Seuerus by large victories gate, that which by concord he raised to
the advancement of the Romayne Empire, now discord in these. ii. brethrene
brings defamation, weakeneth their strength, shortneth their life, pulls
down their kingdom, their discord caused division of countries, for diverse
Regions were lymitted unto each of them, as all Europe to be in the
jurisdiction of Antoninus and Asia was lymitted for the possession and
patrimonye of Geta: Bizance.
Bizance had a great garrison of soldiers for Antoninus, Calcedon.
and Calcedon a Cittye in Bithinia was the forte of Geta, Antioche and
Alexandria the kinglye seat for Geta, Mauritania and Numidia belonged to
Antoninus, this the Senators of Rome (led with all deliberatio^) thought good
to make this equality between them, the Empress with great sorrow suspectinge
discord oftentimes admonished them, Unity.
and gave them exhortacion and as a wise Empress mindful of unity allured
them to concord, but her counsel nothing prevailed, dailye their discord,
hatred, and bloudye practices increased, the one fearing the other, both lived
warely from hurt and poysoninge because they feared: Ambition.
but at the length Antoninus not content with the estate of Geta, nor with
the favor wherewith he was affected, therevppon incensed to possess a sole
kingdom, at a sudden by violence entered his brothers chamber by night, Geta
murdered.
and at unawares before his mother beheaded him: Now is the heart of Antoninus
seen, now has discord caughte his end which he looked for, then Antoninus
(the murder unknown) ran forth making great exclamation cryinge out for
help: said, that Geta with a company entered upon him to slay him, but his
strength prevailed and so he escaped, great was the tumulte and business of
Antonye in this stir then he allured the hearts of the men of war geuinge
them princely gifts, (by which they being overcome) proclaimed him Emperor.
Antoninus with an eloquent Oration parswaded the multitude, appeased their
Irefull hearts, and as much as lay in him altered their suspicion. Tyranny.
As soon as he was created Emperor and in quietness settled, he murdered all
the friends of Geta sparinge no age, yea not the infant, so yt not one remained
on live in the common wealth of Rome, that had any friendship with Geta. Then he
made hauoke of the Senators of Rome, espetiallye on those who either in
nobilitye or riches excelled, small was the cause, and full light the
occasion that procured the murder of any put to death, many noble pears and
women also he put to death, as his own wife the daughter of Plausianus, the
son of Pertinax, his crueltye was intolerable, that hatred which he bore
toward Geta was so great (that he being murdered) yet he ceasseth not to
destroy and slaye all the chief governors and Presidentes of the provinces
as friends to Geta: Tyranny.
the day time was not sufficient for his murders, but also he bestowed the
night seasons in that crueltye, many were his slaughters, and his beastlines
intolerable, the barbarous soldiers loved him, both for his prodigalitye
and bountiful gifts, Me^ of war
wherewith their favor was incensed to love him, hope of pray and spoil,
The warriars life.
leads to extreme peril and hasarde the accustomed warrior: contrary to
that which peace procures, and furthereth to those which live by peace:
Euenso these sons of Mars, do pitche their sure hold in the great calamities
of other, and as reueninge fowls do look after pray. Antoninus wrapped in all
monstrous vices, left the parts of Italy, and took his voyage to Danubius,
where in all pleasure for his delight he did flow at will. The Germaynes he
made friends to him, to aid him in wars he chose out of them those which
were of goodliest parsonage to guard him in all points, and in diet, apparel
and manners he became a German, and to win the favor of the soldiers to
make them the more painful in all travail: A great pollicye.
he dug, he delued many times with his own hands, on foot he travailed
bearinge burdens, vsinge most slender fare wherewith his commendation entitled
him a rare captain. These were rare and singular practices in so noble a
pear, which Zenophon notes in his Historye, saying that this only is the
means for those which in martial feats seek to go beyond other, to be in
labor equal to other, and because he would be an other Alexander, Alexander.
in all Cities he caused the Images of Alexander to be set up, yea at Rome
in the Capitolle and Temples.

Herodian wrote the Historye at large, and says that he in those days with
many other, saw diverse pictures which in one body had ii. faces the face of
Alexander and of Antoninus, he went to the Tomb of Achilles honouringe him,
but above al he commended Silla and Hanniball to whom also he made pictures, he
wrought much villanye to the men of Alexandria as the historye notes at large,
because they of Alexandria mocked him, in that so vainlye he would match
himself with Alexander and Achilles, which contumely he not bearinge,
murdered an infinite sort of them by a gyle, after this he sought to marye the
daughter of Artabanus king of the Parthians, Dissimulatio^*
showing what strength it would be, the Roman Empire and the mighty kingdom
of Parthia to be joined in one, but this was only a guile and train to win
Parthia. King Artabanus thought, that unfeignedly Antoninus made that request
of marriage, but in the end he had welnighe destroyed the king, making great
hauoke with his people. Then Antoninus after that he had murdered ye people
and spoiled the country, went into Mesapotamia, where he had his delectation
in hunting strange beasts, at that time Macri^us and Audentius being
liefetenantes of his armies, Macrinus.
had the doing of those matters only, Autentius.
whereby they were the only rulers. Antoninus curious in his doings was not
content to aspyre to the knowledge of human matters, but also he sought to
learn of sprytes, and because he feared by other to be murdered, he talked
with the most expert southsayers, Vanitye.
Astrologians, inchaunters and witches, none excelled whom he talked not with
to know his estate and end of life, but not content with their aunsweres
because they seemed to flatter him, he caused certain to conjure up spirits,
to know of them what end he should have, or if any wrought treason to his
person or kingdom, among many coniurers Matermanus above the rest excelled,
who learned of his coniured spirit, that one Macrinus who bare chief
aucthoritye under Antoninus, did seek the Emperors death, and whether that he
learned so of the coniured spirit, Coniuringe.
or that some other for hatred uttered the same to kill Macrinus it is
uncertain, Macrious.
but the Chronicles do note that Macrinus was in the end the death of
Antoninus: Austine writes a Book De diuinatione demoniorum, sheewinge that
devils do know of things to come, declaringe great proufes of the same.
Palingenius writes also thereof, sheewinge by good argument the same, and
herein for a manifest^ example is that Historye of the spirit coniured in the
body of Samuel, Saul.
who showed that Saul the king should dye in the next battle.

But now as concerning Macrinus the letters which the coniuerer sent to
Antoninus the Emperor, came at such time as Antoninus was otherwise occupied,
he willed therevppon Macrinus to read the letters: Macrinus readinge the
letters saw his death that would follow, by the instruction of the coniured
spyrites, Martialis.
but he preuentinge the matter, persuaded a certain young man named Martialis,
to seek aportunitye to murder Antoninus, who at a sudden killed him, being
at his priuye, but Martialis escaped not, for he was slain of the Germaynes
who were his guard, the murder done, Macrinus.
Macrinus though he wrought the treason, yet he seemed by lamentation and
outward behavior sorrowful of ye death of Antoninus: for causes there were
that might seem upon some private displeasure taken, to procure that murder.
Antoninus being dead, the men of war not knowinge what governors they
might obey (for.ii. days they were without an Emperor) then they took
aduisement who were most meet to govern, Antoninus recompensed with blood
for blood.
at the first Audentius was thought above the rest meet to occupye that
room, for he was a wise and valiaunte captain, Audentius.
long age with great experience excelled in him, but by reason of age he
refused ye offer, preferringe a quiet and private estate, before that digni^ye,
then the Tribunes fauouringe Macrinus, obtained so great favor that Macrinus
enjoyed the same. At the same time Artabanus king of the Parthians to revenge
the old iniuryes, Moerinus chosen Emperor.
made preparation against the Romans, whereupon the more willingly they
chose Macrinus Emperor, because he was liefetenaunt in the wars before.
Artabanus with a great power came upon the Romans having a great band of
valiant horsemen, strong Archers, mighty Camels, their power was great and
noble for parsonages. Macrinus made an Oration to the Romans, vtteringe the
causes of Artabanus coming, and to encourage the Romans, he did extol
their invincible strength, shewinge them also the decay of the Romayne Empire
if Artabanus prevailed, Parthians.
he laid before their eyes the bare and rude pollicye of the Parthians, he
extolled the wittye practices and noble enterprises of the Romans, in all
Regions their victoryes and large conquestes. After this the hoaste of
Artabanus enteringe on ye Romans, his Archers and other soldiers greatly
did hurt and made havoc of them, the Romans on foot hand to hand, were
more valiante then the Parthians, Parthians.
the success that fell to the Parthians, was by their Archers and Camels, from
whom many threw darts, then the Romans greatly endamaged by the horsemen of
ye Parthians, made sharp pykes, priuelye to be set to annoye the horsemen of
the Parthians, whereby many were destroyed, mighty were the wars on both
sides, for two days the battle continued until night: the third day also
a new they made a fresh battle, where great was the slaughter as appeared
by those that lay dead in great heaps, not only of men but of Camels, in
this extremity Macrinus knowinge that the injuries of Antoninus (being dead)
was the only cause that moved Artabanus to war on the Romans, sent
Ambassadors to Artabanus the king of the Parthians signifying by letters,
that Antoninus the Emperor who was the cause of their injuries, was dead, and
now the Empire to be in his hands, and that he liked not the doings of
Antoninus, The petition of Macrinus
wherefore he promised to give to Artabanus all the captives and spoil which
Antoninus had from him, and that willinglye he desyered to join amitye with
Artabanus, the letters read, he received the Ambassadors of the Romans
honorably, Artabanus was content with the offer, and joined league with the
Romans, and shortly after he returned into Parthia, and Macrinus marching
with his army out of Mesapotamia went to Antioche. In this sort at large
writes Herodian the true and faithful Historiographer, sudden was the death
of Antoninus the wicked Emperor, and at a sudden the choice of Macrinus,
rash were the heads of those warrelike soldiers, A rash chois^*
to choose the murderer of their Emperor to govern them.

Macrinus.


MAcrinus coming to Antioche (as Herodian writes) immediatlye sent letters
to the Senate and people of Rome and as it should seem was moved there to, to
the end good opinion might be bruted of him whereby he might win their favor,
and possess their louinge hearts: and because he was giltye of the death of
the Emperor Antoninus, with other of the Tribunes, as afterward time uttered
ye close conspiracye of their treasons, against their Lord and king (though
he were a wicked Emperor) and even as God leaves no estate vnscourged, but
for sin and iniquitye destroys Cities, ouerwhelmeth Regions, displaceth
Princes, so he utters in time all treasons, Treasons.
as in these conspiratours he opened their beastlye fact and bloody practice,
it is no rare thing, but yet for wonder rare a captive and abiecte parsonne to
the world (yet in virtue excellinge) through the secret providence of God to
be advanced unto a kingdom, a wicked Prince in all glory and strength
flourishinge expelled from Dominion, The secret counsel of God in kingdoms.
and the estate translated to an unknown parson, and to a strange nation: O
how happy therefore is it a kingdom to possess a godly Prince and a
virtuous, God defends the estate of such whose kingdom is beautifyed with a
godly Prince, the only cause of the change of kingdoms, A godly Prince.
and the overthrow and plague of mighty Regions does come through wicked
governors, for as a good Prince heapeth great glory and felicitye to his
kingdom, The wicked Prince.
so the wicked Prince subuerteth destroys and pulls down more in a moment
and short time, then the godly governor is able to establishe and ordain in a
long continuance, so much the life of one chief governor is of force to
prevail in kingdoms.

As concerning Macrinus in his letters to the Senate of Rome, he altogether
reproved the beastly life and ungodly behavior of Antoninus, he advanced
his own glory by good success which he aspyred to in foreign wars,
because he rose from no noble parentage, to defend him thereby from base
reputacion: which people commonly do bear in mind (a man of mean and low
estate promoted to dignitye) who better co^monlye can honor and account of
any one though never so base, Men of low estate promoted.
being an aliant. the^ of such an one borne in their own country, whose low
condition of life unto them is known, although his virtues, and worthiness in
acts have extolled him to that dignitye. The race of noble kings.
The race of many kings is by age out of mind, not known from what pore
cotage they descended, time out of mind entitleth them with honor, and age
for memory Chronicleth them royal, God by a secret providence has raised
from all estates to bear Scepters, long descent rayseth nobilitye to fame,
but virtue and valiantnes of acts, are only the causes that should make
nobilitye.

Macrinus therefore to prove himself noble writes this argument: True
nobilitye.
Let no man think me unworthy the place of the Emperor, because from low
estate I have ascended, for what is nobility except virtuous conditions, and
noble acts do make the parson glorious, for we see daily many who as beasts
live unto the earth destitute of all excellency, Glorious talk of a tyraunte.
without good fame, yea the ignorante to aspyre to heaped riches, to
honorable revenues, and wealthy patrimonye, unworthy parsons also to enjoy
fortunes flotinge wealth and blessed maintenance, because they are thought to
descend from noble progenye: Marvel not therefore if the chief glory of
worthy fame requisite for a noble man, happen unto one descendinge of mean
parents, from a mean cotage in a despised body, who^ fortune seemed to have
cast of, if that in prowes and valiantnes both in feats of arms, and in all
other noble qualities, apt for the defense and gouernmente of a country, he
flowrisheth more then any other. Riches not in admiration with y^ wise.
The brittle gifts of fortune are not with wise men in admiration, for fools
as beasts without senses according to their own understanding are in
admiration of the rich, and place all felicitye in kingdom, ponder with our
selves these few examples, what auayled the long race of the Aslyrian Princes
to Sardanapalus? Sardanapalus.
or the nobilitye of the kings of Lidia to Candaules': Candaules.
or the valiante prowes of the whole race of the kings of Persia to cowardlye
Zerxes? Zerzes.
or the nobilitye of Commodus, Commodus.
who in outward kingdom noble, did degenerate from the true nobilitye that
was in Marcus his father, which Marcus was a wise, noble, godly and valiante
Prince: Commodus was a rash, foolish and beastly governor. Whereunto is come
the nobilitye of Seuerus, Seuerus.
Geta, Geta.
and Antoninus, Antoninus.
being once in glory, who orderly by succession would claim without just
cause the titles of kingdoms? these altogether without descente, without good
qualities, entered by innouations to succeed in kingdom: This tale being told
to the Senators and people of Rome, he wrote also that he would be ruled in
all things with the wisdom of the Senators, and that their aucthoritye
should moderate the whole frame and order of his government, and he promised
that they should live in that liberty, Dissimulatio^
wherein godly Princes before him, had settled ye estate of the Roman Empire:
As Traian, Vespasian, Adrian, Nerua, Marcus Antoninus, and Pertinax, these
letters being read they proclaimed Macrinus Emperor: though Macrinus were
at Antioche, all the Romans were glad that cruel Antoninus was murdered,
then inquisition was made, A just reward for promoters.
the Senators being godly disposed thereto, to search out al promoters, which
in the time of the bloody Emperor Antonye, procured the death of many, and
also accused their masters before that Emperor and shortened their lives, all
such were hanged on gybbets, the common wealth of Rome was throughlye purged
of all wicked persons, more by the pollicye and counsel of the Senators then
through Macrinus: For Macrinus at ye first enteringe of his government, gave
himself from all virtue, lyuinge in all pleasure at Antioche, now his private
state is forgotten, honor and dignitye have changed him, and that great
ignobilitye which he reproved in other is forgotten, and the nobilitye for
which he gloried in himself is now lackinge, his behavior waxed proud, his
countenance hautye, and manners insolent: now he will not be spoken with in
matters of grauitye touching a common wealth, pleasure and fond delights
drew this voluptuous Emperor from care of kingdom, A sudden change.
pleasant flatterers, iesters, dauncers, prodigal and riotous persons were his
delight and company, the lascivious life contented not ye warriors and
soldiers, for the pampered life of the delicious Prince and his wanton
behavior, caused him to be contemned, he now renewed the evil examples and
tragical parts of Antoninus, Wanton behavior.
which before he so much despised. Macrinus this ill governor raigued a
short time, through his wickedness he continued but a year in gouernmente,
the virtuous life in a Prince has no cause to fear what the enemy can do,
Virtuous life in a prince.
neither can the malicious head assure any enterprise. Well, Macrinus was
deceived of the Romans, and those barbarous and warrelike soldiers, pondred
how to place another in that room by murtheringe Macrinus.

A certain honorable woman named Mesa the sister of Iulia, Mesa.
mother in law unto Antoninus, (who afterward married ye same Antoninus the
late Emperor) had two daughters, Semiamira Semiamira.
which was mother to Antonius Bassianus, Mammea.
and Mammea which Mammea was the mother of Alexianus afterward called
Alexander, both these two young men were Sacerdotes solis, priests or dayned
to the honor of ye Sun, to whom the Phenitians did build a sumptuous Temple,
the Princes also of other Nations thereunto a dioyninge, did honor the Sun
for a God, the Parthians also (as the Historyes note) did the like. Bassianus
being in years youthful, of a goodly personage, Bassianus.
of visenomye very amiable, at such time as the Romans had a garrison of
noble warriors in Phenitia, which warriors also making their abode there,
resorted many times to yt goodly Temple builded to ye Sun, where by their often
resort, they vewed well the personage of Bassianus, whose grandemother was
sister to Iulia Iulia.
the Emperesse, which Iulia was mother and wife to Antoninus the Emperor
before, they that bare chief aucthoritye over the soldiers under Macrinus in
Phenitia, saying that this Bassianus was of noble birth descended (though a
priest) The mother also of Bassianus said that he was the bastard son of
Antoninus, Antoninus.
whether it was feigned of her or no, it is uncertain, but as for ye life of
Antoninus his beastlines was such, that he spared not his own kindred, no not
his daughters, but had with them his pleasure in their tender years, These
words being credited that were spoken by the Lady, the soldiers presentlye
determined to make Bassianus Emperor, for that they knew his mother to be
greatly enriched with infinite treasures, Murder for murder requited.
with whom also they talkinge, the murder for money was agreed upon. And so
desyringe to accomplish their promise made for gain, they conueighed Bassianus
into their tents and called him by they name of Antonye, clothinge him in
Princely apparel, preparinge all things necessary to repel the enemy, if
their forte should be besieged, forthwith it was known to Macrinus what
things were done in Phenitia by the bastard son of Antoninus, he had
understanding of the whole means of their conueyance, and of the large
promise of Mesa, at the first Macrinus regarded not the news, but at the
length just occasion was geeuen to credit that report, and then he sent
forth a chief and valiaunte captain: I^lianus.
Iulianus by name, to repress those rebels and to deface their rebellion, to
pull down the estate usurped by the bastardly priest Bassianus, who leaving
his estate of priesthode, A priest Emperor.
coueted to be an Emperor. Iulianus doing Macrinus commandment followed
his purpose, assaulted the forte, where the soldiers sheewed on the wall this
Bassianus called Antoninus, and great bags of money with infinite sums,
which procured the treason. Iulianus as a valiaunte Captain, assayinge by all
means to deface the usurper, and to win the forte, in the end he lost his
head, Iulianus.
and in spite they sent it to Macrinus, the men of war which came with
Iulianus fled to Bassianus, then Macrinus made preparation in his own parson
to fight against them, but he was feign to fly chau^ginge his apparel, and
shauinge his bearde that he might not be known, the soldiers in the mean
time fought for their Lord a long time: it was long unknown that Macrinus
was fled, but as soon as Bassianus heard thereof, he sent certain to pursue
after him, who found him in Calcedon Calcedon.
a Cittye of Bithinia very sick, where they cut of this head with his son
Diadumenus, who^ in his life time he created Emperor. Macrinus thus is
recompensed with violente death, and for murtheringe Antoninus the Emperor
before, Murder.
was murdered by Bassianus called the bastard son of Antony, who ever after
he was made priest, was called Heliogabalus. Macrinus ruled but one year, a
Prince without care of the common wealth given to voluptuousnes and all fond
pleasures, thus caughte a miserable end.

Heliogabalus.


HEliogabalus called the bastard son of Antonye, ye son of Semiamira, she
being sister to Iulia the Empress before, which Heliogabalus being a priest:
In honorem solis, made to the honor of the Sun, for amongst the
Phaenitians) as you have heard) the Sun was compted a God, being but a
planet, they did honor the same at ye rysinge and going down, to who^ for
honor, superstition amongst them had made apriesthode of great renown.
Helyogabalus by interpretation signifies a priest of the sun.
This Heliogabalus how he came to be Emperor, the History before sheeweth in
the life of Macrinus, he was but sixtene years of age when he was chosen
Emperor, and six years he continued therein: in the end was slain with his
mother Semiamira, who procured with great sums the Empire to her son, whom
she feigned to be the Emperors child. This Heliogabalus immediatelye upon
the death of Macrinus (the army of soldiers brybed with great sums of
money) was proclaimed Emperor, Semiamira.
though the Senators at Rome had no choice therein, Necessities.
for as soon as the Senate heard thereof, of necessitye they obeyed the choice,
having proof dailye that virtue and worthiness created not Emperors amongst
them, Election. forced.
but as fansye in those warrelike stomakes gave election, herein by force they
obeyed election, saying so sudden choice of Emperors by them, and so sudden
the faule from their estate through them, cruel and bloudye hearts displaced
the chosen, and hearts bribed with money made a new election, as Merchandise
of cattle and wares they sold the Empire, as money made the Emperors, so
money made choice of officers: Money.
so great was the calamities of those days in the often change of Princes and
officers, that Princes usurped by money and officers by bribes grew wealthy,
private gain with each one was in steed of a common wealth, Welthye officers.
the Empire bore a name of estate, but private gain with each one bore away
the maystrye. As concerning Heliogabalus after he was created Emperor,
remained under the tuition (for lack of wisdom in those tender years) of his
grandemother Mesa, Priuete gai^*
and his mother Semiamira, the estate of the common wealth well settled and in
quietness in the East parts, he was counseled (by those under whose tuition
he was governed) to make have to Rome: Mesa*
they sheewed him that delay in Niger, folly and tira^ny in Macrinus, and
unadvisedness in Albinus, was their destruction, then this Bassianus being under
the government of other, obeyed what they willed for a season, Follye.
the departure of Heliogabalus toward Rome was bruted in all coasts, Delay.
the army of soldiers understood ye same, forth he passed from Syria, and
made his winter abode in Nichomedia, such was the season of that year, that
it let ye passage of the Emperor to other coasts, Unadvisedness.
and in ye end there he wintered. Though his graundmother and mother, had
chief jurisdiction over this priestlye Emperor, yet there crept in certain
gallantes both warelye and secretly, whose pleasure was in Courtly behavior,
and all things delectable to delight a Prince, they found favor with
Heliogabalus, Courtly gallantes.
so much their demeanes and light toys sancke in the head of that young
Prince (though his graundmother with other endued with all grauitye and wise
counsel, used oftentimes exhortacious mete for his estate) but young Princes
obeyinge fansyes, and refusinge counsel do commonly flow in free passage to
vice, where counsel prevails not, (pleasure following) fansye bears rule
and weakeneth the strong Prince, Pleasure.
and pulls down the mighty from their kingdoms, whom noble virtues and
temperancye has exalted, the embrasinge of the meanest pleasure has cast
down fortes, Pleasure.
and demynished the estate of the mighty, virtue harbors not where vice
dwells, Virtue.
pleasure gives no abode where vice rau^geth, such mates has the Emperor
chosen, as pleasure and vice liked: Vice.
those two disposed yt frame and order of his household, and in like sort
schowled the common wealth, he might well be the son of Antonye, who in
beastly behavior did so well resemble that beastly Emperor Antoninus, his holy
priesthode is forgotten, Gawish aparell what it betokens.
and the devout ceremonies of his strange God, and he as a ruffyne with all
sumptuousnes in light and gaudishe apparel of diverse coullers clotheth
himself, rybaldrye was affected in all his doings, Daunsinge.
daunsinge was the delectation of the Prince, and therewith followed like
pleasures, he despised the vestures and apparel of the Roman Emperors, a
new fashion is invented to please this fond Emperor, his apparel was not
wholye after the manner of the Phenitians, but somewhat like the Medes and the
Phenitians, a mingle mangle of both: As for the apparel of the Romans, which
the Emperors before used, he would say in reproach: New fashion of apparel
devised of strange heads.
De lana vilissima confe and as Imperatorum vestes, gresye woll (says he)
before clothed Emperors of Rome, and as new fashions for apparel crepte in
by vain heads, so the sober mediocrite, and virtuous mean was despised, and
now fond pride, monsterous vices in all estates flew abroad, rich ought the
ornaments to be, and full sumptuous the clothinge of Princes and noble pears,
when the mean sort, leauinge all mean and consideration of estate, as
players on a stage, above Princes and Princes mates do clothe themselves, Pride.
yea when amongst the mean sort, each one strives to be a rare gallant,
Princes may go as Princes, and as nobility leads nobles, and of high estate
enjoy their vestures, the mean sort in comparison without nobilitye, The
pride of these days.
do match with sumptuousnes their nobles, so pride has brought in sumptuous
clothinge, wherewith a great and wealthye patrimonye that fostered many, lies
all in gaye clothes. Mesa being grandmother to this Hehogabalus, Mesa.
was very much grieved with the insolente manners, excessive pride, and garishe
apparel of of her nephewe, mouinge him to have consideration of his estate, by
calling to mind the faule of proud Princes, the decay of folishe
governors: she warned him with long and humble intreatye, to use the
accustomed robe of the Roman Emperors, Pride.
shewinge also how light he would seem to the Romans, whose apparel as
childishe, would be thought and womanlye rather then for any man, and much
less for a Prince. The schole of folly.
But Heliogabalus was now throughlye scholed of his mates, whereby he despised
Senators, and men of grauetye and wisdom were put far from him, such was
his delectacion as in pride, rybaldrye, ryote and beastlye demeanor. these he
embraced as companions, and because he would not enter Rome with his strange
apparel to be wondered at, cunninge men were serched out: who most liuelye and
artificiallye could set forth his very visenomye, parsonage and comelye
stature, the very apparel though light and gawishe, with his priestlye robe
which he used, the picture also of ye Sun, in whose honor he was
consecrated priest, he gave also commandment that his picture should be set
on high, where the assemble of the Senate should be gathered, and that every
one of them to him as a God, should burn incence, and that the Romans
before all gods, should entitle him the great God Heliogabalus,
Heliogabalus, a man, a priest, a great God.
this thing at Rome (as he commanded) was done of the Senators and multitude.
Each one toted and looked at the picture, the sight was rare, the follye of a
mortal man ridiculous, and worthy to be hissed at, of an Emperor
intolerable, no man liked the great follye of that Prince unknown to the
Romans, chosen by many of ye soldiers, the Romans looked for some
singular matter, they wondered a mortal man to fansye a Godheade, children
laughed in their sleeves, Pride.
and old men for fear ducked, as prostrate to honor a man as a God, an
Emperor, a priest, and bastard son of Antoninus. Wicked governors.
Nevertheless such is the estate of wicked times, wherein ungodly and beastly
governors do reign, that for fear each one obeys their commandments,
Rome receives him with honor, and the Senators wish him (faynedlye) long
life, full Princelye was the Court of this young priest, who in his
accustomed priestly apparel entered bearinge ye estate of an Emperor,
fayninge with all men a Godheade: to win the favor of the Romans,
princelye were the gifts which he gave to win their love. Forth with in
the honor of his God, he erected a mighty, huge and sumptuous Temple, and
round about the Temple Al^ars, doing therevppon sacrifyce of Oxen and
sheep, and with incence oderiferous perfumed his God, certain women of
Phaenitia playinge on cymbals and instruments, did solemnise the sacrifyce,
the wickedness of him was such, that he murdered all those which rejoiced not
at his follye, and all such as reproved and spoke evil of him: secretly this
Emperor was desirous of marriage, Iyranny.
and would have had to wife a noble Lady of Rome, with whom afterward he
married, but not continuinge with her, he made a deuorce depriuinge her of all
dignitye and honor. After her he fell in love with a Nun seruinge the Gods
Vesta, professinge virginitye, A Nun.
which also the laws both Civil and Common, do bind to perpetual
virginitye, whom Bassianus taking from her holy sell and Temple married, that
crime was full reprochefull, the fact detestable, wherewith the Senate being
grieved accounted it horrible, in those days it was so heinous, and the laws
also gave this sentence: A vow broken in virginitye ye party so offending to
be buried quick. The first king of the Romans was borne of one professing
that holy virginitye, Romulus.
his mothers name was Rhea, who served Vesta the Goddess. Heliogabalus
answered in these words. Sacerdotis nuptias congruere sacerdoti ob id magis
venerandas and augustiores esse nuptias. The marriage of a holy Nun would well
agree to ioyue in matrimony with a holy priest, for where two holy ones be
joined in marriage, there the marriage must needs be most holy. This Emperor as
it seems followed fancye, wherein pleasure ruled marriage, forlo^g he continued
not with her being such a holy one, for her he put from him by deuorce, then
afterward he married one who descendid from the house of Co^modus the Emperor,
Follye.
her also he put from him, then would he needs have the Image of a goddess
which was Pallas, Pallas.
to be brought to his chamber, that same Image was of great antiquity
amongst the Romans, the Greeks when Troy was burned saved the Immage of
Pallas, Troy.
of the which the Romans attained to have the possession, this goddess he
called the wife of the sun his God, this Image was coumpted of that holiness
that no man durst remove it from the place where it was set, such was the
supersticion of those days in Images and forged godheads of antiquity,
Superstition*
as in many other ages superstytion has borne such rowte, not amongst the
simple and princes only, but fancied, vpholded, and allowed of the learned,
which maintenance of fond gods of devotion in Images, Images.
spronge from those that knew not God, and yet mainteyned as clarkelye as tongue
could forge of those, which would seem to hold of a religion pure and
profess god, and even as ye heathen were in admiration of honouringe strange
goods by force and blodye practices, grownding a perfect religion upon their
gods, even so from time to time there have remained such as have brought in
among christians a supersticious devotion of infinite saints, not as merit
but as fancye and authority stauled them saints: Sibilla. lib. ^.
but Sibill who perfectlye set forth such superstitions calls them. Deos
mortuos, Idola mortuorum. Dead goods, and patterns of the dead: as concerning
that matter more largely it shall be spoken of, Irenae.
in the life of the blodye and superstitious Empress Irenae, who for ye like
superstitiousnes practiced the terrible persecution upon christians.

As concerning the last marriage of Bassianus for his god, now he puts of
Pallas as unmeet to match with the sun his god saing. A lamentable state when
God is neglected of a Prince.
Belligera dea and armata, vxor esse non possit pacifici dei. A wife all in
armoure and warlike, was an unmeet wife for a quiet god, then as folly grew
upon folly he commanded a certain Image which had no name, but because it
was found, and no man knew from whence it was, and at yt time being full of
bewtye, An old devise of the supersticious.
gorgeous, and sumptuouslye clothed as a queen, bearing chief route amongst
her she gods, and because the finding of that Image was strange, they said it
came from heaven, leauinge immortal creatures to vysite the mortal, and
therefore they called her the heavenly goddess, other histories write that
Dido building Carthage placed her there, at what time as she first erected
Carthage the Carthaginians, and Phenitians, called her the governor of of the
stars, Follye.
which is the moon, so Bassianus blinded with folly thought it a meet match
to marry the Moon and the Sun together, such was his folly led with
pleasure, cast from the knowledge of God to do things against God, to ye
which solempnity he ordained a festival day and a great solempnity for all
people of all estates, young and old, tagge and ragge to se this marriage, he
made also a sumptuous temple: it were to long to set forth his beastly manners,
his horrible life in all respects, and whereas by nature he was amiable and
beautiful he painted his face with diverse colors, wherewith his dignity for
his beastly life was not dreaded, he was contempned, the love was not so great
in ye beginning as is now the hatred of those who chose him, so brickle a
hold, and weak strength it is for a prince to trust in people or kingdom, The
virtuous Prince.
the virtuous prince shall never have cause to fear his enemy, to doubt of
his kingdom, or to stand in awe of his subjects, all these things wicked
princes fear.

The government of Bassianus being in this sort, his graundmother Mesa feared
that by indignation of the men of war, the faule of Bassianus would happen,
whereby also she saw that if Bassianus were murdered, her own estate would
fall in like peril, yea, to hasarde her life, and lease her dignitye, whereupon
in that extremity, full wisely she commoned with Bassianus and by pollicye
persuaded him to make his Cousin who was the son of Mammea her other daughter,
companion with him in the Empire: saying the cause that enforced her to move
him thereto was the tenderinge of his estate, and procurement of his liberty,
she extolled therewith his free estate: saying it shall be mete for you Bassianus
to leave the care of worldly things which are far unmeet for your high
estate, being holy addicted to the honor of your god the sun, as for
Alexianus he shall be an ease unto you in all your busynes, Subtle cou^^^^.
whereby with more quietness and less care lyeu may execute your other
affairs, she declared unto him that she sought out no stranger nor aliante to
perticipate with him in ye kingdom, but his kinsema^ Alexianus, who with all
profit, aduau^cement, love and sinceritye, would execute yt office: The
grandmother Mesa signified unto the men of war, that Antoninus the Emperor
before, begat Alexianus of her daughter Mammea, Pollicye.
whereby she knew that the men of war would more fervently love Alexianus,
the memory of Antoninus not forgotten: therevppon Alexianus was called also by
the name of Alexander, Bassianus.
and was entitled Emperor. Bassianus purposed to train his young cosyne, to
run ye race through all beastlye pleasures wherein he ranged, but Mesa (as
discret Lady, and grandmother to both) kept back Alexianus from all such
villanye, Godly education in a Prince.
priuelye she brought Alexianus up under virtuous governors and teachers,
which gave him education, meet for the estate of so noble a parsonage, no
excellencye wanted wherein his young years was not dailye instructed. Then
Bassianus full of vice, and flowinge in all beastlynes, was grieved much at the
virtuous education of Alexianus, whose life he would have framed to his own
fashion, and therevppon he repented him that he had exalted him to that
fellowshippe in kingdom: Now it was to late to change yt which the Romans,
the whole Senate and the warriors had decreed, now was the estate of
Heliogabalus most weak, the Romans possessinge a Prince whom they loved,
being learned, brought up vertuouslye, excellinge in all Princelye qualities:
this wicked Emperor Bassianus therevppon banished from his Court those that
furthered this young Emperor to wisdom, and godlynes, to learning and other
princely qualities: some he put to death for the same cause, he said they
corrupted the tender years of his son, he said these are only meet
qualities: Principem agitare choros, bacchari and scortari. It shall behoue a
Prince (says he) to be an excellent daunser, a riotous parson, and to use many
women. Bassianus only promoted to dignitye inuenters of pleasures delightinge
in beastlye follye, and all such as be out castes from the Courts of godly
Princes, Follye.
and from all common wealths: the wickedness of this Prince brought him in
contempt of all men, then Heliogabalus saying all the Romans with the
Senate, and me^ of war to be wholly given to ye favor of Alexianus otherwise
called Alexander, sought diverse times to murder him by diverse traynes as by
poison, but Mesa his grandmother warelye prevented by discrete officers to put
of all these mischiefs, Mesa.
whereby she preserved him: Heliogabalus.
also Heliogabalus would openly disclose what secretelye he pretended diverse
times, also he would have deprived his vicegerent of estate, but the men of
war not bearinge it, delivered this Alexianus otherwise called Alexander from
the hands of the Emperor, then in these his extremityes, he would have put
to death those as traitors, and ennemies to his parson, but what is it for a
Prince or chief Emperor to stand, being stricken down: for as love created
him Emperor, so sin, vice, and beastlye gouernmente, have cast him from
dignitye. They apprehended Heliogabalus with his mother Semiamira, drawing
their bodies with all spite through the City of Rome, cruellye their bodies
were handeled, torn in pieces, and at the length cast into the open priuyes of
the floudde Tiber. Thus at large ye life of Heliogabalus is set out in
historye. Six years he governed, his election is well known, The death of
Heliogabalus.
his end likewise Chronicled, now openly Alexander is chosen, saluted and
obeyed for an Emperor, who was always called Alexander Seuerus.

Alexander Seuerus.


ALexander succeeded Heliogabalus, by ye pollicye of his graundemother Mesa, by
whose godly counsel, his tender years were altogether trained up in
learning under famous teachers, in the Greek and lattine tongues also
singulerlye instructed, Godly education.
and as his education was virtuous, so his natural disposition from tender
years, gave great proufes of his excellent virtues, for he was gentle, lowlye,
courteous, and endued with all humanitye. The beastlye life of Bassianus was the
utter decay of his estate, the virtuous behavior of this Alexander prevailed
to purchase unto him the favor of the Romans, as he was virtuously brought
up, so he vertuouslye governed, nothing lackinge in him to all nobilitye and
excellencye of estate for gouernmente, The counsel of women in the court of
Princes.
if he had not been obedient to follow the fansye of his mother Mammea, who
with infaciable covetousness, procured many times things which delighted her
greedye purposes, the obeyinge of her was the decay of this Emperor in the
end.

As concerning the whole manner of his government thus will I orderlye proceed,
Mesa.
his graundemother was called Mesa, sister to Iulia the Empress the wife of
Seuerus: This Mesa in the days of Seuerus and Antoninus his son, Emperors
of Rome, with great dignitye and estimation lived intheyr Court, and so long
as Mesa lived with this Emperor Alexander, her dignitye was such, and
counsel of such value, her manners of so great grauetye, and her estimation
with the wysest Senators of such credit, her countenance framed with such a
majesty, A rare singulertye in a woman.
that for a woman so many virtues in one body was strange and marvelous, so
God in diverse ages to many kingdoms, and to diverse common wealths, has given
of that sex and kind such maruailous success of estate, as the mighty frame
of many Regions, of populous people, The gouernmente of women.
or infinite nations, yea the mighty Princes of the world have obeyed their
government: for it is not to be supposed (much less to be believed) yt men in
their estate, do pass and excel women in their gouernmente: the most mighty
Princes cannot of their own power and proper strength, work any marvelous
thing, if GOD give not a strong ground and a steadfast foundation to their
kingdoms: oftentimes we see Princes base (in no point worthy to be compared
unto noble Ladies adorned with reason and virtue) as ye Macedonians, The estate
of kingdom.
the Meades, the Mores and the Bactrianes to have risen from their base
estates, to bear Sceptures over many Regions, and to rule mighty Princes.
How mean was the estate at first, when Aemilius uncle to Romulus first king
of the Romans governed? even as the estate of small kingdoms have risen by
mean persons, in time to run a race in title and long descente from many
kings over diverse Nations: so the most noble and virtuous race of women have
in many ages obtained maruailous success, to asspyre to mighty kingdoms, The
government of women.
and to govern many Princes: as the Amazones and Semiramis, the Queen of
Halicarnassus, who ruled worthily, and fought more valiantly then durst Z^rzes
with all his huge hoastes: consider ye the noble acts of Debora, of Iudeth
against Holopharnus, of Queen Mertia queen of England, and Hester for the
Jews. The government of this Alexander was under the tuition of Mesa and the
other noble Ladies, who altogether directed and disposed the whole frame of his
dominion to all excellencye, and these noble Matrons being vertuouslye
inclyned to tender the state of the Emperor, A worthy government.
and the whole jurisdiction of the Roman Empire, with great consideration
chose^ unto them sixtene Senators being men of gravity, in whose breasts
experience of long time had laid up plenteous store of great wisdom, without
whose counsel nothing passed to be done, or determined in any matter, such
is the care of those who govern kingdoms in all godlynes, to proceed with
grave and sage counsel of the wysest, of the most expert and godliest
affected, A godly counsel.
in all affairs couchinge the common wealth: the time before the gouernemente
of this Alexander, was with tyranny maintained, as under Antoninus the son
of Seuerus, and under Macrinus and Heliogabalus: now was Rome thought to be
in great felicity of estate, when it was thus changed from tyranny, to the
best order that might be in a common wealth, for one young head did not
rashlye determine matters, but hoar age with long experience, wisdom and
godly counsel, The best counsel.
which before was contemned, did now bear the swaye, and yet in the heart of
every Senator, superstition remained in those days of strange Gods, for
God was not then known: the estate of such people perfectly knew not God, but
outwardly and politikelye to a common wealth governed. Antoninus without any
zeal or true knowledge (as fantastical superstition blinds) both set up,
Ignorance the mother of this devotion.
and pulled down the Image of his Gods. Alexander (such was the ignorance of
those days) renewed the due and proper honor of his Gods, restoringe each one
to his proper place and devout Tabernacle. Of long time their superstition
remained, Blind devotion.
their blind consciences was puffed up with blind devotion and invented dailye
as each one fansyed in Religion of strange ceremonies, the Histories do note
that in the days of the government of this Alexander, superstition was
vpholded with famous men of great learning, for many sage, pollitike and deep
grounded heads, flowed plentiouslyin those his days, many noble, valiant,
and rare Captains each one in their estate, the one for counsel, the other
in arms did endeavor themselves manfullye to uphold the estate, and to
preserve ye Roman kingdom a long season, Mesa a rare Lady.
the gouernmente of this prosperous estate continued as long as Mesa the
graunde-mother of Alexander lived. For counsel, and deep memory never
failed in her crooked age, nor noble courage never ceased in seekinge to make
perfect a common wealth, till withered age gave up her ghost: her death was
much lamented: Rome lost of her a Lady of rare virtues. Alexander was maimed,
by her death he lost his chief staff, the mean and strongest ground to
establishe his Empire though his mother Mammea lived, and well affected in
heart to seek the prosperous estate of Alexander her son. A perfect token of
a wise Prince.
Mesa never enterprised any one thing but by the counsel of many wysemen,
and their experience disposed and ruled the same. Mesa being dead, Mammea the
mother of Alexander in like sort sought to govern her son being not of
years ripe to govern. Mammea.
Mesa was led aduisedlye by counsel of other, but Mammea made her own
counsel of force to rule Alexander and other, though at the first she
pretended otherwise, this thing was not commendable in Mammea his mother, his
education continued altogether in vertuousnes, in learning, and all qualities
meet for a Prince, she expelled from the Court all such, whose insolent
manners, whose proud behauioure, whose beastlye follye, might sone corrupt and
inure to horrible life her son, being vertuouslye brought up, so dangerous
is the Court of Princes, The Court of Princes.
where close, and secret pleasures lurcke with haultye lokes, strange
devises, idleness and all gallant demeanor ranginge: most co^monlye courtly
behavior by all means indeuoureth through courteous ciuilitye, and by
frendshippe of the mighty to be most honored. The Court receaueth all
sorts, wherein each one labors to excel in that behavior which the Court
commonly favors, Courtlye behavior.
whereupon the mother of this Emperor, ponderinge the peril of Alexander,
and knowinge his estate to be subject to many such, who under a certain
excellencye and singularitye of rare qualities, creep into the Court of many
Princes: As in the Court of Tiberius, Drusus, Claudius, Nero, Domitianus,
Commodus, Antoninus and corrupted those Princes, whereby she saw their estate
of government prospered not, their kingdom was weakened, their life short
ned, she led with these persuasions, did therevppon take ye greater head: for
after Alexander came to those years, as yt in his own hands the government was
wholly settled, amongst many a certain Senators daughter descending of noble
blood, was chosen of him in marriage, wherein also he obeyed the counsel of
his mother, who though she was commendable in many things in time passed,
Covetousness and pride.
yet now pride and covetousness possessed her and she not bearinge the estate of
the Empress to be above hers, chalengeth to have that name alone to her self,
where upon great discention fell, and the father of the Emprisse (through the
instigation of Alexander his mother was put to death. The mother of Alexander
bore such swaye, so terrible was her commandment, and majesty dreaded, that
she banished from the Court and bed of the Emperor the Empress, unto the
uttermost coasts of Africa: Thus was Alexander the Emperor ruled, (who as it
seems stood in great fear of his mother, not being able by aucthoritye to
retain with him his wife the Empress, Crueltye.
nor to save his wives father from death, Pride.
pride only was the cause yt moved his mother Mammea hereunto, who against
order of estate, law, and right, challenged the sole title of the Emperesse,
the like pride also moved Lucilla the sister of Co^modus Emperor of Rome, she
being wife to Po^peianus, but first to Lucius Verus, who was associate in the
Empire with Marcus her father (that she puffed with pride) accomptinge herself
the aunciente Empress in Lucius Verus time, disdayned now to follow the
train of the young Empress, whereupon great mischief was practiced. Pride.
Now began the manners of Alexanders mother to be had in great indignation,
his gouernmente much contempned, in that so fondlye he obeyed, it should
seem great was her aucthoritye so to dispose the government of her son
Alexander, who many times by just occasion moved thereunto, reproved his
mother, the brute and talk of people was so heavy against her, Covetousness*
for her intolerable covetousness, wherrewith the estate of the mighty was
brought down, and the estate of the poor and inferior sort much decayed. All
these things were done against the will and counsel of Alexander, his mother
(though covetous) by heaped riches thought to make him a wealthy Prince, True
nobilitye vpholded by liberality.
and for his rare and infinite treasure a rare governor: This in cogitation
she minded far contrary to the noble Lady Mesa, who otherwise, in true
nobility, in faithful love and sincere affection of his subjects, placed the
strength of kingdom, Covetousness*
covetousness never harboreth in noble stomachs, but as Aristotle does say:
Omnis imbecillitas facit auaros. Peulinge hearts affects covetousness. The
true nobility of courage has not respect to riches without mean, True
nobilitye.
or heaped treasures without mediocretye, but as virtue in all affairs shall
give out an excellencye in vsinge to dispose the same, so this only was ye
chief cause that there arose reprehension in Alexander, who for the space of
xiii. years might be for virtuous government that whole time placed above all
Princes: crueltye and bloudye factes were most abhorted in his government, as
it becomes the wise and noblest Princes with lenitye and all gentleness to
entreat the hearts of those whom they govern, so he with equity and justice
ordered the frame of his Dominion, wherewith Justice from each one proceeded to
give sentence upon laws: in all this time such was ye quiet estate of those
xiii. years wherein Alexander governed, as that no Chronicle or aunciente
Historye can record any time more noblye or with greater excellencye
governed. If ye consider the antiquitye of times and order of all common
wealths, from Julius Caesar through the whole race of Emperors to those his
days, the like quiet estate of the Roman Empire was not known. For many
tyrants and bloudye governors succeeded in that Empire before the days of
this Alexauder, Alexanders happy gouermente.
who destroyed for their time the common wealth, they deminished the estate and
name of the Roman Empire: The happy days of this godly Emperor
Alexander, delivered from all stormye seasons and troubleous times, the
miserable estate of Rome, thus long Rome was by him fortunate, though at the
length contrary success fell: Kingdoms do not always enjoy a like security
of estate, Kingdoms.
but many times stormye seasons, and sinister success does follow in
kingdoms. Now at a sudden heavy news was sent him from his deputies, who
governed in Syria and Mesapotamia, The death of Artabanus.
who in their letters signified, that Artabanus ye mighty Prince of Parthia,
(who sometime invaded with maine host the Romans) was murdered of Zerxes
king of Persia, his people slain, and country wasted and spoiled, and in the
possession of Artaxarxes king of Persia. The news was the more terrible,
Artabanus.
because Artabanus who was titled ye first of all kings, the great and mighty
Prince of the world, who for his dreaded majesty and large conquestes wore a
double Crown, was murdered. These things made ye Romans afeard, Artaxarxes.
because Artaxarxes ceased not with ye conquest of Parthia, but threatened to
assay all the world, to get fame by conquest, Cyrus.
he challenged much from Cyrus sometime king of Persia, who first reduced ye
kingdoms of ye Meades, as in one linked unity to the Persians. This young
Emperor Alexander brought up in all security of estate, to whom neither
civil war at home, neither foreine enemy did at any time molest, now at a
sudden mighty wars are threatened: ye letters being read and consideration
had on every side through the counsel of his noble Senators, answer were
made in these words: The saying of Alexander.
A Prince ought to be content with his own Dominion, and not to move any sparcle
of war to seek innouatio^ over other Regions, thereby through vain hope to
seek after leasinges and decay of his own estate, wiselye also he admonished
ye king Artaxarxes, declaring what foyles the Persian kings caught at the
hands of the Emperors of Rome: he called to mind the great overthrow that
Augustus gave them, and what Traian the Emperor did, what Lucius valiantlye
assayed, and how great an overthrow Seuerus gave them, Alexanders letters.
This was the effect of Alexanders letters to Artaxarxes, sent by famous
Orators from Rome to Parthia, they read the letters, they contemned the
argument and the Ambassadors: For Artaxarxes the son of cowardly Zerxes, by
nature puffed up with vain glory, led with flattery, nothing knowing God,
forgetful of his estate, thought by his main host to subdue all the whole
world: Pride.
At the first all things went luckelye on his side, Parthia a mighty Regio^e
gave place to him by conquest, many Regions for fear of invasion, yielded up
their Crown and title before they were assayed, neglectinge their own and
proper governors, all things went with Artaxarxes, fear abandoning munitio^,
they opened the gates of every City, fortes not assailed yielded to an
unknown Prince, so it fauleth out many times unto kingdoms, The secret
counsel of God.
where God has prepared a scourge by a foreign Prince, by an unknown enemy
to subdue and bring to subjection mighty Nations, so many times ambition
reigns in many Princes, who desirous of more loftye estate, and larger
Dominions bring in the end their own kingdoms and people to ruin, Ambition
the overthrow of ye ambitious.
in seekinge larger Dominions. This great success of Artaxarxes amassed
Alexander, who continually in his government had securitye of estate, peace and
quietness by sea and by land, whereupon general musters were taken in all the
provinces and jurisdiction of the Roman Empire, now noble courages were
redye to aid their Prince whom they loved entierlye, and obeyed willinglye,
each one for sincere heart both lamented and wept for his troubleous estate.
As Soon as a great army was prepared of the Romans, noble Captains who had
proved diverse adventures by long experience in many bloudye wars, were
appointed to their bands, nothing for munition wantinge, then they passed
from al coasts to arrive at Antioche, where all things were set in readynes
both for men, victuels and money. Alexander as a most godly Emperor
abhorringe from effusion of blood, even in his enemy sought by all means to
put of bloudye slaughters in those deadlye wars, whereupon he sent another
Embassage to ye proud and lofty Prince Artaxarxes king of Persia, Artaxarxes.
to entreat him to peace, and to will him to concord, but nothing prevailed,
he set at naught the Embassage and Ambassadors, who immediately upon that to
show his Princelye courage and glorious vaunte, sent a new Embassage from
himself.iiii. hundredth of the mightiest parsonages for stature that has been
seen in Princelye robes, A proud attempt.
with whom gold and treasure was at will plentiful, with fearce and barbed
horses, with bow and arrows armed in their Embassages, to bring terror to the
Romans, who by consideringe of them, might imagine what the maine hoastes of
the Persians were, Ambassadors ought well to be used.
Alexander received the Ambassadors as a good Prince, retayninge them
Princelye: far unlike to his Ambassadors received of the Persian king, ye
next day followinge those brave Ambassadors came before Alexander to declare
their Embassage, silence being given one amongst them who for wisdom,
counsel, grauetye and valiant courage, had charge to tell his Embassage
before the other, thus he began. The great and mighty Prince Artaxarxes
king of Persia, being Lord of Lords and king of kings, The Ambassador of
the Persians, his Oration.
commands the Romans and their governors to depart and give over the
title of all Siria, Asia, and all the parts near to Europe, and also to
suffer the Persians to be Lords over Caria and Ionia and all those countries
which the Mare aegeum and the Isle Pontus separate, which some time the old
Princes of Persia, otherwise ouermatched with foreign enemies lost by
rebellion, who for lack of opportunity, and through diverse calamities
chauncinge unto their Princes, have hitherto ceased to claim their right. This
is therefore to admonish them, least Artaxarxes moved with just indignation,
do destroy them and lead away the rest captives, and as villaynes to serve
him, this was the effect of his Embassage. Alexander the Emperor took great
consideration, the whole number of Senators assembled, and consulted what they
were best to do therein, they thought it heinous to slay ye Ambassadors, for
it was against the law of arms they being but messengers, Ambassadors ought
curteouslye to be used.
the which like fact the Athenians abhorred from, being moved of all the
Greeks to slay the Ambassadors of Corinthe. Achilles also being injuriously
handled of Agamemnon received his Ambassadors curteouslye, for Talthuuius and
Eurubates lovingly and frendlye entertained them with these words: You who are
Ambassadors both of God and man are welcome, you are not the cause of this,
Why Embassages were first ordained.
but Agamemnon your master, and seeing that Embassages were first ordained, not
only to join amitye with Princes, and to make leage, and for the weak to seek
aid of the mighty: but also the estate of government, the manners of people,
the form and fashion of the best common wealths are known to Princes by
Embassages: injuries also wrought by many Princes are prevented, diverse
conspiracies of forrayne enemies are cut of: which things also considered
of Alexander, he commanded the Ambassadors to be entertained, geuinge unto
them large revenues in the coasts of Phrigia there to remain perpetuallye,
thus he provided for them, yet contrary to the manners of a good Prince: for
Artaxarxes a proud and loftye Prince gave free passage to his Ambassadors to
carrye home with them their bodies with aunsweare of the Embassage. Free
course to Ambassadors.
After this Alexander divided his host in three parts, as he thought good,
sending one part by Armenia, another by Medea, and the third by Euphrates with
the which ye Emperor went, who in sundry coasts arryuinge, much dismayed the
Persians, and greatly endamaged them, this strength also had the Romans
above the Persians, to have continual aid from other Princes: for ye Persian
kings at those days gave no wages to their soldiers, but the spoil of
wars maintained them, women also bore armor to fight for their Prince.
Valiant people in ye Princes quarrel.
And that Prince is most strong, whose subjects have wealthye estate at home
and patrimony to care for, who so fights for any Prince, and knows yt other
shall possess the followinge felicitye, they fight but faintlye, The strong
Prince.
because the danger is theirs and the profit for other, but who so fights
for his country, he does the more egarlye and manfully fight for his Prince, to
the end he may uphold that which he possesses, and therefore valiante
courage assayeth so great adventure as necessitye enforces, for the
maintaynance of private profit to give great assayes. The Persians did not use
as the Romans are wont, to wage their subjects in battle, the Romans
did it for that they knew of most strength that people to be, Courageous
people.
that has great maintenau^ce and succor in war, as Isocrates notes in his
Oration written to the Athenians.

As soon as word came to Artaxarxes that the Romans were in diverse coasts
arrived, he gathered a great number of soldiers and set upon them where
they arrived in all coasts, happy success fell on the Persians side, great
slaughters were made on ye Romans, wherewith Alexander oppressed, (as with
the great grief and heat of the country) returned with great loss of men:
and the valiante courages of his soldiers being much dismayde. Alexander
returned to Antioche where with Princely gifts given and distributed to his
men of war, The louinge Prince.
he comforted and revived their spirits, and there prepared fresh
soldiers, where all care of war for a time ceasinge: Alexander in pleasure
and princelye delights passed the time, thinkinge immediately upon ye
dismissinge of the Persian army to set upon them. At that instant when he
thought to have proceeded further against the Persians, letters were sent him
from Illiria from his chief deputye there, wherein he read that the Germaynes
were passed beyond the flood Rhene, The sinister fortune of Princes some times.
and the flood Danubius, spoylinge and wastinge the Country and provinces of
ye Romans co^mittinge many slaughters, towns and villages were destroyed:
whervppon they requested tht Emperor his presence, Civil war worste.
this heavy calamitye did much dismaye the Romans and the Emperor
Alexander, yea more then the great misfortune that fell in the former wars
against the Persians. It is commonly seen (such is the wickedness of men)
that it is a weak staff for a king to trust to the league and amitye of
other Princes, The league of Princes.
for ambition never cease to assaye enterprises, but takes occasion to
fasten adventure, if any pretenced cause may be surmised, as the Thebanes did,
inuadinge Pelloponesus, Phillip into Thracia, Antoninus into Parthia, of king
Iemye into England. In this misfortune and heavy estate of fierce wars, the
rash multitude of soldiers blamed Alexander, because either through
negligence and lack of counsel, or by his cowardlye heart, the foreign
Princes were encouraged to diminishe the estate of the childishe Emperor and
cowardlye Prince. After he had set in order al things necessary to resist the
seditious vprores of the Persians, he passed over Rhene making a bridge over
it, for the ready passage, as Caesar did in his wars against the Germaynes,
these two flouddes Rhene and Danubius be thought the greatest under the
North, Rhene.
Rhene passes by Germanye, Danubins.
and Danubius passes by Pannonia: but Volga in Russia is greater, Volga.
which is in length.iiii. thousand miles and more, and a goodly river,
whereupon they pass even to Persia, Mare Caspiu^.
by the Mare Ca^pium next unto it. I may self have passed a thousand miles
upon a great river called Dwina in Russia, Dvvina.
and yet but upon a part of it for a months space, from S. Nicholas to
Vologda, Vologda.
where the great Emperor of Russia has a mighty Castle. I have also passed
over ye Volga otherwise called the Rha, Rha.
over against the City called laroslaue, where it is twice as broad as the
Thames at London, and very deep: Money.
which at large I will set out in another Book, of the mighty estate of that
Dominion. Then Alexander prepared a great number of Mores excellinge in
swiftnes of foot, being noble darters and out of Parthia he had noble Archers,
Innovation of estate.
which in those days gave most noble and worthy adventures in caryinge away
the honor of the field. Alexander having his army prepared and ready to
encounter with the Germaynes, not desirous of any slaughter, sent Orators to
entreat of peace, and because Alexander was fearful of nature and tymerous,
promised to give unto the Germaynes what they requested, Peace.
knowinge that diverse Princes have repressed their injurious offers by bribinge
them with money: but the Romans in martial enterprises geeuinge place to no
Nation, not only reproved Alexander, but also began to disceauer themselves
from obedience, fansyinge rashlye an other governor, so unconstant are the
heads of the rash and bace multitude to seek innovation of estate and
change of Princes, as fansye leads them to refuse now that Prince, through
whose virtuous education and godly government, the quiet and prosperous estate,
long time flourished in the Romayne Empire: those rare virtues are not with
them in price, Maximinus.
a Prince desirous of peace is contemned, his dignitye and counsel derided,
bloody wars, spoil and robbinge is the mark whereat they shot: thus the
Romayne Empire by unconstant heads was brought to miserable estate, at a
sudden they made choice where fansye led them, and with like consideration
displaced the chosen. At the same time there was one a chief captain, who
bare chief authority called Maximinus a Thracian, borne of base estate, a
shepeheard, whose mighty stature of body and stiff sturdines, had advanced
him by diverse adventures to all orders and degrees of chiualrye, who for his
excellencye and dexteritye in feats of war, was the chief to train up
young soldiers, of whom by dailye familiarity and diligence, with
industruous travail, he purchased great favor and earnest love, who also to
win their favor used this mean, liberality and great gifts, then all the
men of war did contempne and disobeye the godly Emperor Alexander, A
miserable end for so virtuous a Prince.
ascribinge to him the evil success of ye wars, and to the childishe
stomach of him followinge only the advice and counsel of his mother Mammea:
treason thereby was conspired to place Maximinus Emperor, and to murder
Alexander. Who now but Maximinus, Alexander the godly Emperor is forgotten,
now the princelye robe clotheth Maximinus, Note the end of the usurper.
who as unwilling seemed, by force compelled thereto (as the manner of diverse
ambitious Princes is noted in Historyes) some record that the men of war did
threaten to murder him refusinge the choice, immediatlye after by violence
they began to set upon Alexander who at a sudden amassed, saying himself
thus forsaken wept, and trembled for fear, he also consideringe yt he had
advanced Maximinus from a base sheepehearde, from the dungehill to be a chief
captain, A most detestable fact.
reproved his ingratitude and falsehode: and blamed also the other soldiers
(who leauinge their liege Lord) sought to promote an usurper trayterouslye.
Alexander spoke unto them many things mouinge obedience, he showed also a
full discourse by what lenity many years he governed the Romayne Empire: he
showed unto them his education from tender years. Covetousness ye overthrow of
kingdom and people.
Some good hearts moved with his Oration lamented his case, and with willinge
hearts obeyed him, but the main route of soldiers swarmed to Maximinus,
Maximinus only exalted by this good Emperor Alexander, from a base
sheepehearde and base pesante to that dignitye, was the destruction of
Alexander and Mammea his mother, he left not one alive that favored Alexander,
so deadly is the enmitye of those which wickedly aspyre, displasinge and
murtheringe whom fansye leads. Thirtene years Alexander ruled vertuouslye
without bloudshedde, laws proceeded with equitye, godly was the government
he being most godly, he was a rare Prince, of whom greater virtues in other
cannot be recyted, Covetousness ought to be avoided.
only the couetuousnes and greedye appetite to infinite treasures of his
mother Mammea, was the first occasion that extinguished the faithful obedience
and sincere love of the men of war.

Maximinus.


MAximinus was of base condition of life a sheepehearde in his childhode, his
parents very poor and needye, but he wearye of that base and rustical life,
began to apply himself to the exercise (for lack of lyuinge) of the art
of a soldier, and because nature had made him of personage mighty and taule,
of strength the valiante, he fansyed in himself, according to his sturdye
estate, great advancement, for in process of time being hardye, he assayed
most manfullye all perils objected to him, the dangers which he passed brought
him to great admiration, The courageous man.
as it does all those whom noble fame in martial enterprises vpholdeth, for
they refuse no danger, the success of their adventures tytleth them with
great commendation, they pass those dangers which courages fearful, and
hearts timerouse do fly and avoyde, the good success which beutifyeth them,
brings fame and nobilitye of acts in the eyes of all those which pondereth
their practices, Fearful hearts.
fearful and tymerous hearts never asspire to large kingdoms, splayed
conquest, or renowned victoryes: fortune takes by the hand the boulde and
hardye soldier, The hardye soldiers.
and maintayneth him in all his enterprises. Thus Maximinus purchasinge fame
and honor, was promoted by ye last Emperor Alexander to great dignitye, to
rule over many, but in the end with all ingratitude from shepehearde exalted
by Princely favor, both loved and accepted, in the end was the death of this
good Emperor, so great was his ambition to diminishe the estate, to deprive of
honor and to take away the life of so good an Emperor. This Maximinus being
made Emperor, Maximinus.
for a time with great liberality purehased to himself their hearts, but after a
season being settled in government, Alexander.
he was not so gentle as Alexander whom he overwhelmed and with all tyranny
slew. Alexander deserved at his hands great obedience, faithful service, but
thus has he rewarded him, Alexander promoted him to dignities, but Maximinus
framinge diverse conspiracies, catched to himself the dignitye of his Lord and
master, most traiterouslye he robbed him of estate, and spoiled him of life,
his mischiefs so ceased not, for he murdered all who either by frendshippe,
Tyranny.
alyance or kindered, either favored, loved or obeyed the Emperor: his great
tyranny appeared in the eyes of all the Romans, the change was sudden,
Rome thus to be plagued with a detestable tyrant, yet that great tyranny
could not repress the talk and brute of the people, A hard thing to remove a
tyrant.
his tyranny was such in his enteringe, that each one reproved him, then they
lamented the doleful end and pytifull misfortune of Alexander, whose
gouernmente long they enjoyed in felicitye of estate, now say they, abase
sheepehearde, a runegate from his own country, a barbarous Thratian, a right
Thratian by nature and bringinge up, desirous of bloodshed, practices yt,
which the vile Thratians in their country do, and the more they contemned him
with blasinge unto all the world, the base estate of his parents, with whom he
was brought up: the more fearce he was, for the bloody heart of Maximinus
quailed not in all his tyranny, but on sheep, so on men he played the
butcher, thinkinge to place himself in securitye of estate, A butcherlye
Prince.
and to purchase rest (all those being murdered whom he hunted after) he
changed the estate of Rome, he put in and put out offices and officers, his
manners contented him whom he promoted to dignitye, many for fear fled
from his tyranny, many tarried clokinge and dissemblinge a feigned love, and
sincere obedience, they flattered him that in the end conspired his death, A
just reward for a tyrant.
they in all points obeyed him that wished him fainedly long life, such is the
estate of tyrants, who thinkinge themselves by aucthoritye mighty, in the
heart of each one accursed and detested, whose death they wish and seek after
rather then long life, in the end his tyranny provoked many treasons, many
also were accused before him of diverse conspiracies, none escaped against whom
accusation was brought before him, also he was brought to extreme peril by
treason, passing over a bridge into Germanye, but that conspiracye came to
light, the aucthors thereof taken and put to death, the tyranny of Maximinus
was so great, Tyranny.
that the barbarous soldiers co^spired his death many times. There was one
ambitious parso^ (who as ye History notes) was enforced by cruel means to
usurp, whom one that seemed to be his friend murdered, and brought his head to
Maximinus, thinking thereby to obtain great prefermente with the love and
favor of the Prince: for although Maximinus had great cause to rejoice to
see his enemy slain, yet in like sort he recompensed with death him that
brought his head, iudginge that same parso^ a chief aucthor of the
co^spiracy, who also was thought to have done y^ murder only for hope of
preferment, no love and sincere affection leadinge him thereto. Julius Caesar
likewise recompe^sed those, which upon hope murdering Pompeie thought at
Caesar his hand to be thanckefully rewarded, but Caesar knowinge the great
trust that Pompeye put in them who murdered him, being neither by oath nor
allegiance bound to Caesar, but friends to Pompeie, whose cloked hearts well
vewed and dissimulation toward so noble a governor uttered, death for honor
and reward at Caesar his hand, they received their deadly fact, which
worthily purchased them a deadly dome. These co^spiracies moved Maximinus to
greater crueltye and more detestable tyranny, it increased rather then
dimynished in him, though he was at that instant oppressed with great wars
against ye Germaynes, against whom when he had prepared noble warriors and
most worthiest captains, he entered upon their territorye in the Harvest
time, destroyinge their Harvest, their Towns and villages were quite burned,
this one thing the men of war commended in Maximinus, that with large and
mighty spoils he fed continually the soldiers, The barbarous soldiers.
whose riotous and dissolute life, affects sincerelye such a one as procures
most spoils, the doing of Maximinus was so terrible against the Germaynes, yt
they retired into the marish grounds, great havoc he made of them with many
slaughters, such spoil and destruction of their countries, such burninge of
houses and ruin of whole villages, has not been seen: he might well be the
son of bloudye Mars that was in acts so bloody, his victoryes not only was
set out in letters to the Romans, but to be seen in Mappes and Cards, his
victories might with commendation be celebrated, if that his crueltye had not
passed toward the Romans: Flatterye.
for by flattery (wherewith he was altogether led) he sought the destruction
not only of the commons, but also of the nobilitye, wherevppo^ diverse
provinces being under the jurisdiction of the Romans rose against him,
Tyranny.
such was his tyranny both by officers and other means, such only were
favored of Maximinus as were most wicked, at a sudden he rose, and murdered
Procuratorem Africae, then being in that extremity they chose Gordianus
against his will Emperor, after whose creation through the tyranny of
Maximinus, the fame and dignity was sone removed, and honor and renown taken
away, Gordianus enjoyed fully the dignitye of the Emperor, who enioyinge that
estate and settled therein, wrote letters unto Rome reprouinge the tyranny of
Maximinus, and because he began vertuouslye to govern, great was the
commendation of him, in puttinge to death all those detestable promoters who
by unjust means had sought the death of many me^, Promoters.
then he put to death Vitellianus, who was a chief doer under Maximinus,
forthwith the Romans saluted Gordianus Emperor and his son, who
endeuouringe to appease all parts of the Roman Empire, and in their letters
set forth the beastly life of Maximinus, his crueltye and bloody tyranny,
these things being known to Maximinus, he began forthwith to make an
oration unto his soldiers, to appease and quiet their minds, sheewinge unto
them the inconstant heads of the Carthaginians, their natures prone to
treason, he contempned and set light by Gordianus an vnmanlye Prince, a
deceauer, an usurper, then he prepared an army against Gordianus toward
Carthage, and at ye same time a certain Senator being an enemy to Gordianus
of long time having great auchoritye in those parts prepared also an army
against Gordianus: as soon as Gordianus heard that Maximinus the Emperor came
with great power against him and y^ other Senator, Gordianus.
being in utter despair, unmanly hanged himself for fear, those that
created Gordianus Emperor saying him thus dead, did keep close his death and
obeyed his younger son Gordianus: who also in battle dyed, for Capilianus
the Senator whom I spoke of before, made hauoke on Gordinaus son, with great
slaughters of the Romans, who also in ye end would have usurped, so great
was his ambition under the color of obedience and a sincere heart of atrue
subject. Ambition.
After the Senate understood of the death of Gordianus and his son,
preuentinge the crueltye of Maximinus, who was now coming against them like
a Lion, they elected two Emperors, Maximus Puppienus, and Claudius Balbinus,
both men of great auctoritye, whom many by voice and election would have
succeeded, but the Romans cried out against them, and would have slain them,
being not content with their government, in great tumulte was Rome and the Empire
in miserable estate, diverse ambitiously would have usurped, and diverse also
sought to possess, A miserable estate.
they chose a child Emperor but that continued not, Gallicanus by force would
have usurped, ambitious heads wrapped Rome in great calamities, ye wealthy were
made pore, the most beggarlye sort made rytche by spoil, the City also in
diverse parts was fyred, great hauoke Maximinus made by slaughter upon the
nobilitye of ye Romans, as he cared not for man, so he regarded not God, for
he persecuted the Christians also, The vi. persecution.
tyranny was the whole estate of his government, his fansy ruled laws and all
things proceeded as him listed, at the same time diverse other conspiracies were
wroughte against him, and as he by murder usurped, so also by murder
seekinge innovation and change of estate they sought to displace him, he
passed with a great army by the high Alps of Italye to Aquileia where his
enemies had their abode. Aquileia.
Aquileia is a noble City populouslye inhabited, a Cittye of great riches,
and a mart most highest in price of all Italy, situate by the sea, to whom
from al coasts and countries strongers for merchandise have had access, and
because at that time they heard of the coming of Maximinus, all the country
there aboutes leauinge their houses, fled with all their riches and store to
Aquileia, placinge therein their great forte of strength, Aquileia being an
old ancient City was much in ruin, but the necessity of that time sone
repaired it with infinite hands, for the people were infinite in number, their
provision was not lackinge to continue a long siege: the chief of this
enterprise were Crispianus Chrispianns.
and Menephelus, Menephelus.
by whose counsel and pollicye, all things were in a readynes to uphold
manfully their estate, and to put of violently their ennemy.

Maximinus ponderinge the strong and fenced forte, the noble City Aquileia
wherein they were enclosed, assayed first by a flatteriuge Embassage to over
come them, and by great gifts to bribe them, he sent unto them in these
words: Maximinus being their Emperor commands them to leave their forte,
to yield up their armoure and to take him their frinde, not an enemy, he
seeks not their slaughter but peace, quietness, and advancement to the estate
of ye Romans: much also they uttered in commendation of Maximinus, Never
trust a tyrant.
and exhorted the men of war not to neglecte the liberal and Princely offer,
but Crispianus fearinge the subtle practice of Maximinus, gave exhortocio^ to
the men of war and people inhabitinge Aquileia to withstand the violente
tyrante, who under fair words and fair promises, would destroy them as he
has before time handeled diverse yeldinge to him: Crispianus.
This Crispianus was one in great reputation with ye Romans and virtuous in
his government, of talk wittye, of counsel grave, whose wisdom they obeyed
and resisted valiantlye Maximinus: they cut of all their bridges the water by
stormye seasons being mighty, and of great depthe, over the which Maximinus
and his army could not pass, but many of the Germaynes more rashlye then
wiselye, assayinge to pass that water perished in it, but afterward by
pollicye of a shipwrighte, means was found to come to the wall of Aquileia,
Necessitye.
where the men of the City defendinge their walls, fought from above, no
age or kind wanted to bear armor for the fasegarde of Aquileia. Maximinus
destroyed all the country about Aquileia, so great was his displeasure against
them, which the soldiers of Maximinus felt, being glad to return with
great loss, and little honor.

This Maximinus being in this sort Emperor after Alexander through crueltye
his life was shortened, Maximinus.
who reigned but three years, and no marvel he murdered his king, and also
exercised cruelty toward his friends. Crueltye.
As concerning his excess in gluttony, Gluttony.
every day fortye pound of flesh was his repaiste, five gallons of wine his
drink, as he was mighty of stature, Germanye is vanquished.
so in war manlye, and fortunato, for his time, at the length he vanquished
the Germaynes, and on the Romans also he showed great crueltye. This tyrante
made great persecution upon the Christians: in the time of this Emperor was
Origin the great learned man, Origene.
who through his excellent knowledge in learning and deep parswation, brought
to the unity of the true Church, Berillus.
one Berillus a bisshoppe in Arabia, which heritike taught that Christ neither
was before his mother, Heresye.
nor had a Godheade, as one parson of the Trinitye but that the Godhead did
remain in him a certain season. Antherus in the time of Maximinus and Fabian.
At this time the bishop of Rome was called Antherus, who enjoyed his seat
but one month, after Antherus succeeded Fabian and he was bishop xii. years.
As you have heard before, there was chosen of the Senate at one time to be
Emperors Maximus and Balbinus, Three were chosen at one time.
and of the commons Gordian a child, unto which election the Senate yielded,
that they might appease the furye of ye people: Maximus was slain of his
people in Aquileia, and Maximinus and Balbinus not favored of the soldiers
were slain at Rome.

The king of Britayne at this time was one Ascleprodorus who reigned.xxx.
years, who besieged London being driven out thereof before by the manhood of
Lucius Gallus, but Lucius Gallus was after slain by Asclepiodorus, and cast
into a broke that ran where Walbrooke stands, Walbroke whereof it took y^
name.
for this Lucius Gallus being cast into the same, it has ever since been
called Gallus broke, though now Walbroke or Wallesbroke, but the cause that
moved Asclepiodorus to make his war, was one Alectus a Roman who governed
Britain and subdued to the Romans this kingdom, whose gouermente was
cruel, Alectus.
and the Britaynes were moved that this noble man should usurp as a king,
where upon they chased the Romans with their king from place to place by
mighty force, Alectus.
Alectus went toward London because there he was the most surest, but in ye
end he was slain with a great number of Romans. This Alectus was before a
Duke in Rome, in great estimation with Maximinus, and sent to the Britaynes to
subdue Carassus, Carassus.
whom he slew and usurped after viii. years. Altharco after the murder of
his father was king of Scotts and reigned xi. years, a dissolute Prince, a
flute player, and minstrillike in all his days, he was slain for rauishinge
of a maid, a noble man's daughter.

Gordian.


THe cruel tyrant Maximinus being thus dead, Gordian who was chosen with
other two, only came in favor to enjoy the Empire, the soldiers favored
neither the godly Princes, neither yet they loved ye ungodly, but always they
bore sway, spoil large and greedye pray contented them, The manner of
soldiers
luker and prodigal gains made them chose governors, so was their kingdom
boughte and soulde for money, and surely where such brainlesse people bear
siegnorye, there the like is practiced, for what confusde heads do determine
unadvisedly mischief executes, The best point of chiualrye.
it is the happiest part in all chiualry and mortal wars, soldiers to
obey the counsel of the wise and happy Captain, else perishes the army,
and counsel is no counsel, when rash heads upon a sudden bring the
kingdom to dissolution, Desperate soldiers.
neither is the desperate soldier of any price, being a beastlye liver, he
can bring no glory to the Prince that is not beloved of God, The fear of God.
all honor and renown flies from him that fears not God and lives
wantonlye: sudden is the faule of Princes, and unlooked for, disolation
happens both to ye king, the Prince and the people, the godly only sees
the cause, sometime: Quicquid delinquunt Reges plectu^tur achiui, The sentence
of Ouide.
and sometime contrarywyse: Scaelere grecorum plectuntur Reges achiui. As a
wicked Prince brings dissolution to his people (God scourging sin) so
mischeuous people is a rewyne to ye good Prince, and to the most flourishinge
kingdoms, therefore both must be amended, Remedies to avoid plagues in
kingdoms.
for as a certain godly man writes. Ergo fames, pestis, bellum grassantur in
omnes: viuere si vultis viuite iam melius. No Region can quietlye be governed
where there is uncertain succession to be placed in estate, Virtuous
succession.
ye Prince by death ceasinge to rule, note these troublous times of the Romayne
Empire, wherein so often change and pullinge down of estate have followed, in
few days to see many possessinge kingedomes, some by favor, other by envy,
many by kindred moved to uphold, or pull down the exalted from kingdom, and
as all these be causes, so ambition is the root of all other, Ambition.
that geeueth most assayes to aspyre and trouble kingdoms, ye see the end of
tyrauntes as in Maximinus, Bassanus, Commodus, and so in all other what
lamentable saying was this Maximinus a most cruel tyrant being murdered,
and his son also slain with him. Ex pessimo genere ne catulum habendum, full
sodainlye was the end of Puppienus Balbinus ambitiouslye inuadinge the Empire.
Puppienus.
In this troubleous season Gordianus the nephew of Gordian, Balbinus.
borne of his daughter, whose father and grandfather, were famous Senators, in
hye reputation of wisdom and grave counsel among the Romans, Gordianus.
being well brought up of his father, chosen of the Romans to succeed in
this troubleous time, yt name was well-beloved. This Gordian the second year of
his government, Misitheus.
married the daughter of Misitheus who was excelling among the Romans, in
rare wisdom and learning, by estate and dignitye a Senator, the Empire of
Rome was with all nobilitye stayed by the counsel of Misitheus, the Emperor
Gordian was ruled by him, of so great force is counsel and wisdom to
uphold and stay the Prince: all parts of the common wealth prospered, where
such grave and wise heads be in estimation, the Prince ruled by one good man,
gives good example unto other, how many ways does that kingdom prosper
that is governed by wisdom, but ruin and dissolution follows many times
for lack of wisdom in maiestrates and counsailers: in the gouernmente of
Gordian wars were proclaimed against the Persians, at ye same time ye fierce
Thrasians were subdued, Sapor.
Sapor also king of Persia was put to flight and drouen into Ciuillia, he
recovered many Cities and countries lost before time of tyrants, so great was
the wisdom of Misitheus in the Emperors affairs: as he was loved so he was
dreaded, not only of the Romans, but of many other Nations, of such value is
worthy counsel, all things went luckelye with him whilst his father in law
Misitheus lived, for at a sudden the former estate declyned, The death of one
wise cou^sailer, is a plague to a whole realm
Misitheus being dead: Gordianus made great lamentacion and also the
Romans, who depelye considered the former state and beutifull government,
wherein the Romayne Empire flourished as long as he lived. How sone was
Gordian maimed? his great comfort gone from him? the office and dignitye which
Misitheus enjoyed, Philippe.
Philippe. was preferred unto, who in the end slew Gordian the Emperor. As
long as Misitheus lived, no treason was assayed against Gordian, so it is
seen many times in kingdoms, he whom the Prince promoteth, Ambition.
seeks sometime to be above the Prince, and for a sole regimente to slay his
king.

Gordian was slain by the traitorous soldiers of Philippe in an uproar,
Gordian was but xx. years of age when he dyed, he governed but vi. years, he
was buried in the vttermoste end of the Romayne Empire, near to the Persian
kingedome: who had a monument erected unto him, with this superscription written
in Lattine, Persian, Hebrewe and Egiptian letters. Gordiani hoc posteris
monumentum relictum: This monument of Gordian is left to the posteritye.

The king of Scotts was at this time called Altarchus a wicked Prince.
Altarchus king of Scotts.
The king of Britayne was called Asclepiodorus who killed Alectus the Romayne,
who many years with tyranny ruled Britain, Alectus.
and slew at the same time Lucius Gallus, and drowned him in Walbroke,
(Walbroke being a part of the Thames then at that time) in the second year of
his gouernmente. The deadlye enemy of Christian Religion was flourishinge at
Rome Porphirius by name, Porphirius.
who caused great persecution, this Porphirius was a Philosopher of great
subtiltye and knowledge in all arts, who made a notable Book of the
Predicables commo^lye red in all Universities in Greek, many other famous men
there were at that time.

Philippus.


PHilippus, of other called Marcus Julius Philippus, descendinge from a noble
house, but of very poor parents, for his father was among thieves ye chief
ringeleader and Captain, barbarous and fierce in his conditions, brought up
in bloudye practices and delightinge therein, his son who was this Emperor
Philippus for feats of arms, was advanced and favored of the Captains:
although he murdered Gordian: The men of war at the first chose one Marcus
to be Emperor who dyed within few days after Marcus being dead, they chose
in his place Seuerus Hostilius, then was preferred unto that room Philippe
which murdered Gordian, the Historye before declares ( Misitheus being dead)
that this Philip was placed in his room, though by him a detestable fact was
committed, so to reward his Lord and Emperor of whom he was promoted: but
that purpose and fact as in all other pays home with like recompense, Murder
recompensed (...) murder always.
even blood for blood: Philippe murdered Gordian, and Decius murdered
Philippe, so bloody hands receive meede of blood. Some Histories write that
this Philippe being made Emperor, in his government of all Emperors first
professed the Christian faith, and was baptized with his wife and children,
certain Epistles of Origene show that Origene wrote to this Emperor as
concerning Christian religion. Origene.
Certain it is that persecution ceased against the Christians, and the
Scriptures preached, and the godly were maintained in his Dominion. The
fourth year of his government, was the year since the first foundation of
Rome by computacion of years a full thousand, in Rome at the same time great
solemnitye and triumph were for the same, even as Philippe sought by unjust
means to usurp over his Lord and master, so now Decius seeks a bloody
purpose against Philippe: I just recompense.
Thus Philippe raigninge but five years was cruellye murdered of him, his
head being cloven: his son also was murdered being but.vii. years of
age. Cyptian.
In the days of this Philippe was Ciprian ye famous bishop of Carthage,
whose works remain of great value: this is that Cipriane whom Gregory
Nazeanzene writes of, she winge what knowledge he had in coniuration of
spirits, who among many practices of co^iuration, coniured a spirit to win
to him ye love of a maid, that not preuailinge, the foul spirit possessed
Cipriane, as ye History tells at large, The conversion of Cyprian.
who afterward converted to God, became a true professor of Christian Religion,
a most famous Divine, and burned openly his Magical books detesting the same.

At this time Dionisius was bishop at Alexandria, and also those heretics
which denied certain Scriptures, and rejected them as false Epistiles, were
confounded by Origene. Asclepiodorus as yet governed Britain. Fabian was
bishop of Rome at that time.

Decius.


AFter the death of Marcus, and so of Seuerus hostilius who reigned but a few
days Emperors, although orderlye they are not noted in the Chronicles after
Gordian: It is to be noted that Marcus succeeded Gordian, he reigned but a few
days, and no famous thing of him Chronicled, likewise Seuerus hostilius, and
of him nothing worthy memory recited, these by death ceasinge, Decius came
by favor to enjoy the Empire, (who as the Histories do note) murdered
Philippe. This Decius was borne in Pannonia bubalia, Decius.
who reigned but.ii. years, he was in arms valiant, a great enemy to God
and against his sincere Religion, The vii. persecution.
for immediatlye in enteringe to that estate, he published a terrible
persecution against Christians, in what place soever they might be found
out, in that persecution many learned and godly fathers were tormented,
Fabian.
Fabian bishop of Rome was martyred, Cornelius,
Cornelius the other bishop after Fabian martyred, and that in the profession
of Christ, at those days the great aucthority which the bishop of Rome has
sense challenged was not, The auctoritye of the bishop of Rome
for Fabian bishop of Rome was martired for the profession of Christ, who to
death submitted himself to the aucthority of Decius. This is the greatest
pre-eminence yt the Prelates in Christ can challenge, not to fight against
Princes, no not against the cruelist tyrauntes and most terrible persecutors,
and as for the desire of high and loftye estate, it ought not to harbor in
their breasts, who^ God has placed pastors and feders of his congregation.
Humilitye in the clergy.
Christ in himself and to his Apostles gave that example of this perfect
humilitye to contemn so high a seat, for how should they learn and teach
others to despise the world, they most of all stryuinge for honor, Pomp.
for pomp and domination, who not as followers of the flock do live, but as
Gods in earth, and rulers over Princes. Prelates Princelye.
The Chronicles show from all times ye before those Lordlye and Princelye
revenues came to Prelates, greater was the care of Christ, and they of a more
pure Religion, but since those days their doctrine has been but all in
fancies and vain constitutions made to search out golden mines, Decius.
and delicate ways of lyuinge. If there were a cruel Decius, Nero.
a Nero, Julian.
a another Julian to scourge the true preachers, Domitian.
or a terrible Domitian, they must do as Fabian ye bishop of Rome did, to dye
in the holy profession of Christ, as Peter and Paul did, James and John,
teachinge all prelates to be Fabians, that is to feed, and suffer death for
the defense of Christ's flock, and not as raueninge wolves to destroy them.
In many and sundry Cities, all kind of torments were invented, Bloudye
tyrauntes.
to make the professors of God to forsake their Christian Religion, diverse
famous bishops put to death. As concerning Decius, he was xlviii. years of
age when he began to govern, he continued but.ii. years, his son called
also Decius was made partaker in the Empire with him, France.
the French men made wars against Decius, who were maruailouslye discomfited
of him, great was their overthrow, their goods confiscated, their Cities
and Towns burned, then Decius departinge from them left diverse garrisons, to
keep under the French men, after that by occasion and necessitye offered, he
was forced to make wars on the Goths, but the Goths prevailed against him,
the cruelty also of Decius did also dyminish his power in the Romayne
jurisdiction. Cruelty makes a Prince weak.
Thus Decius with his whole hoaste put to flight, but Decius in his flight
passinge a river of Thracia in the same was drowned, his son slain in the
same battle, all this time Asclepiodorus was king of Britain, and Nathalac
king of the Scotts.

Virius Gallus.


AFter the overthrow which the Romans received of the Goths, as many as
escaped, fled unto the place where Gallus was encamped, whom upon a sudden
they created Emperor, who together with his son Bolussenus continued in
government xi. years the Roman Empire was at this time in great trouble, not
only with wars, but the like tyranny that was in the government of Decius
against the Gospel, Tyranny against the Gospel.
was executed of Virius Gallus, no estate of parso^, sex or kind was in safe
condition from his tormenters, neither did there want parsons meet to
satisfye the pleasure, lust, and appetite of so cruel a tyraunte, Christian
Religion persecuted, the Christians fled, those that abode felt the torments
of this tyrant, all means were invented out, to make this tyraunte possessor
and Lord of innocents goods, they were most in price that invented
delectacions and pleasures for this Prince, and because God was not known
among them, beastlye was their government, Tyrannus.
miserable their common wealth, no care of true Relition, but each one gaped
who might ambitiouslye to the highest room aspire: for many at a sudden rose
to demand the seat of Empire, some by treason, other some wanted no title,
many by might would advance themselves to be most mighty, Usurpers.
as Hostilianus perpenna was by the favor and will of the Senators chosen
against Virius Gallus, for now the cruelty of Virius Gallus was abhorred of the
Romans, so detestable is tyranny that neither the fortress, nor strong
garrisons can uphold the tyrauntes, nor many friends linked in amitye, The
estate of tyrants.
all hope in the end fails them: Who ones has read the estate of tyrants
to be quite? their end not miserable? and doleful to themseues, and the
condition of their subjects not enclyned unto all wickedness? and many plagues
follow their gouernmente. In this uproar and tumulte Emilianus by night,
enterprised to take upon him the estate of the Emperor, Scithians.
in Mesia the beggarly Scithians rose mightily, who brought a scourge to the
Romans, for in passing they spoiled many parts of the Romayne Empire, who by
a secret providence of God became most mighty, and made other tributory unto
them, great was their cruelty, for in one city called Adria they slew most
cruelly of all sorts of people 100000. Virius Gallus.
Virius Gallus was but a cowardlye Prince who ouermatched of ye Scithians, made
great means to conclude a peace, and consented to pay them great tribute,
these calamities did not only scourge the Romans, but also a great
pestilence fell which infected all parts of thempyre whereby they perished
infinite nombers, Pestilence.
such plagues followed the persecutions of Christians, the same plague began
in the Cities of Ethiopia and Egipte, and continued ten years. As
concerning Emilianus usurping: Virius Gallus and his son levied a great
power against him: but in the battle they were both slain, at this time
rose a great controuersye in the church between Ciprianus the great learned
father, Cyprianus.
and Cornelius a Bishop, Cornelius.
if heretics returninge into the faith might be baptized or no again, reasons
were alleged on both sides. As yet Asclepiodorus was king of Britain,
Nathalac king of the Scots, and the bishop of Rome was Lucius, immediately after
him was Stephan. ()

Licinius Valerianus,


AFter the death of this Emperor, who was slain with his son in his
enterprise against Emilianus, who is not nombred amongst ye Emperors, because
of his short reign, for he was immediatlye slain of the soldiers.
Licinius Valerianus who was otherwise called Colobius enjoyed the Empire,
Colobius.
of him the Historyes note diversely: Some write that he was of wit dull, most
simple in his doing, and far unmeet for that office, as the Historye of
Euteopius and of Sextus Aurelius Victor affirms, but Trebellius affirms,
that this Valerianus was a wise and valiante Prince, a virtuous Emperor,
though on him fortune frowned, no Prince among the Romans felt more
miserable calamities the^ he, neither the like thraldom, who sone out of a
Princelye throne was thrown and made viler then a slave, as it is sheewed at
full afterward: This Emperor Valerianus was also a persecutour of the
Christians, like unto Decius in manners, and in beastlye lyuinge like to
Domitian, the Christians lived in great fear, being so long time scourged
with these tyrants, The viii. persecution.
but in the end the tyrauntes have tasted of the like plagues, wherewith they
scourged other. Valerianus made his son partaker in government with him, and
also Cornelius his nephewe. It is said that Valerianus came from a noble
house: great vprores and tumultes were raised in diverse parts of his
Dominion. Religianus usurped in Mesia, Cassius Labienus Posthumus in France,
Emilianus in Egipte and in Macidonia, Usurpers.
Valens Aureolus usurped in Millane, all these mighty personages put in trust
under this Emperor, ambitiouslye sought to place themselves in kingdoms,
Mesapotamia was in this troublous estate invaded of the Parthians, Sapor then
king over them, who made fierce war against the Romans, Valerianus ye
Emperor being in Persia with the Romans, gave also the Parthians a
battle, but the battle was dishonorable to the Romans, for the most part
of them was slain, and ye Emperor made a captive, who of long time in vile
bondage with Sapor the king of Parthia, Sapor.
was made his foot stole or treadinge block, so he continued a long season
in miserable captiuitye with his enemy, Crueltye.
whom the Romans never assayed to bring home from bondage, so much the
hearts of them abhorred him for his crueltye, neither his own son who was
made partaker with him in gouernmente, neither Cornelius his nephewe being
mighty among the Romans, in his captiuitye would redeem him. The life of
Galienus was most beastly, exercisinge the like crueltye as his father
Valerianus did, who thereby in the end was abhorred, this Galienus reigned xv.
years, Galienus.
vii. years with his father, and viii. years alone. As concerning Aurelius
who usurped in these days, he enjoyed for a season, in Egipte, Emilianus
seeinge to usurp, was cut of from his ambitious hope, by Theodotus, many
other there were which usurped, as in France certain Almaynes who by their
enteringe spoiled the Romayne Empire, in Slauonia, Macrinus was chosen to be
their Emperor, but he prospered not, for Aurelius in battle slew him: thus
many mischeues rose one of another, and all for kingdoms sake, Greece, Pontus
and Asia were ruled by the Scithians: Scythians.
Even as the estates of gouernmente were troublous, so also like constitutions
of the air, according to this gouernmente, in Asia earthquakes, in Italye
darcknes of the air, cold filthye and stinckinge mistes, a rottinge pestilence
in many countries, destroyinge man and beast, God foreseinge the decay of the
Romayne Empire, Odenatus.
raised Odenatus who mightelye prevailed against the Parthians, and overthrew
many other countries, Galienus moved with the valiant success of Odenatus,
proclaimed him to be his vicegerente and chief deputye in the title of
Augustus, in this Odenatus name money was coined.

After many fierce battles and noble victoryes atchiued and won to the
Romans, Odenatus dyed being in the affayers and wars of ye Romans, whose
death they did not without cause lamente, his son a worthy captain dyed with
him: Zenobia.
when Odenatus was thus dead, Zenobia his wife a Lady of great courage, and
of maruailous pollecye succeaded: This Zenobia with two of her sons (against
the will of Gallienus Emperor of Rome) took on her the government of the East,
and was called Empress, the like virtues reigned in Zenobia, that did in her
husband Odenatus: but Gallienus the Emperor of Rome (according to the usual
manner of his gouernmente) gave himself to all beastlynes, whose life decayed
much the Romayne Empire, at this time the great heretic Paulus Samosatenus
was, Samosatenus
whose heresye was heinous, That is, that Christ was not before our Lady, and
was but a man: his heresye was condemned by a general counsel, Samosatenus
an heretic was excommuni- then Aurelius began to usurp over the Romans, and
to be their Emperor and to displace Gallienus: Armies were prepared on both
parties, and deadly conflictes fought between them, in the end Gallienus the
tyrante was murdered with his brother near to Millane, Aurelius not long
endured after the death of Gallienus, The death of a tyrante.
but he ambitiouslye inuadinge, was with death rewarded at the hands of
Claudius, who next succeeded this Aurelianns who usurped many years in Pannonia.

Claudius, the second of that name,


Claudius reigned.ii. years, this Claudius by some Historyes, is thought to be
the son of Gordian, his mothers name was Licista.

This Claudius subdued Aurelius, and also discomfited him: Claudius.
by this valiant Claudius ye terrible host of ye Scithians and Goths was
discomfited, which was in number 3200000. fightinge me^, and diverse other
Nations he overcame, some write that he reigned but one year, he deserves
immortal commendations for his worthiness, in yt he reduced the Romayne Empire
to so fortunate estate, from the crueltye of tyrants, from the spoil of
forrayne Princes and aliantes.

Quintilius.


Claudius dyinge with honor and great glory unto the Romans. Quintilius
his brother a noble young gentlemanne succeaded, who reigned but xvii. days, a
barbarous, cruel, and bloudye soldier, murdered him at Aquileia, not
contented with the vprighte and just dealinge of this Prince, who endeavored
to convert unto virtue, the dissolute life of the soldiers.

Aurelianus,


AVrelianus succeeded Quintilius, this Aurelianus was of low birth descended,
his father was an husbandman, he governed five years, his nobilitye of acts
advanced him and for his valiante prowes and experience he was made Emperor,
ye Chronicles do show that he was a virtuous governor, of whom vice was
corrected, in all parts, with all men it was bruted that the Emperor was a
good Physician, but that his medicines were to sharp and bitter, the worthy
success that followed him, made him not unlike to Alexander the great, or to
the valiante Julius Caesar, for the City of Rome was saved by his wisdom,
pollitike practice and valiantnes, from utter destruction being thrice
besieged, the Historyes recite at large, in how many and sundry places he
triumphet over his enemies, diverse also usurped who by his wisdom were
repressed.

This Aurelianus was the first Emperor yt wore crown Imperial, clothinge of
gold and pearl, which ornaments were as then strange to the Romans. In
Thracia and Illiria he subdued the Goths, and the king of Bithinia was
conquered of him. Aurelianus was a virtuous Prince, and enlarged the City of
Rome, and made it strong with walls: Rome at those days was 50. miles in
compass, this Aurelianus did first ordain among the Romans, the eatinge of
swynes flesh. The ix. persecution of ye Christians.
This Emperor not fauouringe true Religion persecuted the Christians, but in
the end by means of his secretarye he was murdered, between Heraclea and
Constantinople, after his death by the space of viii. months there was no
Emperor chosen. Eusebius a famous bishop in Laodicia flourished in the time
of this Emperor, whose learned works remain at these days in great price.

Tacitus.


TAcitus was made Emperor after Aurelianus, Tacitus was endued with all
humanitye, who governed but v. months, and also Florianus his brother
governed two months, some Historyes note ye Tacitus dyed of an ague at
Tharsis, other do write that he and his brother was murdered of their
soldiers, the one at Pontus, the other at Tharsus. Victor affirms that
Florianus dyed by cuttinge his own veins.

Probus.


PRobus a Gardeners son was borne in Dalmatia, his government was very
short, in his days Saturnianus usurped in Egypt, and Proculus and Bonosus in
France and Germany, but they were subdued, the praise of Probus is in high
commendation, in that his godly government did astablishe ye Roman Empire in
so great quietness, ye Sarmathians (now called Muscouites and Poles, in which
name are contained many other people also which rebelled) but they were
maruailouslye scourged of him, he slew of the Germaynes in their Commotions.
400000. The Pollonians were subdued by him, he overcame the Goths in many
notable battayles, he restored to the Romayne Empire, diverse Regions and
sondrye countries, which were under the government of tyrants, the care of
Probus was great to bring glory to the Romans, for by the industrious
travail of his men of war, he caused the great hill near to Smirnato to be
planted with vynes, some do write that the great servitude wherewith he
oppressed the Romans was the cause of his death, this was his usual saying
to them: Soldiers must not spend victuels, except they labor to profit
the common wealth, this was also his saying. Quid opus est militibus cum
desint hosts? Soldiers ought always to be maintained.
What need is there of men of war when there lacked enemies? Which saying
being understood of the soldiers and men of war, it caused them to hate
him, and to conspire his death: For the Emperor having reduced all his
Empire into a maruaylous quietness and peaceable estate, marched toward the
Persians, and Parthians, mindinge to subdue and chastise those proud enemies
of the Romans, but his soldiers slew him by the way, when he had governed
the Empire vi. years and.iiii. months. Such is the force of such as be
barbarous soldiers, who being trained up in bloudshedinge, do always
thirste after the same, having no regard of any estate, neither obey the
wise captain nor Prince: Of this mind Scipio was, when he would not have
Carthage to be destroyed of Romans, saying: It was a thing very necessary
that the Romans should have such an enemy as Carthage was, A forrayne enemy.
whereby ye people of Rome might for fear of such a foreign enemy, be moved
to all prowes and excellency, whereas otherwise civil wars at home would
bring them to utter destruction: Through peace, both policy and feats of
arms, would be to seek in Captains, and the soldiers maimed from al
dexterity except they have an enemy abroad who^ they may fear.

Carus.


CArus was borne at Narbona, he reigned but ii. years, who immediatlye made
his sons Carinus and Numerianus Caesar's with him, he continued the like
enterprise that Probus did against the Persians, Carus not content with his
prosperous estate, but still ambitously minded, Ambition.
proceeded in larginge the Romayne Empire, with the calamities and myseries of
other Princes, but suddenly in his enterprise, he was from Heaven stricken with
lightninge and thunder at Ptesiphon and thereof dyed, Numerianus his son
bewailed the lamentable death of his father, in such extreme sort, that his
eyes became so sore as he was not able to abide the light, but was carried in a
Waggen, and after murdered of Aper his father in law, which murder came to
light in the days of Dioclesian the Emperor followinge, Murder recompe^^^d
with murder.
for the which Aper was put to death. As concerning Carinus who was made
partaker in the affairs of the Empire with his brother: This Carinus was
polluted with all filthiness of life, he put to death the good and godly
Senators by crimes forged: by his beastly and corruptible means, diverse chaste
Matrones and many an honorable Lady was ravished, this beastlye person was
so outrageous and wicked in gouerninge in France (when he heard of his
fathers death) he expelled all wise and grave counsayl^urs from him, lyuinge
most wickedly in all kind of vices, but his mischievous life, caught a
mischievous end, for after his long cruel, and beastlye life, even of the
Romans he was detested and slain in a battle of Dioclesian, who after
succeeded in ye Empire: such is the end of tyrants and beastly livers, whom
God sodainlye strikes, The sundry deaths which happened unto diverse
Emperors.
as an example of his wrath and heavy displeasure conceived against them. For
in all the Chronicles which have been read, of kings and Princes, there
have not been mentioned the like sorts of death, as happened unto Romayne
Emperors, for it is certain that there is no kind of strange death, but it
has happened unto one of them: For Carus was slain by thunder, Valens burned
in ye fiere as hereafter you shall hear, Bonosus who usurped in ye time of the
Emperor Probus, was hanged: Heliogabalus was rent in pieces: some were
poisoned, as Tiberius and Drusus: Valerianus kept in prison, dyed there as a
most miserable and vile slave: Quintilius and Florianus, dyed by incisio^ of
veins: Decius drowned himself: Julius Caesar was murdered in the Senate
house: Commodus was strangled to death, amongst which unfortunate number of
Emperors, may also these two sons of Carus, Carinus and Numerianus (who
were called Caesar's as long as they lived) be nombred. In such sort yt having
described but ye lives of xl. Emperors, it may appear how doubtful is the
estate of Princes, and what calamities follows them, if God frown on them:
God respects no parson, the secret counsel of God, sees only the cause
and end. The sequel of our Historye, shall show unto you the ends of other
Emperors, no less strange and fearful, then those which already you have
heard of.

Dioclesianus.


DIoclesian was a Dalmatian borne, some time in estate a bondeman, but he was
made free by Emilianus a Senator, his mothers name was Dioclea, and the town
wherein he was borne is called also Dioclea, whereby he was called Diocles
until such time as he came to be Emperor, theu this name Dioclesian was geeuen
unto him, be continued in gouernmente.25. years, he was before his creation,
a Notarie. This Dioclesian was by nature wittye, quick, subtle in his
government, cruel, and a great ennemy to Christian Religion, The.x.
persecution of the Christians.
and because the bounds and Dominions of the Romayne Empire, were large he
made diverse partakers with him in the Empire: In the 3. year of his
government, Dioclesian sent into this our Island, a Duke of Rome called
Constantius* Constantius.
for certain tribute due to ye Romans sense the death of Alectus, who
being a Romayne ruled this land, Alectus.
and was killed in a battle not far from London, by the hands of
Asclepiodorus (who as I showed before) after him ruled this land. At the same
time as this tribute was demanded, Coilsucceding Asclepiodorus who was king of
this land, this Coil was sometime Duke of Colchester, Cost Duke of Colcester.
but then dyed at the coming of Constantius, when he had governed this land
xxvii. years, but of him in Historyes no notable thing, or any worthy factes
remain Chronicled, but this only, which is worthy to be remembered the great
favor which he bore to learning, also his daughter Helena a Princess of
great worthiness by him brought up in learning to all excellencye, a Lady of
great beautye: This Helena (Coil her father being dead) was chosen to
govern this land, Helena.
the Britaynes being in troubleous estate with the Romans, caused Helena
their Queen to marrye with Constantius a Duke of Rome, to make quietness with
the Romans: the marriage was concluded by a common co^sente of the Britaynes,
for an universal peace and quietness. This Princelye marryage solemnised, peace
and quietness settled, Constantius returned to Rome with the tribute and his
wife Helena. Constantius.
Consta^tius was made governor of this land, his receyuinge at Rome was with
great triumph, and Helena according to the estate of a Queen entertained.
Her wisdom, learning and Princely majesty, was in admiration with the
Romans, her knowledge in many languages right commendable, her outward
Princely gesture, within ye Princely body showed to be reposed secret and
maruailous virtues. Thus was the troubleous estate of Britanye quieted, by a
marriage lincked with the Romans, the Romans also rejoiced of their tribute
and jurisdiction won of the Britaynes: But as no estate can always be
settled in quietness and securitye, and as no glory is steadfast, so now in
the midst of this joyful estate wherein the Romans thought themselves,
Carausus usurped to be Emperor in France, Achilles in Egipte, and Julius in
Italye under the eyes of Dioclesian usurped: Usurpers.
But see whereunto the ambition came of those, who without right or title,
claim Princelye seat, all these at the last came to a miserable end. Julius.
Julius who usurped in Italye killed himself, and the other caught like end:
through these Commotions and bloody vprores, Dioclesian was enforced to
associate many partakers in the Empire with him, Galerius was made chief
governor in the East, Constantius yt married Queen Helena of Britayne chief
presidente, and in France Carausus there usurped: By this order taken now
again, all things began to prosper with Dioclesian, Dioclesian.
and in the wars all victoryes fell on his side, his enemies came to naught,
the name of the Romans was in his old ancient strength and glory: But what
is it, a Prince blessed of God by the good success that flows to him in
lands and people, when by pride he falls from God? Dioclesian in pride
puffed, commanded himself to be called a God, and sometime brother to the
Son and the Moon, by commandment he was kissed, Pride.
as many Popes have since those days compelled kings to kiss their feet,
they pass to be brothers to ye Son and Moon, being the chief and most
Lordliest vicars, most pontifical, and most vain gloriouse Prelates under
Christ: Popes.
If Dioclesian had lived in a proud Popes days, where had his title been, of
being brother to the Sun or Moon? surely his neck should have been bended
to smacke at a Popes foot, and been content to give submission to their proud
and blasphemouse sayings: Et mihi and petro. Pride.
They also in title of sanctity, will be above Christ, not as Christ sanctus,
but sanctissimus: The Apostles would not prostrate be worshipped, neither the
Angel of John, as in the Apocalipes, but the Popes must, wherein they show
themselves not followers of the Apostles, but rather successors of Dioclesian
and Domitian in pride and tyranny. Their apostolic usage of Frederike the
Emperor, and of Henry ye second Emperor, show whose vicars they are: they
immitate Sapor the Parthian king in abusinge Emperors: For the Pope dyninge
or banqueting, the Emperor Frederick was tied in chains at his feet, that
was his ba^quet. The pride of of Popes.
Henry the second waytinge the Popes absolution, was enforced with his wife and
child barefoote to do penance certain days. If virtue had been the scope
and mark whereat the Prelates did shoot, their humilitye would have sheewed
them in humility otherwise affected, Humilitye.
not commanding Princes, but obeyinge to death tyrants for the Gospels sake,
which truly is professed in obedience, in holy title, in perfect humility, and
not in a glitteringe Crown, sword, armor, fiere and faggote, and content to
let their doctrine abide the trial, The life of prelates.
their bodies at the will and commandment of tyrants, and their mind
invincible to death in a good cause:

Quia non mors sed causa facit martyrem: For it is not death but the cause yt
makes a martyr. The obedience of Christians.
The obedience of Christians amaseth tyrants, overthrows their power, and
brings plagues on them and their people, and for a just trial note the end
of all tyrants, even from the beginning, who not converted, dye most
miserable.

As concerning Dioclesian who forgot God in his glory and fell most beastly,
was become a most terrible persecuter of Christians, his persecution
continued.x. years, he ouerthrewe Churches of the Christians, A terrible
persecution.
he gave commandment that the holy books of Scripture should be burned,
Images to be worshipped, by him all means were sought to overthrow Christian
Religion, as by tyranny, by promises, by promotions, and by promoters, but to
pass over the long persecution wherewith the Christians were tormented, at
the length Dioclesian filled with the blood of Christians, gave over his
gouernmente into the hands of Galerius and Constantius. Galerius.
Galerius was also a persecutor, and as a raueninge wolf sought out his pray,
and did thriste after the blood of Christ's professors: Galerius also at the
length filled with his bloudye persecutions, gave over to persecute, but he
was first plagued of God, The death of a persecutour
and by great affliction, enforced to revoke his terrible persecutions and
proclamations: his filthye beastlye life made him to ^tincke above the earth,
who not able to abide his own stincke killed himself.

Galerius being dead another persecutor rose to plague the Church of God, who
also dyed most miserable: all these persecutors being thus dead, the
gouernmente consisted in the hands of Constantius and Licinius: Constantius.
This was that Constantius that married Helena Queen of England and the
daughter of king Coil, of this Constantius and Queen Helena, was Constantine
the great, I will orderly entreat of Maximianus, of Galerius Armentarius, of
Maxentius and of their deaths, because they were as partakers with Dioclesian
in his Empire: The government was together, but to avoid confusion, I have
placed them as Emperors seperatlye. Dioclesian being at Salna for fear,
murdered himself, and dyed without issue. Immediatlye after whose death also
dyed Constantius the father of Constantine the great.

Maximianus.


MAximianus surnamed Herculius being besieged of Constantinus at Masilia a
country in Affricke, and at the last taken prisoner, was sore punished and in
ye end hanged, Galerius.
Galerius was murdered, (but as some write) he slew himself: Maxentius
while he waged battle against Constantius, Maxentius.
somewhat above a bridge which he had made, making haste to take ship at a
haven, and so to enter on the other side, by the faule of his horse was drowned
in the deep, his body with much difficultye found being soncke into the
mudde with the waighte of his harneys: Maximinus,
Maximinus dyed at Tharsis by sickness, Valens. Valens was murdered of
Licinius, and Licinius Licinius.
afterward of Constantinus: Such lamentable end, fell to these ambitious
Princes, seekinge by all means to themselves regimente, and pre-eminence of
Dominion, Usurpers.
but kingdoms will not bear perticipation or fellowshippe, so that it is a
matter of impossibilitye, and never seen in any estate of kingdom, that unity
or concord has taken rote in ye hearts of many governors, but that after
their feigned frendshippe and concord, murder of people, waste, spoil and
desolation of the country, with a lamentable and doleful end has ensued to
them.

This Maximianus was a man of nature fierce, Maximianus.
raginge in all lust, a very fool in matter of counsel, of low birth, and by
country a Hungarian, for at these days not far from Sirmius the place is to
be seen, a Princelye house there builded, where his parents before did live,
by their handye craft: He dyed when he was lx. years old, he was Emperor
twentye years.

Galerius Armentarius


THis Emperor Galerius was very worthy of commendation although his equitye
and upright life, was without ciuilitye, rude and homelye according to his
education, he was beutifull in complexion, of body fair, for virtuous
gouernmente luckye and fortunate, his parents were of birth bace, living by
kepinge of cattle, for he was so brought up. And because this Emperor
Gallerius was sometime a keeper of beasts, therefore his syrname was
Armentarius, so the providence of God disposes times and seasons, Armentarius.
placinge in ye throne and majesty of kings, bondmen, and sheepeheardes
sons, to bear in the world swaye and Dominion, thereby shewinge his will
and omnipotente might, so to advance rude and homely men above the mighty
estates and pears of the Realms sometime: The secret counsaale of God.
In time and seasons extollinge and puttinge down mighty kingdoms, shewinge
thereby also no kingdom or estate of government, to be fixed or stablished to
any one man, but as his providence. sees time and cause alteringe the estate
and form of common wealths: What kingdom has so prospered that has not
seen a change or alteration, and felt at the last subuertion of their
estate? what line or progenye of kings has held Scepter of so long time,
but that in the end it has left the succession out of their titles, and
given the regemente to an unknown parsonne, base and mean in comparison? This
Emperor was borne in Hungarye, which lies toward the hills near to
Arcadia, which place was called Romulianu^ by his mother name Romulia. This
Galerius would crack proudly, that in his conception his mothers did dream
that she conceived him being begat of a Dragon: as Olympias the mother of
Alexander the great did dream of his birth.

Galerius Maximinus.


GAlerius Maximinus was borne of the sister of Galerius Armentarius who was
Emperor before, this Emperor was called Daza by his true name: before he was
created Emperor, he was Caesar for the space of.iiii. years, and afterward in
all the East part for.iii. years reigned Augustus: he was brought up: as a
shepeheards son, his father was a sheepehearde, being advanced to the
Empire, he became a great favorer of learned men, and such as were wise, it is
a token of a flourishinge and happy estate of kingdom where learning is in
price, The florishi^g estate of a kingdom.
estimation and honor, who so cares not in his time to plant learning, and
geeueth not honor reward and maintenance to further the studientes thereof,
shows himself to be deprived of all lerninge and understanding: For honor
only and rewards nourishe arts, and plant wisdom, without the which two,
the kingdom would be beastlye, without order, law and discipline: and in that
he gave such honor to learning, he loved and tendered the wise, for these two
in one knit and consociate, for a kingdom flowinge and aboundinge, with famous
and learned men, Wisdom.
must of necessitye be vpholden by wisdom: What Prince therefore favors
learning, cannot but tender and love wise, sage and discrete persons. He was
of nature quiet, an immoderate drinker of wine, and because with excess of
wine being sometime droncke, he did beastly govern, seeing at the last his
own fault, he enforced himself to repentance, and what affairs or busynes of
the Empire came to his hands being in that case, he would differ them till
he was sober, or unto the next morninge.

The second part of the lives of the Emperors.
Constantine the great.


COnstantine the great, was son to Constantius a Duke of Rome and Helena a
queen of Britayne, her father was Coil king of Britain, and sometime a Duke
of Colchester. Constantius was Emperor of Rome, but he dyed in Britain in
the City of York, who governed the Island, and other parts of his provinces
with such wisdom and pollicye, Constantius.
yt in all the time of his reign, there was never moved against him any
rebellion. This Constantius father of Constantine, after long sickness dyed of
a fever: at whose death the nobles and Princes that were present, took
counsel to bring the whole government of ye Realm to his sons hands:
Crocus.
Crocus king of the Almaynes, came with him into Britain to further him to
the kingdom, wherein he so much prevailed, that his father being dead, and
all Princely solemnitye in his funeral ended, the Britaynes enjoyed
Constantine their king, who was Emperor of Rome afterward, and did great
things in the advancement of the Romayne Empire, whose great glory and
worthynes of acts, titled him Constantine the great, which name rose by the
great success that fell to him in the conqueringe of kingdoms, Constantine
the great.
and subduinge of Nations. At such time as Constantine the great, was both
king of this our Islande, and also Emperor of Rome, he joined with him as
partaker of his government Licinius, Licinius.
so great love was between Constantine and Licinius, that he did not only
authoryse him with equalitye in government, but also Constantine married his
sister Constantia at Millane. But in all this great amitye and fellowshippe,
yea though a marriage was linked to make the stronger bands of amitye, love
and strength in kingdoms, yet at a sudden, cruel hatred, war and
discention, spredde on each side the banners, and no end made till Constantine
was a sole governor, and Licinius slain, this amity of Princes is not so
strong lincked, but as ambition kindled, so the same breaks the knot, and
makes the hate to be more deadlye and cruel: For Princes are most deluded by
such lincked marryages. At this present the government of the Empire
consisted in the hands of Constantine and Licinius, Licinius.
Constantine ruled all Asia at that time, who being most godly minded,
revoked from banishment the Christians, and ceased the persecution continued of
many tyrants: But Licinius who was partaker with him in the government of the
Empire, began a most heinous persecution, because he saw Constantine more
beloved of the Christians then he was, and said the Christians prayed more for
the life and good success of Constantine then for him: immediatlye great
contention rose, between Constantine and Licinius at Ryball near to a fenne
called Hiulca: in the night season, Constantine did break into the tente of
Licinius, but Licinius fled to the City Bizanze, and made Martianus master
of the requests Caesar: But Constantine prenaylinge in war against Licinius,
forced him to fly into Bythinia, whereupon a condition to save his life, he
consented to geeue unto Constantine his Princelye robe by his wives hands:
from Bithinia he was sent to Theslalonia, not many days after Constantine
commanded Licinius and Martianus (whom I spoke of before) to be murdered:
Licinius.
Licinius governed xiiii. years, Martianus.
he dyed near xl. years of age, in covetousness he was most beastlye of all
men, in adulterous lusts spotted excedinglye, of nature bitter and roughe,
nothing paciente, The ignorance of Licinius.
a detestable ennemy to all arts and learning, who wrapped in most ignorance,
called learning Virus and pestem publicam: But especially with those execrable
names he titled the pleadinge of judicial causes, a rare thing to see in
beastly parsonnes learning loved, maintained or advanced, though sometime
learning has been maruaylonsly extolled of the ignorant, as well as of the
most glorious. Justinian.
Justinian Emperor of Rome, whose acts and careful study for the
maintenance of a good common weal, the mighty volumes of the civil laws
records. Galerius.
Galerius Armentarius, did both favor and love learning being unlearned:
This one thing in Licinius in despisinge learning, was according to his
bringinge up, he was in all respects to husbandmen very profitable, and
gracious: to the warrior in all order and ceremonies to chiualrye
appertayninge, a severe arbitrator, he was a scourge to the Enuches, and
lascivious Courtiars, he called them the moathes and rattes of Princes Courts.
The rattes and moathes of princes courts.


Some Historyes note that Licinius was murdered of his own men of war, (who
being dead) the sole government of the Romayne Empire was fullye settled in
the hands of Constantine, fortunate success of victory fell on every side
to him, enemies prevailed not that displayed banner against him, fortune almost
in all things was a companion to Constantine, but that a wicked wife was a
great plague to him, whose name was Fausta: Fausta.
by whose bitter parswatio^ and execrable request, he commanded his son
Crispus a bastard, borne of his concubine Mineruina to be murdered: Bloudye
practices requited.
but her blind practices wroughte her a cruel end. for her forged
accusation, for the truth being known unto Constantine, she was caused by him
to be cast into a hoate bathe, and so slain: Helena his mother did much
reprove him, Helena.
for his crueltye against his bastard son Crispus, who^ she loved
entierlye. This fault remained in Constantine, he was enflamed with the self
love of himself, and desirous of commendation and vain glory: Constantine
being a virtuous Prince, called an assemblye and counsel of most grave and
learned bishops to a general counsel, at the City of Nyce, in the which
City and most godly assemble, Counsel at Nyce.
Constantine the Emperor in his own parsonne was present, and 318.
bishops, they all consulted against Arrius the great heretic, they
excommunicated him and banished him with six other bishops.

In this assemblye maryages began to be odious among ye Clergy, Marriages in
priests.
in so much that some of them would have such priests as were married
already, not to company any more with their wives, many to the contrary
wythstode it, but especially a virtuous and learned father withstode yt
demand mightelye, saying that the lettes and prohibition of priests
marriages, would work great whoredom, and all filthye abomination in ye
clergy. This was ye first time wherein priests began to be prohibited of
marriages, where the ancient estate of the Church always allowed marryages as
a thing in all estates honorable, Prohibition of marriage.
and the beds of holy wedlock to remain undefiled. Since those days that
filthye opinion with feigned hypocrisye, in all Regions under the Popes
jurisdiction has prevailed, the perfect life in chastitye, the holy
conversation thereof has not so much been regarded in ye sight of the world, as
a fantastical sole life of priests, bearinge an outward show of holiness, but
ye great abhominatio^ yt flowed from those chaste Prelates, the Sodomitical
acts, the murtheringe of infantes in their holy selles committed, their
ouerthrowinge of the chaste conversation of virtuous Matrones, ye defense of
Stewishe houses, which harbored their secret abominations for their sole
chaste recreation, have in all ages been Chronicled. A whore as a most holy
Pope, stauled in ye high Princely dignity, and in their solemn procession
delivered of a child, Pope Ioane.
Pope Ioane by name: this whorish woman is become a mytred Pope, she shows in
her whorishe body ye Romans chastity, from time to time the acts of Popes
with other like, in most learned Histories are recorded. But as concerning the
defense of Priests marriages, Theophilacte in this wise speaks of yt text
of Matthew, where Christ coming to Peter's wyfes mother, whom being sick of an
ague he healed. Thus Theophilact says: the Prince of the Apostles had a wife,
neither does marriage let from virtue. In the xxi. year of the government of
this great Constantine, he made a great solemn triumph with Princelye
banquettes, in the which the sinode of those bishops that were at ye
counsel. 318. were present. God blessed Constantine mightelye in his
doings, both in the quiet estate at home and also in external affairs which
he took in hand against his enemies: Constantine baptized.
Constantine embrasinge Christian Religion, was baptized of Eusebius bishop of
Nicomedia, in the which City he dyed, but his body was buried at
Constantinoble.

As concerning the heresye of Arrius, Arrius.
it grue mightelye and many favored it, but sodainlye God plagued him, who
before the disputacion dyed at the siedge of nature, and by auoydinge his
guts dyed myserablye. Lactantius.
Lactantius flourished in those days, Athanasius.
and Athanasius also the famous bishop of Alexandria, Iuuencus a notable
learned Poet flowrished at Rome. Also it is not to be put in silence, that
Constantine made a bridge over the great floude Danubius, Danubius.
Constantine used continuallye Princelye robes decked with Pearl, on his head
always he wore a Crown: This Constantine was to be commended for many notable
virtues, as to cease strife and contention, not only with the Romans, but
with foreign Princes to make frendshippe, he nourished all excellent Arts,
encouraginge by great preferments, studientes thereunto, wherein he declared
himself to be a careful Prince, not only of his private estate or
gouernmente, but of that which to the posterites might be glorious by
learning. The worthy care of Princes.
This Constantine used much to read, especially in the excellent knowledge
of Historyes, the liuelye glass of Princes wherein is contained the memory of
all ages, a scolemaister to manners, Histories.
the light of all truth, ye counsel house of Princes, the perfect spectacle
of all gouernmente, as well of the florishinge estate of kingdoms, as of their
decay, unto virtuous Princes a perpetual example, and a continual memory of
the wicked: of all their enterprises a perfect rehearser, a directour of
wisdom, and to counsaylours a lively register. This Constantine would hear
the Embassages of Princes, and their complaints, he lived lxxxix. years, he
made in the end his sons Constantine, Constantius and Constance, with
Adalmatius his brothers son Caesar's, xiii. years he reigned alone: his
nature somewhat gave him to pleasante scoffinge. As concerning Adalmatius his
brothers son, he was killed of the warriors now at the death of
Constantine, so that the gouernmente of the whole world, was brought to the
hands of the three sons of Constantine, who divided the Empire among them:
unto Constantine was limited Spain, England and France, and that part of
Germanye which was then possessed of the Romans: Unto Constantius who was
the second brother, was given Italye, and all Affricke, Sicilia, Dalmatia,
Achaia, Macedonia, and all Greece: Unto Constance which was the third, was
given the province of Thrace, in the which stands the City of
Constantinople, with all the East provinces of Asia the lesser, of Syria, of
Mesopotamia, and of Egipte.

In this sort after the death of Constantine the great who was son to Helena
king Coils daughter) was the Empire divided among his three sons, which dyed
afterward most lamentablye: A notable example of ambition.
For division enflamed with ambition, brake this natural knot, each one hunted
for ye others death, so hard a matter it is for Princes to live in concord
and amity, Ambition.
ambition and desire of Domition destroys kindreds, and for the most part
enforces rulers to forget justice, and all integritye: large hope of mighty
kingdoms displayeth the banners with insaciable desire, and without reason
rayseth a quarrel, rash counsel gives attempt, and flattery linked with
Princes inuenteth occasion, they kindle ye bloody foundation of Mars, Ambition.
they reap up the bulwark of all decay, they for private lucre sake, hunt
for the blood and ruin of many: discord destroys at a sudden, more then
many fortunate victoryes have obtained. In many ages the rash and private
quarrels of diverse Princes have undone the great and pollitike counsel of the
wise: through which they have not only received diverse great overthrows, but
also lost their estate, and seen their Towns and Cities destroyed and
burned before their eyes. These are the fruits of division, as it shall
appear in the Historye followinge of the.iii. sons of Constantine ye great:
this Constantine ordained the sunday to be kept, and that upon that day
abstinence should be made from all labor: he also was the first that appointed
Rome to be the bishops seat.

As concerning the estate of Britanye, at the death of Constantine, Octauius a
Duke of the Weste Saxons, (who was made liefetenaunt and high Deputy in
Britain under Constantine) through the counsel of the nobles and commons of
the land, would have rebelled and expelled the monks: but Constantine sent
aid against the Britaynes, making a Duke of Rome called Traiherne, with a
great host to go against them, who at his arrival were at hand to join
their hoastes with the Romans who landed at Southampton, and nere to the old
ancient City of Winchester a terrible battle was fought: but the Romans
and their Captain retired, not able to abide the force and power of the
Britaynes. Traiherne fled into Scotland, Octauius pursued him and in
Westmerlande another battle was fought, but so vnco^stante is the estate of
Princes, fortune now turns her whele from Octauius, and with terrible
countenance behold him, and they before chafed, began to conquer: Octauius
with great bloodshed fled, and power and strength so failed him, that of
necessitye he was compelled leauinge the land to flee into Normandye, in
whose absence another Earl of the Britaynes by treason murdered the Roman
Duke, which being known to Octauius, he came again into Britain and reigned
54. years against whom the Romans sent a great army, to maintain their
jurisdiction.

Constantinus.
Constantius
Constance.


Now the swaye of the Empire was in ye gouernmente of three, but Constance,
did appointe as Caesar to govern Armenia Dalmatius his cosyn, so that ye
Empire was ruled by three Emperors and one as Caesar. At this season deuisio^
began between Constance and Constantius brethren, ^onstance.
the sons af great Constantine for the title of Italye and Africa,
Constantius.
Constantius was effeminate and womanlye of nature, not courageous, unapt to
generation, all these brethren were persecutors, the Church of God was in
most miserable estate, Persecutors.
by reason that in all parts of the Romayne jurisdictions diverse pernicious
sects, opinions and doctrines flourished, each one persecuted other, but above
al, the aucthoritye, power, and poisoned opinions of the Arrians prevailed,
whereupon many bloody commotions were conspired of the Arrians, and even in
the Temple and house of ye Christians, were put in practice, by whose bloudye
practices, the people were of infinite nombers slain: The discord of ye
Christians, The discord of Christian Princes, is a strength to infidels.
their division in many sects, did encourage the hearts of the Paganes and
infidels, to place their Ethnicall faith in their fond Gods: where the
Christians made ye true word of God to be blasphemed, and evil spoken of
among those Gentiles that knew not the true God, as in these days the like
contention among Christian Princes, and the bloudye practices of the mighty
Prelates in the world, do decay the name of the Church of God, A decay to
Christians.
whiles that worldly promotions, pomp and dignitye does accompanye them, their
present joy, their felicitye, their glorious name, their pontifical seats,
their large titles by all crueltye and bloody means are vpholded. This
Constantine made a law that no delicate meat should be used in feasts, it is
said he was of dyete most temperate, Arrians doctrine.
in all causes of Judgment just and righteous, wherefore great was the decay
of the Romayne Empire, in that the Emperor favored the sect of the Arrians,
whose opinion he so favored, that thereby he was cruel against the Catholic
Athanasius a famous bishop, Athanasius.
who for withstandinge the doctrine of the Arrians, was banished by Constantine
that ruled France, one of the sons of Constantine the great, from the which
banishment he was revoked, but Constance that was Emperor of the East, as of
Asia the lesser, of Syria of Mesopotamia, and of Egypt, was also infected with
the opinion of ye Arrians, whereby Athanasius was again exiled from the City
of Alexandria where he taught. Athanasius.
This Athanasius was a most godly bishop, of great learning in the faith of
Christ, suffering many persecutions of the Arrians, this Athanasius was present
at the counsel holden at the city of Laodicia, being most mighty in ye
Scriptures he confounded the heresies, but in a manner the universal world,
the mighty Princes the bishops and Prelates were infected with this doctrine
of ye Arrianse the wrath of God in this troublous estate of Religion was
spredde upon Asia and the Region of the East, Arrians doctrine.
for many of the renowned Cities were overthrown with earthquakes, The wrath
of God against heretics.
a great pestilence not long before, devoured the countries of Syria and
Silicia, so the wrath of God scourges the wickedness of men, and sleeth the
persecutors of his Church, all these Princes, and their Prelates were wrapped
in these plagues, the Regions by many plagues were devoured and consumed. The
end of that heritike Arrius (whose opinion first I mentioned) is before
rehearsed in the life of Constantine the great. Constantine the son of
Constantine ye great, not content with his Dominion left of his father,
Ambition.
which was Spain, England, France and Germanye, moved war against his
brethren, thinking to obtain by force that which they would not willinglye
give him, but Constantine was slain of the men of war sent against him by
his brother Co^stantius, The eldest son of Co^sta^tine slain.
near to a Cittye called Aquileia: thus through ambition the eldest of the
sons of Constantine the great is slain, after he had reigned.iii. years,
being a young man of xxv. years of age, so that there remained but two
Emperors, Constantius and Constance. At this time Macedonius a priest of
Constantinople, An abominable heresy.
taught another heresye, that the holy Ghost was not God but a creature, also
this Macedonius ambiciously striued with one Paulus whether of them should
succeed that famous bishop Alexander, bishop of Constantinople. This bishop
Alexander should have dysputed with Arrius, Sapor.
but that Arrius dyed before the dysputacion: In Persia the Christians were
also persecuted by Sapor the king: Constantine the great, a defender of
Christians.
this Sapor was a great enemy to God, for in the time of Constantine the
great. 16000. were martyred, of the which bloudye fact Constantine the great
wrote to this Sapor, willinge him no more to persecute the Christians. As
concerning the byshopprike for the which Macedonius and Paulus striued for,
Eusebius.
Eusebius was made bishop of the same, being favored of this Emperor
Constantine: this Emperor was as an Arrian, and by all means furthered them,
whereupon to fortifye and make strong their Church, their faith and
doctrine, by his commandment, a Synod of bishops was assembled at
Antioche, where Athanasius that godly father was condemned as an heretic, A
just plague of God.
but the wrath of God was styrred over the Cittye of Antioche where the wicked
assemblye was gathered, an earthquake shoke diverse countries about Antioche,
but especially in Antioche, where it continued a whole year. Athanasius fled
to Constantine the Emperor, of whom he was with all humilitye received, yet
the great contention in Religion ceased not, but therevppon another Synod and
counsel was holden at Sardis, where 300. bishops did allow the counsel
of Nyce: those that were bishops of ye East, refused the company of them,
and according to their heriticall sect, gathered themselves at a City
called Philipolis, in that wicked Synod, was made accursed the foresaid
counsel of Nyce, which was called in the time of Co^statine the great, of
318. bishops against Arrius and his sect, who denied the son of God to be
equal with the father: In that Synod Arrius with vi. other bishops were
banished, for this cause the bishops of the East, made that holy counsel
of Nyce accursed, The counsel of Nyce.
in that Arrius and his scholars were put to flight, who also were Arrians. But
see what the change of an Emperor is: The change of a good Prince.
sone a true and perfect Religion is thrown down, an holy Sinode and their
true profession persecuted: the father an vpholder of ye true Church,
mayntayned Christ's Religion and Catholic faith, his son destroyed the same
good doctrine, and being a persecutour was in his government, many ways
plagued by the Persians in war, and grievously scourged, for in viii.
battayles he had the over throw, and lost many great Cities which were brought
to their thraldom: Constantius his brother, was slain by the conspiracye of
Crestius, Marcellianus, and Magnentius by the hands of Geison the thirtene
year of his government, Constantius.
thus Constantius was slain in a certain City, whose death being known
to Constance his brother, and understanding that Magnentius was the chief
aucthor thereof, he prepared war against him, and in his absence ordained
Gallus his kinsema^ liefetenant in the East: Diverse ambitious Princes usurped
to be Emperors, as Britanion in Illiria, Nepotianus at Rome, great was ye
fight between Constance and Magnentius, for in their conflicte were slain
54000. men of war, and Magnentius in the end flewe himself. Gallus in the
absence of Constance, exercised tyranny over the people, and put to death
many thousands, diverse of their Cities were burned by him, which rebelled
against him, but his crueltye caused him to be deprived, and after his
banishment his head was stricken of. At this time France was invaded of the
king of the Almaynes: and as yet the heresye of Arrius prevailed, The
counsel of Ariminu^.
and therevppon a counsel was gathered at Ariminum of 200. bishops of the
Weste, who established as most holy the counsel of Nyce, but ye Arrians
withstode it: In this troubleous estate of Religion Constance by a
commandment, caused the bishops of the East who were all Arrians, to make
their Synod at Celeutia, Sapor.
to confirm the doctrine of the Arrians. Sapor king of Persia warred on ye
Romans, and endamaged them much, and took diverse of their Cities, the
doctrine of the Arrians was by crueltye vpholded of Macedonius bishop of
Constantinople, his bloudye factes note no small testimonye of their wicked
doctrine: a cruel practice is always grounded of a like doctrine. Christian
doctrine.
No Christian doctrine builds it self in bloody pollices, but in humilitye
both their faith, and their sincere conversation florisheth, whereby they give
a testimonye of an humble Church, of a pacient profession, with it the saints of
God have overcome the world: by tyranny the humble Martyrs have most
flourished, in the most wicked times their oppressed estate, The true Church.
has at a sudden overthrown the mighty tyrants, plagued their kingdoms,
for God never utterly forsakes his Church, but by a secret means rayseth
it to be most mighty, and confounds the ungodly: God always preserves his
true Church.
as in the time of the Arrians doctrine, God preserved ye true Church, and
plagued the persecutors. Iulianus was after the death of Gallus made chief
under Constance, whose name by the great success that fell to him was in great
commendatio^, both among the Romans and also otherwise: the Almaynes invaded
France and spoiled it, but they were overcome of Iulianus, Iulianus.
and all such Cities as were taken of the Almaynes, Iulianus recovered
again: he destroyed the whole pomp of their felicitye and glorious success,
so that the soldiers would have had him their Emperor, and called him
Augustus. Constance knowinge his dignity, name, and power deminished through
Iulianus prowes and title, was greuouslye displeased, commaundinge him by
Ambassadors to refuse that name or title, but immediately after this Constance
dyed at Mopsocris, a Cittye lyinge between Cilicia and Capadocia: Of his death
Victor thus writes, that there he dyed of a sharp Ague, which he took of
anguishe of mind and lack of sleep: The death of Constance.
Constance dyed the.44. year of his age, he reigned xxxix. years Emperor,
eyghte years alone, and with his brethren xvi. years, and Caesar 25. years:
the good success that fell to him in civil war was great, in destroyinge
his domestical enemies, but he never prospered in forrayne battayles. This
Emperor was very courteous, of a pleasante and delectable conversation,
liberal to his friends, most temperate in eating and drinkinge, very
painful, he delighted in fine communication, although he were by nature
neither very wise nor eloquent, he was a very expert archer, and therein
very much exercised himself. Moreover he was very prompte to geeue credit,
unto tryflinge reports that should be made unto him, of a man's enemy: At
his death he ordained to be his heir Julian of whom I will now entreat. At
this time Romake king of the Scotts was slain of his nobles, Octauius.
and then Octauius was king of Britain, who reigned liiii. years.

Julian the Apostata*


AFter the death of Constance, Apostata, signifies one yt renounceth ye faith
which once he has professed.
Julian his kinseman called the Apostata, enjoyed peaceable the whole Empire:
who if he had not renounced the faith of Christ, and enclyned unto ydolatrye,
might worthelye for his manyfolde virtues and good qualities, have been
compared with any other that ever lived. Diverse Aucthors write that he fell
into this unbelief, through the parswasions of one Libanus an Idolatrer,
Libanus.
who was his instructour in Rethoricke: which thing may be a notable example
unto Princes, and all other men of every estate and condition, that they ought
not only to procure with especial diligence such masters for their
children, Instructors of children.
as are learned in those faculties, in which they desire to have them skilful,
but also such as be virtuous, honest, and of a good judgment in Religion: for
most certain it is, that those things which children learn in their youth,
they so imprint in their memory, that afterward they never forget them, and
the exercises and conditions which they get in that tender age, become unto
them both proper and natural: For probation whereof, although many examples
may be alleged, yet for this present, let that Julian suffice, in who^ the
instruction of so wicked a master had such force, that the fruits thereof
very well appeared, which he received through him. Julian compared.
For in all other things he was so expert and singular, that in bountye and
curtesye, he was equal unto Titus, in clemencye unto Antonye, in prosperous
success against the Dutcheme^ unto Traian, in temperance, modesty, and
Philosophye, unto Marcus Aurelius. He was endued with a singular good memory,
and therewith very studious, he was very eloquent, as well by nature as by Art,
most temperate in his eatinge, drinkinge, and sleapinge, in all carnal desires
he was most chaste and continente: He was of such strength and courage, that
he was reprehended for vsinge greater bouldnes, then was convenient for a
Captain or Emperor. Vain glory.
He was very desirous of vain glory and fame, (a vice common unto most
excellent wits and haughty courages) he was liberal and pleasante with his
friends: he used justice a like toward all men, both in the time that he was
Caesar, and also when he was Emperor. But all these virtues, with many other
were polluted with the infidelitye which he embraced at the parswations of his
Scholemaister Libanus the Idolatrer. Libanu^^
As sone therefore as he had understanding of yt death of Constance the
Emperor (which news was brought him in France, from whence he was going
against him, who likewise was marchinge for the same intent) he went with all
celeritye unto the City of Constantinople, Constantinople.
which after Constantine was the head of ye Empire, whereby all means he
procured the good will of all men, and caused the Temples of the gentiles to be
opened, and gave them license to adore their Idols: and albeit he was an
enemy unto Christians, yet would he not persecute them, also between the
Catholics and the Arrians he remained a neuter, enclyninge neither unto ye
one, nor other part, which doing purchased him yt love and favor of all
worldlinges: and the barbarous Nations fearing his fame and name, abstayned not
only from making war against the Empire, but also sent unto him
Ambassadors to require peace of him, which he granted them. In this wise he
began with contentacion and prosperity to govern the Empire: but as one that
in heart was an Idolatrer, he determined to find out some mean to persecute
the Christians, for thaccomplishmente of which wicked intent, he used a mean
not lightye hard of: For having intelligence that through torments or
martyrdom, Persecution rayseth more Christians.
the Christian faith was much increased, he resolved the work by the
contrary, who (as Ruffinus and Saint Hierome write) did enduce them with
gifts, promises, offices and dignityes to renownce their faith, and to do
sacrifice unto their false and lyinge Idols. And as diverse affirm, there were
not a few of covetous and ambitious parsonnes, which to become rich, and to
be exalted unto honor and dignitye, denied their true faith, in such wise,
that this was one of the greatest persecutions that ever the Church received,
not only in respect of those which did willinglye abandon their faith, but
also for that he did institute and ordain by general decrees, The decrees of
Julian against the Christians.
that no Christian might profess any art, or science, nor likewise study, or
go unto any Schole, but such as did worship unto Idols: to the end that
for the desire of learning, they might do service unto his Idols, or else to
remain ideottes and ignorantes, whereby they should be unable to preach and
teach their faith sufficientlye. In conclusion he immagined all ways and
means that might be devised to persecute the Christians, except only by
effusion of blood.

And continuinge the use of this pitiful crueltye against the Christians, he
determined like a most valiante Captain, to move war against the Persians:
who only had not humbled themselves, nor would not acknowledge him for their
superior. Whereupon he went into Asia with a huge host, and having passed
through Asia the less, he came into Mesopotamia, which was the country for
which the Romans and the Persians did contend, from thence after certain
light skirmishes, Zaita.
he went unto Zaita, where he understood that the king of Persia was
encamped not far of, with his whole hoaste, and therefore he set in good
order his army, with a maruaylous desire to join battle with his enemies:
but they at this instante refused to fight, and sent their Ambassadors to
require pardon of him: Unto whom the courageous Emperor gave no audience, but
perceyuinge that they refused the battle, ye more to provoke them he entered
into diverse parts of their country, taking many Cities of Surrey, some by
force, and some by yeldinge of their own accord, greatelye endamaginge the
whole country as he passed, whereby in the end the Persians being overcome
with shame, fought a battle with him, which was both cruel and terrible:
into which before he entered, he made a solemn vow, that if he had the
victory in that conflict, he would make sacrifice unto his Gods, with the
blood of all those Christians (whom he termed Gallileans) which would not do
sacrifyce unto his Idolles. The voice of Julian.
And it pleased Almightye God (through his secret Judgments) to make him
conqueror for that instante, and to reward him in this world with his wrath.
Who perceyuinge that he had obtained the victory, The victory of Julian.
not findinge any resistance, proceeded till he came unto the famous City of
Pt^siphont, determininge to make his abode that winter in Mesopotamia: but in
this iourneye his soldiers suffered great afflictions, as well through
want of victuels, and that their hoaste was very copious, as also for that
their enemies, did many times assault and moleste them: And having for his
gyde a fugitive Persian, he was brought by him (through treason together with
his soldiers) into a place where was made a great imbushement of the
Persians, with whom he being enforced to fight, was with a spear so wounded
in one of his arms and thighs, that not long after he dyed: who when he
felt himself to become fainte, Julian wounded to death.
spoke with great arrogance against Christ, saying: Vicisti Gallilee, O thou
Gallilean thou have overcome me. After which words when he saw that all they
which were present bewailed his death, he reprehended them saying: that they
did greatly offend, to lament and bewail the death of a Prince, that dyed in
the favor of his Gods. Gregorye Nazeanzen writes an inuectiue Oration
against Iulia^, which is worthy to be read.
And afterward as long as breathe served him, he desisted not to entreat of
the immortalitye of his soul. A thing to be greatly lamented at, that such
want of grace, filthiness should remain in a man, endued with so much
worthynes, and so many excellent virtues. He dyed in the seventh year after
he was Caesar, and in the third of his Empire, when he was xxxi. years of
age: and in the year of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. 366.

Iouianus.


AFter the soldiers had much bewailed the death of Julian, they elected for
Emperor a famous and noble gentleman named Iouianus borne in Hungarye, a
very faithful and constante Christian: For when Julian commanded that no
Christian should have the charge of a Captain, nor enjoy any other office in
the war: This Iouianus answered with a stout and cherefull countenance, yt
he made more account of his profession, then of all ye dignities he had, and so
abandoned his charge. A good example of a Christian.
And afterward being which (as is said) elected Emperor, he prouounced in open
Parliament, yt he being a Christian, would not (although he might) be a
Captain over infidels and idolaters: and so most constantly refused the
Empire. But the contentation which every of them conceived of his election was
such, that after they had confirmed the same, they exclamed that they were
Christians: And to the end that he should receive charge of the Empire, they
that were not as yet, promised that they would be. In this manner with
incredible joy, they swear obedience unto him, and gave him the ensigns of
the Emperor Whereupon presently with great industrye, he provided and made
preparation of all such necessaryes, as were requisite for the mayntenaunce of
the present war, (which was very difficulte to be done.) Sapor.
For Sapor understanding of the death of Julian (whom for his noble acts, and
great courage, he did not a little dread) made small account of the new
Emperor: and assemblinge all the power that he might, he set with such
violence upon the army of the Emperor, that the Romans were enforced to
retire, and the Persians remained as conquerours in the field, whereupon
Iouian with great labor and travail removed his camp, and marched toward
the City of Carra, Carra.
where Cressus was overcome by the Parthians, making as he marched diverse
skirmishes with the Persians, who continuallye pursued him even unto the river
Tigris: Tigris.
and thither Sapor sent Ambassadors unto The Emperor, to signify unto him, that
although he perceived that through want of victuels, and other mishappes,
both he and his hoaste were at his mercy, and in his power: yet he was
contented, (if he would yield unto certain conditions) to remain for ever a
faithful friend to the Empire: Unto which conditions, Iouian (being enforced
through the present peril) yielded unto, and concluded a peace with Sapor for
xxx. years. This truce was of some, accounted most abominable unto the
Empire: but of other, who better considered the distress unto which the
Romans were driven, The doings of Princes are diversely construed.
it was reputed (although not honorable) yet both profitable and necessary:
for he was in apparaunt danger both of losinge his whole hoaste, and of the
greater part of those provinces which he granted unto him.

After ^he conclusion of the truce, Iouian went into Surrey: from whence he
sent decrees into all places, to revoke from exile Athanasius, with other
infinite godly Christians: unto whom he commanded that all such offices,
dignityes, and honors should be rendered, as were given them in the time of
Constantine the great, and that the tythinges of corn and other things which
were taken from them by Julian, should be likewise restored unto them again.
After Iouian had finished this holy foundation, with vsinge in all other
affairs, the duty and office both of a wise and just Prince, and having
sufficiently provided in the East, for all such things as were necessary: He
marched toward Constantinople, shewinge himself in all places where he
passed, both a just and merciful Prince, in such wise that all men conceived a
good hope of him: But this and all his noble intentes, and Christian
determinations were intercepted by death, (for the wickedness of the people
deserved not so worthy a Prince) which happened in this wise. The secret
counsel of God.
After he was arrived at a certain place in Asia the less, called Dudastana,
being in the cold time of the winter: there was in the Chamber where ye
Emperor should lie, a fire made of coals and wodde, which was moist and
grene, in which after he was gone to bed, and ye chamberlaines departed and
locked the door, The death of Iouian.
the vapoure of the fire maruelously increased, and fillinge all places full of
smoke, not having any vent or window to issue forth at, stopped Iouianus
breath in such wise, that he smothered as he slept, for in the morninge he was
found dead, most men iudginge this to be thoccasion of his death: although
some supposed, that he dyed by eating of a Mushron, which was poisoned: other
affirm, that he eat so much meat the night before, that ye natural heat,
not able to make perfect disgestion, he was through the cruditie of his meat
strangled. But (howsoever it was) his death gave great cause of sorrow unto
all men, for he had held the Imperial Septer but eighte months: and dyed
when he was (as some write) of xl. but as other, of xxx. years of age.

Valentinianus the first of that name.


IT pleased Almightye God of his goodness, to appoint to succeed the Christian
and virtuous Emperor Iouian (although he left behind him neither child nor
kinseman) one that was equal with him in faith, Valentinian like in goodness
and virtue unto Iouian.
goodness, and virtuous conditions, whose name was Valentinia^. Who although he
were descended of a base stock, and borne of poor parents: yet he was a
Catholic Christian, beutifyed and adorned with most splendente virtues: His
fathers name was Gratian, God exalts from low estate.
borne in Hungarye in the City Cimbala, a very poor man, and by profession
a maker of coardes or ropes, one of a very great strength, who after he
became a soldier, so excelled in martial prowes, that he was for his
worthiness, preferred from degree to degree, and in the end appointed general
of the Pretorian soldiers: which was the cause, that his son Valentinian
(of whom we now entreat) was brought up in martial feats wherein he became
very excellent. And at such time as Julian commanded that all they which
would not do sacrifyce unto idols, should be deprived of their dignity and
offices. (he being a Captain over the soldiers which bare shieldes) refused
as a most constant professor of Christ, Persecution tries Christians.
the office of his captain ship, to remain and abide in his true
profession, but afterward in the time of the good Emperor Iouian, he together
with infinite other Christians, was restored unto his former dignitye, and was
at such time as he dyed in that degree of honor, in which he had been before
the edict with Julian. This Valentinian for his singular worthiness was by the
general suffrages of ye whole hoaste, elected at the City of Nyce: as his
father for his valiantnes, had been likewise preferred unto many honorable
degrees of chivalry. After he was thoroughly established in his Empire, he
elected for companion with him in the same his brother Valens, and not long
after he created Caesar, his young son Gratian: In the time of these
Emperors, the world was greatly afflicted with earthquakes, wonders,
excursions and inundations of the seas, with strange things which rayned from
Heaven, and with such mortal wars, that the like have not lightly been
hard, or read of. Notwithstanding these afflictions, the wise and sage
Emperous did with such force and pollicye oppugn and resist the invasions and
rebellions, which were made by sundry barbarous Nations: that they did not only
conquer them in many battayles, with expellinge them out of ye Imperial
territoryes, but also overcame and suppressed diverse domestical tyrants:
Procopius.
among which there was one Procopius, a kinseman of Julian the Apostata, who
took upon him the title and name of Emperor in Constantinople: But afterward
he was overcome in battle by Valens, and flyinge away, he was by his own
soldiers apprehended and brought unto the emperor: who (as some affirm)
caused him to be beheaded, But as other write, he caused two trees to be
bowed, and unto either of them one of his legs to be tied, A reward for
rebels.
and after by lettinge them go at liberty, he was (unto the terror of all
other) rent and divided in two parts: a meet reward and punishment due unto
all rebels.

As Valens was infected with the sect of the Arrians, who^ he greatly favored:
so Valentinian was a most true and sincere professor of Christ's Religion, who
after he had overcome the Sarmathians, a barbarous people which often
rebelled, made answer unto their Ambassadors, which entreated for peace with
so much vehemencye, The death of valentinian.
that he fell into such extreme bledinge at his mouth, as that he dyed
thereof within few days. Some say that he fell into an Apoplexia and dyed
of that disease, in the 50. year of his age, when he had reigned xii. years.
After whose death Valens, together with his nephewe Gratian enjoyed the Empire:
He began to make little account of his nephewe, and greatly fauouringe the
sect of the Arrians, employed and bestowed his time in Nigromancye and
enchantmentes, with diverse other kinds of sorceries, The persecution of
Christians.
and also in martyringe of many Christians, which God did not permit long
unpunished: For shortly after being overcome in a conflict by the Goths (unto
whom he had done many pleasures) he fled for succor into a pore cotage of
the country, (which his enemies perceyuinge) set at a sudden the house on
fire, and so burnte him being in the same, The end of a wicked governor.
making there that end which his wicked life deserved: when he was 50.
years of age, after he had governed the Empire xv. years, and after the
incarnation of our Savior Jesus Christ 382. years: according unto the
computation of S. Hierome, who in this year ends his Historye, A flourishing
time of the learned.
and hereafter follows that of S. Prosper.

There began to florishe at this present many excellent learned doctors in
Diuinitye, which at this instant are the chief pillars of the Church: As S.
Hierome, S. Ambrose, and not long after S. Augustine, the learned Basil
bishop of Cesarea, Gregorius Nazeanzenus, Epiphanius, Cirillus bishop of
Jerusalem with many other.

Gratianus.


AFter the death of Valens ye Emperor, the administration of ye whole Empire,
as well of the East as of ye West remained only unto Gratian his nephewe the
son of his brother Valentinian, who before him enjoyed ye Empire of ye West:
and unto the infant Valentinia^ his brother, whom he had created Emperor:
although because of his infancye he made no account of him. The Goths
followinge their victory, in short space became patrones of the whole country
adioyninge near unto them, and besieged the Imperial Cittye of
Constantinople, (where the noble Empress, wife unto the unfortunate Valens
made her abode) against which Cittye they made war with great force and
violence, burninge and destroyinge both the walls and Suburbs of the same,
which were very great: but the widdowe Empress (as Cassiodorus writes) did
with dillige^ce animate her people with gifts and fair speech, A valiaunte
Empress.
that they fought with so maruailous force against ye Goths, that they
received great loss and hurt and cold not enter, but were enforced to raise
their siege. In this wise by the carefulnes of this Lady, The noble government
of a woman.
and valiantnes of the inhabitants, the Cittye was defended. After the Goths
were departed thence, they divided themselves into sundry companyes,
inhabitinge the provinces of Thrace, of Dacia, and the confines unto them
joining. These were certain Nations, which descended out of Scithia and Russia
(as most Aucthours affirm) but whether they were borne there, From whence the
Goathes came.
or come from some other country thither, no writer makes mention, nor puts
any difference between those which are called Ostrogothes and Visogothes, since
that the diversity of names betokens no other thing, Ostrogothes.
but that the Ostrogothes are those of the East, Visogothes.
and the Visogothes of the Weste. Wherefore I intend at all times when I shall
have occasion to make mention of them, (which will be very often) to term them
indifferentlye by the name of Goths: For it is most certain that the
greatest wound and loss, and the beginning of the ruin of the Romayne
Empire, was occasioned by them. Wherefore those Nations may worthelye be
accounted and judged the most valiante in arms of all other. The Goths.
Since that (although with great travail, and long war) they were able to
overcome and subdue, a people and Empire which was conqueror of the whole
world. Gratian having understanding of the death of his uncle Valens, and
how the Goths with diverse other Nations of the North called Hunnes and Alanes,
no less valiante in arms then they were: Hunnes.
did continually invade ye Empire, Alanes.
and became Lords over many countries and provinces: Then he, with as great a
power as he was able to assemble, marched toward Hungarye to repress their
furye, ordayninge for general over his army, a certain noble Captain named
Theodosius, Theodosius a fortun (...) Emperor.
which was borne in Spain, who so worthelye behaved himself, and with such
courage repressed the furye of his enemies, that in the end he enforced them
to serve him in the wars, and reduced the Empire unto his pristinate estate
and dignity. For which noble acts Gratian did associate him for companion with
him in the Empire, and assigned unto him the Empire of the East: for he
continued in France, where he alienated the minds of the soldiers from him,
by shewinge himself to much affectionate toward the Alanes, Gratian ^omuche
addited to strangers.
and other strange Nations whose kind of attire he did often wear: At which
time one Maximus a tyrante in the country of Britannye rebelled, and leuyed a
great power against him, who saying himself to be abandoned of his Legions,
returned in all have toward Italye, in which voyage, Maximus making a great
slaughter of his soldiers, did also in the Strategeme kill him: who without
doubt would have proved a virtues and worthy Emperor, if he had attained unto
the government of the Empire: The death of Gratian.
for in all other things, which appertayned unto a worthy and bountiful
Prince he excelled. His death happened (after the computation of Prosper) in
the year after the birth of our LORD 387.

Theodosius the first of that name.


GRatian the Emperor being dead, the orderinge of the whole estate of the
Empire, concerning both war and peace, appertayned unto Theodosius, as the
only pillour and sustentation of the same: for albeit the young Prince
Valentinian made his abode in Italye, The cowardlynes of Valentinian.
yet he had not the courage to revenge the death of his brother Gratian: for
when he understood that Maximus was entered into part of Italye with a mighty
power, he forsook the same, and fled unto Constantinople to demand succor
of Theodosius: who being very sorrowful for the mishappe of the two
Emperors, the one to be slain by treason, and the other to be driue^dute of his
Empire by tyrants, according unto his accustomed natural worthiness, resolved
to sail into Italye, to revenge the death of the one, Theodosius a most noble
Emperor.
and to establish the other in his Empire, by persecutinge and destroyinge the
new mighty tyrant: whereupon leauinge his son Arcadius in Constantinople,
and taking with him Valentinian, he prepared all things necessary for his
departure, and having assembled a sufficient army of valiant Captains and
soldiers, he directed his course toward Lumbardye: where Maximus was
making his abode in the City of Aquileia, Maximus.
who had ordained for his general to withstand Theodosius, Andragathius, a
valiant Captain in martial affairs, Andragathius captain unto Maximus.
which was the party that slew Gratian. He with great diligence had taken
and occupied all the streights and passages, by the which Theodosius should
come: but afterward alteringe his determination, he removed his soldiers
from the defense of the mountains, and placed them in certain ships,
mindinge to fight with his enemies upon the water before they landed, and to
apprehende his adversary. Whereof the pollitike and worthy Emperor Theodosius
having intelligence, very well provided for his landinge, Theodosius.
and after marched with great iourneyes, who findinge the passages without
defense, entered into the territoryes of Lumbardye, and came unto Aquileia
where Maximus was, Maximus.
before that Andragathius could come thither, and besieginge the City on
every side: they that were within the same through fear, and moved also in
conscience yielded themselves unto Theodosius, before any assault was made or
battle fought, The death of Maximus and his son
and the tyraunte as a traitor and rebel was put to death, with a son of
his called Victor, who not long before had been by his father created Emperor.

Andragathius understanding of the taking and death of Maximus, (who at that
instant was with a great army upon the sea) being surprised with exceeding
grief and desperation, cast himself out of the Gallye where he stood, The
death of Androgathius.
into the sea, and so was drowned, and his soldiers wantinge a head or
governor yielded unto Theodosius: unto whom after he had obtained this notable
victory without the effusi^ of much blood, there repaired out of France,
Germanye, Spain and England, many Embassadous, yeldinge their obedience unto
him, with great humillitye and devotion.

Who after he had triumphed in Rome, Theodosius (...) rare Prince
restored the Empire unto Valentinian, and returned unto Constantinople. This
was a manifest argument, and sufficient proof of his goodness and loyaltye,
for whereas he was of power if he had been so disposed, to have made him self
a sole monarke, and Lord over all, he reputed it to be a greater worthiness and
dignitye to recover an Empire, The nobility of Theodosius.
and to restore it unto him unto whom by right it appertayned: then to reserve
it unto himself.

Not long after the return of Theodosius unto Constantinople, the death of
Valentinia^ was conspired by a Captain of his called Arbogastus, a man of a
singular courage, wisdom and stoutnes, very mighty, by reason of the
aucthoritye and credit which he was in with the Emperor. This Arbogastus
determined upon the sudden to murder Valentinian, Arbogastus.
and to create Emperor one Eugenius, Eugenius.
who for his excellencye in Rhetoric was very well thought of, and had in
great reputacion with all men, unto whom after he had reveled his intent,
Tribes.
and that Eugenius had willinglye accepted the same, they invented the means
to corrupt the Eunuchs which were the Emperors chamberlaynes, and concluded
with them that they in the night should strangle Valentinia^, and say that
they found him dead. The death of Valentinian.
It happened therefore that in the night as the Emperor slepte in his Chamber
at Vienna a Cittye in France, the ribalde Eunuchs did strangle him,
reportinge unto all men that he had hanged himself, being the xviii. year
after he was by his brother created Emperor. Eugenius created Emperor by
Arbogastus.
Incontinently after his death was published, before the treason was known,
Arbogastus nominated and made Emperor Eugenius, and because these two were of
most reputation, the election was approved of all men. And albeit Eugenius was
nominated Emperor, yet all things were disposed and ordered at the pleasure
of Arbogastus.

Within short space Theodosius had understanding of this fact, which he
received very sorrowfullye, in that he perceived how dangerous a war he was
to enter into. For he accounted it a great dishonor, Murder unto be
unpunished.
to permit so heinous an act unpunished: wherefore with all diligence he levied
soldiers, and with as much celeritye as he might, he departed from
Constantinople, leauinge in the same his.ii. sons Arcadius and Honorius, whom
at that present he created Emperors. After he was arrived in the confines of
Italy, where the tyrants had so huge an hoaste, and so carefullye had provided
for the maintenance of the war, that they occupied all the passages of the
Alps, and encamped their army in the closures of the same: in such sort,
that Theodosius was in very great distress, for after he had passed over
certain mountains, he might very well perceive that he was on every side
environed with enemies, in such wise that victuels might be brought unto him
from no place, his enemies also having many mo soldiers then he had, in no
respect inferior unto his, in experience and courage. Notwithstanding these
extremities like a most prudent Emperor, having his whole confidence and
trust in God, he omitted not, to remedy the present necessitye in the best
manner that he might: God gives the victory to Princes only.
And certainlye the danger and oppression in which he was in, was such, and
the multitude of his enemies so great, that he with his, must needs have
been destroyed, if God in the battle which followed, had not assisted him,
with a manifest miracle. For when as in the next morninge Theodosius saw,
that he was compassed in on every side with ennemies, he embatailed his
soldiers very strongly, awaytinge with a maruailous courage ye assault of his
enemies, out of whose camp at a sudden, Arbitius.
came unto him a Captain named Arbitius with all his soldiers: presentlye
after whose coming the battle began, in which the Romans fought against
Romans, so fiercely, that at the first encounter Theodosius army was like to
have had the overthrow: if at the very instant a Captain of his named
Barbarius, Barbariu^
with a great number of soldiers, had not succored certain Squadrons, which
were at the point of being overcome: which he did so courageously, that they
which seemed before to be overcome, recovered their former forces, in such
wise, that without making any retire, they endeavored to overcome fightinge
most valiantlye: Although the number of the enemies was so great, that it
seemed a thing impossible to withstand them. But in this conflicte it pleased
God to assiste Theodosius with his divine power, for at a sudden there arose a
most boisterous and tempestuous wind, the like whereof has not been seen:
which without the offending of the army of Theodosius, The power of God in
battle.
did strike with such force into the faces of his enemies, that it took from
them their sight, and kept them back in such wise, that they had no force to
proceade against Theodosius soldiers, yea the wind was of such might, that
all the arrows, stones, darts and lances which they threw, were driven
back upon them, wounding and molestinge them in such wise, The death of
Engenius.
that in the end after long fightinge, (contrary to all men's expectacion)
Theodosius got the victory, and slew in the battle Engenius: but Arbogastus
(as all writers affirm) when he saw that he was overcome; Arbogastus kills
himself.
fled out of the battle, and not findinge any place where he might abide
in safetye, with his own sword killed himself. After this victory
Theodosius, saying thempyre to be delivered from all wars, went unto Millane,
where he remained the remnant of his life, S. Ambrose bishop of Millane.
S. Ambrose being at that present bishop of the same: thither he sent for
his son Honorius, whom he invested after his death, with thempyre of Italy and
of all the West, and his brother Arcadius, of all thempyre of the East. Also
into Affricke and the provinces there about, he sent for governor Gildus a
very noble and wise Captain: but for that his children were as yet but of a
tender age, he appointed unto them two tutors, men no less valiant in war,
then prudent in peace, the one called Ruffinus, and the other Stilicon. Not long
after the finishinge of this his order taking, he fell sick of a certain
disease, whereof he dyed, when he was fiftye years of age, after be had
reigned in the Empire xi. years, besides the vi. years, in which he governed
together with Gratian: so that in the whole he reigned xvii. years, and dyed
in the year after the incarnation of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. 397.

Arcadius and Honorius.


AFter the death of Theodosius, his two sons Arcadius and Honorius took
upon them the gonernme^t, Arcadius.
who had with little care and small travail, Honorius.
sustained and ruled the whole Monarchy, if the wickedness of their tutors had
not molested and troubled the same. For they which were elected and chosen to
see all things well governed, were the occasion, that the Empire in such sort
was vexed, that in the beginning they ministered no small presumptions of her
utter ruin. The tutors of Arcadius and Honorius, procured to get the Empire
unto them selves.
For immediatlye after Theodosius was dead, Gildus, which was governor in the
province of Affricke, and Ruffinus and Stilicon in their provinces, likewise
did by all means procure to reuolte the state of the Empire, from the sons
of the late Emperor their Lord, unto themselves: and every of them at
convenient time, manifested his wicked intent and imaginations. Arcadius,
together with Ruffinus his governor, Arcadius.
went to Constantinople, where he enterred with much honor the dead body of
his father: but Honorius remained with Stilicon in Italye. The young Emperors
in all respects continued their government as their father had done before:
The behavior of Gildus.
And true it is that Gildus, the governor of Affricke, after he understood of
the death of Theodosius, regarded not to keep secretr any longer his perverse
and wicked intent, as Ruffinus and Stilicon did: but presentlye in his deeds
did utter the same, attempting to bear seigniorye over the provinces committed
to his government: Ambition.
not with the title of a Countye, as unto that time he had done, (the which
title as Paulus Diaconus says was at yt instante given unto the governors of
provinces) but as a king or Emperor without acknowledginge either of Honorius
or Arcadius. Mastelzerius ye brother of G^^dus.
This tyrant a brother of his own, called Mastelzerius, a good and faithful
Christian, resisted in all that he might: but the power of Gildus was then so
much increased, that his brother was enforced to fly into Italye, and he
remained as Lord in Affricke. Tirants spares no kindred.
Gildus understanding that his brother was gone to find out the Emperor,
caused two of his sons that he had left in Affricke to be slain, not
respectinge that they were his nephews and his own blood. After Mastelzerius
was come into Italye, he reueyled as much as was happened, unto Honorius, or to
say more truly unto Stilicon his tutor and governor (whose wisdom and
courage was very great, Stilicon.
although founded upon a disloyal and wicked immagination) He gatte unto him
an army of men, with all necessaries thereunto belonging, to the end he
should invade his brother as enemy of the Imperial estate. Mastelzerius
Mastelzerius, to revenge the death of his sons, with the greatest celeritye
that might be, returned into Affricke with a small company, trustinge unto the
right which he had on his side, and the good will of the people, but especially
unto Gods help, whose divine bountye he desisted not dailye to call upon,
with effusion of tears, and continual prayer.

And although he arrived in this manner upon the coasts of Affricke, with so
small a number of soldiers, yet with a maruailous courage he landed them,
and having erected and fortifyed necessary lodginges, he caused his arrival
to be published, in all those places where he was beloved, and from whence
supposed to receive supply of soldiers and aid of friends. His brother
understanding of his arrival, came against him with.iii. score and ten
thousand men of war, so that Mastelzerius might very well seem to be in a
marvelous distress and danger, Victory is in the hands of God.
yet it abated nothing of his iourneye, neither was he in doubt of winninge
the victory, for yt he knew the obtaining thereof consisted in the power of
God, and not in the multitude of men and horse. The third day after
Mastelzerius was arrived, and had well refreshed his army, with an invincible
courage he set upon his enemies: who supposed nothing less, then that he
durst make any such attempt, and therefore had their minds occupied with the
contrary. A wise Captain, wins with counsel.
But he aduauntinge himself before the foremost ranks, exhorted his brothers
soldiers to desiste from farther rebellion, and vsinge of weapons against one
that was sent from their Lord and Emperor: Which request when an ensign
bearer refuced to agree unto, and therewith used violence against him, he
stroke the soldier with such force that his ensign fell unto the ground,
with which only stroke it pleased God to give him the victory, for there was
not one yt would make farther resistance, but presentlye the most part of the
army yielded and obeyed unto him, and the other together with his brother
fled, so that myraculouslye he obtained the victory. The flyinge away and
the death of Gildus.
After Gildus saw that he was abandoned of his soldiers, he fled unto the
sea coaste, where he entered into a ship, and committed the sails unto the
wind, thinkinge to escape thereby, but after he had sailed prosperouslye a
certain space, at length the wind turned against him, in such sort that he
was enforced to return from whence he departed, Traitors taken in their own
snare.
where he was apprehended, and his brother for a chastisement of his crueltye,
as also to revenge the death of his two sons, and treason unto his Lords,
cause him to be beheaded. After whose death Mastelzerius remayninge conqueror
and as Lord in the field, Pride.
without any contradictio^, and perceyuinge himself to be very puissante (as
happens unto men which in prosperitye become insolente) yielded not praise
unto God for this his victory, as he ought to have done: but rather
attempted to get unto himself the Empire of Affricke, Ambition.
not once respectinge the Emperor Honorius which sent him thither: which
disloyalty his captains and soldiers not contented with, The death of
Mastelzerius through insolent pride
s^ue him with their own hands. After the death of these two brothers, the
Empire of Affricke continued a certain space obedient unto ye Roman
Emperors. While these things passed in this wise in Affricke, Arcadius was
not without disturbance in Constantinople, for Ruffinus his governor desyringe
to bring to effect his purpose, procured by all means possible, to bring
Arcadius into some distress and danger, to thend he might thereby usurp the
Empire: Ruffinus does solicit the Goths to dampnifye the Empire.
He did solicit the Goths and other Nations to invade the Imperial
territories, which practice being discovered, (he was by the procuremente of
Arcadius,) slain by certain Italian soldiers, and his head hanged upon one
of the gates of Constantinople. After the death of Ruffinus, Arcadius remained
a more free and quiet Lord in his Oriental Empire, Ambitious traitors.
then Honorius his brother did in his: For Stilicon who had the government in
the Occidentall, was more circumspecte and pollitique then Ruffinus, Stilicon.
and therewith a very valiante and singular Captain, and sent soldiers to
aid and assiste his brother. Not long after the former fear was passed,
Alaricus arrived in Italye, a more wise and valiant Captain then was
Rhadagasius, whose soldiers also were very active and expert in Martial
affairs: Against him went Stilicon with his army, as one that never feared
any danger, and encountered with the Goths within the territory of Rauenna:
in which conflict Alaricus was overcome by ye prowes of Stilicon, Alaricus
overcome of Stilicon.
who for courage and pollicye in war like affairs, had not his equal at
that time lyuinge. But continuinge in heart the conspiracye before mentioned,
who would never (although he might) utterly vanquishe Alaricus, for diverse
times he seemed not to regard his doings, and suffered to march through the
country without resistance, or endamaginge his people. Whereby Alaricus very
well comprehended yt Stilicon was not very willinge to conquer him: for as
some write, this war continued between them three years. At this time the
Alanes, ye Hunnes, the Vandales, and the Burgundions were entered the Emperial
territoryes, and iorneyed, making of war alonge the river of Rhene: this
enforced a new terror to possess the hearts of the people. But Alaricus
having understanding of their coming, sent unto Honorius, to desire a
peace or truce of him, and so much of the Realm of France, as would suffice
for him and his people to inhabit in, promisinge to defend that country from
the invasion of those Nations, he did also give him to understand, how
Stilicon proceeded craftelye by protractinge the war which he had against him,
and that he was the only Aucthor of mouinge of these new wars.

The Emperor upon this enformation, conceived great suspicion of treason in
Stilicon, (although when it was reported unto him long before, he would not
credit the same) and yet also for the present he did dissemble it, and made
peace with Alaricus, granted his demaundes, received of him hostages, and sent
him into France: whereby there seemed to ensue two great commodities, the one
was the peace and tranquillitye in Italye through his absence, and the other the
defense and safegarde of France: into which already were entered the
Vandales, the Alanes, and the Hunnes, of which Nations the number was esteemed
to be more then two hundredth thousand. The wickedness of Stilicon.
These presumptions of felicity were wholye disturbed and interrupted by the
treason of Stilicon: who although he accomplished that which was commanded him
by Honorius, as in permittinge Alaricus with the Goths, quietlye to enter into
their iourneye, with supplyinge unto his people all such necessaryes as were
needful for their voyage, according to thorder received of Honorius: Yet as
one that hated peace, and especially that Alaricus should go unto the defense
of France, he determined to destroy both him and his people. For as Alaricus
was iourneyinge peaceable toward France, (as was accorded) Stilicon priuilye
practiced with an Hebrewe Captain named Saul, which was in his army, that
he with his soldiers upon some feigned displeasure or peculiar quarrel,
should at Easter when the Goths were celebratinge, and lest mistrusted any
such mischief assault them at a sudden and slay as many as he might: by
which breach of peace he thought the war would revive again, which might
restore him unto his pristiuate dignity in government, which with the late
concluded peace began to decline. The Hebrew Captain at ye time appointed
brought to effect this priuye conspiracye, for he assaulted the Goths upon a
sudden, unto their great hurt and damage: but he presentlye received the
reward which his treason deserved, for they arminge themselves with great
speed, fought against him and slew him, The death of Saui.
with the most part of his soldiers.

Although his intent were as wicked or worse then theirs, yet he was better
able to conceyle it, as well by his wisdom, as also through his aucthority and
power. For besides yt he was ye ouerseer and governor of Honorius, he was also
twyse his father in Law: for Honorius had at yt instante unto wife. a daughter
of his, Stilicon.
and was before married unto an other of his daughters which dyed a maiden. This
Stilicon was a Va^dall, Of what country Stilicon was.
and being desirous in mind to create a son of his called Leucherius
Emperor, with his (although a wicked) circumspecte forsighte, did conceyle
his purpose unto a co^ueniente time: immagininge the best way to attain unto
his pretense, was to bring the Emperors into great troubles by wars, to
thend that he for his worthiness sheewed in such extremities, The animo^^ty and
strength of Stilicon.
might be accounted and reputed the only defense and safegarde of the Empire.
For he was of so stout a courage, and endued with such force, that he esteemed
himself sufficient to order and dispose all things at his own pleasure, and
knew that the necessitye which the Emperors should have of his service,
would be a very good entrance unto his attempt. Wherefore by many subtle,
secret and craftye devises, he provoked the Goths, the Alanes, the Vandales
and the Swyzers, with diverse other Nations to move war against ye Imperial
territories. Goths.
And after he had brought his resolution to this forwardnes, he appointed the
Goths (as men which knew the country very well) to go unto the conquest of
Italye, and that the Vandales, the Alanes, and ye Swyzers, should assail
France: and yet he decreed to take upon himself the defense of Italye,
supposinge that Honorius should be compelled for want of good Captains, in
proper parson to go unto the defense of France, where either he should be
slain or overcome, or at least brought into some extremity: So that he by
conqueringe the Goths in Italye, (which he judged very easy) might without
resistance become Lord of Rome, Traitors purpose one way, and God disposes
the contrary.
and having obtained the principal, he nothing doubted to attain unto the
segniorye of all the other members of the Empire. But these his determinations
had success contrary unto his expectation: For that treason became, not only
his own confusion, but also the ruin and destruction of the whole Empire. The
Goths move war in Hungarye and Austria.
For after Honorius and Arcadius had reigned viii. years, Stilicon and
Aurelian being chosen Consulles, the Goths began covertly to make war in
Hungarye and Austria, which war although in the beginning it seemed very
small, and little dangerous, yet wtin short space, their power and might grew
to be such, that they were dreaded of the whole world. For having with their
Captains Halaricus and Radagasius, The Goths
in such sort subdued all Thrace, Sclauoni and Hungary, that nothing was
there to be seen, but the earth and firmament, they marched into Italye, where
passinge the Apennine, they came unto the mountains Fiesole in Tuscanie:
Against whom for the defense of the Empire, went two valiant Captains called
Vldinus and Sara, Vldinus and Sara, Captains unto Honorius.
with a great army of Hunnes and Goths, Mercenary soldiers hired of
Honorius. Which Captains with their soldiers resisted valiantlye the power
of Rhadagasius, and cut of his passages, over the mountains, and also deprived
his army of victuels: by reason whereof, within very short space, the
mortalitye among the enemies became so great, that most part of the army
dyed by famyne, and Radagasius apprehended by Honorius, and put to death.
Rhadagasius.
When these events in this wise succeeded, Honorius made his abode in Rauenna,
which at that time was the principal City, Rauenna.
and his brother in Constantinople: From whence Alaricus with this displeasure
was greatly moved to wrath, and marched to fight with Stilicones army: of
whom Stilicon feigned to have great fear, and sent to the Emperor for aid:
who not ignoraunte of that which was happened through Saul the Jew (although
Stilicon supposed his pretense to be unknown) sent priuelye certain
soldiers into the hoaste, Saul.
and gave them in charge, that at some convenient time they should slay
Stilicon and his sons: The death of Stilicon.
this commandment was presentlye executed, and the cause thereof was
afterward openly published to the whole army.

But although the Emperor in extirpatinge the seditious race, wrought very
wyselye, yet he omitted to institute for governor over his host such a
Captain, as was sufficient unto so great a charge, and that might remove
king Alaricus, from creditinge that this breach of truce was committed with
Honorius consent. For Alaricus provoked by his iniurye, The enterprise of
Alaricus against Rome.
or rather saying the time and opportunitye to serve well for his purpose,
marched with his whole army toward Rome, the head and Emperyce at that
present of the whole world, vsinge as he iourneyed extreme crueltye,
committinge all things unto fire and sword, and in the end besieged the City
after it was first builte, a Thousand and six hundredth years. The Romans
prepared them unto the defense of their Cittye so valiantlye, Rome besieged.ii.
years.
that the siege continued two years: duringe which time it was kept so
straight, that the mortalitye of the inhabitants became maruailous, for there
were very few, but either they were slain, or taken prisoners. Finally the
famyne among the people was so persinge, A great famine in Rome which
enforced ye mother to eat her own child.
that they were constrained to eat one another, yea the mother enforced to
feed of her suckinge infant, which she had a little before brought out of her
own bellye. And in conclusion the City was taken by Alaricus (as some
Aucthors affirm) through treason, but as other write by force of arms, and
in such wise spoiled, that all things found there in, Rome won and
destroyed by ye goths.
were committed to the sword and fire: except only the Churches, and the
people which for their safegarde had fled into the same. Honorius the Emperor,
notwithstanding this war, made his abode in the City of Rauenna: Who after
he understood that Rome was taken, was stricken with no small terror and fear
of loosinge the whole Empire.

This was the first time that Rome was won, The first time that Rome was
won.
by any barbarous Nation, after it became of any force or might. After the
sackinge of the City, Alaricus departed from thence, and sailed toward
Cicilia, but there arose so great a tempeste upon the sea, that he was
enforced to return unto the coasts of Italye, The death at Alaricus.
where he became sick, and dyed in a City called Coseuza. After whose death
the Goths created king Ataulfus, who was married at the expugnation of Rome
unto Placidia, the daughter of Theodosius ye late Emperor, at whose request
he abstayned from the utter subuertion of Rome, and concluded a peace with
Honorius, and departed out of Italy into Spain, where he made his abode in a
City called Barcellona. While these things proceeded in this manner in Italye,
Arcadius Emperor of the East, made his abode in the City of Constantinople,
where he lived continuallye in peace, and governed with little disturbance: For
there are no writers that make mention of any wars, that might have procured
the contrary. The death of Arcadius.
This Emperor after he had governed, and ruled the Empire of the East xiii.
years, dyed in the said City, leauinge behind him a son called
Theodosius, whom he committed to be brought up, unto ye king of Persia and
Parthia, Hisdig^rdus.
called Hisdigardus, which was at that instante, confederat and friend to the
Empire. After the king of Persia understood the decree of Arcadius, he very
willinglye accepted the gouernmente and charge of the young Emperor, and sent
presentlye unto Constantinople for him, Antioch^^
by a valiant Captain of his named Antiochus, who afterward together with
Honorius, governed the whole Empire with great fidelitye and much honor,
conseruinge the same in peace and justice, until that Theodosius the son o^
Arcadius, was grown unto years apt to bear rule.

After the death therefore of Arcadius, That which happened after the death
of Arcadius.
the titles of Emperors remained only unto Honorius, and Theodosius his
nephewe, But the West Empire was now brought unto a maruaylous confusion,
through the Goths, the Vandales, and other Nations, Goths.
who proceeded conquering the provinces of the same, Vandales.
for that the Emperor Honorius was not careful in leuyinge some sufficient
army, that might resist their barbarous invasions, but continued his abode in
the City of Rauenna. Also in England one of the chiefeste barrons of ye
Islande called Gratian, Gratian.
rebelled and took upon him the title and name of Emperor, with the consent
of certain of ye commons of the Country, but his rashness had evil success,
for within a few days after, he was slain by his own soldiers. After
whose death they created an other of the soldiers Emperor called
Co^stantinus, Constantius chosen Emperor of the soldiers.
a man of greater courage and strength then Gratian was: he removed his whole
army out of England, and went into France, mindinge to bear segniorye over
the same. And therefore presentlye he procured peace with the Vandales, the
Swyzers, and the Alanes, who departed out of that country toward Spain, the
Burgundions remayninge in that place, which now is named Burgundy.
Constantinus associated in league with him, a great number of Frenchemen,
whereby he became so puisante and of such force, that he minded to make
himself Lord over Spain, and so to prevent those barbarous Nations, of their
purposed habitacions. Upon which resolution, diverse Captains with sundry
bands of soldiers, to possess the same, unto whom a great number of
Spaniards yielded, reputinge it less dangerous to obey unto them, then unto
those which were to come: But two noble, rich and mighty gentlemen of Spain,
refused to yield unto either part, who (as Paulus Diaconus affirms) were
called Didimus and Verodianus, The loyaltye of Didimus and Verodianus.
borne in Valencia: these resisted the usurpations, and determined to expel
the tyrants from their countries. Whereupon at their own, and at their
kinsefolkes proper coasts and charges, with the aid of their friends, they
went unto the mountains Perinei, to defend the passage over ye same: not
only against Constantinus the usurper, but also against all those Nations
before mentioned, endeuoringe to maintain and keep Spain in the continual
obedience, and devotion of their Emperor Honorius, which they did a long
season, although with great travail, marvelous slaughters and extreme
dangers. Wherewith Constantinus was greatly offended (being as he thought)
not a little injured, and therevppon elected certain of the most expert, and
valiante soldiers that he had, to go against them, over whom he appointed
Captain Constantius his son: Constantius.
Who was of such force, and so well experienced in martial feats, that in
the end he overcame the two brothers, and entered into Spain. The which
after the people of Constantius had with great tyranny spoiled, and with most
cruel war over ru^ne the country, they marched toward the mountains
Perinei, from whence they expelled the Spaniardes, which were appointed for the
defense of those hills, and took upon themselves the custodye, unto which
they were very sufficient: and Constantius went into France unto a city
called Arli, where he found his father. After whose departure, they which
kept the passages, made a contracte with the Vandales and other Nations, and
for money soulde unto them the same, permittinge the Vandales, the Swyzers,
and the Alanes, to pass through the country, who so wasted and spoiled all
Spain, that sufficientlye it cannot be resighted or expressed, especially
those places adioyninge near unto the mountains, because there they were
most resisted. After they had exercised their barbarous crueltye in the
country, they went unto the Cittye of Valentia which they utterly destroyed:
Valentia.
then they marched unto the City of Astorga, into which they entered by
force of arms, and so procedinge without resista^ce, they greatly endamaged
Galatia. From whence coastinge over Castile, Toledo a famous City.
they came to Toledo, which City either through the fortitude of the
situation, or valiantnes of ye inhabitants, they could not conquer:
(although they continued the siege many days) but were constrained to depart
unto the reproach and shame of themselves, and the great honor of that noble
City, Toledo*
which for experience in warrefare and martial pollicye, has always been
reputed very famous: with this example, a great number of Spaniards remained
faithful unto the Emperor Honorius, although he never sent thither either
Captain or aid. These Nations did very much endamage the valleye of Toledo,
and so marched forward alonge ye river of Tagus, Tagus.
until they came unto the City of Lisbone, Lisbone.
which at that time was one of the worthyest, and most famous Cities in
Europe, the which they assaulted, but it was so valiantlye defended of the
Citizens, that they were not able to make any entrye: and therefore were
content to co^pounde with them for a certain su^me of money, and so to raise
their siege, then they returned that way by which they came, making war in
diverse places. At which time the country being oppressed with famyne, (as
Osorius affirms) they were constrained to lay a part their weapons, and give
themselves to till the ground, so that being now become as it were
Citizens, they divided the conquestes among the Captains, and kings, of the
Vandales, Alanes, and Swizers. These troubles chaunsed in this wise, (as ye
have hard) when Athaulfus, and the Goths kept Narbone and Barcellona, who
together were confederates and friends with Honorius, Constantine.
and when Constantine the tyrant with his children did possess the greatest
part of France. The young Emperor Theodosius being at that instant a child,
was nourished in Constantinople under the protection of the king of Persia,
and Antiochus his Captain, of whose royal parson, Anthemius.
and court, was gouernoure a very virtuous and wise man called Anthemius: who
brought up the young Prince in study of good letters, in such sort that he
proved virtuous, religious, and a good Christian.

Honorius his uncle who made his abode in Rauenna, (...) in a Prince.
began now to make preparation for the deliuerye of the Empire of the Weste
from the yoke of tyrants, and barbarous Nations, as was that of the East. For
he elected an army of soldiers, and appointed general over the same, a
singular and valiant gentleman named Constantius, who of long continuance had
been an Earl and citizen of Rome, and was des^ended from an ancient
parentage. This worthy Captain with a Romans heart and courage, having a
practiced and chosen hoaste entered France, where he overcame and put to
flight the mighty tyrante Constantine, The death of Constantine the tyrante and
others.
and after besieged him in Arli, and in the end took him, and put him to
death. This enterprise had such good success, that within few days after the
death of Constantine was certainlye known, Co^stantius his son whom he had
created Caesar, was slain at Vienna in France by one of his Captains, called
Gerontius: Gerontius.
and the same Gerontius, (who also endeavored to become a tyrante, Ambition
makes traitors.
and minded to create Emperor, a friend of his named Massimus) was likewise
slain by the soldiers, which had rebelled in England with Constantine, and
now were willinge to return unto the service of Honorius.

After the death of Gerontius, they spoiled Massimus of his Imperial tytles
and dignities, and sent him to inhabit Spain. In this manner as you have
hard, France was recovered by the virtue of this excellent Captain
Constantius, and ye army of the rebels with all devotion and humility,
returned unto their true Emperor Honorius: and sent certain captains into
England to recover that again, which from ye beginning of Constantines
tyranny had disobeyed, England.
but now peaceable yielded unto the Emperor. Constantius the general Captain
for the Emperor (as you have hard) was now become very puisant and mighty:
when Athaulfus king of the Goths who remained in Barcellona, and was Lord
over the Country adioyninge thereunto, that had also at the request of
Placidia his wife, ye sister of Honorius, continued in peace iii. years: began
greatly to fear the might and power of Honorius, and of his Captain
Constantius, who (as he understood) had fortifyed the A^pes in such sort, that
he might not again invade Italye, Wherefore he determined to create himself
Lord and king over all Spain. And to put it in practice, he persuaded a
certain Romayne Captain named Atalus, to take upon him the title of
Emperor, and to collect an army promisinge that he would aid him unto the
segniorye of Andalosia, together with the greatest part of Affricke, and also
would make war for him. Which offer Atalus with little foresight, and less
discretion accepted and presently sent into Affricke his hoaste with governors
to rule the country, as if he had already been Emperor and in quiet
possession, and after began with cruel war to invade Spain. Heraclian the
Captain of Honorius.
Against whom Honorius sent a valiante Captain named Heraclian: who drove out
of Affricke the governors of Atalus, and leauinge it in peaceable quietness,
went with his army to encounter with Atalus, whom he overcame in battle
upon the sea: And he flyinge into Spain was apprehended by the Spaniards, and
was sent into France unto Constantius the general for the Emperor, Atalus.
he presently sent him unto Honorius, who caused one of his hands to be cut
from his arm, and then sent him in exile unto Lipari, an Islande near unto
Cicilia. And after preferred Heraclian for the victory which he had obtained
unto the dignitye of Consul, With prosperity grows pride.
and gave unto him the government of Affricke, whereby (as most commonly we
see, that with the increase of felicitye grows pride and ambition in men's
hearts, which draws them out of the right pathe or way in ye which
adversity or mean estate, keeps them in) even so this Heraclian saying
himself now to be come mighty and of great power, Ambition forgets duty.
determined to usurp unto himself the Empire. And being already as it were
Lord of Affricke (as Osorius writes) he admitted for friend and companion in
the Empire (or to say more truly) for a fellow Captain with him in his
rebellion, one named Sabinus, a very subtle person and of great courage, whom
he sent into Italy against Honorius, and to co^quere ye country so huge a Nauye
of ships, as the like was never read of. For as ye same Osorius affirms
(if in the co^putacio^ no error be committed) there were of Vessels of great
and small.iiii. thousand lxx. Which without doubt was the greatest Nauye, that
ever passed the sea: For it was never read that Xerxes or Alexander had so
great a number. With this Nauye, being furnished with soldiers and all
necessaryes thereunto belonginge, he arrived upon the coasts of Italye and
there landed his soldiers, to march toward Rome, who although they were
many, yet were they not so expert and well practiced, as the Romans were,
which in very good order expected their arrival, being conducted by an
excellent Captain called Marinus, Marinus.
who had the title and name of a Countye. This Captain kept his soldiers in
very good order, and determined rather to dye, (if he might not overcome) then
to be besieged as other had been of Alaricus. Heraclian that thought to
terrifye the whole world with his fame, and with his multitude of ships and
soldiers, and supposed that he should find no power that was able to resist
his: became stricken with such fear, when he saw his army upon the sea
discomfited, The flyinge away of Heraclian.
that without abiding the battle, he returned back, flyinge away by sea in
a Gally, and so came with shame into Affricke, from whence he departed with so
great an army. But immediatlye after his return, his cowardlines being
understood, the ordinarye soldiers murmered at it, The death of Heraclian.
and slew him: And Sabinus his son in Law and companion (to escape the
danger of death) sailed unto Constantinople, and there beseched the young
Emperor Theodosius, to obtain for his offense of his uncle pardon. Whereupon
Theodosius sent him unto Honorius, Sabinus banished.
who at his request was content to grant him life, notwithstanding he
condemned him unto perpetual exile. In this wise as you have hard, The end
of all rebels.
all the tyrants and rebels, were by Honorius confounded and destroyed: Who
now knowinge himself to be wholly delivered from Domestical enemies, and also
the greatest part of his provinces, to remain toward him both in peace and
obedience, determined to expel from the Cities of Spain, France and
Narbone, the barbarous Nations which did possess the same, and accounted it
most expediente to begin with the Goths, The Goths came out of Scithia and
Russia, and yet possessed Spain.
who were the mightiest, and best practiced in feats of arms, and inhabited
y^ part of Spain aforesaid, nothing doubtinge but if that they were expulsed,
he might with very great facilitye expel all other.

Athaulfus their king, as one who loved his wife Placidia most entierelye,
greatly desired to have peace with Honorius, and did procure it by all means
possible: which being known, The death of Athaulfus.
and perceived of his soldiers (who desired the contrary) was the cause that
presentlye they slew him.

After whose death they elected for their king a stout Captain of their
own country, Segericus chosen king of the Goths was also presentlye slain
by them.
named Segericus: And because they suspected ye like of him, as they did of
Athaulfus, (which was most true, that he desired to have peace with Honorius)
they sieve him also. After the murtheringe of the two kings, they created king
one Vualius, not doubtinge but that he would be a mortal enemy unto the
Romans, with who^ they desired always to have wars: they retained as yet in
their custodye Placidia the sister of Honorius, wydowe unto Athaulfus, whom
they used very honorably, and with all respects of honestye. Vualius
created king of ye Goths.
Vualius taking upon him the gouernmente, was very loathe, (as one that did
account it neither profitable or necessary) to war with Honorius, but being
terrifyed with the death of the late.ii. kings his predecessors, as also to
content his people, assembled an huge army of soldiers, and sent them to
conquer Affricke, which at that time was in peace and obeyed unto Honorius.
But God in the voyage wroughte miraculouslye for the Emperor, by sending
among them as they sailed such a terrible tempest, The power of God.
that the whole Nauye was almost destroyed. Which mishappe with the
understanding of Constantius) Honorius Captains) coming against them, they
did greatly assuage the fiercenes of the Goths: whereupon Vualius used such
pollicye with them, that willinglye and requested there unto by them, he
concluded a peace with Honorius, which was upon this condition: Peace made
between Vualius and Honorius.
That Placidia should be restored unto Honorius, and Vualius with his
soldiers, should faythfullye aid and assiste the County Constantius Captain
unto Honorius, to expel out of Spain the Vandales, the Swyzers, and the
Alanes, which then had in their possession the greatest parteof the country.
The accord being finished Vualius gave good assurance and hostages, and
Placidia was restored: whom afterward Honorius gave for wife unto Constantius,
Constantius created Caesar and successor unto Honorius.
in recompense of the manifold and great victories which he had atchiued, and
obtained in his behalf, and created him Caesar, and pronounsinge him his
successor. Immediatlye after this, Constantius and Vualius the king of the
Goths, began their war in Spain against the barbarous Nations, as
hereafter shall be sheewed. While these things as you have hard of were a doing,
the barbarous people were become Lords of diverse parts of Spain, and the
Vandales had gotten into their Segniory a great part of Bethica, From when^
Bethica took the name Va^dalosia and after Andalosia.
which of them was named Vandalosia, and after was called Andalosia. The Alanes
and Swyzers occupied Merida, and a great part of Lucitania, which at this
present is part of Portingale, and in Galitia, and in the kingdom of Lions,
they possessed also many great provinces, and had among themselves, divided
the countries by lottes. Constantius the Emperors Captain, being arrived in
Spain, and with him the Goths did presentlye after his arrival, enter into
battle against the Alanes, The victory of Constantius.
which inhabited near unto the city of Merida, with whom he fought a most
cruel and terrible conflicte, in which the Alanes were vanquished, and the
king who was called Acall slain. This victory of Co^stantius so feared all
the other Nations, that presently with all submission and humillitye, they
requested peace of him, and sent to entreat and beseech him, that he would
grant them truce, and limit unto them some one place in Spain, where they
might inhabit and live. While these affairs had this prosperous success in
Spain, Honorius went unto Constantinople, to visit the estates of the East,
where ye child Theodosius his nephew governed: who now was growe^ unto years
of discression, and free from the government of tutors. And it chanced that
while he made his abode there, being far from Italye, and Constantius also
occupied with the wars of Spain, Tertallus a Roman.
that a certain noble and mighty Romayne named Tertallus, of a very aunciente
familye, being assisted with a great number of the people of Rome and Italye,
rebelled and took on him the title of Emperor, and began to invade ye Empire
with a great number of soldiers: but the friend and allies of Honorius came
in battle against him, where he was both overcome and slain. After whose
death, Atalus.
audacity and disloyaltye began to inflame men's hearts, that an other named
Atalus did as the other had done, naminge himself Emperor, also he leuyed a
great number of people through out all Italye: which riote being understood of
Constantius in Spain, where he made his abode, after the aforesaid victory,
enforced him to mynister great hope unto the Alanes, Swyzers, and Vandales,
that he would yield unto their desired peace: for (some thing to acquiet the^)
he published that he would go into Italy to debate thereof with Honorius,
whereupon he departed out of Spain, and came into Italye, whither also the
Emperor was come, for that he had intelligence of the troubles of Italye in
Constantinople. The arriualles of Honorius and Constantius being known of in
Rome, the common people arose in great fury, Atalus taken.
and apprehended the tyrant Atalus and sent him to Honorius in Rauenna, where
was also at that instante Constantius with his wife Placidia: and there by the
commandment of Honorius, Atalus was bereiued of one of his hands, and then
sent in exile unto Constantinople. This without question was a marvelous
example of clemency in Honorius, who remayninge in Rauenna, where Constantius
Caesar his kinseman continued, after he had with sage advise considered and
pondered, the noble acts and great exploytes which he had achieved,
Constantius created of Honorius Caesar and companion with him in the weste
Empire.
and how beneficial he had been unto the Imperial estate, caused him to be
called Caesar Augustus, and his companion in the Empire of the West, which was
done at a very solemn feast, with a long Oration pronounced in the
commendation of his honor. There the two Emperors with mutual consent, to
retain in their service Vualius the king of the Goths, did geeue and
establishe unto his people the City of Tolosa, which is in the kingedome of
France, with all the province adioyninge unto the same, Aquitaine now called
Guasconye.
called Aquitanie, which they named Vasconia, and now is called Guasconie. The
feasts of the coronation of Constantius being expyred, Honorius went to
Rome, to pacifye the tumultes which raged in that City, and Constantius the
new Emperor determined to return into Spain, to end ye war which he had
begun: which he would with much honor and great renown have finished, if
death had not prevented the noble pretense of this most worthy Captain, and
valiante Emperor yt he had delivered Spain, What it is to leese a noble
Captain.
from the invasion of foreign Nations. His death was unto Honorius a just
cause of extreme grief and sorrow: who to supplye his room instituted for
Captain to go into Spain, Etius elected captain of Honorius for Spain.
a famous gentleman both valiant and active, whose name was Etius: he without
protractinge of time, took the hoaste which Constantius had collected, and
marched toward Spain: where presentlye after his arrival, he conceived
displeasure against ye Alanes, for that they had not elected to govern them a
king, since they were overcome by Constantius, but were associated, and
confederate with the Swyzers which governed the country of Lisborne. But
after they had perfect understanding of ye death of Constantius, they
returned unto Merida, recoueringe again their pristinate courages, and
forthwyth began to move war against the Cittyes which remained faithful
unto the Empire. When Etius parceyued that these Nations with one con^ent were
coming against him, and knowinge his hoaste not of force to encounter with
them, refrayned certain days from geuinge of battle, to the end he might
thereby increase his army, and deminishe that of his enemies, but his policy
(without just cause) was of Honorius accounted a cowardly part, and therefore
he sent to receive his charge the Countye Castinus, Castinus.
whom he ordained his Captain and successor. Castinus saying the affairs of
Spain to be very dangerous and ruinous, allowed the counsel of Etius, and
in like manner protracted the war, until Bonifacius who was governor of
Affricke, came to aid and ^uccour him with an expert hoaste of soldiers, and
then these two armies being joined in one, they began the war, and
obtained sundry notable victoryes against the Barbarians, and proceed so
prosperouslye, that it was supposed for certaintye, that they would within
short space have delivered Spain from those foreign Nations: Contention
between Boniface and Castinus for superioritye.
if through the contencion which arose between those two valiante Captains for
superiority, there had not followed this inconvenience, that Bonifacius
returned unto his government in Africa (as Prosper and Paulus Diaconus
affirm) whose departure, did greatly dimynishe and bring to ruin a great
part of the Roman estates in Spain. At such time as these things proceeded
in this wise in ye West, Theodosius nephewe unto Honorius and Emperor of the
East, being (as is said) delivered from tutors, and come unto the years of
bearinge rule: Discord between Theodostus and Barrobanus.
was in great displeasure with Barrobanus the king of Persia, and successor of
Isdegeron, because he had requested and admonished him to desiste from
persecutinge the Christians, which did inhabit his countries: For Barrobanus
would not yield unto his demand, but rather persecuted them the more, which
tyranny enforced Theodosius to send an army into those parts, with a
singular captain to govern the same called Ardaburus: Who presentlye came to
battle with Narsius, ye general captain over the Persians, and made of them
very great slaughters, then he iuuaded the whole country, maruelouslye
wastinge and spoylinge the same. The victory of the Christians against the
Persians and Saracines.
Also Theodosius sent at that instant an other Captain, with an army against
Alamander the king of Saracines, who gave unto him a marvelous overthrow, so
that he himselselfe escaped with much difficultye out of the battle.
Moreover an other Captain of ye Romans called Arcobiada, overcame in
battle ye Persians in such sort, that the honor of the Romans excedinglye
increased, and the Persians were enforced to desiste from persecutinge the
Christians. The death of Honorius.
At this time dyed Honorius, after he had reigned and governed the Empire
xxviii. years, for he governed two years before his father dyed, and xiii.
years together with his brother Arcadius, and xiii. years after his brothers
death. He left behind him no children, for by his two wives the daughters of
Stilicone he had no issue: a little before he dyed there arose a discord
between him and his sister Placidia, so that he went to Constantinople unto the
Emperor Theodosius her nephewe, with her two sons which she had by
Constantius, whose names were Honorius, and Valentinianus who afterward was
Emperor. Honorius dyed after the incarnation of Christ.4. hundred and xxvii.
years.

Theodosius the second of that name*


MAruailous have been the affairs of the empire, their wars as well prosperous
as unfortunate, which have continued in ye Empire by the space of those.400.
years (or there aboutes) of which we have entreated, as the reader may with
small travail easelye comprehend.

And although the Empire at sondrye times, has been greatly afflicted and
oppressed, and in danger of utter ruin, yet in the end hither unto it has been
delivered from aduersitye, and recovered her pristinate dignitye and forces.
The declin^g of the empire in the secret counsel of God.
But from this time forward (through the secret judgment of God) ye affairs
of thempyre proceeded not in such order, but rather continually decreased and
did loose their forces. Albeit at sondrye times through the worthiness of some
valiante Emperors and Captains, she recovered her pristinate majesty, and
was both honored and feared, yet she cold never attain unto her ancient
dignitye: for that the same happened very sildome. But from this present
forwards, at diverse times by sundry accidents, themperours have lost both
provinces and Regions, so that in those have begun particular kingdoms and
estates, and by the strength which the Empire lost, were made other great and
mighty kingdoms, and as their power and Dominions increased, so the euentes
and chances which happened were greater: which I cannot rehearse, neither if I
might will do it, for that my intent neither was, nor is to describe a general
Chronicle, The intent of the Aucthor.
but only the lives of the Emperors, as succintlye as I may. Wherefore with
that breuity which I may well use, I will proceed in this my enterprise,
writing only the things of importance in the Historyes of the Emperors:
And that I may very restrictly finishe my storye, omitting those of other
kings and kingdoms, which in this discourse shall occur unto me, unto other
which have, and do take upon them a longer treatise. For to prosecute fullye
the estate of all Princes, the estate of Religion, the faule of the mighty
prelates, the ambitious purposes against God and their Princes, would rise to
an huge and mighty Volume.

Honorius being dead, the government of the whole Empire remained only unto
Theodosins his nephewe, who at that instant made his abode in Constantinople.
This Emperor perceiving that many tumultes endeavored to usurp the Empire of
the West, and also that the tumultes of ye barbarous Nations excedinglye
increased, created Caesar for those provinces being but a child, Valentinian
being but a child was made Caesar.
his cosyn Valentinian the son of Placidia, sister unto the Emperors
Honorius and Arcadius, and wife unto the excellent Captain and Emperor
Constantius, by whose wisdom and pollicye, the Empire was so well governed,
with the overthrow of many puisant tyrants: that not long after the recouerye
of Italye, ye young Caesar was by the consent of Theodosius, and of the people
created Emperor. As long as these two Emperors lived, there were
continuallye such grievous and bloudye wars, kept by the barbarous Nations, as
of the Hunnes, Goths, Vandales, and other strange Nations, that the whole
world was vexed and boiled in most cruel slaughters, but that which was kept
by a people of Germany called Fra^chi, From whence the Frenchemen disce^ded.
who took their name (as some affirm) of the Cittye Fra^conia, excelled all
the other, for they perceyuinge, that the Imperial Captains were busyed in
the wars against ye Burgundions and Goths, and that the Emperor
Valentinian had his host discomfited in Affricke, by a tyrant called
Bonifacius, and also that his cosyn Theodosius was occupied with thaffayres of
the East, determined to invade France, from whence not long before in the
time of the Emperors Honorius and Arcadius, they were expelled by the
Vandales, Alanes, and Sueuians, and also by a Romayne Captain named Etius. But
now with the help of the time being become mighty, they entered into the
provinces of Sennoni, Aureliesi, and of Paris, of all which in short space
they became patrones, The first king of France.
having unto their Captain Faramund the son of Marcamund, who was the first
king of the Frenchemen, unto whom succeeded Clodius who also was their king:
So that in process of time their power grew to be such, that Gallia was called
of them France, and at this day their king is called the king of France.
From whence the Frenchmen had beginning.
Of this Nation of the French men, certain French Historyes rehearse diverse
fables, saying that they descended from the Troyans, and from a son of
Hectors called Francus, from whom they derive their name. Other affirm that
they obtained this name by certain Fraunchesse (that is, privileges and
immunites) which they had in the time of Valentinian the first: All which are
both feigned and untrue, For Hector had never any such son, neither do they
descend from the Troyans, neither is there found any mention of more
Antiquitye to be made of these Frenchmen, The beginning of the Frenchmen.
then from the time of Aurelian the emperor, who overcome them in the year after
thincarnation of Christ 270. or there aboutes, The year of Christ. 270.
neither did they obtain this name in the time of Valentinian, for he was
long after, and they (as I have said) were so called two hundredth years
before. Notwithstanding, at that present, there were certain unknown
Nations, of whom neither Caesar, Strabo, Plinni, Cornelius Tacitus, Pomponius
Mela, nor Ptolomie, ever made any mention, because then they had no names, nor
were not known. For if it had been otherwise, some one, yea the greater part
of these writers, would have left some memory of them: When the Frenchmen
came into knowledge.
Let this suffice therefore that the Frenchemen came into knowledge, in the
time of Aurelian or there aboutes. It is also to be considered yt those kings
which in these days reign in France, have no right or interest thereunto,
nor do not descend from that stirpe or familye, for the house of ye kings of
France has had diverse alterations. The first, in the year of our savior
Christ. 750. The year of Christ. 750.
when king Childericke was deprived by Zachary ye Pope, after the kingdom
had been governed by the Frankes.330. years: Childericke.
then was elected Pipin the father of Charlemaine, Pipinus.
a German borne, so that then the Frankes lost the ryall Scepter, which
continued unto the descendentes of Pippin 238. years, which was in the year of
our Savior 990. Capuccio.
Then a mighty barron of France named John Capuccio obtained the kingdom,
unto whose successors it remained, until yt for want of heirs males, it
descended lawfullye by marriage unto the kings of England, which title our
most gracious sovereign Lady the Queens most excellent majesty enjoys at
this present, and in this accord, agree all good and true aucthors.

But to return unto the Historye, I say that the Frenchmen entered the
provinces with such force, that in all their attempes, they obtained most
prosperous success. But the Empire of Theodosius in the East continued in
great quietness and tranquillitye, in respect of that of the Weste, which was
always afflicted with most cruel and tumultuous invasions of the barbarous
Nations, for the resisting of whose furyes Theodosius sent continuallye
Captains and soldiers into Italy. Whereupon Atlas the king of the Goths,
supposing the Empire of Constantinople vnfornished of Captains and soldiers
to defend the same, (not content with the conqueste of Hungarye and many
Cities in Germanye) determined also upon that occasion to assault that
Empire. So that Theodosius was enforced to send for those Legions which he had
sent unto Cicilia for to aid Valentinian, to defend his Countries and
provinces from the invasions of so mighty an enemy, who had in his aid and
favor the Turlinges, Tungries, Ostrogothes, and Marcomanes, with diverse other
Nations of the North, which most like unto swarms of Bees repaired dailye unto
Atlas from all parts, who prepared himself to invade the Empire of
Constantinople, but by reason of a suspicion which arose between him and his
brother Beda, and of certain controversies among those kings which they
conducted with them, ye war proceeded not with such violence as it did
before, although they desisted not from spoylinge the whole country as they
marched. While these troubles continued in this wise in France, Italye,
Spain, Cicilie, Germanye, and Constantinople: Scotts
the Scotts and Redshankes, or Pictes, most fiercelye invaded England, which
at that time was called Britannye. Whereupon the Romans which at that
instante governed the Islande (dispayringe of all aid at the Emperors hands)
allured with promises and great sums of money to assist them, Angli, were
Saxons which were called of the Romans unto their aid.
the Saxons called Angli, a noble people of Germany, bordering upon the sea
coast. These invited with money, and with the fertilitye of the country,
sailed with their king Ingist into Britannye, where with the aid of ye
inhabita^tes, they both subdued and overcame their enemies. But afterward
ambition so reigned in their hearts, that they did in the Islande, as the
Vandeles had done in Affricke, for within short space they became patrones of
the whole country, and over came the inhabitants, in such wise that they in
the time of Augustus ye Emperor, drove them into France, where they remained
in that part, which through their coming at this present is called
Britannye. In this wise the Empire lost that Islande, Britannye called of the
Angli, Anglia, or England.
and the kingdom thereof remained unto the Saxons who altered ye name of
Britannye, and called it Anglia or England, which name as yet continues,
although there have been in y^ same diverse alterations, with infinite wars
and troubles. Of all which: besides Beda, Polidor Virg. a diligent writer of
the affairs of England.
with diverse other Historiographers, Polidorus Virgilius, ye most diligent
Chronicler of our time, has written a noble and famous Historye. While
Theodosius was seriouslye busied at Constantinople, in leuyinge of soldiers
against Atlas, he was stryken with the pestilence, whereof he dyed within few
days, after he had governed the Empire xlii. years, The death of Theodosius.
whose death was unto the whole Empire occasion of much grief and sorrow,
for he was a merciful, virtuous, and a most Christian Prince, finallye there
wanted no virtue in him, that was requisite in a most worthy Emperor, for he
was endued with all goodness, and void of all vice. The year of Christ.450.
He dyed in the year after the incarnation of our Savior Christ.450.

In his time began the heresye of the Nestorians, The heresye of the
Nestorians.
which was introducted by Nestor the heretic, bishop of Constantinople, who
judged most peruerslye of the deuinity of Jesus Christ, both God and man, the
redeemer of mankind. This heresye by a general counsel held at Ephesus of
200. bishops, in the time of Pope Celestine, was condemned together with
Nestor, who also was excommunicated: One of the chief of this counsel,
Cirill:
was saint Cirill bishop of Alexandria, a most learned doctor in Diuinitye,
as his works at this present most manifestlye declare. Chrysostom and other
flourished at this time.
Also at this instante flourished S. Chrysostom, Cassian the heremite his
Disciple, who wrote a most holy and learned Epistle against Nestor. There
flourished also Sozomen, Socrates and Theodoret, with diverse other most learned
Deuines *

Valentinian the second of that name.


AFter the death of Theodosius, the whole Empire remained only unto
Valentinian, who at that instant made his abode in the Weste, which was not
little afflicted with wars, and continual invasions of sundry nations. This
Emperor co^sideringe that the Empire of the East was incessantlye molested by
Atlas, married his sister Pulcheria unto a valiant and worthy ancient
Captain named Martian, whom he created Emperor and governor of the East:
Whereof after Atlas had understanding, he desisted from farther attemptinge
the conqueste of Constantinople, as a thing very difficulte, and of long
travail, and departed toward the West, mindinge to conquer France and
Italy. Against who^ Valentinian sent a worthy Captain named Etius, who
ordinarily was his general in France, having first, both he and the
Emperor Martian concluded a peace with Gensericke the king of the Vandales.
This Etius encombred Atlas very much, for with many overthrows which he
gave unto his soldiers, he made manifest proves of his excellencye in
martial affairs, and in the end he vanquished him in a notable battle* and
put him to flight. Which victory caused Valentinian to suspect that Etius
eudeuoured to create himself Emperor, and that he practiced secretelye with
Atlas for the same intent, since that in the former battle he had not
utterly destroyed his whole army* wherefore he caused him secretelye to be
slain, Etius murdered.
whose death was the occasion of the ruin of Italye, and of the Empire of the
Weste. For Atlas understanding of the death of Etius, returned into Atalye,
(the which at that instante was peaceable enjoyed of Valentinian) and assaulted
the same, which none of the Emperors endeavored to reskewe or succor, for that
they were unfurnished with such a sufficient army, as might resist the force
of their ennemies. Aquileia besieged.
Wherefore Atlas besieged the City of Aquileia, and continued the said siege
iii. years, before he won the town: and then after he had committed unto the
sword all that he found a live, Abuileia taken and utterly subverted by
Atlas.
he caused the City to be destroyed and made plain with the ground, not
permittinge to stand either house or place, that might serve for any
habitation: Although it was at that instante, the most noble, and the most
richest City (or the second) that was in the whole world. After the fierce
tyrante had destroyed Aquileia, in few days he conquered many other noble
Cities, as Mantua, Brescia, Cremona, and Bergama, and went unto the conquest
of Rauenna, which for that the Emperors kept there their Courts, was at that
instant accounted the most worthyest and famouste Cittye of Italye, it yielded
notwithstanding unto Atlas, without abydinge either battle or assault. From
thence he marched through Tuschanie, not mindinge to stay until he came to
Rome, with which Cittye he published yt he would deal with it, as he had done
with Aquileia. Pope Leo.
At that present was Pope, Leo the first of that name, who at the intercession
of Valentinian the Emperor, went against Atlas with many Senators, most
humblye besechinge him, that he would not destroy Rome, but pardon that
Cittye. Which duty of Leo was executed with such wisdom and eloquence, yea
it pleased God to form his words with such force, that although Atlas was
the most cruel and obstinate Prince that ever was portrayed or Chronicled, yet
he was with his Oration so overcome, that he did not only desiste and leave
his iourneyinge toward Rome, but also determined to abandon all Italye,
Eloquence of great force.
and to return unto his ancient seat in Hungary, having first received of
the Romans a great sum of money, for the acknowledginge of his Segniorye.
The estate of that Empire through the wickedness of the inhabitants, was in
such miserye and extremity, that they durst not deny unto Atlas that which he
demanded, but accounted it a most happy and fortunate euente, yt they
escaped with such facilitye, the danger of his cruel and tyrannical
determination. After Atlas was returned into Hungarye, he married Honoria the
sister of Valentinian, and at the feast of his marriage day, he ouercharged
himself with so much wine and meat, yt in the night his nature not being of
force to supporte so great a burden, The death of Atlas the tyrante.
there began to issue from him great abundance of blood, whereof he dyed in his
bed. Whose death began to restore liberty unto the Empire, although the
Weste part was in a manner utterly destroyed, whereby arose the greatness of the
Empire of the East and of Constantinople. The next year after the death of
Atlas, Valentinian was also slain, The death of Valentinian.
by a soldier named Transill: as well to revenge the death of his Captain
named Etius, as also being hired thereunto by one Maximus whose wife
Valentinian had enforced. He dyed after he had governed the Empire thirtene
years. In the year of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. 456.

Martianus.


IMmediatlye after Valentinian was murdered, (as Procopius and Paulus
Diaconus, with sondrye other Aucthors do affirm) Maximus a Citizen of Rome,
Maximus usurps the name of Emperor.
descended of a noble blood or familye, presently usurped the name of Emperor:
and became patron of the Cittye, and of all Italy.

Also to assure his usurpation, he practiced by diverse means and subtilties,
to take unto wife (although more by force the^ through love) Eudosia, which was
but a little before the wife of Valentinian, and daughter of Theodosius the
younger. Unto whom after he had her person in possession, thinkinge thereby to
purchase her favor, he discovered that he had caused her late husband
Valentinian to be slain, especially for that he was surprised and overcome
with the love of her beutye. That confession did little mittigate or assuage
the wrath of Eudosia, Murder.
but rather with such force augmented the Ire and hatred which she bare
toward him, that she determined by some mean or way to be revenged. And
supposinge that she might not from Constantinople, and from the Emperor
Martian have any aid, secretelye she wrote unto Genserick the king of ye
Vandales, Genserick ye king of the Vandales at the intercession of Eudosia
comes into Italye.
who reigned in Affricke: whom she most earnestly beseched, that he would
vouchsafe to deliver her out of the hands, and from the custodye of Maximus.
Genserick minded not to omit so present an occasion, for that he conceived he
might thereby, either become Lord over all Italye, or at the least thorowlye
ransancke and spoil the same. Wherefore employinge his whole force, he
assembled a mighty hoaste, and passed into Italye so puisant, (that most
Aucthors affirm) he conducted with him thirtye hundredth thousand soldiers:
The end of (...) murderer.
Against this great force of Genserick, Maximus was neither able, nor durst
make any resistance: although he assayed every way that might be immagined.
Wherefore being deprived of all hope, he fled toward Rome, but in his
journey he was slain by a valiante Captain named Orsus.

After Genserick was arrived in the consines of Italye, ye fear of him was
such in Rome, yt the most part of the noble men did fly and abandon the same.
The office of a true pastor.
But the devout and holy Pope Leo, foreseinge the great calamitye which was
imminente unto the poor Cittye, as a good sheep hard determined to hasarde
his life, for ye defense or safegarde of his weak flock. And hauiuge
intelligence of the extreme crueltye which Gensericke had used, toward the
bishops of Affricke, for that he was infected with the sect of the Arrians,
he went to meet with him before he came to Rome, and requested him with all
lowlines and sincere humilitye, The Pope humble in necessitye.
that for Christ's sake, he would mittigate or assuage the furye, and that he
would content himself with the pray of the substance, and riches of the
Romans, and leave untouched the ornaments of the whollye Temples. The cruel
tyrante (notwithstanding this intercession) went unto Rome, and entered the
same with his whole army, Ge^serick sacketh Rome.
spoylinge and sacking without difference, as well things sacred, as profane.
And after he had continued the spoil of the Cittye xiiii. days, he departed
from thence with infinite riches and prisoners, caryinge with him Eudosia and
her ii. daughters, whom afterward he led with him into Affricke. In such wise
was Rome, (the head of the whole world, and Empress over all Nations and
people) taken and sacked by the Vandales, having been once before (as is
rehearsed) spoiled by the Goths: A maruailous example, sufficient to instruct
all men of every condition and estate, that they ought to contempne and
account as nothing the dignityes, honors, promotions and Empyres of this
world. Naples.
From Rome he departed unto Naples and besieged the Cittye, but it was so
valiantly defended by the inhabitants, that he raised his siege and departed
into Affricke, laden with treasure and spoils: where he married one of the two
daughters of Valentinian, unto his son Trasimond who succeaded him in the
estate. This happened in the sixth year of the reign of Martian, and the
second after the death of Valentinian. After Genserick was departed out of
Italy, the principal Senators, and noble men of Rome, immediatlye returned
thither, and elected by common consent to be Emperor of Rome, Italy and
Sicilia, an ancient Roman both of blood and years named Auitus, Auitus a
Roman elected Emperor.
which election was approved and confirmed by the Emperor Martian: who
conceived an assured hope, that thereby ye Roman Empire should be maintained
and conserved in the present estate. But these presumptions or suppositions,
were wholye disturbed by the death of the Emperor Martian, The death of
Martian.
who was poisoned in Constantinople, by the treason and practices of Ardibure,
and of Aspar his father: which happened in the year of our Savior Christ.459.
After he had governed the Empire.7. years, being (as you have hard) a
virtuous and just Prince, The year of Christ.
who bath preserved and increased the Empire of the East.

Leo the first of that name.


AFter the death of Martian, certain tyrants which had been the occasion of
his death, endeavored by sondrye means to usurp the Empire, but their
pretenses not enioyinge or obtayninge any good or prosperous success, they
created Emperor Leo, a Gretian: Who in the beginning of his reign, Leo
chosen Emperor.
did so worthilye and brauelye behave himself, yt there was not one of his
most mighty enemies, which had the courage to rebel or move war against
him. But the Empire of the Weste, there were both in Italy and Cicilia,
marvelous alterations and changes of many Emperors, worthy to be compared
unto their auncitors, rather for their title and name, then for their
aucthoritye or continuance in the administration. The mighty and puisant
Genserick king of the Vandales, did not desiste from molestinge and spoylinge
the Cities of Italye and Cicilia, of which Island in the end he became
patron. In the first year of the reign of Leo, The death of Auitus.
Auitus dyed at Rome, where as is before mentioned) he ruled: after whose death
ye Roman army which remained about Rauenna, did elect and nominate Emperor a
worthy captain named Magioran, Magioran elected Emperor of Rome
unto which election consented also the Emperor Leo: He was very careful in
defendinge Italy from invasion of Genserick, and of other barbarous nations,
and made preparation to sail into Affricke, mindinge to recover the same, but
he cold not bring his enterprise unto any good end, for yt he was prevented
by death after he had been Emperor.iii. years and certain months, some
write that he dyed of a natural death, The death of Magioran.
other affirm yt he was slain by ye soldiers which created him Emperor.

In his place was chosen an other mighty Captain named Seuerianus, Seuerian
elected Emperor.
who gave unto ye Alanes a marvelous overthrow and slew in the conflicte
Berigus their king, after which victory he returned unto Rome where he
dyed, when he had governed the Empire.iiii. years. The death of Seuerian.
In exchange of whom was received and created Emperor, a noble Captain which
was sent by Leo into Italye, to succor and defend the same against the
Vandales, named Anthemius, a son in law unto Martian the Emperor the
antecessor of Leo. Anthemius elected Emperor.
But there arose presently against him, and usurped the name of Emperor, a
Captain named Geruandus, who was the President and governor of the province
of Narbone, which part only of all France remained in obedience, at that
instante unto ye Empire. But Anthemius vsinge expedition and diligence, sent
against him his Captains, who apprehended him, and condemned him unto
perpetual exile: and in his place to govern the province of Narbone,
Anthemius sent a singular friend of his named Belimer: The former rebellion was
scarcelye thorowlye appeased, when in Rome there arose an other mighty person
named Patritius, but he was with like facilitye overcome by Anthemius. While
these mutations and deaths of Emperors happened in this wise in Italye, the
Emperor Leo enjoyed quietly Greece and the whole East, with much honor and
worthiness: when the valiante Genserick king of Vandales and of Affricke,
saying the dailye calamities which happened in Italye, determined with that so
good an occasion, to make himself Lord over Italye, of whose riches he had
many times (to his great contentasion) most happily tasted of. Upon this
resolution therefore he assembled together as great an army as he might, both
of his Vandales and of the people of Affricke: Which being understood of the
Emperor Leo (who very well knew yt Anthemius, who governed in Italy was not
able to withstand Ge^serick) and that if his estate were overthrown, his
might not remain in securitye, especially Schiauonia which was near
adioyninge unto Italye, he determined therefore to prepare in all that he
might against Genserick, and to aid Anthemius, who at that instant was
seriouslye busied, in making of provision for the defense of Italye, and had
prepared a singular army of ships to fight with him upon the sea.

After Leo had leuyed as great an hoaste as he was able, both of valiaunte
Captains and courageous soldiers, Basiliscus ye Captain of Leo.
he ordained for general, a very noble man named Basiliscus, who was brother
unto the Empress his wife, and cousin unto Anthemius. He departed with a most
mighty army from Constantinople, and sailed with prosperous wind into Italye,
where he joined with the nauye of Anthemius, and so coasted to join with the
army of Genserick, who at that instant was saylinge with his nauye very near
unto the banks of Italye: So that the.ii. armies were come the one within the
conspect of the other, when Genserick perceyuinge that his enemies were more
active, and better practiced upon the sea then his soldiers were, began the
battle with fear, not hopinge of any victory, for he wittinge of the
disauauntage, determined to depart out of the battle, while the Gallyes were
busyed to fight, The overthrow of Genserick.
the one against the other: and in the end began so to do. Which after his
soldiers perceived, they altogether fled after him: being pursued and
chased by their enemies, and in this wise with the loss of his soldiers and
of many ships, he fled with shame and reproach into Affricke. Basiliscus
continued the chase, and landed not xx. miles from Carthage (and as Procopius
me^tioneth) if presentlye he had marched with his army unto Carthage, he might
without resistance have taken the same, and also for that Ge^serick should
have been enforced (as one banished and forsaken) to abandon the country, he
might have recovered the pristinate segniorye of the whole province: for on
the other part toward the East, a Captain named Hera^lius (who was sent by
Leo the Emperor) had conquered the Cittye of Aripolis, with diverse other
towns and fortresses thereunto adioyninge. Wherefore for the want of sage
advise, or for that Basiliscus was corrupted with some great su^me of money,
(as diverse affirm) he ceased the war, remayninge satisfied and content with
that victory: and from thence he sailed into Cicilia, mindinge to recover in
that Island, the Cities and towns which were possessed of Genserick. While
the Captains of the Emperor Leo were busied in these affairs, Aspar.
Aspar together with his son Ardibure, fearinge yt through ye great power of
Basiliscus, they might not in time to come attain unto their wished desire,
determined (as it were by rygor or co^pulsion) to enforce the Emperor to
create Ardibure, The words of Aspar unto the Emperor Leo.
Caesar as he promised when he was made Emperor.

Wherefore Asper (as one that was of great power and aucthoritye) at this
instante requested Leo with such stoutenes and vehemencye, that he would
perform and fulfill his promise, that he shaked his Imperial robe which he
did wear, and said: Leo, thou ought to discharge thy promise made unto
me: for this Vesture with which thou art adorned, An excellent saying.
ought not to harbor untruth. The Emperor answered, neither must it sustain,
that any man use toward it force or violence. Aspar by these words
conceyuinge the determination of the Emperor, determined by force of arms to
create his son Caesar, and began presentlye to leuye an army. Whereupon the
Emperor with all celeritye, sent for his Captain Basiliscus, willinge him,
(that all his other affairs set a part) he would with his whole army come
to succor him: Aspar overcome by Leo.
for before his landinge the Emperor was in a marvelous distress and danger,
but immediatlye after Basiliscus arrived, he fought against the father and the
son (who both were very valiante) and in the end after diverse conflictes
overcame them, and put them to death at the commandment of the Emperor.
After the overthrow of Genserick, Anthemius enjoyed a most quiet gouernmente in
his Empire of Italye. But as there never was, so may there not be found either
stabilitye or securitye, in this most troublesome and wretched estate of man's
life, for in the chiefeste felicities happen most extreme calamities: as
witnesses the sudden faule and ruin of this Emperor. When Rithiner or
Richimer (who as we said) overcame the Alanes and slew their king at Bergamo,
Rithiner rebelleth against Anthemius.
began (as one altogether unmindful of the manifold promotions and dignities
which he had received) to rebel against his Lord and father in law. And
having assembled a marvelous huge number of valiant soldiers, he marched
into Italye against the Emperor: who not being able to resist ye puisance of
so mighty an host, fortifyed in the best manner that he might the City of
Rome, hopinge in time to receive from Leo some aid or succor: but his
expectation was made frustrate, for Rithimer overcame al those Captains, which
were sent from Leo to succor Anthemius: and in the end slew the Emperor and
won the Cittye also, Rome ye third time taken and sacked.
which he most cruelly ransacked and spoiled, except only two places which he
reserved unto his proper use.

In this manner was Rome the third time spoiled, after it had sustained many
travails, much affliction, and infinite rapes: So that by this, as in a myror
or most brighte Cristall a man may easelye perceive, that the world cannot give
any felicity, which it does not in ye end take again: Neither does it exalt
any City or Empire, unto any high renoune or dignitye, No kingdom steadfast.
but in fine with extreme miserye and infinite calamityes, he abaseth the same
when God sees time. Rome once subdued whole world, and bare rule over all
Nations: Nevertheless in process of time (through the divine providence of
Almightye God) it was taken and spoiled by those, whom she before had overcome
and brought under the yoke: as has been already seen in that which is
written, and shall be in that which hereafter I shall write. After Rithiner was
become Lord of all Italye (except Rauenna and the straight thereunto
adioyninge) with the name and title of Emperor: The death of Rithiner.
he enjoyed the same but.iii. months, for then he dyed of a certain
disease, with which he was maruelouslye tormented. After whose death Olibrio the
Captain of Rauenna, Olibrio created Emperor.
was created Emperor, he enjoyed ye same.iiii. months also and then dyed: So
that as Rome had lost her former forces and reputacion, so the Emperors
enjoyed little health and short lives. For who so well co^sidereth the
History, shall find that while Leo governed in the East, Man purposes and God
disposes.
there reigned with legitimate and illegitimate titles in Italye vi. or vii.
Emperors. Immediatlye after the death of Olibrio, the Senate having
consideration of the manyfolde tyrannies and ruins passed, endeavored to
elect and chose, after a good discuss, and consultation, an Emperor by the
suffrages, and consent of the whole estate. But they were prevented by
Guandibar a Captain of Rauenna, who enforced them to create Emperor
Glicerius, a Senator of Rome. Against whom the Emperor Leo (for that the
election was done by force) sent a Captain named Nipole, Nipole.
with the name and title of Emperor: he was so assisted with the Romans,
(which were enforced against their wills to serve unto Glicerius obedience, yt
within short space he resigned his title and dignitye, A priest.
and became against his will a priest: unto whom Nipole gave a bishopprike,
and reserved thempyre unto himself, which was like to have been thoccasion
of infinite troubles and wars, if they had not been appeased by the virtuous
and worthy bishop Epiphanius. Epiphanius.
While Nipole enjoyed with great tranquillity the estate of Italye, he had
understanding that Henrye the king of the Goths, who at that instant reigned
in Tolosa and in the greatest part of Spain, made war against that part of
France, which as yet was under the devotion of the Empire, and had already
taken certain Cittyes, and minded to proceed farther. Against him, Nipole to
show himself mighty, Orestes the Captain of Nipole.
sent a familiar friend of his named Orestes, with a valiante army of worthy
soldiers. Who after he was departed went unto Rauenna, where neglectinge his
duty, and allegiance due unto his Lord, he nominated and created Emperor a
son of his own named Augustus, Augustus nominated Emperor in Rauenna.
which of ye Romans and Historiographers was called (for that he was but a
child) Augustulus, and so will we hereafter term him. After he had so done, he
determined to go toward Rome against Nipole, who for that he had employed his
whole forces in yt army, was not able to encounter with him: Wherefore void of
all hope to remain Emperor, he abandoned Rome and fled unto Dalmatia, which
was under the jurisdiction of the Emperor Leo, and so Augustulus was confirmed
in Rome with the name of Emperor. But while these euentes happened in this
wise in Italye, The death of Leo.
Leo dyed in Constantinople, after he had governed the Empire with honor and
reputation 17. year, and in the year of our savior Christ, 476.

Zenonus the first of that name.


I Supose ye the reader has had sufficient understanding, in what estate ye
Empire was found to begin, at the death of the Emperor Leo in
Constantinople. Wherefore it shall not be: needful, that I return to rehearse
ye same again. I say therefore, that as soon as Leo was departed out of this
life, his nephewe called also Leo, without difficulty was obeyed as Emperor: who
after he had governed certain months, wrought an effect, in my judgment
both rare and merueilous: which was, that of his own proper consent and good
zeal, Leo refuses the Empire, and geeueth it unto his father Zeno.
(reputinge it a thing very unseemly the father to be subject and inferior
unto the son) he renounced the Empire, and gave it unto his father Zeno,
whom he crowned with his own hands, and gave presentlye obedience unto him.
That fathers in their life time, have resigned their dignityes and kingdoms
unto their sons, it is a thing that we have both read and hard, and it
seems both honest and reasonable: but rarely it has happened, that any man
has understood, that the son has deprived himself of his own segniorye,
to give it unto his father, but rather it has often chanced, that the child
has by force deprived his father of his lyuinge: yea and sondrye times
children have desired and procured their fathers deaths, yt they might
inherit their kingdoms: Wherefore it may be reported for a rare and
miraculous virtue, that there was so great love and obedience in this son. It
happened therefore that Zeno was Crowned, and sworn Emperor at Constantinople,
and his son remained in his former estate. The contrary unto that, was then
seen in Italye, for Orestes had created Emperor his son Augustulus, without
procuringe or desyringe the Empire, The death of Leo.
unto himself. After Leo had surrendered the Empire unto his father, he dyed
within few days after, but in what manner his death happened, there is made no
mention: but his father began the administration of the Empire, when in
Calcedonie the widdowe Empress, wife unto Leo the first made her abode: She
disdayning that Zeno should be Emperor, for that her husband did never
account him worthy the honor, induced Basiliscus her brother (who as is
said, overcame Genserick in a battle) to take upon him the name and title
of Emperor. Basiliseus, created Emperor of Constantinople.
For he being through that notable victory become puisant and mighty, and had
in great reputation, did this without contradiction, and was received and
sworn Emperor in Constantinople: which as soon as it was understood of Zeno,
(whether it were through cowardice or to avoid the effusion of much blood)
he went unto Isauria, a very strong province in Asia the less, where he
supposed he might live in safetye. Whereof Basiliscus became very insolente,
and reioysed excedinglye, reputinge himself now to be in maruailous
securitye, and named presentlye his son Mark, The wrath of God on the
proud.
Caesar. But his pride and reioysinge continued not long: for being infected
with the heresye of the Nestorians, he began to persecute the faithful
Christians, and the Temples: Whereupon he was so hated of all men, that the
Captains which he sent against Zeno, went against him, and by a general
consent Zeno was restored unto his Empire, The death of Basiliscus.
and he, his son, with Verina his sister were apprehended, and being
banished they dyed in exile. In this manner was Zeno restored unto his Empire,
xviii. months after he had been deprived: Of whom we will for this instante
omit farther to entreat of, and return to speak of that, which happened
unto Augustulus Emperor in the Weste of Italye: Who saying that there was none
in Italye yt made resistance against him, August^iua enters into league with
Genserick.
(by the advice of his father) entered into league and concluded a peace with
Genserick king of the Vandales in Affricke, who at that instant was very
aged, and of short life. After which league he conceived a firm securitye, for
that Leo was busyed and molested with the wars against Basiliscus. But his
ruin happened from whence it was not suspected: for the Herulians, and the
Turiges, a people of which mention is made, that they were in the host of
Atlas, the most mighty king of the Hunnes, which at that instant, inhabited
upon the river of Danubius in the uttermost confines of Hungarye, elected for
their Captain a valiante gentleman of their own Nation named Odoacre, Odoacre.
and determined to go unto the conquest of Italye, for that they saw without
all order or reason it was possessed of the most mightiest, (so it pleased God)
that Italye, The secret counsel of God.
which accustomed to send Captains unto the conquest of the whole world,
should see, that from all parts of the world should come people to conquer
her.

After Odoacre was arrived in the confines of Italye, Orestes the father of
Augustlus, with a singular army of elect soldiers, which he and his son
had assembled, went against him: and the.ii. armies being within the conspecte
the one of the other, both the Captains were desirous to fight, and gave signs of
battle: But certain squadrons of Orestes soldiers passed unto Odoacre,
which he perceiuinge, and having no great confidence or trust in those which
remained, Ti^ine at this present called Pauia.
he retired with the best order that he might, and marched toward Ticine,
called at this present Pauia, a Cittye of Lumbardye. Odoacre followed him, so
that Orestes not having a sufficient army to encounter with his, permitted
himself to be besieged in that Cittye, where although he employed and
endeavored in all that he might to defend the same, yet the assaults were of
such violence, that it was taken after it had been defended certain days by
force of arms, and Orestes was taken prisoner. In that City the soldiers
of Odoacre used most extreme crueltye, from thence Orestes was carried unto
Placenza, The death of Orestes.
where by the commandment of Odoacre, he was put to death. After this
victory, as the Empire of Augustulus, held by a weak foundation, and less
justice, so all things succeaded in the favor of Odoacre: who with small
difficultye, and little resistance, became patron of all the Cittyes of
Italye, and named himself Lord and king of the same. When Augustulus
understood that the people drew whollye unto Odoacre, he departed from
Rauenna, and went toward Rome, leauinge of his own accord as he went, the
ensigns and Imperial Vesture: where upon he abandoned Rome, and fled away
secretly desyring to save his life, by lyuinge in some simple estate, and so
he consumed the remnante of his life in poverty and miserye, for the
Historiographers make no more mention of him. Rome being abandoned of
Augustulus, The death of Augustulus.
Odoacre became Lord over the same, and all Italy without resistance which he
possessed quietlye in prosperitye and peace xiiii. years. In this wise as you
have hard, ended with this Augustulus the Empire of Rome, The time when the
Empire of Rome ended.
which enjoyed no Emperor afterward by the space of 330. years and somewhat
more. This happened in ye 1229. year after it was first built, and in the 529.
after Julius Caesar became Lord thereof: The year of Christ.
and in the 477. year after the birth of our Savior Christ. At this instant
in England, a mighty barron of the country named Ambrogius, moved war
against the Saxons, but in the end he was overcome and enforced with his
Britains to fly into that part of France, which at this present is called
Britain, were in those days inhabited certain people caled Veneti, Cenomani,
and Turoni, by the consent of which inhabitants, and by their own prowes, they
inhabited that country, and perseuered in ye same with good success, so that
at this present their name remains, and their speech continues, it is also
one of ye principal provinces of all France: and there have governed the same
many mighty Princes, but at this instant after sondrye alterations and
chances, it appertains unto the possessions of the French kings. After
these alterations, Zeno reigned in Constantinople, and Odoacre in Italye
certain years in tranquilitye: so that there happened unto thempyre no act
worthy of memory. At the end of which, the whele of unstable fortune turned in
such wise, Odoacre deprived of that which he had gotten.
yt Odoacre lost all that, which before he had most wickedly gotten, and that
tyrante was deprived from his usurped kingdom, by an other tyrant which
happened in this manner. Theodorick the son of Theomir the king of
Ostrogothes, Theodorick the king of ye Goths.
by the consent of Zeno Emperor of Constantinople, invaded Italy with a
mighty army of practiced soldiers, and pitched his camp upon the river
Sonza not far from Aquileia, The river of Sonza.
mindinge there to refreshe his soldiers: Against whom Odoacre marched with
an hoaste of no less puisance, and in short space joined in battle with his
enemy, which was apprehenced of Theodorick with an exceadinge courage, and
with no less accepted of Odoacre: So that as it were by a mutual consent of
both the Captains, their hoastes encountered together. A conflicte between
Theodoricke and Odoacre.
That co^flicte was fought as valiantlye as ever was any, for the Captains and
soldiers of both parts were most liuelye, and the one endeavored to win
honor, a kingdom and fame: the other procured to conserve the same. The
battle continued the most part of the day, and after many occisions, and
much bloodshed on both parts, The victory of Theodorick.
the victory fell unto Theodoricke: and Odoacre was enforced to fly after he
had most valiantlye sustained the fight. Although Odoacre lost the field, yet
he abated no part of his courage, but with all celerity assembled an other
host, and awayted the coming of Theodorick, not far from Verona: where was
fought an other battle, with no less prowes then was the first, for in this
consisted ye whole hope of Odoacre: but in ye end Theodorick remained
conqueror also, and Odoacre fled unto Rome, Odoacre returns unto Rauenna.
mindinge to defend and keep that Cittye against his enemies: but the
Citizens would not permit him to enter, wherefore he returned unto Rauenna,
which not long after was besieged of Theodoricke, but it was most valiantlye
defended by Odoacre, who continuallye so much grieved and molested his enemies
army, that the siege endured three whole years, at the end of which, it was
yielded unto Theodorick upon condition to have his life saved, and a part of
Italye limited for him and his to inhabit. The death of Odoacre.
But that promise or composition was not afterward performed, for both he and
his son were slain: such was the end of the life and Dominion of Odoacre.
After whose death, Theodorick within a very short spare became Lord over all
Italy, and named himself (as Odoacre had done xiiii. years before) king and
Lord over the same: The comme^dation of Theodorick.
This king was a most virtuous, a most just, and a most excellent Prince and
governor, as he was very mighty, so he was both beloved and feared, but above
all things, he was most prudent and wise in conseruinge his estate, The
parentages of Theodoricke.
yea he grew to be invincible by procuringe of parentage with all the kings,
which in those days reigned in Europe: For in one instante he married with
Audefreda daughter unto the king of France: and of three daughters which he
had, he gave one for wife unto Sigismond king of the Burgundians, an other
unto Alaricus king of the Visigothes, and of Spain, And the third called
Amasulinuta unto a Prince of Germanye named Eutharicus: and his sister
Maufreda, he espoused unto Honoricus the king of Affricke and of the Vandales,
who succeaded Genserick: He proceeded so pollitickely, that with all the Princes
adioyninge unto Italy, he contracted a parentage and frendshippe: so that he
enjoyed and sustained the kingdom which he had conquered with honor, and with
no less dignitye, more then xxx. years.

While these affairs succeaded in this wise in Italy, Zeno who held in
Constantinople the Empire of the East, had diverse battles with the
Bulgarians, which after the death of Atlas inhabited Germany: he entered
through the province of Thrace, and did there much hurt, but shortly after
they returned into their own country. At that present also in Constantinople
there arose a maruaylous fire, which consumed a great part of the Cittye. Also
Ariadna the wife of the Emperor was accused unjustly of disloyaltye, by Illo
the Lord Stuarde of his household: upon whose accusation Zeno, (without either
just proof, or farther examination) commanded one of his soldiers to slaye
her, whereof she having understanding fled secretly unto the house of ye
Archebishoppe: who (when Zeno the next day, was apparelled with mourninge attire,
Rash judgment to be avoided.
as though he lamented the death of thempresse) reprehended his rashness and
lightness very seuerelye, manifestinge unto him the bounty, faythfulnes, and
loyaltye of his wife, and how that was both untrue and false, which was
objected against her. Finallye he wrought such means, that be persuaded him to
credit the truth: and reduced them both unto a perfect unity and peace. But
the Empress after she understood who was her accuser, (being desirous of
revenge) appointed a certain friend of hers to slaye him: False accusors.
who assaulted the traitor at a sudden, and thinkinge to have divided his
head, did only cut of one of the traitors ears, and so he escaped. After
which blemishe being ashamed to repair unto the Court, he conspired a great
treason, with an other man named Leoncio, Leoncio.
who both were in short space slain by their soldiers, and their heads
presented unto the Emperor at Constantinople. In this manner was Zeno from all
griefs and travails, and lived the remnant of his life in quiet
tranquillitye: although without just occasion he caused certain of his chief
noble men to be put to death. And after he had governed the Empire.xvii. years
he dyed in Constantinople of an ordinarye death. The death of Zeno with
diverse of his conditions.
It is written that he was some what brutishe, both of nature and countenance,
and that he would be diverse times overcome with wine. He dyed in the year
after the incarnation of Christ.494. ****

Anastasius the first of that name.


AFter the death of Zeno, Anastasius was elected, who being in favor with
the Empress was married unto her, the xl. day after the exequies of her
husband. He findinge all things in quietness, in ye beginning of his
government, wrought many good works, but he continued not long in his well
doing, for being infected with the heresye of Eutichius, Eutiches an heretic.
which added a quaternity unto the divine Trinitye, he began to be hated and
detested both of God and man: and many Nations rebelled against him, against
who^ he fought sondrye battles, and overcame diverse rebels, but in the
end he was so environed and compassed by the^, that he was enforced with
dishonor and shame, to purchasse peace with money. After which, he went
against the Persians, and overcame them in diverse battayles, but in the end he
concluded a truce or peace with them, The City of Anagia buite by Anastasius.
and built a Cittye in Mesopotamia called after his name Anastagia, which did
not a little discontente the Persians: who, for that they had war with the
Hunnes, durst not break league with ye Emperor: So that he consumed the rest
of his life with quietness and peace. And finally when he was most void of
fear, he was slain with a thunder bolte which fell from Heaven, The year of
Christ. 510.
after he had governed the Empire 27. years, and in the year of our Savior
Christ.510.

Iustine the first of that name.


THere succeaded Anastasius in the Empire, Iustine Emopalate, The base parents
and country of Iustine.
this Iustine was a Thratian, although some affirm that he was of Schiauonia
or Dalmatia, borne of very simple parents, so that in his childhoode, he was
a keeper of sheep. Notwithstanding it pleased God to exalt him, that was
descended and borne of most base and vile parents unto that most highest
seat and dignitye, for by the inspiration of the Divine power, at xvi. years
of age, he forsook that servile condition, and went unto the wars, mindinge
to pass his whole life in the atchieuinge of martial exploytes, in which he
became so excellent a soldier, that in short space he was very much
renoumned for his egregious acts, and worthiness. Whereupon he was by the
Emperor created a Captain, and not long after a Countye, which vocation in
those days, was accounted a most honorable and high dignitye: while he was
in that estate, it happened Anastasius to dye, being of a very great age.
After whose death when the noble men endeavored to create a new Emperor, a
certain Courtier named Amantius, Amantius.
which was an Eunuke and chief in the Emperors house: The richest man that
lived in his time, did greatly desire, and very much procure, that there
might be elected a noble and mighty gentleman named Theocretian, Theocretian
who was his especial friend. And because it was needful to have in this
behalf, the aid of the soldiers and men of war, he went unto Iustine, and
offered him a great sum of money, so that he would with the soldiers consent,
that Theocretia^ his friend might be elected Emperor. Iustine received his
money, and promised to accomplish his whole request: but after he had the
treasure in his possession, he omitted to entreat for Theocretian, and
procured secretly to win their good wills, for his own preferment: The
pollicye of Iustine.
yea he labored the matter with such pollicye, that when Amantius supposed
that the soldiers would have created his friend Emperor, they all with one
voice nominated Iustine: unto whom they swore presentlye fidelity and
obedience, by a common consent both of the Senate and whole hoaste. Amantius
perceyuinge that he was deceived (although he durst not for the present refuse
to swear unto him obedience) yet presentlye after, he procured the death of
the new Emperor, by conspiringe the same with Theocretia^, and with an other
named Andrea, with Missahale, and Ardibure, all which were Chamberlaines unto
the Emperor: that they should slaye him, when time and oportunitye served.
But God reueiled their treason, which being proved, the Emprrour caused to be
put to death Amantius, Andrea and Theocretian, and condemned the other unto
perpetual exile: and for the better establishinge of his Imperial estate, he
sent for Vatilian unto the Court, who rebelled against Anastasius, and
created him Consul and general over his men of war. Notwithstanding all
which, he (as an ingrate and disloyal subject) wrought certain practices
against the estate and life of Iustine: The death of Vatilian.
For which, after they were known, he was by the appointmente of the Emperor
slain in his Palace, together with Paul and Celerian, which were partakers
with him in the conspiracy. Iustine being delivered by ye death of these
traitors from all dangers, and enioyinge ye Empire with much quietness:
endeavored to refourme the abuses in Religion. Whereupon he commanded by his
decrees, Iustine against the sect of the Arria^s
through out all the East, that none should admit to receive into the
Church, for bishops or priests, any that were infected with the sect of
the Arrians: While Iustine was busyed with this good work, The death of
Trasimonde king of the Vandales.
Trasimond king of the Vandales, which was an Arrian died in Affricke: and his
son Elderick succeeded him in the kingdom, whom he begot by a daughter of the
Emperor Valentinian, he was a very good Christian, and revoked from exile all
such bishops, and Religious men, as had been banished by his father. But
Theodorick king of Italy being an Arrian, caused the noble men which enuyed
his heresye to be slain, and not content with that crueltye, having remained
unto that instant a just and worthy Prince, The death of Pope John.
he caused Pope John with diverse other which returned from Constantinople, to
be cast into prison, where through famishment, with other torments they ended
their lives. Which crueltye God with speed revenged, for the 90. day after
they dyed, The death of Theodorick.
he was stricken with a sudden death, leauinge for his heir (in that he had no
children of his own) a nephewe of his, named Athalaricus his sisters son
being but viii. years of age. Also Iustine being through his years unapt
to govern the Empire determined to nominate Caesar, and to adopte for his
successor and heir his nephewe Justinian, whom presently he associated for his
companion in the Empire, and.iiii. months after, he dyed on a disease which
he took in Constantinople, when he had reigned xi. years in the Empire. He dyed
in the year after the incarnation of our Savior Christ 529. ()

Justinian.


Unto Iustine without resistance succeaded Justinian, who presentlye began his
enterprise against the Persians, under ye conducte of a most worthy and
valiante Captain named Belisare: Belisare.
He after sondrye euentes of fortune, and variable success in diverse
conflictes overcame them, although for certain occasions of importance, he
concluded a peace with their king. After that, there happened in
Constantinople a very cruel, and pernicious civil war, in which Justinian
was very likely to have received his utter ruin, if by the industrye, and
worthiness of Bellisare he had not been presentlye rescued, and delivered from
that immine^t danger, although in that battle were slain, above thirtye
thousand persons. After this sedition was appeased, and ye aucthors thereof
extremely punished, Belisare went unto the conquest of Affricke: Gilimer.
the cause was, for that Gilimer had by force of arms, and without either
right or just title (not only rebelled against Ilderick the nephewe of
Genserick the king of Vandales, Ilderick.
and right heir unto that kingdom) but also apprehended him, and made
himself king and Lord of all Affricke. This thing did not a little grieve
Justinian, for that before he was elected Emperor, he had contracted a
league and amitye with Ilderick: wherefore after he had with letters and
Ambassadors, exhorted and requested Gilimer, that he would restore his cosyn
unto his kingdom and segniory: and prevailed nothing with this his demand,
he became accensed with indignation, and wrath against Ildericke,
determininge by force of arms to recover the provinces, Belisar sent by
Justinian unto Affricke.
and Cities of Affricke. And having assembled a most puisante army of worthy
and practiced soldiers, he ordained for general over them the invincible
Captain Bellisare: who after diverse and sondrye victoryes, Belisar in a small
time co^querred all Affricke.
in the end dryuinge Gilimer into the mountains, recovered and subdued all
Affricke unto the Empire, after it had been possessed by the Vandales 96.
years: and then leauinge for general over the whole province, Solomon made
general of Affricke by Belisar.
Solomon. He returned with the king and his kinsefolke together, with a great
number of men and women prisoners, and with infinite Jewels and riches that
was, with all that which the Vandales in a hundredth years before had robbed
from Rome, Spain, and Affricke, with diverse other provinces. And when he was
arrived at Constantinople, the Emperor caused him to be received with a
triumph, and with all such ceremonies and pompes, as in the beginning the
old ancient Romayne Consulles, and afterward the Emperors used, in their
triumphs at Rome. * It is necessary (although I abridge the Historye in all
yt I may) that the Historye of Justinian be set out full, before that I
entreat of many other Emperors: for that as the time of his gouernmente was
of long continuance, so the affairs which happened were great and notable:
Wherefore it shall not be well done, that I omit without some mention making,
the noble and illustruous exploytes of arms, Of what things the readers are
desirous.
which were achieved in his time. For that also I seem to conceive, that
Readers are only delighted with the readinge of cruel wars, strange happes,
conquestes, and mutabilitye of kingdoms. The Historyes of peaceable Princes,
and of happy times without wars, are not so contentable: as those in which
are spoken of murders, wars, alterations of estates, mutations of kingdoms,
singular victories, vprores, taking of parts, tumultes, and finally
dangerous and great euentes both good and evil. See that for these delights
those Books of fables are most co^monlye read, wherein are written the
slaughters of infinite thousands, how Cities were overthrown and won, with
other feigned things altogether impossible. To what end Historyes are to be
read.
But true Histories are principallye written, and especially to be read, to
the end that by readinge of evil and vicious acts, the readers may eschew
and avoid the like, and to imitate the virtuous: and that by the variable
success they may learn to be circumspecte, in thadministration of such
things, as in their life time shall happen unto the government. But to return
to the Historye, Belisar remained not long in Constantinople, for within few
days, he had the charge given him by the Emperor, of the conquest of Italye
and of Cicilia, against the Goths and Theodate, who at that instant was Lord
of them both: Which enterprise was reputed of no less importance and danger,
then that of Affricke, yea the success in the end manifested, that it was
more troublesome, by reason of the great conflictes, and manifold slaughters,
which happened unto both parts. The original and beginning of this war, was
in this manner.

As soon as the puisante and terrible king Theodoricke dyed, there succeaded
in his kingdom (as is before mentioned) Atalaricus his nephew, for that he had
no son of his own, who at that instante was but viii. years of age.
Wherefore his mother Amalasuntha took upon her the government of Italy,
Amalasuntha took upon her the government of Italye.
which she began to administer, with singular wisdom: educatinge and
instructinge her son, in virtuous behavior, and honorable exercises, with
applyinge him unto the study of good letters and learning. But after a while,
there arose both discord and parts taking betwixt her, and the kinsefolke
of the child: and there grew a particular hatred with her and Theodate the
cosyn of Atalaricus. Whereupon, she saying herself in a distress, surrendered
the charge of her son, unto the principal and chief of those persons: and
abandoninge Rome, went unto Rauenna: where she reserved continuallye her
aucthoritye in the government: but the enmitye did dailye so increase with her
and Theodate (who was exceadinge mighty, and had covertly obtained the Dominion
of Tuschanie:) that both of them procured the favor, and aid of Iustinia^:
and promised unto him an entry into Italye. The death of Atalaricus.
At that instant dyed the young king Atalaricus: for whose death Amalasuntha
became not a little desturbed, and molested, in that she was a sole woman, and
much hated of many of the Goths, which were in greatest reputation. But
ponderinge in her mind the sequel that might happen, she determined to
compounde with Theodate, and to create him king of Italy, supposing, yt he
receiving so great a benefit, would remain unto her a most faithful friend,
but yet she minded to administer the kingdom, and he only to enjoy the name
and title of a king. Amalasuntha creates Theodate king of Italy
She being fullye resolved to accomplish this her determination, began to put
it in practice, and in fine, after they had debated the controuersye
sufficientlye the one with the other, there was concluded a frendshippe and amity
betwixt them, with solemn oaths and promises, and he was named king of
Italye. Whereupon ioyninge his power with that of Amalasuntha, (which was the
greater) he obtained without difficultye the kingdom, and obedience of al men.
Notwithstanding, this counsel or advise succeeded very unfortunate unto
Amalasuntha, for immediatlye after that Theodate saw himself to be Lord and
patron over all, he began his government not only contrary to the expectation
of Amalasuntha, The death of Amalasu^tha.
but within few days (as a most ingrate and perjured Prince) caused her to be
apprehended, and in the end most cruelly slain. Whereof when Justinian had
understanding, he became not a little moved with wrath and indignation against
Theodate: for he always favored the parts of Amalasuntha: and therefore
reprehended excedinglye this most cruel and heinous fact. And supposinge that
the occasion served unto his desire, which he had to recover Italye unto
thempyre: determined without protracte of time, to assail Theodate with open
war, hopinge to conquer the same by force of arms: ordayning for general
over this enterprise, Captain Bellisare, who at that present was returned a
conqueror out of Affricke. Peter.
Justinian in those days had always an Ambassador in Italye named Peter, who
trauayled very much, to conclude an unity with Amalasuntha and Theodate, who
yielded not a little, for that he greatly feared the displeasure of the
Emperor. But while this practice was a determininge, Bellisare arrived in
Cicilia with a mighty host and huge army, for that he supposed it a thing
most necessary first to subdue that Island. Wherefore after he had by force
conquered the Cittyes Catanaia, Saragosa, and Palermo, which he wanne with
great loss of soldiers, within short space after he became patron over the
whole Island, such was the expeditio^ and felicity of Belisar in martial
affairs. And for that his fame was excedingly feared: Theodate having
consideration of that which happened in Cicilia, fearinge his force, concluded
with the said Peter, certain couenauntes of peace in the which he renounced
the title which he had unto Cicilia, The conditions with Theodate and Peter.
and consented that in Italye, in all the decrees and statutes which should be
ordained or published, ye name of Justinian should be first placed: Moreover
that he would be bound to send unto him every year a crown of goulde, in
token of subjection, with certain other things, which are written of
Procopius. Peter being departed with this answer, ye fear which Theodate had
did so increase and disturb his quietness, that he caused to return again
his Ambassador named Rusticus which he had sent with Peter, and bound him by
a solemn oath, that he should not discover this his second resolution,
before he perfectlye understood how Justinian accepted the first offer: and
that the^, if he refused and were not contented with the same, he should make
unto him a promise of all Italye, upon this condition, that he would lymit and
assign unto him as much ground in Greece, as might suffice for him and his to
inhabit in. And therevppon he wrote with his own hand unto Justinian a most
noble letter.

After the Emperor had heard the first petition of Theodate, as a Prince of an
invincible courage, he would not accept the same, whereupon the Ambassador
reueiled unto him the second, in ye which was offered unto him all Italy: ye
contented and reioysed Justinian excedinglye, for thereupon he rescribed unto
Theodate a most gracious answer, with which he sent his Ambassadors to
conclude the accord, and to inform Belisar, that having established the
affairs of Cicilia, he should pass into Italye, to impadron himself of the
forces of the same. But the accord was not concluded for that, before the
Ambassadors, The victory of Theodate,
which went unto the emperor returned, ye Captains of Theodate obtained a
singular and notable victory in Sclauonia: in the which were slain Mundus
and Mauritius his son, who were Captains unto Justinian, so that the
Imperial host seemed to be utterly destroyed. After which victory Theodate
became so proud and haughty, that he refused, not only to accomplish the
partitye offered: but shewinge himself wrathful with the words, which were
spoken by ye Emperors Ambassadors, he caused them to be apprehended, and
committed to safe custodye. Also this increased his bouldnes: for at that
instant Belisar was enforced to sail out of Cicilia into Affricke, to succor
and rescue Solomon, whom he had left there as lieue tenant general, for a
Captain of the Emperors named Extorsa, Extorsa rebelieth in Affricke.
with the greater part of the host rebelled, and were become patrones of
diverse Cittyes, having murdered the governors and Justices of the whole
province. But after the arrival of Belisar into Affricke, the enterprise
proceeded with such a good and happy success, yt within few days he
overcame the rebels, and corrected most sharply the Cittyes, reducinge them
unto a quiet and peaceable obedience, then he returned into Cicilia, where he
had understanding of the affairs of Italy. What the obscurity of the Sun
betokens.
Eutropius writes, that in this season, there was seen in the Sun a sign
and marvelous prodigy, ye like whereof has not been hard, continuinge the
most part of a whole year. Which was, yt the said Sun, yielded as small a
light as did the Moon, so that, there appeared little difference or none at
all between the shyninge of the one, and the other, although her glisteringe were
neither kyuered, or hid by any cloud or other impediment: but without any
occasion that appeared, unto man's judgment, it continued darckened and with
little light all y^ season. Which, (as afterward was judged) portended and
betokened the great famyne and want of bread, that happened vniersallye
through the whole world: and likewise it prognosticated the wars and
prognosticatio^ of blood, which were to be made in Italye.

Justinian saying the inconstancy of Theodate, and being not a little displeased
for the death of his Captains and soldiers in Dalmatia, with the
apprehending of his Ambassadors in Italye: provided with great wisdom,
courage, and disposition of a worthy Prince, unto both his present
necessities: Constance Captain for Justinian in Dalmatia.
for he sent into Dalmatia and Slauonia, a valiant Captain named Constance,
who recovered a great part of that which was lost, and renewed ye wars in
those parts. For the affairs of Italye, he commanded Belisar, that with all
expediton he should enter into the same, with all the power and force that he
was able to make. He with his accustomed celeritye, and courage, (leauinge in
the Cities and fortes of Cicilia sufficient garrisons to defend the same)
passed with his host, by the straight of Messina into Italye, where he wanne
all those Towns and Castles which bordered upon the sea, not meeting with any
power that might disturb his enterprise, and so he proceeded conquering, even
unto ye City of Naples, for the defense of which Theodate had appointed a
great and chosen company of Goths, which defended the same most liuelye, so
that between them there was done many a notable proof in feats of arms, but
in the end, by force the Cittye was taken and spoiled of the soldiers, The
taking of Naples.
with the slaughter of all the Goths. But the next day after, Belisar
induced, and persuaded his soldiers with courteous language, that they would set
a liberty the Citizens, and restore unto them their goods, with contentinge
themselves with the great bootye of their enemies, The bountye of Belisar.
and not of the Citizens, for he published, that their coming was only
torestore Italye unto liberty. Great was the fear, which the taking of
Naples gave unto ye Goths, for that they thought it impossible to be won:
Whereupon all the men of greatest reputation, and Captains of Theodate, saying
ye small provisions, which he made, and understanding for certaintye, that
Belisar would not satye long in Naples, for that he determined to march
toward Rome, assembled and took counsel together, in a certain place
adioyninge unto the Cittye, where after many discourses they elected for their
king a valiante and prudent Captain named Vitige, Vitige elected king of ye
Goths.
to the end that he should provide a sufficient host that might withstand the
forces of Belisar. Which when Theodate understood, being at yt instant in
Rome, doubtinge of his security, fled from the Cittye toward Rauenna, but
he was taken as he iourneyed, and slain at the appointment of the new king by
a Captain named Ottaro, The death of Theodate.
who was sent after him unto that effect, his death happened after he had
governed Italye.iii. years.

After the death of Theodate, Vitige called a counsel, in which it was
concluded, for that there was not a sufficient and ready army at that instant
to encounter with Belisar, who drew toward Rome: that he should go unto
Rauenna, where, after he had prepared a sufficient host of practiced
soldiers, he should expect and provoke his enemies unto battle. Bador
left Captain at Rome.
After this consultation was finished, he left in Rome a Captain named
Badore, with.iiii. Thousand soldiers, and having exhorted and persuaded the
Citizens to defend their Cittye valiantlye, he took his iourneye toward
Rauenna. And Belisar leauinge Naples in good order and well furnished with
soldiers, marched with his host also toward Rome: whose coming being
known unto the Citizens, they resolved and fullye determined, not to remain
and abide in the defense of the City, but to open ye gates unto him, against
whom the Goths, not able to resist, were enforced to depart and leave the
City: Belisar enters into Rome.
and it happened that the very same day, in which the Goths issued forth at
one gate, Belisar entered by an other. Who, after he had made a worthy Oration
unto the Senate, and encouraged them unto the recouerye of their Liberty,
began presentlye to reedefye the waules, and through out to fortifye the City,
causing also great provision of victuels to be brought thither, and the Cities
and Towns in y^ streighte thereunto adioyninge to be furnished with garrisons
of soldiers.

In this mean while Vitige the new king, who in no respect was vile or a
coward, omitted not to attempt, or practice every way and mean that might
make him mighty against Belisar. The wisdom and pollicye of Vitige.
And first for his better assurance, he concluded a peace with the king of
France, who sent unto him al his Captains and ordinarye soldiers, unto
which he gave continual stipendes, and commanded them to join with his
army, also from Germany, and diverse other places he procured aid, and
assistance in all that he might. Finallye he so well provided, that he
assembled in Rauenna and in ye territoryes of the same, a hundred and fiftye
thousand soldiers on horseback and foot, al excellent in feats of arms,
the greater part whereof were very well armed. With this host he marched
toward Rome, where Belisar made his abode, not being at that instant of
sufficient power, to encounter in the fields with the army of his enemy.
Wherevpo^ king Vitige not doubtinge of the victory became so insolent and
proud, The vanitye of Vitige.
that he was only vexed to see that Belisar would not flee and abandon Italye,
yea he would demand as he iourneyed if Belisar were fleinge away,
reioysinge infinitely, when it was reported yt he fortifyed Rome, and would
there expecte his coming. But Belisar was minded contrary to thexpectation
of Vitige, for he determined rather to dye, the^ with dishonor to abandon
that, which he had so worthilye gotten. But for that he saw his army to be
far inferior unto that of his enemies, he sent for Blessus and
Constantinus both Captains, who were appointed to defend the fortes there
abouts, that with all speed they should return unto Rome with their
soldiers, where he was with his, so yt after their repair he kept the City
both strongly, and well provided for, with intent to defend the same, and
disturb his enemy, The going of Vitige unto Rome.
if he would proceed torecouer that, which he had won in Campania, Puglia,
and Calabria.

Vitige continued his journey toward Rome, supposing that against his power
Belisar was not able to defend the same: and in his joining unto the City,
there happened an accident so notable, so rare, and of such importance, (that
although I know in the declaration, I must somewhat excede the lymits of
breauity, yet I have thought it both expedient and necessary to rehearse the
strange auenimente) Belisar had procured to be built at a certain bridge
distant a mile from Rome, upon the river Tyber, two exceeding strong Castles,
and had left therein certain garrisons of soldiers, to molest and resist his
mighty enemy: but Vitige being in the night season come unto this bridge,
they which had in charge the defense of the same, were so surprised with terror
and fear, that presently they did abandon it, without making of any
resistance, so that the same night there passed over a great part of the
host. The next day following Belisar not having intelligence of this cowardlye
part of his soldiers, issued out of Rome with a thousand chosen horsemen,
and rode toward the bridge, to elect and choose out some conueniente place
where he might best pitche his tents, or lodginge, and with most advantage
defend the passage. But as he drew nere unto the bridge, he met at a sudden
with the soldiers of Vitige, which had in the night passed ye same. Whereat
Belisar became so wrathful after he perceived yt his people had lost the
bridge, that with less consideration the^ was convenient, he assaulted his
enemies with such violence and force, that there followed as cruel a fight as
might be imagined, in such sort, that the soldiers of Vitige retired unto
the whole army: The worthiness of Belisar.
where Belisar was so greuouslye charged with many troops of Goths on
horseback, that all his, looked for present death, but he in his iorneye
behaved himself with great prowes, killinge and wounding many of his
enemies, and with such danger aduenturinge his own person, that the authors
which make mention of this conflicte, write that therein he behaved himself as
a most valiant soldier, but not as a prudente and politic Captain, for he
did in such wise hazard his own person, that in Rome it was supposed, and
believed that he was dead, for certain of his soldiers which had escaped
reported it for a veritye.

He being at this instant in such an extremity, and distress, saying many
of his familiars and friends slain, and the residue most like to pass that
way, not able any longer to susstayne the force of his enemies, (of whom
there were slain a thousand) began with his to retire. But he was pursued and
followed with a great number of his enemies on horseback, Belisar was not
permitted to enter into Rome.
even unto the gates of Rome, which were kept continually shut, and they
which had the custodye would not in any wise open them for that the enemies
should not enter in with the Romans, and for that upon the report, they
believed that Belisar was slain, no man gave ear or harkened unto his voice.
Whereupon Belisar who had fought ye greater part of the day, accosted nighe
unto the walls, and reducinge into a square battle his soldiers, defended
himself with fighting against his enemies, without taking any repaist even
until night, when he practiced and used a most boulde enterprise, both
dangerous and desperate. For he assaulted with such violence the Goths,
after he had made a cyrcle of his own soldiers, that his enemies being
deceived with the obscurity of the night, The courage of Belisar.
supposed and credited that not they, but a great number of fresh Captains
were issued out of the Cittye and fought against them, which suspecte caused
the Goths to retire unto their camp, Belisar most fiercelye pursuinge them,
until that he, finding a place of most advantage, which was abandoned of the
enemies, returned with all celeritie unto a gate of Rome, where his voice
being known he was with all his intromitted and received, the number being
far inferior unto that which he led forth with him. In this manner he
retired with safetye out of so dangerous an encounter, having his armor
perced with many Darts, Spears, and strokes of swords, of all which there
was not one, that touched his skin, this was reputed and accounted a miracle,
in respect of their marvelous oppression, and dangerous distress which he was
bestede. The day folowinge Vitige arrived, and overcame at one instant the
whole company of Rome, and for that he was not able through the greatness of
the City to besiege it round about, Vitige besieges Rome.
yet he did inuiron it, by dividing his host into six camps. And because it
would be more tedious then necessary, to reherce the manifold conflictes and
battles which happened in the time of this siege, in that they were both
great and marvelous, I will omit to entreat of any of them. It shall
suffice to know, that this was one of the most bloudye and perilous
oppugnations, that ever happened unto any Cittye, The time of continuance of
the siege.
for it continued a whole year and.ix. days, and in ye first vii. months of
the siege, Vitige and his Goths which were most liuelye, never desisted from
battering, and assaultinge the Cittye an every part, whereby they both
received and did very much hurt. And Belisar with his soldiers on the other
side, did never permit his enemies to take rest or to be at quiet, but
issued out of the Cittye continually to fight with them: in such wise, that
in their skyrmishes and battayles they slew more then xl. Thousand Goths. In
which time he achieved marvelous factes as well by his dexteritye and prowess,
as by the pollicye, and cyrcumspect government of a most excellent Captain.
The Emperor Justinian omitted not to send continuallye succor, both of
soldiers and victuels unto Belisar, for he sent him certain Captains with
footmen and horsemen, who conducted with them all kynds of grain and other
victuels, al which with great travail and danger were brought unto Rome.
This provision prevailed not so much, but that they in ye City sufferd
extreme famyne. Notwythstanding Belisar kept secret this need or want, and
behaved himself so stoutlye against Vitige, A truce concluded betwixt Belisar
and Vitige.
who at that instante being wearye of his abydinge in the fields, entreated
with Belisar a truce, which was concluded for three months. But it continued
not so long, for Vitige (procured thereunto by the deceyte and treason of
certain of inhabitaunts) required that he might be permitted to enter and
visit the Cittye. Which demand renewed the war, and Belisar commanded one
John his Captain which was under him general in the field, that he should
with most cruel war invade ye territorye of Rauenna, unto which he had sent
him with mo^^ then two thousand horsemen, and certain other soldiers,
supposing yt by afflicting that part, Vitige would raise the siege and depart
from Rome. And it happened that John used such dexterity in this enterprise,
that he took by force of arms the Cittye of Ariminum with diverse other,
wherefore Vitige fearing the loss of Rauenna, determined to raise the siege,
and to revolt unto the defense of those parts. But in his retire Belisar gave
unto the rerewarde of his host a great discomu^ture, and slew many of his
soldiers. So that with great shame and reproach Vitige returned unto the
siege of Rauenna, Vitige besieges Arimiu^.
and besieged a long time Ariminum, in which was the Captain John. And
Belisar, who always was vnwyllynge to loose time, assembled an army of
soldiers, and having fortifyed the City of Naples, departed with all
expedition toward Rome, and from thence toward Rauenna, beginning to invade
with terrible war sondrye parts of Italye. At which present there was come
unto him from Justinian the Emperor, a valiant Captain with a great number of
soldiers named Narsete an Eunucke, Narsete an Eunucke.
who afterward was general. Belisar and he joined their arms together, and
went to reskue and succor John, who at that present was besieged, but they
enforced Vitige to raise his siege and depart with no small loss of his
people. After yt, Gallia Cisolpina which at this present is called Lumbardye,
and Milan, Bergamo, and Nauarra with many other Cittyes yielded unto the
devotion of Belisar. Wherefore he sent thither certain Captains, which fought
diverse notable battles with the Goths, and with Theodorick king of France,
who at that instante was in arms, supposinge through the dyscord and
continual war of those Princes, he might with little labor possess it
himself of that Segniorye. Belisar in the end fought a singular and notable
battle with Vitige, who had in the same all ye power that he was able to
assemble, or gather. In which (to use breuitye) Belisar was conqueror, and
Vitige fled unto Rauenna, where he was besieged many days, during which time,
there were many practices practiced between them, and unto Belisar was offered
the kingdom of Italye. But he continuinge his siege, took the Cittye, The
taking of Vitige.
and had Vitige rendered unto him for prisoner, whereby almost all Italye was
brought in obedience unto Belisar.

But when the affairs of Italye proceeded in this wise, Justinian (contrary to
that which he ought to have done) sent for Belisar to go against the Persians,
for that he had finished the conquest of Italye: although not long after
there happened great alterations, with infinite discommodityes. For although
there remained in those parts for Captains and mynisters in his stead, John,
Bessa, Vitale, all which were both valiante and of great reputacion, yet they
were not to be compared unto him, who in every respect was both rare and
singular.

The mighty Captain Belisar departed out of Italye, caryinge with him the
king Vitige prisoner, Belisar returns unto Constantinople.
and the Queen his wife, with many of their kinsefolke, and principals of ye
Goths. He was received into Constantinople with infinite joy and gladness,
where he was so excedinglye beloved and honored, that all the Citizenes and
strangers went to see him, as a thing myraculous, giving great commendations
unto his notable prowes and worthiness, which the breuitye of my Historye is not
sufficient to contain. The proportion and conditions of Belisar.
His commendation was the more, for that he was of an amiable and comlye
countenance, taule of stature, of a very gentle, and well proportionat
personage, he was also noble, courteous, favorable, and endued with all other
virtues.

Not long after the departinge of Belisar out of Italye, certain Cittyes
created for their king Idibald, Idibald.
a very valiant Captain and of great reputacion among the Goths. He became
the more mighty through the evil government of the Captains, and for
certain taxes which they burdened the Cittyes withal, Evil officers
so that after he had assembled together his people, he elected out of the^ an
army of ye most worthiest soldiers, and fought and overcame Vitale in a
battle, so that he became a terror unto all states. But, for that he had
slain a nephewe of king Vitiges, The death of Idibald.
one of his Guarde did also murder him, after he had reigned little more then
one year. In his place was elected Alari^us, who of Paulus Diaconus, and Jordan
is called Ararius, he also was slain within five months after his creation,
Alaricus king of Goths.
and then they elected and created for king Totile, who was the destruction
and ruin of Rome, as shall be manifested, after the occasion is reueyled, for
which Belisar was by Justinian called out of Italy, which was touched a little
before. It happened in this manner. Cosroe king of Persia, perceiving that
Belisar whom he especially feared was busyed with the affairs of Italy, found
certain feigned occasions to move war against the Imperial territoryes,
Cosroe.
and enteringe into the country of the Romans, he took by force certain
Cittyes.

Whereupon Justinian, who with great wisdom and policye provided for all
parts besides his ordinarye garrisons, sent an army into the East, appointinge
for general a valiante and worthy knight called Scytha, who was overcome and
slain in the first conflict. Then Justinian sent thither an other named Buce,
a very expert Gentleman in martial exploytes, with a nephewe of his called
Germanus, and diverse other Captains and soldiers, who had with Cosroe most
cruel and bloudye conflictes, all which I omit to entreat But in the end
ye state of the Empire were not of sufficient power to resist the Persians: for
Cosroe proceeded co^quering, and leaving Mesopotamia on the right hand, he
overcame Surrey and Gicilia, and wanne many noble Cittyes by force of arms.
Whereupon Justinian conceyuing that there was no man sufficient or able to
appease the furye and rage of that war but Belisar, caused him to depart out
of Italy, at such time as he had subdued the same, except only certain strong
Cittyes and Castelles in Lumbardye, in which remained sundry garrisons of
soldiers with diverse Captains of the Goths. Belisar being upon this
occasion departed out of Italye, and arrived in Constantinople, he was within
few days after sent into the East against ye mighty Cosroe king of Persia, by
whose coming the Imperial army recovered his pristinate force, for Belisar
renewed ye war with such pollicye and courage, that in all things he made a
sudden change. And having obtained certain victoryes against ye Captains of
the said king (for he himself never durst encounter with him in battle) he
recovered a great part of y^, which had been usurped by the enemies: So that
the affairs of the Orient did daily wax better through the presence and
politic government of Belisar. But in this mean season (which was of two
years) the affairs and estate of Italye did daily decline, for (as it is
before mentioned) after ye kingdom of the Goths descended unto Totile, he
maintained ye war with such courage and circumspecte dealinge, that he
overthrew and slew certain Captains of the emperor Justinians, whereby the
Goths won such reputacion, that all men out of every part accosted unto
them, except those only which had among them the Emperors soldiers. And
Totile with his whole army went through out all Italye without finding
resistance: and besieged the great Cittye of Naples, Naples besieged and wa^ of
Totile.
(after diverse successes happened both by sea and land) he wanne with certain
other thereunto adioyninge, yea his affairs proceeded with such prosperitye,
that it manifestlye appeared, that if presently there were not appointed some
remedy, he would possess himself of the whole. Which Justinian very well
perceyuinge, who accounted the loss of Italye to be greater, then that of any
other province, commanded Belisar to establish the affairs of the Orient in
as good order as he might, and to repair presently unto him. Who (as one
subject unto obedience) with expedition accomplished themperous commandment,
and being arrived in Constantinople, without making any abode there,
Justinian sent him into Italye, Belisar arrived in Italye with few soldiers.
in such have, that he might not conduct with him for want of time, more the^
5000. soldiers, supposinge to find there sufficient people to supplye unto
his want, also he imagened yt themperours part was not reduced unto such
extremity. But he found in all respects ye contrary: so that his arriual did
rather damnifye then profit, for whereas he was desired, and looked for of his
friends, and feared before of his enemies: now, for that they saw him to
arrive with so simple a power, the one part laid away their weapons and armor,
and the other exiled from them all fear. Wherefore in the beginning the
enterprise was both full of trouble and travail. The wisdom and worthiness of
Belisar.
But the placinge himself in Rauenna, to fortifye and defend the same, within
few days so well established al things, and in such wise provided unto the
present necessity, that although he might not encounter and meet with his
eunemyes in the field, for that he had so mighty an host, yet notwithstanding
ye Goths did rather loose of their Cittyes then recover or win any from
the emperor. Which did not a little molest and grieve Totile, wherefore he
assembled all the Captains and soldiers that he had, and sent part of them
unto Rauenna where Belisar was, and he with all ye remnant of his host marched
unto ye City of Rome, Totile goes unto Rome.
which was so simplye furnished with soldiers and victuels, that it seemed,
it might not long defend it self. These determinations being reueiled unto
Belisar, did not a little afflict and vex him, who remembering the great
travail and danger yt he sustained for the defense thereof, and saying
himself not of sufficient power to meet his enemy in the field, wrate in
all have a most rigorous letter unto Justinian, requyringe of him soldiers
and money, The order taken of Belisar to go unto Rome.
and determined to leave Rauenna, and to go unto Rome by sea. Wherefore he
sailed into Dalmatia, and from thence unto Durazzo where he met with Captain
John, who conducted with him an hoaste of soldiers sent from the emperor,
with which he thought himself able enoughe to fight against the Goths. But
he judged it most necessary to succor with all celeritye ye City of Rome,
for he supposed that if Totile should win the fame, yt then all Italye would
render it self unto his devotion. Wherefore he resolved to sail thither by sea
and to enter the Cittye by the river Tiber: For the Cittye called Porto which
stands at the mouth or entrye of the said river, appertayned unto the
Emperor, although Ostia which is situate on the contrary side was subject
unto the Goths, he ordained also that Captain John should cross the sea, and
land in Calabria and so succor the Cittye by land.

After this deliberation, Belisar sailed from Rauenna and arrived at the port
and mouth of the said river, and not being able by reason of the huge hoaste
of Totile to pass by land, he prepared with much speed, a great number of
ships and Brigantines laden with victuels and soldiers, and so sailed a
long the river. And although Totile kept it, in the most narrowest places
attrauersed with chains, Belisar passes a long (...) river ^ber.
and a bridge upon each side of which was a Castle, replenished with munition
and soldiers appointed to desturbe ye passage: Belisar notwithstanding
proceeded with his up ye river, and being arrived at the said bridge, his
soldiers fought so valiantly against those which guarded yt same, ye they
overcame their enemies, brake the bridge and chey^es and passed forwards. And
had presently rescued Rome, and ministered unto every thing a prosperous
auenime^t, if one sinister accident had not disturbed the whole. Belisar had
left his wife and family (which wife he so fervently loved, yt in the most part
of his wars he conducted her with him) in the said Porto, which stands at
ye entrye of the river, with soldiers to defend the forte, having for their
Captain a valiante gentleman named Isaac, with express commandment, that
he should not in any wise issue out at the gates, but should guarde and
defend the fortress. But Isaac understanding of the victory which Belisar
obtained against his enemies, desired also to atchiue some singular exploite,
wherefore he issued out of the forte against the soldiers of Totile, which
were appointed for ye defense of those places* and although in the beginning he
brake their arraye, and enforced them to retire, yet in the end he was
vanquished and taken by them. Which was presentlye understood of Belisar by
certain that fled, and the fame went also that his people were taken, The love
of Belisar to his Wife.
and his wife remained in ye custodye of the enemies. Which thing so much
grieved his heart, that without expectinge of other news, he returned down
the river, determyning either to dye among his enemies, or else to deliver his
wife, determyning after he had recovered her to return in one instante unto
Rome. But when he arrived at Porto, he found that the fort was mainteyned and
defended by his, and that his wife was at liberty, although the Captain,
remained captive: whereat (when he saw that he was deluded) he was more
greuoslye vexed and oppressed, then at the former news. Moreover the same
night in which he arrived at Porto, whether it were through ire or grief,
The disease of Belisar.
or by some other private occasion, he was assaulted with so fervent an ague,
that sodeinlye he fell into a sound abandoned of all sense: so that it was
impossible for him to rise out of his bed, or proceed in the enterprice of
Rome, for the anguishe of his disease did so increase, that often times he was
at the point of death.

In this mean while, which was of many days continuance, Totile besieged
Rome so straitlye that they of the Cittye dyed by infinite nombers of famine,
Totile takes Rome.
and did eat dogs, cattes, and rattes with other things, which may seem
impossible. And in the end Totile wanne and took the same by force, and sent
Ambassadors unto Justinian, offeringe unto him his service and friendship, and
that he would restore Rome unto him, so that he would grant him peace: unto
which if he would not consent and yield, be promised and protested utterly to
subvert it, and to move against him most cruel wars.

Justinian answered, that he had in Italy his Captain Belisar, and that unto
him he remitted the disposinge of all his affairs. Totile with this answer
became so wrathful, that he determined to destroy Rome, The ruin and
destruction of Rome.
which determination (in an unhappy hour) he accomplished. For he caused the
Capitol to be burnt, with the better part of the whole City, and overthrew
the third part of the whole Cittye, and overthrew the third part of the
waules, commaundinge the Citizens upon pain of death to abandon the same, and
to procure an habitation in some other place. In this wise he left Rome burned,
destroyed and desert. And went against John, who was the Captain, Totile
becomes Lord and patron of many provinces.
which with the soldiers of Justinian marched through Calabria toward Rome:
He was of so vile and base a courage, that he durst not abide the coming of
Totile, but went unto Otranto, which is situate in ye uttermost conu^nes of
Calabria: so that Totile without resistance did possess himself of al
Calabria, Abruzzo and Lucania, which all had remained unto that instante in
obedience unto the emperor. Belisar repayreth Rome.
At this present Belisar recovered his health, and enterprised as worthy an
exployte as ever he had attempted. For he went and placed himself with his
soldiers in Rome, mynding to repair and defend the same, and sent his wife
unto Constantinople. Yea he used such diligente expedition in the reedifying of
the Cittye, that within a very short season he made a Cittye of a desert and
uninhabited soil. The fame whereof being published, many cytizens (drawn as it
were with ye love of the country, as also with the true zeal which they bare
unto Belisar) repaired thither from all places.

This being understood of Totile, he returned at a sudden by making of great
iorneyes unto Rome, which he minded to take together with the Captain Belisar.
But it was defended so valiantly, that Totile was enforced with great loss of
his soldiers to depart and raise the siege.

In this mean season Captain John had in Calabria and Puglia, received and
intertayned all the Citizens which had f^ed and were expulsed, and sent them
back again unto Rome: whom Belisar placed in their Cittye, and having made
sufficient provision and well fortifyed the same, he left therein sundry
garrisons of practiced soldiers for the defense thereof, with a valiant
Captain named Cannon, and departed thence to join with John and the other
Captains, mynding to seek out Totile, between whom there happened diverse
euentes, which for breuityes sake I omit to write of.

At this instant for that the king of Persia, renewed his war in the East,
Justinian was enforced to send for Belisar, although in the end he went not
unto that enterprise, Belisor sent again into Italye.
for that there was a peace concluded. Whereupon he was sent again into Italye,
where although he obtained not such good success in his attemptes as he had in
times passed, yet he never received either shame, reproach, or dishonor, for
he at no time declyned in any point, from that which was convenient or
requisite unto a most valiant, prudent, and politic Captain. And finallye,
being surprised with age, he returned unto Constantinople, wherewith quietness
he passed the remnant of his life. Rome taken by Totile the second time.
After whose departure Totile returned unto Rome, and besieged the Cittye,
which after a long season and manifold afflictions of the inhabitants, as
also through the negligence of John which made no expedition in succouring the
same, and by treason of certain which were corrupted with gifts, the cruel
barbarian wanne it again. But in this he did not exercise such tyranny as he
used in the former, for he permitted no spoil to be done in the Cittye, but
procured and endeavored to furnish it with inhabitants, by geuinge of great
rewards and large privileges, unto all such as would return and remain
there. He wan afterward many other places, and passed into Cicilia, in which
(for that he might not lightly or with small travail conquer the Island) he
left.iiii. Captains with an army of soldiers and returned into Italye. Of
all which within short space he had been patron, if Narsete a Captain sent
by Justinian, had not most valiantly resisted, and disturbed this his fortunate
success. This Narsete was in great reputation and authority with the emperor,
whereby he became both rich and mighty: He arrived in Italye with a mighty
host, which consisted of diverse kinds of people, as Hunnes, Erulians and
Lumbardes, which at that instante inhabited Hungarye, with sondrye other
warlike Nations. He made his journey a long the bank of the Adriatike sea,
coastinge from Venice unto Rauenna, although at his entrance into Italy he
fought diverse battayles with the Goths. And after he had remained certain
days in Rauenna, he marched with his army toward Rome. But Totile who in no
respect was vile or fearful, awayted and expected his coming with whom he
fought a most cruel battle, in which conflict Totile was slain, and his
host vanquished. This victory opened and manifested unto Narsete, The death
of Totile.
that the conquest of all Italye consisted of small travail, and little danger.
Whereupon he continued his journey, until he came to Rome, which he besieged,
and in the end (although it was most valiantly defended by the Goths) yet he
wanne the same, and made of them a marvelous slaughter. And departing from
thence without resistance, he possessed himself of all the Cittyes, and
Castelles thereunto adioyninge. After the death of Totile, the Goths created
for their king, Teia king of Goths.
a mighty and worthy champio^ named Teia, who took all the treasure which
Totile had in Pania, and leuyed soldiers therewith to resist Narsete: and
sent unto ye Frenchemen for aid, but they would not in any wise grant
thereunto. Wherefore Teia saying that Narsete took both Cittyes and Castles
without fightinge for them, departed out of Lumbardye with as great an host as
he was able to provide, and marched toward Campania, where he determined to
meet with Narsete, so that ye two armies encamped upon the side of a river,
between whom after long skyrmishes was fought a most cruel and bloody
battle, yea diverse writers make mention of marvelous acts which the king of
the Goths achieved with his own hands. The death of Teia.
But in thend he was after a long and cruel fight, slain by the soldiers of
Narsete, notwithstanding the battle continued even unto night, without any
apparent victory unto either part. The Goths reposed that night as quietly as
they might, but the morninge folowinge like desperate parsons they renewed the
battle, and the Emperial soldiers moved with wrath, fought most fiercelye,
for yt the Goths being without a Captain began the fight and defended
themselves so obstinatly, this conflict continued also unto night, when the
Goths sent Ambassadors unto Narsete, The victory of Narsete.
offeringe to abandone all that which they possessed in Italye, upon condition
that he would permit them (without bearing of armor) to live freelye in ye
same. That demand was granted unto them by Narsete, because he would not
any loner fight with desperate men, as also for yt his soldiers received
great damage and loss: In this wise they lost all that which they enjoyed in
Italy, In what manner the Goths lost their name in Italye.
and remained as subjects and natives in that country, whereby in short space
the Goths lost their name and memory. But the affairs in yt estate obtained
not through this victory a present quietness: for certain Captains and
soldiers which remained in Lumbardye and Piemont, fortifyed themsel^^^, and
having aid out of France and Burgundye, renewed the war, which continued a
whole year, in which time were fought diverse and sundry battayles. But in
the end Narsete obtained the victory, and became Lord and Segnior over all
Italye. Narsete extinguished i^ Italye, the name of the Goths and Ostrogothes
And it pleased God, that he should end and destroy the name of the Goths and
Ostrogothes, in the xviii. year after this war was begun, and 72. year
after Theodorick first enjoyed and possessed the same. But contrary wise the
Visigothes which were in Spain increased dailye in might, and the name of the
Swizzers and Alanes decreased, so that the fame of those Goths remained only.
At this time there reigned in that kingdom, Athanalgidus in great prosperitye,
who governed all Spain.22. years.

After the finishing and endinge of these enterprises, Narsete endeavored in all
that he might to reedifye Rome: which for that it was very ruinous, and much
destroyed, and void also of inhabitants, he reduced into far lesser
circuit, governing both that, and the whole estate of all Italye with as good
order, laws and pollicyes as might be devised or invented.

For the which he enjoyed the whole government as long as Justinian lived: who
all the time of these wars made his abode in Constantinople, from whence he
sent provision, both of men and money, not only unto the affairs of Italye,
but also unto those of the East, for that he maintained an incessant war,
and of no less danger against Cosroe the king of Persia, then against the
Goths in Italy.

There happened in the time of Justinian besides ye before specifyed conflictes
and conquestes, Earthquakes with diverse other accidents happened in the time of
Justinian.
marvelous earthquakes, famishmentes with diverse other accidents of great
importance. Notwithstanding all which he omitted not to have a regard and
care unto the preservation and mainteynance of peace, yea it might seem that
he only studied, and respected the same: For he reduced, all the old volumes
and decrees of the Emperors, which were so infinite yt scarcelye a man might
live to read them over, Laws ordained and made by Justinian.
and so variable and contrary, that they seemed a confusion of many laws
repugnante and disagreing the one unto the other, into a unity and succint
breuitye, excerpting only out of them that which was necessary with adding
thereto certain of his own invention. In this manner he abreuiated all the
laws of ye aunciente Maiestrates, Judges and Lawyers, which all consisted
of.2000. books, by reducing them into.50. Books called Digestes, and he
compounded the.iiii. Books of the Institutes, and the laws and decrees of the
Emperors and Caesar's which were dispersed into many books, Digestes,
Institutes, Code, Volume.
he reduced into.xii. and named the same the Code of Justinian, he made also
an other book which he entyled the Volume, unto which he added.iii. books
of the said Code. Moreover ye Emperor was very curious in making of singular
and sumptuous edifices. And when he was very aged, for that he had no heir
males of his own, he elected and associated for companion with him in the
Empire, Iustine his nephewe, son unto one of his daughters. It is written
that in his age he was infected with ye heresye of those which affirm that
Christ was impatible: With what heresy he was infected.
which proceeded (as it is supposed) for want of judgment or reason, of
which he was revoked from certain days before he dyed: which was when he had
lived 80. years and more, and in ye 39. of his Empire, and after the
incarnation of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.578. ***

Justine the second.


IVstine, nephewe unto Justinian, took upon him the government of the Empire,
he was in conditions contrary unto his grandfather, and also negligente in
administratinge and gouerninge the Empire, which he permitted to be whollye
ruled by Sophia his wife. Who in the beginning (to win the favor and
benevolence of the people) persuaded Iustine, to pay out of the public
treasure the dettes of the poor, which suffered indurance, and were not able
with out their utter undoing to recover their liberty. For this liberal
act, he was a while well thought of with all men. He had moreover at that
instante war with Hormisda the king of Persia, Hormisda.
who succeaded Cosroe. But after diverse co^flictes, and sondrye victoryes
obtained by the states of themperours, there was a peace concluded, whereby the
affairs of the East were reduced unto rest and quietness, and Iustine passed
his life void of care, delightinge only in vices and wanton pleasures. Of him
there are no notable acts to be mentioned of, The affairs of Italye.
except certain aueniments which in this manner chanced in Italy. After
Iustine had reigned.iiii. years, and Narsete governed Italy for the Empire xii
years, in which time he obtained infinite victoryes of the Goths, and ruled
both with sinceritye and pollecye: diverse malicious, and wicked persons,
enuyinge at his great honor, dignity and riches, which he had gotten in the
former wars, wrote certain accu^ations against Narsete unto Iustine: in
whose Court, (as happens most commonly in all Courts) there wanted not that
bare him the like hatred, False and slanderous accusations objected against
Narsete, for which he was by Iustine deprived from his government.
wherefore the accusors were hard with such favor, that Iustine through the
imbecilitye of reason, and Sophia by her light credytinge, were persuaded,
that to be most true which was objected against him. And therefore without
respectinge, or having considerations of the manifold dangers and trauayles,
which Narsete sustained and suffered in the conquest of Italy, they determined
to deprive him of his gouernmente, and to authoryse another to be Regent over
the same, which was one of the extremest iniuryes that ever was hard of. Noble
acts ought to be rewarded.
And Sophia not content with this despyte and manifest wrong, did also reprove
him in words: saying, that she would enforce him to spynne woll in
Constantinople among her maidens, and with all expedition there was sent in
exchange of him a noble man named Longine. Which being understood of Narsete,
whose invincible courage could not dysgest, so great a reproach, without
disdain and wrath: said, in as much as she would send for him to spynne, he
aduouched unto her, to weaue such a piece of clothe, No cause ought to move a
man to war against his country.
as she should not very easelye undo: which promise or vow he accomplished,
as shall be hereafter declared. For he, having intelligence that Longine was
arrived in Italye in the Cittye of Rauenna, fearing to sail unto
Constantinople, went from Rome where he made his abode, unto Naples, in which
he was so well thought of, and so intierlye beloved: that there he reputed
himself to be in most safety. From whence, as one slaundered and become
desperate, he did solicit with many letters the Lumbardes, with Alboine their
king (who was his very friend, Narsete induces Albonie to invade Italye.
and had sent him soldiers against ye Goths) that he should leave Hungarye,
and possess himself of Italye, unto which he would assist him in all that he
might, and give him instructions for ye better order taking in atchieuing y^
same. This attempt or offer was accepted and received both of them and their
king: Who as some affirm were called Lu^bardes because of their long beardes:
and their oryginall and beginning (as Paulus Osorius mentions in his
History) was in a certain Island, situate in the Germayne sea, named
Scandinania: from whence, for that they were many, and the land not ample
enoughe to contain the inhabitants, (as many other Northren Nations had done)
with.ii. Captains called Aeione and Thermes, they adventured to win some
commodious place to inhabit in, either by war, or otherwise. And after the
death of these two Captains, Agelmond.
they elected a king named Agelmond, after whom they created diverse other
kings, which had sondrye wars and successes with the Goths, Vandales and
many other Nations, until that after long wars they became Lords over
Hungarye, from whence Albonie their king had sent soldiers to aid and
succor Narsete against the Goths. Whereby, this occasion grew, that Narsete
sent for him to conquer Italy, unto which he determined to goo, being allured
as well through ye promises made unto him of Narsete, as also for that he was
informed of the fertility of the soil, by those which had been sent of him
unto the wars of Italye.

While he was mustering of his people, and making preparation for this so
weighty an enterprise, Longine ye new governor of Italye, began a new form
and manner of administration, which continued long after: naminge himself a
supreme governor, and he appointed unto every Cittye a ruler whom he termed a
Duke from whence it is supposed yt that name of honor and dignitye was first
derived: The original and beginning of the title and dignitye of Dukes.
and in Rome he ordained a governor which was called a President. In this
manner the authority of the Senate, and dignitye of the Consulles were
altogether lost, and never recovered there prestinate name and form, for
Narsete and Basil his companion were the last. After the gouernmente of Italy
was in this manner divided, Pope John defends a traitor against his prince.
and Albonie in a readynes to march thither ward, it happened yt Pope John the
third, with the consent of the whole people of Rome, who with a marvelous
affection honored Narsete, went unto Naples, and after many persuasions
co^ducted him unto Rom^, minding both to defend him from his enemies, and to
retain him in his own Palace. Narsete repented himself of his treason.
Whereupon Narsete repented yt he had procured Albonie, who^ he persuaded from
ye enterprise by writing, and manifesting unto him the manifold difficultyes
which would come in ye same. But he preueyled nothing, for Albonie was fullye
resolved to proceed in that he very well knew the force or strength that was
in Italye, as also the new government of Longine, and the small care and
negligence of Iustine: Wherefore he would not credit Narsete, but did rather
accelerate his journey, The death of Narsete, and Pope John.
before whose arrival Narsete dyed in Rome, where he had hid a great
treasure, which afterward was found, his body was conveyed unto
Constantinople, and at that instant there dyed also Pope John, which brought
him from Naples.

Albonie at his departing out of Hungary, left the government of that province
under the protection and tuition of the Hunnes, which were the remnant of the
host of the fierce and mighty Atlas, of whom it was called Hungarye: and
passed into Italye with 200000. men, which brought with them their wives,
children and facultyes, he entered first into the province called Friuli, and
without resistance conquered ye same, over which he appointed for governor a
nephewe of his named Sisulphus. Then, for that Longine had fortifyed with
garrisons and victuels Rauenna, Padoa, Cremona and Mantua, with diverse other
Cittyes, he departed from those places and went unto Vincenza, and Verona both
which yielded unto him without resistance. From thence he passed over the river
Adda, and marched toward Milan, whose Citizens at ye persuasions of their
bishop, as also for that they would not be spoiled and slain, yielded the
Cittye unto his clemencye: which example many other followed, for his fame was
such and so general, that all places rendered themselves, except those which
were fortifyed by Longine, among which, there were on that part where he
conquered two Cittyes Verselli and Pauia, The besseging of Pauia.
which he besieged, but it was so well defended that the siege continued three
years. At the beginning whereof for that he perceived it would require a long
time, he divided his host, remayninge him self at Pauia with a sufficient
number, and sent the rest to invade other places of Italye, unto whom there
happened such good success, that they became possessors of many Cities,
Towns and Castles. In such wise, that from Milan to Bonnonie, there were
very few Cittyes or fortes which were not reduced unto their subjection,
within the space of those three years: which province they enjoyed afterward
more then 200. years and called it Lumbardye, Lumbardye from whence and at what
time it was so named.
and that name remains even unto this present. At the end of.iii. years
Albonie might easily have entered Pauia, but he went unto Rauenna, where his
wife Rosimund repaired unto him, with al his treasures and Jewels. And while he
there made his abode with continual pastimes and feasts, he was murdered by
treason, at the appointment and consent of Rosimund, The death of Albonie.
whose father he before had slain, and at a bankette gave her to drink in
his skull: for which most tyrannous act, she with good reason conspired his
death. After Albonie, the Lumbardes elected for their king a noble man both of
birth and worthiness, Clephi elected king of Lumbardes.
called Clephi or Cleue, who renewed the war and exercised great cruelty in
those Cittyes, which in the province of Venice, remained loyal and in devotion
unto the Empire, that caused the City of Venice, through the flyinge thither
so many worthy gentlemen to become so renoumed, as at this present it is one
of the most famous Cittyes in the whole world. Also in these days Iustine the
Emperor, who made his abode in Constantinople void of care, but replenished
with vices, was so tormented with the Gout, The death of Iustine.
that he dyed with the anguishe and dollour: after he had reigned xi. years.
But certain days before, at the request of Sophia his wife (for that he had
no son of his own) he created Caesar a most excellent Captain named
Tiberius, whom he most earnestly entreated to remain obedient unto Sophia.

His death happened in the year after the incarnation of our Savior
Christ..579. ******

Tiberius the second.


THe behavior and conditions of Iustine were such, that his death was bewailed
of no man, except only of his wife Sophia, who only in his time held in her
hand, the bridle of the whole government, with geeuing order unto all things:
In which estate the determined to continue, being fullye resolved to take unto
husband Tiberius, The virtuous conditions of Tiberius.
who immediately after the death of Iustine was created and crowned Emperor.
He, for that he was a virtuous, just, courteous, merciful and a bountiful
Prince, endued with all virtues requisite unto a Christian Emperor, would not
receive and accept Sophia for his wife, whose conditions were repugnat and
contrary unto all goodness. Whereupon after he was created Caesar, he
distributed great su^mes of money unto the poor, and after his Coronation, he
caused to be nominated Empress a noble Lady named Anastagia, Anastagia the
wife of Tiberius.
with whom he had privately contracted a marriage. For which, Sophia practiced
to have him slain at his nuptial feast, determininge to create Emperor
Justinian an other nephewe of Iustines. But it pleased God to defend the good
Emperor from this execrable conspiracye, The mercifulnes of Tiberius.
and to reueyle unto him the wickedness of Sophia, unto whom at her humble
submission he remitted the offense or crime, and pardoned also Justinian who
was her confederat in the treason. A horrible murder of Sophia pretended.
But not long after, she assayed and attempted the like: for which Tiberius
caused her to be apprehended, and deprived from all her riches: but (in that he
was replenished with clemencye) he permitted her to live, maintayning and
procuringe her to be well entreated and served with much honor,
notwithstanding he discharged all her old servants, The mercifulnes of
Tiberius.
and appointed to supplye their roumes certain of his own familye. He also
pardoned Justinian, for that he perfectlye understood, that he was entyced and
allured thereunto by Sophia: but he not long after was excedingly beloved and
exalted by Tiberius, whom as Paulus Diaconus affyrmeth, he ever after served
with sincere loyaltye. These were the private and domestical affairs which
happened principallye unto Tiberius. Who as touching the universal
gouernmente of his Empire, always observed equity and justice, and reigned
with infinite worthiness. Unto him obeyed Affricke and all the other provinces:
for that he enjoyed the Empire of Europe and Asia with tranquillitye and
quietness, but the war in Italye against the Lumbardes, and that in the East
with yt Persians, did not a little molest and disturb him. Yet in Persia he
obtained many victoryes and made great spoils, by the worthy procedinges of
the valiante and prudente Countye Maurice, who afterward was created Emperor.

While the affairs of the East proceeded in this manner, those of Italye,
Clephi king of the Lumbardes.
enjoyed not the like prosperity: For Clephi the new king of the Lumbardes,
invaded with most cruel war the Cittyes and Towns, which remained obediente
unto ye Empire, his successes were so fortunate, that he dailye recovered from
the Emperors estates, and being desirous somewhat to repose his weryed
spirits, he sent his Captains and soldiers toward Rome, who with little
travail wanne the Cittyes thereunto adjoining, and Rome it self was by them
besieged, and in great danger of taking. For the Historiographers affirm,
that if Clephi had not so sodainlye dyed, The death of Clephi.
he would in short space have been Lord and patron of Rome and Rauenna, the
two eyes of Italye. But his determinations were intercepted by death, as those
were of other kings, as mighty or mightyer then he, which death happened unto
him by the treason of his own subjects. After him ye Lu^bardes refused to
create any other king, but they elected xxx. of the chief among them, or to
say more truly.xxx. tyrants, Thirtye tyrants.
which did possess themselves of xxx. of the chiefest Cittyes in all Italye,
every of them rulinge his with the territory thereunto belonging as best
pleased him, with ayding one another when any war was kept against thempyre.
And for that Tiberius was busyed in the wars against the Persians, without
respectinge the affairs of Italy, or making such provision as was necessary,
the Lumbardes had the better oportunitye, The kingdom of Naples won by the
Lumbardes.
to extend their forces more at large, with conqueringe of Cities and
Castelles even unto Rome and Naples. In which war they used such crueltye,
forces and rapines, as the like were never hard of, and for that these
barbarians were not as then perfect Christians, they robbed and spoiled
without any difference, as well things sacred as profane, and in the end
wanne the kingdom of Naples. Moreover his their happy success was furthered,
The death of Tiberius.
in that Tiberius became so extremelye oppressed with sickness, that he might
not attend unto the gouernmente of the Empire, yea the infirmitye continued so
long that he dyed thereof.

Whereupon the Romans seeing the great distress into which they were
brought, A truce taken with the Lu^bardes.
by the Lumbardes, entreated a peace, and concluded a truce with them for a
certain season. Unto the which the Lumbardes granted through this occasion,
that the kings of France (for at that instant there reigned three brethren)
had sent had a mighty hoaste against them, being not a little displeased
that they were grown unto so great a power. They yielded thereunto also, for
that the Saxons which unto that present had assisted them, were now departed
and had left them.

While Tiberius (as is aforesaid) was oppressed with that his infirmitye, he
nominated Caesar and his successor, Maurice his son in law: and presently
after, leauinge all the Empire which he inherited in peace, and tranquillitye,
except only the estates of Italy, he dyed after he had governed vii. years,
and in the year after the incarnation of our Savior Christ 585. Whose death
was greatly bewailed, and lamented of all sorts of people, as well for his
magnificencye, and liberalitye, as also for his singular virtues and bountye.

At this present there flourished in Spain, the holy doctor and Prelate
Leander Archbishop of Ciuilia, through whose divine preachinges and godly
exhortations Ricardo the king of Spain with all the other Goths, utterly
renounced and forsook the sect of the Arrians. At this instant there
flourished also Saint Gregorye one of the four Doctors of the Church, who at
yt time wrate the noble Book of the moralles upon Job, and dedicated the same
unto the bishop Leander aforesaid. ***

Mauritius.


MAuritius by country a Cappadocian, married Tiberius daughter Constantina by
name, and ruled in the Empire of Rome 20. years: he was Crowned of the
Patriarcke John. This Mauritius was secretarye to Iustine the second, and for
his great service through the persuasion of Sophia, was made general of his
army. Who against the Persians most happelye preueyled and overcame them,
Mauritius.
and wanne from them Mesopotamia. The beginning of this Mauritius gouernmente,
was very fortunate: he had also in his gouernmente wars against the
Persians, against whom he sent a chief Captain called Philippicus, who
married Gordia the sister of Mauritius. Many calamityes fell to the Romans,
and also to ye Persians, many tumultes and seditious vprores on every side:
but in the end the Romans prevailed, and became conquerours over the
Persians, they being wounded with civil wars. The Persians were at rebellion
with a tyrante being their Prince, called Orimasda: Orimasda.
whose eyes they pulled out of his head. Also Cosroes the son of this
tyraunte Orimasda, against nature cruellye commanded his father to be slain:
Although Orimasda was a detestable tyrante, yet the wrath of God for this
murder fell upon Cosroes his son, Cosroes.
for the murder committed on his father, who for sauegar^^ of his life, was
forced to fly to the Romans. So in this division among themselves they were
overcome of the Romans, by the flyinge away of Cosroes to the Romans.
Mauritius by this extremity happeninge to Cosroes, restored him into his
kingdom, and the limittes of the Romayne Empire and of the Persians was
appointed. Phocas.
This peace continued till the beginning of the reign of Phocas.

After this, Mauritius reduced his army and great power into Europe, and his
great host out a^ Syria, to subdue the great Prince Caganus, Caganus.
a noble warrior, a most expert Captain, and a Prince of great renown.
Before he enterprised this war, he made his son Theodosius Emperor, being
crowned of John the Patriarcke, called for his abstinence Ieiunator. Theodosius.
Theodosius married the daughter of Germanus a Senator, the sisters daughter of
Mauritius wife. Hitherto the estate of Mauritius was most fortunate, but ye
estate that followed was a declaration to all estates, Kingdoms
of ye mutability and change of kingdoms. Mauritius by pride puffed up, Pride.
forgatte God Almightye, cruel, disdai^full, suspicious: His proud and wicked
behavior, withdrew obedience, love, and the faithful hearts of his people. At
this instante time he made war against ii. mighty Nations, Hungaria^s.
ye Lumbardes in Italy, and against the Hungarians: yet the Lumbardes although
they through discord had lost many famous towns, yet they were not subdued.
The wars against the Hungarians was most cruel, Caganus.
Caganus king of Hungarye a Prince of great power, an excellent and most
courageous warrior: This Caganus was for his noble arts in chiualrye, much
feared of the Romans and of many other noble Princes. Of so great force is a
valiant Prince to his country, a terror to many Pinces. This Caganus had wars
with ye Turks: Turks.
the name of ye Turks was first known in the time of this Mauritius. As
concerning the Turks, I will entreat of them in the life of Heraclius.

This Prince Caganus possessing a part of the Romans, Mauritius marched
against him and took that part from him: Mauritius returned to Constantinople,
and there made Priscus a noble Captain liefetenant of his army: Priscus (...)
made war with Caganus, and ye Romans greatly scurged by him. Priscus at the
commandment of Mauritius, sent an Ambassador to entreat of peace, who
because he knew Caganus a proud Prince, contemninge al other Princes, Caganus.
a cruel tyrante and without the fear of God. He learnedly devised with
himself an Oration, very eloquent, so full of persuasions to beat down the
proud stomach of a tyrante, that as the Historye tells: Caganus though
most wicked, not knowing God before time nor himself, did with all modestye
use his estate, bridled his tyrannical government, and fell into a league with
the Romans, and delivered their Captains. Thus begins the Oration of the
Romayne Ambassador.

PRISCVS general of the army and great host of my Lord and Emperor
Mauritius, at the commandment of Mauritius, has appointed me from so mighty
a Prince an Ambassador to ye O King: whose wisdom in Princelye affairs,
whose nobilitye and expert knowledge in warlike enterprices, whose great
Dominion of Princelye estate is bruted to all parts of the world. The cause
of this Embassage.
I came not to call to mind in what high renown God has placed thee,
neither to entreat upon thy Princely glory and royal magnifycence, neither of
thy puisante force linked and united with so many noble Princes: but by an
Embassage to encreate a perpetual amitye, to be concluded between the Emperor
of ye Romans and thy majesty. And whereas ye Romayne Princes, have many times
confirmed leagues with diverse Princes, whose oaths and princelye promises in the
sacred breast of Princes ought to have been inviolable, yet so chaungeable have
been their conditions, The oath of Princes.
their league and oath of so small force and value, that slight devises have
dissolved that, which al god lines and justice did maintain, the law of arms
from aunciente times observed, and the law of nature in all points confirmed.
The power of God.
Such is the brickle hold of ambitious Princes, their oath and promise toward
Princes violable: but the power of him who is above all Princes, does not let
go unpunished such malicious dealing of such Princes whose acts are wrapped in all mischief, The power of God.
whose studies are only for the spoil of other Princes the ruin of kingdoms,
and infinite people.

Are ambitious Princes so ignorant, Ambition.
that for lofty estate they are blinded above all other? who knows not that
every one has a mixture of pleasure and sorrow folowinge them: yea the
noblyest Princes, the richest, the wisest, the most triumphante conquerours
have felt it, yea the one follows consequently the other. To all mortal
creatures the heavens have always from above their influence and temperatures
falling to co^serue and anoye, as their virtue and power is limited: yet all
chances are common as well to Princes as to other mortal creatures, both age
and kingdoms have their flourishinge times appointed, and the mighty
Dominions have had a beddered state and douleful faule. Seeing therefore that
Princes are wrapped in the same mortal shape and corruptible earthly mould with
other creatures: The estate of Princes.
the earth, the air, the heavens, are without the reach of Princes to be
governed, the great floudes and mighty streams do not pass their bonds and
limittes by God appointed. Such is the estate of Princes, the hand of God
governs them, forces and compels them, he exalts and who can pull
down? he subuerteth and who exalts? The pr^seruatio^ of a prince in god
only.
No kingdom can save a Prince, no power can defend him, when God refuses the
Scepter and throne of any kingdom: In those days who looked for, or hoped of
the pitiful and doleful end of yt most noble, Caesar.
wise and valiante conqueror Julius Caesar? or the overthrow of that noble
Pompeie? Pompeie.
If wisdom nor grauitye could save Cato, Cato.
neither many conquestes preserve from so pitiful an end Scipio: Scipio.
Nor Ptolomeus displeasing God, Ptolomeus.
avoid his wrath: If Alexander the great fallinge from God, Alexander.
and by pride puffed to fansye in his proud corruptible body a godhead, was at
a sudden by the power of God subverted in Babylon: his kingdom rapted and
catched into the hands of many ambitious governors, and they severally in
kingdoms and Dominions mighty, by cruel wars destroyed and quight rased
out from memory of noble fame.

What may other ambitious Princes look for, who know not God? Lion.
The Lion being most fearce and by terrible voice and countenannce subduinge
the courage of all other, yet he ones snared is a pray to the meanest fowls:
A small edge tool overthrows suddenly the mighty Ceders of Libanus, Olyphant.
and the stro^gest oaks and Fur trees of Parnassus. The mighty Olyphant
being bound, is of no force: neither the cruel Tigers can prevail, being
ouermatched by subtle pollicye: Stonye rocks have been wasted with a small
issue of water drops, Iron of all metle strongest, is quight consumed with
ruste: things of most strength are utterly overthrown by the weekest.
Olyphant.
The strong Olyphante that by power is able to throw down mighty things,
This was proved at Muscouia.
is tamed with the sight of a Ram, or trembles at the grunting of a suckinge
pigge. Raueninge grypes, are by a secret operation of nature killed with odor
of oyntmentes: Serpents.
And Serpe^tes by touching an oak bough dies: Adamant stone.
The Adamant stone by a small head of garlic, leeseth his power and strength
of drawing. In such sort be the secret euentes in things natural, way
these examples, and consider the doubtful state of the Romans, The fall of
kingdoms.
and in them consider thine own flouryshing estate. The Romans sometime
Lords of all the world, yet have they lost diverse times their great
Segniorye: What should I speak of the runnagate Goths, Goths.
the beggerlye Scythians, Scithians.
the spoylinge Vandales, being at the first feared of no Prince, Vandales.
no account made either of their valiantnes or power, being a field and
savage people, without all honor and dexteritye of martial feats: yet they
have driven the mightyes Princes, both of Asia and Europe out of their
Dominions, Princelye seats and territoryes.

Rome the head of all the world often taken, Rome often taken.
spoiled and destroyed, as by Alaricus king of the Goths in the time of
Honorius: Of Gensericke king of the Vandales in the time of Martian: Of Totile
in the time of Justinian and Narsete. Also consider these most valiante
conquerours, who for a time preueyled and plagued unjustly without title or
law of arms other Princes, scurging them with all calamityes of war: The
secret counsel of God.
yet they thrown down from their glory, their conquestes and large
victoryes, were in the end by a mightyer force subdued and utterly
vanquished. Troy.
Loftye Troy is fallen, and Priamus with many ambitious Princes brought to
desolation, the Greeks unjustly vexing the Troyans, Greeks.
were also brought to confusion: The Thebanes entering into Platea without law of
arms unjustly, were destroyed and overthrown in their hostill enterprises.
The Emperor Mauritius seeks not a league of peace with thee because he
fears thee, The cause of Mauritius league.
but because the concord of so mighty a Prince, is a terror to other foreign
Nations, thy amitye a defense, thy countenance a Bulwarcke to the Romans, The
amitye of Princes a bulwarcke to each other.
and ye Romans to thee. The Romans know thou art mighty, and yet they have
seen thee week, and many hazardes of battles have followed thee:for sake not
amitye offered, but foresee wisely the sudden crack or unfortunate hap of
shippewracke that may follow. Never proud Prince prospered, neither tyrants
have enjoyed a sure perpetual foundation of kingdom: we know thy beginning,
and thy glory and renown, thereof with great admiration we do behold, but thy
end who knows? Proud Nicanor is fallen, Antiochus, Zerzes for all his
infinite host, fled away cowardlye, and dyed at home vngloriouslye. Caligula,
Nero, Domitian, wicked tyrants not knowing God, neither regarded justice, was
at a sudden overwhelmed in all their glory with Dioclesian, with Silla and
Marius. Who was more mighty then Nabuchodonosar? and yet the Historye says he
fell and lived as a beast vii. years, cast out of kingdom: let the faule of
proud Princes teach the to govern. Who so knows himself, is not ignorant
to know god, for he knows God yt knows himself, and it is ye chiefest
point of wysedom, any man to know himself: Enter into a league perpetual with
the Romans, and know thou have a friend most mighty, redye to defend thee,
and so a league confirmed deliver our noble Captains and other.

* The fame of Sesostris is known to all Princes, Sesostris.
who was a Prince of great glory and of large Dominions, yet by a wittye
Oration and persuasion was mollifyed, and released and set at liberty
the.iiii. great Princes being with him in captivity. Sesostris was one of the
prowdest Princes that any Chronicle or Historye makes mention of, yet in the
end by an Embassage persuaded. This Sesostris was accustomed when he would
seem to all his people most glorious, to be carried abroad in his most
glorious Chariot, Sesostris his Chariot.
which was laid on with most pure and fine goulde, adorned and beutifyed with
the richest stones that might be found: this Chariot was driven with the
hands of.iiii. kings, being in this proud Princes thraldom and captiuitye.
One of the Captive kings being in this toyling slauerye thus occupied, did
continually behold the wheel of the chariot turninge: A tyrante.
Sesostris the proud and beastly tyrante, not knowing God, disdainfullye asked
why the captive king did continuallye behold the turninge of the wheel? The
captive kings Oration.
The captive king most wisely answered: (I being a king, and sometime in
great renown both for my kingdom and people, though now in thy thraldom and
miserable captiuitye) do daily behold and wonder at this my state with the
rest, and do deepelye consider the power of God in all Princes, to throw down
and exalte as he only lists. Gods secret judgment.
I do dailye behold the wheel of thy Chariot turning, yt part of the wheel
which is now hiest, suddenly is lowest descended and fallen: We were ones in
Princely seats aloft exalted, and now with the lowest and meanest abiects
abased and thrown down, the upper part of our wheel of glory is cast
down that was sometime aloft. And thy wheel aloft stands which when the
mighty God will, may faule. Kingdoms
Kingdoms have no stay, nor time of continuance, which when God apointeth
they faule when he pulls down, and who ryseth not when he exalts? and in
this our miserable estate and slauerye: Know thy self O king, and use us as it
becomes kings. Sesostris molifyed with ye captive king talk.
Sesostris moved with this talk of the king, being so full of wisdom, and
with so fearful an admonion of his estate, was suddenly stricken with fear,
and forthwith became humble, lowlye and modeste, and set at liberty the.iiii.
captive kings.

* The Historye says, that Caganus was so much moves with this Oration, and
specially with this one notable example of the kings, Ambition.
that he entered in league with the Romans, and delivered all the Roman
Captains. Upon this for a time, peace and tranquilitye was maintained between
them, but sodainlye broken, each one feared the power of the other.

Sic nescia virtus stare loco, Lucanus. 1. Lib.

Solusque pudor non vincere bello.
A sentence meet for the ambitious.
The Captains of Mauritius murdered.30. thousand of the Hungarians and
Slauonians, War.
the enemies took of the Romans.12. thousand by the treason of a Thratian
who was in the host of Mauritius. Treason.
Caganus king of Hungarye in his hostill enterprise threw down the temples
of the Christians, and threw out of ye graves the bodies of the holy Martyrs:
the wrath of God in all this his cruelty fell upon Caganus, a great pestilence
fell on his army, and in a manner destroyed the whole number. The power of God
against tyrants.
God also destroyed at a sudden vii. of his sons with the pestilence in one
day, the plague drove him home to his country. The wrath of God molifyed him,
whereupon he sent letters to Mauritius that he would send him his Captains
home, if he would send but foreuery one a piece of goulde. Thus ye power of
God tameth, bridleth and brings down tyrants, The power of god against
tyrants and persecuters.
he alone cutteth of their purposes, and makes them to know that there is a
mightier to scurge them: Not as man's will is, or purpose, but as the secret
counsel of God shall determine and dispose: by who^ the mighty states of the
world are disposed ruled and governed, the proud brought low, the humble
exalted, mighty kingdoms translated. So God being most mighty rules at
commandment all things, the devil can do nothing but what God permits
him to do: Devils at the commandment of God.
So evil men against God and Christian Religion, tormentinge Christians, and by
pains thinking to subdue them, and being of less force then devils: they have
their limittes and bonds appointed, that they shall not pass. And this is a
great comfort to all Christians yt fear God, not to be dismayde in the
troubles of this world, for ye least finger of God will at a sudden
overthrow an infinite number of Senacheribes, A great comfort to all
Christians.
Mahomets, Iulianus, or Antiochus. This Cosroes a cruel enemy to all
Christians, was driven home with many plagues, and in the end slain of his
own son as the Historye shows. Cosroe slain of his own son.


Mauritius being a cruel Prince not regarding the Christians being in
captivity, would not give money out of his treasure to redeem them, for ye
which afterward the wrath of God fell on his kingdom, and he was murdered of
one whom he loved entyrelye. Caganus being wrath that Mauritius did not
redeem his Christians, A slaughter of Christians
he caused all the Christians to be put to death, with diverse kinds of
torments. In the army diverse conspiracyes were wrought, also Petrus ye
brother of Mauritius being a chief Captain polled the men of war of their
wages. Petrus.
By the hardened heart of Mauritius toward the Christians who in his quarrel
fought so courageously, was so much hated that on Christmas day he entringe
the Temple, was almost stoned to death. He became without cause suspicious
fearing every man, for he put in prison a Duke called Philippicus that married
his sister, suspecting yt he sought to depose him, Germanus.
also Germanus to who^ his wives sister was married, would have put him in
prison: Also his own son Theodosius he suspected of the like. Mauritius
feared the more these things because of straung things that happened and
dreams unto him: There appeared a blasing star like a sword, and a certain
monk ru^ne with a sword drawn to the Emperors Image, and crying out:
Imperatorem ferro periturum. Mauritius himself dreamed yt he was given to be
murdered of Phocas, whereupon he brought Philippicus out of prison (as one he
durst trust most) and he asked of him: Qualis sit Phocas? Philippicus
answered: Centurio ambitiosus sed timidus. He is says he, an ambitious
Centurion but fearful: Then Mauritius answered again: Si timidus est,
homicida est. The fearful man not by manhood, but by murder finisheth his
purpose. Mauritius was brought to great contempt in the army, and diverse
conspiracyes wrought to put him down: the men of war about Istrus chose
Phocas, a barbarous bloudye Thratian to be Emperor. This Phocas being chosen
Emperor, made have to Constantinople, and there he was Crowned in the
Subberbes by Cyprian the Patriarch.

Mauritius being at Calcedon for grief of mind and trouble fell sick, being
thither fled with his wife and children: but Phocas this tyrant commanded
him to be killed, with Phocas diverse other rascolles, who by themperours favor
came up and conspired with Phocas to destroy in his sight, Mauritius two
youngest sons, who killed afterward his.3. daughters, then their mother
Constantina the daughter of Tiberius the Emperor before, Mauritius beheld ye
death of his daughters with great patience, A lamentable end of a Prince.
but when he saw his wife put to death, he uttered these words confessinge
his own faults: O Lord thou art just and thy judgments are right. Last of
all Mauritius had his head cut of, and so the bodies were laid upon the
shore, to be looked at of the people, which were afterward buried of an
Eunucke of Mauritius. Theodosius who was before of Mauritius his father
commanded to flee to the Persians was taken and murdered at the commandment
of Phocas. He put to death Germanus the father in law of Theodosius, and
Theodosius wife also, A detestable tyrante.
and then afterward he killed all the friends of Mauritius. Great was the
wrath of God on Mauritius (as all Historyes do note) for not redeeminge the
Christians which being taken in his wars, was in thraldom with an infidel
Prince: No money ought to be spared to redeem our Christian brethren, if money
may redeem them, and full charitable, through all Christendom almost money is
collected to set at liberty Christians, the end of Mauritius was in this sort
and that most miserable.

This was done in the.4366. years after the beginning of the world. Of
Rome.1355. Of Christ. 604.

Phocas.


PHocas a base Centurion and a Thracian in ye seditious uproar was created an
Emperor. He murtheringe his master and king Mauritius of whom he was brought
up, this Phocas governed vii. years, he was Crowned at Constantinople of the
patriarcke Ciriacus. As Soon as Mauritius was slain, A tyrante.
immediately he exercised crueltye against his friends: After he was placed in
the Emperial seat without all nobility, as by bloudye practices he obtained
the same, so he exercised himself to the destruction of the Romans with all
crueltye tormenting them, given over to all abomination. He took away other
men's wives from their husbands: he made much of wicked persons: He wasted the
Romayne Empire of their riches and treasures: he lived at Rome in all beastly
dronkennes, and suffered the Roman Empire to be spoiled of the Persians, of
the Hunnes, and of Caganus king of Hungarye who^ I spoke of before. The wrath
of God fell upon this murderer, and all that host and power of men which was
ye overthrow of Mauritius and priuye to his death. For Cosroes in.ii. great
battles made slaughter of the Romans infinitlye, and ye rest he led away
captives. This Cosroes wanne from the Romans Jerusalem, and murdered there
a great number of Christians, he possessed the Dominion of Cyria and destroyed
many Princes.

Phocas through his ill life came in hatred, not only of the Romans, but also
of al other Princes: ye murder of Mauritius committed by Phocas was not
forgotten. Priscus who in the time of Mauritius was one of his chief
Captains, and also a Duke and son in law to Phocas: also Heraclius President
in Africa whose wife Phocas had taken away, all these conspyred against Phocas
to destroy him. This was ye effect of their purpose, that at one time Priscus
should bring his host of Thracians to Constantinople, and Heraclius his
host out of Africa to Constantinople also, Photius with another part to set
upon Phocas in his Palace, where small resista^ce was made, these entering ye
Emperors house, took Phocas and brought him to Heraclius ye son of
Heracliona who was then general of the parts in Assyria. Immediately the men
of war cut of his legs and arms, and cut of his priuities, and last of
all his head. This was the end of that tyrant, who before murdered the
Emperor Mauritius, his wife, his children, his kinsfolk and friends, and
plagued with all calamyes the Romans: God never leaves unpunished any murder
committed, Murder.
and most of all he scourges the bloudye factes of those who seeks to destroy
their own king or Prince, and be domestical vipers to their own country.

This is that Phocas that first made the bishop of Rome, supreme head above
all other bishopes: a godly foundation of superioritye, grounded and vpholded
by so wicked a tyrant, and as a tyrante gave that title of superiority, so they
like bloudye tyrants against Princes, do houlde and defend their superiority,
not as humble Prelates in sincere doctrine and veretye, but by sword and
armor keep it, subduinge Princes, and make them prostratinge to worship them,
kissing their feet. Gregory did ones disco^mende this Phocas therein, as it
appears: for Mauritius made ye Patriarch of Co^sta^tinople chief bishop,
which brought co^tentio^ up between the bishops of Rome and of Constantinople
for the superioritye. Oicoumenicos chief over the house of God.
The bishop of Constantinople named himself Oicoumenicon, the bishop of all
the whole world, for so this word Oicoumenicon signifies. But as the Romans
were never Lords over all the world, so their ambitious Prelates never
Oicoumenicoi, for then had they been over all the world the head. But they
being most ambitious, have gotten so vain a title to them: which vain title
Gregorye in those days reprehended as a most ambitious title in these
words. O wicked times, O detestable conditions, the world on every side is
set a fire with wars, the Christians are murdered of the worshippers of
Idolles, Cittyes are overthrown of barbarous Nations, and the Christians
spoiled: And yet for all this the Prelates do as it were with leapinge joy
rejoice all, at the universal calmityes, and with profane title do vaunte
themselves.

* This was done in the year of the world, four Thousand three hundredth
seuentye three: And after the first building of Rome, one Thousand three
hundredth sixtye one: And in the year of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
612. ****

Heraclius.
HERACLIVS ye son of Heracliona (who was President of Africa, at what time
as Phocas was killed.) He was borne of a noble house: Immediatlye by the
Senate and men of war was made Emperor, he governed.xxx. years. His
gouernmente was famous in two things, the one was fortunate, the overthrow of
Cosroe king of Persia: the other estate full of calamitye, to al mankind. For
in his time rose the beginning of that beastlye Mahomet his kingdom, Mahomet.
of the which it shall be entreated orderlye.

** Heraclius making peace with Caganus, by his Ambassadors he made peace also
with Cosroe, who at that time had spoiled Jerusalem, and possessed Cyria, and
had murdered 90. Thousand of Christians, at that time as the Jews had bought
many Christians to kill them. Cosroe made answer that he would not cease his
wars until he had brought to pass yt his God of Persia might be
worshipped, and the invocation of that God quight abolished Qui dictur
ciucifixus, that is said to be crucified. Cosroe the proud king was puffed up
with pride, for his great success in the time of Phocas. Heraclius was in
great distress by means yt his Captains was false to him, Treason.
Heraclius the more wyllingly fought because not for kingdoms sake only, but
for defense of Christ's Church his quarrel was attempted. I godly quarrel to
war.
Heraclius therefore styrred up by the help of God, led his host into Cyria
to Azotum, from Azotum whence Cosroe fled. Heraclius fought with the host of
Cosroe, God overthrows the persecutors of his saints.
who being driven to flight: Cosroe was oppressed with great calamitye at home,
where with his great pride and blasphemy was punished. Cosroe made his second
son successor after him called Mardaces, displacing his eldest son Syroe:
Mardaces.
upon this the elder son Syroe took his father Cosroe, Syroe.
and killed his brother Mardaces in ye sight of his father, Cosroe kille^*
after yt he murdered his father Cosroe. By this means Syroe obtained the
kingdom, and because he would be safe he made peace with Heraclius,
restoringe home his captives, among whom was Zacharias the Patriarcke of
Jerusalem. Zacharias.
Also Heraclius restored his captives, and received Cyria and Jerusalem, this
great wars continued 6. years: Heraclius returninge from these wars,
entered Byzance sittinge in a Chariot without ornaments, (which had been meet
for a triumphinge Prince) and openly gave thanks to the son of God for this
great victory. The wrath of God upon blasphemers.
And truly the vengeance of God for the blasphemye of Cosroe, as of
Senacherib, Nichanor, Antiochus, and Iulianus and such like, is worthy of
perpetual memory.

In the time of this Heraclius the dreadful change of all mankind, at a
sudden was made by reason that the doctrine of Mahomet was spredde abroad.
This doctrine of Mahomet the Arabians did first embrace, The Arabia^s first
embraced Mahomets doctrine.
who never obeyed kingdoms or laws lawfully appointed: for ye Arabians either
did exercise robbi^g of each other at home, or else of their own voluntary will
abroad, many of them have served under the baner of other Princes for wages.
Mahomet wrote a law meet for this licentious people, Mahomets laws.
desirous of liberty, and man by the enlarging of liberty his power. Mahomet
was borne in Arabia as many do write, and first of all joined to him the host
of the Saracenes, The first beginning of ye Saracenes.
whereupon afterward mention is made of the host of the Saracenes. I think
it good to show how the Saracenes first came: It is manifest by ye holy
Prophet Moses, Ismaell.
that the ofspringe of Ismaell who descended from Agar, did possess Arabia,
Agra.
thereof the Cittye Agra has his name of Agar the mother of Ismaell, Agrei
and their people Agrei, who in the first book of Paralepomenon ye.5. Chapter
are called Agareni, where the limittes of Galaad are showed, Agareni.
that name Agareni is in the 92. Psalm. In that same conntrye where it is
certain that Agareni were, Ptolomeus places the Saracenes: And the name of ye
Saracenes is in the Historye of Zenobia, in the victoryes of Aurelianus
Emperor of Rome. It is to be thought that that people called Agareni, had
rather be named Saraceni of Sara, because it is more glory for them to vaunt
that they be borne of Sara, then of her handmaide Agar. Mahomet afterward by
mention of this glorious name did confirm and strengthen his host: Cryinge
out that the promise of the kingdom of the world, did appertain unto them
only given unto the posteritye of Abraham, The Proclamation of Mahomet to his
people.
because they were ye sons of Sara.

The host of the Saracenes were under the banner of Heraclius, in wars
against the Persians, and because they were without their wages, they
trayterouslye fled from Hreaclius. Some Historyes write that they were
contumeliously used at ye Treasurers hands of Heraclius, in yt they said they
had not money sufficient to pay to the Roman soldiers, and to the Greeks,
and much less to satisfy such a number of dogs as they were. These Arabians
were thieves and lived by spoil, as the Tartars do. The power that fled from
Heraclius of the Saracenes, did spoil many towns near to Damascus. Also
many spoiling wretches being furthered of Mahomet, for Mahomet married a rich
wife, and by his riches and large gifts, brought to pass that his men of
war, with gifts should hear him, and to constitute him their Captain, and
that their camp might be the stronger, there were taken away al controuersyes
in Religion. Mahomet set forth to them a new form of doctrine, and said he
had talked with God, thereby thinkinge to increase his power. The beginning of
Mahomets kingdoms is put in the.623. year after Christ: After Mahomet
succeaded Amiras his son in law, who took Damascus and made it his Princely
seat, after this he took Gasan, and Jerusalem he besieged.ii. years. The
third after Mahomet, was Ahumar, who possessed a great part of Assyria, and
held in Dominion Egypt. Then Muhauias the 4. king after Mahomet, took Cesaria
and Palestina.ii. years besieged, and ouercomminge Orimasda the son of
Cosroe, he added Persia to the kingdom of the Saracenes, and made them keep
Mahomets laws, which the Persians observe at this day. So wtin 30. years the
Saracenes possessed Arabia, Palestina, Phenitia, Syria, Egipte and Persia.
After this they possessed all Africa, and by little and little they went
forward into Asia, and largely did set out the law of Mahomet in their
Empire: although among them were great tumultes and sedition, and division
of kingdoms followed them as in all other kingdoms: Yet the Princes of the
Saracenes called Sultany, had their chief Dominion in Syria, Egypt, Africa,
and a great part of Asia about 400. years, until a king of the Saracenes who
ruled Persia, brought the Turks against Babylon. Who by little and little
receyuinge the law of Mahomet, they drive out of the kingdom of Persia the
Sarasen king, in the time of Constantine Monomachus or of Co^radus the French
man not long before the setting forth of Godfride with his power and host
into Palestine. It is true yt the Nation of the Turks is signified under ye
name of Gog and Magogge, the which Esechiel the Prophet says to be a people
Northwarde, in the.18. Chapter and.19. It appears by the Prophet Daniell,
that he speaks of the Saracenes kingdom, when he foresheweth the destruction
of ye.iiii. Monarchies: The destruction of the.4. Monarchies
Saying that such a kingdom should come, yt which should set forth a new
doctrine blasphemous against God, and make war against the saints, who be ye
Christians. The doctrine of Mahomet.
This agrees manifestlye with the kingdom of the Saracines or Turks, for
they have a blasphemous Doctrine, denyinge Christ to come in the flesh, and
many other abominable heresies defacing Christ and his Doctrine.

This doctrine the Jews received and many other mo: In their Alcaran it is
written that ye holy man Sargius and other Jews, have sat in counsel and
set out a certain universal doctrine, which the Turks at this day do hold
of Mahomets faith. Sargius an heriticall Muncke.
This Sergius an heretical Muncke unlearned fayninge himself to be inspeared
of God, came into Russia, and spredde many heresies there, and many iudeicall
Cerimonyes foolish and abominable, Russia.
which I will set out at large in a book of the Moscouiticall kingdom. He
lies buried at the Monasterye of Troites, called otherwise the Monastery of
Sargius: by who^ the Moscouites say many miracles have been wrought, by his holy
meditation and prayers fountaynes of waters hane been spronge up, where
there has been none to be found. And they say and it is believed, that the
body of Sargius never putrifyeth, and it is a great point of Religion so to
believe: All men may see the shape of a body under a clothe, but no man so
boulde to search it, for that were abominable heresye, to doubt or not to
believe what is told them of Sargius.

They say by this miracle, A marvelous pot.
there is a pot boylinge with meat, and no man brings either water, fire,
or meat, and yet the pot dailye boyleth and feeds infinite persons, and so
continues. I marvel there is so many miserable parsons that dye for hunger,
and so great a myraculous pot.

I my self have been at that Monasterye where this Sergius lies buried: And
of this writes also an Ambassador called Sigismundus, sent from Ferdinando
to Basilius this great Emperors father, that rules now over so many
kingdoms.

Mahomet to bring men unto his law, says yt the kingdom of ye universal
world, is promised unto his Nation, because it is descended from Sara, and that
it is to be kept by force of arms, and all Nations to be compelled to obey
the law of Mahomet, or else to dye or live in servitude: who soever speaks
against any thing in the Alcaran to dye. He does permit a man to marrye as
many wives as he will, and to make deuorce at his own pleasure, he punishes
homicide and theft as the law of Moses did, to make a distinction of his
people from other Nations. He has appointed certain iudeicall Ceremonies, as
washinge of all their body to be clean from sin: Washing of all the body the
Moscouites use, in ye hot houses or stoues sweating out their sins, or else
they stand without the Church door: And shauinge all parts of their bodies
the Turks, Tartars and Persians do use. The law of Mahomet observes
Cyrcumcision to confirm a persuasion of a kingdom promised to the posteritye
of Sara. The Sabbath day on ye saturday with the Turks and Muscouites.
Their sunday is there the sixth day of the week, every day they are
commanded by their Alcaran to pray.5. times, he gives leave to eat the
flesh of all beasts, fish or foul, yet he excepteth swynes flesh: To those
that does observe this law, he promises victory and riches in this life, and
after this life to be in the joys of Paradyce, and most happy is he that dies
in the quarrel of Mahomet. With many other blasphemous points of Religion. It
is manifest that the doctrine of Mahomet is of latter time after the Apostles
doctrine, more the^ 500. years: therefore it is impossible the Church of
Mahomet to be of God, in that he does reject the writings of the Apostels and
Prophets. This kingdom of the Saracenes rose at the first, prophesyed by
Daniell of.iii. horns yt were plucked from the Romans Monarchy, which was
Syria, Egypt, and Africa. This is that Antichrist yt denies Christ to come in
the flesh. He that honors not ye father, honors not the son, this is
life everlasting that they should acknowledge the true God, and whom thou have
sent Jesus to be Christ. Who so denies the son, has not the father, no man
comes to ye father, but by the son. He that does not believe, is already
condemned: because he does not believe in the only begotten son of God. Who
so does not believe the son shall not see life, but the wrath of God
remains upon him. No other foundation can be laid, than that which is laid
already, which is JESUS CHRIST. Thus much as concerning Mahomet and his
doctrine, now to the storye of Heraclius.

Fabia Eudoxia was the first wife of Heraclius, by whom he begat Constantine
the younger, whose offspring for a time enjoyed ye Empire, although his mother in
law went about to kill him with poison, that she might bring the Empire to her
son, borne in unlawful marriage. For Heraclius after the death of his wife
Fabia, he married his brothers daughter called Martina: of who^ Heraclionas was
borne, his mother to make him Emperor, poisoned Constantine her husbands
son the sixth monthe after he reigned. Pyrrhus the Patriarcke did further this
pretense, who hated Constantine being of a good Religion: Good Religion hated
of the wicked.
their bloudye conspiracye brought the^ a like end, as God always punishes
bloudye factes. So on them fell the wrath of God, for Martina and her son
Heraclionas governed not fully two years, for the Senate apprehended them, and
cut out the Empress tongue: A just reward of murder.
least by witty persuasions she might allure the people. Heraclionas her son
had his nosetrelles cut of, and they were both exiled into Capadocia, and there
dyed in prison: Pyrrhus the Patriarcke being giltye of the fact fled, and
in flying was taken and killed. Thus yt wrath of God fell upon this horrible
murderer, she murdering her son in law: Her bloody purposes for ambition
sone dissolved, and thereby the incest marriage punished, for she married her
uncle. And the holy Patriarcke was according to his bloudye fact rewarded.

This was done in the year of the world.4684. The year of Rome.1396. And in
the year of Christ.644. ****

Constantinus the younger.


HEraclius otherwise called Constantinus the younger, from his first birth was
Crowned of his father Emperor. This Constantinus begat of Gregory the
daughter of Niceta who was a Senator, Constans the next Emperor in
succession. This Consta^tinus by his stepmother Martina was poisoned ye first
year of his reign. This Martina his stepmother usurped with Heracliona,
being..10. years of age the Empire, and by a conspiracye of the Court, two
years not fully passed, they were taken and set into banishment. They cut
out the tongue of Martina, least that by her eloquente talk (wherewith she
much excelled) she might persuade the people. They cut of the nose of
Heracliona her son, and then they chose Constans Emperor, without the
choice of the men of war, which before that time was sildome seen.

Constance the third.


COnstance the son of Constantine the yo^ger, the nephewe of Heraclius
(Martina being banished with her son) was made Emperor of the Senate. He
governed 27. years, he was unfortunate in his enterprises against the
Saracenes: At home he killed his brother Theodotius, and fauouringe the heresye
of those who was called Monothelete: An heresye.
He put to death certain godly men rebukinge this error. At his
commandment Theodorus Caliopa by disceate and gyle, took Martine bishop and
sent him into Thracia, and there Marten the bishop dyed with hunger and
filthe of prison.

The kingdom of the Saracenes greatly increased, for from the beginning of
the kingdom of Mahomet, which began in the 623. years, unto that present
year of Christ.6^5. and the xiii. year of Constance, that they sending their
Nauye from Phenicia, did spoil the sea coasts of Asia. Constance the.13.
year of his reign, was overcome in a battle fought in Licia by Muthauia a
chief Captain of the Saracenes, and also the Saracenes spoiled the Roodes.
Constance at the length came into Italye, and was over come of the Lumbardes
in battle, with whom he took truce, and the City of Rome being spoiled by
them: he returned into Sycilia, where this unfortunate Emperor being in a
Bathe, was strangled. After he had reigned 27. years. And in the year of the
world.4932. Of Rome.1423. And of our Lord and Savior Christ..670.

Constantinus Barbatus.


THis man began to reign at what time as his father made him Emperor, before
he led his host into Italy, and at that time he was Crowned. He reigned 17.
years, he was more fortunate then his father. In his days a great many of
Saracenes, came even to the waules of Byzance, from thence repulsed, they
possessed Chisicum: there they remained.7. years, and oftentimes made wars
against Constantinople, A subtle pollicye.
Until such time as wild fire was devised of Calinicus, which fire consumed
the Saracenes ships under the water, by which slaughter the rest were
compelled to fly away. At Malia where contrary winds do make oftentimes
whirlewindes, The wrath of God.
the rest of their Nauyes were destroyed by rocks, and the rest were drowned
in the Sea. There dyed of the Saracenes as good as 3000. Their chief Captain
Muthauia sought peace at the Romans hands, and peace was made for.30. years.
After this the Bulgarians began to be known, which be in Misia ye lower which
had their name of the floude Volga, Volga.
whose head and fountain ryseth not far from Liuonia in the marishe
grounds of it, so some do write. But it is certain that the head of Volga
ryseth out of the marryshe grounds of Belosero, Belosero signifies as much in
the Russe tongue, as Albus Lacus: that is a white lake, and passes from thence
by the Cittye Iaroslaue, a Cittye with a Castle in it, which is in ruin. The
floude Volga is as broad as twyse ye Thames at London, in that place many
goodlye streams enter into it. Volga.
By Volga they pass to the Mare Caspium toward the East it runninge, and so
to the Mare Caspium: from thence to Persia. At what time the Bulgarians
overcame the Romayne host, the Emperor made peace with them, and gave unto
them Missia the lower: which at this day is called Bulgaria. In the xii. year
of this Constantine, which was in the year of Christ.681. A Sinod was
assembled at Constantinople: this was called the.vi. Sinod in the which it was
desputed against the heresies of Samosatenus. Constantine the Emperor dyed
peaceablye, making peace in the Empire of the East, and in the Church. The
year of the world..4649. The year after the first buildinge of Rome. 1440.
And after the incarnation of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.687. ***

Justinianus the second.


IVstinianus the son of Constantinus Barbatus, was made Emperor after his
father. He governed.10. years before he was driven into exile: after that
being restored he reigned.6. years. This Prince was the last of Heraclius
stock, a man unquiet, cruel and unfortunate, many calamityes fell on him by
two of his Court, that were sycophants and flatterers, who took upon them
great authority, and did many mischieues thereby. As in the time of
Theodosius the younger: Eutropius who^ for his mischieues they called Gorgone.
One of the sycophants in the Court of Iustinianus, was a Moncke called
Theodosius, to whom by reason that he had so great authority, they called him
general: the other was called Stephane ye Emperors Chaplene, who governed al
things as touching Religion: Who as it seems was of to much credit with the
Emperor, when he durst beat the old Empress. These two evil persons
exercised crueltye against the chief Dukes and Captains, they kept Leontius a
Duke.ii. years in prison: who escaping out of prison (the Patriarcke helping
him) he was made Emperor, he cut of the Nosethrelles from Justinian, and
sent him to Chirsonesus. Theodosius and Stephen his two sycophants of the
Court being bound with fetters, were drawn through the Cittye, and
afterward buried. This Leontius governed not above three years, for Tiberius
Apsimarus returning with his host out of Africa, being driven back of the
Saracenes: and said Leontius was by a conspiracye made Emperor of the host.
He caused Leontius Noosetrelles to be cut of, and put in a Monastery to be a
Moncke. He sent his brother Heraclius into Cyria against the Saracenes, who for
a time repulsed them. He gouerued 7. years.

Justinian before mentioned, returned being aided of the Bulgarians: who
commanded Leontius and Apsimarus, to be led bound through the market, and
trade upon their necks, they lying prostrate at his feet, and then
immediatlye cut of their heads. He pulled out the eyes of Callinicus the
Patriarch: he hanged up Heraclius the brother of Apsimarus. At what time as
he sent his Nauye against Chirson the host made Philippicus Bardanes Emperor
who made have to Constantinople, and took Justinian and his son Tiberius and
killed them, taking them from a Santuarye place: So three Emperors in a short
space were killed. This was done in the year of the world.4675. Of Rome.
1466. Of our Savior Christ.713.

Philippicus Bardanes.


PHilippicus Bardanes being made Emperor of the army, which forsaked
Justinian: He held his government 2* years, he put down Images in the
Temples He ouerthrewe the decrees of the 6. Sinode, and defended his opinion
against Monotheletas, but by the counsel of Artemius his Secretarye, his eyes
put out was cast into prison. In ye year of the world. 4677. Of Rome 1468. Of
our Savior Christ.715.

Artemius, otherwise called Anastasius.


WHo was named the second, held his Empire one year and.iii. months. He was
learned and was chief of all the secretaryes of ye Empire, and being desirous
of concord in the Church, he repressed those that would overthrow the sixth
Sinode. In all his wars unfortunate, for his men of war corrupted with
the seditious uproar of the Emperors before, and grieved to be put from their
old licentiousnes, they made Theodotius Adramittenus Emperor, who having
Artemius put from his kingdom, and afterward included in a Monasterye. He
governed but one year, and willinglye gave place to Leo Isaurus: but Artemius
after a few years gathering an host out of Bulgaria, went about to recover
his Empire, but he being brought to Leo was murdered. In the year of the
world.4680. The year of Rome.1471. And of Christ.718.

Leo the third.


LEO the third of that name before, named Isaurus Conon, and governed the
Alanes afterward being sent of Artemius against the Saracenes, as soon as he
hard that Theodosius was made Emperor against Artemius, (he although he
would defend Artemius) came to Nicomedia, and taking the son of Theodosius,
made a covenant with his father to give place in kingdom. So Leo Isaurus
commanded his chief Captains and host to swear, he governed 25. years. The
time of this Leo Isaurus is worthy most consideration, for in his time was that
great wars of the Saracenes, and there they shall see how sone the power and
might of the Sarcenes increased. The Saracenes were driven out of France by
the happy victory of Carolus Martellus, Duke of Brabantia: This Carolus
Martellus was grandfather of Charles the great who was Emperor. And thus
consider the cruel Mahomet began to reign in ye 623. year after Christ, from
that time to the beginning of Leo Isaurus, that is to the year of Christ.718.
are years 105. In this space Mahomet and his successors which are called
Saraceni and Agareni, obtained Araba, Palestina, Syria, Persia, Egypt and
Africa. They passed out of Africa into Spain, where they held government 10.
years: then into France 3. hundredth thousand and 70. of the Saracenes russhed
in even unto Turonum, into other places they passed as into the lesser Asia,
they besieged Byzance, Constantinus Barbatus raigninge: this was done in the
year of our Sa-Christ. 674. From Byzance repelled, they returned with a great
host in the time of Leo Isaurus.40. years after, to ye beginning of this
Emperors reign. Then again two years they besieged Constantinople, Magasda
being their chief Captain, but the Almightye God overthrew them, for their
host perished with famine and pestilence, the nauye of ships with lightining
from Heaven were drowned and burned: and thus they were driven back in their
enterprises, least they should obtain the less Asia and Byzance. But great
wars were moved in France by them, first Abiramus a king brought a great
multitude of Saracenes to the number of 30000. men. Eudo Lord of Aquitania
brought him in against the Frenchemen, the Saracenes spoiled Burdogala, taking
it by force of arms, and even to Turonum a great number of Christians being
murdered, as they passed: At this time Italye and France were in great
peril. Then Carolus Martellus keepinge his wars in France and Frisia, A
Christen quarrel to defend Christendom.
he being ye chief stay of France, brought in a great power against the
Saracenes. This Carolus Martellus, required of Eudon that he would not thus see
ye name of Christians to be overthrown, and gave him Christian exhortacion,
that leauinge the sect of the Saracenes, he would come himself with the
host of the Frenchemen. The battle joined, through the power of Almighty God,
the host of Carolus Martellus had the victory, and all yt multitude of
Saracenes was murdered, and Abiramus their king lay dead in ye field.
Although ye Saracenes took this foil yet they ceased not as yet, for sone
after eut of Spain, two great hoastes of ye Saracenes rushed into France,
trustinge to the aid of the Visogothes in Aquitani, and those that were in
France.

Athinius king of the Saracenes with a great power and nauye of ships,
invaded the parts of Narbone in France, and took Auinionem at a sudden and
made it their strong hold: then Carolus Martellus delivered that from their
hands, and expelled the Saracenes a great number of them, with Athinius their
king, who fled into his ships with a great part of his soldiers, and was
brought to Narbone. As Soon as Carolous Martellus did besiege this City,
Amoreus another king of ye Saracenes to help those that were besieged, came
out of Spain: then Carolus Martellus making have least ye power of the
enemies should join, in the valleye near to Narbone by the floude Bury, he
had a great battle with ye Saracenes, and in the same battle Amoreus their
king being slain, the army amazed with ye death of their king, the whole
host was partly killed of them. The death of Amoreus being known, and the
spoil of his army, Athinius fled from Narbone with his power, and robbing
in the Isles near to Liguria, and so be went into Spain. Carolus Martellus
overthrew Naroena, least afterward the Visogothes of it should raise new
wars. By these calamityes and foyles, ye Saracenes were quight vanquished,
who hoped to have enjoyed both France and Italy: after this they held them
selves within the compass of the mountains of Pirineus. by this calamity
France and Italye was saved from ye spoil, and also that wicked Doctrine and
blasphemous religion of Mahomet, was quighte in those places extinguished. No
wars was more profitable then these, nor more necessary then to defend so
many bodies of Citizens, and families of of Christians, and from such
blasphemous people and doctrine. These be the most causes why noble men wore
armor: and hereupon the king of Spain called Alphonsus in his banner has a
portured Pelican woundinge her own breast, and with her blood nourishing her
young ones with this title: Prolege and pro grege. As who should say, A Prince
ought to ve^ture his life, for ye defense of godly laws and for his people:
These are the.ii principal points of wars. This victory was profitable to
Spain, because many Christians that came of the Goths held the rough and
baren places of the mountains of Pireni, Cantabria and Asturia, they goinge
forward by little and little vanquishing the Saracenes, and at the length
recovered Spain, so of that remnant of the Goths is descended the progenye of
the last kings of Spain: from the which Charles the fifte Emperor of that
name, by the mother side is come. God by his mighty power raised up Carolus
Martellus to this mighty war. He prevailed much against ye Saracenes being
in number infinite: Where God defends, the coward chaseth away the strong and
mighty, the fool the wise, no pollicye preuayleth where God gives the
victory, and where as God disposes a kingdom or state, the devise and
counsel, and pollicye of the wicked are caught to their own destruction of the
wicked.

This Carolus Martellus was of a noble blood in France, and near to the
Princes of that land: he was Duke of Brabant, God diversely saved him from
many perilles, who being but tender of years, by his mother being a
steppemother was put in prison at Colleine, her name was VVoldruda, his father
Pipinus then at that time being dead, yet from that bloudye purposes he by the
power of God escaped.

This Carolus Martellus obteyninge his fathers dignity, vanquished the
Frisians, and after that he overcame Eudon in Aquitania: After this God
blessing him in his victoryes, the Princes and chief governors of France,
gave unto him the kingdom of France which he would not receive, being content
with his fathers dignitye. After this he vanquished quight ye Saracenes that
came into France: in these wars he had ye aid of king Lutbrande a king of
ye Lumbardes, and Lanfryde a Duke of the Almanes, of Odille Duke of Bauaria.
The name and authority of Carolus Martellus was so great, yt at what time as
this Lutbrande king of the Lumbardes did besiege the City of Rome, and the
bishop of Rome in this extremity sought for aid, then Carolus Martellus
only by an Embassage, brought to pass yt the Lumbards should depart from the
siege, and to make peace with the bishop of Rome. This Carolus Martellus
governed in his fathers estate and seat 26. years, he dyed in the year of
Christ.741. The 11. of the Kalends of November, not long before the death of
the Emperor Leo Isaurus: He was buried among the kings of France, in Saint
Denis Church, and upon his Tomb was put this Epitaphe.

Ille Brabantinus Dux, primus in orb triumphans,
Malleus in mundo, specialis Christicolarum:
Dux Dominusque Ducu^, Regum quoque Rex fore spernit,
Non vult regnare, sed regibus Imperat ipse.
Thus much of the Saracenes, and of the victoryes of Carolus Martellus, which
acts are necessary to be known: the Saracenes being expelled from Byzance,
Leo Isaurus made an edict by the which he put down all Images in Temples, and
for that fact he was called Eiconomacus, and so Gregorye the third of that
name, shot out against him his thundringe boultes of excommunication, and
let tribute to be paid to him in Italy. At this time began a contract or
league, between the Bishop of Rome and the Frenchmen: the Frenchemen flourished
not only in power, but also in virtue and godlynes, therefore defense was
sought at their hands so often.

The year of the world.4740. Of Rome.1475. And after the incarnation of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.742.? *

Constantinus the v.


COnstantinus Copronimus the son of Leo Isaurus, was crowned in the life of
his father, by Germanus the Patriarcke, he governed 35. years. He was called
Copronimus because being an infant newborn, and in Baptizing did defyle the
water with the filthye excreme^tes of his body. Copros in Greek signi^yeth
Stercus.

This Constantinus was more vehement then his father in puttinge down Images
(and for that cause was Artabasdus made Emperor against him, by the consent
of the Patriarcke, and of the nobilitye.) But this Constantinus after two
years, took Ardabasdus and put out his eyes, and also of his two children: he
gave commandment to beat ye Patriarcke with whippes, and to set him on an
Ass with his face turned to the tail, and to hold the tail in his hand, and
so to be carried about. The like punishment is used in Moscouia to ride on a
Bulls back.

This Emperor made great wars against the Bulgaria^s, at the length after
his crueltye sheewed, he dyed of sickness: In the days of this Emperor, the
estate of the Vicegere^tes in Italye ceased, and Pipinus the son of Carolus
Martellus was made king of France, in the year of Christ.751. Some Historyes
note, that by the authority of Zacharias bishop of Rome, the nobles of
France being made free of their oath and alegiance toward king Hildericke,
deposed him and put him in a Monastery. Bonifacius Crowned Pipinus king of
France at Suessiane: after this Pipinus was called for into Italye twyse,
against Astulphus king of the Lumbards. In both these expeditions the great
virtue of Pipinus appeared, and used the Lumbardes curteouslye, and made so
gentle a peace, that he set in quietness the kingdom of the Lumbardes not
possessing one foot of their country, he used the more favor because of
Lutbrande a king of the Lumbardes, with whom he was brought up. In this first
wars against the Lumbards, he compelled Astulphus being besieged at Ticima,
to promise to keep peace geeuinge pledges, and Pipinus being content with the
promise he returned into France: But the fearcenes of Astulphus was more and
more increased, not molifyed. For after the return of Pipinus, Astulphus
(against his leage and covenant) made new wars, and with a great power went
to Rome and besieged it three months. And as soon as king Pipinus came into
Italye, Astulphus not able to encounter with Pipinus, left ye siege of Rome,
fearing his own kingdom of Lumbardye: and although Pipinus might have
vanquished Astulphus out of his kingdom, yet he full of all humanity, willed
him to observe the conditions of peace, and to be content with his fathers
kingdom, and to leave of the siege of Rome and from Italye. Pipinus not
credeting the fair promises of ye Lumbardes, tarried in Italye until such
time as Astulphus had brought back his power from Rome and other Cities. At
what time as Pipinus departed out of Italye, he led his power and great
host against the Saxons, and the Bauarians, but Tassillo king of Bauaria
without fight, entered into amitye with Pipinus, who commanded him to keep his
kingdom (for he was the sisters son of Pipinus.) The Saxons being overcome,
peace was so granted, that being content with their own, they should take
nothing from the kingdom of France, and to live with their own laws: The
(...) Parliamente in France. Why a Parliament is ordained.
Only this tribute they should pay yearelye to the Frenchmen.300. barde
horse meet for the wars.

Of this Pipinus was the Parliamente first ordained in France, the which for
the wisdom of the Judges and worthy counselors, gathered from all parts of
the Dominion for pollicye in geuinge orders, a care universal of all estates,
for ordayning any statutes and decrees, in reuoking any enormities fallinge
upon any common wealth, Cittye or Town, for the sauegard of the Prince and
his estate, it passes all assembles. These chief points of nobility was in
Pipinus very heroycall: He moved only just wars, upon just occasions, in
victoryes he retained justice and modestye, and set forth laws very profitable
to the common wealth. These were the chief matters which were in ye Weste, in
the time of this Copronimus. Also, in the East out of the mouth or Port of the
Mare Caspiu^, the Turks rushed into the land of Colchis and in to Armenia,
where they fought with the Saracenes. In the time of Mauritius the Turks fought
with the Persians, but they were overthrown of the Persians, and therefore
their first invasion is not so famous as the second time. In this time the
force of the Saracenes power was most mighty, which happened in the days of
this Copronimus and Pipinus. The mountains of the Mare Caspiu^ are near to
Iberia, where now are found out many rich mines of metal: By this Sea
Caspium the English Marchantes pass with their adventures into Persia, from
^ar^slaue and so upon Volga on the fresh water two Thousand mile of Russia
miles, and so they pass to Casane, which ye great Emperor of Russia has at
this day in his own possession, it was the chief City of the Tartars, from
thence to Astrachan whereof the Emperor of Russia calls himself great
Emperor of Astracan and Emperor of Casane. At Astrachani a great filthy
stincke is of fish that is there taken, by which corruption the air is much
infected, and many strangers passinge thereby are killed with ill air. It is
called Caspium of an Hebrew word Kesephe which signifies silver, of the which
the places by are plentious of such mines: So that most noble writer Philippe
Melancton writes.

At what time as the Turks took a way the kingdom from the Saracenes. it
shall be declared afterward.

The year of the world.4739. Of Rome. 1530. Of Christ.777.

Leo the fourth.


LEO the son of Constantinus Copronimus, succeaded his father in the Empire,
he governed five years, he was Crowned of the Patriarcke in his fathers
life. His father married him to a wife called Irene, an Athinian borne: This
Leo the fourth, followed his father in putting down Images. He sent in his
time an army into Syria, which did rather stir up the Saracenes, then
repress them. Not long after Irene made peace with the Saracenes, promisinge
them tribute: Leo the.4. caused in his life time, his son Constantine to be
Crowned of the Patriarcke, a few days after Leo dyed the.4. day of Noue^ber.
The year of the world.4744. Of Rome.1535. Of Christ.782.

Irene with her son Constantinus.


IRENE with her young son Constantine, governed the Empire.10. years, after
this their domestical discord brought upon them great confusion. The first
part of the gouernmente of this Irene was very quiet, in the.7. year of her
gouernmente, a Sinode was assembled at Nice, which was the.7. Sinode: In this
Sinode a decree was sit upon to restore Images (but that was not done without
great tumulte. At what time as the Bishops and Doctors sat in the Temple of
Byzance to speak their mind of this matter, disalowing Images, a multitude of
soldiers was of Irene appointed to enter in and break up the Sinode by
force of arms, Images.
because they in that assemble and Sinode, would not allow Images. This Sinode
was afterward reduced to Nicia by the suit of the bishop of Rome, and he made
an edicte that Images should be restored again. There was a certain Eunucke
of ye Empress, Aetius by name, who governed chiefly in all matters of
counsel in the Court, who persuaded Irene to marrye with a kinsema^ of his,
who was Presidente of Thracia: and persuaded her that this President should
come with his power to remove and appease all sedition, (this President sent
for) all armor was taken away from the Citizenes, and many carried away in
ships, and sent into Islands for to live in servitude. After this her son
Constantine being.xx. years of age, took upon him the government, and removed
certain counselors about his mother: then she with her company stryred up
part of the host to swear, not to admit her son to be Emperor, but the
Armenians detested this unjust act, and swear unto her son to stand to him
their true Lord and Emperor, which example afterward ye other followed. Yet
herein ceased not ye traynes laid for her son. When Constantine had reigned
7. years, his mother gathered an occasion because her son, did put away his
wife and closed her in a Monastery, and married another, she sent certain men
to take her son, they apprehending him put out his eyes, of which griefs he
dyed immediately. Then Irene (her son being dead) reigned.iii. year, in this
three years space, cruel bloody wars were committed by her, and for her
cruelty showed upon her son, and against his uncle: and also Italye was in
great distress needinge aid against the Lumbardes, and their seditious
tumultes, Also at Rome the high bishop by sedition was apprehended and
whipped. Hereupon Charles for his great justice and many other singular
virtues, when as before also Italye had tasted of the justice and modesty of
Carolus Martellus his grandefather, and Pipinus his father: hereupon the
gouernmente of Italye was committed to Charles the great, and hereby there was
a godly unity of Italye, Germanye and France.

Now the Emperors of Greece ceasinge in government of the Empire, of ye which
number, most have been tyrants, and the last of the Emperors by Domestical
discord have brought in the Turks, and now follows the acts of the
Germaynes, whose doings were godly to Italye and Germany, and the ruin that
after fell, was by the discord of the Romish bishops and Emperors, and their
power, strenghte and fortitude, by discord waxed feeble.

Nicephorus.
NIcephorus possessed the Empire of the East, and made peace with Carolus
Magnus. He was Crowned of Leo ye bishop, he kepinge the league yt was made
with Charles, agreed of between Irene and Charles: Which was that Apulia,
Calabria, Cicilia and Italye should be Charles, and the Venicians should live
of their own laws free. This Prince was most covetous, he had many
overthrows of the Bulgarians, and was killed of them with his whole power, the
ix. year of his reign: he making first his son Stauratius Emperor in y^
battle, his son being wounded in the said battle, returned to
Constantinople, who also the third monthe after he governed, was deposed of
Michaell Curopalates and put in a Monastery.

Michaell Curopalates.
THis Michael Curopalates married Procopia ye sister of Stauratius. This
Emperor made a league with Charles ye great that Charles should govern the
West, and the East to be in his gouernmente. He had wars against the
Bulgarians and overcame them, but at the length he was overcome at a Cittye
called Adrianopolis: and hearing that Leo an Armenian did usurp, he went into
a Monasterye and became a Moncke, rulinge his Empire but.ii. years.

Charles the great, the first Emperor of the West.


THe godly orders in gouermente, Godly orders.
where people live in obedience both toward God and their Prince, are
manifest tokens of the great goodness of God, to maintain society in life:
without laws the life would be brutetishe and beastly, servitude and myserye
to al estates, and in steed of lawful Princes and gouerners, tyrants,
homicides, destroyers of common wealths, and kepinge no laws, they would
subvert al good orders, neither knowing God nor obeying nature. Laws.
Godly laws and judgments are the waightes and ballanes of God, to directour
life. For laws, societe maintained by wedlock, distinction of possessions,
lands and goods, contracte^, Maiestrates, judgment, punishment for sin, are
the eui^^^^ testimonies of the wisdom, goodness and justice of God, and of his
presence in mankind. Tyranny.
Where tyranny is, it is a scourge for the sin of the people, and for sin
God chau^geth kingdom and Princes often, Godly Princes.
it is a singular benefit of God where godly Princes succeade. For except God
do keep the Cittye, in vain does the watch keep it, God translateth ye
kingdoms, and stablisheth them, great alteration and channge fell about the
time of Charles ye great. God showed his heavy wrath upon the Empire of the
East, also upon al other Nations, for there arose up in the East, the
blasphemous and wicked kingdom of the Saracenes, by the which the true Church
of Christ was wasted and destroyed: the true Religion of God extinguished,
servitude to Christians, many famous Cities and goodly common wealths
overthrown, but the great mercyes of God was a stay unto them and to al
Christians. In good time God raised this mighty Prince Charles ye great, who
profited ye posterity with his orders after his age 300. years, unto ye reign
of Henry the 4. In this Henry's time by ye mischieues of the bishops, and their
ambitious conditions, the Empire fell into great decay: and although between
ye successors of Charles civil wars arose, Charles.
yet of that Charles great good wealth rose, and quietness. Lodouicus.
As also by these. Lodouicus pius, Arnolphus Ottones.
Arnolphus Ottones, Henry of Bambridge, Conradus the Frenchman, and Henry. the.
3. All these did greatly advance Italye, Germanye, Pannonia, and all other
Regio^s, these were called of God in heavy state of time, for God rayseth good
governors to be a defense for the people. As Octauius Augustus, Vespasianus,
Titus, Nerua, Constantine the great, and Theodocius. Desiderius a king of the
Lumbardes made great wars in Italye at those days (and possessed many
great Cities) of the which some partayned to the Emperor, and some to ye
Church of Rome. At Rome also much tumulte rose through ambitious Prelates. The
Emperors of the East had small regard to Italye or Rome, hereupon the Weste
part oppressed with calamityes: God raised that noble Prince Charles the great,
who took Desiderius the king of the Lumbardes, and took his kingdom from him.
This Charles was called Charles the great for his noble acts: as Pompeie the
great, Alexander the great. Carolus Martellus was grandfather of this Charles
the great, his father was Pipinus king of France, his mothers name was Birtha
daughter of Heraclius, Emperor of Constantinople, crowned by Leo the bishop
of Rome. Pipinus their father dying, left his kingdom to these two sons,
Charlemaine and Charles the great. But this Charles the great, (his brother
Charlemaine dying ye third year after he began to reign) he was Lord only of
France and king, he was excellently brought up in the Greek and latiue
tongue, for Petrus Pisanus an excellent learned man was his teacher. This
Charles the great learned at Paris, and there Alcoinus an English man
famouslye well learned, Charles excellently learned.
taught him Logic, and the doctrine of Christ. This Alcoinus was the Scholar
of Bid that great learned man of England. Alcoinus made a brief short
book of the doctrine of the Church, Alcoinus.
which remains at this day: by the which it appears that he followed ye
doctrine of S. Austen. Some do write yt Charles the great led with the
perswation and counsel of Alcoinus, did make the University of Parris: but it
is written that the University of Tisina, was set up by Charles: Paris.
in diverse parts of France he did set forth learning, and gave great
stipendes, he was excusite in ye Mathematical Sciences, in Astronomye, and in
the motion of the Celestial Planets, he profited so yt he was able to write an
Ephemerides, all this he learned of Alcoinus ye English man. He occupied
himself much in reading of Saint Austines works: whereby it appears yt he
had the true knowledge of the says in Christ, the storye says that he was a
very godly Prince, whereby his virtue gave him to be a myrror to all Princes.
He had many great wars against ye Saxons and the Hunnes, for at what time as
his father Pipinus dyed, which was in the eyghte Kalendes of October, in the
year of Christ 768 He divided his fathers kingdom with his brother
Charlemaine, Charlemaine had his Princelye seat at Svvesion, and Charles the
great abode at Worms. The first wars that he took in hand, was against
those of Aquitania, left of his father Pipinus unfinished, where a remnant of
the Goths remained, seekinge by tumulte to make an uproar, a Duke of Aquitania
called Hunodus, styrringe them to rebellion. This Duke of Aquitania not able to
bear the force of Charles the great, fled unto Lupus a Duke of Vasconia, to
whom he sent Ambassadors to deliver the Duke of Aquitania: Lupus Duke of
Vasconia delivered him, and yielded himself to Charles son, after this his
brother Charlemaine dyed, in the year of Christ.771. Whose wife called Berta
by the counsel of Adomarus, fled into Italye. Desiderius king of the
Lumbardes, either for hatred or fear of Charles the great, which thing
styrred up Desiderius to great hope, being before desirous of that Cittye of
Rome, and of the Empire in Italye, after the putting away of ye Vicegerents of
kings. And he feared also the Frenchmen whose league with the Romans, was
suspected of him to be a hurt to his estate, in time he thought to bring to
pass yt the sons of Charlemaine, should be made kings of France of the
bishop of Rome. If that might be brought to pass, he hoped that either the
Frenchmen would of their own will depart from him, or civil wars between
them should weken the power of France. He overcame the Saxons, on every side
peace being settled, he returned into France making his son Lodouicus,
partaker of the kingdom with him. He dyed at Aquisgrane, in the.5. kalendes of
Februarye, in the.71. year of his age. Of his government 14. years, and the
year of Christ.816. **

Lodouicus Pius, the first of that name.


LOdouicus alone remained alive of ye children of Charles, after his father,
who as soon as he understood of the death of his father, he returned out of
Aquitania, and look upon him the government at Aquisgrane. He was called with
this holy name Pius, Lodouicus a superstitious Price.
a Religiosa superstitione, not having ye perfect knowledge of God, nor of any
pure Religion, but as ye Religion went in those days he was counted Religious:
for he increased the worshipping of Idolles and Images, and set up many
observations of Monkrye, and of that sole Monastical life. This Lodouicus was
far inferior to his father, both in wisdom and virtue, his authority also
began to be contemned. He was a cruel Prince against all godly laws, Cruelty
in a Prince.
whereupon he was hated of the noble pears: What crueltye did he use against
his brothers son, called Bernardus king of Italye? and against his
kinsefolke? The counsel of a stepmother.
also toward his own sons, through the subtle purposes of their
stepmother? Whereupon civil wars rose between this Lodouicus and his own
sons. This Lodouicus had first to wife Irmengardin ye daughter of Ingramus a
Duke, of whom he begat iii. sons Lotharius, Pipinus, and Lodouicus: this his
first wife dyed.ii. years before he came to enjoy the Empire, then he
married Iudeth the daughter of Guelphus the first Earl of Altofordensis, in ye
country of Sweuia: she was the sister of Conradus and Rodulphus Princes, of her
he begat Carolus Caluus. This Lodoui- before he was Emperor, did valia^tly use
himself especially against the Saracenes in Spain: As Soon as he was
Emperor, he created Lotharius his eldest son king, and he made Pipinus
king of Aquitania, and Lodouicus his youngest son he retained with him, but
he made him king of Italye. The aduauncemente of Lodouicus to ye Dominion of
Italye, moved Bernardus who was before king of Italye, to make war against
his uncle the Emperor Lodouicus Pius. The Emperor at that time was in war
against the king of Denmarcke, and to restrain him from the entringe of
Italye, and from the kingdom of France. This Bernardus through the persuasion
of certain flatterers, was persuaded that ye Dominion of Italy was proper to
him, and not to Lodouicus: the^ Lodouicus Pius, his wars being ended in
Denmarcke, entered with a great and terrible host into Italye, by whose coming
many of those yt were considerates with Bernardus fled away, Bernardus
being forsaken of his men of (...) his body to ye Emperor his uncle, with
his son Pipinus, and his (...) nephews Bernardus, Pipinus, and (...). The
Emperor, sent this Bernardus unto Germanye, and was condemned to dye at
Aquisgrane, but he was pardoned having his eyes put out, he was put into a
M^^^asterye, in the which with great pensiuenes dyed: this act was done of
the Emperor Lodouicus Pius, in the year of Christ.818. This great crueltye
did withdraw the minds of many from the Emperor Lodouicus, so incon^inentlye
after the death of Bernardus king of Italye, the Emperor made Lotharius his
son king of Italye, and also Emperor, he gave him to wife Irnengardis* the
daughter of one Hughte, he made him Emperor by the bishop of Rome called
Pasthalis. The nobles of the Empire did have Lodouicus, and especially the
bishops, because he was ruled by his wife, and with her counsel the
government was ruled, wholye to the deminishinge of the estate of the Empire.
Hereupon the nobles and bishops under a ^^lloure and outward show of
deuillishe practices of their stepmother, they moved them against their father
and to depose him. A conspiracy against the Emperor.
The beginning of this conspiracy (...) as in France, wrought with Pipinus his
sons but this conspiracye was sone extinguished, because at that time his
sons had not met with their power, but afterward they ren^ed their former
conspiracy against their father, who being driven to such an extremetye* that
he was compelled to yield himself to his sons, and was forced to put away
their stepin other (...) Lodouicus the (...) son of this Emperor, The
overthrow of the Emperor by his sons.
put his father into a Monasterye at S^ession, the.19. year of the reign of
this Lodouicus: He sent his brother Charles into Brumia to a Monasterye in
Lotharingia: He sent his stepmother into an other Monasterye in Italye called
Derton. Of all these mischieues done and conspired against the Emperor, the
chief authors were the bishops: but the heavy wrath of God ceased not, but
that the children of ye father (...) of his vengeance. Ungracious children.
The other brethren having compassion of this great calamitye and misery that
fell to their father, they made petition with a great number of the nobles of
Germanye, that they would restore their father deposed into his Empire again.
Lotharius Lotharius.
being unwilling to set upon his father again, fled into France, and
moved war to let the purposes of his brethren: but in the end he being
forsaken of all his men, did request pardon of his father and obtained it.

So by this means Lodouicus Lodouicus.
came to be Emperor again, a year after his deposinge, who forgave his
sons their offenses: then he revoked from banishmente his wife who ruled her
husband, and made his son Charles king of Neustria, Neustria.
which is Celtic^ Gallia, and Lugdunensis Gallia. Sone after this, Pipinus his
second son dyed, and left behind him two sons Carolus and Pipinus.
Pipinus.
Pipinus did seek to possess the kingdom of Aquitania. Lodouicus afterward
again made wars against his father, whom his father met at Moguntia, and
there was reconciled to Lodouicus: The death of Lodouicus.
and there Lodouicus dyed, the 10. of the Kalendes of June, in the year of
Christ.840. In the year of the world.4802. Of his reign 27. Of this life 64.
He was buried in the Cittye called Metensis near to his stepmother Hildegarde.

Lotharius the first.


LOdouicus Pius being dead, civil wars began among his sons, Civil war.
with so great bloudshedde, with the slaughter of so many noble pears: that
by the great destruction and long continuance of the wars, the whole power
of France and strength was in utter decay, there were consumed by those
wars more then a hundredth Thousand in one conflicte. Lotharius obtaining the
Empire by lawful title of succession, Lotharius works iniurioslye against
his brethren.
and being appointed of his father to enjoy the Empire: he would compel his
brethren to his appointment, that Lodouicus should govern Bauaria, and
Charles to possess Aquitania, and to be content with his appointment, and
thereby to challenge no part of the Empire more, and to obey him as Emperor.
The brethrene being upon just cause grieved in yt they were put from their
just inheritance, continentlye in armor they made war against their
brother Lotharius, and drove him to ^lighte in Gallia Lugdinensi, at a town
called Fontannedu^, and his host almost utterly slain. Great calamityes
has fallen on France by civil wars through ambitious governors: So God for
the iniquitye of men pulls down kingdoms, spoyleth countries, and
translateth the seats of Princes. This war was fought in the year of
Christ.841. the.7. kalendes of Iulye.

So in all countries civil discention pulls down ye mightyest Dominions, as
of France, Italy, Germany, Spain, Polonia, Greece and Persia, yea all
countries has felt the plague thereof as the historyes shows: So of
Scotland, division from time to time, and civil co^motion, have wrought many
mischieues. A certain learned man of Germanye named Caspar Peucerus, writes a
notable thing out of the Historyes of Scotland: as follows.

Scotia crebra ex caedibus intestinis interregna habuit, donec post atroces and
tragicos multorum Tyrannorum interitus, Lib. 5. Chronicarum.
regnum nutans ad Stuardam domum Danicae originis deuenit Cum enim per annos
mill septingentos and amplius, Reges numerent ex veris annalibus ce^tum and
quinque ex his, quinquaginta aut in bellis cecidisse, aut insidijs proceru^
crudeliter interemptos esse reperimus.

Scotland has oftentimes lackte their kings, by civil wars, until after
many cruel and tragical faules and death of many tyrants, the kingdom fell
to the house of the Stewardes, (whose stock first rose from the Danes.) For
when as by the space of a thousand years seven hundredth and more, they reckon
their kings out of their own true historyes, to be in number an hundredth and
five, and of those 100. and five, 50. of them was either killed in ye wars,
or else at home cruellye murdered by the mischievous factes of the noble men.

And now to our storye again. Lotharius retyring came to Aquisgrane, and there
leuyed up a new power, with who^ also his brethren met the 17. of the kalends
of April: the year following the soldiers of Lotharius being brought into
great fear through the great calamitye that fell to them before, they forsook
Lotharius the Emperor. But Lotharius as a most valiante Captain, not having
his wit to seek, neither amassed with these two overthrows, did so quiet
himself: but deeply consideringe the sinister state of Princes happeninge in
wars, gathered his men of war together, and pitchinge his tents at
Maliscone a Cittye of Burgundia, and thither came his brethren to fight with
him. But the noble pears of the Empire was as lettes and stiklers between
them, by whose counsel, a conclusion was made to make a Tetrarchia, that is,
the Empire to be divided into iiii. parts: that Lodouicus should rule Germany,
France to be in Charles hands, Lotharius to enjoy Italye with the Empire, and
to possess a part of Germanye which lies between Rhene and Mosella floudes,
and Pipinus the son of Pipinus to govern Aquitania. This agreement was
concluded at Verodunum, and proclaimed there in ye.843. year of Christ.
Lotharius after this conclusion, made his son Lodouicus partaker with him in ye
Empire, and with a great host sent him into Italy against ye Saracenes. In this
partitio^ of the states of thempyre, yt part yt was given to Londouicus, was ye
Dominion of the East, and yt which Charles possessed was the kingdom of ye
West, to make a distinction from that which Lotharius had in government. By this
civil disce^tion the brethren being thus occupied and wekened, other foreign
Nations glad of such occasion offered to them, raised an army against these
countries: In Saxone also war was moved of the servants and slaves of the
country, but that war was sone repressed. The Normanes entered by a nauye of
ships, into certain coasts of France, and through the country destroying
and spoiling al parts as they went, even to the City of Paris. King Charles
not able to match them, with infinite sums of money, willed them to depart
out of his country. This people did first invade France in the time of
Lodouicus the first, and afterward possessed a great part of it. The Bohemians
rose against Lodouicus Sorabi Marcomanni, yea for all the troubles and invasion
of so many forrayne enemies, the deadlye hatred of these brethren, many times
braste out against themselves. Lotharius threatened to war on his brother
Charles, because Geselbartus a chief governor under Charles, had taken away
his daughter secretelye, but by the wisdom of Lodouicus it was pacifyed, and
al sides contented. By this discord of the brethren, foreign Nations being
styrred up, and infidels also by false treaso^s of ambitious heads were
brought in, with a great scourge to the Christians: this great inuasio^
ceased not until the government of ye Saxon Princes, The happy coming of the
Saxon Princes.
out of who^ God raised mighty worthy Princes, that set up again the
Empire decayed. Lotharius perceyuinge that the Bishops and ambitious clargye
did enclyne themselves to ye Emperors of Greece, and that they did priuilye
conspyre to betake unto them the Cittye of Rome, A conspiracy of the clergy of
Rome against the emperor.
he went to Rome in the year of Christ 854. and put to death the chief doers
in that conspiracye, appointinge new Maiestrates more surely ordering the
states thereof. Thus Lotharius returninge out of Italy parted to his three
sons the Empire: he gave Italye to his son Lodouicus and the Empire: to
Charles, Gallia Narbonensus: Lotharius deposes himself.
and to Lotharius, Lotharingia. The father of them being in conscience pricked
for his evil committed against his father Lodouicus Pius, gave over himself
from the Empire, and went into a Monasterye called Brumia in the year of
Christ.855. The next year followinge he dyed, the third of the kalendes of
October.

Lodouicus the second.


AFter the death of the Emperor Lotharius who against his father made war,
and thereupon by his evil conscience and cruel dealing tormented in mind,
gave over his gouernmente, and dyed into a Monasterye. This Lodouicus the
second of that name, succeeded by the will of his father: Of what force is
ambition to move the sons to seek the fathers death for kingdoms sake?
surely the state of kingdoms is very brickle, and the seat subject to many
calamityes, the private state (though meanest) in most safetye. Therefore the
godly Princes have no small cares, and men of great authority, no small
charge by whose noble counsel, the whole body of the common wealth is in
safety. After ye death of Lotharius Italye was never in quiet, until the
coming of Otho: So God scurged the succession of those Princes, that so
unnaturally did depose their father, many vsurpinge to depose each other, many
tumultes began, Seditious men have an ill end.
and many seditious vprores attempted, but all came to an ill end. This
Lodouicus the eldest son of Lotharius before, as soon as he was chosen of his
father into ye possession of the Empire: he descended down into Italye with a
great power to drive the Saracenes from thence, and especially Exagro
beneuentano. He warred nobly and valia^tly, with most fortunate success
against those, chiefelye aided of his brother Lotharius, but their army was
almost consumed with the rotten pestilence and other diseases. Lodouicus
departing from thence commended the defense of Italy, to Adalgisius a Lumbarde
Prince of Salerne: but this false Lumbard committed to so great a charge,
intised with great promises of the Greeks, he fled traitorously to the
Greeks, yelding over to them these towns of Saminu^, Campania and Lucania.
Lodouicus seeking to revenge himself of this treason, returned again into
Italy, and by his valiant prowess wanne^ again his towns being lost, he wan
Capua by long siege, and they in the end yielded themselves. Yet he was for
all this, snared with many traitorous wyles, whereupon Lodouicus was
compelled to swear to this false Lumbarde, yt he should remitte and forgive
this traiterous act committed by him: but his holy father the Pope absolved
him from that oath that he might lawfullye break the same. Whereupon this
Lumbarde Adalgisius being Prince of Salerne, fearing Lodouicus crueltye, and
the Popes absolution to be not sufficient, fled into the Isles called
Corsica. But Lodouicus cruelly tormented those that were confederate with him
in that treason: al things set in peace and quietness in Italye, he dyed at the
length at Millen, in the year of Christ 874. after he had ruled 19. years.
This Prince Lodouicus excelled in learning, in godlynes, humanitye,
liberalitye, in profound wit, singular dexteritye, and in wise counsel at a
sudden not to seek, furthwith to determine upon any matter, which is a rare
gift and a great blessing of God: And they are in respect of other most noble
for counsel, and in the affairs of the common wealth * most fortunate. * ^

Carolus Caluus,


THis Emperor Lodouicus being dead without any heir male, next after him
succeaded Carolus Caluus, the son of Lodouicus ye superstitious, borne of his
second wife Iudeth. As soon as he hard of the death of Lodouicus, he marched
into Italye that he might bring again the Empire (then in succession to the
Germaynes) to ye hands of the Frenchmen. The purpose of this Emperor
certainlye known to Lodouicus Germanicus, he sent with celeritye his two
sons Charlemaine and Charles, who was also called Carolus Crassus, to mete
his brother Carolus Caluus, and to cut of that pretenced purpose toward
the^pyre. But the two sons of Lodouicus Germanicus, either by great gifts
won of Carouls Caluus, or afraid to enter against their uncle Carolus
Caluus by reason of his great host, returned to their father without any war
moved. Thus Carolus Caluus went to Rotme without resistance, and there was
made Emperor the eight Kalendes of January, in ye year of Christ 875. Carolus
Caluus placed in the Empire, suddenly his brother did seek to make himself
strong, with the friendship of other mighty Princes, and league of them, by
whose force and aid, he might more strongly possess the Empire: He exalted
diverse noble men to higher dignitye of estate, as to Boson he gave the Dukedom
of Italy, and immediately he created him king or chief President of y^ whole
province. He made Bere^garius and Guido, being noble men of Rome,, and
descended from an ancient race of Lumbards: One of them he made Duke of
Foroiuliensium, the other Ducem Spoletanorum, and to ye other he gave offices,
revenues and dignityes to make them faithful to him, and through the amitye of
so mighty persons, to be a terror to his brother and his co^federates. But
vain is the purpose of man where God blesses not the state, and counsel is
no counsel, where God refuses the estate: No leagues are fortunate, neither
the purpose of Princes have any good success, that seek the defacing of good
to set up evil, and by unjust title, friendship or amitye of the mightiest
rulers for kingdoms sake, be folowers of Julius Caesar. Si violatu^ est ius,
regnandi causa violatu^ est. If right and rule be to be broken, let it be
broken for kingdoms sake, otherwise let godliness and justice be maintained.
The great mischieuousnes of these Princes and their bloody ambitious purposes
not regarding God nor right, was ye utter overthrow of the stock of Charles
ye great and almost utterly rooted them out. By this confedrature or amity,
Italy was wrapped with seditious vprores, and thereby cut of from the Princes of
Germanye and France: and after many cruel wars and bloudye end of many
noble Princes and pears, the Frenchmen were overcome, and ye Germaynes again
recovered their former estate lost, and became again mighty. But the stoutnes
and bouldnes of Charles at the length was cut of from the Empire, and the
kingdom of France, and those that Charles sent into Italye against his
enemies for his Empire, put their Lord out from that possession, and entered
thereon themselves.

This Carolus Caluus returninge into France, and being certifyed of ye death
of his brother Lodouicus Germanicus, forthwith he made wars on his brothers
sons, for to take from them their fathers kingdom, he went against them with
a great host, but Carolus Caluus was put to flighte, and recovered of him
those Dominions that he lost.

This Carolus Caluus was punished of God for his injurious dealinge toward
other, for his miserable covetousness, for his ambition and wars moved
without just title, this war was fought the.8. of the Ides of October, the
year of Christ 876.

In the mean time Charlemaine coming with his brother Charles, marched into
Italye with their power, ye Emperor met these, but he was forced to retire,
and escaped with much difficulty, he fled to Mantua, and dyed of a laske: but
it was not without the suspicion of poysoninge, by a Jew called Sedechias who
was his Physician, Sidechias.
and in great estimation with him: He was a covetous Prince, proud,
ambitious, a great boaster, wtall vanity vain glorious, he dyed the year of
Christ.878. Of the world.4840. After he had governed France 36. year. and the
Empire two years. His sons would have carried his body into France, there to
be buried, but they could not for stincke of his Carcas, whereupon they were
compelled to burye it at Vercelles, and 7. years after taking his body up
again, they carried it into France. This Emperor had two wives, the first was
called Richildis the sister of Boson: the second was named Hirmendruda, of her
he begat.4. sons and.1. daughter.

Lodouicus Balbus son to this Lodouicus, Pope John gave to him afterward in
France the title of the Empire: and Lotharius who dyed before his father, and
Charles Duke of Aquitania, and Charlemaine Duke of y^ province: this Charles
Duke of Aquitania in wrestling with one Albinus, dyed his back being broken:
Charlemaine being compelled of his father to be a Moncke, he leauinge ye
Monastical life, (was altogether according to his proper study and
instruction a warrior. Charlemaine
) His father with much chiding would have driven him to that Monastical life,
but he would not: at the length his father put out his eyes and cast him in
prison. He would have made him a blind Moncke, but he thought ease and
liberty would have got him friends, to reduce him to his former state, Then was
Lodouicus only lyuinge.

This Carolus Caluus warred on the Norman^, by ye aid of VVelechindus the
Saxon: this VVelechindus came of ye progenye of that noble VVelechindus, with
who^ Charles ye great had wars. Carolus Caluus made this VVelechindus chief
governor over Gallia Lugdunensis: Of this VVelechindus, ye kings of France
are thought to descend. Carolus Caluus made Rupertus VVelechindus son,
chief Captain of his great hoaste in Italye, against the Normanes who also
dyed in wars. Otto the son of Rupertus by the permission of Arnulphus came
to the kingdom of France, when as Carolus Simplex for young age, was not
meet to govern: Of the brother of Ottou, Hugo the great Earl of Paris was
borne, to whom by the sister of great Otto Hugo, Capetus king of France was
borne, the first stock of the kings of France that now is and * governs.
* (*)

Lodouicus the third.


AS soon as the death of Carolus Caluus was known to be true, the nobles of
Rome and estates of the Empire did incline themselves to the choice of the
empire, for Carolus Crassus who with his brother Charlemaine possessed Italye:
but Pope John bishop of Rome at that time, withstode it for he favored more
the Frencheme^. But this holy and spiritual Pope, Pope John
was taken moving sedition and styrred an uproar against the estates, but some
of his friends in pitition to ye estates, entreated for his liberty: but he
being set at liberty, trayterouslye fled away into France to Jews the
king, of whom he was with all honor received and honored for so holy a
Prelate. The Pope for his good entertayninge and honorable receiving, rewarded
him with ye title of ye Emperor. This Lodouicus with the Popes grant and his
power and might, became Emperor contrary to the will of the nobilitye: this
Lodouicus governed but two years, he dyed in the wars attempted against
Bernardus in ye marches of Italye, in the Ides of April, the year of
Christ.878. of the world 4842.

Carolus the younger, or Crassus


CArolus the son of Lodouicus ^ermanicus, who received of Charlemaine Italye,
and of the other Lodouicus the kingdom of Germany by heritage. This Carolus
Crassus with very fortunate success, expelled the Saracenes out of Italye, at
that time as he was made Emperor of Pope Iohu^. Within.iiii. years space, the
Empire of the West had this Emperor ye third, whereby great alteration fell:
and a great wekeninge to the estates. Alteration of kingdoms.
So sudden chaunges are not happening without ye great wrath of God, and
manifest calamityes to the universal estate. Xenophon wrote of the noble
estate of common wealths of the Lacedaemonians and of ye Athenians, thus he
says. Omnes mutationes rerumpublicarum lethales. All chaunges of common
wealths are deadlye. Also the often change of governors, pulls down the
state of countries: for because commonly Nouus Rexnoua lex, A new king new
laws. Most happy are they that enjoy the virtuous Prince: It is a manifest
token of the wrath of God, the often alteration of the state of Princes. At
what time as Carolus Crassus had expelled the Saracenes out of Italye, he
returned into Germanye, he held at that time the government of France in his
hands, The often alteration of Princes.
because Lodouicus Balbus had left Carolus Simplex borne after his death. The
Normans entered by force into the country of Atribatum, having admitted
Godfride and Sigefride for their Captains: then Carolus seeking to aid the
people invaded of their enemies, but his enterprises not prosperinge, he made
peace with them, and gave in marriage to Sigefride, a fair Lady called Gis^la,
ye daughter of Lotharius his uncle, and gave for her Dowrye Frisia. But ye
Normanes did not so cease, but with another Captain called Rollo, they invaded
Neustria, but Carolus also made a league with them, and granted them that they
should have that part of Neustria, which lies from ye floude Epta to the
Britaynes and there ends, it is closed in with the French Ocean Sea, whose
head Cittye is Rotomagu^. Of these new inhabitours Normandy took his name,
which before was called Neustria. To this Rollo being Christened, another name
was given Rupertus. Carolus Simplex gave his daughter to him in marriage: From
this king in long succession descended ye Dukes of Normandye. Carolus Crassus
through his misfortune in war, and through his evil leages with his
enemies, came in hatred and contempt with his own people, sickness also
brought him low, whereby and with care of mind, he was not of right mind,
and left his kingdom. In his stead Arnolphus the son of Charlemaine was
elected. This Carolus Crassus was brought to great miserye, not having
sufficient to live, he dyed afterward in a po^^ town of Sweuia, in the Ides
of January. The year of the world.4850.

When he had reigned.7. years, and in year of our Savior Christ.888. ^

Arnolphus.


THen Arnolphus the son of Charlemaine was created Emperor, and subdued the
Normanes, who being given to great couetouslle neglected no means to catch to
him his spoil or pray, he governed xii. years and dyed of lyce: after him, ye
majesty of the Empire fell to ye Germaynes which for the space of 100. years
continued with the Frenchemen. Arnolphus being dead, Italye and all the states
thereof would have Beringarius, by descent a Lu^barde to be Emperor, but the
Germaynes and Frenchmen would have to enjoy the Imperial seat, Lodouicus ye
son of Arnolphus, who governed vi. years: to whom also Co^radus Duke of
Austria put in place raygned vii. years. So he had his successor Henry the
first, ye son of Otho Duke of Saxone for xviii. years: By the ambition of
these Princes, many detestable vprores and seditious tumultes rose almost 60.
years, from the death of Arnolphus to Otho the first. In this sort the Italians
vexed with daily invasion of barbarous Nations, not willing to leave ye
ancient regiment, laws, and glory of estate, they created Beringarius
Foroniliense^ a noble man of great renown and a noble warrior to be Emperor.

This Beringarius ouerthrewe at Verona, Lodouicus the son of Arnolphus and
put out his eyes, he drove the Pa^nonians out of Italy with money, he killed
Guido a Duke. After he had governed four years, Beringarius the second
succeaded him, who after the third year was driven out of his country of
Rodolphus king of Burgundye: this Rodolphe raygned.iii. years, and was driven
out of his kingdom by Hugo a Duke: this Hugo governed.x. years and dyed,
leauinge behind him Lotharius his son, who dyed after he had governed.ii.
years: after whom Beringarius ye third sent for into Italy, with his son
Adelbertus governed it xi. years, who used himself with all tyranny, and
therefore Otho a Saxon was sent for. This Otho drove out of Italye the father
Beringarius and his son. Great calamityes fell to all Europe by the often
change of Princes, which happened through the ambition of vsurpinge Princes
who knew not God, and it is a sign of the great wrath of God to have often the
change of Princes, and most of all when tyrants succeade the virtuous
Princes, who be fathers of Christ's Church rulinge with good law and
discipline.:

Otho the first.


OTHO the first son of Henrye aforesaid king, this Otho was sent for to
throw down Beringarius the third of that name: this Beringarius was a wicked
Prince, and a tyrant to the Romans. Pope Agapetus was very willinge of his
coming: this Otho came with.50000. men of war, and drove out of Italye
Beringarius with his son, but he gave to them by his liberality a part of
France to dwell in. But after this both Beringarius and his son rebelled and
overcame them: this Otho deposed John the bishop of Rome from his seat, and
put Leo in his place. This Otho deposed Bodeslaus king of Boemia from his
kingdom, because he killed his own brother, he was a Prince of great justice,
endued with all singular virtues, so to administer justice against a murderer,
and it was with all le^itye to depose him only of kingdom, that deserved death
for murder.

This Otho ouerthrewe the Ra^nonians wastinge and spoylinge Italy, and in that
conflicte.iii. kings was taken of the Germaynes and hanged up. This Emperor
Otho dyed after that he had governed 30. years, he was buried at Magdenburge a
Cittye of Saxony, being a noble Prince, learned and an excellent warrior

Otho the second.


OTHO the second, the son of Otho and Adelhida, who was before the wife of
Lotharius king of France, he was Crowned in his fathers life: This Otho
restored Nicephorus Emperor of Constantinople (being put out of his
kingdom) into it again, and married Theophania his sister. After this he
vanquished Henrye Duke of Bauaria, and made wars against Lotharius king of
France: At this time also the Saracenes entered into Calabria, but Otho with
an army of soldiers went against them, who being overthrown and put to
flight, narrowlye escaped in a little boat and came to Rome. Sone after this he
dyed there, and was buried in S. Peter's Chapel after he had reigned.xi.
years, leauinge behind him Otho his son and 7. daughters.

Otho the third.


IMmediatlye after the death of Otho the.2. Otho the third (being his son)
was created Emperor of the Princes of Germanye at Rome: who as soon as he was
Crowned, made Bruno a Saxon bishop of Rome, and that Pope was called Gregorye
the sixte. At what time as Otho took his journey into Saxony, this Gregory was
deposed from his Papacye, of John that usurped: but Otho full of wrath, The
ambition of the Romish Bishops.
with a great power entered Italye and took Rome, and put to death
Crescentius the author of this sedition, he put out the Popes eyes that
usurped, and restored Gregorye again. And at this day an order remains that
6. Princes of Germanye should chose the Emperor.3. Ecclesiastical 3. Lay or
secular, and the king of Bohemia is the seventh, who is appointed an Vmpeare
to break of all discention in election if any rise. This Otho when he had
ruled xix. years dyed at Rome, not without suspicion of poison, and was carried
into Germany: his wives name was Marye, the daughter of the king of Aragon, a
woman given to all beastlynes, and vntemperance of life.

Henrye the second.


DVke of Bauaria, the nephewe of Otho the first by his brother the first king
of the Germaynes of that name, who was chosen Emperor of the states of Italy
and Germanye. He brought Stephen king of Pannonia to be Christened, and to him
he gave his sister in marryage, mouinge him against the Saracenes. This Prince
gave himself from al wars, and whollye was given up to all Religion and
godly life: his wives name was Cunigunga, whom he loved entierlye, with whom
he lived godly, and they were buried to gether at Bambrige. He governed but.8.
years.

Conradus the Frencheman.


THe nobles of Italye being at discention at the death of Henry, there was
apause and ceasing of any Emperor to be chosen: but.iii. years were not
fullye passed, or that Conradus was chosen, borne of the daughter of Otto the
first, from whom a certain part of Italye departed, whervppon he entered
Millen with a great power and besieged it, but by the entreating of Duke
Lutebrande, and ye admonition of the bishop of Collen, he ceased from the
spoil of Millen. He had fortunate wars against the Pannonians who in this
rebellion aided ye Italians: This Co^radus subdued Burgu^die, he governed xv.
years and then dyed, and was buried at Spyres, his wives name was Gisa the
daughter of a Prince of Vandalia, of whom he begat Henry the second whom he
Crowned king before his death.

Henrye the third.


THe son of Conradus the Frenchma^, this Henrye as soon as he had received his
charge of the Empire, by the consent of the Princes, he made Vldricus king of
Bohemia tributary to him: he restored Peter cast out from his kingdom of the
Hungarians to it again. In the time of this Emperor, great division rose at
Rome about ye bishops, who straue to be Popes, Gregorye, Siluester and
Benedicke, ye which ye Emperor drove away as usurpers, and made the bishop
of Bambrige Pope, whom he named Clement the second. He compelled ye Romans by
an oath that they should not at any time chose the Pope. After this he
fortifyed Capua with munitio^, then he returned into Germany, he dyed the 18.
year of his reign, and was buried at Spyres. His wives name was Agnes ye
daughter of William Duke of Aquitania.

Henrye the fourth.


HEnrye the fourth, the son of Henry ye.iii. this Henrye was cursed of the
Pope, and therefore of many Historiographers he is called an enemy of ye
Church: this Henrye began his reign in the year of Christ.1507. The state of
this Henrye is worthy deep consideration* who greatly withstode the tyranny of
the ambitious Prelates, and as much as lay in him defended the state of the
Empire, being cursed of the Pope, who by treason was overthrown into the
Popes hands. This Henrye was but.7. years of age when he began to reign, his
father gave ye education of him to his mother, and the gouernmente of the
Empire to Conradus a noble Sweuia^. For.v. years space his mother governed
very wiselye, this Henrye through the treason of Conradus, had his mother
taken from him, and she fled for sauegard into a Monasterye: then this Henry
went into Saxony, (the bishop of Cole^, and Eccebertus a noble man of
Saxonye mouinge him thereto.) This Emperor was accursed of the Pope, because
he had given Ecclesiastical dignityes, which ye Pope would have had in his
own hands to give: Many Historyes write that he was a virtuous Prince, well
learned, and of a good wit, yet the thundering boultes of the Pope, ceased
not against him, and styrred up also his friends to envy at his estate. The
body of this Henry being buried, the Pope caused it to be taken up, but at the
last it was vuryed at Spyres in the Monumentes of his ancestors.

Henrye the v.


HEnrye the v. the son of Henrye the fourth, followed the steps of his
father in withstandinge the tyranny of the Pope, and Paschalis the bishop
would not suffer him to enter into the Cittye of Rome. But the young Prince not
bearing the proud bishops attempt, he calling himself Seruus seruorum
Dei, The servant of the servants of God. Then he brought ye Pope into his
jurisdiction, and took his Crown from him, then the Emperor returned into
Germanye: by this seditious Pope, great tumultes rose in Italye, whereupon the
third time ye Emperor entered into Italye, and put out of the Cittye of Rome
Gelasius the Pope. After this he returned into Germanye, and after he had
governed xv. years he dyed and was buried at Spyres among his ancestors.

Lotharius the second.


LOtharius the second was a Duke of Saxony, this Lotharius was made Emperor
by subtle pollicye of the Bishop of Magunce, he made his first wars
against ye Bohemians, but he had evil success, and in the end peace was
concluded between them. The.7. year of his reign, Innocentius the 2. was
driven out of Rome into France of a bishop that usurped. The Emperor
Lotharius to restore him again to that pontifical seat, went to Rome and
drove the vsurpinge bishop out of Rome to Apulia with other of his faction.
These affairs being ended, he in his iourneye was taken with a Fever whereof
he dyed, his body was carried into Germanye, and there buried in a Monasterye
of his name, after he had governed.xi. years.

Conradus the third.


COnradus the third Duke of Bauaria, the nephew of Henrye the fourth by his
daughter, he was made Emperor by ye consent of the Princes of Germanye, he
had great wars with the Saracenes in Asia, ye which wars the Historyes
note, that Jews the French king, and king Richard king of England did
take in hand, but they returned without any notable act done. Conradus
after these wars returned into Germanye, and dyed without all glory or
renown, the xv. year of his government, and was buried at Bambrige in Germany.

Frederick the first.


Frederick ye first called Oinobarbus because he had a red bearde, he was
by country a Sweuian, his fathers name was Frederick ye brother of Conradus a
king. This Emperor Frederick was endued with all Princely qualityes both of
mind and body, of noble courage, a notable and expert warrior, all felicitye
followed him, much he had to do with the Popes of Rome, and with Alexander ye
Pope, placing in his room Octauius a bishop. He made wars against Millen
and ouerthrewe it to the ground, he chased Pope Alexander out of Rome, but
at the length he was almost overthrown of the Millaners: not long after this
there was a league or amitye concluded between the Emperor and the Pope, then
the Emperor took his iourneye into Syria, and in the passage over a river was
drowned, the 37. year of his reign.

Henrye the sixte.


HEnrye the sixte, the son of Frederick Barbarossa the king of Sicile
before, he married Constantia a holy Nun, the daughter of Rogerus Northman.
This Henrye (his father being dead) was made Emperor of Clement the third,
upon a condition to put out of his kingdom Tancrede a bastard out of Sycile,
because the Pope challenged that title. The Emperor overthrew Tancrede, he took
Naples and spoiled it, he killed two daughters of Ta^crede unmarried: Some
Historiographers write that a great plague rose, and drove the Emperor away
from Sycile, but Tancrede being put to flighte, he obtained the country of
Sycile. The Emperor dyed of sickness, when he had ruled eyghte years, he
left behind him his son Frederick borne of Constantia.

Philippus.


PHilippus the son of Frederick Barbarossa the brothere of king Henrye,
this Philippus was chosen Emperor, the greater part of the Princes being
willing thereto, but Pope Innocentius the.3. did chose Otho a Saxon, whose
ancestors did before time defend and uphold that pontifical seat. By this
discord they brake out to wars, the king of England gave aid to Otho, and
the French king to Philippus: but in the end Otho was driven out of all,
and Philippus enjoyed the seat, but the Pope was much against it. Philippus
raygned 9. years, and was murdered of one Otto a Countye Palatine: then ruled
in his seat Otho the fourth of that name, who before entierlye beloved of the
Pope, and was under the curse of the Pope, and in his place there was placed
Frederick the second, At the length he dyed the 4. year of his reign.

Rodulphus. Adolphus.


ROdulphus a Countye of Hasburge was chose^ Emperor, but before he was chosen,
eue^ from the death of Frederick till.22. years after, there was no Emperor
chosen, such discention rose on every side, no man bearinge an others state.
This Rodulphus killed Othocarus king of Bohemia, he burned one that would
have parswaded the people that he was Frederick the second, and many believed
it because he was so like to Frederick, as in England the like has been done
of diverse which have given out themselves to be ye king. This false usurper
Frederick usurped in Sweuia, this Emperor governed xviii. years, and was
buried at Spyres. The Countye of Nason succeaded him, who was chosen by ye
nobles, but they annoyed with his beastly life, and ambition of this Adulphus,
they chose in his place Albertus Duke of Austria: then Adulphus raised a power
against this Duke, but he was slain in his enterprise ruling but viii* years.

Albertus the first. Henrye the vii.


ALbertus the first, the son of Rodulphus the Emperor, by the consent of the
Princes and of Bonifacius the Pope was Crowned Emperor. The Pope was moved
thereto for envy he bare to the seat of Princes, and because he might thereby
work his malicious and detestable mind against Philippe the French king.
This Emperor to gratifye the Popes mind, went with a great power against the
king of France, but in passinge over ye flood of Rhene was killed of John his
brothers son, after that he had ruled x. years. The Emperor his brother
neglected him, because he was a young gentleman of great actiuitye, of excellent
learning, of rare virtues (yet fearing him) would not suffer him to enjoy his
dignitye and revenues, neither gave unto him any thing. The Emperor being thus
slain Henry of Lucenbrige a County, succeaded in the Empire: the bishops was
willing thereto, because the Princes and states of Italy holped the bishop, and
he would gladlye show and utter his bloudye purpose by the Emperor. This
Emperor ouerthrewe ye people of Millen, he entered Rome after he was (...),
but he was driven out of it, he had great wars against the Saracenes, but in
the end a holy Dominicke Friar poisoned him in the Sacrament: The practice
of Romish Prelates.
A holy practice of Prelates to poison Princes, it shows how far they be
from the Doctrine of the Gospel, from humilitye and obedience toward
Princes. The Gospel teaches them to obey Princes even to the death: but it is
the fruits of the Romish Catholics to utter their woluishe faith by
murder. K. John.
King John king of England (as the Historyes shows) was poisoned by a
Monk, with diverse other examples to manifest their tyranny, which I will
omit because it is manifest: and it has been an oulde purpose of Romish
prelates by murder (against the law of God and nature) to further their
deuilishe purposes.

Lodouicus.


LOdouicus Duke of Bauaria, and Frederick Duke of Austria, both were chosen
Emperors, the states of Italy and Germany were divided in the election:
whereupon neither of them would give place, but for the space of 8. years,
they made wars one against the other, to ye great ruin of all Italy and
Germany, many seditious vprores and commotions boulstered by them, the
slaughter of many noble years, the decay of many noble houses, and the death
of many valiant Captains, this is the fruits of sedition, of cruel
commotions, and of ambitious heads. At the length the Duke of Austria being
killed, the Duke of Bauaria was a sole Emperor: He entered Italye with a
mighty power, but the bishop of Rome being not his friend, shot out
against him his thundringe boultes of cursinge and excommunication, but the
Emperor little esteemed his cursing God blessinge him, and entered Rome the
bishop not able to withstand him, and was Crowned there of Stephanus
Columnius, So little the curse of the Pope prevailed. And in this place it
geeueth me occasion to write of a certain curse which the Metrapolitan of
Mosconia did curse the Emperor withal, as follows.

* The Emperor of Russia who is Emperor of Casane and great Emperor of
Astraca^, on a time was cursed of the Metropolitan of Moscouia, and the
Emperor hearing of his curse, The Metropolitan of Moscouia.
sent to the Bishop which cursed him, a great stone in a platter,
tauntingly saying: bless the from famyne for I have cursed thee. The holy
bishop answered again, bishops love not to eat stones? the Emperor
answered, nor Emperors to be cursed. But says the Emperor thou shall feel
not only what is the wrath of a Prince by so hard a stonye penance, but also
thou shalt feel for all thy curse, that my power is without the reach of thy
curse. The bishop fearing the Emperors threateninge, fled to a poor
Monasterye, but he was taken, and by the way he gave to our Lady his Pall
and his bishops roabe, to Petronilla his hatte, and to S. Michol (whom we
call Nicholas) his staff. And I saw this Metropolitan (as many more English
me^ did to) have a great Iron chain about his neck, and carried on a ^ledde
most vile to behold, which was never seen before in Moscouia: for the chief
bishop there, is counted a Saint and father of the Emperor. After this and
diverse other torments, the Emperor caused him to be torn a sonder with
fierce horse: This was done in the year of Christ.1569. at what time as I
served with the Emperor of Moscouia.

Lodouicus made Corbarius Pope, and deposed the other bishop, and placed in
all the Cities Maiestrates that acknowledged obedience to him being their
Emperor. He dyed the 32. year of his reign, he was a most noble Prince
endued with all Princelye qualityes.

Charles the fourth.


CHarles the fourth a Bohemian, whose father was John, a Countye of Lucenburge,
he was chosen Emperor and enjoyed it against Edward king of England
elected, and against Gunter Earl of Suarlzenburge. This Charles was brought up
in learning, and in the knowledge of the chief languages: He made the
university of Prage, and adorned it with most sumptuous buildinges. He
neglected the majesty of the Romayne Empire, geuinge himself whollye from the
care of it, the Pope cursed him out of Italye. He governed 32. years, then his
son Venceslaus by a common counsel was elected Emperor. ^

Venceslaus.


VEnceslaus the son of Charles the fourth, was unlike to his father, and
graund father in martial policies, who through slouthfulnes let the Empire
faule into ruin: he was taken of his brother sigifmundus and deposed, and in
his steed was chosen Rupertus the Earl Palatine of Rhene, he dyed the.22. of
his reign. Rupertus Duke of Bauaria in fight against Galiatius, was driven
out of the field, he went to the Venetians and to the people of Trydent, and
was honorably received of them. After this he returned into Germanye, and gave
himself to peace and Religion: he dyed the x. year of his reign, leauinge
the state of the Florentines in great peril.

Sigismundus.


SIgismundus the son of Charles the fourth, in all Princely glory most
excellent, of goodlye and taule personage, with all princely qualityes endued:
a godly Prince, excellent in all noble languages. He excelled in the copuousnes
of the latin tongue: and much blamed the Germaynes that they hated the lattine
tongue. He married Marye the daughter of a king of Hungary, and obtained
Bohemia of the king her father: he was often overthrown of the Turks and
Bohemians, he put to death 32. noble me^ of Pannonia beheading them. At ye last
he was taken and in the custodye of a Lady whose husband he put to death, but
with great difficulty he was delivered: He took away the contention of
ambitious Prelates at Rome, and drove three bishops from their seats. He
had a second wife and dyed the 27. year of his reign. He was buried at Alba
in Hungarye. ****

Albertus.


ALbertus Duke of Austria, the son in law of this Sigismundus before, king
of Bohemia and Hungarye: As Soon as he was Emperor he subdued the Normanes, and
the people of Sweuia, also ye Pooles he brought them within his bo^des and
limittes, he brought under ye factions in Bohemia, he had wars with the
Turks, but he prevailed not against them, he dyed of a bloody Flixe, and was
buried with his father in law Sigismundus, rulinge but two years. The Empire
was in great calamitye by him, he left his wife Elizabeth the daughter of
Sigismundus (before named great with child, who bare him Ledislaus king after
his death. ^

Frederick the third,


Frederick ye third, Duke of Austria who governed his Empire with so great
wisdom, that for the space of 53. years continuallye so long as he
governed, the state was vpholded with all prosperity and quietness. He ceased
many seditious tumultes in Austria, he delivered his son Maximilian from ye
Flemminges, and was Crowned at Rome of Pope Nicholas with his wife Leonora
daughter to the king of Lusitania, who with his wife returned to Naples to
greet his kinseman Alpho^sus Then he returned into Germanye, making a
foolish vow that he would go to Rome on pilgrimage in poor habit, then
after yt he returned into Germanye, and dyed the 79. year of his age.

Maximilian.


MAximilian the son of Frederick the third, borne of his wife Leonora, in
ye life of his father the government of the Empire was committed to him. This
Maximilian entering into Burgundy where he married Marye ye daughter of Duke
Charles, by who^ he had ye Dukedom of Burgundy: Mathewe king of Pannonia
being dead he obtained to himself his kingdom. This Maximilian was a noble
Prince, Germanye was given all to wars in his time, yet this Prince was most
desirous of peace, till just and good occasion moved him thereto. He was of
beautiful countenance, of goodly stature, broad shouldered, he was so much
given to hunting, that neither heat nor cold, could keep him from that
pastyme. He was excellent in all languages, a patron of all learning, This
was his excellent saying of those that were learned. Eos se amare quos natura
alios ante stare voluit: Those he ought to love, whom nature had made to pass
other. He was a Prince endued with all humanitye, and wisdom, in prosperitye
and adversity all one, neither proud in the one, nor cast down in the other.
He governed.33. years, and dyed with the grief of all men, for his virtues so
much beloved.

The most victorious Emperor Charles the fifte.


CHarles the fifth the son of Philippe, which Philippe was Archeduke of
Austria, and ye son of Maximilia^ and Marye: Of this Philip was borne these
two noble Princes, as al writers do write them, Duo preclarissima orbis lumina,
Carolus Q. and Ferdina^dus. The mother of this Charles and Fernandus, was Ioane
queen of Castill: Of this Ioane, Philip begat also.4. daughters, yt is
Leonora, Isabella, Marye and Katherine all these his daughters were married to
kings: Leonora was married to ye king of Lusitania, Isabella to ye king of
France called Frau^cis, at what time as he was delivered home from Charles ye
fifte, king Frauncis being in his captiuitye. Marye was married to the king
of Dacia, Katherine to the king of Hu^garye, their father was buried at Burges
in Castile, the year of our Lord and Savior.1506. Charles the fifte succeaded
his grandfather Maximilian, by the election of all the estates: These
co^mendations ye Germaynes give unto him.

Carolo Q. praeter fortunae and animi dotes, maximae bellorum and pacis
accessere felicitates, vtpote, qui tot insulas subegit, tot regulos aut bello
perdomuit, aut etiam potestati subiecit quo regnante res maiorum monumentis
inauditae obtigerunt.

To Charles the fifte not only all felicitye followed, both for fortune and
the mind, but also in peace and war he triumphed over all his enemies, for
many Cittyes and Islands he brought to his subjection, and many Princes and
kings he brought to his obeisance, as no Emperor more.

This Charles the fifte, unto whom for valiante acts, may worthily be
attributed ye syrname of Magnus, in that it may be truly affyrmed, that ye
virtues of this Prince were so manifold, and his qualityes so rare, that
neither the divine eloquence of Cicero, nor ye grave Copy of Demosthenes,
might suffice with due honor to celebrate him. And as impossible it is fully
to describe his who^e conquestes and victoryes, as it is to reduce the Ocean
into a little Vessel. Wherefore although the burden of this enterprise be most
great, for his noble acts fully to be spoken of: where upon there may happen
unto me ye like as chanced unto a certain Ingrauer, who having taken upon
him to set forth an Image in some stone of Porfrey or white Marble, and
although his workemanshippe therein was not very perfect, yet it was much
regarded and beheld for the raritye of the substance, and not for ye
excellencye of the workemanshippe. Even so the subject of him on every side,
of whom I have taken upon me to write of, is such, that of it self it may
very much supplye unto the imbecilitye of my understanding, and baseness of
style: being encouraged therefore with these occasions to enter freely under
this burden, I have thought it necessary to repete the Original of the house
of Austria, a familye certainly, by fate ascribed unto Emperors. The first
from whom this most famous house had beginning, was Leopold (syrnamed the
worthy) who was created Marquis of Austria, by Charles the great, which was
in the time when the Hungarians overcame the country of Germanye: but in the
end being overcome of Charlemaine, The first name of Marquesses, and why they
were so called.
they were prosecuted by him unto Buda, where first began the name of
Marquesses for such noble men, unto whom were assigned frontiers of countries
to defend, against the incursions and invasions of the enemies, were named
Marquesses.

After Leopold, Leopolde.
succeaded Henrye the first of that name and second Marquis of Austria
(syrnamed ye rebel) because long time he refused to obey unto ye Roman
Empire. Henrye. ^.
Unto He^rye succeaded Albert (syrnamed the victorious) for his manifold
victoryes. Albert.
Heruestus succeaded Albert (syrnamed the valiant.) Leopold the second
(syrnamed the beutifull) succeaded Heruestus. Heruestus.
Unto Leopold the second, succeaded Leopold the third (syrnamed the godly)
who for the godly deeds which he wrought, Leopolde. 2
was canonized and registered in the number of saints. Unto him succeaded
Leopold the fourth (syrnamed the bountiful) for the liberalitye which he used.
Leopolde. 3
Unto Leopold succeaded Henrye, who of Frederick ye Emperor was created Duke
of Austria, Leopolde.4*
which was in the year after the incarnation of our Savior Christ.1361.

Unto Henrye succeaded Leopold the fifte syrnamed the virtuous, Henrye.
for his manifold good qualityes: this was ye second Duke of Austria and the
first of Stiria. Leopolde. 5
Unto him succeaded Dukes of Austria and Stiria, two brethren, Frederick the
first syrnamed the Catholic, Frederick.1.
and Leopold the sixte called the glorious, who ouerliued his brother and
governed prosperously both Duches. Unto him succeaded Frederick the second
syrnamed the warlicke, Leopolde. 6
who was the last Duke of Austria and Stiria. He dyinge without any heir,
Margaret who was the sister of Frederick, Frederick.2.
and ones wife unto Henrye the king of the Romans, the son of the Emperor
Frederick the second: being now a wydowe and without heirs by her husband,
Margaret.
returned into Austria as sole heir.

There was also an other Lady named Gertruda, Gertrude.
daughter of Henry Duke of Meddling (who was also brother unto the said
Frederick) she was given by him in marriage unto Ladislao Duke of Morauia, with
who^ she lived scarsely xviii. months but he dyed, and after she was married
unto Herman the Marquis of Bada, by whom she bare a son named Frederick,
unto ye which without question had descended both the estates, if he had not
been beheaded at Naples. This Gertruda after she had been wydowe.iiii. years,
returned into Austria, unto whom was assigned to inhabit the forte and Castle
called Meddling, and unto Margarete was given Hiemburg. After Frederickes death,
the treasure which was in the Castle of Starchemburg, was divided into three
parts, one part was given unto Margaret, an other unto Gertrude, who had two
sons Theodoricke and Albert, and the third was distributed among the sisters
of the said Frederick. After this there grew a great discord among the
Barons for the election of a governor, since there remained no heir male unto
Frederick, of which discord to entreat of appertains nothing unto my
purpose. It suffices to understand that after the Empire of Rome had long
time been destitute of a king, Rodulphe the Countye of Hasburge was elected
king of the Romans, who gave the Duchye of Austria unto his eldest son: by
which means it descended unto this most glorious family of Hapsburg, in the
which it has continued the space of 260. and mo years, and has brought
forth nine Emperors, which are. The said Rodulphe, Albert the first,
Frederick the first, Alberte the second, Frederick the second, Maximilian,
Charles the fifte of whom we now write of, Ferdinando his brother, and
Maximilia^ yt raygneth. The beginning of the the house of Austria.
This (as most approved Authors affirm) was ye Original of the house of
Austria. Charles the fifte was the son of Philippe king of Spain, son to
Maximilian the Emperor, and of Queen Ioane who was daughter unto king
Ferdinand the Chatholicke, he was borne in Gaunte a noble Cittye of Flaunders,
very famous by ye birth of this mighty Prince. But here the better to
satisfye the Reader, I have thought it necessary to entreat of his Petegree,
by a more higher descent. Charles the sifte, king of France (syrnamed the
wise) gave unto Philippe his younger brother, The stock of Charles the fifte.
the Duchy of Burgundy: this Philip took to wife a daughter of Lodouickes the
Countye of Flaunders, who was his only heir and was called Margaret, Philippe.
by whom he had a son whose name was Philippe, Charles.
this Philippe had a son who was called Charles (syrnamed the warrior) who
being slain before the Cittye of Nance, Marye.
left Marye his daughter sole heir unto many large Countries, who married
with Maximilian son unto the Emperor Frederick ye third, Maximilia^,
Philippe.
and bare by him Philip, who had unto wife Ioane the daughter of Ferdinand
king of Spain, Ioane.
unto whom she bare two sons, Ferdinande Charles.
Charles and Ferdinand, which Queen Ioane being great with child removed unto
Gaunt where she was delivered of Charles, Ferdinand.
as you have hard before. Ferdinand his grandfather by the mother, was king
of Aragonie and Cicilia, and had to wife Elizabeth the daughter and heir of
John the second, king of Spain, who afterward conquered the kingdom of
Naples: He begat^e of Elizabeth these children, John, Isabell, Ioane, Marye and
Katherine. John and Isabell, dyinge without issue, the kingdom descended
(according to the laws of Spain) unto Ioane the second sister: by this mean
therefore all the segnioryes which belonged unto the Duke of Burgundye, (who
undoubtedly was a very mighty Prince) and all the kingdoms which king
Ferdinand possessed, descended unto this Charles the son of Ioane: in the
dividing of which enheritance, all the Duchy of Austria was obtained by his
brother Ferdinand. Charles was borne upon S. Mathias day, which was the
xxiiii. of Februarye.1500. Philippe his father dyed he being but a child of
vi. year old, but his grandfather Ferdinand lived after him ten years, and
continuallye duringe his life, tendered his nephewe with a fatherly affection,
and procured to have him brought up in learning and most virtuous exercises,
who when he was of xvi years of age, sailed into Spain, where he was
received with great joy and gladness: For the Spaniards more then any other
Nation, are inclined to love their Prince, and for this they did the more
honor Charles, for that they conceived to be in him great prowess, and that
their name through him would be much exalted. It is certain that at the first
diverse of the Barons and chief of the kingedome, would not accept him for
their King, but as a Prince, for that they supposed they should very much
iniurye their queen Ioane, if they should do any thing against the
Testamente of the worthy king her father. About this there arose great
tumultes, but in ye but in the end all things were acquieted by accepting him
for governor together with her in the kingdom: Charles being received unto
the administration of Spain, in the year of Christ.1517. He remained there
two years, in which time he exercised himself, not in childishe pastimes,
but in all those affairs which belong to a most sage and prudente governor.
And (a thing to be wondered at) in that little space he so attained unto the
conditions and behavior of yt people, that he seemed to be borne, nourished
and brought up among the Spaniardes, and yet he never abased in any respect
the state of a king, for with his majesty, humanitye was so united, that with
difficulty it might be discerned whether in him was the greater: Unto the
proud he was a terror, and unto the humble courteous, which made him to be
both loved and feared of all men. Rare virtues in a Prince.
These virtuous of his being published thorowout all Europe, so much
prevailed, yt after the death of Maximilian, the Electours chose him for
Emperor when he was but.xix. years of age: the which election was esteemed
the worthier, in yt Frauncis the French king was his competitor in the same,
who had in his favor Pope Leo the x. It is reported that Charles understanding
the French king to seek after the Imperial dignitye, doubtinge that there
might through this emulation arise some discord, certifyed him that he also
sought after ye same: Unto whom the French king answered, that it displeased
him no more, then if they were both riualles in loving of one woman. After
Charles was chosen Emperor, he sent the report thereof into Spain by
Frederick the Countye Palatine, who for his news was most welcome unto the
Spaniardes: but he ordained certain in his absence to govern the kingdom, as
Adrian the Cardinal, and Charles Ceurus a Flemminge, instructor unto the
Emperor in feats of arms, which ruled Spain with such tyranny, that wtin
short space it was altogether in Arms, unto the universal discommoditye and
hurt of the whole province. Upon which occasion the French king (a Prince of
great worthiness) very well perceyuinge that if the Emperor were not in time
prevented, he would in short space grow unto such strength and power, as yt he
might be a great terror both unto France, and al other Princes near unto him
adjoining. He had in remembrance the folly of Pompeie, The small discretion of
Pompeie.
who permitted Caesar to grow unto such power and force, yt he was not able
(when after he would abate his might) but in process of time through his
negligence was by him vanquished, and by those he trusted, most shamefullye
slain. Whereupon by this tumulte in Spain, the French king took
oportunitye to invade the kingdom of Nauarra: but as the rebels were sone
overcome by Don Ignico Velosco ye great Constable of Spain, and by Henrye the
Admiral, even so by those Captains ye Frenchmen were destroyed and
vanquished. At this present the Emperor passed into Germany, where he was
joyfully received, and in the year after the Incarnation of Christ.1520. in
the City of Aquisgrane, he was solemply Crowned Emperor with the silver
Crown: for it is an ancient custom, that all Emperors should be Crowned at
iii. fondrye places, with three diverse Crowns. I have thought it necessary
therefore in this place, The order observed of ye Electors in chusinge the
Emperor.
to describe ye order which the electors observe in their creation. Charles
king of Bohemia and fourth Emperor, in the year 1306. ordained for the same
a certain law, the which is commonly called the Bull of gould. The principal
points of which are these: First, upon the certain report of the Emperors
death, ye Archbishop of Mense is bound, as soon as he shall have
understanding thereof, to certifye the rest of the electors, and to cite them
to meet together within ye space of three months in the City of
Franckeforde, there to elect a new Emperor: and that they which cannot at the
day appointed come themselves, do send their deputyes with full commission and
authority. Yea if it should happen the Archebishoppe to be necligent in
accomplishinge the same, yet they notwithstanding are bound to meet there
within that term, and none of them to enter into the City accompanied with
more then two hundredth horses, among which there must be, but.50. men of
Arms: and he that does not appear himself nor by his deputye is for that
present deprived of his Electorshippe. The first penaltye.
Moreover the Maiestrates of Franckforde, are bound to permit them to enjoy
all Fraunchesses and libertyes: and not to suffer during the diet, any other
person to enter into Franckeforde, beside the electors and their familyes.
After they be all assembled, they have service solemplye celebrated for them in
S. Bartlemewes, where, in their prayers they pray unto God, that in the present
election he will vouchsafe to endue them with his grace, and to illuminate their
hearts with his holy spirit, that they may choose a good and virtuous Emperor.
The oath.
After this they swear, yt in the election they will work nothing neither
for favor, reward, condition or promise. In fine they come to consultation,
from whence they may not depart, until they have chosen the Emperor: for if
it happen that they conclude not within the space of one monethe, The second
penaltye.
then all kind of victuels are taken from them, except only bread and
water. And as touching the election, he that is chosen by most voices,
enjoys as much privilege, as if they had all consented to the same. The
Election being in this manner as you hard ended, The oath of ye Emperor.
and the Emperor created, he is sworn to establishe all the electors
privileges, with all such rightes as appertain to their dignity, liberty, and
immunityes. I pretermit for breuitye diverse other conditions, which to write
would make a large volume.

* At this time Martin Luthar, did most feruentlye and learnedly enueighe
against the Popes usurped supremecye, and his erronius traditions.

The Emperor considering how that Frauncis ye French king attempted the
conquest of the kingdom of Nauarra, and understanding that the said king
was in Arde, there to meet with the king of England, to conclude with him a
league and peace: supposed yt if the French king might obtain any such
league of amitye at the king of Englandes hands, (whose valiant courage he
very well knew was inferior to no Prince that ever lived, and whose power (as
both France and Scotland can testifye) was invincible: might be unto his
attemptes very prejudicial, or to say more truly an utter subversion.
Wherefore after he had polliticklye consulted upon these ambiguityes:
Immediately upon king Henryes return into England, the Emperor with all speed
possible, sailed thither also, where the king received him very royallye, with
whom the Emperor so much prevailed, that in the end the king (for yt he was
his kinseman) joined with him in league: Henrye the eight a terror to Princes.
Such was the might and worthiness of this most triumphante Prince, that these,
two of the most mightyest Kings that have of long continuance reigned in
Europe, omitted no occasions that might be devised, to procure his favor and
frendshippe.

After the death of Jews the French king, Frauncis discending from the royal
familye of the Valesi succeeded him: who having a mind desposed to attempt
waightye affairs, determined the conquest of Milane: and having in redines a
warlicke host of worthy soldiers, prepared before of king Jews for the
same intent, without protracting of time, marched forward with his army,
which was of.8. Thousand men of arms, every one of which led with him three
horses: viii. thousand light horsemen, and twentye Thousand footmen, among
these were.x. thousand Almanes very valiaunte and hardye soldiers, with.xx.
ensigns of Ghiunie men, Gascoynes and Biscalines, with these Nations he
marched into Italye by secret, and unused bye ways: for at the persuasion of
Triuultius he passed over the the Alps of Argentera, Prospero Colonna taken
prisoner by ye Frenchmen.
with such celerity and silence, that unawares Prospero Colonna, who then was
at Villa Franca, with 5. hundred men of Arms and light horsemen, was with all
his taken prisoner. This Colonna and the Cardinal Sadunese were ye Popes
generalles over his armies. After the French me^ had fought diverse times with the
soldiers of the Pope, and of the Sforzeschi, by a Cittye appertayninge unto
the Duchy of Millen, they fought also twyce with twentye Thousand Suizzers
very valiantlye, and in the end after they had with doubtful success
continued ye battle the space of xvi. hours, the Suizzers were by the French
horsemen put out of order and so vanquished. There were slain in two
battayles, above ix. Thousand Suizzers, besides as many mo which were
wounded, the other that escaped fled through Millen, and so returned into
their own country. After the Milaners had received this great overthrow,
Millen in the French kings hands.
being abandoned of the Suizzers, they opened ye gates unto king Frau^cis, who
victoriouslye entered Millen. The Duke whereof Maximilian Sforza fled into
the Castle, which for fear yielded it unto the French king: upon this
condition, that the king should pay him yearly during his life, xxxv.
Thousand Crowns, and that he as long as he lived, should never depart out of
France, without license obtained of the said king. In this manner as you
have hard Millen became subject unto the French king: presentlye after this
he went unto Bonnonie, where he met with Pope Leo, with whom he entered into a
league of frendshippe, Carniual we call it shrouetyde.
and after he had passed the Carniuall in solace and pleasure, he returned
into France, and for a few years enjoyed quietly that miserable and
unfortunate estate.

After the death of the Catholic king, before ye going of Charles into
Spain, A truce taken between the Emperor and the French king at Noion.
he made a truce by his Ambassadors with king Frauncis at Noion in Burgundye,
rather of necessitye enforced thereto, then moved by good will: for he might
neither safelye nor spedelye have made his iourneye, not having the friendship
of this stout and mighty prince: The conditions of which accord were these.
First, that the Emperor should restore Nauarra unto ye son of king John, if
the arbitrators which were to determyne the controuersye, would judge it
reasonable: Moreover yt he should pay every year unto king Fraunces, an
hundred Thousand Ducates for the kingdom of Naples, to the end it might appear
that he had some right to the claim thereof.

This accord being concluded by a Prince of.xvi. years of age, could not be
of much force, for the tribute was never paid: although in the behofe of the
French king, it was diverse times demanded. Charles who possessed the
kingdom of Naples lawfullye as his inheritance by his grandfather Ferdinand,
thought it a discredit to pay tribute for his own, for he well knew that in
so doing he should have abased his lawful title: Moreover he esteemed it a
great dishonor that the French king should enjoy the state of Millen,
which was tributarye unto the Empire, without having any just title or
claim thereto: Also the being of the French men in Italye, caused him to
doubt of the safe enioyinge of the kingdom of Naples. Wherefore after
consultation had upon these differences, he fullye determined and disposed
himself to revenge the injuries offered him by the Frenchmen, and with all
speed to drive them out of Italye. He appointed as general in this
enterprise Prospero Colonna, and Fraunces Daualo Marquis of Pescara, he made
general over the footmen. The French king not ignorant of the Emperors
determination, sent into Italye an army of soldiers, whereof a great part
were Suizzers, over whom was Captain Monsignor de Lotrecco, who marching with
great celeritye out of France, drew near unto the same bridge over ye which
Prospero Colonna had passed to go unto Cremona: So that the two hoastes
incou^tred as it were face to face at Rebecco. The Captains of ye Suizzers,
being desirous to join battle with their enemies* desired Lotrecco that he
would grant them lysence to geeue the charge upon the Emperors army: And
also Francesco Maria Duke of Vrbine, a wise and valiant Prince who then was in
the Venitian Camp, affyrmed by good arguments that the conflicte would have
been unto them most prosperous. But Lotrecco (no man wittinge the occasion)
would not by any perswations, condiscende thereunto, although every man
affyrmed that Colonna had encamped his army imprudentlye, Great wisdom in
the encamping of an army.
and in a place of great disauauntage, which opinion he himself verifyed
shortly after, by retyringe with his army into a more safe and better
defenced ground: and in the end very politickelye passed with his army over
ye river Adda in certain small boats Whose passage Lesen a Captain of the
French kings resisted all that he might, for he well perceived that passage
to importe very much, but he prevailed little with this his attempt,
wherefore he retired with all speed unto Millen. When ye Marquis of Pescara
marched with ye footmen, over which he was general, toward the Cittye also:
The Spaniardes approaching near unto the Town, and vewinge every place
diligently, found a secret enterye into the same by a Posterne gate, who not
omitting the present occasion which fortune as smyling offered unto them,
passed with force through the trenches near unto which Lotrecco was encamped in
the Suburbs: Millen taken of the Emperors soldiers.
and assaultinge the French and Venitian soldiers at unawares gave them a
marvelous great overthrow, and took prisoner Signior Theodoro Triuultio
general over the Venitians, who at that present was unarmed, An overthrow of
Frenchmen.
as one that looked not for any such assault. The Milleners who greatly
favored the parties of Sforza, and might not well support the great pride and
cruelty of the Frenchmen, at midnighte opened unto the Emperors army the
gates of the Cittye, and received him with great joy.

Lotrecco at this instant (although no man pursued him) with the Frenchmen at
Arms fled unto Cremona, which at length he obtained, and attempting in
vain the conquest of Pauia, encamped at Sesto, mindinge to assault Millen. But
he found in a redines Prospero Colonna and Sforza, who with great affection
was followed of the Milleners: The Frenchmen and Suizzers are vanquished.
wherefore he went unto Bicocca, where a battle was fought, in which the
Frenchemen were overcome, and a great number of them and of the Suizzers
slain, and in this conflicte was slain Albart Peter their Captain. Pope Leo
as it was thought killed with poison.
After this fortunate success the Emperors soldiers wanne Lod^, Piccightone
and Alexandria. At this time dyed Pope Leo, who as it was suspected) was
murdered by empoysonme^t: Adrian the 6. created Pope
Unto him succeeded Adrian the sixte.

At this present the Marquis of Pescara took the City of Geane, The City of
Geane taken by the Marquis of Pescara.
which he permitted to be sacked of the soldiers. Adrian the Pope entered
Rome at such time as the miserable Cittye of the Rhodes (so much celebrated of
aunciente writers, being a securitye unto all Christendom, of marvelous
force) was after a long siege, The City of Rhodes taken by the Turks.
won by Soliman the Emperor of the Turks, a most deadlye enemy unto all
Christians, and yielded unto him upon certain conditions by Monsignor
Litidaine, the chief governor there for the Christians.

And now the Emperor to gratifye the Milleners, invested Fraunces Sforza with
the Duchy of Millen, and also concluded a league with the Pope, for the
defense and conservation of the Duchye unto the said Sforza: into which
league entered the Venetians, who esteemed this the only mean to restore
Italye unto liberty. Notwithstanding this league, and the manifold
overthrows which the French men had sustained, yet no chance that mghte
happen, was able to withdraw the invincible mind of king Fraunces, from the
conquest of Millen: Wherefore with all speed he prepared a mighty host
of.32. Thousand footmen, The second coming of king Frau^ces into Italy to
conquer Millen.
among who^ were xii. Thousand Suizzers, and of.xii. Thousand horsemen. But
the Duke of Burbon Constable of France, did somewhat stay the French kings
hastye coming into Italye, for Madame Aluigia the kings mother seemed by
force wrongfully to take from the said Duke certain Castelles which
appertayned of right unto his Duchy: whereof he complained unto ye king, of
whom he received so discouragious and aunsweare, No cause ought to move a man
against his country.
that he was moved being much injured to conceive displeasure against him with
desire of revenge, which desire in the end took effect: And now ye king for
diverse considerations, thought it necessary to have his company, but the Duke
(otherwise mindinge) feigned himself to be sick, and was visited of the king,
who said yt in any wise he should go with him unto the conquest of Millen. Unto
whom the Duke (to satisfye him for the present) answered that he was content.
But after the kings departure, he used this subtiltye to escape: and having
sent before the army certain of his family with a Horse litter, in which were
his Ensigns and Armor, al men supposing him likewise tobe in the same,
secretelye with a small company of horsemen he roode into Burgundy, a
country of the Emperors, in which he leuyed x. Thousand footmen, minding to
assault France presentlye after y^ king should be departed thence, as he had
decreed with the Emperor long before: by the working of Adrian Baureno, who
was sent unto him to debate of this enterprise, in the habit of a marchaunte.
After the Duke had molested the country of France with those Duchmen,
atchieuing no exploite worthy of memory, he departed into Italy: In whose place
the French king authorized Vvill^a^ Gofferius his Admiral, who greatly
dampnifyed ye Emperors host. The death of Prosper^ Colonna.
At this present Prospero Colonna dyed, to supplye whose charge was appointed
Charles Lanoia the Viceroy of Naples. Gofferius entringe into Italye with the
army aforesaid, drove from the river Ticine the Imperial hoastes, and
pitched his tents not far from Millen, and determined to besiege ye same:
whose power the Emperors Captains not able to resist in ye field, wtdrewe
themselves into the Cittye, which they afterward perceyuinge to be weak and
slenderlye furnished of victualles, forsook it also, and returned unto the
defense of certain other fortes and Castelles. These Captains were scarlye
departed the Cittye by the gate called Porta Romana, bu^ the Frenchmen who
conceived hope of victory, by celeritye entered into the same Cittye, by the
gate which goes unto Vercelli. The soldiers would have sacked the Cittye
but the king who was replenished with clemencye and mercy, would not in any
wise permit them. After the Frenchmen were entered Millen, Anthony Lodia a most
famous Captain took upon him the defense of Pauia, and the Marquis of Pescara
with the Spanish footmen marched unto Lodi: and Don Charles Lauonia, with
Fraunces Sforza went unto Cremona, and the Duke of Burbon being gone into
Germanye to leuye soldiers. While these things were thus a doing, king
Fraunces was doubtful, whether it were better to assault Lodi, or to cut of ye
Duchmen before they came to Pauia: but in the end after long deliberation his
sinister fortune enduced him to march unto Pauia, at such time as the Duke of
Burbon was returned out of Germanye, with a great supplye of that country
soldiers, and the king having sent a great part of his army unto the
conquest of Naples, being abandoned also of 7000. Grisones, was enforced with
that company which was left him, to join battle with the Emperors
soldiers. In which confliete ye Marquis of Pescara Lanoia, and the Duke of
Burbon so vexed the Frenchmen, An overthrow of Frenchmen.
that in the end they gave them a great overthrow: Which the courageous king
perceyuinge, entered with his horsemen into the battle, and fought most
valiantlye, not omitting any duty that might appertain unto a most
valiante Captain, or worthy soldier. But in this conflicte the king at one
instante received three misfortunes: the first, ye Duke of Alonson with four
hundred fled away: secondly Anthonye Leua with his soldiers issued out of
Pauia, who at the first entrye into the battle put to flight two Thousand
Italians: and thirdlye with an invincible courage, set upon the Suizzers and
brake their arraye. The king also had behind him the Ducheme^ whose force he
was notable to resist because they kept their order, and were stronglye
enbattailed, and the Spaniardes did so assault him on every side, that in the
end his army was whollye discomfited and vanquished, and he himself taken
prisoner by Lanoia, The Frenchkinge taken prisoner.
who entertained him curteouslye, honoring him with all duty appertayninge
unto so puisant a Prince. Some write that the Duke of Burbon first apprehended
him, willing him to render himself prisoner unto ye Emperor: A worthy
aunsweare of a Prince.
unto whom the king answered that he would not yield unto a traitor. There
were slain in this bloudye conflicte, above viii. Thousand Frenchemen,
besides.xx. of the noblest Pieres in all France: there were taken prisoners of
noble men beside the king. The king of Nauarra, the bastard of Sauoy, ye
Popes Legate, Monsignor Memoransi, Monsignor de Florenge, the Lord Lescu, the
Lord of Buonauille, ye Lord of San Polo, Viconte Galeazzo, Frederick of
Bozzolo, the Prince of Lorene, Monsignor de Brion, Monsignor Dobeguino,
Fraunces the brother of the Marquis of Saluzzo, with many other Barons and
gentlemen. Of the Emperors soldiers were slain about 700. This conflicte
happened upon S. Math^as day, which was the day of the birth and Coronatio^ of
ye Emperor. A rare virtue in a Prince, for after report was brought to him
of this great victory, and taking of the French king prisoner, he showed not
any sign or token of joy: but rather considering the unstableness of fortune,
and infinite calamityes proper unto the estate of man's life, he desired
secretelye in heart for ever to live in peace, rendering praise unto the bounty
of ye Almighty God, yt had opened so present a way, for the quiet
establishment of ye estates of Italy, which he greatly desired. Whereupon by
letters directed from him unto Don Charles Lanoia, he exhorted the king with
patience to embrace this unfortunate accident, unto ye like whereof all men are
subject: and to be conducted unto Piccighitone, where (though his cruel fate
had in one instant dejected him from so high and mighty estate and dignity, yt
he was become a prisoner unto his enemy, with great loss and death of his
people) he sheewed a singular fortitude, and an incomperable temperance of
mind: for he was never seen to utter or manifest in his talk or countenance
any alteration, either by mirth or sorrow, neither did there at any time sighe
proceed from him: also he would with such sobrietye, and skill entreat of that
conflict, as he gave great cause of admiration unto such noble men as hard him,
of his singular judgment in the same. He only lamented ye vileness of the
Suizzers, who in the beginning fought so valiantly, and now the victory being
in their hands, fled so cowardlye. Not long after, Lanoia by order and
appointment tra^sported the French king (because the Emperor would not in
any wise see him) into Spain, King Frau^ces carried unto Spain.
and placed him in Madrid with a sufficient garrison, for the safe custodye of
his person: where he continuinge prisoner, void of all hope to receive any
curtesye or favor at themperours hands, in ye end by thought taking and
pensiuenes, became very sick: whom in that extremity the Emperor at the
earnest suit of diverse his familiars, and in most courteous wise promised to
restore him with al speed unto liberty. Neither did he protracte the time in
accomplishing his promise, King Frauncis delivered out of prison.
for upon these conditions he was shortly after redeemed. First, that he
should dispossess him whollye of Italy and Burgundye, and that when the
Emperor should repair into Italye to be Crowned, the king should send at
his proper costs and charges to guard his person, six Thousand footmen, 600.
men of Arms, and as many Archers with Crosseboweson horseback, unto al which
the king should pay wages for six months: And for the sure performance of
these conditions, he should cause to be delivered for hostages, of his three
sons, ye two eldest Frauncis and Henry: and yt not performing the conditions
he should come and restore him self prisoner again: Also to the end that this
league and agreement might be of ye greater force, the king should take unto
wife Helenor his sister, who was left wydow by Emanuell ye king of Portingale,
by who^ if he should have children, the emperor promised to inuest them with ye
Duchy of Burgundy. Charles the fifth married Isabell daughter unto the king of
Portingale.
These conditions being ended and condiscended unto, the king was set at
liberty, and returned into France. Not long after the emperor married Isabel
sister unto John king of Portingale, and daughter of ye foresaid Emanuel, and
contrary wise he gave for wife unto ye said king, Madam Katherine his sister.
Through this league between the emperor and ye French king, a great suspicion
was conceived by many, that they had coniured ye destruction of diverse
Princes: whereupon, Pope Clement, the king of England, and the Venetians renewed
their former league, unto their mutual securitye. Frauncis Maria Duke of
Vrbine Captain of the Venetians.
And the Venetians presently moved war for the delivery of Sforza besieged in
the Castle of Millen, over whom was general in ye enterprise, Frauncis Maria
Duke of Vrbine, who with great courage took Lodi: where he attended the coming of
4000. Suizzers, which had been leuyed by ye officers of king Frau^cis. The
Army also of Pope Clemente, which was conducted by Signior Gionau^ de Medici
joined unto his: Segnior Gionaum de Medici Captain of the Popes soldiers.
at such time as Sforza with his soldiers in the Castle of Millen was
driven unto such extremity through want of victuels, yt secretelye he caused
to be signified unto ye Duke of Vrbine, that without present supplye of
victuels, he was not able to abide the siege any longer. Wherefore the Duke
together with Gionaum de Medici, having in their company.15000. footeme^, and
2000. horsemen, marched toward Millen and encamped at Porta Romana, wherethey
gave certain courageous assaults: but finding very strong resista^ce, they
desisted from making farther attempt for yt present, minding to attempt ye
coming of ye Suizzers, who now were passed the Alps. Wherefore upon this
resolution they retired with both their Armies unto Marignano, with intent to
join with the Suizzers, but by reason of their carryages, their enterprises
was so slow, that the soldiers of Sforza which were besieged in the Castle,
not being able any longer to support their extreme famyne, sent Giacomo
Philippo Socco unto the Duke of Burbon, to signify yt Duke Sforza would yield
the Castle upon reasonable conditions. The Duke as one that desired nothing
more, Frauncis Sforza yeldeth the Castle of Mille^ unto ye Duke or Burbon.
granted that he should depart fre with all his, and promised also to give him
Coma, which when afterward he would have possessed, the Spaniardes which were
therein refused to part thence: saying, that although the City was giving
unto him, yet it was not so co^discended ye they should leave it. Sforza
perceiving him to be deluded, went unto ye army of the league, not co^playning
of the emperor, but reporti^g yt he was deceived and injured of his officers. At
this time Don Vgo Moncada was arrived in Naples with a fresh supply of
soldiers, which he brought out of Spain, who mindi^g to remove ye Pope from
the league concluded against the emperor with the Princes of Italye, Cardinal
Colonna ransacketh the Popes Palace.
induced Cardinal Colonna to make war against him, who being destitute of
soldiers for his defense, fled into the Castle of S. Angelo, where he was so
straightly enclosed, yt he had victuels scarcely for three days. Cardinal
Colonna being very wrathful toward him in the behalf of the emperor, without
resistance of any sacked the Popes Palace: and would have passed farther, if
Moncada who was the occasion of this, had not otherwise persuaded him. Whereupon
a truce was concluded between him, and the Pope for 4. Months, with condition
that ye Popes soldiers should retire from the territorye of Millen, unto the
other side of the river Po: and having received pledges for the performance of
the same, he departed from Rome, at such time as Don Charles of Lanoia being
returned out of Spain with an army of Spanishe footeme^, encountered with ye
Popes army at the river of Lauoro, where after long fight, he was overcome and
put to flighte. After which conflict a peace was entreated of, which in the
end was concluded between the emperor and the Pope, upon this condition: That
Don Charles of Lanoia should cause to return and desist from farther proceeding
the Duke of Burbo^, who was reported to march toward Rome, with intent to
sack the same. Don Charles met with ye Duke, but he prevailed nothing, for he
said yt his soldiers (who were without money) would not in any wise be
withdrawe^ from the rich pray of that City: except ye Pope to avoid that
inconvenience, would give him to pay his soldiers.4. hundred thousand
Crowns. Of which aunsweare Don Charles certifying ye Pope, he seemed in
countenance nothing to account or regard the same, but ye Duke of Burbon
co^tinuinge his iorneye came to Ronciglon, which presently he ransacked, and
from thence he went unto the Suburbs of Rome: when the Pope (who imprude^tly
had dismissed his soldiers) wtdrew himself with a great number of his
Cardinals, into ye Castle of S. Angelo, othersome recoueringe themselves for
fear into other strong places, so yt Rome was with small resistance easelye
taken. But at the assault thereof, the Duke of Burbon was slain with an
Hargabuse, The death of the Duke of Burbon.
so that the soldiers being without a chief ruler, sacked the same,
exercising therein sundry kinds of extreme crueltye, and ye Pope who was
straighty besieged in the Castle, Rome taken and sacked.
and not well furnished with victuels, was enforced to entreat for his
liberty: for the obtaynment whereof, he distributed for a pray among the
soldiers.400000. Crowns. At this instant Don Charles who concluded the peace
dyed, and in his place succeeded Don Vgo Dimo^cada, in who^ the Pope having no
great affiance, the morning followinge, vnaccompanyed of any in the habit of a
seruinge man, he mounted upon a good horse and departed out of the Castle,
from whence he rode unto Oruielo. This taking of Rome was occasion that the
king of England, the French king, the Pope, and the Venetians, renewed their
league against the Emperor: Whereupon the Frenchmen wanne Geane, and besieged
Naples. At this instante the Emperor was in Spain, who understanding that
against the estate of Millen and his kingdom of Naples, was moved a most
terrible war, being at that instant destitute of money, did by singular
pollicye very well provide, both for the defense of the Duchy, and sauegard of
the kingdom: And being very wrathful against ye French king, for that he had
broken his faith and promise made unto him at Madrid, Charles the fi^te
chalengeth the combat of the French king.
did challeng the combat of him, and sent him the defyance by one of his
Haroldes: unto whom was given no audience, but diverse and sondrye skoofes.
About this instant Phillipine Doria gave a notable overthrow by fight upon the
Sea, unto the Emperors Nauye, in which were slain seven hundredth soldiers,
the greatest number whereof was Spaniardes, together with Moncada, and diverse
other valiant Captains, and Signior Ascauio Colonna, with the Marquis of
Guasto were taken prisoners. Not long after this conflict, Andrea Doria not
satisfied by the French king for the good and faithful service which he had
done unto him, reuulted unto the service of the Emperor, and caused Geane to
rebel against him. At this present being in the year of Christ.1528. when
the Frenchmen besieged Naples, ye whole army almost was destroyed by an
unknown disease, which rose among the soldiers, and Lotrecco their Captain
dyed also at that instante: the year following the Frenchmen were whollye
driven out of Italye, which caused the French king to conclude a peace with
the Emperor, which was determined in Cambrai by Madam Aluigia the kings
mother, and Madam Margaret Aunte unto the Emperor and daughter of Maximilian:
ye accord was, that the king for the ransom of his sons, should pay
unto the Emperor two Millions of goulde, and should cause all the soldiers to
depart which as yet remained in Calauria and Puglia. The overthrow of the
Turks.
At this instant Ferdinand the Emperors brother, gave a great overthrow unto
the Turks. And in the year of Christ 1530. the 24. of Februarye, which was S.
Mathias day, The Chronation of the Emperor at Bononie.
so much fortunate unto Charles, he was by Pope Clement Crowned Emperor at
Bononie with a Crown of goulde, and an other of Iron: For ten years before
(as you have hard) he was Crowned with the silver Crown at Aquisgrane, The
signifycation of the iii. Crowns
which signifies ye kingdom of Germanye: that of Iron which was accustomed to
be received in Monza nigh unto Millen, betokens ye kingdom of Lumbardye: the
Crown of gould represents the Empire of Rome. At this Coronation by the
request of the Pope, Frauncis Sforza upon a certain composition, was by
the emperor restored unto the Duchy of Millen: also the Emperor at the
instance of this Neronius Pope, and Sedituis Cateline conquered Florence, and
reduced that noble and famous common wealth into a private estate, geuinge it
unto Alexander de Medici the Popes nephewe (who was presently created Duke
thereof) and to his posteritye for ever.

At this present there arose a great discord among ye Princes of Germanye,
concerning the reformation of the abuses in Religion, for Frederick the Duke
of Saxony, and Philippe the Langraue of Hessa, with diverse other, refused any
longer to obey unto the false, and erroneous traditions of ye bishop of
Rome: whereupon was ordained a diet by the Pope, whose person was represented
by Cardinal Campagio, but nothing worthy rehersall, was concluded in the
same. In this year Mulemanse king of Tunnis dyed, who left behind him two
sons, Mulerosetto who was the elder, and Muleasem: Mulirosetto for that he
was the elder was Crowned king, but Muleasem by the aid of certain of his
friends, moved war against his brother, and in the end drove him out of
Tunnis. Whereupon, Mulirosetto having intelligence that Soliman was at that
instant in Germanye, went unto him, and besieched his aid for the recouerye of
his kingdom: unto which demand ye Turk consented presentlye, and sent with
him Barbarossa into Africa, supposinge by that mean, to make himself patron
of that Segniorie: this war (as after you shall hear) passed in such sort,
Soliman the second time enterpriseth the conquest of Vienna.
that the emperor in proper person was enforced to sail into Affricke. But at
this present I will continue ye History of Vienna. The Turk to revenge the
overthrow which king Ferdinand gave him, assembled an huge host of.200000.
soldiers, or as many affirm of.300000. with the which on S. John Baptist
day he entered Hungarye, deuidinge many troops of horsemen in sondrye parts
of the country, over who^ was general Abraim Bassa, who caused to be made in
one instant, many Bridges over Sana: For leauinge the river Danubius on the
right hand, he marched directlye unto Stiria, a province very plentious of all
kind of victuels. The Emperor having understanding of these doings, he
caused all the Spaniardes which were about Florence to repair into Germanye,
with a great part of the Italian footmen conducted by the Marquis of Guasto,
which were in number about fyftene Thousand chosen footmen, after whose
coming there repaired unto the Emperor also Don Ferra^te Gonzaga, who
brought with him two Thousand Italian horsemen, among which, besides those of
the Duke of Ferrara, there were many knights and gentlemen who served of
their own accord, desyringe to win honor in so noble an enterprise. The
Pope also sent thither Hippolitus a Cardinal of the familye called Medici,
with diverse other knights and gentlemen, together with a great sum of money,
to leuye in Hungarye viii. Thousand soldiers: unto this enterprise also there
resorted the most part of the noblest gentlemen of all Germanye: so that all
these assembles, amounted unto.90000. footmen, Solima^ fears to join
battle with the Emperor.
and thirtye thousand horsemen, all which when they came unto Vienna, were
divided into three armies, and awayted the coming of the Turks, for the
rumor went yt Soliman would bid them battle. Who, although he had sent
his defiance unto Ferdinand and the Emperor, yet continuallye he discosted
from Vienna: which cowardlynes of him so much encouraged the Christians, that
not a little they contemned the base courages of the infidells, especially that
they were far greater in number then the Christians. But Soliman not mindinge
to return without the atchieuing of some notable enterprise, Michaloglie.
sent Michaloglie Captain over the adventurers with.15. Thousand horsemen, to
ouerrunne the Country, who was encountered first with the Palsgraue, whose
Ordinance afflicted him not a little: and in the retire Lodouico Lodrone, made
a second spoil of his soldiers, and ye residue were slain by ye Hungarians,
who set upon them at unawares, so that very few of them escaped. Upon which
discomfiture the Turk fearing his utter ruin, Soliman flies from the
attempt of Vienna.
desisted from the attempt of Vienna, and with all speed retired over the river
Mura, ouerthrowinge the Bridges always as he went, fearinge continuallye that
the Emperor was at his back. It is written that he led with him for
slaves.30. Thousand Christians, besides a great number which he slew in
diverse places. After the runninge away of the Turk, the Emperor returned into
Italye, leaving with his brother Ferdinand a sufficient supply of soldiers
for the defense of the Country: and at Bononie Pope Clement met with him,
where was concluded a peace between them for six months. Immediatlye after
which conclusion he sailed into Spain, where he had understanding that
Mendoza was in Cerene besieged of the Turks: against whom he sent Andrea
Doria, who rescued the City and put the Turks to flighte, at which time also
the More of Alexandria, a Captain of Solimans was vanquished upon the Sea, by
Girolamo Canale Admiral over the Venetia^ Nauye. At this present Pope Clement,
who continuallye enueyed the prosperous estate of this noble Emperor, having a
mind only bente unto wrath and revenge, procured the obtaynment of a most
firm and sure friendship with the French king, by giving in marriage unto
Henrye his second son, Katherine the daughter of Lorenzo de Medici, which
Henrye by the death of his elder brother, was afterward king, and his wife
Katherine Queen. This meetinge and new parentage between the Pope and king
Frauncis, nothing contented the Emperor, who conceived small securitye to
remain in the unconstant Pope, and less assurance of peace in the French
king. Also at this instant Philippe the Langraue of Hesla, The Langraue
endeavors to molest the state of Lumbardye.
for diverse iniuryes which he alleged he had received of the Emperor, being
(as it is supposed) aided and supported by king Frauncis, began to disturb
thestate of Lumbardye. Wherefore the Emperor doubting the La^graues forces,
the Popes inconstancy, and the French kings dissimulation, like a polliticke
Prince, provided sufficient repayres against the devises of his enemies: for as
before time he had promised in marriage Margaret his daughter unto Alexander
Duke of Florence, so the better to establishe his seat in Italye, he gave
Christerna the daughter of Christerne king of Dacia, and of Isabell his sister
for wife, unto Frauncis Sforza Duke of Millen, which he did as well to remove
all suspicion of depriving the Sforzeschi at any time of the Duchy of Millen:
as also to gratifye the Venetians whom he always knew very desirous of the
liberty of Italye: Also he gave unto the Duke of Vrbine, the Duchy of Sora,
and unto Doria Melfi, and long before he was assured of the faith and
friendship of the Duke of Ferrara, for the sentence which he pronounced against
the Pope (in his behalf) upon the Cittyes of Modena and Reggio: Moreover he
allured unto him Frederick the Duke of Mantua (unto whom he gave that title)
by promisinge him the Marchesat of Monferrate, which afterward he gave unto
him.

At this time Barbarossa who was sent of Soliman into Affricke, established
Mulirosetto in the kingdom of Tunnis, by conquering of Muleasen, and forcifyed
Goletto, which is the keye of that province (being a most strong forte, by
reason of the manifold marshes which inuiron the same) with a great number of
Moors for the safe keeping thereof.

While these things in this wise proceeded, The death of Pope Clement.
Pope Clement who pretended in heart much evil against the Emperor, was
prevented by death when he had reigned xi. years, and in his place was created
Alexander Farnese, called Paul the third. At the time of whose creation the
Emperor had intelligence, that Barbarossa had driven Muleasen out of Africa,
in such sort yt the whole country became as it were tributorye to the Turk.
Wherefore he by the aid of the Pope, the king of Portingale, and diverse other
Princes, gathered a Nauye of two hundredth sail and passed into Affricke, whose
coming did not a little disturb the tranquillitye of Barbarossa:
Nevertheless with a stout and valiant courage he prepared all things
necessary, for the defense of yt Goletto, distante from Tunnis.xii. miles, nigh
unto which the incursion of the Sea, has made a poole, in such wise, that by
reason of the lownes of the water, there is no passage from thence unto Tunnis,
but by a little canall or stream. The Emperor after he was arrived within the
co^spectt of Goletto, caused the Nauye to lie at Ancar, and certain soldiers
to land by little boats, who with their Hargabushes drove away the Moors
which defended the Sea banckes: then the Emperor caused Trenches to be made,
and planted the Artillery about the Tower to batter the same, The taking of
Goletto.
which after diverse skyrmishes and assaults, made both by Sea and land, was
taken with a marvelous occision of those which were within the same, so that
few escaped, for they which lept into the poole were slain with Hargabushes
and pykes. After Barbarossa had understanding of the taking of Goletto,
although he was greatly terrifyed thereat, yet like a polliticke and valiant
Captain, he comforted his soldiers: saying, that he doubted not, but that
in short space, by the aid of the Arabians, he should be revenged of the
received damages, and also of force to expel his enemies out of Africa.
Muleasen (who as you have hard) was by Barbarossa deposed from the kingdom,
repaired unto the Emperor, humblye beseechinge him that he would restore him
unto it again: the Emperor accepted his coming, and gave him a very
frendlye countenance, promisynge to accomplish his request. But while he was
busyed in repayringe for the siege of Goletto, and in furnishinge the same with
munition and Armor, Barbarossa with twentye thousand horsemen, of Arabians and
Moors, among whom were a great number of Archers and Gunners, sodainlye
assaulted his army in such sort, that he was enforced to join battle with
them, in which encounter the Spanishe horsemen not able to support the force of
the Arabians, were constrained to retire unto their ensigns: which ye Emperor
perceiving, (like a most worthy Captain, and most valiant soldier void of
all fear) with the men of Arms so stoutely charged them, The worthynes of
Charles the fifte.
that he compelled the enemies to leave their Artillery behind them, and to
commit themselves unto flight. After this glorious victory (although the
Emperor was not a little diswaded) yet he continued his enterprise,
determininge to drive Barbarossa out of Affricke, and to deliver from bondage
many Christians which were in Tunnis: toward the which he marched
presentlye with his whole host, and being come near unto the Cittye, as much
as he might he provoked his enemies (who were in the Subburbes) unto
battle. But Barbarossa not a little terrifyed by his late overthrow, refused
the offer, and through his inestimable choler, fell into such a frensye, that he
caused all the Christian captives, to be bound with two chains, and to be put
into the Castle of Tunnis which he would have overthrown with Gunnepouder,
if when he was consultinge with the Maiestrates, what order was best to be
observed for the defense of the Cittye, certain which detested his cursed and
dampnable intent, had not secretelye set them at liberty by vnlosinge their
bands, and giving them sufficient weapon and armor, with the which they might
defend the Castle against Barbarossa, whereof as soon as they had obtained ye
full possession, they made with a Standarde a certain sign by the which they
signified that they would yield the same unto the Emperor. Barbarossa
understanding of the loss of the Castle, endeavored by fair words and
large promises to get the same again, Barbarossa flies toward Bona.
but he prevailed nothing, whervppon dispayringe to win any good success,
he fled with vii. Thousand Turks toward Bona, which in time past was
called Hippona, where he had caused to wait in a redynes, to serve him if
occasion so required.xiiii. Gallyes and certain Foystes. The Emperor having
certain intelligence of the worthy act of the Captives, and of the flight of
Barbarossa, marched immediatlye with his army unto ye walls of the Cittye,
against whom came the Maiestrates and proferred him the keys of the same,
promisinge to become his obediente and faithful subjects. Wherefore he
commanded that no hurt should be done unto the Cittye, but ye soldiers which
entered in at other gates, of whom ye chief were Duchemen, did thoroughly spoil
the same: the Emperor made very much of the slaves which were in the
Castle, who were in number more then.vi. Thousand, and to every one of them
he gave money, and promised them ships and provision, necessary to conducte
them into their own country. This happy success had ye enterprise of
Affricke.

Then the Emperor according to his promise, restored Muleasen unto his
kingdom, upon this condition, that year lie for a tribute, he should send
him a cast of Faulcons, and six Barbarye horses, that he should always be
enemy unto the Turks, a friend unto the Christians, and at the devotion of
the Empire. After this as a most triumphant conqueror (or another Alexander,)
he departed from Affricke into Cycilia, from thence to Reggio and so to Naples,
where he had understanding that Frauncis Sforza Duke of Millen was dead, The
death of Frauncis Sforza Duke of Millen.
and that the French king renewed the claim and title which he had unto that
estate: and also that in his absence by Philippe Sciabotto his Admyrall, he had
taken, burned, and destroyed diverse Cittyes, Towns and Castelles in Piemont,
appertayning unto the Duke of Sauoye. These doings of the French king so
much displeased the Emperor, that the winter being passed, he iourneyed
unto Rome, where he was received of Paul the third, and of the whole Cittye
with great solemnitye and pomp: and there in the presence of the Pope and many
other noble men, with a very excellent Oration he bewailed the great untruth
of the French king, and rehearsed unto them the manifold injuries, which the
kings of that Nation had always used against the house of Austria, with
reprouinge also the king for breakinge the accord which was made at Madrid,
protesting yt he had observed and performed any of those vows which he
promised being his prisoner, for the recovery of his liberty: and yt in his
absence he had vexed Piemont with most cruel wars, wherefore he concluded,
that although he had most just occasions, to move war against the king and
to assail his kingdom, yet to avoid th'effusion of chrystian blood, The
Emperor offers to fight the combat with the French king, at Rapier and
Dagger.
he proffered to finishe and end all controversies, upon condition that he
would fight the combat with him at the Rapier and Dagger. The French
ambassadors which were present, would have answered in their masters behalf
but the Pope would not permit them, who endeavored with courteous talk to
mittigate the wrath of the Emperor, but he little prevailed, for presently
after his departure from Rome: in Prouenza he assembled an huge host of
horsemen and footmen: over which footmen was captain the Marquyse of Guasto,
Don Herna^do Duke of Alua.
over the men of arms the Duke of Alua, and over the light horsemen Don
Ferrante Gonzaga: in this host as most authors affirm were.50. thousand
footmen, and.30 thousand horsemen: with this royal army the Emperor entered
Prouence which he found abandoned, but his navy over which was general prince
Doria always followed him to supply unto the want of all such commodities as
were needful for his host, for the Frenchemen to endamage their enemies had
consumed with fire, their own corn and all other provision, for which doing
the king released them of their ordinary taxes for ten years. At Bregiola the
French horse men in a conflict were vanquished by the imperial horsemen as
they marched uncircumspectly in a plain, and diverse of their captains taken
prisonners: A great number of themperours army destroyed with sickness.
not long after which encounter there happened so mortal a plague in
th'emperors army, that 18000. of his soldiers dyed, wheruppon he re: tired
into Geane: but while he was in Prouence the french King had prepared an host
of.40. thousand soldiers for ye recovery of Geane, unto which city his
captains gave a fresh assault, but Augustine Spinola who valyauntly defended
the same and gave the^ the repulse, that they raised their camp and returned
into Piemont, where they joined with the residue of the french captains: and
not long after King Frauncis entered Flaunders, where he took Edine a very
strong city when he had besieged the same 50. days: whervppon the Flemings
with all speed gathred an army, and nere unto Turwin they gave the Frenchmen a
great overthrow: but while these events happened in Flaunders and Piemont: An
overthrow of Frenchmen.
Soliman began to make war against the Venetians, so that both by sea and land
he greatly endamaged the territories of the christians, without any resistaunce
made against him, by reason of the continual discord between the Emperor and
the Frence King: wherefore the Pope having present occasion for that a truce was
taken between these two mighty princes for 6. months, sent to persuade with
them his ambassadors, who so much prevailed that in the end they consented to
meet at Nizza where also ye Pope minded to be present, who so vehemently in
his talk exhorted them unto peace, with manifesting unto them the great ruin
that otherwise was like to ensue unto all Christendom through their
contention, that in the end a truce was taken and peace concluded between
them for ten years. After this accord the Emperor passinge through France
returned into Flaunders, Where the citizens of Gaunt refused to pay their
taxes, and had expelled ye Emperors officers, but they not able to defend the
city against his power rendered it unto his majesty, who after he had unto the
example of all other greuouslye punished the principalles and chief authors of
this rebellion, caused a Castle to be built in the city, to remove from them
all hope of rebelling that might happen in time to come.

The amytie concluded between the Emperor and the french King continued not
long, The Castle of Gaunte builded.
for King Frauncis sent ambassadors unto the Emperor to require him that
unto the accord he would inuest his son with the Duchy of Milaine, unto
which demand the Emperor would not in any wise consent, wheruppon the King
became very wrathful and converted his good will into extreme hatred, and
encouraged William Duke of Cleueland to rebel against the Emperor, unto whom
he consented the rather for that Charles denied to inuest the said Duke with
the Duchy of Gelderland, The Duke of Cleue rebelleth against the emperor.
which he claymed by the right and title of his mother. Wherefore the Emperor
(who at this instante was upon sondrye occasions departed out of Flaunders
into Germanye) having intelligence of the French kings practices, not provided
of a sufficient army, signified unto him that he intended to give the kingdom
of Flanders unto his son the Duke of Orlians: unto which promise the king
for diverse considerations giving no credit, continued his former preparation
for the wars, being thereto the more incensed for that his Ambassadors very
valiante, Rincone and Caesar Fregoso were slain not far from Pauia, by an
ambush of Spaniardes contrary to the laws and order taken in the truce. But
while these things thus proceeded, the Barons and commons of Spain (who in the
Emperors war against the Turk, would not contribute any sum of money,)
being now greatly vexed by the king of Algiers, proffered unto him by their
own consent and accord, that he would (unto the benefit of all Spain) make
war against thenfidels, to aid him with as much money as should suffice
for the maintaynance of the same. Thenterprise of the Emperor against the king
of Algerie.
Whereupon themperor whose chief desire was to suppress infidels willingly
accepted thenterprise, and leaving in the co^fines which border upon the French
king, sufficient garrisons of soldiers for the safe keeping of the same, he
iorneyed with all speed into Italye, and after he had in Millen prepared all
things necessary for that war, he went unto Luca where the Pope met with
him, who endeavored by all means possible, to renew the unity which was
before concluded between him and the French king: but he nothing prevailed,
for themperor openly declared that he would not in any wise surrender the
state of Millen unto the Frenchmen, whom he knew to be so insatiable that
having that, they would endeavor by all means to deprive him of all other
his segnoryes in Italye: Also he said it greatly displeased him, that he who
bare the title of the most Christen king, should be in league with the Turk,
by occasion whereof there ensued daily no small damages unto the Christians.
The Pope not able to bring to effect that which he desired returned unto Rome,
and the Emperor the beginning of October with.xxxvi. Gallyes, The Islands
Baleariche.
sailed unto Corsica, having sent his ships before unto the Islands
Baleariche, from Corsica he sailed unto Bonifacio, and from thence unto a
Cittye of Sardinia called Larghera: A calfe borne with two heads.
where, the same night in which he was arrived, a Cow brought forth a Calfe
with two heads, which was brought unto the Emperor to be seen, by him that
ought the Cow. From thence he sailed toward the Island Minoreca, but being
marueilously afflicted with tempests, he arrived with much danger at the
Port Mahone: Port Mahone.
from whence he sailed unto Maiorica, where he found Don Ferrante Gonzaga
Viceroye of Cicilia, in a readiness with.vii. Gallyes of that Country, and.50.
great Italian ships, which together with those that the Emperor had, made
in number a hundred and fiftye: from thence the emperor sailed unto Algeris,
which he besieged in.3. places, deuidinge his people being of.iii. Nations
into.iii. companyes: The Spaniardes were encamped upon the sides of the hills,
over whom was Captain Don Ferrante: The Duchemen at the foot of the hills
near unto Themperours pauilion, and the Italians (over whom was general
Camillo Colo^na) were encamped in the plain near unto the Sea side: So that
the Emperor nothing doubted the taking of the Cittye, but while he expected
the coming of the victuels with other provision from the ships, sodainlye
from Heaven there fell a terrible reign, which continued three whole days
without ceasinge, together with such a tempestuous wind, that it drowned
many of the Ships and Gallyes which lay at Anchor, and the miserable
soldiers which swamme toward the land to save themselves, were most
cruelly slain by the Turks, and Arabians, and his soldiers by standing so
long time in the water without victuels became so faint, and weak, that there
seemed but shadows of men, they were so bereft of all courage: through which
mishappes the Emperor was enforced to raise his siege, and in those shyps
which he had left him to embarke his souldyers, A most noble act of a prince
for whose safegarde he caused a great number of very fair gennets to be
drowned, preferring the lives of these feeble soldiers, before the preservation
of such excellent races. An example most worthy to be remembered at this present
of most nobles, who contrary to the example of this most noble Emperor are not
ashamed for a little vain pleasure which they conceive, to account much more of
the flying of a bird or running of a dog or horse, Our christian brethren
ought to be cherished
then of many poor christians, whom by Gods precepts they are bound to
cherishe. Yea so uncharitable are their lives, and brutish ye doings, of ye
covetous yt most like unto profane Epicures, they study only to make the^
selves happy in this tra^sitory world, in which they think always to remain,
for if they thought of any other to come, they would not as they do,
continually keep their gates shut, their ears closed unto the cry of the
port, whose cause no doubt God the most just judge, will in the end according
to his infallible promise revenge unto their utter confusion, and subuertion of
the ruinous securitye which they build upon. But to return to the historye,
as the Emperor was the first that landed, so was he first that entered in to
ship, after whose entrye, the mariners launched and sailed toward Spaygne,
(but by occasion of tempest which separated the navy) some were driven unto
Cicilia, other unto Geane, but the Emperor with much travail landed in
Carthaginia in Spain: such was the miserable end of ye enterprise of Africa,
The affairs of princes, troblous.
which as it was a discomfiture unto all christians, so it was especially unto
the Emperor. At this present the Dolphin not expecting ye Emperors return,
with a mighty host besieged Persegnano, but not being able to win the same, he
raised his siege and departed: at which time Charles Duke of Orliance took in
the co^fines of Luxenberge many towns and castles, and in the end the city
it self, Laundersey taken by the Frenchmen.
but afterward it was recovered again by the Emperors soldiers: the next
spring after this, the French King took Laundersey a city not far dista^t
from Cambrai: and Monsignior Vandosme was sent by the said King into the
country of Artois where he took by compositio^ Turnay, and also wanne
Mentarole, also Monsignior Lange who was governor for the King in Piemont, wan
Chierasco and possessed Verolenge, Pinauolo, Sanigliano, Mo^calier and Turine,
and the imperial captains were patrones of Fossano, Chieri, Alba and Vercelli,
with diverse other places. Moreover the French King, who wholly desired to molest
and endamage the Emperor, induced the Duke of Cleues when the Emperor was
sailed unto Algeris to leuy certain soldiers against him which he willinglye
did, not mynding to manifest his pretense unto the world, until he might
understand news of the Emperors estate whose correction he greatly feared,
for when it was reported the Emperor with all his nauye to be drowned he much
rejoiced, and refused to defer the assaulting of Anwarpe, after which he had so
long thirsted, wherefore he assembled his soldiers, and with his army marched
toward Eburone, desyringe the citizens of passage through the same, saying
that he was going to conduct home his wife, daughter unto the King of Nauarra.
But the Eburones denied his demand, saying that they would not permit any to
pass through the city into the country of the Emperors enemy with such an
armed company: The Duke of Cleues assalteth Anwarp
The Antuerpians understanding the pretense of the Duke sent against him seven
thousand Flemings, but they were repulsed by the Cleueners. Roshemio a valiau^t
captain, general for ye duke of Cleues entered Brabant spoylinge the country
as he went, against whom was sent the prince of Orange, Roshemio captain of
ye Cleueners.
who in a conflict was put to flight, and so retired into Anwerp: which city
Roshemio afterward besieged, but it was so valiauntlye defended that he raised
his siege, and marched toward France through Flaunders, where he took many
cities and towns, and meruailouslye endamaged the whole country. At which time
the French King also to the end he might the more molest and debilitate the
proud forces, A deuelishe practice of a christian king
renewed his league with the Turk, whom he exhorted and persuaded to invade the
frontiers of Spaigne, which he did with the effusion of much christian blood
and no benefit unto the King: moreover the Frenchmen attemptinge to win
Cuni, were couragiouslye repelled by the Spaniardes, and the Imperial
soldiers took Carignano, a place of great force adjoining nigh unto Turine,
which as hereafter you shall read caused ye wars to become more cruel then
they were at any time before. But while these wars continued these mighty
princes, the Duke of Saxony, and the Langraue of Hessa deprived the Marquise
of Brunswick of his estate: and the King of England for diverse injuries done
unto him by the french King renewed his league with the Emperor, who not
willing to detract time passed out of Barcelona into Gean with.40. gallyes, and
certain great shyps which conducted twelve thousand Spaniards and seven
hundred horses: from thence he went unto Busetto where he was exhorted by ye
Pope (who waited his coming) unto peace with the French King, but he being
desirous of revenge would not in any wise condescend thereunto: and from thence
he departed through Germany with an incredible desire to join battle with the
Duke of Cleueland: at which instant ye navy of Barbarossa appeared at Cistia
which greatly feared the Pope, The Turk concludes a peace with Ferdinand.
but without doing of hurt it departed toward Prouenza and Soliman returned
into Hungary, when after he had taken Alba Reale, and obtained Strigonia he
concluded a truce with king Ferdinand. The Emperor continuing his journey came
unto a strong city of the Duke of Cleuela^ds called Dura, which was defended
by a valyau^t Captain named Flattes, Flattes
with a garriso^ of worthy soldiers, this city the Emperor assaulted, and in
the end when after great occasion and loss of the assaulters he had taken the
same, the soldiers most cruelly committed all they found a live to the sword,
and after the ransackinge consumed the whole city with fire. The Emperor
following his good Fortune, went unto the Cities near adioyninge which being
terrified by Bura, Duraburnt by the^perors souldirs.
did of their own accord open their gates unto him. The Duke not a little
feared by the winnynge of so strong a City, determined to commytte his whole
state and life unto the Emperors clemency, who at length through
intercession and long suit made by the Marquise of Brunswicke and the Prince
of Orange in his behalf, he was permitted in safetye to repair to the
Emperors presence, of whom after humble submissyon he obtained pardon upon
certain reasonable conditions: And not long after the Emperor procured him
to renounce the marriage of the King of Nauarras daughter whom he had not as
yet espoused, and to take unto wife a daughter of king Ferdinandes his brother:
he pardoned also Rossenio, reteininge both him and his host unto his service,
with which mighty army, together with the aid that was sent him by the
King of England, he marched toward Picardie, endamagiuge very greatly the
French territoryes: myndinge before he would attempt any new enterprise, to
recover again the country of Luxenburge, especially Laundersey, a Cittye of a
great force, which although at that instant was well guarded with valiant
Captains, soldiers and a good company of light horsemen, yet it was by him
battered with great ordinance in one instante at three sundry places, but the
strength of the walls was such that the battry little hurted: the siege
continuing notwithstanding King Frauncis came thither with a great power,
who greatly desyring to vittel the Cittye, sent before his army Monsignior
Brisack, and Decarso with certain troops of horsemen to provoke ye enemies
unto battle, between who^ there began a lively conflict, at which instant ye
french king (having caused to be lade^ certain carts with victuals appeared as
though he would also enter into battle, The French King vitaileth Launder
sey.
but not omitting the present oportunitye, by main force he pierced through ye
enemies, making a notable slaughter of the resistantes, and so vittayled the
Cittye, furnishing also the same with fresh soldiers, and taking from thence
the old with their Captain Landa who was hurt, in exchange of whom he placed
Varminio a most worthy soldier: And the next day followinge he went unto
Cambrai, by which time the Emperor was joined with his army, unto whom the
French king proffered battle, which offer he willingly accepted and prepared
his host to fight, but the French king not minding as he spoke, Tee French
king after he had proferred battall flies into France.
departed with his army, and so returned into France. Upon whose departure
the Emperor by reason the sharp winter, went into Flaunders mindinge the
Spring followinge, (by the aid of the king of England) to renew his wars
against the said king: who although he had intelligence of the great
preparation which the Emperor and the king of England made for the invasion
of his country, omitted not to provide for his affairs in Piemont: but sent
thither an army of.xx. Thousand soldiers, over who^ was general Monsignor
d' Angie, who with small resistance recovered certain Towns and Castles which
the Frenchmen a little before had lost, and remained in the field as a
co^querour, (for the Marquis of Guasto was gone unto Millen to levy
soldiers) and brought the Cittye of Carignano unto such extremity, that
Pirro Colonna who was in the same not being able to encounter with his power,
was enforced to awaite ye coming of the Marquis, who making have to vittell
the said Cittye, was encountered by Monsignor d' Angie, and after long fight
overcome and put to flighte, and with that number of soldiers which was left
him, he recovered Hasti, being sore wounded. It is written that in this
battle were slain of the Emperors soldiers.10. Thousand, and of the
French.4. Thousand.

At this present Amida the son of Muleasen (whom the Emperor had restored as
you have hard unto his kingdom) drove his father out of ye Realm, who flying
again unto the emperor for aid, received letters that he should stay for
his coming at Naples, but he understanding that his son was become Lord of
the whole kingdom, levied with such money as he had left him, An unnatural
act of a son.
certain Italian soldiers, and sailed into Affricke where in a conflicte he
was overcome, and taken by his son, and afterward by him most cruelly
deprived of his eyes: The king of Tu^me was deprived of his eyes by his son.
for which act Amida fearing the displeasure of the emperor, labored to
conclude a peace with the governor of Goletto, who knowing the mind of the
Emperor not to be greatly grieved with his fact, willinglye agreed to his
demand. At which instant while ye Emperor and the king of England, were
seriouslye occupied, in providing of all such necessaryes as were expedient for
the maintaynance of war against the French king, at Rome certain noble men
with the French Cardinals, leuyed soldiers to fight in king Frau^cis
quarrel, and diverse other noble men of the same Cittye, with the Duche
Cardinals, having money sent from the Viceroye of Naples, leuyed a power
likewise in ye Emperors behalf, between which two companyes happened diverse
successes. But the French men which were in Piemont and Lumbardye became so
mighty and terrible to their enemies, yt the Milleners had forsaken their
City for fear, if Cosmo Duke of Florence had not at the very instante
sent.2000. footmen to defend them against their enemies. Notwithstanding
Pirro Colonna yielded upon certain conditions the Cittye of Carignano unto the
French men, who of king Frauncis was entreated with much curtesye, and
requested with honorable entertainment of the said king to serve him, A
worthy example of a saythful subject toward his Prince.
but be would not in any wise condiscende thereto, for which co^stante
fidelitye toward his Prince, the king highlye commended him, and with rich
rewards licensed him to depart, and return unto the emperor. Who, having
acquieted the tumultes of the Duke of Cleueland, and the Realm of Hu^garye not
molested by the Turks, proceeded in his determination together with the king
of England, who at that instant was arrived in Picardye: where, not mindinge
to consume time in vain without the atchieuinge of some notable exploite
worthy of memory, Bolloigne won by the king of England.
besieged Bolloigne the strong Maiden town of France, which after he had
battered in sondrye places (to the great destruction of the Boloigners) was
yielded to his mercy, who in proper parson entered the same: setting at
liberty all that were there, and lycensinge them to depart with bag and
baggage. And the emperor in marchinge toward Paris, The Prince of Orange flame.
besieged Sandesir, at the assault whereof Landa the French Captain was
slain, and likewise the Prince of Orange, who served the Emperor: but
notwithstanding his death, he continued thassaulte in such wise, that no
succor appearing, Sanserra the Captain yielded the same unto the Emperors
mercy: at which time ye French king was come with his army unto the river
Marne, where on the contrary side the Emperor was encamped with his boaste,
who desired greatly if he might, to join battle with the French king.
King Henry the eighte, a terror to all France.
The winning of Bolloigne brought such terror unto the French Nation, that the
Parisians, thinkinge their king to be taken prisoner and vanquished, embarked
their treasure, and sailed down the river Seane toward Normandye: but
having understanding of the contrary, they returned unto the Cittye.

While these two courageous Princes with their mighty hoastes the one against
the other, certain respects mutuallye moved them to conclude a peace,
especially the French king, who very well comprehended that if he should loase
the victory in that battle, all France would become subject unto the
Emperor and the king of England: wherefore (by the Divine operation) when it
was least looked for, a peace was concluded between them upon these
conditions, that the Emperor should give in marriage unto ye Duke of Orlians,
his daughter which he had in Spain, and Flaunders for her Dowrye: and that the
French king should marrye a daughter of king Ferdinandes his brother, with
whom he would give the Duchy of Millen for a Dowrye: to resolve upon which
weighty causes, the Emperor requested a years deliberation. Moreover it was
condiscended that after the marriage should be solemnized (unto which the
Duchy of Millen should be given for Dowrye) yet the emperor to keep in his
possession the fortes of the same, and of Cremona until they should have borne
unto them a child, and that then upon the deliuerye of these fortes, the king
should restore unto the Duke of Sauoye, all the Towns and Castelles which he
had taken from him in Piemont: and finallye that either to other should restore
al such Cities and Towns, which in the confines of Flaunders they had gotten
the one from the other, since the truce taken at Nizza.

At this present a great number of the Princes of Germanye and free Cities of
the same, kept a Diet in Smalkaldia a Cittye appertayninge unto the Duke of
Saxony, for the reformation of Religion: the chief where of were the Langraue
of Hessa, and the Duke of Saxony, which two Priuices for diverse iniuryes done
by the Duke of Brunswicke against the City of Coslaria (which was one of the
confederates) expelled him out of his Duchy, and in the end took him
prisoner. This doing moved the Emperor unto wrath, and thereupon sent unto
the Langraue, willing him to set at liberty the said Duke, and to restore him
unto his Duchy, which the Langraue did not only refuse to accomplish, but
also being furnished with a mighty Army of his own, and of the
confederates, marched against the Emperor, saying that he minded not to
restore that which he had gotten by Conquest: this aunsweare much grieved the
Emperor, insomuche that with as much celeritye as he might, being not a
little aided and provoked thereunto by the Pope, he leuyed a huge power,
intendinge as soon as the season of the year served, to make war against the
Princes of Germanye. The death of Henry the.8. king of England.
At this present dyed Henrye the eight king of England, leaving to inherit
the kingdom, Prince Edward his son, and in March the same year dyed also
Frau^cis the French king: The death of king Frauncis king of France.
but to return unto the affairs of Germany. The Emperor to iustifye his
attempt, cyted the Duke of Saxony and the Langraue, to appear at a diet at
Ratisbone, but neither of them would come, wherefore he deprived the Duke of
Saxony of his Electorshippe, and pronounced against him and the Langraue, a
banishment or perpetual exile out of the Empire, giving for a pray their
Dominions unto such as would by any mean occupye the same. At the fame of the
Emperors preparation for this war, certain Princes and free Cittyes
ignorante of his pretense, began greatly to fear his sudden tempest: The
cause was, that the Emperor always before that instant, accustomed unto the
preparation of any war, to request their aid and counsel: whereupon
many Cittyes seat unto him their Ambassadors, as well to understand his
meaning, as also to siguifye their prompe readiness to serve in his affairs.
The Emperors aunsweare unto the Ambassadors.
Unto whom the Emperor gave great thanks, for their large offers and good
will: saying, that for this enterprise he had no need of their aid, since that
he minded but to correct certain persons, which rebelled against ye Empire:
and that therefore he had geeuen them no understanding of his determination,
for that he reserved their ayedes unto affairs of greater importance, and so
dismissed them. The Princes nothing impaled with themperours condemnation, and
Edict pronounced against them, continued their enterprise, and gathered to
withstand his violence an Army of 80. Thousand footmen, and of 15. Thousand
horsemen, with a hundredth Pieces of Artillerye 6000. Miners, 300. boats for
bridges, and.800. Carts for ye caryages of shot and munitio^, unto which were
appointed. 8000. horses, well furnished with all sorts of Artificers that were
needful. This may be accounted one of the greatest hosts that ever was
among Christians: whereupon the Langraue perceyuiug a present sign of victory
to be offered by fortune, determined not to omit the same, but sent
presentlye unto the Duke of Saxony, willing him in any wise to send his
horsemen unto him, that he might at unawares assail ye Emperor, who as then
was not provided of soldiers for his defense, (which if he had done without
question he had driven the emperor out of Germanye) but the Duke void of reason
deferred the time, and neglected the wise advertisement of the Langraue,
sendinge a letter unto the emperor, which signified that where they understood
his majesty, determined to correct certain rebels, they desired to know
who they were that they might serve him in the same war, and that if he
prepared his army against them, they nothing doubted but that they would
both iustlye and honorably aunsweare him. The Emperor answered that he was
not come into Germanye of his own accord, but called by them, and that he was
not minded to move any war against any, but rather to chastise such as
should seem to disturb the quiet estate of the country: After which
answer, they thought it necessary not to protracte longer time, wherefore
they removed their hoaste toward Ratisbone where the Emperor was, supposing
that if they might win that City, the war would be quight ended. But in
their marchinge intelligence was given them, that Albert Marquis of Brandeburg
was entered the Cittye with the horsemen, and that daily the number increased
with all sorts of soldiers, they understood also that xii. Thousand
footmen, and six hundredth horsemen, were now arrived in those borders, which
two occasions removed the Princes from continuing there iorneye unto Ratisbone,
to endeavor and study to keep and defend the straights, and fortes by which
these soldiers should pass: but their devises took no effect, for whereas
ye Langraue had taken Tonauert, and marched to Lanzuotto, mindinge also to
occupye the same, he was prevented by the Emperor, who not long before was
entered into the said Cittye, being only acco^panyed with.2000. Duche
footmen, and.300. Spaniardes, unto whom shortly after came 5000. Duche
soldiers on foot, and 2000. horsemen.

Wherefore the Princes perceiving their intentes to become frustrate, provoked
the Duke of Bauaria to aid them in their enterprise: unto whom he answered,
that the Emperor was his Sovereign, Subjects ought to obey the commandment
of the Prince, and not to rebel.
and that therefore he might not deny unto him entrance into his Dominion,
yet he promised unto them, that in yt war he would remain a Newter without
offendinge either party. This aunsweare much troubled the Princes, who
knowing the power of ye Duke, were loathe in their talk to displease him: and
now they understanding that the Italian army was approached very near,
minded to set upon the fame but they were prevented, for the Emperor fearinge
ye same, advertised Segnior Gioua Baptist Sauelli Captain over the Romayne
horsemen, that with all celeritye he should repair with his army unto
Lanzuotto: which commandment he accomplished with all expedition, and so
deceived the devise of the enemies, wherefore they remained in the territoryes
of Inghilstatte, for defense of which Cittye (because it was of great
importance for that war) the Emperor sent to safegarde it, a Captain with
two hundredth Italian Hargabusyers, and five hundredth Duchemen. And now the
Emperors supplies being assembled together with those of his confederates and
allies, he marched toward Inghilstatte near unto which the armies as it were
met together: where ye Langraue not mindinge to loose time, sent the defyance
unto the Emperor and provoked him unto battle, which defiance for diverse
causes the Emperor would not accept, for as he very well knew the number of
his enemies to be much superior unto his, so he judged that within short
space their power would not a little decrease, The great wisdom of Charles
the fifte.
wherefore he resouled to keep them at a baye, and to pass the time with
skirmishes: which continued unto the.xxi. of Noue^ber. When the Langraue
perceyuinge daily the victuels and soldiers of the Emperor to increase, and
his to deminishe, and also that while he consumed the time in vain in the
field, by thinking to overcome the Emperor, he together with other, lost at
home their own countries: he raised his camp, (themperours army not witting
thereof) and in the night marched many miles, not staying till he came to
Haiden, God overthrows rebels.
where he dismissed his power, every one repayringe unto his own country.

The Emperor saying his enemies departed, and no resistance to remain,
lysenced the Countye of Bura to depart with his soldiers, at which instant
the Countye Palatine repaired unto him, in most humble wise yeldinge himself
unto his mercy, of whom he obtained favor for his disobedience. And
although this season was most cold, yet the Emperor not minding to omit
the present opportunity offered unto him by fortune, sent part of his host to
win certain Cittyes and Castelles of the Langraues there adjoining, The Duke
of Vertenberg submits himself to the Emperor.
and the Duke of Alua likewise with an other part of the army, man most of
the country of Vertenberg, ye Duke whereof (as the Countye Palatine had done)
humbled himself unto the Emperor, of whom he obtained pardon upon condition
that he should pay unto the Emperor 2. hundred* Thousand Florens of Gold, in
consideration of the expenses made in that war, with diverse other couenauntes.

In like manner Vlmes and Augusta yielded unto the Emperor, with certain other
free Cittyes, every one payinge a sum of money to sustain the charge of
that war: and although the sharpenes of the season did dailye increase, yet
the Emperor would not desist from persecuting the Duke of Saxony and Langraue
as chief of this rebellion. But while he abode at Vlmes to refresh his
soldiers, there repaired unto him Monsignor de Bura, who practiced to make an
accord between him and the Langraue, but he would in no wise give ear unto
his suit: and at that instante he received news, that Duke Maurice was in a
readynes to enter into battle with the Duke of Saxony, but immediatlye after
he had understanding how the Duke had not only caused Maurice to retire, but
also had recovered all such Cittyes as the said Duke Maurice had won in ye
behalf of his brother Ferdinand the king of the Romans, with a great part
of his own Segnoryes. Wherefore the emperor sent Signior Pirro Colonna,
Marquis Albert taken prisoner.
and Marquis Albert to molest the territoryes of the said Duchye, but Albert
was with a great number of his taken prisoner by an ambushme^t made of Saxons:
wherefore the emperor resolved to go himself to tonquere that Duchy, and
thereupon sent his army toward Norinberg, for he being sore vexed with the
gout, stayed at Nerling, but within short space recoueringe he departed
thence, and ioyninge his army with his brothers, they made in number x.
Thousand horsemen and viii. Thousand footmen, with this host they entered
Saxony, bearing away all that they found without resistance, and as
Conquerours they came unto the River Albi, on the farther side of which within
a few miles the Duke was encamped, and had sent a number of soldiers unto
the river to prohibit the Emperors passage. This river was.8. foot deep
and.300. broad, which made it very difficult to be waded over, but fortune was
so favorable unto the Emperor, that in this necessity a countryman declared
unto him the foorde, so that he and his brother with all their army passed
easily over the same and entering into battle with the Saxons, after long
fight he overcame them and took prisoner the Duke who was a little hurt, and
his eldest son who was also hurt escaped by flight: in this battle were
slain about.5000. Saxons, and of the Emperors soldiers but.300. The Duke was
presented prisoner unto ye Emperor by the countye Hippolitus: The Duke of
Saxony taken prisoner.
who after he was brought before the Emperor, alighted not from his horse but
putting of only his hat, said, most mighty and merciful Caesar, I am your
prisoner, The words of the duke of Saxony to ye Emperor.
and as a prisoner I pray you deal with me: unto whom the Emperor
answered, that he would entreat him as he had deserved and that he called
him to late Caesar: these words the Emperor spoke because the Duke in his
letters directed unto him entitled the^ unto Charles of Gau^t not accomptinge
him as Emperor, not louge after the Duke was by ye Emperors Judges condemned
unto death, but he as a most merciful prince, A merciful Prince.
granted him life, upon certain conditions, of which one was, that he should
remain prisoner during The Emperors pleasure, who used exceeding great
liberality unto Sibilla a Lady of hauty courage wife unto the said Duke. At
this instant also, the Bohemians (who were in league with the Duke) being not a
little terrified with these events, humbly beseched ye Emperor that he would
reconcile the^ unto his brother Ferdinand the king of the Romans: of whom
they received aunsweres booth of hope, and doubt. The Langraue destitute of all
aid, assayed to win the favor of the Emperor, by the means of the
Marquise of Bra^de^burg, and of Maurice his son in law: who with earnest
suit obtained his pardon, upon condition that he would present him self, and
in humble wise beseech the same: The Conit^ Albert of Mas^^^t and Tunberson,
(...) of the duke of Saxone.
but the Langraue by nature very stout, refused in such a lowly manner to
submit him self, harboring as yet a certain vain hope to be aided by diverse
of the confederates, who not long after deceived his expectation for they
dismissed their souldyers, and to procure quietness returned into their
countries. Whereupon the Langraue of his own accord now offered to do that
with many other conditions, whereunto before at the request of his friends he
would in no wise condescend: but Charles understanding that he was ready to
demand pardon and to yield unto all other conditions, showed him self not so
tractable as he had done before, notwithstanding in the end as it were overcome
with the importunate suit of ye Langraues friends, he granted so that he would
come unto his presence, and with humble submission demand pardon, he would
not only receive him into favor but also remit unto him all offenses which
he had committed, also revoke his edict pronounced against him, moreover he
promised to pardon his rebellion, with deliueringe him from perpetual
imprisonment, and from all other punishment as well of his substance as of his
person. The Langraue having sufficient assurance for the performance of these
conditions, presented himself unto themperoure humblye demaundinge pardon
upon his knees, of whom he was received into favor, but when after the
German fashion he offered him his hand, the Emperor would not receive it,
but wylled him to repair unto the Duke of Alua, with whom he supped merylie,
but at night when he thought to be dismissed he was retained by the Duke, not
without great fear unto the Langraue, and much marvel unto the electours,
who being troubled in mind quieted them selves for the present, in that they
perceived the Emperor minded to keep him in prison, until all the conditions
were observed, which were contained in ye co^ditio^s written. This was the end
of the long war which the Emperor had with the Langraue and the Duke of
Saxony, whom without question he had never in this wise brought unto
subjection, God overthrows rebels.
if they had not been betrayed by certain of their feined confederates, in
whom they reposed great confidence and credit. The Emperor having with
prosperous success finished the wars in Germany passed into Sueuia
couducting with him the two Princes as prisoners, he carried with him also
great abundaunce of Artilerye which he took from his enemies, part whereof
he sent into Spain, part into Milaine, and the rest unto the kingedome of
Naples. Ferdinand.
The King of the Romans also by the industrye of the Marquise of Marignano,
and Augusto the brother of Maurice, brought the Bohemians unto his obedyence
and subjection. While the Emperor made his abode in Augusta, Lubeck, Bremia,
and Bransuice submitted them selves unto him payinge for their liberty.200000.
Crowns, many other free Cities yielded themselves unto the Emperor
raunsominge them selves with sommes of money, but the Dukes of Luneburg
desiring themperours favor did not obtain it, for that their ambassadors
uttered words of great arrogancy: The (...).
It is most true that in the cittye of Augusta the soldiers of Madrucci,
being grieved for not having the paies which were promised them, comme^ced a
mutine, and being most insolent went to besiege the Emperor being in his own
palace, who presently caused their due to be paid and the authors of the
treason to be punished: also after the Emperor had appeased certain tumults
which were like to have happened in that cittye about religion, he iorneyed
unto Spires where he procured a reformation and establishment for religion,
Fortune.
but Fortune whose property is to be mutable, and then especially when least
cause of doubt is offered, seemed at this instant as it were to revoke her
favorable smilinges which she had of so long time continued toward the
Emperor, for where as he thought he had ended all troubles, he was at a
sudden wrapped in greater trauayles then ever at any other time, for after the
death of King Frauncis, Henry his son succeeded in the kingdom, who (as
Hannibal against the Romans) having from his chyldehoode hated the Emperor,
(...) of France.
immediately after he was plated in his fathers seat determined to move war
against him, wherefore having well provided for the defense of the frontiers of
Picardie, and sent diverse captains and souldyers into Scotland to aid them
in their wars against the Englishemen, he went into Piemont, as well to
furnyshe their forts and cities there with all kind of municion and other
necessaries, as also to conclude a league with the Pope and Suizzers. Unto the
Emperor who was most vigilant, the practices of the French King could not
be hidden, although he endeavored by all means possible to conceile the same.
Bura.
Wheruppon he sent into England the County Bura to confirm with that King
the League which he had with the King his father: and vsinge the like arts of
dissymulation with the French King, as he knew the French King did use to
practyse toward him, to renew susspition did write unto him, that he should
not marvel at the going of the County into England, for that it was upon
certain occasions of his own pryuate affairs, moreover yt he intended (if by
him there were made no brech) to continue the peace which he made with King
Frauncis, with all frendshyppe and brotherlye love. These words the King
accounted as feyned, and suspectinge contrary effects procured with more
expedition to renew with the Suizzers the league which was concluded with them
by King Frauncis his father. This league did not a little dysplease the
Emperor, who perceived to what end their confederacy tended, as also for that
he had determined to chastise certain free cities which were in arms for
the reformacion of religion: from which attempt he was revoked by this new
league of the Pope, the French King, and the Suizzers, with diverse other
princes: wherefore while time and occasion served, he sent into Spain for King
Philippe his son by Maximilian his Nephew, who in Valiadohe married Marie the
Emperors eldest daughter, and was left in Spain to supplye the room of King
Phillip: who in the month of November arrived at Geane, and passed from thence
by easy iorneyes unto Brussels where he was looked for by the Emperor his
father: The death of Paul the 3.
the tenth day of November which was in anno. 1549 dyed Pope Paul the third:
for whose successor was created Giouan Maria, called Julius the third, Julius
the 3. created Pope
who presentlye established Octauio Farnese in the Duchy of Parma, and
Piacenza, and sent him forthwith unto the same, but Piacenza was kept unto
the Emperors behalf by Don Ferrante Gonzaga, in whom Duke Octauio reposed
little confidence, Duke Octauio married the base daugher of ye Emperor Charles.
although he had married the Emperors base daughter, wherefore both the one
and the other were stronglye guarded, for the better assurance of their mutual
securitye. At this present Dragut Rasis a famous Corsale occupied the City
Africa, which is a Cittye both rich and mighty, and stands upon an arm of
the Mediterraneu^ Sea: from whence Dragut toastinge the Seas, did greatly
endamage the Christians, and induced no small fear unto Cicilia and diverse
other Islands thereunto adjoining. Wherefore the Emperor to repulse the furye
of this tyrannous infidel, determined to win from him that Cittye, and
appointed general over ye enterprise Gian de Vega Viceroy of Cicilia, he sent
thither Prince Doria with his Nauye, accompanied with many other ships full
of Spaniardes and Italians, thither went also Don Pietro Viceroye of Naples,
with the Gallyes of ye kingdom: these valiant Captains besieged the City,
and in thend took it with small loss of Christians, for there were not slain
above fiftye. Dragut fled from thence with 6. Gallyes and.xiiii. Galliottes
unto Zerbi, from whence he wrote unto Soliman of the injury done unto him by
the Emperor: who thereupon sent very threatninge letters unto king
Ferdinand. At this present through the aid which the French king gave unto
Duke Octauio, to maintain him in the state of Parma, or rather as some
think, to impadron himself thereof: there arose sudden wars between the
Emperor and the French king, in sondrye places, as well by Sea as land, for
while Giouan Baptista the Popes nephewe, and Don Ferrante (who credited the
truce which was taken between the emperor and the king,) had caused certain
Garrisons of soldiers to repair unto him out of Piemont, which were left
there for ye defense of diverse Cittyes and Castelles: to be siege Parma, into
which entered a great number of French Captains and soldiers. Mo^signor
Brisack general in Piemont for the French king, mindyng to reuolte the war
from Parma, caused certain companies of soldiers at sondrye times to repair
secretly unto him out of France, with whom at a sudden he assaulted Cheri,
and wanne it with diverse other fortes of importance. And upon the Sea the
Prior of Capua general for the French king, understanding that Prince Doria,
was departed from Geane, to conducte into Italye (by the Emperors appointment)
Maximilian the king of Boheme with the Queen his wife, determined to encounter
with them, and upon the sudden to assault them: but Doria although he had.v.
Gailyes more in number then the Prior had, durst not meet with him, but
retired back again for fear, whereupon the Prior chased him a whole day,
and being not able to overtake him, returned unto the Port of Tolone, and not
long after departed for the service of the French king, and went to serve
with the knights of the Rhodes.

The siege of Parma and Mirandola having long time continued unto a small
effect, and little co^moditye of the Pope, who now being wearye with the
great charges and expenses which daily arise by the maintaynance of war,
concluded a peace with the French king, after the death of his nephew who dyed
at the siege of Mirandola, and so raised both sieges: from whence the Marquis
of Marighano departed with his soldiers to succor Piemont: (but here
omitting certain euentes which happened between the emperor and the French
king) I say that the war ceased between them. Notwithstanding Henrye to
procure the increase of his own forces, and to deminishe those of the
Emperors: caused many Princes both of Italye and Germanye, to manifest their
hatred against him (which unto that time had remained very secret and not
known:) For he entered into league with diverse Germayne Princes, who now
were in Arms against the Emperor, for controversies in matters of Religion:
among whom was Maurice who had been invested by the Emperor of the Duchye of
Saxony, Duke John being deprived of the same, together with his Electorshippe
when he was taken prisoner. This Maurice was most fiercelye incensed with
wrath against the Emperor, for yt he would not dismiss the Langraue who was
his lonne in saw, Mauryce insenced with wrath against the emperor.
from imprisonment, since he had long before observed and performed all the
Articles contained in the Capitolatio^ of the accord. Wherefore he esteemed yt he
was both mocked and deceived by the emperor, and therefore omitting his
obedience and duty which he ought unto him being his Lord, and pricked
forward by other who for matters in Religion hated the Emperor: he determined
to move war against him, and thereupon joined with the Duke of Saxons son,
the sons of the Langraue, and certain other Princes their confederates, to
endamage him all the ways they might: All these entered into a league with
the French king, who as one that desired nothing so greatly, gave them unto
this effect 400000. Crowns, upon condition that they should disburse among
them every month 100000. Crawnes, with which, together with that which other
would contribute, they should maintain continually in the field an host of
20. Thousand footmen, 8. Thousand horsemen, and of 2. Thousand men of
Arms: Moreover he promised that at what time the Emperor should come against
them with an army, he would be in a readiness with an host to succor them.
The Emperor at the concludinge of this league was in Ispruck, who not thinking
that th'ennemyes could in any short space have gathered so puisant an host,
used no expedition in prouidinge of soldiers, but continued there: either
mindinge to see unto what end this provision would tend or else (being upon
such a sudden unprovided of sufficient power to resist the force of so mighty
enemies) to procure meaenes to mittigate the wrath of Maurice, which caused
certain to suspect (although without cause as hereafter will appear) that
Maurice had with the Emperor co^spired the death of the French king, which
opinion was most folish and vain: For Maurice at a sudden with his Army marched
unto Augusta, taking by the way Vlmes, from thence he went toward Ispruck,
intendinge there to apprehend the Emperor: who having intelligence of his
coming sent certain soldiers to defend the streighte (a passage very strong
and of great importance) but the soldiers of Maurice came against it with
such force that they took it: the Emperor disapointed of his purpose, departed
from Ispruck in the night by torch light when it rayned without any company
except those of his court, and certain other which guarded his person together
with the ambassadors unto Vilacco, The Emperor is constrained to fly unto
Villocco.
a Castle in the confines of Friuli, belonging unto the ancient patrimony of
the house of Austria: a thing certain to be lamented at, that so victorious an
Emperor, should in the night when it rayned retire with such have into so
simple a place, with his court disordered, and the greater part on foot for
want of horses, being chased of his own vassal, and subject unto ye Empire,
whom a little before he had exalted unto that estate and dignitye: Maurice came
y^ very same night unto Ispruck in which he departed where he staid not, but
followed the Emperor, whom when he could not over take returned unto
Ispruck, where he spoiled all such goods as appertained unto strangers,
without endamaginge any of the citizens. The Segniorie of Venis understanding
of the Emperors being at Vilacco, sent immedyately to visit him, presenting
them selves very honorablye, and with much curtesye profering to pleasure him
any way they might. Unto whom the Emperor rendered most hearty thanks,
having his mind wholye bent to revenge this injury of Maurice,
notwithstanding his determination (the time so requyringe) he sent King
Ferdiuand to fall to some accord with Maurice, but he obtained nothing, for
the Protestants would not in any wise accept the conditions offered, for that
the Emperor to maintain the Popes ceremonies had so cruelly dealt with them in
the last war: and therefore proceeded as conquerours in reuenginge upon the
Papists, the injuries which of late by them they had received, The death of
Mauryce.
but in the end in a conflict with the Duke of Brunswick this Maurice was so
hurt that within three days after he dyed, whose death was rather a hurt
then a profitte ^inge of the Emperoures affairs: the cause of this war
chiefly being for the long deteyninge of the Langraue prisoner contrary to the
Emperors promise. The death of the Duke of Saxonye.
At this present John ye Duke of Saxony dyed, who although he were set at
liberty by the emperor before time, yet willingly he followed the court, whose
children he received into favor and invested them with the Duchy of their
father, and determining also to set the Langraue at lyberty, he sent into
Flanders unto Queen Marie his sister that she should deliver the Langraue out
of prison, which the captain of the Castle would not permit to be done, The
La^graue set at liberty.
for that the Emperor had not sent unto him by a secret token which was
between them, of which in the end he advertised the Queen, and then he was set
at liberty.

At this time the people of Sienna being much abused by Don Diego, Don Diego.
who governed the same for the emperor, practiced with the French King for
their liberty, who favoring their suit, sent thither the county Pitilian, and
the county Fiori with.5000. soldiers, which of the Sieneses were intromitted
the city, and the Spaniardes upon certain conditions were content to render
the cittadell, which Don Diego had built, for that the citizens promised
faithfully to remain and abide at the devotion of the Emperor, protestinge
that they had not done this as rebels against him, but to recover their
liberty, which they had lost by the tyranny of Don Diego, while these events
happened in Sienna, the French King moved war freshly against the Emperor
in Flaunders. Whereupon the Emperor sent the Marquise of Mariniano with
diverse other captains into Germamnie to levy soldiers, unto whom repaired
at Ispruck, many captains of Spaniardes and Italians, with a great number of
Duchmen, moreover he induced Marquyse Albert who at that time served the French
king with.14000. footmen and certain horsemen to renounce his service,
Subjects ought to obey their prince.
and to revolt unto him who was his natural Lord which in the end he
obtained. The Emperor being at this instante in Augusta altered his
determination from going into Flaunders, and resolved to pass into France
against the King, through the Duchy of Loreine: of which resolution ye
Marquise Albert having understanding marched before him unto the city of
Mettes a mightty and popolous cittye in yt territory of Loreine, The
description of Mettes.
standing in a plain not much distant from the Alps, from which the river of
Mosella desce^deth which over runs the fields, and deuideth itself into
two branches, the bigger of which compasses for a little space part of the
cittye, and then entringe into the same, makes as yt were two Islandes. The
other in like manner making as it were without the cittye a little Islande,
does after approach more nere and forms an other Island between two bridges,
the one called Zistro, and the other Dismore, both the one and the other of
which bridges has seven arches.

This city for a great sum of money was once made fre, but after it came
into the possession of the French King.

In it there was at this present the Duke of Guise with many soldiers of
Frenchemen and Italians, who issued out against the Marquise with great force,
and skirmished daily with the Duchmen. But not long after the Emperor with a
mighty host came and made present battry against ye same, The Emperor
battereth Mettes.
which was couragiouslye defended by the Duke: and by reason of the sharpenes
of winter, which that year in all parts of Europe was very extreme, for a
great number of the Emperors soldiers and horses died with cold, so that not
being able to support any longer the contagious seasone in the end of December
he departed from thence especially for that he understood the French King had
taken by Monsegnior of Vandosme, Edine a city in Flaunders of great
importance, which he determined all other affairs set aparte, The Emperor
battreth Mettes.
to recover the next spring following. But at his departure from Mettes,
having in mind the affairs of Sienna, he wrate unto Don Pietro of Toledo,
viceroy of Naples, that he should with speed prepare a sufficient host, and
go his own person to make war against that cittye, which commandment he
accomplished with all expedition, and being come unto Frorence, where he should
have joined his power with that of the Dukes, he dyed, but the war was
afterward maintained by the Emperor and the Duke against the Frenchmen with
variable success, and in the end Storza unadvisedly coming to battle with
the Marquise of Mariniano, The Marquise Mariniano, overcomes Pietro Storza
and takes Sie^na
received a great overthrow, and he him self wounded in one of his thighs.
Then the Marquise caused the cittye to be assaulted, but he could not that way
win it wherefore he continued his siege, and at length had it upon sundry
conditions, of the which never any one was observed At this instant the
Emperor was encamped before Edine with a very brave host, and ceased not to
batter and assault the town most lively both night and day, until he had
gotten ye same, where was slain Duke Horatio, who was there for the French
King, D. Horatio.
and diverse noble gentlemen Frenchmen and Italians taken prisoners, among whom
was Memoransi the Constables son of France: this city and Tirwin which
afterward the Emperor also took, he caused to be overthrown, and plained
with the ground, because he would be no more molested with them. This year
before the winninge of Sienna dyed Charles ye Duke of Sauoy, unto whose son
Filibert the Emperor gave the country of Hasti: and who at this present
(through the accord which after happened between the Emperor and the french
King) enjoys again his whole Duchye of Sauoy. The deeth of Edward king of
England.
There dyed also in this year Edward King of England: and Marie the
daughter of King Henry the eight by Madame Katharine, daughter to the
catholic king was crowned Queen: which Mary afterward was married in England
to Phillip king of Spain her own cousin, Queen Marye maryeth Phillip king of
Spain.
son unto the Emperor, which marriage was made legittimate by ye Popes
dispe^sation. And in the year.1555. dyed Pope Julius the third, unto whom
succeeded Marcellus the 2. who died ye.20. day after his creation: The death of
Julius the.3 Marcellus ye second.
and Paulus quartus of ye house of Carassa was created Pope, whose life was
such yt al me^ wished his death especially ye Romans who more the^ all other
tasted of his Neronious wickedness. Paulus ye.4. created bishop of Rome.
The Emperor who at this present was in Flanders sore grieved with the gout, and
diverse other infirmities, being ouercom with the continual wars, and great
troubles unto which empires are subject, The Emperor determines to forsake his
gouernmente of all his estates.
resolved to wtdraw himself from ye cares of this world, unto a quiet and
peaceable life without bearing any longer government over any estate which
certainlye no man is able to do, but that the two contrary passions desire,
and fear, in altringe our minds, do disturb our whole quietness: it is said
yt he was determined so to do viii. years before: The like is read of the
the emperor Diocletian, who forsakinge the Roman Empire, wtdrew himself unto
Salona a City of Dalmatia his country, where he continued his days in
labouringe and making of a little Garden with his own hands, reputing himself
more blessed in that estate, then when he enjoyed the Empire of the whole
world: So was Octauius minded to forsake his kingdom. The Emperor sends for
king Philip out of England, and resigneth unto him all his estates.
The Emperor desyring to bring to effect this his determination, sent for
King Phillip his son who at that instant was in England, and resigned unto
him by open Decree the kingdom of Naples, Flaunders, Burgundye, the estate of
Millen, with all other his Segnioryes: And yt next year following he resigned
likewise unto king Ferdinand his brother, the.24. of Februarye in the year of
Christ 1557. which was the day of his Natiuitye, the whole Empire: and in
August following being in Gaunt, The Emperor resigneth the Empire unto king
Ferdinand his brother.
he lysenced to depart all the Ambassadors that were with him, and all his
officers, Princes and Captains, saying unto them that he should have no more
need of their service. Moreover he rendered infinite thanckes unto the
Maiestrates that were present, for their loyalty and faythfulnes, which they
had always used toward him, recommending unto them Phillip his son: and
having finished these words he ascended into a Litter, and was carried unto a
certain Castle called Asueda, where the 14. of September he entered into a
ship, which was prepared for his voyage with ye two Queen's his sisters, and
after he had blessed his son with giving him many godly exhortacions, he took
of him his last farewell, and therewith ye sails being hoysed, he sailed
toward Spain, being accompanied with.70. Gallyes, for the safegarde of his
person, in which country it is said he had been vii. times, the first when he
was xvii. years of age, Of the Emperors arriual at Lared, and of the words
which he spoke the^e.
ye second when he was xxii. the third.xxiii. the fourth.xxxvi. the fifth
xxxviii. the sixte.xli. and this seventh which was the last, when he was.lvi.
years old: and being arrived at the Port of Lared a Cittye in Biskay,
thither repaired to receive him the great Constable with all the Barons of
Spain: who as soon as he landed, kneeled down upon the Sea bancke, where
after he had rendered his most humble thanckes unto Almightye God for his
arrival, in that it had pleased his goodness to bring him safe unto the land
and people which he most loved, and by whom next under God he had aspyred unto
so many high degrees of honor, and received infinite victoryes and
triumphs: He spoke these words, O my most desired mother, GOD preserve thee,
naked I came out of my mothers womb, and naked I return unto thee, as unto
another mother of mine, The Emperor was carred to Valiadolit
and in recompense of the manifold benefits which I have received of thee,
(not being able to reward the with any thing) I geeue thee this my simple
body, and these my simple boones: which words being ended with the effusion
of many tears, he courteously saluted those noble men which were come to
honor him, and then was carried in a Litter unto Vagliadolit, The Emperor at S.
Iustus withdraws himself from all companion into a Monasterye of Monckes of
thorder of S. Hierome.
where the infant Charles his nephew made his abode: there he remained 2.
days, not in a sumptuous Palace, but in a private house, where he exhorted
the infant to fear God, and to follow in virtue his ancestors: From thence
he was carried unto a certain Valleye somewhat pleasant, whereunto toward the
South adjoined certain hills, this place he had chosen to consume that
remnaunt of time, which God should give him to live, the name of it is S.
Iustus, distant.7. miles from Piacenza in the province of Estremadure: In it
also was a Monasterye of Monckes, of the order of S. Hierome, with whom
the emperor intendinge to make his abode as long as he lived, he lysenced to
depart the two Queens his sisters, with all ye residue of his familiars,
retayning only to attend his person, but.xii. men with a horse which he very
seldom occupied. There he dispensed the hours continually in prayer, and in
hearing Divine service, in such wise that his whole thoughts and words were
only of God: with this Divine and spiritual exercises, he continued unto Anno
1558. the xxi. of September, in which he feeling his time to draw near,
prepared himself most willingly unto death, and lifting his eyes vnmouablye
unto heaven said these words.

O Lord God my redemer, I render unto thy divine Majesty most hearty thanckes,
for the manifold benefits which thou of thy goodues have vouchsaued to bestow
upon me, as in making me Lord and ruler over so many kingdoms, and likewise
for thy holy protection, which thou have always preserved me: But above all
things for this my last end, which by the light of thy grace I saw two
years since, by contemninge of this transitorye and vain world, and cleaving
unto the sure ladder, The perfitte wape to heaven.
by which I trust to come to reign with thee in Heaven, which is the passion
of thy dear son Jesus Christ. After that he said: O most merciful father, I
most humblye besiech thee, that thou will forgeeue me all my offenses, and
wash clean with thy innocent blood, this my sinful soul, as yet bathed and
defiled with blood, who have caused the blood of many Thousands of thy
creatures to be shed, Anotable lesson for all men to learn to avoid sin,
and to contemn this world.
through the vain follye of these false Dominions, and transitorye wordlye
felicityes: Receive my soul O heavenly father into the arms of thy mercy.
These words being ended he said: Into thy hands O Lord I commend my
spirit, and therewyth closing his eyes, as though he had fallen into a sweet
and pleasante sleep, he passed (as it is to be judged) out of this most
miserable world into a most blessed, without making of any passion or
alteration of countenance or coullour. This was the death of this most
victorious and invincible Emperor CHARLES the fifte.

Ferdinandus.
BY the providence of Almightye God, ye Majesty of ye Romayne Empire, has
continued.260. years and more, in the most noble house and royal familye of
Hapsburge, and has brought forth lynallye.9. Emperors. Rodulphe Cou^tye of
Hapsburge was elected king of the Romans, at what time a long season, the
Empire of Rome was destitute of a king (who as it is sheewed before) gave the
Duchy of Austria unto his eldest son: By this means it descended unto this
royal and most Princelye familye of Hapsburge, from that honse.9. Emperors
have spronge forth to govern this Empire. The first Emperor was Rodulphe ye
first Countye of Hapsburge, the second was Albarte the first, Frederick the
first the third Emperor of his house, the fourth was Albarte the second,
then the fifte Frederick the second, the.6. was Maximilian, ye seventh was
Charles the fifte, then the eight was Ferdinandus, of whom I now entreat of.

This Ferdinandus was the brother of Charles the fifte, ye son of Philippe
Archeduke of Austria. The perfect desce^t of that noble house, is fully set
forth in the life of his brother Charles the fifte, and how it has continued
in that royal familye of Hapsburge, of the which house this Ferdinandus was
the eight Emperor, and Maximilian the 9. that now governs. This Ferdinandus
was the son of Ioane Queen of Castile, whose petegree is on every side set
forth also in the life of the foresaid Charles, which orderly succession to
recyte were tedions. It is a great blessing of God, a kingdom or Empire, to
continue so long in one familye they being godly Princes: great be the
commendations of this Ferdinandus, whose noble acts if I according to his
merits should fully set forth, it would rise to a great huge Volume.

This Ferdinandus was in the time of Charles the fifte his brother, king of
the Romans, he was a great comfort, stay, protection, and safegarde under
God, to all Christendom, against the Turk. This Ferdinandus God by his mighty
power blessed in many prosperous victoryes, and in a small power (in comparison
of the Turk Soliman his power) was made a conqueror over the Turk. After
many overthrows, ye Turk seking by a great power to conquer Hu^garye and
Vienna: God marueilouslye prospered and preserved him, and gave to him with his
brother Charles the victory. This Ferdinandus was a Prince of great clemencye,
with al courteous humanity endued, of few words, of life most temperate and
godly, a lover of learning, studious by all means to preserve peace and
concord in Europe among Christen Princes. Soliman the Turk was over throwe^
of this Ferdinandus, about the year of Christ.1529. Soliman to revenge the
great slaughter which he caughte by Ferdina^dus, gathered an host of 200000.
soldiers, but as some authors write, of. 300000. and with this great army
he entered Hungarye, but that great host was almost quight overthrown, the
Palsegraue entering the one side of them, and the Hungarians on another, with
diverse other noble and valiante personages, these valiant Captains on every
side so assaulted them, that they gave them a marvelous great overthrow and
put them to flighte. An other time also this Ferdinandus gave the Turks a
great overthrow at Malta, he being then Emperor: as concerning more at large
of him I will write, as soon as I get the perfect declaration of his whole
life, but this suffices to show that he was a rare, wise godly and
victorious Prince.

This Ferdinandus left behind him his son Maximilian, who now with all
glory governs, and with the mighty hand of God uphold is against the
Turk, who according to the office of a careful Prince, has a diligent eye
to ye preservation of Christendom, with other godly Princes.

God grant that all we Christians may walk in the fear of God, to love
and dread him, to obey our Princess, to whom by duty we are bound to be
subject, in holy conservation of life, to show the fruits of Christians in
mutual love and charity one toward another, charity being the badge of a
Christian: For by charity we abide in God and God in us, Love being the
fulfillinge of the Law and Prophets, whereby the detestable enemies of God,
saying the good works of Christians, and so holy fruits of that most holy
word, may be made to become Christians, and to glorifye our Heavenly
father. Concord and unity among Christians, overthrows the detestable
enemies of God: God grant that the Princes of Christendom may embrace that
Christian love, and so lincke themselves in one unity, that the infidels may
not seek by the contention and disagreing of Christian Princes, an occasion to
do mischiefs: For by the contention and disagreinge of Christen Princes, the
devil and his seek to establishe their kingdom. God grant all contention to
cease among Christians, and in the love of God to be united, by which love
neither the flesh, the world, nor the devil, shall be able to hurt us: by this
holy unity we shall be the children of God, and God will be on our side, and if
God be on our side, we need not to care who shall be against us, let us
therefore humble our selves before God, we being most wretched and miserable,
without Gods help, and put our slues under him, by whose protection we are
defended, vpholded, and delivered. ****

The end of the lives of all the Emperors.
Faults escaped in the printinge.
In the Epistle Dedicatory the first side, read egraegiam for egaergia^.

An Folio.11. read De emptionibus, for Do omitionibus.

In Folio.12. read periodos, for periodo.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London in Fletestreate near to Saint Dunstones Church, by
Thomas Marshe. ****

Anno Domini..1571.


